

1799
1949
BARCLAY & FRY LTD
(BRANCH OF THE METAL BOX COMPANY LTD)
SOUTHWARK GROVE, LONDON, S.E.I




1799-1949
BARCLAY & FRY LTD
(BRANCH OF THE METAL BOX COMPANY LTD )
SOUTHWARK GROVE, LONDON, S.E.I


BARCLAY & FRY.
9.COLLEGE HILL-CANNON STREET.E.C.
PRIZE MEDAL
Awarded ,
1851.
PRIZE MEDAL
Awarded.
1862.
The old College Hill premises, taken from the 1873 catalogue.


HE completion of a hundred and fifty years of successful
trading is in itself an achievement of some merit; and yet
any account of it which did not pay due attention to con-
tributions made to the sum of the knowledge and skill of the
trade as a whole would be but barren reading. No firm for long
draws out from industry much more in the way of experience
and profit than it puts back in the form of improvements to the arts
and practice of its craft. In the following brief account of our own
first century and a half, therefore, this aspect of our endeavours
must receive pride of place. Rightly so, since the enormous strides
taken by industry in those years have been entirely due to the
enterprise, ingenuity and vision of many men in many different trades.
The firm that is now Barclay & Fry Limited had its modest
beginnings in 1799, in Bucklersbury, under the shadow of the
Mansion House. John Williams & Company, as the business was
then called, were bookbinders and stationers; printing and its allied
trades were then no more than handicrafts—ancient and honourable
crafts, like many another, but never of any great magnitude. Great or
small, however, inventiveness was already the watchword, and it was
Williams himself who, early in his firm’s career, discovered a method
whereby the backs of bound books could be rounded and set into
covers having a spring effect. This development set a new fashion for
account books, and with the demand spreading to all corners of the
country, we can now boast customers who were first supplied nearly
a hundred years ago.


The art of printing, however, at the time of our founding, was
in the early throes of a revolution which transformed it from a
handicraft to a world industry of the first importance. The first stage
in the transformation was the invention, in 1798, by a Bavarian
named Senefelder, of the process known as lithography. This was
introduced into England in 1802, and Williams and Co. were
undoubtedly among its first exponents. Thus in their early years,
the new process and the new firm grew up together until, in 1855,
Robert Barclay, founder of the modern business, acquired Williams
& Co., with the primary object of supplying the growing require-
ments of his family’s banking business, Messrs. Barclay & Co. of
54 Lombard Street.
Robert Barclay, the founder, c. 1850.
Robert Barclay, staunch
Quaker, and man of vision as
well as of action, was one of the
greatest minds in the printing
world of his day, and his con-
tributions to the industry are
acknowledged throughout the
world. Very shortly after he had
acquired the business, he brought
out his first invention, a design
for a two-revolution printing
press, which was to give his
company a pre-eminent position
in the trade. Soon after that in
1857, he introduced an even more
important innovation. We have
already mentioned his close con-


nections with the banking concerns of those days; with the accelera-
ted growth of commerce of all kinds had come a corresponding
increase in commercial sharp practice; forgeries of many sorts of
security and negotiable documents were becoming common and
increasingly difficult to detect. Barclay’s invention of an indelible
cheque paper, proof against chemical alteration, fulfilled an urgent
need, and laid the foundations for the large cheque-printing business
which has continued to this day.
The rapid success of these two devices left him little time for
further research during the next few years. Indeed, all his energies
were applied to the extension of his existing premises to cope with
the increased business. In addition,
he was beginning to find his finan-
cial needs outstripping his own
resources, and he therefore took
steps to find himself a partner
who could bring further capital
into the Company, and also
relieve him of many of the
matters of daily routine which
held him back from further tech-
nical research. In 1867 he found
the man he was looking for in
John Doyle Fry, a brother Quaker,
and a son of the famous Bristol
family of chocolate manufac-
turers. The partners soon consoli-
dated into a sound working team,
and in 1870, a further business
Barclay's first partner, John Doyle Fry.


was acquired, that of Ashby & Co., a City firm of great repute as
engravers and printers of banknotes and other security documents.
It was at this time that we commenced our very considerable export
trade with the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, in
which we have been privileged to continue to this day. Many of
Ashby & Co’s beautiful engravings were kept as treasured relics at
Southwark, until they were destroyed, to our great sorrow, in one
of the many fires suffered during the London blitz.
Facsimile of a banknote, printed for Plymouth Naval Bank, c. 1880.
1875, just over half way in the progress of our business down
to the present day, must have been a memorable year for Robert
Barclay. He had for some little time been devoting a good deal of
attention to the development of colour printing, and he now raised
a patent which was to mark an epoch in the history of his trade. His
discovery, which is now known to the world as offset lithography,


made it commercially possible to print in colour directly on to tin-
plate and other sheet metals. In fact, it opened the door to a whole
new world of colour-printing and yet, by one of life’s ironies, it was
never given to this wise and far-seeing man to prove that it was so.
Lack of adequate new finance, and the absence of any other pro-
vision to cover the expansion which would have been required to
exploit it, led him to grant full and exclusive rights in the operation
of the process to Messrs. Bryant and May—who devoted its use
solely to the decoration of metal covers for matchboxes.
It is possible that events might have moved very differently even
then, but for Barclay’s sudden and untimely death towards the end
of 1877. This left a tragic gap in
the councils of the firm, which
only a man of John Fry’s calibre
could have begun to overcome.
None the less, a new partner had
to be found, and that immediately,
and after consultation with his
family, he was joined by his cousin,
Roderick J. Fry. This once again
consolidated the business, and
pointed the direction in which it
was to be further developed, so
that the next few years saw in-
creasing ties with their fellow
Quakers, which led to an ever
growing demand for the colour
Our City offices in Queen Street
in the nineties.


The London blitz - winter and spring
1940-1941




printing of labels and wrappers for the Tobacco and Confectionery
businesses then centred in Bristol and London.
In 1889, Barclay’s tin-printing patent lapsed, and there was an
immediate rush by other printers to take advantage of the innovation.
To begin with, Barclay & Fry were content to do much of the
printing for existing tin-box manu-
facturers, etc., but it was not long
before they themselves decided to
enter this field. A site was acquired
at The Grove, Southwark, and the
erection of our new premises was
commenced.
By 1894, a further new block
had been built, to house our ex-
panding tin-printing and box
making business, and in that year
also, the firm was converted into
a limited company, with the two
Frys as joint managing directors.
At the same time the first manager
was appointed, specialising in this
side of our activities. This was
The first buildings at The Grove,
in the nineties.
Mr. A. E. Attwood, who came to us from our old friends and rivals,
Huntley, Boorne & Stevens of Reading. Shortly afterwards, in 1897,
the chairman’s eldest son John was elected to the board. The new
venture prospered at once, and expansion was continued until in
1904 all the available ground had been covered, with a factory of If
acres ground area, and mainly of five-storied construction.


ND so at the turn of the century, with our first hundred
years of endeavour already behind us, we found ourselves
with our feet firmly set on the path which we have followed
with little deviation ever since. Paper-converting and printing,
and box making, were together entering on a phase of rapid
expansion, in keeping with the increased tempo of the times.
Reconstruction of the Board to meet this expansion began in 1901,
when Roderick Fry retired to join his father’s concern in Bristol and
was replaced by the Chairman’s second son, Rex Fry. In 1903, a
fourth director was elected, Frederick Cowderoy, who had been
manager of the paper-converting plant.
With these changes came changes of method also. In the same
year, 1903, the first steps were taken towards electrifying the factory,
with the installation of a 20 h.p. motor to drive about fifty small
printing presses. This was well ahead of the times, and it was not
until years later that it was decided to introduce electric lighting.
The completed factory from the railway viaduct, c. 1905.


In 1907, John Doyle Fry passed away. His forty years of
association with the firm had been marked by unceasing and even
increasing growth in every aspect of our business. His loss was great
indeed, but, by some strange manner of compensation, the year of
his death also marked the advent of another notable figure in the
history of our company. Byrom Stanley Bramwell, first as secretary,
and later as a member of the Board, contributed greatly to the
efficient running of the business under the ever changing conditions
of the times.
Main entrance at The Grove, c. 1905.


Expansion and change, unsettling as they might have been, had
never succeeded in stifling invention, however. 1910 saw us at the
outset of a great demand for printing on satin which lasted, with
minor interruptions, until the outbreak of the recent war. 1916, amid
the stresses and strains of the first world conflict, brought yet another
innovation which stands out as a landmark in its particular field.
This was Rex Fry’s development of the composite container, a
concentrically wound paper cylinder, with tinplate bottom and lever
ring and lid seamed on to it. The urgent needs of the time, when
sheet metals of all kinds were in critically short supply, made it
advisable to grant manufacturing rights to certain outside firms.
This was at once done, and assistance given to them in setting up
their own plants. Meanwhile other demands on our already extended
production capacity were piling up, and we never in fact returned
to this type of manufacture until 1936.
The end of the 1914-18 war, and the return to peacetime
economy and competitive trading marks the commencement of the
final chapter in our story. An early threat of American competition
in packaging and its ancillary trades led to the formation, in 1921,
of an association of some of the leading tin-box manufacturers in
the country. This was named The Metal Box & Printing Industries
Limited (later The Metal Box Company, Ltd.), and Barclay & Fry
Ltd. was one of the first four associated companies, with Stanley
Bramwell playing a leading part in the founding of the new venture.
None, save men with the same vision and foresight as had
inspired Robert Barclay nearly 70 years earlier, could have predicted
and planned for the success which attended the new organisation


from its earliest days. None, save men with the same devotion and
fixity of purpose, could have exploited that success to the full, or
translated it into the concrete things of plant and equipment, the
abstract things of human endeavour and enterprise, which go toward
the making of a great industrial concern. Under the Chairmanship
first of Mr. F. N. Hepworth, and later of Sir Robert Barlow, the
Company has grown to its full stature in an amazingly short time,
considering the organisational problems involved.
We, at Southwark, although now just a part of a greater whole,
were most wisely encouraged to retain all that was best in our long
tradition, and to foster and increase the skill and ingenuity which
had so sustained us down the years. 1923 saw the erection of a branch
factory at Portslade, especially to cater for the needs of certain
important customers along the south coast. In 1934, we added to an
already imposing list of manufactures the cardboard jig-saw puzzle,
Jigsaws by the million —a production achievement between the wars.


and in particular the range featuring the many lovable characters
which Walt Disney has bequeathed to the children of the world.
Composite manufacture was at last resumed in 1936, first at
Southwark, and later transferred to Portslade.
HEN came war; all the foresight of our predecessors could
not have envisaged the aeroplane, or that the excellent
factory site they had so carefully selected would be in
the middle of one of the Luftwaffe’s most tempting targets.
During that distressful winter and spring of 1940-41, there were no
less than five major incidents at The Grove, besides many other
minor occurrences which were far too close for comfort. 70% of
our total factory space was destroyed, together with many
machines which were at the time irreplaceable. The ingenuity
and enterprise, which had been our pride in times of peace, now
had to be turned to the stern task of finding other expedients,
other manufacturing space and of “making do” in a hundred
different ways. Part of the remaining plant was transferred
to Tonbridge, and housed in a portion of the premises of friends in
the trade. A small space in our own premises at The Grove was
cleared and patched up and put back into commission. Everyone
helped, and no one spared himself, and we stayed on the job.
With the war’s end came re-organisation. The Tonbridge
premises were released to their owners, and what remained
of the tin-box making plant at Southwark was transferred
to other branches of The Metal Box Company. And so
we find ourselves back on much the same path on which


Robert Barclay first set our feet so firmly. We find ourselves part
of a great industrial family; it has thirty factories in Gt.
Britain, and eleven overseas, in India,Pakistan, South Africa, Kenya,
Malaya and Israel; it has close working associations in Australia,
Belgium, France, Holland, Sweden and the United States; and it
employs all told nearly 23,000 people. We look to a future that is
bright with promise, for even now, as the new buildings at Southwark
are beginning to rise and take shape upon the ruins of the old, we
are determined that they too shall be filled with the same spirit of
diligence, enterprise and ingenuity which inspired our founding in
Bucklersbury a century and a half ago.
Another Phoenix —an architect's impression of our new premises on completion.




DESIGNED, PRODUCED AND PRINTED BY THE METAL BOX COMPANY LTD.
HEAD OFFICE: THE LANGHAM, PORTLAND PLACE, LONDON, W. 1., ENGLAND.
