

r^F f
6 \0
117
|?». 3ntircto’s CatficDral,
17th JUNE, 1902,
Being the Day of the funeral
WILLIAM MACQUARIE GOWPER
M.A.,
FOR 44 YEARS
Dean of tl>e Cathedra! gbwrch of $. Andrew,
AND
flrcbdcacon of Sydney.
I


ORDER OF SERVICE.
After the singing of the sentences at the commencement of
the Office for the Burial of the Dead , there shall follow this
Psalm.
Psalm xc. Domine, refugium.
T ORD, thou hast been our refuge: from one generation to
another.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the
earth and the world were made; thou art God from ever-
lasting, and world without end.
Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou sayest,
Come again, ye children of men.
For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday:
seeing that is past as a watch in the night.
As soon as thou scatterest them they are even as a sleep :
and fade away suddenly like the grass.
In the morning it is green, and groweth up: but in the
evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered.
For we consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid
at thy wrathful indignation
Thou hast set our misdeeds before thee; and our secret
sins in the light of thy countenance.
For when thou art angry all our days are gone : we bring
our years to an end, as it were a tale that is told.
The days of our age are threescore years and ten: and
though men be so strong that they come to fourscore years;
yet is their strength then but labour and sorrow; so soon
passeth it away, and we are gone.
But who regardeth the power of thy wrath: for even
thereafter as a man feareth, so is thy displeasure.
So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.
Turn thee again, 0 Lord, at the last: and be gracious
unto thy servants.
0 satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we
rejoice and be glad all the days of our life.
Comfort us again now after the time that thou hast
plagued us: and for the years wherein we have suffered
adversity.
Shew thy servants thy work: and their children thy
gW- , r T
And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon
us: prosper thou the work of our hands upon us, 0 prosper
thou our handy-work.


A LMIGHTY God, with whom do live the spirits of them
that depart hence in the Lord, and with whom the
souls of the faithful, after they are delivered from the burden
of the flesh, are in joy and felicity; We give thee hearty
thanks, for that it hath pleased thee to deliver this our
brother out of the miseries of this sinful world; beseeching
thee, that it may please thee, of thy gracious goodness, shortly
to accomplish the number of thine elect, and to hasten thy
kingdom; that we, with all those that are departed in the
time faith of thy holy Name, may have our perfect consum-
mation and bliss, both in body and soul, in thy eternal and
everlasting glory; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Then shall be sung the following Hymn.
nnHE saints of God, their conflict past,
And life’s long battle won at last,
No more they need the shield or sword,
They cast them down before their Lord :
Oh happy saints, for ever blest,
At Jesus’ feet how safe your rest!
The saints of God, their wanderings done,
No more their weary course they run,
No more they faint, no more they fall,
No foes oppress, no fears appal;
Oh happy saints ! for ever blest,
In that dear home how sweet your rest!
The saints of God, life’s voyage o’er,
Safe landed on that blissful shore,
No stormy tempests now they dread,
No roaring billows lift their head ;
Oh happy saints ! for ever blest,
In that calm haven of your rest.
The saints of God their vigil keep
While yet their mortal bodies sleep,
Till from the dust they too shall rise.
And soar triumphant to the skies :
Oh happy saints, rejoice and sing:
He quickly comes, your Lord and King.
O God of saints, to Thee we cry ;
O Saviour, plead for us on high ;
0 Holy Ghost, our Guide and Friend,
Grant us Thy grace till life shall end ;
That with all saints our rest may be
In that bright Paradise with Thee.
Amen.


Then shall follow the Lesson taken out of the fifteenth
chapter of the former Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians ,
Then shall follow the Hymn.
/UJ_OD of the living, in whose eyes
Unveil’d Thy whole creation lies ;
All souls are Thine ; we must not say
That those are dead who pass away;
From this our world of flesh set free,
We know them living unto Thee.
Released from earthly toil and strife,
With Thee is hidden still their life ;
Thine are their thoughts, their works, their powers,.
All Thine, and yet most truly ours ;
For well we know, where’er we be,
Our dead are living unto Thee.
Rot spilt like water on the ground,
Not wrapp’d in dreamless sleep profound,
Not wandering in unknown despair
Beyond Thy voice, Thine arm, Thy care ;
Not left to lie like fallen tree ;
Not dead but living unto Thee.
Thy word is true, Thy will is just;
To Thee we leave them, Lord, in trust;
And bless Thee for the love which gave
Thy Son to fill a human grave,
That none might fear that world to see,
Where all are living unto Thee.
0 Breather into man of breath,
0 Holder of the keys of death,
0 (river of the life within,
Save us from death, the death of sin ;
That body, soul, and spirit be
For ever living unto Thee. Amen.
The body will then he borne to the West Door, the officiating
Clergy preceding the coffin , the other Clergy and choir following
and chanting ‘‘ Nunc Dimittis .”
TOWNSEND A. CO. PRINTERS, 202 PITT-ST. SYDNEY
