

ANNUAL ADDRESS
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA.
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
1887-8.
BY
SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND, K.C.B., F.R.G.S.
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE SOCIETY,
AND
PRESIDENT OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
5h* 1—89




GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA.
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
1887-8.
ANNUAL ADDRESS
By SIR E. STRICKLAND, K.C.B., F.R.G.S., Vice-President of the Society.
In accordance with my annual custom, I propose to give as
comprehensive a survey as can be compressed within the limits
of an evening’s address of the work done by our explorers all over
the world during the year 1887-88. That year will be memorable
in geographical annals for the starting from the very heart of Africa
of the expedition under Stanley through a hitherto unexplored
region for the relief of Emin Bey. After the lapse of nearly a
year and a half, during which period the gravest fears were
entertained of the safety of the explorer, letters from Stanley
have at last been received by the Royal Geographical Society, by
the son-in-law of Dr. Livingstone, and by the Chairman of the
Emin Bey Relief Eund, giving full particulars of the fortunes
of the expedition up to the beginning of September, 1888.
Lengthy extracts from the letter to the Chairman of the Emin
Bey Relief Eund have been published in the Sydney morning
dailies, and the public have therefore been able to form some
idea of the extraordinary hardships undergone by the dauntless
explorer and the expedition he led during the course of a journey
which was marked, to use his own characteristic phrase, “by
disease, disaster, and death,” but which was so far successful
that its main object —that of placing relief in the hands of
Emin Bey —was attained. By far the most interesting letter
A


of the three, however, that to the Royal Geographical Society,
has not been published in the papers referred to. In this
letter Stanley gives a full description of
New Regions and Tribes in the Heart of Africa,
“ previously,” as he tells us, “ entirely unexplored and untrodden
by either white or Arab.” The expedition left the Middle
Congo, in the very heart of Africa, on June 28,1887, and followed
the Aruwhimi stream, an important affluent of the Congo, called
by various names by the various tribes dwelling along its banks, but
for 300 miles from its source known as the Ituri. This is the
river which Stanley’s expedition has now made famous for all time.
Stanley has traced its geographical position in a few masterly
touches. “ Draw,” he says, “ three or four respectable streams
draining into it from the crest of the plateau overlooking the
Albert Nyanza and two or three respectable streams flowing
into it from north-westerly, let the main stream flow south-west
to near north latitude 1 deg., give it a bow-like form from north
latitude 1 deg. to north latitude 1 deg. 50 min., then let it flow
with curves and bends down to north latitude 1 deg. 17 min. near
Yambunya, and you have a sketch of the course of the Aru-
whimi, or Ituri, from the highest source down to its mouth, and
the length of this Congo tributary will be 800 miles.” For a
great part of the way this is the region of almost impenetrable
forests, of low dense bush, of gigantic creepers and climbing
plants choking up the spaces between the trees, of tangled under-
growth and jungle, every inch of which has to be tunnelled
through before progress can be made, of clouds of butterflies
sailing across stream- for hours at a time, of myriads of strange
insects and stinging flies, of bees innumerable, of wasps, gnats,
and ticks, of sombre skies and thick mists, of heated stagnant air,
and of eternal gloom. “We were prepared to encounter the most
ferocious cannibals,” writes Stanley, “ but the Central African
forest, now opened for the first time, contains several horrors
within its gloomy bosom that we were not prepared for.” In
a graphic passage, Stanley describes a sombre morning in the


forest, when the sky is covered with lowering and heavy clouds,
or a thick mist buries everything in its fold. “Nothing stirs
there,” he writes, “ insect life is still asleep, the forest is still
as death, the dark river, darkened by lofty walls of thick forest
and vegetation, is silent as a grave, our heart throbs seem
almost clamorous, and our inmost thoughts loud. If no rain
follows this darkness, the sun appears from behind the cloudy
masses, the mist disappears, life wakens up before its brilliancy,
butterflies scurry through the air, a solitary ibis croaks an alarm,
a diver flies across the stream, the forest is full of a strange
murmur, and somewhere up the river booms the alarum drum.
The quick-sighted natives have seen us, voices vociferate chal-
lenges, there is a flash of spears, and hostile passions are
aroused.”
A Land of Cannibals and Dwarfs.
This is the region, too, of numerous cannibal tribes, and of
dwarfs called Wambatti, a “ venemous, cowardly, and thievish
race,” who are scattered about the valley of the Aruwhimi,
especially between the Nepoko and the grassland, near the
Albert Nyanza, in about 150 forest camps. In a former work,
“Through the Dark Continent,” Stanley gives some particulars,
on the authority of an Arab trader, of a forest country in the
very heart of Africa filled with dwarfs, “fearful fellows and
desperate,” who shot arrows tipped with the most deadly
poison at all their enemies, and wore no clothes. The singular
tale told by the Arab trader has been mainly confirmed by
Stanley himself, who lost many a brave fellow from tetanus
brought on by the slightest puncture from an arrow, and
which generally terminated the sufferings of the victims within
a week. Several deaths occurred from this painful disease
at Avisibba, about half way between Panza Palls and the
Nepoko, where the dwarfs attacked the camp in quite a
resolute and determined fashion, their stores of poisoned arrows
giving them plenty of pluck. When the poison is fresh death is
almost certain; but when it is stale, and consequently dry, it


loses much of its effect, as in the case of Lieutenant Stairs,
whose wound remained open for months, but who recovered his
strength after three weeks. Stanley’s description of this poison
is worth quoting. “We were much exercised,” he says, “as to
what this poison might be that was so deadly. On returning
from the Nyanza to relieve the rear column, under Major
Barttelot, we halted at Avisibba, and, rummaging among the
huts, found several packets of dried red ants, or pismires. It
was then we knew that the dried bodies of these, ground into
powder, cooked in palm oil, and smeared over the wooden points
of the arrows, were the deadly irritant by which we lost so many
fine men with such terrible suffering. Now we wonder that we
have been so long in the dark, for we could create any number
of poisons from such insects as we have seen. The large black
ant, for instance, whose bite causes a great blister, would be still
more venomous prepared in the same way; the small grey cater-
pillars would make another irritant, which, mixed with the blood,
would torture a man to death; the bloated spiders, an inch in
length, which are covered with prickles most painful to the
touch, would form another terrible compound, the effects of
which make one shudder to think of. These poisons are prepared
in the woods. In the depths of the forest the savage makes his
fire, and prepares the fatal venom which lays low even the huge
elephant. It is forbidden to cook it near a village. In the forest
he smears his arrows, and having covered the points with fresh
leaves, lest he himself might be a victim, he is ready for war.”
This confirmation of the story about the great dwarf-land is all
the more interesting as a correspondent has pointed out that
Herodotus relates a similar anecdote, which of course we moderns
have hitherto treated as unworthy of belief. “In Herodotus 11,
32-33,” writes a correspondent of the London Morning Post, “we
find a story told originally by Etearchus, king of the Ammonians,
to some men of Gyrene, and by them to Herodotus, to the effect
that certain adventurous Nasamones, wishing to discover the
sources of the Nile, made a long journey into the interior of
Libya. After passing through a region infested by wild beasts


and a tract of sandy desert, they came at last to trees growing
in a plain, and while engaged in plucking the fruit growing
thereon they were attacked and captured by ‘ small men, less
than men of ordinary size,’ who carried them away through a
vast expanse of marshes until they came to a town the inhabitants
of which were all of the same diminutive size. By the town
flowed a river containing crocodiles, which river Etearchus
conjectured to he the Nile —a belief to which Herodotus also
inclines. The story, no doubt, has little historical value, but is
interesting as showing that some 2,000 years ago the difficulties
attending African exploration were much the same as at the
present day.”
The Subtleties of Savage "Warfare.
Some of the dangers which the expedition had to encounter
were of a very peculiar kind. For example, when the expedition
first started along the Aruwhimi river bank no path could be
found, and one had to be cut through the manioc fields, which
took them to a travelled road leading from village to village
inland. “In a few days,” says Stanley, “we became fully
initiated into the subtleties of savage warfare. Every art known
to native minds for annoying strangers was practised by these
natives. The path frequently had shallow pits, filled with sharp-
ened splinters, or skewers, deftly covered over with large leaves.
For barefooted people this proved a terrible punishment. Often
the skewers would perforate the feet quite through; at other
times the tops would be buried in the feet, resulting in gangren-
ous sores. We had ten men lamed by these skewers —so efficiently
lamed that few of them recovered to be of much use to us. One
of the approaches to every village was a straight road, perhaps
100 yards long and 12 feet wide, cleared of jungle, but bristling
with these skewers carefully and cunningly hidden at every place
likely to be trodden by an incautious foot. The real path was
crooked, and took a wide detour, and the cut road appeared so
tempting, so straight, and so short. At the village end was the
watchman, to beat his drum and sound the alarm, when every


native would take liis weapons, and proceed to the appointed
place to ply his bow at every opportunity. Yet, despite a
formidable list of hostile measures and attempts, no life was
lost, though our wounded increased in number.”
The Geographical Results of Stanley’s Trip.
Among the results of Stanley’s trip, from a geographical
point of view, are the discovery of what is probably the most
extensive forest region in all Africa, the mapping out of the
courses of the Aruwhimi stream and of its tributaries, the veri-
fication of Colonel Mason’s chart of the Albert Nyanza, which
is rapidly diminishing in size at the base, and the establish-
ment of the existence of a separate lake to the south —the one
discovered by himself in 1876, and which may drain either into
the Congo or the Nile, he feels sure, but not into the Albert
Nyanza. It is now thought to be fairly clear that the natural
outlet of the region round the latter lake is not by the Aruwhimi,
with its many rapids and impenetrable forests, but eastwards by
Victoria Nyanza and British East Africa. What the fate of
either Stanley or Emin Bey has been since the famous meeting
of the two men in April, 1888, at the southern end of Albert
Nyanza, is a matter for conjecture. Rumours of all sorts have
been afloat. Not long ago they were stated, on the authority of
a letter from Osman Digna, the rebel leader, to the commander
of the Suakim garrison, to have been captured, placed in chains,
and delivered to the Mahdi’s lieutenant at Lado. Then again,
we were informed that a certain “ white traveller ” had escaped
from the Mahdi’s clutches, but that Emin Bey remained a
prisoner. Then the news ran that both had been recaptured by
the Mahdi, and that they were captives at Khartoum. But
whatever adventures may have happened to Stanley since his
interesting letter was received, of one thing we may be quite sure,
namely, that if dauntless energy, extraordinary patience and
perseverance, indomitable will, a soul that knows no fear, and a
regular schoolboy’s faculty for getting out of every scrape can
help him, Stanley will yet return to Europe, and in his company


will be Emin Bey. One of the latest cablegrams to hand states
that both Emin Bey and Stanley were fighting their way to the
eastern coast, a piece of news which chimes in with the cable-
gram received last month to the effect that Stanley and Emin
Bey were pacifying the hostile native tribes in the territory of
the King of Uganda. News had been previously received by
cablegram, dated January 24th last, of a revolution in that
country, of the deposition of Muange, of the plundering of the
Erench and English stations, of the massacre of the Christian
natives and the expulsion of the teachers, of the destruction of
an immense accumulation of letters and stores for Stanley and
Emin Bey, and of the establishment of tbe temporary supremacy
of Mahommedanism on the ruins of the Christian faith. No
one who has read the description of that wonderful land and of
the country of the equatorial lake, contained in my paper on
“ Emin Bey and his surroundings,” read before this Society last
year, and copies of which may still be had, need be in the least
surprised that a revolution of such a character has taken place
over there. It is said to have been partly owing to the discovery
of a diabolical plot made by Muange to leave his body-guard on
an islet and starve them to death, and partly to the anger of
the Arabs at Muange’s successor, Kiwewa, commencing his
reign by favouring the converts to the Christian faith. The
Arabs accordingly prompted the massacre, and predicted the
speedy extermination of all the missionaries’ efforts in Central
Africa, in revenge, it is said, for Engand’s anti-slave trade policy.
The Slave Trade in Africa.
This question of slavery in Africa is, after all, the one which
should excite our warmest interest and our earnest and keenest
sympathy more than any other event which is taking place on
African soil. That it is the problem of the hour may be inferred
from the announcement made deliberately before an influential
meeting by one having more than ordinary means of getting at
the truth, that “ if the present state of things continues, the heart
of Africa will be an impenetrable desert in less than fifty years.’


Even Stanley’s brilliant feats, and the almost unparalleled
hardships and sufferings which the expedition under his charge
went through, pale into insignificance before the terrible, the
appalling story which Cardinal Lavigierie, the African Primate,
has to tell. Eor months the Cardinal has been telling that story
all over Europe, and his burning words have sunk deep into
the hearts of men, and the inhuman system of atrocities which
prevails in the interior of the Dark Continent, and is rapidly
turning it into a desert stained with the blood of countless
victims, is to form the subject of a special conference of all the
European Powers to be held at Lucerne in August next. Eor
twenty-nine years the Cardinal has laboured for the negro slave.
His missionaries, as he told his audience at Piccadilly in August
last, are established in the Sahara and upon the high tablelands
of Central Africa, from the north of Nyanza to the south of
Tanganika. Eleven of them have suffered martyrdom, while
more than fifty have died from fatigue and hardships. More
than half a million slaves are sold every year in the interior
of Africa. The missionaries have seen with their own eyes
whole provinces absolutely depopulated by the. massacres of
the slave-hunters, and each day, says the Cardinal, they are
compelled to witness scenes which point to the rapid extinction
of the race. Particularly is this the case in the province of
the Manyuema, above Stanley Palis, on the Upper Congo, which,
at the time of the death of Livingstone, was the richest in
ivory and population, but which the slave-hunters have now
reduced to a desert, seizing the ivory and reducing the inhabit-
ants to slavery in order that they may carry the ivory to the
coast, after which the captives are sold. “The infamous name of
Tippoo Tib,” says the Cardinal, “ will always be associated with
this work,” and it is he who has furnished Stanley with a portion
of his men. The Cardinal sketches in a few graphic words the
physical characteristics of this wonderful land. “ Africa,” he
says, “ is divided really into three zones —the lowlands, along
the seaboard of the Mediterranean, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans.
Advancing towards the interior, there is a raised plateau of


about 2,000 feet above the sea, and above this first plateau there
is a second immense tableland about 4,000 feet high. It is there
that fall every year those abundant rains which form the great
lakes, and it is from these lakes that flow the vast rivers of the
Nile, the Congo, the Niger, the Zambesi, and their innumerable
affluents. The nature of the soil, the heat of the sun, and the
abundance of water contribute to make this country one of the
richest and most beautiful in the world. The population also
was, and in some provinces still is, very numerous, and happy, and
peaceable. It is a wonderful country, where Europeans might
live, prosper, and procure all the necessaries of life. This is
the country which is being rapidly depopulated by Mahommedan
slave-hunters, whose religion teaches them to regard the blacks
as an inferior and degraded people, and who, in the last half
century, have been slowly and silently, but steadily and surely,
exterminating the African race.” It is to be hoped that one
result of the approaching European conference will be the striking
of a blow at the very root of this unholy traffic, and the estab-
lishment of barriers against slavery composed of natives led and
instructed by Europeans, in order to supplement the maritime
barriers formed by our men-of-war.
The New African State.
Turning to another part of Africa, where King Leopold has
established the new African State, but which is principally in-
debted to Stanley for its discovery and political birth, we find the
results of ten years’ labour thus tersely summed up by an officer
of the State “ The Lower Congo,” he says, “ has been opened
up to navigation by large vessels as far as Boma, soundings have
been made and the course marked out by buoys, a cadastral
survey of the Lower Congo has been made as a step towards the
preparation of a general map of the entire region, justice is
regularly administered in the Lower Congo, and a trustworthy
and cheap postal service has been established. In addition,
registries of births, deaths, and marriages have been established
for the non-native population, and it is expected that soon the


natives near the stations will also be brought within the scope of
the registrar’s returns. At Banana, Boma, and Leopoldville
medical establishments, under the direction of Belgian doctors,
have been founded, and a considerable armed force of blacks,
officered by Europeans, has been called into existence. The
caravan route between Matadi and Leopoldville is as free from
danger as a European road, and a complete service of porterage
by natives has been established. A railway has been projected,
and the route almost entirely surveyed. The State has established
herds of cattle at various stations, and in the very heart of Africa,
on the waters of the Upper Congo, there is a fleet of steamers,
every year increasing in number. A loan of 150,000,000 f. has
been authorized, and the first issue subscribed. Many of the
more intelligent natives from the country drained by the Upper
Congo have taken service with the State, and numerous trading
factories have been established as far up the river as Bangala and
Louebo. In addition, several private companies have been formed
for developing the country; and, finally, geographical discoveries
of the greatest importance have been made, either by the officers
of the State or by travellers who received great assistance in
their work from the State.” Among the other noteworthy events
in Africa during the period under review were the practical
confirmation by a Belgian officer named Lieutenant Yan Grele
of the identity of the Welle, the great stream discovered by
Schweinfurth, in the Niam Niam country of the Soudan, with
the Mobangi, one of the chief tributaries of the Congo; the
conclusion of his recent march across Africa by Lieutenant
Wissmann, who has opened up new routes from the Kasai River
across to the Lualaba, the great eastern affluent of the Congo ;
the ascent by Dr. Meyer of the snow-capped Mount Kilima-njaro
as high as the ice-wall surrounding the crater; and the settle-
ment of disputed topographical questions in the Nyassa region
by the Rev. A. Hetherwick; while south of the Zambesi, Mr.
Selous and Sir Marshall Clarke have added to our knowledge of
Matabele and Busutoland respectively.


Two Brilliant Exploring Feats in Asia.
Asia lias also been the scene of some remarkable exploits during
the year under review, which will be famous in the annals of
geographical enterprise—to quote the appreciative remarks of
General Strachey, President of the Home Society —for the com-
pletion of two of the most adventurous and extensive journeys
in the great central area of the continent ever carried out by
Europeans, one by Mr. A. D. Carey, and the other by Lieutenant
Younghusband, both of which journeys were performed with
only a few native attendants, without armed guards, and brought
to a successful conclusion without encountering serious obstacles
on the part of natives or Governments, throughout the thousands
of miles of country traversed. Mr. Carey’s route covered the
entire circuit of Central Asia, extending over nearly 20 degrees
of longitude and 10 degrees of latitude, while that of the lieu-
tenant stretched from Peking to Hanei, via the Gobi Desert;
thence westward to Kashgar and Yarkand, and eventually crossing
into India, by a long-disused pass over the ice-bound Mustagh
Range. The lieutenant gives a thrilling account of the crossing
of this pass, which is quite enough to make the hair of a stay-at-
home President stand on end. The night before the pass was
crossed the lieutenant and party slept out in the middle of the
glacier, with a horrible cold wind blowing down it. They had
only fuel for cooking purposes —none whatever to keep them
warm. The supplies, too, were running short, and there was
but little prospect of obtaining either fuel or food till the pass
was crossed, and the village of Askoli, on the other side, was
reached. There was a general apprehension that the crossing of
the pass was an impossible feat, but the lieutenant determined to
attempt it. They accordingly started in the early morning, when
it was yet dark, to reach the summit of the glacier, from whence
they hoped to find a way down to the other side. At every step
they sank knee-deep in snow. They were 19,000 feet above the
level of the sea. The rarity of the atmosphere added to their
distress, and they could only advance about a score of steps
at a time before halting under the pressure of sheer fatigue.


This was all the more tantalising, as the ascent to the pass was
so gentle, and the summit looked so near, that it seemed as if
they could run up in no time. But it was not till midday that
they reached the summit, aud then, on looking about for a way
down, they could see none. Huge blocks of ice had fallen
from the mountains which overhang the pass, and had blocked
up the path by which travellers used formerly to descend from
it, and the only possible way of getting to the village and the
supplies below was by crossing a steep icy slope to a still steeper
cliff, and thence to descend on to some more icy slopes which
could be seen below. “Nobody spoke,” says the lieutenant,
“as we looked down that pass, and I waited anxiously for the
next move. I could not give an order to go ahead, for I felt
incapable of going first myself. I heard them asking each other
who should-go first, and at last Wali, the finest fellow that ever
stepped, quietly took an axe, tied a rope round his waist, and
giving the end of it to us, told us to follow him.” Then follows
a description of the descent, which was of so marvellous a
character that it fairly takes one’s breath away merely to read the
account. Indeed, after the party had successfully accomplished
the feat, the lieutenant acknowledged that it seemed perfectly
impossible that any man could have got down such a place.
The Heart of Indo-China.
In my last annual address I gave a description of the great
Indo-China region—the “ most richly gifted by nature of Asiatic
lands,” as it has been called—which stretches from the Bay of
Bengal to the China Sea, and which Messrs. Hallett and
Colquhoun propose to open up by the construction of a great
line of railway from Moulmein, the Burmese sea-port at the
mouth of the Salween, via Raheng, a big city lying due east in
Siam, to Ssumao, due north on the Chinese frontier, where the
Chinese system of railways would join on. Since then, Mr. J.
M‘Carthy, Superintendent of Surveys in Siam, has read a report
to the Home Society of six years of exploration in Siam, the
greater part of which had been previously unexplored by any


European. Siam is a much larger country than one would infer
from looking at an ordinary map. It comprises nearly the whole
of the Malay Peninsula north of the 4th parallel of latitude, in
addition to the great mainland. The continental portion is
bounded, as almost every school-map will show, by Burmah and
British Burmah on the north-west and west, by Yunnan on the
north, by Tonquin on the north-east, Annam on the east, and by
the Gulf of Siam and Cambodia on the south. Siam, therefore,
occupies the heart of Indo-China, and it is a very interesting
country in manv respects. On the west is a chain of mountains,
which runs in an unbroken range with peaks from 7,000 to 8,000
feet high to Singapore, the southernmost limit of the Malay
Peninsula; while on the east is another range, with still loftier
peaks, which forms the great watershed of all the rivers that
flow into the Gulf of Tonquin and the China Sea on the one
hand, or into the Meinam-Kong on the other. The Meinam-
Kong, which flows through the northern and eastern parts of
the kingdom, is the largest river in Siam, but so blocked with
large rocks and cataracts as to be unnavigable in parts even for
native craft. The most important river, however, is the Meinam,
called the Siamese Nile, because a good rice harvest depends
on whether it overflows its banks. The people, of whom there
are probably about 10,000,000 in all, are mostly settled on the
river banks, and are principally employed in cultivating rice.
There are but few villages distant from the large rivers, or in
the mountainous parts of the country, the towns and villages
being generally built in open flat valleys, picturesquely sur-
rounded by mountains, which are clothed with forest and a thick
undergrowth of bush from summit to base. The climate is far
from enviable, jungle fever being a very common complaint.
The population comprises Siamese proper, Lao, Cambodians,
Burmese, Annamites, Malays, Chinese, and many tribes of hill
men, such as the Karens and others of a similar stamp. These
different nationalities do not amalgamate with one another, but
occupy villages apart. One of Mr. M‘Carthy’s trips was up the
Meinam, from its mouth at Bangkok, where it flows into the


Gulf of Siam, as far as Paknam Po, north latitude 16°, where
the two main branches join. The river between these two places
flows through flat country, both sides showing great rice cultiva-
tion, well studded with villages and numerous temples. The
villages are continuous, consisting principally of wooden houses
hidden away in groves of cocoa-nut palms, plantain trees, and
bamboos, so similar in appearance that it is difficult to tell where
one village begins and another leaves off. On the slopes of the
banks advantage is taken of the rich deposit left by the river as
it subsides, and tobacco is planted along the whole course. The
Mei-Ping, or western branch, at any rate as far as Raheng, is not
so well peopled. Por long stretches this branch of the river has
no trace of a habitation, and the villages, such as they are, are
very poor. Between this river and the British frontier is a
perfect wilderness of jungle, and a region so mountainous that
few even of the Karens live there. A new interest attaches to
this part of the country, says Mr. M‘Carthy, on account of the
railway scheme for connecting Maulmein with China, referred to
above. While not presuming to question the feasibility of such
an undertaking, Mr. M'Carthv points out that the Indian railway
between Poonah and Bombay, on account of the heavy cost of
construction, is not a paying line, although it is a short one and
the traffic is good; whereas part of the route of the suggested
Siamese line would be over a wilderness of mountains, where the
rainfall is measured not by tens but occasionally by hundreds of
inches, and the traffic would probably be light.
The Land of the Wandering Haws.
Mr. McCarthy, accompanied by a strong escort, also paid a visit
to the north-eastern portion of the kingdom, which was reputed to
be infested by Chinese brigands, called Wandering Haws, sup-
posed to be descendants of the Taiping rebels who first settled in
Tonquin, and, having levied tribute, thence spread inwards towards
the Meinam-Kong. Leaving the Meinam River at Saraburi,
Mr. M‘Carthy travelled to Khorat, a very important city, N.


latitude 15°, E. longtitude 102°. The walls are enormous monu-
ments of labour, over 5,000 ft. long and over 3,000 ft. broad, but
in a state of decay. “In this district,” observes Mr. M‘Carthy,
“ are to be found ruins of stone temples, and involuntarily,
while gazing on them, the question rises in the mind: Who
were those who carved the beautiful tracings on the walls, and
bowed down before the now crumbling stone figures ? All
knowledge of them is lost in the past —where clouds of incense
rose to ‘the million Gods’ now all is still.” Erom Kholat the
party travelled north to another very important town situated
on the Meinam-Kong, called Nongh-hai, distant about 300 miles,
through grass plains, interspersed with clumps of trees, here and
there native villages nestling amid tall waving cocoa-nuts and
acacia palms. At Nongh-hai the river has a magnificent appear-
ance, the channel when in flood being about a thousand yards
across. During the rainy season, however, the whole of this
part of the country must be a perfect sea, judging from the fact
that the water-marks on the trees are four feet up the trunk,
but in summer everything is parched, until it is difficult to find
water at all. On the other side of the river from Nongh-hai is
the land of the Wandering Haws, or, at any rate, these robber
bands had cast a spell of desolation over a large part of it, and
from their strongholds in the hills had reduced the most
beautiful province of Indo-China to a desert nearly as silent
as the grave. The first part of the route was very picturesque,
with many thriving villages, instead of being totally uninhabited,
as rumour had stated it to be. There were bold lofty
mountains decked with primeval forest, then bare naked rocks
like colossal giants of stone, having for inhabitants seven
hill-tribes call Khas, the aborigines of the country, all owing
allegiance to the chief of Luang Phrabang, and until very
recently willing workers for nearly all the Lao of that province,
whom they supported with rice. The Khas have a legend that
the Lao were driven in from Tonquin, spreading into the present
Lao country through the beautiful valley of Taeng. Then there
are the Meos, who resemble Chinese in appearance, and live in


comparative ease and plenty on the cool heights of the mountain
tops. After passing some more mountains covered with forests,
jungles made more than usually dangerous by pit-falls and
sharpened stakes, and gently-sloping hills bedecked with long-
leaved pines and the most beautiful flowers, the party entered upon
a vast plateau, backed by lofty mountains, and about 4,000 feet
above the level of the sea. On the grass-covered plain were a
number of what at first sight from a distance appeared to be tents
then cattle, then rocks, but which on a nearer approach proved to
be gigantic stone jars, erect, prostrate, or broken to pieces, which
former residents in the country said were the handiwork of angels,
but which were probably fashioned perhaps in sport by some
long-vanished race. Over all this beautiful country there reigns
a silence as of death, and everywhere the traveller comes upon
evidence of the destructive ravages of the Wandering Haws.
Once upon a time Luang Phrabung, which is the name of the
most important town in this locality, situated on the Meinam
River, was the capital of a powerful and populous kingdom, but
the terrible fever which prevails there, and the still more terrible
bandits, who destroy what the fever has not touched, have reduced
what Mr. M‘Carthy calls “ the most beautiful province in Indo-
China” to its present melancholy state.
Between Tibet and Nepal.
But apart from Mr. M'Carthy’s interesting exploration of
Siam, a great deal of other geographical work has been done in
different parts of Asia. The ruby-mines district in Burma has
been explored by Mr. Robert Gordon, who has contributed much
original information regarding the country and its inhabitants.
General Haig has traversed the interior of Yemen, and has added
to our knowledge of that district. Some good work has also
been done by a native explorer attached to the Indian Survey
Department between Tibet and Nepal. The explorer was
refused a pass by the Governor of the Khumbu District, 18 miles
west of Mount Everest, but having cured the Governor’s
daughter-in-law of goitre, which is a verj common complaint in


that region, the explorer was allowed to proceed north, and
reached the watershed of the Himalayas near a village called
Pangji. Large masses of rock, brought down by snow-action
from the heights on either side, are scattered in the adjacent
valley, poised like capitals on pillars of frozen snow, about 30 or
40 feet in circumference, and 20 to 30 feet in height. Near this
spot is the formidable Pangula Pass, estimated by the explorer
to be 20,000 feet in height. The ridge or water-parting forms
the boundary between Nepal and Tibet. On an adjacent hill is
the stone-built hut occupied by the Tibetan Governor, under
whom are forty Chinese officers, commanding 500 soldiers of Tibet.
The authority of the Governor extends to the westernmost limits
of Tibet. He exercises both civil and military jurisdiction,
except that of capital punishment, within his territory. He has
a monopoly of the trade in tea and salt, which the inhabitants
are compelled to take over and pay for in barley and coin. The
chief articles exported from India into Tibet by this route are
tobacco leaf, cotton cloth, broadcloth, iron, brass and copper
vessels, corals, and rupees, which are used for making jewellery.
Por these the men of Khumbu go annually in parties to India,
some even as far as Calcutta, taking with them musk pods,
yahtails, antelope horns, blankets, and argus pheasants. Por a
distance of about 25 miles beyond Chamda the valley shows
abundant signs of having once been very largely populated, but
it is said that in the last great war between the Nepalese and
the Tibetans most of the inhabitants were killed, and the place
now is almost deserted.
From Andaman to Labrador.
Before leaving Asia I would like to refer in terms of the
highest praise to the excellent work done by Mr. Maurice
Portman among the Andamanese, especially on the Little Anda-
man, which no European had previously explored, and where he
found a model race of savages, which, unfortunately, is fast dying
out. A very interesting district on the borders of Europe and
Asia, known as Suanetia, a mountain-girt basin near the Central
B


Caucasus, has also been described with exceptional ability by
Mr. Douglas W. Ereshfield, the hon. secretary of the Home
Society. On that Central Caucasian range a friend of the hon.
secretary’s, Mr. Donkin, a very talented and enthusiastic Alpine
traveller and photographer, recently met his death, buried with
three companions beneath an avalanche. They are supposed to
■have been overtaken by one of those terrible catastrophes which
sometimes burst upon the unsuspecting traveller from the
heavenly blue, and which can neither be prevented nor fore-
seen. A still more notable death, which has recently
occurred, is that of General Prejivalsky, the indefatigable Eussian
explorer, who started in August last upon his fifth expedition to
Central Asia, which he was destined never to finish. In my last
annual report I gave a brief account of the General’s fourth and
most memorable trip, in the course of which he visited the
sources of the Hoang-ho, which lie in the marshy plains of
Odontala, the Sing-hu-sai, or Starry Sea of Chinese, seven days’
march from which spot is the watershed between the upper
waters of the Hoang-ho and the Yang-tse-Kiang, at an elevation of
nearly 15,000 feet. The Imperial Eussian Geographical Society
at St. Petersburg published a splendid work by Prejivalsky last
year, descriptive of this trip, which also contained a political study
by the author of the inhabitants of Central Asia. The regions
in Central Asia as yet unexplored by Europeans, he says, are the
whole of Northern Tibet, where geographical discoveries await
the traveller at every step; Eastern Tibet, and the Ambo
country, a wild, Alpine region, with a luxuriant flora and fauna ;
and Southern Tibet, between Lhassak, the capital, and Ghartoh.
The frozen north has also formed the scene of some very important
work. Dr. Nansen, the young Norwegian naturalist, the curator
of the museum at Bergen, has accomplished the brilliant feat,
never performed before, of traversing Greenland from west to
east, and his record of the trip is awaited by scientists with the
keenest interest. Mr. Handle E. Holme has explored a portion
of the interior of Labrador, the climate and scenery of which he
finds altogether different from that on the coast. A luxuriant


forest covers a large portion of the interior, which is excep-
tionally well watered, and remarkable for perhaps the most
stupendous waterfall in the world, that on the river Grand,
which is said to descend in one sheer leap from the lofty table-
land in the interior, a distance of 2,000 feet to the sea. The
country is also noteworthy for being the habitat of the unadul-
terated Red Indian, of whom Eenimore Cooper used to write,
and who, after having been turned out of his happy hunting-
ground by the Canadian lakes, has found a last resting-place in
the interior of Labrador.
Tapping the Persian Gulf.
The last number to hand of the Annual News contains a
report of what Professor Vambery described as “the most
important lecture yet delivered ” on the subject of the proposed
new trade route by the recently-opened Karun River from the
interior of Persia to the Persian Gulf. One of the “ Colonial
Notes ” in the paper referred to sums up the question in a
nutshell. It reads as follows : “ The advantages of the Karun
River as a trade route have been before the country for some
months, and much has been written and said on the subject.
But the most important information on the Karun River and
the development of the commerce of Persia now comes to us
from one who has resided for many years in the Shah s kingdom.
General Sir R. Murdoch Smith is our best authority on the
ancient ‘lran’ and the countries adjacent to it. He has made
a special study of the great river systems which formed the
grand physical features of the mighty empires of antiquity
long since vanished, and whose places have been unworthily
filled by the non-progressive and effete governments of Persia
and Turkey. The recent concessions from the Shah are, how-
ever, a step in the right direction. In the hands of Englishmen
they should effectually alter the future of Persia. The Shah
himself is almost a puppet in the hands of the Russians, who
hold the commercial monopoly of the northern provinces of his
kingdom. To the south he is less fettered, and the opening of


the Karan River may be the means of shaking off Russian
influence, and of turning to practical account this hitherto
almost untapped region, richly endowed as it is by nature.
Both Sir Lepel Griffin and the famous Asiatic traveller,
Arminius Vambery, declare that English spirit is dying out in
the East, and that Russia is having pretty well her own way.
Here, at any rate, is an opportunity of counteracting Russian
influence, and of bringing under the British flag a trade giving
free access to the rich markets of Persia.”
The Work of Exploration in Australasia.
We now come to the fourth and last great section of the globe
in which our explorers are at work, that in which as Australians
we are specially interested. We have not been altogether idle in
this part of the "world during the period under review, but I have
already dwelt at such length with the work in other parts of the
globe that I shall content myself for the present with merelv
glancing at what has been done here, promising to deal with it
at greater length on some other occasion. Another attempt has
been made to penetrate the interior of New Guinea, this time by
an expedition under Mr. Cuthbertson, sent out by the Victorian
branch of this Society ; but, beyond a considerable collection of
plants and animals, nothing very important was achieved. The
newly-discovered Empress Augusta River in German New Guinea
has been ascended for 380 miles by Dr. Schrader, who believes the
stream to be navigable up to and beyond the Dutch frontier. New
rivers and harbours have been discovered in the Gulf of Papua by
Mr. Theodore Bevan, who surveyed two fine rivers and several
minor streams and channels on the eastern side of the gulf; while
Captain J. R. Hennessy, in the mission steamer “ Ellengowan,”
has discovered a new harbour. The Hon. John Douglas, who
succeeded the late Sir Peter Scratchley as Special Commissioner
for New Guinea, has since resigned, and has been succeeded,
in his turn, by Sir William McGregor, K C.M.G., who is now
engaged in an important expedition at the foot of Mount Stanley.
In his report for last year the ex-Commissioner states that he has


visited all the different points of importance from the western to
the eastern end of the protected territory, and there had not
been a single instance since his last report of any serious outrage
by natives against the white men, or by the white men against
the natives, while intertribal disturbances and native murders
had been less frequent than before, and not such as to call for
interference on the part of the protecting authorities. The
great requirement of the western division, he states, is a light-
draught steamer capable of navigating the shoals on the coast
and the inland waters of the Fly, which, as he rightly enough
observes, is the great natural highway to the interior of British
New Guinea. Since then steamers have been specially built in
England for the purpose, have been sent out to the new Com-
missioner, and they appear to have proved a great success. As in
New South Wales, so in New Guinea, especially to west of Port
Moresby, there bas been a terrible drought, which has killed half
the cocoanut palms and fruit trees planted last season, the like
of which has not been experienced in that country since it has
been known to us. There has also, it appears, been a discovery
of gold at Sudest, and hundreds of men have gone there to try their
luck. Under the orders of the ex-Commissioner, a survey has been
made, by Mr. C. E. Strode Hall, of the Mai Kassa or Baxter
River, which discharges itself into Torres Strait, about 80 miles
west of the Ely River, and has been hitherto considered as
belonging to the great delta region of the Ely. Mr. Hall has defi-
nitely ascertained that it constitutes a small and curious indepen-
dent river system. Mr. Hall followed up in succession to their
sources all the streams, fifteen in number, tributary to the two
main channels of the river, and found that the furthest source
was distant about 25 miles from the Ely. The country on the banks
beyond the mangrove zone is low-lying open forest country, and
generally of very poor soil. Since my last address, Mr. D.
Lindsay, the South Australian explorer, has traversed the conti-
nent for a second time, a somewhat similar feat to that performed
in Africa by Lieut. Wissmann, who, as a recent cablegram
informs us, has succeeded in capturing Saadaniand Windji, after


slight resistance, from the Arabs. Mr. Lindsay, accompanied
only by a native boy, eight years of age, left Port Darwin in
September, 1887, using four horses for transport purposes. He
has expressed the opinion that the whole of the country between
the gold-fields, lying 150 miles south of Port Darwin, and the
M‘Donneli Buby Eanges, in the centre of the continent, might
be utilised for cattle-rearing with considerable chance of success
as soon as the trans-continental railway is further advanced, with
the exception of isolated stretches of sandhills and spinifex which
defy cultivation. Going further afield, I may state that the large
group of the Solomon Islands, to the south-east of New Guinea,
has been partly explored by Mr. Woodford, an enthusiastic
naturalist, and the first European to penetrate into the interior
of the mountainous island of Guadalcanar, of which he has
given a very interesting account, besides adding considerably to
our knowledge of the flora of that region; while in North Borneo
some admirable explanatory work has been performed by Mr.
D. D. Daly, C.E., one of the Assistant Eesidents of the North
Borneo Company, and by Admiral Mayne.
Conclusion.
And now I will bring my task to a close. If I have failed to
do justice to my subject, the immense extent of ground that has
to be covered must be my excuse. The field traversed by our
explorers is so vast, and the topics of interest are so many,
that the difficulty is not so much what to say as what to
leave unsaid. My principal endeavour has been to instil into
the minds of my hearers some of that interest in the study of
geography that I myself feel. It is not the dull dry science that
used to be, and perhaps still is, taught in the schools. On the
contrary, it is the most fascinating science of all. It does not
concern itself merely with the past history of the planet, as
geology; nor with its present fauna and flora alone, as zoology
and botany; nor does it concern itself exclusively with the
allocation of land and water, as cartography and hydrography;
nor, as history, with the past history of the race; but each in


turn and all combined, welded into one complete and harmonious
whole, serve to make that most comprehensive, that most perfect,
that most absorbing of all the sciences—geography, which treats
of all the different relations of the earth. Let me commend the
study of geography to all, and especially to the young, who are
in search of a study that will endure, and let me assure them
that in geography they will find a study which —’ever changing
and ever growing in interest —will well repay the devotion of a
lifetime. And before I sit down, let me humbly suggest to the
Minister of Education to signalize his accession to office by
encouraging its study in the schools, and by offering special
scholarships for proficiency in it, for I feel sure that the very best
way to prevent lawlessness and crime in a State is to promote a
taste for intellectual pursuits, and that a few hundred pounds
devoted to the encouragement of geography would be one of
the wisest, and in the long run one of the most remunerative
expenditures that the Government could possibly make.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBB9.






