

“1899” CONTRACT.)
JfjifiHoMttrittm of 4oMf att made and entered into at Sydney, in the Colony of
New South Wales, this Third day of January, Anno Domini One thousand eight
hundred and ninety-nine, BURNS PH ILF & COMPANY, LIMITED, herein-
after termed “The Company,” of the one part, and the Reverend Doctor JAMES
COSH, Secretary to the “Dayspring” Board, acting for and on behalf of the NEW
HEBRIDES PRESBYTERIAN MISSION, hereinafter termed “ The Mission,” of the
other part, both of Sydney aforesaid, ‘‘SU'latitic to the Company supplying the Mission with
a Steamship Service to and from Sydney, and among the Islands of the New Hebrides
Group, on the following terms and conditions
I.—The Company agree to provide a Steamship Service, with or without transhipment,
of not less than six voyages per annum, at intervals of not more than two months.
affording communication with all the Mission Stations in the New Hebrides.
2.—The Company agree that the Steamer shall call at every Mission Station on the Outward
and Homeward Journey, landing or receiving Mails, Passengers and Cargo, and
directly on completion will proceed on her voyage. But should it meet with the
requirements of any Missionary, and with his approval, the vessel may call only on
the Outward or Homeward Journey, remaining not less than three hours from time
of anchorage for transaction of business.
3.—The Company agree that if at any time inclement weather should, in the opinion of the
Master of the Steamer, render it unsafe to laud at any Station or Stations, he shall
proceed to the next nearest Station or Anchorage affording better shelter, and shall
not be bound to return to any Station or Stations passed in such manner. And in
such event Passengers shall be carried on at the Steamer’s expense, but shall have
the option of landing at any other point at which the Steamer calls, and of remaining
there at their own expense until the next call of the Steamer. BUT in cases where,
through stress of weather, it shall have become necessary for the Steamer to pass any
one or more places, the Company agree to call on the return voyage, or to provide
other means of communication at earliest opportunity.
4. —The Company agree that the Steamer shall anchor as near as she safely can to all Stations
called at, and that the Steamer shall safely land all Cargo, Passengers and Mails
with her own boats and her own crew. BUT, nevertheless, the Mission undertakes
that all Missionaries shall assist the Steamer as far as possible with native labour, and
with boats where available, without any charge whatever.
s.—The Company agree that the Steamer shall do no work in Port on the Lord’s Day, and that
no Cargo shall be received or discharged on that day, excepting in cases where delay
would endanger the safety of the ship, or at Vila when unavoidable, or when
perishable Cargo or Livestock has to be landed or received to avoid loss or unnecessary
ill-usage. And the Company further agree not to sell or supply any natives with any
spirituous liquors or intoxicating drinks, and to place every restriction upon the crews
of their vessels, preventing them from infringing this rule.
6.—Seven clear days to be allowed in Sydney between the arrival and departure of the
Steamer.




' —To facilitate the yearly Synod meeting’, the Company agree to make suitable arrangements
for the conveyance of all the Presbyterian Missionaries to and from Aneityum or other
Station named upon receiving six weeks’ notice in writing from the Secretary of the
“ Dayspring” Board of the approximate due date at which said Meeting requires to
assemble. The Steamer to allow at such port named or Aneityum for the transaction
of business by the Synod four clear week-days, not counting Sunday and not requiring
Missionaries to embark on Sundays, and any further period to entitle the Steamer to
demurrage at the rate of fifteen pounds (£ 15) per day or fraction thereof.
B.—Special provision to be made for the carriage of Female Native Steerage Passengers, such
Passengers to be provided with a separate compartment and carried apart from Male
Native or other Steerage Passengers.
9.—For the due and faithful performance of this Contract the Mission agree to guarantee a
minimum freight and passage money total of Twelve Hundred Pounds Sterling, per
Annum, calculated at current rates, AND in the event of the total for the year not
amounting to Twelve Hundred Pounds, then the Mission to guarantee to pay any such
shortage prior to the 31st January, 1900.
10.—Both parties agree to the rates chargeable from Sydney or Melbourne to Islands, and
vice versa for freight and passage money as set out in separate verified schedule.
Accounts to be paid by the Mission at per trip. But the rates of passage money to
and from Melbourne are to apply only to Missionaries and their families actually
resident or about to become resident in the New Hebrides, and to the Agent and
Convenor of the Victorian Foreign Mission Committee, and all passengers between
Sydney and Melbourne, or vice versa , shall be at their own expense while awaiting
transhipment in Sydney.
11.—Both parties agree that this Contract shall continue in force for one calendar year, from
Ist January to 31st December, One thousand eight hundred and ninety-nine, and that
three months’ notice of expiry shall be given on either side; after that time, and
failing such notice, then the Agreement to hold good until such three months’ notice is
given on either side.
12.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this agreement, delays or non-fulfilment of service
caused by Force Majeure , the acts of Rulers, Princes, Foreign Powers, hostile natives,
breakdown of machinery, damage to or loss of vessel, bad weather, strikes, lockouts,
quarantine regulations, or other causes beyond the control of the Company, shall not
invalidate this Contract, but the Company agree in such event to do all in their power
to, as promptly as possible, remedy any omissions of the service so caused.
|lt Wcrrof both parties have hereunto set their hands at Sydney aforesaid, the
date first before written.
Witness to the Signature or
BUENS, PHILP & COMPANY, LIMITED.
(s.) Joseph Mitchell
p.p. BUENS, PHILP & COMPANY, LIMITED,
(s.) P. G. Black
Witness to the Signature op
JAMES COSH,
JAMES COSH.
Secretary to the
(s.) Joseph Mitchell.
“ Dayspring ” Board.


/it f
JO / T
eJii9rrr j £■ ns. eldadiiie wiLum od 001 tir yflaqntoO add ,'gni'jo9m boxjyß yfiaey -‘ fol >
isriio -to ranydten A moil bos od aehanoiaaiM tian&dydaai 4 ! H« io oonayevnoo add 10l
9?v ; io yiadoiosS odd mo r is ■onidiiw ni eotoon V->f ,ow xie xioqn bomau noxdadQ
oi eeiinpoi •gni idoM hum doidw da adab onb ad* niixoiqqa odd Io InaoS " ■otmqayaO. *'
noidoßSirrsid add iol rany jisn A7O borne ft rtoq dona 4a wofla oi lamaad o adT .010 maaa.6
jo it JbiiTi y/ibanS ‘gniimroo don iaalo mol bouyB add yd «Baaiand Io
oJ lecrraadß oxft alatone od boiieq lasldiui y/ia baa <ByabunB no daadxoa od Raima oieeiM
.ioeiaito noidoail 10 y?.«b toq (oil) ei amoq aoo-Jlii lo adsi add 4a a^imnOTab
xiOj.'B ?"o’3iior-.' s R t I avidnltf '-*laino f 4 io ©xto iol abaxn ao d noisivoiq laioaqS—.B
elaM moti diaqa bsirrao bna dxtymdiaqmoo atsia qaa a ddiw babivoiq ad od giagaeeaa*!
.Bi9'gii9ftHa c l 9gaioojB ion 4o 10 avidaK
n eejoaiarj® od eeriui noieaxM add doxndnoO eidd io oonaanoiioq liddjiai baa enb odd io r i—.9
■f.n ( r gbetrro*! baibmiH eylewT lo faded venom egagaaq baa ddgiaii tamnlaim
don ixjoy eat iol Indod odd jo dneva odd nr (I VIA <aadai duenna da badalnolao «rati tut A
dona vfffi yr, q oJ 99Jxim-xu Li 1 . od noiß3iM odd naxid , m io f i btinbunlx svbw ior *&rndxjtroutk
.0091 t yiannal» ,1b 58 odd cl loiiq agaiioda
fana od euioocfisM 10 yanbyß moil aldaegiado eadai odd oJ e©Tga gnidiaq a loci .01
.aiobadoa baflnev adxriaqaa ni dno dog aa yaaonr ag.c.'Hfaßq baa ungia'd. iol .i srj
od i(enoffl Jo gedai sdd dnfi .qhd isq 3a oorsailA arid v* . biaq od od BdaaoooA
Yfiandoß eoiliinaJ lieild Bna aohanoiaaiM od od aia exmtodieM rnor't baa
bnxj end od has K B9bhdeH v/eA n - !3 ni dnobiß9tt ©mooed od dnoda 10 dcebiaoi
aesT/dod Ha bna noiaaiM nanodoi ■/ end do lone/co J
'aarc iUY/x> oliiiw ©Bnvqx© nwo ifsdd da 8d bails t .as>txtv 10 t oninooieM boa /©itb^B
,70 [JjyS m dnamqklansid
y r :(Til tivoy-iKi-naiatK 000 toJ.ftOioJ ni ennidnoo »tox;ndnpO aixfd <iadd oyijra..iatliaq. iLioHrr—. 11
indd beta ,9ni«-yd«nfii baa beibnnd ddsio bnasaorfd snO ( i9dm9o9<l delB od yiamiab del
baa <9Ol Id ‘add teb ■ : ebia leddi© no nevrg 90 fiada lb eoidon 'addnom eeirfd
ei eoidon 'aridaom eeiuld ilouc I toxin blod od add aodd .soiion done
.sbrg lodiie no aovi^g
ooi viob‘io jnemlfllnj-irbr io gyafeb ardd ni bearadnoo *aniddvaa g/iibnsieddiwdoVl —.SI
t e©vidan oitoeod .gisv/oS n , gi9io n I ,seoai r i f I t eialnfi lo «xoa edd &aio r 4 yd boanao
.ednodool eeafiide ,ioddaow bad Jomuv io aaoi 10 od .vionnloara io nwobdaaio
don flade .ynnqmoD nrib io loianoo exlj bnoyad eoenao lorfito 1 > su-;n ; i.o rp
vowcq irsdd ni Ifx. ob 01 dime done ni oei-ra vnaqnroO e •':! dnd .JoaidnoJ amd idcbuavx
,bo: mo. oa eorv'*9B •>;! i io arrorad : ao Yu'); . 000191 ,ei*jsßSoq so yldqmoiq ea t o-J
9iii ,bixiB9foijs yonbyS ;fn gbaijd lisJt t*^
(tofirjo79/i 97i5ff goxJvjjq rflocf loitid® sSilftiP)
aaaiMUt ;apia c imod a ‘Auin t B T /uiua
f RBOO
iHT OT yjiATaaoscS
.fIHAOto. f '. OZTb 1 .!.?-Y7 ll
|
h i;^\
y i
