

SERVICE
INFORMATION
1937
CHEVROLET
Passenger Cars
Issued by the Service Department, General Motors - Holden's Limited
March, 1937


Frame
The frame is of the Box-girder type, which
provides great strength combined with a mini-
mum weight. It has the further advantage of
making access simple to other parts of the chassis.
It consists only of two double-drop side rails
connected by three box-section cross members,
another cross member which serves as a fuel tank
support, and an engine side support tie bar.
CROSS MEMBERS
The box-section front cross member and king
pin support together form a support for the en-
gine, radiator, headlamps, front end sheet metal
and knee-action units. The tie bar is bolted di-
rectly to the bottom of the side rail. Being bolted
in place, the member can easily be removed when
it is necessary to remove the engine oil pan.
The second cross member serves as a support
for the transmission, hand and foot brake mech-
anism and their supports and protects the front
end of the battery against flying stones.
At the left side of the frame, just ahead of this
member, a channel links the side rail and the
cross member. This bracket supports the brake
main cylinder and pedals.
The third cross member serves as a support for
the front of the fuel tank.
HANGERS
Practically all of the hangers attach to the lower
flanges of the side rails. The rear spring front
hangers are placed directly under each side rail,
reducing otherwise severe loads by eliminating
torsional overhang.
The rear hangers of the rear springs are heavy
drop-forged brackets, each incorporating a cylin-
drical boss in which the shackle pin fits.
The four step hangers are riveted to both
flanges of the rails.
Bolts for the rear shock absorbers and front
and rear bumpers go completely through the side
rails. In addition, a sheet steel reinforcement, with
each end rolled cylindrically to enwrap the attach-
ing bolts, is used at each point of the bumper and
shock absorber mounting points.
BODY MOUNTING
For attaching the front end of the body to the
chassis three body hold-down bolts are provided
at each front corner. Two pass through a body
bracket, which is located on the front of the dash,
and one is located just behind the dash and passes
through the body sill into the chassis.
Fig. 1—Frame
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 chevr O let CARS


Fig. 2 —Box Type Frame Provides Accessibility
FRONT END MOUNTING
Unit mounting of the radiator, front fenders
and headlamps with support at the centre of the
front cross member, is again employed, although
the design is materially altered from that used in
1936 ‘ POWER PLANT MOUNTING
The engine front mounting bolts project
through a double thickness of metal and rein-
forcements. The mounting cushion itself is the
same as in 1936, but slightly less resilient. Attach-
ment at the sides to the tie bar is similar to the
1936 arrangement.
The transmission support bracket carries the
rubber cushion on a flanged platform-like projec-
tion. The rubber cushions for both the side and
rear mountings are the same as the ones used on
the 1936 Passenger cars.
The Power Plant Mounting adjustment is the
same as for 1936, and is the same for both Stan-
dard and Master De Luxe.
DIFFERENCE STANDARD AND MASTER
DE LUXE FRAME
The Standard frame differs from the Master De
Luxe at the front end because the Standard has a
conventional front axle, while the Master De
Luxe has a knee-action. Otherwise the two frames
are the same.
Front End Suspension
MASTER DE LUXE FRONT END
SUSPENSION
The Knee-action unit, used on the Master De
Luxe, has several slight but important changes.
(1) The seal surface on the wheel support arm
is now provided with a rolled finish which
is much finer and smoother than that pro-
vided in 1936.
(2) The heavy type rubber seal used in the latter
part of 1936, is continued.
Fig. 3 —King Pin Bushing
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


(3) The threads of the radius rods are rolled in
order to provide smooth bearing surface and
consequent long life.
(4) Floating bushings are now used for the king
pins instead of the former needle bearing.
This steadies up the steering and reduces
strains imposed on the steering gear.
See also "Shock Absorbers.”
STANDARD MODEL FRONT END
SUSPENSION
A conventional type of semi-elliptic springs and
an I-beam axle are used on the Standard instead
of the Knee-action used on the Master De Luxe.
The front axle is an I-beam forging with reverse
Elliott ends. It is offset to the front.
Floating king pin bushings are used instead of
pressed-in bushings as formerly.
FRONT SPRINGS
A feature of the Standard front spring is the
design of the front eye. This is of the reversed
double wrapped type, the type that proved so
successful on the 1936 109 in. In this construction
the eye is formed from the second leaf. This, in
turn, is wrapped by the top leaf which serves as
a reinforcement.
To reduce the amount of spring wind-up due to
brake application, each front spring has a special
torque leaf, which is actually a half leaf extend-
ing from the spring seat to the rear eye. It rests on
the top leaf and is held to it by the spring bolt
and clips.
A threaded pin in the eye bushing forms the
front attachment of the spring to the hanger on
the frame. The shackles at the rear of the spring
are of the same threaded type that is used on the
rear spring.
Fig. 4—Front Axle Assembly, Standard Models
Durable rubber spring bumpers of the hollow,
conical type, are inserted in the retainers, attached
to the frame. A wire ring in the base locks the
bumper in the retainer. The bumper plate, which
is raised to clear the centre bolt, is held by the
spring U bolts.
SHOCK ABSORBERS
Shock absorbers on the Master De Luxe models
are double acting front and single acting rear.
They are the same type as used in 1936, except
for changes in the valving to accommodate tbe
changes in the weight distribution of the car.
The Standard model has single acting shock
absorbers both front and rear.
Rear End Suspension
REAR AXLE
The propeller shaft is located lower in the
chassis and, with the lower frame, permits the
rear floor level to be dropped two inches without
an inconvenient tunnel. This is made possible by
the use of spiral hypeid pinion and ring gears.
Spiral hypoid gears resemble in appearance the
spiral bevel gears used heretofore, but are so de-
signed that the pinion runs off centre, or is under-
slung, with respect to the ring gear. The hypoid
gears combine this "underslung” principle and
silent operation with relatively low friction. In
these respects, they may be considered to combine
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


the advantages of both worm gears and bevel
gears.
The axle is again of the semi-floating type with
a pressed steel banjo housing.
The two-pinion type differential is continued,
with a slight reduction in size and weight of the
parts as compared with the 1936 Master. The
differential assembly is mounted one-half inch left
of the centre of the propeller shaft to equalize the
loads on the differential side support bearings,
making each do its proper share of work.
Barrel type roller bearings, in which contact
area increases as the load increases, are used as
differential side bearings.
Because of the offsetting of the differential, the
left and right hand axle shafts are di§erent in
length but otherwise they are identical. The longer
one is the right hand shaft.
The drive shaft bushings must now be driven
out of the housing from the back end; a special
leather pinion shaft bushing seal is now used.
A simple, single oil seal which serves as an oil
deflector, is used just outside the wheel bearings
to prevent lubricant leaking on to the brake
mechanism.
Fig. 5—Rear Axle
Fig. 6—Barrel Type Roller Deflection
RING GEAR ATTACHMENT
The ring gear is now held by ten | in. screws
which go into tapped holes in the back of the gear
itself, as opposed to the former use of twelve
5/16 in. rivets through the differential case and
an inner ring on the gear. The new method is
better because it gives a more solid backing and
support on the gear. Further, the use of screws
permits easier replacement.
The bolts are wired together in pairs. Five
guide pins made from | in. x 24 in. x in. bolts
should be used to pilot the ring gear when press-
ing it on the case. Use new bolts every time the
ring gear is changed, and make sure the correct
ones are obtained in order to make certain that
the bolts do not "bottom.”
AXLE ADJUSTMENT
The setting of the pinion is arrived at by shims.
Standard shimming is .033 in. The pinion and
housing are marked as in 1936. No thick spacer
is used as in 1936. The required back lash is .004
in. to .008 in. and the adjustment is the same as
in 1936.
REAR AXLE LUBRICATION
IT IS DEFINITELY NECESSARY THAT
ONLY THE HYPOID LUBRICANTS AP-
PROVED BY GENERAL MOTORS —HOL-
DEN’S BE USED IN THESE AXLES. SEE ALL-
DEALER BULLETINS NOS. 60, 61.
The type of lubricant used in the rear axle of
the 1937 passenger car is of the utmost import-
ance due to the sliding contact between the teeth
in Hypoid gears. To do a thorough job, the lub-
ricant used must have sufficient "toughness” to
maintain an oil film on the contacting surfaces
of the gear teeth, and must not contain any cor-
rosive substances, nor must it have a tendency to
foam, or to become stringy.
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


For these reasons, the only lubricant that is to
be used in the 1937 Hypoid rear axle is Special
E.P. (Extreme Pressure) Lubricant. Hypoid Lub-
ricant Nasco E.P. No. 1 is suitable for this
purpose.
Steam or water flushers must not be used in
flushing out the differential in Hypoid rear axles.
This is very important as the moisture may react
with certain of the ingredients in the lubricant to
form corrosive substances.
The lubricant in the rear axle should be in-
spected at each 1,000 mile lubrication period for
amount and condition, and under no circum-
stances is any lubricant except the same brand of
Hypoid E.P. Lubricant to be added to that already
in the rear axle. Different brands of Hypoid Gear
Lubricant should not be mixed. Therefore, unless
the brand already in the axle is definitely known,
lubricant should not be added but the axle should
be drained and refilled.
The rear axle housing should be drained at
least twice a year, or every 5,000 miles, and re-
filled with Special E.P. Lubricant.
PROPELLER SHAFT AND TORQUE TUBE
The propeller shaft and torque tube have been
lengthened in. as compared with the 1936
Master, due to the fact that the engine is shorter
and has been moved ahead. They are both stronger
Fig. 7 —Propeller Shaft and Universal Joint
and less subject to vibration because the torque
tube is larger and the propeller shaft bearings
are re-located to support it better.
A vent in the propeller shaft tube relieves pres-
sure built up in the axle housing due to the use
of improved grease seals.
REAR SPRINGS
The features are: Rubber front mount,
threaded shackles with high grade cork seals. In-
terlocking spring clips are used, as described under
"Standard Model Front Suspension.”
SHOCK ABSORBERS
(See page 4)
Brakes
The brakes for the 1937 models are changed
only in the hydraulic piping, the main cylinder,
pedal adjustment, brake lining, and the hand
brake hook-up. All the brake mechanism at the
wheels is identical to that used in 1936.
BRAKE PIPING
The main line is now threaded directly into the
rear end of the main cylinder, eliminating the
former brass connector, connector screw and cop-
per gaskets. This actually means that only one
joint is used at this point instead of four.
The pipe to the front extends to the front cross
member, below which a T connection splits the
fluid path to each front wheel. The pipe to the
rear leaves the side rail at the rear kick-up in
Fig. 8—Brake System
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


almost the same manner as in 1936, and is con-
nected to the rear brakes through a flexible lead,
a T joint and a pipe behind the axle. The piping
is clipped to the frame so that the whole system
is as nearly on one level as possible in order to
avoid air pockets.
MAIN CYLINDER
The main cylinder mechanical details are the
same as in 1936, the only change in the entire
set-up being that the casting now includes bosses
for the pedal mounting.
This results in greatly improved pedal mount-
ing.
The actual attachment to the frame now is
made by two bolts through lugs cast on the main
cylinder. The bolt through the rear lug attaches
through the L-shaped frame member, a spacer
tube and the box-section cross member. The front
bolt goes through the L-shaped member and
through a reinforcement.
WHEEL CYLINDERS
The wheel cylinders are the same size on both
models, I-4- in. front and 1-3/16 in. rear. This is
the same as the 1936 Master.
BRAKE LININGS AND DRUMS
The brake lining has been changed. The for-
ward shoe lining is DV-2270 and the reverse shoe
facing 453-R. The forward shoes have red paint
on the sides for identification. This lining or fac-
ing is more "squeak-free” than formerly and does
not create as severe a brake when wet as some
facings. The same lining and shoes are used on
both Standard and Master De Luxe. The same
type cast iron and steel combination drums are
used on both jobs. The rears are interchangeable,
the fronts are not.
Fig. 9 —Main Brake Cylinder
The emergency brake cables are set at an angle
with the frame, so that no springs are necessary
to keep them away from the tyres.
PEDALS
The pedal shaft now is chromium plated, pre-
senting a smoother bearing surface for the pedal
bushings.
Brake and clutch pedals are of a detachable
stem type, consisting of the pedal proper, mounted
on a short shaft through the yoke on the main
cylinder, and the pedal push rod, which carries
the pedal pad. The push rod is round in section,
so that good sealing against heat and cold is pos-
sible at the toe boards. The pedals are not adjust-
able for length.
ADJUSTMENT
Except for the pedal setting, the adjustment of
brakes is the same as in 1936. Pedal adjustment
is accomplished by means of an eccentric at the
junction of the pedal and the main cylinder rod.
(See figure 9-) If sufficient adjustment cannot
be obtained in this manner, shims may be re-
moved or installed between the main cylinder and
the frame at the forward end of the former.
Engine
NEW FEATURES
Increased power and torque at all speeds.
Increased piston displacement.
Greater bore and shorter stroke.
Higher compression ratio.
More rigid cylinder and case casting.
More rigid fouf-bearing crankshaft.
Greater main and camshaft bearing areas.
Lighter, dome-head, cast iron pistons.
Four steel-backed babbitt camshaft bearings.
New, more sensitive harmonic balancer.
Diamond bored piston pin bushings.
Shorter, stiffer connecting rods.
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Diamond bored connecting rod bearings.
Improved connecting rod bearing oil grooves.
Heavier flywheel.
Increased fuel economy.
Better manifold heat control.
New design, high reserve fuel pump.
Smoother fuel delivery.
Improved octane selector adjustment.
New air cleaner with removable element.
Better cylinder head gasket burn-out resistance.
New gear type oil pump.
Ventilated timing gear chamber.
Increased oil pressures at all speeds.
Oil filler on side opposite exhaust manifold.
CRANKSHAFT
For 1937 a four-bearing crankshaft is used.
The strength and rigidity of the shaft are greatly
increased by the overlap of shaft and crank pin
cross sections, which amounts to -| in. This pro-
vides a continuous band of steel through highly
stressed lengths of the shaft, preventing the con-
centration of stresses in the crank arms. This, and
the short stroke, make this shaft inherently stiff.
MAIN BEARINGS
The main bearing ft is slightly looser than in
1936. It should be set up to a very light drag and
then one shim should be added.
The front intermediate bearing cap has the
word "front” cast in it, and the cap should be
assembled with this word toward the front of the
engine. The rear intermediate cap has the word
"rear” cast in it, and this cap should be assembled
with the word "rear” toward the rear of the
engine.
Fig. 10—Engine
The front intermediate bearing shells, both
upper and lower, have the letter "I” cast in the
oil groove to distinguish them from the front
bearing shells which are practically the same size.
FLYWHEEL AND RING GEAR
To make certain that the timing ball in the
flywheel rim is in the correct position with respect
to the shaft, the pattern of the bolt holes is made
non-symmetrically, assuring correct alignment at
assembly.
The flywheel ring gear has 139 teeth. With 139
teeth, an odd number, the hunting tooth principle
Fig. 11 —Crankshaft showing Main Journals
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


is continued, assuring
long gear life because
the pinion must revolve
139 times before any
two gear teeth repeat
a contact. Similarly, in
production, hob im-
perfection effects are
neutralized, providing
greater machining ac-
curacy.
HARMONIC
BALANCER
The same general
design as in 1936 is
used but the construc-
tion is more simple.
The spring mounted
weight in front has a
greater vibration dam-
pening range and is
less subject to turning
vibrations.
Fig. 12 —Harmonic Balancer
The 1937 harmonic balancer is not interchange-
able with the former one. A new Puller and
Driver are necessary because of bolt spacings.
CYLINDER HEAD AND GASKET
Greater resistance to burn-out is offered by the
new head gasket because the metal edge, or grom-
met, around the cylinders is improved. The metal
rim around each hole is wider. In addition, the
grommets are linked together in pairs to provide
a greater length of metal "path” for heat trans-
fer. The gasket is marked "this side up” and must
be installed as indicated.
As previously, guide pins should be used when
installing gasket and head. They should be in-
stalled in the front and rear bolt holes on the
left side of the engine.
1937 IMPROVED SEALING
Accomplished by wider grommets.
Fig. 13 —Cylinder Head Gasket
The cylinder head should be tightened as in
1936; namely, start at the centre and work our
toward the ends.
The compression ratio is increased. The pis-
tons, as described later, are of a new dome-head
shape. The contours of the combustion chambers
are changed to correspond.
CAMSHAFT
The four-bearing principle is applied also to
the camshaft, steadying it against deflection due
to tappet loads on the cams.
The cams proper are increased in size at the
base circle. This increase, without a change in
lift, gives a much better type of cam because
effects of manufacturing variations are mini-
mized.
The camshaft bearings are all steel-backed
babbitt, and are replaceable.
CONNECTING RODS
The connecting rods are reduced in length.
The bearings are diamond bored. The bearing has
a single straight annular oil groove at its centre,
with a spreader groove cut along the parting lines
of the bearing halves. This provides good oil
distribution while less of the bearing surface is
cut away. An air bleed or vent at the top of the
bearing makes operation safe with cold oil.
Fig. 14 —Four-Bearing Camshaft
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Fig. 15 —Connecting Rod Bearings
The bearing ft is one
shim looser than in
1936, because of the
larger journal and the
diamond bore bearings.
The accuracy of this
diamond boring oper-
ation doubles the initial
contact surface of these
bearings. For this rea-
son they must be fitted
less tightly than former-
ly, otherwise the en-
gine will remain tight
for a long time. The
pinch bolt and numbers
on the rod and cap are
to be installed towards
the camshaft as in pre-
vious years.
VALVES AND
VALVE MECHANISM
Valve springs, caps,
keys, lifters, lifter
springs, are the same as
in 1936. The 1936 and
1937 exhaust valves
are the same size and
vary only in the depth
of the cup in the valve
head. The 1937 valve
is marked "G.M. 37
Exhaust” and the cup
Fig. 16 —Sectional Views
of Engine, showing
Valve Train
is more shallow than in 1936. It is very important
that only 1937 valves be used in 1937 engines.
However, 1937 exhaust valves may be used in
1936 engines.
VALVE TIMING
The same valve timing as in 1936 is employed,
but is checked in a new way.
Valve timing may be checked as follows: —
On a cold engine—
(l) Turn over engine until No. 1 exhaust valve
is definitely closed, then remove all lash until
the valve is riding open slightly.
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


(2) Turn engine over until No. 1 exhaust valve
opens fully and starts to close. —Watch "tri-
angle” mark on flywheel and line it up accur-
ately with the pointer in, the flywheel
housing.
(3) Mount a dial indicator to bear on the adjust-
ing screw of No. 1 exhaust valve rocker arm
and set indicator to rear .036 in. on plus side.
(4) Crank the engine until the indicator hand
stops moving. If the valve timing is correct,
the indicator should read o°, plus or minus
.003 in.
Note. —If incorrect reading is obtained, before
tearing engine down re-make the check,
watching for insecure indicator mounting
and presence of lash in the valve.
Valve Clearance —•
Intake ... ... .006 in.—.ooB in. hot.
Exhaust ... .013 in.—. 013 in. hot.
This is the same as in 1936.
TIMING GEARS
The pitch diameter of the gears is smaller as
a result of closer spacing between the crankshaft
and the camshaft.
TIMING GEAR CASE REMOVAL
It is necessary to remove the oil pan in order
to reach the bottom cover bolts.
PISTONS
The pistons are cast-iron, electro-plated.
A gain in strength and a reduction in weight
are obtained by the new piston design.
Fig. 17 —Piston
The strength of the arch is given to the piston
by its dome-headed construction. Light weight
and great rigidity are added to the piston by its
slipper-type skirt and X-rib bracing.
The reduced piston weight makes possible a
reduction in piston pin diameter from 1 in. to | in.
The piston pin bushings are diamond bored.
The piston fit is 25 lbs. pull on a .0013 in.
jeeler J in. wide, the same as in 1936.
The piston pin fit should be finger to medium
thumb-push fit, the same as in 1936.
The piston ring fit —check with .002 in. jeeler,
top ring should be free, second ring snug, third
ring (oil control) should also he free and can
have as much as .003 in. clearance.
Fig. 18 —Carburettor
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


CARBURETTOR
In order to suit the new engine, the metering
rod jet and metering rod are recalibrated to re-
duce the amount of fuel in the fuel air mixture,
a definite economy step.
In order to provide extra good sealing of the
carburettor float bowl, the bowl cover has been re-
designed to be fastened with four screws. This
gives a tight seal with no danger of warping.
A baffle has been added in bowl below vent, to
prevent petrol slopping into carburettor, causing
stalling on rough roads or after quick stops.
The internal vent has been changed so that on
full choke the bowl is open to atmospheric pres-
sure.
The float level is f in. and -| in, the same as
in 1936.
The metering rod gauge is the same as in 1936
—(No. T-109-25).
THROTTLE LINKAGE
To provide a definite amount of lost motion
which is necessary for flexibility in the throttle
linkage, a manual adjustment is made through a
set screw, which is placed between the accelerat-
or lever and the throttle control lever. Both are
re-designed for the new arrangement, the throttle
rod being made straight and hence more rigid.
Previously, there was a bend in the rod, which
was used in making the adjustment for the initial
settmg FUEL PUMP
The bowl is on the top and is thus more easily
accessible and readily seen. The diaphragm is
easily removed by using a screwdriver from the
lever side, also easily replaced by holding up the
arm with a small screwdriver. The pump screen
is accessible for cleaning by removing the bowl
after loosening the knurled nut and swinging
aside the bale over the bowl.
Valves and seats are now assemblies and these
two assemblies are interchangeable. They cannot
be installed incorrectly if installed opposite to
each other.
MANIFOLDS AND INTAKE HEATER
The exhaust outlet is placed at the centre of
the engine, between the third and fourth cylinders,
where the hot exhaust from all six cylinders may
sweep around the intake heater box.
Fig. 19 —Fuel Pump
The size of the intake manifold is increased
from 1-5/32 in. to 1 in. on account of the larger
engine.
The heat valve shaft is now bushed with stain-
less steel bushings to prevent rusting and sticking.
The valve itself is a curved steel plate similar
to previous ones, but half wrapped around the
shaft, with a clamp on the opposite side similarly
half wrapped. These are welded together and
welded to the shaft.
Fig. 20—Manifold Heat Control Valve
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Fig. 21 —Manifolds
The valve is put in the "heat on” position by
a flat coil thermostat mounted outside the mani-
fold on the end of the shaft. Under conditions of
no load or during warm-up period, the heat valve
may strike the manifold stop, once on dosing the
throttle after rapid acceleration, and once or twice
on deceleration just before idle. The design is
such that the pressure of the exhaust gas tends to
blow open the valve. The spring tension and the
valve weight are calibrated to give the proper
heat control, and dampen out any vibrations of
the valve due to the turbulence or fluctuations of
the exhaust gas, after warm-up.
Under no conditions should the spring tension
be changed, or any part of the heat valve as-
sembly be altered as detonation or sticking of the
valve may result.
Percolation of the fuel is avoided by disposing
of the manifold metal so as to reduce conduction
Fig. 22—
Removing Air
Cleaner Element
of heat to a minimum and cutting down the size
of the box around the tee. As an additional pre-
caution, a metal inlet to exhaust manifold gasket
of special design is used. This is a piece of steel
1/32 in. thick and rolled double on its inner
edge. The actual metal to metal contact for trans-
fer of heat is only 3/32 in. wide.
AIR CLEANER AND SILENCER
By removing a wing nut on the top of the
cleaner, it is possible to lift off the cover and pull
the cleaner element out easily.
ENGINE LUBRICATION SYSTEM
Exhaustive tests proved that the basic engine
lubrication system employed during 1936 gave
better results in the 1937 engine than any other
of the various systems tried. Therefore, it is again
used.
The only major change in the system is that a
gear type pump is used in place of the former
vane type.
Fig. 23 —Oil Pump
OIL PUMP
Two seven-tooth gears are housed in the body
of the pump. One is driven by a shaft coupled
to the distributor shaft; the other is piloted by a
short shaft mounted in the pump body. Under
the pump body proper is a cover below which is
a long hexagonal suction pipe which screws into
the cover.
Oil discharged from the pump is forced down-
ward into a lead in the cover which is connected
to the oil line.
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Cast in the pump cover are two hollows, one
serving as an inlet manifold or feeder for the
gears, the other providing space for the oil to
squeeze out ahead of the contacting teeth and
serving as an entrance for the high pressure oil
going into the engine lubrication lines. This relief
eliminates noises which arise from the action of
the teeth on trapped oil. Above the gears, at each
side, are two reliefs which serve similarly as
silencers.
In the oil pump cover, in line with the dis-
charge opening, is a cold oil by-pass blocked by
a ball valve, spring-loaded to 75 pounds. At rimes
when frictional resistance in the oil lines is great,
as in cold starting, the gears, continuing to force
oil into the line, could cause breaks and leaks
were it not for some kind of by-pass.
Fig. 24—Sectional View showing Location of Oil Pump
Fig. 25 —Water Pump
The gears are ground on one side only and the
ground side must he toward the cover. The idler
gear is of cast iron and the drive gear of steel,
insuring long life. The distributor thrust washer
is now held in the oil pump; thus eliminating the
chance of misplacement or loss.
FRONT COVER VENTILATION
To prevent sludge formation and possible cor-
rosion from engine fumes inside the timing gear
front cover, a vent into the valve tappet chamber
is provided.
WATER PUMP
The water pump will be serviced as an assem-
bly until further notice.
An oil reservoir is formed in the body of the
pump and by a stamped cover pressed on the
front of the body casting. Lubrication is accom-
plished by filling this reservoir. Oil from it flows
through drilled holes to the bushings and per-
meates them, then flows from the porous bushings
to the packings, keeping them soft and assisting
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


them to seal. A drilled hole in the pump body
vents air from the reservoir to speed filling with-
out overflow of oil.
A heavy engine oil should be used for lub-
rication.
The water pump is permanently packed, self-
adjusting, with vane type rotor. The shaft is sup-
ported by two copper graphite composition bush-
ings. Between the bushings are specially designed
chevron packing rings (four on the inner face of
the rear bushing, two on the inner face of the
front bushing). A coiled compression spring, be-
tween the two sets of packing rings, maintains
adjustment and prevents leaks by putting pres-
sure on the packing. Due to the spring tension,
the packing resets itself every time the engine is
stopped.
Care should be taken against too tight a fan
belt adjustment. CLUTCH
The clutch is basically the same as in 1936. It
is of the single plate dry disc type, consisting of
a pressure plate assembly having nine pressure
Fig. 27 —Oiling
Throwout Bearing
springs, three release levers and a clutch disc
mounted on a drop forged splined hub.
The clutch fork is mounted on a swivel. The
swivel is screwed in a shoulder stud in the clutch
housing.
The release bearing is made of a carbon graph-
ite composition shrunk into a trunnion collar
Fig, 26 —Clutch
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


mounted in the fork. This collar has an oil res-
ervoir, which is back of the bearing, with an
oiler on the top. This allows the throwout bear-
ing collar to be filled with oil, which in turn
seeps into the bearing.
It is only necessary to refill the clutch throwout
collar when, upon releasing the clutch, a "squeak-
ing” noise occurs.
To fill the clutch throwout bearing collar with
oil, remove the floor board and the inspection
cover on the clutch housing. Driving conditions
control the frequency of oiling this reservoir. It
should be filled with S.A.E. 160 oil.
There is somewhat less clearance in the new
clutch; consequently it is necessary to block down
the fingers when disassembling. The underpan
extension of the clutch housing is in one piece.
The clutch fork is made in. narrower than in
1936, and the clutch fork spring position is re-
versed. The clutch inspection opening is re-
shaped, allowing for greater accessibility.
The clutch adjustment is T\- in., as in 1936.
Transmission
A new type synchro-mesh transmission is used.
It is more compact and lighter in weight than
that used formerly, but has definitely greater
capacity.
The principles embodied in the previous syn-
chro-mesh transmissions are still used, but the
arrangement of synchro-mesh parts is entirely new.
The 1937 transmission is much more simple to
service than previous models. This is due to the
fact that it is no longer necessary to check syn-
chronizer clearances.
SYNCHRONIZATION
The synchronizer cones are now part of the
high and intermediate sliding sleeve, and the syn-
chronizer rings are carried within the sliding
sleeve (Fig. 29) ■ The rings are held in their cor-
rect relation to the synchronizer cones by means
of spring lock rings, which are reached through
slots cut in the sliding sleeve.
Fig. 28—Transmission
Each synchronizer ring has three lugs which
engage in slots cut into the gear with which it
synchronizes. Therefore, when synchronizing the
Fig. 29 —Transmission Parts
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


speed of die sliding sleeve and the gear to be
engaged, the lugs of the synchronizer ring being
engaged with the gears to be mated, cause that
gear to be speeded up or slowed down as the case
may be.
Fig. 30 —Synchronizer Ring and Second Speed Gear
The actual synchronizing is done by the syn-
chronizer ring lugs first contacting with a spring,
located on the gear to be mated, causing the
chamfered edges of the lug to contact with similar
wedge angles machined on the shoulder of the
gear. The wedge angles of the lugs and those on
the gears, resist the shift action on the sliding
sleeve as long as there is any difference in the
rotating speed of the two parts being mated, and
as the speed of the two parts is equalized, the
pressure between the wedge angles diminishes,
allowing the shift to be completed.
Fig. 31 —Wedge Angles Positioned for Contact
GEAR SHIFT
The gear shift lever and shifter mechanism is
entirely new.
The shifter yokes are carried on shifter shafts
mounted in the transmission case. The cover
carries the gear shift lever only. The two front
bolts of the cover lock the shifter shafts in place.
Care should be taken to insure these being used
in their proper location.
An interlock plate contacts with the lower end
of the gear shift lever and moving with it, en-
gages with a plate attached to the cover, which
Fig. 32 —Gear Shift Lever and Transmission Cover
positively prevents the engagement of more than
one gear at a time. (See figures 32, 33, 34.)
As illustrated, the interlock is a stamped piece
of steel, either end of which engages with the
yokes. The hole near its centre fits the end of
the shift lever. Above the interlock is the inter-
lock guide plate with each end rounded and
notched.
In neutral, each notch partly overlaps fulcrum
pins riveted in the ends of the interlock, prevent-
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Fig. 33 —Shifter Interlock
Fig. 34 —Interlock Action for Shifts
ing fore and aft movement of the interlock or
yokes, or engagement of any gears. When the
shift lever is moved to the side it carries the inter-
lock with it. This frees one fulcrum pin from its
notch, permitting shifting of the yoke on that side
of the transmission. At the same time, the other
notch and pin engage completely and form a
pivot for the interlock. Until this engagement is
complete, no shift can be made, and when com-
plete, no shift is possible on the pivot side of the
transmission.
The leverage obtained through the arrange-
ment of the interlock assembly permits a short
shift lever between the fulcrum ball and the
lower end of the lever. As a result, the gearshift
tower is very nearly at floor level.
The gearshift handball travel is made prac-
tically equal for all shifts. This is accomplished
by offsetting the gearshift lever hole in the inter-
lock stamping a distance proportional to the
length of shifts.
COUNTER-SHAFT BUSHINGS
These bushings are anchored in the gear by
ball peening the bushing into the holes. Lubrica-
tion is improved by flats ground on the shaft to
serve as oil feeds.
REVERSE IDLER SHAFT REMOVAL
The reverse idler shaft is held in by a tapered
pin. In order to remove the shaft, drive the pin
into the shaft. Then remove the shaft with a bent
wire.
Do not attempt to push the shaft out with a
finger of the hand, as the latter may get stuck as
a result.
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


UNIVERSAL JOINT
The universal joint is now the same on both
Standard and Master De Luxe. It is of the bolted
type. The ball is now provided with a Duprene
and felt seal. The Duprene goes next to the trans-
mission. In the front yoke ten splines are used
instead of six splines as used in 1936.
SPEEDOMETER DRIVE
Simplification of the speedometer driven gear
assembly located above the universal joint, is
accomplished by a re-design of the driven gear
fitting to incorporate both the fitting and plug
formerly used. The end of die cable is now
swaged square, and is inserted into a square hole
in the driven gear shaft, eliminating the use of
the key drive formerly employed.
The speedometer gear ratio is changed to cor-
respond with changes in rear axle.
Fig. 35 —Speedometer Driven Gear and Fitting
Assembly
Fuel Tank and Exhaust System
FUEL TANK
The same fuel tank as that used in 1936 is con-
tinued on all body types, the filler neck position,
however, has been changed. It projects through
the rear fender on the right side of the car.
FUEL TANK FILLER CAP
To prevent spilling of petrol on the fender or
body when making sharp turns or travelling over
rough roads, a new device is incorporated in the
filler cap, consisting of a baffle cup and a "jiggle
pin.” Through this new arrangement the vent
area is reduced to a minimum, yet it is large
enough to serve as a breather for the fuel tank.
The small vent area is accomplished by insert-
ing a special pin in the breather holes, which are
kept open by its bouncing action.
Fig. 36 —Exhaust System Suspension
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


The device not only controls the flow of the
petrol, but also traps in the baffle cup any that
may escape through the lower vent. The chamber
volume is adequate for the ordinary overflow,
which subsequently returns to the tank. A small
hole is provided at the top of the chamber to com-
plete the breather system.
EXHAUST SYSTEM
The exhaust system is essentially the same as
in 1936. It is supported in a manner similar to the
1936 109 in. Series model. The mounting is made
more flexible by the use of additional rubber.
Fig. 37 —Petrol Tank
Steering
MASTER DE LUXE
The Master De Luxe steering gear is the same,
in principle, as that used on the 1936 Master. It
has a 17-| to 1 ratio, and is now bolted on top
of the frame box-section side rail. A new flange,
cast to the pitman shaft housing, sets directly on
top of the rail, and is held to it by two bolts
threaded through the rail, the heavy side rail re-
inforcement plate and two nuts welded to the
Fig. 38 —Master De Luxe Steering Gear Mounting
Fig. 39 —Master De Luxe Steering Gear Stops
plate. Alignment with the dash is obtained by
placing shims between the steering gear housing
and frame.
The serrations at the end of the pitman arm
shaft are spaced irregularly so that it is impos-
sible to assemble the arm on the shaft incorrectly.
Two steering stops are cast within the steering
gear housing. This eliminates the necessity for
the bracket formerly fixed on the frame for this
purpose. The teeth on the roller contact these
stops to obviate any possibility of the roller over-
running the end of the worm.
The adjustment is the same as in 1936.
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Fig. 40 —Standard Steering Gear
As mentioned under "Front Suspension” float-
ing bronze bushings replace the needle bearings
in the king pin supports.
These bushings tend to steady up the steering
and reduce the strains imposed on the steering
gear.
STANDARD
The steering gear on the Standard is quite dif-
ferent from that on the Master De Luxe.
It is of the worm and sector type. The main
shaft worm is mounted between two taper roller
Fig. 41—Standard Steering Gear Sector Mounting
Fig. 42—Exploded View of Standard Steering Gear
Assembly
bearings located in an eccentric sleeve, which is
mounted in the steering gear housing.
The sector shaft is straddle-mounted and ro-
tates on two bronze bushings, one in the housing
and the other in the side cover. The bushing in
the housing floats, permitting the shaft to rotate
in the bushing and the bushing to rotate in the
housing.
ADJUSTMENT
The sector shaft is adjusted for end play in a
manner similar to 1936. The main shaft end play
is now adjusted at the bottom end of the steering
gear by means of a screw and lock nut adjust-
Fig. 43 —Master Steering Gear Adjustments
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


ment. The adjustment for back lash between the
worm and sector is made by means of a new type
lever adjustment located at the bottom of the
gear.
The adjustment of the Standard gear differs fur-
ther from the Master De Luxe in that the bearings
are set up with no appreciable tension and there
is no high spot in the gear mesh.
The correct lubricant for the Standard steering
gear is Transmission Oil. The construction of the
housing permits seasonal changes.
STANDARD MODEL DRAG LINK
Two springs have been added to the Standard
drag link, thus providing a spring on each side of
the pitman arm ball as well as at each side of the
third arm ball. This arrangement gives the rod
a "floating” method of suspension in each socket
and does the work of a kick shackle. Adjustment
—up tight and back at least \ turn.
Fig. 44 —Standard Drag Link
Wheels and Tyres
The same wheels and tyres are used on both ‘
Standard and Master De Luxe models. The tyre
size is 16 x 6.00. The tyre pressures are 26 lbs.
front cold, and 28 lbs. rear cold. Left hand thread
hub bolts are now used on both series on the left
side of the car.
Electrical
BATTERY
A 6 volt, 15 plate battery is used. The capacity
remains the same as in 1936, i.e., 105 ampere
hours.
The battery is supported in a hanger on the
right side of the frame directly behind the second
cross member. The front of the battery case is
protected against stones by the cross member and
by a metal shield.
Fig. 45 —Battery Location
GENERATOR
A generator provided with a third brush is now
used. The lighting switch is provided with a lamp
load resistance. Moving the lighting switch out
one or more notches cuts out the resistance and
steps up the charging rate to maximum. The first
notch out of the switch cuts out the resistance
only, without turning on lights.
IGNITION DISTRIBUTOR
This is of the same general design as in 1936,
except that the advance characteristics of the new
engine are changed to provide 46 degrees advance
at 3500 R.P.M. The distributor point gap is .018
in. The distributor number is 649-G.
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Fig. 46 —Octane Selector
VACUUM ADVANCE AND OCTANE
SELECTOR
This is the same as in 1936, except for the
method of setting the octane selector. Chevrolet
has a 17° advance with an arm travel of slightly
under in!
SPARK PLUGS
The gap is increased to .035 in. to .037 in. A
multiple spark condition exists when a spark
jumps a wide gap through highly compressed
fuel mixture. This multiple spark provides more
Fig. 47 —Spark Plug Gap
than one chance for the mixture to ignite,
whereas, with a short, single spark, if the one
spark misses fire, there is "ragged” engine oper-
ation unless the mixture is enriched to permit
more ready firing. Thus the wider spark gap
actually permits smooth operation on a "leaner”
fuel mixture without over-stressing any part of
the ignition system.
The spark plug type is Pyrox P.Z.14, with a
gap of .035 in. to .037 in.
Fig. 48—Headlamp Adjustment
HEADLAMPS
These are attached to the radiator in a similar
manner to that employed in 1936. A terminal
block for the headlamp wires is used in 1937 on
the inside of the radiator shell. Care should be
exercised to see that too long a screw is not used
in attaching the wires, otherwise a short circuit
may result.
The headlamp switch is located on the instru-
ment board and has four positions; —"Off,”
"Charge Acceleration” (See Generator), "Park-
ing,” "Headlights.”
Headlamp adjustment is shown in figure 48.
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Cooling System
Fig. 49 —Radiator Fillers
The water pump has been described under the
section entitled "Engine.” The radiator filler is
mounted on the top of the core upper tank on the
right hand side of the car. Formerly it was located
on the opposite side and projected to the rear of
the tank.
In order that the water can be drained directly
into a pail, the drain cock is now located at the
Fig. 50 —Draining Radiator
front of the lower tank, where it can be operated
from the front of the car. There is also a drain
cock located on the left rear of the engine, to com-
plete drainage of the cylinder block.
A new mounting of the core, plus sufficient
room ahead of the engine, permits easy removal
of the core for servicing without the necessity of
removing the complete radiator assembly from the
Fig. 51—Radiator Core Removal
car. Three accessible bolts through the anchoring
flange at each side attach the core to the radiator
shell. When these bolts and the water pump are
removed, the core may be slipped easily out of
the car.
The thermostat starts to open at 140 to 142
degrees, and is fully open at 170 degrees.
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


CHASSIS LUBRICATION
EVERY 5,000 MILES OR TWICE A YEAR
fQ Carburettor Accelerating Pump Shaft: Re-
■ • move the cover and fill the screw hole with
graphite grease.
MRear Axle: Drain completely, flush and
refill with special E.P. (extreme pressure)
lubricant recommended by your Dealer. Do not
use ordinary rear axle lubricant. This should be
done every 5,000 miles or at least twice a year.
EVERY 10,000 MILES
J Front Wheel Bearings: Remove the wheels,
• clean the bearings and pack the bearing
ball retainers with a high melting point front
wheel bearing grease. Do not pack the hub be-
tween the inner and outer bearing assemblies nor
the hub cap, as this excessive lubrication will
result in grease working out into brake drums
and on the linings.
In mounting the front wheels, great care must be
taken to adjust the bearings properly —an opera-
tion that requires mechanical skill.
K Front Shock Absorber I Keep the shock ab-
sorbers filled with
| Rear Shock Absorber Genuine G.M. - H.
■ , I Shock Absorber
Fluid. Do not, under any circumstances, use a
shock absorber fluid other than that recommended
above. Heavy body fluids are detrimental to the
proper functioning of the unit. Use the same fluid,
summer and winter. Consult your Dealer for de-
tailed instructions.
YEARLY
“I £L Transmission: Drain completely, flush and
■ “ refill. Use transmission oil S.A.E. 110.
MISCELLANEOUS
11 Clutch Release Bearing: The clutch release
■ ■ bearing is of the carbon type lubricated
from a reservoir with an oiler on top. This con-
struction eliminates necessity for frequent lub-
rication.
It is only necessary to refill the clutch throwout
collar when, upon releasing the clutch, a squeak-
ing noise occurs.
To fill the clutch throwout bearing collar with
oil, remove the cover plate on the toe board and
the inspection cover on the clutch housing. The
clutch throwout bearing oiler should be filled with
S.A.E. No. 160 oil.
Universal Joint: The universal joint is directly
connected to, and receives its lubrication from,
the transmission. The pipe plug opening in the
housing is used to fill the unit at the time of
assembly.
Rear Wheels: The rear wheel bearings receive
their lubrication from the rear axle. Additional
lubrication of the bearings is unnecessary.
Rear Spring Bushings: Rubber bushings are used
at the front of each rear spring. These bushings
must not be lubricated or sprayed with oil.
Rear Springs: Should the car owner find it neces-
sary to have the spring leaves lubricated, a cup
grease to which 8% to 10% of graphite has been
added should be used.
LUBRICATION CHART
1937 STANDARD CHEVROLET MODELS
Lock Cylinders: Lubricate with powdered
graphite.
Door Check: Use soft soap on rod. Use light ma-
chine oil on hinge pin.
Door Dovetail Bumpers and Striker Plate: Apply
“Decrease” to the metal shoes.
Front Seat Adjuster: Use graphite lubricant on
gears. Use cup grease sparingly on seat supports.
BODY
EVERY 1,000 MILES
light machine oil along the upper edge of the
sash channel on the inside for its entire length.
This oil will flow down on the channel and lubri-
cate channel, bracket and the regulator arm knob.
Windscreen Wiper Shaft: Use light machine oil.
Door Hinge Pins: Use light machine oil.
Door Lock Bolts; Use “Doorcase” on curved side.
Use light machine oil on flat side.
Hood Hinges and Catch Mechanism: Light ma-
chine oil.
Window Regulator: Lower window to fully opened
position. Hold a piece of wire with one end touch-
ing the shaft at the gear end (inside the door).
Apply a few drops of light machine oil to the wire
and allow it to run down to the shaft.
Window Regulator Arm: Raise the window glass
to the closed position. Using a squirt can, apply
CHASSIS LUBRICATION
EVERY 1,000 MILES
Only a good grade of water-resistant chassis lub-
ricant should be used at points indicated in the
chassis diagram, except where other lubricants
are specifically mentioned.
NOTE: The chassis should be lubricated every
1,000 miles if the car is operated on paved high-
ways. If operated mostly on dirt or gravel roads,
more frequent lubrication will be necessary.
Front Spring Shackles.
Steering Knuckles.
Steering Tie Rod Ends.
’Jf Front Spring Bolts.
Distributor Shaft.
13 Spring Saddles.
15 Rear Spring Shackles.
10 Steering Connecting Rod.
11 Steering Connecting Rod.
ML Water Pump: Fill the oil cup with a good
w grade of engine oil.
f Starter Motor: Two or three drops of light
engine oil in the oil cup at the front end
of the starter motor.
MRear Axle: Check the oil level. It should
be maintained at the filler plug opening.
Use only E.P. (extreme pressure) lubricant of
the same brand as already in the axle. If the
brand is unknown, do not add lubricant. Drain
completely and refill with new lubricant every
5.000 miles or at least twice a year.
| ML Transmission: Check the oil level. It should
IW be maintained at the filler plug opening.
Use transmission oil S.A.E. 110.
■f Brake Master Cylinder; Check the oil level
I M and see that it is not less than half full.
Use only Genuine G.M.-H. Brake Fluid. Consult
your Dealer.
1A Steering Gear; The steering gear should
■ Jr be lubricated with special steering gear
lubricant. This is a light, non-flowing lubricant
having a temperature range from extreme sum-
mer conditions to below zero without affecting
the efficiency of the steering gear. Seasonal
change of the lubricant is unnecessary and the
housing should not be drained. If other lubricants
are used, it may be necessary to dilute them in
extremely cold weather.
Do not use pressure fitting in the filler plug hole
when filling the steering gear, as this will force
grease up the steering column.
Generator: A few drops of light engine oil
• •in the oil cups at each end of the
generator.
EVERY 1,000—1,500 MILES
Engine: Drain and refill the crankcase. Use S.A.E.
30 for summer months and S.A.E. 20 for winter
months. EVERY 2,000 MILES
“tfk Air Cleaner: The filter element of the air
■ w cleaner should be removed and washed in
petrol. Keep the felt pad dry. After drying, re-
oil it by dipping it in S.A.E. 50 engine oil. Allow
the excess oil to drain off and then re-assemble.


CHASSIS LUBRICATION
EVERY 1,000 MILES
Only a good grade of water-resistant chassis lub-
ricant should be used at points indicated in the
chassis diagram, except where other lubricants
are mentioned.
NOTE: The chassis should be lubricated every
1,000 miles if the car is operated on paved high-
ways. If operated mostly on dirt or gravel roads,
more frequent lubrication will be necessary.
J Front Spring Unit Radius Rod.
Front Spring Unit King Pin.
g Steering Tie Rod.
Distributor.
14 Spring Saddles.
15 Rear Spring Shackles.
11 Steering Connecting Rod.
1 Generator: A few drops of light engine oil
in the oil cups at each end of the
generator.
t Water Pump: Fill the oil cup with a good
grade of engine oil.
3 Front Spring Units: Keep the housings
filled to the level of the filler plug with
Genuine G.M.-H. Shock Insulation Fluid. Use the
same fluid summer and winter.
Do not under any circumstances use a fluid other
than that recommended above. Heavy body fluids
are detrimental to the proper functioning of the
unit.
| ft Starting Motor: Two or three drops of
I w light engine oil in the oil cup at the front
end.
| Jt Rear Axle: Check the oil level. It should
iw be maintained at the filler plug opening.
Use only E.P. (extreme pressure) lubricant of the
same brand as already in the axle. If the brand is
unknown, do not add lubricant. Drain completely
and refill with new lubricant every 5,000 miles
or at least twice a year.
| Transmission: Check the oil level. It should
■ ' be maintained at the filler plug opening.
Use transmission oil S.A.E. 110.
| O Brake Master Cylinder: Check the oil level
I O and see that it is not less than half full.
Use only Genuine G.M.-H. Brake Fluid. Consult
your Dealer.
|A Steering Gear: The steering gear should
I w be lubricated with special steering gear
lubricant. This is a light, non-flowing lubricant
having a temperature range from extreme sum-
mer conditions to below zero without affecting
the efficiency of the steering gear. Seasonal
change of the lubricant is unnecessary and the
housing should not be drained. If other lubricants
are used, it may be necessary to dilute them in
extremely cold weather. Do not use pressure fit-
ting in the filler plug hole when filling the steer-
ing gear, as this will force grease up the steering
column.
EVERY 1,000—1,500 MILES
Engine: Drain and refill the crankcase. Use S.A.E.
30 for summer months and S.A.E. 20 for winter
months.
Hood Hinges and Catch Mechanism: Light ma-
chine oil.
Window Regulator: Lower window to fully opened
position. Hold a piece of wire with one end touch-
ing the shaft at the gear end (inside the door).
Apply a few drops of light machine oil to the
wire and allow it to run down to the shaft.
Window Regulator Arm: Raise the window glass
to the closed position. Using a squirt can, apply
BODY
EVERY 1,000 MILES
light machine oil along the upper edge of the
sash channel on the inside for its entire length.
This oil will flow down on the channel and lub-
ricate channel, bracket and the regulator arm
knob.
Windscreen Wiper Shaft: Use light machine oil.
Door Hinge Pins: Use light machine oil.
Door Lock Bolts: Use “Doorcase” on curved side.
Use light machine oil on flat side.
Lock Cylinders: Lubricate with powdered
graphite.
Door Check: Use soft soap on rod. Use light ma-
chine oil on hinge pin.
Door Dovetail Bumpers and Striker Plate: Apply
“Decrease” to the metal shoes.
Front Seat Adjuster: Use graphite lubricant on
gears. Use cup grease sparingly on seat supports.
LUBRICATION CHART
1937 CHEVROLET MASTER DE LUXE MODELS
CHASSIS LUBRICATION
EVERY 2,000 MILES
6 Front Spring Unit Spindle Bushing: Re-
move the plug at the inner end of the
spindle and pack the reservoir with a lubricant
such as soft cup grease.
*i ft Air Cleaner: The filter element of the air
* w cleaner should be removed and washed in
petrol. Keep felt pad dry. After drying, re-oil it
by dipping it in S.A.E. 50 engine oil. Allow excess
oil to drain off and then re-assemble.
EVERY 5,000 MILES OR TWICE A YEAR
|| Carburettor Accelerating Pump Shaft: Re-
■ I move the cover and fill the screw hole with
graphite grease.
| //L Rear Axle: Drain completely, flush and
I w refill with special E.P. (extreme pressure)
lubricant recommended by your Dealer. Do not
use ordinary rear axle lubricant. This should be
done every 5,000 miles or at least twice a year.
EVERY 10,000 MILES
4 Front Wheel Bearings: Remove the wheels,
clean the bearings and pack the bearing
ball retainers with a high melting point front
wheel bearing grease. Do not pack the hub be-
tween the inner and outer bearing assemblies
nor the hub cap, as this excessive lubrication will
result in grease working out into the brake drums
and on the linings. In mounting the front wheels,
great care must be taken to adjust the bearings
properly— an operation requiring mechanical skill,
| Rear Shock Absorbers: Keep the shock
I absorbers filled with Genuine G.M.-H.
Shock Absorber fluid. Do not, under any circum-
stances, use a shock absorber fluid other than that
recommended above. Heavy body fluids are detri-
mental to the proper functioning of the unit. Use
the same fluid, summer and winter.
YEARLY
| "F Transmission: Drain completely, flush and
■ » refill. Use transmission oil S.A.E. 110.
MISCELLANEOUS
I*l Clutch Release Bearing: The clutch release
I * bearing is of the carbon type lubricated
from a reservoir with an oiler on top. This con-
struction eliminates the necessity for frequent
lubrication.
It is only necessary to refill the reservoir when,
upon releasing the clutch, a squeaking noise
occurs.
To fill the clutch throwout bearing collar with oil,
remove the cover plate on the toe board and the
inspection cover on the clutch housing. The clutch
throwout bearing oiler should be filled with S.A.E.
No. 160 oil.
Universal Joint: The universal joint receives its
lubrication from the transmission. The pipe plug
opening is used to fill the unit at the time of
assembly.
Rear Wheels: The rear wheel bearings receive
their lubrication from the rear axle. Additional
lubrication of the bearings is unnecessary.
Rubber Spring Bushings: Rubber bushings are
used at the front end of each rear spring. These
bushings must not be lubricated or sprayed with
oil.
Rear Springs: Should the car owner find it neces-
sary to have the spring leaves lubricated, a
medium cup grease, to which 8% to 10% of
graphite has been added should be used


3 1508 00283744 6
Standard
Master De Luxe
Wheelbase
112|- in.
112d in.
Tread —Front
56f in.
57-17/64 in.
Tread —Rear
57-9/16 in.
57-9/16 in.
FRONT SUSPENSION:-
Type
Conventional
Independent
REAR AXLE:-
No. of Teeth on Gear and Pinion ...
41 — 11
41 — 11
Gear Ratio ...
3.73
3.73
BRAKES:-
Type of Actuation
Hydraulic, Internal Expanding
Hydraulic, Internal Expanding
Parking Lever Operation
On Rear Service Shoes
On Rear Service Shoes
Operation of Parking Brake Inde-
pendent of Service Brake
Yes
Yes
Brake Drum Type
Pressed Steel Back with Cast
Pressed Steel Back with Cast
Iron Rim
Iron Rim
Brake Drum Diameter
11 in.
11 in.
ENGINE:-
Engine Type
Valve-in-head
Valve-in-head
No. of Cylinders
6
6
Bore
3i in.
3i in.
Stroke
3| in.
3| in.
Piston Displacement
216.5 cu. in.
216.5 cu. in.
Compression Ratio
6.25 to 1
6.25 to 1
Horse Power (S.A.E.)
29.4
29.4
Maximum Brake Horse Power
85 at 3200 R.P.M.
85 at 3200 R.P.M.
Firing Order
I-5-3.6-2-4
1-5-3-6-2-4
Valve Tappet Clearance —
Intake
.006 in. to .008 in. hot
.006 in. to .008 in. hot
Exhaust
.013 in. to .015 in. hot
.013 in. to .015 in. hot
Piston Material
Cast Iron
Cast Iron
Piston Surface Treatment
Electro-Plated with Tin
Electro-Plated with Tin
Ring Location about Piston Pin ...
Above
Above
Connecting Rod Material ...
Drop Forged Steel
Drop Forged Steel
Connecting Rod Bearing Material ...
Babbitt
Babbitt
Crankshaft End Play
.003 in. to .007 in.
.003 in. to .007 in.
Crankshaft Bearing Material
Steel Backed Babbitt
Steel Backed Babbitt
Camshaft Material
Drop Forged Steel
Drop Forged Steel
Camshaft Bearing Material
Steel Backed Babbitt
Steel Backed Babbitt
Camshaft Drive ...
Gear
Gear
Valve Seat Angle
30 degrees
30 degrees
Carburettor
Carter Down-Draft
Carter Down-Draft
Choke Control
Manual
Manual
General Specifications
RVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Standard
Master De Luxe
Fuel Gauge
... AC, Electric Type
AC, Electric Type
Fuel Pump
... Diaphragm Type driven off
Diaphragm Type driven off
Camshaft
Camshaft
Number of Intake Ports
Radiator Hose I.D. —-
... 3
3
Inlet
... li in.
li in.
Outlet
... H in.
li in.
Fan Belt Adjustment
... Movable Generator
Movable Generator
Water Pump Type
... Vane
Vane
Water Temperature Control ...
Thermostat Opening —
... Automatic
Automatic
Starts
... 142° F.
142° F.
Fully Open
ENGINE LUBRICATION:-
... 170°
170°
Oil cleaned by
... Screen
Screen
Normal Oil Pressure
... 17 lbs.
17 lbs.
Timing Gears
... Nozzle
Nozzle
Tappets
... Drip and Splash
Drip and Splash
Pistons, Pins and Rings
... Splash
Splash
Main and Camshaft Bearings
... Force Feed
Force Feed
Connecting Rods
CLUTCH:-
... Dipper and Nozzle
Dipper and Nozzle
Clutch Adjustment
... li in.
li in.
Type
... Dry Disc
Dry Disc
Lubrication of Release Bearing
... Carbon Disc —Manual Lubrica-
Carbon Disc —Manual Lubrica-
tion through oil hole when
tion through oil hole when
noise indicates necessity.
noise indicates necessity.
Clutch Pedal Pressure
TRANSMISSION: -
... 35 lbs.
35 lbs.
Type
... Synchro-mesh
Synchro-mesh
Type of Gearing
Ratio —
... Helical Second
Helical Second
Low ...
... 2.94 to 1
2.94 to 1
Second
... 1.68 to 1
1.68 to 1
Reverse
... 2.94 to 1
2.94 to 1
Universal Joint
... One Enclosed Joint connecting
One Enclosed Joint connecting
Transmission and Drive
Transmission and Drive
WHEELS AND TYRES:-
Shaft.
Shaft.
Tyre Size
... 6.00 — 16
6.00 — 16
Number of Ply
Tyre Inflation —
... 4
4
Front
... 26 Cold — 30 Hot
26 Cold — 30 Hot
Rear
STEERING:-
... 28 Cold — 32 Hot
28 Cold — 32 Hot
Steering Gear Type
... Worm and Sector
Worm and Double Roller
Steering Gear Ratio
... 16 to 1
17.5 to 1
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


Standard
Master De Luxe
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM:-
Charging Rate Adjustment ...
Maximum Charging Rate —
... Third Brush
Third Brush
Cold
... 18 to 21
18 to 21
Hot
... 15 to 17
15 to 17
Generator Model Number ...
... 948-R
948-R
Ventilated
... Yes
Yes
Starting Motor Model Number
... 739-A
739-A
Engagement
... Bendix
Bendix
Shift Operation
... Hand Control on Instrument
Panel
Hand Control on Instrument
Panel
Distributor Point Gap
... .018 in.
.018 in.
Spark Plug Gap
... .035 in. to .037 in.
.035 in. to .037 in.
Spark Plug Model
... Pyrox P.Z.14
Pyrox P.Z.14
Battery Capacity
... 105 Amps.
105 Amps.
Voltage
... 6
6
Number of Plates
... 15
15
Horn Type
... Vibrator
Vibrator
Headlight Type
... Tilt-Ray, Double Filament
Tilt-Ray, Double Filament
Headlight Switch Control
... Toeboard and Instrument Panel
Toeboard and Instrument Panel
Parking Light Location
Power of Bulbs —
... In Headlamp
In Headlamp
Headlight
... 32-21 C.P.
32-21 C.P.
Parking Light
... 1.5 C.P.
1.5 C.P,
Tail Light
... 3 C.P.
3 C.P.
Stop Light
... 3 C.P.
3 C.P.
Instrument Light ...
... 1.5 C.P.
1.5 C.P.
Dome Light
... 6 C.P.
6 C.P.
Electrical Circuit Protection ...
... 20 Amp. Fuse
20 Amp. Fuse
Body and Sheet Metal Finish
Duco Lacquer
Duco Lacquer
List of Tool Equipment
... Screwdriver, Pliers, Wheel
Wrench, Hammer, Jack and
Handle, Starting Crank,
Grease Gun, Tyre Pump,
Spark Plug Wrench, Oil Can,
Adjustable Wrench, 4 Open
End Wrenches, Instruction
Book, Tool Container.
Screwdriver, Pliers, Wheel
Wrench, Hammer, Jack and
Handle, Starting Crank,
Grease Gun, Tyre Pump,
Spark Plug Wrench, Oil Can,
Adjustable Wrench, 4 Open
End Wrenches, Instruction
Book, Tool Container.
CAPACITIES:-
Petrol Tank
... Ilf gallons
Ilf gallons
Crankcase
... 4f quarts
4f quarts
Cooling System
11 quarts
11 quarts
Transmission
... If pints
If pints
Rear Axle
... 3 pints
3 pints
SERVICE INFORMATION 1937 CHEVROLET CARS


GENERAL MOTORS - HOLDEN'S LTD.
MELBOURNE + SYDNEY + ADELAIDE '
BRISBANE + PERTH
G. W. GREEN a SONS PTY. LTD. • .
