

ACROSS
AUSTRALIA
IN
A
"Ford"
by
FRANCIS
BIRTLES.
Tarrant Motors Pty. Ltd.
Russell Street, Melbourne
VICTORIA


■DRESENTED With the
compliments of
TARRANT MO-
TORS PTY. LTD.,
Russell Street, Mel-
bourne. Sole Agents
for FORD CARS in
VICTORIA.


"Ready for a Start.” Birtles (in white) and his "Ford.”


3,500 MILES ACROSS
AUSTRALIA IN A
FORD CAR
FROM THE GULF OF CARPENTARIA
TO PORT PHILLIP BAY
By FRANCIS BIRTLES
Edited and Compiled ey G. W. WHATMORE
AUG. TO DEC. 19 13


The "Ford" Cars unmeaning in Sydney, ex s.s. “Batsford," 8th June, 1914. The “Batsiurd ” carried the largest
shipment of cars ever brought to Australia —430, of which 402 were “Fords.


INTRODUCTION.
“ And if a path be dangerous known,
“ Danger itselj is lure alone." —
Scott
HIPIS love of adventure and spirit of
iib daring has ever been a tradition of
S I the British race from the earliest ages.
fggggQj The restless desire to accomplish new
deeds seems insatiable, and the attainment of
the seemingly impossible is attempted without
regard to life or comfort.
For ages past the goal of ambition has been
the discovery of the World’s polar extremities,
which has called upon many valuable lives ere its
accomplishment. Darkest Africa, with its untold
. .l - _ _ rrloe ll O C rIjIIITIPH itS IIGTOCS
WcLSLCS CliU-l
and victims, whilst nearer home the exploration
of the vast interior of Australia has likewise
sacrificed the lives of many brave men ; but
as one hero goes down, another rises, to
take his place. The evolution of the World’s
progress ever continues, and one might seriously
reflect as to what will be left of the World’s
surface to be exploited by the generations to
come—truly, but little !


In Francis Birtles, Australia possesses a
native born who is by birth an explorer, whose
native land in all its natural beauty, “far ftom
the maddening crowd ” is the shrine at which he
worships. The hardships, the dangers, the strug-
gles, bodily pain, hunger, thirst, solitude—these
are but the means whereby he is enabled to
“ mingle with the universe ,” to know his beloved
country as no others know it. Of food, he gets
Gulf Country Cattle—Northern Territory.
nature’s supply, with the canopy of Heaven
over his head at night. Not content with having
twice encircled its coastline on his cycle, he has
now started to “criss-cross” it per medium of his
“Ford” Car.
The illustrations shown herein represent
some of the scenes, &c., on Birtlcs’ first journey
Across Australia from Burkctown, in tliG Gulf
of Carpentaria—the Northern sea border, to Mel-
bourne, on the shores of Port Phillip Bay, the
Southern sea border, being a distance of 3500
miles, and which, having been successfully ac-
complished, makes history, in that it is the pio-
neer ride, being the first occasion on which this
long and trying journey has been done per
medium of motor car.


Profiting by the experience gained on his
cycle journeys, Dirties realised that to accom-
plish by motor car the drive mentioned, the car
should possess all the vital points _ known to
motor science. Starting in the tropics, and in
mid-summer, he would encounter heat, dust, and
sand storms, to say nothing of bush fires,
stretches of heavy sand, and dry river bee s,
whilst further south he would meet heavy
Among the Sandhills—Northern Territory.
thunderstorms and black soil for which Western
Queensland is noted, and still further souta
Tough mountain country, with running streams
to cross. It therefore became a matter of serious
o nor ranahlc of negotiating the
tnougllt tu ---Jr- -
difficulties which beset this strenuous journey.
He realised that the car should combine
strength, power, flexibility, lightness, high clear-
ance, simplicity, economy on petrol consumption,
lightness on tyres, and above all durability. After
much careful consideration, he chose a 20 H .
Ford Touring Car, and with what wisdom, the
terse and graphic description of the trip as de-
scribed in Dirties’ own words, will show. u
flee it to say that, in spite of the almost impos


sible task, beset with difficulties which must
have taxed the car far beyond the manufac-
turers’ dreams of the use (and abuse) to which a
car would ever be subjected, and such as no
ordinary motorist would ever experience—the
Ford came triumphantly through, arriving at
Melbourne as perfect as when new, and with
the original tyres still in use, having covered
upwards of 3500 miles in the wonderful time
of 21 daj's.
A claypan—Northern Queensland.
Not content with this wonderful pioneer
motor drive, sensational enough to gratify to the
full the ambition of most mortals, Birtles could
1 e mid 1A 1 11 f* C C +lt
IIUL lUiig tiiuuic Lli U'-Mllit-'i 1-0 O-iiva mivnvoj, me-
vanities, and mockeries of “civilisation”?, the
hum-drum shallowness and sameness of city
life.
Little wonder then, that the call of his
beloved bush, haunted his restless dreams.
There yet remained parts of his native
land still untrod ; small wonder, then, that
the unreality of city life should prove stiff


ing after the freedom he had enjoyed. What
matter the pangs of hunger and thirst.
Once again his mind and thoughts pon-
dered anxiously over the map of Australia,
would he have to “ sheath his sword for
lack of argument was there no journey
left which he could pioneer ? Yes, Mel-
bourne via Sydney, to Port Darwin—a dis-
tance of many thousand miles, though after
passing through New South Wales and the
Good going—Tambo, Central Queensland.
south-western portion of Queensland, the
journey would be entirely devoid of roads (as
indeed was over 1000 miles of his Burketown
to Melbourne drive).
Still, this did not daunt him, and hav-
ing decided on this, the most adventurous
and daring expedition of his life, the next
and most important question which arose was,
what motor car should he use ? This he
quickly settled, being guided by the perfect man-
ner in which his Ford car had carried him over


the long and trying journey of 3500 miles from
“the Gulf” to Melbourne.
As the actual start of the journey was to
be made from Sydney, Birtles droves his Ford
car over the space separating Melbourne from
Sydney, a distance of 624 miles in the short
space of 2 i/2days (averaging 250 miles per day),
but then were there not roads, a thing which
Birtles seldom enjoyed, or even worried about.
In Sydney, Birtles was joined by Mr.
Frank Hurley, photographer, who, it will be re-
membered, accompanied Mawson’s Antarctic ex-
pedition, and who now will somewhat vary
his experience. Verily Mr. Hurley and Mr.
Birtles are well met ! On Good Friday morn-
ing, the happy pair, mounted on -their faith-
ful Ford, together with upwards of half a ton
of luggage, left the Sydney Showground on
their daring journey to Port Darwin. From
thence they purpose motoring down the west
coast of Australia to Perth, and continuing over
the route of the Transcontinental Railway to
Adelaide and Melbourne, a journey of upwards
of 10,000 miles. The progress they are making is
graphically described in the following telegram.
r' 1 a 1 1
| j. ClGgi ana . j
Charieville,‘2lst April, 1914.
“Arrived Charleville 2.30 p.m., drove 100
miles over sand hills without stoppage. Ford ■
loaded.with half ton camp gear and .supplies,
averaged 28 miles per gallon of petrol, car run? -
ning perfectly.— (Signed) Birtles?” ,


Their hopes are high, and the heroic little
Ford is living up to its reputation. Weeks and
months will elapse before this long, long journey
can be completed, and many anxious hours will
be spent by near and dear friends of these in-
trepid explorers, though Birtles expresses him-
self as quite confident that, with the aid of his
Ford car, he will again return triumphant “in
a few months’ time !”
The description of Birtles’ 3500 miles jour-
ney in the Ford car from Burketown to Mel-
bourne, which the photographs in this Booklet
illustrate, is given in his own words, and being
extracts from his diary, are printed without
alteration, _
, TTTTT a m *n tr /"'v T~» XT'
G. W. WHATMORE.
Brisbane, June, 1914.


Group of 18,000 "F ord" Employees, who will read with pleasure the wonderful success accomplished by Birtles
on his pioneer Motor Drive across Australia, a distance of 3,500 miles in a “Ford” Car.


ACROSS AUSTRALIA
IN A FORD CAR
EXTRACTS FROM DIARY BY FRANCIS BIRTLES
FROM THE GULF OF CARPENTARIA TO
PORT PHILLIP BAY AUG. TO DEC. 1913
August 12, 1913. —Left Charters Towers and Prairie
for a pioneer motor journey to the Gulf of Carpen-
taria, thence right across Australia, from Burketown
to Melbourne. Selected a “Ford,” as being both light,
powerful, and flexible.
August 14. —Following few days ploughing through
sand plains. Very hot, but did not have much time to
Birtles before he secured his “Ford” Car.


Birtles (in white) and his “Ford” Car, which enabled him to travel in comfort and safety, and sheltered him
from all the elements. On the left “Ford” Agent. J. Willett, of Hughenden, Q., bidding Birtles bon voyage en


notice the heat, as 1 was kept busy stump dodging.
Anyone in search of a new excitement, might try
stump dodging in a motor. It is a pastime guaranteed
to give more thrills than any other.
August 17. —Going down a steep mountain side,
breaks on, big bough fastened on behind. Rope broke,
car sliding down steep pinch, with rear wheels lockea.
Put reverse clutch in, at same time advancing throttle.
Very busy steering, back wheels started to grip on
wash out gravelly descent. Arrived at bottom, my
knees “knocking" badly.
The Overland Telegraph Line, Leichhardt Ranges.
August 18.—Crossing a clay pan the crust .sudden - '/
gave way, car bogged up to the springs. Put cocoa-
nut matting down, car promptly sank that aid deep
down into the shiny mud. Decided to lighten the car
by unpacking the “furniture,” and carry this to a sandy
bank a mile distant. Tried to dig the mud away from


Birtles leaving Hughenden, Q., en route to Burketown. (Birtles in white).


the wheels; it was so gluey that each shovelful had
to be dug off the spade, for which purpose “hands and
claws” were the handiest. Process long and tedious.
Fastened a rope to a telegraph pole, and attached the
after end to the back wheel cap of the car. Set en-
gine at top speed—there was a great whirring sound
—two fountains of slush were thrown high into the
Dry Bed of Leichhardt River, sand most dreaded by Motorists.
air by the back wheels—and the telegraph post came
up by the ’’roots,” Going cautiously, engine still work-
ing strongly, I got out and helped with two saplings,
shifted car to a more desirable position. Then it im-
mediately tried to bury itself again. For hours, in
the intense heat, worried by salt dust, and eyes being
chewed out by flies, until late in the afternoon, got
clear. Water supply giving out. Camped at a “gilgi”
(small waterhole), but not to rest.


“Ford” —The Squatter’s Joy—(Homestead, Central Queensland).


The flics were unbearable; they got into my eyes,
buzzed in my ears, crawled down the back of my neck,
committed suicide in the tea, and insisted on forming
part of my meal. My bulldog “Wowser” jumping
frantically, and evidently wishing that he could get
his famous grip on the small tormentors.
Granite Waterhole—A Morning Drink.
August 20. —Raining, bogged several times. Chop-
ped away a number of trees which had fallen across
the track. This day was introduced to a new smell.


J, J. Donnelly & Co., “Ford” Dealers, Temora, N.S.W.
“Ford” Cars—part of order for Temora (N.S.W.) Dealers—
Messrs. J. J. Donnelly & Co.


Met an Afghan camel party. Anyone who does not
know the camel cannot imagine the “rich” perfume
resulting from a combination of camel and motor.
(Car runs well on this “rich mixture.”) Camels were
in a single file, led by a “nose line” fastened into nos-
tril, and thence fastened on to the leading animal’s
tail.
Native Rock Drawings—Northern Territory.
Great commotion. Camels tugging at each other s
tail, some disappearing over the sky line, others doing
their best to kick each other's “loading” off. * Ghans
boosting and cursing everything, from the dried up
brown earth, to the brassy blue skies. “Camels are not
afraid of anything.” This bush motto evidently out
of date.
August 21. —Strong westerly gale blowing, ground
drying up. Good claypan flats of scalded country.
(Scrub, grass, etc., killed off after a sudden shower of
rain, then hot tropical sun kills all vegetation).


Ant Hills—North Queensland.
An “Out-Back” Camp—Western Queensland.


Some sport chasing animals. Scientific investiga-
tions into the speeds of various animals. Reckoned that
the dingo can travel twenty-live miles an hour, and
keep up the pace. Wild dogs go about twenty miles
an hour, but they are great dodgers, and will not
keep a straight track. An emu tested for speed did
a final sprint of something like thirty miles an hour.
A few others were —
Kangaroos.—Fifteen miles an hour, and they can
maintain that speeed over long distances.
The Hairdresser at Burketown (in “The Gulf”), also
the local Butcher.
Wild Pigs.—A steady dog trot of ten miles an
hour, on a short run in cool weather 20 miles per
hour.
Organ Grinding Lizards sprint twelve miles per
hour for twenty yards.
Blue-tongue Lizards. —Unable to wait long enough
to test, but calculate that they travel at the rate of
about one mile per day if they are in a great hurry.


A Setony Patch near Charleville, Q.
In the Bush—N.S.W.


Supply of cotton waste lost. Using the dog’s hair
as a substitute on which to wipe my oily hands.
August 26. —Following overland telegraph line.
Hundreds of cockatoos perched on wares, some upside
down, screeching in acrobatic delight. Picked up a
freshly killed turkey, with its neck broken owing to
its having struck the wares in its flight. Dined on
roast turkey, a la mode!
A Fashionable Gathering of Burketown “Ford” admirers-latest Paris fashions-discussing ths
wonders of Motor Cars-"Fords" in particular.
August 27. —Battling across big sandy creeks. Cut-
ting a road through thick scrubs. Washed ray only
pair of trousers in a rockhole about the size and shape
of a bucket. All the time dingoes were slinking about
in the background, waiting a chance to slake their
thirst. A dingo will stalk the water when he is sus-
picious. First he will approach to within a safe dis-
tance, crouch down, and w r atch for half-an-hour or so.
Then he will advance another fifty yards or so, and
await further developments. And so the procedure


Scorching—No Speed Limit.
Birtles to the Rescue—helping a brother “Ford” Motorist
out of a difficult situation. Note the trouble, owing to
the Burnt Bridge. An ugly thing to meet on a dark
night.


continues till he finds it safe to drink. If you file at
them they will scamper in all directions, only to return
again as soon as they have recovered from their
fright.
Car running mechanically perfect, averaging 25
miles to gallon of benzine.
Pastime on the Diamantina River, North Queensland.—
A morning’s catch of Golden Perch.
August 30. —Discovered new brand of mosquito.
This “skeeter’ has three one-eight inch spikes, one on
port side, one on starboard, and one at the stern.
Length of monster over all, one ana nan incites.
September 3, 4. 5, 6. and 7.— Following the Flin-
ders River down to the coast. Very heavy sandy
creeks. Some half-a-mile wide. Had to build a road
across with a foundation of bough saplings and scrub.
Made a valuable discovery for crossing sandy river
beds. Taking off the mud guards and running boards
to give greater clearance. Procedure. Then got some
long sacks, fill these lightly with grass, and fasten on


Snake eaters in the “Gulf” Country.


with rope to the tyres. Go gently down the steep
banks ; on reaching the sand put in low gear very
gently, accelerate slowly, watching back wheels do not
skid. The car will waddle across in fine style. If much
of this heavy work has to be carried out, especially
under a hot sun, it will pay to run out the usual
Ford light oil and put in a heavy oil. The difference
in lubricating oils is remarkable. An unsuitable en-
gine oil will entirely upset the running. Most petrol
spirits are good. More power being lost over unsuit-
able engine lubricants.
Mr. E. J. Lumley-Martin (Queensland National Bank), in his “Ford” Car. after bidding
farewell to Birtles, 18 miles from Burketown, Gulf of Carpentaria.
Note.—The Ford high compression engines re-
quire for normal work and also for starting purposes
a thin crystal oil, which must not get thin under heat.
Some oils create overheating. The importance of en-
gine oils has not been appreciated by the average
owner. Get a good oil!


The Ford car, owing to the current being generated
in oil, will make a richer and fatter spark on a light oil.
On straight away going, this makes for speed, as a
big strong spark will fully and instantly ignite a big
charge when under high compression, and fast piston
revolutions.
September to.—Went out hunting wild pigs aboard
the car. Chased and caught a young porker. Put him
in bottom of car (back seat). Attempted to chase an
old boar, he stood his ground, gnashing his big
grinders. Ford came to a full stop. Shot at him
with a 22 calibre repeater. Bolted into some long
“Picannin”, the motor dog, bails up a week’s supply of wild pig. Dog subsequently lost
in North Queensland.
grass. 1 dismounted and followed him. Dennis got
away by crossing crocodile swamp. Returned to
car, promising myself a pork supper. For;: supper had
got out and disappeared over the skyline. Luck out.
Evening.—Plague of frogs. Frogs hopping over
and under everything. One big fellow is booming from
under the engine bonnet, and one is peering at me from
under the edge of the mudguard. Another one has
started up the leg of my trousers. ***—???—!!!


In addition there are mosquitoes. Millions of
them. I am convinced that where insect pests abound
no great art or philosophy can develop. How can one
pursue a train of thought or carve a sonnet while
every exposed part is being worried by pesky, persis-
tent, poisonous pin pricks, and each hand is engaged
in “squash, squash”?
“Prattsie” earns his passage-Wild pig rations for another week.
September 12.—Sport on the road incidents. One
• fin /-*P Vtf»n7inf=*
came through sitting on a, ica*.m&
whilst having lunch in the sun. It revived memories
of the mustard plasters of childhood. Camped three
days.
September 13, 1913- —Two thirteens. Socks, straps,
and my only pair of trousers missing this morning.
Looked at dog enquiringly. He seemed to be sleeping
innocently; but on making some pointed remarks, he
awoke suddenly, and sprinted for the horizon. Later
on he returned and deposited some old bones and
mouldy cowhide on my blanket, by way of payment
for the things he had taken.


View of "Ford" Factory, showing one day's outpul— ooo “Ford"


assis, complete except [?] to "Ford."


During the night the faithful dog brought into
camp some birds which I had shot and lost some
days ago. A bad case of “chickens coming home to
roost.” —odour fearful. Weather very hot.
September 14. —Hunting rock wallabies for fresh
meat. In one place crawled along a cliff ledge with
a sheer drop of 200 feet, and met five small “cattish
A Dingo Hunter —Northern Territory.
faced” wallabies. Cornered. Pushed them over the
edge with my rifle. Descended. Found three. Cut off
their tails. Soup for dinner.
Evening.—Centipede in bed. Mob of horses with
bells on gathered around campfire smoke. This to


evade the stinging sandflies. Music not appreciated. In
the morning I found the dog eating the last of the
candles.
Coastal Aboriginals, Northern Territory. A Plentiful supply of fish food
and sea bathing produces a better physique than the less fortunate inland
natives have.


September 16.—’ Track leading along the top of the
cliffs with a drop of 300 feet only a foot away, the
back wheels skidding on the bad surface. Splendid
views of low-lying coastal Gulf country. Descended
Inland Natives.
Poor miserable wretches —inhabitants of the “sun baked
plains”—who live on the borders of starvation compared
with the Coastal Natives.
over washed-out boulder strewn creek bed. Engine
pulling badly. Guessed change of atmosphere cause.
Adjusted carburetter jet. Car smoking a lot owing to
steep descent and oil running forward to two front
cylinders.


September 17. —Bad attack of malaria fever. Drank
four gallons of water to-day. Nerves shaky. Talking
loudly. Dog underneath car, shivering. Poor beggar.
My only friend, with the serious pessimistic expression
of a wet blanket, and reproving side glances whenever
a curse arose; hence his name. “Wowser.” Took him
out and patted him. Very hot. Began to wonder in
a dull kind of way as to whether I had been transferred
“Old Age Pensioners’ ’in the Spinifex—Gulf Country.
to Hades. Lay down in cheese cloth net. “Wowser”
whining uneasily. Let him come inside the net with
me. Took a big dose of quinine, and slept, waking up
in the middle of the night with brains wonderfully
clear. Feel as though the greatest problems could be
easily solved. Got out of net. Stood up, ground rose
up and hit me. So it felt. Crawded back into net, feel
sickly hunger. Chewed some damper. Woke up bet-
ter, but very weak. Shot a cockatoo, and boiled him.


Birtles stop, for Kelreshment. “A Lone Full." Thank God for His great blessing-Fresh water!


September 20. —Arrived Gulf tidal waters. Inves-
tigated a big fish trap. The trap is about ten feet
square, netted above and at sides, with a doorway 5
by 2 feet and leading into this are netting fences,
branching out in various directions. The tide, 20 feet
high, covers the trap, and retreating, leaves an assort-
ment of finny creatures inside. Put on bathing cos-
tume, and waded into this trap while the water was
3 feet deep. Yelled as something big rubbed against
my leg, water too muddy to see what it was. Soon
The Disdainful Camel, conquerors of the Desert—West of Cloncurry.
after discovered that it was a stingaree, with a 7 feet
tail, and a 10 inch poison barb. Made a scramble for
the netted post. The tide was going out, and the catch
could be seen, turtle as big as a round table, king-
fish, a shovel-nose shark, an enormous mangrove crab
with bone crushing claws, and scores of tropical fish
—spikey, thorny, puffed up, all eyes or all mouth,
gasping or grunting, and looking truly wicked. In a


corner was a 6 foot sea snake, with sharp fangs, and
a young 3 foot alligator. I had wandered innocently
barelegged into this peaceful gathering. Anyhow, that
evening I had fried turtle for tea. Judging by the
sample, 1 should say that very much mixed bathing
should be a popular pastime here, when this place be-
comes a popular seaside resort.
“Oh, Solitude—where are thy charms.”
Desert Lands, Northern Territory, south of the Barclay Tablelands.
September 23.- —Camped on a freshwater river. A
crocodile crawled out on to a sandbank in the middle
of the stream; big barramundi in his jaws. Fired a
bullet at him, he dropped the fish and dived into the
water. I swam across, towed my future meal to the
camp, grilled about 8 lb. of it for tea, salted the rest.
Sweet dreams.
September 25. —Shot an iguana for lunch. Strange
reptile, can climb a tree, dig a burrow, swim a creek,
dive like a fish, sprint his hundred yards in six and a
half, swallow anything, from an unopened tin of jam


to a discarded sock, lays eggs in the hot sand (which
the dingo promptly unearths), and can fight like several
demons.
September 26. —Blacks coming in for a big “cor-
roboree,” wallabies roasted brown, a la natural, tucked
underneath the gins’ arms. Started to show fight, var-
ious tribes standing behind trees, shaking spears and
jabbering wildly.
A “Ford” Joke.
September 27. — Travelling along a cattle track,
overlook a wild bull going down to water. He kept
running ahead. I could not get past. Suddenly he
stopped short, dropped his head, and charged. Ran
off track, dodged, got past. Did not have time to
look behind. Beat him easily on the “straight.”
September 28. —Heat intense. In tropical Australia.
“Tophetical Australia”?
September 29. —In camp. Flies bad. Crawled into
mosquito net, lay there half asleep .Suddenly a pur-
ring grunt made me quietly and quickly grab my rifle.
Through the blue of the cheesecloth netting 1 could
see a grey body. Pushing the rifle muzzle close to it,


Birtles’ Arrival at Burketown—N.Q.
Note "Non-skid Hopes,” also mass of luggage in car.
Wedding Party—Burketown, North Queensland.
“Ford” adds to their happiness.


and without sighting, I pulled trigger. A rush and a
scramble, feathers flying in all directions, and I grabbed
a badly wounded turkey.
October 4. —Travelling across big plains, very tus-
socky. Skylines and horizons very plentiful here,
not managed to “run” them down, though.
October 28.—At Burketown.
November 7. —Celebrated my birthday. Beer strike
on. Had to liven up on fresh water, which I brought
in from the Nicholson River, 15 miles away. Publicans
Two Australian Blessings—Artesian Water and "Ford" cars.
had locked up their water tanks. No other fresh water
on hand. Very dry district. Drought on.
November 10. —Beer strike over. “Pubs” won.
November it, 20, 25. —Numerous adventures, alliga-
tor shooting, netting shark fishing, hunting out on
plains with the motor car. Inhabitants good "sports.”
The following telegram was received from Birtles,
dated Burketown, 24th November, 1913: —“Travelled
fifteen hundred miles with my Ford car, no media


nical troubles, will leave Gulf next week for Port
Phillip Bay.”
(Signed) Birtles.
December 3. —Set out from Bnrketown for Mel-
bourne, 3000 miles away, across the Continent. Felt
lonely and hopeless. No spare parts. Feeling weary
and tired; the effects of malaria. Carrying Christmas
goods and mails to outback stations. Country too dry
for the mail horses to travel. Saw a big alligator
lying asleep with his head resting on a dead cow, which
“Ford” Car used on a six month’s journey in Western Queensland, by Dr. Rosrers, of
Queensland Education Department. Car under way at Camoweal,
800 miles west of Brisbane.
had bogged on the river bank. Put a 22 bullet into
his eye. Tremendous splashing and churning up of
tidal mud and slush.
Ford car engine running with a splendid deep
undertone as of distant thunder. Sweet music, best on
earth, “yea” even better than the voice of one’s best
beloved.


The following telegram was received from Birtles,
dated Cloncurry, 4th December, 191 j: —“Arrived Clon-
curry this afternoon in record time, leaving for Hugh-
enden, Ford car going well.”
(Signed) Birtles.
Another view of Dr. Roger's "Ford," showing how running boards and mud guards are
sometimes used in the Bush.
December 7. —Rushing steep “gullies.” Hair-rais-
ing game. Grades of 1 in 3 quarter of a mile long,
taken at top speed, sometimes with a few inches to
spare. Big breakaways on both sides. Case of “go
or bust.” Dodging logs, stumps, and trees. Rushed
a big sandy river, the Fullarton. Car buried up to
running boards. Broke up all benzine cases, jacked
each wheel up, put boards underneath. Got out all
blankets, kit, etc., and laid out on sand. F,ven my
coat I laid out a la Sir Walter Raleigh style, finally
to cover over a weak spot my cap and shirt was
used. (Scrub and grass could not be obtained.) Three
hours hard work under a blazing sun had given me a


Dr. Roger’s “Ford” getting over drill sand with the aid of coir matting—Camoweal District,
Western Queensland.


40 H.P. thirst, which I endeavoured to quench with a
bottle of strong ship’s limejuice, neat. My waterbag
was empty. Two benzine tins full of vile smelling and
muddy water were aboard, but this was for emer-
gencies.
The following telegram was received from Birtles,
dated Hughenden, Bth December, 19 r 3: —“Arrived
Hughenden, averaging two hundred miles daily over
mountain ranges, sandy creeks, boggy plains, from re-
cent thunderstorms, Ford going without any pause
travelling via Barcaldine post office.”
(Signed) Birtles.
December 9. —Met a mob of cattle out “storm
hunting.” They were led by an old bull; behind him
they stretched out in single column, head to tail, for


The Great Australian Dash. —A Pioneer's Home in the Mountains— New South Wales.
48


a distance of about five miles. The dust which
drifted to leeward gave the appearance of a big grass
fire approaching. The beasts seemed to be thirsty and
tired, with nostrils almost touching the ground. They
determinedly kept to the track, which would lead them
to the high tablelands, 50 miles away, where rain had
most likely fallen. The old bull leader’s instinct would
not fail.
“Watching for Game.”—In the Tropics, Gulf of Carpentaria.
The following telegram was received from Birtles,
dated Tambo, 10th December, 1913: —“Arrived Tambo,
lightning set plain on fire, car surrounded middle of
night, moved camp in a hurry, heat intense, Ford still
going strong, heavy bogs.”
(Signed) birtles.
December xi, 12.—Speeding across the plains of
Western Queensland. Race against time, as I must
keep a promise made three years ago that I would
be in time for an appointment in Melbourne Christ-
mas Eve.


December 13. —Made three hundred miles to-day.
D ecember 14. —Had to lay up in Longreach. De-
lirious with fever all day and night.
December 15. —Too weak to crank car. Got a man
to start her for me. Went away out of my course
to dodge a sandy creek. Gradually feeling better.
“In gloomy [?]
An Overlander’s horse boy—barclay Tableland.
■. The following telegram was received from Birtles,
dated Baan Baa, N.S.W., 15th December, 1913: —“Ar-
rived Boggabri, passed through heavy thunderstorm,
been ill malaria. Ford making fast trip,”
(Signed) Birtles.


December 17. —Had a good feed to-day. Lived
without eating, drinking water for three days. Fever
starved.
Montaginni Warriors-northern Territory.
December 18.—Crossed Queensland-N. S. Wales
border after following the Maranoa down.
December 19. —Arrived at Moree. Had a race with
a big English car. Dodging in and out amongst the


Arrival in Sydney— in Bevies & Fehon’s Garage, N.S.W. “Ford” Agents. Mr. Joe Pearson (the father of cycling in N.S.W., but who now drives a


gum trees. Shipping seas of dust. Got past. Beat
him on the 50 mile run. Spoke to owner afterwards.
He was surprised at “the little cheap car” running
away from his “thousand pounder.”
The following telegram was received from Birtles,
dated Sydney, 20th December, 1913: —“Arrived Sydney
four fifteen p.m., car in perfect order, absolutely no
troubles whatever.”
(Signed) Birtles.
The Motoring Dog says—“What sort of thing’s that ?"
December 20.—Arrived Sydney. Averaged 150
miles a day from the Gulf of Carpentaria.
December 21. —Cleaned carbon out of engine.
Tightened up big end bearings.
December 22.—Left for Melbourne.
The following telegram was received from Birtles,
dated Albury, 22nd December, 1913: —’“Arrived Albury,
Ford going exceptionally well and fast, expect arrive
Melbourne to-morrow.”
(Signed) Birtles,


December 23. —Camped for night on top of Pretty
Sally’s Hill, outside of Melbourne. Blowing a gale of
wind, and raining heavily.
Chopping out a wild [?] on the border of N.Q.
and Northern Territory.
The following telegram was received from Birtles,
dated Rialto, Melbourne, 23rd December, 1913; —“Com-
pleted pioneer journey across Australia, arriving Mel-
bourne three weeks out, averaging one hundred fifty
miles day, carried no spare parts. Ford requires no
overhaul.” (Signed) Birtles.


"Only another day to roam"-150 miles from Melbourne.


December 24.—Arrived Melbourne, completed jour-
ney. Went home to have a good sleep. Slept for 20
hours. Kept ray appointment.
Thus ending the first journey ever undertaken by
Motor Car across the Continent of Australia, from
the Gulf of Carpentaria on the North to Port Phillip
Bay on the South—in all a distance of upwards of
3500 miles, whilst the hero of the journey—namely,
the “Little Ford Car,” which gallantly responded to
The “Ford” serves many purposes. In this case of Wild Pig hunting—a new
every call entailed in this long and trying journey,
bore but slight evidence of the difficulties which it
had successfully overcome, and thus more than upheld
the reputation of the “Ford” as being “The Car for
Australia.”
A close examination of the working parts —after
completion of this long journey—revealed the fact


Photographer Darge, of Melbourne, gives Birtles some news of home.


that they were all perfect, and showed no signs of
wear, and beyond cleaning the engine, no repairs of
any description were necessary.—FßANClS BIRTLES
“There’s nought to do, but do it!”—The amphibious “Ford.”
Note.—As stated in the preface (mounted on
the identical Ford Car above mentioned), Birtles, ac-
companied by Mr. Frank Nuriev, has again started
out on a Transcontinental Ride across Australia
this time, however, from East to West via Mel-
bourne, Sydney, and Port Darwin, etc., a total distauce of
IU.OOU miles.


Home again in Melbourne. Motor Sport at Richmond.—“Ford” again a winner.
Main Street, Goondiwindi. A typical Country township, Agent on the left.


20 H.P. 5 Passenger “Ford” Touring Car, with full equipment. Price, £210.


20 H.P. 2 Passenger “Ford” Runabout, with full equipment. Price, £190.


“Ford” Cars landing ex s.s. “Mallina,” Brisbane.


The Car for Long Distances and Short Costs
Everybody can “ afford-a-Ford”
The Motor Car which has administered a
Compound Comminuted Fracture to all records
regarding Sales in every civilised country in the
world
A
m
r
WZ
£l9O £2lO
All reasonable mechanical and financial
questions are answered by the fact that during
1914 there will be over Half a Million “Ford”
users the world over. Figures which constitute
the most marvellous romance in the history of
engineering science.
APPLY
FOR
TRIAL
RUN
VICTORIAN AGENTS:
TgRRPkMj
i Motors Pn Lis ■
WRITE
FOR
CATALOG
MELBOURNE


THE UNIVERSAL CAR n
_
FORD AGENTS FOR VICTORIA.
AGENTS—TARRANT MOTORS PTY., LTD.,
Russell Street, Melbourne.
SUB. AGENTS—
(Appointed up to time of going to press.)
R. G. Carey Ballarat
Colman and Gardner Maryborough
Fraser and Co Hamilton
F. W. Grabsch Horsham
H. I. Harrison Castlemaine
A. E. Head Yarram
B. H. Jenkins Rainbow
A. C. King St. Arnaud
A. G. Kelly Warragul
T. Laidler Wangaratta
H. H, Mercer Warracknabeal
A. and J. Mclntosh Nhill
Farrington, Shaw and Lloyd Geelong
Richards Bros . . Bendigo and Deniliquin
E. C. Whitcroft Colac
Hunter, Yule Mildura
M. J. Caffrcy . . . . Seymour
C. j. Warrnambool
G, Nixon Orbost
