

FIFTY
YEARS OF
ACHIEVEMENT
1895 1945
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd.


the story of the establishment
and development in Australia
and New zealan- of
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Limited


Foreword
During the past fifty years, the organisation which is now
known as Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd., has
been privileged to work in close co-operation with the
Post Office Authorities, Government Railways, Transport
Services and Public Utility Bodies of the Commonwealth
of Australia and the Dominion of New Zealand, in the
development of telegraph, telephone and radio com-
munication. During that time, it has introduced many
new improvements, some of which have revolutionised
the science of electrical communications in both countries.
With the growth of electrical communications in Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, the activities of Standard
Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd., popularly termed S.T.C.,
have been increased, resulting in successful achievements
for the benefit of mankind. It seems fitting, therefore,
that on this 50th anniversary, some lasting tribute should
be paid to the part which has been played by S.T.C., in
the inauguration of telecommunications, radio and
electronics throughout Australia and New Zealand.
It is with this purpose in view that this book has been
published and, in the following pages, a record is outlined
of the expansion of S.T.C. in Australia and New Zealand
since its inception fifty years ago. During this time many
valuable inventions have been perfected and the world
has been enriched by the contributions made in production
in all fields of electrical equipment which, during the
second World War, proved instrumental in assisting the
Allied Nations to ultimate victory.
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd. presents to
you this Souvenir Book commemorating its Fiftieth
Anniversary.


COLONEL COLONEL SOSTHENES BEHN
PRESIDENT, INTERNATIONAL TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CORPORATION
Colonel Sosthenes Behn is President of the International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, the Company controlling the
many operating, manufacturing and research companies comprising the International System, which, due largely to his vision
and foresight, now occupies such a leading position in world-wide communications. Standard Telephones and Cables Pty.
Ltd. is an associated company within the International System whose associates employ over 100,000 people.
Colonel Behn was awarded the Medal for Merit (the highest civilian decoration in the U.S.A. for wartime service), for
exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding service to the United Nations.


MR. HENRY M. PEASE
PRESIDENT, INTERNATIONAL STANDARD ELECTRIC CORPORATION
Under the able guidance of Mr. Henry M. Pease, who was Managing Director of Standard Telephones and Cables Limited,
London, from 1918 to 1928, Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd. madc remarkable progress.
He initiated the steps which led to the manufacture of S.T.C. products being undertaken in Australia, which has resulted in
the Company becoming one of the largest manufacturers of telecommunication, radio, and electronic equipment in the
Commonwealth.
Mr. Pease became European General Manager of the International Standard Electric Corporation in 1928, and later was
appointed President, in which capacity he now directs the activities of Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd.


RICHARD BECHER HUNGERFORD
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd. owed much to the late Mr. R. B. Hungerford, its first Managing Director, who,
during his association with the Company from 1903-1932, laid the foundations upon which it has been possible to carry on
the work of expansion so successfully.
Mr Hungerford arrived in Australia in 1903 as Manager of the Australian branch of the Western Electric Company of
London. He was appointed Managing Director of the Western Electric Company (Australia) Ltd., incorporated m Sydney in
1912, and retained that position when the Company’s name was changed to Standard Telephones and Cables (Australasia)
Mr. Hungerford died in November, 1932, after being in control of the Company’s activities in Australia and New Zealand
for twenty-nine years.


MR. H. C. TRENAM
Managing Director, Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd., Sydney.
Vice-President, International Standard Electric Corporation, New York.
Director, Standard Telephones and Cables Limited, London.
Director, Creed and Company Limited, Croydon, England.
MR. T. N. BORE
MR. E. H. McINNES
MR. J. CLARKE
MR. R. S. BECKWITH
MR. A. H. CAMERON
MR. S. D. McPHEE
THE DIRECTORS OF Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Limited


The Story of Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Limited
Vickery’s
Chambers,
Sydney.
wealth of Australia, the telephone services were
operated by each of the States independently.
Communication by telephone was, however, des-
tined to make rapid progress. How great this
has been is amply illustrated by the transition
from the small office in Vickery’s Chambers oc-
cupied by the Western Electric Company, to the
great organisation which to-day is known as
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd., with
factories at Botany Road, Alexandria, near
Sydney, and Camperdown, with branch offices
at Lismore, New South Wales, Melbourne, Vic-
toria, and Wellington, New Zealand.
The Company was incorporated in 1912, in
which year the Western Electric Company
(Australia) Ltd. of Sydney, was formed, with
the late Mr. R. B. Hungerford as Managing
Director.
Name of Company Changed to S.T.C.
The name of the Company was changed from
Western Electric Company (Australia) Ltd.
to Standard Telephones and Cables (Australasia)
Ltd. in 1925, when the International Telephone
and Telegraph Corporation, in order to have
productive capacity for their needs acquired the
properties previously owned and operated by the
International Western Electric Company. The
name of the lastmentioned Company was
changed to International Standard Electric
Corporation.
The foundation of Standard Tele-
phones and Cables Pty. Ltd., was
laid fifty years ago when, in 1895,
the Western Electric Company
Limited, of London, opened an office
in Vickery’s Chambers, Pitt Street,
Sydney. At that time the telephone
art was in its infancy. The total
number of telephone subscribers
throughout Australia, which was
then a Crown Colony, did not ex-
ceed three thousand. As this was six
years before Federation of the Aus-
tralian States into the Common-
This transfer meant very much more to the
Company than a mere change of name for,
through it, Standard Telephones and Cables Pty.
Ltd. became a member of that great Inter-
national organisation—The International Sys-
tem —which has now grown to be one of the
greatest forces in the world of telecommunica-
tions and radio.
Undertakes Manufacture in Australia
Up to 1926 the Company acted as a selling or-
ganisation for the products of its associated
manufacturing companies in Great Britain and
in other parts of the world. By that time, how-
ever, telecommunications had developed so
amazingly in Australia that the Company de-
cided to manufacture S.T.C. products in the
Commonwealth.
First Australian Factory, Chippendale, Sydney


Twenty-two thousand sq. feet of
floor space was rented at Myrtle
Street, Chippendale, where a fac-
tory was established during the
latter part of 1926. Production
at first was confined to S.T.C.
telephones and radio receivers.
Subsequently the manufacture of
radio broadcast transmitters and
various types of telephone equip-
ment was undertaken, included
among which were telephone repeater coils.
These were the first repeater coils ever manufac-
tured in Australia.
Mr. Hungerford died in 1932, six years after the
establishment of the factory at Chippendale,
and was succeeded by Mr. H. C. Trenam, of the
London organisation. Mr. Trenam, who was
Managing Director of Creed and Company Ltd.,
London, an associate company of S.T.C., and
also a Director of Standard Telephones and
Cables Ltd., London, arrived in Australia to take
up his appointment in 1933 as Managing Direc-
tor of the Company in Australia and New
Zealand.
Erects Own Factory Premises
By 1935 the capacity of the factory at Chippen-
dale was unable to cope with the Company’s
rapidly expanding business, and the need for
erecting its own manufacturing premises became
apparent. Land was acquired in Alexandria,
fronting Botany Road, a nearby suburb of Syd
ney, and a modern factory was erected with an
initial floor space of 30,000 square feet. The
Factory and Office Staff, Chippendale, Sydney, 1926.
expansion of the Company’s manufacturing
activities was greatly accelerated in the years
immediately prior to the outbreak of war, and
many building extensions were undertaken in
accordance with predetermined plans.
By 1939, at the outbreak of war in Europe, the
Company’s employees numbered 500, and fact-
ory space was 75,000 sq. feet. At the outbreak
of war in the Pacific in 1941,, employees num-
bered 1,000, and factory space was 100,000 sq.
feet. At the present time employees number
2,000 and factory space is more than a quarter
of a million sq. feet, which occupies the whole
of the available site at Botany Road, Alexandria.
To cater for further expansion of business which
will be necessary to permit the Company to
maintain its rightful place as a leader of the
Electronic Industry, a long range plan has been
adopted necessitating the acquisition of a new
and extensive site to provide for future building
expansion. Seventy-five acres of land have been
purchased at Villawood, seventeen miles to the
south-west of Sydney. On this site the Com-
Aerial picture of the original factory buildings of S.T.C., Botany Road, Alexandria, Sydney, taken after completion in 196. The
illustrations on pages 32 and 33 give some idea of the many building extensions made since then, which have increased the floor space
from 30,000 to over a quarter of a million sq. feet.


pany will build a large modern factory in keep-
ing with the Company’s policy of providing
ideal conditions for work and leisure. Provision
is being made for playing fields, swimming
pools, and other amenities for the Company’s
employees. Plans are complete for the new fac-
tory, the first unit of which is being proceeded
with at once.
Achievement
Fifty years is but a relatively short space of time.
Yet, during that period electrical communica-
tions in Australia and New Zealand have grown
from small beginnings to vast world-wide sys-
tems of radio and telecommunications which
connect both countries with every other civil-
ised country in the world. In these great
national undertakings, Standard Telephones and
Cables Pty. Ltd. has played a highly important
part, having supplied much of the essential
equipment, and having introduced in the pro-
cess many important improvements and some
new developments which revolutionised the art
of electrical communications.
It is of interest that the Company was first to
introduce in Australia Telephone Repeating
Coils, Train Telephone Control Equipment,
Multi-channel Carrier Wave Telephone Systems,
Public Address Systems, Electronic Repeater
Valves for use in long distance telephone circuits,
Dull Emitter Electronic Valves for use in speech
input equipment, and High Power Electronic
Radio Transmitting Valves of the water cooled
type.
In order to present a clear picture of the
important part played by Standard Telephones
and Cables Pty. Ltd. in the amazing develop-
ment of electrical communications in Australia
and New Zealand, the activities of the various
departments of the Company have been recorded
individually in the following pages.
Acknowledgments
The Company records with pleasure its long
association with the distributors of its products.
The Brisbane Electrical Company, founded by
Mr. T, Tonks, has been distributing the Com-
pany’s products for the past fifty years, having
been appointed agents for Queensland in 1895.
Messrs. Unbehaun and Johnston Ltd., Adelaide,
have been distributing the Company’s products
for forty-six years, having been appointed agents
in South Australia in 1889.
The Company also takes pleasure in acknow-
ledging its long association with the Bank of
Australasia, its bankers since 1895 ; Mr. E. R.
Mitchell, of Messrs. Mitchell, Bowes and Craig,
who has been its auditor since 1899, and Mr.
George Patterson, of Messrs. George Patterson
Pty. Ltd., who has been its advertising agent
since 1920.
HEADQUARTERS OF THE INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM.
Standing at the tip of Manhattan Island, New York, the Inter-
national Telephone Building, headquarters of the International
System, symbolises the world-wide resources of which it is a
centre, and the vast expansion of the International Telephone
and Telegraph Corporation. This fine building, depicted above,
is erected on the site upon which stood the residence of Lord
Sterling, during the British occupation of New York in 1750.


TELEPHONES
On the evening of March 10th, 1876,
Dr. Alexander Graham Bell, and his assistant,
Thomas A. Watson, were experimenting in
an endeavour to transmit speech over wires
by electrical impulses. Wires ran from
Belh s room to another room where Watson
stood listening. Whilst making some adjust-
ments, Bell accidentally tipped over a glass
battery jar, some acid solution from which
spilled over his clothing. Involuntarily he
cried, "Mr. Watson, come here; I want
you!" Watson rushed into Bell’s room
shouting; "Mr. Bell, I heard every word
you said distinctly.”
And so speech was transmitted for the
first time over wires by electrical impulses.
Bell’s patent was registered in "the Aus-
tralian Colonies, Tasmania and New Zea-
land” by the Western Electric Company
in 1878.
The modern desk telephone, and its
brother, the immersion proof army field
telephone has many ancestors, each em-
bodying the same vital principle, but each
a progressive step toward greater reliability
and economy in production.
When the foundations of Standard Tele-
phones and Cables Pty. Ltd. were laid in
Australia fifty years ago, Sydney had less
than one thousand telephone subscribers.
To-day, there are over 200,000 telephone
subscribers in Sydney, and over 800,000 in
the Commonwealth.
S.T.C. was one of the first suppliers of
telephones in Australia. To-day the Com-
pany’s telephones are in use throughout the
Commonwealth, providing an indispensible
service to private homes, business organisa-
tions, government railways and transport
services and other public utility bodies; and
during the war they were of invaluable
service to the fighting forces of the allied
nations in many theatres of war.
Some of the types of Telephones manufactured by S.T.C.


Above: S.T.C. Automatic
Telephone Equipment at
Wagga Telephone Exchange,
N.S.W.
Centre: Adjusting Selectors
during installation of S.T.C.
equipment at North Sydney
Automatic Telephone Ex-
change.
Below: Automatic Switching
Equipment being tested at
S.T.C. Factory, Sydney.
SWITCHING EQUIPMENT
woomba, Queensland, and Bal-
larat and Bendigo, Victoria.
To keep abreast of modern
developments and with the ad-
vent of the automatic exchange,
the Australian Post Office de-
cided that future exchange
equipment would, where pos-
sible, be of the automatic type. The
Company’s contribution to this devel-
opment of the nation’s telephone communi-
cations, included the supply and, in some
instances, the installation of automatic
switching equipment for exchanges at
Unley and Norwood, South Australia; Dee
Why, Maroubra, Edgecliff, Tamworth,
North Sydney, Wagga, Newcastle, Concord,
Burwood and Eastwood, N.S.W.; Windsor,
Ivanhoe and Heidelberg, Victoria; Fre-
mantle, West Australia. In addition, the
Company has in the course of manufacture,
automatic switching equipment for ten ex-
changes, comprising Granville, Pymble,
Pennant Hills, Watson’s Bay, Willoughby
and Hunter’s Hill, N.S.W.; North Geelong,
Coburg and Richmond, Victoria; and
Edwardstown, South Australia. Over a
quarter of the value of this equipment is
being manufactured in the Company’s
factory at Alexandria, Sydney.
Switching equipment pro-
vides the nerve centres of tele-
communications, for it makes
possible the telephone exchanges
which bind together into a net-
work the telephone services of
the nation.
The systematic development
of the telephone services of the Common-
wealth may be said to date from 1907. In
that year the Sydney to Melbourne tele-
phone trunk line was completed, and the
Australian Post Office decided to instal new
and up-to-date telephone exchange equip-
ment in all capital cities.
S.T.C. was successful in obtaining most
of the resulting telephone exchange con-
tracts, being entrusted with the supply and
installation of common battery telephone
switching equipment at City and North
Sydney (Sydney area) ; Central and Wind-
sor (Melbourne area) ; Brisbane; Adelaide;
Port Adelaide; Hobart and Launceston.
The Company’s magneto and magneto
lamp signalling exchanges were installed
at William Street (Sydney), Petersham,
Edgecliff, and Newcastle, N.S.W., Too-
Below: A general view of the S.T.C. equipped automatic
telephone exchange at Unley, S. Australia, which has a
capacity of 6000 lines.
Above: Plugging
in the last call
on the S.T.C.
equipped manual
telephone ex-
change, North
Sydney, 28th
May, 1938.
Centre: North
Sydney Auto-
matic Exchange.
This S.T.C.
equipment, pro-
viding switch-
ing for 6,400
lines, replaced
the manual
equipment sup-
plied by S.T.C.
in 1912.
Below: Installing
S.T.C. Auto-
matic Switching
Equipment.


CARRIER
TELEPHONE
EQUIPMENT
Introduced to Australia by Standard
Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd., in 1924,
the carrier system revolutionised communi-
cation by telephone and telegraph. By
transmitting messages over one pair of
wires, the carrier system makes that pair of
wires do the work of several pairs. It has
played a highly important part in the de-
velopment of the long distance telephone
and telegraph services of the Common-
wealth in peace, and proved invaluable
in handling the exceptional heavy loads
imposed on the nation’s communications by
the stress of war.
By the year 1924 the number of tele-
phone subscribers had grown to 300,000.
Traffic along the overhead telephone wires
serving the main trunk telephone routes had
become so congested, as a result of the con-
stantly increasing use of the trunk tele-
phone services, that telephone subscribers
had to wait for a considerable period for an
interstate call to be put through. Natur-
ally this caused the Postmaster-General’s
Department much concern and it was found
necessary to give serious consideration to
the possibility of increasing the number of
overhead trunk telephone wires. This
would have necessitated the provision of
thousands of miles of heavy copper wire.
Under the conditions imposed by Australia’s
vast spaces and long distances between set-
tled areas the cost of implementing such
projects would have been enormous.
Fortunately, however, by the time the
problem had become acute, associate com-
panies of S.T.C. had perfected the carrier
system. The far reaching economic advant-
ages resulting from a system which trans-
mitted simultaneously several messages over
one pair of wires, were quickly appreciated
by engineers of the Australian Post Office,
which promptly decided to use the carrier
system in Australia. This was a tribute to
the foresight and enterprise of the Tele-
phone Administration, for at that time
there were only six carrier systems in use
throughout the world.
The first carrier system to be installed in
Australia was a three-channel type for use
between Sydney and Melbourne. This
provided a total of three additional tele-
MAKING TELEPHONE HISTORY
Official inauguration of the first
Carrier Wave Telephone System in
Australia, 10th September, 1925. This
three-channel system was supplied by
S.T.C. and used between Sydney and
Melbourne. Reading left to right:
W. G. Gibson, Postmaster-General;
H. P. Brown (now Sir Harry), Direc-
tor-General, Posts and Telegraphs;
J. M. Crawford, Chief Engineer,
P.M.G.’s Dept.; R. N. Partington, State
Engineer, P.M.G.’s Dept., Victoria;
S. H. Witt, P.M.G. Engineer (Re-
search); J. S. Jammer (S.T.C.); C. E.
Bright, Deputy-Director, Posts and
Telegraphs, Victoria.


phone messages to be transmitted simul-
taneously over one pair of wires. The
equipment for this installation was supplied
by S.T.C. and the service which was opened
for traffic in September, 1925, was highly
successful. Telephone subscribers who had
previously been accustomed to waiting
hours to get a call put through between the
two cities, were requested not to leave the
telephone after placing a call which now
came through in from five to six minutes.
Since then the Company has been
awarded many contracts for the supply of
S.T.C. carrier telephone and telegraph sys-
tems, which have been installed throughout
the length and breadth of the Common-
wealth. Notable amongst these is the car-
rier and associated equipment supplied for
use in connection with the longest sub-
marine telephone cable in the world con-
Right; Final inspection of 3 Channel Carrier Telephone
and Voice Frequency Equipment manufactured in
S.T.C.’s Factory, Sydney.
Below: Assembling and wiring.
15


necting the mainland of Australia with
Tasmania, and which is 160 nautical miles
in length. This is installed at Appolo Bay,
King Island and Stanley, and provides thir-
teen channels, comprising five for telephone
services, seven for telegraph services, and
one for radio broadcast programme trans-
mission, This equipment was put into ser-
vice in March, 1936, and in the first twelve
months 8 5,000 telephone calls were made
between the mainland and Tasmania, whilst
about 4000 broadcast programmes were re-
layed.
A development of major importance was
the twelve channel carrier telephone system,
the first equipment of this type in Aus-
tralia, which was supplied by the Company
and put into service between Sydney and
Melbourne in 1939. This system, which
was designed for heavily loaded trunk lines
between large population centres, oper-
ates in conjuncbon with existing three chan-
nel systems and raises the number of tele-
phone conversations possible over a single
pair of wires to a total of sixteen. Any one
or more of these carrier derived telephone
channels may itself be taken for telegraph
use, and functions in the same manner as
the carrier telephone equipment, but pro-
vides eighteen two-way telegraph circuits.
As a typical example, ten pairs of copper
wires without carrier telephone or telegraph
equipment will provide a total of fifteen
telephone channels, and twenty telegraph
channels by means of phantom and com-
posite connections, whereas the use of car-
rier equipment now enables one pair of
wires only, to provide exactly the same
arrangement of channels.
Australia ranks high amongst the coun-
tries of the world in the use of carrier
systems, and it is notable that the majority
of these systems operating throughout the
telephone and telegraph services of the
Commonwealth have been supplied by
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd.
Below: Carrier Telephone Equipment Panels under test
at S.T.C. factory.
16


Right: Amplifier Bay
and Line Terminal
Equipment. This
comprises seven both
way repeaters, seven
receiving and seven
transmitting ampli-
fiers. The Jack Panels
allow any single
equipment to be used
in conjunction with
any of the six con-
trol desks.
S.T.C, Telephone Train Control Equipment
at the N.S.W. Government Railways,
Sydney.
TELEPHONE
TRAIN
CONTROL
EQUIPMENT
Telephone Train Control Equipment
was first introduced to Australia by Stand-
ard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd. in 1914,
when the Company supplied equipment to
the order of the N.S.W. Government Rail-
ways for installation between Sydney and Thirroul. Since
that time the Company has supplied Train Telephone Con-
trol Equipment to the Government Railways of every State
in the Commonwealth. Special equipment manufactured
in the Company’s factory at Sydney to the order of the
Victorian Government Railways, employed automatic
impulsing and at the time of installation was the only Tele-
phone Train Control Equipment of its kind in Australia,
and amongst the most modern in the world.
Telephone Train Control Equipment is a specialised adap-
tion of the regular telephone to the problems of controlling
traffic on railways systems. The employment of a selector
device enables the controller to ring selectively any station
out of a considerable number of stations, all of which may
be connected to one pair of wires running throughout the
system. The controller usually has in front of him a map or
plan of the section under his control and every traffic move-
ment which occurs can be so rapidly reported to him that
the whole picture of the section is always before his eyes.
Right: Telephone Train Control Equipment de-
veloped and manufactured by S.T.C. for the
Victorian Government Rai[?]ways. Employing
automatic impulsing, this equipment was at the
time of installation the only kind of its type in
Australia, and amongst the most modern in the
world.


S.T.C. 11,000 volt power cable supplied to the
Sydney County Council being laid under Martin
Place, Sydney,
CABLES
The history of the Company’s activities in Australia
and New Zealand would be incomplete without refer-
ence to its contribution to the nations’ requirements of
telephone cable—a major plant expense item in all tele-
phone net works. During the past fifty years the Com-
pany has supplied thousands of miles of telephone
switchboard cable and lead-covered underground cable,
ranging in size from one pair to 800 pairs.
An important contribution by S.T.C. to the develop-
ment of long distance telephony was the introduction
and supply of loading coils, by means of which induct-
ance is inserted in the telephone lines, thus effecting a
marked improvement in transmission.
Another phase of S.T.C.’s activities in both countries
is the supply of Power Cables. Since the time, many
years ago, when these were laid underground, the Com-
pany has been entrusted with contracts for the supply
of hundreds of miles of pilot cable, high tension,
and super-tension cable. The last mentioned, inches
in diameter, for use on 33,000 volts, is the highest trans-
mission voltage via underground cable used in Australia.
Top: Section of S.T.C. 3 core
paper insulated, lead covered,
steel tape armoured power cable.
Left: A section of an S.T.C. 800
pair paper insulated lead cov-
ered underground telephone
cable.
Left: Laying S.T.C. 33,000 volt
power cable supplied to the
Sydney County Council.
Right: Loading Coil Case com-
plete with loading coils. Cases
may contain up to 300 coils.


Australia’s first Public Address Installation —
Anzac Memorial Hall, Mosman, N.S.W.
PUBLIC
ADDRESS
SYSTEMS
Whilst Public Address or Sound Ampli-
fying Systems are now an accepted adjunct
to everyday life, it is notable that the first
Public Address System ever used in Aus-
tralia was introduced by Standard Tele-
phones and Cables Pty. Ltd. This epoch-
making event took place when S.T.C. in-
stalled a Public Address System for use in
connection with the official opening of the
Anzac Memorial Hall, Mosman.
For years the Company operated the most
powerful Public Address System in Aus-
tralia. Known as the S.T.C. No. 1 Public
Address System, this equipment was cap-
able of making a speaker’s voice heard
clearly by many thousands of people,
whilst using a minimum number of loud
speakers. It was used on many historic oc-
casions, notably the following:—
Opening of Federal Houses of Parliament, Can-
berra, by H.M. The King (then Duke of
York).
Opening of a new Parliament by H.R.H. The
Duke of Gloucester.
The arrival of the late Sir Charles Kingsford
Smith’s famous "Southern Cross” aero-
plane at Mascot after the first flight ever
made across the Pacific Ocean.
The Anzac Day Memorial Services in the Sydney
Domain and in Melbourne.
The Melbourne Cup.
The 15 Oth Anniversary Celebrations of the City
of Sydney.
To-day, the Company manufactures Public Address
and Sound Amplifying Systems of many types, for
all purposes.
Official opening of Federal Parliament Buildings, Canberra, 1927. The Public Address System used was installed and operated by S.T.C.


The Electronic Valve has, in the short
space of a single generation, affected the
mode of life of people throughout the
world, and has well been named the mod-
ern Aladdin’s Lamp. Its beneficial effects
on industry, communications and medi-
cine have been of far reaching import-
ance, and in the field of research it is shed-
ding light on some of the darkest secrets
of nature.
It is perhaps not generally realised that
electronic valves were used commercially
before the advent of radio broadcasting,
Above: Prepar-
ing bulbs for
Ligh power mer-
cury vapour rec-
tifiers.
Below:
The stem for a
large water-
cooled transmit-
ting valve. The
finished stem in-
corporates three
glass to metal
seals, and four
glass-to-glass
seals.
Right: A stage
in the exhaust-
ing of a large
valve. Personnel
and equipment
must both con-
form to exact-
ing standards in
order to main-
tain the high
quality de -
manded of an
S.T.C. product.
The valve shown
in process is the
largest of its
kind made in
Australia.
ELECTRONIC VALVES
Nation’s long distance telephone circuits,
dull emitter valves for use in speech in-
put equipment and high power radio
transmitting valves of the water cooled
type.
The Company commenced the manu-
facture of electronic valves in Australia
at the beginning of 1939, and at the out-
set it was decided that local production
should as far as possible be self-contained,
and that no completed parts would be im-
ported from overseas. To-day the Com-
pany has one of the most modern and best
equipped electronic valve manufacturing
plants in the Commonwealth, and pro-
duces types suitable for a wide variety of
applications. S.T.C. repeater valves are
used throughout the telephone network
of the Commonwealth, and also in mob-
ile carrier telephone and telegraph sys-
tems used by the armed forces of Aus-
tralia and her Allies. Air-cooled radio
transmitting valves are manufactured in
a complete range up to 1| kilowatt plate
but as early as 1913 communication en-
gineers realised that the valve was the
answer to the problem of long distance
telephone communication and, after a
short period of development, transcontin-
ental telephone circuits became an ac-
complished fact in 1915. Since that date
progress has been little short of miracu-
lous, and to-day the advanced science of
electronics has made possible the highly
efficient telephone and radio communi-
cation system serving the entire world.
The electronic valve has been applied
in other fields with no less success, and
one recent result has been the develop-
ment of Radio Location, or Radar, which
bids fair to proving one of the most im-
portant single contributions to the safety
of travel on sea, land, and in the air.
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty.
Ltd. are pioneers in the application of
electronic valves to communications in
Australia, having been the first to intro-
duce repeater valves for use in the
dissipation, and high power mercury
vapour rectifiers and water-cooled trans-
mitting valves are now in production. It
is noteworthy that the largest air-cooled
valve and also the largest mercury vap-
our rectifier yet to be manufactured in
Australia are amongst the Company’s
products.
Early in 1940, that is shortly after the
outbreak of war in Europe, the Company
was requested to manufacture a special
type of valve used in radio location
equipment, and since that time thousands
of S.T.C. valves of various types, de-
signed especially for such use, have been
manufactured and placed in service. The
Company is proud to have played such a
prominent part in this young, but im-
portant branch of electronics.
Above: Some of
the types of
electronic valves
made by S.T.C.
Below: A chem-
ist making tests
to determine the
degree of pur-
ity of a batch
of raw mater-
ials, and a rout-
ine microscopical
examination of
a sample fila-
ment taken from
the production
line.
21
20


Above: A 50 V. 5 0 m.a. trickle charger,
one of the first rectifier equipments made
in Australia by S.T.C.
Below: S.T.C. 140 V. 120 amp. Battery
Charging Selenium Rectifier Equipment.
This is one of the largest metal rectifier
battery chargers ever made in Australia.
Selenium Rectifiers, used chiefly for the conversion
of alternating current to direct current, were introduced
to Australia by Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd.
in 1939, the first equipment made at the Company’s
works, being constructed of Selenium discs imported from
our associated Company, Standard Telephones and Cables
Limited, London.
During the early years of the war, local equipments,
utilizing these imported Selenium discs, were manufac-
tured. The Company anticipating the ever-increasing
demands of the Fighting Services for rectifier equipments
and shipping losses due to the exigencies of war, decided
to manufacture the Selenium Rectifier disc locally.
This industry was entirely new to Australia and con-
siderable scientific and engineering developmental work
had to be carried out, but the first unit, incorporating
Australian made Selenium discs, was ready for delivery
from the Company’s works in January, 1942.
The Company takes pride in the fact that this
achievement rendered the Commonwealth a service of
national importance. It ensured that certain highly im-
portant defence commitments were met, and A.C. con-
version equipment was made available to Australian
S.T.C. 3-channel oil immersed, flame-proof, selenium rectifier equipment, for re
three mining shuttle cars at one time.
SELENIUM METAL.
RECTIFIER EQUIPMENT
industry at a time when such equipment was urgently
needed for the war effort.
So great was the demand for Selenium Rectifier
Equipment for war purposes that practically the whole
of the Company’s output was required for the Armed
Forces of Australia and her Allies.
S.T.C. Selenium Rectifiers are being adapted for
rectifying current from as low as one milliampere up to
several thousand amperes. They are also being employed
to obtain direct current potentials from fractions of one
volt to as high as 60,000 volts.
The manufacturing capacity of the Company has
been increased considerably in order to meet the ever-
increasing need for direct current for many specific pur-
poses. Consequently S.T.C. is now in a position to under-
take the design and manufacture of Selenium Rectifier
Equipment to meet the individual needs of various
industries.
This S.T.C. 4-6
volt, 2500 amp.
selenium recti-
fier equipment.
shown under "
construction at
the Company’s
factory, is one
of the largest
rectifier equip-
merits ever built
in Australia .
Eight feet high
b y eight feet
long by six feet
wide, its weight
without oil is
nine tons.
S.T.C. Home Battery Charger. A selenium
rectifier which has proved very popular
with the Australian public.
22
23


Popular types of S.T.C. Radio Receivers.
Above: A Radio-gram. Below: A Band-
spread, all-wave receiver.
RADIO RECEIVERS
The Company manufactures an extensive range
of domestic radio receivers for the reception of
broadcasting on the medium and short wave bands,
a high standard of fidelity of reproduction being
an outstanding characteristic of all types, and one
which has contributed largely in making S.T.C.
one of the best known and most popular makes of
radio receivers in Australia and New Zealand.
Thousands of homes throughout both countries
are equipped with S.T.C. radio receivers which
have been obtained through a distributor and re-
tailer organisation second to none.
S.T.C. Mantel type Radio Receiver.
Standard Telephones & Cables Pty. Ltd. has
made several important contributions in the de-
velopment of radio receiving equipment in Aus-
tralia. Notable examples being the introduction
of push-pull amplifiers and loud speakers of the
balanced armature and double cone types which
greatly improved the quality of reproduction of
broadcasting. Others included the first commer-
cially built superheterodye receivers, and the first
radio receiver equipment for hospitals, which was
installed by the Company at the Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital, Sydney.
A popular S.T.C. Portable Radio Receiver.
Above: An S.T.C. Low Boy Console Radio
Receiver. Below: A popular Band-spread,
All-wave Receiver.


Left: Ultra high frequency
transmitter used in the radio
beacons installed by S.T.C. at
Essendon, Nhill, Kempsey, and
Brisbane, for the navigation of
aircraft.
Receiving equipment used in
conjunction with the ultra high
frequency radio aircraft beacon.
The equipment, which comprises
a navigation receiver, marker
receiver, recorder amplifier and
power supply was manufactured
by Standard Telephones and
Cables Pty. Ltd.
A pilot coming witbin range of
the beacon, but flying to sea-
ward of his true course, hears
a succession of dots in his head-
phones. Flying to the land-
ward he hears a succession of
dashes. When flying on course
his headphones register a steady
note.
RADIO AIRCRAFT BEACON EQUIPMENT
S.T.C. was the first company in Australia to demonstrate the
efficacy of ultra high frequency radio beacons for controlling the
navigation of aircraft. The demonstration was made at Essendon,
Victoria, in 1937, at the request of the Commonwealth Civil Avia-
tion Department and proved so highly successful that the Company
secured orders for the installation of beacon equipment at Essendon,
Nhill, Kempsey and Brisbane.
These ultra high frequency aircraft beacons provide radio signals
which enable the pilots of aircraft to maintain a true course by night
or day, and under all weather conditions.
The equipment consists of an ultra high frequency transmitter
located at the aerodrome and complementary receiving equipment in
the aircraft. The transmitter which has a power of 500 watts is
crystal controlled and operates on a frequency of approximately 36
megacycles per second. It transmits a continuous signal along the
aircraft’s true course, a succession of dots on the seaward side, and a
succession of dashes on the landward side.


An industrial electronic heating unit is
essentially a powerful radio transmitter, the
power of which, instead of being radiated
from an aerial system is converted into heat
in the "work.” When used for the heat
treatment of metals (induction heating),
the object to be heated is placed in the field
of a coil carrying a large radio frequency
current and electric currents are induced
in the object causing it to heat up.
When non-conductors of electricity, such
as plastics and wood resins require heat
treatment, the work is placed between the
plates of a condenser and capacity currents
Rear view of Type SD4 Dielectric Heating Unit, showing
layout of rectifying and control equipment.
Front view of Megatherm Dielectric Heating Unit—Type SD4
with sliding drawer heating on. This equipment delivers an output
of ten kilowatts.
flowing in the object cause it to heat up. This
process is known as dielectric heating, and appli-
cations of this method of heat treatment offer an
even wider field than electro-magnetic (induc-
tion) heating. The drying of wood, the processing
of rubber and plastics, the heating and melting of
insulating materials such as glass, ceramics, and
varnishes, and the dehydration of foodstuffs are
examples where manufacturing processes are made
possible and the time involved considerably re-
duced by the use of dielectric heating.
The design of electronic heating equipment
involves many special problems in providing maxi-
mum reliability and simplicity of operation. S.T.C.
with its vast experience in the design and fabrica-
tion of high power communication equipment, are
particularly suited for undertaking this work.
With the full technical information regarding lat-
est developments of its overseas Associates at its
disposal, the Company has put into production a
comprehensive range of units, which are known
under the trade-name Megatherm, to meet all
industrial requirements.
MEGATHERM
ELECTRONIC HEATING
EQUIPMENT
27


Above: 7 k.w. Radio Broadcasting Equip-
ment manufactured by S.T.C. in 1935 for
7LA, Kelso, Tasmania.
Above: S.T.C 10 k.w. Radio Broadcast Trans-
mitter, as supplied to 2FC, 2CY, 3LO, 3AR
and 4QS, in 1937.


RADIO
TRANSMISSION
EQUIPMENT
Standard Telephones and
Cables Pty. Ltd. has been in the
forefront of the radio trans-
mission industry since the in-
ception of radio broadcasting in
Australia, and enjoys the dis-
tinction of having been solely
responsible for the design and
construction of the most power-
ful radio station in the South-
ern Hemisphere. S.T.C. has
supplied the radio transmitters
for nearly all the stations of
the Australian Broadcasting
Commission, as well as those
for a number of Commercial
or "B” Cl ass stations.
When existing contracts are
completed the following
national and regional broadcasting stations will be equipped with
S.T.C. radio transmitters:—
New South Wales and Australian Capital Territory.
2FC Sydney 610 kc/s. 10 kw. 2CY Canberra 850 kc/s. 10 kw.
""'2BL Sydney 740 kc/s. 10 kw. 2NR Grafton 700 kc/s. 7 kw.
2NC Newcastle 123 0 kc/s. 2 kw. 2CO Corowa 670 kc/s. 7 kw.
: ‘2NU Manilla 660 kc/s. 10 kw. 2CR Cumnock 550 kc/s. 10 kw.
Victoria
3LO Melbourne 770 kc/s. lOkw. 3WV Horsham 580 kc/s. 10 kw.
3AR Melbourne 620 kc/s. 10 kw. 3GI Sale 830 kc/s. 7 kw.
VLH Lyndhurst short wave 10 kw.
Queensland.
**4QG Brisbane 800 kc/s. 10 kw. 4RK Rockh’pton 910 kc/s. 2 kw.
4QR Brisbane 940 kc/s. 2 kw. 4QN Townsville 630 kc/s. 7 kw.
VLQ Brisbane short wave 10 kw. 4QS Dalby 760 kc/s. 10 kw.
South Australia.
SAN Adelaide 890 kc/s. 2 kw. SCK Crystal Brook
640 kc/s. 7 kw.
Western Australia.
6WN Perth 790 kc/s. 1 kw. 6WA Wagin 560 kc/s. 10 kw.
*VLP Perth short wave 10 kw. 6GF Kalgoorlie 720 kc/s. 2 kw.
T as mania.
7NT Launceston 710 kc/s. 7 kw.
* Under construction.
* "‘Under construction to replace existing equipment.
S.T.C. 10 k.w. Radio Broadcast
Transmitter, supplied to 4QG,
1945.
Below: Rear view of S.T.C. 200 watt
Transmitter, installed in 1937. The Com-
pany is designing a new range of trans-
mitters suitable for "B” Class stations.


Above: S.T.C. Radio Transmitters at the R.A. Naval Station, Belconnen,
Canberra. At the left is one of the 20 k.w. bigb frequency multi-channel
transmitters. At the right is the 200 k.w. low frequency transmitter —
the most powerful in the Southern Hemisphere.
Aerial loading coil (right) and aerial tuning variometer (left) of the
200 kilowatt radio transmitter at the Royal Australian Naval Station,
Belconnen, Canberra. The aerial loading coil is 15 feet high.
TRANSMISSION
It is of interest that, in terms of power,
three-quarters of the total radio power
broadcast in Australia is produced by S.T.C.
radio transmission equipment located in all
six States of the Commonwealth.
Another notable S.T.C. achievement is
the equipment manufactured for the
U.H.F. radio link between Tasmania and
the Mainland, installed by the Postmaster-
General’s Department to provide contin-
uity of service in the event of damage to
the submarine telephone cable.
The equipment installed comprises two
250 watt 39-42 Mc/s radio transmitters and
two receivers at each end of the 168 mile
radio link, and each circuit can transmit
simultaneously a broadcast programme to-
gether with three telephone channels. To
secure the required transmission character-
istic with absence of interference between
channels, called for a frequency response of
30-3 5,000 cycles with distortion less than
0.25% over the complete circuit. Both
transmitters and receivers incorporate feat-
ures which, even to-day, are unique.
S.T.C.’s most interesting achievement in
the radio transmission field prior to the war,
however, was the design and construction
of the transmitting and receiving stations
for the Royal Australian Navy at Canberra.
The transmitting equipment, in addition to
a number of small transmitters, comprises
three 20 K.W. high frequency multi-chan-
nel radio telephone and telegraph trans-
mitters and a 200 K.W. low frequency
multi-channel radio telephone and tele-
graph transmitter. The last-mentioned is
the most powerful transmitter in the south-
ern hemisphere, and one of the largest in
the world.
The low frequency antenna is nearly half
a mile long and is supported by three 600 ft.
guyed steel masts and, together with the
EQUIPMENT
high frequency directional and non-direc-
tional antenna systems and associated trans-
mission line, forms a most impressive array.
A number of cottages arranged as a well
laid out village, has been provided by the
Navy about half a mile from the transmit-
ting station to house the operating staff.
The 200 K.W. radio transmitter can
operate on any one of ten frequencies in the
40-500 Kc/s band, selection of the required
frequency being performed by operation
of a telephone dial, whereupon the tuning
condensers, tuning variometers and coup-
ling coils are adjusted automatically to the
correct settings for the required frequency.
The huge antenna tuning inductance is
housed in a separate room adjoining the
main transmitter building. In the con-
struction of this room it was necessary to
avoid the use of all nails and other metal
fittings in order to prevent fires which
would otherwise be caused due to the in-
tense electromagnetic field surrounding the
inductance. The lead out to the antenna
system which carries the antenna current
of 200 amperes at a voltage of 100,000 volts
is supported by a large plate glass insulator
in the wall of this room.
The receivers, antenna systems and high
speed receiving equipment at the Naval
receiving station were also supplied by
S.T.C. A number of cable circuits con-
nects the receiving station with the trans-
mitting station eleven miles away, and
starting, shutting down and frequency
changing of all transmitters can be carried
out by remote control from the receiving
station. An ultra high frequency link is
provided to maintain communication be-
tween transmitting and receiving stations
and to enable emergency traffic to be han-
dled in the event of failure of the cable
connecting the two stations.
Above: 15,000 volt rectifier for the 200 kilowatt radio transmitter.
This rectifier is capable of delivering an output in excess of 200 kilowatts.
Note provision for supply of conditioned air to the mercury vapour valves.
Below: Control desk for the 20 kilowatt and 200 kilowatt radio trans-
mitters. This provides complete facilities for starting, shutting down, and
frequency changing of the transmitters. The undulators shown at ends
of the desk are used for making tape records of any signal transmitted.


THE OFFICES AND WORKS OF
Engaged in the develop-
ment and production of tele-
communication, radio, and
electronic equipment, S.T.C.
is the largest telephone
manufacturing company in
Australia.
Manufacture of S.T.C.
products was started in the
Commonwealth in 1926 on
premises leased at Chippen-
dale, Sydney. By 1935, how-
ever, the capacity of the fac-
tory at Chippendale was in-
sufficient to meet the de-,
mands of the Company’s rap-
Portion of main building, fronting Wyndham St., Alexandria, Sydney.
idly expanding business, and
land was acquired at Alexan-
dria, Sydney, and a new fac-
tory with initial floor space
of 30,000 sq. feet was con-
structed in 1936. Since then
the Company’s operations
have expanded notably, and,
in accordance with predeter-
mined plans, building exten-
sions to permit increased pro-
duction have been completed.
These illustrations show the
factory as it is to-day. Total
floor space is more than
a quarter of a million sq. feet.
Mr. H. A. COLTON
Works Manager.
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Limited
Aerial view of factory, from Wyndham St., Alexandria,
Aerial view of Factory from Botany Road, Alexandria.


BASS STRAIT U.H.F.
RADIO LINK
To augment the facilities of the Bass
Strait submarine cable linking the main-
land of Australia with Tasmania; Standard
Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd. designed
and manufactured radio transmission and
receiving equipment for use by the Post-
master General’s Department in a Multi-
plex Ultra High Frequency Radio Link.
The equipment consisted of radio trans-
mitters having a power output of 2.5 0 watts
unmodulated carrier power capable of
100% modulation by any frequency in the
range 30 to 3 5,000 cycles per second;
together with radio receivers having a sim-
ilar performance.
Left: 25 0 watt Radio Transmitter, four of which were
manufactured by S.T.C. for use in the Bass Strait Ultra
High Frequency Radio Link.
Four of these transmitters and re-
ceivers were supplied, forming two
Ultra High Frequency Radio Links.
Each link can carry a three channel
carrier telephone system (or two if
run back to back) without terminal
equipment, and in addition a voice-
frequency circuit. In the event of
failure of the submarine cable, its cir-
cuits can be switched directly to one
of the radio links which are capable of
carrying the whole of the cable traffic
at a carrier frequency of 39-42 mc/s.
The Ultra High Frequency Radio
Link was put into service in 1943.
Right: Ultra High Frequency Radio Receiver,
manufactured by S.T.C. for use in the Bass Strait
Radio Link.
34


The War Effort
"We the soldiers in the firing line give thanks to you soldiers on the
production line for the sinews of war that make victory possible."
General Douglas MacArthur.
The above quotation was part of a cable dispatched from New Guinea, 1942, to the
International Standard Electric Corporation, an associated company of S.T.C., Sydney.


A Record of the Company’s Achievements
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd.
takes just pride in its achievements in the pro-
duction of the munitions of war for the Aus-
tralian and Allied Armed Forces. Due to the
foresight of the Defence Authorities, S.T.C
was engaged in the design and manufacture of
. . • r i XT a
communication equipment for the Navy Army
and Air Force for some time prior to the out-
break of war m September 1939. By 1943 the
number of employees had increased fourfold
while production for defence purposes ac-
counted for all but 1% of the total output.
Embodying major engineering projects com-
paring favourably with any carried out in other
parts of the world, S.T.C.’s war effort was one
of the outstanding contributions of the com-
munications industry in Australia, and was
largely attributable to the creative and organ-
ising ability and untiring efforts of the Com-
pany s .technical and executtve personnel
Equipment for war purposes was supplied to
Defence Departments of the Common-
namely, the Roya l Austral.an Navy,
Australian M;lit ForceSl Royal Austra l ian
Air Force and the Postmaster . GeneraFs Depart-
ment In addk;on wQrk was carried Qut for the
Roya] Navy> Roya , Netherlands Navyj and
the armed forces of the United States of
America.
Many important projects were carried out
for the Royal Australian Navy, some of which,
such as the design and manufacture of the radio
equipment for the Naval Wireless Telegraph
Transmitting and Receiving Stations at Bel-
connen and Elarman, near Canberra, compare
in magnitude and importance with any in other
parts of the world. Most interesting of the
radio transmitters supplied by the Company for
this great project at Belconnen is the 200 kilo-
watt multi-channel long wave transmitter
already referred to on page 30 of this brochure.
Royal Australian Navy
Personnel of the Royal Australian
Navy operating S.T.C. High Frequency
Radio Receivers at the Royal Aus-
tralian Naval Radio Receiving Station
at Harman, near Canberra.


The primary function of this trans-
mitter is to send out messages in code to
all ships in Australasian waters, and its
efficiency in this respect may be judged
by the fact that its transmission can be
picked up reliably in far distant parts of
the world, and also by submarines while
operating submerged off the coast of New
Guinea.
Indicative of the importance of the
Navy’s tasks in wartime is the fact that
if the safe arrival of just one merchant
ship with its valuable cargo can be attri-
buted to a transmission from the Naval
Wireless Station at Canberra, the total
expenditure on the station is more than
recovered.
Other S.T.C. transmitters installed at
Belconnen include three 20 kilowatt and
three 1 kilowatt multi-channel short
wave radio transmitters and a short wave
radio telephone link used for maintaining
emergency communication between
Harman and Belconnen. The short
wave radiating systems include a
"Rhombic” antenna providing direc-
tional transmissions beamed on England,
in addition to numerous omnidirectional
vertical and horizontal antennae for the
various frequencies in use. A
feature of the system is the
antenna switching equip-
ment which enables each
transmitter to be switched
to the appropriate antenna.
Prior to the outbreak of
war, S.T.C. had developed a
high grade radio communi-
cation receiver which was
used extensively in shore es-
tablishments of the Royal
Australian Navy. On the
outbreak of war further de-
velopment work was under-
taken to render the receiver
suitable for operation under
active service conditions and,
later, for service under trop-
ical conditions. Types were
manufactured for the recep-
tion of both long and short
wave signals and these re-
ceivers were used for main-
Above: Naval telegraphist operating an S.T.C. type A679H High
frequency Radio Receiver at the N.O.I.C. (Naval Officer in Charge)
station, at Madang.
Below: Driver Unit for the S.T.C. 200 Kilowatt Transmitter at the
R.A.N. Wireless Station at Belconnen, Canberra. This station had
to carry practically the whole traffic for the Royal Navy, U.S.
Navy, and the R.A.N. in these waters.


taining communication with ships at sea and
with other naval shore establishments, for inter-
cepting enemy transmissions and for direction
finding purposes.
The Naval Receiving Station at Harman is
the control centre and all messages are trans-
mitted from, as well as received at, this point.
In addition to a number of receivers, the equip-
ment includes a remote control system provid-
ing full control of the operation of the trans-
mitters at Belconnen, and arrangements to per-
mit any of the operators to key any one or all
of the transmitters simultaneously.
The receiving system at Harman comprises a
rhombic directional antenna and a number of
short and long wave antennae similar in prin-
ciple to those at Belconnen, but on a smaller
scale, and a manual switchboard, called an "An-
tenna Exchange,” which is fitted with cords and
plugs, and is used to connect any antenna to any
one of the receivers.
Also installed at Harman and Belconnen is
high speed telegraph equipment which enables
messages to be transmitted and received auto-
matically at speeds up to 200 words per minute.
This equipment, comprising keyboard operators,
automatic transmitters heads, and undulators
was manufactured by Creed and Co. Ltd., Lon-
don, an associate company of Standard Tele-
phones and Cables Pty. Ltd.
S.T.C. also supplied equipment for the Royal
Australian Naval Receiving Station at Perth, and
completely equipped the receiving stations at
Darwin and at Townsville, the facilities at which
are similar to, though less extensive, than those
at Harman.
Australian Military Forces
Late in 1938 the Defence Authorities of the
Commonwealth, fearing the imminent outbreak
of hostilities, decided to modernise the communi-
cation equipment at its disposal, much of which
was a modified version of that available at the
end of the first World War of 1914-18. Ac-
cordingly, the Company was requested by the
Ministry of Defence to develop and manufact-
ure a vibrator type power supply to operate
what was known as the No. 1 Army set equipped
originally with low and high tension batteries.
This vibrator power supply unit was developed
and production continued until all No. 1 Army
sets were equipped. Although this was under-
taken in 1938, the unit was designed for the
purpose of withstanding semi-tropical con-
ditions.
Following the completion of the vibrator power
unit project, the military authorities requested
the Company to design a ten watt radio trans-
mitter and receiver, and to produce it at ex-
VETERAN OF TWO CAMPAIGNS.— S.T.C. Type 109 Field Radio Set. This was the first field radio to go into action with the Second A.I.F.
and was used by that force in the Middle East and New Guinea campaigns.


S.T.C. Field Telephone in use at an A.I.F. advance post, New Guinea.
tremely short notice. A number of sets were manu-
factured by hand processes, and proved so successful
that further orders were received but delivery was
required so urgently that no time was available for
tooling. This radio unit became known as the S.T.C,
109 Army Set, and was destined to make history, be-
ing the first field radio to be taken into battle by the
2nd A.1.F., and, at one critical period during the
famous seige of Tobruk, it was the only means the
British Forces had for maintaining communication
with the outside world.
Although the adoption of improvised production
methods was unavoidable in order to meet the ex-
treme urgency of delivery, the S.T.C. 109 Army Set
proved to be one of the best radio units supplied to
the Army up to that time. It was a veteran of two
campaigns, being extensively used by the 2nd A.I.F.
throughout Libya and Syria, and later in New
Guinea. It was also supplied to the N.Z. Army.
Another achievement on the part of the Company’s
engineering, production and factory personnel on
behalf of the Army, was the design and production
within six weeks of two sample radio transmitters
and receivers for armoured vehicles. The equip-
ment incorporated special features, and the pro-
duction of samples of first-class finish and per-
formance in so short a time, was a truly re-
markable effort on the part of all concerned.
The sample equipments were installed in
Army tanks, and under test, communica-
tion was established between Sydney and
Melbourne, a distance of six hundred miles
airline.
The Company produced large quantities
of various other types of communication
equipment for the Army. These included
telephone relays, jacks, plugs, keys, trans-
mitter insets, field telephones, field switch-
boards, selenium rectifier discs, special types
of electronic valves, and specialised appar-
atus such as voice frequency telegraph
equipment, mobile stations complete with
three channel carrier telephone terminals
repeater and ringer equipment, and selen-
ium rectifying equipment for the recharg-
ing of batteries in armoured and other mil-
itary vehicles. These were items which had
not previously been made in Australia, and
their manufacture was established under
the difficulties of war time control of mat-
erials and manpower and shortage of quali-
S.T.C. Selenium Rectifier Equipment for re-charging the
batteries of Army Tanks.
39


fied technical personnel, the de-
ficiency in the latter respect be-
ing carried out by the adminis-
trative staff.
After the outbreak of war in
the Pacific, special attention was
given to the tropic proofing of
equipment to make it suitable for
operation in the humid tropical
climates prevailing in the battle
areas. Existing designs were modi-
fied to incorporate new processes
and finishes, and extensive devel-
opment work was undertaken. A
special form of tropic packing
was also introduced to meet the
requirements of transportation
and storage at extreme conditions
of temperature and humidity.
In addition to purely com-
munication apparatus the Aus-
tralian Army authorities requested
the Company to undertake the
S.T.C. Type 14S. 1000 watt, 10 channel
H.F. Transmitter, supplied to the R.A.A.F
Above: S.T.C. Type ATS 500 watt Radio Transmitters for the Royal Aus-
tralian Air Force, and Royal N. Z. Air Force, on the assembly line.
Left: These elec-
trical units
forming an es-
sential part of
anti-aircraft
control equip-
ment were made
in Australia ex-
clusively by
S.T.C.
manufacture of electrical apparatus, form-
ing an essential part of anti-aircraft fire control
equipment. This apparatus had previously been
made only in Great Britain, and its manufact-
ure in S.T.C.’s factory involved development of
new methods of much improvisation as regards
raw materials. Nevertheless, the extremely ex-
acting tests imposed were satisfactorily met and
several thousands of these items were produced.
Royal Australian Air Force
The first equipment supplied by S.T.C.
to the Royal Australian Air Force was designed
some time before the outbreak of war. This
consisted of R.A.A.F. transmitters types 14-S
and AT-8. The 14-S was a 1 k.w. multi-channel
transmitter with facilities for ten short wave
channels or ten channels combining short and
medium wave lengths, and the AT-8 was a 500
watt transmitter covering a frequency range of


2-20 megacycles. Large numbers of these trans-
mitters were manufactured and put into service
by the R.A.A.F. in Australia and in outlying
bases, a number of the AT-8 transmitters being
in operation in Java when the country was over-
run by the Japanese.
On the outbreak of the Pacific War, local
manufacture of service equipment became still
more urgent, and in 1942 the Company designed
to R.A.A.F. specifications, the Model AT-20, a
radio transmitter with a power output of 500
watts, suitable for installation in vehicles or at
fixed stations. A system of forced ventilation by
filtered air ensured satisfactory operation in all
climates. The AT-20 transmitter was manufac-
tured by the Company in considerable quan-
tities, and figured prominently in some of the
important successes against the Japanese during
the fighting in the South West Pacific area.
Other transmission equipment manufactured
by S.T.C. for the Royal Australian Air Force
included a 1 5 K.W./C.W. transmitter installed
at Laverton and a 25 K.W./C.W. transmitter
installed at Ballarat.
The Company has manufactured Selenium
Rectifier D.C. Conversion Equipment, including
Above: S.T.C. Type AT20, 500 watt Transportable
Radio Transmitter, designed and manufactured for
the Royal Australian Air Force.
Left: Some types of Radar Valves, made by the Com-
pany. S.T.C. produced the first Radar Valves to be
manufactured commercially in Australia.
many 900 amp. units for the R.A.A.F.
and numerous other units ranging from
250 amps to 50 amps. Practically every
R.A.A.F. servicing depot in Australia
which undertakes electro-plating has in-
stalled S.T.C. Selenium Rectifying
Equipment.
Other important items which the
Company has manufactured and sup-
plied to the R.A.A.F. include valves for
radio-location or radar equipment, field
telephones and head-receivers, all of
which were supplied in considerable
quantities. The Company also manufac-
tured height indicating instruments,
which were installed as standard equip-
ment in Beaufort Torpedo Bombers. The
Height Indicator is a form of radio alti-
meter and is a necessary adjunct to the
successful operation of service aircraft
of this type.
41


Praise for the aid rendered
the U.S. Army by S.T.C. in
supplying urgently needed
communication equipment
in large quantities, is con-
tained in a letter to the Com-
pany from the U.S. Army
General Staff Corps Director
of Procurement.
The letter reads as follows:
r 7 would like to thank
your Company for the ex-
cellent co-operation which
has consistently been ren-
dered the U.S. Army during
the past two years.
"Please extend to all your
associates my deepest appre-
ciation for their services and
their commendable efforts in
producing equipment of the
calibre of the AMT 120 and
125 transmitters.
Above: U.S. Army Mobile Radio
Station . showing an S.T.C. Type
AMT-120 Transmitter.
Centre: S.T.C. Type AMT-125
Dual Purpose Transmitter, large
numbers of which were supplied
to the U.S. Army. Power output
was 500 watts on telegraph and
35 0 watts on telephone trans-
mission. The transmitter oper-
ates over the range 2 to 20
megacycles.
Below: U.S. Army Mobile
Radio Station showing one of
the S.T.C. radio receivers and
part of the control equipment.
"I wish to pass on to your Company my sincere
thanks, and those of my staff, and 1 can say with utmost
sincerity that it has been a pleasure to be associated with
your organisation in our mutual obligation of furnishing
our troops with supplies as soon as possible. It is antici-
pated that future relationships will continue to be a great
source of pleasure and of gratification.”
In addition to radio transmitters, the Company has
supplied to the U.S. forces appreciable quantities of high-
grade radio communication receivers, mobile radio units,
selenium rectifier battery chargers and selenium rectifier
discs, electronic valves, line filters for special purposes,
miscellaneous apparatus, and broadcast receivers tor
amenity purposes.
In its turn the Company takes pleasure in recording its
appreciation of the co-operation and assistance given by
the U.S. Signal Branch, Procurement Division, on the
undertakings referred to, and of the efficient and cordial
relations which characterised our association on this work.
EQUIPMENT FOR THE
ARMED FORCES OF THE U.S.A.
42


Above: Personnel of the U.S. Army Signal Corps
inspecting S.T.C. Type AMT-125 500 watt
Radio Transmitters at the Company’s factory.
Long before the U.S. Forces
landed at Leyte, S.T.C. High Fre-
quency Radio Receivers were en-
abling Guerilla Forces of the Philip-
pine Army, operating in the moun-
tains of Cebu, to maintain direct
communication with General Mac-
Arthur’s headquarters in Australia.
Below: U.S. Army personnel watching assembly
of Transmitters, and left, observing the inspec-
tion of Transformers.
U.S. Army Signal Corps Photos. Page 43
Below: U.S. Army personnel listen intently whilst an
S.T.C. engineer goes over a blue print of a radio trans-
mitter.


During the war, Standard Telephones and
Cables Pty. Ltd., and Amalgamated Wireless
(Australasia) Ltd., entered into a joint con-
tract with the Postmaster-General’s Depart-
ment to supply and instal two broadcast trans-
mitters for the Overseas Service of the Depart-
ment of Information. Each transmitter has a
nominal power output (unmodulated carrier
power) of 100 Kilowatts but powers up to 150
Kilowatts were obtained during tests.
High Power units of No. 1 Transmitter. These transmitters are the most powerful broadcasters in the Southern Hemisphere.
View of outdoor cooling system. The concrete hut covers the end of a tunnel leading from the pumps, and houses the electrical
equipment auxiliary to the coolers.
The station is situated near Shepparton, Vic-
toria, about 100 miles north of Melbourne. The
two transmitters, together with a 50 Kilowatt
equipment imported from the U.S.A., are
housed in an air-conditioned ferro-concrete
“RADIO AUSTRALIA”
The High Power Short Wave Station at Shepparton, Vic.
building erected by the Department of the
Interior. The directional aerial system was
designed and constructed by the Post-
master-General’s Department and switching
operations are carried out from desks
mounted adjacent to the Control Desks of
the three transmitters. The station normally
operates from power supplied by the State
Electricity Commission of Victoria, but an
adjoining building houses oil engine driven
standby alternators.
Each transmitter is divided into two sec-
tions, placed on either side of the main hall.
The R.F. Driver Unit and two Rectifiers
supplying the Power Amplifier and Modu-
lator Units are on the right hand side while
the high power units themselves, together
with their water cooling system, are placed
on the left hand side. High tension power
transformers and chokes and the modula-
tion transformer and feed reactor are
housed in cubicles on either side of the
building, having access to galleries fitted
with travelling gantry cranes. A control
desk is located in the centre of the room,
between the driver and high power equip-
ment.
The pumps and porcelain piping of the
water cooling system are placed in the base-
ment below the high power section and dry
air blast coolers, four per transmitter, are
located in the yard outside the building.
High temperatures are experienced at
Shepparton during the summer months, and
the coolers are designed so that the equip-
ment will operate satisfactorily with three
units, leaving one spare.
The R.F. driver is itself a complete 8
Kilowatt transmitter and can be operated
directly into the aerial system in the event
of failure of the high power section. Dup-
licate Power Amplifier units are provided,,
placed on either side of the Modulator Unit,
the drive and power supply being switched
to the unit in service.
Above: Modulator Unit, showing S.T.C. 4030-C tubes.
The cabinets at the rear contain the Speech Amplifier
Equipment.
Right: Power Amplifier Unit, using four Federal F124-A
tubes in parallel push-pull. The tuning condenser of the
output coupling circuit is shown in the foreground .
45
44


FIELD TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT
At the outbreak of war in September,
1939, S.T.C. was approached by the Dept,
of the Army with a request that we supply
urgently needed field telephone equipment
and, although only meagre and incomplete
information was available we were able to
produce a prototype field switchboard by
October, 1939. This was interchangeable
with, and performed similarly to the War
Office Pattern Switchboard U.C. 10, but
differed insofar as standard civil compon-
ents were used in its manufacture. Deliv-
ery of production switchboards commenced
in June, 1940, and during the war years
large quantities were supplied. This was
followed by delivery of Telephones F.Mk. 1
commencing December, 1940; Telephones
D.Mk.V, December 1941; Telephones "L”,
March, 1944. Tens of thousands of these
field telephones were supplied to the fight-
ing forces. As the war moved to the Pacific,
finish to resist humid conditions became im-
perative, and latest supplies to that area
were sealed against moisture and in addi-
tion, were capable of operation in the most
humid locations with seals removed.
In addition, major components were
made for supply to other manufacturers
and the services, including buzzers, head-
phones and single receivers, handsets, gener-
ators, transmitter insets, switchboard plugs,
and magneto bells.
Left; S.T.C. 10-line
Universal Military
Switchboard, a large
number of which were
supplied to the Aus-
tralian Military Forces.
Right: Tropic-proofing
of Field Telephone
Equipment received
special attention in
order to make it suit-
able for operation in
humid tropical clim-
ates, Illustration shows
an S.T.C. Army Field
Telephone passing the
immersion test at the
Company’s factory.
Above: S.T.C. Type "L” Field Telephone in use at an A.I.F. forward
post in Borneo.
46


RADIO EQUIPMENT
FOR AIRCRAFT
One of the most important developments in
radio aids to aerial navigation is the radio alti-
meter. When visibility is bad, it is vital for a
pilot to know the height of his aircraft. Hitherto
the altimeter has been a barometric device which
gives only height above sea level; that is, it takes
no account of rising ground beneath the plane.
Right: S.T.C. Height Indicator Equip-
ment, which gives a pilot of a Torpedo
Bomber visual warning when he is too
high or too low to release hi storpedo.
Several squadrons of R.A.A.F. Tor-
pedo Bombers were equipped with this
apparatus.
Below: S.T.C. Altimeter, developed by
S.T.C. at the request of the R.A.A.F.,
in order to give continuous reading of
actual height.
The radio altimeter, applying the radar prin-
ciple, transmits a signal to the ground and re-
ceives the echo back at the plane. The time this
signal takes to go down and back is measured
and can be interpreted in feet. Hence the pilot
is given his real height, and the risk of flying
blind into mountains is thereby greatly reduced.


S.T.C. LABORATORIES
In no other field of endeavour is continuous
study and research more necessary, or more pro-
ductive of progress, than in telecommunications
and its related fields of radio and electronics.
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd. has
unusual facilities for such fundamentally im-
portant study and research. The Company not
only maintains its own laboratories, which are
amongst the best equipped of their kind in
Australia, but also benefits from the inventions
resulting from the research of thousands of
scientific workers in the great laboratories main-
tained by its associated companies in Great
Britain, Europe, and the U.S.A., which have
made many notable contributions to the ad-
vancement of communications.
In order to co-ordinate the wealth of scientific
work of these widely separated, but closely asso-
ciated groups, a new company—lnternational
Telecommunications Laboratories Incorporated,
has been formed. Under the direction of some
of the most brilliant scientific minds in the com-
munications industry, this company will con-
centrate upon initiating and developing inven-
tions, and providing an interchange of inform-
ation on post-war activities among the laborat-


Right: S.T.C. Radio Receiver
Laboratory.
ories of the great Inter-
national System of
which Standard Tele-
phones and Cables Pty.
Ltd., is a part.
Such closer co-ordin-
ation of world-wide re-
search by associates of
Standard Telephones &
Cables Pty. Ltd., in
telecommunications,
and other fields, will un-
doubtedly result in
S.T.C. playing as im-
portant a role in the
future developments of
electrical communica-
tions in Australia and
New Zealand as it has
done during the past
fifty years.
Centre: Aligning and adjusting
an S.T.C. High-grade Commer-
cial Communication Receiver
for use by the P.M.G.’s Dept.,
in relaying overseas radio pro-
grammes over the National
Broadcasting Network.
Below: S.T.C. Radio Transmitter
Laboratory.


TIE PEOPLE OF
No matter how great its tradition, or
how fine its manufacturing plant might be,
a Company is no better than its people—
the personnel who administer its policy,
plan, design, manufacture and merchandise
its products. Standard Telephones and
Cables Pty. Ltd. has never lost sight of that
important fact. Consequently, the welfare
of employees has always figured prominently
in the Company’s policy. S.T.C. has a Wel-
fare Department which is divided into two
sections, one for women and one for men,
and functions under the control of two
welfare officers, whose sole responsibility is
to look after the welfare of the Company’s
employees.
Sickness and Accident Benefits and
Pension Plans.
No permanent employee of S.T.C. need
have anxiety regarding financial loss
through sickness or accident, or provision
for old age, or for their dependents upon
death. The Company operates for the bene-
fit of its employees two benefit plans. Both
are on a non-contributory basis and oper-
ate at no cost to employees. One, known as
"The Sickness and Accident Benefit Plan”
provides liberal benefits in the event of sick-
ness or accident. The other, known as "The
Pension Plan” provides pensions for em-
ployees upon retirement, such pensions be-
ing calculated in accordance with the em-
ployee’s length of service with the Com-
pany. This plan also provides for benefits
and pensions to be paid, upon the death of
an employee, to his or her dependents.
The S.T.C. Social Club.
The Company makes special efforts to
cater for the social, sporting, and recre-
ational activities of its employees. These
are organised and managed through the;
S.T.C. Social Club, concerning which
"Erda Journal,” the official publication of
Top: S.T.C.’s first annual ball in Sydney Town Hall
Centre: Employees being addressed at a War Loan rally.
Botton: Presenting an ambulance to the Army.


the Electrical and Radio Development As-
sociation of N.S.W • said: The S.T.C.
Social Club is a model which may well be
studied by other concerns with similar in-
terest in the welfare of its employees.
The Social Club publishes its own
monthly journal—The S.T.C. Social Club
News. Consisting of from twelve to eigh-
teen pages, this is edited and produced by
employees at the Company s expense.
Sporting activities are organised under
the auspices of the Social Club, which also
arranges the Company s annual picnics,
dances and other social functions.
Employees’ War Effort.
The second World War imposed heavy
demands on the employees of S.T.C. who,
not only serve Australia and her allies well
by producing vast quantities of communi-
cation equipment for the fighting services,
but also raised funds which provided a com-
pletely equipped motor ambulance for the
Australian Military Forces; comforts for
the Company’s employees serving in the
armed forces, and specially equipped motor
snack-bars, which were presented to Her
Majesty the Queen by Mrs. S. M. Bruce,
wife of the Australian High Commissioner
in Britain, on behalf of the Company’s em-
ployees, for service in the bombed districts
of London.
It is also notable that when the factory
of Standard Telephones and Cables Limited,
London, was hit by a flying bomb, the em-
ployees of S.T.C. in Australia, by voluntary
subscription raised £1,250 for the benefit
of the dependents of employees who lost
their lives.
During the war an entertainment unit
was formed by employees, who after the
day’s work was done, visited the camps
around Sydney, entertaining the fighting
forces with concert programmes.
War Loan Efforts.
S.T.C. employees made notable contri-
butions to the various war loans, subscribing
a total of more than £65,000. In the second
Victory Loan they subscribed £lO,OOO,
when their allotted quota was £6,500.
In a recent drive for old clothes for the
U.N.R.R.A. Appeal, employees contributed
over two tons of clothing.
Top: A lunch-time War Loan rally.
Centre: Afternoon tea in the Cafeteria.
Bottom: Loading parcels of clothing for U.N.R.R.A.


J. CLARKE
E. H. McINNES
R. FRANCE
Personnel
with more than
20 Years Service.
A. ASHWORTH
T. N. BORE
T. P. COURT
O .HANDLEY
MISS L. HILL
H. K. S. KEN-
NEDY
K. LEIGH
c. j. McQuillan
LONG SERVICE
PERSONNEL
with 25 years Service and over
A. H. CAMERON
E. THOMPSON
MISS J. ANDERSON
W. EVERARD
F. WATSON
H. C. TRENAM
C. R. FOSTER
A. R. PEACOCK
Personnel
with more than
20 Years Service.
S. D. McPHEE
A. MORGAN
H. F. PEARCE
R. PECKMAN
W. S. PRICE
J. H. prickett
E. R. REDDEL
S. THORPE
G. H. UNDER-
WOOD
R. S. BECKWITH
H. STEVENS


BRANCHES
The Melbourne Branch
Thirty-three years ago the Company
recognised that in order to maintain
close contact with the central adminis-
tration of Government departments
located in Melbourne, a branch of the
Company in that city was of para-
mount importance.
Accordingly, the Melbourne Branch
was established in 1912, with Mr. E. H.
Mclnnes (now Resident Director in
New Zealand) as Branch Manager.
Upon Mr. Mclnnes being transferred
to New Zealand in 1914, Mr. C. R.
Foster was appointed Manager of the
Melbourne branch, and he has remained
in charge of the Company’s activities in
Victoria for the past thirty years.
Throughout the years the Company’s
activities have expanded and, with the
advent of radio broadcasting, the Mel-
bourne branch undertook the sale and
distribution of S.T.C. radio products
throughout Victoria. An efficient or-
Melbourne Branch of S.T.C., 588 Bourke St., Melbourne.
Inset, Mr. C. R. Foster, Manager.
The Lismore
Branch
The Lismore branch
of the Company was
established in 1938 in
order to ensure
prompt and effective
distribution of S.T.C.
products throughout
the North Coastal
Districts of N.S.W.
The branch is the
centre of distribution
for a succession of
prosperous and pro-
gressive towns in and
around which are
many large butter
and bacon factories
and sugar mills sup-
plied by thousands of
dairy farms, sugar
cane fields, and sub-
tropical fruit planta-
tions.
ganisation of progressive radio
dealers was successfully built
up, and S.T.C. radio receivers
became one of the most popu-
lar with the public of Victoria.


S.T.C. has played an important part in the
development of telecommunications in New
Zealand.
The first order which the New Zealand Post
Office placed with the Company was in 1913,
and called for Rotary Automatic Equipment
for seventeen exchanges. This was installed by
the Company’s own installation staff at Auck-
land, Wellington, Masterton, Hamilton, Blen-
heim and Oamaru, under the supervision of Mr.
IN NEW ZEALAND
E. H. Mclnnes, who subsequently opened the
Company’s branch office at Wellington, and was
appointed manager. The initial equipment, which
was for approximately 15,000 lines has since
grown to nearly 84,000 lines.
Under the able administration of Mr.
Mclnnes, who is Resident Director of Standard
Telephones and Cables Pty. Ltd., the Company
has made remarkable progress. In addition to
introducing Rotary Automatic Telephone Ex-
changes in New Zea-
land, S.T.C. also intro-
duced the multi-channel
carrier telephone system
which is used extensively
throughout the Domi-
nion. The first Carrier
Equipments were in-
stalled between Hamil-
ton and Palmerston
North; Auckland and
Hamilton, and Seddon
and Christchurch. A
considerable amount of
carrier equipment has
been supplied by the
Company to the New
Zealand Post Office since
then, including the
twelve channel terminal
equipment for the Cook
Strait submarine tele-
phone cable service.
S.T.C. has also been
closely associated with
the development of
radio broadcasting in
New Zealand; having
supplied the transmis-
sion equipment for the
Dominion’s first broad-
casting stations, IYA,
2YA, and 3YA.
Left: Offices of S.T.C. at 126
Manners St., Wellington, N. Z.
Inset (from left to right):
Messrs. E. H. Mclnnes, Resident
Director; K. S. K. Kennedy,
Accountant, J. H. Prickett,
Manager; G. H. Underwood,
Commercial Manager, and D.
Brown, Sales Manager.
54


Line Finder and Selector Racks of the mod-
ern 7A2 Rotary Equipment designed and
manufactured by S.T.C.’s associate com-
pany. The Bell Telephone Manufacturing
Company, Antwerp.
Central Control Room of the Wellington
City Council Electricity Supply Dept.
This Control Room is the Indicating and
Operating Centre of the S.T.C. Supervis-
ory System, designed and manufactured
by Standard Telephones and Cables Lim-
ited, London. Since its inauguration in
1940 the system has been widely extended,
and now exercises supervision and con-
trol over 25 major sub-stations and the
City of Wellington's Faction System.
Portion of a 7A2 Rotary Automatic Tele-
phone Exchange, showing register groups in
the foreground. Eighty-five per cent, of the
120,000 lines of automatic equipment in
New Zealand is of the Rotary type. There
are exchanges now 30 years old still giving
a high grade of service.
55


WORLD-FAMOUS
ACHIEVEMENTS
MULTIPLE RADIO
TRANSMISSION
Post-war Plans
NEW YORK, Jan.. 25 (A.A.P.).
—Duplex broadcasting, which
will enable 12 different pro-
grammes to be broadcast on the
same frequency band, will be a
revolutionary development in
post-war radio and television
transmission, according to the
Director of the Federal Tele-
phone and Radio Corporation.
Mr. E. M. Deloraine.
He told the Institute of Radio En-
gineers that the new system will also
be capable of combining full colour
or black and white pictures with sound
in the same channel
The system will require new trans-
mitters and receivers, production of
which will be started soon after the
war
World’s most powerful television
station, operated from the Eiffel
Tower, in 1937, The transmission
equipment was made by S.T.C.’s
French associate —Le Materiel Tele-
phonique, Paris.
The companies associated with
Standard Telephones and Cables Pty.
Ltd. within the International System,
have many notable achievements to
their credit. Some of these have been
of such far-reaching importance in
the field of radio and telecommuni-
cations, that they have made head-
line news throughout the world’s
daily press. A few of these achieve-
ments are illustrated on this page.
The radio-telegraph and radio-telephone equipment on the Cunard
liners "Queen Elizabeth” and "Queen Mary” was manufactured by
S.T.C., London, for the International Marine Radio Company Ltd,,
both of which are associate companies of S.T.C., Sydney.
FULL COLOUR
TELEVISION
From Our Special Correspondent.
NEW YORK, Saturday. The
Columbia Broadcasting System is to
erect a new television station on top
of the Chrysler Tower, in New York
City, that will transmit pictures
larger and clearer than were pos-
sible ever before, not only in black
and white, but in full colour.
Equipment for the new television
station is being manufactured by
the Federal Telephone and Radio
Corporation.
Aerial system, 800 feet high, of
Rugby Radio Station, operated by
the British Post Office. S.T.C.,
London, supplied the 200 K.W.
Transmitter, by means of which
the first regular Trans-Atlantic
telephone service was inaugurated
in 1927.
56


OVERSEAS COMPANIES ASSOCIATED WITH S.T.C.
FOLLOWING ARE THE MANUFACTURING, OPERATING AND RESEARCH COMPANIES ASSOCIATED WITH STANDARD
TELEPHONES AND CABLES PTY. LTD., IN THE GREAT INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM:—
Great Britain
Standard Telephones & Cables Limited, London, England.
Creed & Company Limited, Croydon, England.
International Marine Radio Company Limited, London, England.
The Commercial Cable Company Limited, London, England,
Kolster-Brandes Limited, Sidcup, England.
Europe
Bell Telephone Manufacturing Company, Antwerp, Belgium.
Le Materiel Telephonique, Paris, France.
Standard Electric Aktieselskab, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Standard Electric Aktieselskab, Oslo, Norway.
Standard Electrrica Italiana, Milan, Italy.
Standard Electrica, Lisbon, Portugal.
Standard Electrica S.A., Madrid, Spain.
Standard Telephon und Radio A.G., Zurich, Switzerland.
U.S.A.
International Telephone & Telegraph Corporation, New York.
International Standard Electric Corporation, New York.
International Telecommunications Laboratories Incorporated, New
York.
Federal Telephone & Radio Corporation, Newark.
All America Cables & Radio Inc., New York.
The Commercial Cable Company, New York.
Mackay Radio & Telegraph Company, New York.
China Electric Company Limited, New York.
South America
Companhia Radio Internacional do Brasil, Rio de Janeiro
Compania de Telefonos de Chile, Santiago.
Compania Internacional de Radio (Argentine), Buenos Aires.
Compania Internacional de Radio S.A. (Chile), Santiago.
Compania Standard Electric Argentina, Sociedad Anonima Industrial y
Comercial, Buenos Aires.
Compania Standard Electric. S.A.C., Santiago.
Standard Electrica S.A., Rio de Janeiro.
Mexican Telephone & Telegraph Company, Mexico City.
Montevideo Telephone Company, Limited, Montevideo.
Porto Rico Telephone Company, San Juan.
United River Plate Telephone Company Limited, Buenos Aires.
In Other Countries
Shanghai Telephone Company, Shanghai, China.
Cuban American Telephone & Telegraph Company, Havana, Cuba.
Cuban Telephone Company, Havana, Cuba.


POSTWAR DEVELOPMENTS
The Challenge of the Future
Fifty years is a relatively short period as time is measured. Yet the
past fifty years, which almost encompasses the full story of electrical
communications in Australia, has seen Standard Telephones and Cables
Pty. Ltd. grow from small beginnings to the largest telephone manu-
facturing company in the Commonwealth.
With the end of the second World War, a new era of peace and
prosperity begins, in which the Company intends to play a major role,
not only in telecommunications, radio and electronics, but also in the
field of household electrical appliances, including refrigeration.
Possessing one of the best equipped manufacturing plants of its
kind in Australia, with key personnel thoroughly experienced in the
techniques of precision manufacture, and having at its disposal the
unsurpassed research facilities of the many companies associated with it
in the International System; the faith which S.T.C. has in the future
is well founded. The Company faces it with confidence!
Cables: RELAY, SYDNEY. Telephones: MX 0444 (17 Lines)
BRANCHES: MELBOURNE. LISMORE. WELLINGTON, N.Z.
Standard Telephones a
Offices & Works: BOTANY ROAD, ALEXANDRIA
SYDNEY, N.S.W.


DISTRIBUTORS OF
TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT
NEW SOUTH WALES:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
257-274 BOTANY ROAD
ALEXANDRIA
SYDNEY
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
71 MAGELLAN STREET
LISMORE
QUEENSLAND:
BRISBANE ELECTRICAL COMPANY
R. H. TONKS
47 ELIZABETH STREET
BRISBANE
VICTORIA:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
5 88 BOURKE STREET
MELBOURNE, C.l.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
UNBEHAUN & JOHNSTONE LTD.
5 8 GAWLER PLACE
ADELAIDE
WEST AUSTRALIA:
M. J. BATEMAN LIMITED
12 MILLIGAN STREET
PERTH
TASMANIA:
W. & G. GENDERS PTY. LTD.
5 3 CAMERON STREET
LAUNCESTON
also at
69 LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART
MOUNT STREET, BURNIE
52 STEWART STREET, DEVONPORT
NEW ZEALAND:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
TROJAN HOUSE
MANNERS STREET, WELLINGTON


DISTRIBUTORS OF
RADIO RECEIVERS
NEW SOUTH WALES;
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
252-274 BOTANY ROAD
ALEXANDRIA
SYDNEY
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
71 MAGELLAN STREET
LISMORE
QUEENSLAND:
EDGAR V. HUDSON PTY. LTD.
284 EDWARD STREET
BRISBANE
VICTORIA:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
588 BOURKE STREET
MELBOURNE, C.l
SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
LENROC LIMITED
211-15 PULTENEY STREET
ADELAIDE
WEST AUSTRALIA:
M. J. BATEMAN LIMITED
12 MILLIGAN STREET
PERTH
TASMANIA:
W. & G. GENDERS PTY. LTD.
5 3 CAMERON STREET
LAUNCESTON
also at
69 LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART
MOUNT STREET, BURNIE
52 STEWART STREET, DEVONPORT
NEW ZEALAND:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
TROJAN HOUSE
MANNERS STREET, WELLINGTON


DISTRIBUTORS OF
RADIO TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT
and HOUSEHOLD ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES
NEW SOUTH WALES;
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
2 5 8-274 BOTANY ROAD
ALEXANDRIA.
SYDNEY
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
71 MAGELLAN STREET
LISMORE
QUEENSLAND:
EDGAR V. HUDSON PTY. LTD.
2 84-2 86 EDWARD STREET
BRISBANE.
VICTORIA:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
5 88 BOURKE STREET
MELBOURNE, C.l.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
UNBEHAUN & JOHNSTONE LTD.
5 8 GAWLER PLACE
ADELAIDE.
WEST AUSTRALIA:
M. J. BATEMAN LTD.
12 MILLIGAN STREET
PERTH.
TASMANIA:
W. & G. GENDERS PTY. LTD.
52 CAMERON STREET, LAUNCESTON
also l at
69 LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART
MOUNT STREET, BURNIE
52 STEWART STREET, DEVONPORT
NEW ZEALAND:
STANDARD TELEPHONES Sc CABLES PTY. LTD.
TROJAN HOUSE
MANNERS STREET, WELLINGTON


DISTRIBUTORS OF
SELENIUM RECTIFIER EQUIPMENT
NEW SOUTH WALES;
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
2 52-274 BOTANY ROAD
ALEXANDRIA
SYDNEY
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
71 MAGELLAN STREET
LISMORE
For Mining Rectifier Equipment .
MASSE BATTERIES PTY. LTD.
115 CROWN STREET
SYDNEY
QUEENSLAND:
BRISBANE ELECTRICAL COMPANY
R. H. TONKS
47 ELIZABETH STREET
BRISBANE
VICTORIA:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
588 BOURKE STREET
MELBOURNE, C.l
SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
UNBEHAUN & JOHNSTONE LTD.
5 8 GAWLER PLACE
ADELAIDE
WEST AUSTRALIA
M. J. BATEMAN LIMITED
12 MILLIGAN STREET
PERTH
TASMANIA:
W. & G. GENDERS PTY. LTD.
5 3 CAMERON STREET
LAUNCESTON
also at
69 LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART
MOUNT STREET, BURNIE
52 STEWART STREET, DEVONPORT
NEW ZEALAND:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
TROJAN HOUSE
MANNERS STREET, WELLINGTON


DISTRIBUTORS OF
BRIMAR RADIO VALVES
NEW SOUTH WALES:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
2 52-274 BOTANY ROAD
ALEXANDRIA
SYDNEY
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
71 MAGELLAN STREET
LISMORE
QUEENSLAND:
TRACKSON BROS. PTY. LTD.
1 57-1 59 ELIZABETH STREET
BRISBANE
VICTORIA:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
588 BOURKE STREET
MELBOURNE, C.l.
NOYES BROS. (MELBOURNE) LTD.
597-603 LONSDALE STREET
MELBOURNE
SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
RADIO WHOLESALERS LTD.
31 RUNDLE STREET
ADELAIDE
WEST AUSTRALIA:
M. J. BATEMAN LIMITED
12 MILLIGAN STREET
PERTH
TASMANIA:
W. & G. GENDERS PTY. LTD.
5 3 CAMERON STREET
LAUNCESTON
also at
69 LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART
MOUNT STREET, BURNIE
52 STEWART STREET, DEVONPORT
NEW ZEALAND:
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
TROJAN HOUSE
MANNERS STREET, WELLINGTON


Shepherd & Newman Pty. Ltd., Printers, Sydney
Standard Telephones and Cables Pttf. limited
2 52-274 BOTANY ROAD
ALEXANDRIA
SYDNEY.
Branches at Lismore, Melbourne, Wellington, N.Z.




