

600 COMPETITIVE
CONUNDRUMS
ON THE
Late Champion Boat Race,
ROWED BY
BEACH AND HANLAN
ON THE
PARRAMATTA RIVER,
ON
March 28th, 1885.
The Writer of the Winning Conundrum
was awarded a Ruddick Boat, given by-
Mr. Hanlan.
Paddington:
BOYCE & DOUST, Printers, Heley-street.
T. C. WALKER,
GENERAL DRAPER & MEN’S MERCER,
367 & 369, OXFORD STREET, Paddington.
Go to WALKER'S
For UNDERCLOTHING, STAYS,
HOSIERY and HABERDASHERY.
Go to WALKER’S
For SHIRTS, COLLARS TIES ,
HATS and UMBRELLAS.
Go to WALKER'S
FOR
CALICOES, FLANNELS, BLANKETS,
And QUILTS.




a
LIMIT* 0
s ay,,.
Music-
EasyTimePAYi
\overBoooF‘
BestMakzßSm
SNn %&s>i o l


INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
t? N presenting the following conundrums—which were sent in to
Mr. G. A. Coleman at the Opera House, to compete for
Mr. Hanlan’s Ruddick Boat, which he offered for the best
conundrum on the late boat race between himself and Beach —to
the notice of the general public, the publishers feel that they are
bringing about two very desirable ends—namely, doing mere
justice to the various non-successful contributors, by affording the
rest of the community an opportunity of judging of the merits of
their productions; and offering at a very trifling cost an instruc-
tive, amusing and durable memento of the late rowing matches,
between Hanlan and Beach, for the championship of the world.
It is needless, perhaps, to state that these are not the sole
reasons for the publication of this pamphlet—the solidity of
them, however, have induced the publishers to undertake the
large expense necessary in such an undertaking, and to believe
that their labour and expenditure of capital in purchasing the
right of publication, printing and publishing, will not prove
unprofitable to themselves. The events touched upon excited
world-wide interest; an interest that has become greatly intensi-
fied by a New South Welshman—William Beach—gaining the
sculling championship of the world.
Whatever may be the merits of the conundrum awarded Mr.
Hanlan’s prize, it will be seen on perusing the following pages,
that there were contributions equally, if not more, worthy. The
whole of those sent in are not published, many of them being too
ridiculous to put into print, while others had no bearing whatever
upon the subject to be dealt with. The chance of obtaining so
valuable a boat, as may be imagined, brought a most varied lot of
contributors into the field ; in fact, over 600, not a few of the
worst of whom appeared to fully expect the prize. The follow-
ing absurdly amusing examples will illustrate this :—“ Konun-
drum.— (The winning one). —Why did Hanlan lose 1 Because
the first man that met him on the wharf was Dan O’Connor.”
But this was eclipsed by the effort of a young lady, to which the
following post-script was attached : —“ P.S. I regret to state
that owing to indisposition, in the form of neuralgia, and a painful
abscess on my left arm, I shall be unable to attend the perform-
ance on Monday night, but I hope it will be a success.” The
committee were too adamantine-hearted to be influenced by this
gentle epistle, and did not award the fair writer the boat—
probably fearing that her attack of neuralgia would only be


QUESTION.
Why does the Tram stop so often
at the New Post Office, Paddington ?
ANSWER.
Because J. Gillies
Establishment
& Co.’s Grocery
is opposite.
PRICE LISTS (IS APPLICATI
morSTA'Em HOTEI*,
Corner of
DARLINGHURST ROAD & LIVERPOOL STREET,
Darlinghurst, Sydney.
Mrs. C. GORDON, Proprietress.
Superior Accommodation for Country Visitors.
STBICWtf M@BS-BA.T-E CHARGES,
ADVA
CE AUSTRALIA.
The People’s Standard.
Important Information from the Seat of Operation.
Russian Advance in Afghanistan.
Negotiations Very Unsatisfactory.
The Wonder of this Military age is—
jlkl&dLGiraMMA*& IsviriciMe Handmade Bloat®.
It has been proved beyond a doubt that Feet are the Magnificent Standard
of Man throughout the World.
BEAR IN MIND, EVERY PAIR OF ANDERSON’S KNEE-MADE BOOTS IS DONE
ON THE PREMISES DAILY.
The above Standard carries the Universal Military Spirit of the World.
Sole Address— JQHN ANDERSON,
INTERNATIONAL PRIZE BOOT MAKER,
GIfS, George Street, Haymarket, Sydney.


aggravated by an outing on the water, or that the abscess would
somewhat interfere with her properly managing the sculls,
Others “ very diffidently ” named where and how the boat was to
be sent—one going so far as to write :—“ Please send the prize
along as soon as possible.” Many of the contributions have
therefore been thrown aside, and only those inserted which
seemed to have some claim to that distinction. A large number
of the writers hit upon the same ideas, and to prevent needless
repetitions their effusions also had to be excluded.
Ministers, doctors, lawyers, civil servants, teachers, business
people, and others, residing in different parts of the colony, have
composed the conundrums —to which, considering all the sur-
roundings, special interest should attach.
BOYCE & DOUST.
Publishers,
Paddington.
PRIZE CONUNDRUM.
The following conundrum was awarded Mr. Hanlan’s prize, at
the Opera House, York-street, Sydney, by the gentlemen ap-
pointed to act as judges and was signed by Mr. Dan 0 Connor,
M. L A., as chairman -
Why does Hanlan accept his loss of the Championship so honorably
and manfully ? Because he knows he was beaten by a Man of “ Iron,” of
strong and determined “Will,” and a dangerous “ Beach” a-head of him.—
Gkace Darling.
COMPETITIVE CONUNDRUMS.
Why did Beach win the Sculling Championship of the World from
Hanlan ? Because Beach’s mettle (metal) was sculled (culled) by Aus-
tralian oars (ores.) — Physician, Riley-street, Surry Hills.
Why was Hanlan in the last boat-race like a drowning man, who,
seeing land, exerts every muscle to reach it P Because he struggled to
reach Beach.—C. 8., Opera House.
Why were Hanlan and Beach, in rowing the recent boat-race, as
plucky as any of our New South Wales contingent ? Because, although no
Butchering was done with their Sculls, it was a Jont battle in Choppy water,
and the Stakes couldn’t have been greater, if they had gone to Sue Ban
(O’Connor) for them.—T. D., Sydney.
Why was the late Champion boat-race an unequal contest ? Because
Hanlan’s principal supporters were only “ Roosters”—(Alcock andLaycock)
—whilst Beach had the “ Debil” (Deeble) and his Messenger to back him
up. —H. T., G. P. 0., Sydney.
What part of English History was repeated in the race between
Hanlan and Beach ? William the First came before Edward the Second.
G. C., Smith’s Wharf.
Why was Hanlan after the race like a Bushman in despair ? Be-
cause he had no backer and lost his last match.—J.' H., Castlereagh-street,
Sydney. P. S, —Hanlan found his own Stake.


The Hammam of the Turks.
The Thermae of the Romans.
INTBODUCED IN SYDNEY BY
CMS. el wm,
OXFORD STREET, CITY.
E5T0.1854-
H£RDRESSER HfllM^
<b!
BATH
*\UAfcUii
mWpypwmm
HOT,COLD j RLUNCE&SHOWER BATHS
*. Ih! irjjpi {Hp
MM
!!!i!!!llliiUiL!!J
I*O'OXO^9<XD' > ' 7'~o'o\\ o o o o O'O o >o oo oo
W, MWH. Mill
The Turkish Baths are open for Ladies every Monday and Thursday Mornings, from 8.30 t# 12
noon ; also every Tuesday Evening from 6.30 to 8 o’clock.
For Gentlemen—Monday Afternoons, Tuesday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m,, Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday, from 8 a.m. to 7.30 p.m.
CH A RGES—Ladies or Gentlemen, Single Bath, 3s 6d ; 4 Tickets, 12s ;
8 Tickets, 20s; or 50 Tickets, £5 (Tickets Transferable.)
Cheap Turkish Baths (for Men Only) every Monday, Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday Evenings from 5 to 7 o’clock, TWO SHILLINGS each Bath.
CHAS. E. WIGZELL, Proprietor.
137, 139 & 141, OXFORD STREET, SYDNEY,
Near Crown Street Tram Junction.


How was Hanlan ill-used after his race with Beach ? Laycock gave
him a “rub,” and Hunt “drove” him to Parramatta.—A. E. G., Eliza-
beth-street, Sydney.
In what way did the late boat-race resemble a gambling table?
They spun for position, “ cut” for win, and Beach cleared the pull (pool) !
A. E. Or., Elizabeth-street, Sydney.
Why is it a matter of little surprise that Hanlan lost his late match
against the Dapto sculler ? Because he became confused at having a bank
on each side and a beach (Beach) just ahead of him.—E. A. N., Burwood-
road, Burwood.
Why was the last race not an aquatic contest ? Because it was a
Beach-Hanlan (Beach and land) one. —E R. J., Elizabeth-street.
What is the difference between Beach and a blackfellow’s nullah-
nullah? One is a crack sculler and the other is a skull cracker.—F. G. H.,
Smith-street, Balmain.
Why were the competitors in the last Champion boat-race like the
hands of a clock ? Because the little man, like the little hand, travelled
fast, while the big man, like the big hand, travelled faster.—J. F., Crown-
road, Ultimo.
Why is Beach a greater General than any other Southern celebrity ?
Because he has advanced the New South Wales’ (colours) scullers to the
front of the whole world. (This is intended for a military pun, but is a
trifle nomadic , being made (sudden) Soudanly, not having enough time to
(dally) Bailey with it.) -Momus, a Riddle-iculous Admirer of Hanlan.
Why is Beach a better financier than Gladstone ? He is the only
man who ever made people glad to have a Bill overdue , and congratulate
themselves that it can't be met. — Momus.
Why is Hanlan a most extra( oar) ordinary man of business ? Having
failed twice , everybody wants his good-will. — Momus.
What is the toughest thing Beach has had to contend with on the
water ? Why aN Eddy , of course. (Mr. Hanlan’s Christian [name is
Edward) . —Momus.
Why are Beach and Hanlan both strong advocates of matrimony ?
Because they are continually interchanging congratulations on having been
each other’s best man. —Momus.
What is the difference between Captain Cook and Edward Hanlan ?
Cook’s “Endeavour” became famous when he discovered the New South
Wales shore ; Hanlan’s endeavour came to grief when he encountered the
New South Wales Beach. —W. P., Redmyre.
Why might the Parramatta be considered the most wonderful of
Rivers ? Because (as Hanlan very admirably admitted, after that memor-
able event), it has borne, in a shell, a Beach too good for the world.—
Native.
Why didn’t the Canadian win the Championship ? Because he
couldn’t Han(d)l’an oar well eno’.—H., The Point, Gladesville.
Why would the Australian Jockey Club Rules have disqualified
Beach ? Because he pulled the race from start to finish.—E. 0. F., Castle-
reagh-street, Sydney.
Why is Wm. Beach’s victory over Edward Hanlan more powerful
than a galvanic battery ? Because he, with a Messenger, gave the world
such a shock when he defeated the great Canadian.—W. C., Redfern.
If the two same rowers in the late Champion boat-race should meet
again on the Parramatta, why will they then be like the first grave-digger
and the Young Dane in Shakespeare’s play of Hamlet ? Because they will
B-each Hanlin' a scull.


Gr. B. PYKE,
221 OXFORD STREET,
Mfi
yj Of\K JJnexcelled,
a, . and.
—Promptly Executed at the Lowest Charges.-
BOYCE & DOUST,
irar
HELEY STREET,
(Near Begg Street),
IF^IDIDIiTa-'rOlfcT.
Country Orders will receive immediate attention.
ESTIMATES GIVEN WHEN REQUIRED.


FURNITURE BAZAAR,
Darlinghurst Sydney.
Why is Wm. Beach’s victory over Edward Hanlan like the recent
action of Wm. B. Dailey, in sending troops to the Soudan P Because
neither had the sanction of O’Connor.—W. C , Redfern.
Why was the Parramatta River the most disastrous course Hanlan
ever pulled on P Because he was twice defeated through pulling against a
Be ch.—R. S., Leichhardt.
Why was Hanlan, after the last Champion boat-race, like General
Gordon in his dying moments ? Because they both could see that their day
was done.—J. S. E.
Why was Hanlan beaten in the race ? Because he was loth to leave
dear “ Charity,” and never could get to “ Kissing Point” without stopping.
—C. C., St. Leonards.
Who had the best boat in the late boat-race ? Beach, because he had
the championship).—E. J. K., E. N. 0., Market-street.
Why was the Champion race like a Victorian speculator ? Because
it made Beach worth (Beechworth) money.—R. R. E., Bathurst.
Why was Hanlan, when he lost the Champion race, like a person at
a mournful ceremony? Because he was in Beach’s wake.—R. R. E.,
Bathurst.
What is the difference between Beach and Hanlan ? About (8) eight
lengths.—S. L., Oxford Hotel.
How did Hanlan, in the late contest for the Championship, prove
himself to be the fastest oarsman in the world ? Because in less than 23
minutes he rowed from Ryde, on the Parramatta River, to within six
lengths of the Australian beach (Beach.) —N. T. C., Gunning.
Why was it impossible for Hanlan to win the late boat-race ? Be-
cause he had a beach on both sides of him and Beach in front of him.—R.
S., Leichhardt.
Why did Hanlan labour under a great disadvantage in the late boat-
race ? Because he had to pull round a big Beach to win—R. S., Leich-
hardt.
Why was Hanlan, after the last Champion boat-race, like Jonah
when he was swallowed by the whale P Because he was sucked in while
trying to get up to a Beach.—T. W.
Why was the last Champion Sculling Match like the English Derby ?
Because there was no hoax (Oaks) about it, —it was rowed (rode) fair, and
was won on the straight.—A. W. F,, Cambridge Club.
What is the difference between the Champion Oarsman of the
World, and an Artilleryman in the Soudan ? One rows from a shell upon
the water, and the other shells from a row upon the land—F. W. J.,
Armidale.
When did one of Hanlan’s races make his friends anxious to lunch
with him ? When he had a fowl (f 0 ul) and spoke of it.
When were Hanlan’s friends the most heated during the contest ?
When they were all mustered (mustard.)
When should Hanlan have beeu looked upon as one of the greatest
magicians that ever visited our shores ? When he ran a Beach in a few
seconds round the Parramatta River,


IF you wake with coated tongue, sour stomach, headache, no appetite
or strength, then use
ABRAHAM’S PILLI,
The Great Liver Remedy.
SOLD EVERYWHERE AT Is, 2s, and ss.
Prepared only at the Laboratory, 434 George St.
J. SKINNER & CO.,
§inmbeeS,
GASFITTERS,
Galvanized Iron Workers, and General Contractors,
LICENSED DRAINERS,
3L®, MM® iTEEEl 1 , HWmWW*
Pumps, Baths, Cisterns, Taps, Brass Bars for Window Lights. Beer
Engines Manufactured and Repaired. Lamps of all kinds.
Electric and Other Bells.
Chandeliers Re-Bronzed. Gas Stoves. Asbestos Fires. Shipping Repairs
Attended to on the Shortest Notice. Gas Engines Fitted.
Proprietors Selby's Patent Burners.
E S T I M A T E S Gr I VEW .
MEDICAL ADVICE.
A LM&AI/I.Y QUALIFIMV PMYSXCIAST
Sees patients daily from 10 to 1 and 6 to 9 (Wednesday evening excepted).
SUNDAY, 10 to 11, morning only.
ADVICE AND MEDICINES, 2s.
HILLS PROVIDENT DISPENSARY,
$T9t SMBrETT STEBBf, e©E3©E Rcv©atts=st.
£.. AHRIOfBZ,
40 HA.E,<3-E.A.VE STREET, IFA-IDIDIIbTG-TOIN" SY ID IT IE "ST.
Manufacturer of Meteorological Instruments, Barometers, Thermometers,
Hydrometers, Rain Gauges, and Aneroids.
C3HCEIvIXCA.3Li -A.XTD ESPEXSIMriTTAL, SLASSBLOWEB.
Engine Dividing Done.
Wholesale ahd Retail.
Repairs of all kinds executed to Barometers, (Marine and House), and Aneroids. Ther-
mometers for brewers, sugar boilers, steam guages, soap works, freezing chambers, dairy
nse. Chemical and Clinical, and incubatoring, Hydrometers, Saccharometers, &c.
Bie’CrCIEJ,
(Late CRAMPTON & BRUCE,)
PIANOS. ORGANS. MUSIC,
197, PITT ST., SYDNEY.


How did the late boat race alter the chronological position of two
kings of England ? By making Edward the Confessor come after William
the Conqueror.— Chronos, Sydney.
Why was the Beach-Hanlan boat race a very hollow affair ?
Ist. Because they rowed with sculls, and skulls are hollow- 2nd. They
rowed in shells, and shells are hollow. 3rd. The people hollered when the
race was won. 4th. The losers had to pay up, which made their pockets
hollow (empty).— Hollow Skull
Why was the recent championship boat race a foregone conclusion ?
Because the champion said to the ex-champion, ‘‘ I admire your style of
Kanlan (handling) your oars, hut I’ll Beach you (beat you). And, as an
oars-tralian, and speaking o«r-acularly, it was ruddick xx\ou& to pull against
my kangaroo-bounding and emu- singly successful boat. Your head is
more experienced than mine; but my skull is better than yours.”—J.H.B.
How was it that Hanlan did not gain the champion race ? Because
he had a long Beach constantly between him and the winning post.—R.M.,
Hyde.
Why had Beach great odds in his favor ? Because the debble (Heebie)
always helped him.—R. M., Ryde.
Who is the better horseman, Beach or Hanlan ? Beach, because he
rode (rowed) Hanlan over the whole course without being upset.—R. M.,
Ryde.
Why was the recent Beach-Hanlan contest a foregone conclusion for
Beach ? Because, firstly, Hanlan could not possibly row over the Beach in
front of him ; secondly, Beach was better a(Dapto)ed to row against a strong
flood tide, (being a Hapto man), and thirdly, he had the devil (Deeble) to
back him.—A. R., Balmain.
In what color should Beach keep the championship, to the honor of
Australia and himself? Inviol(et)ate. —H. W. J., Castlereagh-st., Sydney.
Why is William Beach, the winner of the late boat race, greater than
the German Army in the late Franco-German War ? Because the German
Army defeated the French with living armies, but Beach defeated the
world with a couple of sculls.—H. 8., Robert-street, Petersham.
Why did Beach beat Hanlan ? Because he Hanlan(ed) his Beaches
two well—had a good shell on—had it all his own way—and was backed by
he Deeble.—M, L , Petersham.
Why does Deeble back Beach? Because he over grows grass
Han-lan.—T. W., Sussex-street, Sydney.
Why did Beach win ? Laycock says, he Can-aid-in winning a race
for Hanlan ; but of the two men, Beach is better a-Dap'to-ed to sculling.—
j. A R., William, street, Sydney.
Why was Hanlan defeated by Beach ? Because the Eddy of the stream
was not strong enough to wash away the Beach.—A. H. M.
In what way is Edward Hanlan an example for all sporting men ?
His career as champion sculler of the world was an honourable one ; and
when beaten he manfully acknowledged that his boat had been beached on a
friendly shore, and that he was defeated by a superior sculler.—W. S. S.,
Sarah-street. Burwood.
Why should the late boat-race unfit Edward Hanlan for a place in
the present Ministry ? Because he Bailey' d behind —his Co-hen was too
in Trickett —there was Nort on (not an) atom of chance for him, because he
got in Farnelly behind Wright at the start; and, contrary to his usual
Abbott, he didn’t manage to clutch the Bibbs at the finish.— Cyclops.
In what way did Hanlan, after the late boat-race, resemble the
French soldiers after the war with China ? He was down-hearted in conse-
quence of Beach getting all the spoil —E. A. P,, Ashfield.


J. MITCHELL
WHOLESALE and RETAIL
tii mmi[ «
01K9
fUJxIUX
SiJ
Central Office —65, PITT STREET.
Depots—HA.Y and DRUITT STREETS.
Best Newcastle Coal for Household, Steam and Blacksmith
purposes at lowest possible rates.
Coal Merchants and Large Consumers Liberally treated.
lIP COUNTRY ORDERS PROMPTLY SUPPLIED.
Cargoes from 100 to 500 tons afloat.
Sole Agent Celebrated BURWOOD COLLIERY,
NEWCASTLE.
TEE EEWWS OIL MO COLOOB STOEE.
CHARLES J. LAME,
PAINTER,
Haperjjsmger, anti (general Coirtrador.
A large and well-assorted Stock of Paints, Oils, Varnishes,
Colours, Paperhangings, Borders, Centres, Window Glass,
Brushware, Lamps, Nails, &c.
(gT Paperhangings from 3Jd per Roll.
r J' £
CHEAPEST HOUSE IN NEWTOWN.
NOTE THE ADDRESS—
CHARLES J. LANE,
NEWTOWN.


IMPORTANT TO MOTHERS.
Henry’s Australian Worm Powders.
The oldest remedy, and the best for worms in children and adults. In packets of 3 for Is.
HENRY’S COLONIAL OINTMENT.
A never failing remedy. Sold by all wholesale houses, and by the inventor,
J. HENRY, Chemist, 750 George Street, South.
IW Is POTS.
Why was it a difficult matter for William to win the boat race ?
Because Hanlan pulled behind, and the people held the “Beach.”—T. S.
A., Surrey-street, Darlinghurst.
Can you tell me the two greatest events in Hanlan’s career in Aus-
tralia ? Ist. When Hanlan went to Manly Beach to give an exhibition of
his skill as an oarsman. 2nd. Wh n Manly Beach went to Hanlan on the
Parramatta River, and took from him his laurels as an oarsman —A. R ,
Balmain.
How was it that Hanlan was in front of Beach throughout the race,
and yet lost it ? Hanlan posed “ a-head,” while Beach remained “ head-
less.”—A. G. G., Elizabeth-street, Sydney.
How did Beach show his sorrow for his victory ? After ‘ ‘ skulling ”
Hanlan, he wished to shake hands with him.—A. G. G., Elizabeth-street,
Sydney.
Why is Hanlan the most generous man in the world ? Because he
travelled many thousands of miles to place the rowiug championship at the
disposal of Beach, for the honor and glory of Australia, and went on his
way rejoicing.—R. T,, Parramatta.
Why does Hanlan, the ex-champion sculler of the world, resemble
the ill-fated ship Lochard ? Because he foundered on an Australian Beach.
—E. W. M., Cook’s River Road.
Why ought Edward Hanlan to have been delared the winner of the
last race with Beach? Because he was a’ Ed. from start to finish. J. T.
L., Kent-street.
Why did Hanlan look like a skeleton when he lost the boat race ?
Because he made an exhibition of his skull in his sculling a boat there.—
H. F., Liverpool-street, Sydney.
Why was Hanlan’s first exhibition on the waters of Port Jackson
different to his last ? In one he was seen leaving Manly Beach and in the
Other Manly Beach was seen leaving him.—J. M. G., Redfern.
How did Hanlan and the public differ re the race ? They said he
looked round, he said he felt square , —A. E. G., Elizabeth-street, Sydney.
Why did Beach win the boat race ? Because he was best in Hanlan
his oars.—“ Ipse dixit,” George-street, Parramatta.
Why did Beach win the boat race ? Because he had a trained
“ Messenger ” to presage his victory, and a “ Deeble ” (Fr diable), (English
“Devil”), to back him.—G. E. S., Croydon.
Why was Edward Hanlan so disappointed in not winning back the
Championship ? Because, though he Tor(e)onto the finish, he got
Beached.—C. N. F., D.T.O , Sydney.


Why did Hanlan not win the Championship on the 28th March?
Because he was unnerved at having a Big Bill to meet, in consequence of
which he pulled his boat against a Beach. —H. S., Park-street.
Why is the Championship in the last boat-race like a waterman’s
boat when at its moorings? Because it will have to be taken from a
Beach.— K. ?., Redfern.
How did Hanlan prove himself, in the late boat-race, a susceptible,
though somewhat uncertain, lover ? Though he was defeated at the first
(s)mile, he never lost heart entirely.—H. J., Parramatta-road.
Why was the late boat-race a mournful affair ? Because Beach sat
in his shell between two sculls, while Hanlan attended at his wake.—H. J.,
Parramatta-road.
Why would an objection, raised by the winner of the late boat-race,
have been a most marketable production? Because it would have been a
case of Beach demur (Beech-de-mer).—H. J., Parramatta-road.
Why was there no need for the pullers in the late boat-race to be
hungry ? Because if the stakes were too high, they could have had fouls at
the Hen and Chickens.—H. J , Parramatta-road.
Why was the late boat-race a blood-thirsty affair ? Because Beach
kept a-head of Hanlan all the way and finally defeated. him, and although
the latter was not stumped he was well quartered , and his backers were much
cut-up, —H. J., Parramatta-road.
How did Beach prove himself a good digger in the last boat-race ?
Because he got a good lead and kept it. —H. J , Parramatta-road.
Why would the contestants in the late boat-race have made good
defaulting jockeys ? Because the harder they pulled the better they rowed
(rode). —H, J., Parramatta-road.
Why was it almost impossible for Beach to lose the late match?
Because, besides having the good wishes of all Australia, he had also th&
sympathy and support of the ‘ ‘ Deeble ’ ’ (Devil). —T. R.
Why was Hanlan’s boat like a Russian cruiser? Because neither
could come up to our Manly Beach.—R. C. T., Athlone-place.
Why is Hanlan like an egg ? Because, when he was beaten, he most
un-sAeW-fishly owned it, and submitted to the yoke. Cyclops.
What could Hanlan have taken from Beach, and given him in return,
to have won the last Champion-race ?—Take from Beach ch, give him
(tea) t, and then be would be bound to have him Beat (Bea t~ Beat.)
Schoolboy, Post Office.
How did Hanlan and Beach, after the late race, resemble a successful
and defeated candidate for West Sydney ? One said he victorious, while
the other said he whs defeated but not disgraced.—E. A. 1., Ashfield.
Why does Beach, by his victory over Hanlan become a turfite?
Because Hanlan has proved himself a good man, but Beach has proved him-
self a better.—J. H. T., a. P. 0., Sydney.
In which way did the champion boat-race resemble four eggs ?
When Hanlan was pushed in his shell he cracked , and Beach laid to and won
(laid two and one). —E. P., Lands Department, Sydney.
In what way have the Sydney ladies marked their disapproval of the
late boat-race ? By trampling the two men’s colours under their feet.
— Stockings.
Why is Beach a most murderous man ? Because, on the 28th March
last, he pulled Hanlan fiercely— wouldn't let him get up, and then beat
Hanlan(s) scull in (sculling).—K. L., Glenmore-road.
Why did Hanlan lose the race ? Because he was not in A merry key.
—■Cyclops.


How was Hanlan disappointed in the late race P He made shore of
putting something in the bank, and he got Beached ! —Cyclops.
Why did not Hanlan beat Beach ? Because he was a ftnw-adian, and
therefore not Abel (able). — Dorothea 8., an admirer of the gallant, though
defeated, Canadian.
Why ought Hanlan to retire, and never row any more ? Because he
was defeated by a simple Cornstalk, that grew up and flourished from a
Beach in New South Wales.— Erin-go-Bragh.
Why were Beach and Hanlan in the late boat-race like two ladies in
love ? Because both were ambitious to win, and made up to appear.—H. W.,
Bourke-street, Woolloomooloo.
How did Beach in the champion boat-race resemble Maccabe, the
king of ventriloquists ? Because he proved he could do more with a pair of
wooden sculls than any other man in the world.—B. P., A. J. S. Bank.
Why did Hanlan not win the late Championship P Because in Aus-
tralia he found the grandest Beach he ever met with, and after trying
with several boats to reach it, found his strength not equal to the task. —
C.M., Bidge-street, Surry Hills.
Why may Hanlan in the last race be said to resemble a ship wrecked
on the Goodwin Sands ? Because it may be said to have been beached,
and even Hanlan admits it to have been a Goodwin, Beach ( Good win Beach).
—Utopia.
Why did Hanlan on the day of the champion race resemble a large
harbour steamer ? Because he was a Brighton (bright’un), bound for Manly
Beach.—Bluenose.
In what noble course of action did Beach and Hanlan try to excel in
their recent boat-race ? Charity towards Brothers (Charity Point towards
the Brothers). —A. R, Phillip-street, Sydney.
Who did most of the public wish to see the recent boat-race won by,
if possible? B-each.—A. R., Phillip-street, Sydney.
What is the difference between Beach and Hanlan since their last race
on the Parramatta River ? Ex.—J. 8., D. T. 0., Sydney.
Why did Beach in his last boat-race with Hanlan resemble a tele-
graph boy coming by train from Parramatta ? One was a messenger by
train, and the other was trained by Messenger.—l). S., Castlereagh-street,
Sydney.
What is the difference between Hanlan’s friends now, and in the late
race ? They wanted him to go on, and now they want him to stop.—R. 1.,
Lambert-street, Macdonaldtown.
Why is the rowing Championship of the World like a lighthouse ?
Because it shows the Beach that caused the wreck of Edward Hanlan.—
Meteor, Sydney.
Why ought Beach to have been arrested, after the race for the
Championship, and why ought the people who witnessed the race to be
reproved- for heartless conduct ? Because Beach beat Hanlan’s sculling
(Hanlan’s skull in), and the people cheered him for so doing. —E. 8.,
Milson’s Point.
Why should Australia sympathise (with Mr. Hanlan in his defeat ?
Because while Beach was all at home, poor Hanlan was all abroad!
—Mrs. R. T.
Why was Hanlan like a stamp on a letter from the Champion to his
wife ? Because they were both licked by Beach,—T J., Sydney.
Why was the late race between Beach and Hanlan like the prize
Ruddick boat ? It was not to be sold, but won on its merits — lmpulse,
Ferry-street, Glebe Point.


Why is E. Hanlan after the late boat race like the steamer Collaroy ?
Because he was Beach (ed),*and is now as good as ever.—W. H. S., Auburn.
Why were the Ruddick boat and the Donnelly and Sullivan boat,
in which Beach and Hanlan rowed for the Championship of the World on
the Parramatta River, on the 28th March, like Beach and Han'an ? Be-
cause they were well framed, good models, and built of the best stuff
Capt. M. 8., Pyrmont.
What caused Hanlan to steer such a good course in the late race ?
He had no desire to get Beached, therefore, he determined upon Hanlan
(handling; his sculls properly.—R. S., George street, Sydney.
What is the difference between Hanlan’s first and last rowing ex-
hibitions (or experiences) in New South Wales ? His first he pulled before
Manly Beach, his last behind Manly Beach, — “ /Eneas.”
Why was it natural for Beach to win the late race with Han an for the
championship of the world ? Because an Orient rather than Occidental
son (sun) should shine. —J. C. S., Watson’s Bay.
Why was Beach and Hanlan, on the 28th of March, the most affec-
tionate men on the Parramatta River ? Because they raced to get to
their Brothers (Brothers Rocks). —P. F., Elizabeth-street, Sydney.
Why is Willian Beach the most wonderful blacksmith in the world?
Because he forged a head (ahead), and well did (welded) a champion on
water. —R. T. B , Leichhardt.
Why did Edward Hanlan lose the championship ? Because he left
his home Toronto (to run to) Australia, and rowed at and against our
Manly Beach.— “ Query.”
Why was the late Hanlan-Beach Sculling Match an unequal contest ?
Because a Messenger conveyed to Beach the tactics of Hanlan, and Beach
was well a Dapt(o)ed to the use of the Jacke, being a Smith, while Hanlan
had to run to (Toronto) the goal with only the support of a Ruddock (Rud-
dock, a species of toad). —D. A., Bligh-street, Sydney.
Why was the late Beach and Hanlan boat race the most disastrous
feature in Hanlan’s visit to Australia ? Because, although he arrived
safely on our shores, still he was wrecked upon our Beach, and there he
lost his champion-ship.—W. H. McM., Sydney.
How soon after leaving port, homeward bound, will the gallant
Hanlan receive a lively reminder of his last race for the championship ?
When he sees Manly Beach receding from view.—E. P., Petersham.
Why is the present moment like one of the skiffs used in the late
race for the championship? Because its jesting time (just in time). —E.
P., Petersham.
Why were the competitors in the late race for the championship
unlike the big torpedo ? Because they obliged the spectators by going off
at the appointed time.—E. P., Petersham.
How does the recent contest between Beach and Hanlan prove that
Beach is entitled to a seat in the present Ministry of New South Wales ?
Because by his recent victories over the most brilliant and scientific sculler
(scholar) of the day, he has proved himself far superior to Mr. Trickett,
and like Mr. Dailey and his colleagues, through the Masterly stroke and
power of his scidls (skulls) he has once more placed New South Wales be-
fore Canada to the front, and by paying strict attention to the slightest
hints and requests of a Messenger of the people, the result has proved him-
Belf Wright (right) in the end.—G. A. E., Goulburn.


Why should Edward Hanlan be considered the greatest navigator
on record ? Because he anhored the largest ship (the champion—ship) of
the world on an Australian Beach, and is to-night honored by the greatest
living 1 Sala ” (sailor), whose ship (friend —ship) Hanlan commands. —C.
H. S., Phillip-street, Sydney.
Why will Looking Gla s Bay, Parramatta River, ever be memorable
in connection with the Champion Race ? Because it reflected an event un-
paralleld in the rowing history of the world, grand and honourable alike to
the winner and loser. —W.
Why was Beach in the last boat race like a successful criminal ?
Because he cleverly forged a head of Hanlan, passed him easily, and made
a fortune.—F. W. H., Surry Hills.
Why is Hanlan like his own boat? Because he was “backed,’'
not wrecked, and will float again triumphantly. —B.
Why during the late championship boat race did Ed. Hanbm, by his
defeat, make an important discovery on the Parramatta River ? He found
New Siuth Wales in possession of a Beach that defied all attempts to row
past.—R. D. T.
In what way does Mr. Hanlan resemble Captain Cook? He led fair
races in many countries, and would not have received such a cut, if he
could have left that Beach behind.—P.
What prevented Hanlan winning his last race for the championship ?
B’ull tide ; he couldn’t cross the Beach. —T. C. B , Glebe.
When was Hanlan the greatest sculler in the world ? When he
started from America to pull down our Manly J Beach.— Valentine, Hunter-
street, Sydney.
Why is the word “champion” like Hanlan? Because it comes
after Beach.— Valentine.
What was the most singular event of the race ? Hanlan got
“ Beached ”in deep water. —G. H. D., Hunter’s Hill.
Why was Hanlan, the prince of scullers, in his last race with Beach
like Julius Caes ir buffeting the waves of Tiber? Because Csesar longed to
reach Tibre’s shore, and Hanlan to reach Dapto Beach.—F. S.
Why have Messrs. Hanlan and Beach proved themselves greater men
than Samson of old ? Samson conquered a thousand men with a jaw-bone,
and Hanla i and Beach have conquered the world with a scull.—A. R. P ,
Sydney.
Why was Reach in the late boat race like Mr. Dailey's offer of troops
for service in the Soudan ? Because he was first to the front.—W. G.,
Surry Hills.
Why are the people of Sydney jubilant over the late boat race ?
Because they can show to the world now, that they have the best “ Beach.”
—W. G., Surry Hills.
Why was Hanlan in the late boat race like Victoria’s offer of troops
for service in the Soudan ? Because he was all behind —W. G., Surry
Hills.
Why did the finish of the great Beach and Hanlan match resemble
a marriage in high life ? Because fair Australia was wedded to a proud
title, and the brothers were surrounded by their cousins and their aunts.
J. E. E., Ultimo.
What ship folio wed the race for the great aquatic championship
Beach verses Hanlan? Fellow-ship.—J. E. E., Ultimo.


Why won’t it puzzle N. S. W. to keep the Championship ? Because,
no matter how in Triclcett, while we have a Will of our own, we can get a
Messenger to Rush for Reach, who with Matterson the water, has the Pull of
the lot.— R. S. S., Kingston, Newtown.
A Conchological Conundrum on the recent great race for the aquatic
Championship of the World, evolved from the “skull” of a “ (h)oar(y) ”
headed old sport, who, although he is no “ sculler ” himself, yet takes a
“ wherry ” great interest in all first-class “ sculling” contests, such as that
which resulted so gloriously for Australia, on the 28th of last month (March).
Why was the world-renowned Canadian defeated in the recent contest on
the Parramatta P Because, although he displayed more skill and science
than his opponent, in ‘‘Hanlan ” (handling) his sculls, still the superior
species of “muscles” indigenous to the “ big Australian Beach” enabled
“ our boy” to secure the victory. P.S.—lf this “Kuddick-ilons” effusion
wins the prize, the writer will be most “ outrigger-ously” “Sir-Prized.”
P.S.S.—If successful, send the glad tidings by the trusty “Messenger.”
—F. H.
Why did the result of the late boat-race develope a new departure
in botanical science ? Because the Canadian laurelß were grafted on to an
Australian Beach.—L. L. M., Redfem.
Why was Hanlan during the race like a stubborn horse ? Because
Beach rowed (rode) and beat him.—M. W. M., Ryde.
Why are Hanlan and Beach never likely to ask assistance from the
residents on the Parramatta River ? Because they make a Point of their
Charity. —M. W. M., Ryde.
Why is Hanlan’s last race like a shoemaker ? Because he Benefits
by his Last. —E. P. E., Castlereagh-street.
Why is the winning-post on the Champion Course, Parramatta River,
]ike a hawk ? Because it comes after Hen and Chickens.—T. H., Ryde.
Why was W. Beach, during his last race for the Championship of the
World, like a brave man and a coward, both at the same time ? Like a
brave man because he kept his face to the foe; and, like a coward, kept
running away all the time.—R. W P., Post Office, Sydney.
What noted English coastal point should be impressed on the mind
of Hanlan for all future time ? Beachy Head.—W. J. D., Pitt-street.
Why was the late boat-race between Beach and Hanlan like a
pauper’s funeral ? Became they tried to get it over as soon as possible.
—Ryde.
Why was Beach in the late boat-race like a telegram to be delivered
from the office ? because he was in a “ Messenger’s ” care.—Ryde.
Why did the spectators, looking at the champion race between Beach
and Hanlan, witness the most wonderful phenomenon, one unparalleled in
the history of the world ? Because when they looked the(y) see Beach moveb
along the surface of the water at the rate of ten miles an hour..—J. D.,
Pitt-street.
Why is Hanlan like a Canadian ship wrecked on the Australian
coast? Becai se they both sailed here to be left by the Beach.—C. M.,
Georg e-street, Sydney.
Why did Edward Hanlan and William Beach show signs of starva-
tion on the day of the boat-race ? Because they stripped to the buff, for a
struggle to gain a steak (stake). —Mrs. W. P., Waterloo.
Why was it as impossible for Hanlan to beat Beach in the late race
for the Championship of the World, as to catch a bunyip ? Because Beach,
like the bunyip, is a Black’s myth (blacksmith). —T. S., Watson’s Bay.
Why is Mr. Beach the most wonderful of blacksmiths? Because he
forged a-head of the great Hanlan, with <n’y two sculls for tools.—W B
Ashfield.


Why is Hanlan like a captured sea monster ? Because through the-
indefatigable energy displayed by a sea (C) Messenger, he was latterly
caught, properly Beached, and after a lengthened period’s great handling
(Hanlan) he is now deprived of his aqua greatness.—W. A., Sydney Club.
Why did the late sculling contest on the Parramatta for the Champion-
ship resemble a horse-race ? Because Beach and Hanlan went out to Ryde
(ride); and they rowed (rode) a great race to the finish over the Champion
course.— Lex.
Why was Hanlan, on the 28th March, like a new horse-shoe ? Because
he had just been beaten by a blacksmith.—W. T., Forest Lodge.
Why was Hanlan after the late race like*an empty well ? Because he
was pumped out.—W. T., Forest Lodge.
Why was the late boating contest ill-omened ? Because the Deeble
(devil) had a lot to do with it.— Pax.
What is the difference between the recent boat-race and the opera of
“Martha”? One introduced the “ Last Rose of Summer,” by a Flotow
(a-float oh), the other produced the Last Rows of Summer by Beach-Hanlan
(beach and land.) —J. Mcl., H. Office, Sydney.
What is the difference between our City Council and the boat-race ?
One has Playfair, and the other had fair-play.—C. W., Pvrmont.
Which two smiths made themselves most conspicuous over the last
boat-race ? Blacksmith and Jack Smith. —J. S , Sydney.
Why was B anlan most ungentlemanly in the late Hanlan-Beach
match? Because he had his back on Beach all the way.—J. T. McK.,
Pyrmont.
In what way did Peach have a great advantage over Hanlan in the
last race ? In being a smith himself, and with the help of another Smith
(his boat Jack Smith), they managed to forge a-head. —J. M., Petersham.
Why are Hanlan and Beach like the New South Wales Ambulance
Corps ? Because they can stand severe trials, take care of the body, use the
stretcher, and started for the honor of their country.—W. J., Paddington.
What difference has the late boat-race made between Planlan and
Beach ? One now is small, the other tall, and that’s the short and long of
it.— Patsy, G. P. 0., Sydney.
Why was the late boat-race between Hanlan and Beach like the post
to which Cranmer was tied when he was burned ? Because it was a large
stake , and right against the tide (tied). —C. J. M., Surry Hills.
Why was the Beach- H anlan boat-race like a funeral ? Because Beach
sent a Messenger of death, and Hanlan (Lay-cock) sure he would outwit him,
which resulted merely in a procession.—H. L., Redfem.
Why does the description of the late boat-race between Hanlan and
Beach resemble the present Ministry of New South Wales? Because at tha
start Beach did not Dalley, but at once went away with a strong lead, and
Hanlan found he had not a Tkickett to deal with, as Beach was Stu-aktlul
and Nobt-on to be caught napping, which Hanlan found to his cost, as he
dropped his coin (Cohen) and Beach pocketed the Dibbs. —F. W., Elizabeth-
street, Sydney.
Why did Hanlan fare best at the late boat race ? Because, though
Beach got the stakes, which were high, Hanlan had the pluck, which was
found. —H. J., Parramatta-road, Sydney.


Why is genial Edward Hanlan, among the world’s great engineers,
renowned above all others ? Because in twenty minutes he transfered
Manly Beach from Charity Point right down unto the Brothers.— Ruddick,
Woollahra.
Why is Beach the greatest man of the 19th century? Because he
beat the world with a skull (scull) in each hand. —Jack.
What is the difference between Captain Cook, the great navigator,
and Edward Hanlan the ex-champion sculler? The one received a check
on a beach, and the other by a Beach.—J. M,, Clarence-street.
Why is William Beach, the champion sculler of the world, like a
successful bushranger ? Because he has taken what belonged to another,
stuck to it, and never was nailed.—J. M., Clarence-street.
How would you strip Beach of the Championship ? Take away the
B, and each won the race.—J. M., Regent-street, Newtown. Note. —Each
won the race is, of course, a Bull. Hanlan did more than if he had won
20 races when, on a previous occasion, he said—“ The man who cannot bear
defeat is no man.”—J. M.
Why did the Canadian lose the late boat-race ? Because Australia’s
son (sun) proved too strong for him! That’s so !—E. W., S. D. T. 0.,
King-street.
Why is Dapto like Botany Bay in particular ? Because it has the
greatest Beach in N.S. W. in it.—A. H. McT., Surry Hills.
Why is Hanlan like a horse-shoe ? Because he was beaten by a
blacksmith.—A. H. McT., Surry Hills.
Why was the last race like games of ancient times ? Because it took
place in the t(ides) of March.—A. H. McT., Surry Hills.
When Mt. Hanlan arrives in Canada, what will he tell his friends
there about the last race? That he was fairly Beached. —J. T. S., Sydney.
Valedictory.
“ A Native ” contributes the following lines regarding the Cham-
pionship :
Proud hail the Champion mystic oar,
Great Canada’s aquatic flower;
Let Australia’s breathings worthy greet
Our honored rival’s power.
Once more, while distant “ loved ones wait''
Their conquered sway to greet;
United, Tropic Oars, rejoice
Their worthy foeman meet.
All hail! the Prince of Honor, Truth,
Oft mirrored by streamlets pure;
We’ll ever proud his emblems girt,
Round Austral hearts secure.
R. J. S., Oxford-street, Paddington.


Why was the Hanlan-Bsach boat-race a grand example of federation ?
Because the Southern Cross absorbed the Stars and Stripes in fame and
good fellowship, and made our Beach a power in all the world, so long as
we are Ran'lan the honours.—A Ebiend.
Why was Hanlan in the late race fulfilling a Biblical precept P Be-
cause he was doing unto Beach as he would that men should do unto him—
come in behind him.—P. K., Mount-street, St. Leonards.
Why was Hanlan in the last boat-race like a man trying to reach,
shifting sand? Because our Beach travelled faster than his boat ! —A Colo-
nial.
Why did Deeble and Alcock cause the Champion race to be won by
Australia ? Because they sent the strange Messenger, Laycock, Han’lan
(ded) Beach a winner.—S. J., Steamer’s Wharf.
Why may Hanlan take back the Championship yet ? Because he’s
Annex-Champion.—H. H.
Why was it easy for Beach to win the last race ? Because a Smith
oarried him—(the John Smith.) —K. R., Ryde.
Why is a Champion contest like the New South Wales loan? Be-
cause it causes interest. —K. R., Ryde.
What is it Beach claims as his own, but people use more than him-
self? His name.—K. R., Ryde.
How is Beach since his victory like the ocean in a storm ? Because
he’s a swell. —K. R., Ryde.
What is it Hanlan can give to his friends in America, and yet keep it
himself? Information.—K. R., Ryde.
Why is a Champion’s life a painful one ? Because he has to be
pulled. —K. R., Ryde.
What was it Hanlan carried in his boat, the last race, that made him
unlucky? Skulls (sculls). —K. R, Ryde.
Why was Hanlan on the Parramatta River like a boat in distress ?
Because he couldn’t gain the Beach. —D. R. L., Macquarie-street, S.,
Sydney.
Why are Hanlan and Beach contemporary with Noah? Because
they rowed at the time of the flood. —A. B. S., Darlington.
Why are Hanlan and Beach the most successful anatomists or phre-
nologists ? Because in their Handling of sculls they are the Champions of
the world.—T. C. W., Darlington.
When the race was over, why were Hanlan and Beach like young
chickens? Because they came out of their shells.—A. B. S., Darlington.
Why has Edward Hanlan proved himself to be the greatest sea cap-
tain that ever entered the Sydney Harbour ? Because he brought the
Champion-sAijo of the world into it, and finding it impossible to take it away
again, he carefully beached it— where it will long rest. — Balmain.
Why was the Hanlan-Beach race a perfect paradox? Because,
although they rowed on the course (coarse), no race could have been finer. —
Stroke-Oar, East way’s Hotel.


Why did the last boat-race for the Championship resemble the
Soudan war ? Because the Arabs de(i)fied the Madhi to their sorrow, and
Hanlan defied Beach to his (Hanlan’s) sorrow.—J. S., Darlinghurst.
Why is Beach a better rider than Hanlan ? Because he is a superior
horseman (oars-man.) —A. B. M., Hyde.
Why was Beach’s trainer like John the Baptist ? Because he was a
Messenger , sent before to prepare the way.—A. B. M., Ryde.
When were Beach’s backers like shipwrecked sailors ? When they
saw a Beach a-head, whereon they centred their hopes. H. A. L.
How did Beach act unconsciously the part of a scoundrel towards
Hanlan, by winning the recent boat-race ? Because he beat him unmerci-
fully. grieved the hearts of the ladies, and eased his friends of cash.
A. F., Harbours and Rivers Department.
Why was the late boat-race like a magic-lantern ? Because it was
worked by slides and had its views, the most prominent one beine Manlw
Beach, —E. M, 8., G. P. 0., Sydney.
Why will Hanlan’s visit to Australia, taken in connection with the
races he has rowed here, always present a curious phenomonon ’ Because
he reached Australia’s shores with ease and comfort, though thousands of
miles intervened, but failed on two occasions to reach Australia’s Beach
though but a few yards ahead of him.—T. P., Surry Hills.
~ How did Beach beat Hanlan? By feathering his oars he jlew past
him.—E. A. E., Elizabeth-street, Sydney.
Why did the principals in the late boat-race resemble a party of
naturalists ? Because Laycock studied, Handled many a scull (skull) • with
a Tern, Hanlan spent and devoted much time, while on a good Beach a
smart Messenger got muscle (mussel!), and turned up a Great Gem in a shell
—B. H., Redfern.
What is the difference between Hanlan and the New South Wales
Parliament ? The difference is that Hanlan has done more with two sculls,
than they have done with all theirs put together.—E. C. J., Glebe Point.
What great geographical change was witnessed on the day of the
Champion boat-race? Manly Beach on the Parramatta.—Punnup, E. P. 0.
How did the late boat-race prove a most hollow affair—Hanlan a
great coward—and Beac h a most expert barber ? Because it was pulled in
shells, and as soon as it. started Hanlan did his best to gain the (Beach)
while Beach, although sliding and giving full play t© his rowlocks (rollicks),
managed to feather two Australian skulls (sculls )—W. H., Camperdown.
„ . . “ th e best stuff for Hanlan to build his next wager boat of >
Colonial Beech.—Gr. H., Sydney.
Why did Hanlan’s boat, while rowing the late race, resemble the ship
Baraway ? Because it was close to Manly “Beach.”—R. C. T., Randwick
~ , Wh y did Hanlan want a flood tide in the recent boat-race ? Because
(he’d have a-beaten Beach)-he would have had a beaten Beach.
How was it Hanlan had three men to pull against instead of one ?
Because Beach was the first man to pull between “ r Jhe Brothers.” Alice
tj v. beaten, yhy is Hanlan a more wonderful oarsman than.
Beach. Because he had to pull his sculls behind him Rose.


Why is Beach, the Champion sculler, the most wonderful magician
and most powerful monarch in the world ? Because, with the assistance of
a pair of wooden sculls, he raised one thousand sovereigns,—A. E. D.
Why is Australia the most remarkable place in the world ? Because
we have a Beach that left the shores of Illawarra, went to Sydney and won
the aquatic Championship of the World, and will return to the same place
again.—J, K, Balmain.
What Beach is the most remarkable in the world ? The one that left
the shores of the South and won the aquatic Championship of the World,
with three skulls in a shell —J. K,, Balmain.
How did Hanlan’s birth-place fail him for once, in his late race, and
why was he like the umpire’s boat? Because, however he tore-on-to
(Toronto) get to goal, Beach was still a-head, and no matter how “Inflexible”
his rowing, he still followed Beach.—E. M., G-. P. O.
What is the difference between Hanlan’s first appearance in the
colony as a professional, and his appearance in the late boat-race ? The
difference is, on his first appearance in the colony as a professional, he gave
an exhibition at Manly Beach, and in the late race (Manly) Beach made an
exhibition of him.—W. S., Macdonaldtown.
Why were Beach’s feet like Hanlan in the late boat-race ? Because
they would make bad lasts. —W. S., Macdonaldtown.
Why was Hanlan quicker than Beach at the late boat-race ? Because
Han-landed first on the Beach.—H. T., Ultimo.
Why was the champion race like a clumsy boatman, who fails to reach
the shore ? Because the Hanlan (handling) was not good enough to reach
the Beach.— Bluenose.
Why is Hanlan like a tidal wave ? Because he came a long way over
the sea to leave his crest upon the Beach.—J. A. H., King-street.
Why is Mr. Edward Hanlan like the North Head ? Because he
comes next to Manly Beach.— Young Australia.
What was the cause of Hanlan being beaten in the late boat-race ?
Why, because Beach took the lead and kept it throughout, therefore Hanlan
had a continuous Beach in front of him. —R. R., Belmore Park.
Why was the scene at the finish of the champion boat-race like early
morn? Why, because tfie (steam) cocks where crowing “ Cock-a-doodle-
doo.” —R. R., Belmore Park.
Why was William Beach like a powerful locomotive engine drawing
a train to its journey’s end? Because he took the lead at the late boat-race,
and carried it right through to the finish, —R. R., Belmore Park.
Why were Messrs. Beach and Hanlan, in the late boat-race, like a
Hat, and the Australian Boys off to Soudan, a Phrenologist, a Dentist, a
Poulterer, an Undertaker, a Laundress, Sir Henry Parkes, like Bricks, the
Hangman, theElogger, and the Hon. W. B. Dailey ? Like a Cat, good on the
scratch; like the Australian Boys, off to Soudan ; like a Phrenologist,
clever at handling sculls (skulls); like a Dentist, wonderful pullers ; like a
Poulterer, expert in pulling feathers ; like an Undertaker, because they use
shells ; like a Laundress, good at making wash ; like Sir Henry Parkes,
great on the sliding-seat; like Bricks, the quality is proved when hard
pressed; like the Hangman, good finishers ; like the Elogger, grand at
making strokes ; like the Hon. W. B. Dailey, because they use outriggers, and
the Hon. W.B. Dailey was the “ outrigger ” of our brave Australian Boys to
the Soudan, an honor to their country.— Kangaroo.
Why is the Beach-Hanlan match a paradox ? Because it was rowing
without rowing. —H. S. F., Renny-street, Paddington.
What knowledge did Mr. Hanlan gain by his race on the Parramatta
River? That the Australian Beech is superior to Canadian Fine. — Jumbo,
William-street, Darlinghurst.


„ , Why did the great Hanlanßeach match resemble a naval sham
nght. Because while the Inflexible fired away, the shells passed harmlessly
on.— J. E E., Ultimo. J
W hy should Hanlan be considered the fastest sculler in the world ?
Because on the 28th March he started at Ryde, and after rowing a few
Ultimo 3 he lo ° ked rouncl and saw (Manly) Beach just before him.—J. E. E.,
Why was the race between Hanlan and Beach like a poultry farm ?
Because Hanlan was trained by Laycock, backed by Alcock, and lost with
a cock-a-doodle-doo.—R. M. 1., Crown-street, Woolloomooloo.
Why were Hanlan and Beach during the late boat race like two
tmud young girls? Because they endeavoured to keep clear of the
Buoys —W. M., Crown-street.
Why is Beach like a drum without a head ? Because he cannot be
beaten.—A. E. W , Pitt-street, Sydney.
What great navigator did Hanlan remind one of at the late sculling
match? Captain Cook, when he saw an Australian Beach ahead.—
Excelsior.
Why did Hanlan lose the race ?
Because he in his little craft,
Pulling with a mighty reach,
W as kept in his position aft,
By the waters from the “ Beach.”—
G. A D., Hunter’s Hill.
CVhy did Hanlan fail to regain the championship in the late boat
race. Because he was not sufficiently expert in the Hanlan (handling)
HiU SU ’ t 0 ake Beach. —W. C., Buckingham-street, Strawberry
Why is the winner of the late sculling contest like a phrenologist ’
Because he is good at Hanlan (handling) sculls.—J. T.
Why were Beach’s backers like a ship-wrecke 1 crew ? Because for
a time they had great doubts as to their future, but when they saw Beach
ahead, they knew they would be saved.—J. A., Church Hill.
Why was Han’an so easily beaten on the 28th ? Because he thought
he was as good on the water as he is(h)on-lan(d), (Hanlan.)— D. Y. °
Why is Hanlan a favourite with the rich and poor ? Because he is
respected by (B) each.—D. Y.
Why is Beach a better looking man than Hanlan ? Because he (Beach)
never had a Tomki in his eye. —D. V.
Why didn’t Hanlan win the last great boat race ? Because he could
not leave “the Beach ” behind.—D. V.
Why was Ed. Hanlan defeated in the late championship boat race
on the Parramatta ? He did not take into consideration the great Aus-
tralian Beach on the river, which he could not pass.—R. D., Orient Co’s.
Office, Sydney.
What is the best material to build winning boats of ? Beach (beech)
wood ? —S. D., Parramatta.
What was it that brought about the defeat of Hanlan in the late
boat race ? It .was the muscle (mussel) on the “Manly Beach,” and his
skill in managing his “shell ’that beat the plucky Canadian, who has
shown us that, although not altogether a “ Beach,” he has no end of “sand”
in him.—C. D., Market street, Sydney.


Why did Hanlan and Beach pull their best at the race ? because
Hanlan thought he can-add-a (Canada) victory to-run-to (T ol 'O nt o) Axner
with, and Beach could not help going his best, because he had gas-going
(gascoine) with him. Gas is better than the secret in the bottom, it. d.
F., Sydney.
Why was Hanlan’s defeat in the last great boat race only the result
of miscalcuation ? Because he anticipated he’d win (head wind) throughout,
but he never bargained for such a rough beach , to which his sculls were not
a-Dapto’d (adapted).—A. C. C., Telegraph Department, Sydney.
Why will the people of Sydney be to blame, if Beach wins another
match ? Because, after sending a “ Messenger ”to “ Beach, which caused
him to give his opponent a great “ Hanlan ” (handling), they immediately
allowed him to go to the “ Deeble ” (devil). —T.H,
Why is Hanlan a bad judge of timber ? Because he passed English
and American woods, but not Colonial Beach (beech) —C. S. J., Woolloo-
mooloo.
Why should the late boat race for the championship of the world be
considered one of the most miraculous on record ? Because, with about six
feet of good solid “beech,” Australia made some thousands pme.
F. W. J , Armidale.
When did Hanlan show to the best advantage ? When he publicly
acknowledged Sydney had the finest Beach in the universe.
When did Hanlan show his strength ? When he held a Sydney Beach
in his hand.
Why was the resent Hanlan-Beach contest, on the Parramatta. River,
like a severe castigation? Because Hanlan was beaten by a good stout
Beach (beech) throughout the length of the championrhip course, in t e
presence of thousands of spectators,—A. J. D,, Paddington.
What kind of timber did Hanlan wish to have at the stern of his
boat, when rowing for the championship of the world, lately ? Beech
(Beach), of course.—A. J. D., Paddington.
Why was Hanlan unfortunate in his recent contest with Beach on
the Parramatta River ? Because his opponent was bached, _as the abori-
ginals would say, by the “ Debbil” (Deeble). —A. J. D., Paddington.
Why was it a moral certainty that Hanlan must lose the race?
Because some weeks previously he deliberately signed a contract, agreeing
to pull against a “Beach.”—A. W. N., Paddington.
Why was the late boat race, for the championship of the world, on
the Parramatta River, on the 28th March, a greater and more surprising
event than the departure of the Soudan Contingent? Because Manly
Beach was at the front in five minutes from the start, returning victorious
in twenty-five minutes without the loss of a scull (skull). W. D., Mill-
street, Sydney.
Why did Hanlan fail to win the boat race ? Because he attempted
to run over a beach (Beach), and a devil (Deeble) was urging on his op-
ponent. —H. C., Pott’s Point.
Why was the late Beach-Hanlan champion boat race unlike a
Schnapper ? Because it was more like a Herring, it was so hard-rowed.
F. J., Harbour-street, Sydney.
Why were Beach and Hanlan like two prisoners? Because they were
watched on both sides and followed up behind.— Bill.


tin Why was the Beach-Hanlan boat-race like the departure of our Con-
Sf I ] l !i. So^ dan ? ® ecau se it was a grand procession from start to
a * e t? -Australia, and created a sensation throughout
the world. —P. F. K., George-street.
t, io was tbe boat-race between Hanlan and Beach like a wedding ?
Because they were both married.— E. IST. McF., Sydney. S
Mes^nS 7 tn WaS Beac^. bound to win the late boat-race ? Because he had a
Messenger to prepare his way.-W. H. F. K., Mount-street, St. Leonards.
Why is Hanlan still a stranger to our shores ? Because he has not
yet passed our Beach.-W. H. F. K„ Mount-street, St. Leonards.
Why should Mr. Hanlan make a bad carpenter ? Because, although
ne can play Toronto- ra with American pine, Eaisly Vork Thames English
oaks, he cannot as yet be found quite a -Dapto the Australian Beach.—
O. ±l., Darlington.
~ Why are dark blue and yellow like Beach and Hanlan? Because
Da?Un4uSt CliamPlollS COl ° UrS (cham P ions ’ scullers).-J. J. ( Forbes-street,
r, „ hat is * he difference, between Hanlan before the race and now ?
iJerore the race he was a Canadian rowman, now he is a roamin’ Canadian.
- —J. W., Darhnghurst.
Why was the late boat-race like a deserted poultry-farm ? Because
there was no fouls (fowls) in it.-J. J. W., Darlinghurst.
» ~ part did Hanlan suffer most after the race ? In de-feat (the
ieet). —j. J. Yv., Darlinghurst.
77 Why did Hanlan lose the boat-race? Because, though he got two
u Is, he couldn t get a-head. —J, J. \Y., Darlinghurst.
, Why was Hanlan at the late champion boat-race like a Yarmouth
bloater ? Because he had a hard row (roe) —C. M., Double Bay.
. , Wb y 18 tbe dinner of the champion boat-race like a favorite resort
C M 6^ 61,8 a^°U *' ®y dne y- ? Because he is a “ Manly Beach. ”
What is the difference between a child playing with pebbles on the
sea-shore and the late boat race ? The one is handling (Hanlan) shells on a
Beach, the other is Hanlan (handling) Beach on shells.—J. W. S., Hunter-
street, Sydney.
How did the great American sculler secure the honor of the Cham-
pionship for the Australians ? He lost it on the river at the boat-race;
Daman did it (an landed it), by the celebrated Beach at Parramatta, whe
we hope it will be kept for a long period.—H. F.
0 is th ® best reason for the race of the 28th March ending as it
did Because, while Hanlan was uncertain of his Ruddock-boat being anv
better than a “ Tommy Dodd,” Beach could lay cock (Laycock) sure that
Pyrm t feulllvan would be first messenger (Messenger).—W . Y. H.,
• W ben did Beach row under royal patronage ? When he beat Hanlan
m the presence of Prince Alfred (steamer). — Little May.
Q ~ banks issued the greatest bank-note ever circulated in New
south Wales? A note of admiration was issued from the banks of the
Parramatta River when Beach beat Hanlan.— Young Julia.
Why should Beach be considered an unfair antagonist? Because
not only did he gore his opponent a very rough handling (Hanlan), but with
the assistance of his Messenger beat his skull in (sculling) —E O’R
Clarence -street. »
Why would Beach make a better phrenologist than Hanlan? Because
he has a better way of Hanlan (handling) skulls (sculls). —E. O’R.,
vidrcQC6 ■ street.


Why did Hanlan lose the boat-race ? Because he was over-matched
by sinew and muscle.—S. W., Beattie-street, Balmain.
Why did Hanlan lose the great champion boat race ? Because the
Sydney smiths were too strong for him. Blacksmith, Beach ; Jack Smith,
boat ; J. R. Smith, backer. —F. J., Moore Park.
What is the difference between the late sculling match won by Beach
and our boys fighting the Arabs in the Soudan ? Beach upheld the honor
of New South Wales by using sculls (skulls), our boys uphold it by ill-using
skulls (sculls.) —T. A. T.
When did Mr. Beach attempt manslaughter ? When in the race he
shot a-head of Hanlan,
Since Messenger commenced training Beach, what sort of a servant-
gal is Beach like? A sculler re-made (a sullery maid). —J. A, R.,
Waverley.
Why were Beach and Hanlan well provided against a fire ? Because
they had a Messenger, a Laycock, and plenty of water close at hand.—
F. D., Elizabeth-street, Sydney.
Why was Beach in the champion contest like our gallant contingent
in the Soudan ? Because with arms, he breasted the waves to gain our
southern land an honour and a name. — Alpha, Beta, Omega.
Why should Beach be considered the best oarsman ? Because while
in Hanlan there is great science, strength and endurance, in Beach there is
more of E-A-C-H.—Qc. R., Paddington.
Why had the wager boat “Jack Smith” less to carry in the boat race,
than the “ Just in time ?” Because the Australian boat had only to carry
the champion Beach, whilst the Canadian had to carry the acquatic prince
and land (Hanlan), —J. D.
• When was the Parramatta River like an outfitter’s shop ? When
Edward Hanlan was outrigged by William Beach.—Mrs. 8., G-lebe.
Why was Beach in the late contest with Hanlan like the murderers
Nichol and Lester ? Because he was not content merely with beating him,
but must beat his scull in (sculling) ; and on no other water did he think he
had such an advantage over his victim as on the Parramatta River.—J. H.
D., Margaret-street, Sydney.
Why was Edward Hanlan, the ex-champion, defeated by the
people’s William in the recent boat race ? Why, simply because in Hanlan
(handling) his outrigger, he was unable to propel her fast enough to
j&e-a-cAampion once again.—F. W., Castlereagh-street, Sydney.
What was the great advantage held by Beach that gave him such
confidence in again winning the championship ? He always found in his
worthy trainer he possessed also a reliable Messenger,—G-, D., Denning-
street, Glebe.
What is the similarity between Hanlan and Clifford ? Though both
are good at (Hanlan) handling the sculls, yet neither could (Beach) beat ye
Australian.—G. A. P., Darling-street, Balmain.
Why is Hanlan like the Mahdi ? Because though he has been beaten,
yet he is not conquered. —G. A. P., Darling-street, Balmain.
Why is Hanlan not a carpenter ? Because he beat all-comers on the
American pine, but he could do nothing with the Australian Beach.—J. G.,
Campbell-street, Haymarket.
Why is Mr. Edward Hanlan, the ex-champion sculler of the world,
like the ship Champion of the Seas ? Because if she comes too near our
Manly, she will get beached.—W. M., Pitt-street, Sydney.
Why didn’t I believe Beach would win ? Because he had to pull
against a strong (Neddy) eddy ; and further, because he had the biggest
crack in his boat.— Hard-up.


How did the winner prove himself to be a scientific rower ? By so
skillfully rowing in the stream as to preventHanlan hugging “the beach.”-
F. D , Elizabeth-street, Sydney.
Why was the Parramatta River during the last champion boat race,
made a place of interest to a large number of persons ? Because they saw
the Beach they had previously laid upon possessing a good frontage on the
river.— Amateur, Parramatta.
Why did the ladies, who were viewing the last champion boat race
declare Hanlan a noble fellow ? Because they saw him make great efforts
to hug Beach during the race. —Amateur, Parramatta.
Why did Hanlan lose the boat race? Because, where heavily
weighted with public money, he pulled too close into the Beach, and failed
to obtain a Messenger for assistance, when in difficulties.—E. P., Darling-
hurst
Why is Beach still alive, after being judged, quartered, staked ?
Because the public immortalized him — lsabella.
Why did Beach beat Hanlan ? Because he had three bigger sculls.—
G. S., Parramatta.
Why did Hanlan not win the race on the Parramatta River ? Because
the Smith kept in front and he was in Just in Time to see the flag lowered on
the Beach. —W. 8., Ashfield-
Why is Hanlan, the ex-Champion oarsman, like the ship Susan Gilmore,
lately wrecked in Newcastle ? Because they both left America in A 1 con-
dition, and were both “ Beached in Australian waters.—J. R, Miller’s
Point, Sydney.
Why was the great champion race a contradiction ? Because Beach
started at odds, made it even at Uhr’s (your) Point, and through slower
Han(d)lan, won the race with Jack Smith. —Cosmos Eleventy-too.
Why should a Russian cruiser coming into Sydney harbour be com-
pared to Mr. Hanlan, on the 28th of March, at the boat-race ? Because it
could not pass Manly Beach. —W. H. 8., Ultimo.
Why was Hanlan unable to beat Beech ? Because it is impossible
for a man to contend with a tree (beech). —C H. B.
Why was Hanlan after the finish of the champion race like an
extracted tooth? Because he was pulled out.—R. J. H., Balmain.
Why was King street on the night of the champion race like
Manly? Because the Beach was the great attraction.—R. J. H., Balmain.
Why is Hanlan like the receding tide ? Because he recoiled from
the Beach. —R. W. C.
Why the competitors in the late boat-race like an inexperienced
skater ? Because they were sure to slide on their seat.
Why was the re-naming of a certain Sydney suburb like the great
Hanlan-Beach boat-race ? Because ‘it discovered to us the fact that our
Manly Beach was a Brighton (Bright ’un.)—H. M.
■ Why is Hanlan like an ill-fated ship ? Because he had only safely
passed the cliffs ere (Clifford) he got Beached.— Pluto.
What steps did the Australia us take to throw Mr. Hanlan out of
the race ? Why, a Peach in front of him, and a hump higher (umpire)
behind him, so he had to run to (Toronto) to escape. —J. W., Balmain.
Which are three of the most celebrated names of the present day in
our own history? William Gladstone, William Dailey, and William
Beach.—A J. G.


What was Hanlan’s greatest perplexity in the late champion racee ?
To find Manly Beach at the Brothers, Parramatta River, when he reached
there.— Wyoming.
Why ought the old sculling champion course on the Parramatta
River to be abandoned ? Because it was re-claimed by the presence o
great beach (Peach) on the 28th March last, and is therefore dangerous to
good rowing men.—W. J. D.
When did Hanlan become surprised? When he rowed over the
Clifford, and could not gain the Beach. —H. S. M.
Why was the boat-race, Hanlan v. Beach, like the battle of
Trafalgar Bay ? Because it was won by force of arms, and we may aaa
that as they advanced, the “ Admiral” kept in the rear.—C. J . M., burry
Hills.
Why is Hanlan like a successful searcher in the Australian vegetabl
kingdom? Because he came to New South Wales, found beech (Beach)’
and got beet (beat).— Jumbo, Woolloomooloo.
Why was the great boat-race like the educational question ? Be-
cause both agitated the minds of the people, as to who would make the bi st
sculler (scholar.) —E. W., Surry Hills.
Why did the desire of Hanlan to win the championship resemble a
wager in which the stakes are of wood ? Because it was a Canadian pine
to beat an Australian Beach (beech.) — Bluenose.
Why is the above conundrum like Hanlan ? Because it is a good
boat puller. —Bluenose.
Why is Beach the winner of the champion boat-race, and not the
winner? —Because Jack Smith won.- J. T., Redfern
After the late boat-race, who showed the most manly disposition,
Beach or Hanlan ? Hanlan. Because he sin ok the hand that beat him,
while Beach had beaten the hend that shook him.— lmpulse, Glebe Point.
Why was Edward Hanlan so easily beaten at the last champion
race ?—Because Beach had the help of man and boat (Jack Smith), fiom
start to finish. —W. F , Waterloo.
But this is the conundrum that ’ll knock ’em ! What greater event
than the late rowing match do you remember iij English history ? When
Edward the Confessor gave up to William the Conqueror, and thirty
thousand skulls were smashed on the Beach. —J. 0. B.
Why is William Beach the greatest teetotaller in the Be-
cause he wrested the sculling championship of the world from Edward
Hanlan on water. —W. J. P., Ultimo.
Why is Hanlan like a vessel that has been for the second time
stranded on the sands. Because the Beach has done for him twice. —E. H
L., Woolloomooloo.
Why are Hanlan and Beach a phenomena in natural history ? Both
are a lot of “ mussels in shells.” If accepted, the perpetrator will produce
the press copy.
How did Edward Hanlan in the late boat-race resemble “ King
Canute ?” By showing his admirers it was no use trying to stick to the
“Beach ” against a “ Flood-tide.” —J. H. S.
How did the competitors keep their heads ccol during the race ?
By constantly dipping their “skulls” in the water. —J. G., Mercantile
Rowing Club.


_ What reflection does the champion course best convey, since the great
aquatic contest took place between Edward Hanlan of Canada, and William
Beach of Australia ? Our Contingent’s loyalty to old England Because
the reflection of its brightness will ever flow to mirror a brave heart, who
drove the shell of honor for his country’s glory, though he “fell,” in the
wash of a southern Beach.—R. J. S., Oxford-street, Paddington
How does Hanlan’s visit toN.S.W. resemble a tidal wave from the
Pacific slope ?
1. Because he came daring across,
O’er the same ocean track;
Until met by our Beach,
He goes Beach-beaten back.
2. Because defiant and daring,
He crossed o’er the same track ;
Then a struggle with our Beach,
Sent him crest-fallen back.
3. Because nothing less than our
Beach could stop his (or its) unbroken career.
Bon Accoed.
Why was Hanlan beaten by Beach P Because Beach’s style of
handling (Hanlan) his oars, knocked Hanlan speechless (Beachless). —
W. B. F., Bridge-street, Sydney.
Why was Hanlan in his race against Beach for the championship the
strongest man that ever lived ? Because he pulled manly Beach up the
Parramatta River.—A. H., Wells-street, Redfem.
The race was rowed in “ shells,” an aquatic term. Shells are found
and handled on the beach. Now for the conundrum :—Why was the late
boat race a paradox ? Because Beach won by Hanlan (handling) a shell.
E. Q., Pitt-street, Sydney.
Why are William Beach’s two victories over Edward Hanlan, in the
late aquatic contests, like the magnificent standard of the people, viz., their
feet? Because William Beach’s victories, and the above standard, are
carrying the universal admiration of the world at the present time.—J. A.,
George-street, Haymarket.
Who would you sooner be than Hanlan ? Beach.—J. V. B.
Why was it that Hanlan lost the last two races ? Because in these,
unlike his previous ones, he didn’t pull before.—H. G., Hunter’s Hill.
Why ought the public to think that Hanlan must have been very
weak the day he lost the boat race ? Because what he carried round the
world without much trouble, he was not strong enough to take off our Manly
Beach,— L. E., Elizabeth-street, South, Sydney.
Why did Hanlan lose? Because he rowed in a “ruddick’’-ulous
boat, and kept too far from the Beach —T. H. W., Tork-street, Sydney,
Why was Beach on the day of the boat race like the whale that
swallowed Jonah ? Because he took a good man down.—T. P.
Why was the last champion boat race on the Parramatta River like
our boys in the Soudan ? Because it was Australia to the front, —A, A.,
Castlereagh street, Sydney.
Why was the great champion boat race of the world like Port Jackson ?
Because there were a great many pleasant views and a Manly Beach in it.—
A. C., Redfern.
Why is it surprising that the champion’s backers did not get severe
colds after the boat race ? Because they were “ laying on the Beach ” all
the previous night.—J. W., Stanmore.
Why was the boat in which our esteemed Canadian sculler pulled his
last race on the Parramatta not in the water at all ? Because she was
Beached from the start. —H, F. H., Sydney.


How is it proved that Beach is the best sculler the world has ever
seen ? Because he has beaten a man with an unparalleled record; or as
Beach, in effect, said soon after the great race was rowed : “I’ve Beach
(beat) you honestly and fairly, Han-lan-ded (and landed) a championship to
which is attached more than fifty times the amount of honour and glory
than to the championships previously held by other men ; and you may be
Beach-ure (be sure) I am very proud of it, Han-lan-guage (and language)
cannot express my feelings when I contemplate the fact that I am the victor
of the man who, in the rowing world, is of the great the greatest.”—F. B.
Why does the recent boat-race compare with the present war scare,
Because there was no Dilly-Dalleying. The beach was carefully watched
by man-of-war’s boats and police, as they expected a surprise from a foreign
boat.—J. S., Glebe-road.
How did Beach show his uinnanliness at the recent boat-race?
When he left his Messenger and Hanlan at Charity, and went joyfully
to the Brothers.—J. S., Glebe-road.
Why was it not possible for Hanlan to have won the last champion
sculling-race ? Because the race was won from the start, as Hanlan could
not pull on a beach.— J. P. C., O’Connell-street, Sydney.
Why did Beach and Hanlan make bad scalp-hunters ? Because,
although the banks of the river were lined with heads, they only brought
down four skulls, and even then didn’t get a scalp.—W. G. H., Herald
Office, Sydney.
Why was it impossible for Ned Hanlan to win the late boat-race ?
Because he had a bank on either side of him, and the greatest Beach the
world has ever seen in front of him nearly all the way ; and Layccok was
all of a “ Tremble ” lest he shouldn’t be able to draw his Brett.—W. G. H.,
Herald Office, Sydney.
Vy vos Ned Hanlan fond of fruit ? Because he rowed for miles
after von big Beach.—W. G. H., Herald Office, Sydney.
Why did Beach and Hanlan expect to be blown out of the water on
the day of the late boat-race ? Because they had shells under them, and
several ten-pounders on the Bridge of the Invincible chasing them down
the river.—W. G. H., Herald Office, Sydney.
When did the champion course turn into sand ? On the day of the
late boat-race, when it was Beach from start to finish.—W. G. H , Herald
Office, Sydney.
Why is the ex-champion very forgiving ? Because when Beach beat
Hanlan’s skull in, Ned shook hands with him, and even went so far as to
ask him to come to America and do it again. —W. G. H., Herald Office,
Sydney.
Why may it be said that the recent race and the previous one were
only lost by Hanlan through two remarkable phenomena, over which he
had no control ? Because in the first race the loss of £5OO, which was laid
(layed) by him, was said to have been produced by a fowl (foul), while the
£5OO on the last occasion was lost by a Beach running away from him.
W. McL., S. General’s Office, Sydney.
If Hanlan and Beach, of the late Hanlan-Beach race, desired to
learn professions, which would be the most suitable for them, and what
beverage should they use while studying for them ? Hanlan should be a
draftsman, and Beach a schoolmaster, and they should use tea (T), because
instead of making Beach-Hanlan and race, it would make Beach Teach , and
Hanlan Trace. —W. McL,, S. General’s Office, Sydney.
Why is Mr. Hanlan like our noble Contingent? Because he will
leave us with honours, strengthen our union with a mighty nation, and
take Australia’s heart.— Elsie Secundis.


Why did each of the competitors try and avoid “ choppy ” water?
Because they knew that the “stakes ” were better than that of a “foul.” —
J. G., Mercantile Bowing Club.
How did the race resemble a great commercial panic ? As they
tried to “float alone ” down the river, there was a great “ Rush ” on the
banks, there being no sinking fund —J. G., Mercantile Rowing Club.
Why did they race on the Parramatta? Because they are a “pair-
o’matter ” o’ fact fellows.—J. G., Mercantile Rowing Club.
Why is Haul an like the Pacific Ocean ? It rolls along our shore,
and is beaten by our Beach.—W. H., Newcastle.
Why was Banian praise! so much for his pluck in the late race?
Because he tried his utmost to be the first under pistol fire.—L H., G.P.O.
Why was the champion race the most friendly contest ever seen ?
Because the contestants commenced at Charity, and only stopped short at
Brothers.-X. Y.Z..GPO.
Why is our champion race suited by nature for only the Illawarra
man?—Because New South Wales can-add-a (Canada) can add a Beach to
the Parramatta course, which no handling (Hanlan) in a boat is able
Toronto (to row on to). —X. Y. Z , G P.O.
Why did Hanlan, on the 28th March last, find that the current on
the Parramatta River was too strong to pull against ? Because, after
endeavouring for upwards of twenty minutes to pull up to the Beach, he
found that he was further off than he was at the start. —C. T., Herald
Office.
Why was it impossible for Hanlau to vanquish Beach on the Parra-
matta River? Because of the great quantity of muscles on our Beach.—
H. F. 8., Sydney.
What piece of land was Mr. Hanlan like during his late contest for
the championship of the world ? Like the land that stretches out behind
Manly Beach.—G. R., Woolloomooloo.
How did Beach show the white feather at the race ? By running
away from his opponent.—N. V. L., Paddington.
Why was Hanlan’s sculling in the late boat-race like the new
American dump car ?—Because it proved a failure.—C. R., George-street,
Sydney.
Why is the Hanlan and Beach boat-race like the troops who have
gone to the Soudan war ? Because they have been Dalleyed at the start,
and have gone through their own race with the assistance of their own
sculls (skulls) and arms.—W. H., steamer Admiral.
What are three good reasons why Beach won the boat-race for the
championship on the 28th March? Beach said he would be(a)champion.
His c olo ir (a sculler) was what the Parramatta River is noted for (viz ,
orange.) He could beat a special train Messenger.—P. A. M., Newtown.
Why was Beach like the steamer that followed the race ? They
were both “Inflexible” awlanded winners. —P. A. M., Newtown.
Why may fate be said to have “given the tip” in the Hanlan-Beach
contests? Because it says, What is to be— Will B.—J. M., Woolloo-
mooloo.
What induces Hanlan to present a boat a : a prize for the best conun-
drum on the recent sculling match? His desire to part with the ex-
champion's ship (ex-championship.)— Tod, Pitt-street, Sydney.


My first is a mineral, my second a church dignitary, my third is in
the mouths of thousands, my fourth tells a tale of sorrow. My two first
combined was second to none till meeting my two last, when they had to
succumb. Answer: 3rd, amber, and 4th, black, Beach’s colours ; Ist,
indigo, and 4th, cardinal, Hanlan’s colours J. S. 8., G.P.O. Sydney.
Why did Hanlan lose the boat-race ? Because he had to row against
the two (2) Smiths, one a Blacksmith, the other a Jack Smith, and Hanlan,
and Beach could not be-each or both winners of the same race. —P. M.,
Surry Hills.
Why was Hanlan beat in the late boat-race ? Because he could not
crack on enough to break the shell of a Beach nut. —G. M. P.
Why were some people surprised that Beach won the late boat-race ?
Because a Messenger came from the Deeble (Debbil) to say that an eddy
(a Neddy) Edward, would leach him?—C. C., Paddington.
Why is Peach like a skillful captain ? Because after many months
of buffeting on a foreign shore, and being in an uncertain course, he has
successfully Peached the good ship Champion (championship) in the Parra-
matta River.—J. R. H., Balmain.
Why was Hanlan after the race like a dying Gladiator? Because
he was a defeated Ro(w)man. —C. H. M., Boyce-street, Glebe Point.
Why was it impossible for Beach and Hanlan to pull over the cham-
pion course without being seen ? Because they had to pass One Man (wharf)
and invariably came insight of the Brothers. —C. M., Ryde.
Why was Hanlan after the boat race like the maiden “who milked
the cow with the crumpled horn?” Because he was aMforlorn. —C.M., Ryde.
When are Beach and Hanlan like crabs ? When they are in their
shells.—O. E., Balmain.
What made Beach win the boat race ? Because he had the Deeble at
his back.—o. E., Balmain.
What made Hanlan so confident about winning the champion race ?
Because he had lay-A-cock sure he would (beach) the other man.—o. E.,
Balmain.
How did Beach shew his politeness during the last champion race ?
Though he had a Messenger, he shewed Hanlan himself over the course.—
O, E., Balmain.
Why was the Hanlan Beach boat race like one of our choicest fruit?
Because the soft peach (Beach)Jhas the hardest nut to crack.—D. A., Oxford-
street, Sydney.
Why was the Hanlan Beach boat race like a profitable investment ?
Because Beach well earned the profits that Hanlan lost.—D. A., Oxford-
street, Sydney.
Why is the winner of the big boat race like Manly Beach ? Because
any one can “ land ” on him as a certainty, while whenever it happens to
be low tide with him he will show all the more “ grit.”—C. C., Richmond.
Why were the competitors in the late boat race like shipwrecked
sailors ? Because one was pulling straight for the beach, and the other got a
rough Hanlan (handling).—J. H., Wagga Wagga.
Why did the late boat race for the championship prove Edward
Hanlan to be the greatest sculler in the world ? Because journeying from
Canada he visited old England, returned to America, flitted across that
great continent to the Pacific, and was never checked in his career till
confronted by the Beach of Australia.—J. M., Liverpool-street.


Why ought Hanlan still to retain the championship of the world ?
Because it was forged from him by two Smiths. Beach is a Blacksmith,
and the name of his boat “ Jack Smith.”—H. J. P,, Camperdown.
Why did the Canadian lose the last boat-race ? Because while Lay-
cock let Hanlan go to Putney, Messenger took good care that he would
never get on to Beach.—A. B. 8., Vincent-street, Sydney.
Why was Hanlan in the late race like a stranded whale ? Because
he was “Beached,” Han-landed. —E. M.
Why is the little boy with an ebony button and a sovereign in his
mouth like the last great aquatic event ? Because the black and gold came
in a-head.—J. E. M., Woolloomooloo.
Why should we sympathize with Hanlan on his late defeat ? Be-
cause, although he pulled as he never pulled before, he could not fight
against man and the devil (Deeble). —T. H.
Why was Hanlan like a magnificent turkey ? Because he went to
t he race a man, and came back game. — Hollow Skull.
Why did Beach row like a blacksmith ? Because he had a good
bellows (wind), plenty of fire (pluck), a will of iron, and muscles of steel ,
and he forged ahead of his opponent — Hollow Skull,
Why was Hanlan compelled to row down the river ? Because he
could not row down the Beach, — Hollow Skull.
Why were Beach and Hanlan in their wager boats like oysters ?
Because they looked nice in their shells.— Hollow Skull.
Why was the friendship between Hanlan and Beach greatly altered
during the race? Because they passed from “Charity” at the start to
Brothers at the finish.—F. 8., Stanmore.
Why did the champion race leave both men criminals ? Because
Beach forged a head, while Hanlan tried in vain to pass it.
What Australian politicians did Beach and Hanlan resemble after
the race ? Beach resembled Dailey, because he achieved success by a rapid
succession of brilliant strokes. Hanlan resembled Sir Henry Parkes ; dis-
appointed after a grand career, though well used to shifting seats.
Who were the winners in the champion contest,
And sucked all the sugar on Saturday’s race ?
Who were the backers who skinned the lamb fairly,
And came out at the end real judges of pace ?
The fellows who tried by elaborate hedging
The purses of betting men fairly to reach,
At starting you saw them All-cocky on Hanlan,
And afterwards IDeeble-y taken with Beach.
Why should Great Britain be proud of the men ?
Beach learned his style to a-Dapto the circumstance,
Hanlan pulled hard and Toronto the end ;
Sturdy colonists both, if Britain has many such,
She’ll never again be in need of a friend.
Why did Messrs. Jones and Deeble receive more copper coin over
the late boat-race than at any other time ? Because they found pence-Sir
(Spencer) laying in such large sums upon the Beach, that they were obliged
to employ a Messenger to assist them in bringing it off.—W. A.
What is the result of the recent boat-race to the two competitors ?
That whereas the “Beach” has from all time been oppressed by the sea,
the “ Beach ” is now the greatest king of the sea.— Lkichhardt.
Why did Hanlan lose the late race with Beach for the champion-
ship ? Because there was a Blacksmith in front, who hammered away till it
became too hot for the Canadian to hold it. —J. R , Surry Hills.


Why should Beach be doubly proud to take the championship from
Hanlan ? Because he Ganna-da better than a-Dapt-a, like principle in keep-
ing it—H. W., Sydney.
Why were Hanlan and Beach, during the last boat-race, like two
mashers at a dancing party ? Because they were having a tight squeeze as
to who should be champion of the whirled! —M. A. S. S., Sydney.
Why did Hanlan lose the last championship race ? Because the
“ Just in Time,” which had just reached “ Sydney,” could not carry him
to the front like his “Old Friend” at “Gladesville,” and caused him to
be “ Beached ” on the “ North Shore,” which necessitated his return to his
“ Par-and-Mar-ta !” (good-bye.)—L. H. Names of Hanlan’s boats : Old
Friend, Gladesville, Sydney, Just in Time, North Shore, Parramatta.
Why was it the height of absurdity to match Hanlan against Beach
in the late champion race ? Because how can-a-dyin;-man (Canadian) hope
to contend against a giant ?
Why is Beach like a dishonest jockey ? Because he pulled Hanlan
in a race, and would not let him win.—M. McM., Petersham.
What is the difference between a Birch and a Beach ? One beats
bad boys, while the other beats good men.—M. McM., Petersham.
Why did most people think Hanlan would win the last race with
Beach ? Because he was Headward (Edward) at the last.—F. M., Herald
Office, Sydney.
Why are England and Russia like Hanlan and Beach pulling their
last race ? Because they are trying to score a win for a Colonial Empire.—
F. M., Herald Office, Sydney.
Why was Edward Hanlan in his last race like a bad client ? Be-
cause he would not pay up until we sent him “ our Bill,” (Bill Beach). —
F, M. Herald Office.
Why are Beach and Hanlan two mean fellows ? Because they passed
•charity as fast as they could, with thousands of pounds on them.—R. C.
Miller’s Point.
Why does Hanlan bear the same relation to Beach in a boat race, as
the sun does to its rays ? Because he is always behind. —W. B. S., Toronto.
Which of the learned and scientific professions do Hanlan and
Beach remind you of ? The Phrenologist, they are very clever with their
sculls (skulls.) —H. K.
Why does the of the late champion boat race resemble the
South Head electric light on a dark night ? Because it sheds bright lustre
on our Manly Beach. —Outrigger, Kent-street.
Why is Messenger a great prophet ? Because he has shown that he
knows more than Elias (Laycock).—T. J. C., Begg-street, Paddington.
What scientific fact was discovered at the boat race? That the
Australian beech (Beach) fares better in water than the American cedar.—
R. W. McG , Canterbury).
What lesson should the boat builders learn by the race ? That
Australian beech (Beach) is better than American cedar, or that the hark of
the beech (Beach) went faster than Hanlan’s cedar, (Hanlan see’d her). —R.
W. McG., Canterbury).
What is the difference between a South Sea missionary and the
trainer of the Champion in the late sculling contest ? The former is a mes-
senger of peace, opposed by the Devil sent to teach his fellow-man to take
charity to all brothers ; the other is a messenger for Beach, assisted by the
devil (Dee-ble), sent to teach his fellow-man always to lead the way from
charity to the brothers.—G. L., Balmain.
Why did Beach beat the ex-champion of the world ? Because he
had a better way of handling (Hanlan) his boat.—G. F. W., Forest Lodge.


Why is Australian Beech the most attractive wood in the world ?
Because it drew the rowing championship of the world all the way from
America, and stuck to it so close that the great (Hanlan) himself could not
tear them asunder. —It. T., Parramatta.
When did Hanlan open a laundry during the last boat race, and
prove a defaulter ? When Beach gave him his wash, and he failed to return
it.—G-. B , Wynyard-square.
Why was Hanlan after the late boat race like the Swede (Anderson)
who was of late so unjustly flogged ? Because they both took it so hard
that they were badly beaten. —T. T.
What proverb was exemplified in the late boat race ? Where there’s a
will (Will Beach) there’s a way.—J. S. R.
When does a Canadian lumber-man resemble Hanlan in the late race ?
When he tries to cut down a leech, but fails.—J. S. R.
Why does Hanlan resemble the steamer “ Collaroy ?” Because he
suffered disaster by an Australian Beach.—J. S. R.
In what respect did Hanlan and Beach resemble Indians ? In
feathering their sculls (skulls).—J. S. R.
Why is this testimonial to Hanlan like - corn-plaster ? Because it
soothes defeat (de feet.)—J. S. R.
What moral lesson does this convey ? That, as Hanlan’s glory
stranded on Australia’s radiant Beach ; so will each of us see shipwreck,
if we hug ambition’s beech.—H. McC., Darlinghurst.
Why is the aquatic championship of the world like the sinking of
the steamship Austral in Port Jackson ? Because it was first Trick’tt, and
then got a Han’lin all over the world, and at last was Beach’d in Sydney
Harbour.—W. W., Petersham.
Why should Beach only have been the winner of the late race?
Because his country having wales (wails) in it, was destined to produce a
man who should cause Hanlan’s country to raise more “wails” by his
defeat.—C. W. L., Macquarie-street.
Why was the defeat of Mr. E. Hanlan, in his late race with Mr.
Beach, like the wreck of the S. S. Collaroy ? Because he could not get away
from the Australian Beach.—R,, Balmain.
Why is Beach, with reference to Hanlan, the greatest of emetics ?
Because Hanlan had to throw him up,—R. T., G-. P. 0., Sydney.
Why should we have known that Beach was to win the last race ?
Because a good Messenger told us so.—Miss S. L.
How did Hanlan shew he liked smooth water ? By pulling behind a
Beach the whole way. —J. J., Balmain.
Can you tell me the unfortunate cause of Ed. Hanlan losing the
Championship on the Parramatta River ? Through being Beached ; paying
to much attention to his Poultry Farm, and finding out at the last moment
all his ends (Hens) lost, and nothing but two (2) cocks remaining. P.S.—
(Allcock and Laycock).—J.H.M.
Why did Hanlan lose the champion race P Because at Kissing Point
he was embarrassed with the beauty of Sydney ladies, and at One-Man
Wharf he found Beach was one too many for him.— Wtoming.
How did Hanlan show that he had complete control of his sculls, and
prove himself to be a safe rower? By continuing to row towards “the
Beach,” but always at a safe distance. —F. D., Elizabeth-street, Sydney.


Why is the Hanlan-Beach race like the Australian Contingent?
Because victory depended upon their sculls being sound. —H. S. P. C.)
Homebush.
Why is Mr. Hanlan one of the kindest, most straightforward, and
generous of men that ever visited New South Wales ? In the Morning ,
Herald the news of the great race. In the Evening News, Echo everywhere
that the Australian had won ; and though the Canadian was good at
Han-lin his oars, through the aid of a good Messenger from Victoria, he had
to lay down the palm, but still maintained that it was best to itea-cAeerful,
and awaits with hopes of being again with our best oarsman on a Parr-a-
matta, which all sport-loving Australians would like to see.—E. P. M.,
Cleveland-street, Redfern.
Why did Beach win ?
Why did our glorious William win the race
From Edward, who had held the Champion place
Among all nations for aquatic skill P
Why did he leave great Canada’s valiant son
To fill up such a space and pull a stern chase
Before the final victory was won ?
Was it because our country or our clime,
Which Edward speaks of in such strains sublime,
Had stolen away his strength or wrecked his well-knit frame ?
Ah ! no; his strength and skill were unimpaired ;
He met the fate which others have shared,
And among that multitude lining our shores,
Filling the air with tumultuous roars,
A voice is heard in old Scotia’s strains
Which clearly and fully the conundrum explains :
“ Beach wins ! Beach wins ! ” shouts the voice of applause,
And the voice o’ auld Scotland says simply, because
O' the skilfu' Hanlan o' his oars ! — Excelsior, Don-street, Newtown.
Why was there a doubt about the result of the boat-race ? Because
it was a floating scheme. — H. Gr., Hunter’s Hill.
Why did Hanlan and Beach in their last boat-race resemble two men
making a meal off bread and water ? Because they had but the one course
to take, they had no (fowl) foul, and finished up on the water. F. E. M.
Brougham-street, Sydney.
Why was the late Beach and Hanlan boat-race like the last massacre
in the South Sea Islands ? Beoause in the Islands there was skull cracking •
and in the boat-race there was crack sculling.—J. 8., Camperdown.
Why was Beach in his last race like the Soudan Contingent ? Be-
cause he came well to the front when most needed. — E. J. R.
Why was Hanlan at the recent boat-race like a lazy washerwoman ?
Because he was all behind with his wash.—J. D., Sydney.
Why was the champion race between Hanlan and Beach like the used
end of a bad cigar ? Because it was a long pull from first to last. —H. J. C.,
Castlereagh-street, Sydney.
Why is a chiropodist like the result of the boat-race between Hanlan
and Beach? Because he is a-handling the feet (a Hanlan defeat). —P. M.,
Petersham.
Why were Beach and Hanlan, in their late boat-race on the Parra-
matta River, like our soldiers in the Soudan ? Because, while they pulled
their outriggers, for the honor and welfare of themselves and country, our
soldiers pulled their triggers for the sane purpose. —A. Gr., Darlington.


Why were Beach and Hanlan like the New South Wales Contingent T
Because they were both anxious to be “To the Front.”—M. H-, Hill-
gtreet, Sydney.
How did Beach and Hanlan prove themselves very ungrateful at the
late Champion Boat Race ? When Beach sat upon his kindest benefactor
“The Jack Smith,” and Hanlan discarded his “Old Friend.”—M. H.
Hill-street, Sydney.
Why was Hanlan like an ox drowning a cable’s length from the
sea shore ? Because he was near Beach, but couldn’t reach it; so the
steaks were lost.—S. 8., Petersham.
In what way did Hanlan and Beach resemble the shores of the
Parramatta River in the late boat race ? The beach (Beach) was in front,
(H)an(d) lan(d) Hanlan behind.—A. W., North Shore.
Why was Beach so confident he would win the last boat race ?
Because he was taught how to get wind and proper temper, and with
sledge hammer strokes to beat what was reckoned amongst the best metal
in the world—Mrs. F., Walker-street, Redfern.
Why does Hanlan deserve to be well cared for by all the sympathis-
ing public of Australia ? Because he brought to this colony that which
has taken him years to earn and lost it in as many minutes, by rowing
against an Australian Beach. —E. G., Bourke-street, Surry Hills.
Why was Hanlan’s aquatic career like a vessel that has sailed around
the world, and then come to destruction ? Because he was successful in all
waters until he got Beach-ed in Port Jackson.—E L., Railway Department,
Sydney.
What was the difference between Edward Hanlan, in the late
champion boat race, and an immigrant leaving the shores of old England ?
Hanlan kept his eye on the Australian Beach a long way a-head, whilst
the immigrant kept his eye on the English Beach a long way behind.—
G. R , Forest Lodge.
Why was the Parramatta course the most unfair for Hanlan on the
occasion of the last boat race ? Because he had a big Beach in front of him,
which he could not see ( vide speech), and his opponent had a clear course
all the way. —W. 8., Sydney.
Why was Hanlan in the last race like a man drowning off Watson’s
Bay ? Because he had a “ Beach ” in sight that he could not reach,
W. S. L., G.P.0., Sydney.
Why was Hanlan in the late boat race on the Parramatta River like
the Great Eastern ? Because he couldn’t come near our Beach on the Par-
ramatta River. —C. S. J., Clarence-street.
When did Deeble do one of the greatest conjuring feats ever known?
When he caused a Beach to appear in the middle of a river, that Hanlan
could not pass. —W, E., Sydney.
When was there a miracle performed in Australia ? When manly
Beach got into a shell and beat Canada with a couple of skulls (sculls). —
W. E., Kent-street, Sydney.
What letter in the alphabet is like Hanlan and not like Beach ?
the letter L, because its found in the loser, but not in the winner.—
“ Canadian Lassie,” Church Hill
Why did Hanlan lose the championship of the world ? Because,
though a splendid oarsman, he could not “row down” the Australian
Beach. —M. H., Sutton Forest.
How did Hanlan lose his races with Beach ? The first through a
foul (fowl); the second before he reached the Hen and Chickens. Motto :
—B-each to one another like the Brothers at the finish.—“ Pilgrim,” T. 0.,
King-street, City.


JAMES WARD,
Alllngtoii W@fls,
14, MAKS HALL STREET, Surry Hills,
SYDNEY,
Manufacturer of the Celebrated
§§f®Yli
Unrivalled for
CLEANLINESS,
DURABILITY,
CHEAPNESS,
RAPIDITY OF HEATING,
AND
SMALL CONSUMPTION OF FUEL.
Awarded 4 First Prizes & 3 Silver Medals.
Winner of the GREAT COOKING CONTEST at the Wealth and
Industrial Exhibition, Prince Alfred Park, 1884-85.
Has been supplied
TO ALL
THE PRINCIPAL GOVERNMENT, MUNICIPAL, AND PUBLIC
BUILDINGS OF THE CITY,
TO ALL
THE PRINCIPAL CLUBS, HOTELS, AND RESTAURANTS,
and Many of
THE PRIVATE HOUSES OF THE LEADING CITIZENS.
Ranges, Grill Stoves, and Hot Plates
Repaired.
HOT WATER APPARATUS FITTED AND GUARANTEED. GAS
STOVES AND GAS FIRES MADE AND REPAIRED.
Work done by night if required.
J. W. having had large experience in London and the Colonies, all
Orders may be entrusted to his care, and will be executed with despatch.
SHOW ROOMS :
414 Crown Street, Surry Hills.


1,000 ANNUALLY
X XX 33
MIGNON
PIANO.
NICHOLSON & Co,
GEORGE STREET.
SYDNEY.
1
m
rr
IT.
M
