

75 years
of progress
1877
1952
DAVID SHEARER LIMITED OF MANNUM
A DECENTRALISED INDUSTRY SINCE 1877




Had the Shearer brothers John and David found time to
watch the smoke from their forge rise into the clear
blue Murray valley sky on that morning in 1817, it is
not likely they saw it as a symbol of a vast and growing
industry to come
And their practical Scots minds were doubtless too intent
on the task in hand to be preoccupied with thoughts of pioneering.
Yet the anvil blows from that tiny forge re-echo today
in an urgent call to Australia’s vast expanding industrial
empire.
The call, to industries large and small, is to follow the wisdom
of John and David Shearer in taking industry not to the


fringes of the crowded city, but beyond the horizon to where it is
needed most.
The popular word today is "Decentralisation,” but it is doubtful
if John and David Shearer even heard the word used until
many, many years after they had pioneered what was to them
... simple commonsense.
And so, today, 75 years later, it is with due pride that the
firm of David Shearer Limited, still at Mannum, bears the
legend ... "A Decentralised Industry since 1877”


Then
Then . . . It was in 1877 that John Shearer set up hisAitf!?
forge and began making the implements destined
the way to riches for Australian farmers. It was
invitation of Mannum farmers that brought the Sh^|§J&| w
to Mannum, and the farmers gave them their
support . . . support that was not misplaced, for th
name "Shearer" quickly established itself. Along the Murrayi
/ I/
as far as a paddle steamer could thresh its picturesque way}' /
went the agricultural implements that separated the wealth
Australian soil. And with increasing sales came increasing
men were needed . . . more space was needed.
SHIPPING SHEARER
STRIPPERS FROM
MANNUM WHARF
THE FIRST EXPANSION 1877-1888
"J. & D. SHEARER
MACHINISTS, ETC., MANNUM”


and now
DESPATCHING SHEARERP PRODUCTS FROM FACTORY
1952 THE PRESENT ORGANISATION
EMPLOYING 300 AND STILL SITUATED AT MANNUM


DAVID SHEARER
1850-1936
JOHN SHEARER
1845-1932
1877
THE BEGINNING . . . NEW IMPLEMENTS
In the early days the surrounding districts of Mannum were densely
covered with mallee and pine. Farmers needed tough equipment to
clear the land before making it pay. And it was here that the Shearer
Brothers stepped in with several new machines, adding Stump Jump
Ploughs to the grubbing machines, fixed ploughs, scarifiers and harrows
already being produced. The implements were rugged and builtjon thj
local conditions; they found a ready market in the district and op4f - 4
parts of South Australia. /B
1 ONE-PIECE WROUGHT STEEL
PLOUGH SHARES INVENTED
Up to this date farmers had the choice of two plough shares ... a cast
iron share that broke easily, or a forged share that was almost prohibitive
in price. Determined to solve this expensive problem for farmers, John
and David Shearer went to work, and invented a virtually
unbreakable wrought steel plough share at one quarter the price oijffUm
the old forged share. MHj
These shares swept Australia in popularity and saved farmers agSlions
in plough-share costs.


1895
EXPANSION NECESSARY
Business had increased enormously by 1895. Shearer strippers
were in terrific demand. The only answer was to enlarge
factory still more and install more plant. But as they expands
their business the Shearer brothers made still more improvements, and in
1902 a lighter, stronger stripper with a wider cut was made and enthusiastically
received by farmers. Farm waggons, too, were manufactured at this time.
1890-1900
STEAM MOTOR CAR BtJfSp
10 years before Henry
Ford, in America, had built
his automobile, David
Shearer, at Mannum, had
built a steam car with the
world’s first differential. He
drove this car between
Mannum and Adelaide several
times, but before he could
drive it through Adelaide
streets he had to get special
permission from the Mayor.
Maximum speed of the
Shearer Steam Car was
15 m.p.h.
1904
FURTHER EXPANSION
nnnßp'
The increase in South Australia’s population, and the difficulties
experienced in those days of transporting farm implements *
from Mannum to Adelaide finally meant forming a branch
of the firm at Kilkenny, Adelaide. Ploughs and other
tillage implements were made at the Kilkenny factory, and allowed the
Mannum factory to concentrate on Strippers, Waggons,
Harrows and Plough Shares. In this way distribution wa
simplified, and both factories had more room for new
plant, essential in the Shearer Brothers’ Expansion ggj
programme.


1910
MORE EXPANSION
In 1910 the completion of a large, new factory at MannunMjtade on
the "saw-tooth” roof principle meant more room, nSbgigj
light and greater comfort for the men.
It was in 1910 that the brothers, John and
to dissolve partnership. The businesses at
Kilkenny and Mannum were securely under way, and
it was decided that David should continue at
Mannum, making harvesting equipment, harrows and plough
shares, while John, at Kilkenny, made tillage equipment.
1912
STRIPPER HARVESTERS
INTRODUCED
Insistent demands from farmers
led to David Shearer taking
up the manufacture of L
l
Stripper Harvesters. These *
machines following the
specifications of the farmers,
were made to stand up to rough conditions
and proved very successful, particularly to mallee farmers
1914-1918
THE GREAT WORLD WAR
jQrjTwnile agricultural equipment faded into the background while
the flat out making war equipment sucJp? l fffl!fs?ion
waggonsisaddle stirrups and hames. It-oyas a war effort that!


1927
STILL MORE EXPANSION
PORTION SHADED BLUE SHOWS THE 1910 BUILDING.
With the demand of the
Company’s products still on
the increase it was found
necessary to make extensive
additions to the factory.
The factory, as originally
built in 1910, was entirely
used for manufacturing
component parts, and the new
additions were used for
assembling and painting.
1927
HEADER HARVESTERS INTRODUCED
David Shearer Limited first placed the Header Harvester on the
market in 1927, and it was an immediate success. Popularity
was such that this type of machine now takes the majorjfe
portion of the factory’s capacity. It showed once 7JJJ
again the wisdom of following the requirements
of the man-on-the-land. v]
1939-1915
WORLD WAR 2
When the call for munitions came again, David Shearer Limited
had over 300 employees working round the clock to produce
vital equipment . . . over 1,000,000 malleable iron track links foj;
Bren Gun Carriers were made. Drop forgings for the Anti-Tank N
Gjift, spanners, shackles and many other fo|gings,
(fastings were alscuproduced. Jmf


1944-45
CASTINGS, PRESSINGS,
FORGING AND GALVANISING
Following the manufacture of munition equipment, persistent
enquiries from other manufacturers came for Castings, Pressings
and Drop Forgings. To meet this demand, portions of the
factory were increased and developed. A hot dip galvanising
plant was installed. Now thousands of Castings, Pressings and
Drop Forgings are produced annually.
1947
COMPANY FORMED IN N.S.W.
To be in more direct touch with customers in New South
Wales, a separate Company, David Shearer Pty. Limited was
formed in that State at 62 Railway Parade, Burwood, near
Sydney, to handle the Sales and Service of the parent
Company’s products.
1950
CONDON OFFICE ESTABLISHED
The extent of enquiries in the United Kingdom and the Con-
tinent was such that an overseas office had to be established.
So David Shearer Limited had yet another address . . . this time
at Aldwych House, London, W.C. 2. This London office also buys,
overseas material for the South Australian plant. «
1952
TODAY!
David Shearer Limited, Mannum, has grown with every year. Improvements
are always being made . . . new ideas that farmers suggest are always
being utilised for Shearer products to make the implements farmers
need.
From the two Shearer Brothers who started out together in
1877, to the modern factory today at Mannum employing
over 300 men, is progress indeed.


Departments
DESIGN - Designing new ideas on machines
is the never ending job of this section. Every
new design is fully tested and discussed with prac-
tical farmers before it is put into production.
TOOLROOM - Making and maintaining
Tools and Jigs for the presses, drilling, forging,
moulding machines and the plant generally is the
function of this department. Highly skilled
engineers perform this most exacting work.
FOUNDRY - Both grey iron and malleable iron
castings are produced. In addition to castings for agri-
cultural implements, large numbers are made for other
manufacturers and important Government contracts.
SMITHS—1O ton to 250 ton and mighty 1,000
capacity presses bend, punch and press steel to shape.
It is here that raw steel begins to take the shape
of the implements that reap Australia’s harvests.


GALVANISING The hot dip galvanising
plant installed in 1944 has continually worked at
full Calcify to meet tne requirements of customers
using galvanised pressed steel and forged products.
FITTERS - The function of this
test all parts for correctness
and assemble the more intricate units, such as
gear boxes, universal joints, threshing drums,
combs, walker cranks and steel sleeves in wheel
centres.
MACHINE SHOP - Modern Lathes,
Screwing, Tapping, Drilling and Milling
Machines make spindles, axles, roller bearings,
etc., and turn out bearings, sprockets, wheel
centres, etc.
SHEETIRON - With the aid of
modern plan the men in the Sheetiron
Department make up the units in which
sheetiorn is involved, viz., grainboxes,
riddle boxes, elevators, walker
covers, etc.


WOODSHOP — This department attends
to the woodlining of wheels and sawing, planing
and for walkers, elevator
and Harrow Beams, etc.
SPORE - Each individual part when com-
pleted is Checked into the one store, from which
It is then issued to the various sub-assembly and
assembly sections or as replacement parts. This
ensures correct distribution.
GIANT PRESS - No job in the factory
is ever too heavy for this modern press ... no piece
of steel can stand up to its colossal strength. 1,000
mighty tons are at the immediate call of the operator
at the press of a switch.
ASSEMBLY - Here the component parts
and sun-assemblies are built up into complete imple-
ments and machines. Each machine is tested prior
to going into the paint shop.
PLOUGHSHARE FACTORY - This is a separate unit
utilised entirely for the manufacture of wrought steel Ploughshares from
the raw steel to the finished product. Each share entails up to 60
separate operations.


Today's Products
SERVING THE MEEDS OF AM ADV ANCED
AGRICULTURE THROUGH AM EFFICIENT
AUSTRALIA-WIDE SALES-SERVICE ORGANISATION
FIELD SERVICE
Obliging Mechanics, thoroughly trained in the Factory
and in the Field are readily available to assist users to
obtain full efficiency from their Shearer machines.
SPARE PARTS SERVICE
Spare parts are stocked by Shearer Agents in all main grain growing areas.
In addition, large stocks are kept at the Depots of the Interstate Distributors.


TYPE 36
HEADER HARVESTER
(10 FT. CUT)
Practically eliminating dust, and reducing damage of grain
to a minimum are two of the big features the 36 Header Harvester has to
offer. In the wheat belt dust is almost unbearable at harvest time, and the
all enclosed ”36” has done away with this almost entirely.
I TYPE 48
HEADER HARVESTER
(12 FT.-CUT) [f~
Extra capacity the big feature of the ”48” Header
Harvester ... 48 inch threshing drum and front elevator . . .
52 inches wide and 82 inches long walkers, making total walker area of
4,264 square inches . . . riddles 48 inches wide and 30 inches long, a cleaning
area of 1,440 square inches. Fan 48 inches wide, too, and divided into
two sections permitting air to be drawn in from centre, assuring even blast
over the whole riddle area.
Shearer type ’48 Header at work in a tangled,
"down” crop, making a fine harvest of it and
reducing the inevitable waste.


SHEARER
SPRING STEEL
STUMP JUMP
HARROWS >
Eight-section Set, Five-row Stump Jump Harrows with
Tubular Steel Beam, three 24-in. Wheels and Tractor
Draught.
Spring Steel Stump Jump Harrows, available in sets from 3 to 20 sections.
diamond pointed tynes. 16 or 20 tynes per section. Beams of
steel can be fitted with either slides, 18-inch, 24-inch or 30-inch wheels.
Spring Steel Tynes stand up to the hardest work.
SHEARER
DRILL HARROWS
Shearer Drill Harrows will fit all makes and sizes of drills
and combines. tynes of spring steel with
points drawn out to diamond shape. Very effective /
in covering seed.
SHEARER
DIAMOND HARROWS
Shearer Diamond Harrows (non-stump jump)
Designed for general work on clear land. 20
tynes per section. Tynes inches long by 5/8
inches square. Fitted with slides, 18 inch, 24
inch or 30 inch wheels.
SHEARER
STUMP JUMP HARROW SHARES
These shires have been evolved to give a
wide cut to each tyne, so that all weeds
are uprooted, and the soil thoroughly
stirred. They are designed for Stump
Jumping, and as they clear themselves of
rubbish, they save the trouble of repeated
lifting. They are easy to attach securely to new or worn harrow tynes.


SHEARER
PLOUGH SHARES
Shearer Shares are supplied as standard parts with
Australia’s most famous ploughs . . . solid evidence
superiority
jajyarer Wrought Steel Plough shares have literally saved
millions of pounds for farmers. There is a Shearer share
■HBcdly every make and mqckkjof mouldboard M
plough f usedin Australia. Jmff
SHEARER
CASTINGS
Mamilacturers, who have realised the need of greater efficiency to boost
their production, have left the problems and supply of castings to
Shearers. The speed of delivery and high quality of Shearer grey
and malleable iron castings have resulted in record orders;
electrical switch gear and motor vehicle manufacturers in part^^fcj^^
SHEARER
PRESSINGS
Another service for Australian manufacturers is Shearer stedpjj
pressings. Line fittings for Telegraph and Electricity are just yj§j
some of the pressings that are shaped under presses from 10 ton to
1,000 ton capacity. Shearers pride themselves on their standard
. . . a standard that manufacturers have come to know as being
of the highest. L
SHEARER
DROP FORGINGS
Motor vehicle components must have forgings of the very
degree of strength and cohesion. Under the mighty dropXW
hammers, drop forgings of the highest quality are made . . .
forgings that meet every demand for insistency and sjijpgth. Whether
the drop forging be for garage equipiScator motor fearer standard


Appreciation
A tall paddle steamer takes form out of a river mist and churns its
way through broad Murray water. Ahead lies the wharf of a river
township, and ahead people are waiting . . . waiting for the magic
the steamer carries .. .the magic o f the machinery that wins life and
fortune from the sundrenched soil.
That was the picture of many years past. Today Shearer Agricul-
tural machinery reaches to the corners of Australia by road, rail
and sea, responding to the call for farm equipment built for Aus-
tralian conditions.
And so the Past looks with wondering eyes at the Future.
How completely have the farmers of today carried on the promise of
support left by their fathers. And how immensely has the firm of
David Shearer Limited, Mannum grown as a consequence.
Appreciation must go to the farmers first.


Appreciation
A tall paddle steamer takes form out of a river mist and churns its
way through broad Murray water. Ahead lies the wharf of a river
township, and ahead people are waiting . . . waiting for the magic
the steamer carries.. .the magic o f the machinery that wins life and
fortune from the sundrenched soil.
(Ihat was the picture of many years past. Today Shearer Agricul-
tural machinery reaches to the corners of Australia by road, rail
and sea, responding to the call for farm equipment built for Aus-
tralian conditions.
And so the Past looks with wondering eyes at the Future.
How completely have the farmers of today carried on the promise of
support left by their fathers. And how immensely has the firm of
David Shearer Limited, Mannum grown as a consequence.
Appreciation must go to the farmers first.


DAVID
SHEARER
LIMITED
MANNUM
SOOTH
AUSTRALIA.
