

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE,
Hobart, 1892.
Section G.
Anthropology.
B.—MALEKULA, NEW HEBRIDES.
By REV. T. WATT LEGGATT, Missionary.
Birth and Childhood.
After a birth the woman is not allowed to leave the village
for 20 days. The child is named by a relative on or about
the 30th day. A pig is killed on the occasion, and a distribu-
tion of food made. The name is usually that of a relative,
and the surname that of the plot of ground on which the
child was born.
The mother carries the child astride on her hip, supported
by a mat or calico under her arm and over the shoulder.
The father frequently carries the child. In fact it is nursed
either by the one or other. After a birth the father remains
in the house nursing it until the mother is able to go about.
The child is lovingly, in fact indulgently treated. There
seems to be little or no discipline or training. Suckling is
continued for two years at least.
Maturity.
I am unable to give any definite information yet.
Marriage.
Polygamy exists. It is not restricted, but only men of
wealth can procure wives in any number.
Children take their classification from their mother, and in
war would join her kin. In speaking of the men of a
village, natives never forget to tell you the villages to which
the different individuals belong.


Widows generally marry again; they are the property of
the deceased husband’s brother, but he often disposes of them.
He adopts the children, if any, and in islands like ours,
where population is sparse, children are very much prized.
The work of a married woman consists in planting and
looking after the garden. She dare not cook or even touch
her husband’s food. Women are, as a rule, well treated.
Chieftainship is gained by a man’s rising through a long
course of degrees, each attained by the slaughter of pigs.
This rank is in a sense hereditary, inasmuch as a son takes a
high degree at birth, and so starts on a higher platform than
the others. Chiefs are called mulun , but the name of a high
chief is mara. Chiefs are all very old men. One of them
died lately, and his son, although regarded as chief in his
village, has not the same rank as his father had.
Social and Domestic.
The huts are built like a roof placed on the ground. The
ridge-pole is supported on two or more forked stakes driven
into the ground. For rafters long bamboos are used, which
are softened by fire and bent into shape to fit the ridge-pole.
It is thatched with the leaves of a kind of palm, sewed on
reeds. If well and closely thatched, a hut will stand a long
time. Some are standing yet which were built before living
memory. The ends are finished with split bamboos.
Cultivation.
Yams, taro, and bananas are grown in well fenced gardens.
Yams are ripe in March, and are plentiful until October.
Planting begins in September. Thereafter the people live
on breadfruit, bananas, and cocoanuts, with whatever yam
they have stored in their yam-houses, which are bamboo
erections raised four feet or so above ground and substantially
thatched. Men and women all work together in the gardens.
The whole village goes in turns to put up the fences. They
often sleep in their gardens, if they are at any distance from
the village.
There is really but one meal cooked in the afternoon, con-
sisting of a pudding of grated yam or taro, toasted yam,
breadfruit, bananas, or toasted breadfruit beaten to a pulp,
and cocoanut milk poured over it.
Every man has to do his own cooking on his own fire; at
least only those of the same name and rank can cook and
eat together, as the Baras, the Gulguls, the Muluns, &c.


The women cook for themselves and the children. Pigs
are rarely, if ever, killed for food, except when a wild boar is
shot. Men will not touch a female pig; it is eaten by women
or children. They have fish occasionally, but in no great
quantity, as their only means of procuring them is by wading
on the reef and shooting at them with bows and arrows.
They give strangers raw food to cook, or, if the same rank,
they share the meal of their host.
Ornaments.
The Malekulans usually wear a plume of cock’s feathers in
their hair, and occasionally decorate themselves with red
hibiscus blossoms. They wear small ear-rings of turtle-shell,
to which a tuft of hair from a pig’s tail is attached. The
nose is not perforated ; on the arms they often wear bracelets
of beads, and, as they have no pockets, they wind a spider’s
web, of a very strong texture and yellow colour, round their
arms, in which they stick a knife or pipe. They often have
this same thing tied round their foreheads. Round the neck
and legs they tie creepers or dried strips of pandanus leaves.
Painting is common. They smear their faces with black,
and their foreheads with a glistening black paint made by
burning a cocoa-nut in the fire, the ashes of the shell being
mixed with the oil from the kernel. They paint themselves
red and white, chiefly for feasts and dances.
Their clothing consists of a belt of cocoa-nut cloth or bark
wound round the body. The penis is wrapped in a small mat
of a red colour, the end of which is held up by the belt.
The women wear a small mat or strip of calico, about 6-ins.
wide and a yard long, round them ; it passes under the hips
and is held up in front by a belt round their middle. Being
under the hips, it is quite a covering when they stoop. They
wear great quantities of beads, not round the neck but
generally over the shoulders and across the chest. They paint
themselves black also, like the men, when working, and red
for feasts. They have also a habit of smearing their hair
with paint and oil for feasts until it looks as if they wore caps.
Food in this district is abundant, and the natives are all
plump and well fed.
Wizards.
The native wizards say that the temeses appear to men in
their sleep and confer magic powers upon them.
They may use their powers for evil, but generally, in the


cases I have known, it has been for good, such as for bring-
ing rain.
They are often consulted and paid to lay charms on people
to cause death.
In connection with the discovering of causes of death, let
me relate the following incident. In the village of Balel or
Verelumbon many people were dying, and suspicion fell
upon one man, a sacred man, called Mulunevit, that he was
causing the deaths. In great wrath, Mulunevit arose and
slew a pig, vowing that he was innocent, and sent the carcase
of the pig to a bush village called Baruta, ordering them to
bring the “ Nelimp ” to find out the guilty person. This
“Nelimp” is a piece of bamboo, 6 to 12-ft. long. Three
men are blindfolded and raise it aloft in their hands. They
say it begins to pull in a certain direction, and they move
on directed by its drawing. At last it leads them to the
house of the guilty one and transfixes the thatch. In this
case it struck the house of a man in Verelumbon called
Ambungtemen, who had to pay two pigs, one to the relatives
of the dead and another to the witch-finders. Of course 1
did not see this, but such is the natives’ account.
Death.
Women and children are buried in the bush, a mound is
heaped over the grave, and a banana planted in the centre;
reeds and branches are also stuck in, and her mats, &c. are
hung over them.
As to the burial of men, they are either buried or exposed
on a bier in the bush until the flesh decays, and then their
bones are buried under a heap of stones in the Batua or
burial place. Their huts are left to rot. Sacrifices of pigs
are offered at intervals at the grave, and one or two men
watch it for a month (30 days), all the while blowing on
conches or bamboos at intervals. Gashes are cut on the
bodies of mourners, and pigs are sacrificed at the funeral
according to the rank of the deceased.
Spirit world is called Lelemis , and is somewhere below.
The entrance to it is at a place called Sinemp , where a spirit
called Lesivsiv abides, who seizes the shades as they come up,
and with a tomahawk (sio sio) cuts off their noses unless they
can show him certain tattoo marks (mostly of lizards). This
place is only for those who die a natural death ; those who
die in war go to a place further north, where “ Romberach ”
treats them in a similar manner.


Mythology.
f
«
i
near the shore.
Philology.
N umerals.
1 Bokol.
2 Eurua.
3 Entil.
4 Em bis.
5 Elima.
6 Robokol.
7 Rokurua,
8 Roktel.
9 Rokbis.
10 Sangabul
Pronouns.
Sing’.
I Anu
Plural.
Ist inclusive Antil.
Ist exclusive Amintil.
2nd exclusive ... Amuntul.
3rd exclusive ... Hera,
Possessive,
Formed by prefixing “ ta,” of.
(e.g.) Mine Tukunu.
Thine Tahengco.
His Tahena.
Pronomial Suffixes.
Ist Verank my hand.
3rd Verna or vernta... his hand.
Verb,
Future indicated by affixing “ bangcea.”
Lelemis is a poor place, and spirits take rank in it according
to the number of pigs they bring with them.
They believe in a supreme Deity, called Bokoro, who made
earth, sky, and sea, and formed men.
Of course their great dread is of the “ temes ” (verb 3rd
sing, of emis=“ to die ”) who are continually prowling about
frightening men. These sometimes, however, come to their
wards in sleep and tell them of great events that are happen-
ing. One man was roused by his, and sent down to the beach
to see a huge rock coming from another island and settling-
Ist inclusive Anturua.
Ist exclusive ... Amarua.
thou.. Engco. 2nd Amurua
he ... Hena. 3rd AruaorOronrua.
2nd Yeram your hand.


Past indicated by affixing “esu
e.g. verb to go.
• Present.
I go home (Ann) nepen vere.
Thou go home ... (Engco) upene vere.
He go home (Hena) tipene vere.
Singular Future.
I shall go home nepen bangcea vere.
Thou shalt go home ... upene ~ „
He shall go home tipene „ „
(or vere bangcea).
Past.
I have gone home nepensn vere.
Thou have gone home .... upenesu „
He have* gone home tipenesu „
(or benesu).
To ki11... tarapse (as above).
I kill him (Ann) netarapse hena.
Thou killest him. (Engco) utarapse ~
He kills him (Hena) titarkpse „
Plural.
We (inclusive) kill him Antil tiltarapse hena.
We (exclusive) kill him Amentil miltarapse hena.
Yea (exclusive) kill him Amuntul raultarapse hena.
They (exclusive) kill him Hera arapse hena.
Sentences.
Where have you come from ?
(The only greeting we have)
Where are you going?
What do you want?
The fighting is ended.
The sun shines.
The moon shines.
I shall go to Pangkurau to-
morrow.
Tell the men to make the
fence on the day after to-
morrow.
Thou shall not steal.
Who told you ?
Let us go and spear turtle.
Be nerabe.
Abukambe,
Maps nepach.
Nabura rnokot.
(broken).
Niel tisin.
Ambisia timier.
Ann nepen buku Pagkumu
mebho bagcea.
Übtene asamangk aramucea
nambungko weisa bagcea.
Siki ulevea binoke.
Hase tibtene engco.
Antil tilpene tilsare nevea,


Man
Woman
Head ...
Hair of head
Eye
Nose
Tongue
Ear ....
Hand
Thumb
Foot ..
Bone
Blood
Fire .
W ater
(Sea .
Moon..
Father
Mother
Son
Daughter
Brother ..
Sister
Cousin
Uncle
Aunt
Give
Take
Make or do
Bear ( i.e . carry).
See
Hear
List of Words.
Asamangk.
Tambaluk,
Batina.
Nepolin batina.
Metina.
Ngunsend.
Lemen.
Arsina.
Verna,
Busembus tilumbon,
Neluan.
Bolongkont.
lnrim.
Nachamp.
Nabui.
Netis.)
Niel.
Ambisia.
Teta or Temen.
Nina.
Netin tamare,
Netin tambaluk.
Yeye (elder brother) Atisina.
Rabina.
Sister or brother (often).
(Nalum).
Apapa,
Nina.
Verbs.
Levesak,
Levea,
Mucea.
Ing unta.
Lise.
Euronga.
Additional information about the natives of Malekula,
New Hebrides ; T. Watt Leggatt, Missionary :
Birth and Childhood.
The natives of Port Sandwich bind the head of the child
with ropes of plaited bark to elongate the head. Tips is not
done any further north.


Suckling is continued for about three years.
Abortion is often practised by the women, as they do not
wish to be troubled with the rearing of children; it is also
caused by carrying heavy loads, climbing cocoanut trees, or
eating certain herbs.
I know of only one case of infanticide. A woman gave
birth to a female child and immediately buried it under the
floor of her hut. She had sons previously, but this was her
first daughter.
As far as I can learn, there is no such thing as betrothal.
Girls are married when about six or eight years of age.
Circumcision is performed usually when the boy is from
three to five years of age. I have, however, seen some boys
of 15 or 16, from inland tribes, not circumcised. Until
circumcision takes place they run naked; even those lads
were absolutely nude.
I have not seen circumcision performed, but the natives
describe it as follows ;—The boy is laid on a mat and held
down by some men, while one with a sharp bamboo makes a
slit downwards in the foreskin, and then cuts it round.
There is no special operator, any man may do it. The
operator is presented with a mat, and a huge pudding of yam
or bananas (nelougk) is made for the others. The boy is
kept in the “ amil ” or men’s house for 10 days, and his food
brought to him. He is not allowed to see women, or women
to see him during that time. When he has recovered, the
penis is wrapped in a strip of banana leaf, which is doubled
over a little belt and so held up. It is somewhat difficult to
get reasons for anything from natives: that their fathers,
asimagk tui, “ the men of old,” did so, seems to be quite
sufficient for them. Down in the southern islands they say
that if circumcision is not done, the lads will not grow tall
and strong. Here they seem to say that it is a sine qua non
to marriage.
I am not sufficiently acquainted with their ceremonies of
initiation to be able to describe them. Even after circumcision
there seems to be little restriction placed on the boys. They
continue to live and eat with their mothers, but when they
become “ Baras,” then they are separated, and must prepare
their own food on their own fires.
Rank or Degrees.
To give a full description of these would be a long labour.
There are four classes through which men rise—Baras,


Marriage.
i
1
Gtilguls, Mullins Mals, or Maras. No one of these classes
can eat food with any of the others, or cook it on the same
fire, and of course none of them can eat food prepared by a
woman, or on a fire kindled or used by her. In cases of
sickness, women may prepare food for their husbands, or
brothers, or sons, but when the man recovers he has to kill a
pig to regain his footing.
To become a Bara, or rise to any of the other degrees,
a man makes a “ Mangkea ” or “ Sing-sing ” at which he
sets up a temes, a carved and painted fern tree, to represent
one of his ancestors, kills from two to ten pigs, and assumes
his new name.
After that a Bara is reckoned among the men, sits in their
amil, goes out to fight with them, may marry, and in general
has all the privileges of the tribe.
When a man has a marriageable daughter, he travels
round the villages or sends word that he is disposed to treat
with any one about her. For a young girl 9 boars and 2
pigs are demanded, but less for a widow.
As I remarked before, there does not seem to be any
betrothal; any man who can muster the pigs may have the
woman, and one reason they give for marrying their girls at
such an early age is to prevent others from violating them.
There are degrees of consanguinity which may not marry ;
e.g ., brothers and sisters, which is a very wide term, embrac-
ing— I. Actual brothers and sisters. 2. Cousins german.
On the marriage day the little bride is adorned, her face
painted black and red, a new mat tied round her middle, and
a longer one, about 9 feet, tied round her shoulders containing
her few possessions, knife, &c. She is escorted by all the
women of her village, some of them carrying branches of
dracaena, having the leaves tied with a root. The men
generally follow at a short distance. On their arrival at the
husband’s village, the father addresses the bridegroom, tells
him that he must not beat her, or desert her, but see that
she has food and shelter. On his promising to that effect
the pigs are handed over, and the women take the food,
yams, &c. he has provided, and return home.
Polygamy is practised, but not very largely. It is not
restricted.
Children follow the mother’s kin, and take the side of her
tribe in war, even although they may live in another village.


Brothers and sisters are very chaste in their intercourse.
Any violation of this, or intercourse with unclean women is
supposed to he punished by the man becoming afflicted with
a sort of gravel (meme menrikenrik), a dribbling of wind.
A married woman has the heavy share of the work—the
preparing of plantations and the cultivation of food. She
also carries all the food and firewood, and carries all the
loads of food for barter to different villages. Women are
not cruelly used; how they fare depends on their own
exertions in cultivation, gathering shell-fish, and cooking.
They can take food and come to the trader to get calico or
matches for their own use. They also prepare mats and
thatch for the houses.
The husbands are very jealous and suspicious. No woman
here goes inside a trader’s fence, because he is unmarried,
nor W'ould they approach the house of the celibate Roman
Catholic clergy who resided here for a time. They come
about us quite freely, because of ray wife’s presence.
The Tribe
The tribe with us is really the village or collection of
villages adjoining each other.
There is generally one chief. His position is to some
extent hereditary, but the son does not alw r ays succeed to his
father’s rank ; e.g., Maramulamut, the high chief of Asang,
died and was succeeded by his son Mulan who, however, must
make the necessary Mangkeas before he can become a Mara
like his father. In this case, as he is a worthless, lazy fellow,
it is not likely that he will succeed. Chiefs’ sons rise more
quickly through the grades than others, as their fathers are
able to provide the necessary pigs.
There seems to be no council, except that the men discuss
all matters.
Social and Domestic.
I think I described them fully in a former paper.
Wizards.
These act somewhat after the style of spiritualists. They
have their controlling spirits or “ femes ” {temes from emis,
to die=a dead man, or rather his ghost).
They consult these. They obtain their powers from the
temes visiting them in their sleep and revealing secrets to
them. Their powers are used malevolently as a rule, although
n


they often endeavour to cure the sick, and bring rain or
favourable winds. Women as well have communication with
spirits.
Death.
The great cause of death is “ erabake.” Those who speak
English call that poison, but they really mean witchcraft or
the evil eye. Sometimes women cut each other for mourning,
but that is not common. Women are buried in the bush ; a
mound is heaped over the grave, and their little mats are
hung on branches stuck into it. When children die the father
often ties some little possession, a turtle-shell bracelet, &c.,
round his neck which he wears for years.
After the death of a man of rank, all the men have their
faces blackened for a month. The dead are wrapped up in
mats, being first painted and dressed as in life. A cocoanut
leaf is plaited into a basket, into which the corpse is put, and
a pole thrust through it lengthwise for carrying.
A little to the north of us, the bodies of chiefs are exposed
on a bier in the bush until the flesh decays, but with us they
are buried in a shallow grave, covered with a few cocoanut
leaves and a little earth until decay takes place, after which
the bones and skull are placed in the batua or sacred ground,
among a pile of stones.
As men are buried near the amil, people watch these for 30
days, and during the night blow a long bamboo flute at
intervals.
This flute is called metiorior, from metior=“ to weep,” i.e.,
let tears flow. (Autang=is to wail). It has a very wailing
sound. After a death, a pig is usually burned at the side of
the house, and food is burned at the grave several times after.
The widow of a high chief must not leave the village for a
year after his death, neither is she allowed to wash, or cut
her hair, which hangs in matted, greasy clots.
Mythology.
They believe in a Supreme Being called Bokor, who they
say kneaded the first man and woman out of clay, a some-
what remarkable similarity to the narrative of the Creation
in Genesis. This would seem to make Bokor a supreme
universal deity, but some of their other stories represent
him as local , in fact only as a great chief living among
men and taking a keen interest in human affairs and
amuseipents. On this reef opposite our hpuse there is a


Their story as to the origin of fire is that a woman and
her little boy were out in the bush, and he began to cry and
refused to eat the raw food. She tried to amuse him by
rubbing a stick on a piece of dry wood, and was astonished to
see it smoke and smoulder and at last break into flame. She
laid the food on this and found it much better. After this,
all began to use tire.
6 uiuo
f~ ( i 7
WILLIAM GRAHAME, JUN.,
ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA
stone, about 8 feet high, called Nevit Penepen, “the
walking-stone.” This boulder, long ago, was on the top
of a hill some miles inland ; Bokor lived there with his
son, a young boy. There was a hollow 7 behind the house at
some distance in which his water had formed a considerable
lake. One day Bokor went to a Mangkea at some distance,
leaving his son to make a pudding; he did so, and after
his work was over strolled out and discovered this lake ; on
tasting it he fancied that it was salt water (netis), and that it
would be good flavouring for the pudding ; accordingly, he
poured some over it. Bokor returned and began to eat it,
but having tasted it he demanded where he got the water ;
on the boy telling him, he went out and dashed down the
side of the lake with his foot, which broke down the valley,
carrying houses and everything before it, and this boulder
with the rest.
