











TO THE MEN WHO FOR THE PAST
YEAR HAVE TOILED TO BUILD A
GREATER FUTURE FOR AMERICA; TO
THOSE SONS WHO HAVE WAGED WAR SO
THAT A LASTING PEACE BE ATTAINED;
TO THE PILOTS IN THE AIR, TO THE
MECHANICS ON THE GROUND ... TO THE
MEN WHO HAVE GIVEN THEIR LIVES SO
THAT OTHERS MIGHT LIVE THIS BOOK
IS HUMBLY DEDICATED.




1943 81ST AIR DEPOT GROUP 1944


Contents
Commanding Generals page 3
Commanding Officer page 11
Staff Officers page 12
Hq. and Hq. Squadron page 26
81st Depot Repair Squadron . . . . page 34
81st Depot Supply Squadron . . . . page 44
44th Depot Repair Squadron . . . . page 52
455th Service Squadron page 62
11th Service Squadron page 68
898th Signal Company Depot Avn. . . page 74
1124th Military Police Co. Avn. . . page 82
1616th Ordnance M.M.Company .. page 90
1799th Ordnance S. &M. Company . . page 92
194th Ordnance Depot Co. Det. . . page 96
1912th Q.M. Company T. Dct page 98
Engineering page 100
Supply page 124
Signal page 138
Ordnance page 142
Security page 146
Transportation page 148
Medical page 152
Utilities page 156
C.w.s page 158
Civilians page 159
Activities page 163
Rosters page 190


GENERAL DOUGLAS MACARTHUR
COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF, SOUTHWEST PACIFIC AREA




LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GEORGE C. KENNEY
COMMANDING GENERAL, FIFTH AIR FORCE




BRIGADIER-GENERAL PAU L H. PRENTISS
COMMANDING GENERAL
FIFTH AIR FORCE SERVICE COMMAND


V„_,
A. 1 chapter in the history of the 81 si Air Depot Group, it is
indeed fitting to record the activities of our organization during its golden age at Eagle
Farm. As chance would have it, departure was coincidental with the second anniver-
sary after activation, which should make the average historian rejoice since lie can
write a natural finish to his hook. Bui it is really with heavy heart that farewell is hid
to the mother hase of the 8 J st.
A certain story connected with that Farm will follow us no
matter how far north we move. It is a pulsating story written hy men and materials
on a piece of land taking up hut six square miles in vast sub-tropical Australia. It is
lire story of a thousand men sweating in warehouses ; of hundreds in hangars joking,
cursing, always working, it is a moving story of Signal-men ami radios, of Ordnance-
men and guns, of Medics and pills. It’s even the story of women and typewriters. But
it s a great story of ten thousand hands, five thousand minds, ami one purpose gel-
ling planes loaded with bombs to Japan.
It is not the intention of this book to present a complete account
of that story. It is hoped, however, that the ensuing pictures of America working in a
foreign land will gauge at least the highlights. Much evades the lens, and the pen of
the historian lias rested with the hope that imagination will make up for its limitations.
—EDITOR.


COLONEL R. J. MINIY
COMMANDING OFFICER
August 10, 1943 to February 6, 1944
LIEUTENANT-COLONEI R. L. FRY
COMMANDING OFFICER
May 11, 1942 to August 10, 1943


T
JL. HERE is nothing
small about Col. Monay. He is a big man
doing a big job in a big way.
Trained in Field Artillery,
attached to the engineering section of
Quartermaster, then transferred to Air
Corps, he now commands the largest Air
Depot Group in this theatre if not in the
entire U.S. Army. Col. Monay’s assign-
ments have been almost as varied as his ex-
periences in the Pacific Area. Leaving
Manila three days ahead of the bombs, he
joined the Far Eastern Air Force on Min-
danao Island. There he assisted in setting
up secret airfields and P.T. boat bases.
Mindanao was the door through which per-
sonnel was evacuated and equipment for
Bataan and Corregidor flown in.
While at Mindanao Island,
Col. Monay had very distinguished guests
at his house for a few days—General and
Mrs. MacArthur, their small son, and the
president of the Philippines, Manuel
Quezon.
To hear him tell his story
it all sounds safe and rather tame, hut re-
cords show that the heat was on all the
time. His outfit was cited for outstanding
service in action December, 1941, and again
by the President in April, 1942. He was
wounded and received the Purple Heart.
It was not until the very
end that he received orders to evacuate
Mindanao, and was on the last plane to
leave the island. Landing in Darwin dur-
ing the days when the worst homhing raids
were in progress, they re-fuelled and con-
tinued to Cloncurry and later to Melbourne.
In Melbourne, Col. Monay
was attached to General Connell’s staff and
subsequently moved north with him. While
serving at this post he was appointed Major,
April 10, 1942. He was assigned to the 81st
Air Depot Group and came to Eagle Farm
May 19, 1942, when, as he says, “The kids
were using Hangar No. 1 as a skating rink
and Hangar No. 2 was still a horse stable.”
He is one of the few original officers still
serving in the 81st.
Col. Monay’s ability to or-
ganize and his engineering knowledge were
put to a test when he was assigned the task
of making an up-to-date airdrome and land-
ing field out of marshland. From buying
the land, draining it, clearing it, levelling
it, building a runway to accommodate the
heaviest bombers, construction of the han-
gars, Group Headquarters building, supply
warehouses, quarters for soldiers, the de-
velopment of the Allison Overhaul Plant,
to building the first test block in Australia,
all fell on his shoulders. Today Eagle Farm
is the finest airfield in Australia.
In spite of the large part
Col. Monay has played in building Eagle
Farm, he is always anxious to give credit
to others: “The enlisted men of the 81st
have done a splendid job working under all
kinds of conditions. They deserve the credit.
They did the work.”


COLONEL WI LLI AM H. MONAY
COMMANDING OFFICER, EIGHTY-FIRST AIR DEPOT GROUP


A sparkling sense of humor,
left over from his days at Fresno State College,
where he was President of the student body and,
after graduation, of the Fresno Junior Chamber
of Commerce, so blends pleasure with business that
even when hard at work he seems to enjoy it. A
former Deputy Commissioner of Public Safety and
Welfare, Capt. Mayer has brought with him a sin-
cere interest in the common man.
A former enlisted man him-
self (he jumped from Pvt. to T /Sgt.) he has since
graduation from O.C.S. in April, 1943, served in
jobs requiring constant contact with men. Con-
scientiousness and dependability have made him
one of our hardest working officers. To the enlisted
man he is just a “regular guy.”
CAPT. J. B. MAYER
GROUP ADJUTANT
Blessed with a magnetic personality
and a thundering voice, our Adjutant
since August, 1943, has used these
attributes to good advantage.
Talking things over before one of their jeep-tours of inspection
are the Group Commander and his Adjutant (then a First
Lieutenant).


MAJOR R. H. BARNES
DEPOT SUPPLY OFFICER
The oldest pilot on the field (he was
teaching rookies the “how” way back
in 1918) yet one of the most energetic
is our Supply Officer.
Depot Supply Officers: Capt. Trumbull, Capt. Attwood, Lt. Claus,
Major Barnes, Capt, Brighton, Lt. Young, Capt. Sullivan.
Interest in his work is sup-
planted only by his love for crowds after duty
hours, when his enthusiasm and vitality put
younger men to shame. His consistently amiable
disposition has made him one of our more popu-
lar officers. When things are shaping according
to plan his favorite expression is: “I swear to
goodness,” but if ever he says: “I’ll be a suck-egg
mule! ” just run as fast as you can because he’s
on the warpath.
A voluminous speaker, the
Major, a graduate in law of Ohio State Univer-
sity, is also an ardent business man. As executive
of the largest department in the Group, he has
built supply to handle an annual turnover of
130,000 requisitions. His motto: “Anything from
grass skirts to bomber engines: we have ’em!”
Supply Section, Group Headquarters.


MAJOR D. D. STEELE
ENGINEERING OFFICER
When Pearl Harbor was infamously at-
tacked, Major Steele (thee a Lieutenant)
was in Manila with a P-40 squadron. Dur-
ing the next few weeks he made 72 opera-
tional flights and shot down two Zeros in
combat.
This was the culmination
of many' years of training begun when he learned
to fly while gelling his degree in mechanical en-
gineering at the University of Akron. In January,
1942, lie flew from the Philippines to Australia
and, after serving with the SAFSC (where lie
'was promoted to Major), took over the job of
81st A.D.G. Engineering Officer in September,
1943, with responsibility for the erection, modi-
fication and maintenance of all planes on the
field.
He has a high opinion of
the abilities of the men in his command and,
although a “hard boss” when there’s work to be
done, his fairness has gained him the utmost of
obedience and respect. He was one of the first
officers to succumb to the Australian. Cupid,
Engineering Officers: —(Front Row): Lt. Himes, Lt. Wallace, Lt. Watson, Capt.
Cupp,. Lt. Meding, Capt. Gutierrez, Capt. Rego, Capt. Seiver, WjO Hodges.
(Rear Row): Lt. Reynolds, Lt. Adams, Lt. Grimes, Lt. Naeser, Lt. Barwick,
Major Steele, Lt. LaBerge, Lt. Knauf, Lt. Gronostajski, Lt Lingenfelder.
Engineering Office, Group Headquarters.


MAJOR J. SLINGERLAND
PROVOST MARSHAL
The commander of the M.P.’s—tough-guys
of the airbase —is himself mild-voiced and
peaceable, his career showing the unusual
combination of simultaneous academic and
military interests.
Guard Mount at Eagle Farm: Sgt. Reiner, Cpl. Eisterhold, Cpl. Neve, T/5
Scigalski, Pvt. Mollenkopf, Pvt. Crisp, Pfc. Mierzwa, Pvt. Slusser, Pvt.
Michelman, T/4 Schule.
While a student at the coun-
try’s foremost colleges (he attended Stanford and
Harvard and received a Bachelor of Laws degree
from the University of Minnesota in 1927), and
later while an accountant in Minneapolis, he
was for nineteen years in the Army Reserve and
held a commission in the Field Artillery.
Toward the end of 1940 he
was called to active service in the rank of cap-
tain and, arriving in Australia three months after
Pearl Harhor, was assigned to northern outposts
and then to the islands. After the war the Major
intends to return to the calm life of our northern
lake region, hut while in the army he sticks by
his M.P.’s with the assertion: “We won’t take a
hack seat for anybody!”
Provost Marshal’s Office, Group Headquarters:
T/5 Cavanagh, Sgt. Kelley, Major Slingerland, Pvt. L. D.
Reinhardt.


MAJOR E. C. KARST
SIGNAL OFFICER
Went to work at eighteen for Bell Tele-
phone of New Jersey, and climbed up the
pole until he reached the position of wire-
chief, responsible for some 75,000 stations
in the heart of the State.
Then after twenty years of
buzzes and busy signals, he pulled a silver bar
off the G.I. merry-go-round in June, 1942, and
six months later was in command of a company.
Frequent parties, swims, and ball-games, and un-
tiring efforts to help his “boys” out of any and
all difficulties, have gained him their respect as
a friend and a shrewd leader.
In August, 1943, he came
to Australia and organized the largest and most
efficient Signal-Aviation Depot in this theatre.
A clever man, quick to grasp situations, he is at
heart a sentimentalist, fond of puppy-dogs and
old memories, who wants his troops to treat him
as though he really were their “old man.” His
favorite expressions: “Say it again, Charlie!”
“This is IT, men!”
Signal Officers: — (Seated): W/O Ayers, W/O Kling, Lt. Gussman,
Major Karst, Lt. Hartman, Lt. Speroni. (Standing): Lt. Finger,
Lt. Himes, Lt. Flynn, W/O Overby, Lt. Crowley, Capt. Morris.
Signal Section, Group Headquarters.


CAPT. K. S. URQUHART
CHAPLAIN
Everything about our tall, athletic, heavily-
tanned Chaplain points to the fact that he
is a philosophical man-of-action who be-
lieves that manual as well as mental labor
is good.
ON THE ROOF: Chaplain Urquhan building the Fourth & Fifth
Graders’ Club at Eagle Farm.
After working Ms way
through St. Stephen’s College and the Nashotah
School of Theology, lie took a run-down parish
in New York, and worked for twelve years to
rebuild it both physically and spiritually. In
April, 1942, lie joined the Army and ten months
later was assigned to the 81st, starting- with no-
thing except the chiving desire to help others.
Hammer in hand, he built his own chapel and
an N.C.O. Club for the benefit of the enlisted
men on the post.
His favorite occupations
are “reading and helping the boys.” When an
enlisted man once asked where his office was
located our Chaplain pointed at the sky. The
man proceeded to tell his troubles at the lumber
yard.
Getting the lay of the land at the 81st Advanced Base in
New Guinea.


CAPT. C. L. SEYFRIED
ORDNANCE OFFICER
Affable, quiet to the point of reticence, the
Captain, an authority on guns, is at his
desk most evenings working on the various
problems that confront the head of the
Ordnance Section.
He is vested with the task
of seeing that the cannon and guns are in good
working order, that the supply of ammunition is
uninterrupted, that the vehicles are transhipped
on schedule. Formerly a Company Commander,
Captain Scyfried has not lost interest in the wel-
fare of the men under him and he forever worries
about them.
A native of Brooklyn, and
a graduate of New York University in 1928, he
worked for the Squibb Laboratories as engineer
and draftsman until the Army “drafted” him in
April, 1941, witli a First Lieutenant’s commis-
sion and soon thereafter gave him command of
an Ordnance Company at Mitchel Field, New
York. Since his arrival in this theatre he has
seen eleven months’ service in New Guinea.
Ordnance Property Sectioh at the Group Headquarters.
Ordnance Section, Group Headquarters: Miss Coe, S/Sgt.
Wiesenfeld, Capt. Seyfried, Lt. Anderson, Miss Kelly,
Cpl. Bowdish.


CAPT. S. M. WATSON
CHEMICAL OFFICER
The short officer sits quietly behind his
desk in a corner of the Headquarters Build-
ing, or walks slowly through the warehouse,
doing his work thoroughly but without
fanfare.
He speaks with the unhur-
ried softness traditionally expected of Georgians.
In reply to direct questions, yon learn that lie
worked for the Agricultural Adjustment Ad-
ministration after getting his Bachelor of Science
degree from the University of Georgia, that he
taught school for a year, and entered the Army
as a Second Lieutenant in September, 1940.
His job is to direct the
supply of all materials necessary for offensive
and defensive chemical warfare. Note his twenty-
seven months’ overseas and ask opinions of
Australia: the Captain will tilt his chair back
slightly, a smile will grow and take shape, and
he will laugh softly, leaving you to guess at his
thoughts.
Men of Hq, Sq. receiving instruction from Lt. Garber,
C.W.S. Office, Group Headquarters: S/Sgt. Cadwell, Pvt,
Kling, Capt. Watson.


Specialist training with the
medical detachment of the University of Kansas
was completed in 1934, and after eight years at
the home base and on D.S. in the east he was
commissioned a Captain, He came to Australia
by air and served with the 81st as Squadron Sur-
geon until March 28, 1944, when lie succeeded
Major King as Group Surgeon.
Despite that professional
appearance of “high seriousness” he enjoys a
good time, and has helped produce many suc-
cessful parties as president of the Officers’ Club.
His distinguishing feature from the private’s eye
view is that despite lengthy exposure lie has con-
tracted none of the diseases collectively labelled
“G. 1.”
CAPT. K. E. COX
GROUP SURGEON
By all rights his connection with the “Air
Forces” should be dated from well before
December, 1942, when he joined the 81st,
for he has long been a member of the oldest
of ground crews —for the stork.
First Nurses assigned to the Grouo: Lt. Juanita Bolt, Lt. Betty Hall
(chief nurse), and Lt. Mary Kravitz.
Medical Headquarters: Cpl. Leib, Cpl. Groger, S/Sgt. Meehan,
Sgt. Jochems.


LT. H. P. KELLER
TRANSPORTATION OFFICER
A typical, good-natured, easy-going, pipe-
smoking Southerner with a soft voice which
frequently speaks firm convictions.
W.N.E.L’s-drivers of Group staff cars: Misses Jekyll, Lewis. Monkhouse,
Caine, MacDonald (Sgt.), Burke, Arden, Harrison, Izatt.
He was an accountant in
civilian life and has no trouble “keeping up”
with his two-lmodrcd civilian and G.I. drivers.
Volunteering for service in June, 1942, he was
graduated from O.C.S. at Miami six months later,
and was assigned to the 44th Depot Repair
Squadron, where he was appointed Adjutant and
Squadron Mess and Supply Officer.
Since becoming Group
Transportation Officer in January, 1944, Lt.
Keller has consolidated the many scattered motor
pools into one Group Pool and instituted written
(in addition to practical) tests for drivers. He
can boast of a record which includes no major
accidents, very few minor. Favorite sport is
hunting.
Transportation Office , Group Headquarters: Miss Nightingale,
Lt. Keller.


LT. D. K. ANDERSON
UTILITIES & CONSTRUCTION OFFICER
One of the few 81st officers who can boast
of eighteen years in the Army with experi-
ence from Private to Master Sergeant and
Warrant Officer before receiving a direct
commission.
After studying industrial
engineering at Armour Technical Institute,
“Andy” got his uniform in 1925 from an Engin-
eers’ Supply Room and joined the Air Corps
three years later. He was the first enlisted man
assigned to the 81 A.D.G., serving as mechanic,
crew chief, and line chief. Because of his out-
standing work he was promoted to First Lieu-
tenant from W/0 in May, 1943.
His job has brought him
into direct contact with many Australian
workers, and he says of this country: “I like
the people in it. It has wonderful potentialities
and chances for a lot of development.” But
when it’s all over he would like to finish his time
in the Army (in the IJ.S.A.) and retire to “do a
lot o’ fisiiin’.”
Group Utilities Section: —(Front Row): Pfc. Martin, Cpl. Smith, Cpl.
LeFurgey, Sgt. Watkins. (Second Row): Sgt. McCloskey, Pfc. Hancock,
S/Sgt. Keister, Lt. Anderson, T/Sgt. Raef, T/5 Strange, S/Sgt. Lukes.
(Third Row): Cpl. Tabor, Sgt. Klutts, Spl. Cass, T/4 Salyers, Cpl. Flint,
Cpl. Snyder, T/4 Stokey, Sgt. Perlmutter.
Ditch digger preparing trench for water pipes at Eagle Farm
Airbase.


LT. F. W. LUCTERHAND
PERSONNEL OFFICER
When he hands out a long, complicated
project to be accomplished, he leans back
in his chair, slaps at his desk, and says with
a broad grin: “How aboot that?”
Personnel Section, Advanced Base: Pfc. Mallon, Pfc. Burruss, Lt.
Lucterhand, S/Sgt. O'Connor, Cpl. Talon, Sgt. Steger, Pvt. Cohen,
Pvt. Fryer.
Diligent and quiet,although
loquacious and friendly, with an effervescent
smile at a party and frequently at work. Joined
the Air Corps January, 1942, and skipped lightly
through the various ranks to M/'Sgt. before
0.C.5., from which he was graduated May, 1943.
Before joining the Army was manager of a large
five-and-tcn cent store, and studied business ad-
ministration nights.
His interests now are get-
ting men paid on time, keeping all personnel re-
cords up to date, and keeping men on the jobs
for which they are qualified. He sticks by his
guns and his men, and has done many things to
favor the enlisted men unknown to them. Is best
liked by those who know him well.
Personnel Section, Group Headquarters.


LT. M. R. HICKS
CIVILIAN PERSONNEL OFFICER
From teaching of geo-politics to the
making of history would be the best
characterization of Lt. Hicks’ varied
career since he left his class in Hous-
ton in 1942.
Teacher tactics are still ap-
plied in his kindly ways. Undergraduate study
at Sam Houston State Teachers’ College and an
M.S. degree from Houston University have given
him excellent training in relationship with
people. As Classification Officer, Lt. Hicks was
well liked by the military personnel; then many
friendships were made when lie took over the
job of Civilian Personnel Officer.
As Historical Officer he has
made it possible for his staff to operate efficiently
through whole-hearted cooperation. Though an
added function requiring extra work, this officer
has never tired of getting his men all the facili-
ties and allowing them to show their own initia-
tive. A type of man who usually evokes the
phrase: “He’s a good Joe.”
Civilian Personnel Office, Group Headquarters: Lt. Hicks,
Mrs. Page (Secretary).
Civilian Personnel Section, Group
Headquarters.


LT. R. M. CLARK
STATISTICAL CONTROL OFFICER
Lt. Clark’s birthplace, Dallas, gave
him tall stature, fine features and jet
black hair. The army went one better
givings him a silver bar and Citation
Device with two Oak Leaf Clusters,
and a pretty important job.
Statistical Control Office: Pvt. Grainer, Sgt. Luck,
Cpl. Todd.
One of the few seasoned
soldiers when he entered the army early in 1942,
Cpl. Clark was recommended for O.C.S. in June,
1942, and made it almost blindfolded, his attend-
ance of Kemper Military Academy coming in
good stead. After graduation as 2nd Lieutenant
in July, 1942, from a Statistical Control course
he was much in demand since the G.I. circus car-
ried few mathematicians on its trapeze.
September 1, 1942, he was
shipped overseas to help figure the shortest
route to victory, and February 4, 1943, was as-
signed to Headquarters, 81st A.D.G. Lt. Clark
needs little praise, and asks for less. Still, his
enlisted personnel cannot refrain from an
evaluation:—he is a swell fellow. To tell what
his Australian wife says of him would be divulg-
ing domestic secrets.


MAJOR MANUEL B. VON WALD
Squadron Commander
Ist Sgt. Freeman, Cpl. Madigan, Cpl.
Bedian, M/Sgt, Guthrie, orderly room
tacticians.
HEADQUARTERS & HEADQUARTERS
SQUA DRON
From a cadre of two officers and fifteen enlisted
men dispersed in a foreign city, to a compact group of
16 officers and 150 enlisted men directing the activities of
nearly 3,500 personnel, both military and civilian, and known
throughout the Southwest Pacific for its accomplishments, the
Squadron developed in record time. Far from the temporary
set-up of a year ago, when it was spread over the “Valley,” the
Headquarters offices had become unified under one huge roof situated
in the center of a throbbing airbase. Attached and assigned services
—Chemical, Ordnance, Medical, Signal—had filled their T/O’s at
the time of consolidation and began operating as an integral
part of the Group.
On October 27, 1943, Headquarters Squadron moved
I from the Ward Motors Building, where it had been since
organization in May of 1942, to a new camp site at Eagle
Farm. Here the men were quartered in huts resembling one
story barracks made of salvaged airplane crates, Australian
lumber and pre-fabricated material. The muddy area was
filled in, a boardwalk built, and the main road graded and
packed down, which eliminated in a short time a great deal of
the dampness. The name “Mosquito Junction,” painted in bold
letters at the entrance to the orderly room, was intended as a
memorial to the conditions existing before the Squadron moved in because
the layer-base of the groundman’s flying gremlin was blitzed with
destruction of the swamp.
A vacant civilian house was converted into a day
room and decorated with original paintings by one of the
members of the unit. Furnishings, matching curtains
draped on the windows, lent a homely atmosphere to
the place where men relaxed after the day’s work,
listened to the radio, read, and wrote home. Twice
Cpl. Bedian takes two G.l.’s through a guided tour of the
Squadron Street at Eagle Farm.


weekly, evenings were spent drinking beer out of canteen
cups. On other alternate nights movies were shown in
conjunction with the 81st Supply Squadron. With monthly
parties and dances supplementing the above activities not much
more was required to keep the morale high.
Several men rose from the ranks during the
course of the year. Warrant-Officer D. K. Anderson was appointed
First Lieutenant. Two Staff Sergeants received direct commissions
as Second Lieutenants and five enlisted men attained similar
ranks through Officer Candidate School. Aviation Cadet School
claimed three men who were returned to the United States for
training. The same number of men over 38 years of age
was sent back to our “dreamland” after aging overseas for
1| years to be transferred to the Enlisted Reserve Corps and
to resume civilian life. i
Constant alteration is the lot of any army
unit. This Squadron, however, has undergone enough revolu-
tionary changes to suffice any member for the duration, let alone
for one year. Commands of both Group and Squadron changed
hands numerous times, personnel were rotated, location was moved.
Then came a calm that usually brings with it contentment and a
feeling that for a time at least there will be no movement. But fate
decreed otherwise. Towards the end of April, 1944, the 81st Air
Depot Group, comprising four squadrons and attached units, was
ordered north. The short notice was just sufficient for the
organization to stop all work and pack up overnight. The
Headquarters Squadron embarked on April 21st, accom-
panied by part of the other units, as an advanced detail
to start the 81st on its initial travels along the forward
areas and the wilds of New Guinea. A
First Sergeant
RAY E. FREEMAN
Capt. Von Wald replacing Capt. Frazier at
Squadron Commander, September 28,
1943.
A “liquid sunshine” day in Australia.
& HEADQUARTERS
DRON


HEADQUARTERS SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FORUNT ROW : T/Sgt Nearing, T/Sgt. Hall, T/Sgt.Slater
S/Sgt. K e lly, Major Von Wald, 1st Sgt. Freeman, M/Sgt.
Guthie,S/S gt. Hinton , T/Sgt. Highman, M /Sgt. Pachanik.
SECOUND ROW : Pfc. Omundson,Sgt. Barkumeg, Pfc.Berdysz,
Sgt. Hollar, Clp. Cord,pfc. Bodolato, Pfc. Lundberg, S/Sgt.
Wiesfeld, Sgt. Mccloskey, Vlp. Bowdish. THIRD ROW:
Cpl. Piotrowski, Pfc. Guckert, S/Sgt. Meehan. Sgt Le Duc,
Ptc. Konschak , Pfc. Tuma, Cpl. Lines, Sgt, Parsons, Sgt.
Whitne y,Sgt. C.L. Smith. FOURTH ROW: Cpl. Leib, Cpl.
Beav cr,P fc. Mckee,Sgt. O'Brien, Cpl. Bedian, Pfc. Barotz,
Sgt. Luck, Cpl. My erly, Sgt. Sheridan, Sgt. Bailey. FIFTH
ROW: Pfc. Kulin , Sgt. Heat, Sgt. Perlmutter,Cap. Johnson,
Sg t.J. Friedman, Cpl: Talon, Sgt. Moses, Sgt. Hamby, Sgt.
Klu tts , S/Sgt. O'Con nor.


FORNT ROW: Capt. Urquhart, Capt. Miller, Capt. Seyfired,
Ca pt. Tisda< Major Barnes, Major King, Capt.
Zi on, Capt. Duerst, Capt. Watson. SECOUND ROW: C W /O
Engle, W/O Starlik, W/O Gibart, Wessman, Lt. Lucter.
hand, Lt.McMaster, Lt. Bussell, Hicks, Lt. Adkins, Lt.
W.W. Capl. Dawidson,sgt. Barnes,S/Sg. Kaiser, Put. Scal
treto, Put.Kling, Cpl. Yannes, Cpl. LeFurgey,Sgt. Mayfirld,
Sgt. Ivery, Put. Pfc. Perry, Cpl.Tabor, S/Sgt. Kesiter, Pfc. Brocious,
FOUTH ROW: Pfc. Madar. Sgt. Williams, Put. Fletcher,
T/5 LUNA,put santiesban. Cpl. Harris. S gt. Wambsganss,
pfc. Chanpman. Cpl. Cass, S/Sat. McCarvill, Pfc. J.E. Smith,
M/sgt. Raet, Sgt. Weaver. FIFTH ROW : T/5 Doucette, Pfc.
Lindsey, Sgt. Whitacre, Sgt. Bacciarini, Cpl. Knittel, Pfc.
Teaford, Cpl. Wolf, Sgt. Boyd, Cpl.Hanson, Pfc. Martin,
Cpl. V. R. Smith, Cpl. Snyder Sgt. Wesbrook. SIXTH ROW:
Sgt. Burke, Cpl. Madigan, Cpl. Alfares, Pfc. Mahoney, Cpl.
Dickens, Cpl. Brykala, Pfc. Lagala, Cpl. Owens, Pvt. Eichen,
S/Sgt. Epperson, Pfc. Mallon, Pvt. Blackwell.
uadron Personnel


FU N and How
The Squadron held monthly
parties for its men. An ex-
ample of comradery and fun
is displayed in these records
of the frolic held at the N.C.O.
Club on November 29, 1943.
Remember more of those
nights when the music was
warm, drinks cold and com-
pany so obliging? Remember?


1 General Connell awards the Purple Heart
to Cpl. (now Sgt.) Westbrook, May 8 , 1943 ,
for wound received in action in New
Guinea.
2 Sgt. Robert Moses, one of the first to swap
typewriter for ticket to U.S.A. in the
April, 1944, rotation quota.
3 Newly commissioned Lt. James S. Maier
tries to guess his destination.
4 S/Sgt. Neikes, former Chief of 81st Photo.
Section, who returned home December,
1943, for Flying Cadet training.


EXODUS from Eagle Form to New Guinea
APRIL 21-30, 1944.
AP
1 Atabrine. You winge at its bitterness and bless it later when you get
to mosquito-infested country. The Army takes mo chances: it feeds it
to you before you leave.
2 Some smiled that April 21st, but to most of us it was a sad day of
parting with friends in Australia whom we had known for over two
years. Destination
3 Here it is.
4 How we lived there: the first Hq. Sq. tent in New Guinea.
5 April 30, 1944, when we got off that boat our minds turned to one
thing . . . chow.


6 Cpls. Lnngdoc and Redian in front of the new orderly
room.
7 Mud, aplenty, like clay it clings to your shoes, trousers,
and sometimes climbs way up to your waist.
8 And this—the supply room of our Squadron at the ad-
vance base.
9 Cpls. Cass and Smith will tell you that tent pitching is
hard work but important, especially if you intend to have
comfortable, dry quarters.


CAPTAIN WILLIAM O. FARRIOR
Squadron Commander.
Squadron Officers:—(Kneeling): Lt. Meding, Capt. Farrior, Cnpt.
Cupp, Lt. Lillig. (Standing): Lt. Adams, Capt. Seiver, Lt. Poe,
Lt. Barwick, Lt. LaBerge, Lt. Wood.
LIEUTENANT
RALPH E. LILLIG
Squadron
Adjutant.
EIGHTY-FIRST DEPOTREPAIR SQUADRON
HE 81st Depot Repair Squadron looks
upon the Eagle Farm airbase as its own baby, reared to a
vigorous manhood by the labor and enthusiasm of the
Squadron’s enlisted men and officers. Two months after
the Coral Sea battle ended all Jap hopes of an Australian
conquest, men forming the nucleus of the 81st were sent
from the south to establish a new major base. Awaiting
them were two short airstrips and two small ill-equipped
hangars.
In August, 1942, lacking many tools
and using power supplied by a few one-cylinder engines,
they assembled the first P-38’s to arrive in this theatre.
They have since had the rare pleasure of seeing their work
produce victories. This was particularly true of the modi-
fication of armament on the B-25 carried on under the
supervision of Lt.-Col. “Pappy” Gunn. Planes, improved
here by the installation of .50 caliber nose guns, played a
decisive role in the Bismarck Sea battle and were referred
to as follows in Lt.-General Kenney’s commendation: “The
effectiveness of the forward fire of the airplanes making
the low level attacks on the Japanese convoy is ample testi-
mony of the skillful workmanship of the personnel respon-
sible for the design and installation of the forward firing
fixed guns in these airplanes.” This achievement is doubly
impressive when we remember that all work had to be
done on a strict schedule, night and day, rain and shine,
that men worked ten, twelve, and twenty hour stretches
without days off.
As men and equipment were being
sent in greater numbers to this theatre, both the Squadron
and its field increased in size and importance. From a two-
strip, two-hangar base. Eagle Farm came to house the
biggest Air Depot Group in Australia, with three strips, nine
hangars, and a large machine-shop building. The 81st
Repair Squadron grew from 200 to 460 men, each a skilled
technician, and still other organizations had to be attached
to take care of the tremendous volume of work assigned
34


this depot. This work is the assembly and modification of
all types of fighter aircraft for this theatre. While essenti-
ally "safe” ground work, it has its dangers and has pro-
duced sorrows as well as joys. Deepest of these was the
loss on July 17, 1943, of Major Donald Simpson, Squadron
Commander, and Capt. Paul May and Lt. James Handley,
test pilots. In the course of “routine” work they had flown
three P-38’s to a nearby field and were returning in an A-20
when the fatal accident occurred. They were given full
military honors in the presence of the entire Squadron
under a sky in which flew a formation of P-38’s with three
empty positions. The job of C.O. was taken over by Major
Forrest Harsh, and, in October, 1943, by Captain William
0. Farrior, who had been with the 81st for over a year as
test pilot.
The 81st men are not noted for adher-
ence to Ben Franklin’s adage about the healthy, wealthy,
and wi,sc. When projects had to be rushed, they worked
very hard, went to bed at odd hours, and slept very little.
When the pace was eased they made sure to take advantage
of all possible recreational facilities. Numerous Squadron
parties were held on the base and at the Non-Commissioned
Officers’ Club in the city, and on special occasions the men
were treated by their officers to steak fries and boisterous
beer parties. As was to he expected, however, the biggest
boost in spirit was when the first four men went to the
States on the rotation plan.
The work of the 81st Repair Squadron
was no small factor in the Allied advance northwards. As
the front line was pushed up, more large bases were re-
quired closer to the scene of operations, and the mission of
the Squadron in Australia was completed. In April, 1944,
the 81st was sent north to begin again the saga of army
pioneering and achievement which will soon eliminate all
rotation plans.
Ist SGT. D. J. PITT.
S/Sgt. Doyle issuing clothing in his supply room at Eagle Farm.
The new Squadron
orderly room at the-
advanced base:
S/Sgt. Wells,
Sgt. King.
35
REPAIR SQUADRON


R EPAIR SQEN. Prepares to leave!
at tfce *«""
rtcetf 1 - 6 ®'' 10lA e ®
the the «** ’ ■
yttM 110
.a^ up -
Equipm ent was crated almost overnight.
and loade d on trucks to be taken to
the doc k.
the date: April 20,1944.


CHOW HOUNDS
1 Being mess sergeant of the largest mess hall at
Eagle Farm was a joh in itself, but having to
worry whether his prize dogs would live after
he fed them some of the chow prepared for the
men is what made M/Sgt. Larry Hynek pre-
maturely bald.
2 The 81st Repair Squadron Mess Hall at Forward Base.
3 The 81st Repair “Belly Robbers”: Pvt. McAdams, Pvt.
Maas, S/Sgt. Bender, Cpl. Clark, Pvt. Orchard, and a K.P.
4 The kitchen is not exactly modern, but
5 Water is heated in a steam plant truck.


81ST DEPOT REPAIR SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FRONT RO W : Pfc. Kinseth, Sgt. Crane, S/Sgt. Cernkovich,
Pvt. Kli nger, Cpl. Angrisano, S/Sgt. Bender, S/Sgt. Ulcinski,
Sgt. Vinson, Sgt. E. W. Byers, Cpl. Bussiere, Sgt. Keen, Sgt.
Castrucc i, T/Sgt. E. Anton, M/Sgt. Walker. SECOND ROW:
Sgt. Newman, Sagt. W. E. Johnson, Sgt. Ethridge, S/Sgt.
Decke r,S/Sgt. Flemi ng, S/S gt. Garcia, Sgty. Hahn, Sgt. Egbert,
T/Sgt. Bunnell, Cpl. Tripp, S/S gt.B.T.Brown, Sgt. Hyman,
S/Sgt. Nose, S/Sgt. D'Asta. THI RD ROW: T/Sgt. Daly, Sgt.
Medali e,Sgt . Pazak, M/S gt. Fuller, Cpl. I. G. Brown, S/Sgt.
Dunse th, Sgt . Mize, Sgt. Opgaard, Cpl. Evans, Sgt. McPhail,
Sgt. Kennedy, S/Sgt. Cain, Cpl. Ticehurst, Sgt. Kinley.
FOURTH ROW: Sgt. Slavin, S/Sgt. Provorse, S/Sgt. R.
Thompson, Sgt. Thomas, Sgt. Sevedge, T/Sgt. Hendricks,
S /Sgt. M. Th omps on , Sgt. Skutnik, Sgt. Retmanski, S/Sgt.
Carlt on, Sgt. Va ugh n, Sgt. Trahan, S/Sg t. Ramey, Pvt. Des.
mond. FIFTH ROW: Cpl. Al eshire, Sgt.Wi lson, S/Sgt.
Wareham, M/Sgt. Ko val,T/Sgt. J. B. Kavis, Cpl. Bowman,
Cpl. Benser, Sgt. W ohlford, Cpl. Chittenden, Pfc. Cooke,
Pvt. Luce, S/Sgt . Clotfelter, S/Sgt. Warren, Sgt. W. H. Wil.
liams. SIXT H ROW : Sgt . C allah an, Cpl. Ca se, Cpl. Day,
Cpl. Hafft , Cpl . E. Thoma s, C pl . Clar k, Cpl. Sparger, T/5
Lachowit z,Cpl. J. Smith, Smith, Sgt. Thorson, Cpl. Sartain, S/Sgt.
McGinn, Cpl. Conrad, Pvt. Studman.


FRONT RO W : Capt. Cupp,Lt. Adams, Lt. Barwick, Lt. Poe,
Capt. Farrior, Capt. Seiver,Lt. LaBerge, Lt. Lillig, Lt. Med-
ing, L t. Wood. SECNOD ROW : Pvt. Bonanno, Sgt. Daniels,
Pfc. Cole,Pfc. Te llman, Pvt.Mog, Pf c. W orwa, Cpl. Nettles,
Pfc. Hayes, Pfc. S. Peterson, Sgt. Harrison, Pfc. J. Pitt, Pfc,
Pille, Pfc. Mannix. THIRD ROW: S/Sgt. Congleton, Sgt.
Watkins, Sgt. P.A. Williams, Pvt. Gregory, Pfc. Scott, Pvt.
Volpi, Pfc. S. M. Smith, Pfc. Fitzgerald, Cpl. Adolphson,
Pfc. Horn, Pvt. Metzer, Cpl. Kasuboski, Pvt. H. C. Payne.
FOURTH ROW: Cpl. H. Bates, Pfc. Conley, Pfc. Cripps,
Pf c. Warwick, Pfc. Jacobson, Cpl. Kunyack, Sgt. Manley,
Cpl. L. Smi th, Sgt. Sween ey, Pfc. Siltherthorn, Pfc. Weakley,
Pfc. Pue tz, Pvt .Schoemaker. FIFTH ROW: M/Sgt. Niebur,
T/Sgt. Downey, Pfc.Kruzel, Pvt. Cummins, Pvt. Keaster,
Pvt. G. Orch a rd, Pf c. Foltz, Cpl. Davidson, Pvt. McAdams,
Pvt. Boatrigth, Pvt. French, Pfc. Jusko, M/Sgt. Szuchy.
SIXTH ROW : Pfc. Lords, Pfc. Rurup, Pfc. McCreary, Sgt.
Shields, Pfc. J.C. Payne, Pvt. J. Montgomery, Pfc. Markley,
Cpl. O'Leary, S/Sgt. Townley, Pvt. Jordan, S/Sgt. Kovatch,
Cpl.Ready.
uadron Personnel


81 ST DEPOT REPAIR SQDN. PERSONNEL
FRONT ROW: M/Sgt. Kindle, Cpl. Dysart, Cpl. Cormier
Cpl. Coleman, Pfc. Francis, Cpl. Ehlers, T/Sgt. Eckert, Cpl.
D. L. Smith, Sgt. Fincher, Pfc. Fisher, Cpl. Hallion, Cpl.
Cornelius. SECOND ROW: Sgt. Mikkelsen, Cpl. Heine, cpl.
Holmes, Pvt. Mauller, Cpl. E. A. Miller, Sgt. Finley, Sgt.
Heath, Cpl. Snyder, Sgt. W. E. Johnson, S/Sgt. Hampton,
Pvt. Hanson, Sgt. Herring. THIRD ROW: T/5 Pelstring,
Cpl. W. Peterson, Sgt. Phare, Cpl.O'Hare, S/Sgt. Lacota,
Pvt. Parsons, Pfc. Juares, Cpl. Kinsey, Cpl. Peltekis, Sgt. M.
Cumming, Cpl. Quandt, T/Sgt. Lipper. FOURTH ROW:
Pvt. McMillen, Pfc. Azar, pfc. Aguado, Pfc. G. Anton, Pfc.
Abrams, Cpl. Wolz, M/Sgt. Metzinger, S/ Sgt. W.C. Mont-
gomery, Cpl. R. West, Cpl. Reynolds, Pfc. Aulfes, Cpl.
A lbanese. FIFTH ROW: Cpl. Burw e ll, Pfc. Ephraim, Pfc.
D'Alessandra, Pfc. Crai g, Pfc. Bonham, Pfc. Buczynski, Pfc.
Cabana ,Cpl. Curry, Pfc.Bea r,Pf c. Mashbu rn, Pfc. Finch,
S/Sg t.H.E. Morris. SIXTH ROW: Pfc. maurice, S/Sgt.
Murdock, T/Sgt. Sanders, Sgt. Sorrell, Pfc. Fufidio, Pfc.
Grushkin, Cpl. Hargis, Pfc. Gass, Cpl. W. T. Johnson, Pvt.
A.C. Johnson, Cpl. Lerschen, Cpl. Muirhead.


THIS IS THE Spusut
The Squadron held some hilarious
parties while at the Farm. The lens
recorded one of them held at the
Squadron Mess Hall in October,
1943.


81ST DEPOT REPAIR SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FRONT ROW: Pfc. Hulme, Pfc. McCullough, S/Sgt. Sturm,
S/Sgt. Morgan, Pfc. Kotoff, Cpl. Moffett, Cpl. Meyer, Pfc.
Pitcher, Pfc. Moitoza, Pfc. Walsh, Cpl. Karpenko, Pvt. A. E.
Orchard. SECOND ROW:Cpl. Fort, S/Sgt. Simpson, S/Sgt.
Stafford, Cpl. Kanielson, Cpl. Wadsworth, S/Sgt. Murphy,
Cpl. Kettner, Pfc. Partridge, Pfc. Nuzzo, Pfc. Kovolik, T/Sgt.
Witherspoon, Pvt. C. E. Brown. THIRD ROW: S/Sgt. stovall,
Pfc. Kasper, S/Sgt. Newt, Cpl. Richert, Pvt. Bateman, Cpl.
Schell, Pfc. Suttles, Cpl. Zane, Pfc. Prutsman, Pfc. Pitrone,
Pfc. Piaskowski, Pfc. Fifield. FOURTH ROW: Pfc. Charity,
T/Sgt. Trottier, Pfc. Pal, Pfc.Schhuttloffel,Pfc Rodjom,
Pfc. Krueger, Pfc.Squier,MSgt. Sosowski, Pvt.R.E.
Anderson, Pfc.K.B>Smith,Cpl Wright, T/Sgt.Waitkerns.
FIFTH ROW: Pfc. Neuls, Pvt Sslmon, Cpl. Withem, Pfc
Rukavina, Cpl.Stortz,Pfc. Vasques, Pfc. Young,Cpl.Ver
Steegh. Pfc>hick,Pfc.Hares, Pvt.Hawkins, Pfc. Berg.
SITH ROW: Pfc. Muloney, Cpl. W. T. Johnson, Pvt.
Dalzell, Pfc. Hoffman, Pfc. D.Robinson, Pfc. Strycchrz, Pfc.
JOse, Pvt, J, Jhons, Pfc. Reiver, Pfc. Resse, Pvt. Marchant,
Pfc. Peters.


FRONT ROW: Pvt. Luca, Pfc. Lokey, Pfc. Strack, Cpl.
Olufson, Cpl. Radmacher, Cpl. Gerolamo, S/Sgt. Nelson,
Pvt. Kimmelman, Pvt. Atkinson, Ptc. Wilkinson, Cpl. Russell,
Pvt. H. Miller. SECOND ROW: S/Sgt. Becker, Sgt. Beier,
Pfc. Pierce, Pfc. Murray, Pfc. Rudinski, Pfc. Rorvik, Pvt. S.
Moore, Pvt. Petak, Pfc. Rasmussen, Pvt. Leone, Cpl. Z.
Thomas, Cpl. Brunk. THIRD ROW: S/Sgt. Blum, Pfc. Van
Buren, Pfc. Trummel, Cpl. M. Wells, Pvt. Lock, Sgt. Cracken,
Pvt. McBride, Pfc. H. Wood, Pvt. Tramontin, Pfc. Pfeffer,
Pvt. Fahey, Pvt. Sheeley. FOURTH ROW: Pfc. Owen, Cpl.
Tricon, Pfc. David, Pfc. Ver Heul, Cpl. Einig. Cpl. Roy, Pvt.
Messenger, Pfc. Ingalls, Cpl. Kraly, M/Sgt. Hynek, Pfc. W. A.
Millar, Pvt. H. Johnson. FIFTH ROW: Cpl. Oerly, S.Sgt.
Aikins, S/Sgt. Bobo, Pvt. W. Y. Johnson, Pfc. Rolya, Cpl.
Shelton, Pvt. Maas, Cpl. Dubrod, Cpl. Wasik, Pfc. McClendon,
Pfc. Mattsen, Sgt. Heath, SIXTH ROW: Sgt. Battaglia, Pvt.
Cattabiani, Sgt. King, Cpl. McIntire, Cpl. Schales, Cpl. Weigt,
S/Sgt. Doyle, Pfc. Laurendeau, Pfc. F. Garcia, Pvt. Churchill,
Cpl. Richerl, Pvt. Bennewitz.
uadron Personnel


CAPT. JOHN C. ATTWOOD,
Squadron Commander, appointed Assistant
Depot Supply Officer, April, 1944.
Advanced Base Orderly Room: Lt. Goodrich, Sgt,
Fraser, Capt. Sullivan (Squadron Commander),
S/Sgt. Winget.
81 ST DEPOT SUPPLY SQUADRON
T
u U E past year lias seen rapid de-
velopment of unity and efficiency in the Supply Squadron.
This has helped to facilitate the procurement and shipping
of supplies, making more useful to the forward areas the
valuable work for which the Group was so well known.
By August, 1943, four large 40,000 sq.
fool warehouses were in use at Eagle Farm. However, the
Depot had to retain all of its previously procured ware-
houses off the field because of the increasing volume of
Air Corps Supplies to he stored in this area. The Squadron
was by then operating 28 warehouses. In October, 1943,
the men moved their quarters from Warehouse No. 6, join-
ing the rest of the Group at Eagle Farm near the Group
Headquarters, thus further unifying both the Group and
the Squadron. For the first time since activation, adminis-
trative departments were moved under one roof at the
Group Headquarters building where the Stock Records
Section now occupied the most prominent and largest part
of the big structure. Business hereto carried on by letter
and telephone was speeded by personal contact, and a
great deal of red tape eliminated.
In June, 1943, the Supply Section was
employing more than a thousand civilians. Throughout
the year comparatively low ranking enlisted men super-
vised the civilian employees and did a fine job. On an
average, one soldier supervised the work of ten civilians.
Commencing in September, 1943, the
81st Air Depot Group assumed responsibility for operating
Depot No. 1, and, in fact, used
“5 A.F.S.C., Depot No. 1” on its
letterheads. Gradually, however,
the Group was relieved of pro-
viding stocks for the entire
theatre. Still the volume of
Sgt. Fraser, Pfc. Jacobs, and Sgt. Scheel
in front of the Orderly Room at Engle
Farm.
Col. R. J. Minty confers the Air Medal
on Sgt. Robert E. Burns, Nov. 20, 1943,
for heroism in action on many aerial
flights.


work did not decrease in the Squadron which operated
all supply houses for the Group. The demands of the Depot
No. 1 Engineering and Production Control Sections were
constantly increasing. Furthermore, paper work necessary
in ordering, receiving, checking, re-packing and re-shipping
increased due to the fact that Production and Control Sec-
tion requisitioned all parts and accessories through Depot
No. 1.
Several Squadron parties were held at
the N.C.O. Club, and movies were shown three times
weekly. The Squadron softball team played nightly games
during the league elimination contests, and won the cham-
pionship of the Group.
September 24, 1943, a commendation
was received from Col. Minty, upon recommendation of the
C.O. of the R.A.A.F., for completing the transfer of hangars
from a city 425 miles distant from Eagle Farm in record
time. Another example of initiative the invention of
S/Sgt. Dodsworth —a portable electricity producing unit
and portable machine shop. These are light enough to be
towed by jeeps. In the jungles, this equipment has proved
invaluable in repairing planes. In the forward base they
are proving great assets and arc saving many man-hours of
hard labor.
Capt. Paul E. Sullivan, who had been
Asst. D. 5.0., was appointed Squadron Commander on Bth
April, 1944. Capt. J. C. Attwood became Asst. D.S.O. It is
hoped that the Squadron will be
able to perform its work in the
advanced area as well as it has
at the Farm, where it was con-
sidered more of an institution
than an organization.
(Right): Clothing issue in Supply
Room: Pfc. McCollum, S/Sgt.
Fink, Cpl. Stull, Sgt. Mitchell,
The thirty-year men, “Spanky”
(T/Sgt. Davis) and “Ruby” (T/Sgt.
Reubinall), heard in April, 1944,
that their longevity was to be trans-
ferred to the U.S. on the rotation
quota, and that they were assured of
berths in the Old Soldiers’ Home.
Ist SGT. R. E. RAYMOND.
Supply Sergeant, S/Sgt. Fink, and
assistant, Pfc. McCollum.
45
ply Squadron


81 ST DEPOT SUPPLY SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FRONT ROW: T/Sgt. Bauman, S/Sgt. Winget, S/Sgt. Fissel,
S/Sgt. Kodsworth, S/Sgt. Schutte, S/Sgt. Winget, S/Sgt. Fissel,
Fink, T/Sgt. Kocunik, M/Sgt. Mcelwee, S/Sgt. Burkepile,
T/Sgt. E. T. Davis. SECOND ROW: Pfc. McCollum, Pvt.
Elder, Sgt. Vaughan, Pvt. Minnis, Pvt. Kawecki, Pfc. Murphy,
S/Sgt. Caven, T/Sgt. Ratliff, S/Sgt. West, S/Sgt. Pittman,
T/Sgt. Reubinall. THIRD ROW: Sgt. Newburger, Cpl.
Waldron, Sgt. Mekeal, Sgt. Shandor, Pfc. Kedziorski, Sgt.
Dudziak, Pfc. Jacobs, Pfc. Sensiba, Cpl. Warner, Cpl. Spear,
Pfc. Powers, FOURTH ROW: Cpl. Reilly, Cpl. Witos, Pfc.
Rucki, T/5 Luxenberg, pfc. Mazzocchi, Sgt. Brown, Cpl.
Heniser, Cpl. Jhons, Pfc. Dellof, Pfc. Lesser, Pfc. McFar-
Land. FIFTH ROW: Pfc. Gast, Pfc. Lesser, Sgt. Hauser, Cpl.
Fagundes, S/Sgt. Veverka, Pfc. Madsen, Cpl. Stull, Pfc.
Wittick, Pfc. Lewis, Cpl. Prather, Pfc. McCarter.


FRONT ROW: Ist Sgt. Raymond, Capt. Attwood, Capt. Sulli-
van, Lt. Goodrich, Capt. Trumbull, Capt. Brighton, Lt. Claus,
Lt. Anders. SECOND ROW : Cpl. wilczynski, Sgt. Evans,
Sgt. Neville, Sgt. Fraser, Sgt. Zalar, Sgt. Vogan, Cpl. Cearrin,
Sgt. J. Martin, Cpl. Kipner, Sgt. Scheel, Cpl. Sciarretta.
THIRD ROW: Sgt. Mitchell, Pfc. Rine, Sgt. Rainville, Cpl.
Jeppsen, Sgt. Robison, Pfc. Rush, Pfc. Cooper, Sgt Bock,
Sgt. Sudhoff, Pvt. Freeman, Pvt. Angove. FOURTH ROW:
Sgt. Novak, Pvt. Johnson, Pfc. Reid, Sgt. Scovell, Cpl.
Mackowiak, Pfc. H. A. Martin, Sgt. Allen, Sgt. W.T.Davis,
Sgt. Henderer, Pvt. Smith, Pfc. Mueck. FIFTH ROW: Pvt.
Fritz, Pvt. Mathis, Sgt. Bricker, Pvt. Beauregard, Pfc. Weaver,
Pvt. Walker, Pvt. Whipple, Pfc. Knowles, Pfc. Westberg, Pfc.
Zeidler, Pfc. Stranad. SIXTH ROW: Pfc. Kroshow, Pvt.
Roth, T/5 Madar, Pvt. Larson, Pvt. Hughes, Pvt. Saad,
Pvt. Clark, Pvt. Holland Cpl. Rickerd, Cpl. Tetley, Cpl.
McCormick.
uadron Personnel


Supply Goes North
Like its sister squadrons, 81st
Supply lined up during the lat-
ter part of April to hear that
movement was imminent. An
atabrinc line presages it if
rumors are not enough


April 27th
to
May 6th, 1944


They arrived safely and worked day and night to set up
camp. The result-a place to rest your weary body after
work. The month (as though anyone could forget it):
May , 1944.
Rugged, you bet. Ask Cpl. Kipner, S/Sgt. Robison
or Sgt. Allen.
THE SUPPLY SQUADRON
In New Guinea
in new-
When set up this will he the 81st Supply Squadron utilities tent for
the installation of electrical fixtures on the field. Master builders :
S/Sgt. West , M /Sgt. McElwee, Cpl. Waldron.
Many of them work days , some nights , most of
them both. Personal chores have to be done
sometime , however.


They built and operate a mess hall that feeds
their own Squadron plus Headquarters Squadron
and the 44th Repair.
It won't be long before a roof will keep the rain
out of the mess kits.
Supply, that is their line. True, they can’t boast the sumptuous ware-
houses of former days at the Farm, but theirs is still a giving rather
than a receiving.
The cooks up there have to contend tvith more than
enlisted mens complaints. There is bad weather , and
often the stoves become cranky.


MAJOR GRANT W. BOWEN, Squadron Commander.
44 TH DEPOT REPAIR SQUADRON
INCE arriving in this theatre on the
14th of June, 1943, the 44th Depot Repair Squadron lias
taken an active part in the assembly and repair of aircraft.
Having been trained in a dozen different specialists’ schools
in the States, plus four months’ practical training in a Depot
in Mobile, Alabama, the 44th was well qualified on arm al,
and its leaders have assumed responsibilities here in many
key positions.
Paper work al San Antonio Air Depot,
Texas, officially activated the organization February Till,
1942. Accumulation of personnel was started at Patterson
Field March, 1942. The group was moved to Springfield,
Illinois, April 21, 1942, for basic and technical training, and
it was from this station that men were sent to the various
technical schools. With the completion of the training of most
of the members, the group was moved to Mobile, Alabama,
for advanced basic and overseas training, as well as the prac-
tical work in the Airdrome and Tech. Supply divisions of
Brookley Field.
During the training in Mobile, the 44th
first had its taste of success. The civilians employed al the
Depot refused to work nights; and because they were afraid
of losing their jobs refused to train the soldiers. The soldiers
were put on the night shift and “jumped production 50 per
cent in two weeks, and within a month, 100 per cent.” The
civilians decided to go back to work nights, and the strike
LT. H. N. GRIMES, Adjutant.
Sgt Talbert, Fire Guard.
52


Ist SGT. RICHARD W. JACOBSON.
was broken. But the 44-tli had earned its reputation, and had
.gained self-confidence and valuable training.
During the selecting necessary to get a
good organization of the various skills needed in a repair
squadron, many officers and enlisted men were transferred in
and out. Major Bowen joined the organization 20lh October,
1942, as Commanding Officer, and later the additional officers
assigned to the 4411 i were selected at Mobile with the excep-
tion of Lts. McMaster and Mcding, who were assigned in this
theatre. Ist Sgt. Jacobson was appointed in January, 1943.
The first serious accident of the Squadron
occurred on 17th July, 1943, to 1.1. Wallace, who was dying
on a routine test flight with Major Simpson, 1,1. Handley and
Capt. May. Lt. Wallace was badly injured, hut was the only
one to recover, and is now hack on duly. The first death in
the Squadron was that of Ll. Willis S. Schmidt, Test Pilot,
on 20th October, 1943.
The Squadron initialed construction of
the Fourth and Fifth Graders’ Club buildings, and had a large
membership in the Groups’' INon-Gom Clubs. A member
organized the Group newspaper, “DFPO ECHO.” The men
have worked 18-20 hours a day for weeks on end in the han-
gars, where they have filtered into nearly every department
with initiative, leadership and comradeship. This is ample
proof that the 41 ill Repair Squad-
ron lias proved itself an outstand-
ing organization.
1 Model tent.
2 Orderly Room.
3 44th men laying floor of new 4th & 5th
Graders'Club at Eagle Farm. Lt. Reynolds,
Sgt. Talbert, Sgt. Peca.
PAIR SQUADRON


44TH DEPOT REPAIR SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FRONT ROW : Cpl. Trumbull, Sgt. B. Allen, Sgt. Kramer,
Pvt. Wright, Pvt. Augello, Pfc. Crainer, Pfc. Volovski, Sgt.
Lee, Pvt. Hubbard, Pfc. Sakelarios, S/Sgt. Goroney, S/Sgt.
Jensen, Cpl. Pluta. SECOND ROW: Sgt. J. Williams, Sgt.
Green, S/Sgt. L. Stigge, Sgt. Kelley, Sgt. Shwetz, Pvt. J. F.
McDermott, S/Sgt. Chamdonnet, Pfc. Harris, S/Sgt. A. D.
Andrews, S/Sgt. Buehner, Pfc. Thrasher, Cpl. Gerard, Sgt.
Haacke. THIRD ROW: T/Sgt. Goehring, Cpl. Gerard, Sgt.
Bryant, Sgt. W.C. Brown Cpl. Vahle, Cpl. Bradford, Sgt. Orr,
Sgt. McNamara, Cpl. Murdoch, Cpl. Valdez, Pfc. Howe, Ptc.
Chew, Cpl. C. M. Johnson, FOURTH ROW : Sgt. Brwnner,
Pvt. Morozin, Sgt. Kicklighter, Sgt. Browning, Sgt. Kerns,
Cpl. Joseph, Pvt. Viola, Sgt. Simon,Cpl. Derepkowski, S/Sgt.
Roberts, Pfc. Ceorge, Cpl. Ellinger, Pvt. Donaldson, Pfc.
Biesiada. FIFTH ROW : Pfc. Kulp, Sgt. Ransom, Pvt.
Olterzewski, Pvt. Cooper, Pvt. Banks, Pvt. Borders, Pvt.
Armentrout, Cpl. Andel, Sgt. Walkup, Pvt. Coty, Sgt.
Crimmins, Pfc. Beckman, S/Sgt. Kneil, Pfc. Cormetto.


FRONT ROW : 1st Sgt. Jacobson, Lt. Reynolds, Capt.
Gutierrez, Major Bowen, Lt. Wallace, Lt. Gronostajski, Lt.
Watson. SECOND ROW : T/Sgt. Brewer, Cpl. Werries, Sgt.
Boyll, Sgt. Wehe, Sgt. Nemeth, Sat. Fisher, S/Sgt. Freund,
Pvt. Wilson. THIRD ROW : Pfc. Boulanger, T/Sgt. Schaefer,
S/Sgt. Owens, Sgt. Benoit, Cpl. Padgett, Cpl. A. E. Payne,
Cpl. Heide, Cpl. Bumgarner. FOURTH ROW: S.Sgt. Biggs,
Pfc. C. E. Jones, Sgt. Borden, Cpl. Clark, T/Sgt. Boyd, Pvt.
Reubens, Sgt. Golson, T/Sgt. Moseley, S/Sgt. Pinnill, S/Sgt.
Martin, Pfc. Bennett.
uadron Personnel


44TH DEPOT REPAIR SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FORNT ROW: Sgt. LeBlane. S Sgt> Karl, Cpl. Leatherman,
Pv t. Lery, Pct. E.D Henry, Pfc. Quan, Cpl. Johns SECOND
ROW :Pfc. F. D. Johnes, Pfc. Peterson, Pfc. Thoeming, Cpl.
Sodder, S/Sgt Daiiel, Cpl. Romero, Pvt. P.S. John.
THIRD BOW : Pvt. J. P. King, Pvt. Jameson, Pvt. R. J.
McDermott, Sgt. Holm, Sgt. McNulty, Pfc. Henrioulle, Pfc.
Cosme FOURTH ROW : S/Sgt. Yerkins, Cpl. Griesshaber,
Cpl. Neidhard, Sgt Bilkowski, Pvt. Tisdale, S/Sgt. Scanlon.


FRONTRO W :Pv t Ritondo , Cpl. Neidermair, Pvt. Cabri,
Pfc. Niw ,S gt. W ride, S/Sgt. MUrphy, Cpl.Slas, Pvt. Dobson,
Pvt. M ari no , S/Sgt . John ton,Cpl. Cahn , Sg t. Newsome.
S ECO ND ROW : M/Sgt Cadwell, T/sgt. Henry, S/Sgt. Elkins, Pfc.
wellsh, S/Sgt. cadwell, T/Sgt. Henry, S/Sgt. Elkins, Pfc.
Witten, Pvt. Schneider, S/Sgt. Taylor, Sgt. Mclure, Pfc.
laRoche. THIRD ROW: M/Sgt. Glenn, Sgt. INgenthron,
sgt.B.W. Bell, Cpl. Palmerton, Pvt. Putman, Sgt. Kallrose,
Pvt. Woodruff, Pfc. Birdsall, Cpl. Manning, Sgt. Ward, Pfc.
Trauter, T/Sgt. Long. FOOURH ROW: pVT. Capizzi, Pfc.
Ausburn, Sgt. McReynolds, Sgt. Hudson, Cpal. Garbett, Capl.
Eann i , S/Sgt. Troxell, Cpl. Gardon, T/5 Charland, Pfc
Mitchell ,Pfc . Tillman , Cp l Oliver. FI FTH RO W: Pfc.
Arn ett, Sgt. Mea dors, Cpl. Bentley, Cpl. Halley, Sgt. Wellsand,
Pfc. Bonczynski, Sgt. Starkey, T/5 Musser, S/Sgt. Roarke, Cpl.
Hoxworth, Pfc. Wselaki, T/Sgt.Klundt.
uadron Personnel


The 44TH at the N.C.O.Clule
FEBRUARY 21, 1944


Squadron Supply and Mail Room: Sgt.
Golson, T/Sgt. Welch, Sgt. Miller.
Waller Wallaby, 44th Mascot,
at the
FARM and UP THERE
44th Mess Hall at Eagle Farm
and cooks: T/5 Schinitis,
Pvt, Albright, Cpl. Johns,
Pfc. Quart , Sgt. LeBlanc.
Pfc. Aulfes and Pfc. Conley cutting lum-
ber for tent construction at the advanced Chow line in New Guinea,
base.


44TH DEPOT REPAIR SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FRONT ROW: Pfc. Hardenbrook, T/Sgt. Gover, Pvt. Soldano,
Pvt. Mead, Sgt. Gorneyt, Sgt. Ackerman, Pfc. D.A.king,
Pvt. Mesite, Pvt. E.G. Adams. Pvt.Theo. Allen, Pvt. Brile,
Pfc. Burruss. SECOND ROW: S/Sgt. Duarte, Cpl. Bainbridage,
Pvt.R.A.John,Sgt. Reindollar, S/sgt. C. Johnson, Pfc.
Aderson, Pfc. Goodman, S/Sgt. Christiansen, Cpl. Thomas,
Pfc. H. E. Nelson, Pvt. Brockhaus, S/Sgt. Timothy. THIRD
ROW: Pvt. D'Amour, Sgt Stelmach, S/Sgt. Slingluff, T/Sgt.
Zappia, m/Sgt. Payne. Pfc. W m. Mclntosh, Pfc. Blackmont, Pvt.
Trmblay, Cpl. Hiles, Pvt. Kukla, Pvt. Cochran, Sgt. Phillip[s,
Pvt. McDaniel. FOUTH ROW: Gerlach, Cpl.w yatt. Pfc.
W. r. Brown, T/ Sgt. Winters, Cpl. Sloneker, T/ Sgt. Colby,
Pfc. Odum, Sgt. Owers, Pvt. Alzheimer, Pfc. Neal, Cpl.
Otwell, Pvt. B.S. Allen, Pfc. Corrao. FIFTH ROW: Sgt .
Ellison, bf, Schick, Cpl. Albrecth, Sgt. Sherman, Cpl.
Allen, Sgt. J. Martin, Cpl. Albrecth, Sgt. Sherman, Cpl.
Daniels, M/Sgt. rich, T/Sgt. Rich, T/Sgt.Szeibert. Sgt. Mills, Pvt. Huntoon.
SITH ROW: Pvt. Joinel, T/Sgt. Haines, Sgt. Corogenes,
M/Sgt. Kamam, T/Sgt. Nelsen, Pfc. Potoky, Sgt. Miller, Sgt.
K.M. Jones, Pfc. G.A.McIntosh, Cpl. Thompson, T/Sgt.
W.A.Johnson, Sgt. Talbert.


FRONT ROW: Pfc .Forster. Carroer, S/Sgt. Kiechle,
Pfc. Edwards, Sgt. Peca, Pvt. B ure man, Sgt. Shivener , Pfc.
Maroni,Cp l. Cowdery,Pf c.We st lakes. SEC ONDSRO W: S/Sgt.
Ba ker, S/ Sgt. Hurley, S g t. Moulds. Pfc. Wittmer, Pvt. Creoli.
S/Sgt. Wolscha g, Pfc. Halzel, Sgt. Kirendall, Pvt. Bustard,
Pvt.Fe gl ey. THIRD RO W:Pfc Glaser, Pvt. Fredette, Sgt.
Dyess, Pvt. Senyard,Pvt.Ba userman, Sg t. Beitz, Pvt. Owen,
Cpl. Cross, Sgt. Thr ys eli us, Pfc. Mc karney. FOURTH ROW:
Capl. Haile, Cpl. W.L.Williams, S/Sgt. Tracy, S/Sgt. Jugger,
C pl. Bacon, Cpl. Wilkie Pfc. Sollam, Pvt. Blaney, Pfc. D.
J ones,Sg t. Manch.FI FTH ROW: T/S.Grude, Cpl. C.K
Adrews, Cpl. Brant, Pv t .Wh ary, Pvt. Sharp, Cpl. Rushton,
T/Sgt.Lewis, Pfc.Ri ley, Sgt. Dotts,C pl. Wetelainen, Pvt
Ge reau , Cpl. Shoemake r, Pfc. Sl ate, Cpl. Guttman, Pfc. Stiles,
M/Sgt. Frey, Sgt. Schwartz,Sg t. Schroeber, Cpl. Upchurch.
uadron Personnel


Orderly Room Personnel: Ist Sgt. Barnett,
St Sgt, Tomasek, S/Sgt. M. H. Myers, Pvt.
J. C. Evans, Cpl. Hunley.
Cpl. Warusz, area guard.
Company area, Eagle Farm,
The 455TH
SERVICE SQUADRON
MONG the men who enriched
the American tradition with their sacrifices in the
Philippine Islands were those of the Seventh Materiel
Squadron. The name and spirit of this organization
were bcstow 7 ed on the men who now comprise the 455th
Service Squadron: they upheld the honor well, both in
Australia and near enemy lines in New Guinea. Their
work for seventeen months in forward areas, during
which lime they experienced over one hundred high-
altitude bombing attacks, was specifically commended
by Major-General Ennis C. Whitehead, then Deputy
Commander of the Fifth Air Force. In a letter to the
Commanding Officer, 455th Service Squadron, dated May
10, 1943, he says: “The accomplishment of this Squadron
in providing service facilities for the tactical units oper-
ating from this area in the early days of the war is
without equal. The fact that your Squadron achieved
such results in spite of the handicap of under-strength,
in spite of the poor living conditions and poor diet, and
in spite of the fact that the enemy made life quite miser-
able is worthy of the greatest commendations. ... To
the officers and enlisted men of the 455th Service Squad-
ron I extend my congratulations for your wonderful per-
formance and recognition of services rendered beyond
the usual call of duty.”
Most of the 455th men came to the
Southwest Pacific Theatre in the earliest days of the
war and were soon sent to New Guinea under the com-
mand of Major R. R. Barden. It was a time when trained
troops were much in need, and they were transferred
from one field to another as required by the military
situation. They were at Jackson Field during the well-
known Fourth of July “celebration” in 1942, when the
Japanese bombed the base continually for three suc-
cessive days and nights, and while at Durand Airdrome
MAJOR CHARLES A. SPEARS, Jr.
Squadron Commander.
Capt. Dennis S, Rego and Lt. Albert S.
knauf.


they were at one time only fifteen miles from advanced enemy units.
The 453 th played an important role in the fights which halted the
Japanese advance on Port Moresby and pushed them out of Papua.
In October, 1942, the organization settled down at Port Moresby.
Originally a detachment of 115 men, it had by then doubled its roster
by absorbing personnel from other service squadrons and from re-
placement depots. For its work on the island the entire Squadron
was cited for the Papuan, campaign and several of its members
received individual awards. The Purple Heart was awarded to Major
Barden for action during air attacks. T/Sgt. Ziolko was awarded
the Soldier’s Medal for saving two Australian soldiers from drowning
in shark-infested waters. While at Port Moresby, command was
assumed on May 25, 1943, by Major Charles A. Spears, Jr.
After a year of servicing airfields in the Port
Moresby area, the 455th Service Squadron, comprising 208 men and
six officers, departed for Australia on October 19, 1943, and upon
arrival was assigned to the 81st Air Depot Group at Eagle Farm
Airdrome. Seventeen months in ]New Guinea had been quite a check
on the men’s social ambitions, and they did not wait long before
entering the “social whirl” with Squadron parties at the Non-Com-
missioned Officers’ Club in the Valley. The new amusements had,
however, to he laid aside early in December, when men of the 455th
Engineering Section worked long hours of concentrated effort with
personnel of the 81st A.D.G. to erect and modify Thunderbolts then
in special demand for the big offensives which pushed the enemy
northward.
On the 26th of April Major Spears was trans-
ferred to Headquarters U.S.A.S.O.S. and Captain Dennis S. Regp
assumed command.
In the first two months of operation of the
Rotation Plan the 455th sent home 18 men, each of whom had seen
meritorious service for many months in this theatre. Eventually it is
hoped that the entire personnel will return to the States and to other
theatres to carry on in the 455th tradition of service “beyond the usual
call of duty.”
Ist Sergeant
ROBERT E. BARNETT
Supply Room: Cpl. Yales, S Sgt. Yeck (Supply Sgt.),
Cpl. Metz.
Company area and laundry in New Guinea.
63
455™
Squadron


455TH SERVICE SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FRONT ROW: Pfc. Maker, Sgt. Pawlick, Cpl. Lundy, T/Sgt.
Vasilauskas, Cp t. Wittn er, Pfc . West, Pvt. Keating, Segt. Brink-
ley, Sgt. Tra passo. SEC OND ROW: Pvt. Hoptman, Cpl.
Minar, S/Sgt. Edwards, Pvt. Deam, S/Sgt. Shore, S/Sgt. Wasser-
Pike. Sg t. Mo rgan, Sgt. Beñett, S/Sgt. Shore, S/Sgt. Wasser.
man.THIRD RWO: S/Sgt.Yeck, Cpl.Cave, Sgt.Padilla,
Pvt. Ro wland, Sgt.Ross, Pfc. Walters, Sgt. Carrick, Sgt.
Adrews,Sgt. Blumert, T/Sgt. Leighton, FOURTH ROW:
S/Sgt. Wooley,Sgt.H.R.Reed,S/Sgt.Van Liew,Cpl.Hardon,
S/Sgt. Gould,Sgt.Peppler, Sgt. Lillie,Sgt. W.W.Beck,Sgt.
Hoĺis, Cpl.He mphill. FIFTH ROW: Cpl.D.D Mitchell, Pfc.
Brumit, Sgt. Peo lko, Cpl. Ray, S/Sgt. Chaddick, S/Sgt.Cor.
cora n,Cpl. A bbott,Cp l. Wilson, S/Sg t.Y ankowitz,Cpl. Tor-
gerson, T/5 Stewa rt, Pfc. Steichen, Pvt. J.C. Evans, Sgt. Pribble,
pvt sgt.O. J.Mitcell, Pvt. Schmi ndt, Cpt. Diss, Pvt. Kowalchuk,
Sgt. O.J.Mitchell, Schmindt, Cpl. Diss, Pv t.Kowalchuk,
Cpl. Pence. SEVEN TH ROW: Cpl.Wa r ner, Sgt. Courington,
Cpl.Weis, S/Sgt. Tomasek, Sgt. T.E.Reed, Sgt. Weber, Sgt.
Glaser,Cpl.Ramirez, Sgt. Sproles, Sgt. Keeling, Sgt. Frank.


FROUNT ROW: 1st Sgt. Bar ne tt, W/ O Hodges, Lt. Crill,
Major Spears, Lt. Goldste in, Capt. Selt zer, S/Sgt. Pome rleau.
SECOND ROW: S/Sgt.Benic,S/Sgt. Roberts, Cpl. Huley,
man, Pfc.Crotty, S/Sgt. Benic, S/Sgt. Roberts, Cpl. Hunley,
Sgt. Rigby, Sgt.W.F.Reed. THIRD ROW: T/sgt.Hendon,
cpl. Warusz, Pvt.File,S/Sgt.Messer, Sgt.Ressler,Cpl.
Culmer,Pfc.Mangum, Cpl.Pitts, Pfc. Nevonen, FOUTH.
ROW: Sgt.Martinelli,Pfc.Walker, S/Sgt.Boone,S/Sgt.
Deibel, Col.Medonca, Cpl.Metz,Sgt.Wisnoki,Pfc.Daun-
diver, Sgt.L.M/Beck. FIFTH ROW: Pvt.Logan, Cpl.
Pillow, Cpl.Norton, Cpl.Yates,Cpl.Edie,Sgt.Duchai,Cpl.
Pittenger, Pfc.M.C.Smith, Pvt. Morehouse.SIXTH ROW:
Pfc. Trent, Pfc.Lowther,Cpl.pery,S/Sgt.S.S>Evans, Sgt.
Roberson, Ccpl.Kovacs, Cpl.De Walt, Pvt.Dirscoll,Pvt.Lake
dron Personnel


455TH SERVICE Squadron Personnel
FORNT ROW: M/Sgt.Covarrubias, T/Sgt.Ainslie, T/Sgt.
Eaker, M/Sgt.Neal, T/Sgt.Nicholas, T/Sgt. Jayne, T/Sgt.
Oswald, Cpl. Hanson, M/sgt.Shaw. SECOND ROW: M/Sgt.
Leon,T/Sgt.Pruss, T/Sgt.Cole,T/Sgt.Iliff, T/Sgt.Censier,
T/Sgt. Upchurch, T/Sgt.Donald, Sgt. Sinoţe, Sgt.Sinotte, Sgt.Bowen.
THIRD ROW: Sgt.McCarver, Cpl. Posey, Pfc. Bosse, Cpl
Carns, Sgt. Renta, Cpl.Sanman, Cpl. Pverton, Pfc. Owens,
Pfc.Gallagher. FOURTH ROW: Pvt. Tanney Sgt. Sands,
Cpl>W.H. Smith,cpl>Berkowitz, Pfc.Pelka,Sgt,Nunes,
S/Sgt. Borden, S/Sgt.Pasdeck,Pfc.Amundsen. FIFTH
ROW: Sgt.Woodcock, Cpl.Schasles, Sgt. Roberson, Cpl.
Smellie, Pvt. Litsky, Sgt,Lopez,S/Sgt.Carelson, Sgt.Uyal,
Pfc.Radcliff. SIXTH ROW; Cpl.Mckelvery, S/Sgt.Nelms,
Sgt. Gibson,Sgt.Hilton,Sgt,johnes.


Cooks: S/Sgt, Nelms (Mess Sgt.), T/5 Sanders, Pvt. Albright,
S/Sgt. Murphy, Sgt. McMillan, Pvt. Tanney, Cpl. Radcliff, Sgt.
Balts, Pfc. Walters, Pfc. Gnade, Cpl. Cars.
INSIDE
the
455TH
MESS HALL
Building was com-
pleted and started functioning on 1 March
20, 1944, with Lt. Grill as Mess Officer
and S/Sgt. Nelms as Mess Sergeant. The
1124th M.P. Company, 44th Repair
Squadron, 1799th Ordnance Company
and 1912th Q.M. Company were at-
tached for rations and assigned Mess
Sergeants (S/Sgt. Murphy, Sgt. McMil-
lan) and First Cooks (Sgt. Bass, Sgt.
Schmaelzle, and Sgt. Leßlanc), with a
total of 20 cooks, butchers and bakers,
as well as K.P.’s. These, with 14 civilians,
completed the roster of personnel.
Average number of
men fed daily was 1,400. Six meals were
served daily due to the working hours of
the M.P. Company and night shifts on
the hangar line.


11T H SERVICE SQ
f II I
HE 11 tli Service Squadron originated
at Langley Field, \ a., 17th January, 1941,
as the 11th Materiel Squadron. It moved
to Bangor, Maine, look part in manoeuvres
in North Carolina, and went back to Maine before embarking
for overseas in February, 1942. Landing in Australia ill trained
due to the large number of replacements assigned a few days
prior to embarkation, a program of basic courses was instituted.
During the stay at Bankstown Airdrome, the 11th was perform-
ing Ist, 2nd and 3rd echelon maintenance of aircraft. Inexperi-
enced men worked side by side with skilled mechanics and
received valuable training and experience, which was to serve
them well when the test came in New Guinea.
The 11th Materiel Squadron left Banks-
town in July, 1942, for Port Moresby,
where they were assigned to the Bth Ser-
vice Group. Many humorous stories
could be told about the first air raid —men trying to dig shelters
with helmets and knives, attempting to crowd into shallow" slit
trenches, lying on lop of each other; but this was the first and
only raid that caught them unprepared. The name of the
Squadron was changed to the lllh Service Squadron on 4th
August, 1942.
During the first months sleep was a rare
luxury and food was scarce, but in spite
of these conditions the Bth Service Group
did all the work of establishing and main-
taining the landing strips in the Moresby area. Men from the
11th were engaged in gas servicing, repair, maintenance and
salvage of aircraft, also in the construction of roads, runways
and revetments at eight different airdromes.
Going on one of the missions meant a few"
days or even months of hardship. Tools
were scarce, working conditions were the
worst possible, and often the men had to
depend on friendly natives for food and help in transporting
materials. All of these jobs required a great deal of ingenuity
TOP: Major Alfred T. Geddes, Squadron Commander.
CENTER: Lt. Danziger, Sgt. Loggias, S Sgt. Hakansson.
BOTTOM: “Patches.'’ the plane constructed from salvage parts
by men of the 11th, including: T/Sgt. Hgen, Cpl. Boucher, Sgt.
Grove, Cpl. Lovgren, Sgt. Reedy, S Sgl. Saluti, C.pl. Robertson.
Sgt. Richardson, Cpl. Vujka.


TOP: 1st Sgt. Eugene W. Wygal.
CENTER: Supply Room: T/Sgt. Setzer (Supply Sgt.), S/Sgt.
Cobb. Sgt. Tonella, T/Sgt. Zbiegin.
BOTTOM: 11th's Mess Hall in New Guinea.
and determination. One officer and six enlisted men, together
with an Australian officer, were flown to an airstrip to repair
planes which had been forced down 40 miles from the small strip.
When the job was done the crew and remaining natives cut and
pulled grass to clear the strip so that the plane could he flown out.
The most difficult job ever undertaken by
this organization was the repair of an air-
craft near which two fragmentation or
“daisy cutter” bombs had exploded. The
wings and fuselage were holed in several places, a gopd part of
the electrical system was shot out, all windows were blown out,
and a fire started in the tail end of the fuselage which burned
away several square feet of skin, ruined one bulkhead, damaged
three others, and weakened several structural members before
it could he extinguished. The overall repair time was thirty days.
The ship was then flown to Melbourne by Capt. Edwards, Engin-
eering Officer, and his Co-pilot, Lt. McCluney. Both officers have
since been awarded the Air Medal for this accomplishment.
Col. Bradford A. Shaw, former Com-
manding Officer of the Bth Service Group,
said at a Squadron party: “We worked
fourteen to eighteen hours a day neces-
sary to get airplanes hack in commission so that they could go
out again and again to strike Rahanl and Buna and Lae and
pin the Nip down. We worked and sweated and cursed and
took the raps together through the dark days when it seemed
all was lost, when the Jap was advancing on every front and
when our efforts seemed small and ineffectual, until the Jap
was finally held and then turned hack. No one can ever take
from ns the knowledge that we didn’t drop the hall, and we did
a complicated, unglamorons, thankless job hard and well.”
The 11th participated in the Papuan
Campaign from 30th July, 1942, until
23rd January, 1943, and in the New
Guinea Campaign from 24th January.
1943, to 13th January, 1944, and leads the other Squadrons with
its five Soldier’s Medals and ten Purple Hearts.


11TH SERVICE SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FORTH ROW: T/Sgt. Chaney, S/Sgt.Sellers, T/Sgt.Kato,
S Sgt. Hand,S/Sgt. Hoolmes,T/Sgt. Hardy, S/Sgt. Schick,
S/Sgt. Huntchens, S/Sgt.Plecker, S/Sgt Clary. SECOUND
ROW: S/Sgt. Bolinger, T/Sgt. Garrett, T/Sgt. Hakansson,
M/Sgt. Combe3, M Sgt. Alderman, S/Sgt. H.L. Watkins.
THIRD ROW : T/Sgt. Cain, M/Sgt. Rooney, S/Sgt. Peezick,
S/Sgt. Seabolt, S/Sgt. Spowart, S/Sgt. G.J.Miller,S/Sgt. Heinz,
M/Sgt.Alexander, T/Sgt.Scott, S,Sgt. Shunk. FOUTH
ROW: M/Sgt. Coyne.S/Sgt. Keefer, S/Sgt. Varshine, T/Sgt.
Sezter, S/Sgt. Diesendorf, Pfc. Horbach,S/Sgt. Camilloni,
S/Sgt. Nelson, S/Sgt.Saluti, S/Sgt R.W.Smith. FIFTH
ROW: s/sGT. Moskowitz, T/Sgt. Vossler, S/Sgt Cobb,S/Sgt.
Bender, T/Sgt. Ilgen, S/Sgt. Gumowski, T/Sgt. Kuster,
M/Sgt. Gerhart, T/Sgt. Zbiegin, M/Sgt Fries


FRONT ROW: Sgt.Schnopp,Cpl.Ro bert son ,1st Sgt.W ygal,
Lt. Danziger, Major Geddes. Lt. Cokcroft, Cpl .Baś, Cpl
Finkelstein, Cpl. Wald, Sgt. Bush, SECOND ROW: Pvt.B.J
Jones, Cpl.Ulmer,Pfc.Sahle,pfc.Kelley, Cpl.Bass,Cpl
Shipp,Pfc.Morse,Cpl.Boucher, Cpl.Eckery, Cpl.Lovgren.
THIRD ROW: Pvt. Walker, Sgt.Pitt, Pfc.Truglio, Sgt.
Dionne,Sgt.Lanam, Sgt.Martin, Pvt. Wright, Pfc.Swayne,
Pfc. Moore,Cpl.Parillo. FOUTH ROW: cPL. lalonde,
Sgt.Ma tla, S/Sgt.Brow, Sgt.Rollis.Cpl.Groves, Sgt. Run-
sell, Pfc.Mc Garr y, Cpl.C ampbe ll , Sgt.Kermicle, Plc.Neer-
land. FIFTH ROW: sgt. Richardson, Sgt.Adkerman, Cpl.
j.p. sMITH, Sgt. Hotz, Cpl. Sereda. SIXTH ROW: Cpl.
pratt, T/5 Has, S/Sgt. Morris, Pfc. Vander Ploeg, Cpl.Baker,
Sgt. Tonella, Cpl. Atamanchuk, Cpl. Myers,Cpl. Glennie.
dron Personnel


11TH SERVICE SQUADRON PERSONNEL
FRONT FRONT ROW: S/Sgt. Adrcher, Sgt. Fulford, Sgt. Bell, Sgt.
H.G .JoH.G. Jones,Sgt. Stokes, Sgt Gentile, Cpl. Reece, Cpl. Byrnes,
Pfc. D P fc.De Torre Sgt. La hr.SE COUND ROW: Sgt. Grove, Sgt.
Fa yer, Cpl. Termin, Cpl.J. D.Smit h, Sgt. Aderson, Cpl.
Ford, Cpl. Doyle, Sgt. Grabin, Sgt. Leiby, Cpl. MItchell.
THIRD ROW: Pfc. Ivero, Cpl. Moreines, Cpl. Freitag, Sgt.
Eye, Cpl. Monna, Cpl. Wallance, Pvt. Bonvillian, Cpl. Meza,
Cpl. O'Bara, Cpl. Stanley. FOURTH ROW: Pfc Kerfoot,
T/5 GrT/5 Goger, Sgt. Day, Cpl. Callaham, Cpl. Taylor, Cpl. Coltey,
Cpl. Clausen, Pfc.Manclow, Sgt. Roberts, Pfc, Ripley. FIFTH
ham, Sgt. Hayes, Sgt. Rogers, Sgt. Schoessler, Sgt. Iverson,
Cpl. Kamnick, Cpl. Walters, Sgt. Fudman. SIXTH ROW:
Sgt. Petrouskas, Pfc. Scholz, Sgt. C. O. Cunningham, Sgt.
L.E.Miller, Cpl.Tetkoki, Sgt. Anuszkiewicz, Cpl. Bernstie,
Sgt. Loggins, Sgt. Kolanko, Cpl. Bittner.


The 11TH Goes to a
PARTY
Cpl. William J. Glennie , who was awarded
the Soldier's Medal for heroism in New
Guinea.
Detachment at Amberley Field:- (Kneeling) T/Sgt. Evanosky, S /Sgt.
Krauskop, Sgt. Rollis , Cpl. Sumowitch, S/Sgt. Hagerty , Sgt. Jensen, Sgt.
Little, Major Johnson . S/ Sgt. Novotny. (Standing on ground) Sgt. P. E.
Jensen, S/ Sgt. linn,Cpl Kawa, Sgt. Iverson. (On truck) Cpl. Repko,
Sgt. Lanaris, Pfc. Ragland , S/S gt. Heckler.
11th men being issued their Good Conduct Ribbons in formation
at Eagle Farm.


LT. DAVID S. HARTMAN
Company Commander.
LT. CHARLES R. NOVICK
Company Commander, April, 1943, to April, 1944.
Writing letters in the 898th day room.
898th SIGNAL CO. DEPOT (AVN.)
N December 24, 1942, “898th” meant
eleven enlisted men, wondering what the army
had in store for them up its cold Ohio sleeve;
on July 25, 1943, it was symbol for a team
of 226 completely trained men on their way to do their assigned jobs.
Between these two dates is the energy and ingenuity typical of our new
army. It was each man’s initiative directed into its proper channels by
the Commanding Officer, Major E. C. Karst. Not that everyone saw it
that way; it’s difficult to maintain perspective when you’ve been on
guard in a swamp for two successive nights or when your pup tent is
pulled down for the third time because of poor camouflage; but while
mouths complained, minds and bodies learned.
Most of this process took place in the woods
around Lake Pouch artrain in Louisiana.
Stationed at the New Orleans Army Air Base,
the Company took advantage of all training
opportunities the vicinity offered: radar repairmen were sent for two
weeks to the mouth of the Mississippi River to learn the life of an
Airwarning station; linesmen gathered knowledge and addresses while
putting up telephone wire at Golden Meadows, La.; radiomen went to
Mobile for repair experience.
During this time the Company was growing
rapidly; its numbers increased by men hand-
picked for education and experience. Rumors
about moving were common, and the organi-
zation did move too frequently for some of the tongue-waggers. After
four showerless days of sharing a swamp with clouds of mosquitoes the
men were given a day to clean up and took off in truck-convoy for Camp
Shelby, Mississippi. Finally the outfit settled down to spend the month
of June, 1943, in a pine grove near Slidell, Louisiana.


It was at these bivouacs that hard work, sport,
and good food, in excellent proportions, put
the finishing touches to the Company’s train-
ing. From them are the 898th's most pleasant
memories drawn: swimming at Shell Beach after a ten-mile hike, play-
ing volleyball in a clearing among tall trees, singing at night, dancing at
a party given the Company by the people of Slidell. When it was all
over the men returned to their Air Base huts and wished they were
back in pup tents.
Each movement had been accompanied by a
“This is It” announcement from the Com-
manding Officer, and a few days after return-
ing from the woods the expected repetition
came. Early in July the Company left for the Port of Embarkation, a
five-day trip made pleasant by the cooks who provided frequent chicken
dinners and lots of ice-cream. On the 25th July, 1943, the 898th hoarded
its transport and began the long voyage.
At its stations in the S.W.P.A. the Company
rapidly adapted itself to the new conditions,
and has been accomplishing its objectives
with merit. Through its hands passes all the
signal equipment to be used in the area serviced by the 81st Air Depot
Group. New radios, radars, telephones, teletypes, and associated parts
are received at the 898th Depot, stored, and issued as-needed. Badly-
damaged instruments are returned to it from forward echelons for
repair. Maintaining a Signal Depot is a far cry from the days of infantry
drill; the 898th has taken all the new problems in its stride, and is
Working hard toward that final “This is IT!”
Ist Sergeant
MARTIN J, GALVAN
Orderly Room Staff; Pic. Ruano, 1st Sgt.
Galvan. T/4 Wayman, T/5 Ray.
898th Supply Room at Eagle Farm: T/4
Marshall, S/Sgt. Quigley, W/0 Kling.
Co. Depot (avn.)


898TH SIGNAL COMPANY DEPOT PERSONNEL
FROUNT ROW: Pvt. Bullock, T/3 Hull, Pfc. S.Cohen, T/Sgt.
Wheeler, T/4 Bouham, T/3 kalisty, Pfc. Hand, T/3 Schnitzer,
Sgt. Bast. SECOUND ROW: Pfc. Gibson, T/5,Pelechaaty, Pfc.
Wies, T/4 <ercer, T/5 Reynertson, Pfc. Maruska, T/5 Mein.
hardt, T/5 Rothman, T/5 Riedell. THIRD ROW: T/4 Knapp,
T/4 Marshall, T/4 Piker, Pvt. Morey, T/4 von Bargen, T/3
Beckman, Cpl. Jones, T/5 Weed, T/4 Stefanik. FOURTH
ROW: Sgt. Fena, T/5 Edes.,Pvt Dumas, T/4 Larby, Pfc.
wood, T/4 O'leary, T/4 Lyttle, T/5 Price, T/5 Stoller
FIFTH ROW/; Cpl. Markham .T/4 Bradley, Sgt. Posey, T/5
Fuchs, Sgt. Uthoff, Pvt. Heyden, T/5 Prendergast, T/4 Heitzig,
T/5 C. Adams, SIXTH ROW: Pvt. Pieronski, Cpl. McAlea,
Cpl. Rappaport, Cpl. Schwamberger, T/Sgt. Lovern, T/4
Kawa, T/4 Taylor, T/5 Dreier, T/4 Evans.


FRONT ROW: 1st Sgt. Galvan, Lt. Stewart, Lt, Finger, Lt.
Crowley, MAjor Karst, Lt. Flynn, Lt. Cornell, Lt. Gusman,
Lt. Hartman. SECOND ROW: W/O Kling, W/O Ayers, T/4
Scott, T/4 Macwhirter, T/4 Sams, T/4 Cashman, T/3 Schmel-
zer, Cpl. Bouler, T/Sgt. Domenichetti. THIRD ROW: Pvt.
Gallagher, T/5 Morris, T/4 R. Adams, T/4 Trantow, T/4
McMullen, T/4 Salyser, Pvt. Zeller, S/Sgt. Irwin, Pfc
Humenink, Pvt. Parker. FOURTH ROW: Cpl. Kessel. T/4
Hobizal, T/3 Weincouff, T/4 Earkywine, Pvt, Hahn, S.Sgt
Yeager, T/$ Kincaid, T/5 Hanson, T/4 Konchal, Sgt. Mermer.
FIFTH ROW: Pvt. Schueren, Sgt. D.B. Smith, T/4 Hojo,
Cpl. Doxey, T/4 Faris, Pvt. Thompson, T/5 Moseley, Cpl.
McGuffin, Pvt. Blumenfeld, Cpl. Woodburn, T/3 Biedneharn,
McGuffin, Pvt. Blumenfeld, Cpl. Woodburn, T/3Biedneharn,
T/4 Witt, T/4 Lamm, T/3 Messins, T/5 Rosenbaum, T/4
Armstrong.
Depot Personnel


89 8 th Company Pasty
p vt. Klein, Pvt Dahill, T/5 Squier, T/5 Ray, Pvt. Sorden, T/4
Simpson, T/4 Shubert, T/5 JOhnson, T/5 Whipple.


898th Mess Hall
Ch sistmas
Dinnes
DECEMBER
1943
“Tricks of the trade”
of night-club stewarding and Army mess
administration: this is the Guiren-Ruano
work which combines with a dozen ex-
perienced cooks to make the 898th Con-
solidated Mess Hall a success. High light
of the season was in the last two months of
1943, when Major Karst volunteered his
team to feed men working on the P-47 pro-
ject. A total of 3,400 meals was served
daily at eleven sittings, filling 1,700 men.
Chocolate, fruit, and hot coffee were dis-
tributed at the hangars twice each night.
Special cheers were for S/Sgt.’s Burkepile,
Nelms, and Hand, and First Cooks T/4’s
Nuanes and Foret.
RIGHT CENTER: Cpl. Bittner, T/4 Nuanes, Cpl.
Cleasby, Pfc. Sweigart.
RIGHT BOTTOM: (Front Row) T/4 Foret, Sgt.
Petrouskas, Pfc. Bittner, Pfc. Walters, Pfc. Mazza,
S/Sgt. Burkepile, T/Sgt. Guiren, Sgt. Gentile, Pvt.
Cooper, T/5 Mitchell. (Back Row) Sgt. Jones, Pfc.
Sweigart, Pfc. Driscoll, Cpl. Perry, S/Sgt. Hand, Sgt.
Mayfield, Pfc. Mathis, Cpl. Cleasby, Sgt. Grugett.


898TH SIGNAL COMPANY DEPOT PERSONNEL
T/4 Garland, T/4 Shabazin, Pvt. DSonson. FOUTH
ROW: T/5 Midlam, T/3 Sims, Pfc. Ruano, Pvt. Deierks, T/4
Bruton, Cpl. MAndracchia.T/5 McNally, S/Sgt Oja, Pvy.
Keller, T/4 W.Williams, T/4 Smoot, T/3 Roney, T/4 Stokey,
Serres, T/4 Williams, T/4 Smoot, T/3 Roney, T/4 Stokey,
T/4 Hendrickson, T/4 Telfer, T/3 Lomax, T/Sgt. L. Magee.
FRONT ROW: Pvt. J.R.Smith, Pvt. Sharrock, Pvt. Scheiter,
Pvt. Fryer, S/Sgt. Quigley, Pvt. Kinquist, T/4 H. Williams,
Pfc.Pohland, T/4 Sokolowskt. SECOUND ROW: T/4 Wayman,
Pvt. LeRoy, T/5 Seibel, T/5 Duff, T/5 Blan,Pfc.Casmer,
T/Sgt.B.L. Smith, Pvt. Kasmir, T/5 Blan, Pfc. Levitz
THIRD ROW: S/Sgt. Judd, M/Sgt. Gruber, Pfc. MUrphy,
T/5 Malstead, T/Sgt. McNeill, T/4 Meyer, T/5 Ondrekovic,


FORNT ROW: Cpl: Pettarelli, Pvt. Taylor, T/5 E. Cohen,
T/5 Branst, T/4 Bleakney, T/5 Arthur, T/5 Bass, T/5 Bass, T/5 Fifer,
T/5 Leitheider, SECOUND ROW: T/4 Gilmore, T/5 Holmes,
T/5 Haskell, T/5 Bock, Cpl. Hardy, Sgt. Ketcham,T/4 timm
T/5 Eddy, T/5 Cockriĺ, THIRD ROW: Ketcham, T/4 Timm
pvt. Golden, T/4 Deida, T/4 Leitz, Pfc. Boney, T/5 McElveen,
T/3 Novick, Pv t.Lathrop, Pv y. AllenFOU RT H: T /3
Vislosky , M/Sgt.Boxler, Pfc. Cameron, Sgt. Bury, Pfc. Roller,
T/5 Kinder, Pvt. Hebda, S/Sgt. Fohrmann, T/5 Schwartz.
FIFHT ROW: T/5 Duris, Pvt .Stewart, T/5 Diehl, T/3 Sather,
Pvt. Ryals, Pvt. Rayles, Pvt. Ramirez, T/5 Baumgardner,
T/4 Hine, SIXTH ROW: Pvt. Templeman, T/5 Baumgardner,
Pvt. Thune, Pvt.Liddle, T/3 L.J. Magee, T/5 L.D. Rogers,
T/5 Cooper, T/Sgt. Nordstrom, T/5 Schreck.
Depot Personnel


MAJOR JACOB SLINGERLAND
Commanding Officer
Amherley Field Orderly Room: Sgt.
Scheid , 1st Lt, Wilbur (Detachment Com-
mander), S/Sgt. Howard .
1124TH M.P.
COMPANY
1124th Military Police
* Company was activated Janu-
ary 1, 1943, at the Charleston Army Air Base, with a
cadre of eight enlisted men under the command of
Lt. Andrew J. Ford and other officers drawn from
among the graduates of the Provost Marshal General
School. Within two months upon reaching a strength
of 356 the unit began intensive training with the aim
of selecting the 257 men who would finally form the
Company. This difficult process of improvement and
elimination was carried out under the direct super-
vision of Lt. Norman T. Wilbur and T/Sgt. (now First
Sergeant) Charles Blessing. Upon completion of
“3111411011” the product was, at the beginning of May,
1943, a unified organization of men physically, men-
ially and emotionally fit to carry out the rigorous
duties of military police.
Five months after activation the
Company was already at its overseas station and a
member of the 81st Air Depot Group in Australia,
with Headquarters at Eagle Farm and detachments for
the policing of Archcrfield and Amberley, as well as
guarding our own installations within the city. When
Farm Orderly Room:
Pvt. Nussbaum, Sgt. Bernot,
Pvt. Eddings, Cpl. Anderson, and
Pic. Branch spend a quiet hour at
home in their hut at Amberley.


First Sergeant
CHARLES BLESSING
M.P. Supply: Pvt. Zeason, Cpl. Jaynes, S/Sgt.
Smerik (Supply Sergeant),
Pay Call: Cpl. Jaynes, Ist Sgt. Blessing. Lt.
Walters, Pvt. Kamphaus.
Major Jacob Slingerland assumed command November 23,
1943, lie had very few problems to cope with as the Company
was already in full swing of efficient operation.
Unlike the average organization of the
Group, the duties of the Military Police Company call for con-
stant 24-hour operation. As an efficiency expedient the total
number of personnel available for guard purposes was divided
into four equal shifts. In addition to traffic regulation, general
maintenance of order and guarding — in itself so large a task
as to require the aid of 80 civilians —the 1124th has assumed
responsibility for fire control on the field. A fire department,
headed by Sgt. Indovina, a fireman in civilian life with six years
of experience, keeps constant vigil among the inflammables of
the base.
For the many thankless but essential jobs
well done, without complaint or fanfare, the 1124th M.P.’s
deserve special commendation, and to them goes the satisfaction
of knowing that the Group appreciates their work.
On April 21, 1944, upon departure of the
first boat carrying the advance detail of the 81st Air Depot
Group, filly 1124th men were on board to he followed later by
the remainder of the unit to help police the way for our troops
as far north as the rising sun.
Pfc. Diskin “floored” after a tour
of duty at Amberley Field.


1124TH MILITARY POLICE
COMPANY PERSONNEL
Mullineaux, Pfc. Valdez. THIRD ROW: Sgt. Habak, Pvt.
Fgg, Pvt. Kamphaus, T/5 Hickman, T/4 Kizer. Sgt. McKean,
Cpl.Miller, Sgt. Sprague, Pvt.Culberson, Pvt. Whitington.
FOURTH ROW: pFC. Fennell, Pfc.. Cavanagh,
Pfc. Salter, Pvt.Begy,Sgt. Johnson,Pfc.Gnade.
FRO NT ROW: Cpl. Gallagher, T/4 Stott, Pvt. Warren,
S/ Sg t. Smerik, Pfc. Eiswerth, T/4 Cook, S/Sgt. D.L.Murphy,
Pvt.Tabor, T/4 Schmaelzle, Pvt. Campbell. SECOUND ROW:
Pfc. Peterham, Pfc. Mask, Pvt. E.E.Shaffer, Pvt.Wekerle,
T/5 Engehardt, Pvt. Woody, T/4 Stermer, Pvt. Kovar,Pfc.


FRONT ROW: Pvt. Sparacio. Pvt. Schneiderman, 1st Sgt.
Blessing, Major Slingerland, Lt. Walter, S/Sgt. Zakarewicz,
Pvt. Rafat, Pvt.Crisp.SECOUND ROW: Sgt. Kelley, Pvt
Curley, T/5 Wroblewski, Pvt Nobles, Pvt. Sciarra, Pvt
Rumancick, Pvt. R.E. Wilson, Jr'; Pfc. McTierman,Sgt.Oster.
THIRD ROW: Cpl. Kearns, T/5 Males, T/5 L.J. Smith,
Cpl. Peeler, Sgt.A.J. Woods,Pvt>jackson, Pfc.Morion, Pvt.
Micheman, Cpl.Vander Meer.FOURTH ROW: Pvt.Ayres,
Pvt. Durham,Sgt Indovina, Pfc Kochanek, Pvt. J. Wyatt,
Pvt. Wrobel, Sgt.Sims, Pvt.Schubert, T/5 Files. FIFTH
Pfc. Cortest, Pvt. Ziemski, Pfc. Heinonen, Pvt.Sullian, T/5
Jaynes, Pfc Morgan. SIXTH ROW: Pfc. Nussbaum, Sgt.
Reiner, Pfc. Samanski, T/5 Kuns, Sgt. Bernot, T/4 Schule,
Pfc.M.D.Davis, Pvt. Seler, Pvt.LAkowitz.
Company Personnel


1124TH MILITARY POLICE
COMPANY PERSONNEL
FORNT ROW: T/5 Nickel, Sgt. Tennant, Pvt. Barnett, Pfc
Trouman, Cp.Sely, Pvt. G.E.Davis,Cpl>huisman, T/4 H.W.
ROW: Cpl.Selby,pvt. G .E. Davis, Cpl. Huisman, T/4 H. W.
Harvey, Pvt. H. W yatt, Cpl. O'Donel, Cpl. Staib. THIRD
ROW: T/5 Scigalski, Cpl. Reinhart, Pfc. Neve, Pfc. Mierzwa,
Pfc.Eyres, Cpl. Eisterhold, Pvt. Zeason. FOURTH ROW:
Cp l. Russom, Pv t. J.E.Ho ward, T/5 Wix, Pfc. Livingston
Pfc. Mollenko pf , Sgt. DSornself, Pvt L. D. Reinhardt, Pfc.
Pvt.Mollen kopf, Sgt.Dornseif, Pvt L.D Reinhardt, Pfc.
Walsh, Pvt. Biondo, Sgt.J.W.W. yatt, Pvt. Alfinito.


FIRST ROW: Ptc. Green, Ptc. Hayton, Ptc. Radic, S/Sgt.
Howard, 1st Lt. Wilbur, T/4 Delevan, T/4 Roger, Ptc.
Bendixsen. SECOND ROW: Pvt. Hendrix. Pvt. Gay, Pfc.
McCord, Pvt. Kozak, Pvt. Smith, Pvt. Quinn, Pfc. Carter,
Pfc. Dykes. THIRD ROW: T/4 Wise, Pvt. Cobb, Pfc.
Kiedrowski, Pfc. Ferara, Cpl. Ball, Pfc. Reif, Pfc, Dray,
Pfc. Burns, Jr. FÒURTH ROW: Pvt. Cagney, Pfc. Meydem,
Sgt. Scheid, Pvt. Simpson, T/4 Karjalainen, Pfc. Brandt,
Ptc. Capp, Pfc. Chicoine. FIFTH ROW: Pfc. Huck, Pvt.
Anspach, Pvt. Branch, Pfc. Gallets.
Company Personnel


1124TH MILITARY POLICE
COMPANY PERSONNEL
FIRST ROW: Pfc. Young, Pvt. Bowers, Pfc. DiStasi, T/5
Hare, P vt. DuPree, Pfc. Gruzinsky, Pvt. Grice, Pfc. Cave,
Pvt. Boots, Pvt. Diskin. SECOND ROW: Pfc. Kapronica,
Pvt. Mulvaney, Jr., Pvt. Nesti, T/5 Demetreshon, Pvt. Julian,
Pfc. Wesendorf, Pfc. Nichols, Sgt. Tooker, Pfc. Crews, Cpl.
Anderson. THIRD ROW: Pfc. Bloxom, Pfc. Elias, Pvt.
Kohn, Cpl. Sweet, Sgt. Genis, Cpt. Dixon, Pvt. Bonin, Pvt.
Poitrowski, Pfc. Kaczalka, Pvt. Hogan, FOURTH ROW:
Cpl. Kopchenski, Pvt. Haugen, T/5 Guarcello9, Pfc. Windes,
Pfc. Glover, Pvt. Craig, Pvt. Hook, Pfc. Baxter, Pfc. Arnett,
Pfc. Sasala. FIFTH ROW: Pvt. Cowan, Pvt. Giordano, Pvt.
Fidler, Pvt. Keith, Pvt. Eddings, Pfc. L.W. Smith, Cpl. Banks,
Sgt. Stover, Pvt. Hylton, Pfc. Hileman.


FRONT ROW: Sgt. Tasca, Sgt. Howe, Cpl. Dixon, Pvt Daly,
Pvt. Leiter, Pvt. Ferlic, Pvt. Napoli, Pvt. McCracken, Pvt.
Long, Lt. Weller, Pvt. Tant, Pvt. Maurier, Pvt. McDuffie,
Pfc. Driver, Pfc. Radner, Pvt. Lafarlett. BACK ROW: Cpl.
Demetris, Sgt. Willis, Cpl. Ladany, Sgt. Devlin, Pfc. Faison,
Pvt. McKee, Pvt. Wilson, Pvt. Liston, Pfc. Maguire, Pvt.
Hine, Pvt. Leitz, Pvt. McArthur, Pvt. Kelley, Pvt. M.D. Long,
Cpl. McManus.
Company Personnel


1616TH ORDNAN CE M.M. COMPANY
CAPTAIN RAYMOND K. HOXSIE
Company Commander
First Sergeant
WAYNE STILLWELL
L infancy as an Ordnance unit, having been a Q.M.
adult until the War Department decided in December, 1942, to redesignate
Q.M. medium maintenance companies as Ordnance organizations, the 1616th
was in May of 1943 anything but a “rookie” outfit. Though not yet a member
of tbe 81st Air Depot Group (tbey joined shortly thereafter in June), they had
been in Australia and New Guinea long enough to get acclimated to foreign
service and hard work.
Soon after assignment of personnel, the majority of whom
arrived from New Guinea, Capt. Raymond K. Hoxsic joined as the new C.O.
and Lt. Robert F. Logan as junior officer. With the arrival of 22 additional men
in July, 1943, the Company was ready to function.
As its original purpose, a medium maintenance company
is responsible for vehicle maintenance, the normal number of vehicles serviced
being 600, minimum number 350, and maximum 1,200. Other responsibilities
are parts supply and technical supervision of the work of lower echelons. In
this theatre M.M. Companies have stepped higher into 4th echelon work, namely,
unit overhaul.
Duties at Eagle Farm consisted of supervision and opera-
tion of the Special Vehicle Storage Pool, including all vehicle shipments, and
all 2nd and 3rd echelon maintenance of Air Corps special purpose and Ordnance
general purpose vehicles. Although operating under T/O strength and short of
equipment, handicapped by lack of proper garage space and interference by
rain, work was progressing creditably. By tbe end of November, 1943, the
organization was performing repairs and supplying parts for approximately
1,500 vehicles assigned to 25 various Air Corps installations.
During the latter part of December, 1943, operation of the
Motor Pool was given over to the newly arrived 1799th Ordnance S. & M. Com-
pany. The 1616th moved to the new maintenance hangar to devote full time
to vehicle maintenance and repair.
Since the original members of the Company were partici-
pants in the Papuan Campaign when the 1616th was part of the Bth Service
Group, they were presented the Citation Device for outstanding service and
achievement.
Upon arrival to the advance base on April 30th, 1944,
rumors started running wild about a new Table of Organization disbanding the
Company. Credence was given to that rumor when in the middle of May orders
were issued transferring men to the various Ordnance units, the remainder of
the 1616th to be absorbed in tbe Ordnance Section of Headquarters Squadron.
To those men disbandment meant losing a fine outfit; to the units that received
them —an assurance that the 1616th spirit accompanied those Special Orders.
The Orderly Room at
the advanced base: Pfc.
Roach, 775 Rittenhouse.
Company Sinn, Eagle
Farm.
90


1616TH ORDNANCE PERSONNEL
FRONT ROW: Cpl. Shulman, T/5 Davis, T/5 Galloway,
1st Sgt. Stillwell, 1st Lt. Logan, Capt. Hoxsie, T/4 Hicks,
M/Sgt. Williams, Sgt. Herren, S/Sgt. Halm. SECONDC ROW:
T/4 Serkin, T/3 Felts, T/3 Lord, Pfc. Schaffer, S/Sgt. Perkins,
Pfc. Sandidge, Pfc. Rettig, T/4 Bomio, Pfc. Burke, T/5
Heersema. THIRD ROW: T/4 Bourne, T/4 Unger, T/5
Rittenhouse, Pfc. Byers, T/4 Lyons, Sgt. Johnson, T/4 Nowak,
T/4 Podkowinski, Ptc. Markowski, T/5 Devine. FOURTH
ROW: Sgt. Linhardt, T/5 Organ, Pvt. Stewart, Pfc. Castor,
T/5 Myrick, T/4 Davis, T/5 Collins, T/4 Moler, Pfc. Carroll,
Pfc. Roche, T/4 Knight.


CAPT. WILLIAM M. MOREAU
Commanding Officer
First Sergeant
KERMIT H. LEE
change* before u mt " ltl iW
automotive shop at - -
CaUf ° rnia ‘ j t ro m the
. living emerged from
ISot baling itB men
K \\ that stopped, ho*
about moving overseas.
, t bivouac ana
the program i 1 inst ruction for ■
eluded w« uumher. The
according to his dropp ing ° f cincr .
t . weeks were spcm granting ot ei
f< " V , a ckin" and crating, and r
sonnet, paekuv
ircnev furloughs-
1st Sgt. Kermit H. Lee
and S/Sgt. Petersen
(Supply Sergeant} in
the Company Supply
Room.
Lt. Emil Langkans.
Armament Officer , and
pet “Little B .”


COMPANY "BLOWOUT," 3rd April, 1944.
TOP LEFT (kneeling): Pvt. Mcßride, 1st Lt. Leigh, Sgt. Howell, Pfc. Spalding. SECOND ROW: Pfc. Wilson, Pvt.
Pitts, T/5 Ballenline, T /5 Wise, T/5 Coyne, T/Sgt. Reinert, Pvt. Lovely, T/5 Cichewicz, Pvt. Reisinger,
On November 20, 1943, the
Company boarded a troop transport for foreign
duty and arrived in Australia December 13tb. The
men spent several days at Camp Doomben, then
used as a staging camp, and on the 17th were
marched to nearby Eagle Farm to be attached to
the 453 th Service Squadron.
Upon relinquishing by the
1616th Ordnance MM Company of the Special
Vehicle Motor Pool at the end of December, the
1799th look over its operation. In addition to the
enlisted personnel seven civilians were employed
in the pool. In several months’ time the unit re-
leased six civilians and functioned with military
personnel.
To date the Automotive, Am-
munition, and Supply Sections have been running
the pool. The Armament Section is working on
the maintenance of armament on the field. An-
other of the organization’s responsibilities is ren-
dering such assistance in Ordnance matters as may
be directed by the Ordnance Officer.
One of the youngest units of
the 81st, the 1799th was nevertheless the “crack”
attached outfit of the Group. In discipline and
adaptability, the two most essential missions of an
Army unit, this Company was second to none.


1799T H ORDNANC E S. AND M.
COMPANY PERSONNEL
ROW: T/5 Techero, T/5 Sanders, T/5 Lewis, T/5 Gross,
T/5 Perkins, Pfc. Kaplan, Pvt. Densmore, T/5 Cayne,
T/5 Ballentine. FOURTH ROW: Pvt. Murray, T/5 Pickens,
T/3 Tanksley, Sgt. Pleasants, Sgt. Howell, T/5 Groshek,
T/Sgt. Allen, T/Sgt. Reinert, Sgt. Uchwat.
FRONT ROW: Pvt. Pitts, S/Sgt. Petersen, Pfc. Segrete, Pfc.
Sheets, S/Sgt. Thruman, T/Sgt. Urban, T/4 Kopecki, T/5
Peterlick, S/Sgt. Cachra. SECOND ROW: T/4 Peck, T/5
Walther, Pvt. Stockovich, T/5 Crow, T/5 Wise, Pfc. Dodson,
M/Sgt. Jacob, T/5 Cichewicz, T/4 Missildine. THIRD


FRONT ROW: T/5 Schinitis, 1st Sgt. Lee, Lt. Garton,
Lt. Shaw, Capt. Moreau, Lt. Leigh, Lt. Langhans, T/4 Parker,
Pvt. McBride. SECOND ROW: T/5 Slish, Pvt. Zulch, Pvt.
Pfc. Spalding, Pvt. Guetlin, T/5 Slish, Pvt. Zulch, Pvt.
Allison, T/5 Simpson, T/5 Ochoa. THIRD ROW: pvt.
Stueber, T/5 Odom, T/Sgt. Lellio, Pvt. Parkinson, Pvt.
Morales, Pfc. Feyh, T/5 Wrobel, T/5 Henderson, Pvt. Lowitz.
FOURTH ROW: Pfc. Norman, Pfc. Wilson, Pfc. Dinse, T/5
Harvey, Pvt. Castellano, Pvt. Lovely, Pfc. Tyler, Pvt. Ivins,
T/5 Montforte. FIFTH ROW: Pvt. Locks, Pfc. Heck, Pfc.
Peterman, Pfc. Reisinger, Pfc. Parkin.
Company Personnel


LIEUTENANT WILLIAM. F. RAKE
Detachment Commander
Acting 1st Sergeant
FRANK W. HICKEY
194TH ORDNANCE DEPOT
COMPANY (DET.)
THE BATHERS . . . the 194th ready to take a plunge in the U.S.O. pool while stationed at
Coachella, California — June, 1943.


FRONT ROW: Pfc. Dido, Pfc. Vogel, T/Sgt. Halliburton,
S/Sgt. Hickey, Lt. Rake, S/Sgt. Coyle, T/5 Phillips, Pfc.
Jagielski, SECOND ROW: T/4 Iannucci, T/4 Ohnoutka, Pvt.
Gregor, T/4 Krause, T/5 Mauser, Sgt. Gerulis, T/4 Woods,
T/4 Burns. THIRD ROW: Pfc. Keck,T/S Fors, T/4 Gervelis,
Pfc. Reimer, T/5 Heller, Pfc. Vlcan, T/5 Gallagher.


DETACHMENT, FIRST PLATOON
1912th Quartermaster Co.
(Avn.) T.
The First Platoon, 1912th Quartermaster Company, was
separated from its parent organization and activated as a
separate detachment in Australia, December 5,1942, with 45 men under the com-
mand of Ist Lt. John T. Fletcher, After two months with the 45th Service Group
it was assigned February 16, 1943, to the 81st Air Depot Group, its duties being
to transport equipment, supplies and personnel for units stationed at Eagle
Farm. The detachment also sent details of men to nearby fields for special duty.
April 7, 1943, Lt. Robert R. Austin, Jr., assumed command.
The work of these men was highly commended by their
superiors. Col. R. J. Minty, Commanding Officer of the
Group, said of them: “All indications, including reports from the Officer in
Charge, the civilian supervising technical details, and the Commanding
Officer of the R.A.A.F. unit at Charleville, indicate that the detail of men
from Eagle Farm . . . should be commended. The camp and equipment
were well taken care of and the camp was left in good condition at the
time of departure. The men worked long hours, and without complaint.
The job was completed considerably ahead of the estimate made.”
On November 1, 1943, Ist Lt. George M. Allen
was assigned to the detachment. It was under
his command that the Platoon, of which 17 men served in New
Guinea, began sending its “veterans” hack to the United States
on the rotation plan. Two men were sent in January and
four in February, 1944.
March 18, 1944, the Platoon
was reassigned to the
1912th Quartermaster Company (Avn.) T.,
which established headquarters at
Eagle FaAn.
LIEUTENANT GEORGE M. ALLEN
Platoon Commander
1st Sergeant Cudworth, T/4 Drugan.
T/5 Stoller interviewing
T/5 Clancy.
Cpl. Clancy feeding mas-
cot, “Joe Wallaby," the
area pet.


1912 TH QUARTERMASTER PERSONNEL
FRONT ROW: T/5 Drugan, Sgt. Deveney, Sgt. O'Malley,
S Sgt. Flanagan, Ist Lt. Allen, T/5 Mast, Cpl. Cioffi, Pfc. Till.
SECOND ROW: T/5 Guthrie, Pvt. Fee, Pfc. Mundell, Pfc.
Rupard, Pvt. Losev, Pvt. Fleming, T/5 Markiewicz, Pfc.
Caruvella. THIRD ROW: T/4 Salvos, T/5 Agnew, Pfc.
Treadwell, Pfc. Carson, T/5 Clancy, Pvt. Robbins, Pfc.
Jaskierski, T/4 Alley, Pfc. Watson. FOURTH ROW: Pvt.
Dobrovocky, Pfc. Levy, Pfc. Griffith, T/5 Kulakowski, Cpl.
Calfec, Pfc. Chase, Pvt. Heilman, Pfc. Sheppard, T/5 Pawuk.


ENGINEERING
The middle of 1913 marked the beginning of
phenomenal development in the Engineering Section of the 81st Air
Depot Group. The appointment of Major Donald D. Steele as Engineer,
big Officer on September Bth initiated a period of construction and '
unification unprecedented in the history of the Group. From this
re-organization of loosely knit, separately operated Squadron shops
emerged a compact body of twenty-five departments that was to send
planes to forward areas faster than any army unit in the Southwest
Pacific. I
The primary duty of the Engineering Section is the
erection and modification of aircraft arriving unassembled from the
I nited States. Safeguarded by protective coalings, the ships are lifted '•
off the transports and pulled to the field, where 1,200 skilled men clean,
assemble, modify, repair, test, and do all work required to make the
planes ready for combat.
Supervised by Capt. Cupp, the shops were headed
by experienced mechanics from the 81st and 44th Repair Squadrons


, and. assisted by personnel from the 455th and
lltli Service Squadrons. The combined efficiency
and speed of these shops have drawn repeated
praise of the Commanders of this theatre:
“The speedy delivery of
the fighter aircraft contributed directly to the
successful conclusion of the Lae campaign.”—
General KENNEY.
“The delivery of these
planes was a direct contribution to the success
of the Cape Gloucester Campaign.”—Colonel
brownfield.
Between June, 1943, and
January, 1944, there was an increase of only
195% in personnel, hut in the same period the
rise in output was 340%. Little wonder that
the 81st, too, is proud of its Engineering Section.
ERECTION AND
MODIFICATION


N the runway a mighty 2,000 horsepower engine starts
to cough and then rhythmically to purr and pulsate with power. A cloud of dust
sends this cumbersome creature of the skies streaking down the runway lifting
her bulk with the ease of a bird and quickly zooming into the blue horizon. She
is not a beauty, but once in the air her appearance is forgotten. With her eight
guns blazing death she swoops in at more than 375 miles per hour raking enemy
strongholds with fiery lead. She is a symbol of supremacy as she flashes downward
with the speed of sound. Willi her pilot she is invincible for she is the Thunderbolt.
She is the P-47.


THE P-47 PROJECT
OWARD the end of November, 1943,
the 81st Air Depot Group was called upon by the Com-
manding General, Fifth Air Force, to accomplish the
almost impossible task of erecting, modifying, and deliv-
ering well over a hundred P-47’s in an incredibly short
time. Higher Headquarters said: “We doubt if it can be
done.” The 81st replied: “We’ll try.”
What is this plane so much in demand
and upon which so much depended? .
Designed by Seversky for Republic
Aircraft, the P-47 had already proven its worth as a
fighter in the European Theatre and the Southwest
Pacific. However, the task planned called for a longer
range than it had at this time. A fuselage tank, known
as the “Christmas Tree Tank,” was designed, giving the
P-47 the desired range for its mission in the proposed
invasion.
A plan was
laid calling for three eight-
hour shifts and involving over
450 men per shift. On Decem-
ber 4, 1943, delivery was made
of the first modified P-47.
Lt. General
George C. Kenney made a per-
sonal visit to Eagle Farm and
explained why a concentrated
effort had to he made immedi-
ately to provide additional
Thunderbolts for the fighting
front. He was well satisfied
with the progress of the pro-
ject and did not hesitate an
opinion about the fine work of
the men who worked in con-
stant downpours night after
•fight.
The services of a large number of
mechanics from organizations temporarily stationed in
the Eagle Farm area were secured to make up the per-
sonnel needed. The addition of these men necessitated
a hurried reorganization of the entire Engineering Sec-
tion as well as of the messing facilities. Provision was
made for additional housing.
Meals had to he provided every two
hours during this period. Approximately 3,400 meals
were served each twenty-four hours. Arrangements were
made to serve hot coffee, chocolate, and fruit to the men
twice during the night. During a three-week period, when
Fighter Command was desperately calling for more modi-
fied planes, these men worked as many as 48 to 56 hours
without sleep and then stopped only long enough for a few
hours of rest. The officers and enlisted men deserve un-
qualified praise for the mag-
nificent work. Their splendid
cooperation, attention to duty,
and disregard for personal com-
fort during long hours of con-
tinued rain, were an example
of the spirit of the 81st Air
Depot Group. Rank was of
minor importance since Master
Sergeant worked as hard as the
Private.
With the com-
pletion of this project enough
modified P-47’s had been de-
livered to the fighting front to
accomplish the task required,
and another milestone had
been passed on the road to
final victory.


S he's the THUNDERBOLT
1. Being towed from wharf to Eagle Farm.
2. Entering the field.
3. Washing the wings preparatory to assembly.
4. Installing ‘'Christmas Tree ” tank.
5. Testing operation of hydraulic landing gear
retracting mechanism during erection.
6. Cleaning brake drum during erection.
7. Sheet meted men at work.


8. Propeller installation.
9. Washing the engine.
10. Cleaning the landing gear.
11. Final ground check.
12. Pulling the prop through.
13. Take-off,
14. Test flight.
15. Landing after successful test flight.
16. Lined up awaiting delivery.
17. Thunderbolts thundering north to the battle zone.


MACHINE SHOP
Here twenty-five soldiers and five civilians do
all the machine-shop work for the field, preparing special parts and
tools needed for modification and experiment. M/Sgt. Szuchy was
in charge until the 81st moved north, when he w r as succeeded by
T/Sgt. Censier.
1. General view of the machine
shop at Eagle Farm,
2. Cpl. Evans operating a milling
machine.
3. Shaper, with grinding attach-
ment, operated by S/Sgt. Bueh-
tier.
4. Cpl. Heine engrossed in oper-
ating one of the larger lathes.
5. Cpl. Kulas operating a small
drill.
6. Radial drill machine being used
by Pfc. David.


(Left): M/Sgt. Mit-
chell operating a drill.
Pic. Ver Heul and assistant
preparing nacelle of an A-20G for
installation of a K-21 camera.
SHEET METAL SHOP
All work on the “skin” of airplanes—repair of dam-
ages sustained in shipment, manufacture of braces for the P-38 helly-tank,
rebuilding tail assemblies, to mention but a few examples—was done by
the 108 soldiers and one civilian of the Sheet Metal Shop under M/Sgt.
Fuller. On the Slst’s departure, M/Sgt. Combe was put in charge of the
shop at Eagle Farm.
S/Sgt. Thompson and Cpl. Hart working on flooring
and tail wheel of a C-60 in Hangar 3A.
Tube Rending See finn,
a unit of the Sheet Metal
Shop.
Repairing a B-26 prop
spinner.


ELECTRICAL
SHOP
(Left): S/Sgt. Baker and
Cpl. Brant checking elec-
trical equipment before
installation in aircraft.
(Right): A K-21 camera
being checked by Cpl.
Kovacs and Pvt. Luca
before installation in an
A-20.
(Left): Battery Room in
Hangar No, 1: Cpl. Scran-
ton and Pvt. Brown.
(Right): Cpl. Heath ad-
justing control on buttery
charger.
The Electrical Shop, T Sgt. Hendricks in charge,
does all electrical work from the line-checking and repair of magnetos,
landing and warning lights, voltage regulators and instrument wiring,
to the installation of stoves and refrigerators in ”Fat Cat” ships. Its
thirtv men arc also responsible for all electrical wiring, exclusive of
radio cables, on all transient aircraft.
T /Sgt. Hendricks adjust-
ing a reverse current
relay.


INSTRUMENT SHOP
S/Sgt. R. A. Thompson was head of the
section until he moved north and was succeeded by S/Sgt.
Deibel. The nine men of this shop check all instruments
(except radios) on the panel of the plane and carry out all
minor instrument repairs. They also handle replacements,
salvage, and gyro overhaul.
Sgt. Finley calibrating
tachometer with strobo-
scope.
Sgt. Hurley checking
bank and turn indicator.
Top:
Pic. Hicks calibrating
manifold pressure indice-
tor.
Bottom:
Sgt. Moulds calibrating an
electric indicator.


RA DIO
First and second echelon radio
work, which includes installation, modification, flight
check, and minor repair, was done hy the fifteen men
in the Radio Shop under Lt. Himes. They were drawn
from the squadrons and from the 898th Signal Company
and were under the immediate supervision of S Sgt.
D'Asta until he moved north and was succeeded hy Sgt.
Dyess. The shop worked in close coordination with the
Signal Section, to which it sent all radios requiring
major repair and from which it drew personnel for
special projects.
1. Sgt. Dress and T/4 Bradley working on the radio
receiver of a Flying Fortress.
2. One. of the well-equipped benches in the radio shop
with T/5 Schwartz, Sgt. Dyess, and T/4 Throopin
at work.
3 . T/Sgt. Spires modifying cable arrangement in the
P-47.
4. Receiving and transmitting equipment in the P-38:
Pfc. Shelton, Pic. Gibson, and Pfc. Raker.


CABL E
Sgt. Browning replaced
T/Sgt. Lippert (designer of the gun charging
improvement on the B-25 and A-20) when
the latter went north. The ten men in this
department do all cable work on planes on
the field.
Right: Sgt. Brenner, Sgt. Browning, and Pfc. Beckman
at work in the Cable Shop.
HYDRAULICS
Sgt. Green became head of
the Hydraulic Department when T/Sgt. Long
moved with the 81st Repair Squadron. This de-
partment has eighteen men who adjust brakes
and wheels, true brake drums, modify nose-
wheels on the F-5 and P-38, repair cylinders,
and keep the ship’s hydraulic system up to par.
Left: Checking hydraulic system on a P-40.
Right: Pvt. McDaniels, S/Sgt. Williams, Cpl. Knowles,
adjusting the brakes on a P-47.
Top: General view of the Welding Shop.
Left: Under the welder’s mask is S/Sgt. Biggs.
WELDING
Damaged joints, silver
soldering on gas plugs, aluminum welding
on gas lines, and other jobs requiring weld-
ing kept the fifteen soldiers and two civi-
lians of this shop quite busy. They were
under the supervision of S/Sgt. Newt and
later of T/Sgt. Vasilauskas. These men. did
all the work on Col. Gunn’s bomb racks
and smoke tanks.


The original personnel of
the Prop Department: Cpl.
Clark, M/Sgt. Robinson,
S/Sgt. Becker, Cpl. O’Hare,
Pfc. Piaskowski.
PROPS
When M/Sgt. Robinson returned home
on the rotation plan in March, 1944, his place as head of
the Propeller Department was taken by T/Sgt. Boyd.
There are 35 soldiers in this section whose work consists
of installation, inspection, line work, and the carrying out
of all minor repairs. Major repairs arc done at local
Australian factories.- During the special P-47 project in
December, 1943, these men worked a 24-hour shift and
completed 110 planes in record breaking time.
Group of Prop Specialists.
1. S/Sgt. Andrews, Pfc. Piaskowski, and Sgt. Boyll testing a
prop governor.
2. Sgt. Holm installing a power unit on a P-47.
3. S/Sgt. Roarke demonstrating the Electrical Prop Hoist
invented by S/Sgt. Becker. This invention has saved many
man-hours of awkward work.


Cpl. Russell assembling
a supercharger.
Th is unit operated
the only shop of its kind in
this area. T/Sgt. J. B. Davis
was Section Head and his
personnel comprised 15 en-
listed men, one civilian,
and three R.A.A.F. men at-
tached for training. Work
performed was teardown,
overhaul, sandblasting, and
repair oi supercharger units. A training coui -• •>''
from four to six weeks was conducted for men from
forward areas.
SUPERCHARGER
Pvt. Manlier cleaning
supercharger parts in
kerosene bath.
Left :
Cpl. Meyers balancing rotor
assembly.
Bottom:
Sandblaster (situation normal—
all fouled up).
Cpl. Russell testing supercharger
regulators.


ARMAMENT: One of the boys working on the “ammo-
cans” of the first B-25 at Eagle Farm. Improvements on
this particular type of plane were influenced by Lt. Col.
Gunn, of the 5 A.F.S.C. Experimental Section.
ARMAMENT SECTlON. — Kneeling: S/Sgt. Lacota, Sgt. Dotts, Cpl.
Peltekis, Cpl. Upchurch, T/Sgt. Wadsworth, Cpl. Bradley. Standing:
Sgt. Wolfe, Sgt. Skutnick, Sgt. McNulty, S/Sgt. Tracy, S/Sgt. Stewart,
Sgt. Supplee, S/Sgt. Kiechle, Sgt. Wilson, T/Sgt. Bunnell.
TECH. SUPPLY: Tech. Supply keeps a stock of all parts
from screws and nuts to engines. It draw's its equipment
on requisition from the various supply warehouses of the
Group. M/Sgt. Neal was the N.C.O. in charge of 39 enlisted
men and seven civilians.
RUBBER REPAIR DEPARTMENT: Cpl. Ellinger, Pfc.
Schuttiofel and Pfc. George at work in the Rubber Repair
Department. This section bandied the grading of tires,
repair of fuel cells, life rafts, life vests and oxygen masks.
OXYGEN DEPARTMENT: T/Sgt. Colby (right) and Cpl
Bates in charge of the Oxygen Unit at work on cylinders.
DRAFTING DEPARTMENT -AIRCRAFT: Pvt. Petak, Cpl. Einig
and Mr. Wgchsner working on plans for modifications on aircraft.
Sgt. Mcdalie is Section Head.


PAINT DEPARTMENT: Personnel numbered ten enlisted men.
The work consisted of serious and frivolous paintings on planes.
Examples of free hand drawing are illustrated on the two B-25's
and "Guinca Pig." a Flying Fortress with 208 missions, 23 Jap
planes and 3 ships to her credit.
TOP:
Sgt. Callahan, S/Sgt. Warren, and Pvt. Behring mixing paint in their shop.
DOPE AND FABRIC
DEPT: Sgt. Matla, S Sgt.
Archer, S/Sgt. Carlson fin
charge), in conjunction with
the paint shop, do the fabric
work on ailerons, elevators
and rudders. Dope is pul
over the fabric to stiffen and
strengthen it.
INSPECTION:
Four “Big W heels” of Han-
gar No. 6: S/Sgt, Johnson,
Crew Chief; M/Sgt, Kanan,
Hangar Chief; T/Sgt. Nel-
son, Aircraft Inspector; Cpl.
Thomas, Aircraft Inspector.
INSPECTION TRIP
Col. Phillips, Col. Brownfield, Brig. General
Connell, of Fifth Air Force Service Com-
mand, during one of their tours of inspection.


GRO UP OPERATIONS
Top left:
CAPTAIN JOHN W. DUERST
Group Operations Officer
Center left: All planes must contact control tower by radio for
landing or take-off instructions. Apparatus receives on three wave
lengths, sends on one. Operates 24 hours per day to accommodate
1,500 planes that take off or land in an average month.
Bottom left: The traffic office keeps records of flying time, infor-
mation required by pilots, maps, time of arrival and departure of
ships. Acts as liaison between forward areas and Fifth Air Force-
Transports pilots and directs activities of servicing, field mainten-
ance, and night alert crews. S/Sgt. Elkins (in charge), Sgt. Newsome,
Sgt. Wride.


UP UP UP
mgjggX- RDINARILY, we attach a great deal of glamor to combat flying, and rightly so.
Little, however, is known of the pilot’s pilot who goes through the paces day in and
day out, and whose life is as much in danger as that of any stunt flyer. As one of them aptly put it: “We don’t
make the same mistake twice.”
Planes are shipped from the States in parts, are assembled here, and for the first time test
flown. The test pilot “opens her up wide” to see that all instruments are in working order, under the most trying
conditions. In brief, he tastes the wine for possible poison, this two to five hours per day.
The test flyer has to be well versed in every type of plane, bomber and fighter, compared
with the combat pilot who knows one class better than any other since he flies his own ship all the time. Aside
from more time in the air, the test pilot has four times as many landings and take-offs as the combat flyer.
As may be expected, each of our pilots has his favorite plane and an individual reason for
his choice. Generally speaking, the P-38 and A-20 are preferred ships because of the tricycle landing gear
which gives them easier taxiing, take-off and landing, and twin engines to add to their security. Capt. Gutierrez
has a very earthly reason for his choice —the A-20; “Because I’m a lazy pilot.” Lt. Laßerge, in addition to the
A-20 and P-38, favors the B-17; “Because I like her, that’s all.” Practically all of our pilots have one fear—
“sweating” that a single-engined plane of the P-47 class will conk out on take-off.
As a matter of journalistic curiosity, the interviewer asked for a list of qualifications of a
“good” test pilot. The best testing age was given as 25 to 26, physical condition must be perfect, and knowledge
of engineering and of all classes of aircraft is on the required list; at least 800 hours of flying time, with an
average 30 to 50 hours monthly time in the air, are other necessary adjuncts, according to the men who make
them safe for the pilots up north.


“WALLY”
1st Lt. Luther E. Wallace
“FAT BOY”
Major Donald D. Steele, Group Engineering
Officer and Chief Test Pilot
“LITTLE JOE”
Capt. Joseph S. Gutierrez
“POE”
Ist Lt. Delosse Poe
THEY TEST EM
“DICK”
1st Lt. Richard C. Watson
“VINCE”
1st Lt. Vincent R. Laßerge
“FO-MO”
Capt. William O. Farrior
“JOHNNY”
1st Lt. John R. Meding






IN MEMORIAM
J-
lnd when the stream
Which overflowed the soul was passed away
A consciousness remained that it had left.
Deposited upon the silent shore
Of memory, images and precious thoughts.
That sJwU not die, and cannot be destroyed.
Wordsworth.
Major
Donald A. Simpson
Dec. 7, 1916-July 19, 1943
Captain Paul C. May
July 5, 1918-July 17, 1943
Lt. James J. Handley
March 4, 1920-July 17, 1943
Lt. Willis F. Schmidt
Jan. 16, mi-Oct. 20, 1943


B-17
P-38
You hear the roar of propeller
blades cutting their way through the icy thinness of
the stratosphere. Up high in the heavens the winds
howl like a thousand demons attempting in their fury
to tear her asunder, but deep within this mighty bird
beats a tireless heart of steel. The rhythmic throb of
four powerful engines of 5,000 horsepower fears no
devils of the sky. With her guns to protect her, and
her brain manipulated by two trustworthy pilots, her
course plotted by a master navigator, and a load of
death that wreaks havoc with her enemies, what has
she to fear? She is Queen of the skies. She is the
A
Flying Fortress—the B-17.
A bolt of fire goes flashing past,
zooming through the skies, quickly climbing higher
and higher and vanishing into the blue beyond. A
two-engined message of death with her 20 mm, cannon
and four machine guns bristling from her nose, she is
the scourge of the skies, hated by her enemies for
powers in dealing out death in the battle of the air.
She lives up to her name, “The Lightning,” for she is
a streak of lightning hurtling across the blue at better
than 400 m.p.h. in a never ending search for her target.
Not only a bolt of lightning but a missile of destruc-
tion is she, for the sight of her spells doom to those
who cross her path. She is the Lightning—the P-38.


A-20
B-25.
A double purpose ship, using both
attributes with deadly accuracy and ability, is the
A-20. This night-fighter-bomber has twin engines of
1,800 horsepower, each giving her plenty of speed
and durability as she streaks down from out of the
skies at upward of 350 m.p.h., spraying lead from
her eight machine guns, dropping her 4,000 pound
bomb load. With her crew of three she is used
primarily to disrupt the enemy supply lines, attack
troop concentrations, ships, and fixed installations.
Performing her duties with thoroughness, she leaves
a job well done. She is the Boston. She is the A-20.
The plane that has made a name
for itself, especially in the Southwest Pacific, is the
well-known B-25. Little need be told of her deeds.
Powerfully fortified with fourteen machine guns, a
75 millimeter cannon and a two-ton bomb capacity,
she has blasted Japanese shipping from the seas in the
now famous Battles of the Pacific. Sweeping low
over enemy airfields at higher than 320 m.p.h., straf-
ing and bombing, she will always be remembered by
the foe. With two powerful 1,800 horsepower engines,
and her gallant crew of five, she sweeps the skies dar-
ing the enemy to come and do battle with her. She is
the Mitchell. She is the B-25.


AIR CORPS SUPPLY
No engine’s roar, no whine of lead.
No shrapnel bursting overhead.
No cloud filled skies to travel through.
No world below us, ’neath the blue.
No, none of these to catch our eye.
Ours is the job—Air Corps Supply.
No order comes too large or small.
We try our best to fill them all;
From tail assemblies, wheels and brakes.
To landing lights and armor plates;
From aircraft engines to a screw,
For bombers, fighters, transports, too.
There’s parts to pack and goods to check.
Yeah, “pencil pushin,” too, by heck!
There’s railway problems we must fight.
And boats to load till late at night.
We toil through heat and blinding rain
To load our air freight on some plane.
There 's no use sitting ’round and crying.
It’s up to us to “Keep ’Em Flying.”
To you up front: we hope some day
You’ll understand what part we play.
And in the end we think you’ll see
We, too, have helped towards victory.
— Sgt. H. E. Bailey.
Capt. Sullivan, Group Warehouse Officer, Inspection section: C W/O Engle, W/O
with his assistant, Lt. Goodrich. Wessman, W/O Stralik.
1. Major W. J. Klein, Transhipment Officer,
2. Capt. G. D. Brighton, Local Purchase Officer.
3. Capt. J. R. Trumbull, Shipping Officer.
4. Capt. Altwood, Capt. Sullivan, Lt. Claus, Assist-
ant Supply Officers.


STOCK RECORDS
Paralleling and supplementing the
warehouse’s hin cards arc the stock record cards kept at
the Supply Section, Group Headquarters. These cards pro-
vide an instant check on stocks in all warehouses of the
Depot. The 800,000 items can he located hy class (there
are thirty main classes) and by stock number. A requisi-
tion goes to the Supply Officer at Group Headquarters, is
checked against stock record cards, and if the material is
available it is coded. A shipping ticket is made out from
the coded requisition for those items immediately avail-
able, and sent to the warehouse as authority to take the
items from the bins. The items are then sent to the pack-
ing department.
1. M/Sgt. (now W/O) McElwee, Chief Clerk.
2. Sgt. West, Sgt. Bock, S/Sgt. Sudhoff, Cpl. Davidson, S/Sgt. Kavin.
3. S/Sgt. Kaiser, Sgt. Sheridan.
4. Sgt. Bricker, Cpl. Waldron, Pfc. Doroshow, Sgt. Newburger.
5. Sgt. Vaughan, T/Sgt. Highman, Cpl. Kipner.
6. Sgt. Skovill.
7. Cpl. Davidson at “Tea Call.”


RECEIVING
Materials are received in four
ways: l>y truck from local sources; by rail, from dis-
tant Australian sources; by plane, which includes
emergency requirements; and by boat from the
United Slates, which constitutes the bulk of our sup-
plies.
1. Unloading belly tanks at Whse No, 12,
2. Unloading incoming equipment from trains at Eagle Farm.
3. Warehouse area at Eagle Farm.
4. Unloading drums of industrial chemicals at a storage dump. Sgt.
Henderer, hand on truck, is foreman of the industrial chemical
Whses No. 1 and No. 7.
5. An A-20 being lifted off its transport.
6. B-25 converted for hauling supplies.
126


When received the items are tallied
in and sent to the proper warehouse. There record
is kept of slock supplementing the stock records at
Supply Headquarters. Before storing individual
items are inspected and if damaged the consignor is
notified.
1. Sgt. Veverka, Sgt. Burns, and Pfc. Wittek in Whse No. 21. The
cockatoo is not part of the slock.
2. T/Sgt. Kocunik, foreman of Whse No. 12, tallying in landing struts.
3. Unloading belly tanks at Whse No. 12.
4. Pfc. Rucki and detail at the Intransit Warehouse in IS etc Guinea.
5. General view of Whse No. 12 area.


WAREHOUSING
Under warehousing conies bin-
ning, which is the placing of all items in their respec-
tive bins and posting the number received on the bin
cards. A bin card is made out for every article stored
and filed in the office of the warehouse. It shows how
much of a given item is in storage and how many
units have been received and issued to date. A speci-
fied quantity of each item is supposed to be kept in
the bin, and when stock gets low it is from these bin
cards that requisitions arc made for replenishment.
Office of Whses. No. 1 and No. 7.
T/Sgt. Ratliff, N.C.O. in charge of the Group
Warehouses, with Sgt. Robison.
Photo, chemicals being binned by Sgt.
Rainville in Whse No. 21.
Cpl. Marlin lifting 500 lbs. of “Cane-ite” in Whse
No. 15M.
Pvt. Sensiba (on ladder) and Pvt.
Fagundes placing jars of chemicals in
bins.


1. Paints and lacquers in Whse No. 7.
2. Sgl. Novak, chief of Section D,
Whse No. 21, inspecting (lying
jackets.
3. Towmotor: vital warehouse tool.
4. Technical inspection section, Whse
No. 24.
5. Pfc. Mazzocchi with K-17 camera;
worth $1,500.
6. Electrical supplies at Whse No. 21.


S torage
1. Allison engines stored in Whse No. 15.
2. Pickling an engine for storage: Pvt. Bugy-
niki, Pfc. Johnson, Cpl. Karpenko, Cpl.
Angrisano, Sgt. Cormier, T/Sgt. Haines.
3. Tires, big and small, in Whse No. 8. Cpl.
Gearrin and Cpl, Malle , guard.
4. Engines stored at Whse No. 8.
5. Kelly tanks stored at Whse No. 12.


1. Pvt. Whittick and Sgt. Burns —Whse No. 22.
2. Sgt. Vagan and Pfc. Roth filling a shipping
ticket.
3. Some of the 71 civilians employed at Whse
No. 21.
4. T/Sgt. “ Spanky ” Davis, foreman of packing
section, Whse No. 23.
5. Whse No. IS. Cpl. Zair and S/Sgt. Cushwa.


Pfc. Kedziorski “manhandling” a roll of paper
in Whse No. 8.
Pic. Mazzocchi and S/Sgt. Winget drawing
from bins to fill a shipping ticket.
Civilians preparing orders in Whse No. 22.
SHIPPING
Depot No. 1 can boast of one of the largest and best
Packing and Shipping Departments of any Air Force Supply organization
overseas. T/Sgt. Reubinall, as N.C.O. in charge, has as his assistants: T/Sgt.
Davis, supervisor of all packing and in charge of boat shipments; Sgt.
Martin in charge of all air priorities; Sgt. Allen in charge of rail shipments;
and Cpl. Witos in charge of local shipping by truck. Each section has its
own packing, storage, and shipping area. In all 110 civilians are employed.
Pvt. Sensiba with tubes of oxygen, acetylene and carbon
dioxide lined up for shipment.
At the Intransit Whse, Advanced Base:
T/Sgt. Bowman, Cpl. Stull, Pvt. Saad.
Sgt. Novak removing oxygen mask from bin


I A the Shipping Department, the items are
checked against the shipping ticket and
carefully packed to protect them against breakage and bad
weather. The boxes are shipped immediately, if possible, or are
stored pending shipment. A master copy of the shipping ticket,
showing number of pieces, weight, and cubage, is sent to the
Shipping Office, where space is requested either by air, rail, boat,
or truck, according to the destination and priority. As soon as
shipment is made information copies of the shipping ticket are
forwarded to consignee showing complete shipping information.
Shipping is probably the most interesting
section of Air Force Supply, as the Depot is in continuous con-
tact with all types of equipment, supplies, and transportation.
It probably is largely responsible for the fame of the Group,
inasmuch as all supplies handled by the Depot and issued or
shipped to any organization must be processed through the
shipping department. Theirs is a responsibility of getting the
9,000,000 pounds of supplies monthly to forward areas by the
fastest possible means and in the best condition.


General view of W'hse No, 23, with T Sgt. Davis and T/Sgt. Reubinall, the
two “wheels,”
Section Head, Sgt, Novak, supervises remand of packed 'chutes to Shipping.
TECH. SUPPLY: S’Sgt. Woolley,
Sgt. Lieby, and Sgt. Wehe.
Shipping
General view of Whse No. 21.
Interior of Whse No, 21.


S /Sgt. Dodsworth (left) sees his portable machine shop at work in
the forward area.
Local Purchasing and Contracting is a
major department in Australia. If any article requisitioned is
not available a request is sent to L.P.C. to obtain the items
locally. If not obtainable the requisition is sent to the States.
Two interesting projects of this department
are the portable electricity generating rig and the portable
machine shop shown on this page. Both of these were developed
by S Sgt. Dodsworth.
M/Sgt. (now W/O McElwee adjusting the portable generator which
produces light for the whole camp in the forward area.


S/Sgt. Ferguson, Sgt. Schwartz, and Cpl. Shoe-
maker stitching parachute harnesses.
Sgt, Hares with “Jungle Kit," which contains
rations, knife, compass, atabrine, vitamin pills,
first aid kit, booklet on survival in the jungle,
matter bottle , heavy gloves, mosquito net (head),
miter purifying capsules, signal flare.
Personnel of Whse No. 4 talking parachute repair,
CW/O Renfroe is in charge of this department.
PARACHUTE DEPARTMENT
Packing a parachute: CW/O Renfroe and two civilians.
(This warehouse employs 20 civilians, most of whom are
sewing-machine operators.)
136


T/Sgt. Kuvaja trying a *chute “for size” Pfc. Lander
is the salesman .
M/Sgt. Frye and Pfc. Lander hanging a parachute in
the drying room. All ’chutes are dried for 24 hours before
being packed.
S EPARTMENT


"Big Guns” of the Signal Supply Section: S/Sgt. Judd , T/Sgt.
B. L. Smith, M/Sgt, Gruber.
Radar Supply Section Staff: Pfc. Casmer, Pvt. Kasmir, Pfc. Levitz.
"Getting the message through ” are T/4 Shubert
and Pfc. Casmer.
SIGNAL
At Eagle Farm the major func-
tion of the 898th Signal Company has heen the re-
ceiving, storing, and issuing of air-signal and radar
equipment for the area covered hy the Air Depot
Group. It has handled more equipment than any
similar company in this theatre. Signal Supply Officer
is Lt. Thomas Flynn, assisted hy Ft. Joseph Crowlev,
Shipping and Receiving Officer, and W 0 Carl
Overby, in charge of warehouses.
Signal Supply clerks: T /5 Malslead, T/5 Midlam, Pvt. Morey.
Pvt. Sharrock, Pfc. Pohland.
Message Center: S/Sgt. Irwin and T/4 McKeon.


Shipping Section, Whse No. 20: Pvt. Schueren,
Major Karst, Sgt. Bury (N.C.O. in charge),
Pvt. Dorden. Pvts. Hebda and Liddle in
background.
An average of 55 men, aided by
18 civilians, maintain the Signal Supply Section in
Warehouse No. 20 and overflow Warehouse No. 27.
There are, in addition, 15 soldiers and five civilians
in the clerical section at the Headquarters Building.
T/Sgt. McNeill and T/3 Roney are the N.C.O.’s in
charge of airborne and radar equipment, respectively,
and T/Sgt. B. L. Smith is the Chief Clerk in charge
of Supply Headquarters.
Radar Supply Section: T/S L. Rogers, Pfc.
Humenik, Sgt. Fean, T/3 Roney.
Opening box of incoming equipment; Pvt. Dodson, Pfc. Honey,
T /5 Guglielmo.
Loading shipment on trailer: T/5 L. Rogers on carloader. Pvt.
Dahill and Pfc. Dumenik on trailer.
Shipping: Pvt. “Pop" Fiddle, Cpl. Kessel, T/3 Novick, Pvt.
Sorden.
139
NAt


Checking the frequency of a radio: Sgt. Uthoff,
Sgt. Posey.
T/3 Kalisty in the Radio Compass Repair Room.
T/Sgt. (now M/Sgt.)
Boxler, foreman of
the Radio Shop, hold-
ing a “Gibson Girl"
emergency radio.
Test bench in the radio shop: T/3 Lomax and Mr.
“G.I.” Thompson.
S/Sgt. Fohrmann and
T/4 Rapski at the test
bench.
Instrument Shop: T/4 Hine, T/3 Hidden, T /4 O'Leary.


Radar Lot Personnel: FRONT ROW: T/5 Fuchs, S/Sgt.
Yeager, T/4 Stefanik , 1st Lt. Cornell, T/3 Schnitze r, F/4
Smoot, T/4 Bonham. SECOND ROW: T/4 Trantow, Sgt.
Mermer , T/5 Weed, T/5 Duris, T/4 Marshall, T/4 Serres ,
T/4 Williams, T/3 Novick. THIRD ROW: T/4 Lathy,
T/3 Hull, T/Sgt. Nordstrom, T/4 Hojo, T/4 Lamm, T/4
Adams , Cpl. Bickerstaff, T/5 Rogers.
T/4 Stefanik weld-
machine to be used in forward
areas.
Motor repairmen : T/4 Williams ,
T/4 Bonham, Sgt, Mermer, T/4
Smoot.
Machine shop : T/3 Schnitzer, T/4 Larhy, T/3 Hull, T/4
Marshall .
Telephone crew: T/Sgt. W heeler,
Pvt. Bullock , T/4 Heitzig, T/4
Simpson, Mr, Brown, T/5
Adams,


Armorers assembling .30 and .50 caliber machine guns. Installation in planes is
to he done by the Air Corps armorers.
A “bazooka" repaired mid ready
for the Japs; T/5 Walthers, T/Sgt,
Allen, S/Sgt. Smith.
Inset:
M, Sgt. Pachunik (chief clerk )
and Sgt, Friedman.
RDNANCE
ORDNANCE SECTION HQ. AND HQ. SQ. PERSONNEL
FRONT ROW: Sgt. Parsons, M/Sgt. Pachanik, Capt. Seyfried, Lt.
Anderson, T/Sgt. Nearing, Pfc. Omundson, Cpl. Owens. SECOND
ROW: Sgt. Barnes, S/Sgt. Smith, Sgt. Friedman, Pfc. Lagala, S/Sgt.
Wiesenfeld, Pfc. Kulin, Sgt. Whitney, Cpl. Bowdish, Sgt. Barkume,
Cpl. Johnson.


Sgt. Foschi , Sgt. Gendis , Pjc. Vogel , of Whse
No. 1 6, operated by the 194th Ordnance Depot
Co. (Det.), which handled guns , spare parts, and
vehicle accessories .
1 94 th ORD
WAREHOUSE
NO 16
Sgt. Krause, T/5 Heller, and Sgt, Foschi filling an Ordnance requisition.
Sgt, Byrne binning Ord-
nance publications.
Automotive parts section,
Whse No. 16: Pvt. Ke
and Pfc. Jagielski.
Pfc. Jagielski
T/4 Gervelis,
143


1799th Motor Maintenance. Shop personnel: FRONT ROW: Pvt. Murray,
T/5 Monteforte, Pvt. Allison. SECOND ROW: Lt. Carton, Mr. Cooke, Pvt.
Lovely. Pvt. McKenna. T/5 Cicheivicz, T/5 Ballentine, T/Sgt. Reinert.
1616th Automotive Shop: KNEELING: S/Sgt. Perkins. S/Sgt. Halm, T 4
Knight, Pvt. Wellruski, Pvt. Stewart. Sgt. Linhardt. SECOND ROW: Pvt.
Users. T/5 Myrick. T/4 Serkin. T/4 Davis, T/3 Lord, T/3 Felts, T /4 Moler,
M/Sgt, Williams. Sgt. Heron. THIRD ROW: Pfc. Carroll. Pfc. Castor, T/4
Podkouinski. ON TRICK: Pfc. Sandidge, Pfc. Roche, T/4 Nowak, T/5
Collins.
RDNANCE Automodute Shop
3. Sgt, Uchwat, T/5 Peterlick, Pfc. Heck.
4. T /5 Odom. T/5 Wise. Pvt. Lovely.
1. T /5 Perkins repairing an auto engine.
2. "Yank-doun-under”: T /5 Wrohel.


A PEEP at A JEEP!
\ \eT -Ac*
\ yVV
v " 4- y
•VW
-v>':
V 1" ,- , n°‘
c<t V oi 4
V .\\ O'
\""V" v - V>" 4
CO , 4‘ 4 y '
0« e ' > 4
U t< t# % t< <&' a c#
# 6 ‘
AO 5 " #
v< 0 '
y> v y
* c # k \)\ ct , .
v^V* e .# #i
<>^V-
M t # € o< l% ,
’ <**° {# C # # • /
v A .# rtV v* 1
y l .# # uC<°
0< # rt *t ,ttC
V \ \S n «, ii<t
• V .0 4 ‘V
i#'\,y'’ t .
e\\h- ,X C
0 ■#
\« # u\ vV
ll e ..# V
y k IC V* A,
> f i#'
1° , V # A o '
V c "
v ~e c t V
u & v , # t4 >
\ i° ,*-!° vt"
\\* v ef’ ;
<y> v
fe # fc#
*o^
Cpl.Nathan Kipner.


SECURITY
Performing one of tire most
essential, wearying, and at the same time thankless
jobs on the field are the former farmers, policemen,
firemen, salesmen of the 1124th Military Police Com-
pany.
To guard the base effectively
every hour of the twenty-four, the M.P.’s arc divided
into several shifts each of which walks guard for six
consecutive hours. The average M.P. works 48 hours
a week spread over six days. The 1124th also main-
tains a Criminal Investigation Section, which gathers
information on all violations of the law’ involving 81st
personnel.
Retreat at Eagle Farm.
Pvt. Kohn guarding a C-54 at Amherley Field.
Pfc. Englehardt looks on while Pjc. Samanski “gels the
dope."
The O.D., Capt. Moreau, inspecting the guard, Pvt. Curley.
Pvt. Wilson, Ist Sgt. Blessing, Sgt. Huisman.


f |p 4
I HE FIRE DEPARTMENT was organized in the
middle of 1943 upon the recommendation and under the supervision of
the Group Adjutant, Lt. Mayer. Sfit. Indovina, who had been a fireman in
civilian life, was appointed Fire Chief and was given eight men from
various units on the field to form the Fire Department. On November 23,
1943, Major Slingcrland was appointed Fire Marshal.
Sgt. Indovina found it necessary to improvise and
build his own equipment. To date lie has one 1,000 gallon pumper and
trailer pump capable of 250 gallons per minute, one 650 gallon truck with
a trailer pump, and five Jupiter pumps capable of pumping 500 gallons
per minute, supplemented by a crash truck with a 500 gallon per minute
pump and emergency equipment.
To Sgt. Indovina fire battling is old stuff, hut to his
men who, in civilian life, were never able to get closer to a fire than the
police lines would allow, the high degree of inflammability of 100 octane
gasoline presents a constant peril and challenge. However, there are many
instances to prove that when put to the test they all passed with flying colors.
Fire Department: Major Slingerland, T /5 Kinder, Pfc. Crotty, Sgt. Indoving,
T/5 Smith, Pvt. Wright, Pfc. Bonczywiski, Pvt. Potcell.
Major Slingerland (Fire Marshall and Sgt.
Indovina (Fire Chief).
Fire Department in action.
Hooking up hose to fire hydrant: Pfc. Troutman, Pfc. Bonczywiski, Sgt.
Indovina, T/5 Smith.
Mosquito Control Group: ON TRUCK: Cpl. Morris, Mr. Hanck. ON
GROUND: Sgt. Meadors, Cpl. Perry, Pvt. Putman, The Ranger.


ORDNANCE Special uehicle POOL
TRANSPORTATION
The truck, the modern "Trojan
Horse.” lias played perhaps the greatest part in build-
ing the United States into the mightiest power on earth.
In war, when movement is the foundation of all strategy,
the mechanized wheel has become the symbol of speed
and victory. \\ heels, robber, gasoline, engines -when
combined spell incalculable riches and power for us,
terror and defeat for the enemy.


AIR CORPS
VEHICLE POOL
What role has the 81st played in
fostering this game of trucking on to Tokyo?
We operated four huge motor pools
where thousands of vehicles were stored, repaired, trans-
shipped monthly. The consolidated pool was a model
of self sufficiency, where sparkplug to 12-lon crane
presented no problem to our master mechanics. Three
hundred of them, distributed throughout
the shops, garages, fuel servicing stations,
kept the wheels turning along the roads
finally to brake at sonic Jap entrenchment.
To our boys in the forward areas went
60,000,000 lbs. of supplies monthly hauled
on these selfsame vehicles to ships, planes, railroads.
The immensity of labor involved cannot be
adequately credited in writing. Where words fail the camera’s
eye records. Let us take a trip through the pools with our
drivers, who make them roll along ‘‘Nip Highway,’’ and sec for
ourselves.


Col. Minty presenting Driver Medals to members of the Australian
Women’s National Emergency League .
Three eighty-passenger buses took the civilian employees of
Headquarters to and from work.
Motor Pool Personnel: W/O Gibart, T/Sgt , Hall , Sgt. Bast ,
Cpl. Satis, Pfc. Malino, Pfc. Conchak , Put. Angore, Pfc. Tumn
Sgt. Whittaker , Pvt. Angove, Ptc. Teaford, Sgt. Boyd t T/5 Edes ,
Sgt. Ward , Sgt. Bacciarini , Cpl. Nettle, Sgt. Starkey .
Transportation , new and old.
Twelve ton Michigan crane lifting heavy equipment near the
new Ordnance maintenance shop.
W.N.E.L.'s beside staff cars in which they drove officers on
official business.
House-moving, one of the Pool's miscellaneous duties.


HE second anniversary of the
81st concluded a great transition in the transportation
system. One after the other, transportation officers—
Lt. Thomas, Lt. Grimes, Lt. Keller— worked for greater
efficiency and consolidation of the four scattered pools.
The Heavy Duty Pool, Valley Pool, Ascot Garage, and
Ordnance Special Vehicle Pool were last in the Group’s
campaign to have all facilities within easy reach. Miles
of distance between them were reduced at the beginning
of May, 1944, when all motor pools were moved to one
central location at Eagle Farm.
The Ascot Garage was turned back
to its civilian owner and repair functions were trans-
ferred to the immense maintenance hangars. Here per-
sonnel of the 1799th Ordnance Company worked in
unison with the Air Corps mechanics on 3rd and 4th
echelon repairs. Trans-shipment of some 1,000 vehicles
monthly, in addition to maintenance of 400 of the
Group’s tracks and staff cars, kept the men constantly
at the wheel.
With the completion of unification
the executive personnel—Lt. Keller, T/Sgts. Downey
and Hall, Sgt, Ivy—saw a dream realized. Theirs was a
pool that was the showplace of Base Section 3 and the
pride of the 81st.
1. T/5 Edes and Cpl. Doxey checking a staff car.
2. Cpl. Ward ami Sgt. Kennedy fixing a tug.
3. “Innards” of a trailer cab gelling the “once over”
from Cpl. Sains, Cpl. Ward, Sgt. Starkey, and Cpl.
Doxey.
4. Pfc. Smith “gasses up” Miss Arden's car while Pvt,
Dean gels signature.


MAJOR JAMES T. KING, Group Surgeon,
10 August, '43, to 28 March, '44.
Sick Call, 81st Dispensary.
Medical
The dispensary of ihc
81st A.D.G., giving an average of 3,000 treat-
ments to 1,500 soldiers and 150 civilians each
month, was the showplace of the Southwest
Pacific medics. The five doctors, three nurses,
and 44 E.M. were provided with the latest
equipment for X-ray, optometry, urinalysis,
and physical therapy, and had at their dis-
posal a complete pharmacy under the super-
vision of a competent pharmacist.
Five ambulances were
maintained to transport sick patients to
station and general hospitals and to keep a
24 hour vigil at the airport. Besides treat-
ment at the daily sick-call, the dispensary
gave physical examinations for drivers’
licenses. Hying cadet and O.C.S. candidates,
and food handlers, provided inoculations
against tetanus, smallpox, typhoid fever,
cholera, and other diseases, and conducted
the regular monthly inspection of enlisted
personnel. A prophylaxis station was in
operation day and night.
The 81st Dental section
was stuffed with two dentists and enlisted
assistants, who had at their disposal the latest
in dental equipment.
Capt. Seltzer looking down deep.
Capt. Rothgeiser gives Cpl. Yannes the “once
over.”
DENTAL
(Left): Pvt. Santi-
esteban, Cpl.
Luna, Pvt. Char-
land, Capt. Tis-
dal, Cpl. Sanlarc-
angelo.
(Extreme left):
General view of
Dental Room:
Pvt. Santiesteban,
Cpl. Santarcan-
dela, Cpl. Luna,
Pvt. Charland,
Capt. Tisdal.


(Left): T/5 Hesch in medical
laboratory .
(Right): The “Sad Soak" (Capt.
Mayer).
(Below): Sgt. Mann, optometrist ,
usinp the modern equipment in
the 81st eye examination room.
(Left): Lt. Kravitz at work in
the physiotherapy room.
(Right): “Mote in the eye."
(Right): Capt.
Zion is helped by
Cpl. Santarcon-
gelo in the dental
room.
(Extreme right):
Capt. Tisdal
“ drilling" Cpl.
Davisson.


Sgt. Herman and Capt. Rothgesser, Medical Officer in charge
of X-ray Laboratory.
Old Dispensary at Eagle Farm.
Cpl. Heniser examining a slide in the laboratory.
Cpl. Luxenberg , patient , and X-Ray apparatus.
Officer Candidate (Corporal) Weiss returns for a visit to the
Dispensary on one of his free Sunday afternoons. He was
commissioned a 2nd Lieutenant in the Medical Administra-
tive Corps, May, ’44.
Sgt. Dionne, Pvt. Paisser, S/Sgt. Moskowitz filling prescrip-
tions in the pharmacy.


MEDICS
IN New Qwinea
Ambulances keep silent watch.
The paper medics, too, have work to do.
(Top): Lt. Fried listens to it tick.
(Center): General view of our dispensary up there.
(Bottom): Medical personnel, sick of the sick, work day
and night to keep them fit.


UTILITIES cud
CONSTRUCTION
ƹaale tyasm
1. T/4 Salyers watches T/4 Stokey repair a power line.
2. T/5 Strange at the main circuit breaker for Head-
quarters Building.
3. M/Sgt. Raef, chief electrician of the Utilities and
Construction Section.
4. Preparing a trench for tenter pipes and power lines.
5. Head-on view of the ditch digger at work.
(Right): S/Sgt. Lukes, Chief Draftsman,
who with three assistants made all
maps and construction plans for Eagle
Farm.
New huts being constructed at Eagle
Farm.
Moving a house from the area to make
way for military construction.


Neither rain nor mud deferred our
men and vehicles . From them many
a pioneer could learn about hardships
encountered in building a home in
dense jungle.
BUILDERS OF New qninea
But it teas only a matter of days before
we had a camp site, an airfield, and a
place a soldier could call home with-
out too much nostalgia.


Sgt. Weaver and Cpl, Brykala demonstrate use of the 400-gallon
decontaminating truck , which serves as a portable shower in
areas where water is not easily obtainable.
Incendiary bombs
are dropped from an
experimental tower.
Cpl. Brykala breaks a new gas mask out of its protective cello-
phane shell .
Chemdcal
WARFARE
SERVICE
Top:
Pfc. Smith models the latest fashions in warehouse
footwear while Sgt. Weaver points out spray tanks
in the Chemical Warehouse.
Right:
A smoke screen is laid for Headquarters Squadron
gas mask drill .


CIVILIAN
PERSONNEL
V
MPLO\ MENT figures have fluctu-
ated from just a handful of civilians when the Group began
to function in May, 1912, to a peak of 1,705 in September,
1943, when they were in a majority as compared with mili-
tary personnel.
Men outnumbered women five to one.
With the exception of a small number of assistant store-
keepers in warehouses and sewing machine operators in the
parachute section, women employees were confined to office
work in Group Headquarters and the warehouses. Men’s
work consisted of handling, storing or shipping of supplies,
driving and repairing of vehicles, and constructional jobs.
Limited numbers were employed as clerks, technicians, and
in semi-administrative positions.
W omen’s National Emergency Legion
(W.N.E.L.’s), an organization of civilian volunteers, had
twelve drivers assigned to the Group for the staff cars, which
transported executive military personnel on official business
Civilians employed at Warehouse No. 12
Group Headquarters personnel.
Employees of Warehouse No. 14.
Headquarters typists and
stenographers arrive for
a day’s work.


LOCAL PURCHASE SECTlON: — Kneeling: Miss McNeil, Miss Waters, Cpl. Waldron, Miss Ken-
nedy, Sgt. Newburger. Rear: Sgt. Bricker, Miss Winter, Mr. Killeen, Miss Curran, Mr. Gaffney,
Capt. Brighton, Miss Bodman, Miss Robertson, Pvt. Doroshow, Miss Thomas,
tours. Out of an average weekly pay of five pounds, the
W.N.E.L.’s purchased their own uniforms and were subject
to tax deductions as well as other civilians.
Employees were generally more than
satisfied with working conditions, particularly since the U.S.-
Army paid much higher rales than any firm in Australia.
The “hal»y” of the outfit naturally thought that “Uncle Sam”
was a wonderful boss. He paid her £4 a week since he thought
she was worth it, and saw no reason for following the Aus-
tralian practice of giving her 15 shillings a week because she
was only fifteen years of age.
The average wage for six eight-hour
days was £360 per annum, with a minimum £l2O paid to
messengers and a maximum £BBB earned hy the supervisors.
The Australian government deducted tax averaging 15 shil-
lings per week, extremes ranging from 14 shillings to £5
weekly.
By and large, the relationship between
civilian and military personnel has been most cordial, and
many lasting friendships were formed during the two years
of association. It was with earnest regret that alliances, both
business and social, had to be broken upon departure of the
Group. Nevertheless, the work of our faithful civilians will
not he forgotten hy the 81st.
Warehouse No. 1 and No. 7 group.
Personnel of Warehouse No. 8.


THE LONE
RANGER
The history of the 81st at Eagle Farm
• would not he complete without mention of the “Lone Ranger,”
•■Charles J. Kenyon, a kind typical hushman, with a winning
ismile which readily endeared him to everyone on the field.
When the 81st began the pioneering job of
'•carving an airfield out of undeveloped land, Kenyon was the
Hi- 'ional Chief Air Raid Warden for the Eagle Farm area.
At that time the Group -was experiencing
considerable difficulty in keeping the straying stock off the air
strip. Kenyon voluntarily helped with the task, and conse-
quently a request was put in that the roving cowboy be appointed
Ranger. He was duly sworn in February, 1942.
Kenyon found it quite exciting in the early
days keeping the cattle off the field. He organized general round-
ups among the test pilots who followed on bicycles and in jeeps,
the Ranger leading the posse on his gallant horse. Later stock-
ades were built and the Ranger impounded any stray cattle at
the direction of Col. Minty and Col. Monay, who realized the
seriousness of wandering stock on an important airfield.
The old cowboy is a well-known figure in
the cattle country of Queensland. He was previously a drover
and stock dealer of many years’ standing. As working manager
for the biggest cattle drive undertaken in Australia, he led
13,000 head from the Northern Territory to New South Wales.
The trip took twelve months, and was one of the many successful
drives which followed in later years.
Today, at the age of 60, Charles Kenyon is
as much of a fixture at Eagle Farm as the Air Corps, and in the
future, when we pause to reminisce about the war, one of our
most vivid memories will be the “Lone Ranger” on his beloved
horse, “Teddy Roosevelt.”
Robin Quantrill, at age Uj when hired by the Group
as typist, was the youngest member of the 81st. Now at 15, besides being
still titlehoMcr as infant of the organization, she boasts a promotion to
assistant stenographer. Eight months of schooling for her present job did
not stop with the beginning of employment in September, 1943. She con-
sistently pursues her studies, and has attained shorthand speed of 120
words per minute and typing of 50 words. Elocution is her favorite extra
curricular activity, and in a recent competition for girls 14 to 16 at the
Queensland Patriotic Eisteddfod, Robin won first prize. Her favorite sports
arc swimming and tennis.




AC TI VI TIES SECTION
LIEUTENANT RICHARD F. ADKINS
Special Service Officer
LIEUTENANT ROBERT M. CLARK
Post Exchange Officer
Mr. H. HARVEY SALOW
Field Director, American Red Cross


OFFICERS’ CLUB
ORGANIZED 10 OCTOBER, 1943
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(Top Left):
LT. D. K. ANDERSON, Board Member
MAJOR M. B. VON WALD, Mess Officer
LT. H. P. KELLER, Board Member
LT. D. S. HARTMAN, Board Member
CAPT. K. E. COX, President
CAPT. G. D. BRIGHTON. Secretary-Treas.


PILOTS’ NIGHT OUT: Capt. Duerst, Lt. La Berge, Lt. Poe, Capt. Farrior, Col.
Minty, Lt. Meding, Major Steele, Capt. Gutierrez, Capt. Sullivan, Lt. Wallace.
Tasewe ll Pasty Col. Minty
7 FEBRUARY, 1944
When Colonel R. J. Minty, Command Pilot,
came to the 81st Air Depot Group as Commanding Officer on August
10, 1943, with several thousand flying hours to his credit, lie told
the local reporter that his favorite fighter plane was the P-38. Then
he smiled broadly and added, “But I find it hard to squeeze into one.”
West Pointers of the class of ’23, on hearing this comment, probably
began to reminisce about their school days, for while a student at
the Military Academy, Col. Minty won letters for his outstanding
work in football, basketball, track, and wrestling. Though not as slim
as in former days, he’s still no pushover.
Right: Lt. Wallace. Major and
Mrs. Steele, Capt. and Mrs.
Trumbull, Lt, Poe, Lt. Grimes.
Below: Sitting: Lt. Young and
fiancee, Lt. Reynolds, Capt. Alt-
wood and friend. Standing: Lt.
W. W, Anderson, Lt. Rake, Capt.
Seyfried, Lt. Leigh, Capt. Moreau.
He was bom in Lansing, Michigan,
and attended grade school there until his folks moved to
lowa, where he completed high school, excelling in the
same sports for which he was later awarded letters at West
Point. His favorite subject was mathematics, which sharp-
ened the analytical mind required in a military leader,
who must grasp all the implications of any situation in the
shortest possible time and make faultless decisions imme-
diately. After graduation from West Point he wa£ stationed
for a course at Brooks Field, Texas. He learned how to fly
and, as he says, “had my share of thrills and, like most
pilots, cracked up a few ships.” Col. Minty was for several
years at Wright Field, Ohio, in the Equipment and Power
Plant Branches, where he worked on the original blind
landing apparatus. Before shipping overseas he was for
two years in charge of the Engineering Section at Ogden
Field, Utah.
As Commanding Officer of the 81st
Air Depot Group he established a reputation among the
men as a strict disciplinarian of the old army school who
would not tolerate malingering of any sort. At the same
time those who were familiar with his work regarded him
with the utmost of respect as a man who did not hesitate
to fight for the welfare of his troops.
After establishing the 81st as the most
efficient organization of its
kind in this theatre, he was
appointed Commanding Offi-
cer of IV Air Service Area
Command, February 6, 1944,
and left to assume command
after a “bang-up” farewell
party tendered him by his fel-
low officers at the home of
Col. Monay.
Below: Friend, Major King, Lt.
Keller, Lt. Lillig, Major Bowen,
Capt. Rothgesser, Lt. Grono-
stajski, Lt. Lucterhand.


OFFICERS
ROUGHING
IT
1. Capt. Gutierrez broods.
2. Lts. Anderson and Luc-
terhand and W/O Engle
prepare for a liquid
walk.
3. Walking.
4. Col. Monay’s pri-
vate C-60, “Lorm.”
5. Spiritually speaking
— Lt. Reynolds and
Major Barnes.
6. W/O Stralik is con-
fident that before
long our tents in
New Guinea will
have television sets.


1ST THREE GRADERS'
CLU B
fter opening of the 4th and stli
Graders’ Club at Eagle Farm, the Valley Club, which had
hitherto admitted all non-coms, closed its membership to
all but wearers of the many stripes. Their Friday night
dances became exclusive but classic, especially since the
major portion of the weekly ration of 120 gallons of beer
was consumed. Moreover, members imbibed their allot-
ment of hard drinks as chasers. Squadron parties on Thurs-
day nights, too, were hilarious affairs. The Privates nur-
tured charitable hangovers Tuesday mornings after their
evening of fun when nohody hut the clean sleeved were
allowed in—gratis; and they didn’t go thirsty cither. In
general, the Club made famous that classic “Never Again.”


Combined with genuine night club atmo-
sphere of dimmed lights and modern decorations, the N.C.O.
Club, started as a dream that materialized after Chaplain
Urquhart worked eight months to build it, became the pride
of the Farm. Started as a 4th and sth Graders’ Club, it was
also made available shortly after opening in March, 1944, to
the lonely Privates, who were admitted two evenings a week
without dues. Dances were nightly occasions, as were refresh-
ments —beer, soft drinks, and sandwiches. Together with the
friendly air surrounding the huge hall what more could any
enlisted man ask?
1. Men who helped the Chaplain build the Club: Sgt. Peca, Pvt. More-
house. Pfc. McFarlane, Sgt. Talbert, Pfc. Owens, T/5 Baumgardner,
T/4 Mojo, Sgt. Wyatt, Pfc. Reisinger, T/5 Gross.
2. The corn walk.
3. The liquid dispensary.
4. Finishing loaches to
the lawn: Pvt. Banks,
Pvt. Halznl, Pvt.
Cooper, Cpl. Stiles,
Pvt. D’Amour.
5. Foot-rest wing.
6. Chaplain Urquhart
built while the men
dreamed.


Sad sacky.
The music makers.
Close call.
Juke-box commandoes:
Sgt. Medulie (president) and
Sgt. Newburger (secretary).
Moments of serious orientation.


1. Still oblivious of intentions of the C.Q., a
first cousin to a bugler.
The OVERSEAS
PRIVATE
J J H the increase in
ratings in 1942, the Private became
almost extinct in the Army since lour
out of five enlisted men were either
non-commissioned officers or techni-
cians. Nevertheless, the plebeian among
the G.l.'s was not entirely forgotten.
Financially, lie was made happier with
the boost in base pay from S3O to S5O
monthly, which, added to the 20 /c for
oversea duty, more than fulfilled his
needs. Dependency allotments relieved
his worry about family at home.
Socially, as well, his pres-
tige soared in the 81st. Menial work such
as K.P. was eliminated when the Group
hired civilians to work in the kitchens.
Guard was performed by the M.P.’s, and
the stripeless were free after duty hours to.
attend to their functions other than sentry-
ing. Both the 4th and sth and the First
Three Graders’ Clubs admitted Privates two
nights' during the week gratis. They danced
them and made them forget their G.I. troubles ■
through liquid refreshment.
To save many words, the
staff hired Pvt. “Rookie” (Rucki) , an average
Private of the Group, to guide the reader through
a clay at Eagle Farm and immediate vicinity.
Take it away, “Rookie”!
2. Should have taken off my socks before the
shoes last night.
3. It's either too hot or too cold.
5. Dammit! Won't he ever learn to pronounce my name right?
4 . The awakening is coming.


8. Java-jive.
7. How come no flapjacks.?
6. Chow-chow boogie.
11. Truckin'; and they trust me too.
10. Didn't make the latrine orderly list this
14. Milko, 10:00 a.m.
9. Dear Mom: Just a few lines before 1 go off
to work.
13. These gadgets even think for you.
12. Big time operator.


17 . Sealed gifts for Tojo.
16. 11:30. chow. Some "Fat Cat" must have
scratched Gunga Din.
15. Enginuity.
20. "Sweating" the girl.
19. Warehouse also has deck and lounge chairs
and davenport.
18. Afternoon smoko; 3:00 p.m.
21. Only G.I. similarity is this
movie line.
23. “Random Harvest ” was swell:
so’s everything.
24. Hut above all . .parting is
so street.
22. Holding hands feels good.




RIGHT CENTER: 898th Signal Company Team
FRONT ROW: T/S Cooper, T/Sgt, Munyer, T/5 Schmelser , Pvt.
Dodson, Pvt. Thune, Cpl. McAtea. SECOND ROW: T/S Fuchs, Pfc.
Pohland, T/4 Smoot, A., T/5 Ondrejkovic, T/Sgt. Smoot, H., T/4
Heittig, T/5 Rogers, T/S Darnell, T/S Hanson.
RIGHT BOTTOM:
81st Supply Squadron Team Winners of Group League
Championship:-
STANDING: Cpl. Witzinski, S/Sgt. Schutte, Pfc. McCollum, T/Sgt.
Ratliff , Cpl. Mackouiak , Sgt. Reitly. KSEELING: Cpl. Sciarretta. Pfc.
Minnis, Sgt. Vagan, Sgt. Mauser, Sgt. Hums.
Favorite in sports was softball. A
Group League, organized by Lt. Adkins, Special Service
Officer, eliminated the weak teams. Here you see our top
teams of swat.
SPORTS AND
BELOW: 44th Repair Squadron Team:—
FRONT ROW: Sgt. Meadors, S/Sgt. Taylor, Pfc. Corrao, Pit.
Albright, T/Sgt. Cover, Sgt. Milts, dpi. Bumgardner, Sgt. Martin.
SECOND ROW: Cpt. Albrecht , Sgt, Sherman, S/Sgt. Roar he,
Sgt. Ackerman, Pvt. McDermott, M/Sgt. Frye, T/5 Muser, Sgt.
Valdes, Sgt. Milter, Sgt. McNulty, Pvt. Borders, Pfc. Niwa, Sgt.
Wellsand, Pfc. Jones, Pvt. Snyder, Cpl. Daniels.


Faker faces.
Amberley Field M.P.’s engage in a bit of African Golf.
At Eagle Farm, too, double-time dominoes dominated.
Hospitable evenings were spent at Australian homes.


Frequently
Base Section Three Special Ser-
vices produced musical comedy
hits. "Khaki and Lace,” pic-
tured above, was a "pipperoo."
Many 81st men performed.
A Night Out
The prelims.
Movies were nightly features at
Camp Doomben , the 44th Repair
mess hall, or the Hist Supply area.
Latest in Hollywood productions
were shown.
Getting a “G. I.” before
the leg show.
Blonde happy.


1. No, not a library. The literati
are getting their G.I. publication
from one of our P.X.’s.
2. Cokes-ing alter the day’s work.
3. In the Headquarters Squadron
P.X. cheer comes in more than
bottles.
5. The leg-ation of the 898th Signal
P.X. featured such items as tooth
paste, shoe polish, and advertis-
ing.
4. Money teas no object in the 44th
P.X. . . . on pay day.


Leisure
Moments
1. This structure , when completed,
will be the Group Post Exchange.
2. Headquarters Squadron men often
indulge in serious contemplation
over the chess board .
3. Pfc. Owen , hairdo artist , in his im-
provised hairdresser's shop at the
advanced base.
4. Up there the Medics seldom relax
When they “ gold-brick ” it is usually
with a deck of cards.
5. This , our first day room, w ill be re-
placed by a more permanent and
more elaborate building soon.
6. For some the day is done. Others
begin the night shift with a cold
shatter.
7. A foundation is being laid for the
recreation building.


GOIN' HOME
The ROTATION PLAN
Effective March, 1944, the Rotation
Plan was instituted, returning men to the United States
from this theatre. Under the new policy men with
(1) eighteen months’ service overseas, (2) whose mental
and physical condition indicated greatest urgency for
return, and (3) who within the above categories desired
it, were to he sent hack home.
Fifth Air Force Special Order No.
54, dated 23 February, 1944, announced the good news
to eighteen men from assigned and attached units of the
81st A.D.G. that they were the first to realize the fruits
of the return plan. Awaiting transportation, they were
transferred to Camp Ascot to embark in the middle of
April for the Golden Gate ‘'before ’48.”
The second rotation contingent--
the April allotment—consisting of one officer and thirty-
nine enlisted men, transferred to the Rotation Detach-
ment to await return as soon as a boat is made available.
At the time of writing (May 11th) they arc still waiting
and yearning.
To them a bon voyage from the
whole Group.
April, 1944, Rotation Detachment:
KNEELING: S/Sgt. Yankowitz, T/Sgt. Trottier, Sgt, Hyman, T/Sgt. Bunnell,
S/Sgt. Pittman, Pvt. Morehouse. SECOND ROW: Pfc. Omundson, T/5
Doucette, Sgt. Martinelli, Sgt. Durhai, M/Sgt. Leon, T/Sgt. Davis, Pfc.
McCann, Sgt. Moses. LAST ROW: S/Sgt. Woody, M/Sgt. Walker, M/Sgt. Jayne,
S/Sgt. Messer, T/4 Moler, T/Sgt. Reuhinall, Cpl. Shelley, Pfc. Berdysz.
Wishful Lilt lay .. .
Wishing will make it so.
You’ve heard the poets state.
I cant complain because all mine
Came true right up to date.
When I was a child of nine,
I often used to play
A game of war, and wished that I
Could be a soldier boy some day.
The draft hoard must have heard my wish.
Til never knoiv just how.
Because the man said, “Raise your hand.
You’re in the Army now.”
I’m in the Army now, that’s true,
As pretty as you please;
And so I made another wish:
To get shipped overseas.
Wishing will make it so.
The poets always say.
I’m somewhere in Australia
Ten thousand miles away.
I'm going to make just one more wish.
And pray it’s not in vain:
Please send me home today, and I
Will never wish again.
Pfc. C. J. Samanski.


1. Lt. and Mrs. Robert M. Clark (Norine Farmer) kept an altar date
on the Ist February, 1944.
2. There upon the threshold stood the blushing bride, Maureen Pierce,
after saying “I do” to Lt. Vernon Young, on the 11th April, 1944.
3. Lt. Vincent R. LuBerge and his bride, the former Dorothy Jones, 2nd
Lt. in the Army Nurse Corps, were married June 18, 1944.
4. Lt. (formerly Ist Sgt. of 81st Supply) John Andrews and Marie Adams
were married on the 22nd March, 1944.
5. Captain and Mrs. John R. Trumbull, the former Nancy Christoe, had
the knot tied on the 19th October, 1942.
6. Major and Mrs. Donald D. Steele (nee Bette Murnane) became man
and wife in February, 1942. A baby girl, Karen, teas born February
8, 1944.


1. Sgt. Eugene Burke married Winifred
Norris 4th March, 1944.
2. Sgt. and Mrs. William Mekeal (Margaret
Gordon) dodged the rice 2nd February,
1944.
5. T/Sgt. (now W/O) George Wessman suc-
cumbed to the charms of Eileen Murphy
September 2nd, 1942.
6. S/Sgt. William A. Winget and Delcia
Beavis after their wedding A pril 24,1944.
3. Cpl. Leo. C. Wasik smiled at Margery
Low February 19th, 1944.
4. S/Sgt. Frank E. Dodsworth
and his bride, Nancee
Newman, on their
wedding day,
13th June,
1942 .


81 ST Sweetheasts
“A thing of beauty is a joy forever;
It's loveliness increases; it will never
Pass into nothingness;” . . . KEATS.
It brings hopes and gives us an incentive for
fighting and a motive for return. The man who
can boast: “You ought to see her,” is usually
the better soldier.
Of the sixty entries submitted, the
judges selected these as most, typical of Ameri-
can womanhood.
Carol Murray, Youngstown, Ohio,
friend of Pvt. Felix LeRoy.
Velma Buehner, Camden , Ohio, wife of
S/Sgt. Everett Buehner,
Hazel Johnson, Imperial, Calif.,
sweetheart of Cpl. John C. Lundy.


Alberta Brewer, Meri-
dian, Miss., wife of
T/Sgt. Howard Brewer.
Ann Polunbo, Beacon, N.Y.,
friend of Sgt. Roscoe Scott.
Eleanor Quinn, White Plains,
N.Y., friend of Cpl. Robert
Ticehurst.
Merna Michel, St. Paul,
Minn., sweetheart of Cpl.
Walter Markham.
Mrs. Glenn Boyd, Los
Angeles, Calif., friend of
Cpl. Marshall Speakman.
Natalie Vogen, Washington,
D.C., wife of Sgt. George
Vogen.
Evelyn Cohen, North
Bergen, N.J., sweet-
heart of Pvt. Rubin
Levy.
Mabel Dougherty, Linden,
N.J., sweetheart of Pvt. Stan-
ley Olterzewski.


Noted Visitors
1. Lt. General Kenney teas a frequent visitor to Eagle
Farm during the “project ” rush hours when the men
worked at night, and the General came to emphasize
the necessity of getting the planes out.
2. Big-wigs in Australian aircraft production often came
to learn from their American allies. Mr. Essington
Lends (light suit). Director of Aircraft Production,
and party, were impressed after a guided tour on
13 December, 1943.
3. Major General Frink and Col. Haskin were accom-
panied by Col. Monay during a tour of inspection in
February, 1944.
4. October 2nd, 1943, Lt. General Somervell ( t hi rd from
right) and party of distinguished military leaders,
were shown the accomplishments of the 81st Air Depot
Group by the Commanding Officer, Col. Minty.


1. The First Lady, Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, visited
Australia in September, 1943. Here she is shown
enjoying G.I. chow with some enlisted, men.
2. H. V. Kaltenborn, famous notes analyst, admired
the work of the Group in December, 1943, in com-
pany of Col. Brownfield, of Fifth Air Force Service
Command, guided by Col. Minty, Group Com-
mander.
3. Brig. General Connell landed at Eagle Farm after
return from a forward base. He teas met by Major
General Frink, Col. Brownfield, Col. Monay and
Col. Phillips, 9 February, 1944.
4. Brig. General Berman, Col. Brownfield and Brig.
General Howard visited Eagle Farm installations
in February, 1944.


Group photo laboratory, advanced base: Pfc. Elledge.
"Depo Echo"
In September, 1943, a group of men,
representing the various units of the 81st, met to organize
a newspaper. The first issue, edited by Sgt. Cadwell, ap-
peared November Ist. Gradually the little paper became
the favorite of the enlisted men. Circulations 700 copies
bi-weekly, allowing one paper per four men.
FIRST “Depo Echo” STAFF:—
SEATED: Sgt. Cadwell (editor), Lt. Hicks (advisor), Cpl. Davis-
son. STANDING: Sgt. Sprague, Sgt. Vasey, Cpl. Allen, T/5
Rittenhouse, Pvt, Gilbert, Sgt, O’Brien, Cpl. Gurliaccio.
Photo Section
It is no more than a click .of the
shutter, yet professional army photography is a trying job.
There are nerve racking hours spent improvising since
equipment is not always as readily available as your proh-
lem; there is boredom of laboratory work, and the danger
in aerial flights.
To the five men of our photo unit go
the laurels lor patience coupled with hard labor. To them
we owe thanks lor all photographic material in this book
and all visual historical records of our Group—work long
remembered alter all of our attainments will be forgotten.
To S/Sgt. Krause and his men, the
Yearbook staff is grateful.
Sgt. Dzioba, Sgt. Friedman, S/Sgt. Krause, Pfc, Elledge in
their “Valley” laboratory.
PRESENT “Depo Echo” STAFF:—
KNEELING: Sgt, Sprague, Sgt. Antro, Sgt. Fean, Sgt, Hollis.
SEATED: Cpl. Kipner, Pfc. Reinhardt, Capt. Mayer (Adjutant),
S/Sgt. Wiesenfeld (editor), Lt. Hicks (advisor), S/Sgt. Krause,
S/Sgt. Becker. STANDING: Sgt. Vasey, T/Sgt, Nearing, Sgt.
Scott, S/Sgt. O’Brien, Pfc. Burruss, S/Sgt. Petersen, T/5 Bitten-
house, Sgt. Battaglia.


SEATED: Miss Arden, Lt. Hicks, Mr. Salow, S/Sgt. Wiesenfeld.
STANDING : S/Sgt. Becker, S/Sgt, (indwell, Cpl. Davisson, T/5 Stoller,
S/Sgt. Krause.
Yearbook Staff
Editor ........... S/Sgt. W. Wiesenfeld
Historical Officer ........ Lt. M. R. Hicks
Layout Artist ....... Mr. H. Salow, A.R.C.
Assistant ......... S/Sgt. H. G. Cadvvell
Assistant ............. T/5 L. Stoller
Assistant .............. MISS J. Akden
Contributor ............ Cpl. N. Kipner
Photographic Editor . . . S/Sgt. E. E. Krause
Assistant ............. Sgt. W. DziOBA
Assistant ............ T/Sgt. E. Klvaja
Assistant ............ Sgt, J. Friedman
Assistant ............. Pfc. J. Elledge
Art Editor .......... S/Sgt. L. F. Becker
Assistant ........... Cpl. R. K. Davisson
TOP: Cpl Davisson, S/Sgt. Cadwell and S/Sgt. Becker in the art section of
the Historical Office.
BOTTOM: Yearbook editor, S/Sgt. Wiesenfeld, boarding plane for return to
Eagle Farm after gathering material at the Group's advanced base in New
Guinea.


SUNSET
A breeze is leaf ling fragrant blossoms
Down the dusty way,
Their beauty soiled, which teas but lately
, Innocent and gay.
Beneath the morning dew.
A golden hash comes stealing swiftly
Like the touch of hands.
And heralds dusk anew.
The golden sun is slowly sinking•
Even us it dies
Its beauteous moment comes, and
Glory-drenched before our eyes grey,
Gloomy clouds are
Sivift transformed to silver smitten things
That light the sky
W ith beauty like a flash of angels' wings:
It ever brighter grows.
A honey-tinted mass of gold has changed
The roseate hue to one of flame.
And all the West is shot with glory through.
That radiates o'er the sky.
A rosy flush overspreads the gold,
Departed is the sun.
And starry realm of twilight reigns supreme:
Now day is done and velvet night is nigh.
Anne Arden.




Johnson, Joseph R.
Cpl.
77 Morris Ave., Girard, Ohio
Jones, Harold J.
Sgt.
R.T. 1. Charlotte, Texas
Kaiser, Harry
s Sgf.
880 Blake Ave., Brooklyn, N.V.
Keister, George M.
s Sgt.
282 W, Snyder Ave., Lansford, Fa.
Kelly, Donald M.
S. S(!t.
39 Market St., Ftica, N.V.
Kling, Charles H.
Pvt.
1234 Coolidge Ave., Cnion, N.J.
Klein, Koy W.
Pvt.
819 Indian St., Bellingham, Wash.
Klntts, Maurice M.
Sgf.
302 X. Montclair Ave., Dallas, Texas
Knittle, l‘aul E.
Cpl.
4917 Easton St., St. Louis, Mo.
Konsehak, Earl R.
Pfe.
00 Main St., Orange, X.J.
Krause, Earl E.
s Sgt.
1014 Algoma St., Xew London. Wis.
Kulin, Steve G.
Pfe.
R.F.D. 3, Box 77. Wellsburg. W. Va.
Kwiatkowski, Andrew A.
Pfe.
203 —13 St., Jersey City, X.J.
Lagala, Louis X.
Pfe.
08-20 —78 St., Middle Village*, X.V.
Langdoc, Lloyd L.
Cpl.
0*814 Ferry Ave., Chicago, 111.
Le Due, Donald K.
Sgt.
321 Gold St., Duluth, Minn.
Le Furgey, Lamar W.
Cpl.
Cedartown, (la.
Leib, August J.
Cpl.
449 Evergreen St.. Brooklyn, X.V.
Lindsey, Koy A.
t r>
Route 1, Sasakwa, Okla.
Lines, George J.
Cpl,
140 Church St., Burlington, Vt.
Luck, James H.
Sgt.
Cedar Falls, X.C.
Lukes, James
S Sgt.
2124 So. 01 Ct.. Cicero, HI.
Luna, James M.
T 5
1317 J. Street, Reedley, Calif.
Madar, Stephen A.
T 5
932 Main St., Swoyerville, Fa.
Madigan, Francis T.
Cpl.
Albany. X.V.
Mahoney, Robert S.
Ffc.
r>28 So. 20 Ave., Minneapolis, Minn.
Mallon, John B.
Pfe.
014 Orchard Ave., Bellevue, Fa.
Mannix, James A.
Cpl.
1931 Chestnut St.. Harrisburg. Fa.
Martin, Howard L.
Pfe.
702 Felton St.. Miles City. Mont.
Maytield, Elbert L.
Sgt.
R.T. 1, Goodman. Mo.
McCarvill, James 1*.
S Sgt.
29 Tasker St., Philadelphia, Fa.
McCIoskey, Charles M.
Sgt.
701 W. 178 St., Xew York, X.V.
McKee, Marvin H.
Pfe.
2205 Montclair St., Cleveland. Ohio
Meehan. Thomas A. Jr.
S Sgt.
3323 W. 24 Ave,. Denver, Colo.
Milani, Joseph J.
Pfe.
4 Cnderelitf St., Yonkers, X.V.
Moses, Ralph J.
Sgt.
Golden Eagle, HI.
Myerly, John T.
Cpl.
924 Ingraham St.. X.W., Washington, D.C.
Nearing, Sheldon 1).
T Sgt.
5043 Claude St., Hammond. Ind.
O’Brien, Hobart F.
S/Sgt.
744 So. 7 St., Salt Lake City, Ctah
O’Brien, Walter
Sgt.
2127 Wells St., Emunclaw, Wash.
O'Connor, Daniel R.
S Sgt.
Willard, Mont.
Omundson, William M.
Ffc.
Fort Snelling, Minn.
Owens, J. I).
Cpl.
R.T. A. Spur, Texas
Fachanik, Abraham
M Sgt.
2024—78th St.. Brooklyn. X.V.
Farsons, William R. Jr.
Sgt.
7900 Scout Ave., Bell, Calif.
Ferlmutter. Charles
Sgt.
Planters Apts., Leavenworth, Kansas
Ferry, Charles A.
Ffc.
R.T. 1. Marionville, Mo.
Foysolf. Leon
Pvt.
1448 Sterling St.. Philadelphia, Fa.
Raef, Charles E.
M Sgt.
Oil X. 10 St., Van Buren, Ark.
Santiesteban, Roberto
Ffc.
1008 S. Virginia St., El Faso, Texas
Scaltreto, Joseph D.
Pvt.
10 Sparkhill St., Watertown. Mass.
Sheridan, Robert F.
Sgt.
723 DeWitt St., Syracuse, X.V.
Smith, Chaffin L.
S Sgt.
Forsyth, Ga.
Smith, Vincent R.
Cpl.
Fort Wayne, Ind.
Snyder, George (’.
Cpl.
234 Shitoh St., Pittsburgh. Fa.
Stalford, Roliert E.
Pvt.
Ross St., Lismore, Australia
Tabor, Joseph
Cpl.
421 X. Washington St., Baltimore, Md.
Talon, Louis W.
Cpl.
38 (Jordon St.. Framingham, Mass.
Teaford, Floyd W.
Ffc.
R.F.D. 2. Xew Madison, Ohio
Todd, George A.
Cpl.
Science Hill. Ky.
Tuma, Frank Jr.
Ffc.
Gartield, X V.
Wambsganss, Elder J.
Sgt.
R.F.D. 1, Elmdale, Kansas
Weaver, James C.
Sgt.
1122 Gilmore St., Lakeland, Fla.
Westbrook, William C.
Sgt.
429 W. Sycamore St., Greensboro, X.C.
Whitaere. Lewis I).
Sgt.
450 E. Mulberry St., I/cbanon, Ohio
Whitney. Ralph D.
Sgt.
Sidney, Mont.
Wiesenfeld, Walter
s Sgt.
510 Ocean Parkway. Brooklyn. X.V.
Williams, James ji.
Sgt.
3238 Rosedale Ave.. Dallas, Texas
Wolf, Luther M. *
Cpl.
220 W. 3 St., Pomona, Calif.
Yannes, Roy W. Jr.
Cpl.
Nuremberg, Fa.
Adkins, Richard F.
1st bt.
BIOS W. 10 St., Topeka, Kansas
Anderson, Dorvan K.
1st bt.
9910a So. Broadway, St. bonis. Mo.
Anderson, Wallace W.
2nd bt.
24 E. Greenwich Ave., West Warwick, R.l.
Barnes, Robert H.
Major
108 Chestnut St., Camden, Ark.
Bassow, Carlton, F.
Captain
90 Ridge St., Athol, Mass.
Clark, Robert M.
1st bt.
3415 bindenwood Ave., Dallas, Texas
Cox, Kenneth K.
Captain
45 E. 55 Terrace. Kansas City, Mo.
Duerst, John
Captain
308 College St., McMinnville, Oregon
Engle, boy F.
CW ()
314 E. Xenia Drive, Osborn, Ohio
Gibart, John C.
CW 0
77 Rathbone St., Mount Clemens, Mich-
(•oodwin, Paul H.
Major
49 Via Farallon St., Orinda, Calif.
ilieks, Mobley R.
1st bt.
1233 Oxford St., Houston, Texas
Klein, Walter
Major
114 Pleasant St., Brookline, Mass,
bingenfeldcr, Charles E,
1st bt.
1707 York Ave., Memphis, Tenn.
bueterhand, Fred W.
1st bt.
Remington, lud.
Mayer, James B.
Captain
Sunland Industries, Fresno, Calif.
MeMaster, Sidney F,
2nd bt.
33 East Main St.. Granville, N.V.
Miller, Floyd 1).
Captain
1 Holmcrcst Ct., Oceanside, N.V.
Monay, William H.
Colonel
857 Connor St., Salt Lake City, I'tah
Rosser, Thomas J.
Captain
8401 Wyoming St., Kansas City, Mo.
Seyfried, Carl b.
Captain
582 Triton Ave., Brooklyn, N.V.
Stralik, John J.
W ()
McKees Rocks, Pa.
Crquhart, Kenneth S.
Captain
79 West Ave., Flrport, N.V.
Von Wald, Manuel B.
Major
1021 Ave. b, Hawarden, Iowa
Watson, Samuel M.
Captain
Warwick, Ga.
Wessman, George
W O
2503 —15th Ave., Rockford, III.
/ion, Sam l>.
Captain
1124 Virginia, N.E., Atlanta, Ga.
Abbe, George E.
M Sgt.
P.O. Box 13, San Juan Bautista, Calif.
Aldrieh, James M.
Sgt.
2119 S. Helen St., Sioux City, Iowa
Alfares, Robert M.
Cpb
309 W. 45th St., Seattle, Wash.
Baeeiarini, Mlehael J,
Sgt.
404 South Ave., Modesto. Calif,
Bailey, Harold K.
Sgt.
418 N. Market St., Van Wart, Ohio
Barkume, Francis A.
Sgt.
3319 Portola Ave., Los Angeles. Calif.
Barnes, Elford II,
Sgt.
530 Walnut St., Woodland, Calif.
Barotz, Joseph 1).
Bfc.
240 E. 175 St., New York, N.V.
Beaver, Gilbert J.
Cpb
Loyal, Wis.
Bedian, Arthur H.
Cpb
1715 Chestnut St., Granite City, 111.
Berdysz, Walter
Bfc.
2580 Olga St., Cleveland, Ohio
HliiJkwcll, James \V.
Pvt.
2003 Charter St., New Orleans, ba.
Bowdish, Donald b.
Cpb
Long Beach. Los Angeles, Calif.
Boyd. Max W.
Sgt.
R.F.l). 4. Dayton Montgomery, Ohio
Brocious, Eiger R.
Bfc.
Detroit, Mich.
Brykala, Charles b.
Cpb
23 Pleasant St., New York Mills, N.V.
Burke, Eugene
Sgt.
2442 E, 93rd St., Chicago, HI.
Cass, Robert M.
Cpb
709 Cherry St., Gallon. Ohio
Chapman, Joseph I).
Bfc.
R R. 0, Greenville, Texas
Cohen, Julius
Bvt.
190 Legion St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Cooper, Robert G.
Bfc.
414—11 St., Cairo, 111.
Cord, Robert C.
Cpb
6518 S. Washtenaw Ave., Chicago, HI.
Davidson, William G.
Cpb
Box 443. Midway, Pa,
Dickens, Ralph E.
Cpb
Greenbrier, Ark.
Doucette, Joseph W.
T r>
10 Acton St., Lawrence, Mass.
Klledge, James C.
Bfc.
Baylis, HI.
Epperson, Roy E.
S Sgt.
Ensley, Ala.
Freeman, Ray E.
1st Sgt.
109 W. 83 St., Seattle, Wash,
Friedman, Jack
Sgt.
783 Lenox Rd.. Brooklyn. N.V.
Friedman, James
Sgt.
1523 Arlington Ave., Des Moines, Iowa
Gower, Willard b.
Cpb
R.F.l), 2, So. Portland, Me.
Guckert, Harold O.
Bfc.
103 Cedar St.. Marietta. Ohio
Hamby, Merle H.
Sgt.
4143 W. Pico, bos Angeles, Calif.
Hancock, Lester J.
Bfc.
15675 Maple Ridge Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Harris, Daniel b.
Cpb
R.T. 1. Valrico, Fla.
Heath, Richard K.
Sgt.
R.R. Paris Preble. Ohio
Highman, belaud S.
T Sgt.
R.T. 1, Tell City, Ind.
II hide, Robert E.
Cpb
1732 I'pton Ave,, Toledo, Ohio
Hollars, Howard b.
Sgt.
Dulse, Okla.
Ivey, Joseph 1).
Sgt.
2031 N. Pickwick Ave., Springfield, Mo.
Jenkins, Walter
Bfc.
150 N, Garfield Ave., Scranton, Ba.
81ST AIR DEPOT GROUP PERSONNEL
Head guar ters
and Headguarters Squadron


Adams, David W.
2nd Lt.
3250—Hi Sl„ N.W., Washington, D.C.
Barwick, Edward H.
1st Lt.
3:100 Beverly Dr., Shreveport, La.
Cupp, Walter E.
Captain
1902 W. 3 St., Newberry, Fa.
Farrior, William 0.
Captain
Fort Deposit, Ala.
Fried, Paul H.
1st Lt.
0501 N. 8 St., Philadelphia, Pa.
La Berge, Vincent K.
1st Lt.
037 Fourth Ave., San Francisco, Calif.
Liliig, Ralph E.
1st Lt.
449 S. Kensington Ave., La Grange, 111.
Meding. John R.
1st Lt.
7207 Drumwood Ct., Baltimore, Md.
Poe, Delosse
1st Lt.
500 Troost Ave., Kansas City, Mo.
Seiver, Frank W.
Captain
R.R. 1, Marquette, Neb.
Wood, Robert S.
2nd Lt.
Abrams, Edward W. Jr.
Pfc.
54 Lake St., Ramsey, N.J.
Adolphson, John A.
Cpl.
St. Augustine, III.
Aguado, Henry Jr.
l‘fc.
4212 Vista Ave,, St. Louis, Mo.
Albanese, Angelo
Cpl.
07 Central Ave., Ansonia, Conn.
Aleshire, Dana L.
I'pl.
49 W. Granville Rd., Worthington, Ohio
Andersen, Olaf A. Jr.
sgt.
85 Dexter Rd., Mellrose, Mass.
Anderson, Robert E.
Pvt.
1510 Owen Ave., Racine, Wis.
Andros, Peter C.
Cpl.
341 E. 50 St., New York, N.Y.
Angrisano, Constantino N.
Cpl.
11 Rambler Road, Jamaica Plains, Mass.
Anton, Edward B.
T/Sgt.
R.T. 1, Louise, Texas
Anton, George E.
Cpl.
11307 Langley Ave., Chicago, HI.
Applegate, Harvey E.
Pfc.
2050 N. Easton Road, Willow Grove, Fa.
Atkins, John W.
S Sgt.
204 Wyoming Ave., Audubon, N.J.
Atkinson, James R.
Pvt.
115 S. Cherry St., Hartford City, Ind.
Aulfes, George R.
Pfc.
2344 Plume First St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Azar, Michael G.
Pfc.
30 Glover Ave., Paterson, N.J.
Babis, Stephen J. Jr.
Pfc.
88 Feeley St., Stratford, Conn.
Baldwin, Robert S.
Pfc.
2210 Mt. Curve St., St. Joseph, Mich.
Barratta, Frank
Pfc.
4012 —14 Ave., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Barbee, Wilmer W.
Cpl.
2009 N, 15J St., Terre Haute, Ind.
Bateman, Warren V.
Pvt.
Randolph, Iowa.
Bates, Herbert R.
Cpl.
153 Institute Place, Chicago, 111.
Bates, William M.
Cpl.
795 W. 47 St., Norfolk, Va.
Battaglia, Joe L.
sgt.
18107 Ruritas Rd., Cleveland, Ohio,
Bayza, Joseph
Pfc.
205 E. 77 St., New York, N.Y.
Bear, Perry 1).
Pfc.
2202 N. Robberson St., Springfield, Mo.
Becker, Leslie F.
S/Sgt.
1203 N. 8 St., Colton, Calif.
Behring, Nicholas A.
Pfc.
4572 Montclair Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Beier, Alvin H.
Sgt.
Regal, Minn.
Bender, Edward I.
«, Sgt.
2980 Fairfield Ave., Bridgeport, Conn.
Bennewitz, Ralph K.
Pvt.
1521 El Serino Ave., Pasadena, Calif.
Benser, Arthur H.
Cpl.
Clayton, Wis.
Berg, James J.
Pfc.
5920 Ridge Ave., Chicago. 111.
Blum, William (’.
s, Sgt.
022 Scribner Ave., N.W., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Boatright, John F.
Pvt.
Prescott, Ariz.
Bobo, William C.
W/Sgt.
1415 Linden Ave., Baltimore, Md.
Bonanno, Thomas E.
Pvt.
301 Smith St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Bonham, Frank C. Jr.
Pfc.
R.T. 0, Wylam, Birmingham, Ala.
Boutell, Richard W.
Cpl,
2801 Park Ave. S., Minneapolis, Minn.
Bowman, Clyde A.
Cpl.
020 E. 3 Ave., Duluth, Minn.
Broadstone, Paul H.
Cpl.
1512 S. 9 St., Lawrenceville, HI.
Brown, Burnell T.
S.Sgt.
100 Arlington Ave., Peoria, III.
Brown, Irwyn G.
Cpl.
Walla Walla, Wash.
Brunk, Eugene W.
Cpl.
Marquette, Kansas
Buezynski, John J.
Pfc.
2018 S. 4 St., Milwaukee, Wis.
Bunnell, Ted J.
T/Sgt.
114 So. Rose Ave., Freeport, HI.
Burroughs, William A.
Cpl.
2558 Oxford St., Memphis, Tenn.
Burwell, Edward E.
Cpl.
705 Quinnipiac Ave., New Haven, Conn.
Bussiere, Joseph L.
Cpl.
152 Lincoln St., Lewiston, Me.
Byers, Eugene W.
Sgt.
1708 Parkman Road, Warren, Ohio
Byers, Harry F.
Pvt.
904 Highland Ave., Hendersonville, N.C.
Cabana, Bernard K.
Pfc.
10 Oaks Ave., Southbridge, Mass.
Cain, Raymond E.
tv Sgt.
R.T. 2, Tamms, HI.
Callahan, Gordon P.
Sgt.
10851 Oakfield St., Detroit, Mich.
Carlton, Charles E.
S/Sgt.
Box 445, Fellows, Calif.
Carr, Advert B.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 2, Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Case, Clinton C.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Pendleton, Ore.
Castrucci, Albert
Sgt.
208 Waldon St., Cambridge, Mass.
Cattabiani, Alfred Jr.
Pvt,
1073 E. 93 St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Cernkovieh, Albert
S/Sgt.
1409 Pine St., Johnson City, HI.
Charity, George W.
Pfc.
R.T. 2, Plattsburg, N.Y.
Chittenden, Charles L. Jr.
Cpl.
3021 Monroe Ave., Kansas City, Mo.
Churchill, Harold J.
Pvt.
Maiden Rock, Wis.
Clark, John W.
Cpl.
7879 Michener Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.
Clotfelter, John E.
S/Sgt.
N. 9 St., Monett, Mo.
Cole, Willis C.
Pfc.
Foster, B.l.
Coleman, Morton 1). Jr.
Cpl.
K.F.D. 3, Orange, Va.
Congleton, Clark
s Sgt.
P.O. Box 101, Beattyville, Ky.
Conley, William C.
Pfc.
(549 S. Ohio Ave., Columbus, Ohio
Conrad, Glenard J.
Cpl.
Whiteflsh, Mont.
Cooke, Robert M.
Pfc.
44-18 —30 Ave., Astoria, N.Y.
Cormier, Joseph K.
CpI.
2 Stone Ave., Chicopee Falls, Mass.
Cornelius, Francis E.
Cpl.
208 Broadway, Springfield, 111.
Craig, Penrose A.
Pt’c.
08 Broadway, Deepwater, N.J.
Crane, Joseph L.
Sgt.
Bethany, HI.
Cress well, Lee R.
Pvt.
Satartia, Miss.
Cripps, All»ert G.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 1, Stanley, N.V.
Cromwell, Oliver S.
Cpl.
84 Pleasant St., Richmond, Me.
Camming, Melvin A.
Sgt.
R.T. 3, Pinehurst Road, Bristol, Conn.
Cummins, Martin A.
Pvt.
0012 Westminster, St. Louis, Mo.
Curry, John T.
Cpl.
1122 Ridenbaugh St., St. Joseph, Mo,
D’Alessandro, Joseph
Pfc.
Gypsy Glenn Road, Beaver, Pa.
Daly, Donald V.
T Sgt.
R.T. 5, Bennett Road, Buffalo, N.V.
Daniels, Morris A.
Sgt.
214 Highland St. S.E., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Danielson, Siebert L.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 1, Benins Point, N.V.
D’Asta, John
S Sgt.
1114 S. Eastern Ave., Los Angelas, Calif.
David, Carroll B.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 3, Lansing, Mich.
Davidson, Dewey F.
Cpl.
Summertield, La.
Davis, John B.
T Sgt.
450 W. Locust, Springfield, Mo.
Davis, William F.
Pvt.
414 Laurel Blvd., Newcastle, Pa.
Day, Curtis Q.
Cpl.
710 Polk St,, Conway, Ark.
Decker, Hayden L.
s Sgt.
Farmington, Ark.
Desmond, Bernard T.
Pvt.
4080 Montgomery St., Detroit, Mich.
Di Angustino, Angelo C.
Jr. Pfc.
52 Aekerson St., N. Hackensack, N.J.
Downey, Chilton M.
T Sgt.
R.T. 2, Oblong, HI. y
Doyle, HolKTt M.
S Sgt.
R.T. 2, Grand Rapids, Mich.
Dubrod, Edward F.
Cpl.
3437 W. 04 Place, Chicago, III.
Dunseth, Harold J.
S/Sgt.
916 E. Fellows St., Dixon, Ml.
Dunyak, George Jr.
Cpl.
248 Allen Ave., Donora, Pa.
Dvorak, Victor T.
T 5
Shiner, Texas
Dysart, Archie L.
Cpl.
300 S. Penn., Drumright, Okla.
Eckert, Gilbert C.
T Sgt.
125 E. Bancroft St., Toledo, Ohio
Eglx'rt, James E.
Sgt.
R.T. 7, Dayton, Ohio
Elders, Louis X.
Cpl.
2527 Chester St., St. Louis, Mo.
Einig, William M. Jr.
Cpl.
7201 Delta, Richmond Heights, Mo.
Elliot, Henry D.
Pfc.
2329 W. Grand Blvd., Detroit, Mich.
Ephraim, Robert
Pfc.
Old Bridge Road, Spotswood, N.J,
Ethridge, Ralph W.
Sgt.
R.T. 1, Bald Knob, Ark.
Evans, Robert
Cpl.
029 W. Milwaukee St., Detroit, Mich..
Fahey, Edward J.,
Pvt.
1000 Washington St., N. E., Minneapolis, Minn.
Ferneau, Frank W.
Pvt.
Malcolm, Iowa
Fitteld, Bertwell P.
Pfc.
Cabot, Vt.
Finch, Henry Jr.
Pfc.
R.T. 2, Fulton, Ky.
Fincher, William T.
Sgt.
R.T. 1, Jonesboro, Ga.
Finley, Richard L.
Sgt.
Lincoln, Ark.
Fischer, John G.
Cpl.
122 Woodlawn Ave., CoIIingswood, N.J.
Fisher, Roland J.
Pfc.
1123 Randolph St.. Cheboygan, Mich.
Fitzgerald, Lawrence J.
Pfc.
307—40 St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Fleming, Maurice E.
S Sgt.
Knowlton, Mont.
Foltz, Richard H.
Pfc.
221 S. 2 St., Frackville, Pa.
Fort, Dale H.
Cpl.
520 S. 10 St., Omaha, Neb.
Francis, Paul E.
Pfc.
Greenland, Mich.
French, Kenneth E.
Pvt.
Mattawan, Mich.
Fryer, John C.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Box 211, Butler, Ky.
Fufldio, Arthur P.
Pfc.
007 Casanova St., Bronx, N.V.
Fuller, Donald V.
M Sgt.
2201 Rosemont Blvd., Dayton, Ohio
Fulmer, Luther C.
Pvt.
R.T. 2, Box 100. W-.:
Garcia, Ted E.
S Sgt.
3910 Forest Placed., St. Louis, HI.
Gass. Galen R.
Pfc.
Brandt, S.D.
Gerolamo, Girardo
Cpl.
37 Waverly St.. Belmont, Mass.
Goble, William J.
S Sgt.
5402 S. Morgan St., Chicago, HI.
Gregory, Richard
Pvt.
Johnetta, Ky.
Grushkin, David
Pfc.
94 Amboy St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Hatft, Arthur L.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 1, Versailles, Ind.
Hahn, Raymond H.
Sgt.
New Albin, Iowa
Hallion, James T.
Cpl.
R.T. 2, Box 02, Saugerties, N.V.
Hampton. Ray W.
S Sgt.
R.R. 1, Montrose, Colo.
Hanson, Carl J.
Pvt.
2330 Highland Ave., Birmingham, Ala.
Hares, Lionel J.
Pfc.
440 Mavellen Ave., San Jose, Calif.
Hargis, Fred 0.
Cpl.
4305J Washington Ave., Houston, Texas
Harig, Leo R.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Alden, Minn.
Harriman, John W.
Sgt.
Hawthorne, Neb.
Harris, Theron J.
Cpl.
Rockport, Miss.
Harrison, Samuel F. Jr.
Sgt.
4919a St. Louis Ave., St. Louis, Mo.
Harvey, Roger 0.
Cpl.
211 W, Warren Ave., Tampa, Fla.
Hawkins, Murland C.
Pvt.
052 E. 101 St., Cleveland, Ohio
Hayes, Gordon M.
Pfc.
42 Thames St., Newport, R.l.
Heath, Stanley II.
Sgt.
Box 89, Bradford, N.H.
Heine, George 1).
Cpl.
Jiren, Wyo.
Hendricks, Clarence E.
T Sgt.
115 S. Cnion St., Akron, Ohio
Herring, Glen W.
Sgt.
518 N. Hedgecoke St., Borger, Texas
Hertweck, William H.
Pfc.
585 W. Main St., Meriden, Conn.
Hicks, Orlolf H.
Pfc.
Bonnie, III.
Hodgman, William R.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 2, Clinton St., Concord, N.H.
Blit 2)epot Repair Squadron


Hoeflaak, Tom
Cpl.
6700 Winthrop, Detroit, Mich.
Hoffman, Edward R.
Pfc.
109 Wellington St., Toledo, Ohio
Holmes, Franklin R.
Cpl.
74 Carlton St., Johnson City, N.Y.
Horn, Jesse L.
Pfc.
R.R. 1, Center, Mo.
Hulme, Raymond
Pfc.
22 Mary St., Central Falls, R.I.
Hyman, Joseph
Sgt.
325 Osborne St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Hynek, Lawrence B.
M/Sgt.
906 K. St., Lincoln, Neb.
Igoe, Joseph M.
Cpl.
3537 W. 58 Place, Chicago, III.
Ingalls, Gilbert G.
Pfc.
21 Grove St., Brattleboro, Vt.
Jacobson, Walter L.
Pfc.
Box 452, Henning, Minn.
Jarrett, George R.
Pvt.
112$ E. Superior St., Kokomo, Ind.
Joelson, Phillip W.
Pfc.
Box 183, R.T. 1, Spanaway, Wash.
Johns, Floyd A.
Pfc.
R.D. 1, Mercer, Pa.
Johns, Jay S. Jr.
Pvt.
R.F.D. 1, New Castle, Pa.
Johnson, Albert C. \
Pvt.
Overly, N.D.
Johnson, Harold J. \
PvU
Damon, Texas
Johnson, Warren Y.
y pvt.
R.T. 1, Crawfordville, Ga.
Johnson, Walter E.
Sgt.
10011 LaFayette Ave., Chicago, 111.
Johnson, William J.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 3, Cazenovia, N.Y.
Johnson, William T.
Cpl.
112 Claremont Ave., Jersey City, N.J.
Johnston, Thomas E.
Pfc.
R.T. 2, Paris, Mo.
Jordan, Albert J.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Winnebago, Minn.
Juarez, Antonio
Pfc.
60 Elmwood St., Newton, Mass.
Judkins, Paul L.
T/Sgt.
1248 W. 42 St., Los Angeles, Calif,
Jusko, Edward A.
Pfc.
6915 S. Talman Ave., Chicago, 111.
Karpenko, Norman W.
Cpl.
Broadview Ave., Seymour, Conn.
Kasper, Eugene
Pfc.
605 Kennison Parkway, Mt. Vernon, N.Y.
Kasuboski, Harry R.
Cpl.
997 Summer St., Berlin, Wig.
Keaster, Edward A.
Pvt.
100 —4 St., S.W., Great Falls, Mont.
Keen, Charley C.
Sgt.
Parsons, Tenn.
Kennedy, Frederick C.
Sgt.
22 Andrew St., Massena, N.Y.
Keplingcr, Alfred
Sgt.
104 Jones Hill Road, West Haven, Conn.
Kettner, George C.
Cpl.
'R.F.D. 2, Pine Island, Minn.
Kichik, Michael J.
Pfc.
545 Congress St., Detroit, Mich.
Killenbeck, Clinton I.
Pfc.
R.D. 1, Adams Center, N.Y.
Kimmelman, Joseph
Pvt.
1333 E. 98 St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Kindle, Charles W. Jr.
M/Sgt.
Houston, Ohio
King, Hugh G.
Sgt.
Ambassador Apts., Nashville, Tenn.
Klnley, William W.
Sgt.
613 Perry St., Davenport, Iowa
Kinseth, Myron A.
Pfc.
318 N, Oxford Ave., Eau Claire, Wis.
Kinsey, John A.
Cpl.
1096 East Ave., Akron, Ohio
Klein, Lloyd F.
Sgt.
R.T. 1, Bemidji, Minn.
Klinger, John C.
Pvt.
653 South St., Lukens, Pa.
Kotoff, Alexander R.
Pfc.
749 Tinton Ave., Bronx, N.Y.
Koval, Albert 0.
M/Sgt.
Box 132, Windham, Mont.
Kovatch, Daniel F.
S/Sgt.
5264 Erskine Way, Seattle, Wash.
Kovolik, Paul G.
Pfc.
914 Clark Ave., Hoboken, N.J. \
Kraly, Joseph F.
Cpl.
R.T. 2, Marion Hill, New Brighton, Pa.
Krueger, Wayne G.
Pfc.
Pardeeville, Wis.
Kruzel, Stanley T.
Pfc.
R.T. 3, Box 61, Caro, Mich.
Kuvaja, Edward
T/Sgt.
533$ S. Spring St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Lachowicz, Chester
T/5
600 Brainard, Detroit, Mich.
Lacota, Michael
8/Sgt.
R.F.D. 2, Oswego, N.Y,
Lauren€eau, Raymond L.
Pfc.
547 Maple St., Clyde, Ohio
Lavigne, Bernard H. Jr.
Pvt.
4490 Baccich St., New Orleans, La.
Lavigne, John F.
Sgt.
305 Main St., Keene, N.H.
Lawson, Robert L. V
T/5
Andes, Mont.
Leone, John F.
Pvt.
717 S. 25 St., Milwaukee, Wis.
Lerschcn, Joseph P.
Cpl.
Granite Falls, Minn.
Lindsey, Roy A.
T/5
R.T. 1, Sasakwa, Okla.
Lippert, Charles B.
T/Sgt.
309 Sycamore St., Barnesville, Ohio
Loberg, Oliver S.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Thief River Falls, Minn,
Lock, John L.
Pvt.
New Madrid, Mo.
Lokey, John E.
Pfc.
R.T. 1, Brownsville, Texas
Lords, Wallace H.
Pfc.
109 E. Mason St., Jackson, Mich.
Luca, Ignatius R.
Pvt.
19 Woodlawn Ave., Crawford, N.J.
Maas, John R.
Pvt.
218 Kensington Road, Lynbrook, N.Y.
MacBurney, Perry
Pfc.
3004 Chesterfield Ave., Baltimore, Md.
Maher, Robert F.
Cpl.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
Maloney Kenneth A.
Pfc.
407 Court P, Marina Vill., Bridgeport, Conn.
Manley, Robert M.
Sgt.
88 Monroe St., Hartford, Conn.
Marchant, George V.
Pvt.
R.F.D. 1, Polk City, Iowa
Marchesini, Albert D.
Sgt.
415 W. 6 St., West Wyoming, Pa.
Markley, Benjamin R.
Pfc.
Osage, W. Va.
Mashburn, Clyde F.
Pfc.
711 N. W: 18 Terrace, Miami, Fla.
Mattsen, John
Pfc.
Dearborn, Mich.
Maullcr, William L.
Pvt.
R.T. 2, Liberty, Ind.
Maurice, Jaspar A.
Pfc.
220 Barr Place, Hudson Heights, N.J.
Medalie, Yale M.
Sgt.
119 W. Grand St., Minneapolis, Minn.
Melton, Sidney R.
Sgt.
3rd Avenue, Lupton City, Tenn.
Mentzer, Richard E.
Pvt.
R.T. 3, Kenton, Ohio
Metzner, Harry W.
Pvt.
35 N. Terry St., Dayton, Ohio
Metzinger, Clarence B.
M/Sgt.
Caldwell, Kansas
Messenger, Eugene F.
Pvt,
3040 Nevada Ave., Fresno, Calif.
Meyer, Frank W.
Cpl.
Tilden, Neb.
Mikkelscn, Alvin B.
Sgt.
R.F.D. 2, Coon Rapids, La.
Millar, William A.
Pfc.
401 —58 St., West New York, N.J.
Miller, Evan A.
Cpl.
Pacific Junction, Iowa
Miller, Harvey H.
Pvt.
344 Raleigh St., S.E., Washington, D.C.
Mize, Curtis W.
Sgt.
R.T. 2, Jefferson, Ga.
Moffett, Newton I.
Cpl.
Leupp, Ariz.
Mog, Robert J.
Pvt.
Ellsworth, Kansas
Moitoza, Albert G.
Pfc.
26 Marvel St., Taunton, Mass.
Monte, Pete J.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 3, Benton Harbor, Mich.
Montgomery, Winston C. Jr.
S/Sgt.
701$ N.E. 16 St., Oklahoma City, Okla.
Mooney, Daniel C.
Sgt.
2526 Waverly St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Moore, Sylvester J.
Pvt.
Princeton, Wis.
Morgan, James H.
S/Sgt.
309 E. Vermijo St., Colorado Springs, Colo.
Morris, Homer E.
S/Sgt.
1201 Scott St., Wichita Falls, Texas
Mudy, Valerian J.
Pfc,
1046 Ames St., Hammond, Ind.
Murphy, James H.
S/Sgt.
114-94—180 St., St Albans, N.Y.
Muirhead, Vernon B.
Cpl.
McKinney St., Ennis, Texas
Murdock, Harry P.
S/Sgt.
R.R. 3, Boise, Idaho
Murray, Francis E.
Pfc.
1834 —4 St., N.E., Washington, D.C.
McAdams, Earl
Pvt,
711 E. Geyser, Livingston, Mont.
McBride, Austin E.
Pvt.
Floral, Ky.
McClendon, Joe M.
Pfc.
1001 E. 7 St., Dalhart, Texas
McCreary, Frank R.
Pfc.
1315 —2 Ave., Altoona, Pa.
McCullough, Maynard J.
Pfc.
Custer, Wash.
McGinn, Thomas F.
S/Sgt.
Morsebluff, Neb.
Mclntire, Van C.
Cpl.
R.T. 5, McKinney, Texas
McKee, Marvin H.
Pfc.
2205 Montclair St., Cleveland, Ohio
McPhail, Donald R.
Sgt.
55-21—134 St., Flushing, N.Y.
Nelson, Newell W.
S/Sgt.
R.T. 2, Amboy, Minn.
Nettles, Willie H.
Cpl.
1508 W. 10 St., Texarkana, Texas
Neuls, George E.
Pfc.
Nunn Ave., R.T. 1, Washington, N.J.
Newman, Ezekiel B. Jr.
Sgt.
Holbrook, Ariz.
Newt, James E.
S/8gt.
R.T. 2, Longview, Wash.
Nichols, Jim 0.
Cpl.
1410 S. Green St., Longview, Texas
Nichols, Willie L.
Cpl.
Box 364, Gould, Ark.
Niebur, Lewis, C, B.
M/Sgt.
1107J McColloch St., Wheeling, W. Va.
Norland, Gilbert E.
Cpl.
Galve, Kansas
Nose, Stephen
S/Sgt.
9931 Shale Ave., Cleveland, Ohio
Nunn, Claude H. Jr.
Pvt.
1222 Goss Ave., Louisville, Ky.
Nuzzo, Joseph 0.
Pfc.
394 Brown St., Rochester, N.Y.
Oerly, Earl A.
Cpl.
R.T. 2, Prairie Home, Miss.
O’Hare, Lawrence B.
Cpl.
1654 —36 Ave., San Francisco, Calif.
O’Leary, Stephen W.
Cpl.
Box 13, Harlem, Mont.
Olufson, Gene E.
Cpl.
712 E. 7 St., Norco, Calif.
Opgaard, Allen R.
Sgt.
Fort Ransom, N.D.
Orchard, Albert E.
Pvt.
R.T. 2, Iron River, Mich.
Orchard, Gordon E.
Pfc.
Box 104, Warwick, N.D.
Oms, George L.
Cpl.
R.T. 2, Gridley, HI.
Orsbom, Kenneth R.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 3, Mt. Vemon, Ohio
Owen, James H.
Pfc,
P.O. Box 55, Anniston, Ala.
Papacek, George J.
Sgt.
La Crosse, Wis.
Parsons, Vernon
Pvt.
R.F.D, 1, Ohio St., Moundsville, W. Va.
Partridge, Harry F.
Pfc.
N. Main St., Springwater, N.Y.
Paul, Howard L.
Pfc.
Knapp Farm, Nashville, Tenn.
Payne, Harry C.
Pvt.
Mountain View, Mo.
Payne, James C.
Pfc.
R.T. 9, Dallas, Texas
Pazak, John P.
Sgt.
8075 Grinnell St., Detroit, Mich.
Pehlke, Raymond A.
Sgt.
White Water, Mont.
Pelstring, John J.
T/5
6a Krug Circle, Norwood, Ohio
Peltekis, James,
Cpl.
760 E. 232 St., New York, N.Y.
Petak, Alphonso A.
Pvt.
Newark, N.J.
Peters, Nicholas H.
Pfc.
11 Garwood Place, Irvington, N.J.
Peterson, Stanley T.
Pfc.
801 East Ave., N., Waukesha, Wis.
Peterson, William G.
Cpl.
26850 Oriole Ave., Euclid, Ohio
Pfeifer, Adolph J.
Pfc.
400 Jefferson Ave., Alton, 111.
Phare, Roy T.
Sgt.
2633 Walnut St., Port Huron, Mich.
Piaskowski, Harvey J.
Pfc.
1621 N. 17 St., Sheboygan, Wis.
Pierce, John P.
Pfc.
932 Garden, Warren, Ohio
Pille, Arthur C.
Pfc.
R.T. 1, Haverhill, La.
Pitcher, William P.
Pfc.
1332 Glyndon Ave., Baltimore, Md.
Pitrone, Joe R. Jr.
Pfc.
13401 E. 115 St., Cleveland, Ohio
Pitt, Donald J.
1st Sgt.
28 Spray St., Melbourne, Aust.
Pitt, James A.
Pfc.
Minneola, Fla.
Poling, Burl C.
Pfc.
101 Hanchett, Coldwater, Mich.
Pratt, James W.
Cpl.
R.T. 2. Bristol, Tenn.
Preeschl, Willard J.
T/Sgt.
145 N.E. 80 Terrace, Miami, Fla.
Provorse, John A.
S/Sgt.
R.T. 1, Box 75, Barnsdall, Okla.
Prutsman, A. L.
Pfc.
Spearman, Texas
Puetz, Henry L.
Pfc.
90 Heib Lunde, Watertown, Wis.
Quandt, Herbert W.
Cpl.
R.T. 2, Fairland, Okla.
Radmacher, Victor J.
Cpl.
Meta, Mo.
Slit 2)epot Repair Squadron (Continued


Ramey, Alvin T).
S, Sgt.
Colmesneil, Texas
Rasmussen, Raymond A.
Pfc.
2552 Evans, Omaha, Neb.
Reese, William E.
Pfc.
1029 Boulevard Ave., Fairmont, W. Va.
Reier, Edward P.
Ptc.
4114 —33 St., Mt. Ranter, Md.
Retmanski, Walter S.
Sgt.
275 Nassau Ave., Brooklyn, N.V.
Reynolds. Henry W.
Cpl.
447 Hahlo St., Houston, Texas
Richert, John J.
Cpl.
84 W. Cleveland Drive, Buffalo, N.V.
Riekert, Warren H.
Pvt.
P.O. Box 425, Gridley, Calif.
Robinson, Donald
Pfc.
Ash Flat, Neb.
Kodjom, Michael J. Jr.
Pfc.
706 McCrea Ave., Donora, Pa.
Kolya, Michael G.
Pfc.
120 Beaver St., New Britain, Conn.
Rorvik, Allan W.
Pfc.
Box 283, Glasgow, Mon.
Rouleau, Joseph E.
Pvt.
130 Halifax St., Waterville, Me.
Roy, Joseph J.
Cpl.
5207 Williams, Detroit, Mich.
Rudinski, Vernon K.
Pfc.
401 Arlington Ave., Elgin, 111.
Rukavina, Michael
Pfc.
1414 Young St., Middletown, Ohio
Rurup, Delbert I.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 7, Benson Station, Omaha, Neb.
Russell, Clyde A.
Cpl.
Route 1, Fruita, Colo.
Ruzsas, Louis F.
S/Sgt.
6007 Appoline, Dearborn, Mich.
Salisbury, Harold I).
Cpl.
516 S. Main St., Floydada, Texas
Salmon, Lawrence T.
Pvt.
Sheldon, Iowa
Sand, Burtel 0.
Pfc.
112 W Ludington St., Iron Mountain, Mich,
Sanders, Andrew J.
T/Sgt.
Route 4, Lyons, Ga.
Sartain, Dean A.
Cpl.
Midland, Calif.
Schell, Guy W.
Cpl.
Route 5, N. Kansas City, Mo.
Schlesinger, Edward
S/Sgt.
604 W. Grand, Hot Springs, Ark.
Schoemaker, George J.
Pvt.
6 Pennsylvania Ave., Bellevue, Pa.
Schuttloffel, Robert W,
Pfc.
Route 1, Walnut, Iowa
Scott, Carl W.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 1, Hastings, Iowa
Sevedge, Elmer H.
Sgt.
Syracuse, Kansas
Sheely, Ralph 0. Jr.
Pvt.
817 Parkview Ave., Youngstown, Ohio
Shelton, Gwendall
Cpl.
112 S. Washington St., Elk City, Okla.
Shields, Gordon L.
Sgt.
Sycamore, Ala.
Shore, Isadore L.
Pvt.
3318 W. Harold St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Silva, Joe 1.
Cpl.
394 First St., Chino, Calif.
Silverthorn, Cecil R.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 1, Jeddo, Mich.
Simpson, George N.
S/Sgt.
1544 E. 23rd St., Cleveland, Ohio
Skinner, Virgil L.
Sgt.
2100 — 8th Ave., W., Birmingham, Ala.
Skutnick, Walter
Sgt.
25 E. 17th St., Bayonne, N.J.
Slavin, Robert H.
Sgt.
548 Salem Ave., Dayton, Ohio
Smith, Darwin L.
Cpl.
Jennings, Kansas
Smith, James A.
Cpl.
Route 4, Lumberton, N.C.
Smith, Kenneth B.
Pfc.
16 Bicknell Rd., N., Weymouth, Mass.
Smith, Lawrence A.
Cpl.
Bandy, Kentucky.
Smith, Seymour M.
Pfc.
Regent Hotel, Grand Rapids, Mich.
Snyder, Glenn C.
Cpl.
North Hampton, Pa.
Sorrell, Gerald C.
Sgt.
208 Washington Ave., Cincinnati, Ohio
Sosnowski, Adolph J.
M Sgt.
Wendel, Pa.
Sparger, John L.
Cpl.
301 E. Main St., Ardmore, Okla.
Squier, Mark V.
Pfc.
7 S. 7th St., Yakima, Wash.
Stafford, Robert K.
S/Sgt.
2733 National Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Stortz, Earl E.
Cpl.
3945 Llewellen Ave., Cincinnati, Ohio
Stovall, Glenwood
S/Sgt.
Motor Rt. B, LaMesa, Texas
Strack, Noah A.
Pfc.
4 Church St., Oxford, Mass.
Strycharz, Max A.
Pfc.
2 Lincoln Park, Easthampton, Mass.
Studman, Aaron
Pvt.
316 Hinsdale St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Sturm, Eugene B.
S Sgt.
Hermansville, Mich.
Suttles, William L.
Pfc.
516 Burtons Lane, Connersville, Ind.
Sweeney, Jessie F. Jr.
Sgt.
526 Hagan St., Nashville, Tenn.
Szuchy, Jacob T.
M/Sgt.
3045 N. Orkney St., Philadelphia, Pa
Tatro, Joseph J. Jr.
CpI.
95 Hathaway St., New Bedford, Mass.
Tellman, Aloysius H.
Pfc.
Eugene, Mo.
Terray, Walter A.
CpI.
Airline Ave., Madison, Conn.
Thomas, Edwin W.
CpI.
81 Southland Lane, Babylon, N.Y.
Thomas, Glen G.
Sgt.
386 E. Hillsdale St., Lansing, Mich.
Thomas, Zack G.
CpI.
321 —6 St. N.E., Canton, Ohio
Thompson, Morris F.
S, Sgt.
R.T. 1, Moscow, Ohio
Thompson, Raleigh A.
S/Sgt.
R.F.D. 7, Stop 11, Richmond, Va.
Thorson, Kenneth K.
Sgt.
Siebert, Colo.
Ticehurst, Robert E.
Cpl.
46 Russell Ave., Beacon, N.Y.
Townley, Arthur M.
s/sgt.
Malvern, Ark.
Trahan, Rudolph R.
Sgt.
46 Mayfield Rd., Pawtucket, R.L
Tramontin, Donald P.
Pvt.
217 Blane St., Iron Mountain, Mich.
Tricon, Alfred J.
Cpl.
2501 N. Derbingy St., New Orleans, La.
Tripp, Dana M.
Cpl.
Westminster Road, South Ashburnbam, Mass.
Troped, Harry
Cpl.
40 Druid St., Dorchester, Mass.
Trottier, Clarence J.
T/Sgt.
Goodman, Wis.
Trammel, Forrest G.
Pfc.
20 tfe Main Sts., St. Maries, Idaho.
Tussing, Dalton A.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Alexandria, Va.
Ulczynski, Joseph
S/Sgt.
Box 78, Dillonvale, Ohio
Upchurch, James K.
Pvt.
550 Elm St., Swarthmore, Pa.
Van Buren, Lester E.
Pfc.
Marion, Kansas
Vaughn, Tollie K.
Sgt.
R.T. 1, Leesburg, Ala. y
Vazquez, Frank
Pfc.
140 Brad St., Revere, Mass.
Verga, Henry G.
Pfc.
92 Columbia Ave., Cedarhurst, N.Y.
Ver Heul, Forrest G.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 2, Mitchellville, Iowa
VerSteegh, Raymond A.
Cpl.
1007 N. Market, Oskaloosa, Iowa
Vinson, James B.
Sgt.
855 So. Second St., Richmond, Calif.
Volpi, Anthony J.
Pvt.
288 Cove Rd., Hollidays Cove, W. Va.
Wadsworth, Fred W.
Cpl.
R.D. 2, Jeannette, Pa.
Waitkins, Frank V.
T/Sgt.
Oneida Ave., Harmon-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Walker, Gradyc
M/Sgt.
219 So. Church St., Florence, S.C.
Walsh, Austin H.
Pfc.
918 Buffalo St., Olean, N.Y.
Wareham, Rolland N.
S/Sgt.
781 Oak Knoll Ave., S.E., Warren, Ohio
Warren, Leo C.
S/Sgt.
119 N. Main St., Sandoval, III.
Warwick, Dale M.
Pfc.
2527 E. Adams St., Phoenix, Ariz.
Wasik, Eugene S.
Cpl.
5888 Mitchell St., Detroit, Mich.
Weakley, Paul R.
Pfc.
525 W. Westfield St., Indianapolis, Ind.
Weigt, Elmer L.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 1, Mt. Prospect, 111.
Wells, Jack W.
s/sgt.
552 Beale St., Bakersfield, Calif.
Wells, Marlyn L.
Cpl.
Fonda, Iowa
West, Martin C.
Cpl.
923 Lamar St., Luling, Texas
West, Richard H.
Cpl.
2501 Forsyth Rd., Macon, Ga.
Westerman, Don 11.
Cpl.
1012 Casteel St., Texarkana, Texas
Wilkinson. Edgar A.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 2, Bates City, Mo.
Williams, Paul A.
Sgt.
P.O. Box 10, Ivanhoe, Calif.
Williams, William H.
Sgt.
722 Wabash Ave., Carthage, 111.
Wilson, Roscoe S.
Sgt.
1909 Home Circle, Colfeyville, Kansas
Withem, Robert B.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 2, Mondemin, Iowa
Witherspoon, Emmett L.
T/Sgt.
Waverly, Kansas
Wohlford, George L.
Sgt.
Oregon, Mo.
Wolz, Daniel C.
Cpl.
98 Main St., Fair Oaks, Pa.
Wood, Hollis J.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 1, Wellsville, N.Y.
Worwa, Joseph F.
Pfc.
1912 University Ave.,N.E., Minneapolis, Minn.
Wright Robert J.
Cpl.
Oakridge, Oregon
Yonts, William N.
S/Sgt.
Neon, Kentucky
Young, David
Pfc.
556 Dumont Ave., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Zane, Francis A.
Cpl.
57 —1st Ave., Mantua, N.J.
Anders, Paul L.
1st Lt.
505 Lancaster St., Marietta, Ohio
Attwood, John C.
Captain
140 Park Lane, Stonegate, Arlington Hts., 111.
Brighton, Gerald D.
Captain
Weldon, TIL
Goodrich, Cleon F.
2nd Lt.
108 N.J., Wellston, Ohio
McElwee, Charles K.
W/O
Johnstown, Ohio
Kenfroe, Edward E.
CW 0
Box 234, Wisner, La.
Sullivan, Paul E.
Captain
42 Forest St., Lowell, Mass.
Trumbull, John K.
Captain
K.F.D. 1, Corland, Ohio
Young, Vernon L.
1st Lt.
Potlatch, Idaho
Allen, Jones K.
Sgt.
Cynthiana, Ohio
Angove, Douglas E.
Pvt.
310—6th St., S., Virginia, Minn.
Bauman, Lee
T/Sgt.
Sterling, Ohio
Beauregard. Lloyd J.
Pvt.
9 Hawthorne St., Vestal, N.Y.
Bock, Earl A.
Sgt.
622 Walnut St., Hamilton, Ohio
Bricker, Alvin C.
Sgt.
K.F.D. 6, Pickle Rd., Toledo, Ohio
Brown, Howard E.
Sgt.
325 W. 13th St., Peru, Ind.
Burkcpilc, Ivan W.
S 'Sgt.
1618 Kenton St., Springfield, Ohio
Burns, Robert E.
Sgt.
Alamosa, Colo.
Caven, Howard S.
S/Sgt.
Conover, Ohio
Davis, Walter T.
Sgt.
2112 Kanawha Blvd., Charleston, W. Va.
Deloff, John L.
Pfc.
Waterloo, Iowa
Dobrkovsky, Fred
CpI.
1736 S.E. 10th Ave., Portland, Oregon
Dodsworth, Frank E.
S Sgt.
503 N. Stone Ave., Tucson, Ariz.
Doroshow, Aaron J.
Pfc.
2462 Napa St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Dudziak, Frank J.
Sgt.
4408 Beta Ave., Newburgh Heights, Ohio
Elder, James W,
Pvt.
2018 Sherwood Ave., Louisville, Ky.
Evans, Roy S.
Sgt.
Greenland, W. Va.
Fagundes, Lionel J.
Cpl.
P.O. Box 144, Atwater, Calif.
Feyereisen, John E.
CpI.
644—11th Ave., N., South St. Paul, Minn.
Fissel, Zeno M.
S Sgt.
196 N. Main St., Mt. Gilead, Ohio
Freeland, Roy M.
Pvt.
General Delivery, Capitan, N.M.
81st Depot Supply Squadron
Btil 2)epol sepa ir $ uadron (Continued


Fink, John J.
S/Sgt.
145 Keehl St., Rochester, N.Y.
Fritz, Michael J.
Pvt.
:U 10 Caitiff, Hamtramek, Mich.
Fraser, Clifford K.
Sgt.
Route 2, Box 82, Petaluma, Calif.
Cast, Frank E.
Pfc.
Route 1, Ripley, Ohio
Gearrin, Roy L.
CpI.
Rising Fawn, Georgia
Gordon, Hartley F.
Pvt.
1470 Commonwealth Ave., Boston, Mass.
Harrison, John P.
Cpl.
R.l). 1, Schellsburg, Pa.
Heniser, Robert S.
Cpl.
7U)J W. Charles St., Muncie, Ind.
Harvey, Glen L.
Pfc.
Cowley, Wyoming
Hauser, Charles M.
Sgt.
Highland Rd., High Point, N.C.
Helland, Orville A.
Pfc.
Chokio, Minn.
Henderer, Ehne p It.
Sgt.
1420 Carolina Ave., Cincinnati, Ohio
Hero, Carl R.
Cpl.
2972 N. 59th St., Milwaukee, Wis.
Hineman, Jack J
Pvt.
R.R. 1, Lyonds, Ind.
Jacobs, Jack
Pfc.
3334 Ainslie, Chicago, III.
Jeppsen, Harvey 1).
Cpl.
Idanha, Oregon
Joints, William H.
Cpl.
New Kensington. Pa.
Johnson, Clifford A.
Pvt.
Marion St., Mt. Gilead, Ohio
Karr, Lawrence F.
Pvt.
545 W. Jessamine, St. Paul, Minn.
Kawecki, Stanley F.
Pvt.
94 Akron St., Meriden, Conn.
Kedziorski, William R.
Pfc.
3319 Dickens Ave., Chicago, 111.
Kipner, Nathan
Cpl.
348 Jones St., Dayton, Ohio
Knowles, William L.
Pfc.
BucKlin, Kansas
Kocunik, John D.
T, Sgt.
510 Hamilton St., Syracuse, N.Y.
Le Blanc, William M.
Pfc.
345 Western Ave., Lynn, Mass.
Lesser, Rowland H.
Pfc.
901 North St., Freeland, Pa.
Lewis, George N. Jr.
Pfc.
Heflin, La.
Lnxenberg, Gilbert
T/5
517 Vniversity Ave., Rochester, N.Y.
McCarter, John W.
Pfc.
Fountain Inn, S.C.
McCollum, Albert E.
Pfc.
223 K. Elm St., Granville, Ohio
McCormick, Paul J.
Cpl.
72 Mill St., Carbondale, Pa.
McFarland, Kenneth M.
Pfc.
Route 1, Sonora, Calif.
Mackow5ak ; Leo R.
Cpl.
Gaylord, Mich.
Madsen, John S.
Pfc.
23 Pardee PI., New Haven, Conn.
Martin, Henry A.
Ptc.
Route 1, Great Falls, Mont.
Martin, James V.
Sgt.
914 E. 98th St., Kansas City, Mo.
Mathis, Johnnie C.
Pfc.
Ona, Florida
Mazzocchi, Erminio K.
Pfc.
3532 Van Buren St., Chicago, HI.
Mekeal, William M.
Sgt.
120 Charlotte St., Akron, Ohio
Minnis, George J.
Pvt.
2121 Lincoln St., Saginaw, Mich.
Mueck, Joe P.
Pfc.
Route 1, Cameron, Texas
Murphy, Leo K.
Pfc.
1917 Lagonda Ave., Springfield, Ohio
Neville, Thomas Jr.
Sgt.
441 E. Main St., Lebanon, Ohio
Newburger, John J.
Sgt.
510 Oxford Ave., Dayton, Ohio
Novak, Julius L.
Sgt.
R.F.l). 1, Deford, Mich.
Pittman, J. J.
S'Sgt.
Monroeville, Ala.
Powers, Gene 1).
Pfc.
1424 Lakeside Ave., Coeur d’Alene, Col.
Prather, Janies M.
CpI.
1604 Pine, Dallas, Texas
Rainville, Howard F.
Sgt.
Pond Hill Rd., Naugatuck, Conn.
Ratliff, Stanley C.
T Sgt.
Chesterfield, Calif.
Raymond, Ralph K.
1st Sgt.
1925 —14th Ave., Altoona, Pa.
Reid, Robert E.
I’fc.
1120 Elm St., Eureka, Kansas
Reilly, James J.
Cpl.
3725 N. 5th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Rickerd, Edward E.
Sgt.
521 Sylvan St., Emporia, Kansas
Rine, Paul W.
I’fc.
1301 Short Center St., Moundsville, W. Va.
Robison, Edward E.
sgt.
1727 S.E. Ladd, Portland, Oregon
Roth, Charles P. Jr.
Pvt.
54 Loughlin Ave., Coscob, Conn.
Roush, Robert E.
I’fc.
Route 2, Box 141, Yoakum, Texas
Kucki, George
I’fc.
Box 5, Wyarno, Wyoming
Saad, George E.
Pvt.
155 Monroe St., Mobile, Ala.
School, Donald X.
Sgt.
845 Park Ave.,. Omaha, Neb.
Sehutte, Joseph C. Jr.
S/Sgt.
215 N. 17th St, Louisville, Ky.
Soiarretta, Harry E.
Cpl.
11 Roseville Square, Lynn, Mass.
Seovall, Paul D.
Sgt.
181 Kasson St., Johnstown, Ohio
Sensiba, Robert L.
Pfc.
830 Adams St., Iron River, Mich.
Shandor, Michael
Sgt.
Box 94, New Middletown, Ohio
Smith, Julius G.
S/Sgt.
1101 North St., Caldwell, Ohio
Spear, Harry H.
Cpl.
1800 Park St., Terre Haute, Ind.
Stranad, William J.
Pfc.
R.T. 1, New Buffalo, Mich.
Stull, Donald K.
Cpl.
Howard, Ohio
Sudhotf, Eester C.
Sgt.
4944 Cleves-Warsaw Pike, Cincinnati, Ohio
Tetley, Roland E.
Cpl.
Route 1, Sikeston, Mo.
Vallely, Thomas J. Jr.
Sgt.
3706 Jackson Heights, New York, N.Y.
Vaughan, William W.
Sgt.
R.F.D. 3, Marysville, Ohio
Veverka, Lewis
S/Sgt.
3464 E. 73rd St., Cleveland, Ohio
Vogan, George S.
Sgt.
1005 K. St., N.E., Washington, D.C.
Waldron, Neal W.
Cpl.
13909 Baldwin Ave. E., Cleveland, Ohio
Warner, Frederick E.
Cpl.
219 S. Barron St., Eaton, Ohio
Weaver, Arnold M.
Pfc.
Route 1, Sparta, Tenn.
West, Harold E.
S/Sgt.
561 W. 4th St., Dayton, Ohio
West berg, Harry A.
Pfc.
Castana, Iowa
Whalen, Joseph V.
Pfc.
37 N. Marshall St., Shamokin, Pa.
Wilczynski, Harold E.
Cpl.
7340 American, Detroit, Mich.
Witos, Benjamin J.
Cpl.
418 Beade St., Plymouth, Pa.
Wittick, Andres H.
Pfc.
1576 Cnion Ave., North Bend, Oregon
Winget, William A.
S, Sgt.
1430 Reese Ave., Lima, Ohio
/alar, Philip J.
Sgt.
29 Houston St., N.W., Barberton, Ohio
/eidler, Herbert J.
I’fc.
Route 2, St. James, Minn.
Bowen, Grant \V.
Major
Livonia, N.Y.
N.
1st Lt.
(540 Bellaire St., Denver, Colo.
Gronostajski, Edward A.
1st Lt.
0(50 Ohio Ave., Trenton, N.J.
Gutierrez, Joseph S.
Captain
3110 N. Rome Ave., Tampa, Fla.
Keller, Harvey I*.
1st Lt.
4024 S. Johnson St., New Orleans, La.
McMaster, Sydney F.
2nd Lt.
33 E. Main St., Granville, N.Y.
Reynolds, Carl E.
1st Lt.
5007 Troost Ave., Kansas City, Mo.
Rothgesser, Jerome C.
Captain
78(5 Bergen St., Newark, N.J.
Wallace, Luther E.
1st Lt.
Sharon, Miss.
Watson, Richard ('.
1st Lt.
R.F.D. 5, Binghamton, N.Y.
Ackerman, George 11.
Sgt.
2420 Birdsall Ave., Chicago, HI.
Adams, Disk B.
Rfc.
402 W. Broadway, N. Baltimore Wood, Ohio
Adams, Edward G. Jr.
Pvt.
Box 55, Pineblulf, N.C.
Albrecht, Vem G.
CpI.
(533 —5 Ave., S., S. St. Paul, Minn.
Albright, Robert
Pvt.
815 North Ave., Aurora, 111.
Alcorn, Herbert B.
Pvt.
R.D. 2, Greensburg, Pa.
Allen, Barton S.
Pvt.
5(5-10 —137 St., Flushing, N.Y.
Allen, Ben N.
Sgt.
1503 Delurrs St., Mobile, Alabama
Allen, Theodore G. Jr.
Pvt.
281 Lafayette Ave., Passaic, N.J.
Allen, Thomas G.
Pvt.
Clyde, N.C.
Alzheimer, Joseph G.
Pvt.
(5(533 —74 St., Middle Village, N.Y.
Andel, Henry G.
Cpi.
Route 2, Perry, Georgia
Anderson, William G.
Pfc.
122 Bindley St., Bridgeport, Conn.
Andrews, Adelbert 1..
S/Sgt.
Pawnee City, Neb.
Andrews, Charles K.
Cpi.
(512 W. 184th St., New York, N.Y.
Armentrout, Hyde C.
Pvt.
Jiox 80, R.F.D. 2, Ashland, Va.
Arnett, Lynn L.
Pfc.
(55(5 Gretna Green Way, Los Angeles, Calif.
Augello, Alphonse A.
Pvt.
40 Emmett St., Rochester, N.Y.
Ausburn, Arthur F.
Pfc.
R.D. 3, Syracuse, N.Y.
Bacon, Warren R.
Cpi.
240 N. Vine, Wichita, Kansas
Cambridge, Paul R.
Sgt.
Mt. Pleasant, Ohio
Baker, Robert 1*.
S/Sgt.
Lovelock, Nevada
Banks, Marion F.
Pvt.
781 Hart St., Spartanburg, S.C.
Bates, Walter
Sgt.
4143 N. 9 St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Baugh, Clifford L.
Pvt.
Kt. 0, Box 770, Bessemer, Ala.
Heaver, Gilbert B.
Sgt.
Loyal, Wis.
Bausennan, Joseph E.
Pvt.
412 E. Bancroft St., Toledo, Ohio
Beckman, Oscar A.
Pfe.
Olanta, Pa.
Beitz, Albert 0.
Sgt.
2002 Federal St., McKeesport, Pa.
Bell, Billy W.
Sgt.
Wessington, S.I).
Bell, Cornelius Jr.
Pvt.
429 Harrison St., Passaic, N.J.
Bennett, Eric T.
Pfc.
9 Bergen Court, Springfield, Mass.
Benoit, Harold G.
Sgt.
Route 3, St. Cloud, Minn.
Bentley, Raymond D.
Cpl.
P.O. Box 483 Troton Ave., Cortland, N.Y,
Biesiada, Stanley
Pfc.
135 Montcalm Ave., Clifton, N.J.
Biggs, Barnette S.
S/Sgt.
021 E. 50th St., Savannah, Georgia
Bilkowsky, Robert K.
Sgt.
20 S. Olive St., Alhambra, Calif.
Birdsall, Reed F.
Pfc.
Oneonta, N.Y.
Blackman, Zell S.
Pfc.
Royston, Ga.
Blaney, Carl
Pvt.
R.F.l). 6, Box 43, Morgantown, W. Va.
Bonezynski, Sylvester
Pfc.
1536 W. Fisher St., South Bend, Ind.
Borden, Peter A.
Sgt.
713 —44th St., Kenosha, Wis.
Borders, Andy H. Jr.
Pvt.
Route 1, Brownsville, Tenn.
Boulanger, Robert J.
Pfe,
1415 Main St., Berlin, N.H.
Boyd, Morris E.
T/Sgt.
003 —10th St., Brookings, S.I).
Boyll, Loren L.
Sgt.
R.R. 2, Terre Haute, Ind.
Bradford, Lester W.
Cpl.
Route 5, Athens, Ala.
Brant, Curtis B.
Cpl.
94-19 —95 St., Ozone Park, N.V.
Brenner, Wilson W.
Sgt.
Box 193, De Gratf, Ohio
Brewer, Howard
T/Sgt.
1400 —13th St., Meridian, Miss,
Brie), Russell
Pvt.
1010 William St., Trenton, N.J.
44th Depot Repair Squadron
Slit 2)epol Squadron (Continued


Brockhaus, Kurt W.
Pvt.
714 Creighton Ave., Dayton, Ohio
Brown, Wallace C.
Sgt.
Phil Campbell, Ala.
Brown, William K.
Pfe.
701 Russellwood Ave., McKees Rocks, P
<i.
Browning, Berto B.
Sgt.
107 Martha St., Montgomery, Ala.
Bryant, James F.
Sgt.
12:1 Adams Ave., Montgomery, Ala.
Buchner, Everett 1).
S/Sgt.
2220 E. 5th St., Dayton, Ohio
Bumgarner, Jolm K.
Cpl.
l(i West H. Street, Newton, N.C.
Burden, Richard L.
S/Sgt.
Albany, 111.
Bureman, Melvin L.
Pvt.
Route 2, Belleville, Kansas
Bustard, John P.
Pvt.
408 West Roosevelt Blvd., Philadelphia,
Pa.
Burruss, George G.
Pfe.
Dunbarton, Va.
Cabri, Richard
Pvt.
JO Wilson Terrace. Concord, N.Y.
Cadwell, Harvey G.
S/Sgt.
42 Summer St., Kingston, Mass.
Calm, Hessel M.
Cpl.
310 Breard St., Monroe, La.
Callahan, Charles X.
Pvt.
17 Belplain St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Capizzi, Frank
Pvt.
230 llaledon Ave., Prospect Park, N.J.
Carrier, Wilbur A.
Sgt.
817 E. 4th St., Flint, Mich.
Chandonnet, Joseph A.
S/Sgt.
120 Gershom Ave., Lowell, Mass.
Charland, Clement C.
T 5
223 W. Washington St., Rome, N.Y.
Chew, Frederick
Pfe.
509 Bergeron St., Fall River, Mass.
Christiansen, Sigurd H.
S/Sgt.
1512 Palisade Ave., Fort Lee, N.J.
Clark, Warren C.
Pvt.
Lavalle, Wis.
Cochran, James V,
Pvt.
Moore Haven, Fla.
Colby, Eugene E.
T/Sgt.
Leadville, Colo.
Cooper, Richard T.
Pvt.
2010 E. 28 St., Chattanooga, Tenn.
Cornetto, Angelo C.
Pfe.
15 May St., Paterson, N.J.
Corogenes, Costa C.
Sgt.
103 Short St., Bennington, Vt.
Corrao, Vincent
Pfe.
51 Bay 41st St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Cosme, Frank
Pfe.
301-1 Belle St., Bakersfield, Calif.
Coty, Robert J.
Pvt.
1200 Cranston St., Cranston. R.I.
Cowdery, Irving M. Jr.
Cpl.
5104 Burt St., Omaha, Neb.
Craeken, Louis W.
Sgt.
4012 Roosevelt Blvd., Philadelphia, Pa.
Creoli, Stanley F.
Pvt.
2531 Cedar St., Baton Rouge, La.
Crimmins, William M.
Sgt.
Cuba City, Wis.
Cross, Elmer E.
Cpl.
R.R. 2, Birrton, Kansas
D’Amour, Roderick 1.
Pvt.
90 Mansfield Ave., Willimantie, Conn.
Daniel, Douglas S.
S Sgt.
1523 N. 34 Ave., Birmingham, Ala.
Daniels, Wilbert E.
Cpl.
34525 Michigan St., Wayne, Mich.
Derepkowski, Antone E.
C]'l.
025 S. Roosevelt St., Green Bay, Wis.
Dobson, Leary L.
Pvt.
305 S. Springfield Ave., Rockford, III.
Donaldson, Trulan E.
Pvt.
R.F.D. 2. Box 321, Grants Pass, Oregon
Dotts, Bruce E.
Sgt.
R.D. 3, Sheloeta, Pa.
Draus, Aloysius J.
Pfe.
12134 Dequindre St., Hamtramek, Mich.
Drye, Henry C.
Pfe.
Barboursville, W. Va.
Dunlap, Norman R.
Cpl.
0500 Falcon St., Long Beach, Calif.
Duarte, Joseph M. Jr.
S/Sgt.
551 Mt. Hope Ave,, Fall River, Mass.
Dyess, Robert E.
Sgt.
Aldoek Road, Whistler, Ala.
Dzioba, William
Sgt.
100 Battle Creek St., Battle Creek, Mich.
Eanni, Michael A.
Cpl.
272 Washington St., Newburgh, N.Y.
Edwards, William H.
Pfe.
341 Sharp St., Lake Wales, Fla.
Elias, Theodore N.
Sgt.
732 S. Eastman St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Elkins, Wysor C. Jr.
S/Sgt.
R.T. 2, Pulaski, Va.
Ellinger, Robert L.
Cpl.
715 Morris St., Winfield, Kansas
Ell.son, Dow N.
Sgt.
5314-i Smart St., Kansas City, Mo.
Evans, Carl E.
Cpl.
Dorothy, W. Va.
Fegley, Roger C.
Pvt.
R.I). 3, Rutztown, Pa.
Finnic, Alden C.
M Sgt.
41 Tilden Road, Seituate, Mass.
Fisher, Armand T.
Sgt.
Route 1. Rantoul, Kansas
Forster, Stephen J.
Pfe.
Haven, Kansas
Fredotte, Charles E.
Pvt.
97 Sand St., Gardner, Mass.
Freund, Clyde S.
S/Sgt.
1122 N. 30th St., Billings, Montana
Frye, Larkin L.
M Sgt.
009 Ferguson St., Paris, Ky.
Garbett, Mason L.
Cpl.
1104 Boyd St., Des Moines, Iowa
Gardon, Leo J.
Cpl.
424 Shanley St., Buffalo, N.Y.
George, Robert J.
Pfe.
143 —4th Ave., Wisconsin Rapids, Wis.
Gerard, Frederick C.
Cpl.
120 Park Ave,, Portland, Me.
Gereau, Walter P. Jr.
Pvt.
3124 Lucas A Hunt Rd., St. Louis County,
Mo.
Gerlach, Ernest C.
Pvt.
R. R. 2, Kenton, Ohio
Gilbert, Alan A.
Pvt.
57 N. Anne St., Mobile, Ala.
(•laser, Marvin H.
Pfe.
45 Leete St., Springfield, Mass.
Glenn, Grover E.
M/Sgt.
102 Elm St., Clarksdale, Miss.
Goehring. Palmer J.
T/Sgt.
815 Louisiana St., Amarillo, Texas
Golson, Edward M. Jr.
Sgt.
915 Howard St., San Antonio, Texas
Goodman, Robert J.
Pfe.
1954 S. 5th St., Milwaukee, Wis.
Gurney, Edward
Sgt.
433 E. 113 St., Chicago, HI.
Goroncy, William M.
S/Sgt.
Box 281, Pricedale, Pa.
Gover, Glen L.
T Sgt.
1003 Escobar St., Martinez, Calif.
Grainer, Francis W.
Pfe.
4100 E. 120 St., Cleveland, Ohio
Green, Clyde A.
Sgt.
Three Rivers, N.M.
Griesshaber, Heinz E.
Cpl.
282 E. 205th St., Bronx, N.Y.
Grude, Norman L.
T/Sgt.
2850 N. England Ave., Chicago, HI.
Guttman, Richard J.
Cpl.
4901 W. 150th St., Cleveland, Ohio
Haacke, Jack E.
Pfe.
2803 North Main St., Dayton, Ohio
1
Hagenhueh, Allen O.
i’ll.
432 N. Second St., Leighton, Pa.
Haile, G. K.
Cpl.
Kingsland, Texas
Haines, Ralph K.
T/Sgt.
1201 Troy St., Dayton, Ohio
Halley, Warren H.
Cpl.
219 Pear St., Monroe, La.
Halzel, Jack
Pfe.
31 Deering Rd., Dorchester, Mass,
Hardenbrook, James A.
Pfc.
3005 Grant Ave., Fresno, Calif.
Harris, Raymond F.
Pfe.
Rochester, N.H.
Heide, Ralph M.
Cpl.
17 N. 32nd St.. Camden, N.J.
Henrioulle, Emil L.
Pfe.
Box 505, Lake Wales, Fla.
Henry, Edward B.
Pvt.
R.R. 3, Versailles. Ohio
Henry, George M.
T, Sgt.
15400 Morrison St., Van Nuys, Calif.
Helm, Herbert E.
Sgt.
R.F.D. 3, Hath, N.Y.
Hiles, Warden R.
Cpl.
R.R. 4, Box 210, Logan, Ohio
Holm, Roger A.
Sgt.
Readlyn, Iowa
Howe, Murl K.
Pfc,
3207 W. 17 St., Cleveland, Ohio
Iloxworth, Walter J.
Cpl.
2255 Kimmel Ave., Youngstown, Ohio
Hubbard, Thomas
Pvt.
Barboursville, Ky.
Hudson, Elwyn T.
Sgt.
Stroud, Ala.
Huntoon, Donald J.
Pvt.
17 Doran St., Rochester, N.Y.
Hurley, John J,.
S/Sgt.
402 Church St., Brownsville, Tenn.
Ingenthron, Leonard ('.
Sgt.
3321 W. Jackson Blvd., Chicago, HI.
Ingram, George L.
Sgt.
Box 74, Watts, Okla.
Jaeks, James G.
s Sgt.
Phoenix, Ariz.
Jacobson, Richard W.
1st Sgt.
Route 3, New York Mills, Minn. *
Jagger, John F.
s, Sgt.
3300 Marshall St., N.E., Minneapolis, Minn.
Jameson, Ralph A.
Pvt.
31 Park St., Presijues Isle, M»*.
Jensen, Charles A.
S Sgt.
270 W.D. St., Coalinga, Calif.
Johns, Jessie 0.
Cpl.
Witts Spring, Ark.
Johnson, Charles M.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 1, Jerome, Idaho
Johnson, Clilford H.
S/Sgt.
Route 1, Pound, Wis.
Johnson, Palmer
Pvt.
7339 Mary Ave., N.W., Seattle, Wash.
Johnson, Williard A.
T Sgt.
Fairfield, Iowa
Johnston, Robert W.
S/Sgt.
West St., Marlboro, N.Y.
Johnston, Rollo A.
Pvt.
004 Jamison St., Parkersburg, W. Va.
Joiner, Russell W.
Pvt.
Box 341, Athens. Pa.
Jones, Charles E.
Pfc.
30 Leslie St., N.E., Atlanta, Ga.
Jones, Donald
Pfc.
S21 Sheldon St., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Jones, Francis I).
Pfc.
5 Burdick St., Elmira, N.Y.
Jones, Kenneth M.
Sgt.
217 N. Broad, San Luis Obispo, Calif.
Joseph, George J.
CnI.
2515 Market St., Wheeling, W. Va.
Kalrose, Leroy H.
Sgt.
300 Ball Park Blvd., Grand Rapids, Mieh.
Kanan, Floyd J.
M Sgt.
R.F.D. 2, Cameron, Mo.
Karl, Eugene F.
S, Sgt.
117 K. Southern Ave., Springfield, Ohio
Kelley, Vernon L.
Sgt.
Box 012, Silver City, N.M.
Kennedy, Frank L.
Cpl.
297 Brent St., Ventura, Calif.
Kerns, Robert J. Jr.
Cpl.
R.R. 3, New Carlisle, Ohio
Kieklighter, William E.
Sgt.
Bona Bella, Savannah, Ga.
Kiechle, Arthur L.
s Sgt.
608 Saratoga St., Utica, N.Y.
King, Doyal A.
Pfc.
2592 Ogden Ave., Memphis. Tenn.
King, John P.
Pvt.
Sharon, Conn.
Kirkendall, Howard H.
Sgt.
R.R. 1, Continental, Ohio
Klundt, Jacob A.
T, Sgt.
Rt. 2, Grafton, Neb.
Kneil, Lawrence H.
S/Sgt.
284 Brown St., Akron, Ohio
Kramer, Walter J.
Sgt.
200 Park Ave., Cardington, Ohio
Kukla, William
Pvt.
4909 McClellan Ave.. Detroit, Mieh.
Kulp, Bernard P.
Pfc.
1510 Roanoke St., Roanoke, Va.
Lachiondo, Joseph
Pfc.
Rt. 2, Box 55, Ho(|Uiam, Wash.
Lander, Walter C.
Pfc.
Rt. 2, West, Texas
Langford, Lloyd
Pfc.
Dekalb, Texas
Laroche, Adelard J.
Pfc.
333 School St., Berlin, N.H.
Leatherman, James H.
Cpl.
1031 Eastside Blvd., Muskogee, Okla.
Leblanc, Lloyd R.
Sgt.
Box 197, Murice, La.
Lee, Raymond J.
Sgt.
77 S. Colony St., Wallingford, Conn.
Levy, Rubin
Pvt.
Box 120, Colchester, Conn.
Lewis, Tom B.
T Sgt.
Saratoga, Texas
Long, Harold T.
T Sgt.
R.F.D. 3, Nathalie, Va.
McClure, Dewey A.
Sgt.
R.R. 5, Springfield, Ohio
McDaniel, David F.
Pvt.
Fayetteville, Tenn.
McDermott, Joseph F.
Pvt.
100-09—100 Ave., Howard Beach, N.Y.
McDermott, Russell J.
Pvt.
29 Mt. Prospect Ave., Belleville, N.J.
McIntosh, George A.
Pfc.
Rt. 1, Stanley, N.C.
McIntosh, William
Pfc.
Route 2, Claremore, Okla.
McKarney, William
Pfc.
Adams St. Ext., Rochester, Pa.
McNamara, Stearns C.
Sgt.
Rt. 3, Howell, Mich.
McNulty, Oscar R.
Sgt.
30 E. Channel St., Newmark, Ohio
McReynolds, Avris L.
Sgt.
Ft. Sumner, N.M.
Marino, Michael L.
Pvt.
10 Wentworth Ave., South Beach, N.Y.
Manch, George R. Jr.
Sgt.
303 Media Pkwy,, Chester, Pa.
Manning, Elmer A.
Cpl.
113 S. Court St., Fairfield, Iowa
Maroni, Stephen I*. Jr.
Pfc.
37-32 —58th St., Woodside, N.Y.
Martin, Gerald D.
Sgt.
Box 181, Mill Creek, Okla.
Martin, John
Sgt.
0530 Maryland Ave., S., Chicago, HI.
Mead, Charles R. Jr.
Pvt.
10 Clarendon St., Johnson City, N.Y.
44! 1 2)epol ir uadron Cdonllnued


Meadors, Robert G.
Sgt.
213 Russel St., Nashville, Tenn.
Mesite, Francis A.
I’vt.
1504 Concord St., Framingham, Mass.
Miller, Ralph I>.
Sgt.
747 W. Walnut St., Springfield, Mo.
Mills, William H.
Sgt.
1318 Chamberlain Ave., Mobile, Ala.
Mitchell, George M.
I'fc.
225 N. Mulberry St., Muneie, Ind.
Morozin, Vincent T.
I’vt.
(il 15 Walker St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Moseley, Robert H.
T Sgt.
1621 N.W. 9 St., Miami, Fla.
Moulds, Junius W.
Sgt.
160 Lonisellc St., Mobile, Ala.
Murdoch, James
CpI.
645 Sheridan Drive, Tonawanda, N.Y.
Murphy, Garson J.
S Sgt.
3100 Alby St., Alton, III.
Musser, Samuel C.
T/5
Route 1, West Union, Ohio
Neal, Guy
I’fc.
424 West Park, Oklahoma City, Okla.
Neidhard, Charles J.
Cpl.
1163 Coronada, Cincinnati, Ohio
Neisen, Maynard L.
T/Sgt.
R.F.D. 1, Audubon, Iowa
Nelson, Hilding E.
I’fc.
Rt. 4, Anoka, Minn.
Nemeth, Peter J.
Sgt.
South Bend, Ind.
Newsome, Harold H.
Sgt.
338 W. 11 St., Junction City, Kansas
Niedermair, Alphons A.
CpI.
347 S. Main St., Mayville, Wig.
Nitzman, Howard C.
I’vt.
11 Wentworth St., Rochester, N.Y.
Niwa, Peter S.
I’fc.
6957 Bulwer St., Detroit, Mich.
Odum, John W.
I’fc.
Rt. 2, Manslield, La.
Oliver, Norman (‘.
CpI.
447 Dudley Drive, Shreveport, La.
Olterzewski, Stanley C.
I’vt.
60 King St., Clark Township, N.J.
Orlando, Albert J.
I’fc.
1500 Sherrick Kd., S.E., Canton, Ohio
Orr, Hilly K.
Sgt.
8254 Flora Ave., Kansas City, Mo.
Orwell, Leroy Jr.
Sgt.
2911 Alamogordo St., El Paso, Texas
Owen, James E.
I’vt.
Saronville, Neb.
Owens, John J.
S/Sgt.
Rt. 5, Box 515, Kirkwood, Mo.
Owers, Fred R.
Sgt.
108 N. Parkerson St., Rayne, La.
Padgett, Eunice K.
Cpl.
Rt. 1, Mt. Vernon, Texas
Palmerton, William
CpI.
R.D. 2, Middle Road, Ogdensburg. N.Y.
Payne, Amos E.
Cpl.
19 W. 23 St., Anniston, Ala.
Payne, Ralph W.
M/Sgt.
Hawkins, Texas
Peca, Stanley L.
Sgt.
Rt. 1, Hinsdale, III.
Peterson, Ephraim P.
Pfe.
Rt. 1, Box 39, Arlington, Wash.
Phillips, Roy A.
Sgt.
Rt. 2, Cozad, Neb.
Pinnell, Clifford K.
S/Sgt.
616 Edison, Independence, Kansas
Pluta, Henry
Cpl.
6650 Mercier St., Detroit, Mich.
Potoky, John E.
Pfc.
441 Clinton Ave., Niles, Ohio
Putman, Charles C.
Pvt.
196 W. Pulteney St., Corning, N.Y.
Quan, Albert L.
Pfc.
933 E. VanBuren St., Phoenix, Ariz.
Ransom, Joseph E.
Sgt.
Lewiston, Utah
Reindollar, Francis 1.
Sgt.
730 W. King St., York, Pa.
Reubens, Andrew J.
Sgt.
8901 Clarion, Detroit, Mich.
Rich, David H.
-M Sgt.
Remmington, Va.
Riley, Paul E.
Pfc.
Chesapeake, Ohio
Ritondo, John A.
Pvt.
188 Beach 83rd St., Rockaway Beach, N.Y.
Roarke, John A.
S/Sgt.
116 Wayzata Ave., St. Paul, Minn.
Roberts, Russell D.
S/Sgt.
R.R. 1, Montpelier, Ind.
Romero, Joe M.
Cpl.
7834 Evans St., Casa Blanca, Calit.
Rushton, Alden E.
Cpl.
Rt. 2, Caldwell, Idaho
Sakelarios, Spiros J.
Pfc.
530 Cookman Ave., Ashbury, N.J.
Salas, Samuel R.
Cpl.
Athens, Texas
Santfts, Joseph A.
Cpl.
106 Fisher St., Attleboro, Miss.
Scanlon, Robert G.
S/Sgt.
St. Martin, Ohio
Schaefer, Herman
T/Sgt.
6352 S. Keeler St., Chicago, 111.
Schall, Gordon Jr.
Pfc.
714 Reynolds St., Muskegon Hts,, Mich.
Scheid, Clarence J.
Cpl.
36 Wyoming St., Dayton, Ohio
Schick, Reinhold W.
Sgt.
Route 3, Norwalk, Ohio
Schneider, George T.
Pvt.
551 Snake Hollow Rd., McKeesport, Pa.
Schroeber, Ernest E.
Sgt,
Shepard, Montana
Schwartz, Bernard
Sgt.
2687 Sturtevant St., Detroit, Mich.
Senyard, Thomas M.
Pvt.
4215 Leeland Ave., Houston, Texas
Sharp, Joseph F.
Pvt.
739 South Maine Ave., Baldwin Park, Calif.
Sherman, Jay B.
Sgt.
Box 447, Aurora, 111.
Shivener, Ralph K.
Sgt.
R.F.l). 2, West Union, Ohio
Shoemaker, Herbert W.
Cpl.
Bourneville, Ohio
Shwetz, John
Sgt.
719 University Court, Cleveland, Ohio
Simon, Leslie J.
Sgt.
Box 3, Russia, Ohio
Slate, Joseph F.
I'fc.
Rutland, Ohio
Slinglnlf, Robert L.
S/Sgt.
R.F.l). 1, Baden, Pa.
Sloneker, Ray E.
Cpl.
R.R. 4, Hamilton, Ohio
Sodders, Robert K.
Cpl.
Route 1, Lewisburg, Ohio
Soldano, Jacob J.
Pvt.
304 Courtland St., Trenton, N.J.
Sollom, Adolph (}.
Ptc.
Route 2, Bagley, Minn.
Starkey, Kuthford E.
Sgt.
Rt. 1, Folsom, W. Va.
Steger, Rennis ('.
Sgt.
Route 4, Carthage, Texas
Stelmaoh, Theodore A.
Sgt.
3678 Tyler St., Gary, Ind.
Stigge, Leo U.
S/Sgt.
R.F.l). 3, Washington, Kansas
Stiles, 1*3111 R.
Pfo.
Jamaica, Iowa
Szalla, Anton J.
Cpl.
42 W. Genesee St., Lockport, N.Y.
Szeibert, Joseph J
T/Sgt.
6925 Crandon Ave., Chicago, 111.
Talbert, Max B.
Sgt.
1403 Millbrook Ave., Fresno, Calif.
Tang, Selmer 0.
Pfc.
Averill, Minn.
Taylor, Carl S. Jr.
S/Sgt.
1124 —21st Ave., Altoona, Pa.
Thoeming, Wayne R.
Pfc.
Stockton, Iowa
Thomas, Lloyd 1.
Cpl.
R.F.l). 1, Sommerset, Ky.
Thompson, Richard 1).
Cpl.
1440 W. Lafayette Ave., Jacksonville, 111,
Thrasher, Brooke N.
Pfc.
676 Tennessee St., Gary, Ind.
Thryselhis, Elmer L.
Sgt.
593 —2nd Ave., Aurora, 111.
Tillman, Ulysses S. Jr.
Pfc.
1327 N.W. 28 St., Miami, Fla.
Timothy, Louis E.
S/Sgt.
Cleveland, Utah
Tisdale, Wyatt W.
Pvt.
Hominy, Okla.
Tracy, Daniel J.
S/Sgt.
1051 Loyola Ave., Chicago, 111.
Trautner, Edward M.
Ptc.
Beaulieu, Minn.
Travis, Charles 1*.
Sgt.
612 Pritz Ave., Dayton, Ohio
Tremblay, Albert U.
Pvt.
415 E. Franklin St., Troy, Ohio
Troxell, George E.
S/Sgt.
Utahville, Pa.
Trumbull, Clarence L.
Cpl.
R.F.l). 4, St. Johns, Mich.
Upchurch, George M.
Cpl.
828 Burch Ave., Durham, N.C.
Vahle, John L.
Cpl,
Star Route, Collins, Mo.
Valdez, Anthony A.
Cpl.
1305 Hunt Ave., Overland, Mo.
Vasey, Byard B.
Sgt,
6434 South Normal Blvd., Chicago, HI,
Viola, Leo C.
Pvt.
121 Scranton St., Rochester, N.Y.
Volovski, John V.
Pfc.
116 South St., Hartford, Conn.
Wagner, Lloyd E.
Pvt.
Monroeville, Ind.
Walkup, Lloyd l>.
Sgt.
Sedan, N.M.
Ward, Edward L.
Sgt.
360 Barron St., Kenton, Ohio
Wehe, James T.
Sgt.
1420 East Blake Ave., Columbus, Ohio
Wellsand, Paul S.
Sgt.
R.F.l). 2, Valparaiso, Ind.
Welsh, Edward W.
T/Sgt.
207 W. 4 St., Connersville, Ind.
Worries, Vernon L.
Cpl.
R.F.D., Tescott, Kansas
Westlake, James R.
Pfc.
16850 Rockdale Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Wetelainen, Arthur
Cpl.
308 Fulton St., Mohawk, Mich.
Whary, Pern L.
Pvt.
1428 W. Spruce St., Shamokin, Pa.
Wilkie, John
Sgt.
1641 Kemble St., Utica, N.Y.
Williams, Jack L.
Sgt.
Kenton, Okla.
Williams, William L.
Cpl.
1502 Westwood Ave., S.W., Atlanta, Ga.
Wilson, John M.
Pvt.
Waverly, Mo.
Winters, Herman C.
T/Sgt.
Brownsville, Texas
Witten, Edward B.
Pfc.
Oxnard, Calif.
Wittmer, Arnold C.
Pfc.
Summerfleld, HI.
Wolsehlag, Stephen S.
S/Sgt.
1017 Greenlawn Ave., Peoria, HI.
Woodruff, Thomas L.
Pvt.
R.F.l). 1, Manistique, Mich.
Wride, Jesse H.
Sgt.
Aberdeen, Idaho
Wright, Preston A.
Pvt.
Lordsburg. N.M.
Wszelaki, Joseph J.
Pfc.
9005 Easton Ave., Cleveland, Ohio
Wyatt, Lloyd A.
Cpl.
Rt. 3, Elk River, Minn.
Verkins, Robert W.
S/Sgt.
R.D. 2, Shoryssburg, Pa.
/appia, Vincent P.
T/Sgt.
1653 —49 St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
441 k 2)epol Repair (don! in tied


lliff, William A.
T/Sgt.
908 N. St., Sacramento, Calif.
Jackson, Harvey C.
Cpl,
R.T. 7, Gainesville, Ga.
Jayne, Henry ('. Jr.
T/Sgt.
R.T. 2, Gate City, Va.
Jones, J.J).
Sgt.
Box 187, Winnsboro, Texas
Kawa, Felix P.
T 4
4718 S. Kcdvale Ave., Chicago, III.
Keating, Gerald 0.
1M.
St., Oakland, Calif.
Keeling,Thomas M.
Sgt.
Van Alstyne, Texas
Kilpatrick, (‘Hester 1).
S/Sgt.
225 Wilson St., Statesville, N.C.
Kovacs, John
(pi.
728 Cass St., Trenton, N.J.
Kowalchuk, Walter
Pvt.
9420 Woodlawn St., Detroit, Mich.
Lake, John F.
Pvt.
Freeman, S.l).
Laskoskie, Alfred 1).
Pfc.
R.T. 2, Hempstead, Texas
Leighton, William M.
T/Sgt.
Dixtleld, Me.
Leon, Frank
M/Sgt.
40 S. Gratiot Ave., Mt. Clemens, Mich.
Libin, Herbert B.
T/Sgt.
101 Main St., Lewistown, Mont.
Lillie, Hnghie L.
Sgt.
R.T. 1, Box 119, Drumright, Okla.
Litsky, Daniel J.
Pvt.
390 Christopher St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Logan, Kenneth M.
Pvt.
Williston, N.D.
Longo, Frank P.
Pvt.
959 Jackson Ave., New York, N.Y.
Lopez, George A.
Sgt.
244 W. 28 St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Lowthcr, Paul D.
Pfc. :
2720 North Ave., Elwood, Ind.
Lundy, John G.
dll.
R.T. 1, Box 52, Imperial, Calif,
McC'arver, Richard W.
Sgt.
R.T. 1, Ecru, Miss.
McCorkle, John A, Jr.
S/Sgt.
715 —1st Ave., Laurel, Miss.
Me limes, John L.
-M/Sgt.
211 N. Jefferson St., Albany, Ga.
MeKelvey, Richard B.
CpI.
34 Portsmouth St., Jackson, Ohio
McKnight, John R.
Sgt.
023 Riverside Drive, Binghamton, N.Y.
McMillan, Daniel
Pvt.
19 Grant Ave., Kearny, N.J.
McMillan, James H.
Sgt.
Stockton, Ala.
MacLeod, James D.
Pfc.
151 Coleridge Ave., Palo Alto, Calif.
Maker, Edward F.
Pfe.
731 Franklin St., Ft. Myers, Fla.
Mallon, Stewart E.
Pvt.
322 Myrtle St., Redwood City, Calif.
Mangum, Melvin W.
Pfc.
000 Dowd Rd., Charlotte, N.C.
Martinelli, Camillo L.
Sgt.
R.R. 1, New Philadelphia, Ohio
Mendonca, Arnold T.
Cpl.
3414 Alum Rock Ave., San Jose, Calif.
Messer, Myron W.
S/Sgt.
R.T. 2, Wellington, Texas
Minary, Irvin E.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 1, Culbertson, Neb.
Mitchell, Douglas
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Detroit, Texas
Mitchell, Oscar J.
Sgt.
801—52 Ave., Oakland, Calif.
Moen, Donald L.
Cpl.
Badger, Minn.
Moore, Ralph 0.
Pfc.
Wileyvillc, W. Va.
Morehouse, Daniel
Pvt.
702 E. 0 St., Ellensburg, Wash.
Morgan, William M.
Sgt.
MooreHrld, Ark.
Mowery, Jack H.
Pvt.
1111 W. Independence St., Shamokin, Pa.
Myers, Leslie J.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Marshfield, Ore.
Myers, -Merle H.
S/Sgt.
Wakefield, Kansas
Neal, Robert L.
M/Sgt.
221 —3 Ave., Meridian, Miss.
Nelms, Richard E.
S/Sgt.
000 Locust St., Sterling, HI.
Nemer, Albert G.
S/Sgt.
318 W. Grace St., Richmond, Va.
Nevonen, Edwin A.
Pfc.
New York Mills, Minn.
Norton, Jack P.
Cpl.
1023 E. Houston St., San Antonio, Texas
Nunes, Lawrence
Sgt.
R.T. 2, Box 887, San Jose, Calif.
Osgood, Emory M.
Sgt.
7 Ridgley Terrace, Jamestown, N.Y.,
Osborne, Raymond L. Jr.
Sgt.
1000 Bay St., San Francisco, Calif.
Oswald, Robert L.
T/Sgt.
323 Ludington St., Menominee, Mich,
Overton, Olin R.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Box 123, Memphis, Tenn.
Owens Harry C.
Pfc.
R.T. 2, Parkersburg, W. Va.
Padilla, Jesse A.
Sgt.
421 Martin St., San Antonio, Texas
Parrish, Dewey B.
Pvt.
Box 04, Wagram, N.C.
Pasdeck, Rudolph F.
S/Sgt.
Nokonis, 111.
Patrick, Michael J.
S/Sgt.
32 Sherburne St., Sanford, Me.
Pavlick, Charles J.
Sgt.
141 Madison St., Campbell, Ohio
Pclka, Theodore J.
Pfc.
1511 Keystone Ave., Chicago, 111.
Pelko, Frank H. Jr.
Sgt.
311 E. Walnut St., Lodi, Calif.
Pence, Richard 1).
Cpl.
115 E. Jefferson St., Columbia City, Ind.
Peppier, Harry M.
Sgt.
Reed City, Mich.
Perry, Elvis C.
Cpl.
* R.T. 1, Meramec, Okla.
Pike, Walter L.
S/Sgt.
Algoma, W. Va.
Pillow, Handley E.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 1, Westerville, Ohio
Pittenger, Arden
Cpl.
R.T. 3, Wellston, Ohio
Pitts, K.C.
Cpl.
R.T, 1, Waynesboro, Miss.
Plank, Emmitt B.
S/Sgt.
1321 N. Wabash St., Springfield, Mo.
Pomerleau, Armand A.
S/Sgt.
86 Horne St., Dover, N.H.
Posey, Concra J.
Cpl.
R.T. 4, Philadelphia, Miss.
Powell, John C.
Pvt.
Vandercook Lake, Mich.
Pribble, Howard T.
Sgt.
McKinley Rt., Coquille, Ore.
Prosise, Jasper S.
Pfc.
Briccville, Tenn.
Pruss, August L.
T/Sgt.
1124 N. Broadway St., Joliet, 111.
Radclitf, Arnold J.
Pfc.
R.F.D., Linn, W. Va. .
Ramirez, Gaston H.
Cpl.
1011 Morley Ave., Nogales, Ariz.
Rangel, Jose P.
Pvt.
839 W. Commercial St., Pomona, Calif.
Ray, Samuel T.
Cpl.
105 Den Bleyker Ave., Rome; Ga.
Reed, Harold R.
Sgt.
Stouchsburg, Pa.
Grill, otto I).
2nd Lt.
228 West Lake St., Marceline, Mo.
Goldstein, Gilbert I*.
1st Lt.
1000 Ferry St., Denver, Colo,
Hodges, Herbert
W/0
804 Poplar Ave., Hampton, Va.
Knauf, Albert S.
Captain
489 S. Wildwood Ave., Kankakee, 111.
Rego, Dennis S.
Captain
902 Locust St., Fall River, Mass.
Seltzer, Joseph
Captain
49 Irving St., Newton Center, Mass.
Spears, diaries A. Jr.
Major
108 Westover Dr., Knoxville, Tenn.
Abbott, James K.
CpI.
2409 Grand Ave., Middletown, Ohio
Ahearn, John I).
Sttt.
87 Mason St,, Salem, Mass.
Ainslee, Wilbur R.
T/Sgt.
121 W. 6 St., Mitchell, S.D.
Amundsen, Albert G.
rtc.
Cambridge, Wis.
Andrews, William W.
Sgt.
057 N. Hillside, Wichita, Kansas
Barnett, Robert E.
1st Sgt.
2014 Wood Dale Terr., Charlotte, N.C.
Bartlett, Harold L.
S/Sgt.
Lafayette, Ga.
Batts, Benjamin B.
Sgt.
2114—14 Ave., N., Nashville, Tenn.
Beck, Lyle M.
Sgt.
581 N. Walnut St., Lansing, Mich.
Beck, William W.
Sgt.
Shelbyville, Texas
Benic, Edward
S/Sgt.
R.F.D. 5, Clare, Mich.
Bennett, Robert H.
Sgt.
589 Jeralemon St., Belleville, N.J.
Berkowitz, Gerard J.
CpI.
870 Bryant Ave., Bronx, N.Y.
Bir, John F.
T/Mgt.
R.R. 8, Huntington, Ind.
Bittner, Norbert S.
Pfc.
7921 Hamilton Ave., Mt. Healthy, Ohio
Blumert, Gerald
Sgt.
1482 W. 5 St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Boone, Myron W.
S/Sgt.
481 Fairmont St., Oakland, Calif.
Boose, Melvin C.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 2, Quarryville, Fa.
Borba, William A.
S/Sgt.
R.T. 2, Box 1189, Turlock, Calif.
Borden, Charles C.
S/Sgt.
Box 08, Shoshoen, Idaho
Bowen. Lee H.
Sgt.
4128 Brookside Ave., Minneapolis, Minn.
Brinkley, Clifton S.
Sgt.
1527—12-i St., Hickory, N.C.
Brumit, Samuel A.
Pfc.
211 Holston Ave., Elizabethtown, Tenn.
Carlson, Orville E.
S/Sgt.
1990 Marshall Ave., St. Paul, Minn.
Cams, Jim W.
Cpl.
828 Struthers Ave., Grand Junction, Colo.
Garrick, Laban C.
Sgt.
Westville, Okla.
Carson, William L.
S/Sgt.
R.T. 8, La Junta, Colo.
Cave, John B.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Princeton, Texas
Censier, Francis A.
T/Sgt.
8088 St. Aubin St., Hamtramck, Mich.
Chaddick, Coy C.
S/Sgt.
Randolph, Ohio
Cole, Ellis E.
T/Sgt.
Satsuma, Ala.
Cook, Edward A.
M/Sgt.
Bloomfield, N.J.
Corcoran, Ollie A.
S/Sgt.
1420 Seymour Ave., Nashville, Tenn.
Courington, Barney C.
Sgt.
R.T. 2, Parrish, Ala.
Covarrubias, Walter M.
M/Sgt.
18018 Brohl St., Roseville, Mich.
Creaig, James W
Sgt.
P.O. Box 295, Parrott, W. Va.
Crotty, John M.
Pfc.
1800 S. 8 St., Norfolk, Neb.
Culmer, Lowell D.
Cpl.
Woolstock, Iowa
Daundivier, Paul F.
Pfc.
1835 Carmel Ave., Stockton, Calif.
Dean, John D.
Pvt.
1704 Kemp Blvd., Wichita Falls, Texas
Deibel, Frank L.
S/Sgt.
Norlina, N.C.
Dewalt, Robert F.
Cpl.
2349 —8 St., Wyandotte, Mich.
Diss, Ralph E.
Cpl.
2228 Eoff St., Wheeling, W. Va.
Driscoll, Timothy A. Jr.
Pvt.
5949 Magazine St., New Orleans, La.
Duchai, Andrew R.
Sgt.
200 Sprin St., E. Pittsburgh, Pa.
Eaker, Robert L.
T/Sgt.
Tallulah, La.
Edie, Max R.
Cpl.
412 Schwindt Ct., Dover, Ohio
Edwards, Jim 1*.
S/Sgt.
Sturgis, Miss.
Evans, John C.
Pvt.
2508 N. Franklin St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Evans, Stanley S.
S/Sgt.
414 N. Juniata St., Hollidaysburg, Pa.
Ferguson, Kenneth
S/Sgt.
R.T. 2, Box 511, Corpus Christi, Texas
File, Charles H.
Pvt.
Mt. Victory, Ohio
Francetic, James L.
Pfc.
R.T. 1, Merrill, Mich.
Frank, George R.
Sgt.
887 —6 St., Oshkosh, Wis.
Freudenheim, Wolf V.
Pfc.
0287 Christian St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Gallagher, James J. Jr.
Pfc.
Junedale, Pa.
Gault, Jack D.
S/Sgt.
405 E. 00 St., Shreveport, La.
Gibson, Alexander
Sgt.
20 N. Fredericksburg Ave., Margate City, N.J
Gillespie, Sidney L.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 1, Lewisville, Ind.
Glaser, Bernard C.
Sgt.
809 Watson St., Buffalo, N.Y.
Gould, Donald E.
S/Sgt.
East Livermore, Me.
Gregg. Mack R.
Pfc.
Oil—'5 St., Newport, Tenn.
Gross, Abraham
Pvt.
2505 S. 3 St.., Philadelphia, Pa.
Guillaume, Clarence E.
Pvt.
188 —8 Ave., Cohoes, N.Y.
Guty, Michael
Pfc.
Canterbury, Conn.
Halliday, Robert L.
s/sgt.
128 Euclid Ave., Jamestown, N.Y.
Hanson, Walter E.
Cpl.
8040 Blasdell Ave., S., Minneapolis, Minn
Hardon, Russel V.
Cpl.
R.T. 8, Bonneville, Miss.
Hemphill, Kenneth C.
Cpl.
88 Elizabeth St., Newcastle, Aust.
Hendon, Thomas S.
T/Sgt.
410 West 2 St., Leland, Miss.
Hilton, John D.
Sgt.
Box 185, Nescopek, Pa.
Hoptman, Irving
Pvt.
25 Hester St., New York, N.Y.
Hollis, Joel H.
Sgt.
902 Elm St., La Grange, Ga.
Hunley, Harvey B.
Cpl.
Coal Fork, W. Va.
Hunt, George A.
Sgt.
R.T. 8, Box 408, Stockton, Calif.
455th Service Squadron


Reed, Truman E.
SRt.
1780 Mission Rlvd., Riverside, Calif.
Reed, Walter I*’.
SRt.
Dayton, Tenn.
Renta, Sam
sat.
900 N. 17 St., Birmingham, Ala.
Ressler, Robert J.
SRt.
1088 Elmwood Avo., Lakewood. Ohio
Rigby, Daniel R.
Set.
400 W. Chase St., 1’ensacola, Fla.
Roberson, John H.
SRt.
Matewan, W. Va.
Roberts, Arthur J.
8 Sgt.
Station A., Faribault, Minn.
Roche, Thomas W.
Pvt.
854 W. 47 St., Miami Beach, Fla.
Ross, Clarence IL
Sgt.
88 Berkshire St., Rochester, N.V.
Rowland, Clifford L.
Pvt.
020 West 4 Ave., Emporia, Kansas
Sands, Melvin E.
SRt.
Welcome, Minn.
Sannan, Roy T.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Hcimdal, N.D.
Schales, Lewis C.
C|.l.
R.T. 1, Pacific, Mo.
Schmidt, Milton
Pvt.
1814 E. Pratt St., Baltimore, Md.
Seltzer, Nathan
Pvt.
2144 W. 57 St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Shaw, Thomas R.
M, SRt.
1 Greenway Drive, Mt. Clemens, Mieh.
Shore, Morris
S/SRt.
4724 Rorer St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Sinotte, Ray S.
SRt.
57 Algoma St., Fond du Lac, Wjs.
SmelMe, Dale ().
Cpl.
704 Palmwood Ave., Delta, Ohio
Smith, Maxwell C.
Pfc.
Lansing, Mich.
Smith, William H.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Tahoka, Texas
Speakman, Marshall H.
Cpl.
529 Vernon Ave., Venice, Calif.
Speleers, Alphonse A.
S SRt.
4411 Fairvlew Ave., Downers Grove, III.
Sproles, Roger K.
SRt.
507 —5 St., Corbin, Ky.
Steichen, Arthur T.
Pfc.
Alton, Iowa
Stewart, Charles H.
T/5
Box 412, Jenkins, Ky.
Tanney, Nicholas K.
Pvt.
207 Girard St., Atlas, Pa.
Tomasek, Virgil J.
S, SRt.
2985 Lexington Ave., Lorain, Ohio
Torgerson, Josej)h K.
Cpl.
Watson, Minn.
Trapasso, Joe
Sgt.
09 S. Highland Ave., Ossining, N.V.
Trent, Joe G.
I’fc.
B.O. Box 1085, Logan* W. Va.
Troop, Buel L.
Pfc.
900 F. Ave., Lawton, Okla.
Turner, Brown L.
SRt.
Whitwell, Tenn.
Turner, Ellis
I’fc.
R.T. 3, Double Springs, Ala.
Vyal, Clarence A.
SRt.
110 B. Concord St., El Segundo, Calif.
Vaji 1 Jew, Wayne
S,- Silt.
P.O. Box 392, Teeumseh, Okla.
Vasilauskas, Albert (1.
T SRt.
525 Richmond St., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Waibel, Leonard C.
SRt.
4177 Sheridan Blvd., Denver, Colo.
Walker, Everett 1).
I’fc.
Pleasant View, Tenn.
Walters, Dale R.
I’fc.
River St., Chester, W. Va.
Warner, Arbe V.
Cpl.
R.T. 2, Tlftin, Ohio
Warusz, Michael J,
Cpl.
929 Morion St., Camden, N.J.
Wasserman, Albert
s SRt.
1307 Point Breeze Ave., Philadelphia, I’a
Weber, Bernard J.
SRt.
Greenwood, Wis.
Weis, Clarence H.
Cpl.
2123 S. 63 St., West Allis, Wis.
Wells, Howard G.
I’fc.
75 (’enter Ave., Marble Hall, l*a.
West, Frank
I’fc.
R.T. 2, Choctaw, Okla.
Williams, Luther A.
S, SRt.
978 —17 St., San Pedro, Calif.
Wilson, Whit H.
Cpl.
R.T. 3, Sikeston, Mo.
Wisnoski, John J.
SRt.
Main St., Cassville, N.Y.
Wittner, Cliarles J.
Cpl.
1306 Magazine St., New Orleans, La.
Woodcock, Willard T.
SRt.
1801 H. St., Eureka, Calif.
Woodham, Charles I*.
s SRt.
567 Charles Ave., St. Paul, Minn.
Woods, Lewis W.
S SRt.
1700 S. Main St., Salt Lake City, Ctah
Wooley, Bob L.
S SRt.
1405 Rose Ave., Selma, Calif.
Yankowitz, David
s SRt.
33 Dewey St., New Britain, Conn.
Yates, Rudolph
Cpl.
418 N. Church St., Thomastown, Ga.
Yeck, Gordon L.
S SRt.
204 —4 St., Luddington, Mich.
Ziolko, Stanley B.
T SRt.
7520 -59 St., Summit, III.
Aufderheide, Howard F.
1st Lt.
1019 S. Minnesota St., New Flm, Minn.
Berliner, Irving A.
2nd Lt.
1391 —41 Ave., San Francisco, Calif.
Holt, Juanita
1st Lt.
Burnet, Texas
Buchanan, James T.
Captain
315 Chatham St., Sanford, N.C.
Bussell, Arnold J.
2nd Lt.
Remington, Tnd.
Daniel), Alfred II.
Captain
Brownfield, Texas
Danziger, Stanley J.
1st Lt.
32 Rosaling PL, Lawrence, N.Y.
Geddes, Alfred T.
Major
754 Orange St., New Haven, Conn.
Gerlaeh, Norman W.
2nd Lt.
R.l, Box 493, Tigard, Oregon
Hall, Betty E.
1st Lt.
1147 8. Orme Ave., Los Angeles, Calif.
Ileiwig, Paul M.
Captain
Box 1025, Riverside, Calif.
Johnson, Irving B.
Major
4129 Nakoma Rd., Madison, Wis.
Kravitz, Mary I).
2nd Lt.
92 Smith’s Row, Plymouth, Pa.
Lively, Arthur J.
Captain
2250 Central St., Indianapolis, Ind.
Oakes, William B.
Captain
26—40th St., Sea Isle City, N.J.
Steele, Donald D.
4
Major
Box 045 R.D. 4, S. Akron, Ohio
Ackerman, Francis J.
Sgt.
0319 N. Greenview A\e., Chicago, 111.
Alderman, Kwald J.
M/Sgt.
R.F.D. 1, Willis, Va.
Alexander, Lawrence C.
M/Sgt.
Martins Lane, Hingham, Mass.
Anderson, Luther M.
Sgt.
Longton, Kansas
Anuszkiewicz, Walter J.
Sgt.
78 Bellas St., Kingston, Pa.
Archer, Richard C.
S Sgt.
2904 N. Mascher St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Badolato, James
Pfc.
4552 Westminster Place, St. Louis, Mo.
Baker, Robert W.
Cpl.
1683 Monroe Ave., Rochester, N.Y.
Bass, John E.
Cpl.
R..T. 1, Chester, Ga.
Bell, John V.
Sgt.
103 E. Ruddle St., Coaldale, Pa.
Bender, Joseph F.
S/Sgt.
200 Blackwell Road, Woy Woy, Aust.
Bernstein, Theodore .
Cpl.
1280 E. 12 St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Bittner, George E.
Cpl.
52 —65 St., West New York, N.J.
Bolinger, Albert E.
T Sgt.
R.F.D., Rohertsdale, Pa.
Bonvillian, John L.
Pvt.
West Butler St., Fort Recovery, Ohio
Boucher, Valjean X.
Cpl.
East Pike, Indiana, Pa.
Brown, Will K.
S Sgt.
H.T. 1, New Edenburg, Ark.
Bush, Joseph J.
Sgt.
Mays Landing, N.J.
Byrnes, John J.
Cpl.
25 Chamberlain St., New Haven, Conn.
Cain, Robert L
T Sgt.
Zoar Road, Gowanda, N.Y.
Callahan, Daniel A.
Cpl.
50-07 —45 St., Woodside, N.Y.
Camilloni, Rizieri A.
S. Sgt.
69 North St., Southbridge, Mass.
Campbell, Cecil E.
Cpl.
R.R. 2, Sullivan, III.
Chaney, Herbert L.
T Sgt.
008 Washington Ave., Hagerstown, Md.
Chase, Edmund I).
S/Sgt.
Brownsville, Me.
Clary, Phillip B.
S/Sgt.
109 Laurel St., Gaffney, S.C.
Clausen, Elmer J.
Cpl.
0510 Gilmore Ave., Omaha, Neb.
Cobb, Richard T.
S/Sgt.
815 Temple St., Hinton, W. Va.
Cocchiaro, Vincent 1).
t-pi.
23 Sherland Ave., Neu Haven, Conn.
Coltey, Gerald F.
CpI.
Gilrain Ave., Rutland, Vt.
Combe, Jule Jr.
M SRt.
152! Ogden A\e., Ogden, Utaii
Cooper, Jake J.
I’fc.
9(53 Cheyenne St., Kansas City, Mo.
Cunningham, Cratus 0.
src
255 Pasadena Ave., Highland Park, Midi.
Cunningham, James W.
SRt.
135 W. Main St., Waterbury, Conn.
Dakey, Zane V.
I’fc.
5537 S. Cornell St., Chicago. III.
Dalessandro, Mario K.
CpI.
2400 Camberling Ave., Bronx, N.Y.
Davisson, Hoyden K.
c’pi.
Gilman City, Mo.
Day, Harry \V.
Silt.
75 Fessenden St., Portland, Me.
Dendak, Andy
J’fc.
1407 Hart St., Akron, Ohio
De Torn 1 , Anthony J.
I’fc.
2130 W. 5 St. Brooklyn, N.Y.
Dickerson, Kenneth H.
T, Sri.
1129 West Cook St., Springfield, 111.
Diesendorf, John D.
S Sot.
3527 W. 66 PI., Chicago, 111.
Dionne, Eduard H.
SRt.
Neu market, N.1I.
Dostillio, Francis A.
I’fc.
27 Willow St., Keene, X.H.
Doucette, Joseph W.
T/;>
10 Acton St., Lawrence, Mass.
Doyle, Charles F.
Cpl.
26 Montvale Ave., Stoneham, Mass.
Dzwileski, Paul F.
S Sot.
781 Lucas Alley, Johnstown, Pa.
Eckery, Haymond F.
Cpl.
704J —6 Ave., N.W., Mandan, N.D.
Evanosky, Peter
T SRt.
15 Manhattan Ave., New York, N.Y.
Eye, John H.
SRt.
Bridgewater, Va.
Fayer, Jacques W.
SRt.
423 Tacker St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Finkelstein, George L.
fpl.
3531 Market St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Ford, Raymond A.
CpI.
R.T. 4, Gentry, Ark.
Freeman, Charles M.
Pvt.
Lewishurg, W. Va.
Freitag, John E.
CpI.
300 Malvernes Dr., Syracuse, N.Y.
Fries, Robert P.
-M SRt.
206 Green St., Connellsville, Pa.
Fudman, Joseph
SRt.
2016 Westwood Ave., Baltimore, Md.
Fulford, Lloyd W.
SRt.
1222 State St., New Albany, Ind.
Funk, James R.
CpI-
Mikaua, Wis.
Gallik, Andrew A.
SRt.
Box 608, New Salem, Pa.
Garcia, Felix
I’fc.
21 Adams St., Clayton, N.M.
Garrett, William C.
T/SRt.
K.F.D. Denton, Md.
Gentile, Nick J.
SRt.
152 Ki\er St., Red Bank, N.J,
Gere hart, Gilbert C.
-M SRt.
McConnellsburg, Pa.
Giedris, Chester W.
s SRt.
Westmoreland, N.Y.
Glennie, William J.
CpI,
9924 Sorrento, Detroit, Mich.
Grabin, Stephen R.
SRt.
465 Main St., Eynon, Pa.
Green, Leslie R.
SRt.
Laird Route, Chester, Mont.
Grimooris, Paul J.
S SRt.
1428 —16 Ave., Altoona, Pa.
Groger, Morris
T/5
593 E. 141 St.. New York, N.Y.
Grove, Vernon R.
SRt.
Dundas, HI.
Groves, Wilson F.
CpI.
166 West Lincoln Ave., Birmingham, Mich.
Gumowski, Stanley J.
s/sgt.
617 E. 21st St., Erie, Pa.
11th Service Squadron
4551 h Service Squadron (Continued


llagerty, Thomas F.
S/ Sgt.
1579 Hamilton Ave., Watebury, Conn.
Hakansson, Kurt
S/Sgt.
3 Ellis St., Framingham, Mass.
Halvorsen, Richard F.
Sgt.
Prairie View, 111.
Hand, John J.
S Sgt.
1007 E. 92 St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Hardy, Mark M.
T Sgt.
3931 Keswick Rd., Baltimore, Mil.
Harris, Thcron J.
Cpl.
Roekport, Miss.
Hash, Eugene
T 5
R.T. 1, Flat Ridge, Va.
Hawkins, Murland C.
1’vt.
073 E. 101st St., Cleveland, Ohio
Hayes, Riehani M.
Sgt.
1005 N. Hickory St., Joliet, 111.
Heckler, Jack
S/Sgt.
80 W. Alvord St., Springfield, Mass.
Heinz, William K.
S Sgt.
413 Tally St., Syracuse, N.V.
Holmes, Kenneth G.
s Sgt.
005 Chippewa St., Eau Claire, Wis.
Horhaeh, Robert C.
I’fc.
1708 Walnut St., Ashland, Pa.
Hotz, Charles L.
Sgt.
R.K.D. 1, Chester, Va.
llgen, Archie E.
T Sgt.
Rebersburg, Pa.
Ivero, Robert
I’fc.
7050 Nansen St., Forest Hills, N.V.
Iverson, Paul H.
Sgt.
3920 S. Portland Ave., Minneapolis, Minn.
Jensen, Lester J.
Sgt.
Boyd, Wis.
Jensen, Paul E.
Sgt.
Boyd, Wis.
Jones, Hurl J.
Pvt.
Tuscola, Texas
Jones, Henry G.
Sgt.
R.T. 3, Fort Valley, Ga.
Katfenbcrger, James L.
Sgt.
Billups Drive, Lawrenccburg, Ind.
Kamnick, Anthony J.
Cpl.
1810 S. 10 St., Springfield, HI.
Kato, Joseph J.
T Sgt.
1523 Merehont St., Ambridge, Pa.
Kawa, Walter F.
Cpl.
197 Wall St., Syracuse, N.V.
Keefer, John I). Jr.
8 Sgt.
R.D. 4, Uniontown, Pa.
Kelly, Timothy D.
I’fc.
244 Bunker Hill St., Charlestown, Mass.
Kerfoot, Donald W.
I’fc.
31 W. Colley St., Cniontown, Pa.
Kermicle, Don E.
Sgt.
Dundas, HI.
King, Willard A.
S-Sgt.
1405 Mosby St., Richmond, Va.
Kolanko, Joseph
Sgt.
2420 W. 47 Place, Chicago, 111.
Krauskop, George W.
S'Sgt.
45 Division St., N. Attleboro, Mass.
Kuster, Charles W.
T/Sgt.
229 W. Snyder St., Selinsgrove, Pa.
Lahr, Joseph W.
Sgt.
18 Exchange St., Geneva, N.V.
Lanam, Carl E.
Sgt,
R.R. 2, Bloomington, Ind.
Lanaris, Angelo C.
Sgt.
220 Webster Ave., Jersey City, N.J.
Leiby, Lloyd K.
Sgt.
567 Idora Ave., Youngstown, Ohio
Linn, Charles H.
S/Sgt.
242 Cadwalleder St., Brownsville, Pa.
Little, Edward L.
Sgt.
R.T. 3, Piedmont, Ala.
Loggins, Walter T.
Sgt.
209 N. Grayson St., Newbern, Tenn.
Lorenz, Leo W.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 1, Bristol, HI.
Lovgren, Harry A.
Cpl.
263 E. 4th St., Red Wing, Minn.
Luce, Edward C.
Sgt.
York Ave., New London, Conn.
Lundberg, Sten P.
I’fc.
547—55 St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Mallory, James C.
T/Sgt.
Rebersburg, Pa.
Manelow, Clyde J.
Cpl.
91 Reid St., Fort Plain, N.Y.
Martin, Robert W.
Sgt.
521 Sarah St., Stroudsburg, Pa.
Mason, Wallace (>,
Cpl.
2941 -215 St., Bayside, N.V.
Matla, Joseph J.
Sgt.
1412 Electric Ave., Lackawana, N.V.
Megna, Roy R.
Pvt.
67 —27 Ave., Brooklyn, N.V.
Merrell, Bobby E.
Pvt.
Showlow, Ariz.
Meza, Henry C,
Cpl.
1012 Guadalupe St., San Antonio, Texas
Mitchell, Herman B.
Cpl.
174 Leigh St., Clinton, N.J.
Monna, John W.
Cpl.
165 Milbank St., Rochester, N.V.
Montgomery, John L.
Pvt.
8508 Marks St., New Orleans, La.
Moore, James J.
I’fc.
2754 Fenton Ave., New York, N.V.
Miller, George J.
S/Sgt.
121 Clymer St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Morris, Paul E.
S/Sgt.
1122 Frederick St., Bluefteld, W. Va.
Moreines, Saul
Cpl.
352 Berriman St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Morse, Fred S.
I’fc.
245 N. Henry St., Bartlesville, Okla.
Moskowitz, Morris
s Sgt.
2109 —76 St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Myers, Warren A.
Cpl.
R.D. 4, Hanover, Pa.
McDaniel, Theodore R.
S Sgt.
1323 Camden Ave., Lexington, Ky.
McGarry, John C.
Pfe.
R.F.D. 1, Phillipsburg, Pa.
McKeon, Francis W.
Sgt.
112 New Britain Rd., Kensington, Conn.
Necrland, Eugene W.
Cpl.
4452 —41st Ave., S., Minneapolis, Minn.
Kelson, Harry H.
s, Sgt.
P.O. Box 104, West Trenton, N.J.
Novotny, William T.
S Sgt.
Howells, Neb.
Noyes, Arthur K.
Cpl.
R.F.D., S. Brewer, Maine
O’Bara, Stanley J.
Cpl.
2788 Monroe Ave., Niagara Falls, N.Y.
Olivia, Raymond F.
T/5
247 Avenue Z, Brooklyn, N.V.
Parillo, Alexander F.
Ptc.
262 Washington St., Dedham, Mass.
Parsons, George R. Jr.
Pvt.
R.T. 3, Grand Junction, Colo.
Peezick, Leon
S, Sgt.
4815 Locust St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Petrouskas, Theodore B.
Sgt.
4951 S. Halstead St., Chicago, HI.
Pharr, William P.
C|,l.
New Site, Miss.
Piotrowski, Frank ('.
Cpl.
4155 N. Richmond St., Chicago, III.
Pitt, Georg** C.
Sgt.
120 N. Wyoming Ave., Ventnor, N.J.
Plecker, Charles I).
S S«t.
R.T. 1, Weyors Cave, Va.
Pratt, Ralph E.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Durand, Mich.
Ragland, .losepli P.
I’fc.
Jordan Terrace, Brisbane, Australia
Ready, Rufus I).
CpI.
Leaf. Miss.
Reedy, Robert E.
Sgt.
197 Bulfum St., Bulfalo, N.Y,
Reece, Robert E.
Cpl.
11 Bark Drive, Boston, Mass.
Repko, Michael V.
CpI.
18874 Deqnindre, Detroit, Mich.
Richardson, Leonard F.
Sgt.
Dnenwep, Mo.
Ripley, Carrol L.
I’fr.
1205 Richard St., Elmira, N.Y.
Roberts, Richard R.
Sgt.
Box A., Jacksonville, Vt.
Robertson, James E.
Cpl.
Cedar Hill, Tenn.
Rogers, Travis E.
Sgt.
418 Park Drive, Hillsboro, Texas
Rollis, Anthony J.
Sgt.
28 Curve St., Branford, Conn.
Rooney, Michael M.
M Sgt.
3000 W. Grand Blvd., Detroit, Mich-
Ruel, Joseph X.
Pfc.
194—10 St., Wood-Ridge, N.J.
Ross, Hosea W.
Pvt.
Hampstead, N.C.
Russell, Estes W.
Sgt.
Verdia, Ky.
Sable, John C.
Pfc.
73 Newton St., F’redonia, N.Y.
Saluti, Frank J.
S/Sgt.
115 Phipps St., Quincy, Mass.
Santarcangelo, Rocco M.
Pfc.
Paterson, N.J.
Sas, Joe F.
Pfc.
213 40—38 Ave., Bayside, N.Y.
Schlytr, Arthur M.
S/Sgt
507 Main St.. Hays, Kansas
Sehnopp, Melvin L.
Sgt.
1019 W. Market St., Pottsville, Pa.
Schilling, Henry F.
Pfc.
2448 Cedar St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Schoessler, Herman H.
Sgt.
Box 20, Ritzville. Wash.
Scholz, Frank M.
Pfc.
R.T. 1, Box 395, Jacksonville, Fla.
Schunk, Eldred A.
S 'Sgt.
Alden, N.Y,
Scott, John L).
T Sgt.
Mercersburg, Pa.
Scranton, George M. Jr.
Cpl.
R.D. 2, Corning, N.V.
Scussell, Mil no G.
s Sgt.
R.F.I). 3, Stafford Springs, Conn.
Seabolt, Edwin M.
S, Sgt.
912 Potapseo Ave., Brooklyn, Md.
Sereda, Walter,
Cpl.
1010 W. 38th St., Chicago, HI.
Setzer, Richard B.
T, Sgt.
4503 Cutshaw Ave., Richmond, Va.
Severson, Earl C.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Centhuria, Wis.
Shelley, Harold G.
Cpl.
R.T. 1, Box 00, Troutdale, Ore.
Shick, Franklin, E.
S Sgt.
1050 High St., Williamsport, Pa.
Shipp, Henry R.
Cpl.
001 Spring St., Atlanta, Go. *
Smith, Donald P.
Pvt.
919 Walrath St., Monroe, Wis.
Smith, J. D.
Cpl.
R.T. 3, Colorado City, Texas
Smith, Joseph P.
Cpl.
24 Thorpe St., Fairfield, Conn.
Smith, Robert W.
S/Sgt.
South Sterling, Pa.
Spowart, Robert A.
S/Sgt.
Dagus Mines, Pa.
Stanley, Paul J.
Cpl.
37 E. 0 St„ Oswego, N.Y.
Stokes, Thomas R.
Sgt.
Alta, Iowa
Strick’er, William W.
Sgt.
Ashton, Mo.
Sumowitch, Morton
Cpl.
1443 W. 8th St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Swayne, William H. Jr.
Pfc.
Mendenhall, Pa.
Swartz, Clarence F.
Sgt.
705 N. 18 St., Harrisburg, Pa.
Taylor, Richard W.
Cpl.
R.D. 1, Westminster, Md.
Tayman, John T.
Cpl
R.T. l,Cpper-Marlboro, Md.
Terrain, William R.
Cpl.
4505 Garland Ave., Dallas, Texas
Tetkoski, Vincent M.
Cpl.
214-J Chestnut St., Johnstown, Pa.
Tompkins, Joseph H. Jr.
Cpl.
R.T. 4, Charlotte, N.C.
Thompson, Morris F.
S/Sgt.
R.T. 1, Moscow, Ohio
Tonella, Carl F.
Sgt.
140 W. Hettit St., Marquette, Mich.
Truglio, Santino F.
Pfc.
347 North Ave., Medina, N.Y.
Clraer, Donald F.
Cpl.
327 Boas St., Harrisburg, Pa.
Vajka, Emil J.
Cpl.
178 Willis Ave., New York, N.Y.
Vander Ploeg, Edward L.
Pfc.
10(t48 S. Wentworth Ave., Chicago, 111.
Vossler, John M.
T/Sgt.
Box 210, Moosnp, Conn.
Wald, Orville L.
Cpl.
825 Main St., Freeland, Pa.
Walker, Billy F.
Pvt.
P.O. Box 1182, Yuma, Ariz.
Walker, William A. Jr.
Pvt.
310 First Cabin Ct., Akron, Ohio
Wallace, Jack L.
Cpl.
835 E. College Ave., Decatur, Ga.
Walters, Wayne C.
Cpl.
R.D 1, Gardners, Pa.
Watkins, Howard L.
S/Sgt.
Timblin, Pa.
Watkins, William C.
Sgt.
Box 8, Waco, Texas
Wcishar, Henry
Cpl.
440 W. 24 St., New York, N.V.
Whipple, Robert E.
Pvt.
551 Ramona St., Hawthorne, Calif.
Wright, Claire L.
Pvt.
4(17 Garfield St., Stoughton, Wis.
Wygal, Eugene W
1st Sgt.
Pennington Gap, Va.
Ulli Service Squadron (Continued


Ayers, Stuart 1).
w/o
S. New Berlin, N.Y.
Cornell, Kenneth I).
1st Lt.
5100 Park Ave., Kansas City, Mo.
Finger, Carl J.
1st Lt.
Box 88, Bedford, Ind.
Flynn, Thomas .).
1st Lt.
49 Montague PL, Montclair, N.J.
Gusman, Andrew
2nd Lt.
1938 Webster Ave., New York, N.Y.
Hartman, Davis S.
1st Lt.
Belle Alliance, La.
Himes, Delbert R.
2nd Lt.
Lusk, Wyoming
Karst, Ernest C.
Major
64 Glenwood Ave., Jersey City, N.J.
Kling, Arthur G.
W/O
236 Spring St., Middletown. Pa.
Novick, Charles H.
1st Lt.
242 E. 93rd St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Overby, Carl L.
W/O
Box 406, Poteau, Okla.
Aecardi, Vito
Pvt.
235 Jefferson St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Adams, Clyde K.
T/5
1507 G Avenue, Newcastle, Ind.
Adams, Robert B. '
T/4
149 —79 St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Allen, Frederick S.
Pvt.
4074 Humphrey St., Detroit, Mich.
Armstrong, Kenneth L.
T/4
1075 Waterman St., Detroit, Mich.
Bast, Harold T.
Sgt.
Ashland, 111.
Baucrschmidt, Robert 1*.
T/5
113 W. Harrison St., Maumee, Ohio
Baumgardner, Harry 0.
T/5
21 Fourth Avenue, Latrobe, Pa.
Bickerstalf, Elmer G.
CpI.
402 Avenue G., Dallas, Texas
Biedenharn, Bernard A.
T/3
2103 Eastern Ave., Covington, Ky.
Blan, Melisandro
T/5
Pasamonte, N.M.
Boney, Archie
Pfc.
Box 27, San Jon, N.M.
Bonham, Harold V.
T/4
Box 22, Talco, Texas
Bowler, Aldrich E.
Cpl.
902 E. Willow Grove Ave., Chestnut Hill, Pa.
Boxler, Regis .1.
M/Sgt.
Box 93, Summerhill, Pa.
Bradley, Robert P.
T/4
Isola, Miss.
Bruton, Audio D.
T/4
Travis & Webb Sts., San Angelo, Texas
Bullock, Richmond N. Jr.
Pvt.
3014 N. Elmendorf St., San Antonio, Texas
Bury, Irwin .1.
Sgt.
118 Royalston Ave., N.. Minneapolis, Minn.
Cameron, John T.
Pfc.
164 Beech St., Belmont, Mass.
Casmer, Edward S.
Pfc.
4030 S. Campbell Ave., Chicago, III.
Christen, William J.
T/4
1334 Lincoln Ave., Toledo, Ohio
Cleasby, Franklin T.
Cpl.
R.R. 3, Eau Claire, Wis.
Cohen, Sam
Pfc.
100 River St., Troy, N.Y.
Cook, William W,
T/4
516 S. McDonald St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Dahill, William J.
Pvt.
517 Lincoln St., Palisades Park, N.J.
Deida, Arthur E,
T/4
9739 Ewing Ave., Chicago, HI.
Diehl, Delos F.
T/5
Superior St., Muir, Mich.
Dierks, Robert F.
Pvt.
2030 Kennilworth Ave., Wilmette, III.
Dodson, Arthur A.
Pvt.
Hurley, N.M.
Domenichetti, Raymond
T/Sgt.
112 Central Ave., Chisholm, Minn.
Doxey, Devere R.
Cpl.
444 —27 St., Ogden, Utah
Driscoll, Thomas M.
Pfc.
233 E. 70 St., New York, N.Y.
Duff, Frank R.
T/5
100 Pulaski St., Newark, N.J.
Dumas, Marshall A.
Pvt.
International Falls, Minn.
Duris, Joseph J.
T/5
979 Belleview Ave., San Bernardino, Calif.
Edes, Ralph A.
T/5
266 St. Botolph St., Boston, Mass.
Evans, Wendell J.
T/4
617 S. Dakota Ave., Sioux Falls, S.D.
Fean, Charles E.
Sgt.
4339 Oakmont St., Philadelphia, Pa,
Fohrmann, Ernest F.
S/Sgt.
1752 Forrest Ave., Memphis, Tenn.
Foret, Clarence
T/4
Bunkie, La.
Franklin, John J.
T/4
5139 W. 80 St., Kansas City, Mo.
Fuchs, Frank A.
T/5
220 Cole 4ve., Akron, Ohio
Gallagher, John E
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Box 192, Marysville, Wash.
Galvan, Martin J.
1st Sgt.
237 S. Washington Ave., Bergenfleld, N.J.
Gartland, Joseph D.
T/4
297 Ryerson St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Gibson, John G.
Pfc.
R.T. 1, South Haven, Kansas
Golden, Herschel
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Columbus, Ind.
Gruber, Edward V.
M/Sgt.
Box 53, Stanwood, Iowa
Guglielmo, Dominic J.
T/5
1542 S. 24 St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Guiren, Edward
T/Sgt.
211 Brunswick St., Roxbury, Mass.
Hahn, Matthew A.
Pvt.
Rockhill Road, Webster Grove, Mo.
Hambleton, Roger L.
M/Sgt.
7829 N. Brandon St., Portland, Ore.
Hand, Henry L.
Pfc.
1614 Buchanan St., Amarillo, Texas
Hebda, Joseph J.
Pvt.
1339 N. Campbell Ave., Chicago, 111.
Heitzig, Clemens L.
T/4
2204 Cooper St., Saginaw, Mich.
Heyden, Leroy W.
Pvt.
409 N. York St., Elmhurst, HI.
Hidden, Gilbert W.
T/5
105 E. Locust St., Canton, 111.
Hills, Frank C.
S/Sgt.
2380 Grand Ave., New York, N.Y.
Hine, Alden
T/4
Old Short Hills Road, Short Hills, N.J.
Hobizal, Frank E.
T/4
Scapi>oose, Ore.
Hojo, Theodore H.
T/4
R.D. 1. Monongahela, Pa.
How, Frank S.
T/3
Kingsville, Mo.
Hull, Harley H.
T/3
321 W. 5 St., Clarinda, Iowa
Humenik, Daniel C.
Pfc.
81 Talmadge St., Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Irwin, Bern B.
S/Sgt.
8510 Ridpath Drive, Hollywood, Calif.
Johnson, Paul A.
T/5
R.T. 2, Hopkins, Minn.
Jones, William E.
Cpl.
137 N. Shippen St., Lancaster, Pa.
Judd, Leslie L.
S/Sgt.
Box 664, Wapato, Wash.
Judy, Wilson Jr.
T/4
208 E. Maple St., Cherokee, Iowa
Kalisty, John
T/3
Main St., Glcnham, N.Y.
Kasmir, Bernard
Pvt.
615 Osborn St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Keller, Robert A.
Pvt.
1034 E. Woodrow* Ave., Lombard, 111.
Kesael, Phillip A.
CpI.
298 Crown St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Kimmell, Robert G.
Sgt.
118 S. Franklin St,, Cherokee, Okla.
Kincaid, Samuel ('.
T 4
W. Sacramento, Calif.
Kinder, Eugene
T/5
115 Cook Ave., Chatfee, Mo.
Klein, Stanley W.
Pvt.
1002 Boston Road, New York, N.Y.
Knapp, Robert G.
T 4
International Falls, Minn.
Konchal, Frank .1.
T/4
071 Canton St., St. Paul, Minn.
Lamm, ‘Eustace I).
T/ 4
R.T. 1, Pennsboro, W. Va.
Larby, Curtis L.
T/4
R.F.I). I, Manilla, Iowa
Lathrop, Eugene
Pvt.
R.T. 2, Willow Springs, Mo.
LcClere, Emmett A.
T/4
1129 Arlington St., Houston, Texas
LeRoy, Felix M.
Pvt.
184 Deerfield St., Windsor, Conn.
Levitz, Paul
Pfc,
1050 Ocean Ave., Brooklyn, N.Y’.
Lewerke, John P.
T/5
1421 Santa Monica Blvd., Santa Monica, Calif.
Libujeski, Thomas A.
T/5
330 Prospect Ave., Binghamton, N.Y’.
Liddle, George A.
Pvt.
Carrington, N.D.
Lietz, Paul A.
T/4
34 S. Herman St., New Bremen, Ohio
Lomax, Herbert P.
T/3
301 Cincinnati Ave., San Antonio, Texas
Lyttle, Howard Jr.
T/4
1213 Grishaver St., S. Charleston, W, Va.
Magee, Warren M.
S Sgt.
57 Myrtle St., Boston, Mass.
Malstead, La Vern A.
T/5
307 E. First St., Norfolk, Neb.
Mandracchia, Anthony C.
Cpl.
Box 368, Hancock St., Brentwood, N.Y’.
Markham, Walter R.
CpI.
150 Lark St., Albany, N.Y’.
Marshall, George E.
T/4
97 Saxton St., Lockport, N.Y*.
Maruska, George I),
Pfc.
62 Thistle St., Pittston, Pa.
Mazza, Louis J.
Pfc.
2123 W. Cambria St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Meinhardt, Walter E.
T/5
7838 S. Stew’art Ave., Chicago, HI.
Mermer, Anthony
Sgt.
Box 438, Highland Ave., Warren, Ohio
Messina, John
T 3
4218 W*. Potomac St., Dallas, Texas
Meyer, James A.
T 4
720 N. Butler St., Fond du Lac, Wis.
Midlam, Glenn E.
T/5
1117 S. Wyoming St., Butte, Mont.
Mitchell, Charles II. Jr.
T/5
526 N. Elder Ave., Indianapolis, Ind.
Morey, Frederick T.
Pvt.
Castine, Maine
Morris, Allan J.
T/5
1426 Hyde Park Blvd., Chicago, HI.
Mosely, Henry M.
T/5
37 E. Division St., Chicago, HI.
Murphy, James K.
Pfc.
4 Highland St., W’oburn, Mass.
McAIea, Thomas B.
Cpl.
57 Broadway, Methuen, Mass.
McElveen, Earl L.
T 5
Olanta, S.C.
McKeon, John J.
r r 4
4312 Washington Blvd., Chicago, HI.
McMullen, Joseph F.
T 4
Mechanic St., Jordan, N.Y’.
McNally, Leroy J.
T/5
322 Grier Ave., Elizabeth, N.J.
McNeill, Chester A.
T Sgt.
2110 W. Bannock St., Boise, Idaho
Nordstrom, Glenn E.
T Sgt.
308 North F. St., Monmouth, 111.
Novick, David
T 3
165 E. 179 St., Bronx, N.Y'.
Nuanes, Leo
T/4
909 E. 9 St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Oja, Ernest W.
S, Sgt.
llvvaco, Wash.
O’Leary, Charles J.
T/4
1020 S. 9 St., McAlester, Okla.
Ondrejkovic, Steve S.
T/5
325 Lenawee Ave., Monessen, Pa.
Orosco, Andrew
T/4
2321 Monterrey St., San Antonio, Texas
Parker, Thurman W.
Pvt.
222 N.W. 5 St., Richmond, Ind.
Pelechaty, John
T/5
1048 Holmden Ave., Cleveland, Ohio
Pieronski, Alex J.
Pvt.
2736 W. 38 PI., Chicago, III.
Pohland, Robert W.
Pfc.
109 E. Grand St., Chilton, Wis.
Posey, Ralph IT.
Sgt.
R.T. 2, Union Church, Miss.
Prendergast, Michael
T/5
7744 S. Marshfield Ave., Chicago, 111.
Preston, Robert J.
T/5
521 N. 2 St., Columbia, Pa.
Price, Robert L.
T/4
711 Barton St., Storm Lake, Iowa
Quigley, Robert E.
S/Sgt.
155 W. Housatonic St., Pittsfield, Mass.
Ramirez, Adan
Pvt.
Seboyota, N.M.
Rappaport, Bernard
Cpl.
1523 S. Avers Ave., Chicago, 111.
Rapski, Stanley W.
T/4
R.D. Box 5, Portage, Pa.
Ray, Alfred C.
T/5
5653 N. Clark St., Chicago, HI.
Rayles, Alvin C.
Pvt.
Rising Sun, Ind.
Reynertson, Phillip S.
T 5
4119 Wellington Ave., Chicago, 111.
Riedell, Lester A.
T/5
15 W. Gates St., Rice Lake, Wis.
Ridker, Myron S.
T/5
7027 Jelfrey St., Chicago, 111.
Rogers, Edwin If.
T/5
19 Messenger St., Toms River, N.J.
Rogers, Lloyd I).
T/5
1756 Grant St., Denver, Colo.
Roller, Mont E.
Pfc.
R.T. 1, Mounds, Okla.
Roney, John M.
T/3
R.R. 2, Greenfield, Ind.
Rosenbaum, Menz I.
T/5
138 Ravinia Court, Highland Park, III.
Ross, John T.
T/4
6492 Woodmont Rd., Detroit, Mich.
Rothman, Daniel
T/5
17081 N. Humbolt Blvd., Cliicago, 111.
Ruano, Parsons M.
Pfc.
2036 Royal St., New Orleans, La.
Ryals, J. B.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Ivanhoe, Texas
Salyers, Jerome H.
T 4
643 Rockdale Ave., Cincinnati, Ohio
Sather, Maurice 0.
T 3
R.T. 3, Benson, Minn.
Scott, Roscoe A.
T/4
123 Liberty St., Newburgh, N.Y’.
Seheiter, Orval A.
Pvt.
Mt. Olive, III.
Schmelzer, Harold A.
T/3
Box 195, Jupiter, Fla.
Schnitzer, Frank A.
T/3
175 Irvington St., Daly City, Calif.
898th Signal Company Depot Auiation


Schreck, Kenneth B.
T/5
423 St. Mary St., Pekin, 111.
Schueren, Albert A.
Pvt.
R.T. 2, Chaska, Minn.
Schwartz, Harold J.
T/5
4329 Wabash St., Kansas City, Mo.
Schwarz, John A.
Pvt.
515 Nottingham Blvd., W. Palm Beach, Fla.
Scibel, Conrad W.
T/5
5751 Milcntz Ave., St. Louis, Mo.
Serrcs, Edwin I
T/4
R.R. 1, Orion, HI.
Shahbaziau, Zaven J.
T/4
R.T. 1, Box 153, Parlicr, Calif.
Sharrock, Leslie W.
Pvt.
R.T. 2, Bethany, Mo.
Shubert, Samuel W.
T/4
896 Parkwood Drive, Cleveland, Ohio
Simpson, William H.
T/4
98 Seward St., San Francisco, Calii.
Smith, Byron L.
T/Sgt.
R.T. 1, Selah, Warh.
Smith, Joseph 11.
Pvt.
2552 Forest Home Ave., Dayton, Ohio
Smith, Tom H.
CpI.
Valley St., May\ille, N.Y.
Smoot, Albert C.
T/4 *
Box 187, Grapeland, Texas
Smoot, Harvey W.
T/Sgt.
6C61 Morris Place, N.E., Washington, D.C.
Sokolowski, Edwin J.
T/4
R.T. 1, Box 306, New Haven, Mich.
Soidcn, Melvin T.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Webster, Iowa
Squires, Jack L.
T/5
811 Crosby, N.W., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Stefanik, Raymond R.
T/4
96 Boundary St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Stewart, Joseph H.
Pvt.
Glendale Hill, Elizabethtown, Ky.
Stokey, Paul B.
T/4
742 First St., N.E., Massillon, Ohio
Stollor, Leon
T/5
9U1 E. 179 St., New Vork, N.V.
Strange, Robert W. Jr.
T/5
12 Cypress St., Grcentield, Mass.
Sweigart, Jay N.
Pfc.
Box 58, Cornwall, Pa.
Teller, Hubert B.
T/4
5205 Xerxes Ave., S., Minneapolis, Minn.
Templeman, Loo D.
Pvt.
Hygiene, Colo.
Thompson, Virgil R.
Pvt.
Hotel Empire, New Y T ork, X.Y.
Thune, George F.
Pvt.
1312 Rosedale Ave., Bronx, X.Y.
Trantow, Lisle W.
T/4
811 E. Main St., Merrill, Wis.
Liters, George E.
T/4
Manson, Iowa
Utholf, Clarence W.
Sgt.
5459 Alabama St., St. Louis, Mo.
Vislosky, John
T/3
2224 Oakland St., Pueblo, Colo.
Von Bargon, Donald L.
T/4
1323 Market St., Reading, Ohio
Wagstalf, Lyle W.
T 3
R.F.D. 5, Murray, Utah
Wayman, Alex
T/4
National Monument, Death Valley, Calif.
Weed, Ralph C.
T/5
1212 W. 11th St., Topeka, Kansas
Weincouff, Stanley M.
T/3
3535 X. Olcott Ave., Chicago, III.
Wheeler, Harold P.
T, Sgt.
1057 F. Street, Springfield, Oregon
Whipple, Dclmar E.
T/5
1600 Lousiana St., Houston, Texas
Williams, Howard
T/4
6 Elder St., Wilkes Barre, Pa.
Williams, Ward F.
T/4
Mullin, Texas
Wilmer, Joseph L.
T/Sgt.
1537 Parker St., New York, N.Y,
Wise, Melvin E.
Pfc.
2410 —11 Ave., Altoona, Pa.
Witt, Mason R.
T 4
2439 S.E. 5th St., Des Moines, Iowa
Wood, Edwin V.
Pfc.
Box 61, Ashland, Ala.
Yeager, Mervin P.
S/Sgt.
301 —2 Ave., Rock Falls, 111.
Zeller, Lester R.
Pvt.
R.R. 1, New Douglas, 111.
Slingerland, Jacob
Major
3232 Colfax Ave., S., Minneapolis, Minn.
Walter, Abner G.
1st Lt.
436 Center St., Ashland, Pa.
Weller, John W.
2nd Lt.
Wymvood, Pa.
Wilbur, Norman J.
1st Lt.
R.F.D. 2, Elmira, N.V.
Alllnito, Joseph P.
Pvt,
1754 Washington Ave., Bronx, N.Y.
Anderson, Bernard L.
CpI.
Box 341, Elmore, Minn.
Anspach, George
Pvt.
301 E. 168 St., Bronx, N.Y,
Arnett, Robert W.
Pfc.
K.T. 2, Box 1194, Oakdale, Calif.
Arthur, James 0.
Pvt.
Bradshaw. W. Va.
Austin, Ernest R.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 1, Oswego Road. Liverpool, N.V.
Ayotte, Charles H.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Box 328, Ironwood, Mich.
Ayres, Harwood S.
Pvt.
R.D. 4, Pittsburgh, Pa.
Ball, Germain H.
CpI.
2902 W. Manor Drive, Phoenix, Ariz.
Banks, ]*hil1lp N.
CpI.
Trenton, N.C.
Barnett, Francis M.
Pvt.
1562 Bankhead Hwy., N.W., Atlanta, Ga.
Baxter, Elwood E.
Pfc.
7525 Georgetown Road, Bethesda, Md.
Bogy, Everett G.
Pvt.
8050 S. May St., Chicago, HI.
Bendixsen, Warren J.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 5, Idaho Falls, Idaho
Bernot, Frank J.
Sgt.
2116 Brainard Ave., Cleveland, Ohio
Biondo, Frank J.
Pvt.
3930 Park Heights Ave., Baltimore, Md.
Blessing, Charles
1st Sgt.
36 Chambers St., Trenton, N.J.
Bloxom, Melvin G.
Pfc.
Bloxom, Va.
Bonin, Harry J.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Box 50, Breaux Bridge, La.
Boots, George F.
Pvt.
483 K. High St., Lexington, Ky.
Bowers, Floyd E.
Pvt.
R.D. 1, Hollidaysburg, Pa.
Branch, Leslie E.
Pvt.
1930 Ohio Ave., Anderson, Ind.
Brandt, Raymond W.
Pfc.
6351 Linzee Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Burns, James T. Jr.
Pfc,
32 Tenth Ave., Haverhill, Mass.
Cagney, William P.
Pvt.
6900 Lakewood Ave., Chicago, HI.
Campbell, Junius 1).
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Fucjuay Springs, N.C.
Capp, Martin L.
Pvt.
5344 S. Emerald Ave., Chicago, 111.
Cavanagh, Joseph M.
T/5
1980 Prospect Ave., Bronx, N.V.
Cave, Augustus F.
Pfc.
1764 —15 St., Augusta, Ga.
Chicoine, Omcr J.
Pfc.
8 Newell St., Manchester, N.H.
Carter, Saleem
Pvt.
164 Myrtle St., Lawrence, Mass.
Cobb, Robert T.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Box 56, Eugene, Oregon
Colario, Paul
Pfc.
1564 E. 38 St., Cleveland, Ohio
Cook, John W.
T/4
R.T. 1, Detroit, Ala.
Cornell, Walter
CpI.
Delaware County, Stamford, N.V.
Cortcst, Odylon R.
Pfc.
Mulvane, Kansas
Cowen, William R.
Pvt.
R.T, 2, Guntcrsville, Ala.
Craig, Thomas W.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Sacramento, Ky.
Crews, George W.
Pfc.
1914 Charles St., Winston Salem, N.C.
Crisp, Kyler M.
Pvt.
439 River Road, Silver Grove, Ky.
Culberson, Fred J.
Pvt.
244 Wiley Ave., Augusta, Kansas
Curley, James S.
Pvt.
15 Pattox St., San Francisco, Calif.
Daly, Joseph M.
Pvt.
468 E. 186 St., Bronx, N.Y.
Davis, George E.
Pvt.
R.F.D. 2, Belle Center, Ohio
Davis, Melvin D.
Pfc.
Box 22, Lawshe, Ohio
Davis, Robert L. Jr.
Pvt.
R.T. 3, Anniston, Ala.^
DeFrain, Paul A.
Pvt.
Sugar Loaf, Pa.
DeLevan, Raymond A.
T/4
21 Abe St., Kingston, N.Y.
Demetreshon, John
T 5
950 X. Randolph St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Demetris, Jack M.
Cpl.
2 West 4 St., Bridgeport, Pa.
Devlin, Thomas B.
Sgt.
1814 N. 74 Ave., Elmwood Park, 111.
Diskin, Robert J.
Pfc,
4022 Forbes St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
DiStasi, Samuel B.
Pfc. '
Grand St., Highland, N.Y.
Dixon, James T.
Cpl.
220 West 1st St., Junction City, Kansas
Dixon, Walter E.
Cpl.
Box 45, Sullivan, Mo.
Dornseif, Edwin M.
Sgt.
723 W. Superior St., Ft. Wayne, I ml.
Dray, Bernard A.
Pfc.
10 Harborview Court, S.I., New York, N.Y.
Driver, Leonard G.
Pfc.
557 Lawton St., S.W., Atlanta, Ga.
Duncan, William 11.
T/5
Bassett, Iowa
DuPree, Donald F.
Pvt.
2448A—S. Burrell St., Milwaukee, Wis.
Durham, Earl B.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Pelham, N.C.
Dykes, Charles A.
Pfc.
2730 Filbert St., San Francisco, Calif.
Eddings, Harold E.
Pvt.
334 Van Buren Ave., Toledo, Ohio
Eisterhold, Raymond G.
Cpl.
Freeburg, Mo.
Eiswerth, Robert G.
Pfc.
1451 W. 4th St., Williamsport, Pa.
Elias, Harry F.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 2, Wheeling, W. Va.
Englehardt, Eugene E.
T/5
R.F.D. 2, Lime Springs, Iowa
Evans, Edgar
Pfc.
Box 803, Rainier, Oregon
Eyres, Henry J.
Pfc,
194 Avon St., Lowell, Mass.
Fagg, Marvin
Cpl.
Wilmart H. 2, Ashland, Wis.
Faison, Roy C.
Pfc.
911 —13 St., Phoenix City, Ala.
Fawcett, Patrick H.
Pfc.
08 Kinsmon St., Lowell, Mass.
Fennell, Edward F. Jr.
Pfc.
10 Summer Ave., Waltham, Mass.
Ferlic, Andrew F.
Pvt.
Edith St., Broughton, Pa.
Ferrara, Patsy
Pfc.
220 N. Fullerton Ave., Montclair, N.J.
Fidler, Richard F.
Pfc.
803 Scott Ave., Greensboro, N.C.
Files, Lester A.
T/5
R.T. 2, Box 85, Sheridan, Ark.
Finney, Frederick H.
Pvt.
215 Washington Ave., Oregon City, Oregon
Franklin, Robert S.
Pfc.
General Delivery, Fowlerton, Texas
Friedman, Hyman H.
Pfc.
19 Ann St., Norwich, Conn.
Frye, William
Pvt.
Braeholm, W. Va.
Gallagher, Robert J.
Cpl.
197 Wilson Ave., Quincy, Mass.
Gullets, Alfred W,
Pfc.
1411 E. Berry St., Ft. Wayne, Ind.
Gay, Robert M.
Pfc.
1992 Madison St., Eugene, Ore.
Gcnls, Leon
Sgt.
81 Limerick St., Gardner, Mass.
Giordano, Joseph J.
Pvt.
1325 S. 30th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Glover, Theodore R.
Pfc.
113—7 St., Clifton Forge, Va.
Green, Max
Pfc.
2021 Virginia Park, Detroit, Mich.
Gnadc, Frederick A.
Pfc.
Main St., Wyckotf, N.J.
Grice, Robert E.
Pvt.
R.F.D. 4, Marion, Ohio
Gruzinsky, Gilbert F.
Pfc.
1830 W. Maryland St., Indianapolis, Ind,
Guarcello, Jack
T/5
1730—70 St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Guerrera, Dominick
Pvt.
2217 S. 8 St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Habak, Michael A.
Sgt.
4340 Jacob St., Wheeling, W. Va.
Harbison, Charles K.
Pvt.
Delano, Tenn.
Hare, Richard J.
T/5
6420—60 St., Maspeth, N.Y.
Harvey, Harold W.
T/4
107 Cleveland St., Elmira Hghts, N.Y.
1124th military Police Company Aviation
898lk (Company — (Continued


Harvey, Warren W.
T/5
3204 Ave. A, Council Bluffs, Iowa
Haugen, Harold M.
Pvt.
Black River, Black River Falls, Wis.
Hayton, Jesse L.
Pfc.
Star Route, Orland, Calif.
Heinonen, John E.
Pfc.
308 Cyr St., Negaunee, Mich.
Hendrix, Earl T.
Pvt.
R.T. 2, .Marietta, Ga.
Hickman, John L.
t r»
R.T. 1, E. Liverpool, Ohio
Hileman, William II.
Pfc.
2724 Maple Ave., Altoona, Pa.
Hine, James L.
Pvt.
Box 407, Lincolnton, N.C.
Hogan, John J.
Pvt.
194 Willow St., Lawrence, Mass.
Hook, Delbert L.
Sgt.
182 Earl Courts, Toledo, Ohio
Howard, Johnie E.
Pvt.
R.T. 4, Albemarle, N.C.
Howard, Lawrence S.
S Sgt.
Route 2, Box 154, Oregon City, Ore.
Howe, Wesley W. Jr.
Sgt.
2048 S. Clarence Ave., Berwyn, 111.
Hack, Nick H.
Pfc.
409 Quince St., Yakima, Wash.
Kinsman, John H.
CpI.
6957 Grand Ave., Maspeth, N.V.
Hylton, William 1).
Pvt.
Forest Hills, Md.
Indovina, Ted L.
Sgt.
249—10 St., Santa Monica, Calif.
Jackson, Marvin L.
Pvt.
Saratoga, N.C.
Jaynes, Alvin
T/5
Hughes, N.C.
Johnson, George M.
Sgt.
4703 N. Manor Ave., Chicago, HI.
Julian, Virgil C’,
Pvt.
807 S. Pope St., Independence, Mo.
Kaczalka, Walter F.
Pfc.
11 Summer St., Bridgeport, Conn.
Kamj>hans, Donald J.
Pvt.
115 W. 14 St., Junction City, Kansas
Kampshotf, William H.
Pfc.
Canova, S.D.
Kapronica, John G.
Pfc.
2387 East Ave., Lorain, Ohio
Karjalainen, Walter A.
T 4
R.F.D. 2, Ludlow, Vt.
Kearns, Joseph F.
Cpl.
227 So. Broadway, Yonkers, N.Y.
Keith, Sandy J.
Pvt.
R.T. 4, Raleigh, N.C.
Kelley, Leonard X.
Sgt.
1424J Logan St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Kiech, Leland G.
Pvt.
Nettleton, Ark.
Kiedrowski, Thomas J.
Pfc.
G.D., Wibaux, Montana
Kizer, Robert L.
T 4
R.T. 2, Doniphan, Mo.
Kochanek, Walter A.
Pfc.
39 Ludlow Ave., Indian Orchard, Mass.
Kohn, Martin A.
Pvt.
2272 Vermont Ave., Toledo, Ohio
Kopchenski, Raymond J.
Cpl.
530 Underclitf Ave., Edgewater, N.J.
Kovar, Charles E.
Pvt.
R.T, 2, Box 186, Dallas, Texas
Kozak, Anthony J.
Pvt.
228 Beaver St., Leetsdale, Pa.
Kims, Henry 1’.
T 5
410 W, Thompson St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Kuchinski, Kasmar K.
Pfc.
89 Grattan St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Ladany, Leo
Cpl.
2124 Kimball St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
LaFarlett, O'Neal
Pvt.
P.O. Box 52, Guntersville, Ala.
Lakowitz, Hyman
Pvt.
1436 Crotona Park E., Bronx, N.Y.
Loiter, Lester 0.
Pvt.
3719 Preble St., Bremerton, Wash.
Leitz, Donald F.
Pvt.
1203 Miller St., Utica, N.Y,
Libby, Albert D.
Pfc.
Sergeant Blutf, Iowa
Liston, John T.
Pvt.
1423 —5 Ave., Seattle, Wash.
Livingston, Charles W. •
Pfc.
R.D. 2, New Wilmington, Pa.
Long, John C.
Pvt.
505 Cherokee Tract, Grand Prairie, Texas
Long, Marion D.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Williamsburg, Pa.
Maguire, James M.
Pfc.
61a Belcher St., San Francisco, Calif.
Mainer, Joseph E. Jr.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Box 624, Concord, N.C.
Males, James H.
T/5
R.T. 1, New Bethlehem, Pa.
Malle, Frank A.
Cpl.
100 W. Quincy St., Pittsburg, Kansas
Marion, Harry 0.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 2, Pinacle, N.C.
Martin, Gerard A.
Pfc.
162 W. 15 St., New York, N.Y.
Mask, Walter S.
Pfc.
Marion, N.C.
McArthur, Archie T.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Dcford, Mich.
McCord, Kenneth L.
Pfc.
R.T. 1, Winegarten, Mo.
McCracken, Brody I).
Pvt.
708 W. Marquette Rd., Chicago, 111.
McDuffie, Henry H.
Pvt.
R.T. 2, Box 73, Samson, Ala.
McKean, Jack W.
Sgt.
Forreston, HI.
McKee, Calvin B.
Pvt.
350 Hurst St., Huntsville, Ala.
McManus, John J.
Cpl.
564 W. 173 St., New York, N.V.
McTiernan, Melvin
Pfc.
5 Catherine Slip, New York, N.Y.
Merriman, Donald T.
Pvt.
6913 Stewart St., Chicago, HI.
Meydem, Willard A.
Pfc.
R.T. 1, c/o Robt. Seefeld, Hamburg, Wis.
Miehelman, John W.
Pvt.
611 So. Streeper St., Baltimore, Md.
Mierzwa, John
Pfc.
1010 Railroad St,, Jackson, Mich.
Miller, James H.
Cpl.
41 Read St., New Haven, Conn.
Mishall, Royal J.
Pvt.
941 Maple St., Kalamazoo, Mich.
Mollenkopf, Vern L.
Pvt.
R.F.D. 1, Parma, Mich.
Morgan, Floyd C.
Pfc.
1137 Adeline Ave., Oakland, Calif.
Morrell, John J.
Pvt.
22 Scarbore Ave., Rosebank, N.Y.
Mullineaux, Lester C. Jr.
Pfc.
Pine Orchard, Ellicott City, Md.
Mulvancy, John R. Jr.
Pvt.
204 S. Fagiey St., Baltimore, Md,
Murphy, Delmar L.
S Sgt.
R.F.D. 1, Linden, Mich.
Murphy, John P.
Pvt.
1481 Myrtle Ave., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Musselman, William W.
Pfc.
R.D. 1, Stillwater, Pa.
Napoli, Anthony
Pvt.
34 Vernon Ave., New York, N.Y.
Nesti, Valdo A.
Pvt.
Perth Amboy, N.J.
Neve, Truman A.
Cpl.
So. Union St., Maustou, Wis.
Nichols, Kimble D.
Pfc.
R.T. 2, Little Rock, Ark.
Nickel, Leon J.
T/5
444 N. Cooper St., Colorado Springs, Colo.
Noble, George P.
Pvt.
323 Westover Ave., Norfolk, Va.
Nobles, Paul 1).
Pvt.
Pollocksvillc, N.C.
Nussbaum, lamnard J.
Pfe.
31-33 Brighton 7 St., Brooklyn, N.V.
O’Donnell, Deo K.
cpi.
747 Halsey St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
O’Kelley, Oliver
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Candler, N.C.
Oster, Harry E. Jr.
Sgt.
17U Vennum St., Mansfield, Ohio
Peeler, Julian M.
Cpl.
R.T. 2, Devereaux, Ga.
Peterliam, Walter b.
Pfe.
37 State St., Oneida, N.V.
Piotrowski, Joseph W.
Pvt.
3116 N. Kilborn Ave., Chicago, HI.
Quinn, Gerald F.
Pfe.
714 S. Massey St., Watertown, N.V.
.Kadic, Robert E.
Pfe.
Stevensville, Mich.
Radnor, Roy
Pfe.
33-23 Leslie Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Ratal, Elias W.
Pvt.
226 W. 17 St., Norfolk, Va.
Reif, Frank C.
Pfe.
148 Richmond St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Reiner, (’harles L.
Sgt.
404 Main St., Northport, N.V.
Reinhardt, Ernst O.
Pfe.
2671A —N. 6th St., Milwaukee, Wis.
Reinhardt, Louis i).
Pvt.
Weiner, Ark.
Reinhart, Richard G.
Cpl.
1107 Prospect Ave., S.W., Canton, Ohio
Rogers, Glen
T/4
G.D., Napa, Calif.
Rumaneik, Joseph A.
Pvt.
W. Brownsville, Pa.
Russom, Elmer A.
Cpl.
R.F.D. 1, Vine Grove, Ky.
Kyskiewicz, Chester F.
Pvt.
4244 S. Francisco Ave., Chicago, 111.
Salter, Ernest B.
Pfe.
No. 8th A Ruth Sts., Goose Creek, Texas
Samanski, Chester J.
Pfe.
47 Division St., Chelsea, Mass.
San Miguel, Johnnie E.
Pfe.
301 S. Presa St., San Antonio, Texas
Sandleback, Louis E.
Pvt.
Bridgeport, Crawford, Wis.
Sasala, John
Pfe.
114 Pearl Place, Perth Amboy, N.J.
Scheid, Charles J.
Sgt.
4325 N. Francisco Ave., Chicago, HI.
Schmaelzle, Carl F.
T4
Reynolds, Ind.
Schnoiderman, Walter
Pvt.
3810 Broadway, New Vork, N.V.
Sehonberg, Samuel
Pvt.
378 Kosciusko St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Schubert, William A.
T 5
3143 Eastern Ave., Cincinnati, Ohio
Schule, Andrew W. Jr.
T 4
4319 Chartres St., New Orleans, La.
Sciarra, Dominick
Pvt.
265 Sanford St., E. Orange, N.J.
Scigalski, Edward
T/5
1224 W. 51 St., Chicago. HI.
Sechrest, Charles J.
Pvt.
304 Center St., Thomasville, N.C.
Seiler, Henry A. Jr.
Pvt.
6820 Everall Ave., Baltimore, Md.
Selby, John 1).
Cpl.
1946 Manzanita St., Klamath Falls, Ore.
Shatter, Ervin E.
Pvt.
Alum Creek, W. Va.
Shatter, Theodore M.
Pvt.
2134 N, 6th St., Harrisburg, Pa.
Simpson, Norman H.
Pvt.
Livingston Manor, N.V.
Sims, Joe E.
Sgt.
Maysville, Ga.
Slusser, William R.
Pvt.
1119 Orange St., Berwick, Pa.
Smerik, John
S/Sgt.
R.T. 2, Youngstown Rd., Warren, Ohio
Smith, Aubrey J.
Pvt.
Brownsboro, Texas
Smith, Leroy W.
Pfe.
56 Sherman St., Dayton, Ohio
Smith, Louis J.
T/5
5th A Main Sts., Puente, Calif.
Smith, Ralph C.
Pvt,
18 McClellan St., Brunswick, Maine
Sparacio, Samuel S.
Pvt.
1824—84th St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Sprague, Charles C.
Sgt.
702 E. South St., Texarkana, Ark.
Staib, Herbert J.
Cpl.
5745 Three Mile Drive, Detroit, Mich.
Stermer, Kenneth 11.
T/4
117 Dwight St., Corning. N.Y.
Stott, Errol J.
T/4
P.O. Box 192, Green River, Utah
Stover, Nelson C.
Sgt.
4428 Commonwealth Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Sullivan, Bill
Pvt.
Argillite, Ky.
Sweet, Frank J.
Cpl.
67 Endicott Ave., Johnson City, N.V.
Tabor, Virgil E.
Pvt.
Marie, W. Va.
Tant, Curtis 0.
Pvt.
9640 Otis St., Southgate, Calif.
Tasca, Alfred N.
Sgt.
7903 Ccdarbrook St., Philadelphia, Pa.
Tennant, Clayvern 0.
Sgt.
R.T. 2, Belleville, W. Va.
'Looker, Richard P.
Sgt.
N. Lake St., Oneida, N.Y.
Troutman, Jacob H.
T/5
2413 Penn St., Harrisburg, Pa.
Tynan, James J.
Pvt.
17 Manhattan St., Buffalo, N.V.
Valdez, Manuel
Pfe.
Isleta, N.M.
Vander Meer, Lewis
Cpl.
1133 Boston St., S.E., Grand Rapids, Mich.
Vincent, Perry B.
Cpl.
G.D., Glendale, Ark.
Walker, Walter 1).
Pvt.
20 Housatonic St., Lee, Mass.
Walsh, William M.
Pfe.
1260 W, 72 St., Chicago, 111.
Warren, Arnold
Pvt.
R.F.D. 24, Richmond, Ky.
Weaver, Edward A.
Sgt.
625 W. Water St., Elmira, N.V.
Wekcrle, John J.
Pfe.
75-17 —41 Ave., Jackson Heights, N.V.
Wesendorf, Louis W. Jr.
Pfe.
116 Rochester Drive, Sheboygan Falls, Wis.
Whitington, Clayton 1).
Pvt.
611 Olive St., Dallas, Texas
Willis, Erwin G.
Sgt.
35 Burke Lane, Wellesley Hills, Mass.
Wilson, Cecil E.
Pvt.
Nevisdale, Ky.
Wilson, David F.
Pvt.
24 N.W. 60 St., Miami, Fla.
Wilson, Russell E. Jr.
Pvt.
403 Chestnut St., Emmaus, Pa.
Windes, Howard L.
Pfe.
1030 W. 7 St., Mt. Carmel, 111.
Wise, Robert N.
T 5
243 Madison St., San Francisco, Calif.
Wix, Henry E.
T/5
R.T. 2, Stratford, Wis.
Woods, Andrew J.
Sgt.
R.T. 4, Louisa, Ky.
Woody, Jack W.
Pvt.
6112 Eleanor St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Wrobel, Andrew J.
Pvt.
13934 Chippewa Ave., Burnham, 111.
H24IL Hjililary police (Company 4vialion Continued


Zakarewicz, Joseph J.
s Sgt.
104 Lincoln St., Worcester, Mass.
Zeaaon, William J.
Bvt.
2812 St., Chicago, III.
Ziehert, Stanley H.
1’fe.
181 Oakland St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Zieinski, Joseph B.
Pvt.
3 First Ave., Ondley, Mass.
Wrohlewaki, Kdward J.
T 5
,V2 Kavinc St., Kingston, N.Y.
Wyatt, HolM'ft
l > vt.
Box 4S2, Waynesville, N.C.
Wyatt, Joe
.Pvt.
W. 70S) Midway St., HI Dorado, Texas
Wyatt, John W.
Sgt.
Petroleum, W. Va.
Voting, Herbert
Pfc.
17« Burrows St., Pittsburgh, Pa.
Hoxsie, Raymond K.
Captain
39 Broad St., Westerley, R.I.
Logan, Robert F.
1st Lt.
5130 Garden St., Seattle, Wash.
Allen, William It.
CpI.
1080 New St., Santa Paula, Calif.
Itomio, Lewis C.
T 4
Southern Paeitie Co., San Francisco, Calif.
Bourne, George W.
T 4
R.F.D. 3, Beaverdam, Va.
Burke, Kenneth K.
Pfe.
903 Vrain, Denver, Colo,
Byers, William T.
1'fe.
4739 Douglass Rd., Toledo, Ohio
Calloway, Kenneth W.
t :>
R.F.D. 1, Camden, hid.
Carrol, George W.
Pfe.
4 White Ave., Brockton, Mass.
Castor, Walter E.
i’fe.
1203 Sibley Rd., Toledo, Ohio
Collins, Robert W.
r 5
2000 K. 233 St., Euclid, Ohio
l>avis, Billy .1.
r j’ r.
Box 284, Carter, Okla.
Davis, James ().
'r 4
Scotland, III.
Devine, Raymond
T/ 5
1049 Roosevelt Ave., Indianapolis, Ind.
Felts, John M.
'l’ :t
927 W. Ruby St., Lakeland, Fla.
Hahn, Edward J.
S Sgt.
1045 102nd Ave., San Leandro, Calif.
Heersema, laToy W.
T/;>
035 Sunset Itlvd., Temple City, Calif.
Herren, James (Jr.
Sgt.
4809 St. Elmo Ave., St. Elmo, Tenn.
Hieks, Howard K.
T/4
941 Chilton St., Charleston, W. Va.
Johnson, Henry J. Jr.
Sgt.
415 Sunset Drive, Jacksonville, Fla.
Klein, Roy W.
Pvt.
Box 841, Friday Harbor, Wash.
Knight, Charles G.
T/4
7th Ave,, Durango, Colo.
Linhardt, Harley A.
Sgt.
General Delivery, Lohman, Miss.
Lord, Wendell A.
T :)
10 Graham St., Leominster, Mass.
Lyons, Clifford E.
T4
Box 132, Adin, Calif.
Markowski, Joseph
Pfc.
Ill Valley St., Exeter, Pa.
Moler, William I).
T/4
Charleston, W, Va.
Myriek, Gerald K.
T 5
Gonzalez, Kla.
Nowak, Edward
T/4
Detroit, Midi.
Organ, Lester ('.
T 5
E. 205th St., Colfax, Wash.
Perkins, William ('.
S Sgt.
Cottage Grove, Minn.
Podkowinski, Anthony J.
T 4
2740 N. Bremen St., Milwaukee, Wis,
Rettig, George J. Jr.
Pvt.
General Delivery, Mississippi City, Miss.
Hlttenhouse, Arthur W.
T 5
145 N. Main St., Spring City, Pa.
Koche, Robert C.
Pfc.
1041 i Provideneia, Bnrliank, Calif. *
Sandidge, Penn
Pfc.
Enterprise, La.
Schaffer, Philip
Pfe.
105 Ave. P, Brooklyn, N.V.
Sehmuek, William A.
Pfe.
10410 Woodward Ave., Suuland, Calif.
Serkin, Charles
T 4
2070 N.W. 02nd St., Miami, Fla.
Shulman, Isadore
CpI.
2903 Brooklyn Ave., Los Angeles, Calif.
Stewart, Donald W.
Pvt.
Glentana, Montana
Stillwell, Wayne E.
S Sgt.
Route 5, Box 51, Fayetteville, Ark.
Cnger, Ercd F.
'J' 4
8508 Partridge Ave., St. Louis, Mo.
Weltruski, Joe L.
Pvt.
Route 2, St. Edward, Neb.
Williams, Neale E.
M. Sgt.
Long Beaeh, Calif.
Garton, Denton 1*.
2nd Lt.
40*2 N. First Ave., Norton, Kansas
Langhans, Emil A.
1st Lt.
2l 30 S. Mansfield Ave., Los Angeles, Calif.
Leigh, William M.
1st Lt.
3827 S. Hill St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Moreau, William M.
Captain
State Highway 34, Holmdel, N.J.
Shaw, Haskell E.
1st Lt.
1514 Gore St., Lawton. Okla.
Allen, Hal D.
T Sgt.
Box 57, New Boston, Texas
Allison, Joseph L.
Pvt.
R.T. 4, Box 240-a, Pensacola, Fla.
Ballentine, William 1.
T 5
3545 Indiana St., Kansas City, Mo.
Cachra, Frank A.
S Sgt.
5421 S. Wells St., Chicago, HI.
Castellano, Benjamin J.
Pvt.
SOS Dickinson St., Philadelphia. Pa.
Cichewicz, Alfred
T, 5
115 N. 0 St., Newark, N.J.
Coyne, Thomas J.
T 5
1S02 Coleman St., St. Louis, Mo.
(Tow, Homer L.
T/5
Mentone, Ala.
Densmore, Hoy 1).
Pvt.
110 S. Pearl St., Albion, Mich.
Dinse, Elmer A.
Pfe.
2S4!) N. Rockwell St,, Chicago, III.
Dodson, Timothy E.
Pfe.
<>14 Russell St., Nashville, Tenn.
Eeyh, Chester 1).
Pfe.
R.F.D. 1, Alma, Kansas
Groshek, Joseph M.
T/5
411 Harding Ave., Stevens Point, Wis.
Cross, Clarence L.
T 5
3052 Chesapeake Ave., Los Angeles, Calif.
Guetlin, Arlo A.
Pvt.
53S E. 102 St., Seattle, Wash.
Harvey, Ebert (J.
T T»
R.T. «, Box 193, Texarkana, Texas
Heek. Frederick L.
Pfe.
58 Walnut St., Wellsboro, Pa.
Henderson, Everett D.
T/5
17 Emerson St., Wenatchee, Wash.
Howell, Edward R.
Sgt.
950 Pallister Ave., Detroit, Mich.
Ivins, Wilford W.
Pvt.
R.T. 1, Ncches, Texas
Jacob, George
M Sgt.
730 N. Albany Ave., Chicago, 111.
Kat>lan, Eli
Pfe.
81 Washington St., Gloversville, N.V.
Ko|>ecki, Henry J.
T 4
9 Salisbury Ave., Moosup, Conn.
Lee, Kennit H.
1st Sgt.
Whiting, Iowa
Lellio, Frank M.
T/Sgt.
331 E. 108 St., New York, N.Y.
Lewis, Raymond C.
T/5
R.T. 1, Jack, Ala.
Locks, Abraham H.
Pvt.
701 Linden Blvd., Brooklyn, N.V.
Lovely, Charles E.
Pvt.
Knox, Ind.
Lowitz, Cleinith A.
Pvt.
Milbank, S.D.
Meulli, Jack
1' 5
219 E. 100 St., New York, N.Y.
Missildine, Don L.
T 4
1402 Thompson Ave., Tarrant, Ala.
Monteforte, Antfelo A.
T 5
590 —0 Ave., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Morales, Salvador,
Pvt.
452 S. Concord St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Murray, George J.
Pvt.
1133 W. 4 St., Oshkosh, Wis.
McBride, John B.
Pvt.
430 Scott St., Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
McKenna, Francis J.
Pvt.
10 Reeder St., Providence, R.I.
Norman, Gladys T.
Pfc.
R.F.D. 2. Henryetta, Okla.
Ochoa, Jesse M.
t r»
1124 Morales St., San Antonio, Texas
Odom, Thomas J.
T/5
K.T. 1, Antlers, Okla.
Parker, Alton B.
T 4
Box 189, R.I). 1, Cumlterlatid, Md.
Parkin, Clarence L.
Pfc.
2575 Gerald St., Rochester, Mich.
Parkinson, Ralph N.
Pvt.
R.F.D. I, Kosciusko, Miss.
Peck, Chester J.
T/4
142 E. borada St., Flint, Mich.
Perkins, Young V.
T/T»
Box 445, Cornelia, Ga.
Peterlick, Norbert J.
'J' 5
770 Marshall St., Milwaukee, Wis.
Peterman, Harold C.
Pfc.
Dillsburg. Pa.
Petersen, William T.
S, Sgt.
1070 Las Flutes Ave., San Marino, Calif.
Pickens, Lyle R.
T/5
R.F.D. 2, Eric, III.
Pitts, Norman
Pvt.
Amarillo, Texas
Pleasants, Brown M.
Sgt.
R.F.D. 3, Beaverdam, Va.
Reinert, John F.
T Sgt.
3114 Park Ave., New York, N.Y.
Reisinger, Roy F.
Pfc.
East Prospect, Pa.
Ritchie, Chester 1).
Pvt.
Box 135, Summit, Miss.
Sanders, Herbert A.
T 5
R.T. 3, Atlanta, Texas
Schinitis, Edward F.
T/5
02 Blackrock Ave., New Britain, Conn.
Segrete, Joseph A.
Pfc.
35-13 Vernon Blvd., Long Island City, N.Y.
Sheets, Willis T.
Pfc.
Randles, Mo.
Simpson, Carl W.
T/5
010 —7 Ave., N., Nampa, Idaho
Slish, William
T/5
210 Marion St., Scranton, Pa.
Spalding, Milton B.
Pfc.
Hull, III.
Stockovich, Matt G.
Pvt.
Kcewatin, Minn.
Stueber. Charles F.
Pvt.
528 Henry St., South Amlwy, N.J.
Tanksley. Harlen J.
T/3
320—9 AIm*., W., Decatur, Ala.
Tehero, Paul
T 5
10080 Lil»erty St., San Leandro, Calif.
Thruman, Henry J.
S/ Sgt.
Warren, HI.
Tyler, John W.
Pfc.
130 Warren St., Hudson, N.Y.
Cchwat, Walter
Sgt.
3525 Sarvis St., Detroit, Mich.
Frban, Chester F.
T Sgt.
707 E. 11 St., Peru, HI.
Walther, Sylvester B.
T 5
500 N. McClellan St., Bay City, Mich.
Wilson, George K.
Pfc.
Langdon, N.I).
Wise, Delbert 0.
T 5
Blutfdale, Texas
Wrobel, Michael P.
T/5
402 Graft St., Everson, Pa.
Zulch, Loren L.
Pvt.
8730 Mason Place, Detroit, Mich.
1616th Ordnance medium maintenance Company
1799th Ordnance Suapply and maintenance Company
H24lh Iddjilitary Police Cdompany ion Continued


Hake, William F.
2nd Lt.
5503 Itaska St., St. Louis, Mo.
Byrne, Edward C.
T/4
4507 Terrace St., Kansas City, Mo.
Coyle, Bernard P.
S Sgt.
5 Shawhan Ave., Carnegie, Pa.
Dido, Sylvester F.
Pfe.
4328 Bingham St., Dearborn, Mich.
Elkan, Kurt M.
Pfc.
2108 Davidson Ave., New York, N.V
Fors, Carl A.
TV 5
6511 Maple St., Omaha, Neb.
• Foschi, Solferino A.
Sgt.
208 Divisibb Ave., Ellwood City, Pa.
Gallagher, Farrell E.
T/5
7515 Normal Ave., Chicago, 111.
Gerulis, John A.
Sgt. v
JLT. 2, Hart, Mich.
Gervelis, Stanley J.
T/4 <
91*2 Meadow Ave., Charleroi,'Pa.
Gregor, Adolph F.
Pvt.
34450 Sims St., Wayne, Mich.
Halliburton, Roland F.
T/Sgt.
2240 Norwood Ave., Norwood, Ohio
Heller, Louis A.
T/5
Sioux City, Iowa
Hickey, Frank W.
s, Sgt.
4008 Chicago Ave., S., Minneapolis, Minn.
Hinojosa, Rafael R.
C'pl.
305 S. Indiana St., Mercedes, Texas
lanimcci, Angelo J.
T/4
1118 Edgewood, N.E., Warren, Ohio
Jagielski, Stanley F.
I'fc.
427 Laurel St., Heading, Pa.
Keck, Edgar G.
1’fc.
R.T. 1, Heiskell, Tenn.
Krause, Donald G.
T/4
0205 S. E. Hoed Place, Portland, Ore.
Mouscr, Edwin G.
T/Sgt.
Ashley, Ohio
Ohnoutka, Theodore E.
T/4
Valparaiso, Neb.
Phillips, George M.
T/5
3040 Ridge Hoad, Highland, Ind.
Keiiner, Melvern M.
I'fc.
Marne, Iowa
Vlean, Louis A.
I’fc.
H.F.D. 1, Weston, Neb.
Vogel, Joseph P.
I'fc.
P.O. Box 36, Andalusia, III.
Woods, Hernando J. Jr.
T/4
Bishopville, S.C.
Allen, George M.
1st Lt.
2150 Linden Ave., Long Beach, Calif.
Austin, Hubert H. Jr.
1st Lt.
2112 Fulton St., Bluefleld, W. Va.
Agnew, Charles M.
c,)l.
E. Greenbush, Renos Co., N.Y.
Baribeau, Ernest J.
Pfc.
528 X. 18th St., Escanabe, Mich.
Bartlett, Charles J.
CpI.
119 Christie St., Ridgefield Pk., N.J.
Cailler, Alfred J.
Pfc.
175 S. Main St., Concord, N.H.
Calfee, Robert M.
CpI.
Box 222, Williamson, W. Va.
Caravella, Dominico
T/5
104 Plymouth St., Fitchburg, Mass.
(.'arson, Janies H.
Pfc.
304 W. Main St., Gouverneur, N.Y.
Caruso, Vincenzo P.
Pfc,
51 Grove Ave., New Rochelle, N.Y.
Caughlin, Charles N.
T,f>
Monticcllo, Ark.
Cliase, Leon R.
Pfc.
Clayton, Del.
Christensen, Anders A.
T/5
Ballston Spa., Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Ciorti, Michael A.
CpI.
290 West St., Rutland, Vt.
Clancy, Frank J.
T/5
9-03 —43 Rd., Long Island City, N.Y.
Collarile, Henry
Pvt.
149 Linden St., Yonkers, N.Y.
Cronin, John A,
Pvt.
714 Broadway, Saugus, Mass.
Cudworth, Kenneth E.
1st Sgt.
300 Central St., Brockton, Mass.
l>e Orio, Frank J.
Pfc.
2 Vineyard Ave., Yonkers, N.Y.
Deveney, James C.
Sgt.
22 Brimblecom St., Lynn, Mass.
Dobrovocky, August J.
Pfc.
15 Edwin St., Bayshore, N.Y.
Drugan, Owen J.
T/4
21 S. Grant St., Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
Duncan, William E.
CpI*
1409 Essex St., Mattoon, HI.
Risenman, Herman
Pfe.
1403 Rosedale Ave., New York, N.Y.
I'almestalk, Harold V. B.
T/5
Box 132, Potter Valley, Calif.
Fee, Thomas
T/5
72 Hood St., Lynn, Mass.
Flanagan, Joseph
S/S«t.
18 Grant St., S. Hadley Falls, Mass.
Fleming, Charles G.
Pfc.
2055 Myrtle, Detroit, Mich.
Franich, Louis
Pfc.
21st A: Cherry Sts., Seattle, Wash.
Geramli, Andrew T.
Pfc.
125—2nd St., New Rochelle, N.Y.
Glide, Henry
Pfc.
1423 E. 69th St., Chicago, HI.
Greenberg, Max B.
Cpl.
479 Winthrop Ave., New Haven, Conn.
Hickman, James E,
T/5
Harrisonville, Mo.
Hogan, Charles M.
T/5
3453 Gilpin St., Denver, Colo.
Hubbard, Hugh F.
T/5
14 Auburn St., Whitman, Mass.
Kane, John A.
Pvt.
2539 —38th St., Long Island City, N.Y.
Kikta, John E.
Cpl.
205 Quarry St., Mt. Pleasant, Pa.
Kinney, Harold II.
Cpl.
Thayer, Iowa
Kulakowski, Frank .T.
T/5
4204 S. Mozart Ave., Chicago, 111.
Lavery, Raymond J.
Sgt.
2155 Gleason Ave., New York, N.Y.
LeBIanc, Raymond L.
Pvt.
72 Aroostook Ave., Millinocket, Me.
Levy, David
T/5
403 E. 94th St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Loffredo, Michael
Pfc.
5 Amsterdam St., Providence, R.I.
Loman, Eugene
Pvt.
51 Prospect St., Union City, Conn.
Losey, Jack G.
Pvt.
2360 N.W. 03rd St., Miami, Fla.
Marecki, Antliony I*.
S/'Sgt.
8189 Edgewood, Detroit, Mich.
Markiewicz, Edward T.
T/5
99 Freeman St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Mast, John Y.
T/5
R.F.D. 4, Watertown, S.D.
Mess, John E. Jr.
Pfc.
107-13 Sutter Ave., Ozone Pk., N.Y.
Miesch, Francis J.
Pfc.
1504—1 St., N., Syracuse, N.Y.
Milano, Armando
T/4
212 Wheeler Ave., Bridgeport, Conn.
Mundell, George E.
Pfe.
11 Morse Ave., Groton, Conn,
Murphy, Joseph E.
Pvt.
29 Wrenthem St., Dorchester, Mass.
O’Malley, Francis J.
Sgt.
6 Division St., Lancaster, N.Y.
Price, Howard J.
Cpl.
235 S.W. 8th St., Miami, Fla.
Robbins, Daniel \V.
Pfc.
Walden St., Concord, Mass.
Roland, Robert
S/Sgt.
03 Pleasant St., Worcester, Mass.
Rupard, Luther D.
Pfc.
11.T. 1, Laurel Bloomery, Tenn.
Salvas, Lawrence W.
T/4
R.F.D. 2, Putnam, Conn.
Schorr, Julius
Pvt.
805 E. 5th St., New York, N.Y.
Sheppard, John R.
Pfc.
Value, Miss.
Shupnick, Norman
Pfc.
2138 E. 23rd St., Brooklyn, N.V.
Singer, Julius
Pfc.
3053 Brighton 2nd St., Brooklyn, N.Y.
Sparks, Oran J.
Pfc.
Tussey, Okla.
Soykin, John T.
S/Sgt.
143 E. 66th St., Los Angeles, Calif.
Stegwcll, John A.
Pfc.
2041 W. Marquette Rd., Chicago, III.
Taylor, Joseph
T/5
43 Smith St., Fall River, Mass.
Terrell, Jack D.
T/4
Vero Beach, Fla.
Ventura, Joseph J.
T/5
4 Hazel St., Glen Cove, N.Y.
Watier, Edward C.
T/5
140 School St., Central Falls, R.I.
Watson, William I).
Pfc.
221 Laurel Ave., Arlington, N.J.
Weathersbee, Haston J.
Pfc.
565 Lee St., Atlanta, Ga.
Wisniowski, Frank
S/ Sgt.
51 Main St., Thorndike, Mass.
Wunderlich, William J.
Cpl.
448 —6th Ave., W., Kallspell, Montana
194th Ordnance Depot Company Detachment
1912th Company Detachment




