

|P* A BILL 'll
# f
| TO RE-MODSL
j(I (je lam ii]elating 1° |Jttltliai|s |
OTHER PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE SALE OF LIQUOR
WITH
SUGGESTIONS RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED
- A*'
The Licensed Victuallers’ Association
NEW SOUTH WALES.
I ::: ::: ' i
f f
i / SYDNEY: i
J. and G. Hyde, General Printers, 187 Castlereaoh Street.


F n


r KlocC
A BILL
TO EE-MODEL
to < JtoWfrw(*
OTHER PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE "ALE OF LIQUOR
WITH
SUGGESTIONS RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED
The Licensed Victuallers’ Association
NEW SOUTH WALES.
. °&o ■&—?-<-
SYDNEY:
J. and G. Hyde, General Peintees, 187 Castleeeagh Street,




To the Honourable the Members of the Legislative
Council and the Members of the Legislative
Assembly of Hew South Wales, in Parliament
Assembled.
The Council of the Incensed Victuallers Association of !New
South Wales respectfully submit for consideration the following
remarks and suggestions concerning the Bill now before Parlia-
ment, entitled: —
“ A Bill to remodel the Law relating to Publicans and other
persons engaged in the sale of Liquor.”
The Council of the Licensed Victuallers Association of New
South Wales, having had the above Bill under consideration,
are of opinion that many of its provisions will affect the trade
of the licensed Publican most injuriously, they are oppressive
to the Publican, and cannot be held in any way to tend to the
direct benefit of the general morality and sobriety of the people-
With a view of affording hon. members an opportunity of
studying their objections seriatim , and comparing them with the
different sections and sub-sections as the Bill is going through


Committee, the Council have marginally noted such sections and
sub-sections, and they trust their remarks and suggestions may
receive careful consideration, inasmuch as though the Bill is
introduced in the interest of the whole community, it should not
be forgotten that, as part of that whole, the Licensed Victuallers’
rights and privileges should not be entirely ignored. Thus :
Section 4.
It is thought that in the City of Sydney, as
in the cities of London and Dublin, a
Eecorder should exercise the powers proposed
to be conferred on a Licensing Court.
Section 6, In common fairness, any person holding the
Sub-section 4. extreme views entertained by the leading Tee-
total Societies should be disqualified from
holding office as a member of a Licensing
Court.
Section 10. Security should be required for the payment
Sub-section 11. of costs before entertaining objections, as a
protection against such men of straw as may of
themselves, or being stirred up by others
thereto, raise frivolous objections.
Section 18. No officer under the rank of sub-inspector
in the Police Force should be entrusted with
such important duties, lest a desire to earn
promotion should render any “Inspector”
over-zealous in the discharge of his duty.
Section 19. In the 39th line, the words “ every room and
part of such premises ” should be omitted, as
being thoroughly indefensible.
Section 21. In the 18th line, instead of “ by any general
authority,” it is thought the words “by an
authority ” should amply suffice to meet all
requirements.


It is thought that the word “Club-house”
should be accurately defined, as there are so-
called Club-houses which are simply public-
houses in disguise —to wit: —the Brunswick
Club and the Civil Service Co-operative Stores,
and others.
Provision should be made for Special
Licenses, entitling the holders, when carrying
on business in the neighbourhood of certain
markets, to open at 4 a.m.
The provision for granting bottle licenses is
manifestly unfair to the retail trader, and can
answer no good purpose. If retained, the fee
should certainly be considerably higher.
The whole of this Section is objectionable,
with the exception of sub-section 5, as it will
be utterly impossible for any District Inspector,
of his own judgment, to rate a house as pro-
posed, with any degree of accuracy, and no
man can justly be compelled to disclose his
business to anyone; and, further, the license
fees proposed to be demanded for classes 1 and
2, in effect, can be regarded only as imposing
penalties on the keepers of superior houses.
This Section is objectionable only in that it
provides for cumulative voting, and it is thought
that it would be better and fairer if the Elec-
toral Rolls were substituted for the Ratepayers’
Rolls.
The 20th line should be amended by the
substitution of the word “ fifteen ” for the
word “ twenty,” the latter providing for such
accommodation as must render the provision of
no effect.


Is objectionable to a great extent, as, in the
hands of unscrupulous persons, some of the
Sub-sections may be made to apply retro-
spectively, and the provision commencing with
the word “ Any,” in the 4th line of page 17,
promises to give endless annoyance to ap-
plicants.
This Section is certainly unfair to the ap-
plicant, and can but promote unscrupulous
opposition. Further, the second part thereof
fails to secure reasonable costs and expenses
being paid, in the event of the opposition being
frivolous or malicious.
As £3O is as high a fee as is paid in any
portion of her Majesty’s dominions for a
Publican’s license, the demand for a greater
sum in New South Wales is decidedly objec-
tionable. The fee for a bottle license, if such
licenses*are to be issued, is certainly too low.
In both instances, seeing how rapid is the
growth both of the city and suburbs, the word
“ three,” printed in italics, might reasonably be
amended by the substitution of the word
“ one.”
In fairness to the Publican, who has to pay
a lighting rate equally with all other ratepayers,
and as it answers no public purpose, it is
thought that this clause might be expunged,
or at all events so modified as to permit of the
light being extinguished at midnight.
This Section, without some clearer definition
of the word “intoxication,” is somewhat
tyrannical, and likely to lead to abuse.
This Section should be amended by striking
out in line 42 the words “ under class 1 or 2.”


This Section should be amended by omitting
from line 10 the words “ Good Friday and
Christmas Day ” ; these, though Church holy
days, being regarded by the vast majority of
the public as simply holidays.
The limit as to distance of ten miles is most
objectionable, virtually closing all places of
recreation in the vicinity of the City of Sydney,
and the burden of proof being thrust upon the
licensee, is merely seeking from him an im-
possibility ; it is, in fact, a glaring injustice.
It is thought that renewals and transfers of
Billiard and Bagatelle licenses might, in the
case of licensed publichouses, be made con-
current with Publicans’ licenses ; also that all
keepers of Billiard and Bagatelle tables who
make a charge for playing thereon should pay
a license fee, and be under Police surveillance
It is submitted that this Sub-section might
be amended by the omission (line 15) of all the
words commencing with “or unless ” down to*
and including the ward “ punishment ” (in
line 20), otherwise a publican whose light shall
have unfortunately been extinguished on two
separate occasions, and shall have been convicted
thereof within the three years specified, will be
liable to have his license cancelled, which would
be absurd.
Are on the like showing objectionable.
Line 5, “ authorised by any Justice,” ap-
pears to be leaving too much arbitrary power
in the hands of the unpaid magistrates.
Constables, being sometimes sent on duty
in plain clothes, it will be impossible for a
licensee to escape the penalty provided. An
exception should be made in this respect.


The sum of one pou/nd should be paid out of
the consolidated fund; otherwise, quite possibly,
there may be no money available for such pur-
pose ; the licensee, nevertheless, being still liable
to a penalty not exceeding Jive pounds for
refusing to receive “ such dead body.”
Under this Section, as under Section 60 of
the present Act, no appeal lies unless the
penalty is above £5. But in too many cases,
itis not so much the amount of the penalty as the
subsequent—the secondary —punishment that
may have to be borne, which is the real grievance.
See Sections 75, 76 and 77. The man’s charac-
ter is stained, and his prospects are liable to be
blighted, whether the penalty be above or below
£5. Why, then, if he feel aggrieved, should he
not be allowed to appeal to a higher Court, in
order that he may have the record of the con-
viction expunged ? There should be no limit to
this right of appeal, especially as the Section
enacts that in event of dismissal, the appellant
shall pay such costs as may be awarded against
him. An appeal should also lie in the case of
(Section 19) the refusal of a certificate for the
granting, renewal, transfer, removal, or cancella-
tion of a license.
It is submitted, that in all cases of complaint,
the complainant, before being heard, should
actually deposit the sum or £2O, as a guarantee
of good faith and his or her ability to make
good the compensation awarded by the Court
or Justices.
behalf of The Licensed Victualler's Association of
South Wales .
J. B. OLLIEEE,
President.


J /Fp


