

JML fiiHm r « $ B 111 s&f H ,\ * • •']
;«j 1 m»J #m ||9H| s I
Slsiiifil HHlta • ,'W - kwam Hk ; i












BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
NICHOLAS de MIKLOUHO MACLAY,
THE EXPLORER.
COMMUNICATED TO THE
ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
E. S. THOMASSEN, E.R.GhS.
BRISBANE,
MDCCCLXXXII.
C. &srt-£u ,1.




BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
NICHOLAS DE MIKLOUHO MACLAY,
THE EXPLORER.
[COMPILED BY E. S. THOMASSEN, E.B.G.S.]
“thp < loln?hl h n the | Un We ? tor i sein the west > fire to be cold, and
«Si -^ * bI T? fro “ out a rock .y fied upon a mountain’s top, that
m»£o PrZfi * y a e man wili not remain “ em P‘y
Nikolai Nikolaewitsh Mikluho-Maklay, now better
known as Nicholas de Miklouho Maclayf, the sub-
ject of the following sketch, was born in the Govern-
ment of Novgorod, in Russia, in the year 1847, and
until his eleventh year was educated at home
under the direction of a private tutor. His father, a
Russian noble {, dying about this time, young Nicholas
* This was selected as seeming very appropriate re the attitude as-
r e Di t y ch M r r v of tbe ri S hts of the Papuans before
! h authorities, as also before Sir Arthur Gordon and
C mmodore Wilson, which had a material effect in obtaining the
abolition of slavery in some portions of the Dutch possessions
d m causing the British representatives to take certain beneficial
measures, as will subsequently be seen.
f li- a^ eratioil . from the original Russian was in consequence of a
cmlitrt r f 0r S y Tr D ? Macla Y’ s passport, when leaving his native
y f ° r . th f University of Heidelberg, which resulted in his
d Under the name bj Which he is known t 0 the
+ Tlle famil J. of Mikluho-Maklay are from the Ukraine, Little Russia
and originally were Zaporogg Cossacks of the Dniepr After the
1 **• Uir s ine ’ “ "-tor of Bamel
Stepan (Stephen), served as a «sotnik” (maior of Cossacks')
under Genera, l Count Rumianzoff, and, having distinguished
himself at the storming of the Turkish fortress of Ostfhakofl;
was created a noble of the empire by Catherine 11.


was placed at the St. Petersburg College, where having
remained until he had completed the usual course of
study, he entered the University of that metropolis,
and passed through the customary curriculum. In
the year 1863, upon leaving his Altnct JUdtsv, he
determined to visit the Universities of Heidelberg,
Leipzic, and Jena; and, having been matriculated
at these seats of learning, the young Russian had
the opportunity of constantly studying under such
eminent men as Bunsen, Xirkof, Helmholz, Zeller,
Mittermeyer, Rau, Roscher, Weber,
Haeckel, Chermak, Gerhart, and others. Having at-
tended the Eaculty of Jurisprudence at Heidelberg for
about two years, and, at both Eeipzic and Jena, devoted
himself for some time to the acquisition of a knowledge
of Medicine and the Natural Sciences, Maclay finally
adopted Comparative Anatomy as his specialty, and was
fortunate in having so distinguished a master in this
branch of science as Professor Carl Gejiembaur, of Jena,
with whom he studied for about four years.
During this academical career, he wrote several able
papers on the morphology of sponges, one of which
appeared in the $£ Jenaische Zeitchrift fur Medicin und
Naturwissenschaften, Bd. IV., 1868,” under the heading
of “ Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Spongien,” and another
in the “Memoires de l’Academie de Science de St.
Petersburg, Tome XV., No. 3, 1870,” under the title of
“Ueber einige Schwamme des Nordlichen Stillen Oceans
und des Eismeeres.” In the same year (1870), his first
work on Comparative Anatomy was published in Le'ipzic,
entitled “ Beitrage zur Vergleichenden Anatomie des
Geliirnes der Wirbelthiere,” forming the initial volume


of a large and erudite work on the Brain of Vertebrata,
the succeeding volumes of which the author purposes
shortly giving to the press, as in his subsequent travels
in various parts of the world he has gathered, by careful
research and observation, much additional information
with reference to this important subject, to the compila-
tion of which new material he has devoted considerable
time and labor.
In 1866, Maclay determined to take a lengthened
vacation, and having travelled through Europe, visited
Madeira, the Canary Islands, and Morocco, in com-
pany with Professor Haeckel, of Jena, Dr. Greef, of
Bonn (now Professor at Marburg), and Herr H. Eol, of
Geneva (at present occupying one of the Chairs at
the university of that city); and, some three years
later, he made a tour along the coast of the Red Sea
and through Asia Minor. These travels seem to have
awakened in Maclay a desire for explorations in more
remote regions, such as are more especially alluded to
by the motto of the Royal Geographical Society; for I
find that in the year after his return from Asia Minor,
and when he had terminated his studies at the German
universities mentioned, he accompanied the Russian
steam corvette “Vitiaz” to Brazil, Patagonia, Chili,
and several of the islands of the Pacific. Einally, at his
request, he was conveyed to New Guinea, on the north-
east coast of which he landed in 1871 with only two ser-
vants, resolved to pursue his scientific investigations in
that comparatively unexplored country. Although
earnestly warned by the captain and officers of the
“Vitiaz,” of the perilous nature of this undertaking,
and strongly advised to abandon a project which, liow-


ever daring, would in their opinion only lead to dis-
astrous, if not fatal results, Maclay steadfastly adhered
to his determination, and eventually, on the 26th Sep-
tember in the year above mentioned, the corvette sailed,
leaving Maclay and his attendants to meet whatever
fate might befall them in so hazardous an enterprise.
The carpenter of the “ Vitiaz” had, during her stay at
the island, constructed for their accommodation a small
cabin, seven feet by fourteen feet, partitioned in the
centre,* which was erected on the southern shore of the
Astrolabe Gulf, in close proximity to a small harbor,
named by Maclay Port Constantine, in honor of His
Imperial Highness the Grand Duke Constantine of
Russia.
Almost immediately after the “ Vitiaz” had taken
her departure, one of Maclay’s servants (a Polynesian),
was prostrated by fever, and after a lingering illness of
some two or three months, during which he received
from Maclay unremitting medical attention and care,
died in the December following. The other man (a
European) was so constantly overcome by his extreme
terror of the natives, as to he of little, if any, assistance,
so that the explorer was actually placed in a worse posi-
tion than if he had been absolutely alone, inasmuch as
his attention had not only to be given to the mitigation
of the sufferings of one of the men, hut he had also
to endeavor, although in vain, to inspire the other with
that courage and self-reliance without which they could
scarcely hope to escape with their lives.
# Vide “ Natuurkundig Tijdschrift, Batavia, 1873,” Maclay’s article
called “ Mijn verblijn ann de Oost-Kiist van N. Guinea in de
Jahren 187i-1&73.”


The reception given by the natives to their visitors,
though it may be said to have been warm, was anything
hut cordial, as they showed unmistakable signs of open
hostility and the greatest suspicion of the intentions
and proceedings of Maclay and his party, who for some
months found it impossible to hold any intercourse
whatever with them, and, therefore, could make but little
progress in the much-needed knowledge of the language.
During this time—apparently either to strike him
with terror and hasten his departure, or to test his
courage—the Papuans frequently surrounded him in
great numbers, discharging their arrows and spears,
which, although they did no harm, frequently
passed in such close proximity to his head as to create
anything but pleasurable sensations.* On these
occasions, they would also often place these last
named heavy weapons against his neck, and with loud
cries and wild gesticulations threaten to despatch him.
Maclay, however, not only entirely abstained from
resenting these little attentions (or “kindnesses,” as he
facetiously terms them), but, remaining invariably un-
armed, strove, by the general serenity of his de-
meanour, to convey the impression to his new acquaint-
ances that he was altogether unconscious of their
having towards him any hostile disposition. This policy
* Apart from the intention of the Papuans to terrify Maclay, their
attitude, above recorded may have been actuated by a desire to
impress him with their shill in the use of their weapons. The
compiler has several times seen similar tactics for such a purpose
adopted by General Melgarejo (President and Dictator of Bolivia,
some ten years ago), who would throw knives and poniards at
marks upon the wall placed close on either side of the head of an
unfortunate bandsman, after cautioning the generally terrified
wretch not to move. J


of an outwardly calm indifference to the threatening
attitude of the aboriginals, together with the fact that
he was the first white man those of this coast had then
seen, were doubtless what enabled Maclay, unacquainted
as he was with the language, to obtain the footing he
did upon this, his first, visit to the terra incognita of
New Guinea. Meanwhile he had repeated opportunities
of exhibiting his medical skill, with, on many occasions,
very beneficial results, and he continued to move about
amongst the people, contentedly endeavoring by every
means in his power to alleviate any distress or suffering
that came under his observation, and, by thus proving
his usefulness, eradicate the existing antipathy to him
from their minds. This done, Maclay, by always
acting with the utmost sincerity, and hy never failing
to fulfil any promises he made the inhabitants in his
intercourse with them, gradually succeeded in gaining
their confidence to such an extent as to give rise to the
expression, almost amounting to an aphorism among
them, of “Ballan Maclay liudi,” (being literally “The
word of Maclay one”); and thus his efforts, so ear-
nestly persevered in, were not without due reward; for
as time went on, Maclay came to be regarded, first as a
benefactor, then as a friend, and finally as a being pos-
sessed of the power and attributes of a deity. The latter
impression—that he w'as a being more than mortal —was
created by one of those remarkable coincidences which
not unfrequently assist brave and patient discoverers in
such situations, and occurred in the following manner,
when the change in favor of Maclay had become suffi-
ciently great to warrant him taking a more authoritative
stand : —Certain acts having been committed of which


he strongly disapproved, he deemed it imperative to
emphatically convey this to the people, when, strange to
say, about an hour after, two shocks of earthquake were
felt, and at once set down by the simple Papuans to the
influence of the mentor whose displeasure they had in-
curred. Previous to this, however, he had been given the
name of “ Kaaram-tamo,” or “Man of the Moon,” which,
it transpired, later on, had arisen from the natives having
seen Maclay, one evening, using a ship’s blue-light, when
in search of some article in the vicinity of his cabin. This
light being somewhat similar, in their eyes, to that of the
moon, they imagined he must be some powerful being
who had that luminary under control.
The aborigines having thus become imbued with the
idea that he was a superior and non-terrestrial being,
Maclay’s safety from injury at their hands, was, from this
period until his departure, completely assured, so that
he was enabled, with more confidence, to devote his time
to a careful study of the habits of the islanders in the
vicinity of the Astrolabe Gulf, and to the exploration of
the mountains adjacent, as also of the islands near Cape
Duperre. This group consists of about thirty islands, and
was named by Maclay the “ Archipelago of Contented
Men,” from the fact that the inhabitants, who had never
had any intercourse with civilized people, appeared to be
living in a state of the utmost contentment.
In October and November, 1872, Maclay’s health
having been greatly impaired by severe attacks of ague, he
had determined to remove from the coast, to obtain the
benefit of the invigorating climate of the hills, but had
been prevented from carrying this into effect by the serious
23


condition of his remaining servant (whom he did not think
could survive), when, on the 19th of the following
December, Maclay was much astonished at the appearance
of a steamer, and the more surprised to learn that it was
H.I.R.M.S. “ Isumrud,” whose unexpected arrival was due
to the following circumstances :—For some time, no intel-
ligence of Maclay’s movements had been received in Europe,
until a rumor from China reached Russia to the effect
that he had been murderech by the savage inhabitants of
New Guinea. His Imperial Highness the Grand Duke
Constantine, who, apart from his position at the head
of the Russian Navy and President of the Imperial
Russian Geographical Society, took a sincere interest in
Maclay’s welfare, at once sent telegraphic orders to the
Admiral of the Russian Squadron stationed on the coast of
North-Eastern Asia, who despatched the steam corvette
“Isumrud” from Japan to inquire into the truth of the
rumor and to take such steps as the result might warrant. *
The necessity for recruiting his health in a more tem-
perate climate now induced Maclay to leave for a time the
coastf on which he had resided for fifteen months, hut not
* Maclay had shown the officers of the “ Yitiaz ” where he, from time
to time, would bury his diary and such papers as he might write,
so that, if he were killed by the Papuans, the greater part of his
writings might, nevertheless, at some future period, be found by
a Russian man-of-war, when finally calling to see what had become
of the courageous young scientist, who naturally expected that
Russia would, some time or another, afford him the means of
communicating with the outer world. The “ Isumrud,” it was
supposed, would convey to the Russian Admiral on the Japanese
station, any relics of Maclay’s sojourn in New Guinea.
t The portion of the north coast of New Guinea, between Cape
Croisilles and Cape King William, has a coast line of about
150 miles, extending inland for an average distance of 50 or 60
miles to the highest ranges, and was given the name of the
Maclay Coast by this explorer, so far back as 1872, for greater


before he had promised his black friends, who expressed
their deep regret at his departure, that he would shortly
return. After remaining five days, the “ Isumrud” steamed
away with Maclay, and, vid Ternate, Cebu, Manilla, Hong-
kong, and Singapore, proceeded to Java, where, at his
desire, he was. left to continue his travels and researches.
The very precarious state of his health, however, caused
him to delay his departure thence, and to accept, for a few
months, the kind hospitality proffered him by the Governor-
General of Dutch India (His Excellency J. Loudon), at
Buitenzorg, where he took advantage of this enforced rest
to commit to writing the results of his scientific observa-
tions, some of which were published in a review printed at
Batavia in 1873.* These papers, on the anthropology and
ethnology of the Papuans of the Maclay Coast, are re-
viewed at considerable length in the number of “Nature”
for February 25th, 1874, the writer of which article—
Mr. John C. Galton—having had, when at Java, as he
affirms, speaking of Maclay, “ the good fortune of making
the acquaintance of one whose fame has rendered his
name familiar to every biologist.”
As soon as Maclay was sufficiently restored to health
to continue his travels, he set out again in December, 1873,
convenience of reference in scientific description by avoiding the
constant repetition of its geographical position, and this designa-
tion is now familiar to the scientific world.
# The papers were published in the “ Natuurkundig Tijdschrift voor
Nederlandsch Indie, Deel XXXIII., 1873 and 1873,” viz.
1. Anthropologische Bemerkungen liber die Papuas der Maclay-
Kiiste in New Guinea.
2. Ueber Brachyocephalie bei den Papuas von New Q-uinea.
3. Ethnologische Bemerkungen liber die Papuas der Maclay-Kiiste
in New Guinea, I. and 11.
4. Notice meteorologique concernant la Cote-Maclay en Nouvelle
Guinee.


for New Guinea, but on this occasion chose as his field of
exploration the south-west coast of the island, which is
known tco the Buggis and Ceramese traders by the name of
“ Papua Koviay.”
Havimg engaged a somewhat numerous party at Ceram
Laut (onie of the Moluccas), to accompany him in case
of emergency, he finally departed for his proposed desti-
nation, £and after calling, on the voyage thither, at
several o)f the islands along the coast of New Guinea,
he eventiually selected as his place of residence a beau-
tiful spott on the main island called “ Aiva,” situated
opposite to an archipelago called by the aborigines
“ Mavarai.” A native village of members of various
tribes of Papuans rapidly sprang up around his hut,
and thus Maclay was placed in a particularly favorable
position t»o pursue his ethnological investigations of the
formation, customs, and habits of the indigenous popu-
lation. He was also constantly visited by the chiefs of
the neighboring tribes, who expressed great satisfaction
at his being resident in their vicinity ; but, unhappily,
during the temporary absence of Maclay from Aiva, on
a cruise eastward along the coast, the enemies of the
tribes who were friendly to him, attached the little
village, and having wounded ten men and women, besides
brutally murdering, in Maclay’s own hut, the wife and
child of one of the chiefs, carried off almost everything
they could lay their hands on, including nearly all the
explorer’s moveables. The pursuit of the leader of this
murderous expedition, and his subsequent
Maclay, personally, are graphically described in Colonel
(now General) the Hon. ¥m. Teilding’s communica-


tion to the Eoyal Geographical Society,* embodying a
translation of a letter from Maclay, giving an
account of the incident, the following extract from
which it may not be uninteresting here to reproduce,
viz. : —“ It was daybreak, and my servant Joseph
“was getting ready a cup of coffee, whilst I was
“ enjoying the lovely view spread out before me,
“ the beauty of the varied outlines and foliage of Lam-
“ mansieri vying with that of the countless islands
“ which closed in this grand tropical panorama.
“ In the foreground were some of my men preparing
“ their breakfast, whilst others were still asleep on the
“ ourembaie. A good many Papuans, recently arrived,
“ were clustered in my more immediate neighbourhood.
“ As Joseph poured out my coffee, he whispered mys-
“ teriously in my ear that he fancied that he had just
“ espied the rajah of Mavara, hidden in one of the
“ pralius which had arrived during the night. I told
“ him to go on board at once, and under pretence of
“ buying some cocoa-nuts, assure himself whether
“ Capitan Mavara was there or not. After a short
“ absence, he returned with the information that his
“ suspicion was correct.
“ I determined at once to seize this traitor, and
“ knowing well that I could not trust to the courage of
“ my men of Ceram, I said nothing to them of the dis-
“ covery I had made; hut I took into my confidence
“ one of the Papuans, Mol Birit by name, whom I had
“ noticed as being more brave than the rest, and on
* Vide Proceedings of the lioyal G-eographical Society for November,
1875.


“ my asking him if he would accompany me whilst
“ making the arrest, he replied, ‘ Yes, if you go first. 5
“ Armed with my revolver, and accompanied by Moi
“ Birit, to whom I had given a piece of strong cord, I
“ told Joseph to remain in the hut, and to load my
“ guns. Passing quietly amongst the groups of
“ Papuans and men of Ceram scattered between my hut
“ and the sea beach, I reached at last the place where
“ was drawn up the prahu in which Capitan Mavara
“ was said to be concealed. Having summoned him
“ three times by name to come out, hut without effect,
“ I commenced to pull off the atapes with which the
“ living part of the prahu was covered. I then dis-
“ covered the rajah sitting on the deck, grasping his
“ lance, evidently greatly astonished at seeing me.
u In an instant I was upon him, and seizing him by the
“ throat with my left hand, placed the muzzle of my
“ revolver against his teeth. At first he held out his
“ hands as if to resist, but overcome with terror, his
“ hands fell down by his side, and he trembled as if in
“a fit of ague. Leading him into the open, I called
“ aloud to the crowd now assembled round the prahu:
“ ‘ This is the Bajah Mavara, who caused murder to he
** c committed in my hut at Aiva, and it is I now who
“ ‘ take him as my prisoner. 5 The sight, however, of
“ this man, now so abject and helpless in my hands,
“ made me hesitate to press the trigger, and so to launch
“ him into eternity. I contented myself therefore by
“ desiring Moi Birit to secure him with the cord.
“ Seeing this, my own men from Ceram rushed towards
“ me, begging me to make haste and to lose no time in
“ embarking in my ourembaie , pointing to the numbers
“of the Papuans as compared to their own. ‘We shall


44 * see,’ I replied, 4 but in the meantime I must be
“ 4 obeyed, and I order you to carry this man on board
44 4 my ourembaie .’ Whilst they were thus occupied, I
“ turned to the Papuans, who, although they held their
44 arms ready for use, had remained silent spectators
“ hitherto. As I approached them, some shrunk away
“ and hid behind bushes, whilst others remained standing
“ where they were. Putting my revolvers back into
44 my belt, I went towards them, saying, 4 Have no
44 4 fear, Ido not mean to do any harm to you? These
44 words had an astonishing effect on the faces of my
44 auditors, which became less anxious, some of them
44 even welcoming me with a smile. I then addressed
44 them as follows : 4 1 am not angry with you, but with
44 4 the two rajahs of Mavara and of Namatoto; and it
44 4 is for this reason that I have made Capitan Mavara
44 4 a prisoner. You must now lay down your weapons at
44 4 my feet.’ Some did so at once, whilst others only fol-
-44 lowed their example, after having exchanged uneasy
44 glances amongst themselves. 4 Now, then/ said I, 4 if
44 ‘you will help my people to embark my luggage on
44 4 board the ourembaie , I will give you some tobacco.’
44 The natives readily complied with this request, as if glad
44 to be relieved of my presence so easily. As, however,
44 1 did not know the number of the natives, nor what
44 might be their intentions, I desired my two Amboynese
44 to keep an eye on the prahus, and to have the guns in
“readiness. Above all, dispatch was necessary, lest my
44 enemies should transmit to others the news of the
44 arrest of the Rajah Mavara. In less than two hours,
44 all my luggage being on board, I called the Papuans
“towards me, gave them the promised present of
44 tobacco, and said to them : * Go, tell the wife and


“ c children of Capitan Mavara that I will not kill him,
“ c nor do him any injury.’ Seeing that they did not
“ believe me, I added, raising my voice : ‘ Maclay says
“ ‘ this, and furthermore I give my hut and the atapes
“ c to the wife and children of Capitan Mavara. As to
“ c the Pajah Namatoto, I will come back another year
“ ‘ and seize him.’* I then took my departure towards
“ the boat, escorted by two natives, to the astonishment
“of my crew, who having begun to show signs of
“ impatience, by no means expected so friendly a con-
“ elusion to so hazardous an adventure.”
As may be gathered from what has been already
stated, Maclay had ample opportunity, during his second
visit to New Guinea, to observe the social and political
condition of the people among whom he lived, and he
arrived at the conclusion that the intercourse which
had existed, for three or four centuries, between the
Malays and the Papuans of the part of the south-
western coast on which the former had settled, had by no
means a favorable or improving effect upon the latter,
and that it may be considered very doubtful whether,
in the future, their contact with the white races will
be more to their advantage. According to Maclay, the
principal benefits obtained by the islanders, in the past,
from their knowledge of their more civilized sable
neighbors, have been their present nomadic life
(originated by the Slave Trade), the Pajhas, traders,
firearms, and opium; and he conjectures that, in the
future, they will probably receive, in due course of time,
* I have since heard that Rajah Namatoto was killed, a few months
later.


from the whites, residents (magistrates), missionaries,
traders more rapacious than hitherto, better firearms,
rum, new diseases, and many of the other so-called
“ advantages of civilisation.”
On his returning to the Moluccas from Papua-
Koviay, Maclay was taken dangerously ill at Am-
boyna, the principal town of the island of that
name, the remittent fever from which he was suffering
Being complicated hy erysipelas, which is endemic
at Papua-Koviay. Owing, however, to the careful
treatment of Dr. Huseman, the able physician of
the Military Hospital at Amhoyna, to which Maclay
had requested to be removed, his indisposition had not
the fatal result that was feared*, and in a short time he
was sufficiently convalescent to continue his return via
Ternate, Menabo, Gorontalo, and Macassar, to Java,
where he arrived at the end of July, 187 J. Here he
remained some three months, residing at Buitenzorg,
Tji Panas, and Batavia, busily engaged in writing
several papers referring to his late tourf, and in pre-
paring for an expedition he purposed making to the
Malay Peninsula, for which place he finally started
in the following November.
* “ The traveller Maclay was in a deplorable state of health and not
“ expected to survive when we left; but I have since heard
“ welcome news of his recovery.” Vide “ Dis-
coveries and Surveys in New Guinea ,” by Captain J. Moresby, 8.N.,
London, 1876, page 293.
f A preliminary notice of the results of Maclay’s second voyage to
New Guinea was published at Batavia in the “ Natuurkundig
Tijdschrift,” under the heading of “ Meine Zweite Excursion nach
New Guinea (1874),” and a paper by Maclay entitled “Einiges
fiber die Dialecte der Papuas-Koviay,” was published in the same
review.


Arrived at the peninsula, he lost no time in making
an excursion into the interior of the principality of
Johore, with a view to obtain some information regarding
the savage races occupying the jungle — i.e., the Jakuns,
Oran Bajets, and Oran Utans. These primitive people
are in the habit of retiring into the depths of their
forests, or taking refuge in the mountains, upon the
approach of strangers; and in consequence of their
following their usual custom, in this particular, on
Maclay’s visit, his journey was of much longer duration
than he had at first contemplated, and occupied about
fifty days, during which he proceeded, sometimes by
water, but, for the greater part, on foot. His explora-
tions, however, in his endeavors to have intercourse
with these tribes, caused him to penetrate into many
parts of the country, never reached by Europeans and
seldom by the Malays. On his return to Bahru, he
was very hospitably entertained by His Highness the
Maharajah, who had taken much interest in Maclay’s
expedition, and had furnished him with circular letters
to all the chiefs in his territory, which proved of great
service during the trip, in materially lessening the diffi-
culties of transport and of obtaining supplies. In
March, 1875, immediately after the excursion above
alluded to, Maclay proceeded to Bangkok, which was
not without ulterior results as regards his subsequent
travels in the Malay Peninsula, as upon this occasion
His Majesty the King of Siam presented him with an
“ open letter ” to all the Viceroys and Governors
throughout the Siamese dominions.
Subsequently, Maclay took another and more ex-
tended trip into the interior, which proved both onerous


and perilous; for his peregrinations through their
country being regarded with much disfavor by the Malay
Rajahs, outside of Johore, he experienced, whilst in their
territory, by reason of their action, all manner of diffi-
culties in the prosecution of his researches; to which
treatment, the courteous consideration shown him by the
Rajahs of Siam, on his reaching the latter country, and
presenting the circular letter from the King, before
referred to, formed a remarkable and pleasing contrast.
Notwithstanding, however, the obstacles placed in
his way by the native princes, Maclay, whose life was
in hourly danger after leaving Johore, succeeded in
traversing, in addition to that State, the more remote
principalities of Pahang, Kalantan, Sa, Lege, Rumen,
Jalor, Patani, Todion, Teba, Tshena, and Songora, and
reached Quedah on his return, after journeying one
hundred and sixty-three days, partly by means of canoes
and elephants, hut chiefly on foot, this exploration, in
fact, being a feat never before achieved by any other
European in this part of the world.
Regarding the value of the highly important
ethnological results of this journey, Professor R. Virchow
made the following remarks at the meeting of the
Anthropological Society of Berlin on the 18th November,
1876, viz.: “The account brought by Monsieur de
“ Maclay has proved, what was presumed sometime ago,
“ that the dark population of the Malay Peninsula is
“ closely related to the Negritos and Andamanese. It
“ represents the most important link between the
ec widely spread blacks of the islands and those of the
“continent of South-Eastern Asia, and it would cer-


“ tainly be in the highest degree important if now, in
“ addition to this, the dark races of South-Eastern Asia
tc were to form the subject of a new investigation. In
“ any case, we are bound to express our special acknow-
“ ledgment of the self-sacrifice and devotion of Monsieur
“de Maclay, who does not shrink from any danger in
“ his endeavour to fulfil, in a new direction, the hopeless
“ desideratum of a comparative investigation of the
“ black races of the East.*”
In December, 1875, Maclay proceeded, for the third
time, to Java, to repose a little and to recruit his some-
what impaired health, in the cool retreat of Buitenzorg,
where, living a very retired life in one of the campongs
(suburbs), he quietly occupied himself in preparing a
series of interesting and important introductory papers,
which were published under the titles given in the sub-
joined footnote, f It will be noticed, in following the
career of Maclay, that he has always been anxious to
impart to the scientific world, however briefly, the more
important results of his travels, so full of vicissitudes,
before undertaking any new expedition, although the
herculean task of giving a full account of all his voyages
and researches will not be undertaken until he be able
* Yerhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fur Anthropologie, Ethno-
logie und Urgeschichte. Sitzung vom 18th Nov., 1876.
f (1.) Eine Ethnologishe Excursion in Johor, Dec., 1874, —Feb., 1875.
(The English translation appears in The Journal of Eastern Asia,
July 1875.)
(2.) Ethnologische Excursion in der Malayischen llalbinsel (Nov., 1874
Oct., 1875), mit Kartenskizze und 2 Tafeln, Eine vorlaufige,
Mittheilung.
(3.) Einiges iiber die Eialecie der Melanesichen TdlJcerschaften in der
Malayischen ELalbinsel.
(4) Ethnologische JBemerTcungen iiber die Papuas der Metclay Kiiste in
New Guinea, II


to devote thereto a couple of years of uninterrupted
labor.
In January, 1876, Maclay was engaged getting
ready for a third voyage to the island of New Guinea,
having decided to again visit it, for the reason given in
a letter from him to the friend of his youth Prince
Alexander Meshterski, a translation of which appeared
in the Italian geographical periodical “ Cosmos.”* This
motive was the redeeming of his promise given, in 1872,
to his quondam friends, on the Maclay coast, that he
would return to them cc by and bye.”
In pursuance of this idea, he accordingy left
Tcherbon, Java, in 1876,t on hoard of a small schooner
named the e< Sea-bird,” which, after a trading trip to the
islands of Mikronesia and Melanesia, was, by agreement,
to be at his sole disposal, as to her ultimate destination.
After a short visit to the Island of Gebi, Mafia (St.
David), and the Group Nogmug (Uliti), Maclay arrived
at the Group Wuap, or Jap, remaining there fourteen
days. Having touched at the Pelau or Pelew Group, the
schooner proceeded via Jap, Hleai, and St. Mathias, to
the Admiralty Group, where Maclay stayed, first near
the villages Loneu and JPuM (on the south-east end of
the island), and afterwards near the small island of
Andra, on the north coast. In fact, wherever the
schooner remained for any length of time, Maclay took
the opportunity of residing on shore, the better to pursue
his anthropological studies.
* “ Cosmos ” di Guido Co?&, Torino, 1876.
f See also “ Petermann’s Geographisclie Mittlieilungen,’ 1879, page
407.


A visit to the groups of Lub (Hermit) and Ninigo
(Exchequer) brought the trading trip of the
schooner to a close, and Maclay then decided to go,
direct, to the Maclay coast. Arrived there, he was most
cordially welcomed by the natives as their old friend
and benefactor, and again taking up his abode with
them, he erected, near a village called by the inhabi-
tants Bongu, a small two-storied house he had brought
with him, in sections, from Singapore, containing two
rooms, with a verandah on the upper floor, and a
laboratory and store-room beneath. His cumbersome
impedimenta of about a hundred packages having been
landed, the schooner proceeded on her voyage to the
islands, leaving Maclay, with three servants (one
Javanese and two Pelau islanders), in comparatively
comfortable circumstances, to make a prolonged stay.
After becoming thoroughly domesticated in his new
home, Maclay made numerous excursions in the hills,
accompanied by the natives, who were delighted to
serve him in every way in their power; and he also
undertook a very interesting trip in a canoe, from the
village of the cannibals “ Erempi,” near Cape Croisilles,
to that of Teliata, near Cape King William, a distance of
about 150 miles along the coast, his native crew and
followers obtaining for him the most gratifying recep-
tion at the several villages at which he landed. The
greater knowledge of the language which Maclay had
by this time acquired, and the perfect confidence of the
inhabitants which he gained, enabled him to correct
the observations he had made in 1881-72, as well as
also to add to his previous experience much valuable


information regarding the manners and customs of the
aborigines of this coast.*
To such an extent had Maclay ingratiated himself
with the inhabitants, at this time, that in the majority
of the villages he visited, offers were made to erect
houses for his accommodation, but he contented himself
with having, in addition to his principal residence near
Bongu, a neat native hut on the small island of Bili-
Bili (Nitiag Island), the site of which was called by
the aboriginals “ Ayiru.” Isolated from all civilization,
but busy in pursuing his researches which yielded him
a rich harvest of scientific results, Maclay continued
his interesting sojourn among his dusky associates,
“ The world forgetting , by the world forgot ,”
until November, 1877, when the appearance of the
schooner “ Flower of Yarrow,” of Singapore, which he
had expected would call for him, as arranged for nearly
twelve months previously, showed to him that, in his
instance at all events, in despite of Hamlet's limit, and
without building churches, a man’s memory may out-
live his disappearance from the “ madding crowd’s
ignoble strife” for even twice ‘‘half a year.” The schooner
arrived, Maclay now prepared to take his departure,
leaving his two houses and his plantations of cocoa nuts,
bananas, and other tropical products, in charge of the
natives, who most earnestly requested him to remain, but
whom he pacified by promising, as when leaving them on
the former occasion, that he would return to them before
long. Writing with reference to the furniture, tools,
* The account of Maclay’s labors during his second sojourn (Jau.,
1876—N0v., 1877) on this coast, has not as yet been published.


stores, &c., left by him in the house near Bongu, Maclay
says: “ All these things, should I return to the Maclay
“ coast and find them safe, will he very useful to me, and
“ in any case, the preservation or the disappearance of the
“ same, will give me in future a criterion of how far I may
“ trust the natives of this coast, who hitherto, during my
“ two prolonged stays, have never stolen a single article.”
I may here mention that Mr. Arthur Peck, of Mel-
bourne, and Mr. Deputy-Commissioner Romilly, respec-
tively, in 1878 and 1881, visited Constantine Harbor, and
state that the name of Maclay at once established an entente
cordiale with the generally unapproachable people of this
coast, and that, on the other hand, the natives seemed to
consider his name a passe partout with any white people
visiting their shores. The scrupulous manner in which
the aborigines had regarded the laws of meum and tuum,
as related by Mr. Peck*, speaks volumes for the influence
# Some eight months after the departure of Maclay, the schooner
“ Dove” with an expedition of gold prospectors to New Guinea,
from Melbourne, dropped anchor in Port Constantine, near the
houses of Maclay. One of the members of this expedition, Mr.
Arthur Peck, has given in his diary the following account of their visit
to the Maclay coast: —“ 29th August. . . . AVb saw plenty of
“ natives in their canoes, but they did not come to us until the next
“ morning, when several canoes came, loaded with cocoa-nuts, bananas,
“ papayas, &c., &c. They called out ‘Maclay’ and then came along-
“ side. . . . Sept. I.—Ten of us took the long boat and seven went
“ round to Bongu, near the residence of Baron Maclay. Here we
“ found two houses, one constructed with sawn planks and the other
“ with bamboos. They were both raised about 6 feet from the ground
“ and were joined by a long verandah leading from one to the other.
“ They were both thatched with leaves. The roofs projected in front
“ about 5 feet, forming a sort of upper verandah. The doors were
“ secured with strong padlocks, and had not been tampered with since
“ the Baron’s departure, and the crowd of natives who were with us,
“ seemed proud of having to take care of this property, and, I have no
“ doubt, would have resented any attempts made to force an entrance.
“ The two houses faced the gulf, and a large quantity of cocoa-nuts,
“ papayas, and bananas, were growing all around; also a lot of
“ pumpkins, water-melons, and other fruits.”


of Maclay over these savage races, and the great and con-
tinued respect they had for him, though absent.
Having finally arranged for his departure, Maclay
embarked in the u Flower of Yarrow,” bound to Singa-
pore, and passing by the Lub, or Hermit Islands, and
the Pelew Islands, reached Mindanao, where he stayed
a few days in the harbor of Zamboanga. Proceeding
thence, he cleared the Basilan Straits, crossed the Sooloo or
Mindoro Sea, and sailing through the Balabac Straits and
along the north-west coast of Borneo, passed through the
Hatuna Anamba, and Tambelan Groups, in the China Sea,
A later record of a visit to the Maclay coast (June, 18S1) is to be
found in the official report of Mr. H. H. Bomilly, Deputy-Commissioner
to Sir Arthur Gordon, K.C.M.G., the British High Commissioner of
the Western Pacific, dated Brisbane, August 6th, 1881. Mr. Bomilly
says : —‘‘ ... We anchored in a tiny little bay called Port Con-
“ stantine. I was much impressed by the magnificence of the scenery.
“ . . . I had been absolutely unable to procure any interpreter,
“ but Baron Maclay had taught me a few words of the language, and
“ had shown me some signs which the aboriginals would understand.
“ Accordingly, when the canoes came round the ships, I told the
“ natives I was ‘ Maclay's brother,' and asked after their chiefs by name.
“ This did not seem to astonish them at all. ... In the afternoon,
“ Lieutenant Maturin and I had a most beautiful walk in the bush.
“ There was a richness of vegetation such as I had never seen before,
“ and such as I had not imagined possible.”
Mr. Deputy-Commissioner Bomilly, in thus referring to the magnifi-
cent scenery and vegetation of this region, is doubtless correct, as the
loveliest of the Antilles, Jamaica and Antigua, cannot be compared in
beauty to the average of the tropical islands of the Western Pacific,
and his statement that he had not imagined possible such richness of
vegetation, &c., is fully borne out by Palgrave. When writing of
these islands, the latter traveller observes : —“ Marvellous in our eyes,
“ impossible to be imagined in the eyes of those who have only word-
“ painting and imagination out of which to construct the view, tropical
“ scenery, be it mountain or plain, forest or coast line, lake or river,
“ can no more be realised by those who have never seen it than
“ colors by the blind, or music by the deaf. A Kingsley attempts the
“ sketch and behold a confused picture of a Kew palm-house; a
“ Michael Scott, and lo! the side scenes of a theatre; the scientific
“ accuracy of a Wallace may supply a correct outline, but even this
“ must be filled up by remembrance, or supplemented by engraving.”


to Singapore, where he arrived in January, 1878. Here
he had a renewed attack of his old enemy, remittent fever,
which, with general anocmia, rendered his health so ex-
tremely precarious, that he found himself compelled, though
much against his will, to submit to a term of absolute rest,
accepting of the hospitality of Dr. N. Denis, of Singapore,
as also, later on, that of His Highness the Maharajah of
Johore, who in the most cordial manner, also this time,
invited him to stay at the palace. Notwithstanding the
assiduous attentions of three medical practitioners (Doctors
Trebing, Arnold, and Robertson), Maclay’s health con-
tinued to decline for some six months, when he was advised
by his medical friends to go to either Europe or Japan,
and agreeing with them that, as he had now spent nearly
nine years in the tropics, a change of climate was impera-
tively necessary to restore him to health, he decided to
proceed to Australia, where, apart from the salubrious
climate, the peculiar fauna of the great island-continent
had much greater attractions for him than either of
the countries that had been suggested to him. Accord-
ingly the indefatigable traveller, who might be said
to have “no abiding city here,’’ was once more “on the
wing,” and arrived at Sydney towards the end of July,
1878, when he found that the change to a cooler climate
had already had such beneficial effect upon his health as
to enable him to embrace the opportunity afforded him by
the well-known lover of science, member of the Legis-
lative Council of New South Wales the Honorable William
Macleay, whose hospitality he had accepted, to continue
his comparative-anatomical studies at the Macleay Museum*
# One of the results of his visit to the Macleay Museum was an in-
teresting paper, written conjointly by him and William Maeleay,


in that city. Maclay having also put himself in communi-
cation with the Linnsean Society of New South Wales, he
contributed a paper* which was read at a meeting of that
body, on the 26th August, on the subject of a proposed
zoological station being established in Sydney, similar to
those of Europe and America, which suggestion he was
desirous should be carried out by the society without delay.
The following extracts from his paper showing the scope
and purpose of this proposal, which was very favorably
reported on by a committee appointed to consider the
matter, may not be without interest:—
“ The chief reason why the establishment of zoolo-
“ gical stations becomes every day a matter of increasing
“ importance, and presses itself more and more upon
“ the attention of scientific societies, are two in number.
“ The first is the fact that museums 'prove insufficient
“ for the study of anatomy, histology, and still more
“ embryology, if these studies are to satisfy the demands
“of modern science. In this fact we find the repetition
“of the universal rule, that as a science develops
“ itself, the field of its investigation is correspondingly
“ enlarged, new and difficult problems present them-
“ selves, and the progress of the science depends upon
“ the progressive discovery and application of new or
<c improved appliances. It is not only that the speci-
“ mens preserved in museums are often unsuited to
“ anatomical investigations, and altogether incapable of
under the title of “ Plagiostomalttqf the Pacific." (Part I, Pam :
Reterodontidee , accompanied by 5 plates, was published in the
Proceedings of the Linnsean Society of JMew South Wales for
October, 1878, page 301.)
* Proceedings of the Linnsean Society of N. S. Wales for August, 1878,
page 114, and January, 1879, page 108.


££ being used in those pertaining to histology; hut the
££ amount of material in museums is generally insufficient
££ in quantity. Now, it is undoubtedly upon the quality
“ and quantity of material at command that the value
££ and completeness of the investigation very obviously
££ depend. Secondly: Although, hitherto, most scientific
££ travellers follow the same routine, and devote their
££ time and energies to collecting, and that often in the
££ field of several sciences, I cannot hut think that the
££ time has arrived when this method should he aban-
££ doned, and that, in place of mere collecting or making
££ collections, the great aim of travel should he observation
££ and investigation , exercised immediately and upon the
££ spot. Eor this reason I believe that the establish-
££ ment of zoological stations in various parts of the
££ world corresponding to the regions in which its fauna
££ is distributed, from being a fond hope or pious wish,
££ will, under the pressure of absolute necessity , turn into
££ an accomplished fact. . . .
“ But, in addition to these two main reasons for
‘ looking upon zoological stations in general as things
‘ of immediate necessity, another presents itself from a
£ different quarter. I mean the circumstance that,
£ next after the tropics (which are the richest in animal
c life), the widest field offered to the investigator of
£ nature, and consequently the most suitable region for
£ the establishment of zoological stations, is Australia,
£ with a fauna so interesting, so important, and so very
£ far from sufficiently known, especially as regards
£ anatomy and embryology. Such a country would he
££ the place for a zoological station, or, to speak more
££ correctly, for several such stations.


44 But perhaps many of those whom I have the
44 honor of addressing, while they will agree with me in
44 most of the considerations above submitted, and attach
44 due importance to the Australian fauna, and to the
44 necessity of more thorough investigations of it than
44 collections and museums can supply, would ask me
44 wliat is to be understood by a zoological station ?
44 To comprise the answer in as few words as pos-
-44 sible, 4 it is a laboratory established for conducting
44 4 investigations in anatomy , embryology, histology, and,
44 4 if possible, physiology as well? The idea is not a new
“ one. Nearly ten years ago, Dr. Anton Dohrn and
44 myself were stopping in Messina for the purpose of zoo-
-44 logical studies, and we then became convinced that the
44 establishment of zoological stations was becoming a
44 vital question, and a necessity for science . That this
44 was not merely my conviction, I will show by quoting
44 the words of my friend Dr. Dohrn himself : — 4 In
44 * spite of a tolerably rich supply of instruments and
44 ‘hooks, I must, in my regard for the truth, confess
£e 4 that my performances fell very far short of my
<c c expectations. It fared no better with my Russian
“'companion, Miklouho-Maclay. We were striking
“ 4 examples of both the cases described above, of labor
‘ c 4 expended to no purpose; and we were both brought
“ 4 spontaneously to reflect on the great advantages
44 4 which we might have derived from a well-established
44 4 laboratory.’*
*A. Dolirn. “ Der gegenwiirtige Stand der Zoologie, und die Griindung
Zoologiscker Stationen,” Preussische Yalirbiiclier, Yol. XXX.,
page 8. To those who are interested in this question, I cordially
recommend the perusal of the article above quoted, as likewise
of another by the same author—“ Die Einweihung der Zoologischer
Station zu Neapel,” Yol. XXXY.


“ Eor ten years past I have often found myself,
“ during my travels, in circumstances similar to those
“ experienced in Messina. During my wanderings, I
“ have often found myself lodged for weeks and months
“ together in the houses and palaces of noble and
“even Boyal hosts, and yet how gladly would I have
“ exchanged the comforts and splendor of such dwel-
“ lings for a small but tolerably well furnished laboratory
“ where, undisturbed and undisturbing , I could have
“ carried on my work
“ To summarise briefly what is wanted, we require
“ a workshop—a laboratory for zoological students in the
“ widest sense of the word. It may at first be a single
“ well-lighted room of tolerable size, furnished with
“ some of the most necessary implements. The full
“ apparatus and furniture may he completed hereafter.
“ Everyone who works at the station will gladly under-
“ take, after the completion of his investigations, to in-
“ crease the original stock by the gift of the appliances
“ which he has needed for his own labor. The imme-
“ diate need is not of apparatus , but of a place of
“ undisturbed work —a suitable convenient room, or,
“better still, a small detached cottage built for the
“ purpose.”
Several months, however, having elapsed without
any steps being taken by the Society towards the object
he had in view, Maclay set himself the task of accom-
plishing it himself, and eventually succeeded in obtain-
ing from the government of the colony a small grant of
land at "Watson’s Bay, in Port Jackson, within easy
distance of Sydney, lie also started a subscription list


for contributions towards the erection of a suitable
building thereon, and in a very short time collected a
considerable sum; but being a stranger to the colony,
and not wishing to intrude himself, he at length decided
to leave the matter to the friends of biological science
throughout Australia. Speaking on this subject at a
meeting of the Linnaean Society (N.S.W.), in January,
1879, Maclay said
“ . . . When I speak again on this theme —of
£c the foundation of a Zoological Station —I assuredly do
“ not address myself specially to the Linnaean Society of
“ New South Wales. I only embrace this opportunity to
“ lay the matter earnestly before every friend of Biological
“ Science in Australia. Bor science it is of no moment
“ whether Aor B does it; whether in this case Mr.
“ Macleay, or the Trustees of the Australian Museum,
“ or anyone else, takes upon him this important task.
“ But to me as a stranger, it is easier to look at the
“ whole matter impartially in a true light, and rightly
“ to judge of the great advantages, for the progress of
« science, of a Station in Australia. But at the same
“ time, to me as a stranger, the ways and means for at-
£C taining the desired end, are less known than to most of
££ the gentlemen present. On that account, I leave this
££ part of the matter to those who are more competent;
££ but I declare myself ready, willingly, to do everything
“that stands in my power for this projectwhere
££ science is concerned, all trifling considerations, as a
££ matter of course, must give way.”
“ . . . I am so perfectly convinced of the
“ absolute necessity of the Zoological Station, that I


“ merely regard its formation as a matter of time . . .
“ the interval between the bringing forward of my pro-
posal (August, 1878) and the actual formation will
Cc afford a good test of the degree and intensity of scien-
“ tific life in Australia—at least in Sydney.” *
After a stay of some eight months in New South
Wales, during which he took several trips into the in-
terior, Maclay decided to visit the Islands of Melanesia,,
to continue his anthropological and ethnological studies.
To this end, and for reasons to be afterwards explained,
he took passage in the American three-masted schooner
“ Saddie E. Caller/’ which was about to sail for his pro-
posed destination, and left Port Jackson at the close of
March, 1879. On this voyage, Maclay visited New
Caledonia, the Loyalty Group (Lifu), the New Hebrides
(Tanne, Yate, Tongoa, Mai, Epi, Ambrim and Malo),
the Banks Group (Yanna Lava), the Admiralty
Islands, the Groups Luh (Hermit), Ninigo (Exchequer),
Trobriant, the Solomon Islands, and the Islands at the
south-east end of New Guinea. Leaving the schoonerf
at Barilalci, or Moresby Island, he reached Ware, or
Teste Island, and there fell in with the steamer “ Ellen-
Gowan,” belonging to the London Missionary Society,
* “ Proceedings of the Linnsean Society of New South Wales,”
January, 1879, page 103.
f All Maclay’s heavy luggage, chiefly consisting of zoological,
anthropological, and ethnological collections, made by him on a ten
months’ cruise in Melanesia, were left aboard the American schooner
named, to be taken on to Sydney. She, however, proceeded to San
Francisco, and only about one-half of the valuable collections mentioned
were left in Havannah Harbor, Fata, one of the New Hebrides, and
finally reached Sydney ; but the other half has never turned up, the
mate, who, on the master’s death took command of the vessel, stating
that, during very rough weather, he was obliged to jettison the missing
packages. It is to be hoped that this loss to Maclay and to science,
be not but a form of damages in which he may have been mulcted, for,
on many occasions, during the voyage of the “ Saddie F. Caller,” inter-
fering in behalf of the “ laborers.”


and in her proceeded to Annapata, or Port Moresby,
where, in consequence of another attack of fever, Mac-
lay remained for about five weeks, availing himself of
the Rev. J. Chalmers’ kind hospitality. In April, 1880,
Maclay visited the islands of the Torres Straits, and at the
end of the following month he landed in Queensland,
intending only to remain in Brisbane a few days. The
opportunity, however, of acquiring some interesting
anatomical material for his anthropological researches,
was so favorable that he was induced to prolong his stay
in that capital for several months. The Government of
Queensland* readily placed a part of a building, formerly
a museum, at Maclay’s disposal as a laboratory during
his stay, and also allowed him to make use of the photo-
graphic apparatus of the Government Survey Office,
where he obtained some excellent photographs of the
brain of different varieties of the Genus-llomo. Whilst
in Queensland, Maclay was induced, by his desire to
follow up his anthropological and comparative-anato-
mical studies, to visit the interior, going on one occasion
as far as the Balonne Biver, and later on to Pikedale
(near Stanthorpe).
In the end of January, 1881, Maclay returned to
Sydney, with the principal intention of at last estab-
lishing the Zoological Station at Watson’s Bay, which
matter still remained in statu quo, although nearly two
years had now elapsed. In a paper read before the
Linnsean Society of New South Wales in February,
* The Macllwraith government, one of the members of which, Sir
Arthur Palmer, Maclay had already met in Johore, when staying
with H. H. the Maharajah, on whom Sir Arthur called while on his
way to Europe.


1881, Maclay expresses his opinion regarding this sub-
ject as follows :
“ When I received in May, 1880, on Thursday
" Island, a letter from my friend Mr. William Haswell,
“ informing me that the Zoological Station in Sydney
“ was not established, I determined not to leave Austra-
“ lia before the scheme had been carried out. My stay
“in Brisbane has once more caused me to feel the
“ necessity of such an institution for the biologist. I
cc could expatiate at length on the advantages of a Zoo-
“ logical Station, but I content myself with remarking
“ that, in spite of my great dislike to wmste my time, I
“ was obliged to spend many days, even weeks, in Bris-
“ bane and Sydney without the possibility of working,
“ on account of the want of a suitable place.”
With these views, he again took the matter in hand
himself, and though the amount required* had not yet
been subscribed, Maclay engaged an architect to furnish
plans, &c., which being put in the hands of a contractor,
the erection of a six-roomed cottage was at once commenced.
Believing that the biological station should be entirely of
an intercolonial character, Maclay proceeded to Melbourne
in April, where, assisted by the scientific societies of Vic-
toria, he succeeded in not only obtaining further donations
towards the erection of the building above alluded to, but
also a formal promise from the Boyal Society of Victoria,
of an annual grant towards the maintenance of the station.
Meanwhile, Maclay, on his return to Sydney, experienced
from the Government of New South Walesf similarly
* Of the sum of ,£6OO required, the Government of New South Wales
had offered to contribute one half, on condition that a similar
amount were obtained by subscriptions,
f The Parkes-Eobertson Government.


liberal treatment to that he had received, when in Bris-
bane, from the authorities of Queensland, being allowed a
cottage at the Exhibition grounds, for use as a biological
laboratory.
In August of the same year (1881), a most favorable
opportunity was afforded Maclay to pay another visit to
the southern coast of New Guinea, by the invitation of
Commodore Wilson, to proceed thither in H.M.S. “ Wol-
verene,” which enabled him to complete certain portions
of his anthropological investigations, left unfinished the
previous year.
On his return to Sydney, in the following October,
Maclay was pleased to find the biological station had
been so far proceeded with as to warrant him in con-
sidering his proposition as at length carried out, and he
was now able under more favorable circumstances to con-
tinue his scientific labors, which had hitherto been too
often interrupted. Writing of the efforts of Maclay in
the interests of science at this time, “ Nature,” under date
of the 23rd September, 1881, says :
“ , . . Certainly science in Australia is greatly
“ indebted to the intelligent energy of Baron N. de Maclay,
“and we trust the work so well begun, will be continued
“ without abatement.”
It will now be necessary to revert to the reasons
that induced Maclay to proceed, in March, 1879, in the
“ Saddie E. Caller,” to Melanesia, as before mentioned.
Since his arrival in the Western Pacific, Maclay had
always taken a very great interest in the subject of the
general relations existing between the islanders and
the white traders and colonists ; and being of opinion


that these were on anything hut a satisfactory footing,
he had, in January, 1879, addressed a letter, setting
forth his views on this important question, to His Excel-
lency Sir Arthur Gordon, K.C.M.G., the British High
Commissioner in the Western Pacific (vide appendix).
Intent, however, on obtaining still further and conclu-
sive evidence regarding the intercourse of the whites
with the natives, with special reference to the so-called
<c labor ” trade, Maclay embarked in the schooner above
referred to, which he reasonably conjectured would afford
him ample opportunity of extending his experience in
the direction he desired, in consequence of her being in
that trade, besides continually having on hoard a num-
ber of South Sea Islanders, engaged for beche de mer
(trepang) and pearl shell fishing, and being bound on a
voyage during which numerous “labor” vessels, hailing
from Queensland, Fiji, and New Caledonia, would he
met with at the several places of call in the Archipela-
goes of the Pacific. From what came under his notice
during this voyage, Maclay became confirmed in his
idea as to the many abuses existing in the “ labor” trade,
notwithstanding that in some instances, as for example
in all vessels trading from ports in Queensland, he found
that officials, one to every vessel, were appointed, to
accompany them and supervise the recruiting * of the
* This term is generally applied to the process of obtaining
islanders by those engaged in the “ labor”-trade, who are either owners
or charterers of vessels, or masters thereof acting on their own account
or on behalf of their employers. A full complement of “ boys ” having
been secured, under the supervision of the Government officer, who is
supposed to see that the rate of wages, period of service, and other
conditions stipulated by Act of Parliament, are properly explained to
the recruits , the vessel sails for a port of debarkation previously arrang-
ed for, where, on payment of a sum fixed upon per head by the master
or other in charge, to cover the cost of transport, et cetera, they are


natives and their subsequent treatment whilst on board.
Even, however, under these circumstances, more favor-
able than ordinary, Maclay is of opinion that there are
objectionable features, in connection with this trade,
which are beyond the reach of any such supervision as
that alluded to, and which are either lost sight of, or left
purposely unacknowledged by those interested apologists
for this traffic, who contend that, so long as the islanders
voluntarily enlist themselves, the “ labor ” trade is per-
fectly legitimate, although tbe inducements offered to
attain this end may very likely be of the most specious
character, and the young islander, prompted by curiosity
and the novel prospects held out to him, may be leaving
his home despite the earnest protestations of his family
and friends and the wishes of lus countrymen.
But the evils arising from such a state of affairs,
although they may he irremediable by any present
system of supervision, must still, according to Maclay,
he obviously existent to every thoughtful and impartial
mind; and it is to these evils that he, in no small degree,
attributes many of the outrages by the natives of which
the whites have from time to time had to complain.
Bor instance, Maclay points out that an exodus of young
and able-bodied men, such as frequently takes place on
transferred to planters and others requiring them,on the latter agreeing
to carry out the provisions of the “Pacific Island Laborers’ Act” of
1880, one of which is that £6 per annum shall be the minimum rate of
wage to be paid each islander. As, however, the Government Agents
are not required to go through any examination, and are generally per-
fectly ignorant of the language, a smattering of which they only acquire
after having made a few voyages, it can readily be imagined that they are,
to a very gi’eat extent, in the hands of those who, pretending to have a
knowledge of the various dialects, engage themselves as boat steerers,
and are tie facto the men through whom the recruitingj is done.


the visits of ct labor” vessels to any of the islands, must
necessarily, in sparsely populated countries, cause much
inconvenience and increased labor to the inhabitants
that remain, more especially to those on whom devolves
the task of procuring food, et aetera; as, with
the diminished numbers of the latter, they not
only experience greater difficulty in obtaining a
sufficiency for themselves, but find they are addi-
tionally burdened by having, in many instances, to
contribute to the support of the families left behind by
the emigrants. Tlius, much discontent is, naturally,
engendered among them, and a concomitant feeling of
ill-will is created towards the whites, whom, they con-
sider, to a great extent, responsible for the alteration
in their conditions of living. Besides, Maclay observes,
the picked men of a tribe, being thus removed, the
latter is of course weakened, and the more readily laid
open to attack by its enemies: hence the chiefs have great
objections to these periodical migrations of those they
principally rely on in times of danger ; and, in the event
of one of their people not returning at the expiration of
the term for which he engaged, they at once conclude
that the missing one has either succumbed to the ill-
treatment of the whites, and died far away
“ From the homes of his kindred , his forefathers’ graves ,”
or that the whites have failed to fulfil their promises to
bring him back to
“ Where his father s hut was rear’d ,
“ Where his mother’s voice was heard ,
“ Where his infant brothers play’d
“ Beneath the tall trees’ spreading shade.”
Thus, from Maclay’s point of view, the circumstance of


“ kanakas” re-engaging themselves in Queensland, after
their first period of service has expired, may be the not
unfruitful source of many recriminatory acts on the
part of the islanders, although such re-engagements are
frequently somewhat feasibly adduced as evidence of
the kind treatment the “ hoys ” receive at the hands of
their white employers.* Here it may be remarked that,
although the diet provided for the islanders, and the
general conditions of their residence whilst employed
* I observe in the Graphic of the 29th October, 1881, that an
anonjunous contributor, who is an evident apologist for the “ labor” traffic
lays great stress on this fact of islanders again taking service, which,
on the other hand, is very ably explained in an editorial,on the subject,
that appeared in the Melbourne Argus (the Times of Australia)
of the 12th November, 1881, followed by a leader on the 10th
December, in the same year. The same journal, in its issue of
the 18th idem , also publishes a report of an address by the Reverend J.
Brown, of the Australian Missionary Society, delivered in the Wesleyan
Church in Melbourne, of which the following extract speaks for itself:
** A rrmof ■nnmhoT' mnrnor*u np fir* Iwn
“ . . . A great number of the murders could be traced to two
“ causes, one being the so-called labor-trade, which would very often
“ be much better described as the slave-trade, and the other being the
“ gross and criminal carelessness of the sufferers themselves. Some-
“ times two or three white traders would land on an island and ‘ bounce ’
“ a chief in a most foolish and reckless way. But a great majority of
“ the massacres of white men were committed out of revenge for
“ atrocities perpetrated by other white men, and often in connection
“ with the labor trade. The fact that many of the ‘ return boys ’ would
“ often voluntarily re-engage themselves a second or third time, showed
“ that many islanders were quite willing to leave their island, but still
“ the labor vessels assumed a jurisdiction over the natives that was
“particularly objected to. For instance, when a ‘ labor’-vessel went to
“a village, a number of young men might wish to get away in her, but
“ the olcl men would object, because the departure of the youths would
“ leave the village without protection, and there would be a difficulty
“of providing food for these young men’s families. If, however, the
“ chief went aboard the labor-vessel and objected to the young men
“being taken away, he might very probably be kicked overboard!
“He would not say the labor-trade was an unmixed evil, but it was
“ almost one. These people were scandal-mongers just like white
“ people, and sometimes, when an islander returned, after a prolonged
“ absence, he would hear stories of the doings of his family which
“ would lead to fights. The trade ought to be brought under super-
vision; until then, massacres would not cease.”


in the colonies, may he all that a Government Inspector,
or other “white man” may think desirable for a
“ blackfellow,” they probably have not the same
roseate aspect to a South Sea Islander accustomed
to a clolce far niente state of existence, and this
supposition is, in a great measure, borne out by
the fact of aboriginals being found in the Aus-
tralian ‘ hush,” who after having experienced the
“ advantages of civilization ” for a considerable term,
have, nevertheless, preferred returning to their original
mode of living, to enjoy ease if devoid of dignity and—
clothes. Moreover, it does not necessarily follorv, be-
cause an islander agrees to enter a second or third term
of servitude, that this can always be safely cited as a
proof of his satisfaction at his mode of living whilst
among the whites, inasmuch as, when the time comes for
him to leave the colony, he may he desirous of avoiding
certain punishment or discipline which he is cognizant
he will be amenable to under the head men of his tribe
upon his return, either on account of his having left his
native island without their consent, or having stayed be-
yond his stipulated time, or, on the other hand, he may
have found on his arrival in the islands, his domestic
and other relations altered to such an extent, during
his absence, as to render his residence there almost im-
possible, and his life so unhappy that it is preferable to
him to choose the lesser of two evils, and again leave his
former home, though it may perhaps be for ever.
Another important matter mentioned by Maclay in ex-
planation of the desire on the part of islanders to re-
engage themselves in the colony, rather than return
home, is the fear they have that they may not be landed


on the island,* or in the exact neighborhood from whence
they came, and that they thus may not he enabled to rejoin
their friends, without probably haying to undertake a long
and toilsome journey, perhaps also rendered dangerous
by the interference of tribes, hostile to their own,
through whose country they would have to pass. These
reasons, together with the narrations given by return
islanders of the discomforts they experienced in being
obliged to change their usual vegetable and piscine diet
to one principally animal (with, in many instances, bad
water), and also from a life of comparative idleness to one
of continuous labor in the interior of a strange country,
far from the blue waters that lave and breezes that
fan the shores of their native isles, are fully sufficient, in
Maclay’s opinion, to account for the natives being prone
to take retaliatory measures on those they imagine lure
their countrymen away, only to deceive them, for ends
of their own. The Colonial Governments will doubtless
endeavor to exercise as much control over this trade as
is in their power, as also to carry out reforms in respect
to the matters that have been herein briefly alluded to,
together with those regarding medical examination
of islanders about to return, and the supply of spirituous
liquors, firearms, et cfetera; but so long as any such
* In Queensland, the master of a “ labor ” vessel, under the 10th
section of the Pacific Island Laborers Act of 1880, has to find two
sureties and execute a bond for £5OO to the effect that he obliges himself
to land the “ return laborers ” with their property at their proper villages
on their native islands, and the Colonial Secretary, no doubt, would
rigidly enforce the penalty in any cases of infringement brought under
his notice, as well as do his utmost to see that the Government agents
in the “ labor ” vessels exercise great care in the certificates they issue,
on which the respective bonds are cancelled. But where no Govern-
ment agent is carried, and where South Sea laborers are taken on
beche-de-mer and pearl shell fishing expeditions from island to island,
as well as in vessels hailing from other parts, most of the abuses com-
plained of are committed.


regulations or restrictions are only confined to British
and Colonial vessels, to the detriment of their trade as
compared with that of other countries, it appears that
the traffic in the South Seas will never be established on
a satisfactory basis, and that this desideratum can only
be attained by an international congress being held to
decide on a line of polity by which an indispensable
unanimity of action may be secured*.
So impressed was Maclay with what he saw during
his trip in the “ Saddie P. Caller ” that, on his return
to Australia, he was at once struck with what appeared
to him the very one-sided accounts of South Sea Island
events published in the press, the particulars of
which were evidently chiefly obtained from masters of
vessels trading to the islands, and others, who, from the
nature of their avocations and interests, could not he
expected to furnish fairly impartial reports of the trans-
actions occurring in the South Seas, or form a correct
opinion on the question of the state Of affairs between
the whites and the natives. Maclay accordingly con-
sidered it his duty to express, in a letter to the Commo-
dore of the Australian Naval Station,! his readiness to
place at that officer’s disposal an unbiassed recital of his
experience in this important matter ; and later on, dur-
ing his voyage in 11.M.5. “"Wolverene” to New Guinea,
Maclay furnished Commodore Wilson with full
information on the subject, in a paper entitled “ Kid-
napping and Slavery in the Western Pacific.”J In
* I learn from a cablegram, published in the “ Sydney Morning
Herald,” of the 17th December, 1881, that Great Britain is inviting
the Foreign Powers to a congress on the subject, so that it is probable
the action taken by Maclay, as subsequently mentioned herein, will not
be without result.
f Vide appendix.
| This paper has not been published yet, but will, no doubt, be


this production Maclay treats the whole subject in such
an able and equitable manner that it is to be sincerely
hoped it will receive from the Lords Commissioners of
the Admiralty and the Imperial Government, when laid
before them, the serious consideration which it deserves,
and be the means of expediting the compilation of the
regulations so imperatively necessary to secure the
proper conduct of the intercourse between the whites
and the aborigines of the South Sea Islands, so that it
may be in accordance with the laws of common humanity
and justice, brom the success which attended Maclay’s
efforts in 1871 and 1876, when he addressed the Govern-
ment of Netherlands-India on the subject of the regular
slave trade existing in their possessions, contributing, no
doubt very materially, to its abolishment so far as re-
gards the islands of Ternate and Tidore,* he is sanguine
that satisfactory measures to accomplish also this end, will
shortly be taken.
Hearing that a scheme had been proposed in New
Zealand to attempt to colonise the Maclay Coast
in New Guinea, Maclay, before he made his
trip to Melanesia, above referred to, addressed
another letter to the High Commissioner, with
a view to having the right of the natives of that coast, to
their own territory, completely recognised in the event
laid before the British Parliament, together with the evidence taken in
Fiji, Queensland, and elsewhere, by Deputy Commissioner Bomilly,
and' the respective reports of Sir Arthur Gordon and Commodore
Wilson.
* It was decided by the Dutch Colonial Government that the slave
trade should be abolished on the islands of Ternate and Tidore. (Letter
from Mr. Levisohn-Norman, Councillor of Dutch India and formerly
Colonial Secretary). Yide appendix. For further information about
this slave trade and slavei'y on the N.W. Coast of New Guinea and the
islands of Ceram Laut,.vide “Social-politischer Zustand der Bevdlkerung
von Papua-Koviay int 1874,” Maclay s paper : Meine Zweite
Excursion nach New Guinea, 1874.”


of an expedition proceeding thither, as also to prohibit the
disposal to them of firearms, ammunition, and ardent
spirits, so as to avert bloodshed and complications in the
future. With the opinions enunciated in this communica-
tion, His Excellency fully coincided, and, whilst forward-
ing the letter to the Secretary of State for the Colonies for
his favorable consideration, promised any co-operation in
his power to carry out Maclay’s suggestions, so far as
British subjects were concerned. (Vide appendix).
Improved in health by the change to the more
temperate climate of New South Wales, Maclay has
now (January, 1882) resolved to take advantage of a
Russian Squadron calling at Melbourne*, to pay a brief
* Owing to the hurried preparations which Maclay has had to
make in consequence of his somewhat unexpected departure, the com-
piler has been unable to obtain such full data as under other circum-
stances he would have become possessed of; but Maclay has,nevertheless,
been good enough to furnish him with the map accompanying this
sketch, which as coming from such a source, and being the latest one pro-
duced of the portion of the w T orld depicted, will doubtless be considered
of interest. Prom the compiler’s acquaintance with Maclay, during
which he took the opportunity of gathering from time to time the fore-
going outline of the many
“ Moving accidents by flood and field"
which have befallen the explorer during his career, he looks forward
with pleasurable anticipations to the perusal of Maclay’s works now in
embryo, which will treat of new and highly important scientific matters,
and not fail to convey to those more particularly interested in Geo-
graphical Science valuable information respecting such interesting
countries as Arabia, Morocco, Brazil, Chili, the Malay Peninsula, Siam,
and the island-continents and numerous archipelagoes, groups, and
islands in the Western Pacific and Indian Ocean, as notwithstanding
his predilection for ethnological researches and anthropological studies
(more especially comparative anatomy and its neurological subdivi-
sion), Maclay, as might be expected from a member of the Imperial
Kussian Geographical Society, has ever been a keen observer of the
geographical features of the varied lands in which he has been so ex-
tensive a traveller. It is satisfactory to know that Maclay has deter-
mined, on his return to these southern latitudes, and as soon as he can
spare the time from his literary and scientific labors, to fulfil the pro-
mise made to his Papuan friends, that he would again pay them a
visit and, should occasion require it, endeavor to protect or assist


visit to liis native land, after twelve years of wanderings,
hardships, and privations, in the several remote portions
of the globe mentioned herein, and accordingly purposes
embarking on board the corvette “ Vestnik,” which will
convey him so far on his homeward journey as Hong-
kong and Japan, from whence, after a short stay, he
will proceed to Russia. His sojourn in Europe ended,
Maclay intends returning to Sydney, to arrange in a
systematic manner the scientific results of his travels,
keeping in view the special facilities that are afforded
by the “ Australian ” and the “ Macleay ” Museums in
that city, so much more replete as they are than those
of Europe with valuable collections from the part of
the world more particularly constituting the field of
Maclay’s operations. The existence also of the Sydney
Biological Station, the founding of which Maclay so
strenuously advocated, and to which he was so instru-
mental in giving “ a local habitation and a name” —
besides the risk of loss and damage attending the
transport of his voluminous manuscripts, collections, et
emtera, to Europe —further induce him to arrange for a
return to Sydney, when it is to be hoped the salubrious
climate of what has been termed, despite her younger
them by again bringing before the proper authorities any matters
about which he considers that the inhabitants of the Maclay coast
have a right to be heard, so that their complimentary aphorism of
“ Ballan Maclay hudi ” may not remain “an empty word.” The fact of
the inhabitants of the villages near Constantine Harbor keeping intact
Maclay’s effects left near Bongu, is especially interesting as showing
some of the characteristics of this little known people when faithfully
treated by a visitor whose word they find can be implicitly relied on,
and seems to indicate that they might, in course of time, claim a place
amongst the names inscribed on the world’s national scale, while it
does not appear at all improbable that from the Maclay coast, and co-
operating with its twenty odd thousand inhabitants, conscientious
white colonists and traders might enter into peaceful relations, also
with other parts of the rich island-continent of New Chiinea.


and formidable rival in Victoria, the “ Queen of the
South,” will give him the health and strength necessary
to do that justice to the compilation and arrangement
of the results of his scientific researches which their
importance demands, as well as to issue to the scientific
and literary world the doubtless highly interesting
and more detailed account of his life when on his
travels, of which this is necessarily but a “ brief and
abstract chronicle.”
P.S. —On revising the foregoing, it occurs to the compiler that he
may not be quite right in ascribing to a slight “error” in Maclay’s
passport the difference noticed between the two names that head this
sketch ; for as the Russian characters have no exact equivalent, it may
be just as correct to spell the explorer’s surname Maclay, as Ma/clay
or MaHaj, and it is well known that many Russian noblemen, when
writing their names in other languages, prefix to their respective
surnames the Latin or Prench “ de ” or the German “ von,” while most
Russians, when abroad, drop the Muscovite “ . . ivitsh ” (son of . .).
“ Sotni/c,” I think, is not very adequately rendered (page 3) by
“ Major” but is a kind of superior officer, next in command to a
“ Hetman ” or chief of Cossacks.
I also find that Maclay did not pass through the entire curriculum
at the University of St. Petersburg, and that his removal to Heidel-
berg was chiefly on account of his health being too delicate for the
severe climate of the Russian metropolis. I would also point out that,
during the four years Maclay studied comparative anatomy under
Professor Gegenbaur at Jena, he also continued his general studies of
medicine and natural sciences under some of the other masters
mentioned. —E. S. T.


APPENDIX.
Letter addressed to H. JE. The Governor-General of Dutch India,
by Maclay re a regular slave trade which then was being carried on
from the north-west coast of New Guinea to some of the Butch
possessions.
Excellence, —
De retour demon second voyage en Nouvelle Guinee (a la cote
Papoua-Koviay) j’ai eu Fhonneur en automne 1874 de presenter a son
Excellence M. le Gouverneur-General James Loudon une note sur
l’etat social et politique de ces contrees.
Cette lettre mentionnait en autre l’existence d’une veritable
traite d'esclaves que l’on exporte de la Nouvelle Guinee et dont les
lies Ceram Laut sont le depot. Le depart devance de son Excellence
Monsieur le Gouverneur-General Loudon a ete probablement la cause
que ma lettre reste dans les archives sans q’on y donne les suites
desirables.
Esperant qu’en prenant connaissance de cette note, son Excellence
jugera necessaire de prendre au nom de l’humanite et de la justice
quelques mesures pour soulager la triste condition des habitants de
ces parages (Cote-Papoua-Koviay en N. Guinee), je lui addresse ces
lignes.
Veuillez agreer, etc., etc.,
N. de MIKLOUHO-MACLAY.
Cheribon, a Java.
6 Eevr., 1875.
Memo : Monsieur H. Levy son-Norman, cidevant Colonial Secretary
and now Councillor of Netherlands-India, writes to Maclay on the
12th Novr., 1878, that SLAVERY WOULD BE ABOLISHED AT
TERNATE AND TIDORE in 1879, so that there is every reason to
expect that Maclay’s letters have not remained without effect with
the Dutch Colonial Government.
Lettre ouverte
a Son Exc. Sir Arthur Gordon, K.C.M.G.,
etc., etc.
Sydney, 23 janv., 1879.
Excellence, —
L’importance du sujet de cette lettre et l’esperance qu’elle ne
restera pas sans resultat pour la sainte cause de Vhzmanite , qui l’a


uniquement dictee, me decide de prier Yotre Excellence de la lire
avec attention et de faire ce que Yotre Excellence jugera possible.
Je ne m’arreterai sur quelques details concernant ma personne,
qu’autant qu’il me paraitra necessaire pour faire comprendre a Yotre
Excellence en suite de quoi, et a quel titre, je prends la resolution,
elevant la voix au nom “ du droit de l’homme,’’ d’attirer l’attention de
Yotre Excellence sur les dangers qui menacent de detruire pour
toujours le bien-etre de milliers d’hommes, qui n’ont commis d’autre
crime que d’appartenir a une autre race que la notre et d’etre les plus
faibles.
Ayant debarque en Nouvelle-Gruinee en l’annee 1871, pour des
etudes scientifiqucs, les circonstances d’abord, l’interet d’etudier une
race primitive en suite, m’ont mis en rapports tres rapproches avec les
indigenes de la cote N.E. de la Nouvelle-Gruinee ou j’ai debarque. A
force de patience, d’une conduite tres amicale et juste, j’ai fini par
gagner la confiance parfaite des indigenes, qui d’abord et pendant des
mois, m’ont traite d’une maniere bien peu aimable.—La connaissance
de la langue papoua acquise,m’a donne la possibilite d’etudier leurs
usages. Ayant passe pres de trois ans parmi ces gens, ayant eu le
temps de juger leur caractere et leurs facultes, je prends un interet
serieux et desinteresse a leur destinee, surtout en prevoyant que
l’invasion de la race blanche en Nouvelle-Guinee peut facilement, ou
presque certamement, mener a une suite de catastrophes bien deplor-
ables.
Je pense pourtant, que beaucoup de ces injustices revoltantes des
forts envers les faibles, pourraient etre prevenues, si les Grouvernements
des peuples civilises, ne meprisant pas la cause de la justice, confirmaient
et faisaient respecter les elements les plus simples du droit des gens
et du droit international. Quelques lignes signees d temps, par une
main autorisee et puissante, peuvent prevenir une serie de meurtres
injustes, et epargner dans l’avenir a la “ civilisation ” la honte, sous le
titre de “ punition meritee ,” de massacrer des femmes et des enfants.
Avant tout, je prie Yotre Excellence de remarquer (je parle en
connaissance parfaite des faits), que les habitants de la Cote-Maclay
(partie de la Cote N.E. de la Nouvelle-Gruinee, entre le Cap Croisilles
et le Cap King William) etant une population agricole et nombreuse
(pres de 15,000 a 20,000 homines, au moins), sont strictement lies au
sol qu’ils cultivent; chaque pouce de terre, chaque arbre utile dans la
foret, les poissons dans chaque ruisseau, etc. etc., ont un proprietaire !
Cette propriete est reconnue et respectee par les voisins. L’invasion
d’etrangers qni voudraient occuper une terre dejd occupee et cultivee
depuis des siecles mettraient les habitants de la cote entre les armes
des blancs et ceux des habitants des montagnes, qni ne voudraient pas
ceder leur terre. Des meurtres et des guerres sans fin auraient lieu,
etc., etc.
Pour eviter des catastrophes semblables a celles qui ont desolee
les Mariannes, la Nouv.-Zelande, la Tasmanie et autres, il ne serait
que juste, de declarer a temps : que le Gouvernement Imperial,
reconnaissant le droit des indigenes sur leur sol, ne protegera pas les


envahisseurs blancs, dans le cas ou les indigenes, defendant leur terrain,
leurs femmes, leurs enfants et leurs autres proprietes, essaieraient de
faire respecter leurs droits a main armee, en s’opposant aux envahisseurs.
[Je prie Votre Excellence de remarquer, que ce queje demande
{droit sur le sol ) a ete sanctionne par le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste,
en Nouv.-Zelande, en 1840, par le Traite de Vaitangi.]
L’histoire du contact de la race blanche avec les peuples de
I’Oceanie nous montre le resultat funeste de l’introduction des alcools
par les blancs, dont les tristes suites rivalisent avec les effets des
maladies introduites et la poudre (dernierement la dynamite en Nouv.-
Caledonie) pour exterminer les races non blanches.
La meme histoire nous prouve, que les tentatives genereuses des
Gouvernements Europeens pour proteger les indigenes contre les
violences et les injustices des envabisseurs blancs, sont ordinairement
venues trop tard, quand le mal etait deja fait, quand les torts des deux
cotes avaient abouti a exciter une haine insatiable et constamment
attisee.
C’est une raison de plus pour que votre Excellence prenne ces
remarques en consideration. Les mesures pour prevenir le mal, plus
tard irreparable, peuvent arriver encore a temps.
Pour ne pas fatiguer Votre Excellence, je me resume : j’ose de-
mander pour la protection des habitants de la Cote-Maclay que le
Gouvernement Imperial:
1. Heeonnaisse le droit complet des indigenes de la Nouvelle-
Guinee (Cote-Maclay) sur leur sol.
2. Interdise, ou rende improbable (par des taxes bien elevees)
Vimportation et la vente aux indigenes : des alcools, des armes
et de la poudre.
(Si le § 1 a ete sanctionne par le Traite de Vaitangi, 1840, le § 2
a ete ordonne aussi en Nouvelle-Zelande en 1852 par le Gouverneur
Sir George Grey.)
Si Votre Excellence pense, que puisque la Nouvelle-Guinee n’est
pas encore annexee par le Gouvernement Imperial, le Gouvernement
de la Grande Bretagne n’a pas le droit de proclamer ces lois, je suppjie
Votre Excellence au nom de Vhumanite et d e justice de ne pas oublier
cette lettre, quand Votre Excellence jugera possible de faire quelque
cbose pour mes pauvres proteges de la Cote-Maclay et d’etendre, si
possible, ces reglementations aussi aux autres parties independantes
de la Nouvelle-Guinee et aux iles de la Melanesie.
En cedant a mes representations instantes et desinteressees, le
Gouvernement Imperial meritera des siecles a venir le titre de juste et
de sage. ... „
Nicolas de MIKLOUHO-MACLAST.
Son Excellence Sir Arthur Gordon, K.C.M.G.,
Governeur de Eiji et Haut-Commissaire de
Sa Majeste Britannique dans le Pacifique Occidental.


Extract of a letter of Sir Arthur Gordon to N. de Maclay.
Wellington, 18-4-81.
I learn, with deep regret, from Captain Knollys, that you have
never received my reply to your letter of January, 1879. —I did reply
to it in the month of April, and at some length but you
will perceive its general tenour from the enclosed copy of my official
letter to the Secretary of State, to whom 1 forwarded your letter . .
[copy.]
Sir A. H. Gordon to the Secretary oe State for the Colonies.
Armitage Hill, 9th April, 1879.
Sir,
I have the honour to enclose the copy of a letter which I have
received from the well-known Russian explorer, Baron Maclay.
I entirely agree with Baron Maclay in thinking that “ les tenta-
“ tives genereuses des Gouvernements Europeens pour proteger les
“ indigenes contre les violences et les injustices des envahisseurs blancs,
“ sont ordinairement venues trop tard, quand le mal etait deja fait,”
and that comparatively slight precautions, taken in time, might avert
misunderstandings which lead too often to the murder of white men
and to the steps, too generally of a most unsatisfactory nature, which
have then to be taken for the punishment of those who have committed
them.
I also agree with him as to the importance of recognizing the
native titles to land and of discouraging the importation of spirits and
firearms.
But it is not easy to see what practical effect can now be given to
Baron Maclay’s suggestions, and I propose to inform him that as Her
Majesty does not claim sovereignty over New Guinea, it is impossible
for Her Majesty’s Government to impose obligations on subjects of
other nations who may repair there, bat that the right of the natives
to their own land is fully recognised, and that so far as British subjects
are concerned, I shall do my utmost to check the introduction of fire-
arms and spirituous liquors into the country.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) Arthur Gordon.
(Melbourne “ Argus," April, 1881.)
KIDNAPPING AND SLAVEKY IN THE SOUTH SEA
ISLANDS.
The following letter, which has been addressed by Baron de
Miklouho-Maclay to the Commodore on this station, will be read
with attention by all who take an interest in the relations between


shipmasters and traders, and the inhabitants of the South Sea
Islands :
“ Melbourne, April 8, 1881.
“ Sir, —The constant recurrence in the daily papers of paragraphs
relative to murders and massacres in the South Sea Islands, and the
review of my own experience of several years of life spent amongst
the aboriginals of different islands in the Pacific, impel me to express
my opinion on this matter, and to direct attention to some special
points connected therewith.
“ That the exportation of slaves (for it is only right to give the
transaction its proper name) to New Caledonia, Fiji, Samoa, Queens-
land, and other countries by kidnapping and carrying away the natives,
under cover of false statements and lying promises, still goes on to a
very large extent, I am prepared to aver and support by facts.
“ The conduct of many whites towards the aboriginals of the South
Sea Islands is in no way justifiable, and of the truth of this, I have
many instances at my command, so that I am not surprised that reprisals
on the part of the natives take place.
“ Impartial observation of the South Sea Islanders teaches that
they are assuredly not more cruel and more revengeful than the whites
(skippers and traders) who visit them, and that they know how to
value and understand just and equitable treatment. Cases occur in
which the natives kill the whites, simply for the sake of killing, but
such deplorable abnormalities are not confined to the blacks alone;
besides, the apparent wanton character of the massacres depends, not
unfrequently, simply on the difficulty of ascertaining the causes and
details of the transactions. Ignorance of the customs and language of
the blacks makes it difficult for the whites to find out the rights of the
matter in most cases.
“It is certain that, so long as such institutions as kidnapping, slave
trade, and slavery are suffered, or even sanctioned by the Government
(under the name of free labour trade), and that shameless spoliation
which goes by the name of ‘ trading,’ continues in the islands, the
results —the massacres —will constantly recur.
“ The least that the blacks have a right to expect from the civilised
races is, neither pity nor sympathy, but justice, and this I feel con-
fident can be given them; but it is to be hoped that the Imperial
Government will never permit skippers and traders taking the law
into their own hands, and, under the pretence of doing justice, further
their own personal interests and trading schemes.
“ It would be desirable if an international understanding upon this
subject could be speedily brought about, for the criminal actions of
skippers not sailing under the British flag are at present removed from
the jurisdiction of the High Commissioners of the Western Pacific
and’notice of the British men-of-war.
“ I am aware that I am stating nothing new, but, as my position in
the South seas during nearly eleven years was that of an impartial


observer, ever anxious to find out the truth, and see things in their
proper light without prejudice to race, profession, or trade, I pen these
remarks as a duty to mankind, and add that I shall feel it a great
honour to place my knowledge of the state of affairs in the South Sea
Islands at your disposal in detail.
“ I have, &c.,
“ N de Miklouiio-Maclay.
“To the Commodore of the Australian Naval Station, &c., &c.”
N. de Maclay, to the British High Commissioner of the
Western Pacific.
Melbourne,
13 April, 1881.
Your Excellency,
Learning from a recent paragraph in the “ Lyttleton Times, ’ that
a scheme for a settlement upon the Maclay Coast, Astrolabe Bay, is
now being promoted, I take the liberty of reminding Your Excellency
of a request made by me in an “ open letter ” of January, 1879.
I wish to draw the attention of Your Excellency to the fact, that
this tract of country is thickly populated, and that the land is entirely
owned by different communities engaged in tilling a soil, which has been
under cultivation for centuries. Indeed, in the forests, every useful tree
has its particular and recognised owner.
The fish, molluscs, and all produce of the sea, rivers and coasts,
belong to the inhabitants of adjacent villages.
As the natives of the Maclay Coast have no hereditary chiefs in
the proper traditional sense of the word, and the chiefs “ de facte,”
not “ de jure,” have only an influence over others derived from their
personal character and individual capacity, a sale of land is a difficult
matter. A general consent to a sale of land to the intruders, is a very
unlikely event, and even should it take place, the land being communal
property, each member of the community has a right to claim his own
share of the payment for it.
Again, the natives do not understand parting with their land
absolutely. (For this reason, I never have considered it right to
attempt, myself, the acquisition of a freehold property on this coast).
Is it a just act on the part of so-called civilized people, to
deliberately swindle a simple minded race of fellow creatures out of
valuable property, for a few bottles of rum, some old nails, and “ trade ”
axes 1
The requests which I had the honor to make to your Excellency in
1879, I will now repeat, viz :


Ist. That the right of the natives of the Maclay Coast to the soil, in
the fullest extent of the word, should be respected. 2nd. That the
importation of spirits should be prevented.
As a sincere friend of the natives, and as one who has lived with
them for several years, understanding their language and customs, I
claim the attention of your Excellency.
I have etc., etc.,
N. de Maclay.
His Excellency
Sir Arthur Gordon, K.C.M.G.,
High Commissioner of the Western Pacific, etc., etc., etc.
EXTRACT OF A LETTER FROM THE COMPILER TO HIS
SHEFFIELD FRIENDS THE MESSIEURS IBBOTSON.
. I will give you two instances indicative of Maclay’s“ savoir-
faire,” while among the Papuans, viz:—Once after having been
summoned before a conclave of chiefs or “ headmen,” Maclay was asked
with great formality whether he could or would ever die, all seeming
meanwhile anxious for his answer to this^ question, while he also felt in-
stinctively that much depended on his diplomacy on this occasion ;
he, therefore, selecting the heaviest spear he could see, directed himself
to the chief invested with most authority, and requested him to answer
the question himself in a practical way by trying if he had strength
enough to kill their visitor with that weapon. The assembly, from
Maclay’s ready reply, decided that the “experiment better not be
tried, as, if he could be hurt by a spear, he would not have asked the
chief to throw it at him.” On another occasion, being told by the
chief of a tribe that some members of a neighboring one had stated
that they would try to kill him, if ever he came into their village,
Maclay felt that, unless he took some steps at once, he might lose his
prestige. He, therefore, after arranging his papers, and telling
his servants what to do with them if he did not return, immediately
set out for the village where his life had been threatened, and on his
arrival at the dwelling of the “ headman ” of it, whom he knew, re-
quested that the members of the tribe, singling them out by name, who
wanted to kill him, be summoned to his presence; this complied with,
Maclay told them that he was very tired, and was going to
lay down to sleep, then and there, and that they letter try to HU
him before he recuperated his strength ly rest, on which he laid down
and finally went to sleep. The natives considering that, if he had not
a charmed life, or,if he'were not a superior being, he would not have
come thus amongst them, left him in peace, and the next morning
came to ask his pardon, bringing him sundry gifts as peace offerings.


A false step by Maclay, on either of these two occasions, before he
had gained the full confidence and friendship of the natives, would
have been fatal to him. In the explorer’s diary, I find the following entry
which appears psychologically interesting, viz : On October Ist, 1871,
Maclay writes : “It is remarkable how soon I have got accustomed to be,
night and day, in danger; whether it is from a disposition to fatalism,
or merely owing to my great indifference to life, I dont know.” You
will remember that Maclay, hardly a week before this entry, had been
left by the corvette “ Yitiaz ” amongst the Papuans, who either to test
his courage or to hasten his departure from their shores, frequently sur-
rounded him in great numbers, placing their spears against his neck and
with wild cries and gesticulations threatened to dispatch him, and you
will also remember that Maclay’s European servant was completely over-
come by extreme terror of the natives and finally died ; while Maclay
himself, as for courage, comes under the category of such men as are
alluded to in the old Spanish epic “ La Araucana,” canto XI., com-
mencing :
“ Cuando los corazones nunca usados
A dar serial y muestra defiaqueza,
Se ven malamente afrentados,
Entonces manijiestan su grandeza .”
Gr. & J. Black, Printers, Edward Street, Brisdane.




...._. f - Ml6'_
t C CroisiUes X
IB! (JtUA,IJ
v||S9 </u/u? P*-
tf.
. \ #^r
r'*' ■£ *%•■ (v..ContenJe<i Mfji
•4..\ ■ It, '•
‘tw,• -. O ' f . s rK oLA
mom- rr
**#**": ■;% “**’-**» '**
. c


..« .' eOMMUNICATS D TO ° > Q
B ftOTXL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY,
Ciown I


IH 7








• -
i! : iiimjtt






31508023401173


