

LEONARD MASCALL
THE BOOKE OF FISHING
WITH HOOKE & LINE
LONDON 1590
799.12
M395






NUMBER 542
THE ENGLISH
EXPERIENCE
ITS RECORD IN EARLY PRINTED BOOKS
PUBLISHED IN FACSIMILE


The publishers acknowledge their gratitude
to the Trustees of the British Museum
for their permission to reproduce
the Library’s copy, Shelfmark: C.31.C.5
S.T.C.No. 17572
Collation: A-L 4 ,M 2 + fold. pi.


A Booke of fishing
with Hooke & Line, and
of all other instruments there-
unto belonging.
ct Another of fundrie Engines and
Trappes to take Polcats, Buzards,Rattes,
Mice and all other kindes of Vermine & 'Beafls
whatfoeuer 3 moft profitable for all Warri-
fuch as delight inthiskinde
of fport and paftime.
<JMadtby L . M.
LONDON.
Printed by lohn Wolfe,and are tobefoldc
bp <£ofoar&e Mljtte tolling at ttje Uttlt s<£t&
ud& of panics at foe Cgne ofttje^umw.




Fisft the knowledge of angling with the
Hooke and Lyne.
<£relotll3aedare bjieflp bnfo vou y
fJrflQ M potato angle taith t!)c txohe i Ipne,
5 m tahat times belt, ana in
(3 HJ ces ofthe inater to tahe b% jfirftm
V
%J <f the inater is fomtaing is
no great tfjotfe of anp place inhere it
io anp thing adepe, either in pole o? o*
therlfaneingtaater: but in a riuer, pe lhaU angle betf
inhere it is adept ana cleare bp the grouna,being granell oj
dap inithout anp mu&ae oi tears, ana in inhirling ina*
ters,oj in a rcuerf,aobnaer a holloin banfee oj rotes of
tes,o.: long tears fioting aboue on the inater, all thefe
places are troublefome: alfo it is goa angling in a&pe fttffe
in falles of tuafers ana ineares, ana in flttaae
gates, ana mill poles, ana it is groa inhereasthe inater
relfcth bp the banhe,o? inhere the llreame runneth nigh
thereabout,be(ngatepeana cleare bp the grouna,!# anp o*
ther place inhere pe map l& anp ftlhhoue aboue in the ina*
ter,oj hath anp other feearng place to refotf, oj on that fiae
the inater inhere the ininae hath no great poiner.
What times beft to angle*
TT <£re lhaU pe bnaerlfana inhat time of the hap is bed
li to angle,from the beginning of spap, hnto the mo*
neth of September filh iniU bpte. 2Cbe bell angling to tahe
fith,is earelp in the moaning from fotire of the eloeft hntil it
it be eight a cloche, other be mdetlp, but not fo ga>a as nt
the moaning: alfo the euenings be inatfferent goa to angle,
tfitbefomeinhatcalmeinithalljOjelsnot goa, the ininae
blototng from the &outb ot«e(t.
slfoifitbes cola infjiiifiing ininae in a aarfce lotajtnar
& i &ap 5


Dap, fo:tbc barite louring toeatber ts mud) better to angle
mttben in aclear efunnr> bap, embfromtbe beginnmg of
September tmto tbe enb of 3p#u,pc fpare no time of
tbc bap to angle,anb liheteife manp pale fill) fotll bpte beff
infbcmib bap about name. SfpelbaUfee anp time of tbc
2&outc,o: darapling leape, pc map then angle to
btinaboub!eloo:me,accojbmgtotbc fame month, ant) if
tbcluatcrbothebbeanafioia, tbc fityin feme place toill
bpte betf at tbe ebbe, anb in fomc places at tbe flouts,acco?*
bing to the places of reff, as bebinb ptllers anb arcbes of
bnbges, o: fucb like tuckering places in tbemotf quiet
toaten
In what wether to angle in.
HCrc pe (ball httberffaftb to tebat toefber pe (ball bed
angle as afo:efatbe in tbe barke louring bap, token
tbe foinbe blotoetb foutblp from tbe £>outb o: GH efi: in tbe
J&ummcrfeafontebentbefunne is berp bole, it is then
naught to angle, but from September bnto 0p:ill, it is
then gcob in a fatre funnp bap, tbe tumbe being then gob: if
it bane anp part of tbe £b:icnt o: ©alt, it is then naught to
angle,fo: tbcp Ml not bpte,ojtoben it is a great toinbe,
&ioto,raine,o: baile, o: in a great tempelf of dumber, u%
lightening,fo: it fcareth tbcm, o: els at a ftomlp bote foe*
tber,all tbefe times are not gcob to angle fo: to take filb.
Oftwclue lets in taking fifli.
Yt&tballherebnberifcmb there be tin clue manner of
impebtments o: lets fohich caufeth a man to take no
fiib 0 tx3itboutotbercunnmg tbat map happe bp calualtte.
nc firtt is if pour Ijarncfle 02 Ipnes be not fitlp mabe: tbe
fcconb is,tf pour baites be not gcob no: fine: tbe tbtcb is,
fohen.tbat pc angle not in tbe bpting time: tbe fourth is,
if that pour hCb be fearcfull of tbe tight of man: tbe fift is,
if the foater be herp thifkc,tobite w rebbe bp-anp flonb late
fallen:


falcm tbe flit is, if tbe fiflj fo: colae Doc not ttim abjoaae:
tfjc fcuentb is, if tbe luctbcr tben be to bote: itbe eight is,if
ft be tn ramp luctbcr: tbe npntb is, if tbcn baile o: fnolu ao
faU: tbe tentb it be in anp tempcff: tbe eleuentb is, if
tbm it be a great toinbe: tbe tluelftb ts, if tbe inin&e biota
from tbe (£aff, fo:tbat is tait, ano tommonlp neither
lumtcr no: ftmimcr tbe fiib ioill tbcn bpte: tbe Sftteit ana
VoinDcs be g©a 7 but tbe &>outb luuiDe beff of all.
To take the Salmon.
is a gentle fifl), but be is cumbrous to
tafceifo; commonlp be is but in Deepe places of great
riuers,ana tommonlp in tbe mi&Ocft of tberiuer: be is in
feafon from Sparcb bnto spicbaelmalTe, ana pc (ball angle
to bim luitb a rca toomie, from tbe beginning to tbe en*
&ing,nn& luitb tbebobbe luo?me that bjoeaetbm tbe Dug*
bill: alfo there is a foucraignc baiie that on tbe
toater accfee: tbe Salmon bptctb not at tbe grouna,but at
tbe flote o; abouc: pe map alfo take bim luicb tbe aubbe
iummeatfucbtimelubenbeleapetb, but it batb felaom
l&nc,anD pc {ball take him in Ithe manner as pc Doe take
tbe2Crout, oj Stapling, o* tbe SDace.
ForthcTroutc. 3
r T~ t l£e2droute is in feafon from Search bnto sicbaeb
1 mafTe, be bfetb commonlp a cleane grauelp grouna,
attain a ttreame: pe map angle to bim at all times luttb a
grouna lpne,lping~o: running, fauing in tbe leaping time,
tbcn luitb ttjcfcubbc flpc,nno cardp in tbe moaning toitba
running grouna Ipne, ana further in tbe aap luitb tbe flote
Ipne ♦ Mb pec map angle to bim, in Search luitb a
tpenotue bangea on pour b©He bp tbe netber parte
initbout anpe flote oi plnmbc, ajatuing tt bppe ana
aotune intbe ifteame till pc tele bim fall, but if pe angle
to bim luitb tbe flpe.pe sall IfriUe luben be is a fote ana
a s nm


mo?e from pout bate, fbjtbe comrnetbfo faff pe map bi
tbe fame time angle to bim foitb a ground lpne,and bapted
foitb a reo foo?me,fo? that io a grad fure bate, and fg molt
fofcd. aifo in September and j®eto*
ber take tbc s)cnofo on pour bake: in December, f aitua*
rie and jrebmarte d?ag foitb tbe bobfoo?me at tbe ground:
tn f unc,f ulp and 3uguff, fiffj foitb madeflpeoon pour
bake: on tbe trppcr parte of tbe footer, foj that ig a fure
bate audio molt bfeo.
fn £pjill take tbe red foojme,and alfo of funeba,otber*
foife catted feuen epeo, ojtbe great canker foojme that
toeedetb in tbe barke of a great inland tbc red fnaile* fn
sap,take tbe Hone flpe o; Caddig toojme, and tbe bobbe
foojrne bnder tbe Cofofotde: alfo pe map take tbe filke
foojme,and tbe bate that foeedetb on a jfeameleafe.
fit fune take tbe red foomtejand nippe of bio bead,and
put it on pour ba>ke,ano a codfootme before. Bin f ulp take
tbe great red foo?me,and tbe codfoojme together* fn
gull take tbe fielbfipe,and tbe great red foo:me, and tbe
fat of bacon, and binde it about pour bake* fn feepfem*
ber take tbe red foo?me,and tbe menofo* fn j© a ober,take
tbe fame, fo? tbep are fpeeiall gcod fo2 tbe SCroute in all
timeo of tbe peare,from op?ilbnto September, tbe.Croat
leapetb, then angle to bimfoitb a dubbed oi armed bake
according to tbe (aide monetbeo, fo; bee is tong in tbe
foater.
For the Grayling*
Stapling, otberfoife named tumble, pemap
* angle (oj bim ao pe doc foj tbe reroute, and tbefe arc
commonlp bio baiteg: in and in pe (ball take
tberedfoo?me: in 95ap pee (ball take tbe greene foojme,
and afurall grapled foo?me, and tbe SDocke canker,and tbc
toojme on tbe bafotbome: in fune, tbe baitc tbat fo&detb
betfoane tbe barke and tbe tree of tbe dDke: in fulp, tbe
batte tbat bjeefcctb on tbc jfearne Icafe, and tbe great red
foojme, and nippe of Jig jicad 3 and put it on pour boko
foitb


Inftb ftje CodWo?me before: in ouguff the red too?me and
the doeke Wo?me,and all tfje yeare after life chiefly the red
Wojme.
For thcßarbyll.
nr ii)c Is a fubttll and a ft raungc fifb to take, and
1 bery Datntte to take his batte: tbefe are commonly bis
baytcs,in search ant) in %:tll pc iball angle to btm With
fcell) chafe latDc on a bo:de, and fo eut it in fmall peaces
fquare, tbc length of your bokc: then take a candle and
burne it o?fmeare it on the end at the point of your boke
till tt Joke yeloW: tbenbindeit on your bake With jflet*
cbersfilke,aio make it rough like a Welbede Wo?me,and
this is berie god fo: all fomer feafon: but in £pay and June
ye fball take the l£aWtbo?ne too?me, and the great redde
Wo?mebefo?e:in3!uly the red too?me fb?a chafe baite,
andtbe%aWtbowe wo?me together,and alfofheWo?me
that b?adetb in the boater dog leafe, and the yong
too?me together: in ottguft and fo? all the yeare, take the
taUoWofafljope and foft chafe of each alifee, and grinds
& tape them Well and fmaU together,till it Ware fine and
tough, then put a little Wbeatc flofocr, and make it into
tittle pellets,and this is a god baite to angle at the bottom,
andfatbatit doe finite alone in the Water, o; els it is not
god fo? this purpofe*
TheCarpe*
T is a ftraunge and daintte filh to take,
1 bis battes ?*rc not Well knotonc, fo: he hath not long
bane in this realme* JEhefirftb?tnger of them into d£n?
gland (as 3 baue bane credibly enfo?med) boas maifter
spafcoUofpumfted in buffer,Who alfo bought firft the
planting of the pippin in England: but note many places
are replenilhed With Carpes,both in poundes and rtuers,
and becaufe not knowing Well his chafe baites in each mo?
neth,3l wmw?itethelefldofhim,heisa ftraunge filb in
a 4 tte


ttje toatcr,ahd beep ffraunge to bpte,btif at cerfame time*
to lint,at foure a cloche in*tbe moaning, and eight at night
be bio cbiefe bpting times, and be is fo ffrong cnormed in
tbe mouth, that no toeake harneOe toill bold him, and his
bpting is berp tickle: but as touching btsbaptes, hauing
fmall knotoledge bp erperience, 3 am loth to tojite mo®e
then 3 knoto and bauc pjooued. Buttoell3i toote,tbe
ret) too:mc anD the spenoto bee gcoD baitesfojbtm in all
times of the peace, ants in lunetoitbtbe cadrs o: toater
too:mc: in 3!ulp,and in the faggot oj gen*
tptl,and tottb the coale too:me, alfo toitb paffc made toitb
honp ants tobeatc flotoer, hnfiniUitorane, toitb the redde
too:m? is bezant) alfo the disralhopper tottb his legs cut
off,tobicb he toil take in the morning,oj the tobitrs of barb
egges flfeped in tartc ale, o; the tobitc fnaiie;
The Cheuyn.
'J i fc Cheupn is alfo a foarie fifft to fake,and berp fearer
ftilhinSparchhctoillbpteatthercttDe too;mc at the
ground,foj commonlp he toill bpte at the grounts anti fomc*
tohat tape at airtimes of the peace,m 0p;tll, the ratirre o;
bitch canker,anti the canker that tocedeth in the barke of
atm, and the too: me that bjeedeth betkfene the barke
and the £Dkc tm:alfo the rco too:me,and the poung fregge
his legges and fete cut off, aICD the ft cnc Cadpce fipe, and
tf)ebobbetoo;me budeefbe rototuro, liketoifc the redde
fnaifc:in{pap,thcbaitcthatburt!cthesi the Djparleafr,
and the dockc canker together put kpen pour b©fee, and
ihcbatfe that bjeedetb on the fee Icafe, alfo the codde
too:mf\an&abaitctbafb2&dctb on the hatothome, and
the too:me that hfedetb on the okeieafe, and alfo the hike
toomte,aitd the coddetoo?me together: in 3!une,take then
the Crckets and tl)e £)o; flpe,nnd alfo the red too:tne, the
cade cut off,and a codde toomte bcfo:c, alfo the too:me in
% £Djiarleafe,and pomigfrogges,the fete cut off bp the
feodp 02 bp the krfe. alfo the baite on the batotbo?ne, and
the


tbe cobtemc together,anb e bungbfflgrubbe toojme
ano a great <ora(bopper:in 3ulp, tbe <oraibopper,anb the
tumble 25& in tbe mcboto tbe toatereft,alfo poung foafps
anbtirf)itepoungl£ometstaheninfbetr combes, anb tbe
greate bianbcbfe ttjat b?&betb tnpatbes ofmebofoes,
ano tbe Aping fobicb be in tbe pifmpar btUes:
In augutt, tafee tbe Colefootf lno:me, anb tbe <£sentpU o*
£oagot bntill sptcbaelmaire,anb in September, tafte then
tbercbbwme, anb thefc baites fobenpemap get them,
tobicb is,Cberies, potmg cppfe not baireb, anb tbe Colo
toojmctbat bj&bctb in poftes of tbe boufe.
Thcßrcimc.
T lst Bjeame is a noble fill) counteb anb a batntfe, be is
x gcob to tahe,be is a ffrong fiib in tbe boater, pe ltjoU
angle to bim from Cparcb bnto ougulf tuitb tbe rebbe
too?me,anb tben toitb tbe Butterfipe, anb tbe gr&ne Ape,
anb alfo tottb tbe battc tbat bjeebetb among greene robe,
anb a inojmc tbat bjabetb in tbe barhe of a beab tree, anb
to take poung Bjemets, take tbe (dentils o; faggots,
anb from ouguff all tbe peace after pee (ball take tbe
reb teme,anb if pe angle fo; bun in tbe rtuer,pe (ball then
fafte of b?otone bjeab, foj tbat is gtfib, pet fome boe bfe in
opnll anb 2pap,tbe too:mc tbat b;eebrtb on tbe dfclme anb
toiUolu,anb ebetoeb b:eab is tjerp gtob, anb all other baites
bfeb foj tbe Cbeupn,but fperiallp poung toafpes.
The Tench.
'T T3e SCencb is a fiib tbat feebetb at tbe bottom,anb molt
x parte of tbe pearc among tbe mubbe, anb moff be (fir*
tetb in tbe nionetbes of Blune anb 3ulp, anb in other times
of tbe peace but little: tbe SCencb is an euiU bpter,anb berp
fubtiU to tahe toitb tbe angle,bis common baites are tbefe,
fin ail tbe pearetbep take b?ofotte bjeab tolteb anb frnea*
B reb


red Imfh honp fn libeneffe of a buttered fo£e,alfo tfjcp tabe
the great red too?me,ana fo? a etjiefc baite, take the blacks
bloud in ttjc hart of a and mire it foitb Actaer and
bonp,and temper them all together fometljing fofter then
pappe o? palfc,ana annoint fheretuttb pour red foo?me on
pour h©be: it is berp gaod both fo? this binde of A A;, and fee
other alfo,and thep toill bpte thereat much the better at aU
times*
To take Pcarch*
10c pearch isa oaintic fill; and pairing tobolefome fo?
a man, he is alfo a free and grrrdp bpter: thefc are his
baites, in sparchfbep tabe the red Income, in %nU, the
bobbe too?me hnder the cjofodung,in spap,tbc batotho?ne
toonne and the codfoo?me, m 3une the baite that b:a?deth
in an oUseboliotoohe, and the great ranker: the
baite that b?eedeth on the £)sicr leafe, and the great bobber
tuonne that b:rcdrth in ti;e dunghill, and the flpeboate
tnojrae that b?&defh an ti>e toeede raggetoo?f, and the cod*
toozme; in ouguff,tbeit tabe the rediuojme and the f*ag*
goto o? gcntils,and the denote tped bp the lippe, and fo?
all the peare after,pe (hall tabe the red fcjo?me, fo? that is
belt*
The Roche*
T Koch is a lnholefom fifb and enfie fo tabe forth the
angle,fo? he is a readp fepfer: thefe are his baites: in
Starch pefljall tabe the red toojme, in opjrtl, the bobbe
foo?mebnder the cofo dung, inSpap, the baite that b;&
deth on the oke leafe and the Aping (£mmat, and the bobbe
foo?metbatb?{edctb in the dunghill: in June the Aping
onte, and the baite that b?a:detb in the £)stcr, and the
codfoo?mc: in 3lulp,tbefoe?nte in the Aagge rote, and pc
fhall tabe ofhonfe Apes, and the baite that b?eedctb on the
obe,ans the too?mc that b?n:dcth in the final! nutte, and
alfo the gentilSjfill spicbaclmafiTe, and after fDtchaelmafle
the forte of BacomtfnQthcr fpeciatt baite, tabe fairc
foheate


ideate anD &tb if like furmantte ♦ tijctt f ake it out of the
boater anD Djte it, then frte it inttb bonp, ant? g©D lioic of
faffron, anD then put it on pour b©ke,anD ttse Sib tmll bpte
tbereatntaruellouofatt. But before pe angle, pe (ball caff
Into tbe toater a fetoe crummeo of bicao, oj take feme
crummeo anD ftp them tmtb fome bonp, ams mire it fottb
faffron, anD fee pe die it not tea mud), foj this its gcoa anD a
rfjiefebaite.
The Dace*
a gentle fiflj to take, anD quicke at the
bapte, bcebitetb all tbefommer nietbetoppe of tbe
loafer, anD tijep angle to bkn Untbout tbe flote in sparcb,
bio bapte to tbe reD too?me,in Tp?tU, tbe bobbe lno:mc bn*
Der tbe colu-tojoe.m <sap,tbe Docke canker, anD tbe bapte
that to bnoer tbe flofoe anD tbe tco;mc on tbe oake
leafe: in 3! one, tbe coDfoo?me, anD tbe bapte tbat bjfrDetb
on tbe £>)pcr, anD tbe tobite tommeintbe DungbiUt in
Blulp, then take boure Qpeo, anD tbe opeo tbat Doe m
ppfnipje btltes: alfo the coDDe toojme anD genfiUeo 0; twt*
goto, anD tbofe bfe tuitill sptcbaelntao, anD if tbe loafer
then be deare, pe (ball take fill) foben other take none:anD
from tbat time fcojtt), take bapteo foj bint ao pe Do fa: tbe
JRocb ? fa.: commonlp oftbetr bapto anD bpting be aU alike.
Theßlckc.
Bleke io a little Sib in , anD commonlp bee
bpteo not nie tbe bottome,but aboue anD in tbe miDDeff
tf tbe loafer. bapteo from Search to are
tbe fame bapteo tokicb are lo:itten afajefo: tbe Uodj.tfnD
alfo tbe SDace, faumg fo: all tbe fommer feafon, angle faj
bint afmucb ao pou map toitb tbe boufe oie, t fa: tbe lotm
ter feafon, pe (ball angle to bim toitb Bakon fldb, anD o*
tber bapteo maDem'&fe fa: htopurpofe, ao hereafter pet
fbaUmo?e bnDerffanDe thereof.
B 2 The


The Ruffe*
Tsc ttuffe is a holefomc fift) * g©o to bptc, mto pe fljafl
angle to him toith the fame baptcs,in aU the moneths
of tf;c pcare, as g bane totoe you befo?c of tbe perch, fo?
tbefe ttoo filbes are in rating and feeding all aitfcefauing
that the Uuffeio notfobigge as the perch, fo?«tbep arc
commonlp altoapes letfeof growth, but the red toc?me
is cbicfefo? them both.
The Flounder,
'P l£c if lounoer to alfo a holefomc fill) fo ? fiefce fblfccs, and
he ittill be in frelh toaters and rtuers, he is fr& in bp#
ting, but a fubtill bpter after bis manner, in ntbling long
rre he take the bapte: and commonlp toben he fuchcth bis
tneate, he f&dctb at the ground, ano therefore pc mutt an#
glc to him toith a lying ground line: and they bfe fo? him
but one manner of bapte, tobicb io the red too?me, fo? that
to the common and cbiefelt bapte fo? him, and aU manner
offilh»
The Googing.
'J' l£c ©fDgtng io a gad and a holefomc fUh, be io a rcadte
bpter, and bptctb rommonlp at the ground, t bis bants
through out the pcare are tbefeUbc red toojme fo? the chie#
felt, alfo the coddc too?me and the gcntcU: and pe mult an*
glc to him toith a flote o? co?he, and let altoapes pour bapt
be toithtn ttoo fingers o? an inch of the botteme o? Icffe, o?
elfe fo? to d?agge on the greunde, fo? fo it is heft and moft
fmneft totahethem* in doepe places toith cleanc
fatid o? grauell ground at the bottorac, as at toapers, b?id*
gCo,andmiltaples,
The Menow.
is a fmall fiftjnnda bold bpter, and bpteth
commottlp at the bottome, as the Ctogitte: it is a hole*
fbme fift; to cate if he be gaulo. if o? tohen he fljmetb in the
boater,


loafer, be is then bitter, tbougb bis boOie be fmall: ano be
is a great rattening bptcr,anO trill bane tbe bapte before o>
tber fiflj: pe (ball angle to bim tritb tbc fame baptes as ye
hot foj tbe <£>ogin, fauing tbep mult be fmall Sno tritb a
fmall boke,O3 elfc pc Iball often be DeeeiucO by tbcm t feme
angles to them tritb a line of tiuo boshes 03 tb;fe, (too to*
getber artt) on otber brake aboue: tbep trill be in all (balotr
places as in Ottcbcs, ano fact) like*
The Yeele.
r T T)e is a gretote ffeoe, ano bee bptetb altrapcs at
J tbe bottome, pe (ball ffe commonlp boles in tbe bottom
of tbe boater, if pe put tn pour brake there, pee IbaU tone
baue bun bpte if be be there, ana be trill boloe berp barbe a
long time, pe mult therefore boloe {pour line Itiffe, ano bee
trill pfelo at length if pe plurhc and ftrtue tritb him baftelp
pe are lihe to tofc him. ano trben be Ipctb in a bole, it (ball
be beft fen to angle to bim tritb pour p?orb brake, as is
(betreo after, but trben peu angle to tbe bottome fo? tbe
oogiit, pe (ball oft times take tbe trben tbat be rum
netb abmao, as often tbep trill fpeciallptn tbe euening,
SCbc great reOtromic is tbe ebiefeft bapte foj him, 03 a
Renoir, 03 anp pace of gutte, o? fucb like*
The Pyke.
T!£c pphe is a common oeuourer ofmoft ftftj, trbere be
commetb ft>3 to take bim pc (ball Ooe tbus.SDake a com
ling bcohe, trell armeo tritb trper,then take a fmall&ocb
o? (oogin, oi dfe a a line, 03 a fre(b Rearing, ano
put tb3eugh pour armeo trper tritb pour brake on tbe end,
ano let pour bcohe reft in tbe mouth of pour bapte, ano out
at the taple thereof, ano oolrite bp tbe rtoge office of tbe
frelb Rearing, ano then put pour line thereto, ano o?atre
it bp ano ootrne the Irater 03 pcole, and if be fa it, bee trill
take ft in bade, let him go tritb it a trbile, ano then ftnhe
315 ? ano


and bolde, and fo tpie bim in tftc toatcr, Doc pctt tfjt
brake in at the cb&ke of the bapfe , and fra;tb at the taple:
but token pc toil! lap pour Ipne , then mull pe put a plum*
met oftcadc Open pour line, a paroc from potir brake, and
aflofctnfljcmtddett bettoametbc leads and pour haute,
that it tmkenot to. the bottome, fo; tijcn tbe toill eat
pour baite atoap* fc map lap in pour baites tottbout Goto
and often pe map fpeede of ppkes: and if pou toill fe a god
fpo;t in a pond toberc as there is fto;e of pokes, pou Qja!l
pat in a Grafe, and put a frogge a hue on a brake /and tpc
tt Until a Ifrong pocktb;eed(fo tbe Grafe fratc)a ward long
o;mo;e, and in fbo;t fpace pe fijall fee god fiiafcbing and
tugging bettoeene the ppke and the grafe. otber manor
in taking tbe ppke tbere to: pe fljall take a line jfrogge, f
putbimon pourb©ke at tbenecke bettoeene tbe fktrote
and tbe bodie on tbe backe part, and put a flote as is afo;e*
faide, tben catt it in a riuer o; pound, toberc pc tbinke tbe
Ppkeljauntetb, andpe tljall franc take bim: and tbe belt
taping o; angling fo; bim, is fotoardcs night. olfo another
maner is fo take bim: fake tbe fame baite afo;efaidc, and
put it into a fafeftda , and tben calf it in tbe toater Until a
long line and ah®ke, $ pe (ball not faple of bim fame after.
Sin other baite fo; bim: £ake Boaresgreafe a fafctida,
neppe,fo botlc altogether, then take a ftock, o; other fmaU
fiib, and d;ie it in pour bofome; and take and araioint bim
fmtbfbe opntmcnt, and then put bim on pour
brake, and caff it into the toater, and pou fkall fpeede: alfo
fame doe bfe to d;agge fo; the ppke toitb a bleke, Hock, o;
Gogin, in ojatoing it bp and dotoncitbe toater, fomettmes
aboue, and famettmes beneath,fo; fo be toil! foonelf come,
if be Fee it, and fomc anglers do put the brake in at bis gill,
and out at bis mouth, and fo d;atocs the bapte, as though
be did flte from the ppkc,tobicb is taken fo? the better toap
to make him mo;c eger to take it.
The Loch, aiiii the Millers thumb c.
'|"sc flock and the cull, 02 fillers tbumbe,fbcp are grad
and tokolfame thep feede at the bottoms., anoipe
moff


tttcHpartintoeeDes,rotes,anb boles tnbaithes, ant) to
angle fo; them,pc mutt lap to tbc botfome,thcp Do felDomc
bptc at an btohe, but tbe rbfcH»mc is tljetr cbicfcff bapte
ttjat 31 Do fenotuc fo; them, fo; tbctr ftotc is ccmmonlp at
tie boucnte, in futhing fucb as lies cn tbc bottoms of the
iuater.
The manner of feeding and preferuiug your
tjiiicke baites*
XT £)iu 3 tofll tell pou botu pou tljall feepe anD h&De peur
x quiche baites, iubicb is, poa fl)al fceDe anD hape tbcm
al in general,but euerp mancr by bimfelf, iuitb fuel) things
as tbep U;ceDein, fo long tbep be quick anD
Heine, fo long tbepare fine anD gooD, but iuhcntbepWe
once DeaD, tbep aretben nothing iuo;tb, out of tbefe be tp
cepteo tb;oe b;oobes o; hinbcs,tbat is to fooete,ofbo;nets,
bumble bets, anD iuaipes, iubicb pe Ibalfbahe tbem alter
the b;eaD is D;aiuen out of tbecuen, anD then Dippe Mr
beaDs in Wood, anD let tbcm fo b;p, anD alfc fo; tbe magots
tuben tbep be b;e&, anD iuare great iuitb tbeir natural fee*
Ding, yet (ball continue anD feeDe them,(furtberrao;e) tuitb
(bapes talloiue, anD iuitb a cahe maDc of floiuer, anD bo*
np, lubicb iuillcaufe tbem to be mo;e greater, anD iuben
yee baue cleanfeD tbem in a blanhet bagge iuitb fanD,h&pe
it botte bnoer pour goione, o; other tuarme thing ttoo
boiuers 02 tb;ee,tben tbep lull be belt to pour purpofe, anD
rcaDp fo; to angle iuitb, anD fo; tbe frog, iuben pee angle
iuitb bim, pae mult cutte off bis legges bp tbe hntrs, anD
alfo tbe bis legges anD iuinges bp tbe boDp,
all other maDc baites 3 Uuilberc let paffe, but life them as
paetbmhegooD.
Baites to laft all the ycare,
3 m fpeahe of certaine baites to laff al tbe pm\
SCbe Srft is mafce of beane anD leane W)t of
15 4 tbe


the bfppes of a con p, o? of a catte, im'tb btrgin toajre, and
tyttpes talloto, fo beate them in a mo?ter, anb then tern*
p ertbcm at the ftte,toith a title darifieb bcnp,anb fo mafee
ttbppetnfmallballeo, attb tfjercvuitfj pee map batte pour
bfflfee acco?bing to tbe quant itp, anb tbio to a goob batte fo?
aU manner of that bfctb the frclhc toatero.
Another.
STaHe tbefuet of a tb®pe, anb chafe, of each lfhe quail;
titp, anb b?ap them together long tn a mo?ter, then take
floto?eanb temper it thcretoitb , anb then Delap it tutth
boitp, ant) fo mafee ballea thereof, anb tbio io a fpectal baits
fo the barbell aifo.
Baires for fheat fiflie.
baifes fo? greatitfhe, pee fljall feaepe in mhibe this
rule, that to, tobenfoucr pa Doe tafee a great f.fijr, pee
(ball open the mato of him, anD Imfee fobat pee finbe there*
in, mafee that pour baite fo? that time, fo? that to altuaieo
belt anb moft furett . SChere is manp other mafetng of
batteo, but fo? laefee of fenotolebge therein,! toil here pafle
them ouer, anb feme not fe necbefull ao neceflarp ao thefe
afo?cfatDc.
Of twelue kindes of made Flies to angle, for the
trout, in Sommer with other hfhe.
hath bcenc bleb ttoelue maner of flpeo, mabe anl
fette fento the bflfeco to angle totthall, on the top of the
toater, the tobteb ifiieo are to angle fo? the grading anb
barce, anb rhtcfcft fo? the troute, anb alfo fo? the chub, lifee
ao noto pe (hall here me tell anb Declare, each bp fetm felfe,
the counterfeiting of them.
Firft for the dunne Fly.
r 2Thc bun j?lp (tn search) the bobp is mabe of Curate
to©Ue, anb the toingco of thepartribge feathers,
m


s m there is another Dunne jflp mate, tf?e boDp of
black e toaril, anD tf)e toinges is maDe ofthe blacke Djakes
feathers, anD of ibe feathers tender tbe fringes of b& taile,
TheftoneFly,
5 Cbe Hone jflp (in 0pnll) tbe boDp to maDe of black
toooll, maDe pelloto bnDcr tbe toinges, anD tmDer tbe fapt,
anD fomaDc toitb the toings of tbe D?ake*
The ruddy Fly*
4 %%t ruDDp Ip, in tbe beginning of sap,is a gcoD
jHp to angle toitb aloft on tbe loafer, tbe boon is maDe of
rcooe tell, lapf about toitb blacke (like, anD tbe feathers
of tbe toinges of tbe D?ake, luitt) tbe feathers of tbe reD ca?
pons taile, oj bakell*
The yellow Fly*
5 %\)e pelloto jflp (in spap) to gooD, tbe boDp maDe
of pelloto toooll, anD tbe fringes maDe of tbe reDDe eockes
backeU oj taile, anD of tbe Djake littiD, o£ coulcreD pelloto,
The blacke Fly.
6 Cbe blacke iflpojlotoper, (in sap) tbe boDpfg
maDe of blacke 100011, anD lapt about toitb tbe bcrle of tbe
peacockeo taile, tbe loittges arc maDe of tbe fringes of a
frotone capon, toitb big bleto feathers in tbe beaD*
The fad yellow Fly*
7 SCbe faD pelloto jflp (in Tune) tbe boDp is maDe of
blacke toasll, toitb a pelloto litte of either fide, $ tbe toings
taken of tbe toinges of tbe bo^ard,bound toitb blacke b:ac*
keDbempe.
The More Fly*
8 Cbe mtmertlb iflp is alfo ga>D, maDe toitb tbe bo?
Dp ofDufktfl) toooll, anD tbe toinges maDe of tbe blacktibe
maleoftbeD?ake*
The tawny Fly.
9 SCbe fatonp Jflp is goD at Viliams Dap.oj
trnto miDDe Tune,tbe boDp is maDe of tatonp toa>ll,anD tbe
toinges made confrarp, one again# tbe other, made of tbe
tobitifbe maile of tbe totlDe D?ake*
The wafpe Fly,
C SCbe


i o nc tualjpeJflpCm 3!ulp)tbebo&p i& madeof black
futon, and lappet) about tottb pelloloc tirade, i foe Un'nga
ate mate of foe feathers of tbe bo sard*
The (hell Fly.
11 SCbe ff)cU jflp to gad at £>atnt STbomao dap* oj
of grane to©H,ano lapped
about totfo the berell of the peacocks fatle, anti the fotnges
mate of the fotnges of a bosard*
The darke or drake Fly*
12* sfoe Darke dtakc jflp (tn ottgufe) to gad, the bo>
&P to made of black e toll, anD tapped about tetfo biacke
Hike, kto toinges are made of the marie of the black d?akc,
toifo a blarkc bead. SDhus are thep mabc bpon the booke,
iapt about Ujtfo fomc ccfhe like eacb jflp afoje mentioned*
Here follow eth bow to coulleryour lines ? to
angle with*
M£)f» to leartie bob) to couler pour Imco ofbearc acco?*
dttlg to tbe couler ofcacb boater and feafott, in this
toke, firft pa (ball take foebatre of a tnbite botfe taile,foe
tongett and ftrongett pa can get, tbe rounder batre foe
better it to* SCben pa foall deuide it ftre partes , and vk
foall couler eacb part bp btm felfc,as pellofo,grane,fooiuti
tatunp, rutTet, and foe dtkkc couler. totomakea good
grane, take a quart of fmallate, and put it into a panne,
and put thereto bake a pound of olum , and fo put therein
pour batre, and let it boilc foftlp bake a bofocr, then take
fo?tb the batre and let it due, Chen take a pottcl of to
ter and put it in a panne, and put therein to band full of
#arp golds,pf of lm'ren,and then pf eke it Mb a tile Hone
and fo let it boilc fcftlp bake an bolder, and lubcn the Crum
is pekobo, then put tn pour bairc, lnitb bake a potmdc of
coperco beaten into fine ponder, and fo let it botle tbe fpace
of bake a mile top, then take it dotoc, and let it kale the
fpace of ftuc of lire botors, and fo take fo?ti) pour hair and
Sine if, fubifo Usilbc foe feitcS grane fo: foe totcr, alfo foe
mote


htoje ofcoperas peedoe put m it. the gt&ncr it trnlbe, o?
pe map put in (feed of it, efberdigrece.
Another ktnde to make another grtene, as tbus,pe
put pour baire tjnto a 10000 faffe, of plunkef couler anti it
luilbe a light couler, and to malic it plunkef cottier, then
pe (ball fetb if in goloes 02 Itnjren, like as 31 bane afo?e#
(aide, bnto this couler pe iball not put coperas, m; bertii*
grece,fo? iftnill Doe better tuitbout
To make yellow hairc.
F®i to make pellotoe baire, pe (ball feeth if Intfb alum,
as 3 baue afoje (betned, ant) after that toifb goto o;
luijrcn, tuitbout coperas o: berdegrece. olfo another pel#
lata pc fljall make thus ♦ Cake a potfell of fmall ale and
ffampe therein tb:ec bandfull ofgrecnc fualemtf leaues, fa
put them together, anti lap pour baire therein, fo long till
p® haue it fo d®pe couler as pou Defire,
To make a ruffet,
Fj®j fo make pour baire ruffef, pee (hall fake a pinte of
fireng lie, ano balfe a pounD of fcof e, luitb a little of the
iutce of tualnut leaues, anD a quanfif ie of alum, then boils
them foell altogether in a panne,then fake it off,and inbeii
It is coloe, put Serein pour baire, and fo let it lie till it be a
darke cottier, fo as pe tuiU haue it.
To make abrowne couler*
Tj’Cj to make pour bjotuue couler, pe (ball fake a pound
x of feote and faetb it m a quart of ale, and luitb (bmanp
of tualnut leaues, as pe Sail tbinke gtod, and luben tbep
(ball tuare blacke, fake it off the fire, and put therein pout
baire, and fo let it lie (till therein till it be as bjotune as p®
Suill baue it 3lfo couler, take of Itrong
ale, and forte, and temper them altogether, and therein
~ C 2 put


pat pour kaire, and let ft remainc fo tke (pace ofttoo daft#
and ttno ntgkts, mid ft Me MI.
To make a tawny haire,
F&>; fo make pour kaire a tatonp coder, pe fake a
quantitp of ltme,futtk tke kke of ioatcr,and fo put tkem
together, ant) put pour Ijaire therein,and let ft reft foure o;
ftue kotuers, tken take it out, ano put ft in tamtam oufe,
fo; a Dap ano it tnilbc tncli.
olfo pc ftjall tioepe ttjc krff part of pour kaire tukftc ffil,
fo; pour lines to be referueo fo; ttje oubbio kfcke, to fiftj fo;
tketroute,andgraiUng,and alfotomake fmall lines, to
angle fo; tke roche, ano tbe dnree, ano fuck.
Lines fit for each water,
J-JCrc pe Ikall knots in tukat boater fo angle,! fo; tnkick
feafonof tkepearepourcoulcreD lines Luill beft ferue.
SCkegraenecolcrcD line tniU ferue in all clcere toaters,
from op;tU Onto September.
Cke pellotu line is gooD to angle in etterp tuatcr toktek
Is cleare, fro September bnto sonember, fo; it toilbe like
fke tn&des, i otker tuitkered grafle tokftk to in tbe tuatcr,
SDke ruflet Itne is beft to angle tuftkall in tnintcr, and
feructk beft all tkc tuinfer, fcnto tke eno of 0p;ill, as toeli
in nuers, as Banking poles.
2Eke b;otunc cculereo line to angle tuftkall, ferueffj fo;
anp tuater tkat isblache, o; of Ocdtlk coder, be it in rtuers
®; Sending boaters.
Anglers and fibers.
T fatunp couiercD line to angle tuitkal,feruetk keft fo;
tkofe tuaters tkat are keafkp, o; mto;i(k coulcr, SEkus
muck fo; pour lines and cullers. p;actifeo acco;Diugto tke
coulet of tuaters, tnftking tkat all anglers tnculD not angle
(n tjHleafonable times, as from mtddc smrck to hud fsap,
fo; tken is the ckiefeft tunc,ano increafe offline.
& great


ogreat number there is in this realm Web gottems fna*
tcrstbatfparesnotimeto Ml, no? cares fo? no time to
faue, but takes at all times, tobteb mafcetb freftie fidjc fo
Oearc, anb fo fcant in titters aub running Utters. SDbero
is fo many tillsrs, but fell) that feHes to fane anb p?efcrue
them, ibepfntll not fuffer the ftfbc fo long as tbe time to
fpainne,but troubles tbe boaters initb nets ano Ufdcs both
nigbt anb ban, anb rnanp Gentlemen lets tbeir lnaters(as
it OjoulD appcarc) initbout attp reception of times in tbe
fp:tng, fo? tbep make all times alike, not fo much as fpa*
ting tbe fpaboning time, as 3p?ill anb 39ap.
SCbus much touching anglers, anb all etber ftfbermen,
fo? tbefc tb?ee monetbs afo?efatb,iDbtcb J Unit fpeak mo;e
hereof in tbeir places*
T o order the red \rorme*
Wl c « V* gather them, put them into a bore o? bag,
v y initb met mode bnber anb aboue, f tbep toil tfo?e
therein, then take anb put them in parcelp, fenell, marge*
ram, ifpe change them ecb night $ put them m netn bung
o? earth, pee map fo Ueepe them goob to angle fire tefres*
Here followetfl how to make your hookes*
1$ vfc make pour bo&es of infer,it is the eaficr to cut the
bo?b,fjDiti)abarbftoelehnifeanbbenbit(tohen pe bane
mabe the barbe anb the point) initb a patre of plpars, o?
toith an tnffrument, initb a boineb inter in the eno , anb
inhen pebauebobocb him cut the (banke of inhat length
pethfcvfce gob, then batter him at the enb, anb tmootb it
inttb pour file, anb it bone, thett beats him rcb in the hi e,
anb quenebe bim in coibe inatcr, anb it inilbe barb againe,
if it be a ttalc neeble pe mult bolbe it in tbe fire,till it be reb
hot, o? oucr a canbel, anb then let it ccolc of bfmfelfe, anb fo
ft inilbe toft as inter, anb fo baue the UnoinleDgc of this in*
ftruments, anb alfo botn much pour bate anb lines,
Cs he


be fo? euerte fifb,bere map pe fee tbe figures of pour tnfbw
ments ano brakes.
ptkeboohc,tbep?ocb.
XJ tu&enpe baue maDefbus pour bate of al fo?fs,
i > then muft pee fet tf)cm to pour lines , aeco?Dtng m
fipeatnes anD ffrengtb, fo? cuerp fifbe in tbis Mt.&t fljall
tahe fmall reD filhe, fo? a great b®fce Double, but fluitfc it
not, anD fo? fmall bate, let it be fmglc,anD tberelnitb fret
pout bate in Doubling pour lines enD, anD pour filfce oj
batre on tbe tnfioe of pour Double line, then fret o? tobippc
it fo fai're as pee fa gooD, then nept pour boofte at tbe
bought put tb?otn pour filkc o? baire, in going rounD about
tbe then pluche fitff pour ftlke o? baire
barb Dofonc, anD then pour line, fo cut it off barbe bp tbe
enD of pour boohe (in fetting pour line on tbe infiDe of pour
barite, anD fott is Done.
Now umftyee know your hookes, how to angle
for cuerie kinde of fifhe^,
F fell pou tuitl) bob) manp fufftcfeitt baires pee (ball
angle fo?. cuerp hinbe of fifbe 4 JFo? tbe s)eno toitb a
ime of one baire, fo? tbe fmall o? tuering roebe, tbe blefic,
tbe gagtn, anD tbe rufic, Itritb a line of tluo baires, fo?tbc
Daree anD tbe great roebe, fmfb a line oftb?ee baire, fo? tbe
percbe, tbe flounDcr, anD tbe fntall b?eme, Vaitb a line of
fourc baires, fo? tbe cbeuin ebubbe, tfjc b?eme, the tenebe,
anDfbep&le, toitb a line office baires, fo? tbe (route, tbe
grading, tljc barbpll, anD tbe great cbeuin, toitb a line of
nine


trine balres, for (be great (route, foitb ttoeluebsfees, foj
tbe fafomon, toitb a line of fiftame baircs,and fo? the pike,
acbalke line,and b?ofonettfoitb pour brofone confer w>
fo?efato, land armco toitb a foier, as hereafter Ctjalbc feene,
fcoben 31 fpeake of the pike.
To know how to plumbe your line*
lines muff be plumbed itn'tb leade, finelp i fbttf
beate, andlapt clofe about pour line nert pour brake,
and the nert leadc to pour brake muff be from pour brake a
footelongo? clfe fcmetobat mo?e: and euerte plurnmH
ought to be of the quantise according to bio line in bignes*
SDbere be tb?& maner of plummets and plumbings, tobicb
is fo? a grotmdline lpmg,and another to; a groundline run*
ntng: and the fbird line is the ftote line fet bpou the ground
line Iw'ng, toitb ten plummets topning altogether, run*
tringbpon tbe ground toitb rr. ojteunefmall plummets:
and to; tbe dote o? co?ke line, leade o? plumbe bint fo bea*
nit , that tbe leaff pluche of anp ft lb map plucke it Ootone,
and make tbe leader o? plummets ftnchc :■ fo? them, make
them round and fmootb, jfmall and clofe to tbe line at both
endes, tbat tbep faffen not on tooedes in tbe toater, tobteb
toill be a let f o pour angling, and fo? tbe mo?e bnderffatf
ting bob? tbep trie them, berc IbaU be tbe figures*
nm is alfo a tine foitbouf co?ke to fifij boitb, bobicb
tbep bfc in fome places in fommer to angle fo? tbeSDarce,
tbe IBleke/ino the SCrolwt, M tbep bfe to call bio tine
into % boater , and lfiil to toatoc the line ? fo that be ntap
C 4 situate*


altoapcs hatte a fight thereof, anD neuerlct the brake anh
bapte fincke to the bottome of the toater out of fight; but
altoaicscadmg anDb?atoingo?m©umg the bapte, anD
fc&ping it tight, that as fame as the fifl? Doe bite, he gtueth
a tutch, anD fo fcd'pcs his line tight ,5 lets the fid* tp?e her
felfe on the hrake, anD then takes her bp gentlp, this is the
chtefcd toap to hauc hot!) line brake $ fify * to? in fnatching
anD driKing harD tohen the dlh bites, pou put pour lute in
Daunger, 0,: tearing the mouth of the fid?,anD fometimes fo
Icofc him.
Were is alfo an other kinDe of angling fo? the ppke,
tohtchis caloeDragging, pour brake becing armeD toith
toper fo? (hiring, tohen pou tooulD D?agge fo? the japke,
pou diall take a fmall tfod), 0? a €>ogin, anD toith a ndDlc
oftooD maDethimtcanD flatfe: put it in at thegille, be*
ttoirt the fkinne anD the boDie of the ftoch, anD fo fco?th at
the tafle, anD D?atoe pour armeD toiar anD hake after, anD
place pour brake dofe bnDcr his gill, anD fo D?aggefo?him
as pe Doc fo? the Darce. it bee toith a fmglc brake pou
(hall put in pour armeD toiar at the mouth of the iiodj 0?
<oogin, anD tttoill feme “toell enough, as pe map herefib
bp figure, there is fo D?ag toith a liuc jfrogjge, anD tie the
Double brake bnDer his necke anD bippes.
SChcfinglc brake.
2Chc Double brake
bnDer the gill
SCbearntcD brake
»c map if pc lulf, place pour ticnble hcofce at the month
of pour nig as 10 Declared of the single h®he: but then mud
pou hauc the bigger bapfc, that the Double h®hc map toe
c?iotncdofetotbeheaD of the bade, anDthen it toil! doc
toell.
SCherc to an other kirtbe of h©ke,caloe a p'cdpng b®&c,
topteh is made toithout a barhc, this kinDc 0? manner of
brakes


ftoltes areto put in a bole in tbe banhe,ojbcttotjtf ttoo
bojDes at a b?iDge oj toatec, o; bettoirt ttoo (tones tobere
tbep lie open,fo? tbere commonlp lictb tbe great seles,anD
tbere put in pour p?ocb b©be a little toap, anD if tbere bee
anp pales, tbep toill tabe it anon: tobicb p?ocb, is toier
tobiptonapacHetb?aDesenDe,anD couereotoitb a great
too?me, anD tberettritb pjocb into tbe fatoe boles, as bp cp
ample foj tbe better bnDerffanDing, lo bere map pou fa tbe
figures.
&bc piocb tinbaitcD.
%\)t cod baptcD fottb a toojme.
fonc as pc falc (bc batb tbe battc,pl«che atoap pour
roDDe,fo? it Dotb notlnng but guiDe pour pjocb into p boles,
anD then Djato foftlp pour paehtb?aD line, anD bolD a turtle
ant be toill paeloc, u pou Do plucfee baffelp, be tutU bolDe fo
ttiffe, pe (ball bjeafre pour line, o? teace bis moutb: tbere*
fo:e bolDe barD Hill, aito at length be totU pattse, anD come
fmjtb. 3nD tuiject pc (ball fee anp bole in tbe bottome of a
bjobe o? riucr,tberc is Ithc to lie an pale,put tberc in pour
p:ocb 7 anD be toill fame bpte if be be tberc. Cbus mucb foj
tbe ojicr of tbe p?ocb bcohe to tafce tbe |%le.
The manner of laying of hooies,
/ Tl£ere is alfo a tun? of laping ofbobes acmcD foj pibes,
A th poles anD riuors, pc (ball bapte tbcm as pe bapte tbe
bofce in Dragging foj tbe sdpbc: anD bere is to be noteD of
ttoo matter of lapings of bobes, tbe one tuap is to tbe bot*
tome
The proch
hookc with-
out the rodd^


fomc of the loafer tottbouteo?ke,and tbe other is tottb
flote 02 eo:ke, to calf in pour bapted bake loitbeut a
fojhe, it loill finke to tljc bottom?, and then tbe pale loitt
&aue it as fane as tbe J3pke: and if be cannot ftoalloto if,
be loill bpfe aloap tbe batte bp littleants little; therefore to
tap from tbe bottom? ts belt fo; tbe Ppke,pe (bal call pour
bapted bake ant) line loitb a ca;he, of lobat depth pe luff,
fo;fo if loill not finite to tbe bottom?*
olfo to lap fo; tbe pales,pc ttjall batte pour bakes tuc tfy
menoloes, gogins, oi loebes, great loo;mes and futb like*
Bno to fiicke p coles in tbe bankes, loitb lutes at tbe endes
fo that pour baitesmaplie on tbe bottomeof tbe loafer,
fo: there tbe pale loill faneft take it, but lap not ntgb rats
of tras o; fucb, fo; tbcp lorU lojappe tbcm fo, pe (ball ne*
uer come bp them.
olfo let pour lines be of gab great pachtb;akc, fftchmg
tbe fat'd? poles 02 pinnes of load in tbe bankes, ants pour
lines to be of tloo 02 tb?a fafbam, fome mo2e, fomc leffe:
$ fo; pour p;ocb bake fo batte bim loitb tbe great loo2me,
02 tbe menoloc is belt, 02 loitb a itocb,o: finall diaogm, fo
if a great pale eomc,be loill floalloloe if bole* SDbus much
fo: laping of bakes fa: tbe and
olfototake pales in lointcr, fomebauebfed fo lap in
pondes and running loafers, taggots of bap, loitb a bcugb
ofMiUolo put in tbe mtooeft, and bapted loitb fomc gar*
bageoffouleo:bealtcs, bound loitb tloo bondes, and to
pluckc it bp (after it batb lame tloo 0: tb;a dates) loitb
bake 02 co;de, and von (ball bauc pales therein: icben it
is a lande do but cruft) it loitb pour fate and tbe pales loill
come out if there be anp. 31f pe lap it in the mioteft cf a ri*
ucr, pou map plucke tt into pour boate* & bus pou map
take manp pales in lotnter* **
Here is how to faue and pretense fifli*
F£>: fo much as 3 baue afo;e fijeioed eertaine loates
andp:actifes bolo to take fill; in (land?
ing


ftig toaters. 2 bill litre Declare ccrtante toaies fjotxj fa
maintatnc fill), ana tbe totefeif toaies to fauc ana pjeferue
tt)cm (it riuers, pooles, ana Hanking toaters, againft fuel)
keuourers ana raucrers as bat!) ana toil! Deftrop them, as
toe sDobtotcke, tbe Coote, tbeCoamojant, tbe
tbe &tngs filler ana fucb like: as alfo toe £>ttcr,
tobo is a common aeifroicr of ponaes ana Hanking toaters,
ana a great Octiourer of ana fpoplcr of riuers, brakes, ana
mining toaters, tobicb toall be aeclarco in toetr places.
The Herne.
ana M, to take toe f^eame, tobicb kefiropes mucb
noting filb o? otber, tftbcp come ntgb toe toallctoe places
o? bankes: toe is fearcfull ana fubtill fo? to take,
toerefoje fome kobapte a b®kc, o? piocb b©ke toitb a spe*
noto oi otber fmall ftib, o? toitb toe gobbet of fome
toen malic peur line greene, o? like toe toatcr tobere to®
bauntes in a toalloto place 02 otber tobere toe refo?fs,toere
put in Pour ptnne in toe earth of toe toalloto toater,anb lag
pour batfe fo tbat toe map toakc balfe a fete k&pe bnto (f,
fo?elfetbe Tiite 0? Croto toil! fame bane it, fojibeetoiU
feme ftoalloto it ana fo be taken.
The Otter.
SDbcp take toe £>tter 0? toater SMolfe,tn a tocle maae
ana keuifekfo? toe nonce, as toall be toetoco in bis place,
tobicb tocle is not make in all points like bnto otber toeles,
tobere be totU eate toe fiflj ana come fanto againc fafe be*
fo:e be be k?otonek. SCberefee tbere is inuentca among
toe ftfbcr men, a toelc fo? to take bim make toitb a kouble
feme 0.2 tonucll, ankagainfitoebtmoH teme toitoin is fet
anpetrne likeagrekpetrne lotto foure booles if aping ana
fitatng bpon ttoo rouna If tekes, tobicb muif be fet bpjtgbf
fn toe tocle before toe teme, to bolkc bp toepeirne: tobicb
ttoo if ickes mull be fall bounO to toe tocle,both aboue ank
beneath, torn muff pebaue a gmk flrtffc rok, tbe oneenke
(ball be fet ouer toe toele to boik bp toe grekpetrne 0? grate,
ana tbe otber enoe of tbe roaae, mull reacb oucr toe inner
teme, ank a fmall ojiar ttek at toat enk of tbe rokke, tobicb
2 ImaU


fmal! £>ft'ar mud be mate initb a round hnot, and fo put
doinne bpon tbe ende of the netbermod £Dsiar in tbe mted
of tbeimterteme,butai)erpUtle toap putontbatinben
tbe £>ftcr to initbm the fird teme, bccomestotbcfecond
inhere tbe fid) is, and there be puts off tbe £star, and tbe
rodde flirtes bp, and tbe gredperne fades ano doppes tbe
btntod teme Inhere be came in, ano as fame as be beares
it fall, beintll turnc baeUe, initbout toucbing anpfiffj,
gnalmng at tbe gredperne Inhere bee came in, ano fo is
tyoinited.
ortd inben pe a inele of fifb robbed imib the
ter, o? pour laper of bides initb filb fpoplcd and robbed
initb tbe 3Ptter, tberc lap pour £Dttcr Mlele, inell bapted
initl) filb, and fo pc flbali fame take him, Mbtcb £Dttcr
Welemudbe made of g<Dd round £Dspars of
rodde o?go?erodde, fo? tbofe are tbe bed. SDbefe £)tter
t&leles are made at 2Etnpfo?d, bp fides Heading, SDbere
betinooftbe<2fotbericbcs inbiebliues much bp malting
of fucb, and other lucles ♦ aifo tbe juDtter inele is made at
)3Do?nep, bp »ndfo?, of one called 2Etniner. if pour £>U
ter inele be olde, and not drong, and if tbe 3Dttcr cbaunce
to b?eafcc it and fcape, pe (ball bardlp tafce him of a long
time after, fo? be is berp fubtill to be caugbt again? in fucb
a inele.2Cbere be tbat batb p?ouided manp inapes ere tbep
could take bun. SCbus muebbeere fo? tbe fetting of tbe
3Dtter Mcle, and here Iballfolloin tbe faioe £Dtter Mele,
initb bio p?opo;ticn boin to be made and fet, tbe mo?e ea*
fier to mahe them inhere as tbep baue net brtne feme be*
fo?e. SCo hnoine if an setter do'baunt riuer o? pondc,poti
mud inatcbtbe inaters in tbe night, then fljall pou beare
him plunging and chafing tbe fid) all night bp efts and
banbes tides, fo inateb o? clfe pour filb map be hilde and
pou finoin not boin no? inben.
feere Colloioetb the £Dttcr Mele.
2Cbe


Cbe fatten of tbe ®tter toele, toitb tfoo banbelo abou*
tbe better to lap bun, be muff be tb?*e quarters anb moje*
bettoijrt teme, anb teme m length*
%\)te figure tuber ffjefoes the fetting of the grebperne,
before the teme of the foele, anb foben be fallen, to reff on
tu»o ftiffc ojiars on tbe lobjer part of tbe fapbe teme, as
pe mahe fee aboue: but loben pe (ball fet 10? tple tbe faibe
grebperne, it muff be plucftt bppe aboue tbe moutbof tbe
tcmee offers muff be cut euen
bp tbe lo?eth, fauc tfiofe tltjo that muffbolbe bp tbe greb*
peme bcneatb as pe map fit. Mbicb mcutb of tbe teme,
muff be bettcirt bt. anb bp', inches b&pe, fo that a cob p?e*
tie bogge map creeps therein: fo? if it to little, the ® tter
toiU then gnats the foele,alfo the grebperne muff fali caGlp
3 on


on tbe ttoo Crtchcss tfjat (tap hint 1 , and the gredferne to be
bm&crthen tbe mouflb of tbe feme, (obicb gredterne mutt
beputmtbelpelctDbentbe toele is a making, becaufeit
can not be pat in (obcn it is mate, except pc make it tuitb
plaptng iopntcs on tbc middle bane to folde, but on tbe one
fide of tbe gredtente, and fo pe map fet bim tn,and take biin
ont iuben tbc (oele to make, o? (oben pou (Dill at anp time*
2£bcp Doe bfe to make bim Uiitfjowt anp topnts, but plaint
and all flat barres, fetting to foure rounD bcopes, of peime
on tbe foure corners of tbe gredterne: tobteb greDicme is
make (uitb flue fiat barres,and fo bfcD, (naping about ttoo
pound toeigbt, becaufe it map fall tbe footer.
For the Water-ratte.
Mater-rat is a burtfull berrntn to kill fiib, rfperf-
A allpCreuts,Forbes, Culles, and SCrototcs Iping in
boles of tbe banke, SCbep toitt fconc deffrop mucb otber fifij
and fpautte in fljalloto rtuers and b: cokes, to kill them it is
bard fo doe: but tobere as pe (ball tec tbetr patb on bankes
(tdrs, there fet a deadfall, fin tbcp do range abroad a ntgbts
like otber &afs, and tmll be tobere as is come millcs, and
filUiug mtlles, to eate come, and gnato clotbes, and Itucs
mucb like to otber Mattes, and totll pill ojiar barkesand
fucblikc, olfo to take them tnluclcs is bard, ejrcepttke
tueles lie ftjalloto, and nigb tbe toppe of tbe (cater bp tbc
banke: fo a fmall Cttcr toelc made fo? tbe nonce bapted,
map polfible decctue tbcm ♦ STbcp cannot tarrie long km
der (cater, (obcrefo?c tbep (Dill not bunt dtepe, no? robbe
(Deles tf tbep lie deepe, fo? tbcp commonlp take fill) nigb
tbe toppe of tbe toater. But feme men doetbinkea kcrie
gcod (cap to take them, that is: to pinne fquare bo?des a-
gaintt tl>e boles lobere tbep (jaunt, tubicb bo?des mutt
baue a great bole in tbe middett, and fet fuftagamSbcr
rommtng in o? out, fait ptnde to tbc bankes: tben make a
latcb and fet it on tbe out fioc of tbe bo?de, tplo as poti tple
tbe ifore latcb,as pe fljaUfee in kis place; tobteb bole in tbc
bo?de


IjoitJC on ftc nefter part, pc ftall fct ft?« 02 fourc pmkcs
tftepar to bolde anp fting ftat comes out q; in.&bispm*
cttfe map eafelp be made.
Sto lap popfoned baitcs,as p£ccs of ftoefe,oeft o? fuft,
ano to (frate tbc poteder of £>?fcnihc ftcreon, to be lapde
inefto,lobereoftcrfttngoCiimc not. 31 knoteenettebat
gad it tell! doe, ft: tebereas pc loud) anp fting teitb pour
bare bandc, ftep Ml not bgbtlp come at it %\m muft
foj taking fte tenter Uattcs o; £Dtter*
To preferue fpavrne in fpawning time. 1
ACbtefe teap to fane fpatene of fift, in 2parft 3 0pjtli,
and#ap, is thus, pcftall make fagots of tebeate,
o? rie ftratee, all teijole (Irate not bmtfed,o? of r®de,binds
ftefe faggots together teitb tb:& bondes, and all about
ftcreon (ticke of poung b:and)cs of tetllotee. SHben catt
ftem in tbc tenter among teases, o: bp fte bankes, and
put in eacb faggot tteo goad long (takes, djiuen fait to fte
ground, anD let pour fagots lie couercdtn fte tenter balfe
a pear* o: mo:e. £>o fte fill) teill come $ fted fteir fpatene
ftcreon, and tben if teill quicUen therein, fo ftat no ofter
fift can come to uefirop o: eate it, and as ftep teare quiche
ftep teill comefcoftb and faueftcmfelues. Eftus much
fo: ftepteferuing of fpatene in the fpnng and fpatening
time.: this is a g®d pzattife to pjeferuefte fpatene of all
fealed Sft.&befe fagots pe map make and lap in all riners,
pounees, oj landing tenters. P our fagots bad node to
be a peard and a balfe long, and bound teitb ft?# bandcs
not bard, tteo bsnoes a fate fromtbe endes, and an other
bande in tbemteteft, and lap them as 31 bane afo?e deda*
red. aifofomedoebfe tobedgein comers in riuers, and
pondcs teitb toiUote, and ftereon fift doe calf fte tr fpatene
anofobm&es.
D 4 Tlic


The manner of way to takeSca-pics,
ffbe &ea-pie (0 a foule tftat bfetb the feas, ana bjeeaes
mud) in lianas in die fca,ana hues motf bp SO) 1 toojmes,
anb Inhere as tbep bfe in fretb riuers, tbep aetfrop much
fith, poung frie ,anafurhas flumuncs nigh the toppe of
the tnater, ana tuill be in thallotn places of the tuater: ana
there tbep haunt to tahe ana faeae on them. ECherefojc
tbefifljer menhaueinuenteaatnap botoe to tahe them,
tahtch is: pe (hall Ipme tioo fmall dDjiars, ana binae the
enas that are nett the bapte, almolf erode toife.&ben tahe
an other tfjotf tf iche, ana btnae the one ena tinto pour enas
ofcrolfe ttoiggesas pe map ana put tbafthojt
ffiche tbtough the fith 0? bapte. SEhen lap it on fome tna*
ter leafe, ruthes, 0? fuch hhe in the miaft of the riuer, ana
as fame as tbep (hallfe it, thep Ml tahe ana die atuap
Inith if in their bpUes, ana fame thep (hall be Ipmea there*
Untb*
SEbe other Mp of laping tbefe Ipmea tiniggesis ,pe
(hall put a fmall fl)o?t ffiche in the bapte, as pee "map fee a
fe. ona at the hinaer enae tpe a tb:#a an intch long, ana
to that tb?cra tie pour Ipmea t to'gges, ana toben the tahes
ana flics atuap foitb if, the cannot flic farre but the Mi be
Ipmea, foj the ttnigs tuill turne ana touch her tnings, ana
then the tuill fall. SCbuspemap tahemanp pies,
both in fommer ana Miter, ana the ithe Mp~pe map tahe
both Crotucs ana other ppes,to tahe the ftpte theretoith,
he


hetofllbaralpbe Ipmca, bcraufe be takes the bapfe fnbts
fate, ana the other takesitin their btlles. Chus much
here fo? the taking of the £>ea-pie.
Here fliall follow the knowledge how to re-
plenish your filh pondes.
F&2, to faue ana maintaine tnmapers, ponies, ana ftinv
aing boaters, fo: fuel) as haue not riuers, ft fljall he gcoa
to faue, kape, ant) maintaine all fuch filh as map be nou*
rifhea ana b:ea in frelh boaters: as spke, 3is:eame,2Cench,
m rch, Croute, SDarce, ttoch, $ fuch like, ana the Carpe
foj one of the heft, bohtch hath not bane here in Cnglanae
hut offeboepeares pall* Che Crout boiUnot like but in
running ana ftoift boaters, ana hara grauell at the bottom.
SLhe flpmte filh is the Stench, the %>cacoa, ana the sale,
ana pet thep are comenaea fo: a g©a faatng meat fo: man,
but manpboillaifaainc the frefy pale, ana eftame asa
flaggie ana flpmie meate, Taping: he botll genaer luith the
tnater fnake, bobfch thing potTible map be, but the pale of
the frelh riuer is trpea a gcoa ana holfome meate, pou tball
haue alfo the liamp:e, ana the lLampo:ne,bobich are called
fcenemous filh of the £>ea, but bohen thep haue ferapea ana
denfea them in the frelh running boaters. sottoithftana*
mg, thep are then gcoa ana holcfome meat Che crcrc*
ments of ftanaing pooled are frogges, tohich in manp pla*
ceo being boell aielt, thep eate like filh , ana is calae a ktnae
of filh, ana aoe tafte afiocll as a poung poullet, fo: 31 taftca
mp part of manp.
3!t is a gcoa thing to haue plcntie of frelh foatcr filh, m
riuers ana pcoles, ana ffanaing boaters: ana a great pica*
fure fo: man fometimes to take toitb his angle a aith of filh
In thofe boaters bobereas filh is pleutie ana boell
not to hfeanp other engitts, but boitbtbe hcoke: ana bp
fuchmeanesas the labors of this realme both permit ana
allobo, not to bfe fire, hanaguns, croffeboboes,oples,oint*
ments, pouaers, ana pellets maae to call in the boaters t o
0 ftonnp


ff onttp and popfoutbe fiff), no?, pet to Dfe all fortes of nets,
and futb as arc dcuouicrs of bobo nets, calling nets,
(hiall trammels, fljcuc nets, and draught nets: tobteb are
Ocllropcrs of filb before tbep ore groboen toanpbtgneffe.
SDbefe are not mate to be bfed but of certatnc Gentlemen
in tbeir feueraU boaters, 31 boould tatlb no running toaters
Iboulo be let to anp filber man, boitbout o?der lubat metb,
bobaf nets, be o? tbep fljall bfe to fifl) fottb, anb in lobat
monetbs of tbe peace to refratne filing, bpon painc to to&
fatfe bis leafe and all fticb engtns.
aifottlball begodfo? all Gentlemen and others, ba*
uttto tbe gouernment of anp riuers, b:ohes, o? Handing
poles, to replentlb tbcm boitb all fuel) hindc of fiQ) as map
there be pzeferued o? b?cd, afboell of Heaping as others*
SCberetsalunbe of filb in Roland, in tbe fennes befides
peterbo&otu, bobicb tbep call a poult, tbep be like in ma*
lung and greatnefte to tbe M biting, but of tbe cullour of
tbe ilocb: tbep come forth of tbe feune b?okes, into tbe
riuers nigh there about, as in Manftoo?tb riuer tbere are
tnanp of them. SCbep Hirre not all the fommer, but in font*
ter foben it is molt roldctf boeatber. 2Cbere tbep are taken
at lilies in belles, and at boapers lihebotfe. SCbep are a
pleafant meate, and feme do tbinhe tbep tuoulobe aOncll
in other riuers i running boaters, as Huntington, Mare,
and fucb like, if tbofe boaters boere replcniibed toitb them,
as tbep map be boitb fmall charge. SCbep baue fucb plcntte
in the fenne b?ohes, tbep faede tbeir bogges boitb them.
other riuers boere flowed toitb them, it toould be god fo? a
tommon health, as the Carpe boieb came of late peaces
into (England. % bus much fo? tbe fenne pult.
Ofclenfingyour pondes from weedcs.
Ijf pou boill baue p?ofitc of pour filb? in pour pondes and
poles,pe mull baue a care alboapes to elenfe tbcm front
tbjee peace to tlr.ee peace, in taking aboap all tofiedes,
Ms, and flagges 3 fo? tbep doe greatlp fiuffe and trouble
tbe


the fill), anb mate them to be moie ffpmie, atm of a too?*
fer tafte. 3Uketoife pe mtilffealtoapcs fo: £Dfters ana
SMatcr-rats, haunting pour ponses anD poles: pee fljall
belt knoto if there be am? in tbe niol)t fcafon, foi then thep
bunt ab?oaD foj fiOtj: then fake to take them bp fucb means
as afoie mentioned, tohich etfe thep tuiU fcone Deflrrop all
pour Sty. aifo it is notgoDto fuffer anp to finite tottb
guns nie pour ponas 01 riucrs, fo; it feares anb aft onity
tbefilbgreatlp,2nt)too|{t of allin fpatoning time, ano
manp totll Die thereof: pe map toatch tbe haunt of the 4Dt*
ter anD atte, anD firike them if pec can toith the trotote
fpeare, tohich is a herp gob thing to lull them, if it be toell
bone, foj fo manp baue borne kilbe*
Here (hall be (hewed a care oflauingyour pondcs
in failing the water where it is fcant for
to (aueyour fi(h aliue.
7 & lauing pour ponDes anD poles, the greatelt care is (if
J there be anp leant of toater) to kape anD beltoin it fo,
thatthe toater tohich is call fotfb, tnap remainenie the
fioes of pour ponoes ano poles,that pe map rccouer it fame
againe to faue the relt of pour filh, tohile pe denfe fojth the
toabes ano muDDe.,tohich trnll let the toater to come quick*
Ip to the fccDpesXherefojc it tball he be# to denfe the Goes
ano bankes firit of all: in hauing all fuch tales reaot'e, as
(hall be nabefull thereunto: as mattocke0 s fpaoes,lhoules,
fcauclts, fcopes, ano fuch like: to Oifpatch it as quicklp as
pe cam ono toben the loafer is lotoer then the Hat-bole in
fee bankes, pe map fet fuch engins afbje their holes to kill
them at their comming out as afojefaibe, fo? thep totll Ipe
altoaies fn the holes aboue the toater, to fmothcr them in
their boles pe (ball harolpooe, if pe then let themfeape,
thep toill fame conuapthemfeluesatoapin the night oj
befoje night, anDtoiUrunnefcerp ftotfk &busmuchfb;
lauingpourponoes,
E z There


There is alfo a care alwaycs to maintaineyour pits
andftuis with fifli.
UiDto poor pits ano ft ma fljeulo bee bfco to Itope filb in,
pour Hues ano pits ought tobeecftrenuco ano belpt
tuttt) great anOfmaU fill) from time to time , ano rcfrcOjcO
often iuitb fmall fill) among: to if pe Ooe aliuaics tahe,anD
none put to, pour fltoe (ball tone oecreafe. 3 ft (ball be gcoD
alfo to put care&illp pour filb therein, both fmall ano great,
ano to that none be hurt if pe map, to put a SCeneb toitb
them it ftjall Oo tocil* £no it Ibali he berp g©o bufbano?te,
to pnefce ano fet about the banoes, of lmllolu, fallo, 0? al*
Oer, tohich toill be g©o to oefeno the heate in fommcr,from
pour fifb, ano to auotoe the coloe itrUnntcr: but the falling
ofleaues bull increafe muooe greatlp, ano alfo (tineb pour
ponOes.
How to nourifli your fifli in pooles, mayers,
and ftanding waters,
ISC ismollcertaine,thefilbtobicbfe inmets, ano run*
ningtoaters, are at moie libertte then thofe tohich are
tlofeo in ponoes ano pita: to thofe in running toaters, the
toater to them altoaies fometobatto tooe on,
ano there alfo the fmall filb Ooe nourilb the great, but the
filb utclofeo can get no fuch thing* SCberetoe it Ibalbe gcoo
to call Onto them of fmall filb, ano of gut 0 ano garbage of
filb ano of bealts, ano figges tut fmall, ano nut cornel*
btofeo, oi b?oofeO tobeate, fooimes, gratnes of bminges,
tohite bjeao, all totes of fait fifties cut ano haefit in
fmall pieces, ano fuch liHe. 3f pour filb nourilb ano fat not
inttb thefe, pe mult tooe them foltb the frettes oj gubbins
of marfeet filb of the filbmongers: if pet thep be leane, it
(betoes platnc thep toeretahen from the teas, tohichfiCb
are raueners, 0? thep haue come from fitters utgb the Teas,
but the filb in ponoes are reffraint from tbofe liberties*
©hereto* eontinuaUp tbep mult be feooe*
Of


Of the taking of fifli diuerfe wayef*
is Oiuerfe maner of foapes in taking fiflj, in
fome places to the Countrie, ano the na*
tnre of great loafers is one, ano ofriuers ano poles, is aw
other Inhere ttjcp inhabite: folikelotfe is the Otuerfifte of
thefith ♦ 3lfo infixing, fome manner of frying is m the
£>eas, an other manner is in finite loafers,an other ma*
ner fo? great filh ,an othermaner fo? pceles, other tuapes
fo? Roches ano fmall fiflj, an other loap fo? the Carpe,ano
fuch like, firing there is fo manp ottierfiftes in faking
fify, it fotU he ham to erp;effe ano long to lo?ite. Mbere*
fo?ehere 3 leaue that knololeoge to thole that hfe to filh 3
ano fell in markets. Binfpeaking here in generall of the
commoOtties fo? the father ano his famelte, in taking o t
fifo fo? the common loealth, tohereof the p?incipall maner
is, loith nets, loeiles, lines, ano brakes. SEbus 31 hour
(hciucO of rcplemthmg pout ponOes to hanc plentic of fith,
ano clenfing poor polities from loceoes, ano a care fo?pour
emtie ponOes, ano holo to maintainepour pits ano Hues
loith 6th- J3lfo to nourilh the fill) m pour tfanoing loafers,
ano oeelaring ofhitters loates in taking of fith.&us ngicb
taken of Stephanus in jfrench*
Pour Amorcer 3 or gatherTortucsw
Trike eight o?ams, Unions
x one o?am, the tat ofbeaie fen o?ams.&>o heafe them to*
gether, ano being maOe in pellets like beanes,caft them bp
their haunt to the Co?tnes,ano tbep loiU come tbemtelues
to the toll thereof, ano fo pe map take them*
To make it dric.
'"pH&ethel&sof Hrong tome mirtloifb ople, ano pot
1 ttin a place Inhere pe knolo it Mlojie, let it fo re*
jnaine ttU it loam blacke, anothep M come to the place,
€ i “ inhere


fo&ere the ofle fljall be put, aim fo pe map fake them , pt
map take alfo £>alarmontach tbirtane o?ams,ano the but*
ter of goatcsmilkeetgbt Drains, beate altogether, ami
make fmall foft pellets thereof, arm tberefoitb rubbe fobat
gratnc, ojfmall Ipnfaoe not broken, bntDriOc: anotbep
tofll fame there all about, aim brill not Depart, ano ffraite
foap pe map fo take them.
To take Loches or fmall fifln
Tthe b?anne of fobeafe meale, t too potmO, of lenfeif
peafe,balfeaporam, mire them together, ano beate
them Uritb a Mcicnt quantitie of brine, atm put thereto
halfe a pouno of feflame, SChen pc part it w paces,ano
them here ano there: foj as franc as pe haue tfooton
ft in the footer, all the fmall fllb fotH eome Onto it, ano re*
tnaine in one place, although thep be ?00, paces off, olfo
pe map take the blouo of an €>re, <ooate, s>bape oj of a
ijfogge, foith the Oung that is in the fmall guts of them,
mo of time, pcmrpaH,la>kes, fauerie,margerum, garlick,
tmth the las of gam foine, of each in like, forth the greafe
iri marofo of the faioe bealfes, fo much as pe fame gam:
beate them a part, ano then mire them a like together, ano
fo make faiall pellets thereof,ano call it fohere pe foill haue
the fith to come an houre before pc calf in pour lines : o;
rife take the blouO of a blacke c2soafe, the las of gam foine,
of barlep meale,all in like portion: beate them all together
foith the lites of a <ooate, ano then cut them in fmall paces
aim make pellets thereof, aim fo trie than as abouefapoee
Another vray*
'J'me bake a pouno of garlick, of burnt fclTame as much;
of pouliof, of organic, of time, great margerum, of fa#
uerie,offoiloaauifacre,of echtfoo anotbritie o?ams,of
barlep meale, one pouno, of foheatc as much, ano of the
barke of a jfranktnfcnrc tra thirtan o?ams, foojhc all to#
getber foith foanne, anocaft it to the bib, ano thep brill
aflTembie thereabout.
To


To take Perch,
Tfee perch ts notfoeafiMahcn loith fake > nets, oj
1 botonct, but father tmth pjuper baites made anObfeO
fn a treubieo boater: therefore mutt make batten butth
tbe liuer of a Ooate, ano tbe fnaile, ct taUe the pcUobo but?
ter flie bobicb flpctb: of(Coates tuljap, calico fromage de
cneureau of each foure o?amS, opopauicis ttoo
bogges blouo foure ojams, galbonp foure mm , bcate all
inell together, ano fpjtncle it all oucr tuitb pure bine , ano
mahe thereoffmall pellets, o; as pe make perfumer, ano
Ojte them intljetbaOe*
To take the Samon as well in the Riucr ?
asin the Sea,
nr<ahe eight mm of Cothes ttoues, ano the curnefe of
1 pine apple tree burnt, firt&ne mams: beatc all together:
a Ithe, till it be tit mancr of a meale, Another. CaUetho
imts ofttnloe ttuc, eight ojams: the fat of a beale, epght
tjams: of thirtaene Ojams, bcate ail together
ano malte fmaU loaues thereof, ano bfe them as the other
before menttoncO, SDhus much »w taken from Scepha-
.nusin jfreneb.
To take much fiih b/ a light in the night*
\?(fc fl^llotttillin alembeefe ofgla(Te,a quantitie ofgfo?
I boojmes that Ihineth in the night, boith a foft ttre,ano
put the ottttUeo boater into a thin biall of glatte, ano there?
unto put foure ounces of quichftluer, that mutt be purgeO
o? patt thorough leader, oj Inooe flunne.flChen ttoppe the
glaltc that no banter enter, ano tie it in the rntOtt of pour
bobo net fo? breaking, ano focatt it in the boater, ano the
filh boill fame come Onto the light, ano couet to enter into
the net, ano fo pc ttjalltafeemanp, Bno fomeoothfuppofe
tf pe ooe but take a certaine of thofe gIQ-buojmes 1 , ano put
p 4 them


them in a ttjfone Wole o;rgfafd,anotben Hoppe it clofe,an»
tie ttin the net, ftjep boill thine as bocll anD giue as mud?
light. IButfben 31 Doubttbepbottl not long beakueboitb*
out meate, except pe put herbes bnto them in tbe Dap ano
let them foDe,anD We them In tbentgbtao before. &opo?
map referue them fo? pour purpofe (31 tbinkc)a long time*
To take Yeelcs in the winter in haye or
drawe bottles;
*VT<& (ball make long fagot s of bap,to?apt about botUobo
X bougbes, bubteb pe (ball put in tbe miDd of pour bottle
o? faggot of bap, ano then finke it in tbe Dape bp tbe
bankc, ano fo let it tie tboo o: tbte Dapes, anD tie a toptbe
c? rope thereunto tbat pe map fame plucke it bp on lano oj
feoate:anDfopcfijaU take pale* therein got) do?c, in a
coloe tneatber berp g©D. £nb if pe baite o; lap in pour fa*
gotte guttes 0} garbebge of a bead, pee ibaU be tbemoje
iertatne to baue them in a fmall time*
How to breedc and incrcafc ycclesin ri tiers*
pondes, and (landing waters.
common Taping among fifljermcn fa, ff pe toil baue
in pour pits anD ponbes (being of a Tbtete boater) great
plentie of petles in febu peares, pe (ball Digge tboo routtb
o? fquare turfes, o: fo manp as pe boiU baue, anD cut tbem
on a fbottte grounD, f a fljo?t grade, a fcote o? mo:c rottnD
o? fquare turfes, bobereon tbe Deboe njeboes mod tn tbe
morning before tbe funne Doe rife. 2Cben take tbem bp anD
clappe tbe graene fiDes together one bpon another, anD pin
tbem fad together boitb p?ickcs of botoD. Cbeit carrie anD
laptbemfoftlpinbobatpitojponD pe lid, anD pe (halite
erperience. SDbfa is to be Done in tbe monetb of spap, bp
the Debo then on the ground anD at no other time eue of tbe
pearetobegoD*
The


The Gafc for to catch Metiowcs.
'’Tlkte <2safe, is a rotmb net of fmaU melb, tuitfj a b®pe of
1 pein»e, o; great toier tjalfc an intcb about, anb to let
finkc in a bitcb, oi b:mhe fobicb is not Dope, ano fo boloc it
a labile bp tfn® ttrrngs like a ballatts, tuitb a Icope in tbe
toppe, anb therein to put tb?ougb a ttaffe o? poale, anb ye*
IbaU banc tottbm a turtle fo manp fpcnotnestobiebtuitl
come anb gate at it, as IniU couer it : pe mutt bang a fmall
plommet in tbe mibbett, to make it finhe. onb alfo tbe
rotmbes mutt be flat optter (belles tpbc to, anb tbe fquares
mutt be fcarlet o: rcb clotb fottieb on: pour bmpe anb net,
map be tin® quartersanb abatteof a pearb b;oab from
fibc to fibc. Cbus mucb fo; tbe Csafe.
How to bobbe for yceles,
is alfo a taking of pales foltb great foojmes
1 bjatoen tb;ougb on a long thaebe one bp an otber, anb
then fetUbeb bp tb;® fingers hope, anb then tpbe abouc all
£ together,


together, and a bigge ffring tide rtjcmmto, and
bnto a poale,tobicb pe (ball bolae tn pour band. KMte
is bfcd to bobbe at (be conmtmg of a floud boater, and at
tbe ebbing boater of aiip boater that ebbes and flotoes,
fo it is bfeo after a great rainc in Ir.mhes and running boa*
ters , pc muff let pour bobbe tcueb tbe bottomland fo bp
boitbit foftlpagaine, andfobfeitffiU, and pe (ball foie
boben anp pale doe bite: then pinch it bp not berp faff, fo?
then be hull fo?fahe tbe boomte be batb bold of, aitdas fame
as be foies tbe ap?e, be boiUtefebts bolde, thereto; e p»
muff baue a beflell on tbe boater albuaies readie, tbaf Ifo
map fall tbercin. SCbus mucb fo? tbe bobbing fo? pales*
The yecle fpeare to take yeeles.
The OtterSpearc.
P&tefymi* mabetorthfiuethimte farm, cut
in the fibes toith teeth, to holbe that pcrlc that is foithin
them, anb mate toith thiefeer aim rctmbrr plates abouc
toarD the foefcet-, tuhhh focHetwua be mabettrong, anb
therein put pour poale o; ftafTe, tohtehlhephfe inmubbe,
Ktoers, anb bjeokes, to take a bilh of pales at pleafure: but
it is eutll to bfe the pale fpeare tuhereas there is ICeech, o$
Carpe, fo? thep toil! commonlp lie in the mubbe totjen the
loafer is beaten o? troubleb, ano fhcrehp thep map fame
be Men anb bie thereof.
fpeare is bfeb Wt>m a man hunteth the m
ter


Icr tn rine vs ct bjrofees, lofjcn ao a man MI tbant t to fet
btm bent abotie tbe toater,tben to tfnoto tbe fpcare at bim,
tobicb fpeare batb a line ttoe at tbe en&e, ano a finall bore
fafienco at tbe ena of tbe line, fbat tuben pee baue firicheti
ijim, w (ball tbe foner percetuc btm tuberc be Dinctb tit tbe
cuter. if t>e ebanneeto finer bim Iping out of tbe to
ter, tbere to finite bmt, anu let bim go into tbe toatcr, ana
fofetllbira.
To breede Millars-rhumbes and Lochcs, in (hallow
brookes or riuers.
nr flfljes calleb Slothes, M the other xalleb sptllars-
tbumbes o£ Culles, thep alloapcs feebe in the bottome
ofb*<Dkes,anbrmcrs, £Cbep are fiftj holefome to be eaten
of feeble perfotts hatting an ague, o? other firfeneffe. Cbefe
fi(h Delight to betn fattbte grauell m mm anb brakes,an&
then are berp eatie to be taken inttb fmaU ttauell, intento*
titng the tf ones inhere thep lie bnoer,foj thep cannot ffofm
faftatoap. 2Dherefo?e tn c ertatne ihalloto rtners f brakes,
fhcpbo bfe to b;«be,anb faue them pemapmlapmg rouna
fjeapes of pebble (tones oi flint, in fljallobJ places of the
fittbcriuersanDb;oHejcU halfe a forte boepe oftoaterojlefle*
if 2 3Ukt


like as there fe a tyatlofo riucr running from Bartam*
CcOc to CbeCum, ant) fa to Cfjauc * aEo bp Cropoen mto
other plates, toheretn thep mightb?erOe of the faioe flty
great Co?e, if tyeptoerefo gturn. Che lifec niter names
in bp flora oltum, mtreafing bp Oiurrfe
fringes, arto runnes tyalloto in manp placeO,anO bp a err*
taine parity there calico the parfon thereof hath
toloc me, he bath bao fo manp of the faioe Cullcs ano iio*
ches, to his tithe tocekelp, that thep haue fotrnoe him fuffi*
cient to rate ifrtoapra ano , fobereof he boas.
caUeo the parfon of Culles. Cbis o?0cr of Cones are laioe
bollofo in tyalloVo places leflTc then halfe afeote oaepe c f foa*
ter. W)icb flty among the faioe beapes of Cones Ootb
there lie fafe, ano fo b?a Oes: ano there thep are faueo from
theboater Hats, ano all otherfoules, bobich othertuife
tooulo Cill Oeuour them. Cbcfe Co?e of City, men might
haue in Oiuerfe fuch UHc rmers in this Hcalm,tf thep iycnlo
take the like, paine, to lapfnch hcapes of Cones as is aboue
let Ootone: Which tyebocfb the maner oflaping them rcitno
tii the bottome, the circuit of tlnopearoes about, o? as pee
tyallfee caufe. Cbus much 3 thought g©o to tyebo fo; the
maintenance ano bz&Oing of Cnlles ano Jloches. olfo it
is euioent in other Countries, the great care thep haue in
p?eferuflig their flty, efpeciallp in the fin mg: as in Jf ranee,
nofityer men o; other, tyall lap anp engms in niterso?
b?a>Kes in the night, asfletoes ~ Cailes, buekes, kerpes,
toelra, ano fnch like, frommio sparcb, to mto spap : fs?
then the flty Ooeth tyco their fpatone among toaoes ano
butyes, no? tyall not beate the boaters o? b?cokraboitb anp
plonging poalcs, no? pet the fttyer men to flty at no time,
Inith anp net bnocr fbure inches maty, becaufc thep tyall
not kill the (mail flty befo?etbep are toell groboen, ippon
pame of fbjfaite anololfe of all fuch engins. Sphere is alfo
p?ohtbtteO, that no flty tyall be taken ano foloe in markets,
tohich are out of their feafon: as the Jlampze ano Jlam*
po?nes, bobitb are henemous m the £>ca befo?ethep be
frourto in ftety boater, ano not in feafon from mio search
to


to mio September, fo? tbep buill (being oat of feafon) Imho
niffet anti fpecklco bpon tfictr bellies, olfo Offers ano
Spufkles,are not gao from tnio mtO September:
arte likctoifc Salmons ano Croiotes, are in feafon from
tnio Search to mio September, ant) after tuare out of fee*
fon.&melts not tit feafon from mio to into £>cptctm
ber o? after. Cockles ano futb are not kinolp but in the
monetises of , 0p?ill , ono 2pap : all the reft of tbc
peare not bolcfome to be eaten o? foloe. £po:eoucr SDarce-y
Hod), perch ano fud) like, are not kiitolp to be kiloe from
mto £pard), to tbe eno ofsap: fo? in tbefe times tl)cp Ooe
caft tbeir fpalone, ano tijen then UhU be rough ano btohen,
fcalcoano piloe foz a labile, after tbep baue fo caft tbeir
Ipabonc. 3no being tben out of feafon, tbep are not fo bote-
fome no? pet gcoD ft liking. 011 tbefe afo?e menttoneO Vuitb
all other tobicb are out of feafon, are fo?btO to be tahen ano
foloe in markets, p?iuelp eaten, bpon tbe like
penaltteafo?emtmfioneo. f looulo toCoOitmere fobere
lnitb bs in Cttgteno, ano to baue mo?e p?efecuers,ano lefte
fpoplcrs of ftib out of feafon anO m feafon♦♦ then Ine (boulo
baue mojc plentie then luc baue through this Heafme.olfo
3 tooulo IniCb that all ftoppe nets, ano o?ags truth cafting
nets, tocre banifbeo in all common riuers tb?ougb this
Healme fo?tb?eemionetbs: as in £parcb,ftp?tll, ano sap,
tobercin tbep tahefifl) out of feafon as tuell as ofbcrs,tuftb
great fpoples of fpntune, both of great ano fmaft ftfl?, (o%
tbep bfe fucb nets fxntb finall mefb, that kite all fifb afo?e
tbep come to anp gvotutb ano gcoo ferutee fo? tbe common
boealtb* Wjo fo cucr ooe p?eucnt fucb, tbep (ball Ooe go®
to tbe common tueaftb. ono luater Naples lubicb are ap*
pomtto to foe fo? ted) mtsintim$ 9 ano running ftreames
(bobirbte thought) tbep neglect tbeir outies, fo? tbep let
the filber men bfe tobat nets tbep lift, as tbe bopce goes ?
ano Ceittlemen lubicb oboes tbs luaters lets them alfoa*
bme, ano the fifocr men tljep fap tbep pap fucb rents, tbep
muft take bobattbep can, fo herein are none g caresfo? the
Screwing of tbe commou boealtb ; boberebp fity cannot in*
~ rreafe


creafe, no? pet fuffer to grolue. £>o 31 leone, tailing that
carefull men taere put in office, and fucb as fauours tbe
common luealtb, and all otber put out tbatl&hcs fo? tbeir
olune pjofite onelp* (bould luce baue taitbin felue
peaces, much plentie of all riuer filb, and alfo a great fpa*
ring to ffeib, if tbep luoulo tie ff lb as tbep lucre lucent on
ifrpdapes, &>atcroapes, and faffing dapes commanded bp
our }3?ince, and fo truelp bepi of all people, from time to
time*
The breeding of Creuis,
fretfj foster Creuts, commonlp lines and Ipes fo
banhes ami boles in riuers ann fomKes, and tbep are a
bolcfome fiflj foj all firhne and foeabe perfons. &bepfotll
calf tbeir fpatonc in tbe fp:trg about tbf monetb of spap 3
anD foill foed it on If ones, <s foteocs in tije bottom?, fobere*
of molt is eaten bp foitb veelrs and foster ratbag fome Do
fcppofe. SDberefo?? it focrenotfotmote to mabe fagots
of bole itrafoe to fauc tbe fpafone as afo?efaibe♦ olfo tbep
foiU fame be foiucn foitb flouds Dofone tbe ft reame, in fefo
peaces tbep foill greatlp inereafe,tf tbcp be not taben foitb
mens ban Des, and bild foitb Mate fo? tbcp foOl lie in boles
and bnder Hones, and fotedes, and fo arc fametaben: foj
tbep cannot file faif afoap, 3f tbep be taben in epap, it
foill be a great fpople of tbeir mereafe, fo? conmtonip scn
sep doe tyed tbeir Mm- rat is alfo a greaf
dcnourq;


monttt of them Iplng In holes j anb tohereas manp rat#
arc, thep cannot Ughtlp piofpcr o* tmreafe there. %Xm
much ffo the frelh boater Cteauis. map ffo:c anp
b;a&c oj riucr halt!) the Crews, hut efperiallp he tones the
fenbicanb graueip running boaters*
TheKinges fifher*.
ta abtrbtohich is a great bcff roper of all potmg
1 frp anb fmall filh, anb he is calico the ftinges filber: he
ia about the btgneffc of a 2Urke,anb both commonlp bjaebe
ut baukes , foes of nuca anb brakes, m the fpmtgof the
peare: b& feathers are gramc anb bletue, anb he tmll al#
toapes haunt about the fioes of riuera anb bjakes, Inhere#
a# fmall filh la,anb aa tone as he hath caught a filh,be tolU
firatght boapflte tathe nert bough, anb there intU fit on a
tUrtgge anb eate the filh, anb fo fetch an other, SChua he It#
ueth bp the beucurlng of all fo?tes of fmall frie, fuch aa he
map take anb carrie abnap, jfoUo take this blrbe, thep
hfe to marke Inhere hts haunt ta, anb there thep fet botone
a bulb ojbjaneh, anb the? put altmeb tfoigge briber the
felbe bulh o? branch: fojfo fame aa he hath taken a filh, he
tuiU flic to the nert bulh anb light on that briber ttutgge Ip#
meb, anbfo thep take him. aifo thep rap this btrb, being
beab, If he be hangeb bp bp the bill tolth athjeeb In pour
boufe Inhere no bolnbe Wolneth, bis biclf tolll altnap hang
agamfttbc inutbe, tohercbp pe mapknolne perfettlp in
tnhat qnarter the Inlnbe la at all time#,both night anb bap.
%\m much of the birb calico tbeftings filher.
The Cormarant.
r alfo a great beff roper of filh, been#
1 fctbfhefrelh Inatcra, anbtotll biue bnberthe boater,
anb loiU take anb cate filh of tbjee i foure pearea grolnth.
potato take o; befirop them 3 knofo notlnell, otbcrinlfe


b?aedc inlands, and rockesbptbefea: feme map be be*
ftroped in riuero and pale*, Until croffeboto, 0; handgun,
other toapes 3 haue not knotoen o? heard of,not toith lime
Itneo ercept it be in the ntgbt, and tben tbep koill pike them
fame clcanc againe.
The Dobchicke,
'Ttye 2>obebtchcies lihetoife a loafer fotole, and tbep
1 toillbealtoapes comtnonlponrtuers and partes, and
tbep are nigh as great as the teaies , and are of cullour
blacke, and tbep toillconimonlp diue Under the toater to
take poung fitb,as 3! haue tenc~in rtuers 1 b;wUes.
fo? to take them, the fifber men fome doe Ufe to lap on the
toater long lines of fmatt th:eeoe Unit full of little cojhes, a
handful! a funder on the line,and cut foure fquarc like bigge
dice, and fo limed and fold on oracle,as 31 fbaU Ihetue here*
after: and toherethep fee them haunt, thep totll fpjeadthe
fatde line afo?e them on the toater, and thentoith their
boats, d?iue them to the fapd line, and fo manp are taken.
JSDbus much fo? taking the SDobcbiekes.
%W racle, fumes round of the middle ffaflfe ,andaspe
f® fy% tb?*be limed foitb fmaU co?hes,tba£ 10 folfi thereon*,
- (g>


fo long as pc teill liauc it of length to lie on the loafer, ano
each cojke f o be but fouce fingers a funOer, o? lefie,
ftiffice.
The More-coote or bauld Coote kils fifti a!f;>.
o? bauloccote, liuesliketoife on tea*
tors, ano thep alfo eate fi(h if thep can take them* £Do
kill o? take tbefe, 3 knote no other Ump, but teith lime, o?
teith the gunne, o? fuel; like to kill them.
The making of a water lime, a veric good and
a perfeft way*
YC (hall firfiteafij pour birolime in running tuafer,
that no knots be fount) therein, no? pet motes, but
pike them out as cleane as pe can in the teafiling * SEhen
take ano bople it in a pot o? fkillet, ano in the bopling put
inalittlerofome, teith fome frefi) greafe, o: gefe greafe,
ano fo let it bople foftlp a pietie fpace in ff o?mg it fiilXhen
take off the fame lime, ano put it to a teeat fefiome in tea*
ter, if it come teith the lime, it is g©o, if not, bople it lon*
ger bntill pe fo that p?a>fc. Mo in flfooe of rota, pe map
take tobite turpentine, fo? that is better, ano this kinoe
of teater lime, teill holoe both in teater ano frofiie tecther*
The Ofpray,
*T|)e <©fp?apis a biro me asbigge as
1 the SDarcell of a goihateke, he kueth bp fith, ano is a
great oettroper of fifi?: fo? 31 haue fone him take fifh in the
miooefiofagreatponoe, thepfaphe hath one fote like a
ano the other like a , ano as he flies me o*
uer the teater, the fifij teill come bp bnto him. looter fo
take him 31 knote no other teap but to toafeb tehere hce
p?apcsfo cate his fiih, fo? he teill flic to fome trtetherea*
boutes, ano there to kill him teith the hanogunne, tebich
31 haue fone in loampityre. Chus much fo? the £%ap.
€> The


The tempering of bird-lime, and it willfcrue
alfo well in water*
a-pouno of bt':D lime, dcanfe anD loath if in rum
x ning boater beriedcarc that no hnotsbe left therein.
SChenbeateout the boater anD D:ic ft againe. SCben put
thereto tboo fpontefuls of fearpe btneger,anD fo mud) g©fe
greafe as boiU make ft fubttU to runne: anD put tberto balffc
a fpamefull of larnpe ople, anD a title SHemre SCurpentine*
SCbenbopic all thefetogetber in an earthen lea Den panne,
anD Surre it attuapes, anD let it but bubble anD plap foftlr.
SThen take ft off the fire, anD fo referue ft anD bfe it at pour
plcafure ,boarme ft tobcu pou boiU hauc the bfe thereof*
Lime made of Mifteltoo*
fapth,thepDo gather the berries in 3utom*
ne, in the full of the gpojne,(foj then thep are of raotf
fo;ce) anD then tbepbjcofe them, anD fo let them lie fo; a
fpaeeanorotte, anD then thepboalh them in running toa*
ter, till thep be cleane like other lime, anD therewith the?
Doe take birDes, asboitb other birbe lime, rnaDe of t;'olip
barken,
A pretic way to take a Pye*
YCS thaH lime a fmall tb;#De , a fete long c; mo;e , nub
then tie one cnD about a p&cc of fldh fo bigge as thee
map fiie aboap buttball: anD at the other enD of the tfxm'D,
tie a th©e buckle, anD lap the flclh on a peff, anD let the
tb?a>De hang Dobone, anD bohen ihe files aboap botth ttthe
tbjeeDe toith the buckle boill about her, anD the®
fee toifi falLfo pe map take them*
FINIS


A
Booke of Engines
and traps to take Polcats,
Buzardcs, Rattes, Mice and all
other kinder of Vermine and beajls what-
foeuer 3 moft profitable for all Warri-
ners,and fuch as delight in this
Jdndc of fport and
paftime.
LONDON
Printed by lobn Wolfe, and are to be /old
Cttoars catjfte otocUing at tije littte
of jßattles attfie figne of tie (octnne.
* 5 9 o.




A hntcfi to take Polcats, as alfo other Vermir
manner of £ngme is cafleb of Mar*
KjgYi nners, a botch, an& it is mace of bo;Ces 5
5v foure fquare^ *° fae wiwoaDmtoffanoe
MCI ttoo falling bodies at the enCcs:
tohicb ttoo bojOes mult fall utto ttoo rp
m2& ** gals on both fiCes of the ences fo* flipping
tottbtn. Blfo there i$ ttoo lathes ano firings tree to tflc faf
Img bojces on the cubes to bolbe them bp, troflihg bppon
ttoopillerstobtcb are mabefalton the bpperbojbe of the
butch, toith a line mace fait on the bacfte floe comming o*
uer the ences of the fatbe lathes cotsne to the b?tbgc on the
fo?e flee* is tpbe toithtn to the bacfte flee 03.
bojoe of the hutch an inch from the bottom? bo;Ce. £>ome
€>3 m


boemake them frith another pfller toffaoe of tbe backs
ftring, but tw is as gcotj a frap, pc map frbicb frap
pefriUbaueit.
A latch trappe for the water Ratte , to be m a de of
bordc with a hole pinde againit the Ratic-
holcin the banke of brookes,
poolcs, or riuers.
r p !£elafcfj muff be fef no tnfDcr but tloo focbe* artb a
balfebfe, fotbat tbepmuff crape tbo?oto toben (bog
comes; in o$ out: it map be fet imtbfn tbc toatcr,ano about
the mater, tobere commonlp tbep lie about aUfcap, ano
coTTWWttotoartJnlgbt.
This


This is called the dead-fall for Polcats.
or other Vcnnrne*
engine 10 cafileD a aeaa falL# is rnaDe teifh a fquare
1 pare of timber 03 furl) like, foaping about fjalfe a bun*
a;etb potmt)Cs 02 moje, tuifb a hole bontxD in the nnaif of
the tipper fine thereof, ana therein a b®bea croohe fet faff*
Mo there is fourefo&ea ffahes tohicbmutf be fet faff in
the grouna, ana taping thereon ffooru&gfls a trotfc, on
luhich cuDgtls, pefballlap a long ftaffe 0? poale to hola bp
the aeaa fall bp the creocb ♦ bnaer tobicb ertoch pe lhaU put
a <bo3tcuageU,toitb a Imemaae fell thereunto, tuhirh
Unereaehcth aofone to the bjiage beneath: tobicb bhage pe
sal!mafte toitbin fine 0: fire inces b?oaa, bbe thofe that
are maae foj the fo?efaibe hutch*
Mo on both (toes of this fall, pe map fet if foitb bmae,
pale, 03 fueh (the: either pe map beage it toith dole rocs,
ana to make it ten inches hie 03 moje. Che foure fp?eaatng
corners, are maae to fbefoe the totoe hcages, that no her*
mine fyaUpatfe fo eafilp bp, but come thojoto tbefaU, ana
4 the


the paffagsaiottbe made no toider then the fell Is b?oade,
no tap of the b?idge behinde,
buffets it lofeagamlt a pirate befo?e the clichet,attdlb it
ftapesbpon the fall.
The latch or Foxe trap.
Tl£ts<£tigttie is called a Hatch o? jfore frappe, ft fe
madelratbatbtchepaccofhwjd of tfoo inches itt the
bottome, and fo made taper toife bpfoardc, sebere is alfo
ttoo other fquare paces fet on the aides of the bottome
pace, and made forth tloo regals fo? the latch fo rife and
fall in, as pe map fa bp erample: in fuming on a pirate in
the lotoer rigall at the hinder endc. Mbicb latch truth the
clogge, mult be made tutth W edge dotonetoard, as the o*
thcr is bptoard: then lhall pe haue bettoaite the latch, and
the lidger, a frnaU round fticke, tpde at the hinder end truth
affring ,and palling tbo?oto the fo?emoft rigall, and at
the ettde thereof mult be ttoo o? th?a fmall holes o? niches
made fo? the pirate that mult hotoe bp the latch toitb the
clogge, and fo fcotte as that ffiche o? bridge is put dotone,
the latch toitb the clogge falles, pe mult bud) aboue the
latch, fo? anp thing leaping ouer, tohercas pc fee it poude*
red , latch map be made balfea peard $ mo?c toioe.
This


This latch is to fet againft a banke or other
hill tide.
engine o; latch, to called a dogge lately, atotoff Ithe
the other afo;e, but that bis ttoo ptllers oj poftes are
fet fall in the ground, and there mull be alfo a bole made
tottbin ttie latch on the infide of the banhe o; bill fide. Inhere
the latch mult be fet t and therein pee map baite it tottb
tobat baite pe Ml, to; a dogge o; other taemttne. olfo
tjpon the bpper fide of the latch, there to notches made one
bp an other aH ouer. SCben is there a barre in the toppe
tobicb runnes hpon a pinne, and runnes into etierp notch,
and holdes dotone the latch, fo that the fapde latch cannot
rife, tobat (better be toithin it toillholde him fait there, be
It dogge, o? other hemtine: there to alfo a toeight hanging
at the end of the latch, to make it fall mo;e quichlp.
H The


The latch trappe*
/ J'%is engine is called a latch oj bjake trappe, ft is mate
Mb foure tbicke bozdes o* paces of timber, fit length
quarters of a peart) o; leflTe, pe map make them as pe
sall tfetnhc gcoD, eptber to fit ftifl fn tbe eartb 7 oa often to
be remoued, But if pe MI make them to remojue, then
mutf tbe bpper fellers be mo?ebeauier made. 2Cbefe foure
paces muff be pint) at botb ends, and tbe tfoo bpper bo:dcs
o; fallerr 7 muff lie foitbin tbe lino neither as pe map fa
bp example, &bcn is there bntbtn tbofe neatber bojdes, a
tong bridge, fobicb muff be tide at tbe neafber ende of tbe
catch Mb a ffring, and that bridge bat!) foure boles at tbe
ether ende, fo; a pinne to put therein to bearc and bolde bp
the tino faUers. Mbicb pinne is put into one of tbofe boles
of the faide bridge, and tbe other ende of the pinne, ff apes
bnder tbe great fquare pinne that is betlrnm the fellers,
and the ffring that is tide to that pinne, is tide aboue to a
Smwcbin, Uibtcb trounebin Ipetb on ttoo forked ffakes, fet
m


In the grounb,as pc map fee bp erample bp tbe neatber part
of tbe trappe* olfo tbe neatber parts are rebateb on the out
(tbe, anb mabc ebge toife t)ptnarb,anb bcbgeb on both fibes
as pe map fee. flub to fall toluarb tbcbcbge is belt*
The foote trappe*
engines is callcb a Jforc trappe oj fate frappe, be;
caufe it tabetb all bpfbe fate. 3t is mabe tuttfj a tbiche
bojbe o; plaitite,of nine o: ten inches bjoab. onb common*
Ip a pearD anb a batfc long, foitb a bole tnaDe intbe nubble,
nearer tbe one enb,tbentbe other* olfo tbe planhc batb iitr*
bolea,atcarbenbttoo, to ttahe botonc fait tbe planheto
tbe earth, that it be not pludtf bp : then tbere is a poale
let, oj tnc bofoeb botone to tbe enb of tbe planhe, anb to
the eitb thereof is tibe altrongllne, foblrb line mult come
tmber the eitbe of tbe planbe, anb bjafone out at tbe fate
bole,tottb a ft)o:t Itrong rlichef of toabtibe thereunto toitb
a fljotf firing, tobtrb dicbet mult befet againlt the nar*
rotn place of the fate bole, anb the other enbe in the niefee
9 1 on


on tbe falling boarb, iobirb mutt ftap again® a flat
ptnne of Ujqjd , iubtrb mutt be fet bnber tbe planfee tobere*
aa pc fee tboo ftomaU patches, to bolbe bp tbe falling boarb:
ano to tbat alfo is tibe a ttrong lingell o? other line, tobieb
line is lapo rounb about tbe bole of tbe fotc bojb o; fall, on
tbe planhe, ano couereo all ouer toitb butt, fanDe, o: cartb,
fojfearc offufpition. %\)is trappe map be fet again® sfore
boles, oj other muce, toitb bebgeo on both Obeo tbe planhe
tbat be ttjall patfe no otber toap.but on tbe bojbe.SUfo pour
falling bo?D mutt be bjober briber, tben pour bole.
The Wolfes Crappe.
The fquarc horded, and the
pin in the top thcrof.
The whole trap with coucr
platter, poale,and baitc.
Tg? Engineiscalled aMolfetrappeojpttte. Bit ts a
large dole digged lire forte fquare, and ttoo peards com*
monlp and a balfc totbe from fide to fide, and bonded all
round,both bottome and fidcs dp to tbc toppe, drttb a poale
fet fatt in tbe mtddett thereof, almott as die as tbc toppe of
tbe pifte. SCbcn is there a pirnie of p?ne put through tbe
widdeff of a large platter of toted o: fucb lifcc, and tbat pin
fet fell in tbe toppe of tbe fapdc poale: and tbere dpon It is
lapde and made fad, fome beattes liucr, n fucb liKc: o: elfe
ageofe


a geofe o? ducbe, iudtcb is tide fall tdereon. Cbett towards
ntg&t tf>cp make a frame bnfo fbc trappe , and t&ep coucr
fljc fatdc pittc Mb hurdles,
bout (fauntg a fpace) and tbep lap of grome turfes tberecn,
fo that Men tljc Molfc, o? jfore, doe come and findc tbe
baite, tbep can not reach tf,kntbout tbep tread on tfje plat*
ter, tobtcb platter is fet tichltlb thereon, and as fame as be
treads? on tbe fide, it tilts dofnne, and rife dp againe, and
tbe W. olfe o? older falles dofrsne into tbepitfc: and if older
doe come, tdepare ferued tde UKe» %tm mued fo? tbe
Molfe trappe. sfo: tde if ore, if de annop tdem, tdep lutU
lap a piece of a fdoepes liuer neto,at d»s dole,and put tbere*
in rlofclp of tdepouder of ratsbane, todted Ml fo lull dim*
olfotdepouderof oeomfum called in ilafm, in <£ngUfl)
Wolfes bane, tde pouder put 02 If rotate onflcfytatllHill
tdem. Coucd idem not Md pour bare bandcs, fo? tdep
MI finde it andfo?fahe it
The kragge hooke*
Tfefe Engine 33 call a djagge bake, becaufe it is made
like a d?agge, it is mate of petrne o? great toiar, aim
5 tumes


tome* on tbe MeueU, like tbe foeneU of a loggar, ot like
on a grap-bound roller. 2Cbe bufbandmen fit jfrance, toil!
bang tbern on branches , of oiuerfe trees about their
groun&es, to take tbe ifore, Molfe, ojdoggc if be take it,
but ebtefelp foj the ifore: tbep fife to bang them fo bte from
tbe ground, that a ifore muft leape at it, before bee can
catcb.it.. edbieb bakes are baited and coocred initb Itutts
of beafies, m otber flelb, and ioben be catches tbe bake fit
bis mouth, be cannot deliuer bintfelfe thereof, but bang*
and tumes about initb the bake fit bis mouth on tbe toeuel
and line: and hereunto tbep make frames toitb fotnegar*
bage againtt nigbt,as tbep commonlp doe to other engrns,
and bp tbis engirt, tbep doe defirop manp of tbetr ifore*,
tdbtcb ofbcriuife inouio dcuour manp of tbetr iiambes,
andpoultcie.ifojmentbaf dtoellesntefbefea fide inhere
rocke* are, there the ifore toill be, there it (ball do twell to
fet fjppe iebbets and bang pour o?agges thereon, and fo
pe defirop pour ifore* fit fbo;t time.
The Hare pipe.
jm fe tf*Het> a pipe, becaufc tf is made
bolloUi,tbep arecomrmnlp made foj tbe bare, of pipes
of C'tocr, of fire o: fetien inches long, ano foj the jfores
anD dogges, tbep are made of p?ne plate, nie tens? eleuett
inches long, fottb tfoo ibarpe pifccs in tbe mouth thereof,
andfbe mo?e tbep plurhe and djatoe, the mo?e it ffriheo in
ano petreefbe flelb oftl)e bcatt. om> alfo fo? the jFore o* o*
ther fucb, it fljall be gcoDto arme tbe firing o: line tottfi
red toiar ft j torring. tClbi:l; line, tbe one end is put in at
a bole wade ui tbe pipe fide, as pc jnan fie, and to d:alone
double


double out at the month of the fame, Cbe other enbtomee
though the ptpCj ana is tice bnto force pirnic fet faff in the
gcounOj oj to force bough* SCbcp are romrconlp fet in mrc
res Merc tbep paffc though: but fo2 the jfore, tb?p pitch
the bare pipe in force places-,at the mouth of bio hole,fuhen
be is hunteo 02 other imfc, 02 in rcufis Mere he bauntes
tomenshoufes in hilling their larcbes, pigges, 02 other
poultrie * ihenfee that pe ffoppe all other paflages there
aboutes, fo (hall pe be fure to faue pour poultre, 02 elfe to
take bun * Pc map rcahe tratnef at pour pipe bole, as is
afo;e mentionco of the other.
The whippe or fpring trappe.
Engine, fe calleb the fobfp, 02 fpftng, ft fe ret thus:
* tijere is alf ring tpoebnto the enD of fame poalefet faff
fnthe grouttU, o? to forne tree: bnto the faio ftring is maDe
foffa fmaU ftwt ftfcfee, Mb a nufee intbe lotoer cnotber*
of;, nrnbe tbitme on tbo ttpper fine ; then the poaleia botoen
4 «^otwte


boUrne foitb if, bnto an other ffiche to fall in the grotmbe
tmtbanickealfo,anti thirtncebge bnber. SChcn l^all pee
iopne both the nickes together., as pc map to bp erample,
as fickle as pecan. SEhen open the enb of pour ffring,fct
it in fome mufe, 01 inhere pe thtnke gab. anb fuhen anie
jfore oj other thing Doe plucke the fatDe tipper ffrtng a fi&e,
then the mcke Hippos bp, ano the poale ffarts anb fo bolbes
him bp, as pe map eafelp to bp erample. 2Dbus much foj
the fp:tng trappe. Sphere is pearelp kiltie Inith if ores in
this ftealme as manp bo iubge, of lambes temte thoufanb,
of poultrietlnentie thoufanb,of Rabbets anb Contes nie
fotfie thoufanb couple: befibes poung jfaunes in manp
ptrkesanbifo?effs.
The double trappe to take Rattcs or Mice.
Engine ojfrap, ft is almoff mat® toitb a fquarc
in the bottome, anti alfo aboue, and aqout flue
fnebesin height ibitb a tbitke in tl;e mibbcß, as pee
map to pointy iottb ffuenaplcs, anb naplcb faff to the
tapper


tapper ant) nearer bo?De, tit parting the trappy, Were fe
alfo tluo falleo naploeioitb leathers on tbe bpper bojbe,
tubicb is ijcioc tip and ttloe toitb a Oring, tuhicb firing bath
a clicftet o? forage, ana to ffaptse on a fl?o?t peece offoatfe,
anD fo titoe foitb pcokcO foiar, fobicb foiar goetb tbojofoe
a bigge bole,and fanes on tbc tapper bos bp a croCTe tdar,
anD on tbe lofoer end of tbe crcoUeD foiar tbe battc is put ott
foitbin the trappe, at the further cnoe of tbe trappe: and
there againff pe map fe ccrtaine fotars fet from tbe tipper
to tbc neatber bo?dc, to vice tbe Hats there to feehc
to goe out* Mbtcb is thought pearelp tbep dell rop tbofofo
C*tglandfo?tic quarters of route*
A trappe or fall for Buzardes, and KyteS,
with a hurdell*
T&* n S l,tc 1531 a fall 02 trappe to tafce 25u?arde*
and tfcpte*, inhtch t* after thi* fo?t, pe fijaU fet a hur*
OeH on tfjc ground Inhere ye thtnfte god, tlfthtch ljurdeU is
golden bpbefojc inttharroftcd fftcfte, and that craved
31 mu


tttcfce i 6 b olfien bp tottb a fich pot briber bim,fc)fcic&
fiojheD fticfce mufi ftanb tofe mi ti)c grotmo, iuttftmtt tbe
neatbcr tetbge % fojfeeo fftche * olfo In fcftuig bp tbe nea*
tber enb of tbe crcokeD fticK that botoes bp tbe burbeU, mutt
be raaDe fmali anD fiigbtlp put into tbe clift of tbe fojfeeb
imbgeantittiefte: fobirb mabefaff,anDttDe
Uritb ttoo ttoeem to tbegrounb, bnber tbe bacUc of tbe
burtcU, as pc map eafelp perceiue: anD foben pee t>oe tfle
o? fct it bp, it IbaU be g®b uritb tbe cwdHcd fftrhcs eno, to
tet tbe bjiDge ftanoe a banDfuUbte from tbe groiuiO, anb
puttberein fbcenbeof pourmoheb ftirfec as ttcHle ao yee
can,tbattobcn anp tljtng comes to take tbe baite anD
treaoes it oobme, tbe burbeU fallcs fuDbenlp on them.
The Basket fall.
Tito Engine t'e edict) t!)c 3!safftet fallto tafte tftrfeo an&
315u$arbe$, ft tefetanD tplbein all tbtngeo Itfce bnto
tbe burble before, tottball things thereunto belonging.


s£t)U3 HBaffiei is comrnonlp mafic npctfcfe fafbam about
in tbe (fcutco, anfi fo bic that a man map toell ffanfie ty*
ngbtUritbmbnn,. SCbe Marrinersfio comrnonlp in fomc
places fife (in Habbet time) to fet bun in ptaines, m foar *
rens, anfi in parkes, toberas Connies ace b:cfi,anfi fb fbcp
tabs tbe fcvtc anfi tbe Bujacfi, in tbis USatbet.
The lay trappe to fet about corne
fields, or orchards*
'J' l£ts (Engine in called a 3ap trappe % it in made bottb a
poaleof feuen o? right Inches abount, and feuen oj
right fcote long o; hie, fetfatt tn the ground about pour
toheat, o; other frutte. UCbere in made in the fatde poale
ttuoholes, one beneath and the other aboue: tn the
ther molt hole, there in a fpjtng boand fet faft therein, and
hoboed hnto'tbe hole aboue, bohlch hole pe (hall put tho*
jotoe a ffrlng, tide fait to the ende of the fp#ng boand,boith
a Knot thereon, to flap It that it (hall not fltppe bacUe a>
31 a game.


gaine* aifo on tljefoje Coe of. the bole, pemnft put a blunt
ptntie of tocoDtoitt) a totmoenfcc of feuen weight inches
long, fct loifelp in bp the Knot to (tap the firing: lobicb
pinne peefljall fa clouen in the micocfi, ano in that cleft
tbep bfe to put a cherie, o? tobeateare, foj a baite. Chen
(hall pa fpjeao finelp, ano lap the firing about on the fatoe
(hotfptnne,ano pour firing to baue a running n©fe. 3lfo
the trappeof pour ftafeemuft be mabe fljarptethat no foule
(haU light thereon . onb token anp lights on the fljotf
pirate to catch the baite, it fallen botone r ano the firing
thereon takes them bp the Iqgges. Ckus pe map fet manp
fitch about pour grounbs, pe map make fhefc trappeson
boughes intrasto take them at all times of the peare if
pelift*


The bow trappe for Rats or other Vermine.
engine oj frappe tottb tfje bofo,fe maoeltfce a bore,
of a tobole pace of toroo, tottb tbe iiDDc opening $ (but*
ting aboue ,anb tbfe Coe to bnbcnt,lbetomg tbe left Coe ano
tbe liOOe,ano clicHct , taken out: luitb boles ano tbe ifrmg
fo.Uo fetbinr r as plainly fljaUbe CjetueO bent anofet*
*3 —*


The bowc trappe fet.
bent, forth tfjc boles ana pftmes
bofo to bcnue bmt: as tbe pirate on tbe lio&c is to botoe
3noalfotje pirtnefetabonetf>c clichet ,ls
to


to ojtier tbe firing ccmmfng from tbe bote of tbe bjfoge bn*
to tbe cltcbet, tobicb mutt (tap bp tbe bjiDgecrottano bap*
teo,tobenbetsfet* 2Cbe pikes are fet to bot&e fafi tobea
bcioputootoe.
The Dragin trappe for Mice or Rattcs,
r T~p3 engine o; trappe is maoe of toosti lOke tbe fiockc of
1 a 15eU, toitb tfoo bole* at tbe entics, anb therein to put
tbojoto baire oj cojoe Oouble, ano tbe littoe put bettoeenc,
ano ttjc baire one toap totuaroe tbe Itbtie bppon
tbe bntser ftoope ? toitb fijarpe topars fet rounO on tbe tapper
UDbe,and along toibgebn&cr 3 falling.toitbintbeneatbcc
t)cope tuitl) a ffaffe fet faflc aboue on tbe fiocke, to tie tbe
firing ano rltchet, tobicb muft boloe bp tbe Itooc: tbe bppec
trappe Iptst toitb tbe moutb totoardc pou 3 anti tbe lotoer
toitb tbe fioc totoartieopcu.
1 4 The


The fall for Rats or other ve rmine.
engine is calleb the Uatte trappe c: fall, tuhicb is
mafic iuttft a thicheboftomebo?be, anb tiuo thinner
booties on both ftbes, anb there is ttoottauesfet fall
rotoe the bottome bo?be, then fbe fall mutt be a tbiefoe bo#
anbbeauiehrifball, anb at the enbes thereof mutt pour
ttaueo goe tbo?oto eafelp to fall anb rife, tubicb duo ttaues
baue boles aboue,fobicb ttaues mutt alfogoetbojoioe the
long bjibge aboue, anb at the boles ue mutt put in tfoo pins
to bolbe bp tbe fapbe bjibge, SCben mutt pe fef fatt another
ttaffemtbemtbbcttof tbefall, foitb a latcb in tbetoppe
thereof loafc fet to fall bp anb Dofoneifobteb latch mutt haue
attring, tobicb ttringconnneth botonefotbc bjibge be-*
tteatb,urifb a fmall rltcKctfattened thereunto: anb the
tyfoge is fatteneb beneath on the bachcfibe oj bo#e,att inch
from the bottome bo#e, anb fo it is bone, see map mahe
them fo fahe foafer Hats in fetting them in the toater, in
the fibes of pour ponbs anb riuers, anb bapteb tuiti) carton
but then pe mutt fet rotues of fljott naples bnber the fall
planhe, anb thofc brill ttap either rattc oj other if thep
gbe though if ? anb put boUrne the b;ibge.
The


Thcbo*etrappe*
TDfe engine oj frappe, Is to take mice, 0? rafter, toblcb
is made of a tbfa bo jde of ttoo tnrbcs and a balfe bjoad,
and eight tnrbcs long, tultfj a round bole cut fbo:otoetbe
bojde in tbc one end, and a bore lopnde and glued therein,
toblcb bore mult baue a bole aboue, and tberem pe: mutt
ptrt pour crashed topar tbat muff bolae tbc balte toltblu tbe
bore,anb (taped aboue on tbe false bore tortb a croflfe tolcr.
SCbcn (ball pe fa tbe falling topar fpldc bp toltb a ff ring 0;
tb?ced,and fattened bnto a long ellcfcet, tobteb is ffm'a tolfb
a crakeo tolar, tbat bolaes tbe balte tolfbln j tbe fapde die*
bet to be made of bone, fo; tbat is better tben toast) ercept
itbebarDSCbefcocbln tn fbemtddeff of tbe bore, 1$ as ft
toere,made fo? tbc balte, SCbc foure tbarpe toiars beneath
tbe bore, areto boloe tlje moufe 0? ratte tobett tbe topar
fallcs. 2Ebe barre croffe bp tbc bore, is to (tap tbe topar,
it (ball not fall 0ut,02 fall 1 0 loto. 2lnd tbe eno of tbe falling
topar to fattened toitb ttoo crolTc bars, and rluetfb tbjoucdb
tbe board, and tbe end of (be falling topar alfo 7 fo It to done.
It The


The fpring trtppeibr Mice*.
o? frappe, is to tahc mice, it te made fottb
x a bo?de of tiuo inches tbiche, and in the one ende, p«
muff bmjefo bigge boles as a moufc map eafelp crap tbep
in, fo manp as pe (ball tbtnhc gmD* SCljen mult pc boy ea*
gatntt ctirrp of ttjc fapd boles, (bare (mail bole Unib a pier;
cer though tbe fapd bo?de.3nd all tbofe boles nerf tbe end,
pe (ball put in ttrong (breeds on tbe tipper boles of tbe bojd,
fo tbep map be frt on tbe enbe of tbe and lie rotmde
in each great bole me tbe bjinhe. iben mult pe put a final
tb:odc tb?ougb tbe boiu Double, and tie bim on tbe fp:uig
ffiffe, tobolli dofone tbe ffcing: and tbofe Brings nevt
tbe enn, mult beare no tight, but lie Bathe, and as tbep
gnatee a funder tbe. other tb?ad to come to tbe batfc, tbat
takes tbem bp tbe bellp, oa itcche: ano euer as pour inner
tbjades arc bit a funder, pe map fame put o; them
though tmtbafmall toparagaine. Blfo tbe otber endes
of tbe fpjings mult be fall fet in boles, beared Unit) a (mail
kmnblc. map mahe tbe litre to take Uattes 3 if pe make
tbe tolro fquarc and bigger*
Th'


The dragin trappe with a great wyar<>
engine oj trappe, is to tafec spfceandftate, ft
is mane of tfoo thttme bokoes: the nearer bojdcte
made rotutf) at the one end, and b?oad at the other end, Ithe
aftoallotutaple. 2Chen is there on other bo:D fet on edge
fit tije mtCitJctt thereof, tohith bo?de hath a great fopae
bofoed ant) napled thereon, as pe map fa: ana the rounoe
botogbt thereof muff ite elofe on the round enoe of the nea>
ther bo?de. Men is there ttoo 0)02t fquare bojdes napled
and the great fopar t Mo pec fa at the
toppe of the tjpjight bojdc, a tong mo?tto, fohereut the ftn*
ar that muff bolde the cUrhet and batte, muff goe thojolne
and there ffape on another lopar, and the itUe to holden bp
fcritb the bpper cttde thereof: tohtch eltefcet, doc ffap on the
toppeof the middle o? Upright bojde, andfo tpde thereat
truth a tfeade fohub hcldeo bp the greattopar, inhen that
petmltfrtojtplehtm: aifo ttjc neather bo?dc is fet rotmde
toffh fopars to mouee o; ratte, and thep muff
ft 2 ftante


tfandeaßfortbmthebofogbt of the great lopar, and it is
done* ffihfe throes forth the (ftetofoathrs pou, 02 the
(wife thereof.
TbcSaxnfoo po/te for Rattcs.
t* alien the damfon pcfle, it (0 (fnpdc bp*
mt tfna pares, and one bcarcs the burton of all, forth
the helpe oftbc other tUio pates, find mane as pe map fa,
forth notches one to flap bppon the offer, grfcefe tfj2tie
aitefohfchpe®, tbebmoeff is carted the , and
that fs mane bjoaoe and thwne and long toitball, to reach
bnoertheplanhetsbojeea godfoap, and bapted at the
end thereof, SEbe ntrt 10 the trofle barre*fobtcb (tapes bp
theplanheoj bojdc, fetm a nrthe In theiend of the fotage.
SCbethirdistbcptllero? polle fetalmolt bprtgbt,tol)rth
(tapes the bridge foj falling to the ground, fobich bridge
mult alfoapes ttanS from the ground an inch 0? mo;e, that
he map the fomer fall fohen he is touched, fllfo pee map
mabr


make them in length as pe Shall rattfe fd? the bjefctb of
pour be;Dcs 0; plankes, lohieh mutt be fesnetrbat foauie
altairrs*
A Mill to take Mice♦
T* sfe engine oi Spill,
x anb thicker in the
£Cbe one halfe of the
lotthfn the other halfe,
cer thorough themfblt,
agrcattopar,o?afmal
map fee, ano that pirate
of four inch bojb, tuhich
tomaocoftj.thmbojto,
mfoif,tbenattbe enoo.
to fet in | topneb
anbboarcb tmtha per*
anb thereto put tbojeto
pirate of (mob, ao pee
ioputintoathichebojb
bo:fce Ipeth on fome ta*
bie ai other bo;Oe from the grounl halfc a pearb, ot ao p&
ftpll ttynfcc g©o: anD frt feme pantie o? pot txrith taster
bnber pour mill, anbbaitepourrctU ctibothfioto of each
leak tottS) fome butter, imrt luttb otmele anb fugar, anb
fet all other things aloap, anofo (hall pc Detune th?fffco?e
o? mote perhaps m a night, as 31 feme tone bone, tf ; there
be if o?e. pe (hall mafee pour mill to turnc tierp eafelp, that
the leaft freight thereon (hall turne it #lfo fet'pour Spill
an inch from pour fquare bojbe that the pimie to [in, ano
baite pour boj&e totth fome otmeale, to tier them to the
mill*


hmU. Cbns map pee fame oefirop fbem ? tf pouc boufc b&
troubleo toitb them neuer fo much*
The fquarc mouce
trappe*
The mouce trap with
a difh & a filboll*
*]ptj)us engine oj fqtrnre moucc frappe, fe mane of ffoo
bo#es,foitbaboleboarrt) tbojougb them betbattbe
totoer cnt>e, ano a ptnne fet faff mtfjc bole of tbe ncatber
bojDe, ano comes tbo:oto tbe bpper bo:0c : lu!)U:t) bpper
bo?t)c rifetb anti fallctb tbcreom SCbeitistbere a firing tine
attbefapoeprnnebKtbalcngkitige-, ano a pmne on tbe
Upper bo>D a&:e fottlj a fljojt firing anti a cltchet tine tber*
Unto, to ffap bp tbe Upper anofo it is none. Wm is
n fiigbt foap, ano fame maoe foz mice.
SDbe other trapped twtb a Oilb ox bofcle,tpfoe bp tottb
a filboll, fueb as tbcp mafic to fill tobicb is mane
initb a tbirate flireof
tndjrs long, ano tbcrcon is tbe baite tpco. SCljc filboulc bis
botngbt is commanip one inch ano mo;e bit, t o boloc bppe
tbe that tbe nwuce touch not tbe bill) before fi;e come
to


U the batfe. Chen fo&en (he ffirs the baite, the dlih fate
soer the ftlboU, and the filboU lnithin, and the moufe alfo*
SChen pe map fet a be*M of toater, and let the moufe fan
therein, thus it is bfed, and aUd quiefelp made*
Totakethc-Buzard with three twigs limed*
engine to to take the Btyard m the fpimg of the
4 peare, as in search and op>t!l, ioijtdj is made thus :
mitt) th?<£ fitiaU roddeo groining on tfceend of fome bough,
01 tb:& frnatt tfolgs fet on tt)e end of a pictle bigge niche,
and of a Ibaftment long ♦ ft mud fo place them that ttoo
ttotggco mud lie alfoapeson tbeground, anti the other
Cano 01 lie ouer * Che ifiche mult haue.a hole board In
the end as pe map he, and therein to fallen the moufe tatle,
oiathnebe lmth a hue moufe tldebntolt. OHb the tlutgo
mud be finelp lapde Imth Ipme, and In a morning lapde on
the ground, tobereaspeOjaU teanp HBujardme, and as
fame as peare departed,if ffjefple the moufe, pe (halite her
cojnc tmto it, and fo tahen, tuhtch Is a oene g©o ioap to
tafce


fate fhdttfo the Gs«ktoitat other ffctft£nofft£ao,o|fo
tbe BujarOjmap Ml be tahen in Search ano BpM totto
fffifagttze ftmtcoos, ano
uer of axotosp a? fuch Ifce.
The MouJl trappe*
T ® s oull tappc,to&ere anp soull hath calf,pe
M firff place ttoo trcffles ouer her carting,then treat)
it Dotnne forth pour forte foftlp,fa long anti fo fooao as pour
fall is, o? mo?e, %\)tn lap a poale crolTe ouer pour tactics
ano there on hang pour trappe ouer the trench. Chen fet a
rtahe forththefoiogetherein, agafrtrt the miottof
pour fall, as pe wap fobp the figure: ano fet pour tfafcc
fo that the brtoge eno map lie ano touch the earth all ouer
tn the trench croflc. jro?tohenthe cat, lb#
toll put hp that eno of the bjtogc fohich Oo crofTc the trench,
ano the other eno toil! fall on the cltcfcet, ano fo the trappe
fallcs, ano the long naples fet at both cnocs of the fart htls
her, fohich foap foeuer fyc comes o: goes, fall murt
betfooforte long, ano fonre inches fooao, anofouretnehes
thiche, fo? the heAutcr the better it is, 3jf it betas light, p&
wap


map remebfe it no pe tbtnUe g©b* olfo pi* map fet pout
long napleo in aibencbcrojtbinnebojbe, anbriapletbaf
to pour fall at botbenbes, anblettbeneptnaplrocn both
fioeo be foure inches from the bjtbge* SChus mucbfo* tbe
rnoull trappe, pe map thus hill tbem in garbrns, toedbes,
bigb-tnapco, o?\»berepeelballtbinheg©b feutpout anic
Uiatcljmg of tbem*
The following trappe.
r pif)te engine (g called tbc follotumg frappe foj sict, it
iarmabe toitb ttoo ftjuare booties , tbc bottom? anb flje
fall bo:tJe, toitlj ebge bo.:bes of an mrij bie, rounb about the
ncatberbtnbe,anbfet tmtb ttoofoing booties of earb fibe
one, foitb a croflTe latb ouer fbe mtDbcft to tpe tbe firing of
tbc rltefeel. Mbieb firing romes botone to tfje bjfcge,plafi
tottb a crofie bjifige, anb then is there tu?eatbebfo?be, 0?
baire, bnoer the lath aboue, an& in that to^eatb, fe put the
following fiaffe, itibitb ao fame a$ tbe litDc boe fall, that
folloining fiaffe boities tt bofone, anb the falling botfe is
napleb fcritb tUio leathery, ao p« mapi& 3 totbe lotoct
% bojoe;


ferftijaftrtng. of
fottotomgtrappe*
The griping trappe made all of yrne,the lowed
birre, and the ring or hoope, with two
clickets, and a turning pinne,
which ring is fetfaltco
the fides of the
lowed bat re*.
Xd tetfo ftte, attfafc Mima fn foetnfoae#, taifo ftue
feoleo cut out, ana a foarpe ptane to foe mfo&eft,
hfofcb plate bafo a fp;(ng on bolt) Oreo totaerfoe cage of
foe plate, ana foep tture not of lapntes ftp ana aofone, as
foe ofoer aofo, inn Itauocs fait In touching foe erode pmne
tetter foe plate.


Here is more with two fprings vntyldc on both
fides, in holding together the two
hoopes with naylcs.
NsDtotobeittbe tfoo (fringes areopencbafyoabeanb
bolbe botone, here it is to be fljcfoeb as bee tfanbetb
tplcD toitb tbe ttoo fpjtnges, botone flat to tbe long barrs
on both floes, tobieb fringes are mabe of gob Hade, anb
as fewte as tbe cltebets tobieb bolbe them botone ijnber tbe
plate toben both tbe outtoarb eliritetsbe ftirbe, SDbettoo
fpjmgestbutstbemfubbenlp together anb there is m tbe
ttoo (butting b©pes (barpe pinnes of pme fet one contrary
to tbe otber,toitb boles mabe fojtbcfe pinnes to gee tbo*
rough anb (but elofe together, that it (will bolbe a«p thing,
if it be but a ruth o: ftrato,fo elofe then (but together. ST be
ttoob®pes on both Abes outtoarb are mabe bigger anb
bigger fcptoarbe, to bolbe moje elofe toben tbep come tm>
tber, as pe map perceiue bp tbe baspes toitbin tbe fpjings,
on both fi&cs. SLbcn there is at tbe cubs of the long barres
ttoo fquare boles, tobieb boles are mabe to prnnt the long
barre fad to the grounb, toben pec fet o? tple biminanp
% z place


place at pour pleate; rttcfcefomapfbbemaDc,tbattf
aitp ifote, o? other, Doe but fteab thereon he fbaU
be fame taken. % bfo pe mult bmfcc a pcece of meat efn the
mtDDdf, ano put ft on the pjtrKe, anDfo btnbe ft fait, anD tn
pulling the bafte, theelfcheto MlflfppeanD the
fofU rife, anD fo ft tofU tahe him. SDhusmuch fo? thfo bfnD
of trappe fhall be fufftefent to hiiDcrlt anD the o?Der thereof.
The fquare boxe trappe*
trapped to t ahc mfcc faritb anp fmafl fquarebore,
tohfd) bore pe thailfetanenDe, ant) mafce the roucr
fo be map fall of bisolrne acroj&e, SCijen tple ban bp
fcjfth a fniall ftfriic trnth a niche ,an& fet ff In the mfDDeft to
botoebpthe couer. SCbenput tWe on the toppe of the
fttthe toithln the bote ♦ £>o tohen fljee bites the baftc, the
ttirfee thaheo, anD the Itooc faUcs DoUme,anD fo themoure
ronapneo fn the bote. 2Chn* pe map tahe manp mice Urith
%naU charge, ano fame bone*
A


A Ipriirg for a Bazard orDunkite,
engine is called a fofyppc fptiwg, made and fet
1 totahe3lsu*acdesana hites, and commonlp fct bp a
bull) fide jit map alfo be fee in a plainetbe fp:mg muff be
uf feme grotomg poale, o: forne rodbelet faff lit tbe ground
tobere pe tbinhe beff . Cbere is alfo tluo ffahes fet balfe
a pearl: a flintier faff in tbe ground, and that ffahe toitba
t rcofce, muff ffand totoardes tbe tore of tbe fpnng, and ttlb
foritbaclichet, Web cltchct abouc muff ffap bnder tbe
treohe: andtbeneatber enb thereof muff ffaitb in tbe niche
of tbe enb of tbe bridge, fobicb batb a benhe at tbe otbenend
about tbe otber ffahe, tobteb fyiagemuff ftanb tbjamebes
from tbe ground, and tbereonfp?ead pour, line as pe fa,
Uittb a (brae buchle to Aide tone. SCben batfe pour bulb
madcfometobatbollofotbat Iberaneome notoap to tbe
battebut ouer tbe bridge: Web baiteraapbe a Conies
bead, o? fome cats flety* SCbus much fo? tbe fsmg,


The hoope nette for the Buzard, fet againft fotn©
huihin a plaine or open place.
en^ne brape nefte, (0 mabe thus: p&
muff banc a gab biggc robbe oftloo inches about , anb
boto btm rounti, fo tbat be be a pearbbiein tbe mibbeff.
Jben tie bis ttoo enbes foitb a fmall paefetbjeeb, totttjin
wee quartet# anb a balfe quarter, tobicb bofoeb robbe yet
tbaU put on a pace of forne bap net, of an eU long, anb tbe
other (toe oftbe net,on tbe grounb line. SEbcn fet ttoo pins
raff tn tbe grounb, tpbe toitb pacfcttoabe to tbe ttoo lotoer
cnoes of tbe botoeb robbe, tobicb muff tumc eafie, anb not
flte op. SCben fet before pour bjffgc toiib babe anb ptnnc
as pe map fa, toitb a botoeb ffiebe, anb a clichet at tbe 0*
tber cube, tobicb cltchct is tibe toitb a ffring reaching to
tbe übe of tbe bape, anb tbe other part Onto the fp:uig rob,
Web robbe muff lie on the grounb, thsttohentbcb?ibgc
ftplucbes the bape oner the Bujarbe anb
ft


The Crowe net Jet or bent
% -f


Co bodies it Hill dotone, tohicb Ijcopc mutt be fet bp right a*
gaintt tome bu% ana couered foitb feme light fearne. ana
s)is is an excellent heap in ttjmter to tahe them.
The order for fetting and drawing the chafFe nette*
for Crowes and Sparrowes* as hereafter
hull be declared.
mahe pour trenches favour neffe, and
ttaues, arrowing to the length of each thereof, anti
pour fa po trenches and ttaueo, to be bjitbout the ends
of pour net. jfirff ptnnc dotone the baefce late of pour nettc
in the trend?, toltb fourc fmaUfjcoiteZj pirates, fo bone, then
tneafure tb?« peartes from the further end of pour net,ano
there bnccheocUme a ftahe,and tie pour paging line tber*
at. buffet pour ffahefo that pour fine, and net map fall
firaigbt toben hefefcatocn: then hnoche dotone in the
ttoo Upper endes of pour ttaffe trenches, ttoo b©hed ptns»
to holde pour ttoo ftaues, as pe map fee in their places.
Chen meafure from the nacre end of pour bache line, Sue
penrdes f otoarde pour hande, and there iutocHe dotone am
other ftahe, and fatten pour puli thereat, and otatoe pour
line through if, and pull pour line fo farre as pe foill o?atoe
pour net,and there pen mutt hnoche deton an other ffrong
ftahe toitb a hole tbojoto a fate aboue the ground, $ there
tic pour toatofng line to a n«o:t tttche to djatoe bp tohen pe
Util, and tie pour line to tight itmapeomettiffe in ben-
ding pour net. Chen bent it, and put pour line in the
notch of pour further ttaffe, and fatten if to the h©hed pm
in the trench, till pe haue bent the other ttaffe in the neere
trench. Chen gather bp pour net, and lap it bnoer pour
line in the trench, fo done: cotter poor net and ftaues, toitb
fomefho3tffratoeo?chaffe, anocouer pour toatomg ime
tottb frame oj focblihe. Chen baife pour flppe me the
bache line, toitb offa!ico;ne,o? ebaffe mirt tottb oates,
fades oi fuch lihe t and let if lb remaine tfr:a oj foure dates,
if pe Util, toithout taping pour neffe, fe thep toiil be the
lb 4 bolder


bolDff (o come loHeti pour m U lapDe, m the
iromber Urill Imotbe , ano not feare tbe nett e. m pout
ftauesfo?tbe £>parrofoe net commonlp mutt be ttoefoe
b-mbfute long, o? nigh fou?c fcctc: ano the catting tecs
pour fc©ke net, map toell be a banofull longer. ®e
length bettoaene pour tees ano trenches fo? pour&par*
rotoe net mull be ttoo onotfocnticfote, o? acco?omg to
tbelengtbofpournct. onDfofo?pour U©kenet.
baefte line map be a (mail line, but pour o?aturog line bao
iweoe be Orong, ano fometobat bigger than a baipenp bal*
tar, to map Ootone tbe net. feome Ooe trfe to lap U ones
ano doooes bp, (if be o?ntoe alone) to lap tbem on tbe out
ttoeo of tbenette, tobile bee takeso? fellies the CroUiee.
Wherefore if tbefe nets toerebfeo in each parity tyo?ouab
Cfcnglano, arco?Oing to tbe ftatutc: tbere luoulo not be tbe
tentbCrofoe aliue, Utytcb is note in tbisffiealme, iwfli
in there feme peaces, ano as fome Ooe iuoge, tbe CroUies
ano biroes ooe eate ano fpople as much graine pearelp, as
tooutogoentgb to finoe all tbe people ano catteU of tbe W
teft tytere in (Snglano fo? one pcare. ifo? if is thought tbep
oeuour i fpople peerrtp in ano fo? each parity in this ftealm
this graine, bib* bnihcls. Cberets counteottuof fiftic
tboufanoe parityes, fo then there is tfoo ano fiftie quarters
of graine oeftropeo pearelp bp Crofoes ano rucb like, be*
Goes a number of other pultrie about mens boules oeuou*
reo bp Crotaes ano &ptcs, ano chicfelp it is fought, tbo*
rough the negligence of flouthfuil bufbanoes,U)btcb pearelp
toptes ano labours to fotoc co?ne, ano regaroes not ate
the ramng of the fame, o? pet to foage o? giue to other ( a c*
co;omg to the ftafute) that tooulo in foinfee ano other
nines be glao to tabs painc to take t oeffrop tbem. nus
3 haue oeclareo touching the Detection of come bp crotos
mta fuch like, ano the p?ofitc ano gaine that tuoulo come
therebp, in Ofing the faiOe nettes in each parilh tho?ough
the wealme lohich nets mapfoelibe bfeo aU the inintn*
alfo from fparch till Uptofomnter o? fometuhat after*
wag alfo baite pour ty?ape ? Unti; flety, o; fome carrion,
m


mfo pc map fake fcptes, fleib Crofoes,tf aliens,ano fuck
like, Men pc tocaufe. Cbc taping pour neffc is eaGe,but
fo make bun calf toell, is al! in tbe fcfting the farle pimte,
ano placing the pullp If ake, in Draining pour tjjppcr line .
m in Blulp ano ougtt(f pe map lock tjfe the lime bulk,ana
tbe call fo? £>parroto)cs,
A baite to kill Rattcs and Mice*
'J* 3kc ofArgentum fttblimafum, of regall, ano of orfe*
ntcke,of each a o?am,toitb tloentic figges of fbe fatteff,
one ounce of bafell nufscleans pilDc ano beaten, ffoelue
inalnuts pilo, anD fjalfe a pouno of lubeaten mealc, alfo a
pouno ano ftuo ounces of bogges greafe, Mb a little bonp
beaten ano kneaoeOMbfbefo?cfaiOe fimples. f tr(f beat
all into ftncpouDcrs, ano tben mire them all together, fo
bone, then make fbem info littlcpeliets, ano lap tbemm
pour boufe Mere pe (ball tbinke gtoo, fo? tbe Mattes to re*
ceiue,anO fet foafer bptbem.lCaken out of£)utcb.£>: pou
map take fforiete creame mirt Mb fugar, ano laio in (belt*
ano (f rofoe tbe fine pouOer of orfcnirkc thereon.
Another compound for Rattes.
*p r okefMte creame, ano mire if foell Mb fugar, tben
take tbe rrommes of tobite b?eao, toitb fmall pieces,
ano put therein, ano make it fometobat tbicke ♦ STbcn
make it fetb, ano (firre it (fill till it be as tbicke as pappe,
tben take it off tbe fire, ano put therein of ferapeo cboefe,
ano If tree it all foel! together: fo oone, take the fine pou*
tier of regall, ano pouoer of , ano put it therein,
ano (firre it Uiell all together: fo pe map lap it on (belts,o?
tple (fones, Inhere pe ibal! tbinke betf; pet forne herein,
toill but If rote the faioe pouoers thereon, toben tbep baue
lapoeif, ano it Ml ferae fo berp teell, o? make the btrba
in pouoer, ano lap it on pour meate, tobicb berbe
is the fielo clot
M An


An other way for the fame*
of fatre cotoe loafer , an& mire ft left! fine foheafe
1 flotocr,anDthenioo^eittoellaUtogether, ffeethm
be no lutnpes offtoloar bnbjcken, then boyle it foftlp, ana
Cirre it alinapes fo? burning: ana tnhen it loaretb thick*
put in fugar, then take it from tbe fire, ana mire it Vuttti a
little elanfiea hony, ana being thick? like pappe, put there;
in as mud) as recall foe gca, of the fine pouoer of j3rfe>
niche, ana then bcate ana ftirre it all tuell together, ana fo
inhen it is cotoe, ye may lay it Inhere ye fljallthinkegcrtu
Abaitefor Mice.
'T’ftkc finite butter, ofmcalc, ana the pappe of a roaUca
1 apple, truth a quantise of tuheate fiotoer, ana fugar.
SChcn tuojke tbefe all together, ana put therein of the pou*
aer of Argentum fublimatum, fo toojhe it laeU together
like a pafie, ana to make it into fmall pcllots, ana laye it
inhere ye thinUe ga>a.,
Another to kill Mice* q 4 Diofcorides.
'Tohe the pouaer oftohtfc C&Uebo?tc,ofhcrtnffc fallen net*
x frngpouaer, ana mire it tmthbarley mcalc* 2Dheti
puttohonny, ana make a paffc thereof, then bake it, oj
f&th if, oj frie it, ana it hull ktU thefe that cates tficp
of.
Another for Mica*
/ barleymealca quantitie,ana mire fherelxrflb
clarifies hony: then put thereto a quantise of the pou*
aer finely beaten of flntlmeneum, tohuh is like Into rco
glafife,alto put therein a little clartfiea Ihfepes fuel, then
hcafe ana iuose them all together, ana make it in paffe,
ana bfe it as the other afoje rehearfea, ye may put of fugar
thereir


tfctxfn if pe lift: anabcrcfstobettctca, (bat fort;rnp&
lap thcfc baptes afo?crap&e tit pcurboitfcs, pee mutt
then keep* all otfjer things from pour ttnttcs cnaqDice,oj
elfc pc (ball not batic pour ptirpofe ofthem fulfillea, tebicb
map be lapse fc? pies ana Crotaes,
An ether for Rats, Mice, Woolfes, Of Foxes,
oUetl)crmtecfan tjerberallcUtit 3Utme, Aconitum:
l in ingltfi), Moifes bane: ana makeit into a fine
pointier, then ftoftc of that pointer on Qe(b,o? other thing
tohat pe toil, ana it fijaU Kill them (cone §ftcr ihcp haue
(alien it
To take Rauens,Pyes, and Crowes,
take of Nux vomica , fo caflcD, tabteb pe (ball
* Imp at the &pothecarfcs, tbep arc gattjerco in tbefira,
autJ are as b?oa& no a pace of feure pence, ana a Quarter of
an mctytbiche o? mo?c. SEbofe Inhich are the tobite&mftb*
(n, arc ccimteo fo? the beft, Inben pe toll ocupt'e aup, bee
o? cut one fmall in tljinne flices, then beate it trrfj
potnber if pe can, the finer it is the better, ana the foner
toll make the Crotos o?ppestofalh put of the fapae
polnaer into a pace of flelh fo lap it ab?oaa, ana pre
(hall fame fa pie, o? C roll SDhenmu®
pe match him a Uihile after, ana pe (hall perceiue him to
fallaotone,thenrnuftpefollomto take him, But if pa
let hmiremainc one quarter of an boure, he tollrecouec
agatne/c: this nux vomica it both but make them a?unfc,
anh Sp?ie fo? a time, Kfye ftptc 3 haue not fane taken,
fb? he bofll calf it bp againe.
The fpring net for Buzard or other kind of foule,
fp?ing net o?bope net, ts to take the Bujarbe ott
the platne,o? to take Crotucs, ppes, o? other fmall
birbes toth their natnrall baifes, as the mojmefo? the
3&lackbira,s the #pfingale * it map be maae toith a hope
eftocoD, o? of p?ne, o? £aletopar, pc muff tying the enaes
z tOgf*


together fo file as y$ (ball ffjtote go|. Wbm uptbofe mbs
teitb btofebatre,o^pacfctto^b,fo oft about tbe ones as pc
fiegob; then put a piwteof m oftw>b, bottom# tb*
feibebaire o* Itoe.&bcn twite $ ttoflt tbebnfrc m pet© foj
a tnouee ttappe, fo tttffe as pe fyallt& taufe,foiniocfee that
pine pin into tbe grorntb tobere pe tofll fet pour net. STben
tafeea fmall ffring that mutt be tibe to tbc mibtt off’ bape,
tebfcb ffring mutt bauc a knot at tbe enb,fij put it bnber (be
toieatb of baire»snb tbojoto a bole in a pinne of too® let in
tbe grounb befme tbc pwe pto,ttob let tbe bnot of tbe fame
ffring, rett to tbe fapb bole. SDben fill tbe feib bole iuttb an
ctber fbojfptonc of focob made blunt, putting it flight into
tbebole,tottaptbehnotof tbe ttting that bcepcs bofone
tbe net, anD on that pinne, mahe a bole, oj flit, $ put
a tbojne Un'tb a batte tberon: anb iuben anp thing bo touch
tbe baite, tbe (bo# pinne toill fame &U,nnb tbe firing flips
tbiougb tbe bole 7 anb fo tbe net tomes fubbenlp bpon tbe
fofolc. SCbus much fo.: o;dering tbis KtnCe of net.


tfflSfcAU. UoHPi«J> 1 5g°i
)
191 ■/&
M3U-


