

BOOK OF
ADVENTURE
ORES
I.S.ELDER A
iMu / " *
ki . £if|
./W A
,r . /mm I
K *•
.-WiV ' '
1 f
vj:
■,€k '




/ -


-


A Book of
Adventure Stories


f
I
BLACKIE & SON LIMITED
16/l8 William IV Street, Charing Cross, LONDON, W.C.3
17 Stanhope Street, GLASGOW
BLACKIE & SON (INDIA) LIMITED
103 Is Fort Street, Bombay
BLACKIE & SON (CANADA) LIMITED
Toronto


. ■


% v
l\i t &mm<r
"*~ 7 ;^ *S^- -v *v; H
♦
E~74 -»-:
JIMMY MAKES CAMP
Page 34
Frontispiece


A Book of
Adventure Stories
J. S. ELDER
BLACKIE & SON LIMITED
LONDON AND GLASGOW


Printed in Great Britain by Blackit ft* Sen, Ltd.. GlatfOW


m \6 701W/4J\
sy-f-gt
MAROONED 7
THE ISLE OF FORTUNE 23
HOGAN’S HOPE 44
DICK VARNEY’S DIAMONDS 71




A BOOK OF
ADVENTURE STORIES
MAROONED
An icy blast rushed from the sea, up the
cliffs and inland a short distance, to throw into
wild confusion the high beech trees which sur-
rounded Allanton House. Past these it hurried,
eager to beat against the plain facade of the
house itself; eager to send puffs of acrid wood-
smoke from the great fireplace of the Laird’s
study into the dim-lighted chamber; eager to
set the solitary hanging lamp a-flicker.
With each blast came a fierce wash of rain
against the study windows, while the heavy
curtains swayed with an uneasy motion, as if
some ghostly hand sought to thrust them aside,
only to find itself baffled by their listlessness.
Allanton was no castle in which to find ghosts,
but a Scottish mansion-house of solid build, a
place whose roots were buried in bygone days,


and upon which there sat an air of experience.
It had no share in legend, being, at the time
our story is told, no more than eighty or ninety
years old; nor had it seen tragedy of the more
lurid kind. Yet to the boy who sat by its
study fire that winter evening in 1769, Allanton
seemed a gloomy stronghold where ghosts might
well w T alk, palid in the wintry moonlight, wring-
ing their hands, w r eeping, perchance.
Old Wallace Maitland of Allanton sat at one
side of the great fireplace, gazing with w r aterv
eyes into the fire, though an open book lay
across his thin knees. From time to time he
seemed to listen to the storm, to the sound of
surf beating against the cliffs, to the swish of
the bare branches as they gave to the wind and
recovered themselves alternately, but more
often he seemed wrapped in thought deep
enough to defy the elements themselves. The
boy sat motionless and unheeded, watching the
laird, his grandfather, but not daring, it seemed,
to break in upon the old man’s grim reflections.
Immediately above the heavy marble mantel
hung a picture, 1 a thing of gay colours strangely
out of keeping with the room which housed it.
It held the boy’s gaze curiously that night,
though he knew every detail of it —the gaily-
dressed man whose face was full of incredulous
1 See Coloured Cotm


surprise about to change to furious anger; the
half-mocking, half-pitying faces of his strangely-
garbed companions; the empty chest, and,
seaward, a ship. Maitland the Younger had
known them all his life, but during his fifteen
years he had learned nothing of their story.
Vivid and glowing, a romantic thing, yet with
a hint of tragedy about it, the picture had
nothing in common with the grim, silent old
man who owned it. Often the boy had wished
to know its story, but something he could not
have explained kept him silent.
Suddenly the Laird of Allanton straightened
himself in his high-backed chair. “ Aye,
Davie,” he said, “ you seem more than ordinarily
taken with the picture.”
Young Maitland, taken aback by the unex-
pectedness of the remark, reddened.
“ Why, Grandfather, I only looked at it as
I have often done, but to-night it seems to
mean something—l cannot explain—it is the
storm, perhaps ” he stammered.
“ Mean something, boy? What should it
mean, and why to-night?” As he spoke, he
leaned forward, his hands gripping the arms of
his chair, his face even paler than usual.
The boy gazed at him in alarm.
“ Aye, aye! It means something,” the old
man went on, without waiting a reply and


speaking to himself rather than to his hearer.
“So that’s what it means —that’s what it
means,” he whispered. “ I mind it was said
that on such a night as this I was born.”
For a while they sat, these two, in silence,
then Maitland of Allanton spoke again.
“ Davie,” he said, a ring of purpose and
energy in his thin voice, “ it is time you heard
what that picture means. Pour me a glass of
sherry wine—and listen.”
“ Ye’ve heard tell of the men who sailed
under letters of marque, Davie? Some called
themselves buccaneers, and some were gentle-
men adventurers, and some were pirates pure
and simple. But keep you in mind these names,
boy. They marked three degrees —w 7 ell de-
fined degrees, but for the passions of men.
“ Forty years ago I was one of the second
class and with me were three others, gentlemen
bom, looking to me as leader. How this came
about I need not tell you, but at least I earned
my place among them, and for years I held it
—now and then by force, but mostly by skill
and daring.
“ At first they sailed wdth me in the Southern
Cross , but as things went well with us we got


together a fleet of four ships and made our-
selves known to the king’s enemies—and to our
own, maybe more numerous, for spoil was the
mainspring of our adventuring, gentlemen or
not gentlemen.
“ It’s a long story, from start to finish, but
the finish is what concerns me now. That’s
part of it,” and the old man nodded towards
the picture, while a grim smile parted his thin,
pale lips.
Ha! ha! That’s near about the whole story,
but not quite.
Ah well! At the time I speak of I was in
command of a fleet. There was Roland Court-
ney in the Devon Lass —renamed, that is—and
Robert Macbride in the Swallow , that never
came out of a yard in Scotland. The fourth
ship was Uetoile , under Walter Desmarais, who
was a Jersey man.
“ Did I say I was a hard man then, Davie?
True. The Spanish Main and its seas were not
places for gentle dealing.”
Maitland paused, gazing into the fire. As
another blast shook the house he shivered
slightly.
“ P° ur me some more wine, Davie, and throw
a log on the fire. The night is awesome, boy.
A hard man, perhaps. I might have known
that they were impatient, but I was the prime


mover in our most profitable ventures, and 1
thought they could not do without me. And
indeed they made a poor showing when they
had their way at last. A poor showing.
“ We were rich then, each ship with a fortune
aboard, when we took the galleon The Holy
Family , and that made us richer, for though
she carried a cargo too bulky for our ships she
had also a store of precious stones and some
gold in ingots. A royal plunder, boy, it was.
They were for sharing there and then, but I
had another plan. ‘ No,’ said I, ‘ let us go down
and sack Vera Cruz —a desperate ploy but not
impossible—leaving this latest treasure in a
place we know of. Then I, for one, go home.’
“ Macbride was for no such rash project,
and the others supported him, but I had my
way—or thought I had—as always. Still, they
were dour and ungracious over it —I had warn-
ing enough, I allow.
“ So we sailed for our secret place and landed
the treasure in two great caskets, and there we
divided the less valuable part, burying the jewels
and the ingots in a single casket hardly then
full.
“Ye know nothing of traitors yet, Davie.
Listen, lad.”
There was a long pause, a silence broken
only by the noises of the storm. Maitland the


Younger looked eagerly at the old man, whose
face was contorted with rage in strange con-
trast to its usual calm bitterness. Still the boy
did not speak.
“ ‘ Now let us discuss the Vera Cruz venture,
Maitland,’ said Macbride, smooth as honey.
‘ I for one think it impossible,’ he sneered.
That vexed me, the more so as I felt them all
hostile. We stood about the spot where the
treasure-chest lay buried deep in the sand, and
there I saw them change from doubt to cer-
tainty, saw that my plan had won them over.
Fool that I was, not to understand.
“ I turned to go down to the boats, when
one of them struck me and I fell. I would give
all the chest contained to know w 7 hich of them
did it,” Maitland cried fiercely, shaking with
feeble passion, “ but at least they all paid.”
For a moment he paused breathlessly, then
went on:
“ That afternoon I was marooned on a mere
reef ten miles from the island rendezvous, and
left to die. I think I should have taken it better
if they had shot me on the Southern Cross's
deck, but to leave me, their captain, to die like
a dog, was bitterness that maddened me.
“ ‘ The Vera Cruz venture will go forward
without you, Maitland,’ said Macbride, the
sneering rat, as they threw me ashore. ‘ A


thousand pities your arrogance will never feed
on that exploit.’
“ The others laughed, for they had all come
off the ships to bid me adieu. As for me, pride
kept me silent, and I watched them pull out to
sea. Daylight was almost done, but while it
lasted I stood and watched. Then came dark-
ness, and I threw myself upon the reef to die.
“ Long I lay there upon my face, but at last
I rose and took to pacing my scanty kingdom,
while the moon rose silvery from the tropic
sea, and a gull, less lonely than myself, cried
eerily.
“ Morning came, though I did not mark it,
and with it hunger. I found and ate some
shellfish and drank from a pool of rain-water
mercifully held among the rocks, but I saw
that in three days at most that slender store
must fail.
“ At one extremity of the reef lay a light
spar. I stripped myself half naked, soaked
shirt and kerchief in the rain-pool, tied them
upon my head and commenced to swim to-
wards the rendezvous. One chance in a thousand
—nay, scarce even a chance, but better than
certain death, slow and torturesome. The spar
rested me from time to time, and I think my
anger forced me on when nature would have
called a halt. And so I won to the island.”


“ I have told you the story of my stay on
the reef and my coming to the island, Davie,
but only as I remember these events. How
long was I on the reef? Two nights, maybe,
not longer, maybe but one. And the crossing,
then —hours it must have been, but how many,
I cannot say.
“Ye would say I must have noted the
direction of the wind before I set out, but I
remember nothing of that. But I do retain
some memory of swimming for an eternity,
aye raising my head to see the island peaks
over the tops of the slow-moving waves that
bore me on. Now and then I’d see Macbride’s
grinning face almost within arm’s reach and
make a plunge for it, my fingers itching to
choke the life out of him. But aye he disap-
peared, and there would be Courtney or Des-
marais in his place. I think now that Providence
sent them or their ghosts there for their own
undoing, for it was they that got me to the
island. Many a time I’ve laughed at that, and
it weighs upon me now that they never knew
it. I doubt not they would have paused over
their wine that night had they thought of these
ghosts—spirits of the deep, Davie—bent on
their destruction.


“ Phantoms of a disordered mind, no doubt,
but powerful, lad, powerful for the punishment
of traitors, for they brought me to the island.
“ And now you must fill in the story for
yourself. The sand, soft and yielding, crept
about my feet at last, the rolling billows cast
me from them, and I stood up upon the shore.
Night or day, I remember nothing more.
“ And yet, something. I dreamed a while,
though I never seemed to sleep. And in im
dreams I wandered over the island, aye looking
for something and never finding it. My dream
seemed to cover days and nights, sunrise and
sunset, and now I was in the woods eating
strange fruits, now drinking from a little stream.
A long, long dream.
“It was morning when at last I woke. My
clothes hung in rags about me, and everywhere
I looked the sand was marked with the print
of naked feet. I rose in fear then, for I was
without a weapon; my heart stood still. It is
a daunting thing to wake from a dream such as
mine and to find the print of naked feet, silent,
slinking feet, all around you. And worse, I
think, to know them for your own.”
• • • •
”1 climbed to a high part of the island and
looked out upon the sea, but I was alone.
Yonder was the reef on which I had been left


to die, and below lay the beach where the
treasure was. Little thought I gave it thenl
A poor thing it seemed in that silent loneliness.
“ But I was never one to allow myself beaten,
Davie. The cool breeze cleared my brain and
thoughts of vengeance came to me. Aye, yc
may start, boy, but my first thought was of my
enemies and I hurried down to the beach. Had
they come and gone, or were they still to come?
How can I tell you my thoughts when I found
the empty chest —I said we had brought two
ashore —and saw that the ground above the
other still lay as we had left it?
“ I think I was mad with joy at that moment.
To tear up the jewels and scatter them upon
the sea! To rush upon the traitors and die
fighting! Faugh! I see it now as the plan of a
madman, but then it pleased me.
“ As the day wore away, a sharp breeze
sprang up from the west. Spray covered the
sea and clouds of sand obscured the shore of
the island, but I sought no shelter.
“ Trees swayed as I made my way once more
to the hill-top, spray-laden wind tore at my
rags and thorny shrubs wounded me, but I
took no heed. And I had my reward, I had
my reward, for there, not five leagues off, were
three ships. Ecstasy! Aye, but the sight turned
me cold, though not with fear. I saw my
(1874)


vengeance slip from me, I saw that I might yet
scatter the jewels, but I could never hope to
wreak my deeper revenge. My enemies must see
traces of me on the empty sands and I should
be hunted, done to death like a cornered rat.
“ I told you I had been their leader. I was
still to be reckoned with, for a way unfolded
itself to me as I stared at the coming ships.
“ The little fleet was still some way off,
beating up against the wind. ’Twixt sunset
and moonrise there would be time for some-
thing, but without a spade I could never hope
to dig up the chest, remove its contents to a
safe place, and cover my tracks. Providence
send darkness and sustain the breeze! I saw
my way clear to square accounts.
“ Oh! the long-drawn agony of waiting for
the sun to set! The ships approached steadily,
steadily and quickly, and from the hilltop I
watched them in a sweat of apprehension.
“ Darkness at last —darkness to prevent a
landing and to cover me! I laughed gleefully
as the sand bit into my naked limbs while I
made my way to the buried chest. Feverishly
I scooped away the sand above it, scraping as a
terrier might, in my eagerness. The chest lay
deep, and as I threw out the cursed sand to
one side it slipped in at the other as if a demon
sought to baulk me yet. But at last the chest-


top showed. Enough! I threw over it again a
thin covering of sand, then dragged the empty
chest and placed it squarely in the hole, above
the other, its open lid facing the wind. A great
plan, Davie, ah! a great plan, I tell ye.
“ About the empty chest I heaped the sand
—the friendly sand—and knew that my work
was finished. Somewhere out in the darkness
were the ships, and the moon was near its rise.
“ I crept away to the shelter of a rock, to
wait the morning.’ *
“ That’s the picture, Davie. I had it painted
long afterwards, as I remembered the morning
of my revenge.
“ The Swallow lay close inshore, beautiful
in the sunlight, and a boat put off. I saw it
touch the sand and then Robert Macbride and
the rowers strode up from the water’s edge.
Ye see them there—trust me to remember how
they came.
“ I saw a look of puzzlement cross his traitor’s
face as he came on. I saw the anger and sur-
prise as he started forward. I saw him draw a
pistol, and I smiled. He would never throw the
empty chest aside and seek the other!
“ Courtney and Desmarais hurried ashore,


and there the three of them stood glowering at
the empty chest. Man, Davie, try to think what
it meant to me. By this time I was nearly sure
of Macbride, but the other two were still to be
reckoned with. What if one of them should put
forward his hand and throw the chest over?
“ I sat shivering behind the rock meanwhile,
and hard it was to wait.
“ Finely do I mind what happened next.
Macbride turned about and drew himself up;
then he says with the sneer I knew so well:
‘ So this is why Monsieur Desmarais was two
days behindhand at Vera Cruz! And when I
come to think of it, you weren’t over-prompt
either, Courtney.’
“ Desmarais and Courtney stood stock still.
Maybe they were too astonished to understand
Macbride all at once, but their wits weren’t
long a-woolgathering.
“ ‘ What mean ye, Macbride?’ Courtney asked,
and, man, but his voice was cold with anger!
‘ Do ye dare to say, aye, or even to think, that
I delayed the Devon Lass so that I might cheat
you of your share of the goods ye stole?’
“ ‘ Stole!’ cried Macbride, and as he spoke
there came a flash from the pistol he had ready.
Courtney never gave even a cry, but staggered
back and sank slowly down upon his face.
“ Desmarais drew his sword at that and


looked at Macbride. ‘Do I understand that
Mr. Macbride includes me in the list of his
proposed victims?’ he said. ‘ A pistol makes a
quick end to an argument, but a gentleman
backs his accusations more fairly.’
“ Man, but he could be as bitter as the man
he faced. Macbride went crimson with fury,
flung his pistol from him and rushed on the
Jerseyman like a madman, sword in hand.
“ Well, well, Davie, that was a fight indeed.
I watched it, every thrust and parry, the blades
flashing like lightning, to and fro. Little did
they know they were fighting for me. Little did
they guess that it was my wish that made them
fight, though by rights my bones should have
been bleaching on that far-off reef. I was
captain yet, though the wind whistled through
my rags and my ship lay broken in the surf off
Vera Cruz. I laughed as I lay behind my rock.
“ The Jersey man went down first, past all
help, and though Macbride still stood upon his
feet he was in little better case. The Swallow's
bo’sun came forward then to help him to the
boat, and a man from L'etoile tried to pour
some brandy down Desmarais’s throat, but he
was past even that.
“ They were all making for the boats when
a shout made them turn; a shout from me,
Davie. Even Macbride whirled round, and


when he saw me, ragged and gaunt, a phantom
that spat fury and pointed a pistol at his breast,
he screamed in terror. Screamed, Davie, like
a frightened creature that sees something worse
than death. And what Robert Macbride saw
then —or thought he saw —was far, far worse.
Ye know nothing of what fear can be till you
have seen what he saw that day, but it needs
a traitor to see it fully. That killed him, killed
him quicker and more surely than Desmarais’s
sword could ever have done.
“ There was no hint of mutiny among the
men; the boldest did not dare to question my
right. There and then we unearthed the full
chest, and the hole it came out of served the
three traitors for a grave.
“ An old story now, Davie, the story of the
picture. I had it painted for me, the first scene
in my plan, for Macbride was ringleader against
me and he it was who made my plan successful.”
“ It’s an awesome night, boy. Go you to
bed and leave me, for the picture that I saw
so well an hour ago grows strangely dim.”


THE ISLE OF FORTUNE
This story is concerned with some episodes
in the career of one James Patton Thomson,
more conveniently to be known as Jimmy, and
deals incidentally with at least one regrettable
happening which influenced the partnership
subsisting between Messrs. Andrew Mac Vicar
and Syd Bloxenby. In passing, be it noted that,
while the first of the names quoted was intended
to be a permanent possession and was arrived
at after some parental discussion, the second
and third have been suspected of merely serv-
ing an occasion.
It is not necessary, for the understanding of
what follows, to go minutely into every detail
of Jimmy’s life, but it may be as well to say
that till the age of seventeen he had lived with
his widowed mother in a small county town on
the coast of Scotland, and that the question of
finance had never even permitted him to think
of a university education.
On the morning of her son’s seventeenth
birthday, in view of the fact that his stay at


a famous day school was about to terminate,
Mrs. Thomson opened a discussion upon
Jimmy’s future.
“ Your fortune amounts to only a little over
one hundred and fifty pounds, Jim, and we
must now think of how you are to use it to the
best advantage. If you care to go out to Grenada,
in the West Indies, your poor father’s old
friend, Mr. Maxwell, will give you a start.
You’ll have to work hard, and some day you’ll
be able to buy an estate or a share in one.”
“ Right, Mater,” said Jimmy briskly, “ in a
year I’ll have a plantation of my own —you see
if I don’t —and then you’ll come out too.”
The foregoing is, of course, no more than
a sketchy record. In point of fact Jimmy and
his mother had many weighty talks before the
idea of going abroad was decided upon between
them and duly approved of by three serious
trustees. Jimmy’s little fortune was drawn upon
for his passage-money, Mrs. Thomson made
herself responsible for an adequate but modest
outfit, a bank draft was secured, and nine weeks
later James Patton Thomson landed at Port of
Spain, Trinidad.
Mention has already been made of a partner-
ship existing between Messrs. Mac Vicar and


Bloxenby. It was a frail bond dictated by
necessity and rendered possible by one of those
curious freaks of Fate whereby kindred spirits
are brought together for their mutual benefit.
It was one of those bonds which must promise
profit if it is to continue binding upon the con-
tracting parties, and wdiich is likely to be
broken, for reasons of policy, immediately
after it has paid. Which is another way of say-
ing that when Messrs. Mac Vicar and Bloxenby
should strike a “ good thing ”, they were likely
to disappear without ostentation and in opposite
directions, after sharing on a fifty-fifty basis.
Lack of vigilance on the part of either might
influence the precise percentage, but for pur-
poses of friendly discussion fifty-fifty was
favoured by the partners.
Three hours before Fate, in a jocular mood,
was to introduce them to Jimmy, this pair sat
in a mean little cafe on the outskirts of Port
of Spain.
“ What we want, Mac, is a flat—a mug
who’ll listen to a good yarn and fall for a tenner
or so,” Bloxenby was saying. He was a young
man with some share of good looks and a
” way ” of wearing his clothes, which were none
the better for w T ear but had plainly never
emerged from a “ slop-shop ”, though their
owner had the air of a sailor. In short, Bloxenby


was in his shoregoing kit, while his ship, carry-
ing the balance of his slender wardrobe, was
already some two hundred miles away, and
rapidly increasing its distance.
Mac Vicar turned and looked at the speaker.
He noted his fine physique, slender yet sinewy
hands, his air of frankness, and above all, his
clothes. The contrast was uncomfortably com-
plete. MacVicar’s age was under forty, but
fifteen years separated him from Bloxenby,
while a small frame, dark hair, and a general
air of shiftiness, not to mention a “ mixed ”
suit of cheap tweeds plentifully decorated by
oil-stains, emphasized the separation.
“ Mugs arena’ as common as —as rum, even
in Port o’ Spain,” he replied quietly.
For a moment Bloxenby looked like resent-
ing this remark, but instead of doing so, he
smiled carelessly. “If you’ve anything to
suggest, Mac, the rum won’t prevent me from
picking holes in it, though rum didn’t suit
your chief in the old Samarkand any more than
it got me my third’s ticket, eh?”
“ Buried treasure, now,” continued Mac-
Vicar, ignoring his partner’s remark. “ There’s
money in that, if ye ken the ropes.”
“ Quite! Buried treasure suits me down to
the ground, Mac —same as running a diamond-
mine; and dead easy, isn’t it?”


“ You wi’ a third’s ticket!” ejaculated Mac-
Vicar scornfully. “ Dae ye think I’m a born
idiot like yerself? See here. Last year a Yank
got up a buried treasure stunt maps an’
plans an’ things all complete—an’ ran twenty
thousand dollars into his own pocket. And
there was never a cent of buried treasure in
the case!”
Bloxenby was visibly impressed. “We want
a flat, eh?” he asked, after a pause.
“ We do!” replied Mac Vicar with decision.
And at this precise moment —for the dis-
cussion had been only one part of their conver-
sation —Fate presented them with the neces-
sary flat, James Patton Thomson in search of
a cooling drink.
Previous acquaintance had convinced Bloxen-
by that when properly up against things the
brain of Mr. Andrew Mac Vicar, once third
engineer on an East-going liner, but now at
leisure to study his many short-comings as a
citizen, was equal to most occasions. Still, this
of itself would hardly have decided the younger
man to consider so fantastic an idea as that just
put forward, had Jimmy’s arrival been long
delayed—had they not, in short, been promptly
provided with a promising victim. Jimmy’s
entrance turned the scale. Hot and perspiring,


with a friendly grin and a frank interest in
everything about him, Jimmy was so obviously
a new-comer that Bloxenby hastened to seize
the occasion by offering a seat. Then, with a
genial gesture that seemed to say “ w r e are
always happy to welcome a stranger ”, he re-
sumed his conversation with Mac Vicar. Im-
mediately afterwards he heard himself addressed
as “ Mr. Bloxenby ”, and only the calculated
deliberation of MacVicar’s words plus a faint
kick on the shins prevented him from re-
pudiating the title in the first shock of surprise.
An interested onlooker might have been tempted
to suppose him unfamiliar with his ow T n name.
Thereafter, the game proceeded merrily.
Jimmy was ready enough to chat with sym-
pathetic strangers. Mac Vicar introduced him-
self, then introduced Mr. Sydney Bloxenby of
Barbados, over in Trinidad on business. By
this time Mr. Bloxenby’s habitual calm was
fully restored and he supported admirably his
new dignity, cordially acquiescing in Mr. Mac-
Vicar’s equally new status as a candidate for
the position of engineer on the Barbados plan-
tation belonging to the said Bloxenby. “ One
o’ many interests ” was how Mac Vicar de-
scribed the plantation. The candidate waxed
so eloquent on the subject of crops, conditions,
and life in the islands that Jimmy entirely failed


to notice Mr. Bloxenby’s modest reticence on
these subjects and his pretty evident desire to
give the engineer a generous innings, regardless
of his own views.
“ Man,” said Mac Vicar at last, “ Grenada’s
the place for a young man o’ means. Ye’ll be
buying a place for yourself an’ settling down
for the rest o’ your life.”
“ I hope to, later on, Mr. Mac Vicar, but at
present I have very little capital ” —MacVicar’s
face fell at this, though only for a moment —
“ but I mean to work hard.”
“ That’s it! No use at all in Grenada without
capital, but a man o’ your education an’ enter-
prise can depend on hearing of all the good
chances going. For instance ” he checked
himself suddenly. “ Now, there’s Mr. Bloxenby,”
he continued, after a pause, “ he’s just the kind
of man to put you wise now an’ then.” Here
Mr. Bloxenby smiled benevolently, as who
should say “ anything a man of some influence
can offer is already at Mr. Thomson’s service ”.
In short, it was a delightful rencontre, and
when Jimmy rose to return to his hotel where
he awaited Mr. Maxwell’s arrival in two days’
time, and Mr. Bloxenby had departed to spend
the night with “ a friend a mile or so up-
country ”, no happier trio existed in Trinidad.
“ Who the deuce is Mr. Bloxenby of Barba-


Dos, Mac?” asked Mr. Bloxenby, when at last
the partners were alone.
“ One o’ the best-thought-of men in Bar-
bados. I saw him on the quay this morning
—going home. You'll get his character an
it’ll be a good exchange for a tippling third
mate,” replied Mac Vicar dryly.
Next morning Jimmy was out and about at
an early hour, partly because sleep deserted
him much earlier than had been usual at home,
and partly because he knew that West Indians
are partial to an afternoon siesta, during which
time is apt to hang heavily upon a stranger who
is foolish enough to ignore the local custom
and rush around instead.
“ Good morning,” said a pleasant voice at
his elbow.
“ Good morning, Mr. Bloxenby,” replied
Jimmy, glad to meet again one of the only two
men in Trinidad as yet known to him.
“ Just sauntered along on the chance of
seeing you, Mr. Thomson,” responded Bloxen-
by genially. “ Sorry I have to get back to my
place for business reasons —really there’s noth-
ing to keep me, now I’ve got hold of Mac Vicar.
Great chap, Mac. Used to work for my poor
old father, and would do anything for me.
Between ourselves, he’s a trifle free with the
rum they sell hereabouts, but he’s a first-rate


hand with an engine of any kind, and I’m keen
on keeping him straight, too. Got stranded
here, and wrote asking if I’d a job, so I ran
over at once, knowing Mac’s value. I’ve given
him a trifle, just to keep him going, and when
he’s got some odds and ends for the old place
over there ” —Bloxenby waved his right arm
seawards —“ stuff coming along any day now,
he’ll follow by the first available boat. Must
be off now. Anything I can do for you?”
Jimmy’s heart warmed to Mr. Bloxenby.
“ Thanks awfully, Mr. Bloxenby,” he re-
plied, “ but my friend’s due here to-morrow,
and I’ve got all I need for the moment. Good
luck and good-bye!”
For several reasons it was inevitable that soon
afterwards Jimmy should encounter Mr. Mac-
Vicar, resplendent in a new suit of white duck.
Jimmy’s situation as a stranger in the town
contributed to make the meeting likely; his
restless desire to see about him assisted power-
fully, but careful calculations on Mr. Mac-
Vicar’s part were the deciding factors. Mr.
Mac Vicar had decided that there was money
in buried treasure!
Details of the interview which followed, one
which proved momentous, are known to two
persons, but of these only Jimmy is available
at the moment. The sole gleam of common


sense displayed by him during it and in the
subsequent negotiations merely serves to darken
an already dismal picture. This was his hurried
inquiries of a local bank-agent regarding Mr.
Syd Bloxenby’s character and standing, and, to
do him justice, the replies were such as to re-
assure anyone. Mr. Bloxenby was everything
a man should be—a person of strict integrity
and an ideal man with whom to do business.
Mr. Mac Vicar showed a childlike faith in the
accuracy of his information and was grieved
almost to tears by the least hint of scepticism.
He supplied excellent reasons for not himself
seeking the buried fortune; he disclaimed any
disposition to guess its extent —Mr. Thomson
must not ask him to deal in mere conjectures;
he proposed for himself a twenty-five per cent
share of all profits over five thousand pounds;
he left himself in Mr. Thomson’s hands on
that point, and, finally, he produced a chart.
It, the chart, was obviously old, if dirt, stains,
and frayed edges mean anything at all.
Now, one must not conclude that Jimmy
w*as an utter ass because he did not dismiss
MacVicar’s yam with a laugh. Bloxenby was
known to be a man of honour, and Jimmy had
no reason to suppose that he and that gentle-
man had never met. Mac Vicar was Bloxenby’s


old and trusted servant. And above all, there
floated before Jimmy’s dazzled eyes a picture
of himself as owner of a plantation, a youth who
had made good that boast of his almost as soon
as his feet had touched West Indian soil. To
be brief, the chart became his for fifty pounds,
and to make everything quite regular, Mr. Mac-
Vicar gave a valid receipt, getting in exchange
a promise of twenty-five per cent of the net
value of the treasure, the said percentage to be
forwarded to him at his present quarters, where
business was likely to keep him for some time.
At first sight the isle of fortune, considerately
placed by Mr. Bloxenby—who was responsible
for the chart —somewhat to the north of Grenada,
was disappointing. A prominent palm tree had
apparently been blown down and no longer
occupied the important position assigned to it.
Indeed, it had wholly vanished. A slight eminence
and a low bluff were in evidence, but as these were
plentifully duplicated by nature while appearing
as unique specimens on the chart, their value
as signposts was much impaired. A small
palm grove, too, appeared to have given place
to a particularly dismal patch of mangroves
whose roots disappeared in mud of unknown
(■m)


depth and quite obvious insalubrity. So much
a hasty survey suggested before night came
down and Jimmy overturned his hired boat,
lit a fire, and made camp. It was an uncom-
fortable experience. The glorious tropic night,
bright with stars of incredible splendour; the
boom of breakers to windward; the rise of a
moon almost at the full, Jimmy appreciated,
but all these did nothing to diminish his over-
powering loneliness. Doubts, too, assailed him
in the silence. After all, the treasure might have
been found and carried off years before. What,
too, w ? ould Mr. Maxwell think of a man who
rushed off at a tangent, as it were, instead of
settling down to work? True, that gentleman
had wired regretting his inability to meet the
new-comer as arranged, and might therefore
never know the real facts of the case, but Jimmy
felt that to conceal them would hardly be
cricket. And the loss of his money was bound
to come out sooner or later. In the midst of
these dark forebodings he fell asleep.
A glorious dawn and a hearty meal restored
him to something like his usual mood of opti-
mism, and chart in hand he started to explore.
“ Lone Palm Tree ” was decidedly missing.
From the top of a tiny ridge he surveyed almost
the entire island, which was little more than a
glorified sandbank at the best. North away a


larger island was clearly visible, while to the
southward lay a number of smaller size, Grenada
itself showing clearly in a sea of deep blue
which sparkled in the morning sunlight. Here
and there the ground at his feet was covered
with patches of thorny scrub. To the left a
low cliff, its summit crowned with cactus and
rough grass, fronted the sea, while at a distance
of half a mile the mangroves before mentioned
skirted a little marshy cove. To his right the
island spread outwards in a gentle slope ending
in a sweeping curve of sandy beach—a featureless
landscape promising nothing. The upturned
boat only added to the general aspect of empti-
ness which a thin spiral of smoke, blown
seawards from his fire, and a varied selection
of wheeling seafowl, did nothing to relieve.
Surf still boomed to windward, though the sea
was softly calm, but this and the cries of birds
were the only noises which broke the silence of
the isle. Still, a patch of land was yet to be
explored, and Jimmy did not despair. There
remained just a chance that the chart badly
out of scale and that all its important features
Lone Palm Tree excepted —might be tucked
away in a corner. The island stock, however,
had fallen heavily. Jimmy would have sold out
at a big discount even then.
Immediately behind him the ridge on which


he stood stretched in an irregular line till, at
something like a mile distant, it ended abruptly,
the sea beyond. The only invisible portion of
the island, therefore, lay on the windward side,
the view in that direction obscured by cactus
growths among which Jimmy at once began to
thread his way. A walk of fifty yards, during
which his clothes suffered more than once from
the prickly spines which everywhere made pro-
gress difficult, brought him to the edge of a
cliff which descended almost perpendicularly
to sea-level. He was evidently upon the back-
bone of the islet, and from his vantage ground
he looked down upon a beach of dazzling sand.
From time to time a vast sheet of snowy foam
rolled and swirled over the beach, to be sucked
back into the next oncoming wave and again
spread upon the sloping sand. From the face
of the cliff hung festoons of climbing plants
whose vivid green, splashed with red and yellow
blossoms, contrasted with the pale purity at its
base. Above all wheeled yet more sea-birds.
A single glance only was needed to wreck
all Jimmy’s hopes. He had now seen every inch
of his island, and that portion which lay be-
neath him was not only destitute of every feature
marked on his chart, but was too small to hold
them. It was the beastliest kind of swindle —
a very complete washout. Still, when one has


the luck to land on a treasure island, even if it
isn’t quite up to its reputation, there’s some-
thing to be done. Jimmy decided on a surf
bathe before tackling the serious business of
what to do next. So he skirted the cliff’s edge
till he arrived at a little shoot or gully down
which it was possible to scramble to the beach.
This gully ended in a ledge composed of debris
which had slipped towards the sea; its level
was perhaps ten feet above the beach, and on
to it Jimmy took a flying leap. He had not even
the excuse of haste for so foolish an action; it
served no possible purpose and was merely
a matter of impulse. But Jimmy took the leap,
landed squarely on the ledge, and knew no
more. There was no time even for surprise,
to say nothing of alarm, before he crashed
through what appeared from above to be solid
earth, disappeared from sight, and brought up
against an unyielding barrier, head foremost,
as if shot from a catapult. It was the beginning
of a real adventure, but as Jimmy was perfectly
incapable of enjoying it then, and we can’t
wait doing nothing during the six hours or so
which passed before he came to himself, we
may as well follow the fortunes of Messrs.
Bloxenby and Mac Vicar in Port of Spain, in
the interval.


Once in possession of the handsome sum of
fifty pounds, for which he had quite a number
of uses, Mr. Mac Vicar felt no overpowering
need to await the arrival of his partner. Accord-
ingly, he made wffiat is known to his set as a
“ clean getaway ”, leaving Mr. Bloxenby to
mourn the loss of an associate or to pass the
time otherwise, without any restraint whatever.
A week went by. Vessels came and went,
but, contrary to MacVicar’s calculations,
Bloxenby stayed. It is not difficult to pass
much longer than a week in Port 0: Spain
without starving even wffien one’s resources in
hard cash are as limited as those of Bloxenby
were. This might have occurred to Mac Vicar,
of all people, but it didn’t. Seven days of utter
seclusion, with money in his pocket, were as
much as he could stick, and at the end of that
time he made up his mind to reconnoitre
cautiously. He made no mistake, either, but
luck was against him. After an hour of furtive
freedom he was on his way to his den again
when a violent bellow and the sound of hurry-
ing feet sent him hastily “to earth ”. One
amazed glance showed him, by the light of
tropic stars, his late partner in full cry, and
plainly dead to all argument. The only available
“ earth ” was a dimly lit drinking den occupied
by about a score of sailors of all nationalities,


and for this Mac Vicar made at top speed. He
crossed the threshold with a bound, tore the
hanging oil-lamp from its place, and hurled it
at his pursuer, regardless of consequences. Ten
minutes later Port of Spain was minus one of
its most popular, if humbler, places of refresh-
ment —the lamp did its work thoroughly—and
Messrs. Mac Vicar and Bloxenby reposed in the
local gaol, where they remained for varying
periods. Bloxenby’s share was ten days for
breach of the peace, while Mac Vicar was de-
tained for one month and ordered to make good
the damage done. Most unexpectedly he was
able to do this to the extent of over forty pounds.
We may now look in on Jimmy.
In the semi-darkness of a gloomy cavern
Jimmy at last sat up and gazed stupidly about
him. Very little of the tropic day remained, his
head ached abominably, and no way of egress
was apparent. After some time, however, he
became aware of an irregular opening overhead
and of a patch of sky. Plainly, he had entered
by that same opening. How long he lay inspect-
ing this remarkable feature will never be known,
but at last the idea of climbing through it
appeared desirable to him. Still later he realized


that the thing was possible, got up, and feebly
tried to reach daylight. Then he changed his
mind and simply went to sleep.
Dawn showed him that he occupied the cabin
of a small vessel, and also convinced him that
he was alive and unhurt. Earth, stones, and
decayed wood lay all around. Above him was
the deck —through it he had fallen the day
before, as a result of his jump, and, pitching
forward against the opposite side of the cabin,
he had been knocked out. So much was plain,
but where had the boat come from? Jimmy
determined to investigate. Food first, however.
He clambered out with the aid of some half
decayed boxes placed upon a settee almost too
far gone to support his weight, and made for
his camp.
Many years before, a small schooner of per-
haps thirty tons had been driven ashore on the
isle of fortune and laid close alongside the base
of the cliff. A fall of earth, whether soon or late,
had effectively concealed the derelict from all
human knowledge till, forlorn and decayed, it
was revealed as a result of the misdirected in-
genuity of a drunken Scotch engineer. All this
Jimmy gathered from a close inspection. More
might be guessed, but beyond the initials J.K.,
and the date 1869, rudely cut upon what was


left below deck of the foremast, no clue to her
identity remained. The upper portion of her
square stem had been torn away, and with it
her name, while in her starboard side, which
lay against the cliff, was a huge rent. On deck
still lay a few scraps of rope whose ends dangled
drearily down through the rent in the planks,
while all below was mildewed and useless. All
trace of her crew had long since vanished, nor
was it possible to say what had been her evil
fortune before she was finally flung, by some
furious gale, ashore on the island.
It was while making these discoveries that
Jimmy found the bag. No grisly skeleton
guarded it, nor was it romantically concealed in
any cunningly contrived recess warranted to
baulk the efforts of a hundred desperadoes but
to yield its precious secret to a hero of fiction.
In point of fact it lay quite openly on a floor-
board beneath the settee used by Jimmy in his
scramble back to daylight, and like everything
else about it was mouldy and unattractive.
Jimmy kicked it, more in idle curiosity than in
a spirit of inquiry, and it immediately disgorged
a stream of small white objects which even he
at once guessed to be pearls. Not, perhaps, a
sudden fortune, but still pearls—more than
fifty pounds’ worth anyway, Jimmy decided.
He was neither romantic nor particularly


imaginative, but it was impossible, in the cir-
cumstances, to start money-grubbing right away.
Not that he didn’t intend to take the pearls,
but he felt that had they been found after a
breathless and exciting search, had there been
some mysterious clue to their existence, things
would have been more comfortable. Sheer
nonsense, of course, but in Jimmy’s place most
of us would have felt as he did—he would
rather have earned the pearls than simply found
them.
What tragedy was here? he wondered. A
pearling schooner was not likely to sail these
seas. Had this craft, then, become derelict
and, after drifting idly for months, reached her
present position by a freak of wind and tide?
Had her crew been butchered in some distant
clime and she herself set adrift? Or had she
been dismasted in a hurricane and, rolling help-
lessly under a burning sun, carried her doomed
crew far from hope of rescue, till, mad with
thirst, they had flung themselves into the sea?
Jimmy shuddered and climbed hastily back to
the sunlight, taking the pearls with him.
“ Dear Mr. Mac Vicar,” wrote Jimmy,
“ you’re a sweep, if ever there was one, but as


you’ve done me a good turn, and were hard up
anyway, I’m going to let you in, though of
course I’m a fool to do it, I know. Thanks to
you, I shan’t require to work quite as long as
I’d expected to before I can buy a share in an
estate. But I haven’t got a fortune, let alone the
one you promised me, and you may whistle
for that twenty-five per cent. However, I’ve
sent Mr. Bloxenby of Barbados fifty pounds for
you, telling him it’s to be given to his old and
trusted engineer. If such a person exists, and
if your Mr. Bloxenby is the same man, you’ll
get it. If not, well, so much the worse for you.
“ Yours truly,
“ J. P. Thomson.”
Mr. Bloxenby—our Mr. Bloxenby, that is—
did not hesitate to open his still-absent partner’s
correspondence. He passed on Jimmy’s letter
to Mac Vicar, with a note of his own. “ I’ve a
good mind to make you go and get it. Wait till
you come out , you little swipe!”
Mr. Mac Vicar did not feel called upon to
reply to either communication. Luck was still
against him.


HOGAN’S HOPE
Danny Hogan, waterside rat always, ship’s
cook when circumstances permitted, turned
stiffly to one side and assumed a sitting posture.
He required some time to recall the events of
the previous night, but even now he had a hazy
recollection of what seemed infinite and inter-
minable labour ending in a last frantic pull
shorewards and blank unconsciousness. Slowly
he sensed the sun, pleasantly warm, then became
aware of a sandy beach, empty but for himself.
To the left lay a scanty line of palm trees be-
yond which rose a swelling hillside, green and
cool, topped by yet more palms.
After a long stare Hogan turned and gazed
in the opposite direction, and what he saw
there quickened the man’s numbed senses.
This way lay the sea, and across the lagoon,
on its outer fringe of sand and coral, the Dugortg
was plainly visible. She lay high and dry —what
was left of her, for masts had disappeared and
it was easy to guess that her hull was riddled,
useless.


Hogan was shocked by the loneliness of it
all, by the completeness of the tragedy that had
been and by fear of another to come, to be
played out slowly in that desolate place with
himself for actor and spectator. He remembered
the events of the night before—the sharp squall
as darkness fell upon the tropic sea, the sudden
rending of the mizzen-mast close at the deck,
the quick, helpless falling away of the schooner
as the wind caught her, crippled as she was.
He could recall very little of what followed.
The skipper, Schultz, and the two Kanakas of
the crew had tried desperately to get rid of
the wreckage and to pinch the Dugong a point
or two to port in a forlorn effort to shave the
lee shore, but there had never been a chance
for them. To Hogan it seemed that only a few
seconds passed before the ship crashed bodily
upon the outer reef and was swept by a huge
breaker which carried him away in a swirl of
foam. It seemed incredible that he had swum
that wide lagoon, for he was no swimmer at the
best, but at least it made plain the awful struggle
which he recalled now with a shudder of horror.
More practical considerations, however, soon
took possession of his mind. His right hand
sought pipe and tobacco, but the sodden mass
of the latter—none so large either, he noted
ruefully—was useless for smoking in its present


condition. He laid it on the sand and thought-
fully spread it out to dry. By this time, too, he
had realized the urgent need to eat, and with a
grimace he surveyed the infrequent palms
within sight. Nuts! Bah! The idea of sub-
sisting on these and a chance lizard, or some-
thing of the kind, till he was able to get away—
if he ever did get away—was far from pleasing,
but it served to bring him to his feet with some
half-formed determination to make his way to
the Dugong.
There was now nothing to distract him from
the all-important work of keeping himself alive,
and Hogan set about it vigorously. To reach
the wreck by swimming must be left to the
last—if it must be tried, he had in mind the
aid of a possible spar, but he was determined
to look upon that method as a last resource.
Squaring his shoulders, he set off along the
beach.
The morning was well advanced when Hogan
boarded the wreck, and he might never have
done so had he not come across a spar which,
only the day before, had been the Dugong's
main boom. Hunger, and the fear of slowly
starving to death, had forced him to use it.
Then had followed a ghastly time. For hours,


it seemed to him, he had pushed the heavy spar
before him, always clinging to it as to a guarantee
of safety in the water he mistrusted, yet hating
it fiercely for its deadly inertia which all his
efforts hardly sufficed to conquer. Still, inch
by inch he had forced it out across the calm
blue water, and inch by inch the wrecked
schooner showed more clearly as he struggled.
More than once he had thought of giving up
the unequal contest, but each time the thought
of food drove him on, till at last he had waded
ashore, dripping and utterly exhausted. It was
at that moment he spied the schooner’s dinghy,
afloat, intact, not a hundred yards away. How
he had missed seeing it before he did not pause
to consider, though later he understood that
it had lain concealed somewhere on the farther
shore, whence it had drifted on the current
which must have aided himself. A great bitter-
ness filled Hogan as he saw it. Those “ hours ”
of painful effort—and a boat within a few yards
all the time!
As he lay gasping on the sand, he watched it
quietly ground close by, its sculls, mast, and
sail neatly lashed over the thwarts. Like him-
self, it was a survivor, and in all likelihood they
had crossed the narrow strip of reef together,
on the crest of the wave which had accounted
for four real sailors while it elected to save a


ship’s cook with a bad record. Not that Hogan
busied himself with the last consideration—
the watertight dinghy was enough to go on
with.
After a bit, he got up and surveyed the wreck.
A glance showed him that, unless it still con-
tained eatable food, it was of small value to him.
A blanket or two it must yield, perhaps other
things of use to a castaway, but food and a
fishing-line were the only articles which seemed
important then. He clambered aboard, fitting
his toes into the spaces where the Dugong's
planks had been shattered by the storm. Once
aboard, he paused to survey the scene from the
little ship’s sloping deck. The Dugong lay
broadside-on, thrown almost clear of the water
at her first contact with the reef, which accounted
for her partial escape. Another such wave as
that which swept her ashore and only broken
wreckage would have remained. As it was,
she had ground dismally upon the coral, so
that her back was broken. Hogan wondered
if anything whatever remained below decks.
Astern, the reef curved away, ringing the
island with a narrow belt of firm sand, to one
side of it the sea, to the other the lagoon. After
a glance Hogan stepped into the companion-
way and dropped below. For the confusion
which reigned there he was fully prepared, but


the presence of Schultz, the big German mate,
took him wholly by surprise. Schultz lay on
his face, a nasty wound visible on the top of his
head, which overhung a rent in the cabin floor-
ing. Such furniture as the little place had
boasted lay all about his inanimate form. Even
the ex-cook, who was not an imaginative person,
saw what had happened. Schultz had been at
the tiller the night before —the impact of the
Dugong on the reef had hurled him head-first
down the companion and he had lain there ever
since. “Of course,” thought Hogan, “ he’s
dead all right. Let’s try for some grub.”
Making his way to the tiny pantry, he com-
menced a search. Water-soaked biscuit spilled
from an overthrown cask, a sack of useless
flour, were easily discovered, but all smaller
supplies had fallen through a gaping hole in the
deck, to be washed away through the schooner’s
riven sides. Still, more than one tin of beef
was visible below—priceless remnants. Hogan
descended eagerly. Five tins, a sack of pine-
apples, and a small rum cask, the last stove in,
rewarded him. With a grin of satisfaction he
ascended and set about the preparation of a
meal. Fortunately the tinned stuff was already
cooked, for nothing remained of the ship’s
galley.
It was while enjoying lunch under these con-
(■ m) D


ditions in the ruined cabin that Hogan first
saw the safe. Turning his back on Schultz —for
hunger brooked no delay and the sun was hot
on deck —he seated himself on an upturned box
and began to eat, and while he did so his glance
wandered over that portion of the vessel w r hich
lay before him. The skipper’s cabin faced him
—to be investigated later, of course —its door
partly open. He noted idly that the curtain
over its single, broken port still hung from its
brass rings. From time to time, caught by the
shoreward breeze, it swung up, allowing a
shaft of sunlight to penetrate the gloom of the
place. And as the sun moved round, its beam
lit up a gleaming object on which Hogan specu-
lated during his meal. Suddenly his busy jaws
ceased work and a gleam of cunning came into
his eyes. That bright bit of brass was, of all
things in the world, the handle of a safe’s door!
Hogan leaped to his feet and entered the
skipper’s cabin.
For the foregoing we are indebted to the
narrative of Eugen Schultz, who had it from
Hogan himself, in part, that is. One significant
detail was supplied later by Captain Roy of the
dead-and-gone Dugong.


The safe was not a “ one-man job ”, as
Hogan quickly realized. It was not a large affair
but it was incredibly heavy for its size, and
the ex-cook was a small man not made for
weight-lifting. Once this was established—the
impossibility of handling the safe, that is—
Hogan turned his attention to Schultz, on the
off-chance of his being alive, and if alive, a
possible aid. For so much Schultz is grateful
to his messmate.
In response, then, to rough and ready surgery
of a kind, the German at last showed signs of
returning vitality. That he did so without re-
lapsing into a serious bout of fever is probably
owing to the wound in his head having been
plentifully washed by flying spray which poured
down the companion upon his prostrate form
but drained away too quickly to permit of its
drowning him. Be that as it may, he was no
sooner on the way to recovery than Hogan went
on deck to prepare his plans further.
As he scanned the sea, perhaps to assure
himself that one man—and that one not an
expert —would have a fair chance of navigating
an open boat of small dimensions to a destina-
tion distant about seventy miles, his eye was
held by a speck visible on the reef. It was an
inconspicuous detail, but it had a strangely
disquieting influence upon Hogan. Indeed, it


changed his plans in a moment, or rather, it
decided him to hasten those plans in order
that they might not be completely upset. For
as Hogan watched the speck it actually moved.
He turned and bolted down the companion,
returning at once with the captain’s binoculars.
These, snug in their rack, had escaped destruc-
tion even when the wooden frame which con-
cealed the safe had been thrust from its fasten-
ings by the weight within. He had to make sure
what —who —the speck was, and as he gazed
he saw Captain Roy raise himself painfully on
one arm and wave the other towards the wreck.
It was plainly a gesture imploring help. For a
moment Hogan paused, then, after a hasty
glance in Schultz’s direction, he threw the
glasses well into the lagoon. “ Blame things are
all smashed up an’ no good,” he said. “ Thought
I saw a ship off there, but, of course, there
ain’t.” To himself he may have added “ Fainted ”,
for just then the distant speck upon the reef fell
back and lay still.
“Ye see, Schultz,” Hogan went on, the
German having now sat up and shown some
interest in the remains of his companion’s meal,
“ we’ve got to get out o’ this an’ take that safe
with us, eh?”
“ Sure,” replied the other slowly, not yet
master of his wits. After a long pause he added:


“ What’s in there will come in handy for the
skipper’s missus an’ the kids, eh, Hogan?
Terrible thing to tell her—this—an’ them poor
kids with no father now.”
“ Kids?” said Hogan. “ That’s it, of course,
mate. You an’ me to the rescue, eh? Them
kids an’ the skipper’s widow is goin’ to bless
us all right. You get on your pins an’ lend a
hand, me son.”
Schultz was slow of movement —an immense
creature of powerful muscles. He continued
to eat stolidly while Hogan, on deck, rigged a
tackle from the stump of the mizzen-mast, in
preparation for getting the safe overside. It
promised to be an easy operation, and was
accomplished without mishap when the German
felt fit to “ tail on ”, his wounded head roughly
bandaged, his strength revived by a frugal meal
of tinned beef and fresh pineapple.
“ Lend a hand with the dinghy, Schultz,
me boy,” said Hogan, when at last the safe lay
on the sand, ready to be dragged to the water’s
edge. “ An’ have a look for a breaker, will ye.
We’ll be powerful dry before long, with the
sun as it is, an’ two of us will want lots to drink.
Pity there’s nothin’ better than water aboard.
How far do ye say the island is?”
‘‘All of seventy miles. There’s a town of
sorts, or at least a trading-station on it, an*


two little islands nearer, but they’re of no use
to us. If the wind holds as it is we can get there
in two days, if the blessed little boat ain t
swamped. We’ll start in the mornin’, after a
good rest.”
“ We’ll start right now ” began Hogan.
“ Ah, well now, may be ye’re right, Schultz.
A sleep will do us no harm. We’ll get all ready
and then turn in.”
Schultz crossed to where the dinghy lay and
noted with satisfaction that the little boat was
sound and well equipped for the proposed
voyage. He was a seaman and the obvious risks
of the journey had no effect upon him. ‘ As
right as rain, Hogan,” he commented, “ but I
wish the poor captain was goin’ with us. I
can’t get them kids o’ his out of my head.”
“ Get her across,” Hogan responded harshly.
“ Ye’ll never see the captain again, Schultz,
an’ that’s a fact.”
“ That’s true,” replied the mate, “ more’s
the pity.”
It was an easy task to drag the dinghy sea-
ward, and at the water’s edge Schultz proposed
to leave her till morning, but Hogan would have
nothing to do with the idea. “ Load her up;
let’s see how she sits in the water,” he insisted.
“ We can’t take risks with her, me boy, an’
this island gives me the creeps anyway. We’ll


sleep all the better for knowin’ that all’s ship-
shape an’ ready to quit bright an’ early.”
An the safe, Hogan? Are we goin’ to lump
it in an’ then out, only to see how a boat floats?”
“ She’ll run easy on them bits o’ spars, 1
tell ye,” replied Hogan, and grumblingly the
German consented to his companion’s plan.
The wrecked Dugong stood out clearly in the
light of a rising moon, a cool night breeze
playing about her shattered timbers. There
was silence on the reef and out upon the sea,
and about the ship herself all was silent. From
time to time a palm tree on the ridge beyond
the lagoon swayed softly, but otherwise nothing
moved on reef or island.
The dinghy, already no more than a tiny
speck far down wdnd w'hen the sun had slipped
below the horizon in a blaze of vermilion and
orange, was hidden by the night shadows. And
still Schultz did not move. He emphasized the
silence of the place and lent that silence a
horrible significance which was intensified by
the stain of blood upon the sand about him, by
the discarded billet of hardwood which lay
where it had fallen. The dinghy sped on, north-
wards, under the stars, but still he did not


move. Hogan, sprawled at the tiller, might well
congratulate himself. He would never account
to Schultz for that afternoon’s work.
But the big German was not dead, though
this time he emerged from unconsciousness
into something no more than half-life. He
moved at last, helplessly, as a cripple might,
but he made no effort to raise himself. Dimly
he realized that all was not well with him, but
he was incapable of active thought, conscious
only of his weakness. He gazed stupidly at
the stars overhead, the only objects within his
line of vision, and waited. That was all. He
waited, he could not tell for what. Certainly
not for help—for as yet he remembered only
the Dugong’s wild rush upon a lee shore and
the certainty it held of death, death close ai
hand and not to be evaded. By slow degrees
memory came back to him, earned him through
the events of the day before, through the work
with Hogan —then failed. He wondered what
had become of Hogan —what had happened to
himself. The night w’as very still and Schultz
did nothing to disturb its silence.
From far across the reef there came a cry, or
so it seemed to the wounded man. A dream-
ery, of course, for there was no one there or
out upon the sea. Hogan had not died, but
Hogan was gone now and there was no one left.


It was a dream-cry—that was it. Again? Was
he calling to himself from some incredible
dreamland, then?
It was calling him , that voice, and there was
no one on the reef or out upon the sea. Schultz
became limp with terror as the cry came again,
nearer, more distinct. He strove desperately
to raise himself and rush away, anywhere, away
from that awful place, but his limbs did no
more than twitch spasmodically, bathed in a
dreadful sweat. He strove to bury himself in
the sand while yet there was time, but this,
too, failed. “ Schultz, Schultz,” came again
the voice, the voice of a dead man on the reef.
Remorselessly, tracking him down, it crept
nearer and nearer. But Schultz was incapable
of anything more than terror now, and as
Captain Roy staggered towards him, stood over
him, the German lapsed into wild delirium.
Hogan was none too expert in the manage-
ment of a small boat, an art in which not every
sailor excels and one with which the ex-cook
was by no means familiar. Any fool, however,
can steer a boat of small size as long as nothing
unexpected happens, and in the present in-
stance everything was going to plan. The weather


was fine, the sea calm, the wind a following one
driving exactly in the desired direction, the
distance to be covered only seventy miles.
Food and water, too, were aboard in plenty, a
more than adequate supply. One possible
snag, it seemed to Hogan, was the arrival of
some ship. He could hardly refuse to be picked
up; he could never explain the presence of the
safe, and his inability to open it would arouse
suspicion even if he persuaded the rescuing
skipper that a small dinghy, a safe, and solitude
was his (Hogan’s) idea of life at its best. The
only greater snag which occurred to him was
that the rescuing ship should first have found
Schultz’s body!
These, however, were mere contingencies
not to be taken too seriously. Far pleasanter
to speculate on what the safe contained. He
could not count on much cash, for the Dugong
was not a big ship and was unlikely to carry
more than might be necessary for possible
repairs, extra stores, &c., but then Captain
R.oy was an old hand in the islands and was
quite likely to pick up a pearl or two when
occasion offered. That, indeed, was part of his
business; like all traders thereabouts he hoped
some time or other to pick up a pearl which
would spell fortune in Sydney, and the natives
did find such gems on occasion. Hogan won-


dered if such a pearl was then actually in the
safe, but he was prepared to be satisfied with
a good deal less—say fifty pounds and a few
score “ seeds ”, which count for something even
if they don’t run to a fortune.
The dinghy was perhaps twenty miles from
the scene of the wreck when disaster first
threatened her occupant. It came on a flat
calm. Dawn broke upon a mirror-like sea un-
ruffled by the faintest breath of wind. Long,
low swells rolled lazily up and swung past with
about as much animation as if they had been
treacle flowing over a sheet of corrugated iron.
The Dugong's reef—or the island which it sur-
rounded—was faintly visible to port, astern —
Hogan noted that he had made heavy leeway
during the darkness—and right ahead, perhaps
twelve miles distant, another island was plainly
to be seen. Hogan realized that there was
nothing to be done but wait for wind—he
lowered the tiny lug, unstepped the mast, and,
spreading the former over the thwarts as an
awning, lay down to enjoy a well-earned snooze.
Meanwhile, Captain Roy of the Dugong was
resolutely confronting a number of problems,
not the least of which was his own unfitness
after some thirty hours of fast, plus the pain
from a wounded leg—the latter a mishap which
had kept him helpless during the time of


Hogan’s activities. His knowledge of the islands
saved him from panicking as the ex-cook had
done —there was food of a kind in plenty be-
yond the lagoon —but he feared that Schultz
would die on his hands if shelter and some
measure of comfort were not quickly forth-
coming. It was necessary, too, to raise a signal
which might attract some passing vessel, trad-
ing schooner or canoe, without delay. It
seemed absolutely necessary to rig up a shelter
for the German—he was far too big to be got
aboard the Dugong— and then get over to the
island. Accordingly, that afternoon, the skipper,
in pants and shirt, slipped into the lagoon and
leisurely paddled across it, afterwards mounting
to the highest point of the island, mindful of
that signal. On reaching the top he gave a
whoop of joy, for below him, not half a mile
away, lay a boat. Roy was about to hail this
vision as an almost unprecedented act of
Providence to deserving castaways, when he
paused in amazement. “ Blamed if it ain’t the
dinghy!” he said aloud. “ The little swine’s
come back! What’s the game?” Very soon,
however, he noticed that no one controlled the
little boat and a shade of dismay crossed his
face. “ Been picked up —already —an’ got clean
away, safe an’ all, for if it wasn t Hogan I saw
yesterday I’m a Dutchman. An’ if he didn’t


pinch the safe, who did? But think of his in-
fernal luck, gettin’ picked up in an hour or
two!” So far it had not occurred to the skipper
that if Hogan had indeed been picked up he
had twice over left him, Roy, to die. When he
did think of the affair in that light, however,
his face became grim enough to alarm Hogan
had that worthy been there to see. “ She’ll
come ashore before long if the current don’t
change, an’ that'll give Schultz and me our
chance;” with which he hurried towards the
shore.
Sure enough, the dinghy was making for a
spit of coral on the fringe of the reef, but there
was a chance that she might be swept past and
lost for ever. The skipper groaned. He must
swim the lagoon again—fortunately at this
point it was very narrow —but he had no relish
for swimming in the sea beyond, and that, too,
might be necessary. On the reef he stood ex-
pectantly —there was still time and the dinghy
continued to drift closer every moment. Scarcely
fifty yards divided Roy from his prize when the
incredible actually happened. Yawning sleepily,
Hogan raised himself and looked over the gun-
wale. As he did so, he first blinked, then,
uttering a yell of terror, he leapt to his feet and
seized an oar. At the same moment the skipper
dashed into the water with a roar of fury.


Hogan did not pause to place the oars in the
rowlocks, but at once began to paddle franti-
cally seawards. It was an unequal contest, and
he was soon out of danger, though his escape
had been of the narrowest. More furious than
ever, the skipper turned and made for the
shore. It was some satisfaction to him, during
the week which followed, to note that the calm
held—the nearest land was fully thirty miles
distant, and to reach it Hogan must use the oars
for many hours under a blazing sun; must,
indeed, row for his life, for the dinghy, loaded
as it was w T ith the safe, could not carry enough
water for a trip of more than a very few days.
The skipper smiled grimly as he prepared to
return to Schultz.
In ordinary circumstances vulgar minds are
prone to exult unfeelingly, even rudely, over a
vanquished opponent. Certainly Hogan was
not the person to show consideration for any-
one of whom he had just succeeded in getting
the better. He was not a person of nice delicacy,
by any means. Yet he went, for the last time, in
silence —and that silence remains unbroken
even now. The final act of his sordid drama had
no audience, though to those who came in at


the finish every movement of it was clear and
distinct, told by sand and cliff and many other
silent witnesses.
How long it took him to reach the island seen
on the morning of his encounter with Captain
Roy will never be known, but that gentleman
distinctly saw the dinghy from his cliff-top the
following morning. It showed no sail, so pre-
sumably Hogan was rowing. The craft was not
suited for long trips of the kind —short, and
with a dead-weight amidships, it must have
been down by the head and therefore hard to
pull. The oars, too, were short, too short for
prolonged use. One feels that Hogan’s heart
must have been near to bursting, his muscles
agonizingly cramped, long before those thirty
miles were covered. Yet he dared not stop. A
change in the weather might spell ruin; time
lost must deplete the supply of water without
which work under the broiling sun would soon
become impossible. To crown all, he might
drift miles during the darkness and miss the
island altogether. He was beginning to pay!
All these circumstances go to explain why
he landed where he did, in place of proceed-
ing to the more distant island with all possible
speed; but he may have been influenced by a
desire to get rid of the safe before landing at a
place where it must cause speculation, not to


say inconvenient inquiry. On the other hand,
it is a difficult matter to open even an anti-
quated safe without heavier tools than he
possessed, and the method he adopted to do so
may have been suggested by the nature of the
island he finally reached. From now onwards
the story is told, then, by silent witnesses.
A visitor approaching Hogan’s Hope, as it
is now known —or was recently —from the
north, would first notice a rounded hill rising
to a height of about two hundred feet. Arriving
from the opposite direction, he would see this
hill as a precipitous cliff towering above a
rock-strewn beach some eighty yards wide at
high tide. On the north is a sandy bay of no
great extent, its high-water mark nearly a mile
distant from the foot of the hill already men-
tioned. Here Hogan landed, and his first task
was to carry his water-breaker to a tiny spring,
discovered, after some search, well away from
the beach. The replenished breaker he placed
at the foot of the hill, to be used as required.
There was hard work before him. He then
returned to the boat and unloaded the safe by
the simple means of tipping the dinghy over
and rolling its contents on to the sand. The
dinghy told this. The boat was then righted and
drawn well up the beach, beyond high-water
mark. At this point begins an island epic, a


record of desperate toil and tireless activity
dictated by nothing nobler than the lust of
gold.
Hogan then commenced to roll the safe,
if the word roll can be applied to an object of
such unqualified squareness, up the beach
towards the hill. The distance was not far
short of a mile, and for the first few yards the
work may have been comparatively easy. But
when the dry sand beyond tide-mark was reached,
the unwieldy object’s edge sank, so that to raise
its bulk a second time Hogan had to use all his
strength. Before long his hands commenced
to bleed, as from time to time sharp particles
of broken shells were encountered in the sand,
in pushing his fingers under the lower edge.
The safe told this part of the story. The work
required long hours, yet all the time the worker
must have been haunted by the fear of inter-
ruption —there was no hiding either the boat
or himself at this stage, and both were plainly
visible from any passing craft. A small risk,
but real, and Hogan knew now that Captain
Roy was alive.
At last, however, the first part of the work
was finished. It was useless to try to hide the
sharp tracks in the sand, but these would be
invisible to anyone who did not land upon the
island. The safe was now at the base of the
(■*74)


hill —to cover it with sand and sea-wrack was
easy, but there remained the work of getting
the boat up and out of sight. Hard enough, too,
but not to be compared with the cruel toil
already faced. This, too, was done —done by
slow degrees and with more than one journey
to the water-breaker at the base of the hill.
When he began the hopeless task of opening
the safe with the help of a small chisel and an
inadequate hammer as his only tools will never
be known. These had no effect, and perhaps
it was in an access of blind fury that he crashed
rock after rock upon the safe’s unresponsive
face in an equally hopeless effort to smash the
stubborn lock. All this the safe, of course, told.
Did he think of giving it all up as a bad job,
then? Or did he dally with the thought of re-
turning later with heavy tools? Perhaps; but if
the latter idea came to him, there also came the
conviction that his fortune must be fought for
there and then or given up for ever. Even yet
he was not beaten.
It is a steep climb to the top of Hogan’s
Hope, look at it as you will, but up it Hogan
went, and the safe with him. If only the thing
could be made to fall from that point to the
rocks below, it must disclose its secret.
The ascent is sparsely dotted with a selection
of strong shrubs, many of them dangerously


decorated with thorns, and these had to be
avoided. A path had to be discovered, and it
was not always easy to find a negotiable spot
free from them. In such a case Hogan cut away
the obstruction with his clasp-knife.
The task began. Here, at least, he had not
to contend with yielding sand, though the slope
was bitterly hard to overcome. But here, too,
he had to work under the glare of a tropic sun,
for light was essential —the previous work may
have been done in the comparative coolness of
night. With savage determination he urged
the iron taskmaster upwards for fifty feet, past
thorny plants and jutting rocks, using every
inequality of the ground to secure a foothold.
Ten feet higher he came upon a patch of bare
rock impossible to ascend. He hitched the safe
aside, slowly, with infinite care, and in follow-
ing it he slipped, perhaps on a loose stone. It
commenced to slide back upon him, and with
all his force he dug his feet into the dry soil and
resisted. Another slip, and down upon him
came the mass so that he barely saved himself
by stepping aside as it hurtled past him on to
the beach once more.
A second time he tried, but before doing
so he tied the boat’s sheet tightly round the
safe’s brass handle. Then the work began once
more, and now he flung the rope around the


thick stem of a plant and drew it taut, so that
he might rest a while in security. A new path,
too, was tried, but there was no easy way up
that slope, and hardly a point in all its dismal
length where the rope might be relied upon
and Hogan stretch himself beside his load.
More often than not his weight was needed to
keep the monster in each hard-won position;
nowhere dared he leave it to the mercy of the
bare earth in case its weight should prove too
great. Foot by foot he progressed, with what
torture of heart and lung one can only guess.
The sun blazed down, and a multitude of in-
sects, disturbed by his passage, blinded him.
Dust rose in clouds, but it was impossible to
moisten his parched lips and burning throat
more than once, when, near the summit, he
rested upon a little ledge. And that refreshment,
if he took it, cost a descent and an ascent I
Within a few feet of the top he wound his
rope about the stem of a cactus plant and paused
again. His left foot, lifted, left an outline in
blood, and his hands bled freely. Clutching
the rope, he leaned against the hillside, steeper
here. The safe lay at his feet. A slip on the
part of either meant death for Hogan —or a
miracle. And the safe slipped! In terror, per-
haps, or in despair, he flung his arm about the
thick stem and felt it give. The rope tugged


desperately, and desperately he clung to his
precarious support. Slowly, grimly, the great
plant gave —the weight below gathered momen-
tum. It was a matter of seconds now, but when
all seemed lost the safe turned over, pressing
one comer into a slight depression. Its course
was instantly arrested.
So the summit was reached, the safe lay
poised on the face of the cliff. Hogan launched
it on its slippery course towards the edge with
a quick rush, far out, and down to the rocks
two hundred feet below.
Extract from the Sydney Tribune of 3rd Dec.,
IQ4-
“ The brig Oletta arrived here this morning
bringing Captain Roy of the schooner Dugong
and E. Schultz, mate of the same vessel.
“ Captain Thomson of the Oletta reports
having rescued Captain Roy and Schultz from
an uninhabited island on which the Dugong was
wrecked several weeks ago. Schultz was in a
critical condition when rescued, owing to a
savage attack by a member of the crew of the
lost vessel, but is now almost recovered, thanks
to the care and attention given him aboard the
Oletta. It appears that, forming a design, which


he carried out, to steal the schooner’s safe, the
miscreant in question felled the mate and
escaped in the ship’s boat, leaving Schultz and
Captain Roy to perish. As there was reason to
believe that the man, whose name is given as
Hogan, might then be upon another island at no
great distance, Captain Thomson decided to
attempt his capture, and a party headed by
Captain Roy landed there. Traces of the man
were at once found, but to the astonishment of
the search-party it w T as apparent that he had
attempted the overwhelming task of conveying
the safe to the summit of a nearby eminence
some two hundred feet in height. Here it was
seen that he had done so, and the searchers
judged that he hoped to break open the safe
by throwing it to the rocks below. On descend-
ing and making their way to the bottom of the
cliff, they were horrified to find the body of
Hogan, along with the safe, which was com-
pletely smashed. A rope attached to the handle
of the safe door was tightly wound round one
of the dead man’s legs, and it is conjectured
that in pushing the safe from the cliff he ne-
glected to free himself, and was thus hurled to
a frightful death. The safe, it may be added,
contained nothing.”


DICK VARNEY’S DIAMONDS
There were brave doings in Bristol, and most
others of our English ports, when first I went
sailing (it was before the Peace of Ryswick), and
no lack of merry adventures to be dared, most
with some hint of profit in them too. Not that
I went to Bristol on that particular day with
any idea of making the sea my road to fortune,
or fame either, but rather by way of passing
the time.
My parents were but lately dead, and, as
I had little liking to spend my life farming in a
comer of England, I had sold the old farm and
was then casting about for something to do, or
at least waiting on Providence to find it for
me. I was my own master, and had my little
fortune (none so poor either for a yeoman’s
son) snugly in keeping of our notary, Master
Kentish of Bristol town.
As I stood idly by the harbour side watching
the shipping, of which there was great store,


a seafaring man laid a hand on my shoulder and
laughed.
“ Why!’* said he, “ ’tis Jack Lanscombe,
as I live!”
HTwas a man from ray own countryside, who
had left it as a youth and had been seen there
but seldom since. He was older than I, yet
fairly within my memory, so that, looking
round, I said quickly enough, “ ’Tis Dick
Varney grown a man!” and then we shook
hands. I told him how it was with me, and his
eyes narrowed (though I scarce remarked it
then) as he clapped me on the back and said
he’d put me in the way of bettering myself if
1 wished.
“ Hark ’ee, Jack,” he cried, for though his
father was no yeoman, and mine had been, yet
he himself was full master’s mate, “ there lies
the Duke and I’m mate in her. We are one of
three who go on the King of Spain’s business
by to-morrow’s tide. There’s more smuggling
between French Martinique and Peru than
suits the Spaniards, and we go to stop it. The
pay is good, but the chances are better ” and
here he spoke low and winked knowingly.
“ Come with us. I need a proper man, and
you’ll be a sailor in a week, or ” and he
swore more than I liked, but I thought it sea-
man’s manners, so let it pass.


To cut short my tale, I went aboard the Duke ,
a gentleman volunteer.
We went down with the tide next day and
came to anchor in deep water by the river’s
mouth, the Duke and Duchess only, our com-
panion being delayed getting in stores. As we
came down I had time to look about me. We
were a ship of about 450 tons, and mounted
thirty guns of a size more than sufficient for
our purpose, and we had already some ninety
men of our company aboard. “ A tidy ship
enough!” thought I proudly, the water being
then calm. But alasl it blew freshly outside,
and, what with the queer motion and the sea
smells, that evening saw me idle in my ham-
mock, none so proud either of the Duke or
myself.
Full two days later I stumbled on to the
upper deck, dazed with my long sickness
(whose duration I did not guess) and half blind
from the inner darkness. On the poop I found
Dick Varney, who waved me to him with a
smile.
“ Well, Jackl So ’tis all over,” said he,
grinning.
“ Why, yes!” I answered, thinking of my
sickness. “ And well over too,” at which he
laughed boisterously and squared his shoulders.
Then he fell to pacing the poop and said no


more. I felt all at sea, but was far from guessing
the truth, though I thought Varney’s manner
strange enough, especially his laughter.
“ Where is the Duchess ?” I asked at last.
“ Off Bristol, Jack, unless I’m far out,” re-
plied Varney; then, seeing me more than ever
in a maze, he added, “ Drop down with me,
Jack, and you shall hear a fine tale.” So I
followed him to the master’s quarters, where
he poured me a glass of rum, and began.
“ Tis a short tale and a lively one,” he said,
“and I hope you’ll like it. Two nights since,
forty men from the Duchess deserted to the
Duke , and we got under way in quick time.
Most of my ow r n boys stood by me, though
every man of them had his chance to leave.”
“ How ‘ leave ’?” said I, “ and what of your
captain?”
“ Over the side, my lad, and safe ashore
long ago!” laughed Varney. “ The master
went like a lamb, being hardly recovered from
his leave-taking liquor. I am master of the
Duke now, with nothing astern to touch me.
Do you like the tale, Jack, for 1 hope you do?
Think it over —‘good wages and better chances’.”
So I sat down to think of this thing, and
before long had wit enough to know that Dick
was a pirate by choice, and myself like to be
no better, by evil chance.


By this time we w r ere in mid-ocean for any-
thing a landsman could do, so I sought some-
thing to eat, and, when thus fortified, must up
and have it out with Varney; but when I found
him bent on despoiling only our enemies, and
then in fair fight, I fell in with the venture
heartily enough, which pleased our captain
vastly. Indeed, the venture was regular enough
after a fashion, for if ever we saw Bristol town
again ’twould be after his Spanish Majesty,
whose servants we were, had paid for the Duke ,
and none could rightly say we had robbed any
Bristol man.
Dick Varney steered his own course, but,
in spite of his brave words, we had most pesti-
lent bad luck, so that long ere we sighted any
vessel worth taking, far less a rich Frenchman,
1 had become as good a fighting sailor as any
on board. We were now come to the Indian
seas, and here Dick promised us full purses,
for there was no little grumbling among the
men. At more than one island, and once on
the mainland, we had touched to replenish our
water-butts and refill our larder; but nowhere
had we been long out of the ship, nor had we
seen the colour of gold since leaving home.


It happened, then, that of a hot, clear night,
the ship moving quietly along and 1 asleep
below the poop, a great cry got up all about me.
“ A vast ship becalmed half a league to lar-
board!” and, sure enough, 1 saw it plainly over
the lee bulwark.
“ Tis a ship of the Great Mogul!” shouted
Varney. “ Down helm, there! To quarters, all
of ye,” he bawled, though we were unlikely to
hang back after months of fret and disappoint-
ment.
But by this time, seeing the Duke as fast
becalmed as the stranger, I was in a fair way to
launch the smallest of our six boats by throwing
it over the side in my eagerness, had not the
bos’n, Matt Willis, restrained me.
“ Ecod! Master Lanscombe, we have sharks
below and blackamoors above water,” said he,
“ and both will be glad to see your way of
launching a boat!” at which I fell back a pace.
A moment later I was afloat and seated in the
stem, the bos’n pulling hard with five others
like himself, and our boat scarce above water
with the press of men in her. Varney, in the
greatest boat, was already ahead and three
others ready to pass us, but though 1 shouted
to the nearest to take me aboard, there being
more room in her, I had to rest content with a
place in the last boat of all. By this time the


blackamoors had wakened up and were training
a great gun upon us, and I had hardly time to
wish their looks less heathenish by the light
of a great torch, when a shot tore over our heads.
At this our fellows set up a shout of anger, for
we had counted on hand-to-hand work against
odds, but not on gunnery, the Mogul’s men
being sad bunglers with cannon at sea. So we
paused and drew out of range to tow the Duke
up, and put the fight on more even terms. We
pulled a full hour and then cast off after canting
the ship for a broadside.
“ Up with you, Jack and Willis, and stand
by the guns, all of ye! One salvo, then after us
to the boarding!”
We lost no time, but scrambled aboard our
ship, now close by the Mogul. I know not
which fired first, but from the tempest of smoke
and noise, which half stupefied me, I heard
a dreadful crashing of timber and a babel of
shrieking cries. The Duke shook from stem to
stern, and for a moment threatened to capsize.
Men tumbled blindly over fallen spars, and
cursed fiercely in the smoky darkness. From
the Mogul came red spits of flame as they let
fly with small arms and pistols. The voice of
Tremaine, our master gunner, bellowed of a
fallen mizzen and a mainmast gone, but whose
they were I could not see. Then from the boats


alongside Varney roared for boarders, and in
the rush of men over to windward, making for
the boats again, I was whirled against a deck-
house. A great roaring sounded in my ears,
something descended on my head, and I fell
senseless to the deck.
When I came to myself I was alone; the
smoke had cleared away, and our mizzen-mast
floated astern. For a while I stared about me
stupidly, wiping the blood from my face; but
happening to hear a faint noise—for so it
seemed —I looked over the side and saw Varney
and our fellows, hard put to it on the stranger’s
poop. In a moment I remembered all. What
guided me I know not, but a faint breeze was
at last upon the Duke, so that I seized the wheel
blindly and bore down straight before the wind
to help my friends. The ships were no more
than a cable apart, and in the press upon the
stranger’s deck it struck me that our company
scarce showed at all. Dick Varney’s voice rose
now and then, and I could see Matt Willis
plainly, but of the others little or nothing, and
my heart sank. It seemed that all was lost, but
I had no thought of holding back, for a mad-
ness took me then. To reach the Mogul and
crush her with the Duke's bluff bows was my
only plan, if plan I had. The breeze freshened
and I held right on. Now, the accident to our


mizzen-mast had been dearly seen aboard the
Mogul, so that when I bore down upon them,
sailing free, it seemed that magic had replaced
our mast and that a demon steered us. Seeing
our onward rush, then, the blackamoors gave
way in sudden terror (though I saw nothing of
this), at which a wounded man of ours turned
to find the cause.
“ The Dukel The Dukel ” he cried, and so
quickly did things happen that almost as he
spoke we were upon the Mogul’s stern, with a
sickening rending of her timbers and our own.
For a second time that morning I fell, and when
I opened my eyes again I was upon the lower
deck, one arm broken and all my ribs sorely
bruised.
“ When I heard Jack West of Bideford cry
out, I thought him mad,” said Matt Willis to
me later; “ but, seeing the blackamoors miracu-
lously in retreat when we were all but over-
borne, I turned my head and saw the Duke
coming hard at us. With that I hailed Master
Varney, who quickly rallied all of us who could
still stand upright, and in a body we prepared
to board our ship as she struck.”
“ ’Twas no small blow, Matt?” said I.
‘‘ Why, as to that, Master Lanscombe, ’twas
a right English blow, and vastly more useful


than most. The Mogul’s men were over their
fright by then and were about to rush us clear
over his stern, when the old Duke took their
feet from them, and before they could get at
us w r e were on English oak again. Some few
followed us, but the blow carried us past to
leeward, and these caused us no trouble.”
“ What then?” I asked.
“ Why, then we had time to look around,”
answered Matt uneasily.
“ At what?”
“At murder, Master Lanscombe. We were
a hundred and thirty out of Bristol, but only
seventy out of the cursed Mogul, for we must
needs leave our wounded. So one by one our
lads, dead and living, were thrown to the
sharks; for though the blackamoor had fore
and mizzen down she was still four to one and
thought herself safe.”
“ Curse you, Matt Willis!” shouted I, mad-
dened by his tale. “ Could you not fire a gun
or bear up and board again?”
“ Gently, gently! ’Tis paid for and more.
*Tis quicker to throw a wounded man over-
board than to load and fire a gun. And the Duke
was like to sink under us. But to go on! ’Twas
useless to try boarding, so we lay-to and gave
them gunnery till nightfall. At dawn our case
was bad but theirs worse, and their ship at our


mercy. She was vastly rich, too, and your share
is worth a broken arm, or I’m mistaken.”
So, being weary, I fell into a troubled sleep,
and Matt Willis left me.
’Twas some days before I saw Dick Varney,
who was greatly busied with the task of carry-
ing our broken ship to some quiet anchorage,
where we might make good the ravages of war
and refresh ourselves ashore, but at last he
came to me.
He was vastly happy, and rallied me on my
prospects of being a great squire in England
one day; “ for,” said he, “ we have a fortune
apiece, Jack, and need but a good tree to get
us home to spend it. There’s an island not far
off where we’ll refit and share out. So get well,
lad, for you’ll be ashore in less than a week.”
Truly enough, we came in four days to an
island where fresh water and fruit abounded,
and in a cove we ran the Duke ashore for re-
pairs, though perforce I looked on, being still
crippled. But first our men must have each his
share of the Mogul’s treasure, and, what with
the tidy store of gold coin and jewels which
fell to each and his part in goods to be carried
to England, it was plain we were all made men.
<M 374)


Indeed, my own share was worth my Bristol
money thrice over, and nothing troubled me
but the getting of it home.
You may be sure we took our leisure once
the ship was new caulked and cleaned; but,
having had enough of play at last, we set about
getting a tree to serve as a mizzen-mast, but
none such was to be found on the island. ’Twas
full five weeks since our landing, and my arm
was well mended by then, so that I proposed
to Varney and the rest to set off at once, taking
our chance of finding suitable timber elsewhere.
But to this Varney would by no means agree,
but must have time to consider; “ because,”
said he, “ half our crew is gone, and how are
we to run wanting the great after-sail if we meet
a fleet of two or three?” So we agreed upon a
week’s delav.
J
But first I must tell you that the Mogul had
carried a prodigious quantity of precious stones,
half of which, mostly great diamonds, Dick
Varney had pocketed unknown to us, but more
for easy concealment in case of danger, I think,
than to cheat his comrades. However, he made
sure that, even should his known portion be
lost, he had a snug fortune left and nobody the
wiser. So, not to weary you, three days after
our council there arose a cry from those first
afoot that the long-boat w r as missing, and very


soon it appeared that our captain had vanished
also.
“ What make you of this, Master Lans-
combe?” Matt Willis asked me, while John
Stirton, who was mate in the Duke under
Varney, shouted “ Treachery!” In a moment
every man rushed off to make sure of his money,
and there was vast excitement with no little
hard swearing; but on its appearing that
Varney had taken even less than his share, we
grew calmer.
“ We look to you to command, and John
Stirton to do our sailing,” said Tremaine to
me, after we had talked over the matter.
“ Willingly!” said I; “ but is it plain that
as the ship is now we may never win home?
You know what Varney’s words were?”
“ ’Twas a trick to get away, naught else,”
swore Stirton, and most seemed of his opinion.
“ Do we fight or run, then?” asked I.
“ We fight when we must and run when
we can,” answered Matt Willis, at which there
was great laughter.
“ Aye, aye! Matt’s right!” said a Devon man.
“ No risks now, for my part.”
So it was settled, and, as soon as might be,
we got the ship afloat, and set sail.
I would willingly tell of our voyage, of the
storms we won through, of two attacks we beat


off, of the island on which we landed and where
Willis and I buried our spoil in secret rather
than risk it in our ill-manned ship, but must
hurry on to Bristol and so finish with Dick
Varney.
Months later Matt Willis and I sat in a quiet
English inn, the Duke safely in harbour and
her crew dispersed. We had money enough to
serve our turn, and though the matter of our
buried treasure was ever in our minds it did
not press, and we relished shore life mightily.
It happened, then, that as we sat at ease
before our inn one summer’s day, a woman,
ill-clad and none so young, came up, and,
feigning to ask charity, slipped into my hand a
letter, and was gone.
“ What now?” said Matt (for we were hand
in glove by reason of our secret as well as from
true friendship). “ A love affair, Jack, and
never a word to me?”
“ Far otherwise, Matt,” said I, laughing,
’tis some news of my affairs from cur old
notary, doubtless, but we may very easily
understand the matter,” and I tore open the
letter, which w r as scarce sealed. But I was far
out of my reckoning indeed, for the letter came
from the last man likely to write a Duke's man


—Vamey himself. So I sat staring for a full
minute till my companion roused me with a
hint. “ ’Tis from no lady, Jack. That I see,
at least!”
“ From him , as I’m alive!” I answered.
“ What!” shouted Matt. “ Impossible!”
“ Nay, listen,” and I read the letter. “ Jack,”
it said, “ though doubtless you bear me a sad
grudge, yet read this. I wronged you in going
as I did, though I took nothing but my own.
Things have gone very ill with me since; make
them no worse, but come to me at Mistress
Owen’s hard by the Crown and Anchor. Or,
if you will, say I am there and have me hanged
for a pirate. In truth I care little either way.
—D. V.”
“ What think you, Matt?”
“ An ill-writ letter from a villain, say I,”
replied Willis promptly.
“ Mayhap, but what to do?”
“ Why! Go now.”
So we got to our feet and turned towards
the Crown and Anchor to seek Mistress Owen’s
lodging.
The bearer of the letter led us to a vile
garret, where there lay a gaunt skeleton of a
man we scarce recognized for Dick Vamey,
though ’twas he. He expected me, but on see-


mg Matt Willis cried out in childish alarm
that I had come to give him up.
“ Nay,” said I, “ ’tis but Matt Willis, and
we do not come as enemies.”
“Nor as friends, Jack?” at which I fell
silent. “ But come near,” he went on. “ There’s
little to tell. A hundred guineas for Dick Var-
ney the pirate, dead or alive! I’m worth a hun-
dred guineas to ye, Jack.”
Tush! said I, nettled by both tone and
words. Was Ito come for this, Dick Varney,
or for some worthier purpose?”
For another purpose, Jack,” he answered
more softly. “ I see I wronged you again and
ask your pardon.”
Granted! said Matt, seeing me hesitate;
for, though our late captain was plainly in dire
straits, I scarce liked his past doings nor present
manners.
“ When I came to Bristol again,” said the
sick man, “ I little knew what awaited me.
Twas only the night saved me, for in haste to
be rich I sought at once a merchant. ‘ A vast
fortune, Master Varney,’ said the oily rogue,
and too heavy for my poor purse. Wait till
I call my friends.’ So four others came, and
the five agreed very quickly upon a price,
whereon my jewels were put into a little iron
box and thrust into a cupboard. ‘ Here is our


joint promise, Master Varney. Will you come
in the morning for payment?’ ‘ Nay, I’ll wait
here till then,’ said I, thinking it safer. ‘ Well
said, sir! but first read our promise,’ and with
that he thrust a paper into my hands. I will
not deny that my hands shook as I took it from
him, for here was wealth beyond a plain man’s
dreams, and all mine, Jack, mine! But even
then I opened the paper slowly, not to be too
eager before them. A printed form! thought I
—these men buy fortunes daily then, and are
too busy to put quill to parchment, but must
needs have printed forms! What stillness there
was as I unfolded the thing! What holding of
the breath, what tenseness of waiting! A
promise, said they? ’Twas a thing of heavy
lines and thick black letters, and, as I saw it,
the blood surged back to my heart, leaving my
face like death. Oh, Jack, ’twas like a hundred
deaths to understand it and all it meant! ‘ A
hundred guineas for— * aye! for me —‘ dead or
alive.’ A cruel trick; but the old man, Lowson,
grinned at me, and I heard him in a dream.
* ou are w r ell paid by our silence, Master
Varney. We are well armed, though you be
a pirate, but mayhap you would wish to call
the watch. ’Tis passing now.’
Twas the thought of hanging stopt me, or
I should have slain him at least where he


stood. But to be wounded and taken! No!
Better to wait —to wait! So I came out peace-
ably; but sickness came upon me here, for I
was penniless and dared not show my face
about the town. I used you ill. Will you use
me better and lend me your help to get my own
again?”
Matt and I looked blankly at each other,
for you must think of Varney as helpless and
half starved, the garret a miserable hole, the
bed no more than a heap of rags, while apart
crouched a woman, sobbing. ’Twas his wife,
she who had brought me his letter. Perhaps his
misfortunes moved us, or pity for his wife, or
perhaps ’twas anger at the base trickery of the
goldsmiths, but I vowed offhand to restore the
jewels.
“ And I vow to try,” said Matt Willis, which
reminded me that he was the wiser man of us,
for the thing was easier to enter upon than to
finish with credit.
At our inn that night, and many others, we
talked of the affair, but ’twas long ere we hit
upon any plan that promised success —so long,
indeed, that I began to despair. But first we
sent Varney and his w T ife in a fishing-boat to


Ireland, for he might do us great harm if taken
by the officers.
• - . . « 11 «
“ Hark ’ee, Jack,” said Matt at last, “ ’twas
a crime to trade with Dick Vamey, knowing
him a man w’anted by the law?”
I nodded.
“ Then old Lowson is in no better case than
Vamey if we but wink to the thief-takers?”
“ True, Matt, but that would scarce help.”
“ With some chalk on your face and a rag
over one eye, could ye play the officer, Jack,
and so help him?”
“ Play the officer ?” stammered I, but in
a moment I had grasped Matt’s hand and was
shaking it heartily, for here was a plan at last.
“ Aye! Go boldly in, summon the old rascal,
all a-tremble at your fierceness, and walk out
with the diamonds!”
“ And if he refuse to tremble at my fierce-
ness, what then?”
“ Pshaw! We need but a way of retreat and
no small impudence, and the thing is done,”
replied Matt, none too graciously.
It seemed a likely venture; ’twas a dangerous
one for certain, but ’twas neck or nothing with
us by then; so we got two horses snugly hid on
the far side of Bristol river, and at its mouth a
sturdy boat ready for sea. A dark night and
moonless it was when we quitted the inn,


and we were scarce away from it when we
vanished from the earth, as it were, and in our
places stood an officer of the law and his ser-
vant. I doubt we were little credit to our
master, but that would only serve the better to
frighten old Spindleshanks.
We came boldly enough to his door, where-
on we knocked loudly, which was all in the
game. Very soon Master Low’son’s head ap-
peared at an upper window’, and I called to him
to descend and open, which he flatly refused
to do. “ All a-tremble, Matt!” whispered I.
“ Listen to him!”
“ Off with you, thieves, or I call the watch!”
and by a most unlucky chance the watch was
heard approaching at that very moment. Here
was a to-do! To be discovered in disguise
before a rich man’s door would be mightily
awkward, for ’twas plain that Master Lowson
fancied our company very little, and was ready
to say so.
Not an idea could I summon to our help!
Matt too looked sadly put out, and I think we
might have turned and run for it had he not
suddenly gone mad, as I thought. “ Ho, there!
The watch!” he bellowed, then quickly whis-
pered to me: “ A bold face, if you love me,
Jack!”
To the first watchman, who came up just


then, he cried very boldly: “ You, there, my
lad! Here’s resistance to the law!” on which
the watch looked less than happy, and Master
Lowson appeared at his door.
“ In the name of the law, Master Lowson,
a word with you,” said I, pulling myself to-
gether and stepping into the house. Matt spoke
to the watch again, so that when I said that
none must leave the place, no one questioned
my order.
“ A word apart, Master,” then, leaning close,
I said our captain’s name very softly.
“ I know of no such man,” replied Lowson
gamely, but his pale lips belied him.
“ But you come to London with me, never-
theless,” said I.
Now, when I saw that he looked sourly at
me, then cunningly, I laughed inwardly.
“ Sir, I am an old man; give me time to
prepare,” he said at last.
“ One hour, no more!” said I, scowling.
“ Dismiss the watch, Master Lowson, and make
haste.” So Matt remained by the street door
while, as I guessed, Master Lowson escaped
at the back, being in no mind to go with a man
who carried things so high. Before long 1 called
him, but there was no reply.
“ Hist, Matt!” said I, beckoning him to me,
“ to work!” but ’twas child’s play then. The


cupboard might have bothered us, but ’twas
plainly to be seen in the wall close by me, while
on a little table lay the old man’s keys. Never
was anything easier! We found the box, nay the
very key for it too, and, as we turned to leave
the room, I chuckled quietly over our mon-
strous good fortune. When at last we were
fairly out of Bristol town, and safely come to
our waiting horses, I laughed loud and long.
“ The old fox has gone to earth fairly enough!”
said I.
“ Squarely beaten at his own game!” returned
Matt, also laughing.
“ A rare plan and rarely kept up, friend!
’Twas a great stroke to call the watch,” and so
we mounted, each vastly pleased with himself
and the other. Nor did we give a thought to
the keys.
Being the better horseman I held the jewel-
box on the saddle before me, riding slowly,
for the night was inky black now. We jested
as we rode, for dawn was still far off and we
could not sail before daylight.
We had come to a turn of the road, perhaps
a mile from Bristol, a dark place under great
trees with thickets on either hand, when Matt’s
horse suddenly stopt, it being close ahead of
mine. ’Twas too dark to see, but I cried to
put the beast forward, when on the instant we


were beset by four or five sturdy ruffians armed
with cudgels, who sprang swiftly from the
darkness about us. They came on with fearful
yells, and were upon us so quickly that I could
fire only one pistol, and then, flinging myself
to the ground, was in the thick of a desperate
encounter. It seemed to me that I alighted full
on a man’s chest —so my pistol had some work,
but it was not enough. We were hopelessly
outnumbered, and, though I fought my best
and heard more than one curse and a groan or
two, it ended for me, as for Matt, with a blow
on the head not to be resisted.
’Twas still dark when I came to myself. No
sound broke the stillness, but very slowly I
came to know that I lay in the road, sore all
over and coated with mud. I staggered to my
feet, but quickly fell over the body of a man
close by. ’Twas Matt, still senseless. How long
he took to come round I know not, but at last
we raised ourselves and compared notes. Both
badly bruised, our horses disappeared, our
pistols gone and the jewels with them. For a
while we sat still, stunned anew by this calamity.
“ What think you of our plan now, Jack?”
“We crowed too soon, lad,” said I; “ but
heard you anything before you fell?”
“ That did I! Old Spindleshanks crying
them on.”


“ Oh, Matt, Matt!” cried I bitterly, “ only
a fool would have been trapped so easily. Yet
I laughed when I saw his keys so ready to our
hands!”
“ How now?”
“ Why! Lowson took a shrewd course —let
us take the jewels and he could get them again
without danger, as he has done, for an officer
of the law may not steal, even from a rogue.
Let us leave them, and he lost to the law that
which cost him nothing, but kept his liberty.
Aye, the keys spoke plainly to any but a fool.”
“ Let’s to the boat, lad, for rest and food.
’Tis a bad business and Varney will die of it;
but tell him we must.”
So we set out, and at dawn threw off our
strange clothes, w T ashed, and sat down to eat.
“ And so, an end to Varney’s fortune!” said I.
“ Confound you for a soft-hearted fool,
Jack!” said Matt angrily. “ ‘ Give me a pas-
sage,’ quoth he, and because of a long face
Master Lanscombe ships a passenger!”
We were bowling down channel before a
brisk wind, Matt at the tiller, I minding the
sheets, and, amidships, a stranger, woefully sick.
“ Tush!” said I, “ he pays for his place and
troubles no one.”
“ Be you surgeon, then, and put his bundle


under his head before he choke,” growled Matt.
So, giving the mainsheet a loose turn and
handing it to the helmsman, I stepped forward
to ease our passenger. A hard pillow, thought
I, and set about loosening the bundle. *Twas
half undone when the sick man opened his eyes
and saw what I did, but he would have none
of me as surgeon or nurse. Instead, he gave a
furious shriek and fell upon me, all unpre-
pared as I was, like a very madman. And mad
in truth he looked. With both hands he grasped
the bundle, his greenish-pale face aflame with
anger, thrust against my breast—for I knelt
beside him. Now, partly to avoid being thrown
back by him and partly through being wholly
surprised, I clung to the bundle, though ’twas
the last thing I coveted just then, and in a flash
felt a set of teeth fasten on my left hand like a
vice. Blindly enough I pushed my opponent
from me till, half mad with pain, I let go and
gave him my right fist full in the face with all
my strength, on which we rolled over to leeward
together in a heap. But the fight was over, as
well it might be, and I free to wash and tend
my hand, after which I made no scruple about
opening the stranger’s bundle. ’Twas only a
coat and a little box, but as I saw the box I
shouted in very joy, for in my hands lay Dick
Varney’s diamonds.


“ ’Twas I and four others who attacked you
on the Bristol road, though ye were sheriff’s
men then who now are sailors,” said the stranger,
when at last he could speak. (He paused and
heartily cursed us and our disguise, the dark-
ness of the past night, and the horrid chance
that led him to our boat.) “ I had no mind to
restore Master Lowson’s box, though, if I
could get it for myself. Your pistol helped me,
for as I stooped to grasp the box, scarce be-
lieving my good fortune to find it so pat at the
very outset, it seemed as if I fell with a bullet
through my head. But I was unhurt, and had
time to throw my prize well across the road ere
I got a mighty blow in good earnest and lay
still enough. When I awoke I lay beneath a
tree some distance from the road, plainly left
for dead. All was quiet. The box lay where I
had thrown it, and I hastened with it towards
the sea. The rest you know.”
So by strange ways his jewels fell at last into
our hands; yet in the end we failed to right
him, for Dick Varney and his wife never reached
Irish land or any other, nor came with out-
stretched hands to meet us there.




**3.9


3 1508 01455902 0


MB
Hs Hi -
H & sc
&UMIT
THE‘SUMMIT 1 LIBRARY
