

A BBJEU ACCOUNT
OF THE
NATIVES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
JhEIR AJMD
PREPARED UNDER INSTRUCTIONS EROM
|jis (Bmlimvy glnj,ar-#,emnil Sir p, St. #rb,
K. C. M. G., C. 8.,
(Hotmrnor of tbo Colon#,
TO ILLUSTRATE THE
Collection of Weapons, Implements, etc.
JSent to the Exhibition at
SYDISIJEY, N.S.W.,
A.D. 1879.
P E E T H:
BY AUTHORITY: RICHARD PETHER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




A BRIEF ACCOUNT
OF THE
NATIVES OE WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Those wlio have seen and examined tlie weapons and imple-
ments from Western Australia in this Exhibition (Sydney,
N.S.W., 1879), may desire to have some further information
respecting the character, laws, manners and customs, and
mode of life of those who make and use them: the following
brief account is therefore offered to their acceptance and
consideration.
The common origin of the aboriginal inhabitants of
Western Australia has been sufficiently proved by Sir George
Grey, from comparison of their language, laws, customs,
and mode of life: subsequent experience has confirmed
his conclusions. Erom similar evidence the relation of the
aborigines of Western Australia to those of the other Aus-
tralian Colonies may, with equal certainty, be deduced.
There are, however, to be found among them physical
varieties, naturally consequent upon those differences of
climate and food which must be found in a country extending
from 13 deg. 34 min. to 35 deg. 13min. in latitude, and
corresponding variety of character and productions, having
an area of 500,000 square miles; estimating only that moiety
in which the Colonists are more or less intimately con-
nected with the natives; there are also such dialectic
differences as must result from the same causes, aggravated
as they are, in this case, by laws which compel isolation.
Those of the coast and southern parts of the Colony and
of the Eastern lake district are the lowest, those of the forest
and plains of the higher types, which culminate in the inhabi-
tants of the upper basins of the Murchison and Gascoigne,
and the Northern Coast. In the North generally the warm
climate is more suitable to the development of the aborigines


than the colder South; there clothes and shelter are unneces-
sary, except against rain, they consequently walk naked, and
seldom build huts for more than temporary use. In the
South the kangaroo cloak is commonly worn; and on the
plains the winter huts are made of solid timber covered with
boughs and clay; and the fire stick is carried when moving
from one place to another.
A high degree of physical development could not be
expected for the natives residing near the settlements, if they
continued their ordinary customs and habits of life ; but this
they are unable to do, as the rights of property and laws
against trespass confine them to their own hunting grounds;
they have therefore become, in part at least, hewers of wood
and drawers of water to the settlers, in order to procure
sustenance; and, receiving but small remuneration for their
occasional services; they have also acquired tastes for things
only so procurable, especially intoxicating liquors and
tobacco. They have suffered from the diseases imported
by the Colonists, and before unknown to them. This more
especially near the centres of population; but even in the
country districts, where their labour is more valuable, and in
some indispensable, as messengers, stockkeepers, shepherds,
&c., they are treated differently from, and paid less for the
same work, than white men are. Their women preferring,
not unnaturally, the white men, are often taken from them,
and they gradually degenerate and dwindle away before the
progress of “ civilization.”
There are no present means of arriving at any satisfac-
tory estimate of the number of the aboriginal inhabitants of
the Colony, but it is in the settled districts decreasing very
rapidly. G. Eliot, Esq., Resident, Geraldton, who came to the
Colony with Captain Stirling in 1829, writes thus, under date
21st August, 1879, “ I cannot give you any estimate what-
ever as to the number of the natives; at any rate, between
the Murchison and this, there cannot be many, and the few
there are are fast disappearing, and the extraordinary thing is
that there are very few young men or children to be seen; I
do not believe there are a dozen of the latter within twenty
miles of Geraldton.”


The term “ family ” is more justly applied to the divis-
ions of the aboriginal inhabitants of Western Australia than
that of “ tribe,” and yet their social system is not patriarchal,
inheritance and relationship being maternal, children taking
the name and belonging to the family of the mother; and
thus the children of the same father, by different wives, may
have altogether different relations, interests, and obligations,
which affect even articles of food in common use, for every
family has its kobong, totem, or cognizance; an animal, a
bird, or other natural object; which, if edible, is on that
account forbidden or tabooed to that family. The following
Table may sufficiently illustrate this portion of the subject:—■
Tabular arrangement of relationship in six families about New Norcia, from
Bishop Balvado. The upper lines of bracketed figures show the families
to which intermarriage is permitted, the lower those to which it is
forbidden; inheritance by the mother, and not by the father.
tt 1. I - Tirar °P _ „ , (3. 1. 4. 5.
2. N-ocognok ■] 0 ~
i. 5. 2. 4. } f - 6 -
*■*■> P 4. Tondorop 3. 2.5.
3 ' I] 5. Moidorop '
6. Jiragiok | 3
If from this table it does not appear very clearly on what
account some families are incapacitated from intermarriage,
it is at least most evident that, under such conditions, both
the patriarchal and tribal systems, in the ordinary acceptation
of those terms, become impossible. The union of families
closely related, may, and does take place for a time, but such
union must necessarily be broken up at the death of the
temporary head or elderman.
Mr. J. Forrest reports that the marriage laws are differ-
ent among the natives of the North West Coast. Of the four
families, Kimera and Paljari can intermarry, as can also
Boorungnoo and Bannighu; the children of a Kimera
man and a Paljari woman take the name of Boorungnoo,
and those of a Paljari man and a Kimera woman that of
Bannighu, while those of a Boorungnoo man and a Ban-
nighu woman take the name of Kimera, and those of
a Bannighu man and a Boorungnoo woman that of Paljari;
and so in continuation.


It is unnecessary to pursue this subject further, hut it may
he observed, hy the way, that this mode of inheritance, and
these laws of marriage, must transfer the possession of
hunting ground from one family to another for every
succeeding generation; and that, in consequence, local names
were not, until the settlement of the Colony, always per-
manent, but might be changed with the transfer of life
interest from one family to another.
The laws of savage life in Western Australia, in their
social relations, are sufficiently simple, being based on the
lex talionis “an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth/’ or,
as an old native once said, <£ if I beat your wife you may beat
mine; ” but they become complicated by the principle that
rules their application, viz., c< that all the relatives of a culprit
are implicated in his guilt.” If, therefore, the principal cannot
be caught, his brother or his father will answer nearly as
well; and, failing these, any other male or female relatives
who may fall into the hands of the avenging party; and, as
vengeance is a duty incumbent on the nearest relatives if the
injured party is not alive or able to take it himself, when a
crime has been committed every one connected with the
culprit is in danger; and so well is this understood, that even
little children are aware of, and prepare against it.
Nothing is more remarkable in the character of the
natives of Western Australia than their submission to their
own laws, and, as the amount of punishment for every
offence is apportioned and known, an offender will, not
uncommonly, present himself for punishment. One case is on
record of a man who readily suffered himself to be killed in
retaliation for a legal manslaughter he had committed, and,
to prevent a battle, thus imminent, between his family and
friends and those of his victim—there is another of two
young persons, who, being attached to each other, were
content to suffer severe punishment three times, in order that,
the law being so satisfied, they might afterwards live together.
Secondary punishments are usually inflicted with the spear,
and the part of the body to be pierced is known for each
offence, and punishment confined to it. Men in their own
families punish ferociously and without control, except from


fear of possible retaliation from relatives, tbeir wives
especially, corporal punishment being seldom inflicted on
male children. The women are the great inciters to
vengeance, and stimulate the passions of the men by their
wild songs. They are themselves when excited very violent,
and fight desperately with their wannas or digging sticks,
which are often heavy and dangerous weapons. As the
women by their songs stimulate the men to violence, so the
men lash their own passions to the highest pitch of excite-
ment by singing, and indeed there is no serious business
of life in which music has not its part. The more mourn-
ful and plaintive songs are, not unfrequently, affecting
even to the European ear; they are often extempore.
The marriage ceremony is simply the taking the bride to
her husband’s hut, which she then prepares, or sometimes
makes a new one, for his reception. The most important
ceremonies are those of the funeral, which appear to differ
considerably in different parts of the Colony. Mr. Arm-
strong, Native Interpreter at Perth, says “ the lowland
tribes dig the grave east and west, the body is placed on its
back, the face turned on one side, so as to look to the
noonday sun, the earth being thrown out in two heaps,* the
one at the head, the other at the feet. The mountain tribes
dig the grave north and south; the body placed on the right
side, with the head towards the south, the face looking
towards the rising sun ; the earth formed into one crescent-
like mound on the west side of the grave.” The grave is
dug very carefully, under the direction of the boolya or
sorcerer, with the wanna or digging stick, the earth being
thrown out by the hands, the eldest of the bearers of the
deceased commencing the digging ; when finished a fire is
lighted within it. f The body is brought in procession with
songs and wailings, the women lacerating their faces and
heads with sharp bones, and, as Mr. Bussell writes, the men
* Sir G. Grey saw a grave dug, by tbe side of which four heaps were
made, the different qualities of soil being kept separate.
f Grey says that the 8001-yas pretend to see in the smoke of the fire
those who have been the cause of the death.


gashing their thighs and sprinkling their blood on and
around the corpse; sometimes, also, they cut oft their beards
and the beard of the corpse, and, haying singed the hairs, rub
their bodies with them ; sometimes the body is buried sitting,
often in full dress, so to speak; sometimes it is covered with
a mound of earth or sand, and sometimes a hut is built over
it; sometimes, also, the arms and implements in use by the
deceased are placed above or near the grave; circles are cut
in the bark of the surrounding trees, if there are any, and
peeled wands, having the bark twisted and curled at the top
like the thyrsus of a Bacchante, are placed around, with
others at a distance; or bunches of peeled bark put in the
bushes to warn any one from incautiously approaching a
grave. These ceremonies, of course, differ more or less
in proportion to the rank and means of the deceased, but as
death is not considered a natural event, but the effect, if not
of violence, then of sorcery, it commonly happens that, in
obedience to the lex talionis, a human victim or victims will
be offered to the manes of the deceased. The spirit is
supposed to leave the body and go to the west; but it
must be presumed that it assumes afterwards a bodily form,
as some among the early colonists were recognised as the
returned spirits of deceased friends and relations, being pale-
faced and coming from the west.*
The belief that disease is the consequence of witchcraft
or sorcery being prevalent everywhere among the natives,
invests the 8001-yas, or sorcerers, with much power. They
are supposed able to cure, and to inflict disease, even when at
a distance, but, more commonly, by means of bones, stones,
food, or other matter to which they have committed the evil
influence. Pieces of crystal called “ Teyl” are held in venera-
tion, as having healing properties (F. Sir G. Grey’s Journal,
Yol. 2). In several different parts of the Colony paintings
have been discovered on the walls of the interior of caves, the
* Governor Weld (report in Council Papers,, 1871,) says that “traditions
of a triad of spirits, a legend of the deluge, and an expectation of an
universal conflagration, are yet current among some of the native tribes,
especially in the North.”


most remarkable being those found by Grey near the Glenelg
river; these are supposed to have been used by the 8001-yas,
but nothing certain is known respecting them. There are
also localities supposed to be inhabited by an evil spirit called
Ginga, which the natives avoid, as they do the lakes said to be
inhabited by a ferocious monster called Wangnl, or approach
them, if necessary, with fear; some also it is believed appro-
priated to the rite of circumcision, which obtains, according
to J. Forrest, to the south and west of a line drawn from
Point Culver on the south coast to the Geraldine Mine on
the Murchison Fiver. There are other rites of a similar
character practised among the natives of the north-west and
north. [Vide Dr. Milne Eobertson’s report).
It is possible also that the separation of the men from
the women, at a particular time of the year, when the
men wander away in bodies, may be connected with that
rite, but very little is known as to the objects or causes of
this separation, which is however annually performed with
great regularity. Indeed no people are greater slaves to
form and ceremony, in every act, and circumstance of life,
than the natives of Western Australia. There are forms for
meeting, forms for parting, for communicating intelligence,
good, or bad, in short, for almost every daily occurrence of
social life.
The corroborrees, or dances of the natives, as usually
seen and described, are properly speaking war dances, but it
is presumed that they have different forms for different
occasions. As commonly performed, these dances differ little
from those of other savage people, especially of the inhabi-
tants of Polynesia, so that it is probable that their other
forms have a similar relation. This, however, is certain, that
on one occasion a corroborree was held at which the men,
stationary as usual, were enveloped by two bands of women,
advancing and retreating, all brandishing the peeled stick, or
thyrsus, already described; producing an effect similar to
those which Cook witnessed in the islands of the Pacific.
This fact is in contradiction of the common opinion that
women never mingle in the native dances.


The food of the natives, which, of course, has much
influence on their physical development, is obtained mostly
by hunting, fishing, and digging, and its quantity and
quality depend on the character and productions of the
district they inhabit.
Cannibalism is still practised among the natives inhabit-
ing the more Northern parts of the Colony, but as the excep-
tion, not the rule, most commonly from want of other food;
yet recent cases, which have occurred within the settled
districts of the Colony, show that it is sometimes from choice.
Grey, enumerating the different kinds of food in use among
the natives, concludes that, before the immigration of the
white man, food was as abundant in quantity as various in
kind. His list contains twenty-nine varieties of animals,
twenty-nine of fish; besides, occasionally, the whale and seal;
the turtle and land tortoise, shell fish of all kinds, except the
oyster; lizards, snakes, rats and mice; four kinds of grub •
the emu, wild turkey, gnou, and other land birds; the swan
and other water fowl; twenty-nine roots; four gums, of which
the knowat from the swamp Minosa is the favorite; the nuts
of the zamia, which are poisonous without preparation, and
several other vegetable products. Most of these Grey himself
had tasted, and some, which might be thought disgusting,
like the grubs, he found not only palatable but delicate eating.
Of all these the kangaroo is the most important, not only as
food, but for the skin, of which cloaks and bags are made, the
bones, which are adapted to many domestic purposes, and the
sinews, which supply the place of thread and string. The
hunting of this animal brings out all the bodily and mental
energies of the native. The chase is followed sometimes by
numbers; then the herd of kangaroos is surrounded and
driven in, as by the Scottish tinchel; more frequently by a
man and his family, the women and children giving notice
of the presence of the prey, and its position, to the hunter,
all acting in accord and by customary rules of the chase, and
in this manner the younger children get their first training;
occasionally by an individual whose powers of endurance
enable him to follow the tracks of a kangaroo until fairly
tired out. This last is the glory of the hunter.


Kangaroo are also taken in pitfalls near watering places,
and by pointed stakes driven in at the fording places of
rivers, or speared from behind screens of boughs; as are
other animals and birds not only with the spear but with
kiley or dowuk. Fish are speared, and taken in weirs made
of brushwood and poles; nets are used in the North as well
as in the central desert; and on the North Coast rough rafts
made of logs are in use, but neither canoes or boats.
The laws of the chase are well understood, —for instance,
if two or more spears are found in the same animal when
killed it is the property of him who threw the first; this law
and others are rigidly enforced; as are those relating to food
so obtained, some being forbidden to young men, some to
women, &c.
In communicating with each other by message, bones
or sticks, with lines scratched upon them, are used. (See
examples in the glass case with skulls). This species of cypher
is neither alphabetical nor pictorial, but nevertheless is
intelligible to them. For keeping count, the natives use
tallies, or nick sticks, the most ancient as the most common
of all methods, because the most simple. (See Peter’s bill
for Noolban in Exhibition).
The aborigines of Western Australia are of average
height, and remarkable for activity rather than strength;
their perceptive faculties are very acute, but their reflective
faculties nearly dormant. They are children of a larger
growth, but, like children, capable of development, both of
body and mind, by education; as has been sufficiently proved
at the different institutions established in the Colony for that
purpose. They have been, and are still, very useful as
messengers, stock-keepers, horse-breakers, hunters, and to
the Police indispensable as trackers. They have been em-
ployed as mail carriers, road makers; have learnt and
practised trades successfully, and become good musicians.
On the North coast there are scarcely any other servants
employed, and as excellent divers they are engaged in the
pearl fishery. When well used, they are mostly ready, tract-
able, and faithful, and have been of the greatest service to


explorers, as many of them, and especially J. Forrest, have
gladly testified.
It has been acknowledged that the Home Government
recognised a duty to the natives, and that the Colonial
Government attempted to fulfil it, even in the earlier days of
the Colony; subsequently, in 1871, the Legislative Council
reported that it was desirable that grants of land should be
made to aboriginal natives recommended by the principal of
any native industrial institution; and, in 1875, an Act was
passed giving power to the principals of such institutions to
act as trustees to orphan native children, and others intrusted
to them by their natural guardians; and, in 1877, a reserve
of 60,000 acres was made in the valley of the Upper
Murchison, for the benefit of the natives.
Of these institutions there remain in active operation
the Benedictine Mission at Hew Horcia, on the Moore River,
established in 1846 by Fathers Serra and Salvado, both since
raised to the Episcopate, and the Mission School of the
Protestant Episcopal Church, originally established by Arch-
deacon Wollaston and Mr. and Mrs. Camfield, at Annesfield,
Albany. From both, those educated there have been sent out
as civilised and useful members of society, and at Hew Horcia
several married couples are settled, and residing in houses
and on land provided for them.
The Island of Rottnest, lying off Gage’s Roads, about
eleven miles distant from the mouth of the Swan River, has
been, for many years, a penal settlement for native convicts.
The expense of the establishment, which has of late been
much enlarged, is about £2,600 per annum, of which £7OO or
£BOO is recouped by the sale of produce. The average
number of convicts is about 70; and there are about 200
acres of land under cultivation; and a large quantity of salt
taken from the lakes is now refined and sold for table use.
There is no other labor employed but that of the natives. A
recent visit made at the instance of the Government, in view
of this publication, to examine the physical characteristics of
the natives, showed the prisoners to be in good condition,
clean, sufficiently clothed, and for the most part cheerful.


York
13
5
5|
3
04
5
04
2 6j
5
34
2
74
Champion Bay ...
12
5
64
2
94
5
04
2 6
5
3|
2
7J
Murchison
13
5
9
3
0
6
24
2 6J
5
5|
2
8
Mcol Bay
3
6
9|
3
14
5
4
2 11
5
74
2
74
Gascoigne
2
5
6i
2 lOi
5
54
2 8f
5
6
2
94
Half-breeds
2
5
94
3
14
5
8
3 0J
5
8|
3
0i
The results of the examination of 53 natives are given in
the following Table :
Table of stature and girth round the chest of natives in Bottnest
Prison, from measurements taken 4th August, 1879 :
Lcealitv tv a Greatest Greatest Least Least Average
' height. girth, height. girth. height. girth.
ft. in. ft. in. ft. in. ft. In. ft. in. ft. in.
Albany 10 6 8 2Hi 5 01 2 6| 5 31 2 71
York 13 6 5| 3 01 5 01 2 61 5 31 2 71
From this it appears that the greatest height in 68
natives was sft. the least sft. O^in.; the greatest girth
round the chest 3ft.; and the general average of height
sft. sJin., and of girth 2ft. 9pin., omitting half-breeds. The
Murchison natives were mixed; had proper separation been
possible, the returns from the upper valley of the river
would probably have shown higher figures.
From a list, furnished by J. F. Stone, Esq., Comptroller
of the Convict Prison, Fremantle, of the height of the last
fifty prisoners admitted into that establishment, the following
comparison may be made:—
Convicts, Fremantle, greatest height sft. lllin., least 6ft. Oin., average sft. 6|in.
Do., Bottnest, ~ sft. 9iin., ~ sft. Olin., ~ sft. siin.
or if, to make the numbers even, the three natives of the
fSTorth-West, whose height is much above the average, be
deducted—
Convicts, Fremantle, greatest height 6ft. lllin., least 6ft. Oin., average 6ft. sJin.
~ Bottnest, ~ sft. 9in., „ sft. OJin., „ 6ft. Sin.
Fifty prisoners at the Convict Establishment, Fremantle,
were also measured round the chest, with the following
result:—
Greatest girth. ... ... ... ... 39 inches
Least girth ... ... ... ... 80 inches
Average measurement ... ... ... 2ft. Ilf inches.
It will be seen the natives compare unfavorably with these
results:—
Greatest'glrth, Least girth. Average.
Native ... 3ft. ... 2ft. Spin. ... 2ft. 9fin.
European 3ft. 3in. ... 2ft. 6in. ... 2ft. Ilf in.


Two native skulls examined and measured according to
Professor Huxley’s method :
No. 1. No. 2.
Axis ... ... ... 7f inches ... 7| inches
Transverse Axis ... 5J inches ... 5f inches
Height ... ... 5f inches ... 6 inches
Projection of upper jaw... 1) inches ... If inches
Cranio-Pacial angle ... 94° ... 97°
Cephalic index... ... 68'85 ... 74-82
Contents ... ... 80 cubic inches, 95cul
80 cubic inches, 95 cubic inches.
ratio 19'22 ratio 20
Professor Huxley, states that it appears in some of the
lower races, —for example, Negroes and Australians, —the
forearm and hand, foot, and leg are often larger in proportion
than Europeans. With the view of ascertaining the extent
of this discrepancy in the natives of Western Australia, Dr.
Robertson has measured fifty natives, together with fifty
Europeans, with the following result:—
Table showing the results of a comparative measurement of fifty Europeans
with fifty
Australians.
Forearm and
Hand.
Foot.
European. Native.
European. Native.
European. Native.
Smallest compara-)
tive measurement)
Largest compara-
tive measurement)
Mean of aggregate 1
measurements )
18-28
19-02
14


The Articles exhibited may be classified as
under
Weapons. —The Spear,— Gidjey.
Board for throwing Spear, — Mero.
Shield,— Wondah.
Boomerang,— Caille or Kyley, and Thumbanda.
Stick for throwing or striking,— Dowak and
Juna.
The spears used in the North are longer and heavier than
those of the South. Near the settlements they are commonly
armed with broken glass. In the North some are of notched
wood, Belem; the barbed are called Topelera; TJmrabanda differs
slightly from Kyley in shape. Shields with fancy patterns are not
used in war.
Implements. —The Hatchet, — Kajou, Coger or Codger.
Knife or Saw, — Dabba.
Digging Stick, — Wanna.
Nets are used in the East for carrying children, and for taking
small animals. The others need no description. The hatchets,
knives, and spears are armed by using a strong cement, Birin, made
of the gum of the blackboy, mixed with charcoal.
The cloak, Booha, is the only native vestment, those of the
women being smaller than those of the men. They are usually
made of kangaroo skin. The women carry their necessaries in a
bag or satchel, Coote or Bolca, made of the same material.
Ornaments. —The Nose Bone, — Mullagunge.
Feathers for the head, — Woonadoo.
Fur Necklaces.
Opossum fur is spun into yarn, Noolban, which, bound round
the body many times, forms a thick girdle, in which the Kyley,
Kajou, and Dabba are carried. It is also bound round the head,
and there serves to stick feathers, &c., in; *it is also used as a
necklace.
Whilgey, a sort of red ochre, is used to color the face and body.
Small circular discs of silex sharpened at the edge, Buyoa, are
used for tattooing, or making other incisions in the body, and
small leaf-like pieces of wood, Meromiro, are swung round to
produce a whirring noise while the operation is being performed.
(Vide Dr, Milne Robertson’s Report.)
By Authority: Eichaed Pethee, Government Printer, Perth.


