

BRIEF SUMMARY
OF THE CASE OF
it* €at(|dpi
Drawn up by the Cathedral Council
IN REPLY TO
The Rev. A. T. Puddicombe.
SYDNEY:
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, 374 GEORGE STREET.
1 S 9 O.




r/i%oy
A brief Summary of the case of St. Saviour’s Cathedral, Goulburn,
drawn up by the Cathedral Council, in reply to the Rev.
A. T. Puddicombe, who desires to claim the building as his
Parish Church under the Church Act—a claim which would
deprive it of its Cathedral character.
Church Society’s House, Goulburn,
19th March, 1890.
To Mr. J. WHITLOW,
Hon. Secretary oe the
“ General Conciliatory Committee.”
Dear Sir,
I am directed by the Cathedral Council to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter of the 12th of February, and in reply
to send the following statement:
1. The Council hope that your Committee will again con-
sider the proposals submitted to them on the 21st of January—
more particularly as they were led to believe, from a declaration
in the public press, that Messrs. Gannon, Conolly and Stennett
(the Sub-Committee who commenced the correspondence with
the Council, and who were acting for your General Committee),
had practically recommended their adoption.
2. When first considering the proposals of the Sub-Com-
mittee, the members of the Council, actuated by a sincere
desire to bring about a settlement of the question, were deter-
mined to make, and did make, most generous concessions, every
concession in short which could consistently be agreed to. As
the result of this determination their proposals are, as regards
all practical points, an acceptance of those of the Sub-Com-
mittee, as a comparison of the two documents below will
abundantly prove.
3. In your letter reference is made to “ facts and principles
“ which must necessarily guide both parties in any conciliatory
“ measures,” Upon this point the Council desire to remark


that the proposals, sent by them on the 21st of January, were
made in response to the invitation of your Sub-Committee, and
were strictly based upon facts and principles, which they cannot
ignore in any negotiations upon the Cathedral question.
4. As a Capitular body they exist under an Ordinance of
the Synod of the Diocese: and they can neither suggest nor
entertain any proposals which contravene that Ordinance, or the
Cathedral principle, which has been affirmed in the Synod by
overwhelming majorities in 1884 and 1887. Such being the
case, it will be evident that the Council cannot recede from the
principle on which their proposals are based.
5. In addition to the basis laid down by the Synod, that
“ the Cathedral shall be called or known by the name of the
“Cathedral Church of St. Saviour, Goulburn, and shall be
“ used as the Parish Church of the City of Goulburn and of the
“whole Diocese,” the Council feel that there are other facts
which carry with them the principle of equity which they cannot
overlook.
6. One such fact is this, that the main builder of the
Cathedral was unquestionably the Bishop of the Diocese; the
money for the erection of which, obtained in Great Britain and
Ireland and in this and other colonies and in the whole Diocese,
has been almost solely collected or contributed by his Lordship.
No one can for a moment imagine that such contributions could
have been obtained, and such persevering toil and self-denial
undertaken, for any object less than that of building a
Cathedral for the Diocese. Equity therefore forbids the
Council to adopt, even on this ground, any proceeding which
would be a betrayal of a solemn trust.
7. Another important fact is, that the Members of the
Council for the most part, and those who with them uphold the
Cathedral principle, are parishioners of St. Saviour’s, Goulburn,
equally with those whom the Conciliatory Committee represent,
and are equally concerned in preserving the rights and privileges
of the parishioners, and of the clergy who minister to them, and
that they have an equal interest in the different properties in
question.
8. The following are also facts which should not be for-
gotton. When the Rev. A. T. Puddicombe was Curate of the
Very Rev. W. Sowerby he acted as Secretary of “the Building
Committee of St. Saviour’s Cathedral Church,” (1871-1875);
and subsequently (1875-1884) he continued to discharge the
same duty. And on several occasions he both wrote and printed
statements in which he referred to the building as “ the Cathedral
“ Church of St. Saviour, which will stand as a symbol of the


“ unity of the Church in the Diocese of Goulburn,” (see Synod
Report, 1882); ” and as “ our new Cathedral, in which the throne
“ will be erected as a present to our Bishop in his Cathedral
“ Church ,” &c.; this was repeated in 1882, 1888, and 1884; and
in August, 1884, the Synod decisively rejected a resolution pro-
posed by the late Mr. Conolly, “ that the words Parish Church
“of the City of G-oulburn in the first clause of the Cathedral
“ Ordinance, and the words Parochial Church of the City of
“ Goulburn in the preamble, should be held to mean the Parish
“ Church of St. Saviour’s Parish.” (Synod Report, 1884).
9. The same fact is shown by the Inscription placed on the
Foundation Stone in 1874 —viz.: that the “building is the
“ Cathedral Church of the Diocese and the Parochial Church of
“ the City of Goulburn ” [not of any particular parish therein] ;
and also by numerous circulars which were issued and distributed
(some of them by Mr. Puddicombe himself) soliciting subscrip-
tions in aid of the Cathedral building fund; as well as by the
fact that the money for the most part was subscribed upon that
distinct understanding, which cannot be denied by any one.
And the Treasurer, R. C. Joplin, Esq., of the Commercial Bank,
is able to affirm that every shilling received by him was for the
building of a Cathedral Church solely.
10. The Council are therefore unable to admit that the
building' was ever intended by its chief promoters to be a Parish
Church in any such limited sense as that now demanded; and in
loyalty and in justice to the originators and promoters of the
building, and in consistency with its original design and inten-
tion, they cannot regard it as a Church in the restricted sense
now contended for, contrary to the decision of the Synod.
11. Before the commencement of the building, and subse-
quently, it has always been in contemplation to obtain an Act
of Parliament to deal with the trusts of the properties for
Cathedral purposes, and it will be remembered that the Rev. A.
T. Puddicombe entered into a legal agreement to aid in obtain-
ing such an Act of Parliament; and the Supreme Court has
affirmed the binding nature of that agreement.
12. With reference to the final clause of your letter, “that
“ the sole object for which the Parochial Committee was elected
“ was to obtain a decision as to the identity or otherwise of the
“ Cathedral with the old Church under the Church Act, and that
“this preliminary question must precede all negotiations, the
Council regret that this condition had not been communicated
previously. The Sub-Committee s letter, which accompanied
their proposals of the 4th of December, invited the Council to
send counter proposals, which most certainly they would not


have done if this sole condition had been made known at the
time. For, if it be seriously required that the building should
be declared to be a Church under the Church Act or otherwise
as a preliminary to any negotiation, there is no room left for
such negotiation.
13. It must be evident to those who understand the
question, that the Cathedral can truly be a Parochial Church to
all intents and purposes for all members of the Church of
England in Gloulburn and elsewhere, and at the same time be a
Cathedral Church for the Diocese; but that if the Cathedral is
to be regarded as a Parochial Church in the limited sense con-
templated by the Church Act and allotted to one particular
parish, it cannot also be a Cathedral Church in any proper sense
at all.
14. And it may be asked what possible good could result
from acknowledging that the Cathedral was St. Saviour’s Parish
Church under the Church Act and then transforming it into a
Cathedral, unless it be to use or to quote it hereafter against
the Council and those who erected the building. It is evident
that the Council cannot possibly make any such acknow-
ledgment.
15. They cannot refrain from again observing, that if
both sides agree as to a settlement, and as to the trust upon
which the different properties are to be held in the future, no
practical advantage would follow from the desired admission
being made, nor anything be lost by its absence.
16. The additional proposals of the Council refer to matters
which must be dealt with in some way, as part of the terms
of any settlement. The Council adverted to them only with the
view to guard against any further difficulty in the future. And
it must not be overlooked that the Council, and those whom
they represent, have only one object in view. Apparently only
two of those additional proposals are objected to by your Com-
mittee, viz.: the formation of a new Parish and the surrender by
the Bev. A. T. Puddicombe of his present license. As to the
first of these, if you will refer to the Council’s proposals you
will see that it was not proposed to form an absolutely new
Parish —but only to assign a portion of the present Parish as a
Cathedral district, and to leave the other portion as before.
Some such arrangement as this was long since suggested by
Mr. Puddicombe, and the Council consider that there are many
reasons in support of its adoption. Nevertheless the plan can
be modified or altered.
17. The other objection related to the surrender of the
license. But there need be no difficulty; an endorsement of the


alteration of the limits of the Parochial district upon the license
is all that would be required, and the power of the license would
remain undisturbed.
18. It will be seen, therefore, that neither of the objections
raised need stand in the way of a settlement so much desired by
all parties.
19. As regards the friendly suit, about which so much has
been said, the Council desire to observe that no legal proceed-
ings of any kind are really necessary. And though (having
regard to the advice given by eminent council—namely: the
present Chief Judge in Equity, Mr. Justice Owen, Mr. Julian
Salomons, Q.C., and Mr. Archibald H. Simpson, M.A., our
Chancellor) the Council would have no occasion to fear the
result—still it is their belief and their wish that further litigation
should be avoided.
20. A friendly suit is out of the question, for the simple
reason that—before such suit could be brought—the facts would
have to be admitted. And it is quite clear that the Council
could not admit the facts as stated by the Committee. And
again, such litigation would involve a large expenditure of
money, and would probably extend over several years, and a
decision against one side or the other in a friendly suit or other-
wise would inevitably widen the breach and lead to further
complications, and certainly would not, and could not, end in a
final settlement of all the matters in question.
21. It has been already observed that the Council, in the
proposals which they sent, have substantially accepted all the
practical points of your proposals. The truth of this will be
seen in the appendix.
22. In conclusion, the Council have shown that they have
endeavoured, most generously, to meet the views of the Com-
mittee as far as possible ; and it is believed that a settlement
may still be arrived at, which may be accepted by all parties
concerned, and which may secure peace upon a permanent basis.
I am, dear Sir,
Faithfully yours,
S. W. ALEXANDER,
Hon. Secretary.
APPENDIX.
This appendix contains a correct statement of all the pro-
posals made by your Committee; and it will be seen that the
Council have virtually accepted every one of them, except No. 1
and No. 2 f., viz.—That the cathedral, not the schoolroom, be
acknowledged to be the representative and successor of the


original Church of St. Saviour; i. e., the church alluded to in
the Crown grants of 1842 and 1843, and regulated by the
Church Act of 8 Will. IY. No. 5;” and “that the schoolroom be
acknowledged to be the schoolroom attached to St. Saviour’s.”
In lieu of these the Council, in accordance with the decisions
of the Synod and with the facts recited above, have proposed
that “ The building known as St. Saviour’s Cathedral is the
Parochial Church of the City of Goulburn and the Cathedral
Church of the Diocese of Goulburnand “ that the building
now used by the Pev. A. T. Puddicombe be transferred to the
Cathedral authorities and attached to St. Saviour’s Cathedral,
together with the lands alluded to in the Crown grants of 1842
and 1843, with the exception of the eight acres attached to the
Parsonage.”
The other proposals are substantially identical, viz., those
proposed by the Sub-Committee on the so-called Parochial side
and those proposed by the Council on the Cathedral side, as the
following comparison will show :
Proposed by the Sub-Committee.
“ That the Incumbent relinquish all
his rights to that Church under the
Church Act.”
“ That the Incumbent for the time
being be an ex officio member of the
Chapter, and occupy the pulpit of the
Cathedral at such times as may be ar-
ranged by the Chapter.”
“ That the Incumbent’s right to enter
the Cathedral at any time for the per-
formance of baptisms, marriages, and
other surplice duties, be acknowledged,
and confirmed by Ordinance.”
“That the Incumbent continue to
occupy the Parsonage; and that he be
paid £3OO per annum out of the Glebe
revenue, as arranged by the Trustees.”
“That the Incumbent also receive
£lOO per annum out of the collections
in the Cathedral in lieu of surplice fees
and alms for the poor, or that he receive
the offertory upon one Sunday in each
month, or a stated sum for alms, and
take surplice fees as usual. ”
“ That the Churchwardens for the
time being be ex officio Members of the
Cathedral Council, or that the Council
undertake all the duties of Church-
wardens, and that Churchwardens cease
to be elected.’'
Proposed by the Council.
“ That the Rev. A. T. Puddicombe,on
surrendering his present license with a
view to a fresh one being issued in
accordance with these arrangements and
relinquishing all claim to any rights in
that Church, be appointed a Canon and
Member of the Cathedral Chapter, and
occupy the pulpit of the Cathedral at
such times as may be arranged by the
Bishop and Chapter.”
“ That the Cathedral be available
(when not used for Divine service) for
the celebration by the Rev. A. T. Puddi-
combe of baptisms, marriages and other
surplice duties prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer.”
“That the present parsonage con-
tinue to be occupied by the Rev. A. T.
Puddicombe, together with eight acres of
Glebe land ; and that he be paid £l5O
per annum out of Glebe revenue. That
the Rev. A. T. Puddicombe also receive
£l5O per annum out of the Cathedral
collections and subscriptions, together
with £lOO in lieu of surplice fees and
alms from the offertory, all of which
shall continue to form part of the
Cathedral revenue ; and such sums of
£l5O and £lOO respectively shall be a
first charge upon such collections and
subscriptions.”
“ That the Council undertake the
duties of Churchwardens, if any, and
Churchwardens cease to be elected. ”


Proposed by the Sub-Committee.
“ That the schoolroom be acknow-
ledged to be the schoolroom attached to
St. Saviour’s.”
il That the above arrangements be
embodied in the Cathedral Ordinance,
and be legalised by Act of Parliament. ”
John Sands, Printer, George Street, Sydney
Proposed by the Council.
“ That the building now used by the
Eev. A. T. Puddicombe for divine ser-
vice be transferred to the Cathedral
authorities, and attached to St. Saviour’s
Cathedral, together with the lands
alluded to in the Crown grants of 1842
and 1843, with the exception of the
eight acres attached to the parsonage.
Additional Proposals
Made by the Council and referred to in
the letter above, relate to the formation
of a Cathedral District ; to the vesting
of all lands, moneys, and buildings in
the Diocesan Trustees upon trust for the
Cathedral; to the alteration of the
Cathedral Ordinance only in so far as
may be necessary to make it consistent
with the proposals now submitted.
“ That the above arrangements be
embodied in a legal document, duly
signed, sealed, and witnessed by all
necessary parties, and that the agree-
ment respecting the property, lands, and
buildings be legalised by an Ordinance
of the Synod, under the powers of the
Church of England Church Property
Act of 1889, or by Act of Parliament, as
may be considered necessary.”






