

fel o
C n


sH.iu
i*. 3. 3


Rev. John Waterhouse: 1789-1842.


REV. JOHN WATERHOUSE.


A Brief Account of the
Life and Activities
REV. JOHN WATERHOUSE
more particularly from the
time of his arrival in Van Diemen s Land
until his death.
VIVE PRO /ETERN IT ATE.
SYDNEY;
Epworth Printing and Publishing House
218 Castlereagh Street


Registered at the General Post Office, Sydney,
for transmission through the post as a book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia
by Epworth Printing and Publishing House,
218 Castlereagh Street, Sydney. 1937.


Contents
Page
Foreword ........ 7
Unveiling of the Memorial ..... 10
Early Methodist Preachers of Australia ... 13
Address ........ 19
Letters to England ....... 27
A Eulogy ........ 37
In Fiji 40
Subscribers to the John Waterhouse Memorial . . 41
Widow and Children of Rev. John Waterhouse . . 44
Bibliography ....... 45
Cist of Illustrations
Page
Rev. John Waterhouse ...... 2
Monument over the Grave of Rev. John Waterhouse,
West Hobart Cemetery .... 6
Granite Obelisk in front of Wesley Church, Melville
Street, Hobart ...... 9
Certificate of Appointment as General Superintendent
of Missions ...... 12
Front view of Wesley Church, Melville Street, Hobart,
showing the Obelisk unveiled 22nd Novem-
ber, 1925 18
Mural Tablet in Melville Street Church, Hobart . 21
Handwriting of Rev. John Waterhouse ... 22
Rev. John Waterhouse superintending the landing of
Rev. C. and Mrs. Creed at Taranaki, N.Z.,
14th January, 1841 ..... 28
Memorial Window, City Road Chapel, London . . 36
Widow and Children of Rev. John Waterhouse . . 44


Monument over the Grave of Rev. John Waterhouse,
West Hohart Cemetery.


jforettiord
This Souvenir is a record of some incidents in the life
of Rev. John Waterhouse, chiefly after his arrival in Van
Diemen’s Land in 1839.
Nearly a century has elapsed since he was called to
“higher service,” and it has taken considerable research to
obtain authentic particulars about him.
The majority of his descendants, who are to be found
throughout the Commonwealth of Australia, New Zealand,
Fiji, Samoa, New Guinea, Hawaii, England, India, and the
United States of America, know but little of their illustrious
ancestor, and will welcome the opportunity of learning some-
thing about one of whom they may justly be proud, and
whose life of devotion should be an incentive to some, at least,
to emulate the sacrificial spirit he displayed.
A few words explanatory of the origin of this brochure
may help to explain its arrangement.
The remains of Rev. John Waterhouse lay in an old
cemetery at West Hobart, Tasmania, long since closed, and
the monument over his vault had suffered considerably from
the ravages of time; furthermore, rumours were abroad that
it was likely that the municipal authorities would resume
the cemetery, remove the bodies interred there, and prepare
the land for building purposes—this was actually done shortly
after the erection of the obelisk mentioned below.
Under these circumstances it was decided to erect a more
enduring memorial in the form of a granite obelisk, suitably
inscribed.
This has been done, and with the permission of the trus-
tees of the Melville Street Church, Hobart (the first service
in which was conducted by Rev. John Waterhouse in 1840),
the monument now stands in the spacious grounds in front
of that building.
His remains and those of his wife now rest in the beauti-
ful cemetery at Cornelian Bay, near Hobart.


On the day following the unveiling of the obelisk, those
of the descendants who had been present met, and after some
discussion, it was suggested that if practicable, the small
balance in hand should be utilised in the printing of a souvenir
of the event, together with some particulars of the life of Rev.
John Waterhouse for the information and benefit of the sub-
scribers to the obelisk fund, headed by the descendants of
John Thomas Waterhouse, of Hawaii,
The publication of this booklet was made possible'only
through the generosity of G. J. Waterhouse, of Sydney, who
undertook to defray the additional expenditure which would
be incurred, and the matter was left with him and Rev.
Spencer Churchward, M.A., Treasurer,
The former was responsible for the gathering of much
detailed and valuable material,
stop temporarily to the work
devolved upon his son, Dr. G.
mately upon the writer of this
subject of this brochure.
Chatswood, N.S.W.,
12th February, 1937.
but his sudden death put a
of publication, which then
Athol Waterhouse, and ulti-
foreword, a grandson of the
JOHN WATERHOUSE.
8


Granite Obelisk in front of Wesley Church,
Melville Street, Hobart,


Bnueiling of tltc Memorial
Following is an account hy Rev. Spencer Churchward,
M.A., of the Unveiling of the Rev. John Waterhouse Memo-
rial and of the evening service which followed ; —
On Sunday, November 22nd, 1925, at Hobart, Tasmania,
a monument was unveiled to the memory of the late' Rev.
John Waterhouse. The memorial had been erected at a cost
of £l5O, having been subscribed for by nearly 200 of his
descendants. By permission of the trustees of the Melville
Street Methodist Church it was placed on the beautiful
lawn in front of that building. It is in the form of an obelisk
of red granite, about 12 feet in height. It bears the follow-
ing inscription:
“In memory of John Waterhouse, Minister of this Church
and General Superintendent of Missions, 1839-1842.
“His last words were, ‘Missionaries! Missionaries! Mis-
sionaries!’ Erected by his descendants, A.D. 1925.”
The descendants who were present at the unveiling
were Messrs. Gustavus J. Waterhouse, J.P., and John Water-
house, M.A., of Sydney; Mrs. Samuel Churchward and Mr.
Samuel Padman, of Adelaide; Rev. Spencer Churchward,
M.A., of Victoria; and Rev. C. Maxwell Churchward, M.A.,
of Rotuma, South Seas, with his wife and infant daughter
(Marjorie Agnes).
The following apologies for absence were received;
By cable from Mrs. Rice, Territory of Hawaii:
“Descendants in Pacific regret cannot be represented
unveiling Grandfather’s monument. Proverbs 10:7. (The
memory of the just is blessed.) —Rice.”
By cable from Rev. C. O. Lelean, Davuilevu, Fiji:
“From third, fourth, fifth generations descendants of
John Waterhouse, in Fiji, including the oldest of third gene-
ration and youngest of fifth. May we ever remember his
dying prayer until the Pacific is wholly Christian.—Chas.
Oswald Lelean.”
By cable from Mrs. W. T. Waterhouse, Melbourne
“Self and family regret inability to be present at unveil-
ing Sunday.—Mary Ann Waterhouse.”
By letter from Mr. Geo. Wilson Waterhouse, Launceston,
Tasmania:
“I regret that I shall not be able to be present on the


22nd instant at the unveiling of the monument erected in
memory of our ancestor, the late Rev. John Waterhouse.
“I shall be with you in thought, for I feel that, as nowa-
days we honour the memory of those who have given their
lives in the service of the Empire, so we ought to honour
the memory of one who nearly a century ago gave his life
in working for the extension of the Kingdom of the Prince
of Peace among the then savage natives of the South Sea
Islands.—Yours sincerely, (Sgd.) G. W. Waterhouse.”
Verbal apologies were received from Mrs. J. P. Roberts,
Adelaide, and Mr. H. M. Hawkins, Sydney.
The unveiling was performed a few minutes prior to the
evening service, in the presence of a large gathering. The
brief open-air service was led by Rev. W. Corly Butler,
Superintendent of the Hobart Circuit and Chairman of the
Tasmania Methodist Assembly. After the singing of the
hymn, “All People that on Earth do Dwell,” Psalm 84, “How
amiable are Thy tabernacles,” was read by Rev. S. Church-
ward. Rev. B. L. Semmens (Conference Foreign Secretary
for Tasmania) then led in prayer. The unveiling was per-
formed by Mr. G. J. Waterhouse, who said, as he withdrew
the covering from the monument, “To the glory of God, and
in remembrance of His devoted servant, John Waterhouse, I
unveil this monument on behalf of his descendants.”
It was estimated that 1,000 people were present in the
Church at the service that followed, both floor and gallery
being wellnigh filled. The Mayor of Hobart was present in
his official capacity, whilst the members of the Protestant
Alliance Friendly Society attended in regalia. Among those
present was Mr. Henry Turner, 89 years of age, who has
attended the Church ever since its opening.
The opening hymn was “All Hail the Power of Jesu’s
Name” (tune “Diadem”), the second “Jesus Shall Reign,” and
the third a beautiful but little-sung Missionary hymn by
Charles Wesley, “Father of Boundless Grace” (tune “Dia-
demata”). The principal prayer was offered by Mrs. Church-
ward, senior, and the lesson, taken from I. Corinthians 1, was
read by Mr. John Waterhouse.
The address was delivered by Mr. G. J. Waterhouse,
and consisted of an instructive and inspiring account of the
life and work of Rev. John Waterhouse.
The closing hymn, sung with all the energy of a thou-
sand voices, was “God Is With Us, God Is With Us” (tune
“Hyfrydol”).
The benediction, pronounced by Rev. W. Corly Butler,
brought a memorable service to a close.


&rUhcatc
f*) tv (/ft* ft] , "t« &U Uft rrt' t-( /rHA*j . iiwt/t 4 fit f* f*'?' /V //*■ / /
// f <f', it iujuAt**fc*.tU*U t{ *U <•'■- iVlj(ci*n *//•'/*>“
J.v JiusKfJ***, *■.’<'<■ '?*(?**•>l* .'i** ft"' ' *.«•
/e*v«~ *&. Jt*gti.y ,*s*fU* *■> '■ —/ ■"• A* ■""/
Sttfitin until /v* > S,ijit > *nfin ti » f< f jvl -/A* jiuifu.i' tf i" y ***'<"'' t>rf» r / •■>*• »V / i
,( JM nj ri*( li. •'huj4-',.,**~* *fr:nTU lit* „.U .-«* *~r.
4L fLt *nd ******* *{ If" ~ Si~Un.*,
junvOnu. t. >W U «y*~' '** ' ’ "*'
tiu Ct xmiTui' . On £•■> *«/•'* -A S.&Jr*"4 . If'WnftikrutC
.Uily ti a..« Ut.t /» H>i qi*i4.*Uy, tin. 4 U, s.ri U if
tiu Jhfit**- , ,i»U f* Mu j.'">:n~- ~»' •’** f) h**
Iti • <*) t i r%/*4 ff 4' C7l4**< & d 4 K ~My ** 4 / •
.SjujcK /%s£*•'•JhjtittuKKj irnitj.
-A Jlll.tny ij jtu If/tiiytM .Uijur<*~i
/? JKcLmi —-'
/h-triis*' jjj ,fci-.,ftr»y &• yu(,y,iV.Mi4U.inn t A-
Jddrt.- tft*4£r
i dwv, s iut &f I riU S H*u ft Oit ,<(
'j' 'lntttni nUn f Stjif'4l ni'tf I*)- iV>^*6.
Certificate of Appointment as
General Superintendent of Missions.


Methodist preachers
of Australia
(From “The Spectator,” 11th June, 1930.)
By C. C. Dugan.
JOHN WATERHOUSE; AN APOSTOLIC VOYAGER.
There are men who through some potent quality of per-
sonality make an impression on their own and after times,
which circumstances would scarcely warrant us in expect-
ing. This was so with John Waterhouse. It may be doubted
whether any minister who came from England in the mis-
sionary period of Australian Methodism impressed more
deeply those with whom he worked, or left a name more
honoured in the traditions of the Church. Yet the total
period of his service in the southern world was no more than
three years.
Unlike his predecessors, Waterhouse had already spent
many years in the ministry in England before coming to
Australia. He had won much repute, being distinguished
both for preaching and administrative gifts, and for the
exalted austerity of his character. He had been greatly be-
loved in his circuits, and had attained the office of chair-
man of district. He had all the prestige of a man in the
front rank. He spent no fewer than twenty-nine years in
the English ministry. By the year 1838 the missions in
Australasia had grown to great size and importance, and the
British Conference felt the need of a man of experience
and special aptitude to oversee and consolidate the work.
Waterhouse, who had attained the age of forty-nine, had
long desired to enter the foreign work, but family reasons
had made this impossible. Now, at length, he was free, and
the missionary committee appointed him* as superintendent
of the missions in New South Wales, Van Diemen’s Land,
New Zealand, and the Islands of the South Seas. Consider-
ing the means of travel then available, it was a vast task.
The minutes of a district meeting, held in Hobart after his
death, picturesquely, but none the less truly, describe it as
being “to brave the perils of the deep, the danger of strange
climates, and the brutality of untutored and savage tribes
of men, in order that he might superintend and assist infant
churches at the ends of the earth.” His own view of his
*At the Conference at Bristol.


task was expressed in courageous and worthy language be-
fore his departure from England. “I am thankful to God,”
he said in Exeter Hall, “who has given me grace, and by
His providence has permitted me now for nearly twenty-
nine years to minister the Word of Life in my native land.
... I feel it is one of the greatest sacrifices I can possibly
make to leave such a country, but I rejoice that God
Almighty enables me to make that sacrifice. I love my Lord
and Master, and I do most humbly offer myself a sacrifice
on the missionary altar.” A few weeks later he spqke in
City Road Chapel.f “I have been led by the good hand of
God to offer myself for the foreign work, as God may give
me grace. ... I am now going to embark for a new sphere
of labour, where it will be my study to preach Methodist
doctrines with simplicity, clearness, force, fidelity and affec-
tion, and to apply them to the consciences of those who
hear me. I shall endeavour to unfold the glorious privi-
leges of the Gospel, urging those who believe to go on to
higher attainments; and I shall also endeavour to incul-
cate its precepts and duties, remembering that that religion
which is genuine is experimental and practical. ... I look
not for a life of ease, but of toil. I expect to be in peril by
water and by land, to be subject to many privations, and
to leave my family for months together in order to visit
savage nations, and missionaries labouring among them. It
will be my aim to cultivate kindliness and Christian feeling
with missionaries belonging to other sections of the Chris-
tian Church, that, while we maintain our peculiar distinc-
tions, we may be one in the Lord, labouring together in the
great and good cause, and looking to God for His blessing.
. . . I trust to see in my new country a native agency raised
up, who will do credit to you at home and be abundantly use-
ful to the heathen abroad.”
With such high ideals animating his spirit, John Water-
house arrived in Hobart on Ist February, 1839. Hobart had
been chosen as the place of his residence because, under
the conditions of sea travel then prevailing, it was the most
central place in the great area over which he was to exer-
cise authority. Immediately after his arrival he applied
himself with assiduity and with fine foresight to the work
that had been given him to do. By November of his first
year of superintendency he had formed a clear opinion of
the value of the mission and of its pressing needs. “I look
at this colony,” he wrote to the English committee, “as
every way important in the Southern Hemisphere. Your
mission here is enriching new colonies by the almost con-
fSeptember 14th, 1838.


stant emigration of pious persons, as well as benefiting vast
numbers of prisoners and others who but for the labour of
your missionaries would be entirely destitute of the means
of grace. . . . There is no system better adapted than Metho-
dism for meeting the spiritual wants of this people.” In
the same letter he urged with much emphasis the necessity
of an effective Methodist occupation of Melbourne. “The
want of more missionaries distresses me; it is so important
to take possession of new colonies. . . . Your men of com-
merce should help. Missionary labours prepare the way for
commercial enterprise.” This letter also makes cheering re-
ference to Adelaide and New Zealand, and shows that al-
ready Waterhouse was looking forward to the voyages
which carried him round the far-spreading field of his
apostolic domain.
- It was during Waterhouse’s term in Hobart that the
building of the church in Melville Street was completed. Its
opening was made the occasion of a great festival, in
which a number of converts from the mission fields took
part. Waterhouse conducted the first service on the morn-
ing of Sunday, 18th October, 1840. A young girl sang in
this service who was afterwards to become world-famous as
Madame Carandini. The music was led by a large orches-
tra. Several missionaries were present, and the celebrations
extended over three days.
Waterhouse, however, spent but little of his time in
Hobart. He was constantly moving from place to place.
In eighteen months, he records, he spent no more than six
weeks at home. His journeys were made on the missionary
ship Triton, which proved of invaluable assistance to him.
Of these journeys he made very full records, and during
their course he wrote many letters which “evince an admir-
able spirit of Christian heroism, zeal, and devotedness,” to
quote from the missionary records of the time. One very
fruitful method of Christian enterprise which owes its
development, if not its actual inception, to him, is found in
the institution of native teachers. As a preacher, he seems
to have exerted a profound influence over the Fijians and
Tongans, despite the fact that he could not speak to them
only through interpreters. That saintly missionary, John
Hunt, wrote: “His preaching when in Fiji in 1841, was truly
powerful. While Mr. Calvert interpreted for him, we saw
what kind of sermons might be preached even in the Fijian
language. So clear and powerful did the truth appear, that
the interpreter seemed to catch the spirit of the preacher;
so also did the people, and we all said, ‘lt is good to be
here.’ ” The same high authority has left on record his
sense of Waterhouse’s powers as an administrator and leader.


“He was fitted, both by nature and by grace, for the highly
responsible office which the Conference appointed him to
fill. Few men would have been able to obtain the confidence
and esteem of so many missionaries in the same time as Mr.
Waterhouse did.”
Although there are abundant materials for following him
through his great missionary journeys, the necessary space
would be greater than the limits of the present essay allow.
It is to be regretted that his journals have not been made,
by attractive publication, more generally accessible to the
people of the Church. They are written with delightful sim-
plicity, and at the same time are instinct with deep religious
passion. They furnish abundant evidence of the social and
ethical value of mission enterprise. One or two entries may
be set down here. “The leading chief of this place came to
inform me that he had liberated all his slaves, and wished
to know if I thought it good. I told him that it pleased me
much; that God’s book required them to let the oppressed
go free; and that in this instance I should set him as an
example to the other chiefs.” “Mr. Turner took me to see
King George (Tonga). He was sitting with the skeleton of
a sermon in his hand, preparing for his Sabbath duties. I
was greatly delighted at seeing this Christian king. He is a
tall, fine-looking, well-made man, with a remarkably pene-
trating eye, and dignified carriage, Christian benignity beam-
ing from his countenance. His words were few but well
chosen. He does not think aloud, but deliberates, and then
speaks. I gazed upon this miracle of mercy with wonder
and delight.” There is pathos in this last entry of the jour-
nal, which tells of his second voyage. “This morning we
entered the Derwent. No pen or tongue can describe the
conflicting feelings of my mind, as I had never heard of or
from my family since the day on which we parted. I
endeavoured to prepare my mind for any calamity. At
length we neared Hobart Town, and saw a boat making for
our vessel. I recognised two of my sons in her, and with
stentorian voice asked, Ts all well?’ And when I was
answered in the affirmative I was filled with unutterable
emotions of gratitude.”
His home-coming, however, was not for a long reunion.
Within six weeks he had again left Hobart “with an inten-
tion to visit every place of importance in the interior of
Van Diemen’s Land, in order to raise an interest in behalf
of the missions in the South Seas.” Wherever he went large
numbers came to hear him. Not only was he an effective
speaker, but in those days the South Sea Islands were lands
of mystery, and one who had actually visited them had


about him all the glamour of romance. Waterhouse gave
heed neither to fatigue nor adversity of climate. After a
missionary meeting at Longford, in attending which he had
been exposed to “torrents of rain,” he returned home in a
state of “great exhaustion.” There supervened an illness
from which he never recovered. After the manner of the
time, there was kept a full and detailed account of his last
days on earth. To the last his mind dwelt on the great
cause in which his life had been laid down. “As the closing
scene drew nigh he lay for some time apparently full of
thought, when he suddenly raised himself in his bed and
exclaimed, ‘Missionaries! Missionaries! Missionaries!’ and
with this dying testimony in favour of the imperative claims
of the mission cause, his happy and triumphant spirit passed
into the presence of God.”
' If Waterhouse’s last words are to be construed as a
prayer, they have a splendid answer in the history of his
descendants. Three of his sons gave themselves in abound -
ing missionary labours. Grandchildren and great-grand-
children have enlisted in this imperial cause of Christ. It
is probable that there is no more conspicuous missionary
family recorded in the archives of the Christian Church. In
the present generation there are among direct descendants
the Rev. C. O. Lelean, of Fiji; the Revs. S. Churchward, C.
M. Churchward, and P. M. Waterhouse, Mr. J. H. L. Water-
house, and Dr. W. L. Waterhouse. A number of women mis-
sionaries also derive from him the same great spirit, includ-
ing Mrs. J. H. Allen, so long and honourably associated with
India. The tradition is being carried on by a great-great -
grandson, the Rev. A. D. Lelean, of Fiji.
On Sunday, 22nd November, 1925, a memorial to this
brave servant of God was unveiled in front of the Melville
Street Church in Hobart. It is a cenotaph bearing the
simple inscription:
In Memory
of
John Waterhouse
Minister of this Church and General Superintendent
of Missions,
1839-1842.
His Last Words Were;
“Missionaries! Missionaries! Missionaries!”
Erected by His Descendants.
A.D. 1925.


Front View of Wesley Church, Melville Street, Hobart,
showing the Obelisk unveiled 22nd November, 1925.


address
* Address Delivered in Wesley Church, Melville Street,
Hobart, by G. J. Waterhouse. Esq., on Sunday Evening,
November 22nd, 1925.
Dear Friends, —I had not expected to address you at any
length, but simply to make a few remarks at the Unveiling
Ceremony, which took place outside the Church just prior
to this service. Being, however, the eldest surviving descen-
dant bearing the name of Waterhouse, at the request of my
relatives, I have consented, and it is indeed a privilege, to
speak to such a large assembly in the very Church in which
my grandfather, the Rev. John Waterhouse, preached the
opening sermon on 18th October, 1840, and in which he fre-
quently officiated, and in which my own father, Rev. Jabez
B. Waterhouse, has also preached.
In the time allotted to me, I shall endeavour to show
“what manner of man John Waterhouse was” —the infor-
mation I have obtained from diaries, letters, magazines, and
other sources, as no biography of my grandfather has ever
been published.
John Waterhouse was born on 10th May, 1789, at Raw-
don, near Leeds, Yorkshire, his parents being members of
the Established Church.
During a visit of the Rev. John Grant, a Methodist
minister, his parents were induced to go and hear him, and
they obtained clearer views of the Universal Atonement
made by our Lord Jesus Christ for the sins of the whole
world and the doctrine of justification by grace through
faith, and this resulted in their joining the Methodist
Society.
John Waterhouse was soundly converted when 14 years
of age, and began to assist in Prayer Meetings. When about
19 years old, by a strong impulse of his own mind and by
the pressure of friends, he was induced to exhort and then
to preach.
After a public examination before a large congregation
he was accepted by the British Conference as a probationer,
*ln this account of the Address certain details are omitted to
avoid repetition, where they are given by Rev. C. C. Dugan in his
article.


and was stationed at Alnwick, being then twenty years of
age.
He successively laboured at North Shields two years,
Huddersfield three, Sunderland three, Reading three, Lon-
don East three, Penzance three, Halifax three, Dudley three,
Birmingham three, second London three; in five of these
circuits he was the Superintendent Minister, and when at
Halifax, Chairman of the District.
A noted English minister of his day wrote of him:
“In bodily presence his frame was slender. His piety
was genuine, his character unblemished, his conduct irre-
proachable. In disposition he was ardent, lively, and agree -
able. His natural abilities were good, and these he improved
by reading and study. His mind was quick in perception and
prompt. Correctness, firmness and decision were the lead-
ing characteristics. He had wit, but it was innocent, and
his cheerfulness of temper rendered him a pleasant
companion.
“Benevolence was a leading feature in his character,
suffering excited his sympathy. His income was always
limited, but he gave according to his means, and that cheer-
fully. Affability distinguished him—he would converse alike
with rich and poor. In the circuits where he was stationed
he was greatly beloved and esteemed.
“Mr. Waterhouse made an excellent Superintendent. He
was a disciplinarian, a thorough man of business. Common
sense was a distinguishing quality—while many men, per-
haps of more splendid talents, would be talking about a mat-
ter, he would set about it and accomplish it. There was no
circuit of which he had the superintendence that was not
greatly improved by his judicious management.
“He appeared to advantage in Circuit and District
Meetings, in Stationing Committees and Conference. As a
preacher he was always acceptable, beloved and useful, and
was privileged to see many souls brought to God under his
ministry.
“He had a fine, full, mellow voice, with which to dispense
the bread of Eternal life. He published but little, except in
some volumes of ‘Sketches of Sermons’—he discovered talents
in the selection, arrangement, illustration and application of
his subjects. His sermons were carefully studied, richly
evangelical, and very frequently telling in their effect upon
his hearers. His style was plain, perspicuous and forcible,
and he never aimed at the amusement of his hearers.”


. ~ ~ — -I
-
I J|
■ the Rev. John Waterhouse. jB
H <•< iitral Superintendent of the Wesleyan Missions fW
B in Australasia and Polynesia, Jt»
'*1|<. <l.-|mi t«-.l (lain life in (hi-* Ci(v on the 30. Maivh is 1-2. mMjt
•*> die 33. voar of his aj£p and die 33. of his ministry.
PHk tie prfiicmrd (he onerous duties of his ofliee nBV
VHft w «di midi inii' zeal ami by his active, and laborious flHV
iile the «T (•<>(!. shortened his days;
teriiiiriiitiny his successful career a
peaceful and triumphant death.
/{/<•»«■</ are the dead n-hirh die in the laird’.
Mural Tablet in Melville Street Church, Hobart.
In the last sermon he preached in England he said: —
“It is our aim so to preach the truths of our common
Christianity with such clearness, such force, as that all, even
of the meanest capacity, may understand—and the highest
not be offended—teaching you in all wisdom in those mat-
ters which relate to doctrine, to privilege, to duty, to prac-
tice—bringing the whole system before you from time to
time, pressing it upon your attention and urging you to adopt
it and practise it constantly and faithfully.”
Of the faithfulness with which he applied his subjects to
(he consciences of his hearers, take the following specimen:
“I now ask you,” said he, “in the name of my great
Master, how matters are with you and your souls? How is
it between you and your God? Have you made your peace
with God through Christ? Have you surrendered your hearts
to Him? Some have—and may those hearts be forever sealed,
hallowed, and sanctified.
“But some of you are not converted, some have fallen
from grace—you have become worldly, careless, and trifling.
You are so alive in the world and so dead at the throne of


c^yfy/
/ /ftf
Handwriting of Rev. John Waterhouse.


grace. You think so much of the world and so little about
Christ. You have more pleasure in the world than you
have in religion, in keeping God’s Sabbaths and minding
God’s commandments.
“Consider your ways, rouse yourselves from your
lethargy, call upon God lest you perish.
“Of some of you there is no inward or outward evidence
of your conversion.
“Your state is becoming worse every day. You used
to feel our appeals, but now your heart is never broken.
You used to make resolutions for the amendment of your
life, but it is not done now.
“You used to shudder at the appearance of sin, but now
you look at it without remorse, you indulge in it and live
in it, and you have been trifling with God and hardness of
heart has overtaken you, and your state is becoming worse
day by day.
“Make haste and go to the throne of grace, and leave it
not —tell God what the hardness of your heart is, tell Him
what you feel and what you cannot feel. Call upon Him to
have mercy, and break your rocky hearts that you may re-
pent and be saved.”
At his farewell address in City Road Chapel, London
on 14th September, 1838, he said:
“Having experienced some of the roughs and smooths of
life, I shall go better qualified for the work I have entered
upon than had I entered it earlier—Lord, be Thou my
Helper! I feel attached to my kindred—l feel attached to
my fathers and brethren. I feel it is a great sacrifice to
leave such a country and such a people, but I rejoice that
God Almighty enables me to make the sacrifice. I love my
Lord and Master better than all—l offer myself a sacrifice
on the Missionary Altar. I give my life, my all, to God.”
He, with his wife and family, and acccompanied by Rev.
J. H. and Miss Bumby, Revs. John Eggleston, Charles Creed,
Samuel Ironside, and John Warren, young ministers, with
their wives, left London on Thursday, 30th September, 1838,
in the small barque James, of some 300 tons, and after a
tedious and at times eventful voyage of 134 days (calling at
the Cape for water and fresh provisions), arrived at Hobart
Town on Ist February, 1839, where they received a warm
welcome, the party being entertained by Sir John and Lady
Franklin.
There were five districts in the Southern World over
which he had charge:


1. The Australian District, embracing New South Wales,
Australia Felix (now Victoria), South and Western
Australia.
2. Van Diemen’s Land (now Tasmania)
3. New Zealand.
4. Friendly Islands.
5. Fiji.
Truly a diocese of Apostolic dimensions, and it must be
remembered there were no railways, telegraphs, cables,
telephones, and not many good roads, in those days. Steamers
were not known, and all sea travelling had to be done in
small sailing vessels, entailing fatigue and strain, and very
little comfort.
He made himself acquainted with the work in Tasmania,
also in Adelaide, Melbourne, and several towns in New South
Wales, which he visited.
On April 23rd, 1840, he sailed in the small Mission brig
Triton, with several Missionaries, one of whom was Rev.
Thomas Williams, and their wives, seven for New Zealand,
four for Tonga (Friendly Islands), and two for Fiji, visited
all the stations in these groups and returned home to Hobart
Town after an absence of five months. In his journal he
speaks of having been in perils by land and water, in the
wilds and among the heathen, exposed to heat and cold, the
tempest and the calm. “My health has been uniformly good:
I have a lot of anxiety and can look for little rest or com-
fort; but having chosen my Master, I am satisfied that He
should choose my work.”
Next year, 1841, Mr. Waterhouse made a second visi-
tation of all Mission Stations in the groups mentioned be-
fore, and returned to Hobart Town in September of that
year. The business which awaited him made large demands
upon his strength before he had time to recover from the
effects of his voyages. In November, whilst proceeding on
horseback to fulfil an appointment, exposure to heavy rain
and cold caused the illness which terminated in his death.
Rev. W. Butters, who accompanied him, wrote: “Wo
proceeded twenty miles down the river Macquarie, where
we met a large company of settlers, many of whom had come
miles to hear from Mr. Waterhouse what he had seen and
heard in the South Seas.
Tuesday, proceeded to Perth.
Wednesday to Launceston, where, though much fatigued,
he preached a heart-searching sermon from “Lovest Thou
Me?”


The sittings of the District Meeting commenced next
morning and continued during the week.
Sunday, 7th November, he preached a Missionary ser-
mon, the last sermon he ever preached, “For My thoughts
are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,”
saith the Lord. The congregation was large and deeply
attentive, and the word was with power.
Monday, Bth November.—Attended District Meeting all
day, and at night gave a most animated speech of two hours’
duration.
Tuesday, 9th November.—After attending the District
Meeting until 1 p.m., he rode through torrents of rain to
Longford greatly fatigued, reached the Chapel in time for
the Missionary Meeting, spoke for about an hour, and then
s§t down thoroughly exhausted.
After the meeting he had to walk nearly two miles
through pouring rain and long wet grass. In much pain, and
with great difficulty, he reached his home four days later,
very weak and ill.
UHU XXX.
i Wyf For many weeks he was confined to his bed. Every-
thing was done to relieve him, but without avail. During
his illness he said, “If I live, well—if I die it is well.”
On 30th March, 1842, in the presence of most of the
jgL.members of his family, knowing his end was coming, he
them to the Father of the fatherless. Whilst be-
supported in bed he appeared to be recognising some-
one, and then exclaimed in a loud voice, “Wesley! Wesley!
Smith! Smith! Clarke! Clarke!” Later on he raised him-
self in bed without help and cried out, “Missionaries f Mis-
sionaries! Missionaries!” sank back, and expired.
As if in answer to his dying words, three of his sons
became Missionaries—Jabez Bunting, who laboured in Van
Diemen’s Land (Tasmania), South Australia and New South
Wales; Joseph and Samuel, both Missionaries in Fiji and
afterwards in Victoria.
John Waterhouse owed his all to religion and was no
time-server.
Time will not permit of my giving particulars and details
at this service of his visits to the South Sea Islands.
Not often has a death been more deeply deplored, or
to human appearances been more untimely; but the Spirit
that John Waterhouse breathed, the standard of action he
set up, and the counsels he imparted, left lasting impressions.
The impression he made on his Missionary tours was
well stated by the Rev. John Hunt, who wrote from Viwa,


Feejee, in 1842, “Mr. Waterhouse was fitted both by nature
and grace for the highly responsible office which the Con-
ference appointed him to fill. Few men would have been
able to obtain the confidence and esteem of so many mis-
sionaries in the same time as Mr. Waterhouse did.” Mr
Hunt also testified that in Fiji the native teachers, and even
the people, had a deep feeling of respect for his name, and
to say that anything the Missionaries wished to enforce had
his approval was to give it great weight in the native
estimation.
In a lengthy minute his Ministerial brethren in Tasmania
expressed their sense of the loss the work had sustained
and the high estimation in which they held their late General
Superintendent. Among other things they said: “His age,
long experience, untiring zeal, and affectionate regard to the
interests of the brethren, combined to give him a pre-eminent
adaptation for the Superintendency of these extensive mis-
sions. He had endeared himself to the affections of the
Missionaries on all the stations, and whilst they regard his
death as a public calamity, they also feel that, as individuals,
they have lost a wise, judicious, and faithful counsellor.”
God grant that we, his descendants, and all who hear
me, may profit by the example he set, and do what we can
to make this world brighter, better, and more full of God.
We cannot all be preachers, but we can be workers,
and whilst we have the opportunity, let us show by our lives
and works that we are followers of Christ.
Amen.


Xettcrs to England
Extract of a Letter from the Rev. John Waterhouse dated
Hobart Town, Van Diemen’s Land, September 8, 1840. to the
General Secretaries of the Wesleyan Missionary Society,
London.
“Honoured Fathers and Brethren, —I wrote to you from
Mangungu, New Zealand, giving an account of our arrival
there, etc., and will forward extracts from my journal as soon
as possible.
Through the merciful protection of my Heavenly Father,
I'have been permitted, after five months’ absence, to meet
my dear wife and family all in health. I have been in perils
by land, and in perils by water, in perils in the wilderness,
and in perils among the Heathen, exposed to heat and cold,
the tempest and the calm; but my health has been uniformly
good, though laborious days and sleepless nights were often
experienced by me.
I have already taken a bird’s-eye view of our various
stations, which is vastly important, as I shall be so much
better qualified to meet the Missionaries in their several
districts. I have conversed freely with most of them; and
what one has failed to communicate, another has generally
supplied; so that there are few subjects in the working of
the system with which I am unacquainted. A universal
welcome has been given me by the brethren and their excel-
lent wives; they look to me as their father; and I feel
honoured by being associated with such children —so labori-
ous and self-denying. My life is one scene of toil and intense
anxiety; and as far as flesh and blood are concerned, I can
look for little rest or comfort; but, having chosen my Master,
I am satisfied that He should choose my work.
New Zealand. —Here I have left five additional Mis-
sionaries, and visited most of the stations. From Kaipara
and Waingaroa the brethren met me, and conversed freely
on their work, and prospect of future usefulness. Much
good has been done; but there are very few thorough con-
versions of the soul to God. Christianity, as a system, has
been embraced by multitudes; the Lord’s Day is carefully
observed; public worship is well attended; and the congre -
gations appear very devout. Many can read and write; and
universal thirst has been excited for the Sacred Scriptures
and other religious books. One Chief had come a three


if?
_g
T
a
*-
Q)
«
H
rj
CQ
£
h—.
o
o
*£
O,
ft)
ft)
o
CO
5-
§
"d
S
53
Wm
OO
KM * <
Wm c 5
wm o §
I 5 i
rl g
tl «
rJ rjn
r-H
XI m <m „
Ir-£ 'ti
-w s
H
IN
||
•C £
w -
§*-*
cS |
„ c
CO CJ
S E-h
Vj I®
Mfci cd
ill I
e
-si
O
'"s


weeks’ journey, expecting to obtain from me a copy of the
New Testament, as some had been sent to England to be
bound. They have given up their sanguinary wars, and the
revolting scenes of cannibalism. They are remarkable for
honesty; but vagrant in their habits, universal smokers,
selfish, dirty, and delight to herd together. They need line
upon line on experimental and practical Christianity. A
person visiting the purely heathen, as I have done, and
then the nominally Christian natives, is filled with wonder
and gratitude at what has been accomplished; but your mis-
sionaries are grieving that so few are savingly converted.
True religion in all its parts is rarely found. But your
labourers are valuable men, who, I trust, will be instrumen-
tal in turning many from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to God. It is “now or never” with them. The
devil and the Pope are at work among this interesting
people. Pray that the Holy Spirit may be poured out.
Friendly Islands. —Here I left Mr. Wilson, bereft of his
estimable wife, who (as my journal states) died, and was
committed to the watery deep, on her passage from New
Zealand. I have left at Vavau, Mr. and Mrs. Kevern also.
Mr. Brooks’s health having failed, and a colder climate be-
ing deemed essential, I have brought him, his wife and two
children to Van Diemen’s Land. The change from New
Zealand is so great, that I had to guard against being too
strongly prejudiced in favour of the Friendly Islanders.
They are naturally indolent, which is occasioned probably
in part from the excessive warmth of the climate; but the
preaching of the Gospel has had a wonderful effect. There
are many truly pious persons; and some of the native teachers
are exceedingly interesting in person, mind, religion, and
manners.
Most of the men were gone with the King on a defen-
sive war to Tonga. King George is, from all accounts, a
very extraordinary man; and, from what I have seen of the
people of Vavau, they do credit to him as their King, and
to the Missionaries as their Pastors. The code of laws by
which George governs his people has been forwarded to you.
Smoking is prohibited by law, unless recommended by a
medical man. This bad custom led them to herd together,
men, women, and children; and universal filth was the re-
sult. Now they are cleanly in their persons and in their
houses; the members of each family associate together; and
the din of industry is heard with the early dawn of the day.
Any violation of chastity is punished by law; the Sabbath is
held sacred; and uniform attention is paid to the schools
and the means of grace.


The Quarterly Fast is observed with great strictness.
No marriages are allowed on a Sunday; and many other
things, of minor importance, were to me equally interest-
ing. There is evidently much experimental and practical
godliness, though many have only the form. Mr. Thomas is
now grey-headed in the service of his Master; but a more
laborious man I never saw.
Feejee. —I left Mr. and Mrs. Williams at Lakemba, in
health, with Mr. and Mrs. Calvert, Mr. and Mrs. Hunt at
Somosomo, and Mr. and Mrs. Jaggar at Rewa. Mrs. Cargill
having died and left four motherless children, Mr. Cargill
had embarked with them on board a small vessel going to
the Colonies; but I had them transferred to our ship.
I visited all the stations; which is no easy matter, where
coral reefs, hidden or seen, are so numerous, and hurricanes
so frequent. The Triton will be of incalculable service in
these seas. I waited on all the Kings and leading Chiefs in
every place, with small presents: the brethren had told me
this was essential, as they had all heard of me. They gave
me a universal welcome, and conversed freely on various
matters. My having one wife and ten children pleased them,
and specially their legitimate Queen, not a little. They were
very attentive while I told them of our great God and
Saviour Jesus Christ; but, as yet, they are unwilling to
embrace Christianity. The people in all the islands have
good houses; and considering them as savages, they have the
appearance of enjoying domestic comfort. I ate with several
of them of their native pudding, fish, yam, etc. They have
some rather extensive potteries, and more generally boil
than bake their food; their earthen pots are fire-proof, and
some of them will hold from ten to twenty gallons. They
have their plantations in excellent order, and are remark-
able for industry and ingenuity. Great respect is shown
to Kings and Chiefs; a word equivalent to “Sir” is always
used by inferiors when addressing them, and frequently re-
peated during a lengthened conversation. All canoes at
Rewa are required to have the outrigger on the off-side
while passing the King’s house; while, at the same time, a
uniform vocal expression of respect is given. The dress of
the men is a little native cloth in a small roll about two
inches wide, round the loins, and under-girt with the same
material from stem to stern. The women are more deli-
cately attired; their beautifully wrought garments are from
six to eight inches wide, with a large fringe of various
colours; it goes quite round, and rests on the hip-bones
forming an entire covering to that part of the body. To be
uncovered would be a crime worthy to be visited with


punishment. Filthy conversation by men, in the presence of
women, is punished by law. They wash themselves once or
twice a day in the sea or rivers; but I never saw one of
them naked even in the water. They are remarkably modest.
But, alas! there is an awfully dark shade. “Their feet are
swift to shed blood. Destruction and misery are in all their
ways. And the way of peace have they not known. There
is no fear of God before their eyes.” They eat each other’s
flesh, and glory in their shame. Last April, thirteen women
were strangled outside the Mission premises at Somosomo.
About twenty women were eaten near our station at Rewa;
and parts of murdered bodies have been thrown into our
premises. Several murders were meditated while I was
there, but were prevented by the indirect influence of Mis-
sionaries. Horrifying deeds of cruelty have been practised,
and the skin of a Missionary has been examined to pass
judgment “whether he would eat well.” But hitherto the
Lord has preserved His servants, who are happy in their
work and labouring with great zeal, prudence, and patience.
The Missionaries’ wives are giving a fine mould to female
society; they appear to know their own work as domestic
teachers, and leave their husbands to teach and govern in
the Church. It is impossible for anyone adequately to sym-
pathize with, and duly esteem them, who has not been a
personal spectator of their sufferings, privations, dangers,
labours, and intense anxieties. The Mission families are all
more or less subject to the caprice or passion of savage
Monarchs, whose mandate is “life or death!” Yet even in
cannibal Feejee, there are some genuine conversions from
sin to God. At Viwa, Mr. Cross’s Station, I had a most
interesting interview with the celebrated warrior Namosi-
malua, of whose Christian character and consistent conduct
Mr. Cargill has informed you. I accompanied him to his
beautiful Chapel, where we united in praising our common
Lord.
Native Teachers are invaluable auxiliaries. My decided
opinion, from all I can hear and see, is, that special atten-
tion must be paid to this department with respect (1) to
their piety; (2) to their qualifications; (3) to a regular
system of training them; and (4) to an efficient superin-
tendence, which cannot well be accomplished without a small
vessel. Ono, for instance, is one hundred and fifty miles
from Lakemba; and the Christians had been waiting for
months for the Missionary to marry them, etc. Mr. Calvert
went in a canoe at a great personal risk, but was amply re-
paid in witnessing so many genuine conversions through the
instrumentality of native teachers. We ought to have a few,
if possible, on every island. In most instances, about £lO


per annum would be sufficient for a man and his wife for
a little clothing: the natives would supply them with food.
But they should not be left for many months, if possible,
without the personal visit and oversight of a Missionary.
The Missionaries might take it in turn to visit such islands.
If spared to return to these uncommonly interesting parts of
the world, I intend, after holding the several District Meet-
ings, to visit every island where native teachers are now
labouring.
“The fields are indeed white unto harvest.” If I thought
that my wife, at her age, could stand the climate, and my
family could be left, I would go there for a few years; but I
cannot at present see it practicable. However, I will visit
them as often as possible. The Missionaries and their excel-
lent wives need encouragement. God is preparing valuable
native assistants, but for some years the demands on your
funds will be great.
Of myself, I can only say I am a poor, unworthy
worm, permitted to endure privations and sufferings of no
ordinary kind. The care of the infant Churches, the breaches
made in our ranks by the hand of death, and the afflictions
and trials of some of our members, are painful events; while
each of them says, T must look to you as a father.’ Through
Divine mercy I have passsed through several months’ inces-
sant labour, in the heavy rains of a New Zealand winter, the
oppresssive heat of the tropics, frequent falls and partial
immersions in the water, with sleepless nights and anxious
days, amidst constant excitement, yet my health has not
failed. God willing, in a few weeks I must again leave my
family, and that probably for twelve months—no small trial.
My life, while Thou preserv’st that life,
Thy sacrifice shall be;
And death, when death shall be my lot,
Shall join my sold to Thee.
‘Your ever affectionate servant,
(Signed) John Waterhouse ”
Extract of a Letter to the Wesleyan Missionary Society,
London, from the Rev. John Waterhouse, dated Hobart
Town, Van Diemen’s Land, September 24, 1841.
Through the good hand of God upon me for good, I
have returned to the bosom of my family, having been away
eighteen months, minus six weeks in the months of Sep-
tember and October, 1840; during this period I held the


Annual District Meeting in this Colony, which, with a press
of other matters, prevented me from seeing my friends, except
from the pulpit; and now I have so many letters from the
different stations, and such a tax on my time and mind, as
almost overpower me. My reception in this town has been
marked with a universal welcome. We had a very large
congregation on Wednesday evening. Lady Franklin, some
members of the Council, merchants, and many strangers,
were present when I gave them a long account of my
voyage, etc. I spoke for more than two hours to a deeply
interested audience. But I must leave these little matters.
The last twelve months have been spent in a minute exami-
nation of your affairs in the three Polynesian districts. To
my family, such an absence has been no small trial, and if
I had not very deliberately counted the cost before I left
England, my heart would often have fainted. My health has,
on the whole, been tolerable, considering the oppressive
labour of the District Meetings, during each of which I had
a short but severe attack of illness.
We have had several providential deliverances from
imminent danger at sea.
Our arrival at Tonga was most timely; such was the
infirm state of Mr. Tucker’s health, that a few weeks longer
might have cut off all hope of his recovery. The voyaging
from place to place has been of great service to him, while
I have received the greatest help from him and his excellent
wife. In visiting the two Niuas, Uvea and Rotumah, I was
able, by their mutual aid, to perform almost herculean
labour for the benefit of those interesting lands. Your ship,
Triton, has been of incalculable service in taking the breth-
ren to and from the District Meetings, and their respective
stations, and in taking native teachers to the out-islands.
Sometimes we have had, including their children, thirty or
forty passengers. But for all these things I must refer you
to my journal, in which I have entered nothing but sober
and deeply-affecting facts, without any embellishment.
I have endeavoured to carry out your plans without
consulting comfort or ease. Life and health have been jeo-
pardized, but, through mercy, not sacrificed. I have obtained
an intimate acquaintance with every part of our work in
these seas, with the wants of the people, the aid required,
etc.
In every place I have been most affectionately wel-
comed, and the greatest possible kindness has been shown;
and I hope things are now placed in such a position as will
facilitate the work of God. My constitution is much shaken
by incessant toil in the tropics; but as I know every man,


every place, and almost everything connected with the
stations, I can do much by writing; and shall only add that
I am tolerably well, and had the happiness of finding my
family in health.
Niua Tohutahu is an interesting Christian land, under
the instruction of two native teachers, and a number of
local preachers; the Chiefs, who, by universal consent, are
called King and Queen, and who are most interesting per-
sons, are class-leaders. The people are considerably in ad-
vance of Vavau, as to their enclosures about the Chapel,
and general appearance. We baptized 100 children; there
are 315 members of Society, and we are greatly delighted
with this pious people, whom we left weeping as we re-
turned from their shores.
Niua Fooa is a place not to be forgotten. The moral
glory of other places was here shrouded by that which
here excelleth, in genuine Christian simplicity, fervent and
active piety, external neatness, and golden age charity.
They all were of one heart and soul,
And only love inspired the whole.
There are in Niua Fooa ten local preachers, forty-five
class-leaders, and 562 members of Society, under the care
of three native teachers. The congregations were large and
deeply attentive. We baptized more than 100 children.
King George, Queen Charlotte, and the great Chief to whom
the executive department is entrusted, with his wife, are all
class-leaders; they accompanied us with their tribes to the
bold shores, when, on leaving, they kissed our hands and
wept bitterly. At Rotumah, where I left five native teachers
and their families, we have now twenty members; but I
must refer you to my Journal, where all the circumstances
are narrated, as well as our visit to Uvea, or Wallis Island,
which was a matter of some risk, from our conflicts with
the Romanists and the Pagans.
Feejee, of all lands I have visited, is the most impor-
tant; but as we have sent a District Report, you will see
the state of things. The brethren and sisters in these lands
are choice persons, well fitted for their work. They have
expressed their obligation to me in the most pleasing man-
ner. The Christian Tonguese in Lakemba are persons who
left the Friendly Islands in their heathen state, and embraced
Christianity in Lakemba. Measures are adopted in every
place for the resident Missionary to have them under his
immediate care, as well as the Christian Feejeeans.
The state of these lands is awful beyond description, as
my journal will show. The hands of the heathen natives


are against every man, and every man’s hands are against
them. Wars, deaths, and desolations are sounds daily heard.
We had to witness the most appalling scenes; we have sat
among cannibals, while human flesh was roasting: we have
seen a man prepared for the oven, while it was heating.
While we were there, some have been roasted alive, others
have been cruelly tortured —their limbs cut off and eaten
in their presence! Widows have been strangled, and cruel-
ties of the most revolting nature practised. But the mes-
sengers of mercy have taken their stand, and a blessed
influence is exerted immediately and indirectly wherever
they have gone. The horrors of war have been softened,
and a few have been savingly converted. All we want is
Missionaries, men of God, who count not their own lives
dear unto themselves; laborious, self-denying men, men who
make the world their parish, and heaven their home; but
who would prefer labouring in this land of death. The
whole of Cannibal Feejee is ready to receive them; the com-
mon people are tiring of war.
Could my beloved countrymen have seen what my eyes
have beheld, felt what my heart has felt, and heard what
my ears have heard, men would be found, and money would
be found. Think of a people without God, without hope,
murderers, men-eaters; implacable, unmerciful! Rise, ye
men of our Israel; rise, young men and maidens, old men
and children; help, by your prayers and by your purses.
I beseech you, by the groans of the suffering, the sighing of
the captive, the shrieks of the mangled, the tortures of the
widow and the merciless state of the fatherless children,
send some messengers of mercy to Feejee, and help us to
train native teachers.
If humanity has any claim, sympathy any place in the
heart, benevolence any correct tone of feeling, piety any com-
passion, the Scriptures of truth any weight of obligation and
the life’s blood of the eternal Son of God any voice, help,
but help us now!


Memorial Window,
City Road Chapel, London.


Rev. Thomas Williams, who was a fellow traveller with
Rev. John Waterhouse on one of his trips in the Triton,
writes:
He was on the list of those who suffered severely on
shipboard, but with much patience. When able to leave his
berth, he would go the round of those occupied by his breth-
ren and their wives, to inquire, as he used to say, “after his
family,” and cheer them with the tones of sympathy and
consolation. It was quite a treat to him if, in rough weather,
he' could surprise the ladies by appearing among them the
bearer of a dish of nicely-cooked potatoes, or enticing
glasses of jam; and no one ignorant of what they suffered
can conceive how welcome his timely kindness and benign
smile were. They shed light on the heart when all around
was gloom; they inspired confidence in the female bosom
when the noise of raging elements tempted it to despair.
At this day his companions recall those scenes, and bless his
memory.
To his young brethren, Mr. Waterhouse acted with
paternal kindness. He bore with our foibles wonderfully;
was a kind arbitrator in our discussions, and set us an
unvarying example of true liberality. He invited us to
supply our want of experience from his own rich stores, and
facilitated our endeavours so to do by reading us papers on
Connexional subjects, and illustrating them with facts that
had come under his own observation. His remarks on our
sermons were ever made with great tenderness, and with so
evident an aim at our improvement, that it became a privi-
lege rather than a task to preach before him. He might
perceive his own strength more clearly when brought in
such close contact with our weakness; but his nature was
too noble to allow of his displaying it otherwise than for our
help. I think all on board the Triton felt as certain he was
their friend as that he was their superior.
Mr. Waterhouse’s wish to make his annual visits to the
several districts under his care seasons of happiness to his
friends, was so obvious, that the most obtuse remarked it
Naturally social, fond of conversation, and abounding in inci-
dent and sentiment to sustain it, he hailed with joy the inter-
vals which occurred between hours devoted to public busi-
ness, as fit opportunities to unbend himself, and administer


to the happiness of all around him. The assurance that he
lay on the bosom of friends inspired confidence, and he
allowed the tide of social feeling to flow unrestrained. Many
deemed him unguarded on this point, and some phlegmatic
men think grievously of those times. Perhaps it would have
been well had he been more cautious than he was, for the
sake of others rather than for himself. But that must be a
cold heart which, with the motives by which he was actuated
before it, can be severe in censuring him. His principle
was right, if he erred in its application. I have heard him
speak on this topic more than once; and once, when alone
with him, he said to me, “I may not appear sufficiently grave;
but really the thought that I am visiting those who are shut
out from the world, and the sweets of society, leads me to
throw as much cheerfulness around me as I can. Doubt-
less you have enough of its reverses most of the year.”
When engaged in business, Mr. Waterhouse could be
serious enough; but when financial or other secular business
dragged, I have seen him effect, by an opportune pleasantry,
what too many at such times attempt by ill-humour.
His ministrations among us were always looked for-
ward to with pleasure, and attended with profit. At the table
of the Lord, the prayer-meeting and the class, we partici-
pated with him in the communion of saints, and rejoiced
together in God our Saviour.
How laborious Mr. Waterhouse was in discharging the
duties of his high office is known to all. He did his own
work: absolute necessity alone forced him to resort to proxy.
He saw the people on our stations with his own eyes, spoke
to them with his own tongue, and cheerfully clasped their
black hands in his. He thought for them, prayed for them,
and felt for them as a father.
Their salvation was what he intensely desired. The
missionaries felt that when they were not successful, he
mourned over the painful fact with them; and they felt that
the joys of their success were his also. I never heard a
whisper of his neglecting any duty. He was instant in sea-
son and out of season, seeking by the use of all right means
to be useful.
Amongst the natives he was very popular. He often
during a day would go where they were, attended by some-
one to speak for him, or alone; and, after preparing the way
by inquiries about what they might be employed in, would
preach to them Christ Jesus and Him crucified.
The interest with which he observed the process in
native manufactures, native costume, and native customs,


always pleased the people. Many recollect his strolling to
the native kitchens, gratifying the cooks by tasting of their
dishes and pronouncing them “vinaka” (“good”).
Some of the heathen call to mind his visiting alone their
houses and endeavouring to speak with them by signs. His
one wife and ten children were made known by digital re-
presentatives, and their respective ages by pointing to the
persons of those around him. By the help of a few little
words he had picked up, he would recommend to them the
“lotu,” whilst his often kind conduct on such occasions left
an impression that there was real excellency in the religion
which had such an advocate.
Only a few days ago (1849) I overheard a Christian
telling some of his companions of the time when he first
saw Mr. Waterhouse, of his taking him by the hand, and
hearing from his lips the native salutation, “sa loloma”
(“love”). It was a verdant spot in that poor Fijian’s his-
tory, and I doubt not it often yields him recollections the
most joyful.
Sometimes he would go forth equipped with a native
hymn-book, and on finding a group of Christians, would
induce them to sing, leading them himself. Often, when
his compagnon de voyage, have I helped him to sing, as we
rowed up a river or visited the native villages. The plan
is a good one, and in perfect keeping with Polynesian usage.
He was always happy in proposing measures for secur-
ing the health and happiness of mission families. He used
to urge attention to this particular upon us all, although we
all thought he was not sufficiently careful of his own health,
and often prodigal of his strength. The truth is now too
plain to be denied—he was overwrought; he was expected
to do more than a mortal could. He strained every nerve
to do treble duty, and fell a sacrifice in the attempt. The
vast reward of his excessive toils he is now reaping; and
their good effect is still being felt in this world, and will
continue to be for coming ages.


3n fi|i
VISIT OF REV. JOHN WATERHOUSE TO TANOA, AND
HIS SON SERU (THAKOMBAU) .
On 17th June, 1841, Rev. John Waterhouse writes ;
I left Viwa for Bau. We had great difficulty in getting
to the canoe, the tide being out, the wind strong, and much
rain making it unpleasant wading through the mud: we were
almost broiled by the vertical rays of the sun. Our canoe
soon reached Bau; when we went to the house of Tanoa, to
whom all Fiji pays respect. He is, in a certain sense, Prince
of Kings, a venerable old man. His house surpasses, in mag-
nitude and grandeur, anything I have seen in these seas. It
is 130 feet long, and 42 feet wide, with massive columns in
the centre, and strong, curious workmanship in every part
Tanoa received us very graciously; and on my offering a
present, he clapped hands, which was the highest mark of
respect, and an acknowledgment that he was in the pre-
sence of a greater chief than himself. If the people had
clapped hands at his instance, that would have shown re-
spect, but doing it himself showed the greatest. He beckoned
me to sit on the mat by him. About a hundred persons were
in the room with him. He put his hands frequently on my
thigh, and various parts of my body, giving a smile of appro-
bation. I told him it was my great wish that a missionary
should live on his land at Bau, and teach the people. He
replied, “It is very good.” I said, “Will you build him a
house?” He said, “I am building that part of the city
which was burnt down; but it is in my mind to build you a
house.” His principal wife, an interesting woman, expressed
a wish that a missionary would go and live among them.
Having urged them to renounce Paganism, embrace Chris-
tianity, and strive to enter the Kingdom of Heaven, we
bade them farewell.
We then called on Seru, his son, whose life is charac-
terized by war, cruelty, and bloodshed. He has thirty or
forty wives: the principal one sat by him, while he was
sleeping on his mat. On being roused from his slumber, he
gave me with lordly indifference his hand, the savage being
depicted in every feature of his countenance. Having told
him what lands I had visited, and our object in visiting
them, I added, “When will your wars cease in Fiji?” He


replied, “We will fight till we die; we will teach our child-
ren to fight, and our children’s children shall fight.” I said,
“It is a pity in so good a land for your people to be des-
troyed.” He answered, “It will be very good for them all
to be dead.” While we were there, we were told they were
going to eat a man, and that his body was in the oven. Our
natives were sent to inquire more particularly into this mat-
ter, and found it even so; and that another man, who had
been killed, was sent as a present to another town to be
eaten.”
Subscribers to the
John Waterhouse Memorial
(List as supplied hy the Treasurer in 1925.)
NOTE.—In the following list the figure (1) after a name denotes
grandchild of John Waterhouse, (2) great-grandchild, (3) great-
great-grandchild, (4) great-great-great-grandchild.
Descendants of Jane Middleton Butters.
Annette Butters Hawkins (1).
Henry Middleton Hawkins (2).
Cecil Alfred Middleton Hawkins
Elwyn Doreen Hawkins (3).
Joyce May Hawkins (3),
Jane Lyth (1).
Marion Beulah Butters (1).
Descendants of John Thomas Waterhouse.
John Waterhouse (2).
Pattie Waterhouse (3).
John Waterhouse (3).
Alexander Waterhouse (3).
Wallace Waterhouse (3).
Richard Waterhouse (3).
Montague Waterhouse (3).
George Waterhouse (2).
Shadford Waterhouse (3).
Marion Waterhouse Wilcox (2).
Eleanor Waterhouse Isenberg (2).
Margaret Waterhouse Walker (2)
Elsie Waterhouse Dawson (2).
Albert Waterhouse (2).
Julia Waterhouse (3).
Albert Waterhouse (3).
Eleanor Waterhouse Wood (2)
Henry Allyn Wood (3).
Eleanor Jean Wood (4).
Mary Waterhouse Rice (1).
William Henry Rice (2).
Charles Atwood Rice (2).
Edith Rice (3).
Juliet Rice (3).
Arthur Hyde Rice (2).
Harold Waterhouse Rice (2).
Charlotte Emily Rice (3).
Harold Frederick Rice (3).
Maud Rice (3).
Mary McKinney Rice (3).
Philip La Vergne Rice (2).
Ann Charlotte Rice (2).
Emily Dorothea Rice (2).
William Waterhouse (1).
Herbert Waterhouse (2).
Lawrence Waterhouse (2).
Paul Waterhouse (2).
Gerald Waterhouse (2).
Glen Waterhouse (2).
Robert Waterhouse ( 2).
Melicent Waterhouse (2).
Madeline Waterhouse (2).
Edith Waterhouse (2).
41


Descendants of Rowland Skipsey Waterhouse.
Constance Lelean Hughes (3).
Elizabeth Kent Hughes (4).
Margot Lansdowne Kent Hughes
(4).
Constance Barbara Kent Hughes
(4).
Arthur Drew Lelean (3).
Colin Oswald Lelean (4).
Alison Clare Lelean (4).
Arthur Brownell Lelean (4).
Clara Watchorn Lelean (3).
Charles Oswald Lelean (2).
Clara Scholes (2).
Lilian Lelean Scholes (3).
Kathleen Alma Scholes (3).
John Lelean Scholes (3).
Florence Muriel Scholes (3).
Evelyn Middleton Watson (2).
Rosalie Bertha Watson (2).
Leila Eugenie Watson (2).
Clara Watchorn Scott (1).
Ethelwynne Gordon Boultbee (2)
Malcolm Leslie Scott (2).
Ronald Melville Scott (2).
Frank Skipsey Waterhouse (1).
Freda Wilson (2).
Dorothy B. Busby (2).
Blanche Florence Waterhouse (1)
Elsie Waterhouse (1).
Percy Leslie Waterhouse (1).
Ellis Kirkham Waterhouse (2).
Bertha Gertrude Cope (1).
Leila Ada Waterhouse (1).
Descendants of William Waterhouse.
Charlotte Annie Roberts (1). Clement Waterhouse Matters (2).
Mary Constance Lavers (2).
John H. Lavers (3).
Kathleen M. Lavers (3).
Marguerite T. Lavers (3).
Ruth C. Lavers (3).
Margaret E. Roberts (2).
Charles A. Roberts (2).
Margery A. Roberts (3).
Joan Waterhouse Matters (3).
Fayette Constance Matters (3).
Arthur Towers Matters (2).
Elizabeth Towers Matters (3).
Stuart William Matters (2).
Mary Gordon Matters (3).
Jeanette Gordon Matters (3).
Reginald Francis Matters (2).
Estelle Winifred Stanley (2). Barbara Frances Matters (3).
Malcolm R. Stanley (3).
Jane Beadnell Matters (1)
Mary Dorothea Gordon (2).
David Matters Gordon (3).
Descendants of Jahez Bunting Waterhouse.
Gustavus John Waterhouse (1).
Gustavus Athol Waterhouse (2).
Gwynneth Jeanie Waterhouse (3)
Margaret Joan Waterhouse (3).
Rex Fossbrook Waterhouse (3).
Stretton Gustavus Waterhouse (3)
John Talbot Waterhouse (3).
Eben Gowrie Waterhouse (2).
Gordon Gowrie Waterhouse (3).
Douglas Waterhouse (3).
Evan Wilson Waterhouse (3).
lan Waterhouse (3).
Leslie Vickery Waterhouse (2).
Joan Margaret Waterhouse (3).
Ruth Anne Waterhouse (3).
John Waterhouse (1).
John Henry Lawry Waterhouse
(2).
Lionel Lawry Waterhouse (2).
John David Walter Waterhouse
(3).
Walter Lawry Waterhouse (2).
Louise Margaret Waterhouse (3).
Olive Lawry Oakley (2).
Donald Waterhouse Oakley (3).
Jabez Leonard Lawry Waterhouse
(2).
Anna Lawry Waterhouse (2).
Rowland Skipsey Waterhouse (1).
Edith Madolyn Blow (2).
Amy Humphries (2).
Rowland Sidney Waterhouse (2).
May Buffett (2).
William Arthur Waterhouse (2).
Alfred Herbert Waterhouse (1).
Olive May Waterhouse (2).
Herbert Raymond Waterhouse (2).
Muriel Augusta Waterhouse (2).
Leonard Parramore Waterhouse
(1).
John Leonard Waterhouse (2).
John Teast Waterhouse (3).
Jessie Flora Cook (2).
Winifred Agnes McNeil (2)
42


Descendants of Mary Ann Padman.
Mary Ann Waterhouse (1).
Gertrude Mary Carey (2).
Ruth Gertrude Carey (3).
Percy Melville Waterhouse (2).
Wilfrid Rowland Waterhouse (3)
lan Corfield Waterhouse (3).
Hilda Ida Greenham (2).
Elma Clara West (2).
Madeline Raston (2).
Emily Emma Churchward (1).
Spencer Churchward (2).
John Spencer Churchward (3).
Rex Mather Churchward (3).|
Lloyd Gordon Churchward (3).
Dorothy May Churchward (3).
Clifton Reed Churchward (2).
Edison Clifton Churchward (3).
Jean Churchward (3).
Phyllis Churchward (3).
Stella Mary Churchward Kelly
(2).
Frank Heron Churchward Kelly
(3).
Stella Mary Churchward Kelly
(3).
Lois Churchward Kelly (3).
Verna Loveday Churchward-
Salter (2).
Trenfield Churchward-Salter (3)
Roger Churchward-Salter (3).
Clerk Maxwell Churchward (2).
Marjorie Agne Churchward (3).
John Waterhouse Padman (1).
Samuel Waterhouse Padman (1).
Vernon Ragless Padman (2).
Maud Lilian Kelly (2).
Alethe Dorothy Padman (2).
Marsden Waterhouse Padman (2)
Joseph Ernest Padman (1).
Maurice Skipsey Padman (2).
Descendants of Joseph Waterhouse.
Joseph Waterhouse (1). Ruth A. Waterhouse (2).
Rowland William Waterhouse (1). Elvie F. Waterhouse (2).
Descendants of Samuel Waterhouse.
George Wilson Waterhouse (1). Chester Waterhouse (2).
Kenneth Waterhouse (2). Margaret Eleanor Ross (2).
Janet Waterhouse (2). Dorothy C. Waterhouse (2).
Herbert Whitney Waterhouse (1). Kathleen W. Waterhouse (2)
Louis David Waterhouse (2).
43


jf'M.'i V' %" I
; </
WIDOW AND CHILDREN OF
TRcD. John Waterhouse
(1) His widow—formerly Jane Beadnell Skipsey.
(2) Jane Middleton married Rev. W. Butters.
(3) John Thomas married Eleanor Dickenson.
(4) Rowland Skipsey married 1. Susannah Watchorn; 2. Ellen Kirkham
(5) William married Mary Towers.
(6) Jabez Bunting married Maria Augusta Bode.
(7) George Marsden married Lydia Giles.
(8) Mary Ann married Thomas Padman.
(9) Joseph married Elizabeth Watson.
(10) Samuel married 1. Esther Day Wilson; 2. Eleanor Watson.
(11) Emma married Richard Hobbs.
Two other children died in infancy.


bibliography
Books, Etc., in which reference is made to
Rev. John Waterhouse.
“The King and People of Fiji.” Rev. Joseph Waterhouse.
“Lights in the Southern Sky.” Dr. J. E. Carruthers.
“Century of Tasmanian Methodism.” Rev. C. C. Dugan, M.A.
“The Spectator,” June 11th, 1930. An article by Rev. C. C. Dugan
M.A., entitled “John Waterhouse; An Apostolic Voyager.”
“A Century in the Pacific.” Rev. J. Colwell, F.R.Hist.S.
“The Magazine,” Vol. cxxix., March, 1916. An English publication.
Journals of Rev. John Waterhouse contained in “The Wesleyan Mis-
sionary Notices” of 1841, No. 29, and of 1844, Nos. 62 and 63
An English publication.
“The City Road Magazine,” June, 1876.
“Sketches of Sermons,” 4 vols., London: Jackson and Walford (1838)
The sketches signed “Kappa” are of sermons preached by Rev,
John Waterhouse, and were supplied by him.
“The Pioneer Missionary”: Life of Rev. Nathaniel Turner.
“Fiji and the Fijians,” Vol. 11. Rev. James Calvert.
“Life of Rev. John Hunt.” G. S. Rowe.
“The Missionary of Australasia and Polynesia.” Rev. S. Dunn.
“Missionary Triumphs.” BlackeL
“Vah-ta-ah, The Feejean Princess.” Rev. Joseph Waterhouse.
“Wesleyan Methodist Magazine.” 1841 and 1844.
Manuscripts, Etc.
Lyth’s Journal.
Certificate of Appointment.
Autobiography of Rev. John Waterhouse.
Journals of Voyage from England to Van Diemen’s Land.
Letter of Rev. John Waterhouse, 1840.
Rev. John Hunt’s Letter to Widow of Rev. John Waterhouse.








’ JfaaAKuJtutL f
> luiLa*JvuuajU*J'
JuxmAj jJuCd . J #Xv Cj/JuC H*** o*° laaJjUl^
juXuaM i*u*Jb A*o HJtxJbouM/ —• a* AuAaJLtidj J AyLaJJL hLcuU
Hdb VQciLUcAl' 1/AiMJ IMXtJt TTLOjJi ; J&v M^4a4
At> LjltajicuH jP A/ ‘ %
(XaaxL aacliaaJ4
huidtA* 04 $Ja) 1/JoJUja> 'h (**f **
tit) /luJLjttt etwu Z*Ah*
jho
JiuMtJbt'/ fitil
Ml* jUmHuaO iauJiL^U
1 JtLtaAJ' AXJtth IAAAJ /U>nAJvtlMAj*toti
l> htt A4AJXL& tJLud TILdIxJL -c& >6O
