

A
BRIEF ACCOUNT
OF THE
CHRONOMETER,
With Remarks on those furnished by
PARKINSON AND FRODSHAM
TO THE
EXPEDITIONS
OF
CAPTAINS ROSS, PARRY, SABINE, KING, LYON, FOSTER,
AND OTHER DISTINGUISHED NAVIGATORS,
With the Rate of Others tried at
THE ROYAL OBSERVATORY, GREENWICH,
In the Years 1826-29-30-31.
London:
PRINTED BY M. A. PITTMAN, WARWICK SQUARE.




CHRONOMETERS.
THE rapid strides with which science has advanced during the
last few years may be readily accounted for by the attention
that has been bestowed on it by the leading men of all nations,
and by the almost universal establishment of Societies having for
their professed object the improvement of its. different branches.
These praiseworthy efforts of individuals have, since the establish-
ment of peace in Europe, been laudably encouraged by the several
Governments, and by none more liberally than our own. It is,
however, remarkable, that in this country the Chronometer, so
important to navigation, and for the improvement of which large
rewards had been offered by our Government, should have been
the only instrument that did not keep pace with the great and
rapid improvement of every other description of machinery that
had engrossed the attention of the man of science and the me-
chanic, and by the aid of which England has been raised to such
eminence among nations. Happily, however, this stigma is in a
great measure removed ; and England may now justly boast of
having as far outstripped all her competitors in this as she has
done in several other instances of the application of science to
purposes of national utility.
It is unnecessary here to dilate on the importance of the
Chronometer in determining the longitude at sea, or to advert to
the great benefit the mariner derives from its use. By its assistance
he frequently preserves the lives and property committed to his
care, while the average duration of voyages, as compared with
those previously to its introduction, is reduced in a ratio perfectly
astonishing.
The very general adoption of the Chronometer, particularly in
]opg voyages, is the liest proof of its value; and it ia more than


probable, that, in a very few years, no vessel will sail without one,
either to distant parts of the world, or when navigating smaller
seas—this invaluable instrument being equally useful to the
scientific navigator in the one case as in the other.
The interest taken by the different Maritime Governments of
Europe for the discovery of a marine watch capable of more
accurately determining the longitude at sea was exemplified so
long ago as 1598, when Philip the Third of Spain offered a reward
of one thousand crowns for that purpose. The States of Holland
soon afterwards munificently promised one hundred thousand
.florins: in the reign of Queen Anne, England, being equally
desirous of promoting so important a discovery, offered twenty
thousand pounds: and in 1716 the Duke of Orleans, then Regent
of France, also offered one hundred thousand livres to the artist
who should attain that object.
These princely inducements naturally stimulated men of science
and ingenuity to the arduous undertaking, which, to the honour
of England, was attained by our highly-talented countryman,
John Harrison, to whom the first premium was awarded. This
scientific mechanic, after forty years of intense application and
study, at length succeeded in completing a marine watch, which,
upon trial in a voyage to Barbadoes, determined the longitude
within the limits prescribed, and he received from the British
Parliament, in 1764, the sum of twenty thousand pounds.
Foreign artists also exerted their powerful abilities to attain this
desirable object; among the principal of whom were Berthoud
and Le Roy. The latter invented the detached escapement,
which very much improved and simplified the Chronometer ; and
also the compensation balance (now with scarcely any improve-
ment universally adopted). That artist, however, on its first
introduction, fearful of applying his own invention—not feeling
sufficient confidence in its stability—used other means in his marine
watch for the purpose of counteracting the changes of temperature.
He also, in a very ingenious, scientific, and valuable Treatise on
Marine Watches, suggested the Isochronous property contained
in the balance spring, so indispensable in producing the accurate
measurement of time. These inventions having been introduced
into this country, were taken up by several ingenious artists, and
improved on by Messrs. Mudge and Arnold, and subsequently by
Earnshaw ; to the former of whom a premium was awarded by
Parliament of three thousand pounds in 1793 ; and the same sum


to both Mr. Arnold and Mr. Earnshaw, by the Board of Lon-
gitude in 1800,
Although prior to this period, and afterwards, some excellent
Chronometers were occasionally produced, which proved the
possibility of their being brought generally to greater per-
fection ; yet it was evident, by their forming so very small a
proportion of those in general use, that their good performance
arose rather from accidental circumstances than from any known
principle in their construction.
During the lengthened warfare which involved the whole of
Europe, England had little time to attend to the advancement of
science: but on its termination, ever anxious to be pre-eminent
on that element by which her glory had been extended to all
portions of the habitable globe, the Government of this country
planned several expeditions for the advancement of geographical
discovery and for the improvement of nautical science ; and the
Lords of the Admiralty, in 1822, offered two premiums—one of
3001. and one of 2001.—t0 be awarded annually to the makers of
the two Chronometers which should be adjudged to be the best,
after having been submitted to a twelvemonth’s trial at the Royal
Observatory at Greenwich.
It is only from this period that it may truly be asserted that
Chronometers have been improved in their construction, so as collec-
tively to approximate to perfection, and that greater improvements
have been made in them than in the forty years preceding. As a
proof of this fact. Government now refuses to purchase Chrono-
meters sent for trial, whose performances have far exceeded those
to which at the commencement of the trials (1822) they awarded
the above prizes.
Among the first of the voyages undertaken by the English
Government subsequently to the late war, for the purpose of
geographical discovery, was the Northern Expedition (in 1818),
to endeavour to settle the long-contested problem of a North-
West Passage into the Pacific Ocean. The expedition consisted
of two ships—the Isabella, commanded by Captain Ross, and
the Alexander, by Lieutenant Parry. Captain Sabine, of the
Royal Artillery, F.R.S., was appointed Astronomer to this expe-
dition. They were furnished with several Chronometers and
every necessary instrument for prosecuting scientific discovery.
Parkinson and Frodsiiam, who had devoted a considerable por-
tion of their time and great attention to the improvement of


Chronometers, and had spared neither expense nor exertions in
their endeavours to attain perfection, considered this an eligible
opportunity of having one upon their principle practically tried.
They therefore made application to the Lords of the Admiralty
for permission to send it with the expedition at their own risk,
which request was acceded to. On the return of Captain Ross,
this Chronometer was reported to have surpassed all the others
which he took with him in the regularity of its going and the
equability of its rate—as will be seen from the extracts of two
letters addressed to Parkinson and Fuodshaji by Captain Ross
and Captain Sabine (See Appendix, No. /.)
This high testimony of its performance induced the Lords of the
Admiralty to order it to be purchased for the use of a second
expedition, then fitting out under Lieutenant Parry, for the purpose
of attempting further discoveries.
In consequence of this liberal encouragement, and having com-
pleted three other Chronometers on the same principle, they
again applied to the Board of Admiralty, and immediately
obtained the required permission to send them with this expedi-
tion, which, consisting of the Ilecla, Lieutenant Parry, and the
Griper, Lieutenant Liddon, sailed in 1819. Parkinson and
Frodsiiaji placed No. 259 under the charge of Lieutenant Parry,
and the other two (Nos. 253 and 254) under that of Captain
Sabine, who again accompanied this expedition as Astronomer and
for the purposes of general science. The whole of them were
delivered to Captain Sabine, accompanied by a letter from
Parkinson and Frodsiiam, stating that they were “ Experi-
mental Chronometers,” in which they had attempted a principle of
correcting their final adjustment different from that in general use,
for the purpose of endeavoring to prevent that disposition to
acceleration and retardation in their rates to which Chronometers
had hitherto generally been subject. The result of the per-
formance of these Chronometers in this severe and unprecedented
trial was an evident proof of considerable improvement—the
whole of them having preserved their rates in a most uniform
manner during an Arctic winter exposed to 40° below zero ; and
whilst every other Chronometer on board (of which there were
fourteen) actually stopped. No. 228, (the one already mentioned
as having been purchased by the Admiralty,) Nos. 259, 253,
and 254, kept the same rates throughout the time occupied by the
expedition, as appeared upon comparison made at London on its


departure and return, and also by observations at Leith. —(See
Appendix, No. II.)
On the return of the Ilecla and Griper the Lords of the Admi-
ralty purchased the two Chronometers Nos. 253 and 254, and the
Officers of the expedition purchased No. 259 for Captain Parry,
which they presented to him as a testimony of the esteem and
respect they entertained for their commander. The Honorable
Board also, on receiving the reports of the extraordinary and
unprecedented performance of the four Chronometers, 228, 253,
254, and 259, ordered their rates to be printed, and circulated
them amongst the scientific circles.
All these Chronometers accompanied the second expedition of
Captain Parry in the Fury, and Captain Lyon in the Hecla, in
1821, to Winter Island and Igoolik. They returned in 1823,
and the report of the rates of their was equally
satisfactory.
In 1822 Captain Sabine sailed from Portsmouth for Africa in
the Iphigenia, Captain Clavering, for the purpose of making
experiments to determine the figure of the earth by means of the
pendulum vibrating seconds in different latitudes. He was fur-
nished with the best instruments of every description belonging
to the Royal Society and the Board of Longitude, in addition to
those of his own private property; and Parkinson and Fnon-
sham also sent four Chronometers with him on trial. He arrived
at Sierra Leone on the 22d of February, and returned to London
on the sth of the same month in the following year. The correct-
ness of these Chronometers was so highly appreciated that Cap-
tain Clavering purchased one of them for his own use.
In 1823 Captain Sabine proposed to extend his experiments in
the high latitudes, for the purpose of concluding his pendulum
experiments. This proposal having been approved by the Lords
of the Admiralty and the Board of Longitude, he sailed on the
11th May on board the Griper, Captain Clavering, to Spitsber-
gen, &c. &c. and returned to London in December. Parkin-
son and Froiisiiam’s three Chronometers accompanied this expe-
dition, together with a Chronometer No. 1, made by W. E. Fnon-
sham, one of the junior branches of their house, which performed
equally well with the others. —(See Appendix, No. III.)
From the report made by Captain Sabine on his return home.
Government purchased two of the abovementioned Chronometers,
Nos. 423 and 049, which were sent out with Captain Parry in his


third voyage (together with some of the others previously men-
tioned), and they maintained the same high character in the Polar
Seas that they had obtained from Captain Sabine in his pen-
dulum experiments.
In 1824 Captain Parry in the Hecla, and Captain Hopner in
the Fury, again proceeded for the purpose of discovering a
North-West Passage. In this voyage, Parkinson and Fuou-
sham’s Chronometers were selected to accompany the enterprise,
together with one that had that year received the first prize of
three hundred pounds. They also sent one out on comparative
trial, Henry Frodsham, No. 1, another of the junior branches of
their house. Mr. Foster accompanied the expedition as astrono-
mer, and had charge of all the Chronometers. Parkinson and
Frodsiiam’s Chronometers preserved their rates in the same
satisfactory manner as in the preceding voyages; and the one by
Frodsham junior performed equally well with those which had
previously undergone so great an alternation of climate: and,
from its regular and uniform going, was adopted (in 1825) as
the Standard Chronometer. From the high report of its excel-
lent performance. Lord Melville, the then First Lord of the
Admiralty, purchased it for a present to his son, the Hon. Captain
Dundas. —(See Appendix, No. IV.)
Several other makers also sent Chronometers on trial on this as
in former voyages, but they were generally found upon trial not to
have been sufficiently prepared for so severe a test as those made
by Parkinson and Frodsham.
In the same year, 1824, Captain Lyon proceeded in the Griper
to Repulse Bay, to endeavour through this course to discover a
North-West Passage, but returned unsuccessful, having met with
most disastrous weather. Lieutenant Kendall accompanied him
as assistant surveyor, and had charge of the Chronometers.
Parkinson and Frodsham sent Chronometer No. 1, which
had performed so well with Captain Sabine in 1822, and one of
their own. —(For their performances see Appendix, \o. V.)
In Captain Parry’s last voyage in the Hecla, to attempt to reach
the North Pole in boats over the ice, which sailed the 26th May
1827, “ Government (we quote Captain Parry’s own words) fur-
“ nished six chronometers, the whole being pocket watches. Of
“ these Parkinson and Frodsham were directed to prepare two,
“ the dial plates of which were to have the hours from one to
“ twenty-four marked on them—a precaution intended to provide


“ against the possibility of incurring an error of twelve hours
“ when travelling over the ice towards the Pole. The rest were
“ directed to be supplied from the Royal Observatory at Green-
“ wich; but it so happened that a short time before the embarka-
“ tion, these latter Chronometers, intended for the use of the
“ expedition, were going irregularly—a circumstance which at
“ this advanced stage of the equipment would have been attended
“ with very serious inconvenience, had it not been for the liberal
“ offer of Parkinson and Frodsham to supply the number re-
“ quired at their own risk. However, the Lords Commissioners of
“ the Admiralty, on becoming acquainted with the circumstances
“ of the case, immediately directed the Chronometers in question
“ to be purchased of Parkinson and Frodsham ; and these, with
“ five others (three of which belonged to the same makers, the
“ other two to Captain Parry and Lieutenant Foster, the astrono-
“ mer), were embarked on board the Hecla.”—They passed the
summer at Spitzbergen; and Captain Parry, in speaking of
Parkinson and Frodsham’s Chronometers, says, “it is highly
“ creditable to the makers of these excellent Chronometers, that
'■ each was found to preserve its rate extremely well; and under
" the severe trials to which these watches were subjected, the
“ boats made Little Table Island, after an absence of fifty days,
“ to a surprising degree of exactness.”
In 1828, Capt Foster, in the Chanticleer, proceeded on a voyage
for making pendulum experiments and extensive surveys. He
had seventeen Chronometers on board (two lent by Parkinson
and Frodsham on comparative trial, and two belonging to the
Government by other makers that had obtained the prizes of
three hundred pounds). One of Parkinson and Frodsham s.
No. 1204, was, after sufficient trial, adopted as the standard, and
continued so till the end of the voyage in 1831. Lieutenant
Kendall had the charge of the Chronometers for a portion of the
voyage, until his appointment to the Hecla surveying vessel. The
expedition sailed from Falmouth, and embraced in its route Ma-
deira, Teneriffe, St. Antonio, Fernando de Noronha, Rio Janeiro,
St. Catherine’s, Monte Video, Staten Island, Cape Horn, South
Shetland, Cape Horn again. Cape of Good Hope, St. Helena,
Ascension, Trinidad, Para, Maranham, Porto Bello, and St.
Michael’s, and returned to Falmouth. Captain Foster, having
been unfortunately drowned on his return home (January 1831),


Lieutenant (now Commander) Austin took the command, and for
his report we refer to Appendix, No. VI.
Previously to these two last voyages of Captain Parry and Cap-
tain Foster, Captain King in the Adventure, accompanied by
Captain Stokes in the Beagle, sailed in 1820, for the purpose of
surveying Terra del Fuego, Magellan Straits, Cape Horn, &c. &c..
Lieutenant Graves having in this voyage generally taken charge of
the Chronometers. One sent out by Parkinson and Frod-
sham (No. 1048), on comparative trial, was officially reported
by Captain King (with the Government Chronometers) to the
Admiralty ; and in a letter to Parkinson and Frodsiiam,
Captain King says, " It performed by for the best of all he
had on board," of which there were thirteen. From Captain
King’s report to the Admiralty, this Chronometer was liberally
purchased by Government.— (See Appendix, No. VII.)
In 1830 Lieutenant Kendall proceeded (by order of the Secre-
tary of State for the Colonial Department) to America, to make a
series of astronomical observations, with the view of fixing the
relative positions of several principal points in the Province of New
Brunswick. He was furnished, at the request of Government,
with five of Parkinson and Frodsiiam’s Chronometers (which
they readily lent for the purpose): and for a testimony of their
excellent performance on their conveyance by hand, in coaches, on
horseback, and on shipboard, we refer to Appendix, No. VIII.
A comparative trial of Parkinson and Frodsiiam’s Chro-
nometers with others was directed to be made at the Observa-
tory of Leyden: they were tried by one of the Learned Professors
of that University—the result of which again confirmed the
superiority of Parkinson and Frodsiiam’s Chronometers, and
they in consequence obtained from the Government of the Nether-
lands the most liberal encouragement.
The Russian circumnavigators. Captain Kotzebue, Captain
Lutkie, and Baron Wrangel, were furnished by the Russian
Government with Parkinson and Frodsiiam’s Chronometers, and
expressed their high satisfaction at the accuracy of their perform-
ances.—(Sec Appendix, No. IX.)
The principle of correcting Chronometers, as adopted by
Parkinson and Frodsiiam in the first voyage of Captain Parry,
in 1818, was applied to all those subsequently sent on the other
voyages of discovery, and has been continued to the present time.


together with those alterations and improvements which observa-
tion and experience have naturally suggested; and they have the
satisfaction of knowing that their exertions in the cause of science
have been duly appreciated.
In addition to the above high testimonials, they have received
numerous letters from distinguished Officers in His Majesty’s Ser-
vice (many of them employed in voyages of considerable dura-
tion), from Captains in the merchant service, from Commanders
of vessels engaged in American commerce, and other intelligent
Navigators in various parts of the world—all tending to confirm
their excellence, and evincing the strongest proof of the value of
the discovery, and the certainty and universality of its application.
—(See Appendix, No. X.J
But, however flattering all these testimonials of pre-eminent
accuracy in the performance of their Chronometers through every
variation of climate—far exceeding the reasonable expectations of
aify artist, however eminent—together with the excellent rates of
going of others (made by the junior branches of their house) at
the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, particularly on the late and
preceding trials, the rates of which are here annexed, and to
some of which Prizes were adjudged Pakkinson and Frod-
stlAM hope that still greater perfection may be attained in this
important branch of mechanical science, so as to make Chrono-
meters generally maintain their rates more equably: and they
confidently trust, by devoting till their abilities in furtherance
of this great object, they may eventually be enabled to produce
Chronometers with such a positive certainty of equal perfection,
as must render them invaluable for the purposes of navigation.
PARKINSON AND FRODSHAM.
in the following page, have the satisfaction to submit the Rates
of Four Chronometers, made by three of the Junior Branches
of their Establishment, tried at the Royal Olwervatory, Green-
wich, ii) 1828-29-30-31.


Average Dailt Rate, for each Month, of Chronometer No. 8/3, by Henry
Frodsham, ’Change Alley, Comhill, for Twelve Months, at the Royal Observa-
tory, Greenwich, sent on Public Trial; with the Maximum and Minimum of the
Thermometer.
Date.
Daily Rate.
Thermometer.
Maximum.
Minimum.
1828.
August
+ 0" 28
- 0“ 02
72’
73°
61“
62°
+ 0“ 37
+ 0" 17
- 0" 25
63’
50°
58°
38’
54°
43’
1829.
- 0" 89
48°
29*
- 0" 18
50°
39’
+ 0“ 40
58°
40’
+ 0" 81
55°
46’
+ 0" 32
(!8°
50°
+ 0“ 41
73°
61’
July
+ 0“ 40
71°
63°
Average Daily Rate, for each Month, of Chronometer No. 2, by W. E.
Erodsha.m. ’Change Alley, Comhill, for Twelve Months,
at the Royal Obser-
vatory, Greenwich, sent on Public Trial; with the Maximum and Minimum ot
the
Thermometer.
Thermometer.
Rate in July -0“ 51
Date.
Daily Rate.
Ditto in Sep-
tember....+0“ 11
0" 62
Maximum.
Minimum.
1829.
October
- 0" 1U
80°
48°
being the extreme
November
- 0“ 17
55°
37°
error on the Kate in
December
- 0“ 27
49°
2J|°
12 months. This
1830.
- 0“ 15
4o°
28°
was only equalled by
two out of nearly
February
- 0“ 50
55°
29°
March
- 0“ 20
«3°
4fi°
500 sent on the trial,
- 0" 17
- 0" 50
71°
74°
45°
and they only by a
few hundreth parts
May
54°
- 0" 14
70°
58°
of a second. Govern-
July
- 0“ 51
80°
00°
ment were pleased
August
- 0“ 50
75°
61°
to purchase this In-
September
+ 0" 11
strumcnt.
Average Daily Rate, for each Month, of Chronometers Nos. 1 and 2, by
Charles Fhodsham, ’Change Alley, Corahill, for Twelve Months, at the
Royal Observatory, Greenwich, on the last Public Trial.
Thermometer.
No. 1.
Date.
Daily Rate.
No. 2.
Daily Rate.
Maximum.
Minimum.
ui;m.
October
+ 2“
73
+ 6"
75
69’
52“
November
•f 3"
45
•
+ 6"
118
59°
45“
December
+ 3“
2‘J
,
+ 6“
07
50°
27“
1831.
January
+ 3"
44
+ 6"
59
50°
35“
February
+ 3"
43
+ 6“
85
59’
34“
March
+ 3"
60
+ 7“
24
58“
44“
April
+ 3'
72
s
+ 7“
45
62“
37“
May
+ 3"
67
+7“
24
71“
52°
June
+ 3-
54
•o
+ 7“
22
72“
61“
July
+ 3“
15
4)
+7“
29
78“
65“
August
+ 3“
25
eft
+ 7“
00
77“
66“
September
+ 3"
66
X
+ 7“
26
72“
60“
October
+ 3“
47
+7-
05
No. 2 was the second, and No. 1 the fifth, in the trial list. With respect, however,
to No. I, some correction was made a few days previously to its being sent on trial; so
that its rate was not settled the first month, and which, in fairness to the merits of the
Chronometer, ought to be omitted : and then, taking the twelve subsequent months,
the extreme variation will be found to be only 0“ 57. This, out of nearly 500 Chrono.
meters sent on the public trials, was equalled only by one, whose extreme variation was
0“ 54. These two Instruments were also purchased by the Government.


APPKNDIX.
No. I.
Extract of a Letter from Captain Ross to Messrs. Parkinson and
Fuodsiiam.
“ Herewith you receive an account of the going of your Chronometer
No. 228, which was sent with the expedition under my command to
Baffin’s Bay. By a comparison with the other Chronometers and obser-
vations which ascertained their rates during the voyage, as well as by the
comparison on our return, it appears that your Chronometer abovemen-
tioned has performed better than any other we had on board, and exactly
as you had in your directions expected it to do: and I have great pleasure
in affording you this testimony of my approbation, and in recommending
your Chronometers as of a superior construction, and as instruments
which may be safely depended on by navigators.
(Signed) “ John Ross, Capt. R.N.
“ London, July 1819.”
Extract of a Letter from Captain E. Sabine, Astronomer to Captain
Ross’s Expedition.
“ Captain Sabine has great pleasure in assuring Messrs. Parkinson
and Frodsham that their Chronometer No. 228 lias gone remarkably
well during the North West Expedition. As soon as he is at liberty to
give extracts from his papers, he will furnish Messrs. Parkinson and
Frodsham with a statement of its comparative going, with live other Chro-
nometers embarked in the Isabella, as also such remarks as he feels it his
duty to make on it.
“ Nov. 25, 1818.”
On the 13th of July 1819, Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsham
received the following Note :
“ Captain Sabine begs to inform Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsham
that in consequence of the favorable report which he has made of their


Chronometer No. 228; and as an encouragement to the liberality with
which Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsham entrusted it on the late Voyage
of Discovery, Mr. Crokcr (Secretary to the Lords of the Admiralty) has
expressed the readiness of Government to purchase No. 228."
No. II.
Extract of a Letter from Captain Parry, R.N. to Messrs.
Parkinson and Frodsham.
“ Captain Parry has the satisfaction to inform Messrs. Parkinson
ami Frodsham that their watches have performed admirably throughout
the voyage, and that the account, which will shortly be published, cannot
fail to reflect the highest credit on the makers of such invaluable Chro-
nometers. Captain Parry begs, however, that Messrs. Parkinson and
Frodsham will not, in any public way, make use of his name on this sub-
ject, as it is his full intention to make known, in the proper manner, the
advantage he has derived from the use of them.
“ Nov. 9, 1820.”
Extract of a Letter from Captain Sabine, R.A., F.R.S., to Messrs.
Parkinson and Frodsham.
“ Captain Sabine has great pleasure to acquaint Messrs. Parkinson
and Frodsham that all thair Chronometers arc safe, and have behaved most
admirably indeed—the details of which Captain Sabine will shew Messrs.
Parkinson and Frodsham so soon as the llecla shall arrive at Deptford
from Leith, where she is at present.
“ Portland Place, Nov. 0, 1820."
Captain Parry’s Journal of this Expedition was subsequently
published by authority of the Lords of the Admiralty, in which
are the following remarks on Messrs. Parkinson and Fhod-
sham’s Chronometers:—
“ The number of Chronometers embarked in the expedition amounted,
altogether, to fourteen. No. 32.3 of Messrs. Parkinson and FrodshaAi,
had been sent on trial in the Voyage of Discovery to Baffin’s Bay, in 1818,
at the risk of its makers, whose property it then was. A favorable report
having been made, on return, of its going, the Admiralty were pleased to
order its purchase for the public service. In consequence of such encourage-
ment, Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsham determined to send three Chro-
nometers on trial on the present occasion ; accordingly their Nos. 253 and


254 were delivered to Captain Sabine in the beginning of April 1819, and
No. 259 a few days before the expedition sailed.
*“ In table No. 3 is shewn the daily rate of the remaining of tire Hecla’s
complement on mean Greenwich time, as shewn each day at noon by 259,
with its correction applied to its rate and original difference.
“ No. 259 has been selected for this purpose, because it is believed to have
preserved the most steady and uniform rate throughout the season. This
fact may be examined by a reference to the table closing the abstract of
.latitudes and longitudes determined in 1819, in which the daily longitude
by each Chronometer is shewn separately, as well as by their mean. It is
considered to afford a presumption of remarkable steadiness.
“ The occasional stoppage of some Chronometers, and the irregularity ol
others, shew, that, notwithstanding the precautions that were adopted, the
cold which was experienced was greater than they were prepared to meet.
“ The Chronometers of Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsham appeared to
have been better prepared for the peculiar service on which they were em-
ployed than any other of the Chronometers. No instance occurred of any
one of them being stopped by the cold.
“ On due examination of the going of the Chronometers at Melville
Island, exhibited in table 5, it was apparent that the four of Messrs. Pah-
kinson and Frodsham’s were principally to be relied on in the detenninafion
of longitude in the ensuing season.
“ Their actual differences, ascertained by comparison at Calton Hill,
being divided by 4 (the number of the Chronometer), gives 1.813 fast, as
the error of the Greenwich time, shewn by the Chronometers'at the end of
104 days, on being allowed the average daily rates at which they had gone
for the three months preceding the period.
“ The longitude of the western parts of Melville Island, and of a con-
siderable portion of the western coast of Baffin’s Bay and Davis’ Straits,
which were surveyed in the season of 1820, have been accordingly deter-
mined by the mean of these four Chronometers, being the rates. Table 7,
containing a statement of their daily going in time since their return to
London. The materials of their statement have been furnished by the
makers, who had not received any intimation of the previous rate.
“ Admirably as these Chronometers have fulfilled the pm-pose for which
they were employed, it is an additional satisfaction to find, that notwith-
standing the change of circumstances attendant on their disembarkation and
replacement in their makers’ care, they are still retaining, almost without
exception, their Melville Island rates.


No. III.
Extract of a Letter from Captain Sabine on his return from his
First Voyage for making Pendulum Experiments.
“ Captain Sabine has the pleasure of apprising Messrs. Parkinson
and Fhousiiam that their Chronometers, 423, 493, 384, and 357 are safe,
and that 423 and 357 are the best watches Captain Sabine ever knew
The others are also very good, but the two named pre-eminent.
“ Captain Sabine is going again to the Arctic Circle for the summer
months, and will be very glad to have with him at least 423 and 357.
No. 357 need not even return into die maker’s hands in the interim.
No. 423 requires a slight amendment in compensation, equivalent to one
second per diem for 10 degrees of latitude.
“ February 10, 1823.”
Extract of a Letter from Captain Sabine on his return from his
Second Voyage for completing his Pendulum Experiments.
“ Captain Sauine has the pleasure to acquaint Messrs. Parkinson
and Frodsiiam once more of his safe arrival, and of the safety and excellent
going of their Chronometers. They have all gone well—the one by W. E.
Frodsiiam certainly scarcely inferior to the best.
“ Captain Sabine hopes he will at length be enabled to make the best
return in his power for the great assistance which these admirable time-
pieces have been to him throughout his observations, by making it known
in almost every page of his publication.
“ December 20, 1823.”
The following are Extracts on the performances of Messrs.
Parkinson and Frousiiam’s Chronometers in Captain Sa-
bine’s two Voyages to Africa, &c. and Spitzbergen, for
making Pendulum Experiments—as published (by authority
of the Board of Longitude) in his Narrative of those Scientific
Expeditions.
“ It would be impossible to express the advantage of which Messrs.
Parkinson and Frodsham’s Chronometers proved to me on all occasions,
or how much the thorough reliance which I could place on their time faci-
litated, or, what is more important, how much it conduced to the accuracy
of the variety of observations which successively occupied my attention,
and which I was usually pressed to complete in the shortest possible time.”
****** «It is known that the rates of Chronometers arc fre-
quently found to vary on embarkation in vessels, insomuch as to have given
rise to the distinctive terms of sea-iates and land-rates. No such variation.


however, can be found in the going of No. 423, in any one of the six
voyages in which it was embarked between April and November, which
alternated with nearly equal periods on land, when it was employed inces-
santly in observations, including those of magnetism.” • • • • •
In a note on this passage. Captain Sabine says, “ An opinion has lately
prevailed that the change in the rate of Chronometers on embarkation
which used to be considered as a consequence of the motion of a ship, is
principally occasioned by the magnetic influence of the iron which she
contains: and it has been assumed by some of the writers who have taken
part in the recent discussions on the subject, that the effect so attributed is
one of general experience. I believe, on the authority of others, rather
than from ray own observation, that a difference has sometimes, and even
frequently, taken place between the land and sea rates of Chronometers;
but, from whatever cause the irregularity may arise, I must regard its oc-
currence as an evidence of the inferiority of the peculiar Chronometer to
the advanced state to which the art of their construction has attained:
because, among the many with which I have at different times been fur-
nished by Messrs. I’akkinso.v and Frodsiiam, and which I have fre-
quently transferred from the ship to the shore, for two or three weeks at a
time, for the purpose of trial, I have never been able to discover any sys-
tematic variations whatever consequent on their removal. With regard to
the influence of the iron as a cause of the irregularity, a more decisive
evidence of its not being practically discovered under the most favorable
circumstances for its exhibition can scarcely be imagined, than took place
in the four Chronometers of Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsiiam, of which
I have given an account in the Appendix to Captain Parry’s Voyages in
1819-20, pages vii. to xii. xviii. xix. and xx*.” Having succinctly men-
tioned the results. Captain Sabine adds :—“ These particulars are stated in
detail in the pages referred to; but the circumstance is thus again generally
noticed, because it seems to have been overlooked by many t chose ingenuity
has been exerted in devising contrivances to remedy an evil which has no
practical existence, when the common discretion of life is exercised in
obtaining the better article at an equal price. Had the especial purpose of
the Hecla’s voyage been to inquire whether the iron of a ship, in its ordi-
nary distribution, would, under such extreme circumstances, exert a sens!,
ble influence on the Chronometers, better adapted arrangements could
scarcely have been devised for the experiment, nor could a more decisive
result in the negative have been obtained.”
• “ The Hecla was stationary and immovable, being frozen up for more
than ten months, in the vicinity of the magnetic pole, the dip between 88
and 89 degrees. Such is the situation and such the circumstances which are
supposed best adapted for the developement of magnetism in the stancheons
and other irons of a ship. The Chronometers were on board during the
whole winter; and their rates, preparatory to th? following smnmer, were


assigned from the average of the four months immediately preceding her
extrication from the ice, at an equal period of navigation. The Hecla
arrived at Leith, having experienced much bad weather in crossing the
Atlantic; but on comparing the four Chronometers at the Observatory at
Leith, their Greenwich time, employing their winter harbour rates, proved
less than two second.a in error on the arrival of the Hecla in the Thames.
The Chronometers were returned to Messrs. Parkinson and F rods ham’s
house in London, where, after a month’s interval, they were found still
going at the same rates as in the Hecla whilst in the harbour of Melville
Island.” —Note by Captain Sabine,
No. IV.
Extract of a Letter from Captain Pahtiy to Messrs. Parkinson
and Frodsham.
“ Captain Parry requests Messrs. Parkinson aud Frodsham will
inform him whether their Chronometer “ Henry Frodsham, No. X,” is
disposed of or not ; as, in consequence of its excellent performance during
his late voyage, a Gentleman has applied to Captain Parry, and commis-
sioned him to purchase it.
“ Admiralty, December 8, 1825.”
Extract of a Letter from Lieutenant Wynne to Messrs. Parkin-
son and Frodsham.
“ Gentlemen —The rate of my Pocket Watch, No. 510, which you
made for me, has been registered throughout the voyage with the Chro-
nometers embarked in the Ilecla, and has performed remarkably well;
certainly equal to any that we had on board. The rate will be published
with the other Chronometers, and you will then have the opportunity of
seeing that I have much reason to be satisfied with it."
Extract of a Letter from Lieutenant Foster to Messrs, Parkinson
and FrodshAm.
“ Dear Sirs —l request you will send some careful person on boArd the
Hecla, now at Deptford, on Monday next at noon, to receive your Chro-
nometer, ‘Henry Frodsham, No. I.’ It was undermy charge through-
out the voyage, and has performed remarkably well, keeping a uniform
rate, and was adopted as the standard during the navigation of 1825,
“ The Pocket Watch you made for me has given me the greatest satisfac-
tion. Its rate has been compared with the other Chronometers throughout


the voyage, of which I will furnish you a copy as soon as 1 hav« arranged
my papers.
“ Hecla, Deptford, October 29, 1825.”
(One of the Chronometers to which Government had adjudged
tlie prize of3ool. was sent out in this voyage.)
No. V.
Extract of a Letter from Captain G. F. Lyon, R.N. to Messrs.
Parkinson and Frodsham.
“ Gentlemen,
“ I have much pleasure in acquainting you of the admirable performance
of your two Chronometers. A carefully registered table of their rales has
been kept, with which I have requested Lieutenant Kendall to furnish
you. You will then see how much reason I have to be pleased with your
Watches. I must state to you, that, in consequence of my favorable
opinion of your Chronometers, I was induced to name you to a sci-
entific Gentleman, who, I believe, will wait on you to purchase one. I
have to request you to accept my best thanks for your having lent me two
such valuable Chronometers, as those brought to me by Mr. Frou-
siiam, jun.
“ Great Portland Street, January 4, 1825.”
Extract of a Letter from Lieutenant Kendai.i., R.X., to Messrs.
Parkinson and Frodsiiam, dated January 14, 1825.
“ Gentlemen —According to the instructions I have received from
Captain Lyon, I herewith inclose a table, drawn up by myself, of the daily
comparisons, differences, and second differences of your Chronometers
embarked on board His Majesty’s Ship Griper in her voyage to Repulse
Hay; and having had charge of the watches during the whole time of their
embarkation, I may be allowed to say their performance was excellent. No
chronometers, I believe, could have been exposed to a severer trial, except
as relates to change of temperature. 1 cannot bring a stronger testimony
in support of the equability with which their rates were maintained, than
the fact of our having made the land with such surprising accuracy after so
long an interval, during which it was not practicable to obtain observations
to enable us to form a judgment of their going, and we therefore relied on
the rates furnished by you on sending the Chronometers on board.
“ In conclusion, I beg to offer you my best wishes for the universal
adoption of the principle you have so successfully tried, being well assured
that, if it succeed according to your wishes, you will have the satisfaction of
having conferred the greatest possible benefit on your country, by advancing
the interests of science.
“ I am, &c.
E. N. KENDALL."


No. VI.
“ H. M.S. Chanticleer, Woolwich, June 7, 1831.
“ Gentlemen—From the very high opinion the late Captain Foster
entertained of your Chronometers, and also the liberality with which you
lent him two for the more effectually accomplishing the object he had in
view, I feel myself called upon, as the late Senior Lieutenant of the Chan-
ticleer, to express to you, that, during a voyage of three years’ duration,
through the greatest variety of climate and most tempestuous latitudus, the
performances of your Watches were admirable in the extreme : and,
indeed, often when in conversation with Captain Foster, we agreed that
your Chronometers had gone beyond our most sanguine hopes at our depar-
ture from England. When Captain Foster was unfortunately lost, he had
the Chronometer, No. .513, in his pocket, which you made specially for him
when he accompanied Captain Parry in his Third Expedition (1824).
This Chronometer he highly prized, and which, he often said, was the
very best that ever was made. I can bear testimony to the accuracy of
those which accompanied the Expedition ; but Ido not think that anything
I can say will express more than the daily rough comparison-books will
shew, and which I have the pleasure of sending for your inspection. I
may add, that I am quite aware, had Captain Foster lived, he would have
most strongly recommended your Chronometers, as I most cordially do, as
the very best that have ever come under ray observation.
“ I am, Gentlemen, your obedient Servant,
HORATIO THOS. AUSTIN,
Commander R. N.”
(There were two Chronometers on board the Chanticleer, to
each of which Government has adjudged the prize of 3001.)
No. VII.
Letter from Captain King, R.N. of His Majesty’s Ship Adventure,
to Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsiiam.
“ Gentlemen—l beg leave to inclose to you the rate of the Chrono-
meter No. lots, made by you, during the time it teas in my possession :
and I have, in returning you my best thanks for the loan of it, to state
with pleasure that it was by far the best going Watch of the twelve that
were in my charge. The inclosed rate will prove this to you, lam sure.
most satisfactorily.—l am, &c.
PHILIP P. KING."


No. VIII.
Letter from Lieutenant Kendali,, R. N., to Messrs. Parkinson
and Frodsiiam, dated Craven Street, October 22,1831.
“ Gentlemen —l beg to inclose a letter which I conceived it my duty
to address to the Hydrographer on the subject of your Chronometers, and,
as he wished me to point out three out of the five which I could most
confidently recommend, 1 pointed out B, C, and D, as those which had
preserved their rates with the greatest uniformity ; and he noted them for
purchase. I regret exceedingly that my constant occupations liave pre-
vented my personally waiting on you ere this, but 1 will endeavour to see
you in a few days. Meanwhile, I remain, &c.
' /r n VT T r M
“E. N. KENDALL."
Copy of a Letter from Lieutenant Kendall to Captain Beau-
fort, R.N. F.R.S, &c. Hydrographer to the Hon. Board of
Admiralty, dated October 11, 1831.
“ Sir —ln accordance with your desire, I beg to annex a statement of
the rates of five Chronometers that were used by me in my recent em-
ployment in determining the relative positions, by astronomical observa-
tion, of several points in the Province of New Brunswick, and to offer my
testimony to the excellence of their perfonnance within the last fifteen
months, during which period they have been exposed to all the different
motions consequent on their conveyance, by hand, in coaches, on horse-
back, and on shipboard. They have also withstood a range of the ther-
mometer from - 30° to + 95; and I would therefore submit for your con-
sideration the propriety of purchasing them for His Majesty’s service,
especially when it is known that the makers, Messrs. Parkinson and
Frodsiiam, with their accustomed liberality, lent them to the Government
at their own risk, without remuneration.”
No. IX.
Extract of a Letter from Baron Wrancel to Messrs. Parkinson
and Frodsham.
“ Your two Chronometers have performed admirably: one never
having gained more than one second six-tenths, and the other being never
more than two seconds four-tenths, during a voyage of more than three
years, exposed to great extremes of temperature, thus balancing their
differences (for errors they could not be called) with astonishing precision,
agreeing with all our observations to an exactness throughout the voyage,
particularly under circumstances the most unfavorable to which such instru-
ments could be exposed.”
The report from Captains Kotzebue and Luxkie was equally
satisfactory.


No. X.
Extracts of Letters from Officers in the British Navy and Mer-
chant Ships; and also from several of the Commanders of the
American Line of Packet Vessels from Europe to the United
States, and other intelligent Navigators engaged in American
Commerce.
“ 11. M. S. Tamar, Plymouth, Dee. 28, 1827.
“ Captain Bremer is happy in being enabled to inform Messrs. Par-
kinson and Frodsiiam, that the Chronometer he purchased of them,
No. 59G, performed to admiration. It never failed in all the various
climates and weather to which it was exposed in the Tamar’s long voyage of
four years, in which we sailed upwards of sixty thov.sand miles. In
running from the Cape of Good Hope to Bass’s Strait, in New Holland, a
distance of 126° of longitude, the land was made by it to a remarkable
exactness.”
(One of the Chronometers to which Government had adjudged
the prize of 3001. was sent out in the Tamar.)
Letter from Captain George Cheyne, II.N. to Messrs. Parkin-
son and Frodsiiam.
“ 6, Arundel Terrace, Islington, March 29, 1826.
“ Gentlemen —Annexed is a copy of the reply of Captain Parry to the
following extract of a letter to him from me:—
* TO captain parry.
‘ May 17, 1826.
‘ 1 have a conditional order concerning a Chronometer for Lord Bloom-
field. Will you be troubled to send me your opiniou of those made by
Parkinson and Frodsiiam, in case my own limited experience of their
instruments may have deceived me in assigning to them the superiority over
any other makers.
‘ Yodrs very truly,
GEO. CHEYNE.'
REPLY —RATED 18TH MARCH.
‘My dear Cheyne—-1 can safely say, that as far as my experience
goes concerning Chronometers, of which I have lately had between thirty
anrl forty in my immediate keeping, I know no maker so likely to furnish a
good one as Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsiiam.
‘ Yours very sincerely,
W. E. PARRY.
“ I shall only add to the above, that I shall ever retain a thankful remem-
brance of the experience I have had of two Chronometers which 1 had from
you. I am, &c.
GEO. CHEYNE."


Extract of another Letter from Captain Cheyne to Messrs. Par.
kinson and Frodsham, dated Santa Ana, August 9, 1829.
“ By the last English packet I received a letter from Captain Bloomfield,
of the Artillery, a relative of Lord Bloomfield, from Stockholm, from which
I send you an extract:—
“ ‘This and divers other things have prevented me executing a commis-
sion I have been long since ordered to do by Lord Bloomfield —to write to
you, and to tell you how well pleased he is with the Chronometer you were
the means of Parkinson and Frodsham furnishing him with. He left
England last May, and had it with him during a few months’ trip on the
Continent: at the end of which time he unfortunately let it down ; but he
had good reason to suppose it had not varied three seconds, and it has gone
admirably ever since.’ ”
“ I felt anxious to know that the Chronometer is a good one, and will
answer the great purpose I had in view—first, in persuading Lord Bloom-
field to take one of your Chronometers to Stockholm as a means of con-
vincing the Astronomer, who is the oracle of the Swedish navy, that he had
erred in saying, ‘England had now to yield the palm of Chronometer-
making to both France and Denmark:’ and, secondly, I trust in turning
the account to your advantage, which your generous compliance with my
desire in this business so well entitles you to. 1 add another extract from
the same letter:—
“ ‘ Only think (lie says) of our having no less than - 12° of cold
(Celsius) at six this morning, and ever since the middle of December we
have seen nothing but snow.’
“ The above - 12° of Celsius is equal to about 22" of Fahrenheit below
freezing, and will of course be to you a gratifying account of your manu-
facture. Knowing you have devoted so much of your time to prevent
Chronometers being affected by either extreme of cold or heat, I have made
it my pleasure to serve you on all occasions since I first became convinced of
the justice of your flaim to so honorable a distinction as the best Chrono-
meter-makers in the world.’’
Letter from Captain George Probyn, of the Hon. East India
Company’s Ship Minerva, to Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsham.
“ 79, Baker Street, March 10, 182.5.
“ Gentlemen —l have much pleasure in making you the most favorable
report of your Chronometer No. 560. Its daily gain throughout the
voyage was about half a second. Indeed that was the original rate which
you gave it. On taking it on board, June 7, 1823, it was 9" too fast, and
on my return to England, July 6, 182+, it was 3' 13" too fast on Green-
wich time ; so that, according with your rate, its error on my return, after


a voyage of thirteen months, was only 13". In feet, I have no hesitation
in saying that it is one of the best Chronometers I ever met with.
“ I am, &c.
GEORGE PROBYN."
Letter from Captain Lodowick Leeds, of the Isabella of Baltimore,
to Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsiiam.
" Liverpool, Jan. 13, 1824.
“ Gentlemen —lt affords me much satisfaction to state, that the Chro-
nometer No. 276, which I purchased of you, in my voyage from England
to China in 1822, and on its return to America, performed with singular
correctness. During nine months that I was on board the Tigris it varied
from its rate and mean time only four seconds. In my subsequent use of
it home, and in my return to Liverpool this winter, it has given the same
correct results. It is only due to your merited services to navigation and
nautical men to give this testimony of the value I entertain of your Chro-
nometers. 1 am, &c.
LUDOWICK LEEDS.
Extract of a Letter from Captain F. Dkwson, of the Boston
Packet Ship Topaz, to Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsiiam.
“ Liverpool, Jan. 23, 1827.
“ Gentlemen —The Chronometer No. .594, which I purchased of your
agent here four years since, is a first-rate instrument, not having varied from
her rate five-tenths of a second during the whole time. I have had four of
your Chronometers within the last eight years, and in every instance they
performed wonderfully. 1 am, &c.
F. DEWSON."
Letter from Captain Hugh Graham, of the Packet Ship Caledonia,
to Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsiiam.
“ Liverpool, Feb. 29, 1832.
“ Gentlemen —l have had several Chronometers of your make, all of
which have performed with the greatest possible accuracy. The last I
purchased of you, No. 771, is unexampled in correctness, not having varied
more than two seconds on its rate for the last three years; and during
tlie ten years it has been in my possession it has met my most decided
approbation. I am, &c.
HUGH GRAHAM."
Letter from Captain Joun Clarkson, of the Bombay Merchant,
to Messrs. Parkinson and Frousham, dated Deptford, Decem-
ber 10, 1828.
“ Gentlemen —Herewith you will receive my eight-day Chronometers,
115 and 116, which have given me great satisfaction. No. 146 has gone par-
ticularly well, and I don’t think 3001. would induce me to part with it.
You’ll please pay attention to their rates, as I shall want thorn about the
loth of March next. I am, &c.
JOHN CLARKSON."


Letter from Captain William S. Seboh, of the Ontario Packet
Ship, to Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsham.
“ London, Feb. 24, 1832.
f< Gentlemen —lt affords me much pleasure to have it in my power to
say, that during the last ten years that I have constantly been engaged in
the navigation between this Port and the United States, 1 have, on board
of the vessels under my command, invariably availed myself of sundry
Chronometers made by you. They have at all times performed with equal
regularity and correctness: and as an additional instance of their durability
and perfection, allow me to mention the circumstance, that when on a late
voyage to this country one of these instruments accidentally fell from a high
shelf, its action did not become thereby in the least disturbed, but, on the
contrary, proceeded without the slightest alteration of rate. It is in justice
to your superior skill, and already amply-established reputation only, that I
have the gratification of stating these facts, the result of personal observa-
tion. Wishing you every farther success your meritorious exertions so well
deserve, I remain, &c.
WILLIAN S. SEBOR."
Letter from Captain F. H. Hebard, of the Packet Ship Hannibal,
to Messrs. Parkinson and Frodsham, dated London, March 27,
1832.
“ Gentlemen —My vessel has just arrived in the London Docks, and I
wish you to send for my Chronometer No. 1152.
“ Previously to my sailing on the last voyage, I was so much engaged ]
that I entirely forgot to request you, to send it on board, and I felt much
obliged by your forwarding it to me at Portsmouth. I consider it remark-
able, that notwithstanding its conveyance by coach, I found, on working up
the rate you sent with it, when at New York, it had not varied more than
7" from the error on Greenwich time. This 1 consider an additional proof
of the excellence of my Chronometer, which I have now had more than four
years, during which time its rate has never altered more than one second
(keeping between + T S'" to + 2" S'"), although it has been twice to
Gravesend, and once to Portsmouth by coach; and I have frequently
returned to Europe with a variation of not more than one-tenth of a second
from the rate given by you.
“ I am, &c.
F. H. HEBARD."
Letter from Captain Joseph Finder, of the East India Ship
Hindoo, dated Whitehaven, Feb. 22, 1832.
“ Gentlemen —I have great pleasure in acknowledging the universal
satisfaction and accuracy 1 have derived from three of your Chronometers
during the last twelve years, particularly No. 729, which, after performing
a voyage from Liverpool to Calcutta (nine months), and allowing her no
rate (supposing her going at mean time), I found on my return that there


was only seven seconds variation from error given me on my departure. I
have had the opportunity of proving them in very cold latitudes, in round-
ing Cape Horn on two voyages in the winter season, in sudden transi-
tions from heat to cold, and the contrary, and always found them to main-
tain their regularity of going, I am, &c.
J. PINDER."
Letter from Captain W ii.liam Rowett, dated Liverpool, March 21,
1832.
“ Gentlemen —l have the satisfaction of handing you the particulars of
your Chronometer 564, which has been in my possession for the last six
years, during which period 1 have made four voyages round Cape Horn,
and it has been exposed to 21° of Fahrenheit, and to 80° and sometimes to
90°. In neither extreme of temperature has it varied its rate. During one
voyage in particular of twenty-six months, on making Ireland, and passing
between Cape Clear and the Fastnett rock with very fine weather, it placed
the rock in 9° 41' 15", (which is immediately between that given by Mr.
Norrie in his two last editions, which vary from each other seven miles,)
allowing one second daily loss, which it had done throughout the voyage. I
could give you numerous other proofs where it has been equally correct.
Hoping you will continue to benefit the public by your attention to that
science, I remain, &c.
WILLIAM ROWETT."
Letter from Professor Bahlow, F.R.S., &c. &c.
“ Gentlemen —You herewith receive the Chronometer I purchased of
you in 1825, which I think should, after seven years, undergo your exa-
mination. I beg to say that I have every reason to he perfectly satisfied
with its performance. I have never in any instance detected in it any un-
steady rate, but simply a slight and gradual change between winter and
summer, and the contrary. This small vibration lam aware you would
have been able to correct; but 1 am unwilling, while the change is so incon-
siderable, and the rate so very small, to have any correction attempted. If
this testimonial can add any weight to those you already possess from many
of our most distinguished Observers, you are quite at liberty to make any
use of it you please. I remain, &c.
“ Woolwich, March 27, 1832.
PETER BARLOW."
Parkinson and Frousiiam oould extend this List of Testimo-
nials to an almosj indefinite length : but they conceive enough is
here shewn to testify the accuracy and truth of their Time-pieces.
CHANGE ALLEY, COUNIIILL,
O/ijxtxite the South Gate, Royal Exchange, London ;
AMI 54, < ASTLE STREET, LIVERPOOL.
Printed by M. A- Pittman, Warwick Square, London,
