

| A BRIEF LIFE
111 • • •
(||j OF THE
| Rev. John Cross
V/gp |3 Forty Years a Chaplain in the Colony of
Jlp ifi New South Wales.
imilllli'irammillimimimiimrmKflltiiititiTrfrriTTTTTTrTTT'rnriiriTTTTrTTTTrrTrr
S I &cu&ctCt f
I|3| AUTHOR OK "LIFE AND LABOURS OK TUB RIGHT REV. WILLIAM GRANT
J |g| BROUGHTON, D.U., First and ongv Bishop of Australia,” etc., etc.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
BRISBANE :
SYDNEY HOBART, Publisher.
F. W. HINCHCLIFFE, PRINTER, STANLEY STREET, SOUTh BRISBANE.
1898.


'






A BRIEF LIFE
OF THE
FORTY YEARS A CHAPLAIN IN THE COLONY OF NEW
SOUTH WALES.
By J. W. FAWCETT,
Author of “ Life and Labours of the Right Rev. William GRANT BROUGHTON, D.D.,
First and Only Bishop of Australia, etc,, etc., etc.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
BRISBANE :
SYDNEY HOBART, Publisher.
F. W. HINCHCLIFFE, PRINTER, STANLEY STREET, SOUTH BRISBANE.
1898 .


PREFACE
The brief details of the life history of the Rev. John Cross,
given in these pages have been compiled from various sources
(chiefly from his grand-children, through a friend of the family)
A. V. Drew, Esq., of Sydney, to whom I tender my most sincere
thanks). They were written with a desire to preserve something
of the career of one of the early clergymen of New South Wales,
and are issued to the public as a Memorial to the faithful Chaplain
who was for so many years a “witness of God” in Australia.
“ A blessed man! who of protracted days
Made not, as thousands do, a vulgar sleep ;
But truly did he live his life ....
Take pride in him.” WORDSWORTH.
By the way, I write this preface on the fortieth anniversary of
his death. The seventeenth of May last was also the eightieth
anniversary of the date of his admission to the Diaconate.
J. W. FAWCETT.
Brisbane, Queensland,
August 7th, 1898.






%ifc of tbe IRev>. John Cross.
EARLY GARBER AND APPOINTMENT TO NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Rev. John Cross, one of the early Church of England
Clergymen in Australia, and the subject of this biograghy, was
born on the roth of June, 1781. It is a difficult matter at this
date to definitely give his birth place, owing to the fact that few
memorials remain of him, but as far as I have been able to
ascertain I am inclined to think that it was the City of London.
Of his parents I know nothing; but, he had three sisters and no
brothers. One of sisters married and became the mother of no
fewer than twenty-one children. They all lived ; and as children
they all walked to church every Sunday in a line, two and two
abreast. Of his other sisters, one had one child, the other three
children. They all lived in England. Where Mr. Cross was
educated is also unknown, but it was evidently at some good
school for he was a man of excellent education. As a Greek
scholar he had a high reputation, and after his arrival in Australia
was for many years surpassed by none in the knowledge of that
language. Previous to his entering Holy Orders he occupied the
position of assistant tutor in a Boy’s School in the City of London.
He was ordained Deacon on Trinity Sunday, May 17th, 1818, at
Fulham, by Dr. Howley, the Bishop of London, and received
Priest’s Orders from the same Prelate in the same chapel on the
sth of July of the same year.
Receiving the appointment of a chaplaincy in New South/Wales
he came, with his wife and three children, out to Sydney, in a
sailing ship named the Baring, Captain Lamb. They left England
on January 27th, 1819, and arrived at Port Jackson, on Saturday,
June 26th, following, having called at Hobart Town en route.
The vessel also carried three hundred convicts, and it appears that
several of them were badly treated by the commander; some—
both men and women —-for misconduct, being tied to the yard-arm
and then thoroughly drenched with water. Another incident of
the voyage was the playing of a hoax upon one of the passengers


whom the captain considered unruly. He was locked up in his
cabin and the cry of “ Breakers ahead ’’ was raised. Unable to
get out and fully believing that the vessel was running to
destruction, the unfortunate passenger began to scream at the top
of his voice, and what with the terror of being drowned passed a
most trying time. Mr. Cross was saved the same sufferings by
some kind person who came to his cabin door and called out that
it was only a hoax.
When Mr. Cross arrived in New South Wales there were four
clergymen of the Church of England religion in the colony to
officiate to the spiritual wants of a total of 18,000 persons, of whom
7,000 were convicts. These were the Revs. Samuel Marsden,
who came out in 1794, and was stationed at Parramatta as Senior
Chaplain ; William Cowper, (father of the present Dean Cowper,
of Sydney), who came out in 1809, and was stationed at St.
Philip’s, Church Hill, Sydney ; and Robert Cartwright, who arrived
the following year and was stationed on the Hawkesbury. Another
clergyman, the Rev. Henry Fulton, was Chaplain at the Penal
Settlement of Norfolk Island.
By the same vessel as that in which Mr. Cross came to New
South Wales, also voyaged several Missionaries of the Church
Missionary Society, bound for New Zealand. These were the
Rev, John Butler, his wife, son and daughter, Mr. and Mrs. James
Kempe, Mr. Francis Hall, and Thomas Tool and Teeterree, New
Zealanders (who went to England in the Kangaroo in 1817).
The Rev. Samuel Marsden, accordingly made preparations to
proceed to New Zealand with these Missionaries, and left Sydney
on Thursday, the 29th July, 1819, for the Bay of Islands. During
his absence Mr. Cross performed divine services at Parramatta, as
we learn Irom the following Government and General Order
printed in the Sydney Gazette for Saturday, July 31, 1819 ;
Head Quarters, Sydney,
Saturday, 24th July, 1819
His Excellency the Governor has been pleased to grant
permission to the Reverend Samuel Marsden, Senior
Chaplain of the Colony, to proceed to the Island of New Zealand,
with leave to be absent from his duty for four months from the
date of his embarkation. The Reverend John Cross, Assistant
Chaplain, is to proceed to and perform the Clerical Duties at
Parramatta, during the absence of the Reverend Mr. Marsden
from the Colony.
By Command of His Excellency the Governor.
H. C. Aniill, Major of Brigade.


CHAPLAIN OF ST. MATTHEW’S, WINDSOR.
Mr. Marsden returned to Sydney by the brig Active which sailed
from the Bay of Islands, November 9th, 1819, and arrived at
Sydney on November 30th. Mr. Cross was then appointed to the
Chaplaincy at Windsor. The Sydney Gazette of Saturday, 18th
December, 1819, contains the following Government and General
Orders: —
Government House, Parramatta,
18th December, 1819.
civil; department.
QN the personal Request of the Reverend Robert Cartwright,
heretofore, Chaplain at Windsor, His Excellency the
Governor is pleased to appoint that Gentleman to the Chaplaincy
at Liverpool, vacant by the Removal of the Reverend John Youle
to Port Dalrymple. The Reverend John Cross, lately officiating
at Parramatta, during the Absence of the Reverend Samuel
Marsden (now returned) is to perform the Duties at Windsor, in
the room of the Reverend Robert Cartwright. These appoint-
ments to take Place from Wednesday next, the 22 nd instant.
The ReverendJJRiCHARD Hill is to continue to do Duty at Sydney,
in conjunction with the Reverend William Cowper, Senior
Chaplain at that Place.
By His Excellency’s Command.
J. T. Campbell, Secretary.
Windsor, one of the oldest settled places in New South Wales,
is situated upon a hill, close by the Hawkesbury River, 34 miles
north-west of Sydney. But for the frequency of floods in the
district, which occasionally sweep over the low-laying country
around the town, it would hold a much higher position than it
does now.
St. Matthew’s Church, a brick building with tower and belfry,
is one of the oldest churches in New South Wales. The founda-
tion stone was laid by Governor Macquarie, on the nth October,
1817. In consequence of the stone having been removed and the
money deposited therein stolen, His Excellency re-laid the stone
on October 13th. The money was for a second time stolen a few
days afterwards. Through some defect in the building, the walls
of the church were taken down in 1819, and another structure —
the present church—built on the same foundations.
The first incumbent of Windsor was the Rev. Robert Cartwright,
who was induced to come to New South Wales by the Rev. Samuel
Marsden, the Chaplain of this Territory when on a visit to England


in 1809-10, and who arrived with him at Sydney in the latter part
of 1810. On his arrival he was appointed Chaplain of the
Hawkesbury district —of which Windsor was his head-quarters—
and he remained until 1819, when he was removed to Liverpool,
and Mr. Cross appointed his successor. It was during Mr. Cross’s
residence at Windsor that St. Matthew’s Church was opened for
public worship by the Senior Chaplain of the Colony-—the Rev.
Samuel Marsden —on Wednesday, the 18th of December, 1822.
The following extracts refer to the important ceremony. The
first is from the Parish Register at Windsor; the second, from the
only newspaper in Australia at that date.
“This day the new Church of St. Matthew’s, Windsor, was
consecrated and opened for divine service, by the Rev. Samuel
Marsden, Principal Chaplain of the Territory, assisted by the Revs.
Messrs. Cross, resident Chaplain, Cartwright and Hassall. After
the ceremony the Holy Sacrament was administered to a goodly
company from various parts of the colony. Scarcely an individual
w r as observed but what appeared deeply attentive during the whole
service, and the church was nearly filled before the Communion
Service was commenced. (Signed) J. Harpur, Windsor, Wednes-
day, 18th December, 1822.”
“New Church at Windsor.— On Wednesday, the 18th inst.,
this elegant and commodious place of worship was consecrated by
the Rev. Mr. Marsden, Principal Chaplain. The Rev. gentleman
preached a sermon on the pleasing occasion from these words,
‘ Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God ! ” They are to
be found in the 87th Psalm. After which the eucharist was
administered. In the various duties of the day Mr. Marsden was
aided by the Reverend Messrs. Cartwright, Cross and Hassall.
We understand that the inhabitants of Windsor gave their attend-
ance upon the occasion in a gratifying way ; and the congregation
was far from uninteresting. In such a colony as ours nothing can
tend more strongly to evidence moral and religious prosperity than
the opening of churches and chapels.” —Sydney Gazette, Friday,
December 27th, 1822.
Whilst at Windsor Mr. Cross had a couple of encounters with
bushrangers, who were frequent in those days in New South Wales.
On one occasion he was called to Sydney on business. On his
way home he heard that a gang of bushrangers had been seen
somewhere along the road by which he was to travel, and his
informers advised him not to continue his journey after dark. As
he expected to meet another clergyman, he did not accept the


advice, but continued on his journey. Shortly after it had become
dark a person stepped into the middle of the road, and before he
spoke, Mr. Cross thinking that it was the minister he was expecting
to see, addressed him as such, but he received as a reply, “ I am
not Mr. , but I know who you are; you are a good
fellow; you can go.” With these words the speaker suddenly
disappeared. Mr. Cross reached home without further adventure ;
but, that same night there were several robberies committed along
that road. On another occasion as Mr. Cross was returning along
a country road from a service he had been holding, a man jumped
out from the side of the road and attempted to stop him. Finding
that his victim was none other but “ Parson Cross ” he did not
further molest him. Mr. Cross, however, severely lectured him,
and advised him to try and lead a better life, at the same time
putting his hand in his pocket and giving him a few shillings.
Mr. Cross whilst at Windsor was a good 4 friend of the Wesleyan
denomination. Though not permitted lo"aitend any other place
of worship but that of his own denomination, he always (when
there was no service of the Church of England in that town) sent
his family in charge ot a trusted servant to the Wesleyan services.
Whenever a Wesleyan minister visited Windsor, Mr. Cross always
extended the right hand of fellowship to his brother labourer in the
vineyard and made him at home in his own residence. Mr. Cross
was a liberal supporter of all the religious institutions of his day—
the Benevolent Society of New South Wales, the New South Wales
Auxiliary to the British aud Foreign Bible Society, and the
Religious Tract Society. There is a record of his preaching a
charity sermon in St. Matthew’s Church, Windsor, on Sunday, the
15th of October, 1826, and in 1856 he gave the sum of
towards the endowment of a school at Port Macquarie.
For eight years he laboured assiduously at Windsor, and by his
kind and attentive manner and his nobleness of character won the
affection and respect of all classes resident both in the town and
neighbourhood.
CHAPLAIN OF ST. THOMAS’S, PORT MACQUARIE.
On the 4th of December, 1827, the Rev. John Cross was
appointed to the Chaplaincy of St. Thomas’s,Port Macquarie, by
the Governor of New South Wales. This appointment is found in
the following Government Order printed in the Sydney Gazette
for Wednesday, January x6th, 1828.


GOVERNMENT ORDER.
[No. *7.] Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, January 15, 1828
His Excellency the Governor, upon the Recommendatim
of the Venerable the Archdeacon, has been pleased to
Nominate the Rev. John Cross, Clerk, to the Chaplaincy at P>rt
Macquarie, and the Rev. Elijah Smith, Clerk, to succeed Hr.
Cross as Chaplain at Windsor on the 4th proximo.
By His Excellency’s Command.
Alexander M'Leay
In the news section of the same Gazette is the following reer-
ence to Mr. Cross Our Readers will perceive, by a refereice
to the Government Order, No. 7, in our front page, that he
Reverend Mr. Cross, long a valued and respected Clergyman in
Windsor and its surrounding neighbourhood, is destined to exerdse
his Ministerial functions at Pori Macquarie, of which we are ri;ht
glad; and we have no doubt that His Excellency at the instaice
of the Venerable the Archdeacon, will not fail shortly to alio a
Clergyman to each <>f the penal dependencies, as soon as the sane
can be conveniently carried into effect.'’
Mr. Cross, with his wife and family, sailed from Sydney on
Tuesday, February 12th, 1828, in the Government barque Ltcy
Ann, for his new sphere of labour, and arrived at Pon Macquade
on Monday, the iBch day of the same month. As the vessel dew
too much water, she could not cross the bar, and her passengers
were obliged to land in a small boat.
Port Macquarie, which stands at the mouth of the Hastiigs
River, xBo miles north of Sydney, was disco'ered in 1818, by
Lieutenant John Oxley, R.N., Surveyor-General of New Soilh
Wales, and surveyed by him on the 19th of June, 1819. The frst
expedition, for the formation of a settlement at Port Macquaie,
sailed from Sydney, under command of Captain Francis Allmm,
of the 48th Regiment, on March 21st, 1821, and on August 15b,
1826 it wtis appointed by the British Government as a place to
which offenders convicted in New South Wales, and being umer
sentence of transportation, should be sent. On the 13th of Jily,
1830, a proclamation was issued by His Excellency the Govenor
(Lieut.-General Ralph Darling) declaring Port Macquarie to be
no longer a penal settlement.
The first chaplain at Port Macquarie was the Rev. Thonas
Jiassall, who was appointed there in August, 1824. He used to


hold divine service in the open air. The foundation stone of
St. Thomas’s Church was laid on the Bth of December, 1824, but
the sacred edifice was long in building, and was in an unfinished
state on Mr. Cross’s arrival. Mr Cross carried with him the
communion vessels, a bell, and other church requisites. The
vessel that bore him thither carried Mr. Hassall to Sydney on her
return trip. The prisoners, under military supervision, laboured
day and night to get the Church ready for opening on the Sunday
alter the new Chaplain’s arrival, and by perseverance they succeeded.
On that occassion the Rev. John Cross preached his first sermon
at Port Macquarie; his text being II Cor., c. xn., v. 10, “When
lam weak, then lam strong.’’ The date was Sunday, February
24th, 1828.
For sixteen years Mr. Cross was the only clergyman in the
country or district, but his labours were chiefly confined to the
town of Port Macquarie, with its gaol, hospital and military
barracks. At the time of his arrival the population of the town
was 820, of whom only 153 were free persons—including the staff
of the Stipendiary Police Magistrate and a detachment from one
of the Regiments.
The Church is a massive brick structure, with a noble Norman
lower, and capable of holding six hundred persons. The founda-
tion stone was laid on December Bth, 1824, by Lieutenant Cannae,
the Acting Commandant. The Rev. Thomas Hassell, who had
been appointed to the charge of Port Macquarie, on August 18th
of that year, giving an appropriate address on the occasion. As
we have seen it was long in building and "as not completed until
Mi. Cross’s arrival in 1828. In this church Mr. Cross preached
with regularity twice on each Sabbath day, and also on the Feast
Days of the Church- —“Warning every man and leaching every
man” with the simplicity and fidelity of Christian wisdom.
In “ The State of Religion and Education in New South Wales”
by William Westbrooke Burton, Esq., one of the Judges of the
Supreme Court of that Colony, published in London in 1840, we
have a contemporaneous account of Port Macquarie and the
labours of Mr. Cross :
“There was at the commencement of the year 1839 but one
station within the county of Macquarie, at which there was a
Church or Clergyman of the Church of England, viz., at Port
Macquarie.
“ Port Macquarie is distant from Sydney by the seacoast about
200 miles to the north. It is a station at which convicts are kept


who for various reasons, but chiefly from having been of a superior
class in life, or being invalids, or cripples, are considered improper
for ordinary service among the settlers.
“ There were in February, 1838, 627 of these persons in Govern-
ment employ, and on loan to settlers in the district 236, and in
the Factory were 24 women. ,
“ The population of the county of Macquarie was estimated in
the census of 1836 at 1300 persons, of whom 936 were returned
as convicts, 898 as Protestants’,' 376 as Roman Catholics, 24 Jews,
and 2 Pagans.
“Port Macquarie is the station of a Stipendiary Police Magistrate,
and of a detachment from one of the Regiments doing duty in the
Colonies. There is a gaol and a new one building, a Hospital
and a Military Barracks, and a Church denominated St. 1 hom-as’s
Church.
“The Church of St. Thomas, which is the only place of worship
in the district, is capable of containing 600 persons. Divine
Worship is celebrated there twice on the Lord’s Day, and on the
usual Fasts and Festivals of the Church. The average number
who attend is 250 persons, besides which the Clergyman officiates
in the Hospital, Gaol, and the Barracks, once a fortnight on a week
day at each.
“ The only Minister of Religion in the County or District is the
Rev. John Cross, a Clergyman of the Church of England, who has
held the appointment of a Chaplain in the Colony from the year
1818.”
As age began to creep on him, Mr. Cross was obliged to engage
a curate to assist him in his chaplaincy, whom he paid a stipend of
a year out of his own salary, which was a year. This
was in the year 1844. His first curate was the Rev. Richard
Woodward, a tall, thin, but active clergyman. Mr Woodward
had a voice scarcely suitable to the large church of St. Thomas’s,
and the pulpit was removed to various positions to render his
discourses audible to his hearers. He was, however, not popular
and did not remain long.
The next curate was the Rev. Thomas O’Reilly, afterwards the
well-known Canon of St. Andrew’s Cathedral, Sydney. He was
appointed in 1846, and lemained until the death of Mr. Cross,
twelve years later. He was only in deacon’s orde,rs at his appoint-
ment, but was ordained priest at a later date. During his term of
curacy he accomplished a great and noble work for the church.
Few clergymen w r orked with such zeal. He was a bold and


powerful preacher, a sincere friend of all classes, and an earnest,
large-hearted, exemplary clergyman. He laboured assiduously and
spared not himself in furthering the truths of the gospel. He
travelled long distances from Port Macquarie, visiting periodically
such places as the Manning and Macleay rivers—fifty and thirty
miles distant respectively—at that date both in the parish of Port
Macquarie.
The Rev. John Cross continued to perform his duties almost up
to the day of his death. He preached regularly twice a day until
he was scarcely able to ascend the pulpit stairs. When unable to
preach, he still continued to be driven regularly to church—only-
missing one Sunday between the day of his last attending service
and that of his death. On these occasions he was driven to church
by an old resident —Mr. Joseph White —who still reveres the
memory of the old clergyman, and remembers him with great
respect and affection ; and was led to his pew by his respected
curate —Mr. O’Reilly—and churchwarden—Mr. Charles Hayward.
In spite of his feebleness to rise he used to kneel during prayers.
Mr. Cross lingered but a short time after he was taken ill. All his
children were in attendance to administer to his dying wants. His
curate was also in regular attendance ; and, by request, read chosen
portions of the Greek Testament (Mr. Cross’s daily companion
and study) from which he found great spiritual enjoyment. During
the last few hours of his life, while Mr. Cross and his curate were
reading the account of Our Saviour’s last sufferings contained in
Luke xxiii., 46-49, he tried to raise himself in bed, exclaiming
“ My dear boy,” (his pet name frequently addressed to his curate.)
He never spoke again, and shortly afterwards passed peacefully
away on the morning dawn of the 7th of August, 1858, in the 77th
year of his age, and the fortieth of his clerical career, thirty of
which had been spent at Port Macquarie.
His remains were laid in the family vault, beside those of his
first wife (who died twenty-one years previously), in the presence
of four hundred mourners of all classes who had assembled to pay
their last respects to one whom they loved ; the funeral service
being conducted by his faithful and much-loved curate, the Rev.
Thomas O’Reilly.
For many years, there was no memorial to this worthy clergyman,
and the Rev. Dr. Tucker (afterwards Archdeacon of Beechworth,
Victoria), who visited Port Macquarie in 1868, thus drew attention to
the omission in the The Australian Churchman of December 5, 1868
—“ We can find no memorial of a worthy cle.'gyman—the Rev.


John Cross—who with consistency of life and simplicity of purpose
served the church in this colony for forty years—no mention is
made of his decease (even in the Church Chronicle) or of his
ministerial character and faithful discharge of his duties through a
long and most difficult course. On the occasion of a brief visit to
Port Macquarie we could find no stone to tell in the simplest
inscription the place of his interment. The soldier ‘ speared ’ by
the natives, or ‘shot’ while pursuing some ‘runaway convict’ has
a sculptured tomb in the old graveyard ; but, the ‘good soldier of
Jesus Christ’ has not a slab or a line to mark his grave. We
examined the burial register in the vestry of the Church of St.
Thomas and saw the record —
“ 1858—7th Aug. J. Cross, aged 77 years-”
And this is the single line that a surviving generation cares to
inscribe. Thus many ‘of whom the world was not worthy’ pass
away, but they ‘rest from their labours and their works do follow
them.’”
He then writes : “ We are informed that the incumbent of St.
Thomas is desirous to restore some part of the old church, and that
the three east windows must be renewed. The centre one is promised
as a memorial window, and as the Rev. Thomas Hassall com-
menced his*ministry in this church, we think that a few friends
might be willing, if requested, to afford the cost of two other small
windows, with a single line of inscription bearing the names of
these two early and faithful chaplains.” This was, however,
never done.
The newspapers of that day were silent upon his death. The
Sydney Herald, The Empire, and the Church Chronicle, all contain
not even the mention of his decease. The only mention that I find
of him is in the Report of the Church Society of the Diocese of
Newcastle for the year 1858, which is as follows ; —“ The venerable
minister of Port Macquarie, the Rev. j. Cross, who for some years
has been obliged through the infirmities of age to delegate hi's
duties to the Rev. Thomas O'Reilly, has during the past year, been
called from the scene of his earthly labours to the presence of his
heavenly Master.”
The Bishop of Newcastle, (Dr. Tyrrell), in whose Diocese Mr.
Cross was from 1848 to his death, in his Annual Letter to the
Church Society, dated September 15th, 1859, makes the following
reference; —“In August. 1858, the Rev. John Cross, of Port
Macquarie, was called to his rest after a long period of weakness
which he bore indeed with Christian resignation.”


When the Rev. John Cross died the parishioners intended
placing a marble tribute to his memory in the church, but his son,
Mr. William Cross, deterred them from doing so, by stating that
he thought that it would not have been his father’s desire to have
any monument, for that in doing a work of Christian benevolence
and that of a Servant of Christ, he was simply doing his duty.
In 1886, however, an old and esteemed parishioner named
Mr. W. C. Wilkins, made a simple memorial and placed it on the
south wall of the Church —over the vestry door. It is made of
polished cedar over-laid with glass, with a black lettered inscription,
that of the text being in gold. It bears the following inscription;
TO THE MEMORY OF
THE RBYD. JOHN CROSS
GOVERNMENT COLONIAL CHAPLAIN 40 YEARS,
AND RESPECTED
INCUMBENT OP THIS PARISH 30 YEARS,
WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE
AUGUST 7TH. 1858
AGED 77.
" Be ye also ready.”
HIS CHARACTER.
The Rev. John Cross was a man of middle height, somewhat
stout, with a full clean shaven face. He was a man of broad and
liberal views. He was always cheerful and bright, and enjoyed a
harmless joke. He was a strict disciplinarian and would allow
nothing to stand before his duty, which was his first consideration.
Punctual to a minute, he was both methodical and regular and
tried to do everything as by clockwork. His bond was his word,
and he never forgot or neglected what he promised. He was
greatly respected and much loved by all classes of his parishioners,
but especially the poor to whom he was a good friend. He would
often place an order in their hands for a few shillings, and then
make a hasty retreat to escape hearing their thanks. He was
naturally of a sensitive and tender-hearted disposition, and
frequently sorrowed emotionally with the widowed and fatherless
in the house of bereavement. On these occasions his generosity
manifested itself to the greatest degree. With them he could feel
the loss of the departed one, for both his daughters were widowed
early, which caused him to look to their necessities, and the
consequence was that when he died he left little worldly possessions
or wealth behind him. His sermons were simple discourses of
biblical teachings and full of scriptural knowledge.


HIS FAMILY.
The Rev. John Cross was twice married and left three children,
one son and two daughters, and seventeen grandchildren to mourn
his loss. His great-grandchildren at the present day are numerous.
He was married to his first wife about ten years before leaving
London. Her maiden name was Ann Davis, and she was a native
of Wales. (From this latter fact there is a supposition that Mr.
Cross was also a native of that Principality.)
She died of paralysis, after an illness of three months duration,
at Port Macquarie, on Sunday, the 10th of May, 1837, and was
buried in a vault in the old cemetery, where there is a memorial
stone bearing the following simple inscription : —-
IN MEMORY OF
ANNE,
THE BELOVED WIFE OF THE
REV. JOHN CROSS
WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE
MAY 10TH., 1837.
“Be ye also ready.’
On the morning of the day of her death, her husband, previous
to his going to church to perform divine service, entered her room.
Noticing her end approaching, he said to her, “ Annie, you are
about to exchange worlds; what is your hope?” She replied,
“Christ is my anchor, to him 1 look for salvation.” He then left
her, but before his return from church she had passed peacefully
away in the presence of her youngest daughter. By her he had
four or five children, of whom only three lived and came out to
the colony.
His second wife was Mary, daughter of William Smith, a New
Zealand Missionary, and sister of Sir John Smith, who distinguished
himself in the Crimean War. They were married in Sydney in
1838, and Mr. and Mrs. Cross returned to Port Macquarie after
only a week’s absence of the former from his duty. Mrs. Smith
accompanied her daughter, and she died at Port Macquarie on the
29th of June, 1863, at the advanced age of 94. She was a woman
remarkable for her wonderful memory, being able to quote from
almost every chapter in the Bible. Being blind for some years
previous to her death, she received great solace from her retentive
memory. Mrs. Cross died at Richmond, one of the suburbs of
Melbourne (whither she went after her widowhood), after a long
and painful illness borne with Christian fortitude, at the house of


her brother-in-law and sister—Mr. and Mrs. Cavanagh—on the
sth of March, 1880. By this marriage there were no living children,
g |William Cross, the only surviving son of the Rev. John Cross
(born February 12th, 1812, in London), was educated by his
father, and was seven years of age when he accompanied his
parents to Sydney. He married, at St. Thomas’s Church, Port
Macquarie, Miss Margaret McDonald, ot Pitt Town, on September
15th, 1840, and settled on some land, which he called Crossland,
on the Hastings River, bringing cattle overland thence from
Windsor. He removed to the Manning River in 1849, and
settled on the pastoral country of the Lansdowne before the value
of the rich brush lands on the mam river had become known, thus
becoming one of the earliest settlers on that river. He was one
of the few Justices of the Peace on the Manning in the early days
of that district, and resigned his commission because he found the
duties were not congenial to his disposition. He was much
devoted to the Church of England, and in the capacity of lay
reader, to which he was licensed by Ur. Tyrrell, the Bishop of
Newcastle, in 1859, he held his first public service on Sunday,
the 17th of October of that year. For upwards of thirty-three years
he rendered valuable assistance to the church to which he belonged.
He made church work his principle labour, and his services were
always readily at the disposal of the resident clergymen of the
district. He frequently held as many as three services on a
Sunday, aud used to travel over considerable distances, even
making long journeys of twenty miles and more to and from
stations where he held services. Often times he left home on a
Saturday afternoon and did not return until about noonday on the
following Monday. He continued to follow up the desire of his
heart until old age, failing sight, and other infirmities incapacitated
him Bishop Tyrrell wished very much to ordain him, but he
declined the offer, saying that he thought he could be of more use
as a layman. Even after his sight had failed him (which did so
on July 4th, 1892) he continued for a while to conduct religious
services, and as he could not see his way he had to trust to the
sagacity ot his horse to carry him safely to where he wished to go.
He never expected any remuneration for the work, and never
received anything of that nature except when the Manning River
people presented him with a valuable testimonial and address, and
a gold watch and locket in recognition of his services, and on
another occasion when he was presented with a large commentary
on the Gospel and Epistles in four volumes. The last two years


of his life he was entirely blind. He died at his residence on the
Lansdowne on the 9th of August, 1894, at the ripe age of 82 years,
and was interred in Lansdowne cemetery. The Right Rev. Bishop
Tyrrell in his diary and letters often speaks of Mr. Cross as “good
William Cross,’’ and wnen visiting the Manning River in the course
of his visitations always stayed with him.
The Manning and Hastings Advocate and the Manning River
Times both referred to his demise. The former stated that he was
“ a noble minded gentleman of sterling worth ; one to whom the
term sans peur et sans reproche aptly applied. Mr. Cross was
essentially a Christian worker; with a heart brimful of sympathy
with the poor, the needy, the sore distressed. He lived to a good
old age and has gone to his rest full of honour. His memory will
be ever green in the hearts of many a sorrowing friend.” The
latter newspaper states that in connection with the Church of
England he did much good and useful work; that “he was a
thorough Christian in all his words and actions, and now that he
has departed they will still remain as a sweet smelling savour.”
By his marriage he had a family of six children—three sons and
three daughters —of whom two sons died in infancy. His widow
is still living.
Annie Mary, the elder daughter of the Rev. John Cross, born
January 19th, 1803, was sixteen years of age when she arrived in
the colony. She married, in 1829, Henry Harding Parker,
Superintendent of Agriculture at Port Macquarie. Mr. Parker
met with a sad death. At the end of 1849 he left Port Macquarie
for the purpose of making some explorations in the New England
district. His journey was made on foot, and he appears to have
died from exhaustion or exposure. His remains were found near
to a station in the neighbourhood of Armidale, in January, 1850,
and after being identified, were interred on it. At the time of his
death he was only 45 years of age. Mrs. Parker survived her
husband for twenty eight years, dying at her residence, Rosewood,
on the Hastings River, on the 4th of May, 1878, in the 75th year
of her age, and was interred in the family grave near her residence.
She left a family of four sons and two daughters.
She had a twin sister named Mary Annie who died in infancy
in England.
Louisa, the younger daughter of the Rev. John Cross, born
January nth, 1814, was only five years old when she arrived in
New South Wales with her parents. She married James Mclntyre,
Government Medical Officer at Port Macquarie, in 1838. Dr.


Mclntyre died at Port Macquarie on the 14th of July, 1853, in
the fifty-fifth year of his age, leaving a young family of six
children —two sons and four daughters. Mrs. Mclntyre died at
her residence, Beach Cottage, Port Macquarie, on the 6th
October, 1887, at the age ot 73 years, and was interred in the
Church of England cemetery at that town.
These three, the. members of a small but devoted family, have
left a good and exemplary testimony behind them of being
Christians in every true sense of the word—thanks to the good
training they received from the hands of their worthy father.
In the early days of New South Wales the sons and daughters
of the chaplains in the colony each received from the Government,
either the sum of ,£5OO or a grant of land to the value of that
amount. Mr. William Cross and Mrs. Parker had grants of land,
while Mrs. Mclntyre received the
REMINISCENCES OP THE REV. JOHN CROSS.
A grand-daughter of the worthy clergyman, to whom I am
greatly indebted for much of the information contained in these
“ Memorials,” supplies the following reminiscences :
“ My recollection takes me back to the year 1848, when my
parents came to live in Port Macquarie. The day after our
arrival ray grand-father came to visit my parents. Although only
eight years of age I remember him well, and the first Sunday that
I saw him in the now old church of St. Thomas, I remember him
coming from the vestry robed in a white surplice and black scarf.
After prayers he returned to the vestry and robed himself in a
black silk gown with white bands round the neck, and then
ascended the pulpit. What I remember most was the impressive
manner in which he read the lessons, the first of which was from
Isaiah liii. The manner of his reading is stamped on my
memory. During the following week he again visited my parents;
and, my brothers and sisters and myself were taken by him into a
room where he catechized us. He afterwards read a psalm—
“ God is our refuge and strength”—which greatly impressed
itself on my memory. He continued to do this until increasing
age prevented him. There was something in his bearing which
caused us all to have great respect for him. My parents
frequently charged us to be very reverend before him, and mother
especially (she was always very devoted to him) was most anxious
that we all should be able to answer his questions with credit.


“ I remember as a child following him, dressed in his black
robe, to the vestry one Sunday after service. The subject which
he had chosen as his text was our duty to our neighbours. On
the way from the pulpit he was met by the Verger who enquired
of him if he should toll the bell for the child of Roman Catholic
parents, who had requested that such should be done. “
(addressing the Verger by surname), what have you been hearing ?
“ Poor Priest has no bell.” “ I suppose I shall toll it, sir.”
He did so.
“At another time when very feeble he was sitting one day on
his verandah when the Roman Catholic Priest, Father O’Quiliven,
came to visit him. Upon enquiring how he was, Mr. Cross
answered, “I do not know you !” “I am the Priest,” replied his
visitor. “ Come then, and sit with me, you are a prie'st as myself.”
They had a long conversation together, and it was not far distant
from that day that the Priest followed in the funeral procession of
the worthy clergyman to the church, on August Bth, 1858.
“ I remember him having called on me one day to repeat some
hymns. One of them he thought very gloomy and g»*e me
another to learn, with the promise of a shilling if I learnt it well.
That hymn I still remember. It was
“ Come ye that love the Lord,
And let your joys be known ;
Join in a song with sweet accord,
While ye surround the throne.
The sorrows of the mind
Banish from their place ;
Religion never was designed
To make our pleasures less.’”
A grand-son of the Rev. John Cross (George John Cross only
son of William Cross) kindly supplies the following incident
“ One day when Mr. Cross was too old and feeble for work and
was relieved in his duties by his curate, his son William heard a
person telling another that he was going to have his baby
christened on the following Sunday, and that he was going to get
Mr. Cross to officiate at the ceremony. He remonstrated with
the man telling him that his father (the Rev. John Cross) was very
feeble and that he ought to take his child to Mr. O’Reilly, the
curate. “Ah ! ” replied the man, “ but we like the old minister
best to christen the children, his prayers are so earnest.”


An old resident of Port Macquarie (a Mr. Thomas Edwards,
who is still living), when a boy knew Mr. Cross. He used to
carry the Chaplain’s books for him when he was on duty.
He states that Mr. Cross used to pat him on the head and say,
“Well done, Thomas,’’ when he was done waiting on him. Miss
Louisa Cross used to teach him and other children in the Sunday
School, which she held in the south-east corner of the church,
being assisted by a Miss Reed; and, still remembers Miss Cross,
whom he stales was always very kind to the children, giving him
on one occasion a small book entitled The Three Hebrew Children.
He stales that the children used to be taught in the church both
on week days and Sundays; and, he also bears testimony to the
Rev. John Cross being the most methodical and practical man he
ever saw. He further says,
“ I remember when a Roman Catholic Dean (Dean Rigney)
visited Port Macquarie. I saw all the clergymen walking up the
street. The Rev. John Cross between Dean Rigney and the Rev.
William Purves (Presbyterian clergyman), and the Rev. Mr.
Curry (Wesleyan minister), on another side, all linked arm in arm.
It made a lasting impression of unity on my memory. The Rev.
John Cross was a man untainted by bigotry, and yet he was firm
to his principles of the Church of England.”
t






WORKS BY J. W. FAWCETT.
PUBLISHED BY
SIDNEY HOBART, Publisher, Brisbane, Q.
Life and Labours of the Right Rev. William Grant
Broughton, D.D., the First and Only Bishop of
Australia. Paper cover, is. •
A Brief Life of the Venerable William Cowper, D.D.,
Archdeacon of Cumberland, in the Diocese of Sydney,
and Forty-nine years Minister of St. Philip’s Church,
Church Hill, Sydney. Shortly.
Sermons by the Rev. John Cross, Chaplain of Port
Macquarie, 1828-58. Shortly.
The profits of the above publications are given to the
Australian Board of Missions for the Yarrabah Aboriginal
Mission Station in North Queensland.
