

A BRIEF ANALYSIS
OF
PUBLIC OPINION
IN
AUSTRALIA
DURING THE PAST SIX YEARS
BY
FREDK. WATSON
LATE EDITOR OF THE “HISTORICAL RECORDS OF AUSTRALIA”
SYDNEY:
TYRRELL’S LIMITED, 99 CASTLEREAGH STREET.
1918.




Australia ...
New South Wales..
Victoria
Queensland ..
South Australia ...
West Australia
Tasmania ...
>■
t3
ks
M
CD
K 4
M
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Legislative
Powers.
h- 4 bO tO fcO tO
Or CD CO tO tO
06 m
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Monopolies.
h- 4 h- 4 to h- 4 to to to
Ox t- 4 CO M cO op O
M d K 4 Or to
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Trade and
Commerce.
co ox to oo h-* a* m
co *5 ci oi -a m to
« £ £ £
O $ $ $ O o o
Corporations.
50 O' to 00 I-* OJ M
® 05 oi oi -i w
s
V
VJ
i CO
>■ i- 1
M
CD
h- 4
CO
j?
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Industrial
Matters.
co in to oo t-» 05 i- 1
Or GO CO lO CO
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Railway
Disputes.
o to oo to a m
c cii co 6
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Trusts.
CD CO CD Oi
to m CO cn dx
!zl H- Kj Izl !Z
o CD CD CD O O O
W CC C» 02 U °
Nationalisation
of
Monopolies.
CD OJ to 00 M 05 M
C* CO 6x 00 00 to CO
K! KJ !z! tz5 tzj tz!
CD CD on® O o
CO 05 w O CO °
Compulsory
Service.
h- 4 CO M h- 4
tO CD Cr» CO CO
co dt ~h m to
I- 4 IO 00 05 05 to
ti
0
CD
I P
i 40
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Compulsory
Service.
CO h- 4 h- 4 h- 4
h- 4 to 00 -q
Ci CD C5 00 Ot
CD 0 50 05 IO tO
ANALYSES OF REFERENDA.
Soldiers’ Vote 1916, Yes, 10*28 ; 1917, Yes, *B9.




A BRIEF ANALYSIS
OF
PUBLIC OPINION
IN
AUSTRALIA
DURING THE PAST SIX YEARS
BY
FREDK. WATSON
LATE EDITOR OF THE “HISTORICAL RECORDS OF AUSTRALIA”
SYDNEY :
TYRRELL’S LIMITED, 99 Castlereagh Street.
1918.




A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF
Public Opinion in Australia during the
past Six Years.
IN the following pages, an endeavour is made to analyse
the trend of public opinion in Australia during recent
years, more especially during the years of war. In this
period, facts have been unduly distorted; persons or parties
have been unjustly blamed for some decisions in order to
hide the real delinquents; credit has been unjustly claimed
by others for decisions over which they had little influence.
One striking feature is that during this period the people
of the State of New South Wales have consistently expressed
opinions, which have been more or less distinct from the
opinions of the people in the rest of Australia. These
opinions have given rise to certain courses of action, and
in several cases have dictated to the whole people of the
continent a policy for Australia.
Public opinion is the expression of the education of
the masses, and the public may be educated up to or down
to any desired standard. The collective mass of opinion
is to all intent a reflex of the opinions of those who have
been the leaders of the community during a period of
years. The leaders of the community in the political,
financial, commercial, patriotic and newspaper worlds are
responsible for the collective opinion expressed by the
public on most occasions. The leaders naturally have the
best opportunity of learning the inside facts, forming con-
sidered opinions, and giving public expression to them. If


they fail in foresight, act from selfish personal motives,
or neglect the opportunity, the public not possessing inside
information form an opinion and give a decision on facts
hastily put before it, and on many occasions distorted by
public leaders for personal reasons.
During recent years in the State of New South Wales,
the people have not realised their obligations. Unfortu-
nately this continues in many classes of the community,
and this feeling must be traced finally to the examples
and the opinions expressed by the leaders of political,
financial and patriotic thought.
It is possible to follow the trend of public opinion in
the political sphere, whether recorded in referenda or at
general elections, by reducing all majorities obtained to a
common basis. This basis can be found by calculating the
majority as a percentage of the total votes recorded. An
example may make this clearer; if 315 votes are given in
favour of and 285 votes against a proposition or a candidate,
the majority in favour is 30 in a total of 600, or a five
per cent, majority. This principle has been adopted in the
table which faces the title page. This table is an analysis
of the various referenda held since the inauguration of the
Commonwealth of Australia, and from it certain conclusions
can be drawn.
In April, 1911, it is clear that public opinion w r as more
or lass strongly averse to any enlargement of the powers
of the Commonwealth in all the States except that of West
Australia. ,
In May, 1913, a decided change had occurred, and
public opinion had swung largely towards a desire for an
alteration of the constitution. In the States of New r South
Wales and Victoria, the negative majorities were largely
reduced, and in Tasmania slightly; whilst in the States
of Queensland and South Australia, the negative had been
changed into an affirmative majority. It is strange, how-
ever. that in the State of West Australia, the affirmative
majority of 1911 was considerably reduced.


It is clear also that the voters in the State of New
South AVales were the deciding factor in the prevention
of interference with trusts.
In this referendum (1913) it is well known that great
numbers of electors voted blindly, recording six negative
or affirmative votes. It is impossible to ascertain the
number of such voters, or the number who gave full con-
sideration to the subjects involved. However, by deducting
the lowest vote from the highest recorded in each State,
the relative proportions of the studied opinions in each
State may be roughly ascertained. They are as follows: —
N.S.W., .9; Vic., 1.9; Q., 1.2; S.A., .8; W.A., 2.4; Tas., .7.
From these figures, it seems probable that the block
or blind vote was greatest in the States of Tasmania, South
Australia and New South Wales, and that considered
opinion, which must necessarily be associated with a feeling
of individual responsibility, was greatest in the State of
West Australia.
In the first referendum on compulsory service, the
margin between the negative and affirmative votes for the
whole of Australia was small. Of every one hundred
voters. 51.61 voted “No,” and 48.39 voted “Yes.” The
negative vote for the whole of Australia was entirely decided
by the vote in the State of New South Wales, as in this
State the negative vote obtained a majority of 117,739,
whereas the majority for the negative in the whole of
Australia was 72,476. The collective affirmative vote for
Australia, after excluding the vote from the State of New
South Wales, was 45,263.
In the second referendum on compulsory service, a
change had occurred in public opinion. In a smaller poll
than in the first referendum, the electors giving a negative
vote were increased proportionately in all the States except
South Australia, where the affirmative vote was proportion-
ately increased. On the percentage basis, the State of West
Australia gave the largest affirmative vote, the State of
New South Wales the largest negative. The collective
opinion of Australia, after excluding the vote from the


State of New South Wales, was altered from an affirmative
vote of 45,263 to a negative vote of 21,297. Australia gave
a negative majority of 164,895, and the negative majority
in the State of New South Wales was 143,598. The affirm-
ative majority in 1916 in the State of Victoria was changed
to a negative majority in 1917.
Since the advent of the first Fisher administration on
the 12th of November, 1908, political opinion in Federal
politics has been sharply divided into two parties, the
labour party and the anti-labour party. This division has
been reflected in the opinions of the electors, and to some
extent the decisions given at the referenda have been
influenced by the fact that one party or another initiated
each referendum.
The referenda of 1911 and 1913 were initiated by the
united labour party; that of 1916 by the labour party in
process of disruption; and that of 1917 by the Nationalist
party.
In estimating the change of public opinion with regard
to the two political parties, the voting in elections for the
Federal Senate alone has been utilised, because in these
elections the States vote as a whole. The fact that a labour
or anti-labour government is in office in any State is no
indication that the total collective opinion of the voters
of that State would give a majority in favour of a labour
or anti-labour form of administration. The majority
obtained in a State Parliament by members of one political
party depends entirely on the distribution of voters in the
different State electorates: as bare majorities may be
obtained by members of the party winning the election and
large majorities by members of the opposition party. The
narrowness of the margin between two political spheres of
thought has been well shown on several occasions under
the Tasmanian system of elections.
The following table shows the changes of public
opinion regarding the merits and demerits of the two
political parties during the past six years:-


ELECTIONS FOR FEDERAL
SENATE.
31st May, 1913
5th Sept., 1914
5th May, 1917
Majority
for
Percent-
age of
votes
recorded
Majority
for
Percent-
age of
votes
recorded.
Majority
for
Percant-
age of
votes
recorded.
Australia ...
Liberal
•6
Labour
60
Nationalist
11-7
New South Wales
Liberal
8-8
Labour
1*1
Nationalist
11*6
Victoria ...
Labour
•2
Labour
6'8
Nationalist
io-1
Queensland
Labour
83
Labour
14'7
Nationalist
2-9
South Australia ...
Labour
7-5
Labour
110
Nationalist
14-1
West Australia ...
Labour
91
Labour
69
Nationalist
363
•
Tasmania...
Liberal
5'5
Labour
1-6
Nationalist
16‘9
In the whole of Australia, in 1913, 50.3 per cent, of
voters were anti-labour; in 1914, 47.0 per cent.; and in
1917, 55.85 per cent. Taking the States individually, in
1913, two, New South Wales and Tasmania, were anti-
labour; one, Victoria, was practically neutral: three, West
Australia, Queensland and South Australia, were pro-
labour. In 1914. every State was pro-labour. In 1917,
every State was anti-labour.
Until May, 1917, the State of New South Wales has
been the most anti-labour of all the States in the Common-
wealth. On the other hand, the State of West Australia
has always returned pro-labour senators since the year 1908.
On comparing these facts with the results of the two
referenda on compulsory service, it will be seen that the
strongest anti-labour State, New South Wales, has recorded
the second and the first largest negative votes, whereas the
most consistent pro-labour State, West Australia, has
recorded the largest affirmative vote on each occasion.
In May. 1917, a change in public opinion was demon-
strated. West Australia has become the strongest anti-
labour State, whilst New South Wales has become fourth
on the list of anti-labour States.


Australia ...
New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland
South Australia ...
West Australia
Tasmania ..
-
t-L to to to to to
O tO tO O tO O
CD O Ci O -*3 O
Professing
Roman Catholicism.
"V
n
13 2
K* t- 1 tO
ob hj to o 9S
t* -3 Ot 05 to -3 O
Of German or
Austro-Hungarian birth.
■§ 2
E 3-
W »
r*■ 9Q
2’ fl>
§ *
O
to 00 -5 00 Q0 00
O 05 Cri to
tD 05 O O H' to
Ox 05 O tD i-i to O
Born in Australia.
CO CO CO
tO O Or CD tO
6 05 w w h oi
Referendum, 1911.
V
n- n
O 1
r- «
g
r* o
K (♦ 0
o •*>
£ -1
» “ *
2 ©
» O g
£ «
C/j a
= 5“
« o
«• 3 3
r»-
O" «
{8
— t/>
o
r* n
3
CO if*- *>• if*- if*-
Cn to 05 H-* CO 4*
oo 4* to -i oo di -i
Referendum and
General Elections,* 1913.
CO 4*- 4*-
Or CD d O GO
00 C> O CD
General Elections,* 1914.
4*. *4-
D h D CD Oi
-i O tO O C* CD
Referendum, 1916.
4>* 0^*
Ol P O' O' 0 03
CO oi CO to
General Elections,* 1917.
h- 4 h- 4 K-* h- 4 »-*
O ►-* CD k — 1 CD O O
to O CO to Ox co to
Ot 00 O CK CO
tO O CO C5 00 H- 4 GO
Masculinity, i.e., number of males
to each one hundred females.
It has been suggested that the variations in the
opinions of the different States have been due to differences
in the religions or birth places of the voters or to the
women’s vote. The following table shows that there is
little probability of any truth in such suppositions:—
*NOTE. —In the general elections, the figures for the Senate have been taken ; the figures for the House
of Representatives are slightly different on account of uncontested seats.


It is evident that South Australia, the State which gave
the largest negative percentage vote in the referendum of
1916, has the smallest percentage of persons professing
Roman Catholicism. But the States of West Australia and
Victoria gave affirmative votes of 39.41 and 3.76, the State
of New South Wales a negative vote of 14.16, differences
of 53.57 and 17.92, yet the differences in the sectarian
votes in these States are only 2.7 and 2.1 respectively. It
is certain, therefore, that the influence of the sectarian issue
was unimportant.
The second column shows that the percentage of persons
of enemy origin is so small that they had little effect on the
ultimate result, especially as, in the referendum of 1916,
the State of New South Wales voted “No” by a 14.16
percentage majority, and decided the issue in favour of
the negative for Australia, and the percentage of persons
of enemy origin in this State is only .47.
In the third column, the percentages of native born
Australians are given. From these figures, it is evident
that the influence of voters born outside the Commonwealth
was of little importance. In the referendum of 1916, the
three States, Tasmania. South Australia and Victoria, with
the largest number of native born Australians, voted two
affirmatives and one negative, whereas the remaining three
States voted two negatives and one affirmative. Also Tas-
mania, the State with the largest native born population,
gave an affirmative vote, and Queensland, the State with the
smallest number of native borns, gave a negative.
The figures for the women’s vote have been taken from
two referenda, two general elections, and one referendum
and general election combined. The greatest variations in
the individual States have been, New South Wales. 5.4;
Victoria, 2.4; Queensland, 8.0; South Australia, 1.3; West
Australia, 10.9; and Tasmania, 3.8. The greatest variation
was in the State of West Australia between the polls for
the referendum of 1911, when enthusiasm was small, and
for that on compulsory service in 1916. At the latter
referendum the State of West Australia recorded a majority


in the affirmative, which was the largest ever registered in
any of the States of the Commonwealth on any subject or
at any election. If the women’s vote in this State had any
influence, it is probable that it was in favour of an affirm-
ative vote on compulsory service.
This conclusion, however, is probably incorrect. It is
more likely that the women’s vote has varied just as the
men’s vote. If the referendum of 1911 be excluded, the
maximum variations in the different States have been, New
South Wales, 2.6; Victoria, 1.9; Queensland, 4.8; South
Australia, 1.2; West Australia. 2.2.; and Tasmania, .9 It
must be remembered that the women’s vote in the different
States varies with the masculinity ratio (see last column in
table). At the referendum of 1916, where this ratio is
smallest, in the States of South Australia and Victoria,
the votes were in the negative and affirmative; and where
this ratio is largest, in the States of West Australia and
Queensland, the votes were in the affirmative and negative.
A comparison of the figures for the first referendum
on compulsory service in 1916 with those for the last
general election (1914) prior to that date gives rise to some
interesting conclusions. It must be remembered that the
general election of 1914 was a strong test of the feeling of
the country with regard to the merits of the labour and
anti-labour parties, as the whole of the senate went to the
polls for the first time in the history of the Common-
wealth. Also the referendum of 1916 caused a split in the
old labour party, and the majority of it formed the declared
negative party.
If it is assumed that every elector, who voted labour
in 1914, voted “No” in 1916 in the States of New South
Wales and South Australia, then 13.2 and 4.6 per cent, of
the electors, who voted anti-labour or liberal in 1914, also
voted “No” in 1916.
Again assuming that every elector, who voted anti-
labour or “liberal” in 1914, voted “Yes” in 1916 in the
States of Victoria, Queensland, West Australia and Tas-
mania, then 9.8, 8.8. 43.3 and 13.7 per cent, of the electors


in these States, who voted labour in 1914, also voted “Yes”
in 1916.
A strong division of opinion had thus developed
amongst the members of both the labour and anti-labour or
“liberal” parties, and this was most marked in the States
of West Australia and New South Wales.
In the States of Victoria, Queensland, West Australia
and Tasmania, it is evident that at least 1 in 10 of the
supporters of the old labour party voted in the affirmative,
assuming that few if any of the old anti-labour or ‘ ‘ liberal ’ ’
party in these States voted in the negative, which is unlikely.
If the same proportion of the supporters of the old labour
party voted in the affirmative in the State of New South
Wales, practically 1 in 4 of the supporters of the old anti-
labour or “liberal” party voted in the negative. This
number u"as more than sufficient to carry the referendum
in the negative for Australia.
On comparing the figures for the second referendum
with those of the general election, which preceded it six
months earlier in 1917, it will be clear that, if every elector,
who voted for labour in May, voted in the negative at the
referendum according to the declared policy of the labour
party, in each of the States the following percentages of
those who had voted anti-labour or Nationalist, also voted
“No”:—New South Wales. 27.2 per cent; Victoria. 9.7;
Queensland, 15.3; South Australia, 22.5; West Australia,
1.3; and Tasmania, 13.7. Thus the States of New South
Wales, South Australia and Queensland had the biggest
numbers of “Nationalist” supporters voting “No.” and
these voters carried the referendum in the negative for all
Australia.
It is evident that the old divisions are now swept
away; and that the official labour party is laying claims to
something that it did not achieve, namely, the carrying
of no conscription, for this party would have failed entirely
without the assistance of large numbers of “liberals” at
the first referendum, and of “Nationalists” at the second.


From the foregoing, it is necessary to search further
for the motive, which is controlling public opinion in
Australia, and more especially in the State of New South
Wales.
An important factor, which requires consideration, is
the influence of the personal well being of the individual.
In war time this operates in two ways, the fear of
physical inconvenience by personal service, and the dread
of financial restriction by increased taxation. After con-
sideration of the foregoing analyses, it is impossible to con-
ceive that the difference of 53.57 per cent, between the
votes registered by the States of New South Wales and
West Australia at the referendum of 1916 was due to the
fear of physical inconvenience. It is necessary now to
examine the possibility of the factor of dread of financial
restriction.
At the war census of June, 1915, the wealth per capita
of the individual was ascertained, and in order of wealth
the States rank as follows: —South Australia, £496 per
capita; New South Wales, £431; Queensland, £418; Victoria,
£412; Tasmania, £387; and West Australia, £349. On
comparison of these figures with those for the referendum
on compulsory service in 1916, it is evident that this order
exactly corresponds with the order in which the States
voted; the largest proportionate negative vote was recorded
by the wealthiest State per capita. South Australia, and
the largest proportionate affirmative vote by the poorest
State, West Australia. In the referendum of 1917. the
three wealthiest States, South Australia, New South Wales
and Queensland, maintained there position in giving the
largest negative majorities, but South Australia sank to
third position. The three poorest States maintained the
same order as before.
During the last two seasons, Australia has benefited
largely by the increased values received for wool and wheat.
This profit, however, has not been equally distributed
amongst the States.


The wool clip has been sold at an enhanced value of
fifty-five per cent, on the pre-war export price per lb.
greasy. According to the last completed return (1915)
the different States possessed the following numbers of
sheep per capita of the population:—Queensland, 23.50; New
South Wales, 17.42; West Australia, 15.11; South Australia,
8.38; Tasmania, 8.08; and Victoria, 7.43. Thus the States
to derive most benefit have been Queensland and New South
Wales.
In the increased prices of wheat, the States have shared
differently. In the 1916-17 season, the following number
of bushels per capita were grown in each State —South
Australia, 101.48; W r est Australia, 52.16; Victoria, 36.55;
New South Wales, 19.74; Queensland, 3.61; and Tasmania,
2.4'6. The States would share in a corresponding ratio per
capita.
It is thus evident that the three wealthiest States,
South Australia, New South Wales and Queensland, receive
the largest share in war profits on per capita bases. These
three States carried the second referendum in the negative,
and one alone, New South Wales, carried the first in the
negative for all Australia.
Is it not the inevitable conclusion from all the evidence
that the result of the first referendum was due to the
influence of the moneyed, interests in the State of New
South Wales?
Further evidence of the influence of, the moneyed
interests in this State may be given.
At the referendum of 1913, New South Wales was the
only one of the five continental States which recorded an
effective vote against the interference with trusts. On this
question, the rest of Australia voted in the affirmative by
a majority of 30.393; but the State of New South Wales
alone vetoed this by recording a negative majority of 39.005.
Whenever two parties, employers and employees, have
frequent disputes, it is morally certain that neither one
side nor the other can always be in the wrong. In 1913,
in the State of New South Wales there were 134 strikes


and only 74 in the rest of Australia; in 1914, 235 and 102;
in 1915, 272 and 86; and in 1916, 336 and 172. As the
moneyed classes are more dominant in the State of New
South Wales than in the other States, and the employees
are probably of the same calibre in all the States, the
extraordinary increase in the number of strikes in the State
of New South Wales must be due largely to errors of the
employer class.
Another form, in which public opinion has been
expressed in recent years, has been in the readiness to sub-
scribe funds for the prosecution of the war. These funds
have been procured in two ways, (1) by the sale of war
savings certificates, and (2) by the flotation of loans.
In the campaign to obtain money by means of war
savings certificates, the State of New South Wales occupies
the most unenviable position of providing the smallest sum
per capita, the subscriptions being 13s. lOd. Tasmania, the
second poorest State, has subscribed most, £1 9s. per capita.
The poorest and wealthiest States, West and South
Australia, follow with £1 65.; then Queensland with
£1 Is. Bd., and Victoria with 18s. Id. The secretary of the
Commonwealth War Savings Council attributes Tasmania’s
premier position largely to the work done by its education
department, giving proof of the possibility of educating
public opinion up to a desired standard.
In the floating of loans, it is difficult to analyse the
feeling of individual responsibility in the different States,
as the totals subscribed to each loan in the States of New
South Wales and Victoria are inflated by large subscriptions
from companies and financial institutions, whose head offices
are located in those States, although portions of their funds
are drawn from other States.
On the basis of the proportion of subscribers to the
population, the States rank as follows in the first loan; —
Victoria, 1 subscriber , in every 161.2 persons; South
Australia, 1 in 285.7; Tasmania, 1 in 312.5; Queensland, 1
in 344.8; New South Wales. 1 in 370.3: and West Australia,
lin 588.2. This was the worst response made by each


State in any individual loan. The best response was made
by all the States, except Victoria, in the sixth loan from
the aspect of number of subscribers. Victoria’s most
favourable figures occur in the third loan. These figures
are: —South Australia, 1 subscriber in every 30.2 persons;
Victoria, 1 in 30.8; New South Wales, 1 in 34.2; Queens-
land, 1 in 46.7; Tasmania, 1 in 54.9; and West Australia,
lin 67.5. The State of New South Wales thus occupies
fifth position at its worst and third at its best effort.
When these figures are compared with those for the
liberty loans in Canada and the United States of America
(1 subscriber in every 9 persons and 1 in every 11), it is
evident that, in all the Australian States, there is probably
as much diffidence in volunteering financial assistance to the
nation by persons with money as in volunteering for active
service by eligibles. This is the more remarkable as the
residents of Australia have been very lightly taxed for war
purposes. In the financial year 1914-15, only 3.59 per cent.
of the war expenditure was paid from current revenue; in
1915-16, 9.17 per cent.; and in 1916-17, 13.66 per cent.;
whereas in Great Britain, 23.2 per cent, of the total war
costs to May, 1918, had been already paid.
When the large subscriptions received from financial
institutions and companies are included, the State of
Victoria occupies premier position in the amount subscribed
per capita of its population to all loans. On this basis the
States rank as follows: —Victoria, £35 12s. 9d.; New South
Wales, £34 10s. 2d.; South Australia, £22 9s. 9d.; Queens-
land, £l9 13s. 9d.; Tasmania, £ls 15s. 9d.; and West
Australia, £lO 17s. 9d.
If individual subscribers only in the State of New
South Wales had subscribed on the same basis as the State
of South Australia, the total for all loans for the former
State would be reduced by a little more than £22,000,000,
and this sum is less than that subscribed by the companies
and financial institutions. On the figures, therefore, it is
probable that the moneyed classes in the State of New


South Wales are not responding individually as well as in
the States of Victoria and South Australia.
Surely all the evidence points to three logical con-
clusions :
(1) The moneyed classes in the State of New South
Wales are self-centred and selfish and are controlling and
dictating the policy for the Commonwealth of Australia.
(2) The moneyed classes in this State are responsible
for many errors of omission and comihission in the past,
for the principal influence in carrying no conscription,
and individually for feeble response in subscribing to war
loans.
(3) The labour party had little or no influence during
the past two years, and has only been made the scapegoat
for decisions framed by others, who did not wish to accept
the responsibility of such decisions.
The immediate remedies must be: —
(1) The labour party should temporarily postpone the
settlement of small economic grievances in order that a
united Australian people can assist the Empire in winning
the war.
(2) The moneyed classes in the State of New South
Wales must commence introspective reforms in order that
the strife between employers and employees may be
practically abolished, manufactures developed, and the
country thereby assisted in bearing the future heavy
financial burdens.
(3) The leaders of these moneyed classes must
strengthen the government by voluntarily advocating
largely increased taxation, and attempt to redeem the sullied
reputation of the State of New South Wales by securing a
record subscription from individuals to the Seventh War
Loan.
FREDK. WATSON.
NOTE. —In calculating proportions in the preceding pages, the figures
for the population in the 1917 edition of the Commonwealth Year Book
have been used.


WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY
WEBSDALE. SHOOSMITH LIMITED. SYDNEY
