

BRIEF ACCOUNT
THE COLONY
POET-JAC K SOI,
NEW SOUTH WALES;
Its Native Inhabitants, Productions ,
&c. &c.
WITH
AN INTERESTING ACCOUNT
OF THE
MURDER OF MR. CLODE,
LATE OF THAT SETTLEMENT,
As communicated by the Rev. RICHARD JOHNSTONE, late Chaplain of the
Colony, to JOSEPH HARDCASTLE, Esq. Treasurer of the Missionary Society.
BY G. BOND,
TATE ENSIGN IN THE NEW SOUTH WALES CORPS*
FO UR Til EDITIO N.
OXFORD:
PRINTED BY SLATTER AND MUNDAYj
FOR THE AUTHOR.
3 806.
A % '




A BRIEF ACCOUNT
OF THE
COLONY OF PORT-JACKSON\
NEW SOUTH WALES, &c.
1 HIS island, which is situated in 10 deg. 30 min. and
43 deg. south latitude, and between 110 and 153 deg.
30 min. east longitude, enjoys a most temperate and
delightful climate, producing in general two crops of
grain in the year; one of Indian corn, and the other
of wheat. The stumps of trees, which rise three cr
four feet above the ground, have at first sight a very
grotesque appearance; but so very rich is the soil, as
to produce, upon a fair calculation, about sixty bushels
per acre.
The natives of this fertile country are entirely black,
their limbs strong and robust, and they go quite naked ;
their bodies, however, which they anoint with the oil
of fish, are capable of bearing the most severe weather.
They usually adorn their hair, which is of a curly
nature, with the teeth of fish and various animals, and
wear a bone or feather, about three inches long,
through the cartilage of the nose.
Their insuperable attachment to this rude state of
life, will appear evident from this: though engaged
as servants, and enjoying the comforts of domestic


life, which they appear for a time to be delighted
with, they soon become dissatisfied; and the first time
they visit the woods, generally leave their clothes be-
hind, or desert to their former companions. Length
of time is unable to overcome this attachment to their *
native wildness. A gentleman of considerable respec-
tability informed me, that a native, whom he had
kept as a servant for three years, afterwards deserted,
preferring the precarious and unsettled state of a ram-
bling life, to all the comforts of dress, and the enjoy-
ments of civilized and social life. This is invariably
the case, with men, women, and children.
They are governed, no doubt, by laws agreeable to
their rude state, and proportion the punishment to the
offence. One mode of punishment is as follows.
When any of their community has committed an
offence, five or six hundred will hold a kind of coun-
cil, and if found guilty, will sentence the offender to
stand the attack of a given number of spears. This
is done in the following manner. The culprit is placed
at a certain distance, with a spear, which is given him
to ward off, if possible, the spears which are thrown
at him; this he generally uses with so much skill and
adroitness, as to escape any serious and fatal conse-
quences. On such occasions, they paint their bodies
with a variety of colours, in regular strokes or lines.
Their unwillingness to associate and connect them-
selves with the colonists, is manifest, from their so
frequently setting fire to the Indian corn belonging to
the settlement. On such occasions, it is usual to send
out parties of soldiers, who, by their firing, may in-


timidate, and cause them to retire; but not wound or
kill any of them, as this would be fatal to the first
white man whom they might afterwards meet. This
was unhappily the case with a sergeant belonging to
the New South Wales corps, and two others, whom
they killed on the same day; as an act of retaliation
upon our party, who had wounded ox killed some of
theirs.
Soon after this unfortunate circumstance, I was
alone, at the distance of about forty miles from Sydney
Cove, on the road leading to a settlement, called
Hawkesbury. Observing a party of the natives coming
out of the woods (about thirty in number), 1 was in
some measure alarmed, not being able to determine
whether it would be more prudent to proceed or re-
turn. Fearing however that my retreat, or attempt
to avoid them, might lead to a suspicion that I had
been connected with the party who had fired on them,
I resolved to advance, and meet them with seeminsr
confidence and unconcern. When we met, they sur-
rounded me on every side, feeling at my pockets and
clothes with the strictest care. Then indeed I was
seriously alarmed for my safety; but providentially
escaped unhurt, through the interference of one of the
party, who having been occasionally permitted to sleep
in my kitchen, knew me, and informed them in broken
English, that I was a good man. With this declara-
tion of their companion they were satisfied, and per-
mitted me to proceed.
Every endeavour has been used to reconcile them
to our ways of life,, and to associate with the colonists,


but hitherto without effect, as the following circum-
stance will show.
Among the number of their kings or leaders, was
one named Benalong, whom Governor Philips, or some
other gentleman belonging to the settlement, pre-
vailed upon to take a voyage to England. During
the voyage, he was treated with the greatest attention,
made a companion of the captain and officers, and
was amused with every thing which they could afford
to render his time agreeable and pleasant. When he
arrived in England, he was humanely introduced to
the King, at St. James’s. He continued here about
two years, living in the European manner. After
the expiration of that time, he was conveyed again
to his native isle: but how great was the surprise,
when, upon his return, he laid aside his European
dress, and fine clothes which had been given him,
and retired to the wild woods; when he might have
enjoyed every comfort which the colony afforded,
and had a constant seat at the governor’s table. Such,
and so great, is the love of their woods and mode of
life in their present state; and so fully is verified that
line of the poet,—
“ Caelum, non animurn , mutant , qui trans mare currant **
The harbour is very commodious and safe, and the
water so deep, that the ships can float along-side the
wharf, and unload their cargoes; and can ride at all
times of the year, at the entrance of the harbour
(which is one of the most delightful lever beheld)
with their top-gallant yards across. Two small ships
of war gre generally stationed here; not so much for


its defence, as for the purposes of conveying cattle
from the Cape of Good Hope, and taking stores to
Norfolk island, which is about rOOO miles distant from
Port-Jackson. Norfolk island is under the same go-
vernment as Port-Jackson, though a lieutenant-go-
vernor is appointed; and, during his absence, the
senior military officer takes the command. To this
place all the incorrigible and most abandoned offen-
ders are sent.
The ships of every nation, who touch here, usually
come well stocked with cattle for the market, as both
horses and cows are here very high and valuable; the
former, which at the Cape cost 40 or 50 dollars each,
will fetch 100/. or 120/. sterling, and the latter in a
similar proportion.
To the naturalist this country holds out many invi-
tations. Birds, though not remarkably numerous,
are in great variety, and of the most exquisite beauty
of plumage; among which are, the cockatoo, lory,
and parroquet. Of quadrupeds I have little to say.
The kangaroo is the most remarkable animal found in
the woods, but as this may be seen at any of the prin-
cipal exhibitions of beasts and birds, it will be un-
necessary to describe it. The hinder quarters alone
of this animal are frequently eaten, and cannot easily
be distinguished from beef-steak. The few others
met with, are almost invariably of the opossum tribe,
but even these do not abound. To beasts of prey they
are utter strangers, nor have yet any cause to believe
that they exist in the country. Fish, which my san-
guine hope led me to expect in great quantities, do


not abound; in summer they are tolerably plentiful,
but for some months before I left the colony, verv
few had been taken. \ enomous animals and reptiles
are rarely seen. Clay for making bricks is in plenty,
and a considerable quantity of them are always ready
burned and fit for use.
Having thus given an account of the island, and its
native inhabitants, it may not be improper to say
something of the European settlers, and the convicts
who are sent here from England.
When a ship arrives at Port-Jackson, the captain*
according to custom, waits upon the governor, with
an account of the voyage, stores, the number of male
and female convicts, &,c. In a few days after their
arrival, the male convicts have their irons taken off,
are well washed and cleaned, and are furnished with
a change of clothes, and other necessaries. After this
previous preparation, the governor, commissary, and
others, go on board, when all the convicts are ordered
upon deck, and each person’s name called over, and
inquiry made what trade or profession each has fol-
lowed, whether tailors, shoemakers, masons, See.
They are then classed according to such their former
-employments, and continue to exercise their usual
trades. Labourers, and such as have had no regular
business, are usually assigned to the officers and set-
tlers. From the considerable number of persons of
this latter class and description, amounting to eight
or nine thousand, it would be naturally supposed that
there would be no want of hands to answer all the
purposes of agriculture, and that government would


have many hundred acres of land cleared, and in a
state of respectable cultivation, since the soil is so
very rich and productive. This, however, is not the
case; and can only be accounted for by remarking,
that the servants of government are employed, gene-
rally speaking, in promoting the advantage of indivi-
duals, rather than that of the community. When I
left the country, wheat was 10s. per bushel; and yet
government had not then as much land cleared on its
own account, as many individuals. The colony, how-
ever, one would suppose, ought to support itself in
grain, instead of paying individuals for it, who raise
it by means of those convicts whom each settler is
allowed to employ.
The female convicts, on their arrival, are treated
in the same manner as the males before mentioned;
being well washed, and furnished with a change of
suitable apparel. The commissioned officers then
come on board, and as they stand upon deck, select
such females as are most agreeable in their person;
who generally, upon such occasions, endeavour to set
themselves off to the best advantage. In this state
some have been known to live for years, and to have
borne children. The non-commissioned officers then
are permitted to select for themselves; the privates
next; and lastly, those convicts, who, having been
in the country a considerable time, and having re-
alized some property, are enabled to procure the
governor’s permission to take to themselves a female
convict. The remainder, who are not thus chosen,
are biought on shore, and have small huts assigned
them; but, tnrough the want of some regular employ-


ment, are generally concerned in every artifice and
villany which is committed.
Females of this description are usually employed in
selling such cargoes of ships as are purchased by the
officers, who generally enter into an engagement with
each other> not to give more than a certain sum for
every article; and as they are the only monied men,
the captain of the vessel has no alternative, and con-
sequently is obliged to accept of their conditions.
Articles thus purchased, are sold to very great advan-
tage. Hum and brandy, which cost 10s. per gallon,
are sold to the soldiers and convicts, from 20s. to 255.
per bottle, which will not contain a quart. Tea, pur-
chased at 10s. per pound, sold at five guineas; coffee,
and other articles, in proportion. By this trade,
several, who on their landing had no property, have
realized a fortune of twenty or thirty thousand pounds.
If it be inquired, —How is it possible to accumulate
so large a fortune ?—the answer is plain;—they have
the labour of the convicts gratis; and for every bushel
of wheat which they place in the stores, they receive
10s. and for every pound of fresh pork, Is. Bveiy
officer is allowed a hundred acres of land, which, with
the sale of rum, brandy, tea, coffee, &c. to the set-
tlers, in exchange for grain, produce a very consider-
able yearly income. The convicts who have served
their time, and are become settlers, have farms given
them, which they clear and cultivate; and as they
never work for government longer than from six in
the morning till one at noon (owing to- the extieme
heat), they can get a dollar and an half lor their even-
ing’s work; and when they purchase such articles a&


they want, from the officers, they pay them with the
grain on their ground; which, when ripe, the officers
collect by the privates, and dispose of to the stores.
The currency of New South Wales, consists of bills
given by the governor for any kinds of produce
brought into the stores, such as wheat, pork, Sic.
The officers have the liberty of issuing hills, from Is.
to 100 k and seldom pay specie; but in general,
such promissory notes, for all purchases which they
make. When any cargo has been disposed of for
these promissory notes, the captain, or other trader,
before he leaves the country, takes these notes to the
commissary, who makes each individual, who has
issued such notes, to pay the amount into his hands,
and then gives to the captain, or trader, a bill drawn
on the Treasury in England, at ninety days after
sight; and such bills are negotiable at all the English
settlements, by allowing the discount. This system
of trading naturally makes the officers jealous of each
other, so that no friendly intercourse is kept up be-
tween them: and having barracks to themselves, they
do not form a mess, as other officers and regiments
usually do. The situation of commissary is, through
the practices they pursue, very lucrative; but no
feeling heart, or sensible mind, would desire wealth
or fprtune, procured in so abusive a manner,
The courts of law are three in number; the admi-
ralty, the criminal, and the civil court. The criminal
court is for the trial of all offences committed in
the eolony, such as murder, robbery, theft, &,c. and
is composed of the judge three naval (if on


the station) and three military officers. If two thirds
asree in the condemnation, the offender suffers death,
or is transported for a certain time, or fpr life, from
the settlement to Norfolk island. The civil court also
consists of the judge advocate, and two others, who
are appointed by the governor. The admiralty court
consists of such persons as the governor may from
time to time appoint.
Every attention has been paid to religious worship,
from the first establishment of the colony: but the
following circumstance will show, that many in that
country, as well as in our own, are not “ righteous
overmuch.”
The convicts had primarily the liberty of attending
or not attending divine worship; but in the year 1799>
Governor Hunter thought it his duty to issue an order
to all constables and overseers, to oblige all male and
female convicts, within their several districts, to attend
upon religious ordinances. This order was for three
Sundays complied with; but on the Monday following,
the church was wilfully set on fire, and burned to the
ground; nor could the incendiary or incendiaries be
found out, though the governor offered a free pardon,
and passage to England, to the informer.—A new
church of stone, instead of the former, which was
covered with thatch only, and had been burned down,
was erecting when I left the colony; but the convicts
were never afterwards forcibly driven to church.
The following unhappy circumstance having befallen
a Mr. Clode, during my stay in the colony, I cannot


but notice it; and as the Rev. Mr. Johnstone has
given the particulars to Joseph Hardcastle, Esq-
treasurer of the Missionary Society, and knowing his
account to be correct and true, I shall communicate
it to the public in his own words.
Sir,
Though I have not the pleasure of knowing
you in person, you will, I hope, excuse my freedom
in transmitting to you a letter from this distant part
of the world: lam sorry to add, upon so unpleasant
and painful an occasion.
By this time, I suppose, you have heard that part
of the missionaries sent first to Otaheite, have left that
island, and are come to Port-Jackson. These gentle-
men arrived here on the 14th of May, 1798, at a
time when I was confined to my room, through a long
and severe sickness. Upon their first arrival, Messrs.
Cover and Henry, with their families, spent a few
days with us, after which they removed up to Parra-
mata, about fifteen miles from Sydney, where they
still reside.
Owing to my indisposition, it was some time after,
before I became any way acquainted with any other
of the missionaries; and with one or tivo I did not feel
disposed to claim any acquaintance, and fear the So-
ciety have been deceived in them: but I wish to be
excused saying more upon that subject. A conscious-
ness of my own infirmities makes me delicate in ex-
posing those of others; to their own master they must
stand or fall; the apostle’s motto I wish on all occa-


sions to make my own, —“ Be not high-minded but
fear.”
During the time of my illness, Mr. Samuel Clode
frequently called upon me, and I believe was pretty
w r ell acquainted with the nature of my indisposition;
and soon after I recovered, a friendly intimacy was
formed between us; and I confess the more I came to
know of him, the more I esteemed him; but it has
pleased God to remove my friend away from me, to
meet him no more, until it pleases him to remove me
likewise from this vale of sin and misery. I will now,
Sir, give you a short account of this painful and
melancholy event.
Mr. Clode, some weeks previous to this, had signi-
fied to me his intentions of returning to England; and
at that time, was preparing things necessary for the
voyage. He had spoken to Capt. Wilkinson of the
Indispensable, and had so far agreed with hiip, that
Capt. Wilkinson had begun to provide a cabin for
him; but alas! a cabin of a different kind was pre-
paring for him at the same time.—A soldier of the
name of Jones had for some time owed Mr. Clode a
sum of money; Mr. Clode now thought it necessary
to ask for it, and after some altercation Jones desired
him to call on Tuesday the 2nd of July, in the after-
noon, and he would settle with him.
My friend had dined with me on the Sunday and
Monday preceding, and was likewise in the camp on
the Tuesday; dined at Dr. Harris’s, surgeon to the
corps, a gentleman who had from Mr. Clode’s first


arrival been very kind and friendly towards him; pro-
viding him with a hut to live in, with plenty of vege-
tables, and giving him free access to his own barracks
at all times.
About four o’clock he called upon us, sat a few
minutes, and then took his leave for the night, pro-
mising to call the next morning, and to bring some-
thing for my little boy, who at that time was indis-
posed; but truly it may be said, we know not what a
day may bring forth; for the next morning, instead
of seeing my friend, tidings were brought me that he
was murdered; was found in a saw r pit under water;
his scull was fractured in different parts, and his throat
cut from ear to ear. Judge, Sir, what was my sur-
prise and horror upon receiving this information. A
kind of stupor seized me; I could not believe it; it
appeared as a dream; but recollecting myself, I im-
mediately went and acquainted his excellency the
governor with the melancholy news. The governor,
with several other officers, went with me to the place,
where we found every thing as w r as related; a scene
so shocking as I never shall forget, hut too painful
and distressing for me fully to relate.
It pleased God, however, that this horrid murder
did not lie long concealed. Divine justice and ven-
geance soon pursued and overtook his cruel and blood-
thirsty murderer. News of this shocking event soon
spread in all directions: numbers of all descriptions
of persons ran to the spot; Jones, the man before-
mentioned, among the rest; and was the first to lay
the murder upon an innocent person, who found


my friend in this melancholy state: but this wretch’s
crime in the murder, and his no less wicked intention
in throwing it upon another, were both soon disco-
vered. Suspicions falling upon Jones, the path lead-
ing from the pit to his house was closely examined,
and blood traced; besides some of the dear deceased’s
brains, laid in different places, to the very door; and
making further search in the house, blood was dis-
covered in different parts, particularly in a small skil-
ling, where, as afterwards appeared, my friend was
dragged, after this horrid butcher had knocked him
down; an axe was found with blood and brains upon
it, though it had been previously washed; a knife and
blanket were discovered in the same state; and upon
examining the person of Jones, blood was found upon
one of his fingers; these and other circumstances fully
confirmed the suspicion of his guilt. Jones, his wife,
and two other men who lived in Jones’s house, were
immediately apprehended, and the next day, Thurs-
day, a criminal court was convened purposely to try
them; when three, viz. Jones, his wife, and El bray,
were convicted upon the clearest evidence; and I fear
the fourth, though acquitted, was a party in some
way concerned. After their conviction, I officially
visited these three horrid monsters, who, for the pur-
pose of obtaining a more full confession of this mur-
der, and others it was conjectured that Jones had
committed, were put in separate places. Jones con-*
tinued hardened to the last, his wife little better; but
Elbray, struck with remorse, which was occasioned
by what I shall hereafter mention, made a full con-
fession of the whole transaction, first to a serjeant in
the corps, and afterwards to myself, which I took


down in writing, and was to the following pur-
port.
The scheme was first planned by Jones and his wife>
on the Sunday : Elbray was asked to assist in it, but
at first refused : to gain him over, Jones gave him
several drams of spirits; when at length, on the
morning of Tuesday, he consented. Trotman, the
other man that was tried, but acquitted, was sent,
with Jones’s two children, to a settler’s farm, for
turnips : Mr. Clode was at that time in the town, and
expecting him to return home before dinner, it w r as
the intention of the other three, to dispatch him before
Trotman and the children returned; but Mr. Clode
not returning home as soon as was expected, this
scheme failed. About four o’clock, two other soldiers
(for Jones and Trotman belonged to the corps) called
in purposely to drink tea: at that time, Jones and
Elbray were looking out for Mr. Clode; and seeimg
him come down the hill at a distance, they went into
the house, and Jones proposed that his wife, together
with the two soldiers, Trotman, and the children,
were to go to look at a piece of wood, which Jones
was said to be cutting for the purpose of a canoe; this
was agreed upon. Mr. Clode by this time was come
to the door, was asked in, and a chair was set for him
by the table, to settle his accounts with Jones. The
axe I have already mentioned, was placed in the cor-
ner of the room; with this, Elbray, coming behind
him, was to knock him down; he took it up in his
hand, but his heart failed him; he laid it down again,
and went out of doors, where he staid a little while;
returning in again, he heard the first blow given by


Jones. This inhuman wretch repeated his blows so
often, that Elbray at last cried out, For God’s sake,
Jones, you have knocked him all to pieces.” They
then dragged him into the skilling, when Elbray came
out again, and Jones soon after him : Jones went into
the skilling, and coming out a second time, took up
a large knife; Elbray asked him what he was going to
do with it; he replied, “ d—n him, he moves, he is
not dead ;” and taking the knife, he went in again,
and cut his throat from ear to ear, and then returned,
both the knife and his hands reeking with blood.
This he immediately washed, whilst Elbray scattered
ashes over the room, to conceal the blood upon the
floor; the window shutters were put in, the tea things
set against the company returned; after tea, liquor
was set upon the table; several songs were sung by
Jones, his wife, and others. .About nine o’clock,
Jones and Elbray went out; when they dragged their
prey through a hole in the skilling, and taking him
upon their shoulders, carried him to the pit, threw
him in, covered him over with green boughs, and
then returned to their company, and kept up jovial
mirth till after midnight. The providence of God
appears singularly in bringing this horrid murder to
light. A man had been at work for several days upon
the ground round this pit,.and in the evening used to
leave his hoe in the pit: going to work the next
morning, and looking for his hoe, he was surprised
to see so many green boughs laid over the pit, suspect-
ed something was there planted, i. e. some property
that had been stolen was concealed; lie put in his hoe
and removed the boughs, when he immediately saw
the hand of a dead man. He then called out to an-


other nian cutting fir wood at a small distance : three
or four others came at the same time, Jones among
the rest, and immediately charged the man that first
discovered Mr. Clode in this woful plight, with the
murder, and wanted to tie his hands, and take him
into the camp a prisoner. Jones came into camp with
others to bring tidings of the murder; expressed his
concern for the murder of a man he so much loved,
and to whom he was indebted for his attention to him
and family, in times of sickness, and again endeavoured
to throw the murder upon the man that first discovered
Mr. Clode in the pit. From the tale he told, and
other circumstances concurring, the man was com-
mitted to prison; but at the very time Jones was thus
speaking, another man came up, myself, and the go-
vernor, and other gentlemen present, and said to
Jones, (< Jones, you are the murderer, blood is traced
from the pit directly to your house.” He then began
to protest his innocence, and to repeat what I have
before related. His house, his body, &c. were ex-
amined; he was taken to the pit, ordered to look at
the body, and to touch it. He replied, “ Yes, I
will, apd kiss him to, if you please, for X loved him
as rpy brother,”
That this unfeeling wretch had reason to love Mr.
Clode, you may easily perceive by his wife’s declaration
to me, whilst under sentence—Speaking to her of this
horrid business, and lamenting the unhappy end of a
friend I so much esteemed, she replied, “ Oh ! Sir,
that dear man was the saving both of my life and the
life of my husband. His attention was such to Trot-
man, as I never saw in any other person in my life;


three times a day he came to visit him, washing and
cleansing his sores; and had it not been for his atten-
tion, he would surely have lost his hand !” Who, my
dear Sir, can hear such a declaration as this, but must
shudder to think that such horrid monsters can exist!
By an order from the governor, the house in which
the murder was committed, was, on the Saturday,
pulled down, and burned to ashes: a temporary gal-
lows was erected upon the same spot, and at twelve
o’clock, these three inhuman wretches were taken out,
and conveyed in a cart to the place, where, having
discharged my duty as chaplain, they were launched
into eternity, to appear at the tribunal of a righteous,
sin-avenging God, and rather execrated than pitied,
by a numerous multitude of spectators. The bodies
of the two men are hung in chains near the place;
that of the woman given to the surgeons for dissection.
In the interim, I gave directions to have the body
of my deceased friend brought into the town to a small
hut of my own, and ordered a decent coffin and shroud
to be made: numbers came to see him, and many
with tears, lamenting his untimely end. On Friday,
his body was committed to the silent grave : the pall
was borne by five surgeons (Dr. Harris, the gentleman
above-mentioned, being one), and Captain Wilkinson;
his excellency the governor walked with me before
the corpse; Messrs. Cover, Henry, Hassel, Smith,
Oakes, and the two Puckeys behind the corpse, and
after them several officers and others. After having
read the burial service, a hymn was sung, given out
by Mr. Cover. I then spoke a little upon the melan-*


cholv occasion, many being in tears, and myself so
muc }i affected, that I could indeed say but little, but
gyve notice that I purposed to preach a discourse on
the Sunday but one next following.
The ensuing week I composed two discourses, and
on the 14th of July preached in the morning from 2nd
of Samuel, l6th and 17th verses, middle clause, —
“ Is this thy kindness to thy friend ?”-—Spoke to the
general character of the deceased, the aggravating
circumstances attending his death (and what these
were you will easily judge, Sir, from what I have
above related), and concluded my sermon with an
exhortation to different descriptions of persons. In
the afternoon I preached from Jeremiah, c. 6, v. 10, —-
i( To whom shall I speak and give warning, that they
may hear?” which was intended as a solemn warning
and exhortation to the living, and particularly to those
guilty of drunkenness, sabbath-breaking, and the
reigning vices committed in the colony; the fatal
consequences attending which, my dear Sir, I have
long seen and lamented, but alas ! I fear, all to little
or no purpose.
The missionaries attended church, hymns were
sung, and the lines were given out by Mr. Cover.
In the evening, Mr. Cover gave an exhortation at my
house, to his brethren of the mission, to my family,
and some others, upon the same occasion.
1 promised to tell you what it was that occasioned
Blbvay to make a confession of the murder before.—
When the bell began to toll for the funeral of mv


friend, he asked what the bell was tolling f or < the
sergeant of the guard told him, it was for the funeral
of the person whom he and Jones had murdered. He
was then taken out of the room, when seeing the corpse
just taken from my hut, he asked who it was walking
with Mr. Johnstone before the corpse; he was told
that it was the governor: he then hung down his
head, went again into the guard room, burst into
tears, desired one to read to him, and soon after made
a full confession; which was in substance what I have
above related.
As I do not doubt but that Mr. Cover, and tbe
other missionaries, who have seen, and with me
lamented the unhappy end of my deceased friend,
will write either to you or some other of the directors,
it was not necessary for me to write to you so fully,
nor indeed at all, upon the occasion; but for reasons
I have given, I judged this was my duty; and I can-
not conclude my letter without saying, that Mr
Cl ode’s conduct, as a Christian, was both humble
and exemplary; as a surgeon, humane and. attentive;
and as a missionary, he spent much ofhis time among
the natives; by whom, as well as by persons of every
description belonging to the colony, he lived beloved
and died lamented.
. 1 mu3t now be S lea ve to apologize for the hasty and
incoherent manner in which I have written this letter;
and can only plead as an excuse, that having many
letters to write by this conveyance, my domestic con-
cerns, as well as official duties, to attend, and withal
enjoymg but a weakly state of health; I could neither
3 1508 01784244


fee so p ? 'icular nor correct as I could have wished,
in 3O extraordinary, singular, and I may say,
une rampled a circumstance of barbarity and cruelty.
My friend Henry appears anxious to return to
Otaheile. He is a studious, serious, young man, and
appears well adapted for the work upon which he was
sent out; and I hope before long a door in providence
may open for his return.
Mr. Cover does not appear so anxious to return,
unless a stronger body of people were upon the island,
to defeat afiy evil intentions of the natives. He is, I
trust, a person of solid piety, and possessed of good
ministerial abilities; and he, together with Messrs.
Henry and Hassel, has, almost from their first arrival
at Port-Jackson, gone to the settlements established
in different parts of the colony, to preach and exhort
among the settlers. I sincerely wish them success in
their attempts and endeavours.
His excellency the governor has been, and still
continues to be, very kind and attentive to the mission*
aries.
That God may bless and prosper the missions sent
•ut to the heathen, in every place, is the fervent
prayer of,
Dear Sir,
Your sincere well-wisher, and humble servant,
Richard Johnstone.
The above shocking murder can be attributed to


fl ■
m :
I
u
I ><■
FINIS.
that system of trading alone, which has bey» T noticed
in a former part of this account. The dcecuvg
entrusted Jones with tea, sugar, rum, &c. and w, s to
be paid from his occasional pay for one year. Jom s
had received and used the articles, but had not re-
ceived his money from the pay-master; and this cir-
cumstance of his having consumed the articles he had
purchased, and not settled his account, no doubt
was the primary cause of the unfortunate event.
Individuals, who wish to go over as settlers, would
do well to consider their situation on the passage, as
well as in the settlement. On board the Barwell there
sailed three families, who were going out as settlers.
They received from government about 251. for each
family, which was intended to make some little pro-
vision for the,voyage (though the ship’s ratio is allowed
them), and to purchase some necessaries on their
arrival at the colony, where they are victualled from
the stores for twelve months. This is their agreement
with government before they leave England; but
some have been kept on the stores for several years.
Each settler is allowed a hundred acres of land, and
two convicts to assist in clearing and cultivating it.
The great number of applications, however, have in-
duced government of late to discontinue the present
of money when they leave England; so that persons
going out as settlers, are now only victualled on the
passage, and kept twelve months out of the stores
after their arrival.
Printed by 3iaU.es and. Mumjay, Oxford ,
