



OXFORD
CITY LIBRARIES
A list of the Rules may be
had upon application.
Please return this book as
soon as you have read it.






A CADETSHIP
IN THE
HONOURABLE EAST INDIA COMPANY’S
SERVICE, 1805
BEING A SHORT MEMOIR OF
EDWARD BLAGDON
BORN 1788; DIED 1806
Edited by
Florence Mostyn Gamlen
LONDON
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
HUMPHREY MILFORD
193 1


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


PREFACE
THE following letters and accounts came into my hands not long
ago. I have copied them as they are written, full of capitals and
short of stops. As a human document they tell their own tale.
Edward Blagdon, the would-be Cadet, was born at Puddington,
Devon, on 12 October 1788, the second son of Peter Blagdon, a
yeoman, who owned Smynacott Farm and about 300 or 400 acres at
Puddington, distant about four miles from Witheridge, the nearest
small country town. At Witheridge lived Mr. Corny ns, Junr., an
Attorney. Edward Blagdon s uncle, Mr. Melhuish, a Surgeon, lived
and practised at Tiverton, ten miles away.
I believe that Messrs. Melhuish and Comyns were the guardians
appointed by Peter Blagdon to look after the interests of his orphan
children. Peter Blagdon died prematurely, when his eldest son, John,
was only 17. John had two younger brothers, Edward and Peter. John
Blagdon succeeded to his father s acres, which had been bought by the
Blagdons early in the seventeenth century; Peter became a Land Agent;
a Cadetship in the Honourable East India Company's Service was
thought of for Edward. Three advertisements for a nomination pro-
duced nine answers; so, although ‘the strictest secrecy and honour were
enjoined, advertisement was clearly a not uncommon method of entering
that Service at the time.
Mr. Munt’s offer of an appointment in Madras at the price of
£2OO was accepted. Mr. Lathy, ‘the Hatter of the first respectability *,
‘Haberdasher to H.R.H. the Princess of Wales*, was given as the
reference. Mrs. Lathy was evidently well known to the Comyns,
father and son.
Edward Blagdon was the first member of his family to seek employ-
ment outside Devon. Once embarked on the seas, he ‘would not be at


Puddington again for the whole world 9 , although the French fleet was
out in the Bay of Biscay in August 1805. After the voyage, which his
letters describe, Edward Blagdon landed in India, where he died at
Barasat, Bengal, on 6 August 1806, in his eighteenth year.
FLORENCE M. GAMLEN.
Oxford, September 1931.


s. d.
To paid for Advertis g once in
Herald Cadetship wanted and ■ 15/10
post
To paid for C d once Times & 1
post j IJ / 10
To paid for C d once in Chronicle]
& post J 15 ' 10
£276
A CADETSHIP IN THE HONOURABLE EAST INDIA
COMPANY’S SERVICE
1805
[The story begins with the following bill]
Mr. Cummins To Trewinan & Son.
1805. May 20.
Settled.
J. Bass.
replies to be sent to Y.K. Post Office, Exeter.
[The answers to this advertisement were dated between the 22nd and
27th of May. I give them in sequence as follows.]
No. 1 Cock Court,
Ludgate Hill, London.
22nd May 1805.
Y.K. may have a Cadetship of this Season if the Young
Gent 11 not exceeding 22 or 25 years of age if he has served 1 y* in


Regulars Militia or Fencibles—can come forward immediately
and lodge 300 guineas as a Compliment and Agency at the
Bankers.
This Cadet is attended with unusual advantages—as there will
be a strong letter of Introduction and Recommendation of a
Person of influence to the Gov 1 Gen 1 which would be full as
valuable to the Young Gent n as the Cadet itself, as he will most
probably get an Ensign’s Epaulets immediately, or some ad-
vantage such as Pay Master etc. of his Company.
An extract of the Register of Baptism signed by the Clergy-
man and Church Wardens must be sent up and the Father or
‘next of Kin’ of the Young Gent 11 must certify that the person
mentioned in such extract is their Relation, the Bearer desirous
of serving the Hon ble E. I. Company as a Cadet.
The season is just over if he applies immediately he may have
a Years Rank which will be of the greatest importance to him,
Cadets are very scarce now, one may be had if the above terms
are agreed to by a line per Return of Post directed to Mr.
Kercher.
London, 22nd May 1805.
Sir,
In Answer to your Advertisement of this Day, I beg to ask if
you will give 300 guins. for the accomplishment of its object?
The Writer of this has litde Doubt of getting the Business im-
mediately effected through the medium of a Friend. Should
these Terms prove agreeable the Mode of Payment must be
made by the Conditional undertaking of a Banker to pay the
Money on the Appointment taking Place. Your Answer, with as
litde Delay as possible, will oblige, and if it meets your Appro


badon, a mutual Disclosure of real Names and Addresses on the
Basis of the strictest Honor and Secrecy will not be objected to.
Sir, Your most humb le servant
A. B.
Address: A. 8.,
Woods Hotel, Panton Square,
Coventry Street.
22nd. May 1805.
Sir,
Having received for myself a Nomination as Cadet to India
which I do not intend to avail myself of; I shall be happy to treat
with you for its transfer, provided the utmost reliance may be
placed in Secrecy and Honor.
I beg by return of Post to know the Sum you will give; the
name and age of the young Gentleman, and if he would prefer
going out now or in November.
I am, Sir, Your obedient Servant
A. Shee Junior.
No. 13. York place
Lambeth.
22 May 1805.
21 Buckingham Street, London.
May 23 rd 1805.
Sir.
I just write in consequence of your Advertisement in the
Chronicle of yesterday, to acquaint you that I have seen a Gentle-
man that would engage to get a Cadetship to India for your


friend, for one hundred and fifty Guineas, but he will not take
any step whatever in the business untill there is security lodged
for the money payable to him when the appointment takes
place. You will therefore let me know by return of post if this
meets your approbation.
I am, Sir Your most Obed 4 Servant
O. K. Somerville
[the rogue]
Y.K.
Post Office, Exeter.
23 May, 1805.
In answer to Y.K. about a Cadetship a Lady is almost certain
she can do it just at the last of these last Ships But Y.K. must be
sensible so late is very difficult and that the compliment must be
in proportion —many proposals have been made But none closed
yet —and assurance of Secrecy and where the Money will be
placed a speedy answer is necessary to say Truly how much will
be given how secured etc —and if the person is of proper age—
and fit in every respect for the situation.
May the 23 rd 1805.
in answer there is no need to pay the Postage,
address to N. N. 20 Downe Street, Piccadilly, London.


Seeing Y.K’s advertisement in this day’s Morning Herald for a
Cadetship, the writer thinks he has it in his power to procure one
either for Bengal, or Madras (provided the Young Gent is of
proper age and Eligible) on the Terms he saw offered in the
same paper a few days ago, which was Two hundred Guineas,
which would be applied to the relief of Family’s in distress—a
letter addressed to A.B. and left at 57 Lombard Street London
will be answered in a few days.
24th May 1805.
To Y.K. Post Office, Exeter.
Friday, 24 th May 1805.
Sir.
Observing your advertisement in a morning paper of this day
respecting a Cadetship in the H ble E. I. Company’s service, I have
to say that I can offer you one from one of the first introductions
which this country can afford, and which will give the holder a
Lieutenancy immediately on his arrival in the country, this being
a most favourable moment for sending any Young man to the
E. Indies. I am the holder of the appointment at the present
moment, which I shall not be able to profit by being I believe
something more than twenty two years of age, which is the
limited time for holding that situation. I imagine this appoint-
ment will throw the holder into four or five hundred pounds per
annum full pay. Three hundred pounds is the sum for which I
will transfer it, the answer must be returned to the present
within 24 hours after its receipt, the acceptor would also do well
B


to come up to town by the earliest conveyance, in order to pre-
sent himself for acceptance before the board of the India house:
he must bring with him a certificate of his birth or baptism
signed by the parish Minister and one or more of the Church-
wardens. The acceptor will be obliged to appear personally to
be introduced to persons of the highest rank, who are instru-
mental in procuring the appointments.
I have the honor to be Yours
In much haste
H. S. Salt.
Direct to No 32. Bury Street
St. James, London.
If the acceptor should proceed instandy to town, which will
be advisable should he acceed to the Terms above mentioned, if
he will send a note directed as above the writer and holder of
the appointment will immediately wait on him.
May 27 th 1805.
If Y.K. will honor the writer of this with his real name and
residence, his communication will be received with every due
attention to delicacy and confidentiality, and Y.K. will be
answered by a Person of high respectability and honor, candidly
giving real name and address in return, and who perhaps can
gratify the pursuit of Y.K. in a manner and quarter greatly more
flattering and acceptable as to the Youth’s future progress and


prospects in Life, than is very likely to result through the
medium of an Advertisement.
Please to address (post paid) to K. Y. to be left with Mr. Rich-
mond the new Chapter Coffee house, Duke’s Court, Long Acre,
London.
Addressed to Y.K. London
Post Office, Exeter. Leadenhall Street
27 May 1805.
It was not until yesterday that I noticed your advertisement
for a Cadetship to India. I believe I can put you in the way to
obtain one, the passage, outfit &c. &c. will cost you altogether
about .£4OO. I wish therefore you would drop me a line im-
mediately. I cannot enter into any further particulars here and
wish you could name some friend in Town with whom I might
converse on the subject as the strictest Secrecy and Honor are
depended on
I am, Yr Obed 4 Servt.
John Munt.
21 Buckingham Street,
London,
May 31 st 1805.
Sir,
I have received yours of the 28 th inst. and in answer acquaint
you that no less will be taken than what I mentioned to you be-
fore, as it is not me that procures it, but a Gendeman to whom I
have applied, he also wants to know which of the two Establish-
ments you wish to get on; at the same time I must acquaint you


that your Age must be between sixteen and twenty one, of a fair
and respectable Character, and a reference to be given for the
same to some Gentleman in London, or else that is well known
in the higher Circles; and no application can be made for you
untill the Money is lodged in some respectable House in London,
and made payable when you are appointed, provided the same
takes place within two months, otherwise that you shall with-
draw your Money again: at the same time you must not men-
tion this by way of purchase, otherwise it would be impossible
for you to get it, as it is no purchase.
lam Sir, Your Obed 4 Serv 4
J. Somerville
P.S. Please to answer this by return of Post and have the good-
ness to Frank your letters.
Y.K.
Addressed to: Bth June 1805.
Comins Esq.
at Mr. Chapman’s
Marylebone Street, Golden Square.
K.Y. has been honored with Mr. Comin’s note, at the New
Chapter Coffee House, and if Mr. C. will favour Mr. Brooke
with a Call, any time between one and three , (not earlier) this
morning, at No 46, Rathbone Place, Soho Square, (the side
door), he will have a Conference with him on the subject,
which K.Y. need not say requires every degree of delicacy and
secrecy on both sides.
Saturday June Bth,8 th , 1805.


12 th June 1805;
R.K. presents his Compts and informs Mr. M. it will be better
to let the Gentleman know that it will be very unlikely the Busi-
ness at the India House can be done this day for its from a Mem-
ber of the House of Corns, its to come and it was so late before
they left this mom g but R.K. will see him this Evening and say
tomorrow at n oc’k. 12 June 1805.
Mr. C. presents Compts to Mr. Lathy he will find by the
above note the business cannot be done today, but tomorrow at
Eleven will be glad to see him and friend.
14 th June, 1805.
Sir.
I have seen the Gendeman he has not disposed of the appoint-
ment and it is exacdy what you wished, being for Madras the ulti-
matum for the Appointment is 200 guineas be pleased to let me
know as soon as possible I send this that you may write by to-
night’s post excuse haste.
yrs. oh 1 J. Munt.
Leadenhall Street,
Friday Afternoon 4 o’clock.
Cummings Esq.
Mrs. Brown’s, 37 Charlotte Street,
Hatton Garden.
i6thjune 1805.
R.K. presents his Compts. and informs Mr. Cummings the
Business will be done on Tuesday to our satisfaction.
Birchin Lane
June 16,1805.


[Here follow two letters from Mr. Comyns Junior to his Father.]
107 Newgate Street, London.
18 June (1805).
D r Father.
My expectations in regard to procuring Edward’s commission
you will perceive from whence this is dated have not been realized.
The Royal Family could not amuse themselves in any other
way last Wednesday but by visiting the India House and thereby
disappoint Hundreds like myself. On Thursday we expected to
have procured the Commission when it unfortunately appeared
the Director thro’ inattention had given in a Nomination for an
Establishment to which he was not entitled—on Friday no Com-
mittee sat —and adjourned to this day.
We are just returned from the India House where Edw d has
passed before the Committee and I have agreed for his Passage
at fj6o in a Country Ship which is expected to sail in a fortnight
we have just sent in a Petition to the Ship Committee to request
their approbation of his going out in this Ship as no Passage can
be obtained in the Regular Ships unless he Dines at the Captain’s
Table which would cost X llO - We have reason to believe
everything will be settled tomorrow so as I may safely Part with
the Cash and I shall take the Evening Coach to Bristol.
I shall leave Bristol Sunday Morning unless I hear from you in
the mean while, you of course will send Arthur with a Horse for
me at the Inn at Willand so as I may reach Home Sunday night.
lam D r Father
Your Du fl Son
T. C.
P.S. If Edward’s Box is not already forwarded to him at
107 Newgate Street not a day is to be lost.


London, Tuesday.
18 June 1805.
D r Father.
Thank God I have just agreed for Edward’s appointment, you
no doubt will be astonished when I tell you that is the
Compliment, this you’l say is at least -£5O thrown away but
when you are informed that from the Situation of the Director
he will rank the Second Cadet of the Season, the expense of
Keeping Edward till another Season at a Military School with
the lost [sic] of a years rank, I say all these things considered you
will no doubt agree with the Learned here that its better to
give X 2OO f° r this Season than one for the next.
Somerville who offers a Cadetship for £l5O turns out a
Swindler.
• With respect to Mr. Shee who held the appointment and to
whom you’l recollect we offered some time since .£lOO was sold
for £250.
The Gentleman with whom I have agreed is of the first re-
spectability a Hatter in Leadenhall Street.
We meet again on this Concern tomorrow and we hope that
the Appointment will be made out. At all events it will be
settled some day this week, and I shall leave this unhealthy place
Sunday or Monday at farthest.
Mr. Lathy has been kind enough to say Edw d shall remain
with him till he sails which will be in July.
I shall now proceed to Somerset House.
I am D r Father
Your Dut. Son
T. C.
Mr. Lathy’s family beg their Compliments.


[O. K. Somerville proved to he an impostor. The others, I suppose,
were genuine agents.
Mr. Comyns, Junior, evidently came up to London to negotiate the
transaction. Mr. Munt appears to have been the intermediary
between ‘ R.K. ' and ‘a member of the House of Commons'. R.K.
wrote on Sunday, 16 June, ‘that the business will be done on
Tuesday 18th June'.
Between 6 and 10 June, Edward Blagdon appears to have paid the
following bills, most of them made out by an illiterate hand, for
food and drink.]
June 6. si
Dinner 9 o
Beer 1 4
Lug d 1 6
Paper 6
Beer 8
Lug d 2 10
7. Brandy 2 6
Bed 2 o
18 6
Beer 8
19 2
Monday:
Light o 3
Beer o 2J
Boate [ibutter] o 9
CofFe o 6
Beer 02^


Ditto o 2\
Ditto o 2 i
Boate 0 2
CofFe o 6
Bread 0 i
Sugar o 5
Washing 2 3
Letter o 2
CofFe o 6
Beer o 2J
Salmon o 8
Beer o 2J
Boate o 2
Milk o 2
Boate o 2
Vinegar o 1
Coffe o 3
Loging 14 0
124
Boate 043
167
June 10th:
s. d.
Dinners 5 0
Beer 4
Brandy etc. 1 4
6 8


s. d.
Beer 2J
Butter 1 8
Candels o 4
Bread o 3
Coffe Sug on
Beer o 2-|
Boate o 6
Beaf 1 2J
Beer o z\
Bread o 7
Beer o 5
Coffe o 9
Milk o 1
7 4
Paid June 10th.
[Then follow the various bills for his outfit, which M. Lathy was left
to pay. Mr. Lathy was, I surmise, ‘the Hatter of the first respecta-
bility Haberdasher to H.R.H. the Princess of Wales.]
Mr. Blagdon.
To Graddon & Cowell
From Fords
Taylors & Breeches Makers
To his Royal Highness the
Duke of York.
No 3 York Street, Covent Garden.
Ladies’ Riding Habits in the first style of elegance.


1805, June nth.
I *• *
To a Superf. fash. Blue Dress Cloth
Coat 3 10 o
To aD° D° Waistcoat D° 1 1 o
To Pantaloons D° of D° Welted
Seams
1 18 o
To 3 Superf. Manchester Brighton'
Coats @.£l ii 6)
4 14 6
To 3 D° Waistcoats @ 15/- 250
To 4D° Trowsers £1 1 440
To best India Nankeen Breeches 1 1 o
To 2 Superf. fash. White Quilt
Dress Waistcoats
200
£2O J 3 6
Mr. Blagdon. June 17th 1805.
London
No 39. Poultry.
Bought of John Luke
Manufacturer of Boots & Shoes
Wholesale Retail and for Exportation.
£ s - A -
To 2 Pair military Boots Back strapt. 440
2 Pair Dress Pumps 10/6 1 1 o
4 Pair Shoes—lo/- 200
£7 5 o
Received for J. Luke
of Lathy.


Received of Mr. Blagdon June 15 th 1805 The Sum of Seven
pounds one shilling Value received as Per Bill.
£7 1 o
for Munt and Adams.
J. Bramwell.
Mr. Blagdon. London June 18 th 1805.
Bought of Munt & Adams
Hat Makers
No 144, Opposite the India House
Leadenhall Street
A Officers Military Hat Trim d
complete 63 /- Box 3/6 £3 6 6
6 extra cockades 2/6 ea r
_ / Ai to o
2 Regulation Feathers 7/6 J
2 Gents fini hats 21/- ea. Boa 2/6 £2 4 6
1 0
Mr. Blagdon
107 Newgate Street,
Mr. Edw d Blagdon. London 18 th June 1805.
Bo* at Lathys
Haberdasher to H.R.H. The Princess of Wales.
Haberdashery, Hosiery etc. Ready made Linen Warehouse.
No 107. Newgate Street. r .
£ s * **•
2 Blankets—7/- 14 o
2 White Cotton Counterpanes 13/6 170
4 Pair do. do. Sheets—l 6/6 360
6D° Pillow Cases 2/- 12 o
36 Plain Calico Shirts—B/6 15 6 o


36 Fine Do. Do. Trimmed French Cambric 13/6 24 6 o
24 India Jaca nett muslin cravats 2/9 360
4 Best Black Velvet Stocks 3/- 12 o
8 Pair India Calico drawers 5/9 260
24 Do. Brown cotton Hose —3/3 3 18 o
12 Pair Brown Cotton J Hose 2/2 160
24 Fine Huccaback Towells—l/6 1 16 o
6 Double Barcelona Handkfs. 5/6 1 13 o
1 Linen Bay 3 6
6 Pair miHtary Gloves 2/6 15 o
6 Do. Cotton Do. 1/9 10 6
6 Fine net night caps—i8 d 9 o
6Do Cotton Do Do—i8 d 9 o
3 Pair Silk Braces —5/6 16 6
2 Coloured morning gowns—2o/- 200
3 Do Silk Handkfs.—7/6 126
24 Common Sorted Do.—2/6 300
6 Fine Lawn 4/- 140
6 Pair White Silk Hose—ls/- 4 10 o
Haberdashery Hair & Shoe ribbon 9 6
Watch Ribbons & Roses for the Gorget 7 6
Washing shirts & Towels 190
77 14 o
By Cash to Mr. Cummings 12
89 14 o
By Cash 60
29 14 o
66 7 6
£.96 I 6


Mr. Blagdon.
Bot of Wayte & Rendall
1805, June 19 .
£ s • <*•
Souchong 3 lb. 7/6 126
Canust 2 o
Loaf Sugar 28—120/- 1 11 6
X 216 °
Paid E. R.
Mrs Lathy London 19 th June 1805.
Bought of H. R. I. Roberts.
8 doz. Regulation India Cadet
/ 1 14 o
Coat buttons extra gilt, 4/3
8 doz. do Breast do—2/3 18 o
An extra Gilt mounted India | q q
Company’s regulation Sword J
Ado Breast plate 16 o
Ado Gorget 18 o
2 rich Bullion regulation Epaulettes 660
A rich Silk Sash 3 12 6
A Belt 100
A Sword Knot 15 6
£2O o o
Received of Mr. Cumins
for the use of Mr. Roberts
19 th June 1805.
J. Lathy.


Mr. Lathy. 19 June 1805.
To John Patrick.
1805. June 19.
To a Pewter bason 3 6
To a Shaving Pot and cover 2 6
£o6°
Rec d W m Frith.
Mr. Lathy. London June 19 th 1805.
Bought at Seabrooks.
original
Trunk and Basket Warehouse
No 5 Comer of St Pauls next Cheapside.
To one large Iron bound Hair Trunk etc. 1 11 6
To one less do do do do 140
2 Plates Eng d Edw d Blagdon Bengal Establishment 5 o
£3 O 6
Mr. Lathy for Mr. E. Blagdon. London. 19 June 1805.
Bought of Mawhood, Greasley & Hughes
Army Clothiers & Warehouse men
55 & 56 West Smithfield.
£
6 Scarlet Sfme CC. 30/- 900
Received 19 June 1805.
for the use of Mawhood & Co.


Mr. Lathy. London 24 June 1805.
Bought of William Heather
Bookseller, Stationer, Engraver & Printer
No 157 Leadenhall Street.
The Cadet etc. bound.— 6 o
Adye. on Court Martials boards 4 o
Rules etc. for His M’gs Forces 6 o
Duties of Infantry Officers do. 5 o
Principles of Fortification, sewed 3 6
Rules etc. for the Sword exercise B d 7 6
Dictionary of Bengal. Bound. 8 3
Persian Vocabulary B d 93
Bible 5 o
Common Prayer Book 7 6
£3 a o
June 18 th 1805.
Things purchased for the use of Mr. Edw d Blagdon.
£ *. i-
A cot 1 14 o
1 mattrass and feather pillow 220
1 Military Hat and Box 366
6 extra Cockades 15 o
2 Regulation Feathers 15 0
2 Round Hats & Box 240
6 Pair Shoes 310
2 do Military Boots 440
1 Do Sash 3 12 6


I Regimental Sword 400
1 Do. Do Knot 15 6
1 Do. Belt 100
2 Gold Epaulettes 660
1 Do. Gorget 18 o
1 Do. Belt Plate 16 o
2 Compleat sets of Buttons 2 12 o
7 lb. Common soap 5 o
a bootjack 1 6
Stationery 5 6
6 lb. wax candles 3/4 100
1 Flat Candelstick 3 3
1 Looking Glass 2 6
1 Pewter washhand bason & Jug 5 6
Set of Blacking Brushes & Cakes 8 6
2 Trunks name engrav’d 30 6
1 Camp Cloak 1 14 o
1 Hair Cap $ 6
3 lb. Tobacco 10 o
6 yds. Superfine Broad Cloth 900
Tea & Sugar 2 16 o
£57 19 3
Wine 800
£6519 3
[Here follows the first of Edward Blagdons own letters.]
Mr T. Comins London, July 3 1805.
Sir
On receipt of Mr. T. Cumin’s Letter this morning I was much
D


surprised to find you had the least objection to my having the
small sum mentioned in a Letter which I wrote to my Uncle it
being no more than ten Pounds which it was impossible for me
to go to London without, to go in the caracter of a Gendeman
as I know it is your wish I should do—you will pardon my
troubling you on this subject but certainly there must have been
some mistake between Mr. Munt and Mr. T. Cumins respecting
the £25 that I received at the India House which sum Mr. Munt
understood I had kept exclusive the sum left me per Mr. T. C.
this I have leamt from Mr. M. since Mr. T. C’s departure home
I havefrequendy conversed with him on the subject—l am going
with him and his Daughter and shall be in Lodging with them
during my stay at Portsmouth which will be till the Ship sails no
Cadets going on Board till that time—Of course all expenses I
must share with them as Mr. M. is only taking the Part of a
Friend to me I cannot expect he will pay any of my expenses I
will thank you to see my Trunk sent off immediately directed
for me at Portsmouth to be left at A. Lindiquz Esq r H. C. Extra
Ship Maria Carr P d . I expect daily to leave this Place it will be
useless therefore to send it here as in all probability I shall be gone
before it arrives, my Family I think has behaved particularly un-
kind to me to neglect my wish at a time perhaps when lam
bidding them adieu for ever—you will much oblige me by see-
ing or ordering this to be done or if it is already sent you will say
by what waggon and when it is sent as it may be laying in some
of the Cellars here—l have just called on Mr. M. and he says it is
not expected for me to be on Board before the other Passengers
which is not until the Ship Sails if you will write to Mr. Munt
and desire him to pay my expenses for the Journey and my living
while there I shall be very well satisfied with the Sum Mr. C. has


written to Mrs Lathy I shall halt I think that will be the best
I remain D r Sir, Y 1 Serv 1 , E. Blagdon.
Please to write by return of Post as I think I shall leave this
Place on Sunday.
Mr T. Cumins.
[Here is a further Bill]
July 10,1805 Mr. E d Blagdon to S. M. Lathy.
Paid Mr. Heather for Sundry Books 3 12 6
3 Stifhers for the neck at i8 d 46
6 pr. Wt. Rib d Cotton Stockings at 5/6 1150
6 pr strong patent garters at 9 d 46
Black Tin Tea pot sundry spoons Blackjack etc. 6 6
Additional Washing Bills 9 6
Paid for Booking Porterage Rope etc. 5 6
Paid towards making his Dollars an even quantity 3 6
J piece Black Hair Ribbon 5 6
J Doz. very dark pockett Hks. at 2/6 15 o
J Doz. patent nett night Caps at i8 d 90
paid Mr. Randle for 1 lb. Coffee 6 o
A Tap packing frame and straps his Trunk 5 6
Shaving Case etc. 6 6
Cash on his going to Portsmouth 660
Coach Hire to Mr. Munt’s Country House where
he was to set of [sic] with the family 6 6
16 1 6
Board 440
£2O 5 6
By Cash j£ 2o * 5-6. S. &M. Lathy. N. Lathy.


[A letter from Mrs. Lathy to Mr. Comyns Junior follows.]
Sir
I think it a duty incumbent upon me to inform you and your
Good Father that Edward left us this morning for Portsmouth
and with a promise from Mr. Munt that he his [sic] to go on
Board his Ship immediately on his arrival there but I assure you
I have had a very hard combat to bring it to this Edward was to
meet all the party by seven this morning at Mr Munt’s country
House at South Lambeth a most delightful situation about a mile
from Vauxhall Gardens they sett off from there six of them in
two post chaises and will change horses every stage till they
arrive I was not well enough to go to Lambeth with him myself
but Sarah and Ann rose by six to Breakfast and arrived at Mr.
Munt’s just as the chases came at the door the greatest difficulty
of the morning was to get a Coach with Horses strong enough
to take them there as at that hour you can only have those that
have been on the stand all night and for which they ask you
double price.
I hope you will rest satisfied with everything that has been
done for him and I beg you will assure his other friends that it
is impossible for them to judge of the trouble expense and time
attending situations of this sort without being upon the spot the
few additions to your order was unavoidably necessary and what
ought to have charg d with the other bills but your leaving Town
so suddenly after finishing at the India House will be a sufficient
excuse for this additional charge I cou d not give Edward less than
six Guineas as I am well aware he will have a great deal to pay
for carriage besides his own Travelling expenses I fear he has but
little left out of the money you left him but he will only account


to me for two Guineas he paid for learning the Broad Sword
exercise what he has done with the rest God knows as I have
never let him go to any place of amusement since you left as I
am never out of an evening Mr. Kentish has been very kind and
attentive to him for which I mean to express my thanks by letter
but Mr. Munt not quite so much as I expected and Edward told
Mr. Kentish so which very much surprised him I have not made
any charge for Edward’s Board as you desir d as your Friend he his
[5lV] very welcome but if you think a charge is absolutely necessary it
ought to be a Guinea per week the poorest House in Town
would charge that but I will leave this entirely to your own
discretion I hope you rec d my parcel sent by your neighbour Mr.
Gumming and that Mr. Lathy is also with you or has been be-
fore this should he not be arrived yet beg he will not hurry him-
self but enjoy himself a few days perhaps for the last time with his
much esteemed Friend your Father. Tell them that I anticipate
the luxury of this meeting to both by the effluvia of the pipe which
I fancy I smell here. lam truly sorry Mary was not strong enough
to undertake the journey the Spirit she tells me was willing but
the flesh was weak. A thousand kind wishes attend you and
yours from this House to all your kind good Family.
Sarah writ a letter to Miss Comins and sent it in my parcel
which she will be anxiously looking for an answer to she his [sic]
just now called upon by a party to attend the Vestry to vote for
a clergyman as an evening Lecturer at our Church pray do
examine among your Linen and see if you have not a strange
shirt more than your own there is no mark in it but you will
know it from yours should you find it and Mr. Lathy has not
left your neighbourhood pray give it to him my kindest love
to your Mother and beg she will make me usefull to her say


all that is kind to sisters to your B r Rich d and believe me to be
sincerely
your Friend, Sarah Lathy.
Mr Thos Comins jun r
Witheridge, near Crediton, Devonshire.
[The two following letters are from Edward Blagdon.]
Mr Comins Maria
St. Helan’s [sic] off Portsmouth.
i6July 1805.
I got on Board the Maria on the 12th of this month and am
quite happy I like the sea very much and I wish that I could
never leave it. I came from London with Mr. Munt and he has
treated me very kindly. Mr. M. has a Daughter on Board with
me she is a very Pleasant young Lady and I assure you I would
not be at Puddington again for all the whole World. I am sur-
prised in your not writing me in answer to my Letter I think it
very unkind in your scanty Allowance of Money I have been
obliged to break in on my Dollars which I reserved for touching
on St. Delena [sic] as I hear it is supposed we shall do. I stayed at
the Isle of Wight nearly a week on my own Expense because the
Captain refused taking me on Board before the other Passengers
and for that reason I hope you will send me some Money if you
do not I shall think very unkind.
Mrs. Lathy has behaved very kind to me and I am afraid I
never shall be able to make her amends for that reason I hope
you will do it—you will write me by return of Post and send me
a litde more money to replace the Dollars and likewise to let me


know how my Brothers sister and Mother are and likewise your
Family my Uncles and any fresh news else. I have not received
my Trunks yet nor have I heard anything I cannot tell how I
shall be able to do without it—l have nothing Particular else to
say but it is reported we shall stay here a Week or Fortnight
longer.
I join in love to my Family and all Friends
I remain Y r Hble Serv*
E. Blagdon.
Mr. J. C. Mulhuish Falmouth Harbour.
Surgeon, Tiverton. July 19 th 1805.
Dear Uncle
Permit me once more to address you before I leave England
for ever. We have just anchored here to my great sorrow and I
understand by the Captain that I am to live on Shore as long as
we are here which Probably will be three weeks at the least and
I am to live on Shore at my own expenses, I have written to Mr.
Comins for Money but he has not replied I assure you I am very
much in want of that necessary article, and without you remit
me pr return of Post a Sufficient Quantity of Money to let me
live and at St. Helena in the Caracter of a Gentleman I must re-
turn to you immediately for that reason you will remit me at
least Twenty Pounds. I cannot conceive how you and Mr. C.
can be so very near after giving me my Commission and rigging
me out like a Gendeman at a Time when very likely we shall
never meet more —you said in a Letter which I received of you
at London that you hoped I would write every half year but
without you remit me the Sum I have requested you must never


expect to hear from me from the time I go away until I come
home again—l assure you lam not telling of you an Untruth the
ten Pounds which Mr. C. left is nearly gone in things which
were absolutely necessary Pardon me Uncle for writing thus
rashly but I am in so much want of Money that I do not know
what to do—l have been very seasick in my Passage from St.
Helan’s to here but for all that I am so taken up with the Seas
that I wish I could never leave it—You will not forget to say
where my Trunk is in your Letter.
I remain, D r Uncle, Y r Nephew
E. Blagdon
Excuse haste.
[On receipt of this letter, Mr. Melhuish wrote to Mr. Corny ns, Junior,
as follows.]
Mr T. Cumins Jun r
Witheridge.
Speed July 1805.
Dear Sir.
As I have always dreaded the want of Money when I have
been abroad, I would recommend that the jC 2O desired in the
inclosed may be sent Edward by return of the Post. He is so
remiss as not to say what Ship he is on board but I suppose he has
acquainted you. Should not the Bill be made payable to Him or
his orders? but if you have any Friend in Falmouth perhaps any
other Bills would be as well, your friend taking his Receipt
altho’ according to his own acct. we have ‘rigged’ him ‘out’ as a
Gentleman ’tis manifest he is incapable of supporting the Cha-
racter he has taken upon him for he neither writes nor spells like


a Gentleman—but this is only between ourselves—l am with
Compts to your Father.
Yrs most truly J. Melhuish
I think he mentions something of his Trunk which perhaps you
can account for. I presume he knows his Mother is married.
Tiverton
Monday Morning.
Plymouth
27 July 1805.
Dear Sir
I received your Letter this morning with a Fifteen Pound Note
enclosed Tiverton Bank 5773. No. for which I am much obliged
I wrote Uncle Yesterday a letter which I beg Pardon for I will
endeavour to make this last me out my Voyage but it must be
used with a great deal of oeconomy I will write you when I
arrive at Bengal and give you an account of my Voyage—Mr.
Munt did not Pay my expenses down to Portsmouth and
Carriage.
I remain, Sir, Y r H ble Serv*
E. Blagdon.
Mr. T. Cumins Jun r
Witheridge, near Crediton, Devon.
[Edward Blagdon writes again.]
MrJ. Melhuish, Surgeon, Tiverton.
Falmouth Harbour
August 3 rd 1805.
Dear Uncle
In my last Letter I was congratulating myself on the good
E


Fortune of leaving England, but now am very sorry it is quite
the contrary the Day after I wrote you we unmoored and left
Falmouth at the Distance of 2 miles when the Commodore fired
a Gun and it was for us to anchor there—after laying there 2
Days they fired another Gun for us to unmoor, and anchor in
Falmouth Harbour, which accordingly we did. this morning
Dispatches came from London to this intent that the Brest Fleet
was going out and that all Vessels of War belonging to his
Majesty should go in order to repulse them. Our Commodore
was among the number of them she is ordered to make every-
thing in readiness and go out as soon as the Wind favors, and we
are to wait here until she returns —which I am afraid will be a
great while—Now I should thank you for a little of your advice
whether it is better for me to stay in Falmouth or return to Pud-
dington the living will be very expensive and my carriage home
would come very high, if you would like for me to five here I
could get Lodgings with some more of the Passengers and it
would make it come a great deal more reasonable now I should
prefer if possible to come home, but I leave it to your superior
Judgement, If I stay here I can come on Board every other Day
and see that Trunks are not opened, for we are manned with
Lascars and they are confounded thiefs for some of the Pas-
sengers have lost a great number of things, but I have been so
lucky as not to loose anything yet. If I stay here I must expect to
hear from you, altho’ Mr. C. wrote me in the Letter which he
enclosed the Note that whether I stayed or went I must not ex-
pect anything of him. If I stay here I must have some food to
support me and without Money I cannot get Food. The Com-
modore’s name is Belliqueux she carries 64 Guns—l wrote you
that I had ten Pounds in Pockett for to take me out to India


which would have been sufficient had we not anchored here
again but ten Pounds is soon gone here it is a very expensive
place and I must have my Dirty Linen Washed here or I shall
not have enough to last me my Voyage they charge the Pas-
sengers for washing a Shirt 5 d the Linen that I have Dirty would
amount to a great number of five pences —a great number of
Cadets on board Different Ships have resolved to Volunteer on
board the Belliqueux if she will receive them which it is supposed
she will, and with your Consent I should like to be of the Party
—we can Keep our Appointment and receive Pay as a Marine
Officer for my own Part I should much approve of this Plan,
therefore, do write me by return of Post, and give me your
opinion and reasons—l am afraid lam troublesome to you but I
consider it as a Part of my Duty writing to you—l must again
beg Pardon for writing you such a scandalous letter as I did the
other Day —if you wish me to stay here I would go about 2
miles in the Country and get Lodgins [sic] because it will come
a great deal more reasonable. In your Letter which you will
write me I wish you would tell me how the Business is setded at
home for I am very uneasy about it and you will tell me how
John Peter Mary and my Mother are and where they live. I am
quite well but not in very good Spirits at this Disappointment —
I wish you would give my Compliments to Mr. Mannin at Mr
Frost’s—l connect in love to Relations and all Friends.
I remain, D r Uncle
Y r affectionate Nephew
E. Blagdon.'
Excuse this long Scrawl
E 2


[Edward Blagdon shows his character in the next letter.]
To Mr. J. Melhuish
Surgeon, Tiverton, Devon.
Cork Harbour August 27 th 1805
£ Past 10 o’clock in the morning
on Board the Maria
Country Ship Capt. W. B. Greenway.
Dear Uncle
We have once more thejoyful News of Sailing at J Past 10 a.m.
our Commodore fired 3 Guns and the Main Top Sail loose for us
to unmoor we are all in very good spirits on the strength of it.
I have not received a Letter from you since I have been here
but in case any Letters should come for me after the Maria has
sailed, I have ordered them to be sent back to you I have lived
at Cork all this while and my Money is rather Slack but thank
God I am as well off in Cash as any of my fellow Passengers—l
will write you when I get at Madiera [sic] and if anything par-
ticular occurs on the Voyage I will mention it to you. Three
Days since the 3rd Mate Challenged me with a Duel for a very
slight offence I understood by some of the elder Passengers that
if I did not accept it he could ruin me for Life in the East Indies
—I immediately excepted [sic] it and on the Day following was
to be the trial—the night before I had no sleep endeavouring to
make my Peace with God. I got up very Early and settled all
my affairs how it should be in case of Death on my side—we met
on the ground at 1 o’clock with our seconds, I was so firm in
what I was on, that I did not tremble the least, nor did I some-
way fear Death, our Seconds measured the ground and we
tossed up which should have the fire, and by the blessing of God,
I had the luck to have it, as soon as he saw it was my first fire a


trembling came over him and he staggered and fell on the
ground, after a little trouble we had him on his legs. Again he
fell on his Knees before me, and begg’d my Pardon, I forgave
him on the Conditions, that he would beg my pardon before the
whole Ship’s Crew he readily consented to it, a thought came
into my head (if God Fights for me who can fight against me) and I
considered your Letter, ‘whether you live or die, do it honorably .’
I hope you will not be angry for my accepting of it but I was
advised by People which knew better than myself, for if an
officer in India refuses a Challenge, he is Kicked out of the Regi-
ment, and a Number of the Cadets knew it, which would cer-
tainly have got me in disgrace, if I had not excepted [sic] of it,
so much on that score.
Cork is a fine City and the Genteel Inhabitants are very hospit-
able, I have Dined out almost every Day since I have been there
because the Chief Mate has taken a great liking to me and he has
a great Number of Friends in Cork being an Irish Man there is a
little Village by the Cove of Cork adjoining the Harbour. lam
very happily situated on Board for I have laid a good stock of
Cheese and Apples to make me comfortable on my Voyage —I
must beg to conclude by giving my Duty to you, Aunt, Mr.
Comins and Mrs. D° as well as my poor Mother, it grieves me
much to think on her, my love to my Dear Brothers and loving
Sister, as well as to Cousin Betsy and all other Cousins—and en-
quiring Friends—remember me to Mr. Mannin the Frenchman,
as well as to Mr. Dunsford
I remain
D r Uncle Your affectionate Nephew
E. Blagdon.


[The next, undated, letter was evidently written by Dr. Melhuish to
Mr. Corny ns, Junior.]
D r Sir,
’Tis plain y r Soldier thinks he shall require a reinforcement as
’tis better for him to have a Guinea too much than too litde I
would advise that .£5 may be sent him—as an answer to his
letter, charge him by no means to think of coming from Fal-
mouth, nor to board out of the Town—the Volunteering on
board the Belliqueux is by no means proper Pray write him soon
the Idea of coming home is folly in the extreme beg he’ll never
think of it again—with Compts to your Father believe me
Yours truly
J. C. Melhuish
Monday morning.
[Edward Blagdon writes to T. Comyns, Junior ]
Mr T. Comins Jun r Falmouth Harbour
Witheridge, Crediton, Devon. Aug. 10th 1805.
My dear Sir
This Morning I received your Favor of the 6th of this month
with a five Pound note enclosed Wilcock’s Bank Exeter No
5737 for which I return sincere thanks I am very much pleased
with you answering me so punctually as you have done every
time I have wrote to you, As for more Money I did not say that
I as yet wanted it but I was fearful we should stay here longer
than it is likely we shall now for two Days since our Commodor
hoisted a Flag for all Passengers to be on Board and we have once
more orders to go the next fair wind I wish we may not receive
fresh orders. Mr Munt has not wrote me since but in every
letter which he has wrote his Daughter has enquired very kindly


after me and the Bankers he has given me a Letter of Credit on
are Messrs Campbell and Radcliffe Mr Kentish has given me
two Letters for Particular Friends of his recommending me very
much to them Mr K. treated me very kindly in London. I dined
with him four or five times, I am glad to hear my Box is safe
and that Mr Jenkins will take it out for me when you write Mr
Lathy’s Family remember me to them for the kind treatment I
have received of them, If any opportunity offers to send you
Letters you may depend on it I will engage it, I am very glad to
hear my friends are all well and will make it comfortable among
themselves—l join in love to all Friends and Relations.
I remain, D r Sir Your Friend
E. Blagdon
Excuse haste as the Boat is waiting for me.
[This letter is forwarded to Mr J. Melhuish, Tiverton, with a note
that postage has cost 3s. gd.+is. yd.]
To Mr J. C. Melhuish
Tiverton, Devon
Madiera
29th Sept 1805.
Dear Uncle
We are at last got at Madiera [sic] after a long and tedious
passage of 29 Days owing to Gales, Calms, and unfair Winds. I
wrote you on the 28 th of last Month that we had sailed we got
outside Cork Harbour when the Commodore ordered us all in
again where we stayed untill the first of this month, when we
left Cork Harbour being in the whole 63 Sail, 3 Men of War,
2 Frigates, 18 Indiamen, 40 Brigs and Armed Transports, we
made a very good appearance I assure you. Two Days after we


left Cork a Storm arose which continued Day and Night,
Dear Uncle you never can conceive what a Storm is until you
have seen one. The Sea arising Mountains high and continually
breaking over our Decks, several of the Transports lost their
Masts which was repaired by Jury Masts, but we met with no
other misfortune than losing one Dozen of our Geese the storm
cleared off to a Calm which continued for two Days we have
had nothing but Gales, Calms, and unfair Winds all the time, we
saw Porto Sancto yesterday to our inexpressible Joy. I got up
this Morning early and saw at 4 o’clock three Islands called the
Deserters besides a Pyramid these Islands are unhabited the Pyra-
mid appears like a Ship in full Sail but I was not near enough to
see it minutely. At 5 I had the Pleasure to see Madiera and we
casted anchor here at 10 o’clock there is no harbour here we lay
alongside the Island it is the most dangerous place possible our
Chief Mate was wrecked here last Voyage. We get very good
fruit here such as Oranges, Lemons, Apples, Pears, Grapes,
Peaches etc. which is very good and tolerable cheap we get
Oranges 1 Doz for 6 d Peaches the same Apples and Pears cheaper
than in England Grapes are very cheap as well as figs I intend to
lay in a good stock of Green Oranges for the Voyage, so much
for a description of our Voyage and Place, I like the Seas very
much and should very much like to be a Sailor I am now learn-
ing Navigation which I hope I shall know very well before I get
to the end of the Voyage. When Mrs Lathy sends my Box by
Mr Jenkins I should thank her to give me a list of the enclosed by
another Vessel, I hope you will send me a long letter or two by
Mr Jenkins and mention anything that has particular happened
since I left home and I suppose this will be the last Letter I shall
write you before I get at Bengal but if there is an opportunity


occurs you may depend I shall engage it. I am quite well and
happy thank God the Sea air agrees with me very well. We are
to lay here two days I understand. I have nothing else to say but
shall trouble you to give my love to Mother, Brothers, Sisters,
Aunt, Cousins, all other Relations as well as all enquiring Friends.
I remain, D r Uncle
Your affectionate Nephew and Well Wisher
E. Blagdon
To Mr J. Melhuish
Surgeon, Tiverton, Devon.
San Salvadore
Nov. 12 th 1805.
Dear Uncle.
An unexpected Circumstance has given me the liberty of once
more addressing my Dear Uncle which I consider a very great
Happiness in doing, we left Madiera on the 3rd of October with
the West India Fleet in company and arrived here on the 10th of
this Month where we expect to stay a fortnight or more, I wish
it was not half as long—The West India left us the Day after we
Sailed. We crossed the Line on the 31st of October and all the
Passengers were shaved with the usual Ceremony. On the 2 nd of
November at 2 p.m. saw the Rockers. We were about 5 miles
distant from them they were level with the surface of the W aters.
There are two of them about a Mile in Length. Between 5 and 8
saw several Pieces of a Wreck floating alongside our Ship, and at
6 saw the Long Boat of the Ship that was wreck’d under a Log
Sail, tack’d Ship and immediately made after it but could not see
anything of it—we could not then learn what ship had been lost


—but since we have been here I understand that y e Britannia
Indiaman and King George Transport was wreck’d on the
Rockers. I understand there is not a great number of Souls lost
but amongst the rest was General York and the 3rd Mate of the
Same Ship—l believe General York was on board the Transport
—The Britannia is the largest Vessel in the Fleet but she is very
Old and Commanded by Capt. Birch. She was on the Rockers
24 hours before she went down. They took a great deal of her
Cargo out, so as to lighten 15 Inches. But when the King George
Transport struck she went down almost immediately. The
Britannia had 300 Souls on board and the greatest Part of them
are saved—we have some of her Passengers and Sailers on board
of us. She struck on the 2 nd of Novr at 5 a.m. The night before
they struck the Commodore made a signal for twelve of the
Head Most Ships to make the best of our way to S* Salvador
(we happened to be among the Number but did not understand
the signal, lucky as it was for us). The Leda Frigate was ap-
pointed their Commodore she got aground first but owing to
good Sailors they got her off with litde damage. This is all the
Sad News I can inform you off, [sir] and this I am very sorry for.
We saw the Main Land of America on the 4 th of the Same
month. St. Salvador is a very fine city and lays on the side of a
hill. The Bay of All Saints is very spacious and very well de-
fended (where we lay). We get very good fruit here and very
Cheap about \ the Price of the Madiera and twice as large. The
Portugese will not allow any Person ashore after the sun set.
This Place will nearly Rob me of all my Money—l am quite
well and quite happy. I like the Sea very much—l hope you and
all Relations and Friends are well. I have nothing particular else
to Relate but hope you will give my love to all Relations Re


spects to Mr. C. and his Family, Duty to Mother love to Brothers
and Sister and not except Aunt and Cousins.
I remain D r Uncle
Your obedient and affectionate Nephew
E, Blagdon.
This I understand is to be sent by a Packet bound to Lisbon.
[The letter, datedfrom San Salvador 12 November 1805, tells the last
news that is known of Edward Blagdons voyage. He died of fever
soon after his arrival in India, at Barasat, Bengal, on 6 August
1806, in his eighteenth year. His only Devonshire memorial is his
name, written by him with a diamond on a pane of glass at his old
home, Smynacott, Devon, before he started for India.
I end this record with an extract from Major V. C. P. Hodsons *List
of the Officers of the Bengal Army, 1758-1834 , Vol. i, p. 158,
1927.]
BLAGDON, EDWARD (1788-1806). ensign, infantry.
UNPOSTED. BORN, PUDDINGTON, S. DEVON, 12 OCT. 1788.
CADET 1804. ARRIVED IN INDIA 17 APRIL 1806. ENSIGN
12 MARCH 1806. DIED AT BARASAT, 6 AUG. 1806, WHILST
UNDER INSTRUCTION AT THE CADET COLLEGE.
SON OF PETER BLAGDON. ED. BLUNDELL’S; ADMITTED 2 OCT. 1798,
AGED IO; LEFT 29 JUNE 1800. REFS. BLUNDELL’S SCHOOL REGIS-
TER. Vol. ii, p. 622 (Addenda to vol. i).
ADD, BAPTIZED MEETING HOUSE, PUDDINGTON, l 6 OCT. 1788. SON
OF PETER BLAGDON, AND ELIZABETH HIS WIFE.


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD
BY JOHN JOHNSON, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


