





MARY W, ALLAN.
FOR PRIVATE GIRGULATION.
HOWWOOD,




CONTENTS.
PROSE.
I. A Perfect Sabbath Day, . . . 1
11. An Old Time Garden, .... 7
111. A Conflagration, . . . . .15
IV. The Trinket, 21
V. Peg o’ the Braes, ..... 28
VI. An Australian Homestead, ... 35
VII. Bits from My Diary, .... 44
VIII. The Church, 50
IX. A Selection, ...... 53
X. Vineyards, ...... 57
XI. A Snake, 60
XII. A Kaleidoscope, ..... 65
XIII. Homeward Bound, .... 68
POETRY.
To Cathie, on her Birthday,
Gertrude’s Birthday,
Friendship,
Pass it on,


My Mother’s Portrait,
A Legend of Old,
The Pic-nic, .
An Eastern Song, .
The Golden Fleece, .
A Keepsake, .
Berceuse,
Clouds.
Memories of Home,
An Ayrshire River, ,
In Memorinm —An Acrostic,
Lights of Home,


CHAPTER I
A Perfect Sabbath Day,
WERE I an artist, I would paint for you a picture
of a perfect Sabbath day. Such a day is
treasured in my casket of memories, laid by
amongst the rose-leaves and tenderness of long ago.
With the laudable desire of taking the two little ones
to church for the first time, but in fear of a penalty
being exacted for our temerity, Mother and Auntie
elected to go elsewhere than to our habitual place
of worship, so the quaint old Kirk of Duddingston
about a mile distant was chosen, where the service
began at 12 noon.
It was a day in early June, “ Sweet day, so
cool, so calm, so bright. The bridal of the earth and
skies.” We entered the Queen’s Park by its western
gates, that pavilion, where the grand old lion Arthur’s
Seat, mounts sentinel for all time, over the ancient
city and its fair waterway.
We moved leisurely along by the path round the
base of the hill, to the music of the happy cooing
voices of the children, with here and there a little trill
of delight at the finding of a daisy rosier than its
fellows or a yellow buttercup, all of which were
brought for our approval and admiration. The air


was fragrant with the odour of summer and full of the
cheery hum of insect life. The joyous song of the
lark rose from out the giant ruggedness of Samson’s
ribs into the ethereal blue. We feasted on the rap-
turous sweetness of its song, as the mighty man of old
may have feasted on the honey-comb hidden in the
carcase of the king of the forest.
As we had left home early, so as not to hurry the
children, we were in good time, and within sight of our
objective sat down on the braeside to refresh our-
selves, and await the tinkle of the bell, the call to
service.
Fair, passing fair, was the scene spread about us.
Below glanced and glittered the loch, with its stately
swans languidly rippling the placid waters, or swaying
aside the tall flags which fringed its shallow edges.
To the left, just over the wall surrounding “ God’s
acre, we could see the square belfrey of the kirk
among its sheltering trees, and in the far distance
the misty Pentlands hemmed the horizon. North
and east rose the green undulating hills, with God’s
sun shining golden over all.
Here and there, on the braeside, were little clusters
of folk awaiting, like ourselves, the summons of the
bell.
At some distance, seated higher up than we, just
at the Wells o’ the Wearie,” was a group of young
men, possibly six or seven. Suddenly, as from out
of the blue, there fell on the still air the majestic
strains of the “Te deum laudimus.” “We praise Thee,
oh, God! We acknowledge Thee to be the Lord.
All the earth doth worship Thee, the Father ever-
lasting.” It was a fitting tribute from the group of
lads seated behind us to the beauty of this perfect


day ; the one touch heeded to stamp it divine. We
listened in charmed silence, even the prattle of the
children was stilled, as they munched their biscuits
and strained their little necks to see the singers. In
exquisite unison and harmony the noble anthem was
sung to the end.
Then, and not till then, five minutes late, did the
bell tinkle out its invitation. As from an enchantment
we rose, straightened ourselves into decorum, and
descended from our Pisgah. Mingling with other
groups from the hillside, we passed through the Dud-
dingston gate of the park, and thence to the church-
yard just round the comer.
Outside the entrance stands the old-world “ loupin-
on stane,” with its steps up for the convenience of
the farmer’s buxom wife or the squire’s more dainty
lady, so as to enable her to mount the more gracefully
behind her lord and master, on to the back of the
family steed. Rivetted on to the wall, at its side,
were the “ jougs,” for the correction of scolding
wives, or all such disturbers of the peace.
In reverent mood, we trod the bare stone passage
of the quaint interior, and seated ourselves in one of
the clean-scrubbed high-backed pews near the entrance.
Surely the drawers of water did not spare themselves
in cleansing this house of God! The children nestled
close to us, and were mercifully soon fast asleep.
Close after us came the tall figure of the Rev.
himself, pastor of the parish, scholar, poet, and
painter. Quietly he entered, in gown and bands,
sermon case in hand, by the same doorway, the vestry
being just across the path. Ascending the unpre-
tentious pulpit, his first words told us that he, too,
had been impressed by the spontaneous homage


rendered on the hillside to the infinite majesty of the
Creator. “We praise Thee, oh, God ! We acknow-
ledge Thee to be the Lord.”
I cannot tell you what his text or subject was, for
all through the service rang in our hearts the echo,
“ All the earth doth worship Thee, the Father ever-
lasting.” Through the years, even now, I hear the
exquisite tones of that anthem floating out on the
still air. Often have I conjectured what might be the
path in life of those young men. Have they through
the stress and turmoil, as well as in the summer sun-
shine and calm, kept unfurled the standard for the
Master in the face of all the world ?
Responsive to the call of duty, my friend soon after
left the homeland, and across the North Sea’s foam
she went, with her two little ones.
And what of the children ? She of the sweet eyes
and trilling laughter returned never again. No more
was it for her “ au revoir,” but “ farewell,” till the
day breaks and the shadows flee away.
The other has been left a solace and companion to
her mother.
As for me, I knew not that the clouds were breaking
and behind was the sun still shining. That for many
years in the future I was to be happy in the com-
forting love of “he whom my soul loveth.” Now,
again, I walk alone, and know the heart loneliness
that lies hidden behind the widow’s veil.
And so, with the glamour of twilight, aye eventide
about me, and the tender tints of long ago mellowing
the precious memories in my casket, I peer into it
now and then, and so paint for you my picture of that
perfect Sabbath day.


To Kathie ok Her Birthday.
Dear little love so far away !
Oh ! would that I possessed the art
To tell thee all that’s in my heart
On this, thy happy natal day.
If only love could be thy shield,
Thy days would trip through golden hours,
And, ’neath thy feet, the fairest flowers
For thee would sweetest fragrance yield.
O’erhead the sky would aye be clear,
And round thee nought but soft winds blow
Nor shade of sorrow wouldst thou know
Thy bonny eyes grief’s bitter tear.
Lord Jesus ! keep our little dove
Within the shelter of thy wings,
And scare away all evil things
With the soft radiance of Thy love.
Oh, keep her winsome, make her wise,
And pitiful, and brave and strong
To do the right and fear the wrong,
And look on life with gentle eyes.
So shall she weave alluring spells
Round many hearts, and loving words
And kindly thoughts, like circling birds,
Shall hover near, where’er she dwells.
Perhaps some sunny summer day
I, sailing o’er the North Sea’s foam,
Shall greet thee, in thy German home,
Dear little love so far away.
October 6th, 1889.


Gertrude’s Birthday.
One sweet May morning not so long ago,
Ere dawn had crimsoned all the Eastern skies,
A waiting angel spread his radiant wings,
And slowly left the gates of Paradise.
Enfolded in his glistening garments fair,
A little baby lay, serenely calm,
A dainty flow’ret fanned by God’s own breath,
A sinless soul, a little snow-white lamb.
As thro’ the rosy light the angel sped,
He gazed upon the child with loving care,
Then touched caressingly each tiny cheek,
And left a beauteous smiling dimple there.
“Ah ! be thou good, dear little one,” he said,
“ A gleam of light, from yonder pearly gates,
Within that earthly home where thou shaft dwell.
And at whose porch another angel waits.” *
To wl(ile away a lonely winter night,
I spun the sweet old legend into rhyme,
And thought, “ ’Twill be a story for the child,
When comes her birthday round, in summertime
Ah me ! to wXile away the weary time !
Lo ! ere the tale is told all time has fled
For her, our little love, with silent wings
The angel came again, and she is dead !
So swift, in midst of joy, the laughter hushed,
The glad eyes close, still are the busy feet,
And long ere Christmas morning breaks she waits
To sing, within the gates, her carol sweet.
* Little Willie lay dying.
November 15 th, 1889.


TTGAIN, I open my casket of tender memories, and
JjL peering into its depths there is wafted to me
the mingled fragrance of lily of the valley, wild
violets, wallflower, and lilacs. Truly a bouquet ox
sweet odours ! Through the far vista of years I see
that old-time garden, where all this sweetness and.
much more lingered. But alas ! for the disillusion-
ment of youth, I have since tasted of the tree of
knowledge and know that there was nothing very
wonderful about this garden; only to me, a girl in
my teens, to whom the fair things of life were opening
their fragrant petals, it was a sumptuous tangle of
beauty and perfume, and sometimes a very haven
of refuge. Here no vulgar fractions pursued me, nor
demi, semi-quavery, crotchety, Chinese puzzles dis-
tracted my mental calibre. 1 remember comparing
those mystic symbols to the ungainly chrysalis from
which emerges the radiant butterfly. >So, in the
garden, there lurked for me no serpent under the old
apple tree to lure me to discomfiture. Here I could
dream dreams and see visions, for did not the Angei
of the Garden with far-seeing eyes ever keep watch-,
over it and me.


The house to which was attached this garden was
built on the sloping side of a hill. The road swept
uncompromisingly up this hill, and the houses which
had the temerity to clamber after it had to excavate
for themselves a slanting yet solid foundation. So
there was also a courtyard at the back of the house,
surrounded by a wall, from which at one end sprang
eight or nine steps up to the garden. Out of the
crevices and on top of the wall grew tufts of bright
yellow and dark red wallflower or sea pinks, enlivening
the clustering ivy or sticky-leaved arboratum.
So we climbed or ran according to age or tempera-
ment up the steps into the garden, with its moss-
grown paths and boxwood borders. There all manner
of old-fashioned flowers had a place, each in its season.
First snowdrops and blue hepatica, then crocuses in
gaudy array, and lavender and white periwinkles
low-growing amidst their glossy leaves.- Sweet-scented
violets, fragrant lily of the valley, lilies galore, yellow
and white. Then came the roses, red, white, and
pink, overhanging in arches, their luxuriant beauty.
Gorgeous 12th of July tigers, columbines, Aaron’s rod,
Solomon’s seal! But those flowers, their name is
legion, and when the fruit trees were in blossom, the
contented hum of the bees proclaimed it a feast for
the Gods! The vegetable domain was somewhere
about, but my culinary soul had not yet awakened,
and I only “ considered the lilies how they grow.”
At the foot of the garden, sheltering it from the north,
was a small coppice. Once it had been symmetrical,
now it was but a jungle of flowering shrubs, lilac,
laburnum, rowan, and hazel trees. It was good to
slip away on a summer Saturday and lounge on the
shady seat within this bower. Just opposite, amongst


the shadow of the trees, was a small stone slab raised
on its edge, with this inscription engraved thereon: —
“ To the memory of my beloved greyhound, Finella,
aged 10 years. June 1, 184—” We were wont to
grow mirthful over the epitaph, but maturer age
discerns in it only the yearning of a lonely life over
the loss of a faithful companion, to whom all secrets
were sacred.
On the east side, the wall of the garden adjoined
the grounds of a church. It was octagonal, and on
the buttress which jutted out towards the garden the
architect, for some occult reason, had elected to
carve an angel’s head with flowing hair and outspread
wings. Perhaps he meant so to adorn them all, but,
for the time at least, finance had possibly failed, as
tjais was the only one. It was quaint indeed, this
beautiful angel face carved out of the rugged s.tone
of the buttress overlooking the garden, and amongst
ourselves it came to be known as “ the garden angel.”
When twilight descended on the garden, and the
blackbird piped his evensong from the highest branch
of the old pear tree, when the crimson and gold of
the setting sun shone on the steadfast eyes of the
angel, I used to wonder if he could see further than
mortal gaze, beyond those pearly gates, for so it
seemed to me.
But I did not walk alone in the garden. Three
people other than I delighted therein —our beloved
master and pastor, his good wife, and little son.
Words fail me when I try to describe the master of
the home and garden, my friend of “ long ago.” His
stately dignified bearing, his beautiful features with
their benign expression, his gracious maimer, his
matchless golden voice. Some called him austere, but


was he not but only just, God-fearing, the soul of
integrity and punctuality \ Was the preacher for
the day three minutes late in ascending the pulpit,
the congregation would whisper to each other, “ It’s
no himsel’ the day.” He was pastor in a country
town, and his flock were mostly rural. But children
shyly loved and clung to him, young men and maidens
revered and confided in him, and those in the sere
and yellow leaf relieved themselves of all their worries,
sure of his sympathy and light in their darkness.
Often he would pace to and fro in the garden drawing
inspiration from its calm and beauty. Sometimes on
a starlit night he would point out to us in the spangled
heavens the different stars and planets, calling them
all by name. His was a beautiful life, as gracious as
his presence, verily a gentleman of the old school, a
tower of strength, a sheltering tree in the storm or
shine of years ! With reverence his memory is cushioned
in love, amongst the rose-leaves in my casket. “ Rose-
mary for remembrance and asphodel for life ever-
lasting ! ”
His spouse was in many ways his opposite. No
p.la.im to dignity or beauty was hers. Indeed, even
as a school-girl, I often wondered wherein lay the
attraction for him. She was, however, a warm-
hearted, simple soul. The kitchen garden was her
special delight, and she “ looked well to the ways of
her household and ate not the bread of idleness.”
Withal she was one of the inconsequent folk who
cannot keep to the thread of their discourse. In
conversation, if you were not for ever on your guard,
she would very soon envelop herself in a very Pene-
lope’s web of side issues. One had constantly to haul
her back to the original text, if at all interested, and


have her start afresh, with possibly the same result.
A simple, unquestioning faith was hers, and her
husband a very king amongst men. Possibly it was
this very simplicity of her nature which attracted and
appealed to him. Amongst the daffodils of “ sincere
regard ” and sweet mignonette (“ your qualities
surpass your charms ”) let her memory rest, in my
casket.
And the child that played in the garden. The little
boy with the hazel eyes and fair, curling hair, wheeling
his barrow along the mossy paths and waving his
flag in the breeze. What of him ? Full of joyous life,
but self-willed, requiring at every stage the vigilant
eye of the father to guide him. Alas ! that when
most necessary that strong hand should have been
taken away, and the mother’s feebler and more in-
dulgent one was the only barrier left to stem the
flood of self-will and self-indulgence which over-
whelmed his life ! Poor boy, he did not keep unspotted
from the world, “ the white flower of a blameless life,”
so in my casket his memory is wrapped in the “ Balm
of Gilead,” “ the leaves of which are for the healing of
the nations.”


Friendship.
As we travel on life’s way,
Flow’rets bloom, flowers of a day,
Sheltering tree in storm and shine,
Hast thou proved, dear friend of mine!
Pass Jt On.
Have you e’er received a kindness ?
Pass it on.
Or a thought to clear your blindness ?
Pass it on.
Or a help across a stile,
Or a lift a weary mile,
Lonely heart-aches to beguile,
Pass it on.
Have you e’er been served cold shoulder ?
Pass it by.
Or amazed to hear you’re older ?
Pass it by.
Looks that freeze you to the bone,
Slights that turn your heart to stone,
Bitter words, from nowhere blown,
Pass them by.
In your soul is music trilling ?
Pass it on.
Or with joyous laughter thrilling ?
Pass it on.
To those who need your aid
In this world, which God hath made,
Gentle heart, be not afraid,
Pass it on.


To My Mother’s Portrait.
Shalt thou greet me first, dear Mother.
When across the mystic sea
Comes the signal flutt’ring softly
That the Master calls for me ?
When from out the hazy dawning
Fair, celestial faces«shine,
Shall your smile rest on me, Mother,
Shall I know it to be thine ?
For no shadow of thy presence
Flits across my mental gaze,
No dim touch of thy caressing
On the chords of memory plays,
When the lovelight sparkled brightest
In thy dear, sweet eyes of brown,
Then ’twas thro’ heaven’s open portals
That God’s angel, Death, came down,
They have told me oft how winsome
Were thy one-and-twenty years,
How full of love and loved ones,
How few thy cares and tears ;
Like soft leaves of summer’s strewing,
Rippling down some upland stream,
Then in storms of pain and anguish
Passed away thy young life’s dream.
Oft in girlhood’s lonely moments
Would I tip-toe to the room,
Where thy beauteous saintly image
Lighted all its shaded gloom.


In thy gleaming satin raiment,
White as heaven’s own loved ones wear,
With the turquoise on thy finger
And the pink rose in thy hair.
Still, in awe and admiration,
With folded hands I’d stand,
And whisper all my girlish woes,
How I longed to touch thy hand.
Till methought thine eyes grew tender,
And thy sweet lips murmured low,
“ I am ever near thee, darling—
Near to guard thee where you go.”
“ Gently chide thy wayward spirit,
Bringing soothing, joy, and love,
So to guide my baby upwards,
To the blessed home above,
Where I shall surely greet thee,
Gladly clasp thy outstretched hand,
For thou’lt know thy own dear Mother
In the fair celestial land ! ”


CHAPTER 111.
A Conflagration.
fl ROPING in my casket one lonely evening, the
vl sight of a slim grey silken glove brought a smile
to my eyes, out of the depths of bygone years.
There are not many memories nestling among the
rose leaves and lavender, in my casket, which can
be termed humorous, but the crumpled glove brought
to remembrance the occasion on which it was last
worn, and the probable fate of its fellow.
It was afternoon service in a country church. Two
companions and myself, for change of scene and
chumminess, as our elders were absent, seated our-
selves in a front pew in . the gallery, rather than in
our respective places. The heavily canopied and
elaborately carved pulpit, of other days, was facing
us, and beneath was the precentor’s desk, an insti-
tution also long since defunct. No “ kist o’ whussles ”
in those days, when the story of the signing of the
Covenant and the Martyrs’ Tomb was still told with
bated breath, and tears of compassion filled hearts
and eyes round many a hearth in old Scotland. The
man in possession of the desk, for the day, the post
of precentor was vacant, and candidates were being
trotted out, was a broad-shouldered, brawny chap
with a voice fit to raise the roof, and a crop of carroty
hair well slaked into decorum for the occasion, but


which the heat of excitement was fast returning to
its original uprightness.
After stentorian efforts and much twanging of his
shining tuning fork, he sat down in his tub, Diogenes like,
while the clergyman expounded his part of the service.
Four heads and an application, whatever the weather !
On the left side of the book-board was an unpro-
tected gas jet. Some accident must have befallen
the only shade this Sunday afternoon, for it usually
boasted of an opaque globe which kept it from disaster.
As the sermon progressed the man of melody appar-
ently was fatigued by his exertions, for after repeated
efforts he at length succumbed to the seductions of
Morpheus.
He placed his left elbow on the book-board, support-
ing his head on his hand, and began a nodding accom-
paniment to the elocution overhead. At his side
grinned the demon of the lamp ! We girls glanced
only once at each other ; we dared no more, then,
fascinated, awaited developments and approaching
catastrophe!
We were not long kept in suspense. Nearer and
nearer went the moth to the candle ! and presently
with a “ fizz ” up went the shock of red bristles nearest
the flame ! I know not into what sonorous paths
his dreams had led him, but with one convulsive lurch
he bounded off his seat, then sinking back into its
remotest comer continued, with frenzied haste, to
rub, with both hands, his singed cranium, till quite
satisfied that the conflagration was extinguished !
Pulling our handkershiefs from our muffs, we
stifled our hysterical tittering as well as we could.
In doing so I must have twitched my glove, possibly,
over the gallery, as it was not to be found in the pew.


Matha, our church officer, a quaint but worthy speci-
men, may have picked it up, as he squeaked along the
passage, in his best Sunday boots, and in his grumpy
voice soliloquising thus :—“ Aye, aye, what’s this
daein’ in Maister M'Gilvray’s sate, an’ him a douce
weeda man ? It’s some thowless lassock’s, nae doot
wi’ mair siller than sense. She can come an’ seek for
it hersel’. I reckon she’ll hae little else tae dae ! ”
Of the same species was the Tammas, of whom the
story is told that, seeing a lady come into the church
with an ear trumpet in her hand, went up to her,
and in a tragic whisper said, “ Mem, one toot an’
ye’re oot! ”
So the silken glove in my casket recalls its forgotten
fellow, long buried in the dust of years, cheering my
loneliness and bringing tears of laughter to my eyes
at the remembrance of this quaint and comical.scene
of long ago !


A Legend of Old.
“ Old friends are best, old coats that fit,”
Old proverbs by old poets writ,
Old wines that lend to mild repose,
Old bachles soothing tragic toes.
Old songs that lilt in memory’s ear,
Old times so far and yet so near.
Old letters wrapped in silken thread
The tender thoughts of lovers’ wed.
Old silver chased in quaint design,
Old Gran’ma’s lace erstwhile, now mine.
Old Paisley shawls of stately fold,
Old cameos framed in purest gold.
Old pictures limned in colours rare,
Old oaken table, old arm-chair.
Old Grandad’s clock, whose solemn chime
Resounds through corridors of time.
Old china ranged on glittering shelf,
Old English ware, old Holland delf.
Old brass, the light of other days,
Old vellum scanned with reverent gaze.
Old golden angels, merks, and groats,
Old postage stamps, worth rolls of notes.
Old tales, replete with piquant jest,
Old pewter pots, old friends are best.


The Pic-nic.
You wish I’d tell the story
Of that pleasant summer day,
Of our pic-nic altogether,
In yon castle grim and gray.
Of our merry chat and laughter
In the sunny window seat,
Caring nought for who might see us,
Nor the tread of passing feet.
But as we sat and feasted,
Did no distant echo fall
Of bygone mirth and laughter
From the ivy-covered wall ?
By the voices and the footsteps,
Was our fancy never led,
To fill the lordly chamber
With forms and voices fled ?
With gay and gentle ladies
And many a gallant knight,
Whose whispered name brought terror
In those days when might was right ?
When round yon empty fireplace
The lord and vassels drew,
And as the Yule-log sparkled
The frolic furious grew ?
Or in the courtyard gathered
At dawn or early day,
The merry hawking party,
Or hunt or tourney gay ?


Ah, no ! our darkened vision
No bright-robed fancy spun,
We lived but in the present,
And were sitting in the sun.
Perchance, when fiery beacon
Flashed lurid down the vale,
In haste, beneath the gateway'
Passed the clash of clanking mail,
Aiml from yon crumbling casement ’
The fluttering signal flew,
That told of tender heartaches
Beneath the proud “ adieu.”
Perchance, yon lonesome turret,
With dark, unfathomed well,
Could many a tale of horror
And ghostly story tell.
Now sparrows build and twitter
Where those gruesome deeds were
And we wished no dreary story,
We were sitting in the sun !


CHAPTER IV.
The Trinket.
IN my casket are many keepsakes and trinkets,
which bring back other days, when loved ones
were with me, in their beauty and strength,
when the sunshine was ever radiant, and night with
its gleaming eyes seemed but a glint of that fair land
of promise.
From travels far and near are gems in my casket
hidden amongst the rich blossoms of more genial
climes than those of our own beloved sea-girt home.
Here is a small trifle, a circlet of gold set with brilliants,
having a pendant of some clear red stone, possible
carbuncle, and forming a brooch. It vividly recalls
a few hours spent at Toulon when on our homeward
voyage from the Australian colonies. From my diary
I find that at 4 a.m. we were roused from slumber by
the ship slowing in calm seas, and the dazzling glare
from a lighthouse streaming straight into our port
window.
On bestirring ourselves, we found we had entered
the roadstead and were preparing to anchor in Toulon
harbour.
Opposite us were beautiful sea-side resorts and
homes nestling on the hillsides, among their wealth
of gardens, and winding along the shore like a broad
ribbon we discerned the Corniche road, which extends
the entire length of the Riviera.


The harbour is very fine and commodious, this great
naval arsenal of France, and anchored in the roadstead
were warships and destroyers. As we came slowly
to our bearings we counted 26 of those slate-coloured
monsters of the deep. Little did we dream, as we
looked on them, that ere long they would be on active
service bent, that the terrific world’s war, which now
rages, was then in the near future, seething on the
verge of ebullition. On the harbour are many landing-
stages, from which steamers constantly ply to the
various watering places.
Seen from the water, the tenement houses along the
dock front, with their white and green latticed windows
and roof gardens, are picturesque and pleasant to the
eye, but “ distance leads enchantment ” in this case,
as in many similar ones, on the Mediterranean shores,
for the balmy breezes of this salubrious clime can
be very much the reverse on occasion.
The first tender for passengers from the “ Otway ”
left at 7.45 a.m. “’T was in a crowd ” that we passed
down the companion-way and were soon skimming
over the quiet waters of the harbour. Landed at
Quay Cronstadt, we walked quite a distance along
the sea front. At length, turning up-Rue de-J’oublie,
we got into the principal parts of the town. By
Vaubon Square, with its fine national monuments
and tasteful garden adorned with tropical plants we
reached Cook’s Office, where we exchanged some
money into French coin, engaged an open fiacre, and
enjoyed an hour’s drive. We drove through some fine
streets and avenues, beneath the pleasant shade of
tropical trees, into the La Marche de Cour Lafayette,
with its luxuriance of fruit and flowers ; away past
vast military barracks and hospital, from the high


road above which we had a splendid view of the
magnificent harbour and its waterway.
Back to Cook’s again, where we dismissed our Jehu
and walked on lingeringly, feasting our eyes on the
tempting wares displayed in the shops of the Boule-
vard de Strasburg, etc., and on the' luscious fruits
and flowers in the market, some of which we com-
mandeered as a “ bon bouche,” and for the further
adornment of our dinner table.
The tram system is electric ; the cars trim and neat.
On the way we invested in p.c.s and books of views,
and remembering some young friends, I hurriedly
entered a shop, for our time was now limited, one
window of which displayed a fascinating variety of
glittering trinkets. “ Bonjour, ma’mselle, je vondrais
acheter —some of these brooches.” I finished in
English. “ Oui, madam,” producing a tray, “ which
will you choose ? ” So did she ! “ Oh, any, je suis
en haste, celle cl, celle-la.” “ Combien, ma’mselle ? ”
“So much,” mentioning the price. “ Merci, madam ;
thanks, bonjour ! ” >
My husband in the meantime was stamping outside,
patience exhausted, “Ma cherie, we are late, look
sharp, time’s up ! ”
Directed to take a short cut which would “ certain-
ment ” lead us direct to the pier, we were off half-
running, wholly breathless, altogether faster than we
ought to have gone. Through devious evil-smelling
narrow streets of high sombre tenements, which
suggested “ Les Miserables ” and garotting, with open
drains filled with garbage and level with the foot-
paths.
“ Microbes ! ma conscience ! ” ejaculated the
Bailie. On emerging on to the quay, luckily quite


near the landing-stage —we had not been misdirected —
wc saw, oh horrors ! the last tender for our ship just
moving off from the pier. On reaching the barrier,
calmly we were told that although the hour was up
for the last one to leave, this one had been detained,
and there was still one to come.
So fate for once was kind ; we heaved great sighs
of relief and fanned our heated brows at leisure.
Several of our shipmates likewise thought themselves
stranded, so we cheerily congratulated each other,
and agreed that “ there’s never an ill but there could
hae been a waur ! ” The belated tender conveyed
us all without further adventure to our ocean home
in safety, and we sailed at noon for “ Gib.,” our next
port of call. Not until reviewing our day’s outing and
laughing over our sprint and the excited purchase
of the trinkets did we recall the fact that the dainty
demoiselle who waited on me was mistress of most
excellent English. More time at our disposal, we
might have seen in the window or doorway the too
often dubious legend, “ English spoken.”
And now amongst the violets and white hyacinths
of the fragrant market place lies secure the little
trinket of Toulon.


An Eastern Song.
I hear the Bul-bul singing
At dusk near yon trellised seat
Where crimson-lmed Hibiscus
And bright Mimosa meet.
Not to its flaming glory,
Nor Mimosa’s fragrant gold
Hoes he in liquid rapture
His love-song thus unfold.
Sweet' queenly Rose
So creamy white !
My heart ’s delight !
My pride !
I see the Maestro ling’ring
Just where the roses grow,
With tender touch caressing,
And whisp’ring soft and low
“ At day-dawn I shall pluck thee
And bear thee safe away
To grace my peerless Leila
On this our wedding day.
Sweet fragrant Rose !
Kissed by the dew,
I gift you to
My bride 1 ”
How sad the Bul-bul warbles,
How silent falls the dew,
How sombre the Hibiscus,
And sweet Mimosa’s hue.


Until the Maestro, leading
His stately lady drest
In all her bridal beauty,
And nestling on her breast.
Sweet, faithful Rose !
Be hope divine,
And love like mine
Her guide 1
The Golden Fleece.
The widow Guindorff was very well off ;
In fact, quite a French millionaire,
With houses in blocks and francs in the stocks,
But, of sense, not an atom to spare.
To appear a la mode, and to guard her abode,
She’d a dog, which she called “ Cher Lulu,”
And her name and address, she indited no less,
On his collar of brass, quite too-too.
Now, Lulu one day got mixed, went astray,
And was hooked by a beau christened Roger,
Who called on the Dame, smelt a nice little game,
He was clearly a French artful dodger.
First with Cupid’s keen dart he transfixed Madame’s
heart,
Then proceeded to transfer a few
Of her jewels and plate, such as came in his gate,
To his Uncle’s, just in the next “ rue.”


Soon the francs and the blocks, the bonds, and the
stocks
Were mingled in bogus confusion,
When her relatives came and released the old Dame
From collapse and still further delusion !
But that beau wanders still, at his own wild sweet will,
While “ La concergrie ” waits for its lodger,
So ye ladies with francs, whose pet dogs play such
pranks,
Oh, beware of that rotter named Roger !


CHAPTER V.
Peg o’ the Braes.
e D' HOT summer day ! I feel its warmth radiate
/*■ even now from my casket, while ever and anon
a sportive breeze flutters the leaves of the honey-
laden lime trees, and cools the brow of the weary
wayfarer.
Three miles and a bittock it was from the farm of
Braes to the parish kirk, and a dusty road at that.
Not so dusty as the same road now-a-days, for then
no such monstrosity as a motor or traction engine
was to be seen. No lightning traffic smothered in
vile dust the dainty beauty of the hawthorn, honey-
suckle, and wild rose hedges, or destroyed the vivid
green of the grassy wayside, but still the road was
unquestionably dusty, for no rain had fallen during
the past week.
Peggy usually walked all the way in bare feet and
kilted skirts, with stockings and well-brushed shoes
done up carefully in a handkerchief, and only produced
and tied snodly on, the handkerchief being used for
cleansing purposes, when a certain fallen tree trunk
was reached, within easy distance of the town and
kirk.
To-day, our Peg felt tired, after her strenuous
morning’s work on her father’s farm, feeding the fowls
and the impatient calves, doing her share of the


milking, also tidying up after the mid-day meal,
with this three-mile walk thrown in after all. So,
'when quietly seated in the coolness of the “ Braes ”
pew, in the front loft, just over the clock, she began
to feel annoyingly sleepy. She struggled bravely against
it till after the text was announced, for was it not
her father’s custom to ask the text and heads of the
discourse from the members of his household on their
return —whether he was present himself or not —and
woe to the delinquent who could not give them. But
longer resistance on Peggy’s part was impossible, and,
laying her head on her arm, she was soon oblivious
to all around.
Her new straw hat with its cockade of white ribbon
gradually slipped from its moorings, and with a gentle
gurgle of mischief over the gallery it went ! For a
moment it poised itself jauntily on the bald pate of
our most circumspect elder, who sat just below, be-
stowing on him a wildly rakish air and awakening him
from a dozing reverie, in which Monday’s orders (he
was in the grocery line) were very much mixed up
with the sermon. With an audible ejaculation of
” What the ! ” he seized the hat savagely and
consigned it to the depths of his pew. Only the stem
gaze of the preacher prevented the titter becoming
general all over the church.
When the service was ended, Peggy, in fear and
trembling, screwed up her courage to go to the area
for her hat. The congregation having all gone, she
was confronted by the irate man of spices, who harshly
rebuked her. ‘‘ Do you not know that it is unseemly
for a woman to have her head uncovered at public
worship ? If such a thing ever happens again you
wont get your hat back,” thundered lie. “ I’ll have it


stuck on the spikes of the gate, a terror to evil-doers,
or maybe nail it on the loft, beside the clock in front
o’ your father’s seat. Moreover, I’ll hae some words
wi’ Braes himsel’ anent this, when he comes to Wed-
nesday’s market.” Poor Peggy !
John, the beadle, who had a soft corner stowed away
in his adamant heart, grunted, “ Hoots, lassie, here’s
ye’re beaver, and if the laskit canna haud it on, tie
on ye’re grannie’s mutch ! ” Peggy of the rippling
auburn hair and blue eyes, “ with cheeks like a rose
and lips like a cherry,” in grannie’s mutch ! Smiles
and tears shone in her eyes as she left the kirk and made
her way to where Jock o’ Broomhill impatiently
awaited her, in the kirkyard. As she came towards
him, he thought she was altogether adorable, like a
dainty forget-me-not, in her blue zephyr dress just
the colour of her eyes, and her white hat shading her
winsome face.
She told him all her tale of woe as they left the town
behind them, and when they reached their “ rest and
be thankful ” they sat down, and he wiped her tearful
eyes with his white, Sunday hankie. “ I’ll daur any
man, let him be wha he likes, to shame you as long
as I can use my lists, and,” continued he, under his
breath, “ if I hae my will, dearie, ye’ll no lang be
sitting in the front laft, but awa’ at the back, doun
laich, in the pew that belangs to Broomhill and me.”
Pawky Jock now saw the chance for which he had
so long and patiently waited, for Peggy was not often
in this chastened mood ; more often was she coy and
saucy, but to-night she craved soothing for her ruffled
feelings—especially from Jock. So his arm, for once,
crept unresistingly round her supple waist, and he
whispered, “ My mither’s chair staun’s empty, Peggy,


and there’s nane I v’acl like tae see siftin’ in’t but
yerselk Forby, naebody could mak’ kail and bannocks
like her, but ye’re gae an’ near, so say the word an’
we’ll hae oor bucklin’ at haarst. The hay has been
heavy and weel self, an’ wi’ this gran’ ripenin’ weather
the crops look a’ a body could wish. Forby, J hae a
hantle o’ siller laid by in the bank. Just squeeze my
haun’, lass, an’ gi’es a bit kiss an’ I’ll pit on ma Sunday's
best an’ tak’ a daunner doon tae the manse on Friday
nicht an’ see aboot pittin’ in the cries.” So Peggy
gave Jock the “ bit kiss ” desired, which was then
and there repaid with interest, much to the further
detriment of the summer hat ! Thus they plighted
their troth seated on the old tree stum]) !
Blythly together they stepped along the road, in
the gloamin’, to the Braes, laughing now and then
at the humorous episode, and arranging many things
as to their future by the way.
“ Jock, ye had better come in by an’ drink a cup
o’ tea” (for it was Sunday), “an’ taste iny bannocks
that pits ye in mind o’ your mither’s ! ” So Jock went
in, and blately between them they told the old folk's
of their plans for a wedding at harvest, at which
they were both well pleased, for Jock was a decent
lad, and had a well-stocked steadin’ o’ his ain. and
it was a “ gude doon sitting ” for their Peg !
In the evening Peggy went to the " laich gate,'’
with Jock, her gudeman to be, and kissed him good-
night, watching him swing down the road, on his seven-
mile walk home to Broomhill, which lay quite on the
other side of the town. His step was light as his heart,
for he was well satisfied with the fall of the hat and its
consequences. Had he not won for his wife the
bonniest lass in the parish, and the sweetest in the


hale world ” thought Jock ! So he was eager, even
at that late hour, to brush his Sunday clothes, and
lay them by, ready for that £ ' daunner doon tae the
minister’s on Friday nieht.”
Soon there was a blythe wedding at the Braes, to
which all the countryside was welcomed, when Jock
and Peggy were united in the holy bonds of matri-
mony “ till death do us part.”
The snows of many winters have whitened the
auburn locks and crowned them with the spotless
mutch of Grannie, but in my casket, amongst the clover
and cornflowers of harvest, I shall always see the sweet
face of Peg o’ the Braes.


A Keepsake.
Only a face, on my mantleshelf,
Out of the long ago,
When our hearts were light as summer eloiuh.
In azure depths aglow.
Only a delicate, girlish head
Set in a faded frame,
A jasmine spray, in her tangled hair.
A motto, for a name.
Only a trifle, yet sacred still
To vanished hands and tears,
Only a bit of a sunny day
Gone by those forty years !
A Berceuse.
Hush, my Baby, Mother is near thee sings
Cooing, crooning
Sleep to her wee white rose.
Far off, dimly, dost thou hear blue-bell -, rhunn
Nodding daisies,
Gladly their bright eyes close.
Humming, droning, honey bees homeward wnurma
Linger weary
Where the sweet, wild thyme grows.
Gently, grayly, twilight her veil is flinging
O’er day’s beauty,
Sweet be my love’s repose !


Clouds.
My dear Brother, I have read it,
Read the poem, which you sent me,
Read your honest, modest letter,
And I think you need not tremble,
Full of fear and inward quaking,
Lest the hungry flames devour it,
Lest the winds of heaven chase it,
For, in meditation on it,
Long and deeply did I ponder,
Gathered all its hidden wisdom,
Noted all its bitter meaning,
Scanned it with the eye of friendship,
Saw it full of grace and beauty,
While the keener “ ken of critic ”
Marked its true poetic fancy.
Truth, I think most highly of it;
Yea, indeed, I truly think it
Words of wisdom, fitly spoken,
Fruit of gold, in silver pictures ! ”
Saw the youth, so nobly fashioned,
Marked the shining halo o'er him,
Saw the rock, and breezy uplands,
Bright with fragrant gorse and heather,
Then, ah, me ! the sea around him,
All the troublous seas surrouud h!m i
Saw those phantom shapes that mocked
Though he w r ot not of their mocking,
Saw “ the drifting, drifting northward
To the misty land and hopeless,
To the land of cold and shadows,
To the land where God’s forgotten ! ”


Then, glad star of hope appearing,
Scattered all those shapes of evil,
Calmly beamed upon him, climbing,
Climbing ever on, and upward,
Through the clouds and mists and shadows
To the heights of the Eternal !
So, dear boy, may heaven aid you,
Ne’er to leave the breezy uplands,
Nor the Rook, where waves your standard,
But should clouds and mists and shadows
Darken all the path before you,
May the stars of Hope and Courage,
Radiant, in the blue above you,
Ever draw you, on and upward,
To the gates of the Eternal!


CHAPTER VI
An Australian Homestead
STANDING out from amongst the many fragrant
H memories in my casket are vivid pictures of our
pleasant visit to Oak Farm, N.S. Wales,in 1911-12.
I can see now, at the end of our long but most
interesting journey of 13,000 miles, the little wayside
station of Belford, on the Great Northern line. This
station was opened for the transit of timber to Sydney,
and is now useful also for the milk industry of the
district. On its tiny platform, as the train slackened
speed, we being the only passengers to alight, were
friends whom we only knew by name, and a few
curious onlookers. Annie, John’s widowed daughter,
a pretty, gentle figure, in blue zephyr, wide hat, and
white gossamer veil, met us at the carriage door.
After kissing us and saying “ This is Uncle, I am sure,
and you must be Auntie,” she conducted us to the
sulky, outside the platform, where her father stood
at the pony’s head awaiting us. I can feel the thrill
of acute sympathy which pervaded all, and noted the
many moist eyes, as the brothers, who had parted
in the dear homeland nigh half a century ago, once
again clasped hands, in this new land of the Southern


Cross ! Many moons had silvered the fair locks of
each, and furrowed their brows. By devious paths
Dame Fortune had led them those forty-eight years,
but their figures were alert, their hearts leal and hale,
their hand-clasp firm and true. The attitude of each
when they met was truly touching ! Hand clasped
in hand, they stood silent and gazed into each other’s
eyes ! Metaphorically speaking, each fell on the neck
of the other and kissed him ! But Scotchmen of the
old school could not thus be guilty of betraying their
feelings, so they simply thought unutterable things.
After much promiscuous hand-shaking we got into the
traps provided, and bag and baggage we treked off to
Oak Farm, our Ark of Refuge !
From the station we ambled along a broad, grassy
road with vineyards on one side, sawmill on the other,
with here and there a quiet sun-sheltered homestead ;
crossed a culvert over what we would call a burn,
but which rejoiced in the ominous name of “ Jump-up
Creek,” turned to the right, still along a wide road,
with rough-grey six-foot fences and tail gum trees
to the Post Office. Oh, shade of Sir Rowland Hill,
despise it not ! this most ramshackle, creeper-grown
shanty, with its quaint verandah and shingled roof 1
To think that His Majesty's mails emerge from such
a shelter ! Verily the King’s name is a tower of
strength ! From here every morning are distributed,
by post-boy on his white pony, the mails for the
surrounding district, a circuit of twelve miles. After-
introduction and hearty greeting from post master
and mistress, we bumped along for about ten minutes
through a wood of tall trees and burnt stumps of all
shapes and sizes, a ghostly place in the moonlight.
At length we reached a clearing, whereon was built


the school, a pretty house painted red, with good
verandahs, dated 1875. One or two homesteads,
shiouded in passion vines, were opposite, and seemed
to watch their more cheery neighbour with sinister
At the side of the school was an extensive
clearing which resembled a cemetery, the charred
trunks of different heights and contorted shapes
looking ridiculously like monuments. We learned
later that it was really set aside for that purpose.
On wo went, down a considerable hill. We were
now on the great northern road which glides like a
great snake through the colony of N.S. Wales into
that of Queensland.
John presently pointed out to us, lying in the
hollow and glistening in the sunlight, the zinc roofs
of Oak Farm. Little Jack, Annie’s boy, was ready
to jump down and open the wide gate, and we drove
slowly up the grassy drive to the front verandah.
Here we got a hearty welcome from Mother and Maggie,
and felt that we were at home once more.
This house was built about ten years ago, and
stands in the midst of a spacious clearing of some
300 acres. It is of freestone. Though this stone is
plentitm in the locality, no other stone house is in
the vicinity, wooden ones being more expeditiously
erected and certainly cheaper. It is a fitting monu-
ment to the patience and perseverence of the worthy
fecotsman who owns it, and who, with the help of a
friendly mason who came along, as so many come
along in this land, and remained with him for some
years, planned and appointed every stone to its place
and moulded every brick.
It is commodious and cool, with its high zinc roofs,
innocent of ceilings, and wide-open whitened fireplaces


for burning good-sized logs. Two public, four bedrooms,
a nice tiled grate in the sitting room, and wood-burning
stove in the kitchen, with its sonsy baking oven. No
coal strikes here !
It is surrounded on three sides —north, west, and
south —by broad stone verandahs, with zinc-covered
roofs, supported on square wooden posts, painted
white, while the many doors opening on to the veran-
dahs and casement windows were dark green.
It is simply but daintily furnished, with an ere !o
comfort and coolness.
On the east side are the kitchen premises, fenced
off from a wide yard, within which is an underground
well of 12,000 gallons capacity. Four steps up take
you to the pump. It is entirely dependant on the ram
which falls on the corrugated roofs of the house, every
drop of which is precious in this thirsty land ! Across
from it, in the yard, are the milk-house and the old
original home, with its flower-garden and wooden
verandahs; its huge log-built fireplace blackened
with the constant use of many years. Its uneven
floors and scanty windows proclaim it a real. Australian
pioneer’s primitive homestead, an every-day sight
in the bush ! I must not omit to mention the " Tree
of Heaven,” which waved its slender branches and
fern-like leaves at one end of the verandah. Numerous
high, grey, unpainted sheds for various purposes are
in this yard, some of which, being erected regardless
of the fall of the ground, have a somewhat rakish
appearance. Here are horse stalls, cattle stalls,
joiner’s shop, hen coops, etc., etc. Here scrambled
mother’s pretty white fowls, and here lurked an occa-
sional snake, foraging for new-laid eggs and scuttling
off on discovery for refuge below the wood heap.


Here there are also two splendid aloes, about 20 feet
in height, with their great metallic, blue-grey-yellow
banded leaves spreading around, and an immense
clump of bamboos, under which the chickens con-
gregated, and an occasional gum tree or iron bark left
standing for cattle shelter. One of the aloes was in
flower that summer. It flowers once in 25 years, then
dies like the fabulous Phoenix, and from its ashes
young plants spring. Great bunches of feathery yellow
blossom, in mathematical precision, are arranged round
the stem, and are evidently laden with honey,
attracting swarms of bees and flying foxes.
Beyond the old house and orchard fence are the
milking sheds, where the cows come lowing every
afternoon at 4 o'clock, in at the one end and out at
the other. Beyond the yard, which is really a paddock
of some acres, are more paddocks, one, named “ the
cultivation, had in a corner “ Mrs. Murphv ” for
a tenant, with her squad of little black grunting
youngsters. I saw no white pigs in Australia. Beyond
that, the old orchard and vineyard, with its great
mulberry, fig, and quince trees, and grape vines.
Then came the creek, of classical name, the dividing
line between Oak Farm and its neighbour of “ Clare-
mont.” Another large orchard lies north, and in
front of the new house across the grassy drive, a
date palm on either side of the gate, and fenced all
round with grey, rough-bark fences, over which hung
great sunflowers, whispering secrets to the scarlet
pomegranite blossoms, shining out from amongst
their glossy leaves, just across the drive. Here, in
the mornings and afternoons, would sit the Kookoo-
burras or laughing jackass, generally in pairs, retailing
their latest joke, and laughing like old men for all


they were tvorth, and the brilliant little rosella parrot
would fly, chattering in the apple trees, and peck at
the brown, velvety centres of the sunflowers.
How rich, how wonderful, was the wealth of blossom
on the countless trees in that orchard, like brides in
spotless and costly array ! Apple, pear, plum, peach,
apricot, nectarine, orange, and lemon, all in their
season, vying with each other in abandon of adorn-
ment, while low down glowed the scarlet and yellow
of tomatoes, and the lovely green of cucumber and
sweet potato, to say nothing of the heavy bunches of
white and purple grapes.
Beyond the orchard, separated from it by the gully
or burn, is another great paddock of some 50 acres,
fairly well cleared. Some tall trees still stand amongst
dead or ring-barked brothers. One scarcely realises
the height of Australian trees, till you stand an in-
significant dot beneath them ; and in the clear distance
rise the beautiful blue mountains, highest ol which
is Mount Tangery.
Seated on the front verandah, I could not dis-
entangle from my vision an imagination that through
the long bare and slender trunks of the trees at the
foot hills I saw the ruins of an ancient abbey or
cathedral such as St. Andrews or Elgin. It was but
a mirage formed by the rising background of withered
grass seen through a maze of trees !
On the south side of the house, extending from the
yard,'is another great paddock of tall trees, a walk
through which brings us to the school grounds afore-
said. On the south and west, between the house and
the public road, is a comparatively new shrubbery of
ornamental trees, obtained from the Government,
consisting of English oaks, elms, firs, etc., which,


when grown, will be a good protection from the gaze
of passers-by, and also, which is more necessary, from
the distressing “ westerly,” wFen it takes to blow.
The most genial wind here is the easterly ; the southerly
is clammy, and the fierce northerly is scorching.
A string of bee hives stretches across the face of the
shrubbery and scarlet geraniums in glowing clusters
clamber over the fences.
Such is my vivid recollection of Oak Farm, and
though the relentless Australian summer played havoc
with the nerves and frames of us, wanderers from a
cooler zone, we objected not to the warmth of hand
and heart which encircled us, and which has journeyed
across the of waters, to abide with us in memory
evermore.


Memories of Home.
Oh, crystal dew! that glistens on the sleeping flowers,
I sip thy fragrance sweet ! i hough oceans wide and
years
Divide me from my childhood’s cherished, dreamland.
hours,
Glad memory serves me well, yet fills my eyes with
tears.
Oh, quiet breeze ! that whispers in the gum f rees tail
And wakes the aspen’s sigh, I hear thy wafted psalm
Through starry nights, the haunting, weirdly, mournful
Of curlew breaks the silence of the moonlight calm !
Oh, golden summer day ! with laden orchard spread.
Thy warmth can reach me still ; the busy hum of
The locust’s lullaby, the balmy shade overhead
Come stealing o’er my soul, across the wind-tossed


CHAPTER VII.
Bits from My Diary.
WHEN the short Australian twilight slid into the
infinite blue of night—star-powdered night —some-
times my sister-in-law and I would sit on the north
verandah, milking-time being past, and enjoy a cosy
chat about our dear ones far and near ; times in the
old country when she was young ; our thoughts of
present things and past, and of that fair land where
all will be made plain that is so puzzling here. She
would tell me of how she dreamed of a home such as
this, which she never expected to see materialise;
of the hard years, when John and she struggled on
together ; of her lonely life, in the bush, in Queensland,
when he was away as shepherd from week’s end to
week’s end; how once, going for water, she lost her
way and was out all night in the dismal bush, with its
many weird voices ; and of the many other sore hard-
ships endured by the settler’s wife. How these things
were all of the past, and the present was radiant,
with the love and care bestowed on her by her
children.
The brothers, too, had many long yams together
of the days of their youth ; of friends long gone ; of
social questions pertaining to the old world and the
new ; and of their ladders to success.
Often, before breakfast, the male members of our
circle would be off to some distant paddock, and I


can see mother now, standing at the fence or on the
rising ground of the well, with hand shading her eyes,
and in a clear, far-reaching voice, much more con-
vincing than a gong, coo-ee that the repast was waiting.
Coo-ee would come back, sometimes from afar, and
sometimes they having returned unawares, the vagrants
would trombone coo-ee in our very ears !
Much cheery humour we enjoyed, for we all had
our jokes to tell, our impressions to relate.
Mother, as we called my sister-in-law, told of a
family she knew in which were three sets of twins.
One of the girls was named “ Gwendoline,” pronounced
by them “ Gwindline,” and she thought they had
run out of names and called her “ windo-blin’! ”
Another time she astonished us all by stating her
weight to be ! “ Nonsense, Mother, said her
husband, “ you are not a ton, which struck us as
being really too funny ! She meant to say stoiie, of
course, which was quite enough, tho she was always
being teased as to her excessive avoirdupois. Collo-
qualisms amused us often. By way of a tease, Uncle
one evening enquired if they always used the word
“ lolly ” when they spoke of sweetmeats. “If I gave
you a penny, would you go into a shop and ask for a
pennyworth of ( lollies ’” ? “ Oil noj was the reply,
“ I always ask for three pence worth ! ” Collapse of
Uncle !
I declared, one afternoon, that in the paddock across
the gully an old swagman with a fuzzy head was sitting,
his back against a tree, legs outstretched, feet sticking
up, billy can at his side, and had been there all day.
We all trooped to the verandah to have a look at him.
There he was, but the laugh was turned against me,
for he was but a burnt tree stump in front of the tall


gum tree ! and had been there for years. When supper
was cleared away we generally sat at the dining-room
table, and lamps being lighted, we chatted, read, or
worked till bed-time. The lamp light attracted many
brilliant moths and beetles, some like that glistening
cream-coloured iridescent pottery, so common some
years ago, others bronze and green, insisted on cremating
themselves down the funnel of the lamp.
Thus, in such light-hearted company, our evenings
sped away at Oak Farm. Rob on his handsome mate
was generally our only evening visitor, all others
departing at milking-time or sundown. So the days
“ pursued the even tenor of their way,” and one realised
how very monotonous life might soon become, the
only excitement from week to week being the arrival
of a new calf, a litter of pigs, or a brood of chickens.
On Tuesday s the English mail; on Sunday, per-
chance, a neighbour of ten miles distance, in their
buggy and handsome pair of piebalds, when Maggie
or Mary, as the case might be, would bring tea and
new baked cake to the front verandah, or Jessie with
her little ones would come to spend the day with
Grannie and Grandad. So we were very pleased when
a drive round the countryside was proposed, that
we might take a few notes as to “ how it strikes a
stranger.”
One morning Mother and I set off by the early
morning train to Singleton before the day began to
blaze. On market days Singleton is of some im-
portance, but otherwise it is just a young colonial
township, with wide, grass-grown streets, and plenty
of room in it, the Hunter giving it a proper wash-
out every few years. It is marvellous what discomfort
people put up with in this country, and smile and


smile. Mother and I broke the record by walking
from and to the station all the length of John Street,
about three miles, burdened with parcels from the
stores. Old Sol was just torrid enough ere we were
through. Jessie, with Alma and Baby Lindsay, got
into the same carriage going back, and she was much
amused to find us two old ladies out on the ran-dan
together. At the station John met us with the sulky,
which is a vehicle made for two, and insisted on us
all getting into it, though Jessie and Alma wished
to walk. Imagine the load for poor Cissy, the pony,
four heavy weights, two children, and packages
galore ! I put up my sunshade, which was enough
to shelter our eyes, but Mother also sprang up hers,
with the result that she calmly remarked that I would
require to get mine recovered when I went to Sydney.
A very evident fact! ■
Several times we strolled through the north paddock,
a pleasant walk, to the tea trees on the creek, a favourite
playground of all the youngsters of Oak Farm. So
we squatted on the green bank, which was their
happy dumping ground, and realised what an ideal
spot it was to enjoy a good book on a blazing November
day!
The foliage of those trees is dark. I expect tea
tree is but the familiar name only, and the hark comes
off in layers, like finest tan-coloured tissue paper.
They were festooned with a luxuriant white jasmine-
like bloom, in fair contrast to their dark leaves. Here
the prickly pear, its myriads of subtile thorns covering
alike stems, leaves, and fruit, shone out scarlet, and
beneath the thick trees were clumps of dainty maiden-
hair fern. Presumptuous new chum that I was, ex-
pecting my gloves to be sufficient protection, I rashly


plucked a large rosy pear, and afterwards had to burn
them, and nearly skin my finger tips to get rid of the
minute and invisible thorns.
In time of drought the settler cuts them down,
boiling the fruit to destroy the thorns, and uses it
for cattle fodder, which illustrates the popular saying,
“ Take what you have and you’ll never want! ”
We sat for a while watching the bee-eaters and
dazzling humming birds darting to and fro across
the rocks and trickling stream, their blue and bronze
or orange and bronze wings and green throats flashing
in the sun. Their bills are quite two inches long,
and sharp as darning needles. Jack, boy-like, threw
a stone at a pretty little diamond sparrow, also at a
wagtail, which wags not up and down as ours does,
but from side to side. Luckily both shots went astray.
Birds, as a rule, are gay in plumage, but are not
songsters. The parrots indulge in apples, the butcher
birds in grapes.
Oh, far off home of mine, ’neath blue Australian skies !
In dreams, I dream again, beneath thy shingled
eaves,
I see dear Mother’s face, the soft grey of her eyes,
And hear my Father’s voice among the gathered
sheaves!
On yonder vineyard fence sits dear old laughing Jack,
And joyful magpies trill the livelong summer day,
Down by the tea tree creek, with shadows cool and
black,
“ Youth weaves its long, long thoughts,” and merry
children play.


Oh, Scotland’s heather hills ! I saw thee purple, grand,
In old time tales, oft told, around the fire light glow,
And now that winter snell sweeps o’er this snowy land.
Its gloamin’ hours I love, as in mists of long ago !
K. R.


CHAPTER VIII
The Church
TJERCHED on a steep hill, about a mile north from
Oak Farm, is the only church in the district—
Episcopalian—a quaint little edifice built of
stone. “It hides not its light under a bushel.” Every
Sunday service is held here, alternately at mid-day,
3 o'clock afternoon, and 7.30 evening, which service
is notified in the local weekly Argus. Sometimes
we "flier conditions forbid the evening one. The
clergyman who officiates has two other flocks to
minister to, and thus divides his favours.
One Sunday, temperature permitting, Mother,
Maggie, and I walked to afternoon service.
Within the gates, at the foot of the hill, riding
horses, buggies, sulkies, etc., were tied up, and the
intending worshippers climbed the rugged path, to
await, in the cool porch, the arrival of the clergyman.
To compare celestial things with terrestrial, this
important personage reminded me of a strolling,
musical acrobat who in by-gone days patrolled our
towns and villages. On his hat were bells, on his hands
were cymbals, in his mouth a clarion, or some such
instrument; by moving his feet he beat a drum and
twanged a triangle. This indefatigable clergyman
combined in himself the offices of sky-pilot, church


warden, officer, and bell ringer, and I have no doubt
did his best to assist the choir !
When somewhat cooled down after a considerable
ride, he donned his surplice, placed his books on the
reading desk, and rang the bell, for the space of three
minutes, when the waiting congregation went into
their seats. Last, but not least, he collected the
offertory !
The church is seated for 50 ; only 21 were present
this day. The walls of the interior are neither plastered
nor lined, and the birds fly out and in at the wooden
eaves. A pair of swallows kept up a perpetual swish
all during the service, a literal rendering of “ Happy
birds that sing and fly, round thine altars, oli! most
High ! ” They were very tame, and not afraid to
swoop down quite low over our heads. The address
was good. There is a small harmonium rather auto-
matically played, and a choir of four young ladies,
who do not spare themselves to shout above it. The
singing was too harsh and unmercifully quick, the
Colonial accent very pronounced; worthy of Tip-
perary itself !
One evening Mary, Rob, and I went to service—
-19, all told. The leading soprano excelled herself,
in haste. The preacher was introduced to me as we
descended the hill. He asked me, If I did not think
this a strange site for a place of worship ? ” I told him
it reminded me of the Ark on Mount Ararat, and though
set on a hill, that it might not be hid, is yet away from
everyone and everything !
The burying-ground is at the back of the church,
and since we came home my brother-in-law has been
carried up and there laid to rest.
The walk home was fine, in brilliant starlight with


a scythe-like moon. The shadows cast on the road
were simply exquisite, like the finest lace! It is
astonishing to see the grandeur that emerges from
such mean-looking wooden homesteads! The elders
in their silks and satins, the young ones in their dainty
white and coloured dresses, hats as gay and up-to-date
as in the cities !
Yet another Sunday, the temperature being some-
what cooler than in the previous week, my husband,
sister-in-law, and self walked to morning service.
The sermon was considerately short, our fans being
in constant requisition. Three girls composed the
choir, the lady of metallic voice dominating all.
Onward Christian Soldiers ” was thumped out in
a brazen sort of a way ; it is so fine usually, but per-
haps I am too critical, as I am sure they did their
best—certainly their loudest—and the clergyman was,
as usual, a host in himself !


CHAPTER IX,
A Selection.
ONE afternoon my brother-in-law, to give us an
idea of what a selection is like, when the settler
takes land over from the Government, took us
through Shearer’s paddock, across the northern road
from Oak Farm. We went in at the slip-rail, and
followed a fairly good track made by trollies laden
with tree trunks going to the saw-mill. However, the
bush begins to be very dense and dark a few yards
from the fence. We sometimes lost this track, but
sure-footed Cissy, innocent of shoes, went bravely
on over logs and scrub. The trees were simply immense,
with great dead ones towering with ghastly white
arms outstretched or else fallen ones of most fantastic
shapes, like great spiders or antediluvian monsters,
obstructing the pathway.
Straight, stately, young gums, with the bark peeling
off their trunks at this season, giving them the appear-
ance of polished marble, were here in hundreds, like
a Japanese beaded screen on the landscape, or the
teeth of myriads of white ivory combs; it is not
easy to describe the effect. At length, after something
less than an hour, we emerged from this primeval
forest on to a cleared hillside, and, but that the
distance was obscured by a heat haze, we would have
obtained a fine view of the Singleton district, on


Patrick’s Plains, and the extensive and finely cleared
estate of New Frew. This is the route Rob takes
through the bush—a near cut —when coming from
Baroona of a night. Both he and his horse would
require an extra sense to get through safely, but
both sight and hearing seem to develop abnormally
in this great, empty, silent land.
This ramble certainly gave us a faint idea of the
difficulties which fall to the selector. John said his
place was just such another, and he mostly cleared
it himself.
After resting a while, we retraced our rugged way,
diverging slightly to come back by the gully with its
fringe of slender oaks, like our “ saughs,” overhanging
its banks. We met a young girl and her smaller
brother, astride their ponies, persuading a white cow
and her new-born, staggering calf to get through the
slip rail, on their way home, across the Hunter.
We went leisurely back all the length of the bush
paddock to the brick kiln, and saw the full extent of
Oak Farm, only partially cleared, on the south side.
Uncle had a fling, within stick length, at a huge
white ant’s nest, stuck on a dead tree. There is a wild
bee’s “ bink ” on another, which he meditates raiding,
but later he was mercifully dissuaded from that
feat!
The scourges of the country, including the merciless
tropical heat of the summer months, and the floods
which deluge the townships and settler’s hardly-
gathered homesteads every now and then, are the
numerous insect pests. Ants of all colours and sizes,
black ants, red ants, white ants, green-backs, to the
hull-dog and soldier ants that sting you with tenacity
and military precision. The small black ant skims


over food and everything else. The white one destroys
your house and furniture without compunction.
The homesteads on the route to Queensland were
built on very high piles, 6 or 8 feet, possibly more,
from the ground, as a precaution against the ravages
of this tiny creature, whose huge, solid, cement-looking
dwellings were numerous in the bush. Some of them,
the height of a tall man, smoothly rounded on the top,
were more like what an aboriginal hut might be than
the abode of an insect. I understand settlers some-
times smoke out the inmates and use these as ovens.
The ant bills around Belford, those of the red ant,
were heaps of fine gravel and pebbles, which might
have been tipped out of a cart on to the road-side.
Then there are centipedes, scorpions, spiders of
immense size, harmless, and tarantulas, whose bite
is deadly, and lizards from the agile green one, which
my nieces called “ pretty little things ! to the great
Jew lizard, the colour and roughness of a piece of bark,
which opens its mouth like a cavern and stands
motionless, hoping thus to escape notice. This feint
was not always successful when Uncle was about.
One day he caught one, stuck a stick like a huge
cigar into its mouth, strewed corn round about
it, and had the fowls all gazing at it in comical
wonder.
I had a hunt for bushrangers every night, and
usually located some transgressor. One night I was
about mesmerised watching a lizard disporting itself
round the four walls of our bedroom. My husband
came in and cornered it, after a skirmish. I confess
to a dread of them, and would rather face a wholesome
mouse than any of these pests, not forgetting the
snakes, from the deadly death-adder to the grey or


black snakes from 4 to 15 feet in length, and whose
carcases oft adorned the fences on the waysides.
Then there are locusts, which come in clouds and
eat up every green thing, and the frogs, also “ pretty
green things ! in millions, which rejoice over a slight
shower and sing doxologies all day long over a deluge !
to say nothing of the persistent, impudent buzz of
the mosquitos ! Verily, the plagues of Egypt were
sent into penal servitude here !
Ah, no ! commend me to the dear old country
yet, with a nice clear fire at which to comfort oneself,
instead of sitting sweltering in 100 degrees Fahrenheit,
with all the windows and doors in the house wide
open, and ants skimming about, inside and out!


CHAPTER X
Vineyards
Tf DELIGHTFUL drive we enjoyed was to the
[*■ Kirkton vineyards, about 8 or 9 miles distant
across the Hunter, the banks of which are very
steep here. They are of red sandstone, cut by the
waters of centuries. Huge dead trees washed down
by mighty floods cumber the channel. We crossed
a low white-painted bridge, against the parapet of
which leaned a great giant trunk, like some per-
historic creature. Cissy was dubious as to its possi-
bilities, and refused to cross until led by her master.
When in flood this river, like most rivers of the Colonies,
is unmerciful, and inundates all the surrounding
country. Settlers quit their homesteads in haste,
leaving all behind, cattle, poultry, and crops, most
of which is irretrievably lost.
Land near the river is, of course, the most pro-
ductive, the acreage of which is valued at a much
higher price than that further inland, but, like the
villagers on the slopes of Vesuvius, the squatter
considers the risk worth taking. If only the divers
scourges of this land would let it be, what an “ El
Dorado ” it would prove !
The rubbish brought down by the river, in flood,
is tremendous, and, deposited on the soil, takes months
of hard labour to clear away.


The “river crossed,” we climbed the bank, which
was much higher ground than that from which we
came. The view was charming, and when we reached
the level we ambled along admiring the landscape
and passing a few scattered homesteads. At length
we came in sight of Kirkton. The lovely green of the
vast vineyards was refreshing. The orange and lemon
groves were still hanging with golden fruit, and great
hedges of prickly pear, 12 to 15 feet in height, pro-
tecting them from the scorching north wind, were
covered with crimson fruit, yellow blooms, and scarlet
buds, and humming with swarms of honey-laden
bees. I was not aware, until then, that orange and
lemon trees were so well protected from assault as
they are by strong thorns.
Mr. Alf. took us through the groves, and we carried
away more than one peck of the ripe and luscious
fruit. He also conducted us through the huge stores,
and we saw the plant of the wine industry. Great
presses, vats, and hogsheads, some holding 1,000
gallons. We did not go empty-handed from there
either, but carried home a few flagons of port and
claret. This is a thirsty land, and no water fit to drink
until boiled, so that lemonade is a necessity. Life
would not be worth living here without the fruit.
My breakfast usually finished up with three ot four
peaches when in season.
We were afterwards taken into the house and
introduced by Mr. Alf. to his sister, Linda, who pro-
duced the inevitable tea. The garden, in front of the
house, had great clumps of pink cactus, like water
lilies, and huge bunches of blue plumbago, with
hedges of scarlet cactus all round.
Bidding our hospitable friends of Kirkton adieu,


we retraced our journey, slightly turning off into an
antediluvian waste, strewed with dead trees, and in
which was a large lagoon, not a blue, but a green one,
where horses stood up to their girths in the lichen-
covered water. We got through various gates and
slip rails, and reached a neat, shady homestead,
shrouded in pepper trees, with a brilliant garden
sloping from the front verandah down to a great
expanse of meadow, bordering the river, on which
were many cattle grazing. The verandah commanded
a magnificent stretch of country and the valley of the
Hunter. To the left were the Black Mountains ; in
front, a white metal bridge over the river. This home-
stead of Stamford belonged to Mr. F. Strange to say,
both he and his wife were remarkably like friends
of ours in the old country. They have the baker’s
dozen of olive branches, twelve being then alive, and
all at home. Large families are a valuable asset in
this country, where there are no drones allowed in
the hive. They milk 60 cows, sending the milk to a
freezing factory in Brankstone, where it is treated
and sent by rail to Sydney as sweet milk. About
7,000 gallons per week go thus from this one factory.
We partook of more tea and home-made cakes on
the verandah amongst the girls and boys. Then cam©’
the signal for departure, milking-time. We traversed,
on our return, the same huge paddock, dumping out
and in its numerous holes, giving patient Cissy and her
cargo many a jolt. Up and down the hills and vales
of the northern road we went, the surveying of which
was always a fertile source of conversation between
the brothers, arriving home shortly after sundown
from our interesting experience.


CHAPTER XI.
A Snake !
in the sulky again, at 10 a.m., with the sun
U already blazing in the East. We drove in an
opposite direction from previously, going east
to Brankstone, the nearest township to Belford, on
the way to Maitland.
The drive was most delightful for 6 miles through
the bush. The road is good ; just like going through
some private policy at home. The regulation width
of 22 feet was well cleared of undergrowth, and the
trees tall, with lots of shade. Rock on the surface
therefore very stony; value, about £2 per acre’
When we got to the bridge across the Black Creek,
where was also a wayside inn, the land was so com-
pletely cleared that scarcely a tree remained for
bullocks to shelter from the vertical sun.
t( 1 § av ® the old gentlemen a scare by shouting out
There s a snake!” John turned the sulky back
to the place, and in spite of protests, being unarmed,
my husband made for the spot pointed out. I regretted
having spoken. It seemed to me a tree stump about
a foot high, and on it coiled round, with its head raised
to strike, was a considerable grey snake. Bob crept
near cautiously, and presently began to caper like a
Maori at a war dance. Of course, the laugh was at
me, for which I gave thanks, but on our return journey
they both acknowledged that it really was not unhke


a snake. One is always on the look-out for them.
It was an old horse collar, with the leather worn
off, and showing the grey stuffing all round. They
always spoke of it afterwards as “ Auntie’s snake,”
and many a tease I got.
We drove along sleepy Brankstone, shimmering in
the blazing day, consisting of a handful of wooden
bungalows, about a quarter of a mile m all, but pos-
sessing a R.C. school and convent, with a marble
Mary and Child in front. Everything -was still, as
if there was no need to hurry between this and Dooms-
day. Market day is the only excitement. Turned
up a road, which led us past “ Howwood Coltage,
old G. B.’s place. It lies in the valley of the Hunter,
and when it was in flood, in 1893, the water stood
4 feet deep in the rooms beyond the verandah. At
the bridge over the creek I spoke of, it rose 20 feet.
My brother-in-law had occasion to cross it when the
waters were subsiding, and it was washing into his
spring cart, and it took all his and his horse's vim to
stand against it.
We climbed considerably to reach " Glenlivet,”
W. B.’s place. It stands on a fine hill and commands
an extensive view of the great plain, with Brankstone
in the midst. Far in the clear distance, we discerned
(he smoke from the coal pits of Greta, Maitland,
and Newcastle. Their garden was one blaze of ger-
aniums, and the verandah looked cool, with great
pots of arum lilies and ferns.
The fly in the ointment here was the flies them-
selves. Sickening ! Everything on the dining table
literally black with them, though covered by mosquito
net!
Very kind and hospitable people ; lie short and


stout, she tall and thin ; very much the short and the
long of it! A musical family, too. Their daughter
played and sang Scotch airs to us for quite a time on
a very good piano. Old George was a very fine violinist,
I understand, and believed in the “ Auld Scotch Sangs ”
of his native land.
We were entertained to dinner and tea, and left,
as is the custom, “ when the kye cam’ hame.” They
were milking 36 cows, and coining money, so said
“ Mrs. Grundy.” We stayed too long there to call
at “ Ellerslie,” G. B.’s place, and as “ Howwood
Cottage ” seemed shut up, we left them for another
day.
Through Brankstone on our way back we did some
shopping at the store : old friends of my brother-in-
law’s coming out to the sulky to shake hands with
us, by the way. I could have told that the old lady
belonged to Elginshire from her accent, though the
couple have been resident in the colony for 50 years !
We went off our road a little way into the bush
to examine a freak of a tree. It stood fully 80 feet
in height, and was divided into sections of different
sizes ; some square, some round like an African idol.
My husband thought it ought to be gifted to the
Sydney Museum as a curio. It was certainly most
unique I


Ax Ayrshire River.
Happy river ! bound along,
Golden sunshine gilds thy way !
’Tis, methinks, thy tinkled song
That awakes the smiling day !
Gurgling river! canst thou tell
Where the wild flowers love to grow
Is it in yon echoing dell,
Where thy murmuring waters flow ?
Is it where the grand old trees
Bend to kiss thy slumb’ring tide 1
And soft blessings from the breeze
O’er thy tranquil waters glide 1
Spariding river ! gleam and shine,
Peace and beauty love to dwell,
Where sweet music such as thine
Weaves around its magic spell!
*“ Loudon’s bonnie woods and braes ”
Nod their shady plumes to thee,
As they whisper in thy praise,
“ All things love thee, so do we.’’
Yet, calm river, long ago
Peace was stranger to thine ear ;
Now where violets sweetest blow,
Then dread battle thundered near.


And the Covenanter’s prayer
From thy banks, at dead of night,
Rose like holy incense rare
To the holy God of might!
Bruce and Wallace both have trod
On thy banks in days of yore,
But the fragrant, dewy sod
Then was steeped in crimson gore.
Gentle river ! wend thy way,
Peace, with dove-like wings, outspread,
Me. Silvery, insmiling day,
Hovers in the blue overhead !


CHAPTER XII.
A Kaleidoscope.
TETANY and various are the pictures indelibly im-
J M printed on my memory during our eight months’
sojourn in the Southern Hemisphere. Trips
to Sydney, travelling by rail along the banks of the
beautiful Hawkesbury, Queen of Australian rivers!
winding round its numerous bays, crossing the splendid
bridge at Woy-Woy and the long embankment across
an arm of the river, which reminded us of the dykes
of Holland, thinking now we are once more buried
in the bush, with its endless miles of prickly pear,
and quite away from it, when there it is again, widening
into great lochs, with tree-clad heights and narrowing,
like the Kyles of Bute.
Of excursions, by car and steamer, to the lovely
beaches of its exquisite harbour, of which Sydneyites
have every reason to glory in. Fancy Glasgow built
on the shores of Loch Long or Loch Fyne, with bends
and bays of never-ending variety! Of course, our
“ Bens ” are a negligible quantity, but still the land-
scapes are charming.
Of the gay crowds in its busy thoroughfares, of its
great stores, fine public buildings,, churches, and
gardens.
Pictures of our visit to our neice, her husband,
and little ones at Tamworth, 145 miles distant. Of


the magnificent mountain scenery era route, and of
Tamworth itself, with its fine roads shaded in feathery
pepper trees, and set like a jewel in the midst of that
pellucid atmosphere peculiar to the Australian colonies.
It always brought to my mind “ Sweet Auburn, love-
liest village of the plain.” Of our journey across the
Nepean River, up to the incomparable fastnesses of
the Blue Mountains, or of that to the Bulli Pass and
Illawarra, on the south coast, through vast bush of
loneliness and silence (those are the outstanding
characteristics), but of endless possibilities, with the
smoke of bush fires curling up in the blue distance.
Of our trip to Queensland, of its stupendous railway
cuttings, awesome curves, and bewildering prospects ;
and from the sublime to the ridiculous, its kangaroos
and wallabies, hopping out of the bush, or a native
bear clambering up a tree to look, in petrified astonish-
ment, at the puffing monster who dared to invade
their solitude. Across the famous Darling Downs,
with its placid townships smiling in plenty ; of beauti-
ful Brisbane and its shining river and luxurious suburbs.
All these, and many more, flock to remembrance,
and are to me a continual feast.
And, last of all, standing out in the brilliant sun-
shine, is our farewell to Oak Farm ; the last, lingering
look at the great cathedral, of my own creation,
towering in the clear distance, and the exquisite blue
mountains far beyond.
Other memories crowd in also ; the familiar drive
along the grassy road to the little station, the wait
for the train, the many clinging hand clasps ; the
final good-bye to Mother and other friends at Bclford.
My brother-in-law and his daughter, Maggie, went
with us to Sydney, to see us safely on board the


“ Otway,” homeward bound, and remained until the
departing bell sounded “ all ashore ! ” As the stately
ship moved from Circular Quay out into the: channel
we stood by the saloon rail and watched till wc could
distinguish our dear ones no longer. Poor Jonn uaved
his hat on his stick, on high, Mary's roses and Maggie s
blue veil floating in the broese, were the last, wc saw
of our dear Australian friend:!. Amongst the forget-
me-nots of faithful memory we leave them, and
“ God be with us till we meet again !


CHAPTER XIII
Homeward Bound
£0 we gladly set our faces towards the dear Home-
land. As a matter of fact, however, that made
no difference to the skipper, who turned his face
and the ship’s bow very much the other way, with the
result that we were soon speeding towards the South
Pole, instead of the North. Nevertheless, there was
method in his madness, for were we not bound for
Hobart, Tasmania, where a cargo of the first of the
season's apples awaited us ?
As in the case of our first parents, the apple, you
see, led us from the way in which we should go !
I am inclined to think, however, that “ the fruit of
that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste brought death
into the world, and all its woes,” was not our apple
at all. It is much more likely to have been the pome-
granite, its dark, glossy leaves and brilliant scarlet
blooms being much more in keeping with the tropical
situation of the Garden of Eden. Then its fruit,
filled with luscious jelly, which surrounds and conceals
its seeds of difficulty, was just the temptation to give
Adam and Eve a bad quarter of an hour. But to leave
problems, let us return to the commonplace.
We had two very cold days with boisterous seas
crossing from Sydney and sailing down the east coast
of Tasmania, and we were glad to enter the friendly


shelter of Derwent Bay, the lovely harbour of Hobart.
It is much longer than that of Sydney ; more of an
estuary. At the entrance it is called Storm Bay ;
great cliffs, mountainous headlands, and barren islands
on either side. Gradually the width contracts, various
tongues of land shoot out, dividing the channel, and
steaming into the mouth of the Derwent, we enter
the docks, below the great snow-clad mountains,
with the town of Hobart nestling amongst its hollow's
and foot-hills.
After breakfast, the day being fine though still
cold, we went on shore. The town is very bright,
clean, and busy, especially oil the arrivai of the
steamers, at this season. The Post Office, generally
our first place of call at the various ports, is a very
handsome building ; so are other Government Offices
and Municipal, etc., etc.
We arranged to join a party in a drive to Mount
Wellington, 4,166 feet. The drive of 16 miles was
delightful, through country districts, up and up and
up. We got front seats and five horses it too 1 , to drag
us up the arduous way. May and December were
with us on our char-a-banc. May, in the shape or an
engaging young lady, who sweetly asked us to chaperon
her during the excursion, but who ultimately found
“ metal more attractive ” elsewhere. December m
the guise of an old gentleman of SO years, lie had
been up to the top of Mount Wellington four times,
and wished to ascend again a little way, for the lifth
and last time. He must have intended to cremate
himself there. However, after delaying the return
journey fully three quarters of an hour, much to the
detriment of the driver’s temper and language, a few
big Tasmanian alphabetical symbols flavoured the


latter, our brave mountaineer was seen returning. A
friend on either side and one at his back assisted him
down the steep and rugged path. When he reached
the drag he had to be lifted bodily into his seat, while
both he and his companions were literally dripping
specimens of perspiring humanity. Poor old fellow !
I often wonder how long he survived to boast of his
dangerous feat. We did not attempt the ascent,
being content with the enchanting view of the estuary
from the elevation of the rest house, and of the numerous
watering-places which crept in and out of its bays and
islands. We also walked to the Fairy Bower, where
a crystal spring of sparkling water in the midst of
tropical verdure was a refresher. Here we indulged
in the only draught of delightful spring water since
leaving home. The evening was devoted to exploring
the town, the gay windows of the shops being specially
attractive.
Next morning we passed along the wharf, where
labourers were still busy shipping our cargo of apples,
28,000 cases, and storing them in open racks in the
refrigerating room. I believe the apple season is an
anxious time for the ship’s company, as the tempera-
ture has to be kept as equal as possible. Alongside
the “ Otway ” lay the “ Aurora,” of Antarctic fame,
and on our way to Brown River, later on, we saw,
lying in Sandy Bay, the equally famous “ Pram.”
Ammundsen was then in Hobart, having arrived,
not long before, from the Far South.
We decided to take an hour’s drive to Brown River,
and were fortunate in securing box seats again. Our
route lay along the coast, gradually rising till 1,600 feet
above sea level. The waters lay glistening and blue
in the sunlight and along the curling roads the hedges


were masses of scarlet hips and acres of orchards,
stripped of their autumn wealth, whirled past us, and
stately giants of the wild wood guarded all the way.
The trees, without exaggeration, were immense in
height and girth, and seemed to be of a more varied
species than those of N.S. Wales. The beautiful
forests were also exempt from those ghastly dead
trees, which are the disfiguring blot on the fair Aus-
tralian landscapes. This climate is not unlike the South
of England, and many familiar home trees and flowers
grow here.
The jaded citizens of Sydney and Melbourne, when
the stifling “ westerly ” blows, escape to find here a
restful haven in its cool and balmy breezes.
From our elevated vantage we looked down on the
river, which had now expanded into a fine arm of the
sea, or loch, as we would call it, and we could trace
its wonderful peninsulas and sheltered bays. We
descended leisurely to our objective, the hotel on the
shore, and had a full hour in which to explore along
the lovely beach. A curio collector has a shop here.
He has been collecting for many years, and has a most
extraordinary collection. Convict’s jackets, manacles,
lashes, letters of sentences, some of them committing
children of tender years to terrible punishment for
trivial offences — e.g., seven years for stealing a bottle,
value twopence, tarts worth two shillings, and hand-
kerchiefs worth four shillings. He has a most valuable
assortment of coins of all times and countries, and
many other unique things. We were sorry our time
was too limited to see all to advantage.
The return journey was equally enjoyed, and we
got to our ocean home in good time for sailing. In
a tranquil sea, we glided out of the beautiful harbour,


passing the basaltic columns of Cape Pillar and Cape
Raoul. The setting sun lighted up their massive
proportions, transforming them into exquisite castings
of bronze and golden lacquer ; verily, Gates of the
Gods !


IX ME MORI Adi.
An Acrostic.
O h, stately ship ! our home as on we sped
T owards Scotland's well-beloved heather Iniis,
W here does thou lie ? crushed by the Kuitured
A 11 God’s fair work and man’s, who vilely kills,
Y ield us thy strength, until sweet Peace is won !
Torpedoed, July 22nd, IQIJ.


The Lights or Home.
Though war clouds dash with deadly haste
Athwart the sky,
The twinkling lights of our dear home
Gleam ever nigh !
Sweet sister, raise me higher still,
I know, for sure,
Those are the twinkling lights of home
Across the moor !
The sailor, treading with vain hope
The cruel sea,
Sings out “ The twinkling lights of home
Are on our lee ! ”
The airman, from his giddy flight,
Far in the blue,
Discerns the twinkling lights of home
With vision true !
The prisoner, pining sad and lone
In alien land,
Dreams that the twinkling lights of home
Are close at hand !
And I lay down my friendly pen
When all is said,
For lo ! the twinkling lights of home
Shine overhead !
October 31s£, 1917.




V '.n^'Uiy
•$: --v ** *'
r-xd.
21,84
All
