

CATALOGUE OF EXHIBITS
IN THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN COURT
AT THE
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION,
SOUTH KENSINGTON,
1873.
f i onoi




Copies of this Pamphlet can be obtained of FRANCIS
I. DUTTON, Esq., C.M.G., Agent-General for South
Australia, 37, Great George Street, Westminster, S. W.,
or in the South Australian Court, at the International
Exhibition, South Kensington.
HANDBOOK
FOR EMIGRANTS
PROCEEDING TO
A D E L A I DE,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY WILLIAM HARCUS, ESQ., J.P.
Mith a Pap of d{olong
PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
AND FOR
GBATIS IDISTIRIIBTJTXOISr.
Second Issue of Ten Thousand.
ITonbon:
G. STREET, 30, CORNHILL, E.C.




CONTENTS.
Chapter I.— Introductory ... ••• 1
Continent of Australia. South Australia. Boundaries.
Extent of Territory. Physical features. Productive-
ness. Climate.
Chapter II. —Natural Resources of the Colony ... 6
Three staple industries —Wheat, wool, copper. Extent
of land alienated from the Crown. Average yield
and price of wheat for ten years. Simple methods
of farming.
Chapter lll.— The Land Laws ... ... ... ... 10
First law. Modifications. Land Act of 1872. How
to get on the land. Occupation and Improvements,
Cultivation. Minute directions.
Chapter IV. — What to do with the Land ... „ ... 15
Hitherto wheat-growing the principal industry. Other
produce—Potatoes, flax, &c. Sericulture.
Chapter V.—Mines and Mining ... ... ... ... 17
Early discoveries of minerals. Copper at Kapnnda and
Burra. Peninsula mines—Wealth and dividends.
Northern mines. Northern railway. Iron ores.
Mineral leases and mineral produce for ten years.
Chapter Vl—Pastoral Pursuits 23
Pastoral lessees to give place to agriculturists when
necessary. Wealth acquired by pastoral lessees.
Leases granted. Exports of wool for ten years.
Chapter VII.— Immigration 25
Former system. Its failure. Present law. Land
order warrants granted to persons coming out to the
Colony at their own expense. Land orders granted
to shippers, companies, associations, or societies.
Assisted emigration under the new Land Order
Regulations. Eligible and ineligible candidates.
Payments. Voyage and outfit. Hints to emigrants
for the voyage and on arrival. Advantages offered
by the Colony. Things to be avoided.
Chapter VIII. — Material Progress ... ... ... 39
What has been done. Land taken up and cultivated.
Public works — Roads, railways, telegraphs, Churches,
Schools, Museum, Botanic Garden, Institutes. Ship-
ping. Exports and imports. Revenue and expen-
diture.
Chapter IX. —Wages, Price of Food and Clothing ... 43
Rate of wages for ten years. Prices of necessaries of
life. Cost of living.
MS P/o yqy
1/0


Chapter X.— The Northern Territory 46
Extent and boundaries. First settlement. Trans-
continental telegraph line opened out Territory.
Discovery of gold. Northern Territory Land Act.
Country lands sold for cash. Blocks of land rented
for tropical industries. Liberal terms. Pastoral
leases. Gold mining regulations. Mineral leases
other than gold. Communication with Pore Darwin.
Conclusion ... ... 55
Advantages offered by the Colony to emigrants. Savings
of the working classes. All nationalities thrive in
the Province.
Appendix
Notes on the capabilities of South Australia and the
Northern Territory for Fresh Industries, by R.
Schomburgk, Dr. Phil.... ... ... 59
Report on Gold Mining in South Australia, by W. J.
Peterswald, Warden of Goldfields ... ... ... S 2


CATALOGUE.
A List of the Wines
forwarded from the Colony of South Australia for exhibition
at the International Exhibition, London.
Description of Wine. Exhibitor.
Verdeilho A. Hardy.
Sweet Water Do.
Sweet Shiraz Do.
Madeira Do.
Carbinet Do.
Doradilla G. White.
Palomino Blanco Do.
Molar Negro Do.
Pommard Do.
Temprano Do.
Pedro Ximenes Do.
Auldana Vineyard P. Auld.
Do. Do.
Carbinet Do.
„ ( Hon. Justice
Scyras ] _
( Gwynne.
White Tokay Seven Hill College.
Shiraz Do.
Black Portugal and White Madeira Do.
Kanmantoo Red Wine C. B. Young.
Coonatto, Red D. Randall.
Do. White Do.
Light Madeira J, D. Holbrook.
Shiraz J. H. Kaines.
Temprano E. J. Peake.
Palomino Blanco Do.
Verdeilho Do.
Clarendon Red Do.
Riesling W. Jacob.
Carbinet Do.


Description of Wine.
Spanish.
Shiraz
Do.
White Highercombe
Highercombe, Red.
Montura, Red .
Montura, White
Red Wine.
White Wine
Red Wine..
Verdeilho
Riesling
Carbinet
Collection of Spirits and Cordials
Gawler Plains
Quinine Wine
Various Samples of Liqueurs, &c. .
Riesling and Verdeilho
Shiraz
White Spirit
Do. Vinegar
French Polish
Pure Grape Spirit
Brandy, Spirits of Wine.
Exhibitor.
W. Jacob.
Wm. Green.
F. W. Lindrum.
R. D. Ross.
E. J. Hector.
Do.
Lorrimer & Co.
Henry Foote.
i Joseph Gilbert, Pew
( sey Vale.
Do.
Do.
Do.
J. Knowles.
Bickford.
J. E. Seppelt.
A. Greig.
W. Nitschke,
Do.
Do.
Do.
Do.
Mr. P. B. Burgoyne, 50, Old Broad Street, exhibits, in a hand-
some glass case, choice samples of the following South Australian
wines, for the sale of which he is the London Agent:—Tintara,
Beaumont, Highercombe, Mataro, Pommard, Glenelg; also several
liqueurs. Messrs. Lawrence, Clarke & Co., Windsor Chambers, Great
St. Helen’s, exhibit, separately, a choice collection of the Pewsey Vale
red and white wines, for the sale of which, in England, they are the
agents.
Note. —The compiler of this catalogue is in doubt, owing to
imperfect information in the lists sent from the colony, whether the
wines and dried fruits, which appear in the name of A. Hardy, should
not properly be described as exhibited by Mr. Thomas Hardy.


Description of Wine. Exhibitor.
Honey, Wine W. Nitschke.
Gin, Rum, Whiskey, Brandy Do.
Bottled Ale and Porter Haussen&Catchlove.
Do. do. H. Lewis.
Food.
Exhibits. Exhibitor.
Various kinds of Preserved ) Adelaide Meat Preserving
Meat > Company.
Extract of Meat in tin cases
Various kinds of Jam
Do. do.
Do. do.
Preserved Fruits
Dried Almonds.
Currants .
Muscatel Raisins
Currants.
Raisins
Dried Apricots
Cayenne Pepper
E. M. Bagot.
South Australian Jam Co.
A. Murray.
F. C. Davies.
F. C. Davis, Fulham.
Brandis.
( A. Hardy, Bankside Vine-
( yard.
Do. Do.
J. D. Holbrook, Wilford
Vineyard.
F. Wurm, Wiley Park.
(F. Beasley, Arrawurra
I Vineyard.
Mrs. A. Bilney, Athlestone,
Casks Biscuit and Ship Bread J. Hamlin & Co.
Cereals, &c.
| Dunn & Co., Steam Flour
OUr ( Mills, Port Adelaide.
( Harrison & Co., Steam
| Flour Mills, GawlerTown.
Seeds Linseed, Sunflower,
j E. & W. Hackett.
and Castor Oil
Wheat Surv.-Gen., G. W. Goyder.
Wheat J. Riggs.


Exhibits. Exhibitor.
Wheat John Frame.
Wheat
Flour
Wheat
C. B. Fisher.
Sheaf of various kinds of
Wheat
Hops, grown by
Wheat and Flour
A. Bell.
I land Park
dock Farm.
William Bowman.
Wheat J. Riggs.
Wheat William Brook.
Wheat Hon. J. Hodgkiss.
Manufactures.
Tobacco Holland & Co
Soap and Tallow Works>
Tallow L. Conrad.*
Shank Bones Do.
Printing Ink
Masonic Inlaid Marble Table
Adelaide.
Flax McDonald.
Copper Vase.
Do. Cross
Do. Pipe.
Silver Cup, the base and cup
hammered respectively out
of a dol. and a5-fr.piece..
Tiny Teapot, made out of Is,
persmith, Adelaide.
These exhibits represent hammer works,
hammered out of solid copper and silver.
* For these two exhibits no room could be found in the Court
j Hindmarsh Steam Mill,
I Magarey & Co.
( C. B. Fisher, Esq., Buck
T. Williams, Yahl Pad-
B. Schwan, Gawler Soap
Braddock & Sons, Port
Mary Schuckels, Wright
Street,'Port Adelaide.
Wilhelm Nitschke, Cop-
the various articles being


i do. 5 samples
Do.
i do. 6
do.
Do.
i do. 6
do
/ Jas. Anderson, Esq., Port
| Lincoln.
i do. 24
do. of Wool ....
( W. Peacock & Son, Ade-
I laide.
Wool,
Exhibits.
case containing various
samples of Merino Wool,
accompanied by Photo-
graphs of Sheep, &c
case containing 2 Fleeces,
one of them being a Ram’s
Fleece, greasy, weight 15
lbs., the other being a 2
tooth Merino Ewe’s Fleece,
greasy, weight lbs., pure
Merino ....
dressed Leicester and
Merino Wether Skin Rug .
case containing samples of
fine Merino Wool
case containing 2 whole
Fleeces of fine Merino
Wool
case containing 9 samples
of Wool
case containing various
samples of Merino Wool
and Photographs of Merino
Sheep
case containing 5 samples
of Merino Wool
Exhibitor.
C. B. Fisher, Esq., Hill
River and Buckland Park.
1 C. B. Fisher, Esq., Buck-
j land Park.
I F. H. Dutton, Esq.,Anlaby.
) J. H. Angas, Esq., Collin
) grove.
| The Honble. A.B. Murray,
i Murray Park, Magill.


Exhibits. Exhibitor.
s Fleeces ( J ' H. Angas. Esq.. Collin-
| grove.
Angora Fleece P. Maurice.
Angora Wool Samples T. P. Jones.
Oils.
Olive Oil Henry C. Packendorff.
Neatsfoot Oil Dodgson & Co.
Trotter Oil Do.
Olive Oil Sawtell, Barnard & Co.
D 0 I Her Majesty’s Gaol
Authorities.
Do. S. Davenport.
Tallow.
Keg of Tallow Gawler Soap Works.
There were also further Exhibits of puncheons of Tallow, tierces
of Beef and Pork sent by Mr. L. Conrad, for which no room can be
found in the Court for the present.
Miscellaneous.
Collection of birds from )
North Australia J H. T. Moms.
3 pieces of Oak Ship’s timber J. Newman.
Showing the destructive effects of the “ Teredo Navalis,” from the
wreck of the ship “Grecian,” near Port Adelaide.
Wild Grass, one bale and ) ~ ~
bundle of Fibre i Mu “ ett -
These plants grow to a very great extent in this Colony. The
broad leaf grows, more or less, all round the sea board on sandy ground,
chiefly in the south-east part of the province. According to the evi-
dence taken before a Select Committee of the House of Assembly, it
grows there for some hundreds of miles along the coast from one-and-
a-half to three miles wide. It seeds immensely. The fibre extracted is
a strong corrugated fibre, admirably adapted for making printing papers
or cartridge; it bleaches very easily, and very excellent paper has been
made from it. When dressed fine, it makes an excellent fibre for


mattresses and upholstery purposes. The round grass grows on
swampy ground near the coast, but not so plentiful as the broad
leaf, it makes a splendid fibre for upholstery purposes, and bleaches
well. The chief cause of this article not being exported, is on account
of the extreme elasticity of it, and its bulky nature. The Parliament
have passed an Act, giving a bonus of two thousand pounds for the
first thousand tons made; and a bonus of two thousand pounds for the
first two hundred and fifty tons of paper made from material collected
in this Colony. A factory is established here for utilising the fibre, and
it is extensively used here and the adjoining Colonies for mattresses.
The military and public institutions have largely patronised it. The
botanical name given by Dr. Schomburgk before the Select Committee
of the House of Assembly, 19th August, 1870, is Psitticoschaenus-
erythrocarpus. The vulgar names that the plants are known by in the
Colony is for the broad leaf, “ Black Flag,” or rush, and for the round
plant, “ Black Grass,” The name of the fibre is known in the Colony
as “ Mullet’s ” fibre, from the first and at present only manufacturer.
A bale of the plants is sent in various stages of its growth, more parti-
cularly those plants in seed.
Paintings, Photographs, Maps, &c.
On the South Wall —Full-length Portrait of the Right Hon.
Sir James Fergusson, Bart., late Governor of South
Australia, painted for the Colony by Sydney Hodges,
Esq., 40, Fitzroy Square.
Bridge over the River Murray (now in course of erection)
designed by Win. Dempsey, M.1.C.E., 26, Great
George Street, Westminster; total length 607 feet, in
5 openings of 121 feet 5 inches each ; clear width of
roadway 22 feet, clear width of footways 3 feet each.
Hamley Bridge, over the River Light, “ Roseworthy and
Forrester’s” Railway, designed by Wm. Dempsey,
M.1.C.E., 26, Great George Street, Westminster;
total length of bridge 312 feet, width of roadway
13 feet, width of each span 146 feet.
On East Wall —Portrait of a South Australian Gold Digger.
Exhibited by A. M. McCormack, Adelaide.


io Exhibits at the South Australian Court.
Specimen of Coloured Photograph by the Photographic
Company. Exhibited by Mr. Upton, Adelaide.
On West Wall —Screw Pile Lighthouse, Margaret Brock
Reef, designed by Geo. Wells, Esq., C.E., North
Street, Westminster.
Portrait of the late Mr. Justice Boothby.
Cathedral of St. Francis, Adelaide, Photograph.
Nine Views of the Moonta Mining Works, do.
View of the Wallarroo Smelting Works, do.
South Australian Native Flowers (September), Painting.
South Australian Heath (August) do.
South Australian Native Flowers (October) do.
Stow Memorial Church (when completed) Photograph.
Culley’s Picture Establishment, do.
Stow’s Memorial Church and Manse, do.
Stow’s Memorial Church (interior) do.
Panoramic View of the City of Adelaide, S.A., 11 feet 7
inches in length by 1 foot 8 inches in depth. Photograph,
View of South Adelaide, do.
Four cases containing 24 Views of Mr. C. B. Fisher’s
wool sheds, horses, sheep, &c. Exhibited by C. B.
Fisher, Adelaide.
Large Map of the Colony, from Surveyor-General.
Overland Telegraph Map, by R. H. Edmunds, Surveyor.
District Map of the Colony, by do.
Four Statistical Charts. 1. Price of Wheat for ten years,
2, Price of Sheep and Cattle for ten years, 3. Rates
of Wages for ten years. 4. Prices of Necessaries of
Life for every month in 1872.


Exhibits at the South Australian Court. n
The following Photographs are framed in sets of six, and are
suspended round three sides of the Court.
Subject.
Botanic Garden.
Unitarian Chapel, St. An-
drew’s Church, and Roman
Catholic Cathedral.
Grenfell Street.
Interior R. C. Cathedral.
Post Office,
Flower Show, Town Hall.
Northern Territory Tele-
graph Banquet, Town
Hall.
Operating Room, Telegraph
Department.
Victoria Bridge.
Post Office and Advertiser
Buildings.
Government House.
Post Office.
Exhibition Buildings.
Adelaide Club.
Rundle Street.
Railway Station, Adelaide.
King William Street.
Hindley Street.
Currie Street.
Bank of Australasia.
National Bank of Australasia.
Town Flail.
Government Offices and
Stow Memorial Church.
Flinders Street.
Subject.
Jetty, Glenelg.
New Reservoir.
Old Reservoir.
Highercombe Vineyard, R.
D. Ross, Esq.
Waterfall, Monalta.
Waterfall, Ford ham’s.
Waterfall Gully.
View from Norton’s Summit.
View from Fordham’s.
Aqueduct from Weir to Re-
servoir.
Adelaide Plains from West
Mitcham.
Blyth’s Cutting N. E. Road.
St. Peter’s Cathedral
St. Peter’s College.
Lunatic Asylum, Parkside.
Prince Alfred’s College.
St. Peter’s College.
St.lgnatius,Roman Catholic.
St. Ignatius Church, Nor-
wood, Roman Catholic.
Angaston.
Sheep and Tree, Angaston.
Hamley Bridge.
Light Bridge.
Gumeracha Bridge.
Clarendon Bridge.
Durham Cattle.
Durham Cattle.


Subject,
Shorthorn Bull, “ Lord
Lindsay,” aged two years.
Shorthorn Cattle.
Tarrawatta.
Lindsay House.
Lindsay Villa, Angaston.
Collingrove.
Dean & Langton’s, Knsngtn.
Hereford Cattle.
Smelting Works Wharf.
Prince’s Wharf.
Dunnicker Slip.
Hawker’s Creek,
Port Adelaide River.
E, and A. Copper Company’s
Wharf.
Prince Alfred Sailors’ Home
Fourth Creek.
Victoria Regia and Orchid
House, Botanic Garden.
The Rosary, Botanic Garden,
and 24 other views of
different parts of these
beautiful gardens.*
Fort Point, Port Darwin.
Jungle, do.
Camp, Port Darwin.
“ Gulnare ” at Southport,
Northern Territory.
Subject.
Fort Point, Palmerston
Northern Territory.
Camp, Port Darwin, do.
Peel’s Gully, do.
Fort Hill, do.
Garden, Palmerston, do.
Todd’s Bluff, Hodgson
River, do.
Landing Place from
Parade, do.
Fort Point, Port Darwin, do,
Stoke’s Hill, do. do.
Telegraph Fleet, do. do.
Camp, do. do.
Tumbling Waters, South-
port, do.
Government House and
Camp, Palmerston, do.
Camp, Port Darwin, do.
S. S. Tararura, Roper
River, do.
Landing Cable, Port Dar-
win, do.
Stables, do. do.
Camp, do. do.
Goot Well, do. do.
Roper River Depot, do.
Sea Beach, Port Darwin, do.
Fort Hill, do.
• Mr. Anthony Trollope, in his work on Australia, describes the
Sydney Botanical Gardens as the most beautiful in the world, owing
to the natural features of the ground; and the Adelaide Botanic
Gardens, as ranking, in Australia, beyond compare, next to those of
Sydney—“ Pleasing like a well told tale.” Dr. R. Schomburgk is the
talented Director of these Gardens.


Subject.
Entrance to Port Darwin,
Northern Territory.
First Telegraph Station,
Port Darwin, do.
Planting first Telegraph
pole, Port Darwin, do.
Hodgson River, do.
Stock Fleet, Port Darwin, do.
Roper River, do.
S. S. Omeo and Bengal,
Roper River, do.
Camp, Port Darwin, do.
Stoke’s Hill, do.
Roper River Jetty, do.
Palmerston, do.
Southport, do.
Officers of the Overland
Telegraph Party,
Roper, do.
Camp, Southport, do.
Torren’s Park, Mitcham, 2
views.
Birksgate. Hon. T. Elder.
M itcham, from T orren’s Park.
The Lodge, ditto.
The Brocas.
Ditto.
The Lake, Torren’s Park.
The Residence of E. M.
Bagot, Esq.
Anlaby, the head station of F.
H. Dutton, Esq. Ditto.
Subject.
Cave, Musquito Plains.
Narracoorte. Oaklands.
Birkesgate. Native Camp.
Native Women. Aborigines.
Second Prize Pony.
First Prize Two-year-old
draught Filly.
Wallaroo Jetty.
Railway Company’s Stables,
Wallaroo.
Custom House.
Linden, A. Hay, Esq.
Roseville Vineyard, Pro-
prietor G. White, Esq,
White’s Assembly Rooms,
Adelaide.
Farm Yard, Mr. J. Riggs.
The Harvest Field,
Government Offices.
North Adelaide, from North
Railway Station. [Terrace.
Parliament House.
Police Court. Supreme Ct,
Local Court.
Bushman’s Club.
Custom’s Office and Police
Station.
South Australian Institute.
Bogie Engine Carrage, S.
A. Railway.
Carriage, S. A. Railway.
Aborigines.
There is also, framed, a fac-simile Parchment- Copy of a
Conveyance for Land, under Torrens’ “Real Property Act.”


CATALOGUE
COLLECTION OF MINERALS
FROM
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Specimens are Catalogued exactly in the order in
which they are arranged in the Exhibition. As it has
not been considered desirable to disturb this arrangement,
which was made previously to the opening of the Court,
it is impossible to adopt a strictly Scientific Classification
of the Specimens included in the following Catalogue,
sufficient space, for a scientific arrangement of these
numerous and heavy Specimens not being available.
Nos. i to 61 in Pedestal Case in Centre of Court.
TOP SHELF.
i. A fine specimen of Malachite, or Green Car-
bonate of Copper, exhibiting a laminated structure due to
a regular succession of concentric deposits, and having
the surface studded with concretions of crystalline blue
carbonate of copper (azurite or chessylite). From the
Burra Burra Copper Mine. R. S. Crabb, Adelaide.
2. Native Gold, with ochreous oxide of iron, in
matrix of brecciated quartz.
3to 15. Eleven smaller specimens of similar Gold-
bearing Quartz.


SECOND SHELF.
14A. Two beautiful Gold Brooches and Pearls,
made of South Australian Gold, by Steiner, Goldsmith and
Jeweller, Adelaide. Exhibited by Mrs. White White,
Lyncombe Hall, Bath.
148. Large Nugget of Native Gold, weighing about
13 ozs., from the Ulooloo gold-field, 60 miles N.E. of
the Burra Burra Copper Mine. The gold is associated
with ochreous oxide of iron, and one side of the nugget
exhibits a crystalline structure.
15 to 17. Three samples of Gold in quartz, from
Sailor’s Gully gold-field.
18. Bottle containing 4 ozs. 7 dwts. of Alluvial
Gold, from Perseverance Reef, Sailor’s Gully gold-field.
19. Bottle containing 10 ozs. 7 dwts. of Alluvial
Gold, from the Onkaparinga gold-field.
20. Bottle containing 43 ozs. of Alluvial Gold, from
Mount Pleasant.
21, Bottle containing 10 ozs. 8 dwts. of Alluvial
Gold, from the Gumarachu gold-field.
22. Bottle containing 46 ozs. 12 dwts. of Alluvial
Gold, from the Ulooloo gold-field.
23. Bottle containing 40 oz. of Alluvial Gold, from
Scott’s Claim, Mount Pleasant.
24 to 26. Three nuggets of Native Gold.
27. Bottle containing 33 ozs. of Alluvial Gold, from
Sailor’s Gully and Hahndorf Diggings.
28. Bottle containing u ozs. of Alluvial Gold,
from the Old Echunga Diggings.
29. Bottle containing 30 ozs. of Alluvial Gold, from
the Baross gold-field.
30. Bottle containing 6 ozs. of Alluvial Gold, from
Sawmill Gully, Echunga gold-field.
31. Bottle containing 60 ozs. of Alluvial Gold, from
Scott’s Diggings, Mount Pleasant.


BOTTOM SHELF.
32. 33. Two fine specimens of Native Gold in
quartz, from the Blumberg gold-field. Exhibited by David
Murray, Esq.
34 to 61. Upwards of fifty specimens of Gold-
bearing Quartz, from the gold-fields of South Australia,
the special locality of each specimen not given, assumed
to contain 219 ounces of standard gold.
Nos. 62 to 149. A collection of large samples of Iron and
Copper Ores, placed against the southern wall of the
Court. The Catalogue of these specimens commences with
those at the East end.
A.—lron Ores.
Exhibited by F. Clark <&* Sons and the Surveyor-General.
'62. Large block of Iron Ore, consisting of mag-
netic iron ore (magnetite, proto-peroxide of iron)
crystallised in small aggregated octahedra, and associated
with red haematite (anhydrous peroxide of iron).
63. Wood Iron Ore, or fibrous brown Haematite
(hydrous peroxide of iron.)
64. Magnetic Iron Ore, massive.
65. Magnetic Iron Ore, partly massive, partly
crystalline.
66. Large block of solid Magnetic Iron Ore, 4 feet
by 2 feet by 1 foot.
67. Red Haematite, with embedded octahedral
crystals of magnetite.
68 and 69. Two blocks of Red Haematite, intimately
mixed with quartz, forming a highly siliceous ore.
70. Magnetic Iron Ore, massive.
71. Brown Haematite, or Limonite (hydrous per-
oxide of Iron), with fibrous structure and black lustrous
exterior.


72. Micaceous Iron Ore (finely laminated anhydrous
peroxide of iron), with a contorted laminar structure.
73. Micaceous Iron Ore, schistose.
74. Micaceous Iron Ore.
75. Brown Iron Ore,
76. Specular Iron Ore, schistose.
77. Micaceous Iron Ore.
78. Specular Iron Ore.
79. Iron Ore, red and brown oxides, mixed.
80. Brown Iron Ore, compact and fibrous.
81. Brown Iron Ore, stalactitic and fibrous.
82. Iron Ore, chiefly brown oxide.
83 to 85. Three samples of fine Kidney Ore, or Red
Haematite, with mammilated surface and fibrous sructure.
86. Specular Iron Ore, or Crystalline Red Haema-
tite ; large mass, withvery brilliant crystalline fracture.
87. Specular Iron Ore.
88. Micaceous Iron Ore, or Specular Iron in finely
divided laminae.
89 to 91. Limonite or Brown Haematite, three samples
from Gossan, at the back of a copper lode, Moonta Mines.
92. Limonite, Stalactitic with fibrous structure and
black lustrous exterior (glaskopf).
93. Iron Ore, chiefly Limonite.
94. Magnetic Iron Ore, massive.
All these Iron Ores are exceedingly rich for metal, and exist in
unlimited quantities in the Colony.
B.—Copper Ores and Samples of
Matrix of Copper Lodes.
Exhibited by the Moonta , Wallaroo , Doora, Euko , Poonah ,
Burrawing, and Sliding Rock Mining Companies.
95. Sample of Veinstone from a Copper lode, con-
sisting of copper pyrites, or yellow copper ore (sulphide


of copper and iron), with iron pyrites or mundic (bi-
sulphide of iron) and quartz.
This specimen measures about 12 inches in width; and being
bounded by the natural walls or cheeks, shows the width of the lode.
The Mundic is partly disseminated through the Copper Ore in the form
of cubic crystals.
96. Veinstone from a copper lode, consisting of
copper pyrites, iron pyrites and quartz ; the iron pyrites
crystallised in cubes.
97. Veinstone containing copper pyrites,
98. Mass of Ore from a copper lode, containing
copper pyrites, iron pyrites, and quartz.
99 and 100. Two samples of Gossany Ore, from the
back of a copper lode, consisting chiefly of ochreous oxide
of iron, with small quantity of copper ore.
101. Mass of Ore from a copper lode, consisting-
of copper pyrites, iron pyrites and quartz.
102 and 103. Two samples of Ore, consisting of cop-
per pyrites, iron pyrites, and quartz.
104 and 105. Two samples of Gossany Ore, chiefly
ochreous oxide of iron.
106 to in. Six samples of the “ Country,” or rock
adjacent to copper lodes at the Moonta Mines. These
specimens are chiefly micaceous and chloritic schists, con-
taining in some cases a little copper pyrites.
112. Concretionary Limestone, forming part of
the “ country ” at the Moonta Mines.
113. China Clay or Kaolin (hydrous silicate of
alumina), from a depth of 5 fathoms at the Moonta Mines.
114. FinemassofCoppEß Ore, consisting of purple ore
(buntkupfererz) and copper pyrites (yellow ore) with quartz.
115. Several samples of Purple Copper Ore (sul-
phide of copper and iron).
116. Large mass of Copper Ore, consisting of copper
pyrites, iron pyrites and quartz.


Exhibits at the South Australian Court. ig
117. Large mass of Copper Ore, consisting of copper
pyrites, iron pyrites, quartz and chlorite.
118. Micaceous Schist, forming part of the
“country” adjacent to a copper lode.
119 and 120. Two large masses of Copper Ore, con-
sisting of copper pyrites, iron pyrites, quartz, chlorite and
mica.
12i. Large mass of Copper Pyritbc.
122. Mica Schist, with indications of green carbonate
of copper.
123 to 124. Two samples of Gossany Copper Ore.
125. Very large mass of Copper Ore, being portion
of a lode consisting of copper pyrites, with iron pyrites,
quartz, chlorite and mica, from the 80-fathom level,
Hughes’ lode, Moonta Mine. The ore contains 15 per
cent, of copper.
126. Gossany Veinstone from a copper lode, con-
sisting chiefly of quartz and ochreous oxide of iron.
127. Copper Ore, composed of copper pyrites, iron
pyrites, quartz, chlorite and mica.
128. Gossany Copper Ore.
129. Copper Pyrites.
129 A. Quartzose Veinstone from a copper lode.
130. Copper Pyrites.
131. Copper Pyrites partly coated with iridescent
tarnish, forming “ Peacock Ore.”
132. Large mass of Copper Ore composed of copper
and iron pyrites in a gangue of quartz, pink felspar, black
mica and chlorite.
133. Copper Pyrites, with iron pyrites and quartz.
134. Copper Pyrites, with iron pyrites, quartz,
chlorite and mica.
135. Quartzose Veinstone, with indications ot
copper ore.
136. Fine specimen of Veinstone from a copper


lode about 2 feet in width, consisting of copper pyrites,
iron pyrites, calc-spar, quartz, chlorite and mica.
137 to 1 39‘ Three samples of Green Carbonate of
Copper with quartz.
140. Copper Pyrites coated with black oxide of copper
141. Quartzose Veinstone from a copper lode.
142. Samples of “Country” adjacenttoacopperlode.
143. Gossany Copper Ore.
144. Copper Pyrites with a little iron pyrites and
quartz.
145. Large mass of Copper Pyrites.
146 and 147 Two samples of Copper Pyrites, tar-
nished on the surface
148. Copper Pyrites, containing 28 per cent, of
copper, from the 45-fathom level, Moonta Mines.
149. Very large mass of Copper Pyrites, from the
45-fathom level. Moonta Mines.
In the absence of separate assays of each of these numerous
specimens, the exact percentage of fine copper contained in each,
cannot be given. It will suffice to say, that no ores of copper are
raised in South Australia of a less produce than ten per cent., whilst
the great majority of ores contain from twenty up to forty per cent, of
copper. The reader is referred to the description of the smelting
process, page 28.
C.—Choice Samples of Copper Ores,
from the Moonta & Wallaroo Mines.
Nos. 150 to 201 are exhibited in Glass Cases at the
Southern end of the Court.
150. A number of samples of solid Copper Pyrites,
or yellow copper ore (sulphide of copper and iron), with
disseminated purple copper ore, from the Moonta Mines.
151. Several samples of Peacock Ore, or copper
pyrites, with an iridescent tarnish, from the Moonta Mines.
152. A number of samples of solid Purple Copper
Ore, or Buntkupfererz (sulphide of copper and iron),


associated in some examples with copper pyrites; from the
Moonta Mines. 70 per cent of Copper.
153. A number of samples of solid Copper Ore,
consisting of purple ore, copper pyrites, and peacock ore,
from the Moonta Mines. Very rich for metal.
154. Several samples of Native Copper (malleable
copper) in nodular forms, crystalline on the surface, some
of the specimens associated with red oxide of copper, from
the Moonta Mines. Almost pure Copper.
155. A number of samples of solid Copper Ore,
consisting of copper pyrites, purple ore, native copper,
red oxide, &c., from the Moonta Mines. Very rich.
156. A number of samples of solid Purple Copper
Ore, or “ Horseflesh Ore,” some associated with copper
pyrites, and others with copper glance, from the Moonta
Mines. 60 per cent, of Copper.
157. Two samples of Native Copper with red and
black oxides of copper, and grey sulphide, the ore yielding
75 per cent, of copper, from the Moonta Mines.
158. Several samples of Copper Pyrites coated
with a pulverulent blue incrustation of indigo-copper, from
the Moonta Mines.
159. A number of samples of Atacamite, or Oxy-
chloride of Copper, the mineral crystallised on some of the
specimens in brilliant dark green crystals, from the
Moonta Mines.
160. Several samples of Peacock Ore, from the
10-fathom level, Moonta Mines.
161. A number of specimens of Native Copper of
crystalline structure, coated with an ochreous and clayey
encrustation, from the Sliding Rock Mining Company.
A fine slab of this native copper stands outside the case.
162. Grey Sulphide of Copper, or Copper Glance,
containing 50 per cent of copper, with steatite, from the
18-fathom level, Poona Mine.


163. Grey Sulphide of Copper, containing 60 per
cent of copper, from Poona Mine.
164. Grey Sulphide and Yellow Copper Ore,
with a little quartz, containing 50 per cent, of copper,
from Poona Mine.
165. Grey Sulphide of Copper, with quartz, con-
taining 40 per cent, of copper, from the Poona Mine.
166. Sample of Rock, adjoining the copper lode, and
containing a little Native Copper, from the Poona Mine.
167. Yellow Copper Ore, with black incrustation,
containing 35 per cent, of copper, from the Poona Mine.
168. Yellow Copper Ore, showing wall of lode,
and portion of “ Country,” containing 30 per cent, of
copper, from the Poona Mine.
169. Grey and Purple Copper Ore, with quartz
and felspar, containing 60 per cent, of copper, from the
Poona Mine.
170. Kaolin and Quartz, from a depth of 7 fathoms,
Euko Mine.
17 1. Grey Sulphide of Copper and Green Car-
bonate, containing 35 per cent, of copper, from the
10-fathom level, Euko Mine.
172. Copper Pyrites, with quartz, containing 24 per
cent, of copper, from the 15-fathom level, Euko Mine.
173. Sample of “ Country,” or rock adjoining copper
lode, at the 15-fathom level, Euko Mine.
174. Grey and Black Copper Ores, containing 16
per cerß. of copper, from the 22-fathom level, Euko Mine.
Nos. 175 to 201. Samples of Copper Ore, rough and dressed,
from the Wallaroo Mines, representing the different classes
of ore received at the Wallaroo Smelting Works. This
collection of specimetis is arranged in a series of trays in
the glass case at the Southern end of the Court.*
175. Green and Grey “Roughs,” from the Wal-
* See description of the process of smelting, page 28.


Exhibits at the South Australian Court. 23
laroo Mines, showing the state in which the ore is charged
in the reducing furnaces.
176 and 177. Two samples of Green and Grey
“ Roughs,” from the Doora Mines.
178. Green and Grey “Smalls,” from the Wal-
laroo Mines.
179. Green and Grey “Smalls,” from the Doora
Mine.
180. Yellow “ Smalls,” from the Doora Mine.
181. Yellow “Smalls,” from the Hamley Mine.
182. Yellow “Smalls,” containing 1 per cent, of
copper, from the Yelta Mine.
183 to 186. Yellow “Smalls,” four samples of
different qualities, from the Moonta Mines,
187. Yellow and Grey “ Smalls,” from the Moonta
Mines.
188. Yellow and Purple “Smalls,” from the
Moonta Mines.
189. Grey and Yellow “ Smalls,” from the Moonta
Mines.
190 and 191. Purple and Yellow “Smalls,” two
samples, from the Moonta Mines.
192. Grey “Smalls,” from the Moonta Mines.
193. Grey “Smalls,” containing per cent, of
copper, from the Paramatta Mine.
194, “Smalls” containing 2of percent, of copper, from
the Paramatta Mine.
195. Slimes, from the Moonta Mines.
196, Yellow “Roughs” or copper pyrites before
roasting, from the Doora Mines.
197 & 198. Two samples of Yellow “Roughs,”
from the Moonta Mine.
199. Copper Ore after havingbeen roasted inthekilns.
200. Roasted Ore crushed and ready for mixing
with the furnace-charge.


2oi, Mixture of Raw and Roasted Ores, with
slags, &c., as charged in the reducing furnace.
The following samples of Metallic Copper (Nos. 202 to 2x2 ),
from Smelting Works in South Australia , are exhibited
on a table at the South-west corner of the Court.
202. Cakes of Copper, smelted at the Wallaroo
Smelting Works. A corner of one of the cakes has been
broken to show the fracture of the metal.
203. Ingots of Copper, smelted at the Wallaroo
Works. One of the ingots has been broken across to show
the character of the fracture.
204, Gridiron Cake of Copper, smelted and cast
at the Wallaroo Smelting Works.
205, Bean Shot Copper, from the Wallaroo Smelt-
ing Works.
206. Coil of Strip Brass, composed of 70 per cent,
of Wallaroo copper and 30 per cent, of spelter (zinc), used
for the manufacture of cartridges by the Birmingham Small
Arms and Metal Company. Exhibited for the Wallaroo
Company by Messrs. James and Shakespeare, London.
207. A collection of specimens illustrating the manu-
facture and uses of Cartridge Metal, by the Birming-
ham Small Arms and Metal Company. Exhibited for the
Wallaroo Company by Messrs. James and Shakespeare,
London.
This collection is placed under a glass shade, and com-
prises the following specimens :
(a) Sample of Wallaroo Cake Copper, broken to
show fracture.
(b) Sample of Wallaroo Ingot Copper, broken to
show fracture.
(c) Coiled Strip of Wallaroo Copper.


(d) Coiled Strip of Brass, composed of 70 percent,
of Wallaroo Copper, and 30 per cent, of Spelter
(Zinc).
Each of these coils is upwards of 800 feet in length, and
is 3f of an inch in breadth, with a thickness of -g Jo of an inch,
or about 38s. wire gauge ; the weight is i| ozs. per square foot.
(e) Cartridge Shells (Prussian pattern) manu-
factured from the Cartridge Metal.
208. Cakes of Copper, of various sizes, smelted
from South-Australian copper ores, by the English and
Australian Copper Company, at their Smelting Works at
Port Adelaide.
209. Ingots of Copper, of various sizes and shapes,
smelted from South Australian ores by the English and
Australian Copper Company.
210. Ingots of Japan Copper, prepared by the
English and Australian Copper Company.
211. Samples of Copper, beaten out to show the
malleability of the metal, prepared by the English and
Australian Copper Company.
212. Rod of Copper, spirally twisted, and worked
into the form of a walking stick, to show the working
qualities of the metal; prepared by the English and
Australian Copper Company.
The following Mineral Specimens (No. 213 to 229 A are
placed on the table with the metallurgical products.
213 and 214. Two samplesjof Native or Malleable
Copper, from the Wallaroo Mines, Yorke’s Peninsula.
215. Gossany Copper Ore, consisting chiefly of
green carbonate of copper.
216. Copper Pyrites, or yellow copper ore, from
Balhannah Mine.


217. .Copper Grange, or vitreous copper ore (disul-
phide of copper), from Balhannah Mine.
2xB and 219, Two samples of Gossany Ore, com-
posed chiefly of red oxide of copper (cuprite), green car-
bonate of copper (malachite), and brown oxide of iron
(limonite), from the Balhannah Mine.
F.—Bismuth.
220 and 221. Three samples of Gossany Ore, con-
taining carbonate of bismuth, from the Balhannah Mine.
222 to 226. Five samples of Bismuth Ore, containing
bismuthine or bismuth-glance (sulphide of bismuth), from
the Balhannah Mine.
227 and 228. Two samples of Ore containing gold,
from the Balhannah Mine.
229, Ingots of Metallic Bismuth, smelted from
the ores of the Balhannah Mine. Some of the ingots
have been broken across to show the crystalline fracture of
the metal.
Nos. 230 to 234 are exhibited in a small flat glass case ,
near the screen at the northern end of the Court.
230 to 233. Four polished specimens of White and
Grey Marbles, from Kapunda District. Exhibited by H.
T. Morris, Esq.
234. A large collection of Small Pebbles, of onyx,
agate, chalcedony, rock-crystal and jasper, a larger
fragment of rock-crystal and another of red jasper, a
crystal of garnet, small rolled fragments of calc-spar and
fibrous gypsum, and five fossil shells.
These specimens were collected in the centre of Australia, by the
Adelaide and Port Darwin Telegraph Construction Party in 1871-2.


The two following specimens (Nos. 235 and 236), being of
unusually large size, are exhibited in the Grounds of the
Exhibition , adjacent to the Australian Annexe.
235. A large block of Coppek Oke, containing 10
per cent, of copper, from the 70-fathom level, Elder’s
Shaft, Wallaroo Mines. This sample contains copper
pyrites, iron pyrites, quartz, felspar, chlorite, mica, &c.
It measures about 6 feet by 4 feet by 2 feet 4 inches, and
weighs 6 tons. «
236. Large slab of Slate, measuring 9 feet 4 inches
by 8 feet, with a thickness of 2% inches, from Mintaro,
South Australia


DESCRIPTION
OF THE
PROCESS OF COPPER SMELTING,
AS CONDUCTED AT THE
WALLAROO, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
‘ These copper works were erected by the Proprietors of the Wallaroo
Mines, in order to smelt the ores raised from the above-mentioned
mines, and were first started in 1861. Since that date, in consequence
of the increased number of mines, the works have considerably in-
creased, and are now reputed to be the largest copper works out of
Swansea. The works consist of 20 reducing furnaces, 12 roasting
furnaces, 3 refinery furnaces, and 21 calcining kilns, and are managed
by 8 officers, 4 chief refiners and watchmen, 64 smelters, 64 mates,
10 refinery men, 8 refinery mates, and 135 mates, mechanics, boys, &c.
The nearest mine in the district is five miles, and the farthest
eleven miles from the works, and is conveyed by means of a
horse tramway. The ores smelted at these works are copper
pyrites, grey sulphide of copper, purple sulphide, black and red
oxide, green carbonate, oxychloride of copper, and small quantities of
native copper. These are more or less mixed with iron pyrites and
various forms of oxide of iron. The gangues associated with these
ores are quartz, talc, mica, hornblende, steatite and felspar. The
average produce of the ore smelted is 14 per cent., the highest produce
being 52 per cent., and the lowest 4 per cent., the latter being the
produce of the Moonta mine slimes.


Copper
Iron
Sulphur
Matrix
Copper
Iron
Sulphur
The process of smelting as conducted at these works may be
divided into four operations :
x. Calcination of the coarse copper pyrites, i.e., copper pyrites
containing iron pyrites.
2. Smelting for metal.
3. Smelting for rough copper.
4. Refining.
1. Calcination. —The ore to be calcined is received from the
mines in the form of roughs, the greater portion of the other ore being
in the state of smalls.
The calcination is conducted in covered kilns, built side by side in
one row, and connected by a culvert with the main stack. The roof
of the kiln is provided with openings, through which the ore and fuel
is charged, and the front wall has an arched doorway, through which
the calcined ore is removed. In front of this doorway, and about four
feet-below the level of the kiln floor, is a tramway leading to the
crushing house.
The charge of ore for each kiln is 140 tons: this is mixed with
1 tons of wood and 2 tons of charcoal in layers. After the lain has
received its charge of ore, the front opening is closed with brickwork,
with the exception of one or two holes near the floor, by means of
which the fuel is ignited and the draft regulated; the openings in the
roof are closed, the fuel ignited, and the ore allowed to bum. At the
expiration of five weeks the openings in the roof are uncovered, and
the contents of the kiln quenched by allowing one or more streams of
cold water to flow in upon the ore. When sufficiently cool, the brick-
work is pulled down from the front doorway and the calcined ore
removed by the workmen into tracks, thence to the crusher. When
crushed it is conveyed into the ore yard, to be mixed with the charges
for the reducing furnaces.
As an example of the composition of the ore both before and
after calcination, the following analyses of average samples, taken from
the same charge, may be cited :
Before Calcination.
After Calcination.
100-00
... n-54
100-00
Matrix 33-72
Oxygen


Copper Pyrites
cwt.
Calcined Ore
99
Carbonate or Oxide
99
Slag from subsequent operations
... 6
99
2, Smelting for Metal. —The furnace employed in this
operation is the ordinary reverberatory Welsh reducing furnace. The
charge for this furnace is 48 cwt., made up approximately, as
follows :
48 cwt.
This charge is melted in about 4| hours, when the slag is skimmed
off, and a second charge placed in, which, when melted, is again
skimmed. A tap hole is then opened in the side of the furnace, and
the metal run out into pig moulds formed in sand. Five such charges
are melted in twenty-four hours, and 28 charges are expected from each
furnace per week. The regulus thus produced is known as “Blue
Metal,” and contains, on an average, about 50 per cent, of copper.
The slag is carefully broken up and picked over. The two first pigs
nearest the door, together with any portions that may be discovered to
contain shots of metal, are returned to the furnace with a future
charge.
3. Smelting for Rough Copper. —The furnace employed in
this operation is provided with a large side door, opposite the tap hole,
and is, in most respects, similar to the reducing furnace. The charge
for this furnace is 3 tons of metal. The pigs are charged in through
the large side door of the furnace and stacked on the bed. The
“ metal ” is sweated slowly, which takes six or seven hours, and the
slag skimmed off five or six times during the operation. In about
twenty-two hours from the time of charging, the slag being skimmed
off, and the contents of the furnace showing a clean face, the boiling
commences, and, when complete, the furnace is tapped, and the rough
copper run into sand moulds arranged at the side of the furnace. The
rough copper, containing about 90 to 96 per cent, of copper, is then
passed to the refinery.
4. Refining. —The furnace employed for refining contains about
7 1 tons of rough copper, and is similar in construction to the wasting
furnace. The charge is melted in about six hours, and is kept in this
state for about fifteen hours, during which the remaining iron in the
rough copper is oxidised and passes into the slag. The sulphur which
is present in the rough copper passes off as sulphurous acid gas. At


the end of this time the slag is removed, some charcoal is thrown on
the surface of the copper, and the operation of poling commences.
This operation consists in depressing a long pine stem beneath the
surface of the copper, and has for its object the reduction to the
metallic state of the greater portion of the sub-oxide of copper existing
in the molten copper, and thus converting the dry into “ tough pitch ”
copper. During the poling small portions of copper are from time to
time ladled out and tested as to their fracture, malleability and colour,
in order to ascertain when the poling has proceeded far enough. When
the assay pieces show this to be the case, the pole is withdrawn, and
some more charcoal is thrown on the copper near the end opening to
prevent the copper from oxidising during the ladling. The poling
generally takes about one hour, but varies somewhat according to the
quality of the poles, coal, and rough copper. When the poling is
complete, the copper is ladled out in iron ladles coated with a thin
wash of fire clay, and poured into ingot or cake moulds, according to
the form required. The refinery slag is passed on to the wasting
furnaces. If cake copper is to be made the cast iron moulds coated
with a thin wash of fire clay and thoroughly dry, are arranged at a
convenient distance from the furnace. Three or four men then provide
themselves with a ladle full of melted copper, and each pours the
contents of his ladle quickly after the other into the same mould, and
thus one cake is formed. They then put another quantity of copper
sufficient to form another cake and so on until all the moulds are full.
When sufficiently cool the sides of the moulds are removed, and the
cakes are taken out and separated from one another. The edges of
each cake are then slightly trimmed, and the cake is branded
“Wallaroo,” ready for shipment. The “ bean shot ” copper is made
by pouring the copper through a perforated iron plate and allowed to
fall into a tank of water. The weekly consumption of coal at these
works is 900 tons, of copper ore 1,000 tons, and the weekly production
of copper 140 tons.
(Signed) T. C. CLOUD,
Associate of the Royal School
of Mines.


&I6U
P/D7-97
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRAI IA
