





A CENTURY OF
VICTORIAN METHODISM


This bronze statue of John Wesley is the gift of Mr. Fred. J
Cato and his son, Mr. E. Alec Cato, to the Victorian
Methodist Church. It is erected in front of Wesley Church,
and is the work of Mr. Paul Montford.


A Century of
Victorian Methodism
Edited by
The Rev. C. IRVING BENSON
193.5
Spectator Publishing Co., Melbourne


First Edition , October, 1935 .
Registered at the G.P.0., Melbourne, for Transmission
through the Post as a Book.
Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia
by the Spectator Publishing Co. Pty. Ltd.,
134 a Little Collins Street, Melbourne, C.l.


106068
) 4. FEB. 1936
Others have rnadc
roads for us, we
maKe then} still for
others; Christ rnadc
a ro?\d to the stars
for us.
Inscription on a Roadside Stone
in Silesia.




FOREWORD.
“In every work regard the author’s end,
I Since none can compass more than they intend.”
This historical survey of the life and work of the
Methodist Church in the State of Victoria has been
undertaken at the request of the Centenary
Committee of the Conference. It has involved two
years of painstaking research into the literature,
documents and newspapers of the century. My
purpose has been to present a living picture of the
men, women and movements of the first hundred
years of Methodism in this State. The record is
one of which the Church may be humbly proud.
In compiling this history I have been constantly
guided by the works of earlier writers, particularly
the Rev. W. L. Blamires and the Rev. John B.
Smith in their “Early Story of the Wesleyan
Methodist Church in Victoria,” Rev. J. C. Symons’
“Life of D. J. Draper,” and Rev. Michael Clarke’s
“History of Primitive Methodism in Victoria and
Tasmania.” It will be seen, however, that I have
differed somewhat from their estimates of some of
the men and movements of their own period.
The Rev. Daniel Daley kindly supplied me with
valuable data relating to the Bible Christian Church,
and the Rev. F. C. Vian with information concerning
the Primitive Methodist Church. They are not,
however, responsible for the use I have made of
their brief notes.
I am greatly indebted to Mr. Joseph Hocking, b.a.,
Rev. C. C. Dugan, M.A., b.d., and Mr. Ambrose
Pratt, who have kindly revised the proofs and made
valuable suggestions. The index, which considerably
enhances the value of the book, is also the work of
Mr. Hocking.
It is a pleasure to acknowledge the gracious
co-operation of the Rev. H. G. Secomb, of the


Conference Office; Mr. Fleming Cooke, Mr. Colin
McCallum, and Mr. A. S. Kenyon, of the Melbourne
Public Library; and Miss Ida Leeson, of the Mitchell
Library, Sydney.
The book owes much to the able contributions of
the following gentlemen who accepted my invitation
to write special chapters:—Revs. A. Wesley Amos,
J. H. Cain, C. C. Dugan, m.a., b.d., J. W. Grove,
M.A., 11.b., J. C. Lawton, B. Nye, b.a., H. A. Overend,
b.a., T. C. Rentoul, and H. G. Secomb.
Thanks are also due to the ministers and laymen
who generously supplied notes concerning the various
Circuits. If the book could have been extended to a
thousand pages the full details of each church might
have been given.
The profits from the sale of this volume will be
devoted to the Centenary Thanksgiving Fund, of
which the Rev. Robert Williams is the organiser,
and by which it is hoped to create a trust fund of
£IOO,OOO to be used in the extension of the work of
the Church.
. 1 la 7 down my pen with gratitude to God for the
rich store of history chronicled in these pages, and
with the prayer that the historian of the future may
have even greater achievements to recount. On the
frontier of a new century the Methodist Church in
Victoria is in great heart and, if she makes worthy
use of her shining heritage, we may confidently hope
that “the best is yet to be.”
C. Irving Benson.
Wesley Church, Melbourne,
28th September, 1935.


CONTENTS.
Chapter Pa S e
I How Methodism Was Born . . . . . . 1
By C. Irving Benson.
II How Methodism Came to Australia . . . . 19
By C. Irving Benson.
111 Methodism Comes to Victoria . . . . 26
By C. C. Dugan.
IV The Story of Buntingdale . . . . . . 40
By C. Irving Benson.
V The Early Days . . . . . . • • 54
By C. Irving Benson.
VI Caroline Newcomb, Pioneer Squatter and
Class Leader . . .. . . . . 75
By C. Irving Benson.
VII The First Appointed Ministers Arrive . . 83
By C. Irving Benson.
VIII William Butters and the Roaring Fifties . . 90
By C. Irving Benson.
IX Walter Powell—An Early Methodist Merchant 107
By C. Irving Benson.
X Daniel Draper—A Master Builder . . . . 113
By C. Irving Benson.
XI From Collins Street to Wesley Church . . 122
By C. Irving Benson.
XII Revival and Challenge . . . . • • 129
By C. Irving Benson.
XIII The Romance and Realism of Circuit Life . . 139
By J. C. Lawton.


Chapter Page
XIV The Home Mission Enterprise . . . . 171
By T. C. Rentoul and J. H. Cain.
XV Victoria and the World Task . . . . 196
By A. Wesley Amos.
XVI The Church and Young People . . . . 243
By John W. Grove.
XVII The Church and Education . . . . . . 259
By H. A. Overend.
XVIII The Church and the Community . . . . 280
By H. A. Overend.
XIX How Five Churches Became One . . . . 289
By C. Irving Benson.
XX Some Men and Women of the Century . . 313
By C. Irving Benson.
XXI The Local Preachers . . . . . . . . 344
By C. Irving Benson.
XXII The Church in Time of War . . . . 353
By E. Nye.
XXIII A Sheaf of Stories . . . . . . , . 352
By C. Irving Benson.
XXIV The Gospel in Ink . . . . . . . 337
By C. Irving Benson.
APPENDIX.
I Notes on the Circuits . . . . . . 403
Compiled by J. C. Lawton.
II The Church Building Fund . . . . . 490
111 The Book Depot . . . . . . # 499
IV Church Government . . . . . . , 501
By H. G. Secomb.
V Statistics 504
VI In Memoriam , . . , . . . . t 505
Ind ex


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Pct§"6
TYESLEY STATUE - - - Frontispiece
CHARLES STONE 32
FRANCIS TUCKPIELD 32
FIRST CHURCH, 1839 32
HENRY REED ------ 33
JOSEPH ORTON ----- 33
WILLIAM WITTON ----- 33
GEORGE LILLEY ----- 33
FIRST PREACHERS’ PLAN 96
SAMUEL WILKINSON 97
EDWARD SWEETMAN - - - 97
COLLINS STREET CHURCH, 1840 - - 97
WESLEY CHURH, 1858-1935 - - - 112
WILLIAM BUTTERS - - - - 113
D. J. DRAPER ------ 113
WALTER POWELL ----- 113
“CALIFORNIA” TAYLOR - - - - 113
J. C. SYMONS 192
J. WATSFORD - 192
JOSEPH DARE 192
J. S. WAUGH 192
“JIMMY” JEFFREY - - - - 193
SAMUEL KNIGHT 193
HENRY BATH - - - - - -193
ALEX. FRASER - - - - - 193
A MOTHER OP CHURCHES - - - 208
E. S. BICKFORD ----- 209
A. T. HOLDEN 209
A. McCALLUM 209
FRED. J. CATO 209
WESLEY COLLEGE 272
QUEEN S COLLEGE ----- 273
METHODIST LADIES’ COLLEGE - - 288
EPWORTH HOSPITAL - - - - 289
PRINCESS MARY CLUB - - - - 304
GEORGE SWEET 305
CLEMENT LINLEY 305
JOSEPH TOWNEND 305
J. TEAGUE 305
LORIMER PISON 305
FREDERICK LANGHAM - - - - 320
W. E. BROMILOW 320
BENJAMIN DANKS 320
W. H. PITCHETT 321
E. H. SUGDEN 321
AARON DANKS ----- 321
A. R. EDGAR 321




CHAPTER I.
HOW METHODISM WAS BORN.
At the head of this cavalcade of Victorian
Methodism rides a mystic horseman. It is his living
spirit and the essential witness born of his creative
experience of God which has been the urge of the
exploits chronicled in these pages. And so the
stirring story we are about to unfold had its
beginning long before the history of this southern
outpost of the Empire began.
Twelve thousand miles away, amid the green fens
of Lincolnshire, enfolded in pastoral peacefulness,
is the township of Epworth. Whoever could have
guessed that in that sleepy, secluded market town
God was preparing His man to change England,
and give a new religious impulse to the world?
John, Also Called Benjamin.
The Rev. Samuel Wesley became rector of that
remote, boorish parish at the beginning of the year
1697, and laboured there for forty long years. In the
old thatched rectory, more farmhouse than rectory,
John Benjamin Wesley was born on 17th June, 1703
—fifteenth in the succession of nineteen children.
The dominant personality in the Epworth rectory,
however, w T as not the rector, but his wife, Susanna,
who mothered nineteen children, and became also, as
Southey said, “the Mother of Methodism.” She must
have been a hero soul to toil on amid poverty, dogged
by debt, bearing “one child at least per annum/’
and yet finding time to teach her brood, order her
household with queenly majesty, and hold regular
classes for the rough parishioners.
Mrs. Wesley lived by rule. Method and good
government saved time, and garrisoned her against


the twin demons of hurry and worry. The home
discipline was firm, but not rigorous; strength,
guided by kindness, ruled the household. True, there
was no enervating strain of indulgence, yet there
was love of deathless quality. John Wesley’s
affection for his mother had a lover’s glow in it.
In that quiet rectory she moulded the characters
of her distinguished sons, who gave to the world a
new religious impulse which crossed the seven seas
and reached to the farthest shores.
A Brand Plucked from the Burning.
On a February night in 1709, when John was
five and a half years old, the rectory was burned.
A mass of thatch, timber and plaster, it blazed
furiously, and in the confused hurry to escape John
was somehow forgotten, asleep in the attic. He was
awakened by the roaring of the fire running along
the rafters above his head. With quick presence of
mind he dragged a chest to the window, climbed on
it, and showed himself to the people below. At that
very moment the rector, in an agony of despair, was
commending the child’s soul to God. Two brave
fellows, who saw the boy at the window, saved him
just before the flaming roof crashed in upon his
bed. John Wesley never forgot that night of terror,
and continually referred to himself as “a brand
plucked from the burning.” Susanna regarded his
rescue as a providential indication that he was
destined for some great work. “I do intend,” she
wrote, “to be particularly careful of the soul of this
child, that Thou hast so mercifully provided for. ’ ’
When he was eleven years old he left the rectory
rooftree, and rode behind his father the long road to
London. There he was entered as a scholar at
Charterhouse—that school redolent with memories of
Addison, Steele, and Thackeray.
In June, 1720, John went up to Christ Church.
Oxford, as an exhibitioner from Charterhouse. In
that ancient seat of learning, the first University of


Europe, he continued his classical studies, and
acquired such a reputation as a scholar that when
only twenty-three he w r as given a place on the faculty
of the college. As undergraduate, post-graduate,
and member of the faculty, Wesley was at Oxford,
save for two leaves of absence, for fifteen years. His
University career was one continued triumph. Dr.
Alexander Whyte says that “John Wesley was one
of the best, if not the very best, scholars of his day.”*
He remained at Christ Church until his ordination
as deacon at the hands of Bishop Potter in 1725.
Then in March, 1726, when he was yet twenty-
three years of age, Wesley was elected Fellow of
Lincoln College—a distinction he was proud to claim
all his life. Do the Methodists of this generation
realise the meaning of the familiar phrase on the title
page of their Hymn * Book, ‘ ‘ Sometime Fellow of
Lincoln College”? It means that at a critical moment
—a moment of family financial peril, w T hen his
father was almost in despair—there came to John
Wesley the distinguished honour and the income of
a Fellowship in a great Oxford college. The joy of
the Epworth rector, himself a devoted son of Oxford,
knew no bounds: “Whatever I am, my Jack is Fellow
of Lincoln!”
The Oxford Methodists.
While Epworth was the cradle of Methodism, it
was at Oxford that it received the strong impress of
intellectual culture. The year 1729 witnessed a
crisis in the life of Wesley. The Holy Club sprang
into existence, holding its meetings within the vine-
covered walls of Lincoln College. Charles Wesley,
strictly speaking, was its founder, while John was
away serving as his father’s curate at Wroote, some
five miles from Epworth. t On his return he was
glad to find a group meeting to read the New
♦Alexander Whyte. Thirteen Appreciations, page 363.
tDuring this curacy he was ordained priest by Bishop Potter
(22nd September, 1728).


Testament and engaged in such Christian service as
clothing and training children and visiting the poor
and the prisoners in the Oxford gaol. John joined
this group, and quickly became the soul of it. They
were mercilessly pilloried by the Oxford of their
day for daring to be different. “Methodists” was
the mildest of the nicknames applied to them, and
this sprang from the methodical manner in which
they regulated their study and religious observance,
including the practice of weekly communion.
Samuel Wesley died in April, 1735, but his swan-
song was a prophecy. To John he said: “The inward
witness, son, the inward witness, that is the proof,
the strongest proof of Christianity”; to Charles he
said: “Be steady. The Christian faith will surely
revive in this Kingdom; you shall see it, though I
shall not.”
Successful and crowded with achievement as were
those Oxford years, punctilious as he was in religious
observance, John Wesley w 7 as unsatisfied —there was
a sob in his soul —he was passionately and persistently
seeking a deeper spiritual experience.
The question inevitably arises as to why this shining
scholar, this genial wit, who could have chosen the
company of the great and lived a life of congenial
academic study, threw away an honoured position in
a great college to serve a rough, overseas colony.
It was the hunger in his heart which prompted him
to sacrifice the settled, studious life at Oxford for
the rigours of pioneer missionary work in Georgia.
“My chief motive,” he said, “is to save my own
soul. . . I hope to learn the true sense of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ by preaching it to the
heathen.”
Two Years in Georgia .
Georgia was then a primitive colony with
conditions such as are portrayed in Thackeray’s
“Henry Esmond.” While Wesley did some good
work in Savannah, it was an unhappy experiment.


He was a rigid High Churchman, living in ascetic
discipline, unyielding in his insistence on points
of primitive usage, introducing the confessional
and penance and refusing the sacraments and
Christian burial to nonconformists. “We are
Protestants,” the young priest was plainly told by
one of the disgusted colonists, “but as for you, we
cannot tell what religion you are of.”
But there were other forces at work in the heart
of this unhappy little man. The Georgia experience
was not all loss. On his voyage thither he met the
Moravians, and was greatly impressed by their
spiritual serenity. While the Atlantic storms shook
the shivering little ship, and he quaked with fear,
they, quite unalarmed, sang hymns of praise.
In the young colony he quickly sought their
company. Spangenberg asked him, “Do you know
Jesus Christ?” “I know He is the Saviour of the
world.” “True, but do you know that He has
saved you?” “I hope He has died to save me.”
Spangenberg then asked, “Do you know, yourself?”
Wesley answered, “I do,” but in telling the story
of this conversation, he says, “I fear they were
vain words.”
He returned to England in 1738, still with a
gnawing hunger in his heart, and sought further
fellowship with the Moravians, who alone seemed to
understand his spiritual condition. He met Peter
Bohler, just landed from Germany, who bade him
“Preach faith till you have it, and then because
you have it you will preach faith.”
The Red Letter Day.
And so we come to the day of crisis, the red-letter
day in the calendar of his soul and the creative day
in Methodist history—24th May, 1738. Wesley
began the day very early, as was his habit. The
morning light of five o’clock fell on his opened
Greek New Testament. “I continued in this way


to seek my salvation (though with strange indiffer-
ence, dullness, and coldness, and with frequent
relapses into sin) till Wednesday, 24th May. I
think it was about five this morning that I opened
my Testament at these words: 'There are given unto
us exceeding great and precious promises, even that
ye should be partakers of the Divine nature. 7 Just
as I went out, I opened it again on these words:
'Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. 7 In
the afternoon I asked to go to St. Paul 7 s. The
anthem was, 'Out of the deep have I called unto
Thee, 0 Lord; Lord, hear my voice. 7 77
In the evening a small company were gathered
together in Aldersgate Street. Sitting with them
there in the soft candlelight was a slight little man
in the habit of an Anglican clergyman, with finely
chiselled face not unlike the countenance of John
Milton. One stood up to read from a book, Luther's
Preface to The Epistle to the Romans.* Up to this
point it is all commonplace—just a gathering of
eighteenth century folk in a bare room; but suddenly
something happened which turned prose into poetry,
and changed the course of the history of the world.
The episode has become an epoch. Wesley has left
us all the luminous details—the exact time —when as
he mused the fire kindled. Here is the golden
passage from his Journal. It is the Methodist Deed
of Declaration, and w T e cannot enter into the secret
of the mighty heart of the tireless rider until we
have heard the sweet strains of its music: "In the
evening I went, very unwillingly, to a society in
Aldersgate Street, where one was reading Luther's
Preface to the Epistle to the Romans. About a
quarter before nine, while Luther was describing the
change which God works in the heart through faith
in Christ, I felt my heart strangely warmed. I felt
I did, at that moment, trust in Christ, and in Christ
alone, for my salvation. And an assurance was
given me on the spot that He had taken away my
*Ree Paul: Luther; Wesley, by Thomas F. Loekyer. pages 256. 331.


sins, even mine, and had thus saved me from the
law of sin and death.”
“It is scarcely an exaggeration to say,” writes
Lecky in his ‘ ‘ History of England in the Eighteenth
Century,” “that the scene which took place in that
humble meeting in Aldersgate Street forms an epoch
in English history. The conviction which then
flashed upon one of the most powerful and active
intellects in England is the true source of English
Methodism. ’ ’
He Begins to Testify.
Before he left the room, he did something which
it is important to notice: “I then testified openly to
all there what I now first felt in my heart” and he
continued so to testify to the end of his days. He
testified to his fellow-travellers in coaches, to his
fellow guests at inns; in churchyards, gaols, horse-
fairs, mining pits, at street corners and in the
open fields —anywhere and everywhere he shared
with ail sorts and conditions of men and women his
experience of the grace of God in Jesus Christ.
Towards ten that evening a troop of friends went
with Wesley from the society meeting-room to Charles
Wesley’s lodging in Little Britain, near by. Wesley
there declared, “I believe,” and all joined in singing
a hymn, the lyric beginning —
Where shall my wondering soul begin?
How shall I all to heaven aspire ?^
A slave redeemed from death and sin,
A brand plucked from eternal fire,
How shall I equal triumphs raise,
Or sing my great Deliverer’s praise?
Charles Wesley had composed this hymn on the
previous day, to commemorate his own spiritual
change.
No sooner were the Wesleys inflamed and irradiated
with God’s love, than they wanted to tell everybody
about it. The news was too vital to be kept secret.


They needed to communicate it to those who were
seeking religion, and to those, also, who were not.
With a warmed heart there came the enlarging
love of God, which bred in him a vast compassion
for the souls of men. His eyes were opened to the
millions who were without God and without hope
in the world. Wesley plunged into his evangelistic
offensive with accelerating energy for more than fifty
years. This work w r as the practical test of his
Aldersgate Street experience and its complete
vindication.
Lest the Methodist historian should be accused of
painting the moral and spiritual condition of England
in the eighteenth century too black, it may be well
to let others speak. 1 ‘ The Cambridge Modern
History”* says that “the earlier half of the
eighteenth century in England is an age of
materialism, a period of dim ideals, of expiring
hopes; before the middle of the century its character
was transformed; there appeared a movement
headed by a mighty leader, who brought forth water
from the rocks to make a barren land live again.”
Rousing the Soul of England.
The religious state of the country may be judged
from the fact that many bishops never visited their
dioceses, and that there were numerous parishes
without a resident clergyman. Under such shepherds
the hungry sheep looked up and were not fed.
Christianity, even in its outward forms, was extinct
in many places. At Haworth, where Charlotte and
Emily Bronte lived in after years, “the dead were
buried with drunken orgies but with no burial
services.” The Church had little or no desire for
the salvation of the masses. Edmund Gibson, Bishop
of London, considered that Whitefield had taken a
dreadful step in “inviting the rabble to hear him.”
Wesley set out on a crusade to rouse the soul of
England from its slumber of death. The most
♦H. W. V. Temperley, Vol. 6, page 76.


neglected and despised classes of the nation felt that
God had sent them a messenger of God’s grace.
Principal Grant Robinson* declares that “Wesley
swept the dead air with an irresistible cleansing
ozone. To thousands of men and women his preaching
and Gospel revealed a new heaven and a new earth;
it brought religion into soulless lives, and reconsti-
tuted it as a comforter, an inspiration and a judge.
No one was too poor, too humble, too degraded to be
born again. . . Aloof alike from politics and the
speculation of the schools, Wesley wrestled with the
evils of his day, and proclaimed the infinite power
of a Christian faith based on personal conviction,
eternally renewed from within, to battle with sin,
misery, and vice in all its forms.”
Open-air Preaching .
The date next in importance to that of 24th
May, 1738, in Methodist history is 2nd April, 1739.
When Churches had been closed against him, and his
brother ministers esteemed him too vile to preach
from their pulpits, Wesley “submitted to be more
vile, and proclaimed in the highways the glad tidings
of salvation, speaking from a little eminence in a
ground adjoining the city (of Bristol) to about three
thousand people.” On the previous day he had seen
his friend Whitefield preaching in the open air. “I
could scarcely reconcile myself at first,” he said, “to
this strange way of preaching in the fields, of which
he set me an example on Sunday, having been all
my life (till very lately) so tenacious of every point
relating to decency and order, that I should have
thought the saving of souls almost a sin if it had not
been done in a church.”
He recruited lay helpers, but at first did not
allow them to preach. When at Bristol he heard
that Maxfield, his earliest helper, whom he had left
in London, was preaching, he took horse and rode
in haste to London to suppress this scandal.
’Oman’s History of England, Vol. 6, “England Under the
Hanoverians.”


His wise mother, however, read the signs of the
times with a profounder sagacity than her learned
son. “Take care what you do with that young man,”
she said; “he is as surely called of God to preach
as you are,” and she counselled him to hear and
judge for himself. “It is the Lord. Let Him do
what seemeth Him good,” the staunch churchman
remarked, and another of his old prejudices was
swept away. He at once recognised Maxfield as a
son in the Gospel. Thus began that great army of
lay helpers who have done so much to give Methodism
to the world.
The Class Meeting .
At Bristol a preaching room was built. Wesley
laid the foundation stone of this, the first Methodist
Chapel, on 12th May, 1739. In order to defray the
cost of it, Captain Fry, one of the leaders, suggested
that each member should contribute a penny a week.
When he was told that some were too poor to afford
even this, he replied: ‘ ‘ Then, put eleven of the
poorest with me, and if they can give anything, well;
I will call on them weekly; and if they can give
nothing, I will give for them as well as for myself.
And each of you call on eleven of your neighbours
weekly; receive what they give, and make up what
is wanting.” “It was done,” writes Wesley; “and
in a while, some of these informed me, they found
such and such an one did not live as he ought. It
struck me immediately, ‘This is the thing, the very
thing, we have wanted so long. 7 77
Wesley at once perceived the germ of an organisa-
tion for spiritual oversight, and so the class-meeting
came into being. Within six months he introduced
the same plan in London. The “society tickets 77 of
membership were now first issued. Constant care
was taken to remove unworthy members, and this
acted as a valuable check on the rapidly growing
societies.


Travelling preachers and lay helpers quickly
multiplied, and chapels were, in course of time,
erected in the chief centres of population.
He Gave Men God .
He became the great itinerant, riding tirelessly
from town to town, village to village, over roads
dangerous and to all appearance impassable, to
preach his message. Everywhere he w T ent men and
women were converted to God, and he gathered his
converts into societies for fellowship and service.
The success which attended his crusade is not
surprising, for there is something in the soul of man
which responds to reality. There is a hunger for
God in every heart, but the many do not know how
to find Him. The discovery of the love of God was
the motif of all Wesley’s preaching. He gave men
God.
Charles Wesley’s genius as a hymn-writer was an
immense help in the crusade —his hymns were sung
by the miners of Kingswood, the labourers of Lincoln-
shire, and through the length and breadth of the
land “Charles Wesley came to add sweetness to this
sudden and startling light. . . His hymns expressed
the fiery conviction of its converts in lines so chaste
and beautiful that its more extravagant features
disappeared. . . A new musical impulse was
aroused in the people.
The Methodists were happy folk. They sang at
meeting, on the way to meeting, on the way home
from meeting, at home, at work, at leisure.
No man ever worked harder than John Wesley. He
valued time as most people value money. Every
morning for fifty years he was up at four o’clock;
every year in the prime of his life he rode eight
thousand miles; for years he preached on an
average sixteen times a week —that is, over eight
hundred sermons a year. He kept a Journal for
more than half a century, and there is no more human
♦John Richard Green. “Short History of the English People.”


document in English literature. Indeed, it is the
most complete, as it is the best, autobiography in the
language.
He rode on his horse through England, a distance
of a quarter of a million miles, as if a man should
ride ten times round the world. The truest vision
of him one can see is as the man on horseback, the
reins loose, the saddlebags full of books, the little
man reading or writing, but always marching on
from town to town and village to village, to conquest
and to victory.
A Great Compassion,
He was incandescent with the love of souls. Open
his Journal anywhere, and passages such as this
meet the eye; “I had a great desire to visit a little
village called Plessey, about ten measured miles
north of Newcastle. It is inhabited by colliers only,
and such as had been always in the first rank for
savage ignorance and wickedness of every kind.
Their grand assembly used to be on the Lord's Day;
on which men, women and children met together to
dance, fight, curse and swear, and play at chuck
ball, span farthing, or whatever came next to hand.
I felt great compassion for these poor creatures from
the time I heard of them first; the more because all
men seemed to despair of them. . . The poor
sinners were quickly gathered together, and gave
earnest heed to the things which were spoken. And
so they did in the afternoon again, in spite of the
wind and snow, when I besought them to receive
Him for their King, to 'repent and believe the
Gospel. ’ On Easter Monday and Tuesday I preached
there again, the congregation continually increasing.
And as most of them had never in their lives
pretended to any religion of any kind, they were the
more ready to cry to God as mere sinners for the
free redemption which is in Jesus."
He scoured the whole country from Cornwall to
Northumberland, and from Norfolk to West Wales,


sowing beside all waters in all weathers, undeterred
by summer heat or winter storms.
With the genius of a military strategist he estab-
lished three main bases for his operations —London,
Bristol, and Newcastle. He made twenty tours
through Scotland, and forty-two times he crossed the
Irish Sea, usually taking Wales on his way to and
from Ireland.
He was frequently in danger of being killed by
the mobs incensed against him; he was stoned and
beaten until the blood ran from his wounds, but he
was never afraid, and many who came to curse
remained to pray.
Whitefield was a more eloquent preacher, but much
of his work was ineffective because it was not
conserved. Leslie Stephen says of Wesley that he
was “the greatest captain of men of his century,”
and Macaulay holds that he had ‘ 1 a genius for
government not inferior to that of Richelieu. ”
“John Wesley’s place in history,” writes President
Wilson, “is the place of the evangelist who is also
a master of affairs.”
A Life’s Work for England .
“No other man did such a life’s w r ork for
England,” says Augustine Birrell. “No man lived
nearer the centre than John Wesley, neither Clive
nor Pitt, neither Mansfield nor Johnson. You
cannot cut him out of our national life. No single
figure influenced so many minds, no single voice
touched so many hearts. No other man did such a
life’s work for England.”*
He saved England by saving the souls of
Englishmen. For what are nations without men?
And what are men without that spirit which Wesley
planted in the cities and hamlets of the land ?
Without the seed John Wesley sowed, men and
nations perish like weeds.
page 12.


In the famous dictum of John Richard Green:
“The Methodists themselves were the least result of
the Methodist revival. ”
The leaven of Wesley’s spirit affected the whole
nation. The Church became more earnest, merchants
and shopkeepers more honest. Politics became more
serious as a new sense of the value of the individual
soul exposed the terrible conditions of social life.
The fox-hunting and port-drinking parson became
something of a scandal. The priest who made fun
of the Methodists became more careful about his own
sermons. A corrupt magistrate learned to fear a
new thing in life —the social conscience of England.
The political consequences of the movement were
important. In every sphere of human activity there
was now an authority greater than the law of the
land —the law of conscience, the moral law, the law
of God.
Of Wesley and his band of itinerant preachers,
“The Cambridge History of England” declares:
“They effected a transformation at once so sudden
in its appearance, so far-reaching in its effect, that
what would have been a marvel in any age appears
a miracle in this.”*
They played no small part in saving England
from the horrors of the revolution which fell upon
France ere the end of the century.
Social Christianity,
Wesley is not open to the charge of caring only for
the souls of men, and having no thought for their
bodies. True, he laid a tremendous emphasis
on a change of heart, and was supremely inter-
ested in the drama of the individual soul. But he
was far from being a religious individualist. Wesley
was too close to the heart of the Christian faith to
be other than a social Christian. He loved little
children, and he maintained a large orphan house.
He was deeply concerned about the welfare of the
*Vol. pagre .


poor, and branded the objection that “they are poor
because they are idle 5 ’ as wickedly, devilishly false.
He was active in providing work for the unemployed.
This great scholar was not above collecting cast-off
clothing. He insisted that all his followers should
contribute weekly for the poor and sick. During his
lifetime he gave away £35,000 in charity—earned for
the most part by his ever-active pen. His personal
charities were exemplary. “Money never stays with
me; it would burn if it did. I throw it out of my
hands as soon as possible, lest it should find a way
into my heart. ”
He established a Loan Society, a Labour Bureau,
and a Strangers’ Friend Society, which distributed
money to the needy of all Churches, and of no Church
at all. He protested against war, against the liquor
traffic and the slave trade; his last letter was written
to Wilberforce urging him on in his “glorious enter-
prise” against “that execrable villainy, which is the
scandal of England, of religion, and of human
nature. ’ ’
Methodism was a great movement of compassion
towards the masses. The impulse of philanthropy
in the eighteenth century came from Methodism.
Wesley’s World Parish,
This great little man rode on, and so mightily grew
the Word of God and prevailed that his journeys
soon became like a royal progress. The people who
had mobbed him crowded the streets to bless him
as he passed. There was no other man so well known
throughout the length and breadth of the land as
John Wesley. His portrait was painted more times
than any other man of his century. In his wonderful
and vigorous old age he had won a place quite his
own in the respect and affection of the whole nation.
He became the best-known man in the kingdom. But
he realised that his discovery of God and his message
of salvation was for the world. “I look upon the
whole world as my parish,” he said vividly. He


saw the great needs of America, and in 1784
consecrated Thomas Coke as Bishop of that continent.
It was not his will to found a Church. He was
driven out of the Church, yet in 1789 he wrote: “I
declare once more that I live and die a member of
the Church of England; and that none who regard
my judgment or advice will separate from it.”*
But he had to provide for the administration of the
sacraments to his converts who w T ere turned away
from the Lord’s table in the Anglican churches. The
sacraments, he held, could only be administered by
duly ordained ministers. “I firmly believe,” he
wrote to his brother, ‘‘l am a Scriptural episcopos
as much as any man in England or Europe, for the
uninterrupted succession I know to be a fable which
no man ever did or can prove.”
To the very end he tried to believe that he was a
loyal churchman, though he certainly was not so
regarded by the Bishops and clergy. Loyal, he was,
in theory; practically he was a great Nonconformist.
Whatever Church prejudice had to give way, if souls
were to be saved, give way it must and should, and
thus he went on his way, casting aside one regula-
tion or custom after another, until at last he had
become, unwittingly, the founder, under God, of an
evangelical Church.
He must needs ordain ministers for the great
multitudes God had given to his charge. And so, in
the providence of God, Methodism became a Church,
and the shining seal of God is there for all to see.
The dynamic of Methodism, the secret of all the
good it has done on the earth, is John Wesley’s
message of the great change which is open to all men
and which all men need —a present, conscious salva-
tion, to be ripened by teaching, discipline and service
unto a full salvation, a perfect love of God and man.
From that evening, when about a quarter before
nine, his heart was strangely warmed, the fires in
* Further Thoughts on Separation from the Church,” Works
Vol. IS.


Wesley's heart never died down. On the 22nd of
February, 1791, he preached his last sermon in City
Road Chapel, and the next day his last sermon on
earth. The following Sunday he quoted with cheer-
fulness his brother's hymn :
44 Till glad I lay this body down,
Thy servant, Lord, attend;
And 0, my life of mercy crown
With a triumphant end!”
And he repeated over and over again the lines:
“I the chief of sinners am,
But Jesus died for me.”
Two days later the happy old man sang with fervour:
“I’ll praise my Maker while I've breath,
And when my voice is lost in death,
Praise shall employ my nobler powers;
My days of praise shall ne'er be past,
WTiile life, and thought, and being last,
Or immortality endures.”
Twice he repeated the words, 44 The best of all is, God
is with us,” and with the words, 44 Farewell! Fare-
well!” upon his lips, his spirit passed into the
Unseen, In accordance with his will, six poor men
bore him to his grave behind the City Road Chapel.
Times Acid Test.
On another March day, eighty-five years later,
Dean Stanley unveiled a tablet to the Wesleys in
Westminster Abbey—that 4 4 temple of silence and
reconciliation.” And so their memory is hallowed
and their work honoured there in that grey old
shrine of the Empire—the Empire which they helped
to build.
A day came when the Prime Minister* of Great
Britain made reverent pilgrimage to John Wesley’s
tomb, and said: 44 Wesley undoubtedly the
greatest religious leader the Anglo-Saxon race ever
produced, and the movement of which he was leader
♦Lloyd George in 1923.


18 A CENTURY OF VICTORIAN METHODISM.
was the greatest religious movement of the past two
hundred and fifty years at least. . . The Methodist
movement gave a new spiritual life to England. . •
There was a complete revolution worked in the
country, and its influence is felt to this hour. That
Divine influence which came from this prophet ot
Methodism has created an effect, an epoch, that at
the present moment is still found undiminished in its
vigour.” , , ~
Time tests all things, and time has approved the
work of John Wesley. What gales of change have
swept the world since those six poor men carried
Wesley to his grave! Dynasties have fallen, empires
have perished, but his discovery of God in Jesus
Christ, his grasp of reality has been taken to the
uttermost parts of the earth, and there is not a lan
under heaven where his followers are not spreading
his message. For every follower he had in England
when he died there is, somewhere in the world to-day,
a church. Up and down the world there are more
than 40,000,000 Christians who rejoice in the once
despised name of Methodist, and constitute together
the largest of all Protestant communions.
“What God hath wrought!”


CHAPTER 11.
HOW METHODISM CAME TO AUSTRALIA.
It was a point of the Victorian coastline on which
Captain Cook first feasted his eager eyes as he wrote
in his log aboard the “Endeavour” on 19th April,
1770: ‘‘The southermost point of land we had in
sight. . . I have named it Point Hicks, because
Lieutenant Hicks was the first who discover'd this
land." On that April day John Wesley was paying
his twelfth visit to Glasgow ‘ ‘ with much satisfaction. ''
Methodism came to Australia in this wise: In
1794, at the instance of William Wilberforce, the
Rev. Samuel Marsden was appointed second chaplain
to the settlement in New South Wales. This “little,
merry, bustling clergyman" was the son of a
Methodist family living at Horsforth, near Leeds.
Before Marsden left England he had evidently been
acquainted wdth Joseph Butterworth, a member of
the House of Commons, a class leader and treasurer
of the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society. The
chaplain wrote seeking his guidance on the appoint-
ment of school masters of good character, to teach
the convicts' children. On Joseph Butterworth's
recommendation Thomas Bowden, a Methodist class
leader and master of the Charity School of Great
Queen Street, London, was sent out, and landed in
Sydney in January, 1812. On 6th March, along with
another schoolmaster, John Hosking,* he held the
first Class Meeting, and from that germ cell the
Church in Australia has grown.
A Cry from Sydney.
Six months after his arrival Bowden reported three
classes meeting regularly—two in Sydney and one
in Windsor. In 1814 Bowden and Hosking wrote to
* Master of the Orphan School for Girls.


the Conference entreating the appointment of a
minister. Their appeal reads like a cry from
Macedonia: —
“By the good providence of our God, we have been
brought under various circumstances from our native
land, to this very distant country, and here, in all proba-
bility, most of us who now address you will be called to
finish our earthly course.
“In the land which gave us birth, we enjoyed the
privileges of the glorious Gospel, and in our union with
the Methodists we had access to those blessed means of
grace which are the glory of that people. Here, we may
truly say, The people sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death . . .’ We feel for ourselves as situated amongst
them. We feel for our children. ... To our God we make
our complaint, and look for help; and under Him, Fathers,
to you, as the instruments of bringing us from darkness
to His marvellous light. . . .
“We have formed two Classes in Sydney, and one at
Windsor. Our members now are nineteen in Class, besides
occasional attendants, and by God’s blessing we look for
an increase. At first there was only one family. There
are numbers who, from some remains of former impres-
sions, and many other causes, would join us heartily if we
were a settled people, and had a pious, upright man
among us to preach to, and watch over us. . . . Send
among us one of yourselves, and we, and a seed of the
Lord, shall rise to bless you.”
The Coming of Samuel Leigh .
Samuel Leigh, a young probationer, had been
designated for Montreal, but it was deemed inexpe-
dient to send him to Canada while Britain was at
war with America, and he was therefore appointed to
New South AVales. Dr. Adam Clarke ordained him
in 1814, and he landed at Port Jackson on 10th
August, 1815. His ship, the “Hebe,” brought the
exciting news of Napoleon’s escape from Elba, and
his triumphant entry into Paris.
Leigh’s first night in the new land was spent at
the home of Edward Eager* in O’Connell Street, but
♦An Irishman educated for the bar transported for forgery.
In his Irish prison he had been converted through Methodist
visitation. His exemplary conduct won for him release, and his
abilities quickly gained for him an honourable place in the
community. He became the first Circuit steward in Australia.


he slept scarcely at all—strange and lonely, he passed
the hours of darkness in prayer and communion.
The next morning he waited upon Governor
Macquarie, who frankly expressed his regret that he
had come as a Wesleyan missionary, and suggested
that he should accept a position as a schoolmaster
under the Government. Leigh could not be persuaded
by dangling prospects of comfort or money before
his mind, and he proceeded to explain the purpose of
his mission, and the methods he proposed to pursue.
The Governor was impressed by his sincerity, and
after hearing his statement said: ‘ 4 l believe your
intentions are good, and therefore you may expect
from me every encouragement. I wish you the same
success in your Mission as you wish for yourself. 77
The Chaplain—Samuel Marsden —had not dis-
owned his Methodist upbringing, and welcomed Leigh
as a fellow-worker. They worked side by side, and
became staunch friends. Leigh began services in
Sydney in “a preaching room’ 7 —a rented house, the
partitions having been removed to accommodate a
congregation.
The First Chapel.
The first Methodist Chapel in Australia was built
by John Lees, who had come out as a soldier with the
New South Wales Corps, and on his retirement
received a grant of land at Castlereagh. On one of
his pioneer journeys Leigh came to the lonely home-
stead at nightfall, just as the family were assembled
for worship. “Perhaps you will take this duty off
my hands, 7 7 said Lees by way of greeting the
missionary. Opening the Bible, he turned to the
thirty-fifth chapter of Isaiah, and read, with
uncontrollable emotion: “The wilderness and the
solitary place shall be glad for them. 77 As they rose
from their knees Lees grasped his hand and said:
“We have been praying for three years that God
would send us a missionary; now that you are come


we are right glad to see you. We had not heard of
your arrival in the colony/ 7
John Lees built the chapel at Castlereagh—a plain,
solid, weatherboard structure, and endowed it with
an acre of land, the annual produce of which he
contributed to the funds. On the door of this
primitive chapel were the words, ‘ ‘ Methodist
Chapel/ 7 and beneath them, “Prepare to meet thy
God. 77 It w r as opened by Leigh on 7th October,
1817.
Another liberal-hearted soldier, Sergeant James
Scott, built the first Sydney Chapel in his garden
in Princes Street. He met the entire cost of erection,
amounting to five hundred guineas. That was in
1819.
Leigh formed a Circuit extending over 150 miles,
with fifteen preaching places, which he compassed
every ten days on horseback.
On Ist May, 1818, Leigh was joined by Walter
Lawry, an ardent Cornishman, twenty-five years of
age. Among the letters of introduction wdiich Lawry
brought was one from Charles Lamb. These two
young men had all Australia for their parish! But
they were not satisfied. The coming of Law r ry gave
Leigh the coveted opportunity to visit New r Zealand,
where Marsden had inaugurated a mission to the
Maoris. But Leigh was burning himself out with
his apostolic labours. He never learned to husband
his strength, and, utterly spent, had to return to
England in 1820. A man of simple heroism, sublime
faith, utterly selfless, he gave all of himself always,
everywhere. When the Governor, who esteemed him
highly, offered him land, he explained courteously
that he could only accept land for chapel sites. He
was assured that he would always be welcome to
such grants. At a muster where the colonists were
required to give a list of their property, the Governor
again chided him. “Mr. Leigh, 77 he said, “have you
nothing to return but your old horse? 77


Leigh’s passionate pleading in England led to the
appointment of Ralph Mansfield and George Erskine
to Sydney, Benjamin Carvosso to Van Diemen’s
Land, Leigh himself to New Zealand, and Walter
Lawry to the Friendly Islands.
First Service in Tasmania.
On the voyage to Sydney in 1820, Benjamin
Carvosso spent four precious April days at Hobart.
There he held the first Methodist service on the steps
of the Court House. The service was announced by
the town-crier, and a motley crowd gathered.
Carvosso preached from the clarion call, “Awake
thou that sleepest, arise from the dead and Christ
shall give thee light.” His wife, who had a good
voice, stood beside him and led the singing. That
same day he was granted permission to preach to
the prisoners, and took for his theme the match-
less parable of the Prodigal Son. There was a famine
for the Word of God, and the people were reluctant
to let him go. Although Carvosso was designated
for Hobart, he was detained for service in Sydney.
A few months after Carvosso’s visit Benjamin
Nokes went round Hobart Town inviting such
Methodist-minded people as he could find to meet with
him. Eight persons gathered in that first class
meeting in Collins Street, Hobart, on 29th October,
1820. One of the number was Corporal George
Waddy, who had come with his regiment from
Sydney. In 1821 services were held in Charles
Bonn’s carpenter’s shop, which came to be known
as the Argyle Street Chapel. The foundation stone
of the Melville Street Chapel was laid in 1822.
Samuel Leigh, returning from furlough in England
to take up his mission to the Maoris, put in at Hobart
Town on Bth August, 1821. He had now been
appointed General Superintendent of Missions in the
South Seas. Exercising the authority of this office,
he decided to detach William Horton to work in
Tasmania during his two years’ ministry. This


pioneer preacher well and truly laid the foundations
of Methodism in the garden island. In his second
year he had the assistance of Nathaniel Turner, who
called at Hobart en route to New Zealand, but was
forbidden to proceed while the fierce tribal wars
were raging among the Maoris. A horse was
procured from Sydney, and preaching places were
prospected in the country, so that a widespread
Circuit came into being. Turner gave himself to
work among the convicts, and regularly visited the
chain gangs.
Corporal George Waddy.
Early in 1821, Corporal Waddy, now promoted to
sergeant, was transferred from Hobart to Macquarie
Harbour —a shark-infested, island-dotted bay, with a
narrow entrance, known as Hell’s Gates, and girded
with dense, impenetrable forests. On these islands
prisons were built to hold the most depraved
desperadoes. But even in this hell-on-earth Sergeant
Waddy succeeded in forming a class with six
members. Governor Arthur, who had “marked the
character and efficiency of the Methodist ministry in
different parts of the world,” secured the appoint-
ment of a Wesleyan Chaplain for Macquarie
Harbour. William Schofield came in 1828, and
served his flock of black sheep Avith exemplary
devotion. John Manton succeeded Schofield in 1832,
but in that year the penal settlement was removed
to Port Arthur, and the Wesleyan Chaplain with it.
Manton was appointed to Launceston in 1832,
where a cause, opened in this thriving town in the
lovely Tamar Valley seven years earlier, had been
abandoned. The cause was revi\ r ed, and became a
sheer _ glory under Manton’s leadership. He was
magnificently supported by devout laymen, among
whom was Henry Reed.
The Van Diemen s Land District.
Ralph Mansfield, avlio followed Horton, was a
commanding preacher, and did a good day’s work for


Christ in Tasmania. Then came the saintly Benjamin
Carvosso, who had been originally designated for
Hobart. The son of a Cornish fisherman, a gifted
man in mind and heart, he preached and practised
sanctification, and his life and work became a
hallowed memory for many generations.
Nathaniel Turner, invalided from his heroic
mission work in New Zealand and Tonga, returned
in 1832. Inspired by a living love for Christ, and a
great compassion for the souls of men, he spent him-
self strenuously for both settlers and convicts. He
was constantly in the gaols and courthouses, visiting
condemned men and offering them salvation in their
last hours. His sacrificial life and unstinted
ministry shines out of the sordid story of Tasmania
at that time like a steady light in a starless night.
Turner left Hobart for England in 1835 —the year
in which the New South Wales District decided to
constitute Van Diemen’s Land a separate District.
Turner’s successor, the Rev. Joseph Orton, became
the first Chairman. With that eventful appointment
the curtain rises for our Victorian storv.


CHAPTER 111.
METHODISM COMES TO VICTORIA.
The first attempt at British settlement in what is
now known as Victoria was made in 1803. In
October of that year Lieutenant-Colonel David
Collins arrived at Port Phillip with a company which
included a guard of fifty-one marines. It was
intended that Collins should establish an outpost on
the northern side of Bass Strait. He appears not to
have taken the task seriously, and left for Tasmania
within a few months. Whether any Methodists were
included in Collins’ expedition we have now no
means of knowing. In view, however, of the wide-
spread influence of Wesley amongst soldiers and
marines, it is by no means improbable that there
were Methodists in the little company of white men
who made this brief stay on the shores of Port
Phillip. If so, we may feel some degree of confidence
that the earliest meetings for Methodist fellowship in
Victoria would be held during the few months of
Collins’ occupancy.
In 1826 another attempt at settlement was made
at Western Port, under the leadership of Captain
Wetherall. This, too, was unsuccessful. To quote
Mr. Ambrose Pratt, ‘ *it was conducted unintelligently
and it ended miserably.”* It is impossible to say
whether any Methodists were included among the
soldiers and convicts who made this attempt.
Although there are records of whalers and sealers
forming stations on Phillip Island and at Portland
Bay during the intervening years, it was not until
1834 that another serious attempt was made to
establish settlement in Victoria. In that year the
Henty family crossed from Launceston to Portland,
♦"Centenary History of Victoria/’ pp. 11-12


where they built their home and engaged in cultiva-
tion and the breeding of stock. What they began
has continued to the present time, and they may
rightfully be regarded as the pioneers of Victorian
colonisation. In a letter written in October, 1877,
Henry Reed claims that he had whaling stations at
Portland Bay before the arrival of the Hentys and
that very early he had commercial transactions with
them. The opinion has been expressed that, in view
of the fervently evangelical character of Reed, it is
probable that he may have conducted services at
Portland Bay as early as 1834. There is, however,
no evidence that Reed visited the young settlement
in person. The statement in his letter is more likely
to refer to visits made by the ships which he owned
or chartered.
The settlement on the Yarra, wilich w r as destined
to become the great city of Melbourne, w r as established
in 1835. In the letter already referred to, Henry
Reed states that in the spring of this year he
“ preached the first sermon in Melbourne. ” Although
the date of the letter is so much later than the event
it describes, and memory might easily be at fault,
there seems every reason for regarding the statement
as accurate. In the letter he writes: ‘ ‘ There were
only two huts, Batman’s and Pawkner’s, and I think
a shepherd’s. My congregation, Henry Batman, his
brother and three Sydney blacks.” In an account
of his life, written for his friends, he states: ‘ 4 About
this time Port Phillip w T as discovered by Batman,
and I went over to devise some means for preserving
the natives from destruction. There were then but
two or three huts in the place—Batman’s, Pawkner’s,
and I believe another’s. I had a letter from Batman
to his brother (who with Buckley and three Sydney
natives occupied his hut) to afford me every
assistance in his power in carrying out my project.
I had prayers in the hut with these five men every
day, read the Scriptures and preached Christ to
them. No doubt this was the first time the Gospel


was proclaimed in Victoria.”* Unless Reed was
thinking only in terms of Melbourne, the last sentence
effectively discounts the impression that he had
previously held services at Portland. There appears
to be a disparity in the two accounts, with regard to
the Batmans. In the one, both brothers are present,
while in the other one seems to have been absent. But
whilst memory may easily have been astray in regard
to this, it is hardly likely that Reed’s description of
the infant settlement on the Yarra would be at fault.
This enables us to be assured that Reed’s visit took
place in 1835, for that was the only possible year
when Melbourne answered to the description given
in both the letter and the autobiographical account.
Early in 1836 the town was still in an exceedingly
primitive condition, but contemporary records show
that there was already a fair number of settlers, who
could not have been housed in two or three huts.
Henry Reed at Port Phillip .
Additional evidence of Reed’s visit is found in
“The Christian Miscellany and Family Visitor,” an
old Methodist journal, in which an article on
Melbourne appears in the issue for July, 1872. It
states specifically that the first religious service in
Melbourne was conducted in 1835 by Reed, “a
zealous local preacher in Van Diemen’s Land.” This
account is published above the initials “W. 8.” It
is practically certain that it came from the pen of
the Rev. William Butters, who was in Tasmania from
the early thirties until the late forties. It may be
presumed that he was drawing upon definite
memories associated with the Tasmanian origin of
settlement at Port Phillip.
In 1875 Reed visited Melbourne, and conducted
an open-air service on the spot where, as nearly as
he could judge, he had stayed forty years before.
*This statement has to be modified in the light of the fact
that the Rev. Robert Knopwood, chaplain to Lieutenant-
Colonel Collins, held service at Sullivan’s Bay, near Sorrento,
on 23rd October, 1803.


He was received unqnestioningly as the man who had
conducted the first religious service in the city.
Previously, when passing through Melbourne, he had
written in a letter: 44 The Churches of every name
wanted to have a public demonstration to com-
memorate my first preaching the Gospel in Victoria.
I found the spot, and have made a conditional
promise to go over next winter.”
This is all the direct evidence that has been
discovered of Reed’s service in the primitive
Melbourne of 1835. The facts of his commercial
history, however, give a high degree of probability
to the statement that he crossed from Launceston to
Port Phillip in that year. There is indubitable
evidence that he was closely associated wdth Batman.
A power of attorney is preserved at Mount Pleasant,
Reed’s Tasmanian home, by which Batman appointed
Reed to manage his affairs while he crossed over to
establish settlement in Port Phillip. This bears the
date 1835. In a letter to his sister in England,
written a few years earlier, Reed tells her that he has
obtained a good position, and has very fair prospects.
These prospects were rapidly realised. By 1835 he
was a man of much wealth and great prestige in the
little colony. He was a large shareholder in a
successful bridge-building company. He was a
foundation director of the Bank of Australasia,
which had its origin in Launceston. He was a
successful farmer and exporter of sheep. But what
is most to the present purpose, he had chartered a
ship—the 4 4 Norval ’ ’ —which was trading between
Launceston and Port Phillip. There is abundant
indication in the shipping news of the time that the
44 Norval” paid several visits to Port Phillip during
the infancy of Melbourne. Although lists of passen-
gers travelling on the vessel were published, Reed’s
name does not appear. But this may be easily
accounted for by recalling that he was the charterer
of the ship. He was a skilled navigator, and probably


classed himself as one of the crew and not a passen-
ger. There is a definite statement in the 4 4 Launceston
Advertiser” for 1835 that he travelled to Sydney in
that year on the “Norval. ” It may surely be
regarded as exceedingly likely that he also crossed
to Melbourne on one of her trips in 1835. A man
of marked vitality and quick interest, and of close
association with the Batmans, would not be content
until he had visited the new settlement on the other
side of Bass Strait. It is impossible now to
determine the exact date of his visit; but, although
contemporary evidence is lacking, there seems
abundant reason for placing it somewhere in 1835.
As we have seen, Reed himself writes of it as 44 in the
spring,” w T hich would seem to indicate September
or October. But whenever it occurred, it represented
the first recorded Methodist impact on what was to
become the great and prosperous State of Victoria.
The Character of Reed .
In a Church which owes so much to the ministry
of local preachers, it is fitting that the earliest of
its services in this State should have been conducted
by Reed. He was an outstanding example of the lay
preachers of Methodism. There are still living in
Tasmania those who can bear fervent witness to the
greatness of his power. The perusal of his letters
and journals reveals a man of intensely mystical
temperament. Religion was the supreme passion of
his life. At the same time he showed great aptitude
for business, and his rapid rise to great wealth
is a romance of fortune. After a few years
in Tasmania, or Van Diemen's Land, as it then
was, he was able to return to England while
yet a comparatively young man, the master of very
considerable resources. He built a beautiful home
at Tunbridge Wells, and remained in the Motherland
for many years. Ultimately, drawn either by
business interests or desires, he returned to Tasmania
in 1874, and settled there again. Whilst in England
he engaged in constant preaching, and was a keen


and successful evangelist. Amongst many others,
he led the quaint and famous preacher, Peter
Mackenzie, into the fellowship of Christ. He was
closely associated with General Booth in the establish-
ment of the Salvation Army. After his death, the
old general wrote of him a simple and sincere
testimony. “Henry Reed,” he said, “was a good
man. He loved God and good work and good people.
His sympathies went out especially to the poor and
friendless. To be the means of ministering to their
temporal and spiritual welfare was for many years
the joy of his life. He was a man of unswerving
integrity, great courage, inflexible will and tireless
energy. Mr. Reed rendered me generous assistance
at the commencement of the Salvation Army, for
which I shall be everlastingly grateful. He did not
see eye to eye with me in every method employed in
those days, but on the main principles of the Salvation
war he was with me heart and soul.”
Henry Reed played a great part during his earlier
residence in Tasmania in establishing the Methodist
Church. As a preacher, a Sunday School worker,
a generous and constant giver, his value to Tasmanian
Methodism could not be overstated. When he
returned from England, however, in 1874, his direct
association with Methodism came to an end. He
held strong views on church finance, believing public
collections to be wrong, and owing to this he founded
a Church of his own in the poorest quarter of
Launceston, where he carried on an active evangel-
istic crusade, combined with much fine philanthropic
work. There was no bitterness whatever in his
departure from Methodism. The minister concerned
in it wrote of Reed: “He was one of the noblest
Christian men I ever met.” This devoted servant
of God died in 1880 in his stately Tasmanian home,
“Mount Pleasant,” near Launceston. He was laid
to rest in its wide-spreading gardens. His tomb,
set amidst English trees, on a slope which looks
across to the rugged heights of Tasmania’s loftiest


mountain, Ben Lomond, is assuredly one of the most
beautiful places in the Commonwealth of Australia.
Joseph Orton s Visit,
Although Reed may thus be regarded as the first
to bring the message of Methodism to Victoria, it is
hardly possible to think of him as the founder of the
Church in the infant colony. His visit was no more
than a visit. There is no reason to suppose that he
left behind him a group of the “ people called
Methodists ” to establish and carry on the traditions
associated with their name. Early in 1836, however,
another visitor arrived from Tasmania, the Rev.
Joseph Orton. He was one of the ablest and most
devoted ministers sent from England in the early
stages of Australian development. Received as a can-
didate by the British Wesleyan Conference of 1826,
he immediately offered for the work of Foreign Mis-
sions, and was appointed to the West Indies, a field
which had proved to be both a difficult and hazardous
one. The unhealthiness of the climate had caused the
death of many missionaries, amongst them Orton’s
predecessor at St. Ann’s Bay, in Jamaica. But what
made the mission more trying was the intense hostility
of the West Indian planters to Methodism. This was
caused by the Methodist attitude to slaves, employed
in great numbers on the coffee plantations. Their
owners wished to prevent religious teaching amongst
them. Unfortunately the official life in the islands
displayed an active sympathy with this iniquitous
purpose. Restrictive laws, persecution, obloquy and
imprisonment were all employed against the
Methodist missionaries who persisted in gathering the
slaves for worship. None showed himself more
earnest and determined in this course than Joseph
Orton. It was inevitable that he would come into
conflict with the planters and their official supporters,
and in 1828 he was committed to prison by a quite
illegal exercise of authority. He was kept in confine-
ment for some time, ultimately being discharged by


Mr. HENRY REED.
Rev. JOSEPH ORTON.
Mr. GEORGE LILLEY.
Mr. WILLIAM WITTON.


&
s ~"""y /)
* ■■ . ■ .... y
P | < &
~ „ | .... 5 • I : i * ■* * " ' ■ .:
a JJrrp & s (* 1 i I
! ■ r ’- 1 (
• if f j
* - .... . —
Mr. CHARLES STONE.
Rev. FRANCIS TUCKFIELD.
THE FIRST CHURCH-1839.


an order of the Chief Justice of Jamaica. A
constitution, far from strong, was seriously impaired
by the treatment he had received. The rigour of his
imprisonment is vividly described in his journals,
and affords abundant evidence of the cruelty of the
West Indian planters of that time. Never afterwards
did Orton recover his full strength, and the physical
weakness thus intensified brought him to an early
death.
Soon after his release he returned to England to
recuperate, and for a while he was employed in
Circuit work. His ardent spirit, however, was still
intent on the missions beyond the seas. In 1831 he
was appointed to Sydney. In New South Wales he
accomplished work of the highest value, particularly
in healing divisions which had caused no little
embitterment in the young Church there. He was
also active as a pioneer, and was the first Methodist
minister to cross the Blue Mountains. He was
transferred to Hobart in 1836 as Chairman of the
newly-created District of Van Diemen’s Land. His
apostolic zeal soon led him to cross the waters of
Bass Strait. Sailing up the River Yarra, he preached
in the infant settlement of Melbourne on 24th April,
1836, thus gaining the honour of being the first
ordained minister to preach in Melbourne. His text
was, “What shall I do to inherit eternal life?”
There were several natives present at this service,
and Orton strove hard to impress on the white settlers
their duty to these people. His visit was but a short
one. In 1839 he again crossed Bass Strait, and
wrote: “I find a town occupying an area of a square
mile, in which are several hundreds of houses, many
of which are spacious, well-built edifices; with a
population of two thousand inhabitants, enjoying
most of the comforts of life.” On this occasion not
only did he preach in Melbourne, but he journeyed
on horseback among the stations of the early
squatters, reaching Macedon and Geelong.


The Church in Melbourne.
In the Melbourne which had grown so rapidly
between Orton’s two visits, Methodist people had
already organised themselves into a church. The
journal of his second visit records: “The Methodist
Society has swelled to the numbers of thirty members,
and a commodious place of worship has been erected
by their liberality, in which two or three persons
officiate as local preachers. ” It is not possible to say
with exactness just when this church first began to
meet. It is probable that after Orton’s first visit a
nucleus of faithful souls formed themselves into a
society. Their numbers were increased by new
arrivals, particularly from Launceston on the other
side of Bass Strait, where the fascination of
Melbourne seems to have been strongly felt, probably
because its founders had come from the Tasmanian
town. Laudatory articles on the new settlement
appeared constantly in the Launceston press, and
doubtless fostered desire to be amongst the pioneers.
Amongst the earliest arrivals was William Witton, a
Tasmanian local preacher, who began to conduct
meetings for “prayer and exhortation’’ both on
Sundays and during the week. The young church
was also fortunate in the coming of John J. Peers,
a gifted singer and musician, who formed a choir
which, assisted by a clarionet and a flute played by
John Caulfield and Edward Peers, gave a charm to
the evening meetings which led to a rapid increase
in attendance. It is interesting to read that on
occasions the Methodist singers went to the Presby-
terian and Congregational meetings, which had
already been organised, and contributed to the
musical part of the worship. The Methodist fellow-
ship was further strengthened by the arrival of James
Dredge and Edward Stone Parker, who were sent
from England as protectors of the native peoples.
A contemporary writer speaks of them as “right-
down earnest men.” They appear to have visited
all the Methodists in Melbourne that they might


quicken their devotion. Others amongst those early
servants of the Church who should be mentioned
with honour are John Sutch, William Overton,
George Lilley, Charles Stone, John Burgess,
James Candy, John Lobb, James Fenton, Thomas
Wilkinson, Thomas Jennings and his wife, who also
gave notable service to Tasmanian Methodism, and
the devoted members of the Howell family. The
earliest meetings were held in the houses of the
members, as in the days of the New Testament
Church. Increasing numbers, however, made this
impossible, and a little building was erected near to
where St. Paul’s Cathedral now stands. Its dimen-
sions are stated to have been thirty feet by sixteen.
Its erection was largely due to the enthusiasm and
generosity of John Peers. Orton preached in this
church during his visit of 1839. Later in the same
year Melbourne was visited by the Rev. William
Simpson, then stationed in Tasmania. In a letter to
the Rev. John Waterhouse he states that the little
building was crowded at each service on the Sunday
of his visit. “Were I going to remain here,” he
writes, ‘ I think that instead of suffocating myself
and congregation in so small a place I should turn
out of doors.” He refers to proposals that were
already being actively canvassed for the erection of
a larger place of worship. “Ground has been
reserved by the Government in a most eligible
situation, but it will not be secured until the parties
concerned have raised £3OO, and actually deposited
it in a bank, forwarding the receipt to the Colonial
Secretary.” Simpson proceeds to urge on Water-
house that he should use his influence to obtain the
appointment of a minister to a sphere where the
prospects are so promising. “I am quite sure,” he
concludes, ‘‘there is no place in Van Diemen’s Land
equal to this in importance, exclusive of Hobart and
Launceston, and my opinion is that this place ought
to be occupied at once, even though some other place
might be only partially supplied in consequence. ’ ’


A Service in the First Chapel.
A quaint and beautiful description of a service
held in the little building in Swanston Street has
been preserved in a paper written by the Hon.
Thomas Wilkinson, who took a very prominent part
both in the Methodism and in the public life of early
Victoria. He arrived in Melbourne on the eve of
Good Friday, 1840. “It was on the Easter Sunday
of 1840,” he relates, “that I found myself and
family in the midst of the little church gathered
in the temporary preaching house, Swanston Street,
and for the first time in the assembly of this people
in Port Phillip we bowed the knee to the God of all
grace, and offered ourselves to His renewed provi-
dential care and spiritual support. Mr. William
Witton was the preacher, and the Word was as
refreshing to the weary spirit as cooling waters to
the parched tongue. The discourse was well studied,
highly suitable with a tone of quiet piety pervading
the whole. There our voices were raised in hymning
the praises of the Most High, in a new country in
which we had never before used them in the celebra-
tion of His worship among His people.”
Before this date two ministers had arrived in
Victoria —the Rev. Francis Tuckfield and Benjamin
Hurst —to undertake missionary work among the
aboriginal peoples.- The centre of their operations
was on the Barwon, a few miles from Geelong. They
were, however, able to make an occasional visit to
Melbourne, and to assist the rapidly growing church.
But the need of a settled ministry was insistently
and increasingly felt.
The British Conference Minutes of 1838 and 1839
each record that “Joseph Orton is returning home.”
The reason that his purposed return was so long
delayed lies in the fact that Orton had volunteered
to take charge of the establishment of a mission in
Melbourne. A special District meeting in Tasmania
not only authorised, but also requested him to do


this. He was never actually appointed to Melbourne,
but under the terms of this special commission he
was there until March, 1842. Stirred by the
inspiration of his leadership, the already enthusiastic
Methodist fellowship was rapidly strengthened.
Although wasted in the extreme by disease, which
was steadily sapping his strength, Orton preached
regularly on Sundays and week-nights, instituted
early morning prayer meetings, visited constantly
and organised the church in harmony with Methodist
principles. A Sunday School had already been
established by the earnest company of Methodist
people, and by May, 1840, William Simpson was
able to record that there were “between fifty and
sixty scholars, regular in their attendance and making
improvement. ” It is impossible now to say who was
the actual founder of this school, but the earliest list
of its officers records that Thomas Forster was
superintendent, Theodore Dredge was secretary (the
Christian name should probably be Theophilus), and
Andrew Crockett was treasurer. Orton threw him-
self into the promotion of the life of this school with
all his characteristic zeal, and it grew rapidly during
his stay in Melbourne. He also introduced the
Methodist system of Circuit control, and the first
Quarterly Meeting was held at his home on 28th
January, 1841. Its minutes state that Mr. Abel
Thorpe and Mr. R. B. Bourne were the earliest
Circuit stewards. Orton’s influence was a vital
factor in effecting the completion of the second
church, which was situated in Collins Street, where
the stately building of the Bank of Australasia now
stands. The church was opened on the 24th of June,
1841, the morning service being taken by the Rev.
W. Waterfield, a Congregational minister, and Orton
preaching in the evening. His text is recorded to
have been Psalm 132: 7-9. A description of Orton
is given in the “Jubilee History of Victorian
Methodism, ’ 9 which may fittingly be reproduced here.


“He was a man of medium size, with dark hair and
pale features, earnest and somewhat fiery in his
style of preaching. We suppose that he was a man
of nervous temperament, as he had a habit of twirling
his fingers in the curly locks of his hair, or of
winding his watch-chain around one finger, when
speaking to an audience. That individuality which
is betrayed by a man’s favourite forms of speech
was marked in him. Few sermons were preached
without this phrase coming into use, ‘darkening
counsel or words without knowledge.’ His sermons
in the body and bulk of them have passed away. He
was a disciplinarian and had love of order. He was
very intent on doing good while his day of work
lasted.”
During Orton’s brief pastorate Melbourne was
rapidly growing, and already the settlement was
spreading to the suburbs. Before his departure
services were established at Brighton, Brunswick,
Williamstown, and New Town, which was later
named Collingwood.
Orton s Valedictory.
On 28th February, 1842, the Melbourne Methodists
assembled for a farewell meeting, in view of
Orton’s departure. After the manner of the
time a warmly appreciative address was presented
to him. In the “Jubilee History” it is stated
that he could not speak to them because of his
illness, and that his reply was written out and
read. Thomas Wilkinson, however, who was present
at the meeting, gives a very different account.
“Contrary to expectations,” it reads, “he exerted
himself for the greater part of an hour in addressing
the meeting with a voice, if such it may be called,
floating into all parts of the building. Every word
could be distinctly heard, the expressions clearly
made not with the semblance of any human voice.
There was no ring about the sound or guttural
utterance. It was a sort of lungless emission,


arresting the ear of the observer in all parts of the
chapel. His wasted frame and pallid countenance
under the dim light of the common candles, united
with the indescribable voice and saddened silence of
the audience, gave an aspect to the scene of no
ordinary description. It was a solemn time; it did
not seem a mere earthly solemnity; it partook of
properties of both worlds. ”
A few days later Orton embarked for England
on the ship ‘ 4 James.’ ’ A brief service was conducted
on the deck, at which it is recorded that crew,
passengers and visitors were present. But the vigour
of his ministry had taken heavy toll of Orton’s
slender physical resources, and as the voyage
proceeded his health rapidly declined. While the
ship was rounding Cape Horn his strong spirit left
the frail body in which for a time it had found its
home. His last words were radiant with faith, “All
is well, all is well.” His body was committed to the
waters of the great deep. Although time may have
idealised the character of this saintly leader, it cannot
be doubted that he was a true minister of Christ,
and a true missionary martyr. To spare himself was
something that he had never learned. But the faith
that he preached says of men like him that in
losing their life they find it.
Orton’s departure left Melbourne Methodism well
organised for the superintendency of the Rev.
Samuel Wilkinson, the first regularly appointed
minister to the Circuit. It entered upon a period
of very rapid development, the record of which
belongs to another chapter of this history. It would,
however, be impossible to exaggerate the value of the
work accomplished by the Methodists who first lighted
the glow of Methodist testimony, and established the
Methodist tradition in the Melbourne of a century
ago.


CHAPTER IV.
THE STORY OF BUNTINGDALE.
A Gallant Effort to Save the Native Tribes.
There is a touch of what Australians of this
century have learned to speak of as “the Anzac
spirit” about the story of Buntingdale. The story
of Anzac is the epic of men who dared an “impos-
sible” task and nearly did it. They dared a deed
which those who knew said could not be done.
They failed, after performing prodigies of valour,
and sailed away at last, unsuccessful.
There are glorious failures and shabby successes.
Real success lies not so much in achieving what we
aim at as in aiming at what we ought to achieve.
And this is the stirring story of men who were
not afraid to fail and were not defeated by defeat.
Both Henry Reed and Joseph Orton crossed over
to Port Phillip animated by compassion for the
native aborigines—anxious, no doubt, to prevent a
repetition of such dark cruelties as had disgraced
the white man’s record in Tasmania. “I went over
to devise some means for preserving the natives from
destruction,” said Reed. On the occasion of Orton’s
first service on Batman’s Hill there were fifty natives
among his audience. “My soul truly went out,” he
said, “after their best interests. I felt as though I
could have sacrificed every personal comfort for their
welfare.” With Buckley* as interpreter, he had
several interviews with the natives.
♦William Buckley, a personal servant of Colonel Collins,
escaped with other convicts from the settlement at Sullivan’s
Bay, near the present site of Sorrento, in November, 1803.
He dwelt amongst the native aborigines on terms of friend-
ship for more than thirty years—to reappear in 1835 and
attach himself to the first Batman expedition.


Appalling Cannibals.
“I was shocked,” he says, “to learn not only that
they are cannibals, but that their cannibalism is of
an inconceivably appalling nature. They are
frequently in the habit of devouring their own
offspring. When they happen to have a second child
unable to walk, from the great inconvenience of
carrying them in the course of their wanderings,
sometimes one will be sacrificed and eaten by the
parents. Likewise, in the event of being killed in
battle, or by accident, they eat them.”
Orton returned to Van Diemen’s Land greatly con-
cerned for “these poor creatures,” alert to the new
perils to which they were exposed, and alive to the
opportunity of serving them. These views were
presented in an elaborate report of his visit which
he sent to the Missionary Society in England. A
special District Meeting was convened, and Orton
was sent to Sydney to make representations to the
Governor, Sir George Gipps, for a grant of land
and support for the proposed Mission. The estimated
cost of the Mission was £6OO to establish it and £6OO
yearly for maintenance.
Native Rights.
Orton outlined to the Governor the proposals for
a Mission, and bravely championed the rights of the
natives. He pleaded that in the disposal of public
lands ample provision should be made for the
aboriginals by the creation of adequate reserves and
instruction in agriculture.
A party of missionaries sent from England landed
in Hobart on 17th March, 1838. Benjamin Hurst
had to remain awhile in Van Diemen’s Land to
recuperate his enfeebled health, while Francis
Tuckfield proceeded to Geelong to make a beginning
with the Mission.


Orton began to despatch stores —tents, ploughs,
flour, bullocks, etc., and a portable weatherboard
house capable of accommodating two Mission families.
For nearlv a vear Tuckfield devoted himself to the
interests of the aboriginals around Geelong, seeking
to win their confidence and study their language and
customs. He acquired considerable influence over
them. They would say to any other white man who
came in their wav: “Merrigig, vou Mr. Tuckfield ’s
•J O O 7 ft/
brother? Mr. Tuckfield plenty sing; me like him.”
They learnt some of the elements of Christian doc-
trine, and with their keen, imitative perception
would say: “Me not fetch wood to-morrow;
to-morrow big Sunday.”
Tuckfield travelled with the natives both east and
west, with a view to selecting a site for the Mission
experiment. First he fixed on Indented Head, but
found that the waterholes there afforded only a
precarious supply. Accompanied, it is said, by
Buckley, he set out westward, until at Birregurra he
found a site in every way suitable. The district
had been the haunt and home of a tribe which had
been reduced by war to one family, and was now the
favourite rendezvous of the YTod-do-rong (Corio),
Kolijon (Colac), and Barrabool tribes.
Benjamin Hurst arrived on sth February, 1839,
and with Tuckfield devoted himself earnestly to the
work.
Orton made his second visit to Port Phillip in
April, 1839, and before confirming the site of the
Mission station he set out with Tuckfield —“making
round towards the interior on our way to Geelong.”
They travelled by way of Mount Macedon, the
Anakies, the You Yangs, crossed the Little River,
“steering south through a forest and over a vast
plain, and arrived at the site of the intended town
of Geelong,” writes Orton in his journal. “At
present there are only about half-a-dozen settlers ’
houses or huts; also the military barracks, some


rudely constructed huts. The Mission premises here
are very temporary until we determine the place in
which to establish the Mission.’ ’
The tour was made to explore the country and find
the natives, but in the journey of a hundred miles
they did not see a single one.
Exploring the Country.
A second expedition set out westward, and this
time they took some friendly natives with them and
a bullock dray and horses. They spent about a
fortnight travelling through Colac, Corangamite, and
Warrion Hills, halting at a number of stations which
had just been taken up. This journey in winter
weather involved considerable hardship. Orton had
to sleep in a calico tent, or under a tarpaulin,
and took his turn in watching the bullocks lest
they should stray into the bush during the night.
The result of this survey was to confirm the selection
of the site suggested by Tuckfield on the Barwon
River, some forty miles from Geelong. The site
seemed in every way favourable —central, retired,
well wooded and watered, and plentifully stocked
with game.
“It is certainly a delightful spot,” Orton writes,
“but I have serious apprehensions lest an application
for it should excite prejudice on the part of settlers
who are already squatting here. Our tent having
been pitched, which consisted of a tarpaulin thrown
over a ridge pole supported by forked sticks, we took
our tea and supper together, and after our rustic
meal we closed the engagements of the day by
engaging in the worship of God, during which natives
surrounded the entrance to the tent. Mr. Tuckfield
took occasion to explain, as well as he was able, the
nature of the service, which appeared to interest
them much.”
After the selection of the site Orton was unable
to stay long enough to see the work inaugurated,
having received instructions to proceed to Tonga, to


straighten out some difficulties which had arisen
there. Think of this Methodist apostle—after six
weeks’ absence from home to explore and select the
site of a new Mission; the claims of his large family
tugging at his heart, and then he receives instructions
to proceed at once to the other extreme of his
immense diocese and settle matters in Tonga!
The needs of the natives were heavy upon Orton’s
heart. Again and again he pleaded for them, and
lifted up his voice in solemn warning. In his judg-
ment “since the Squatter Act of 1839 did not make
any due provision for the natives, they will become
dissipated, pilfering, starving mendicants, and after
enduring incalculable miseries and abuses will pine
and die away, leaving an eternal blot on the character
of a Christian Government.” The natives “were
already so contaminated by intercourse with Euro-
peans as to excite considerable apprehension as to
the success of the Mission.”
The sanction of the Governor of New South "Wales
having been obtained for a grant of 64,000 acres, the
station was named Buntingdale, after Dr. Jabez
Bunting, “the second founder of Methodism,” who
found it a society and consolidated it into a Church.
The Mission Begins.
Hurst, who was the superintendent, took charge of
the work at Geelong while Tuekfield erected the Mis-
sion buildings. Tuekfield lived with the natives until
they were ready. His diary records the occupation:
“15th August, 1839. —Having packed all our goods,
Mrs._ Tuekfield, children, and myself started for the
Mission station, and reached Mr. Austin’s by seven
o’clock, where we were kindly entertained. 16th
August.—Through mercy we have reached our
destination without injury, though not without diffi-
culty. We got bogged in the creek, and I had to
carry Mrs. Tuekfield and the children through the
water on my back, while the man and myself with
great difficulty got out the dray. . . 18th August.—


This being the first Sunday on the Mission station
with my family, Mrs. Tuekfield and myself com-
menced teaching the natives. They are attentive,
and manifest powers of mind capable of receiving
instruction of any kind.”
The missionaries went to work with a will. Tuck-
field had a natural aptitude for acquiring the dialects
of the various tribes, but Hurst found it difficult.
In a report to the Mission authorities on 30th June,
1840, Tuekfield outlined what had been accomplished
in the first eighteen months: “We have built a house
for each of the Mission families of slabs, covered with
long grass and lined with wool-bagging; a school-
room, a storeroom, a house for the overseer, and a
sleeping place for the natives, of the same materials.
We have about ten acres of fine soil under cultivation
this year for the natives, two of potatoes, seven of
wheat, and some turnips, besides a garden each for
ourselves, which in the bush is quite a luxury. In
fencing, digging, bringing firewood and water the
natives engage with increasing ambition to imitate
the whites. For their labour we supply them with
food on the principle of remuneration. I sent four
of them into my garden the other day to prepare a
small piece of ground for turnips. After they had
dug and raked it almost as well as a white man could
do, I told them they might scatter the seed also.
They were much delighted, and divided the piece
into equal parts and themselves into pairs, to see
which could do the work most regularly, yabbering
all the time as to the tiny leaves which would sprout
from the seed in a few days, and tell who was the
best workman. I was led to look forth with intense
interest to the time when the wanderer of Australia
shall become a cultivator of his own soil, and ‘the
wilderness and solitary place be glad for them, the
desert rejoice and blossom as the rose.’ ”


Kurn-Kurn Builds a House.
“Kurn-Kurn,” says Mr. Tuckfield, “has finished
building his house, and we propose to try him and
his wife wdth regular rations. This is the first house
the natives have built after the English fashion, and
is as good as the usual huts of the shepherds and
stockmen. It is 14 ft. x 7 ft., built of slabs, and
covered with bark. Its furniture consists of broad
palings, rice bags filled with straw for mattress and
pillows, two pannikins, two tin plates, one frying-
pan, two knives, one table, one stool, one razor! The
natives are much excited about this house, and several
are anxious to have their ground marked out, and to
get the materials from Geelong to begin to build.
Two of them have three wives apiece, and say they
must have more room than Kurn-Kurn, but I said
if they became civilised in one thing they should in
another, and confine themselves to one wife each.”
Kurn-Kurn it seems was the last of his tribe who
had formerly held this region. House building
became a craze with the natives, but it did not last
long.
Joseph Orton records his impressions of his next
visit in May, 1841: “At 7 o’clock the bell rang for
morning worship, when nearly all assembled for
prayers, which they concluded with the Doxology,
which had been translated by Mr. Tuckfield. My
visit to the native school this morning was very
gratifying. There were in attendance seventeen
boys and twelve girls under the care of Mr. Tuck-
field. . . At the conclusion of the school they sang
to the Old Hundred tune the Doxology, as translated
by Mr. Tuckfield. Their vocal performance was
pleasingly correct. At command they all knelt, and
I prayed with them; though in a tongue incompre-
hensible to them, not so to the Omniscient Being.”
The number of natives on the station varied
from fifty to one hundred and fifty, besides fifty or
sixty children in the school. An overseer (Mr.


Williamson) was employed to manage the farm and
the stock of the station. Under date 29th May, 1841,
Tuekfield says: “Our station has the appearance of
a bustling village with such a number of natives
on it, and almost all of them at work, some in the
gardens, others bringing water, cutting wood, felling
trees, grubbing land, etc.” An assistant school-
master (Mr. Curtis) was engaged, and sheets of
letters, syllables and words were printed in Geelong
to teach the children the elements of the English
language. The young girls were taught by Mrs.
Hurst to make print dresses for the old women, and
by Mrs. Tuekfield, who possessed some musical gifts,
to sing very sweetly. Mr. C. W. Sievewright, the
Government protector, spoke with much delight of
the way in which the natives sang, “Praise God, from
Whom all blessings flow,” at family prayers.
Orton Makes a Pair of Pants.
Each of the missionaries adopted a little orphan
or outcast child, and it grew very attached to its
foster parents. One little lad attached himself to
Joseph Orton while on an exploring expedition, and
his journal reveals him busy making a pair of
trousers for this child of nature. Boys came of
their own accord, or were brought by their mothers,
and begged that they might be taken into the Mission
family. Some of these were taught the English
language in the hope of training them to be
missionaries to their own people.
Tuekfield rejoiced in hope, and was greatly cheered
by the peaceful and teachable nature of the blacks.
A Native Prayer Meeting.
“This evening,” he writes in his diary of 13th
May, 1841, “at the close of the school, I talked with
the children on the nature of prayer, and while I was
talking two or three, looking more serious than the
rest, asked to be taught how to pray. As soon as
we were on our knees and all was quiet I said; ‘Who


will pray?’ One suggested that my new (adopted)
son should be the first, as he had begun to learn
English, and could manage to do it the best. At
length a little boy about seven years of age began.
The substance of his prayer was to thank God for
giving them food, and to ask that when he died
the Great Spirit might open the door of His house
that all who were then present might enter in and
remain with Him for ever. This day of small and
feeble things must not be despised, for out of the
mouth of these babes and sucklings God is able to
perfect praise.”
The natives on the station were fed for the most
part on damper and mutton and the bag of their
hunting expeditions. One hundredweight of flour
was required to make enough damper for their
breakfast. The flour was brought from Geelong, and
the mutton obtained from neighbouring squatters by
buying a hundred head of sheep at a time.
In 1842 Tuckfield undertook a hazardous journey
through the bush as far as the River Murray, making
contact with tribes who had never seen a white face
before. He felt that the blacks who held the region
through which the Campaspe, the Goulburn, the
Lachlan, and the Murray flow would be compara-
tively exempt from “the exterminating progress of
the white man,” and so afford a better field for
missionary operations. His object in this expedition
was to investigate the number and condition of the
natives in the interior, and to seek a site for a second
mission station far removed from European settle-
ment and influence. But his cherished hope of
success with the natives in a secluded part quickly
vanished, for no sooner had he reported to Superin-
tendent Latrobe the discovery of the new country
than squatters rushed in to possess the land.
Tuckfield frequently went on excursions into the
bush with the natives to teach and be taught. He
was greedy to pick up new words, eager to compare


dialects and detect the grammatical principles
underlying the whole.
Great heart as he had, there were trials and
discouragements in plenty. On 28th October, 1840,
the cry of fire was heard, and soon the Mission
house, with its thatched roof and hessian partitions,
was burnt to a heap of ashes. Tuckfield made a dash
into the flames and rescued his journal, and just
escaped as the roof came roaring down. To his
unutterable sorrow his precious vocabulary of the
native language perished in the flames.
Tuckfield found it difficult to lift the thoughts of
the natives above their stomachs —feed them as best
they could, the cry went up for more and ever more
to eat.
Years afterwards a blackfellow said: “Me narry
Mr. Tuckfield long time ago; me read him book; me
quamby long time like it Buntingdale. Mr. Tuckfield
berry good man, big big one hallelujah, piccaninny
budgeecanny! ’
Cannibalism and infanticide were common. The
wandering habits of the natives were also a constant
trial. They would decamp and disperse without
warning, and for weeks there would not be a black-
fellow to be seen about the station. They said their
enemies would know where to find them if they
stayed too long in one place. Tuckfield, undaunted,
followed them through the bush, “to keep them,”
as he significantly said, “from forgetting what they
had learnt.”
Hurst Withdraws .
Hurst grew discouraged and requested to be
removed. In 1842 he reported to the District
Meeting: “The past year has been one of great trial
and anxiety to the missionaries on this station, in
consequence of the apparent fruitlessness of their
labours. For, although their exertions to improve
the moral and civil condition of the degraded and
*Meat.


deeply injured aborigines of this part of New Holland
have been continued according to their opportunities
with unabated zeal and diligence, yet they have not
the pleasure oi reporting that even in one instance
they have been instrumental in the salvation of
souls.” He was convinced that the Mission was
hopeless and withdrew, but Tuckfield, who was
unwilling to acknowledge failure, reported to the
District Meeting of 1844; “It is a matter of thank-
fulness to Almighty God that at no former period
did this Mission present such an encouraging
character as it does at the present. And during the
whole of the year the general behaviour of the natives
towards each other, the colonists, and their missionary
has been such, as not only to afford very great
pleasure, but to warrant the conclusion that the
best mode of improving the moral and social condi-
tion of the aborigines of this land is that of separating
the tribes, and treating them as small independent
communities. . . The religious improvement of the
natives is also beginning to present a very encour-
aging aspect. . . Their occasional meetings for
prayer amongst themselves before they retired to
rest, the repeated invitations which the missionary
has received to come and pray with them, their
attention to private prayer, and the improved manner
in which they observe the Christian Sabbath, are
circumstances sufficient to show that they entertain
a regard for religion, and that the Spirit of God is
at work upon their minds. . . The temporal depart-
ment of the Mission is carried on at present with one
white man and the natives, and is progressing l well.
They can grow sufficient wheat, potatoes, and other
vegetables for the station; and it is gratifying to
witness the rapid improvement of the men and boys
in almost all kinds of manual labour connected with
the cultivation of the soil. And it is equally pleasing
to see the women engaged at their needlework, making
clothes for themselves and their families. The flock


of sheep under their care prospers well also, and is
rapidly increasing, amounting in all to 550, although
the establishment has been supplied from it with
mutton for the last four months. ”
Amid all the uncertainty and perplexity Tuck-
field ’s courage and faith stand out in strong relief.
The missionary and his equally brave wife endured
the loneliness of their position, and, if sometimes a
sigh escaped into the journal for dear old England,
there was no repining. Hearts were soon brave again.
When her husband talked of a mission on the banks
of the Murray, two hundred miles further inland,
she wrote: “Where He appoints we go, and will
labour at His command. ”
Envy and Intrigue.
Though Tuckfield marched breast forward, braving
discouragement that would have broken most men,
there were moods when hope trembled uncertain in his
heart. His journal unfortunately breaks off abruptly,
and we are dependent upon other sources for facts
relating to the last years of the Mission. Orton
was frequently at Buntingdale in March, 1842, and
grew alarmed at the expenditure and was impatient
of the small spiritual results. Meanwhile there were
prejudice and misrepresentation to contend with.
Letters published in the “ Geelong Advertiser’ ’
revealed an undercurrent of envy and intrigue. The
Government was criticised for aiding such fruitless
work. At last the Government announced its inten-
tion to close the Mission. This was circumvented by
an application to Captain Fyans, the Commissioner,
for a squatting lease of the reserve. The withdrawal
of State aid evoked a generous response from friends
of the Mission. Rice, sugar and blankets were sent
by sympathisers from Sydney and Tasmania, while
those near at hand presented sheep by the hundred
and cattle in mobs of tw r enty to thirty, as an expres-
sion of their admiration of Tuckfield’s work. This
provision supplied both food and work, for the young


men continued to cultivate the land and the old men
shepherded the sheep, for which they were paid half-
a-crown every moon. Part of the reserve was rented
for grazing purposes at £3OO a year.
But this new phase of things was only the
beginning of the end, for, though Tuckfield struggled
on for three more years, the last act came when one
morning in 1848 surveyors appeared to measure the
land for disposal. It was beyond the resources of
the friends of the Mission to purchase the property,
and there was no alternative but to abandon the
work. Tuckfield was appointed superintendent of
the Geelong Circuit. His love for the blacks did not
fade with the closing of Buntingdale. He still
visited them and continued to serve them. The
gallant enterprise failed not so much by reason of
the low mental and moral condition of the natives,
but rather, as Hurst said in his report to the Colonial
Government, because of ‘ ‘ the depraving and
destructive character of the godless civilisation which
was going on around. 7 ’ Hurst enlarged upon the
total neglect of religion, especially among the shep-
herds and hut-keepers, and the actual and appalling
vice which reigned among them in the form of
drunken debauches, profane swearing, the utter
desecration of the Sabbath, and the universal
prostitution of native women and girls; while not a
few sought for their own vile ends to prejudice the
natives against the missionaries and their work. A
yet more distressing and appalling fact was the rapid
diminution of the native population. It was computed
that certain well-known tribes were reduced by one
half in three years. The musket, murder, war,
drink, poison and disease brought most of them to
an untimely end.
A Proud Memory .
The wholesale destruction of the aborigines is a
stain on our British history, which calls for
repentance and fruits meet for repentance.


The Methodists of the new century have reason to
be humbly grateful that their fathers in the faith
made a sustained and heroic effort to do justice to
the natives of this great land, and sought to share
with them the knowledge of Christ and His salvation.
The memory of Tuckfield with Bible, blanket and
pannikin wandering with the blacks, an apostle who
became all things to all men if by any means he
might save some, must be cherished as a challenge
and inspiration until the black man comes into his
own.
Francis Tuckfield deserves the laurel wreath that
we lay at the shrine of his memory, and we may truly
apply to him the word of the Lord unto King David,
who dreamed of a temple crowning the crest of Zion
and made lavish preparation for it, but did not live
to see it built.
“NEVERTHELESS IT WAS WELL THAT IT
WAS IN THINE HEART.”


CHAPTER V.
THE EARLY DAYS.
On the testimony of the Rev. John Allen Manton,
who was the resident minister at Launceston in 1835,
a special service was held the evening before the
schooner “ Enterprise 7 ’ sailed with the first party
of colonists for Port Phillip. John Fawkner was
present, together with others interested in the
venture. The Wesleyan brethren in the vestry of
the old chapel commended the whole party to the
Divine care.*
Who was the first Methodist to settle in Melbourne
is difficult to determine with certainty at this dis-
tance. Such evidence as survives points to Thomas
Watson, a veteran of Waterloo, as having that
distinction.
Waterloo Watson.
“On my arrival/ * said George Lilley, “I looked
around to see if I could find any like-minded with
myself, and found one, Thomas Watson, an old
Waterloo soldier, and a member of our society, who
was engaged at the Church of England Mission
Station, two or three miles up the Yarra, with Mr.
George Langhorne, the manager.”! Charles Stone,
writing in 1886, said that “Thomas Watson was a
character in his way. He was not only the first
Methodist, but also the first teetotaller in Victoria;
and by the open and courageous way in which he
advocated temperance principles, and at a time when
those principles were anything but popular, he was
often brought into unpleasant collision with his less
temperate townsmen.” Orton, however, does not
♦See “Christian Work in Australia,” by Rev. J. Bickford, page 86.
|The site of the Mission Station is now the Botanical Gardens.


mention Watson in the “Memorandum of the Rise
of Wesleyan Methodism in the Town of Melbourne,”
which he left in the Quarterly Meeting Minute Book.
This may be explained by the fact that AVatson
did not “run well,” if he is identical with the
Thomas Watson, “the Methodist,” who was convicted
for selling spirituous liquor without a licence in
March, 1839, and fined £3O. # His application for a
licence in April was refused. At one time he was
a “water-carrier” in the town, but evidently he did
not always ride on the water waggon! If this be
the same Thomas Watson, he must have been
converted to temperance after his conviction.
The Irish Lilley.
Whoever was first among them, there were remark-
able men in that tiny group of pioneer Methodists.
George Lilley t was an Irishman, born at Roscommon
in 1803. His father, who had been seriously wounded
at Waterloo, was ordered out to Sydney, and brought
George with him. At Parramatta the youth was won
for Christ by the Rev. Walter Lawry. When Lawry
went out in 1822 to establish the Mission in Tonga,
he took with him “two or three mechanics” including
George Lilley, who went as carpenter to the Mission.
Pour years later he reappears in Sydney at the altar
of St. James’s, marrying Mary Grace Osburne. He
returned to Parramatta as a stationer, but the next
year he was teaching in Sydney. In 1835 he went
to Launceston, and during his short stay of eighteen
months was appointed superintendent of the Sunday
School.
This rolling stone next turns up at the first
Melbourne land sale in 1837, when he bought a
Collins Street block —now the site of Temple Court.
In striking contrast to the present palatial building
was the modest shop and dwelling which Lilley built
♦“Port Phillip Patriot," 20th March, 1839.
■[Variously spelt Lily and Lilly, but preferably Lilley.


there, and where his wife opened a drapery store.
The garrulous c ‘ Garryowen * ’ (Edmund Finn) relates
in his “Chronicles of Early Melbourne” that “An
accommodating modiste, of the very appropriate
name of Lilly, was the first in the field to tender her
services in supplying baby-linen to such as might
require so interesting a commodity, which was then
very slowly becoming an article of necessity.”
Lilley became an auctioneer, and when John
Pascoe Fawkner applied for permission to publish a
newspaper in Port Phillip, he was one of his
sureties.*
Joseph Orton stayed with the Lilleys when he
visited Melbourne in April, 1839, and there “con-
ferred on several matters” with Francis Tuckfield
and Benjamin Hurst. Lilley was the first Treasurer
of the Missionary Society which the pioneers formed,
be it noted, as early as 1839. He was also one of
the company which organised the first Temperance
Society in Port Phillip, being elected a member of
the committee of which John Gardiner, a pioneer
pastoralist, was chairman.
Charles Stone, in his reminiscences of “Early
Methodism in Victoria,”! states that: “With
Watson and two or three others, Mr. Lilley formed
a class, which met occasionally at the house of Mr.
George Worthy, an adherent of our Church from
Launceston. . . The fame of the new settlement
and the adaptation of the surrounding country for
pastoral and agricultural pursuits spread far and
wide; and during this and the following year
considerable additions to the population were made
by persons arriving from Sydney, Hobart Town
and Launceston, among whom were Mr. and Mrs.
Witton. Mr. Witton had been a local preacher on
trial in Launceston, and, true to his Methodist
instincts, set about organising a society. The class
*1 am indebted to Mr. G. B. Minns for some facts relating
to Lilley, Peers and Dredge, as published in the “Spectator."
t“Spectator,” 1886, page 232.


commenced by Mr. Lilley was re-formed, cottage
prayer meetings established, and the nucleus
formed from which Methodism has radiated. . .
On arrival of the writer at the latter end of 1838
. . . he found about twelve persons meeting in
class, under the leadership of Mr. Witton, in a
wattle and daub skilling in Bourke Street, about
forty yards west from where Dunn and Collins’
stationery establishment* now stands.”
William Witton —The First Class Leader.
William Witton was a true pioneer and a brave
champion of Methodism. The grandson of the Rev.
Joseph Witton, sometime Chaplain of the Tower of
London, he was born in 1811 in the city of London.
His father was a merchant engaged in the West
India trade, and his mother was a daughter of the
Rev. Mr. Lambert, a clergyman of the Church of
England. Both his parents died during his child-
hood, and he was brought up by an uncle, in whose
office he began to work. As a youth of eighteen he
migrated to Hobart, and after a brief stay there
moved north to Launceston. There he came into
contact with the Methodists, and married into an
ardent Methodist family. In the year 1834 he was
converted under the preaching of Mr. Leach in
Launceston. He crossed over to Port Phillip in
March, 1837, and became the first class leader.
Orton records in his Memorandum: ‘ ‘ Soon after the
arrival of Mr. Witton in March, 1837, by mutual
consent he was appointed to take charge of the
members, then seven in number, of which he became
their recognised leader.” Services were held
regularly at his house on Sunday mornings.
From Melbourne he went to Belfast (now Port
Fairy), where for three years he was employed as
a home missionary by the District Meeting, the
whole seaboard of the Western District being his
station. He was the first Methodist to preach in
*South-weat corner of Bourke and Elizabeth Street*


Warrnambool, and helped to plant Methodism in
Portland. A memory of Witton has been
handed down —how he found a swagman who had
died by the roadside, and making a coffin with his
own hands, he gave him Christian burial. As his
family increased, and provision had to be made for
them, he became a pastoralist, purchasing the Hartley
Station, some ten miles from Belfast. For thirteen
years he was a sort of perpetual curate to the Belfast
congregation. After leaving Hartley he was
engaged in business in Belfast, Caramut, and
TCirksta.il. Later in life he moved to Gippsland,
and pioneered the cause at Brandy Creek, Long-
warry South, Drouin, and Warragul. All his days
he was a pioneer, blazing trails for the Kingdom.
He lived to take part in the Jubilee meeting in the
Exhibition Building, and died at Warragul in 1886.
This father in Israel saw the little society of
seven grow into a Church of more than sixteen
thousand members and one hundred thousand
adherents.
The Rev. Francis Tuckfield arrived in Hobson’s
Bay in July, 1838. Witton heard of his coming,
and went to welcome him, and by way of introduc-
tion presented his credentials as a local preacher.
“Then,” says “The Jubilee History,” “the minister
and layman, walking arm-in-arm, proceeded from
Sandridge to Melbourne, accompanied with others of
the deputation, exchanging Christian salutations
and talking over the prospects of Christian enter-
prise amongst the white settlers and the aboriginal
population. It was a time of great joy and delightful
intercourse when for a short time pastor and people,
in the small number that then represented
Methodism in the land, could mingle together their
prayers and praise in acts of worship, hear God’s
Word expounded, and plan the beginning of the
godly work and goodly Church which were after-
wards to be accomplished facts in their midst. The


stay of Mr. Tucklield was but short, but it was
a spiritual feast time to the people in Melbourne."
James Dredge ,the Protector.
Early in 1839 James Dredge and Edward Stone
Parker —local preachers of considerable ability—
came to Melbourne under an appointment from
the British Government as assistant protectors of
the aborigines of Port Phillip. Their arrival was
regarded as providential by the little Methodist
Society, and soon after they made a house-to-house
visitation in quest of Methodists. They were men
of burning zeal and luminous sincerity, and a
powerful accession to the strength of the infant
cause.
Dredge (b. Britford, Wiltshire, 1796) was a local
preacher of the Salisbury Circuit, and had been
accepted as a candidate for the ministry and placed
on the list of reserve. He was a schoolmaster at
Salisbury and the nearby village of Fisherton.
Dr. Jabez Bunting wrote to him in November, 1837,
advising him that the Government intended
appointing four Assistant Protectors of Aborigines
for Australia, and offering to recommend him as
one of them. He was duly appointed, and landed
in Melbourne on the third day of 1839. It was not
long before he realised the unsympathetic attitude
of the officials to his mission, and some months
elapsed before he could begin work among the
natives. This delay gave him the opportunity of
serving the Church. Three days after his arrival
we find him preaching in Witton’s house from the
five opening verses of Psalm 103. Later in the
month he led the class, and on 26th January
attended the meeting to consider the tenders for
erecting the first chapel. He was a convincing
preacher, powerful in prayer, and mighty in the
Scriptures.


Dredge wrote and signed, with Witton, the famous
letter to Orton praying the appointment of a
minister. This historic document reads as follows: —
Rev. Joseph Orton, Wesleyan Mission House,
Hobart Town.
Melbourne, Port Phillip,
20th February, 1839.
Dear Sir, —
At a meeting of the Wesleyan Chapel Building
Committee, held in the house of Mr. Witton on the
10th day of February instant, at which the Rev.
Messrs. Hurst and Tuckfield were present, it w r as
unanimously resolved that an application be forth-
with made to the Chairman of the Van Diemen’s
Land District for the immediate appointment of a
preacher for Melbourne.
On forwarding this resolution we beg, Dear Sir,
most respectfully to urge its importance upon your
most serious attention. The following considera-
tions will, we hope, convince you of the exigency
of our circumstances, and induce you, without delay,
to send us the help we implore.
Ist. This township contains a population of nearly
two thousand souls, with an Episcopal clergyman, a
Presbyterian, and an Independent minister, and
church accommodation, by the whole, for about 500.
2nd. We have, at present, a congregation of about
one hundred persons, for whose accommodation we
have nearly ready a temporary chapel, 32 ft. by
16 ft. We have also a society of from 25 to 30
members.
3rd. We have made application to the Govern-
ment for a grant of land on which to erect a
substantial chapel and minister’s house, and have a
subscription list to the amount of nearly £350. Had
we a minister we should immediately receive the
Government allowance of £IOO per annum towards


his support, which would be advanced to £l5O as
soon as the congregation should be increased to that
number. On these grounds, Dear Sir, we reiterate
our request for the appointment of an accredited
Wesleyan minister for this township. And we
entreat you to remember that we have strong claims
upon the paternal sympathies of the Van Diemen’s
Land preachers and societies. We are, indeed, your
sons in the Lord, and separated as we are from our
brethren and long cut off from the regular ministra-
tions of God’s ordinances and Christian fellowship—
except in such manner as we have been enabled to
supply amongst ourselves —we earnestly long for a
recognised pastor.
In conclusion, we beg to remark that the present
appears to us to be the time most appropriate and
promising when Wesleyan Methodism should take up
an advantageous position in this enlarging field of
necessity and usefulness.
Trusting this application will receive your imme-
diate and solicitous attention and, as a proof hereof,
that we shall have the unspeakable joy of welcoming
to our shores a preacher by the first conveyance,
We beg to remain, Dear Sir,
Yours most truly and respectfully,
Signed on behalf of the Meeting,
J. W. DREDGE.
WM. WITTON.
To the Chairman of the V.D. Land District.*
Dredge left Melbourne in May, selected a site for
his station on the Goulburn River, and erected a
bark-roofed slab hut to house his family. His district
extended with undefined boundaries away to the
mountain ranges of the Buffalo, and northward to
the upper waters of the Murray. The conditions
governing this work among the blacks made success
impossible, and after many trials and tribulations he
♦The original letter is preserved in the Queen's College Library.


resigned his protectorship.* Returning to Melbourne,
he built a house in Collins Street, and there opened
the first china store. He was soon preaching again
and immersed in church work. He was present at
the inaugural Local Preachers’ Meeting on sth July,
1840, and his name appears on the first plan.
The china store was not a success, and a proposal
was made to him that he should go to Geelong as a
hired local preacher, and thither he went on 4th
June, 1842. There he found some twelve members
shepherded by James Smith, a local preacher. He
was now in his true element as his journal witnesses:
“Here I am in the character of a pastor in Christ’s
Church, after an earnest desire for such work for
more than twenty years. . . May the Lord guide me
in His wisdom, and may His name be magnified by
many conversions and much prosperity.”
Dredge did formative work, rich in results, until
failing health compelled him to leave Geelong in
1845. Hoping that he would be recovered by a visit
to England, he sailed in 1846, but he died on 3rd
May, in the English Channel, within sight of Home.
Dr. Jabez Bunting conducted the service over his
honoured grave.
Edward Stone Parker.
Edward Stone Parker (b. London, 1802) was
greatly influenced, as a printer’s apprentice lad, by
the eloquent preaching of the great Methodist
theologian, Richard Watson. He was soundly con-
verted, set to work in the Sunday School, and in time
became a local preacher. His natural gifts were soon
recognised, and he was urged to enter the ministry.
He passed the candidate’s examination, and was
appointed by the Conference to a Circuit in Devon-
shire. There he laboured with marked ability and
♦For a critical estimate of the Protectors, see H. G.
Turner, “A History of the Colony of Victoria,” vol. 1,
p. 224. Dredge’s Letter of Resignation, p. 229.


fruitfulness, but having married during his proba-
tion, contrary to the regulations of the Church, he
had to retire from the ranks of the ministry. He
opened a private school in London, and was subse-
quently appointed to the charge of the Wesleyan
day-school in Great Queen Street. In 1838 Parker
was selected by Lord Glenelg as one of the protectors
of the aborigines, and came to Melbourne with James
Dredge in 1839, as we have seen.
Camping for some months at Jackson’s Creek
(Sunbury), he proceeded to Neereman (Baringhup),
the farthest point northward then reached by the
pioneers. After sojourning there for nearly twelve
months he struck tent, and moved onward in search
of new country and more natives. We can picture
this little party —Parker, his wife and six sons, with
their tilted cabbage cart, drawn by a “knobby”
bullock, and a dray, with goods and belongings in
charge of assigned servants drawn by a team of the
same sober snails at the rate of two miles an hour.
The virgin soil, primeval silence and native beauty
of those dense and rugged ranges had been, till then,
unbroken by the presence of the white man.
His north-western district ranged from Mount
Macedon to the South Australian border, and
northward to the Murray, with its headquarters
on the Loddon River at Mount Franklin.
Symons refers to him as the most successful of the
Protectors. For nearly a quarter of a century he
lived and laboured at Mount Franklin for the welfare
of both blacks and whites. With his knowledge of
medicine and law he was preacher, lawyer, doctor
and friendly adviser to the whole district.
The office of Protector was exceedingly unpopular
with many of the settlers, but he discharged his
duties with fidelity and zeal, and some measure
of success. He “trailed a wing” all his days
from the privations and exposures which his work for


the aborigines involved. For some time he was a
member of the Legislative Council, and fought
strenuously for the recognition of Victoria as a
separate colony. After the disbanding of the
Protectorate, he served as a school inspector under
the Denominational Board, and became a member of
the University Council. Parker was a great-hearted
Christian, who, while warmly attached and intelli-
gently devoted to his own beloved Church, proved
himself the friend of all the Churches. One of the
first trustees of the Church in Victoria, he served in
all the important offices, and was untiring in
promoting its interests. When Methodism was
attacked—as often happened in those days—he was
one of the most able and faithful defenders of the
cause.
A royal host, who kept open house—kindly,
benevolent, and wholly free from selfishness—
his life was a shining, kindly light in those far-off
formative days.
During his last years he was tried in the crucible
of suffering, and came forth as pure gold and went
to heaven with “Glory’ ’ on his lips.
The Musician who Built the First Church.
Methodism in Victoria is indebted to few men
more than to the little red-headed John Jones
Peers. He hailed from Liverpool, and came out
to Tasmania. On the 21st March, 1837, he joined
the “Isabella” at Launceston, bound for South
Australia. The ship was wrecked at Cape Nelson,
near Portland, and Mrs. Peers and the children were
rescued in their night attire as they hurried from
the cabin. The men at the Portland Bay whaling
station helped them to land, took them to their huts,
and treated them with much kindness. The Hentys
supplied clothing and extended warm hospitality


until a little vessel called and took them back
to Launceston. The Adelaide enterprise having been
thus rudely, but as it subsequently proved, provi-
dentially, prevented, Peers decided to cross over to
Port Phillip, and arrived in time for the first
Melbourne land sale on Ist June. He bought land in
Collins Street, built a house on it, and began business
as one of the first builders of Melbourne.
The following year John Batman sold to him for
£ll9 the half-acre block at the north-west corner
of Swanston Street and Flinders Lane. It was on
this site that he built the first Methodist Chapel,
costing about £129, stipulating only that he should
be repaid the cost when the congregation moved to
other premises.* This chapel, built of brick,
measuring 30 ft. x 16 ft., and capable of holding 150
worshippers, was opened on 10th March, 1839.
Francis Tuekfield preached in the morning and
Benjamin Hurst in the evening. We can imagine
those early Methodists wending their way by lantern
light along the uncertain tracks to this tiny Bethel,
lit by tallow candles which frequently required
snuffing during the hour-long sermon. The services
were conducted by earnest, able local preachers and
by Tuekfield and Hurst, who travelled the eighty
miles from Buntingdale once a month to administer
the Sacraments.
Like a lusty child outgrowing its swadding clothes,
this vigorous young society soon expanded beyond
the narrow limits of the little chapel, f The site of
the present Eastern Market, at the south-western
corner of Bourke and Exhibition Streets, had been
reserved for the Methodists, but it was declined as
being too far “out of town.” William Witton urged
♦J. C. Symons states in his “Early Methodism in Victoria,"
page 7, that it “was leased by him on trust for a church, at
a nominal rent."
tWhen Peers sold the property, it was converted into a pair
of cottages. Later it became the kitchen of the Queen's
Arms Hotel. A brick of the Chapel is preserved at Queen’s
College. The site is now occupied by a branch of the State
Savings Bank.


his Wesleyan brethren to apply for the vacant block
at the corner of Collins and Queen Streets. This
half-acre block had been bought at the first sale of
land in Melbourne by H. B. Bowerman for £B7.
Thinking that he had bid too much for the land, the
purchaser forfeited his deposit. The Government in
Sydney granted the site conditionally upon £3OO
being deposited in a bank towards the cost of the
proposed chapel.
Peers drew the plans for the Collins Street
Chapel, and set to work in his eager, energetic way
to collect most of the £3OOO required to build it.
The foundation stone was laid by the Rev. Benjamin
Hurst on 11th May, 1840, “in the presence of an
immense assembly/ ’ Gothic in design, the church
was built of brick, and measured 47 ft. x 57 ft.*
Peers was passionately fond of music, and it was
through his efforts and his guarantee of the cost
that the pipe organ was installed in the new chapel, f
The Rev. Samuel Wilkinson, in his Reminiscences,
said of Peers that “in all matters pertaining to the
church and the choir he was an invaluable person,
who spared no expense in accomplishing his object.
At his request I ordered a fine organ from Liverpool,
England, he guaranteeing the cost. The shocking
death of his son produced a great sensation in
Melbourne; he fell from his pony, and was dragged
by the stirrup, and brought a lifeless corpse to his
afflicted parents/ 9
Peers, who had a fine tenor voice, led the singing
at Swanston Street and Collins Street. This builder-
musician was a blend of strong practicality and
winged idealism. A man of catholic taste and wide
culture—interested in art and literature, he was the
treasurer of Melbourne’s first musical society—the
Harmonic, which subsequently became the Philhar-
monic Society. He was zealous in all good works,
See further page 84.
fThe organ, twice reconstructed and enlarged, is still in use
at Wesley Church.


and his name appears on the committees of the
Melbourne Hospital, the Mechanics’ Institute, the
British and Foreign Bible Society, the Wesleyan
Missionary Society, and the Melbourne Debating
Society. Having a high sense of civic responsibility,
he served as a member of the commission which
preceded the Town Council.
“While he lived,” said J. C. Symons, “and until
the death of the late Mr. William J. Dredge, for
seventeen years the organist, the service of song in
Collins Street, and afterwards at Wesley Church,
was scarcely excelled in many places in England and
unequalled in the colonies.”*
A Corner Stone.
Charles Stone was born in London on 4th August,
1819, and when 14 years of age embarked with his
parents for Hobart Town, where they landed in
April, 1834, after a tedious voyage of nearly eight
months. They found the Church there throbbing
with primitive power and zeal. “On 4th March,
1837,” he said, “ I found peace through believing
on Jesus my Saviour. After some time spent in the
Sabbath School at High Street and Sandy Bay, I
made my first attempt to preach at Roseneath, a few
miles from Hobart, in June, 1838.” The young
settlement of Port Phillip was just then attracting
attention, and in November, 1838, Charles Stone left
Tasmania for Victoria. Though still a youth, he
was commissioned by the Rev. Joseph Orton to
exercise his gifts by feeding the little flock and by
doing all the good in his power. We find him
preaching in the open air at a spot where Princes
Bridge now stands, then at the Merri Creek, the
Plenty, and Brighton, or Dendy’s Survey as it was
called. In October, 1841, Stone removed to Williams-
town, and commenced a day school. He w r as a young
man, athirst for knowledge, and often rose at three
o’clock to read and study. For four years he did
*The Life of Kev. D. J. Draper, p. 142.


excellent service as a teacher, in addition to being
the perpetual incumbent of the little church at
Williamstown. He removed to Brighton in October,
1845, and for six years taught a day school in the
small wattle and daub room used for preaching and
worship in Union Street. With the discovery of
gold in 1851 he relinquished school work and opened
business as a gardener and florist. He became
increasingly active in Christian work, and was the
untitled but devoted pastor of the little flock in
Brighton. As the superintendent of the Melbourne
Circuit could only visit them once a month, the charge
of the work devolved largely on Stone. He held a
cottage prayer meeting and met classes every night
in the week except Friday; he stretched out to
regions beyond, riding weary miles through swamp
and bush, pioneering preaching at Oakleigh, East
Brighton, Keysborough, Moorabbin and Beaumaris.
He was a greatly respected figure in the community,
a trusted confidant of many, advising them in matters
of law, making out their wills, prescribing medicine
for their ailments, and the blessing of the peace-
maker was his. There was a beautiful balance in his
Christian character, gracious and tender, yet strong
in principle and mighty with God.
The Man who Introduced Orton to Methodism .
Thomas Wilkinson, one of the most fruitful of
that band of beginners, arrived at Williamstown in
the “Joshua Carrol” on Good Friday in the year
1840. Born at Sunderland in 1799, he vividly
remembered the family removing to London and
wandering about in the East End with his mother
looking for a Methodist preaching place. Finally
they met a West Indian negress, who guided them
through a dark passage into an obscure court where
there was a small room in which a congregation
regularly worshipped. There in that tiny room
Thomas and his mother felt at home with


their own spiritual kindred. They also attended
services at Wesley’s Chapel, City Road, and in the
old Spitalfields ’ Chapel.
Thomas went to work, and one day brought home
the news that a lonely youth at the warehouse was
sick. His mother, with true Methodist solicitude,
went to visit this ailing youth, and ministered to him.
When he recovered the Wilkinson’s home was opened
to him. Thomas and he became friends, and they
invited him to go to chapel with them. He was con-
verted, and joined the society and became an active
Christian worker. This youth was none other than
Joseph Orton! But while Orton found peace, Thomas
was still a troubled seeker. Orton with his ripening
spiritual experience shepherded him until he, too,
found Christ. Then these two worked joyously
together, sharing with others their liberating
experience.
Wilkinson w T ent into another business, while Orton
pursued his Christian course which led to his ordina-
tion, and so by a wide compass to Port Phillip.
Wilkinson was Christ’s man in business, devoting his
leisure to sick visiting, Sunday School work and
local preaching. He opened a Sunday School in a
deserted Independent Chapel among the poor in
Shadwell, which soon became a throbbing centre of
Methodist life.
After the death of his saintly mother, Wilkinson
resolved to come to Australia, and sailed with his
wife and family in the “Ellen Dixon,” arriving in
Hobart on 3rd March, 1833. They were bound for
Sydney, but Nathaniel Turner greeted them with
warm kindness, and entreated them to stay. Among
those who welcomed them was Sub-sheriff Crouch
and his wife, who had been their neighbours in
London. The Government invited him to become
religious instructor of the aborigines on Flinders
Island —an offer which he regarded as a call. For
two years he experimented, until he saw plainly that


the habits of the natives themselves, the attitude of
the civil officers, the military and the prisoners
prevented any permanent good being accomplished.
He was far more happy in his next task, which
involved ministering to the prisoners in gaol and
hospital, and the road parties in and around Laun-
ceston. The Methodist cause there glowed with
spiritual vitality. The Rev. William Butters was a
man of rare grace, and Henry Reed exercised a holy
power which at times carried all before it. With
Mr. Butters he canvassed Launceston from house to
house, and the whole town seemed as if it would
surrender to God.
With the termination of his work among the
prisoners, he turned his face to Port Phillip.
Arriving on Good Friday, 1840, he landed in
the ship’s boat, and walked from Sandridge (Port
Melbourne) along the bush track to Melbourne.
“The first person I happened to meet,” he said, “was
Mr. Peers, who, with a good shake of the hand, and
an expression of surprise to see me, gave me a hearty
welcome to Port Phillip.’ ’
Easter Sunday saw him worshipping with his
spiritual kindred in the little sanctuary in Swanston
Street. He received much kindness from the
members of the society, and Mr. and Mrs. Witton
were “excessively kind” in their unstinted
hospitality.
There is no record of the event, but we can imagine
for ourselves the scene when Orton next visited Port
Phillip, and these two friends of youth met again
after long eventful years. One wonders if they
joined in singing:
“And are we yet alive,
And see each other’s face!
Glory and praise to Jesus give
For His redeeming grace!”
Thomas Wilkinson was present at the first Local
Preachers’ Meeting and also the first Quarterly


Meeting. His pioneering work at Brunswick and
Portland is mentioned in a later chapter. He founded
“The Portland Guardian,” and was one of the
original members of the Victorian Parliament. He
was a thorough-going Methodist, an imitator of
Christ, full of the Holy Spirit, who greatly served
his day and generation, and went to his reward at
the age of eighty-two.
The First Quarterly Meeting.
Orton, relieved of his superintendency of the
Australian District and due for leave in England,
felt so strongly the needs of the Port Phillip Society
that he delayed his departure in order to help them
until the appointed minister arrived. He arrived on
Saturday, 3rd October, 1840, and was gratefully
greeted by the friends as their temporary minister.
Orton’s superintendency, which lasted the best part
of a year, established a proper Methodist order. He
called and presided at the first Quarterly Meeting
which was held at the minister’s residence, 130
Russell Street, then known as the Mission House.
Orton’s Memorandum records:
“The first Quarterly Meeting of the Circuit was
held at the Mission House on Tuesday, 28th January,
under the superintendence of Mr. Orton, on which
occasion Mr. Abel Thorpe and Mr. R. E. Bourne were
unanimously elected circuit stewards. The meeting
was one of unanimity and affection, attended with
mutual prayers and confident expectation that this
infant society will become a praise in the earth, and
under the direction and fostering care of the Head
of the Church will prove a blessing to the rapidly-
increasing population of Australia Felix.”
The First Circuit Stewards.
Abel Thorpe was born at Holmfirth, in the lovely
Yorkshire valley of Colne, in 1804, and came to
Melbourne in 1840. He quickly linked himself to


the society, and joined Thomas Wilkinson’s class. His
tailoring and drapery establishment stood in Collins
Street, but the land hunger was in him, and he
bought properties first in the vicinity of the con-
fluence of the Barwon and Leigh rivers, and
subsequently Edgar’s Plains and Salisbury, near to
Bridgewater, on the Loddon.
The minutes show that this first senior circuit
steward regularly attended the Quarterly Meetings
from the time of his appointment until January,
1844. “Although his name does not appear as a
local preacher on any of the early plans, it is recorded
in Mr. Dredge’s journal that Mr. Thorpe preached
both at Melbourne and Geelong.”* His name
appears among the speakers at the opening of the
Collins Street Chapel, and also on the Committee of
the Melbourne Hospital.
“When Mr. Thorpe and his family left Melbourne
for the station on the Loddon, they travelled by
bullock dray, and as their destination was on the
further side of the river the children were ferried
across on a huge log. After remaining on this
property for some years, the family . . . lived for a
short period at Richmond”! He died at the age
of forty-nine at his home, “Gresford,” on the Merri
Creek, near Coburg.
The junior steward appointed at that first
Quarterly Meeting was Orton’s son-in-law, Robert
Ebenezer Bourne, son of the Rev. Robert Bourne,
a missionary of the London Missionary Society
in Tahiti. Although he was appointed to the
office of steward, he never functioned. Orton’s
Journal shows that he left Melbourne for Sydney
on 3rd March, 1841. At the Quarterly Meeting on
23rd July, 1841, Mr. Marsden was elected in his
stead. “Garryowen,” in his “Chronicles,” says
that Joseph Ankers Marsden was a Yorkshireman,
born at Leeds in 1811. He was ordained as a
*tG. B. Minns, in the “Spectator,” 1935, p. 386.


Wesleyan minister in 1836, and appointed to St.
Vincent, in the West Indies. On account of severe
illness he was obliged to return to England, and
subsequently migrated to Victoria in 1841. He
promptly engaged in business, and with equal
alacrity exercised his gifts as a local preacher. An
active, vigorous man of fine temperament, a born
organiser, he was prominent in all social and reli-
gious efforts. Finn credits him with conducting
Melbourne’s first and second Bazaars, and describes
him as “an adept at passing round the hat.” He
was present at the first meeting of the Melbourne
Benevolent Society, and elected to the position of
secretary. His grandson, the Rev. T. E. Marsden,
was the first Bishop of Bathurst, N.S.W.
The other members of the first Quarterly Meeting
were Messrs. Dredge, Witton, Wilkinson, Peers,
Thomas Forster, Thomas Wellard, Andrew Crockett,
William Willoughby and James Smith.
The Gunpowder Explosion.
The Rev. William Simpson, of Launceston, came
over in November, 1839, and his visit gave a new
impetus to the cause. After one of his crowded
services John Blanch came up to the pulpit
and asked him to take tea at his house.
Simpson gladly accepted the invitation. But
a friend of his, a captain, arrived with his ship
in the Bay, and meeting him in Melbourne, pressed
him to go on board to dine. Simpson agreed to go
if Mr. Blanch would excuse him, and this he did
though somewhat reluctantly.* During the same day
(17th December) two young men called at Mr.
Blanch’s shop to buy percussion caps. What hap-
pened is told by Simpson in his Journal: “Mr.
Blanch took down a gun, not knowing that it was
loaded, and put one of the caps upon the nipple to
try it; he then drew the trigger, and the contents of
the piece lodged in some powder, when, in an instant,
*See “Christian Work in Australasia,” by Bickford, p. 91.


in the twinkling of an eye, the whole premises were
one mass of ruins, and the inmates were buried
underneath. His wife perished immediately, and
he expired the following morning. They had both
regularly attended our services. I visited one of the
other sufferers, a son of one of our local preachers
in Norwich, who lingered until Sunday morning,
and then died. The lives of two others were despaired
of, (One of them died before I left Melbourne). I
improved the awful event on Sunday evening by
preaching a sermon suited to the occasion to an
exceedingly crowded congregation, great numbers
of whom stood outside the chapel, there not being
room within. Many were pricked to the heart, and
several expressed their determination afterwards to
devote themselves to God.”


CHAPTER VI.
CAROLINE NEWCOMB—PIONEER SQUATTER
AND CLASS LEADER.
Caroline Elizabeth Newcomb was born in London
on the sth day of October, 1812. Her father,
Samuel Newcomb, was the British Consul in
Spain, and there she spent her early years. After
his tragic death at sea, Caroline returned to England,
and was entrusted to the care of her grandmother,
by whom she was brought up and educated.
Melbourne in 1836.
It appears that she was a delicate child, and found
the English winters increasingly distressing. Acting
on medical advice, she decided to come south to Van
Diemen’s Land, and arrived in Hobart Town in
August, 1833. On the opening up of Port Phillip,
she crossed over, landing on the 19th of April, 1836.
“I arrived in the brig ‘Caledonia’ from Launceston,
Van Diemen’s Land, now called Tasmania,” she
wrote in her diary. ‘‘The anchor was dropped about
4 p.m., when a party of Sydney natives in the service
of Mr. Batman rowed us up the river Yarra Yarra
in a boat, and we landed soon after sunset somewhere
about the spot now occupied by Raleigh’s wharf.*
Each bank of the river, upwards from its junction
with the Saltwater River, was covered with the tea-
tree of large dimensions, extending back a consider-
able distance, and forming a kind of barricade almost
impenetrable. The appearance of the land up from
the river where we left the boat was quite charming
and park-like, the grass under our feet being like
young barley. At that time only two houses existed
♦Raleigh’s wharf stood at the foot of Spencer Street, slightly
to the east of the present Batman Bridge.


one occupied by J. P, Fawkner, who kept it as an
inn, ... the other house belonged to Mr. Batman,
which had been erected for his family, but was
unfinished, and stood on a rise distant from where
we landed about forty or fifty yards. Dr. Thomson’s
family had two tents a few hundred yards higher up
the river, and a little farther back from ft. . . Two
or three sod huts and a few sheepyards completed
settlement. ’ The Rev. Joseph Orton had
arrived by the same brig, and on Sunday, 21st, she
wrote: “He conducted a service at 11 a.m. in an
unfinished skilling at the back of Mr. Batman’s
house. Nearly all the white persons attended,
together with the Sydney natives and some of the
Port Phillip blacks, the latter behaving themselves
in a very orderly manner. ’ ’
Night corroborees by the natives were frequently
held. Vessels now began to arrive, one and two a
month, from Van Diemen’s Land, with sheep, and
bringing visitors to spy out the land.
Life on the Barwon.
It appears that Miss Newcomb left Melbourne for
Geelong in March of 1837 to stay with Dr. Alexander
and Mrs. Thomson, of whom she writes as “my best
mends.
At the Thomson’s she met Anne Drysdale, who
was of good Scottish family, and had also come to
Australia to benefit her health. These two ladies
went into partnership in 1841, and established a
sheep station at Boronghoop, on the Barwon, a few
miles below Geelong.
There is an account of the daily life of these lady
squatters in Miss Drysdale’s journal: “Miss
Newcomb, who is my partner, I hope for life, is the
best and most clever person I have ever met with;
there seems to be magic in her touch—everything
she does is done so well and so quickly. Our arrange-
ments for the day are as follows: Rise at seven o ’clock,
breakfast at eight, previous to which we have prayers,


at which Miss Newcomb presides and prays extem-
pore very, very beautifully; dinner at two, tea at
half-past six, prayers at eight, and to bed at ten.”
It was at this time that Caroline’s growing
spiritual experience burst into flower. Her diary
reads: “Resolved to contemplate the love of God,
and search the Scriptures for testimony thereof.”
Later in the year she wrote: “I hope to keep a
constant watch over my thoughts, words, and actions,
and endeavour to love God with all my heart and
soul, and resign myself to His will; to be humble and
meek in my deportment, to watch over my temper
and heart, and never harbour an angry thought, nor
utter an angry word.”
This entry reveals her temperament in its
strength and weakness —high-spirited, strong-willed,
impetuous, very sure of herself as a woman of
education and good breeding, she had difficulty in
keeping the rein on her fiery disposition. Her self-
mastery, the deliberate cultivation of love involved
conflicts of which more placid natures know little.
While Miss Newcomb was the guest of Dr.
Thomson, the Rev. Francis Tuekfield tarried in
Geelong and ministered until he could establish his
Mission at Buntingdale.
O, Happy Day!
On the 4th January, 1839, she joined the Wesleyan
Methodist Society, and began to meet in class. On
the 15th of the same month she experienced a vivid
sense of the love of God, and she wrote in her diary:
“The happiest day of my life! A day of joy
unspeakable and full of glory. Blessed be God! In
the morning I was much distressed by temptations to
doubt some of God’s truths. Went to my knees and
wrestled much in prayer, from which I rose blessed
with that peace which passeth all understanding. I
opened the Bible at these words, ‘Ye were sometime
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord, ’ and they


were most sweetly applied to my heart. The weight
of my sin was all gone, and I had a strong love for
every soul of man. I felt a strong desire to tell all
the world, if it were possible, what God had done
for my soul.”
A few days later she writes: “I felt the presence
of God very powerfully in my soul at the prayer-
meeting, and was exceedingly happy.”
Keligion was very real to this strong-minded
woman —she believed her beliefs and found genuine
joy. “My heart is filled with the Divine presence,”
she confesses. “I felt secret prayer very sweet.”
“Went to class very happy.” The class meeting,
she insisted, met a felt need in her experience as
nothing else ever did.
Without any suggestion of morbid introspection
she kept vigilant watch over her spiritual life, not
hesitating to apply surgery to anything which
threatened her higher life. True, she had fluctua-
tions of feeling. “What an unspeakably happy day
this has been,” she chronicles. But a few days later
she confesses: “Much sadness of soul to-day. When
will this wavering state be at an end?” Still she
kept her face to the Light and endured.
The Perfecting Lore .
Caroline Newcomb felt that there must be some-
thing more satisfying in the Christian life than a
religion of ups and downs. She looked and longed,
watched and waited for the something more. We
find her confiding to her diary: “I have frequently
of late yielded to the asperity and impetuosity of my
temper. Alas! I feel this an intolerable burden. 0,
my dearest Saviour, breathe Thy Spirit into my soul,
and utterly eradicate that unholy temper.” And
then this a few days later: “ I bless the Lord for His
forbearance and long-suffering during the many times
I have rebelled against His authority, and my
numberless shortcomings in duty. In viewing


myself during the last three days I have much to
grieve over. When shall I as habitually remember
my Heavenly Father as I forget Him? Lord, grant
that this may soon be; that I, being sanctified
(wholly), may be made like unto Thee in all things.”
Then came the experience of the perfecting love
of God. On 28th July, 1843, she wrote: “A season
of great rejoicing. Last Sabbath Day the Lord was
graciously pleased to bestow on me the precious gift
of sanctification. Blessed be His holy name. . . I
now find the Lord present everywhere. I enjoy Him
in my daily duties; I rejoice in Him every moment.
. . . Bless the Lord, 0 my soul; and all that is
within me bless His holy name/
From that never-to-be-forgotten day a clearer
light shone within her and without. All her powers
were in living contact with God.
But she had the high wisdom to know that
spiritual experience can never be kept healthy unless
it is shared. Miss Newcomb seized every opportunity
of making known to others the light that had come
to her, and helping them to seek and find for them-
selves. Many who came to work on her station found
not only a position but the Pearl of Great Price.
Beautiful Boronghoop.
Anne’s journal gives some account of their life at
Boronghoop Station: ‘ ‘ This place is really beautiful, 7 ’
she writes, “a short distance from the Barwon, which
is a noble river. All around so green and fresh,
with trees of the finest kind —mimosa, acacia, she-
oaks, etc. —scattered about and in clumps, like a noble-
man’s park. The clumps are formed by the burning
of a large fallen tree; the ashes have the property of
bringing up a clump of wattles or red gums, etc.
We have got a good number of live stock to begin
with.” Then, after enumerating the kind and
number, she goes on to say: “The hut, or rather


cottage, is now very comfortable and nice. It con-
sists of a parlour, bedroom, and dressing-room, and
a small bedroom for strangers. A kitchen and
bedroom behind, and a store room; also a little
passage between the kitchen and parlour. We have
got a tolerably good piano, nine American chairs,
and the floor covered with Indian matting. The
walls are all covered with bagging, whitewashed, and
the wood painted. All this, with the zinc cottage
windows, looks very nice, and I think, with the
blessing of God, we have every prospect of being
happy. .” This was a high luxury in these Spartan
days.
Dr. John Dunmore Lang, of Sydney, enjoyed the
hospitality of Boronghoop on two occasions, and set
down his impressions of these godly women and their
home: ‘ ‘ The cottage had been greatly improved, both
externally and internally at the period of my second
visit. Three years had made a wonderful change
for the better upon the garden, which had gravelled
walks dividing the different parterres, the only
instance I had seen in the country, and strongly
reminding me of Home. Upon the whole there was
something of a domestic character about the estab-
lishment generally which is rarely to be seen at the
squatting stations in the interior, and I could not
help thinking that the very horses and cattle seemed
to consider themselves more at home than elsewhere.' ’
Having given this description of the homestead, he
goes on to tell of a visit he paid to the Barwon Lakes,
in company with Miss Newcomb. “ ... Miss
Newcomb was quite at home on her high-spirited
steed, and we galloped along through scenery of the
richest description, beautiful grassy plots alternating
with clumps of trees of the most peaceful and
ornamental foliage till we reached the lakes.”
They were generous, hospitable souls, and the
absence of visitors or guests was so unusual as to be
worthy of note in their diaries: “No visitor this day'.
No stranger here to-night!”


First Things First.
These godly women sought first the Kingdom of
God in all things, and this was the source of their
evident happiness.
Anne depended very much, it would appear, upon
the practical ability of Caroline. She acknowledged:
“All the comfort I enjoy is principally owing to my
dear Caroline, who contrives to smooth all my
difficulties. ’ ’
They worked hard, and hailed Sundays alike as
respite from their work during the week and for
their spiritual refreshment. They rode every Sunday
into Geelong, until a church was built at Drysdale.
Caroline loved the class meeting, and in due time
she was appointed a leader of a class.
It must have called for no little confidence on the
part of these two to manage their men and women
servants, to protect their sheep against dingoes, and
to deal with aborigines who sometimes came on the
stations in considerable numbers and made demands.
Yet such was their tact and instinctive kindness that
they lived in peace and security on the banks of the
Barwon.
Removal to Coriyule.
When they prospered they decided to build a
goodly house of stone in Elizabethan style on a block
of land on the north-eastern part of Indented Head,
known to the natives as “Coriyule.” They moved
to the new commodious establishment on 20th August,
1849.
The discovery of gold made station life difficult —
the servants were unsettled. All who could went
off to the diggings and those who could not were
difficult to manage. Miss Newcomb’s sagacity saved
the situation at harvest time. When the men were
going off she struck a bargain with them —half were
to go to the diggings, the other half to remain to
reap, and have a liberal share of the produce, and


after harvest they were all to meet and equally divide
their gains!
On 11th May, 1851, Miss Drysdale died. “She
was ready for the Marriage Supper of the Lamb,”
wrote Miss Newcomb, “and I am left to mourn the
loss of her. The Lord has very graciously supported
me under this very great trial, and now that my
earthly tie is broken by God’s appointment, I here
enter into a fresh covenant with my God.”
Caroline, lonely without Anne, went on with her
work. She took a lively interest in promoting the
Agricultural and Horticultural Society in Geelong,
and at one exhibition took eleven prizes. Her cattle
and stock were famous in the colony, their progeny
being eagerly sought after.
Caroline’s Marriage.
The Rev. James D. Dodgson* was one of the
ministers appointed to Drysdale, and he married
her on 27th November, 1861. This step was not
taken without due deliberation. She said in her
diary: “ I have not taken this step to please anybody,
not even my friends, but to please God.” She
accompanied her husband to his Circuits in Maldon,
Beechworth, Daylesford and Brunswick, and entered
wholeheartedly into his ministry. Still, she had a
very natural desire, when her husband’s work was
done, to spend the evening of her days in the station
home she had built. But it was not to be. She died
at Brunswick on 3rd October, 1873, in perfect enjoy-
ment of the Presence of God. All that was mortal
of her was taken to “Coriyule” and laid in the same
grave as her beloved Anne.
Such was this many-sided and variously-gifted
woman—one of the pioneers of this State who
deserves well of those who have entered into the
fruits of her labours.
♦President of the Conference, 1880.


CHAPTER VII.
THE FIRST APPOINTED MINISTERS ARRIVE.
The Rev. Samuel Wilkinson (b. 1819, d. 1899), the
first regularly appointed Methodist minister in
Melbourne, arrived from Sydney on 9th March, 1841,
and had all Victoria for his Circuit.
He came in company with John W. Willis, the first
resident Judge in Melbourne. There were very few
lighthouses on the coasts in those days, and the
captain missed Port Phillip Heads. When he felt
sure he saw the lights of Port Phillip Heads there
was a loud cry of “Breakers ahead!” which filled
the passengers with alarm. There was just time to
“bout ship,” or they would have been wrecked on
the rocks. It took a day and a half with a fair wind
to sail back in search of the lost port, which they
ultimately reached after a stormy passage of three
weeks.
Wilkinson was greeted at Williamstown by repre-
sentatives of the Church —the Rev. Joseph Orton,
who was holding the fort, Abel Thorpe, William
Witton, Samuel Hebblewhite and others —thankful
that at last their prayers had been heard, and that
now they had a minister of their own. Wilkinson
was duly impressed by Orton, as he had good cause
to be, for this frail, tired missionary had given up
his urgently-needed furlough to shepherd the Church
in Port Phillip, and in his shaping hands it had
become a well-organised Circuit.
No Continuing City.
“He was a gentleman,” wrote Wilkinson of Orton,
“neat in dress, genial in disposition, polite in manner
and a sound and well-informed theologian. He wore


spectacles, but had a keen eye. My most impressive
memory of his look was on the occasion of a ludicrous
event, when I was preaching one week-night in our
new church in Collins Street, which was, at that
time, in a very unfinished state, very little more than
a shell of a building. The pulpit, which was removed
from the chapel in Flinders Lane, was rather shaky,
and the floor was untrustworthy. I had just given
out my text, ‘Here we have no continuing city,’ when
the floor gave way, and I sank out of sight of the
congregation. Mr. Orton hastened to the door and
looked with amazement upon the forlorn preacher.
The effect on the congregation of my sudden dis-
appearance may be imagined. As for myself, it was
some time before I could repress my risible faculties
so as to stand upon the floor and finish my discourse. ’ ’
The Collins Street Chapel.
The Collins Street Church was opened on
Thursday, 24th June, 1841. The Rev. S. Wilkinson
read the liturgy, and the Rev. J. Waterfield, of the
Independent Church, preached in the morning from
Matthew 6: 10. The Rev. Joseph Orton preached in
the evening from Psalm 132: 7, 8. On Sunday, the
27th, the Rev. Francis Tuckfield preached the
morning sermon from Psalm 137: 5, and the Rev.
James Forbes, of Scots Church, preached in the
evening from Acts 8: 5. The collections at these
services amounted to £122/14/9-|. A great tea
meeting was held on Monday, 28th, when no fewer
than eight addresses were given, the ministerial
speakers being Wilkinson, Waterfield, Orton, Forbes
and Tuckfield, and the three laymen, Dredge,
Marsden and Thorpe. The cost of the building was
£3OOO, of which £IOOO was given by the Government,
£I2OO contributed, and £3OO promised, leaving a
debt of £SOO. In its notice of the opening services


“The Port Phillip Patriot and Melbourne Adver-
tiser” referred to the new building as “a spacious
and elegant edifice, the largest and most costly in
the town.”
At the Quarterly Meeting on 23rd July the mem-
bership was reported as 118, and “it was determined
to build a chapel at Pentridge.” As the mother
church, Collins Street, was responsible for extending
the radius of Methodism, and from Wilkinson’s
appointment onwards the Quarterly Meeting origin-
ated the movements which led to the building of
chapels in Brunswick, Brighton, Williamstown,
Pitzroy, Preston, Richmond and elsewhere.
The tide of migration was setting in, bringing a
goodly number of Methodists from England and
Ireland, and also useful members from Sydney and
Van Diemen’s Land. Wilkinson boarded vessels
arriving in the Bay, and welcomed Methodist
immigrants. The brethren and their wives, as
Wilkinson testifies in his reminiscences, were ever
ready to assist in any good work, and local preachers
raised the standard of the Cross in new localities,
wherever a few people could be gathered together.
Thus, by the blessing of God, the cause prospered,
and souls were saved.
Wilkinson had to find his way through the bush
when he preached at Richmond. “Mr. Hurst
occasionally came for a Sunday to Melbourne to
enable me to visit Geelong,” says Wilkinson, “and
the horse which brought him carried me back. I
rode over the plains, seldom meeting any man except
a shepherd tending his flock.”
“In those days bushranging was rife in Victoria,”
he writes elsewhere, “and it was my painful duty to
accompany some of the desperadoes to the place of
execution, some of whom gave good evidences of their
repentance and conversion. . . While in prison with
a stalwart aboriginal from Portland Bay, who was
under sentence of death, I narrowly escaped murder


by him . . . because I would not promise to give
his release/ 9
William Schofield .
Towards the end of 1842, Wilkinson the lova
steady plodder was replaced by William Schof
(b. 1793, d. 1878), a vigorous, successful, pioi
missionary from Sydney. The growing imports
of Melbourne is indicated in the station sheet
1842, by the words attached to Schofield’s na
“another is requested.” Schofield was a man
parts —good at figures and finance, an acknowled
leader of young men, an excellent preacher wit
remarkable gift of prayer. His ministry covere
difficult period when the colony, having sprung
with mushroom-like rapidity, suffered a
financial depression wffiich inflicted serious hards
on the colonists. The new Collins Street Cho
was hard pressed to meet its liabilities. Edw
Stone Parker, the senior trustee, said that he fea
to see any man who had anything peculiar in
dress approaching his house, lest he should be
sheriff’s officer. But the work of the Gospel v
on, and there was a widespread revival of religio
by no means an uncommon experience in times
depression. One of the leading spirits was a soh
named Rudkin. “A flame of fire himself, he kinc
the holy fire of religious love and enthusiasm
others ... he was of eminent use in lead
sinners to Christ, and in increasing the interest
experimental godliness in soldiers and civilians.
Edward Sweetman,
The Rev. Edward Sweetman (b. 1793, d. 18J
who succeeded Schofield in October, 1845,
England for Australia in 1834. The “Sir Tho;
Munroe,” in which he sailed, was wrecked at
Cape de Yerde Islands. On his return to Engl
♦The Early Story of the Wesleyan Methodist Church in
Victoria, Blamires and Smith, p. 39.


he was sent by the Missionary Society to Calais,
Boulogne and Gibraltar. On 2nd October, 1839, he
again set out for Australia in the “Union,” reaching
Sydney 147 days later. In October, 1845, he suc-
ceeded Mr. Schofield as Superintendent of the Port
Phillip Circuit, a position which he occupied for a
term of five years. In 1850 Mr. Sweetman was
transferred to Launceston. Three years later he
returned to Victoria, and was stationed at Brighton.
During his Superintendency of Port Phillip Metho-
dism he saw the Church greatly increased and
consolidated. At the end of his first year he
reported a membership of nearly 400, and
pleaded for more ministers to be sent from
Home. Something of the character of the man
speaks in his report: “Melbourne, Port Phillip,
14th December, 1847. God’s cause is prospering in
this Circuit. We are at the beginning of a work
here that will last so long as the sun and moon shall
endure; and feeling like the ancient painter who
said he was painting for eternity, we are anxious
that all things belonging to the Wesleyan Society
should be built upon the best and surest foundation.
“Almost every day gives us converts to Christ
Jesus our Lord, whilst those who have believed seem
to be more than ever careful to maintain good works.
But we want ministers from your hands; men who
can at once enter into the opening doors, and minister
the Gospel and the sacraments of the Lord Jesus
Christ. If you are able to send us suitable men, I
am confident that you cannot do Christ’s cause
greater service than you would by sending them
without delay. Meantime we shall labour on, and
endeavour to fill the pages of our life’s volume with
such memorials as shall not disgrace and condemn
us in the day of the Lord.”*
Again, in the same year, he cried almost in anguish
for help—waving harvests were ready for reaping;
♦“Wesleyan Methodist Magazine," 1849, p. 336.


golden opportunities were passing beyond bis power
to grasp. Men were appointed to other stations, while
he was left alone. A stronger cause had been built in
Melbourne single-handed than in Sydney during
three times that period and with a staff of three or
four times more man power.
Sweetman was greatly esteemed by the colonists,
and his memory lingered with them as a fragrance.
A man of noble presence, gentle, kind, and wise, his
transparent sincerity impressed everybody. “The
deliberateness of his utterance,” says Symons,
“caused him to be regarded almost in the light of an
oracle; and his weighty words were stored up in the
memory as amongst its most cherished treasures. He
was a preacher of a very high order. . . There was
a thoughtful vigour, and an elegance of diction .. .
which gave a great charm to his sermons.”
There is still in existence a faded old notebook in
which he methodically recorded the place, date, and
text of every sermon during his ministry. The
Melbourne entries show that his Circuit stretched
from Collingwood to Brighton, Richmond to
Williamstown and away to Geelong. The toil
involved in working such a Circuit made great
demands upon his physical stamina, but he was
sustained by the inward joy of seeing the work
prosper in his hands.
During his term the Collins Street Chapel,
inadequate for the growing congregation, had to be
lengthened by thirty feet, according to the original
design.
The July Quarterly Meeting of 1847 again asked
urgently for the appointment of two or three more
ministers. The same meeting recommended John
Christian Symons and Robert C. Plockart as candi-
dates for the ministry. In the meantime these two
served the District as lay agents. After much asking
and heart-breaking delays, the Rev. William Lowe


was sent to Melbourne, and worked with great
acceptance as Sweetman’s colleague.
Before Sweetman was transferred to Launceston in
1850 it was resolved to erect a brick mission house
and school-chapel in Lonsdale Street. The buildings
stood in front of the parsonage, part of the site now
occupied by the Princess Mary Club.
The Rev. John Harcourt arrived in 1848. Sunday
School teachers could not have been very plentiful,
for during the time that he lived at the Lonsdale
Street Mission House* this strange advertisement
appeared in the press: “Wanted, several parties of
both sexes, competent to take the duties of Sabbath
School teachers in the school recently formed in
connection with Wesleyan Chapel, Lonsdale Street.
Persons wishing to engage will please send in their
names to Rev. J. Harcourt. For terms, see Eccles.
11: verse 1.”
♦When the parsonage was built, in 1859, the schoolroom had
to be taken down, and it was expressly provided that the
materials of the schoolroom should be used in the new
building. There was also a tenement on the land on the
Little Lonsdale Street frontage; it was behind the church.
This is mentioned in December, 1854, as being let at 30/-
per week. There is no record of when this building was
demolished. Dr. mentions a mission house as having
been on Wesley Church ground, in front of the parsonage,
and said that the Rev. John Harcourt once resided there. I
can find no record of this. The District Meeting property
schedule of 1851 mentions a chapel, minister’s residence,
and schoolroom at Collins Street, but only a schoolhouse at
Lonsdale Street. The reference may, therefore, be to the
tenement which was on the Little Lonsdale Street frontage.
The school does not appear to have had any living rooms
attached.—Diamond Jubilee of Wesley Church, by A. J.
Derrick, p. 7.


CHAPTER VIII.
WILLIAM BUTTERS AND THE ROARING
FIFTIES.
The Rev. William Butters (b. 1810, d. 1887) was a
man born for the situation in Victoria, to which he
came in 1850. He brought to his task a wide
experience of evangelism and administration gained
during seventeen years of faithful service in Van
Diemen’s Land, where he had laboured amid the con-
victs at Port Arthur and among the settlers in various
Circuits. He was a man of understanding “to know
the times,” and he came when all his great powers
were in full bloom.
First Bush Missionary .
With the eye of a general he surveyed the situation.
At his first Quarterly Meeting on 2nd April, a
Wesleyan Immigrants’ Friendly Committee was
formed. By this means he set himself and his people
to provide for the newcomers who began to pour in
by shiploads, many of them arriving in pitiable
plight, friendless and penniless. Every incoming
vessel was visited to seek out and befriend any
Methodists on board.
The October Meeting decided to establish a
Wesleyan Day School in Melbourne. Another
important resolution was the request for a bush
missionary to travel the growing agricultural and
squatting districts round about Kilmore, Bacchus
Marsh and Mount Macedon. The Rev. Samuel
Waterhouse was appointed to the Melbourne Circuit
for this work, and became the first bush missionary,
riding from farm to farm and station to station
ministering to the scattered population.


Victorian Methodism graduated into the status of
a District in 1851, and Butters became the first
chairman. It was actually styled “The Victorian
Section of the Australian District,” but from that
time it was a separate District. A better chairman
could not have been found, for, as James Bickford
said of him, he was “a man of great sagacity, of
broadest sympathies, and of manly bearing. He
was in the truest sense primus inter pares, and a
‘father’ to the younger men.” He performed the
duties of a travelling bishop, superintending the
churches with eminent effectiveness.
The first regularly constituted District Meeting—
as the Synod was then called —in Victoria was held
by him on 9th September, 1851, at which there were
present: William Butters, Chairman; Frederick
Lewis, Secretary; William Lightbody, John Harcourt
and Samuel Waterhouse. Butters brought the Con-
nexional principle into full operation, “and indelibly
marked the proceedings with that breadth of view
which characterised the whole of his subsequent
administration. . . Every available precaution was
taken for the conservation of the societies and
congregations already gathered, and due steps were
taken for the extension of the work of God
throughout the colony.”!
Lifting the Lid of the State’s Treasure.
Before the second District Meeting the discovery
of gold threw everything into a whirl of disorder.
The discovery came about on this wise. While the
people of Victoria were still celebrating the first fine
rapture of separation from New South Wales,* and
basking in the new glory of elevation to a Crown
colony, Edward Hargraves found rich alluvial gold
near Bathurst. Later discoveries were made on the
Turon. The gold rush began, and all was confusion.
fßickford, “Christian Work in Australasia," p. 96.
♦Victoria became a separate colony in July, 1851.


Lieutenant-Governor Latrobe’s speech in opening the
first Parliament of Victoria revealed how fearful he
was of the embarrassment of agricultural and pastoral
interests due to the exodus of gold-seekers from the
new colony. The drain of population alarmed the
leaders in Melbourne. William Nicholson, the
Mayor, called a meeting of influential men to discuss
the serious situation. They were shrewd enough to
see that the only way to stay the surge of men to
New South Wales was to find gold in Victoria. Had
not Count Strzelecki discovered a nugget as he
penetrated through the Alps into South Gippsland?
Had not Thomas Chapman found a lump of gold in
a gully of the Pyrenees and sold it to Charles
Brentani, the Collins Street jeweller? These and
other such stories were mentioned at the meeting,
which was convinced that there was gold in Victoria
only awaiting discovery. A committee was formed,
and a reward of 200 guineas offered to the discoverer
of payable gold.
Within a month of the meeting the “Geelong
Advertiser” was able to proclaim, on 7th July, that
“the long-sought treasure is at length found. Victoria
is a gold country!”
Three years earlier James Esmond, driving a mail
coach between Buninyong and Horsham, heard the
romantic stories of gold nuggets to be picked up in
California. He threw dow r n the reins, gave up his
mail contract, and hied away to America. Little
enough gold did he find, but, like Hargraves, he
noticed the resemblance of the gold-bearing country
to his own land.
Returning to Buninyong, Esmond found his old
position filled, and took on a fencing contract. Then
one day Dr. George Bruhn, a German geologist, came
to the district and showed him some rich specimens
found in the neighbourhood. Esmond lost no time
in exchanging his saw and axe for a pick and tin
dish, and on Separation Day he and his mate, Pugh,


set out on a prospecting tour, which led to the
discovery of rich, gold-bearing quartz and alluvial
gold at Creswick Creek. Almost simultaneously
Louis Michel found gold at Anderson’s Creek, only
sixteen miles from Melbourne. On 16th July Mayor
Nicholson issued a statement on behalf of the com-
mittee that they had received unquestionable evidence
of the existence of payable gold in Victoria. Thomas
Hiscock discovered gold on Bth August at
Mount Buninyong, and there was a mad rush to
Hiscock’s Gully. Soon after, the Cavanagh family
brought the rich treasures of Golden Point to light.
Before the end of August the mineral richness of
the neighbouring creeks became evident, and parties
of fossickers gathered the first crops of the Ballarat
goldfields. The dazzling discovery of the Mount
Alexander goldfield by Christopher Peters, a
shepherd’s hut-keeper, added wonder to wonder.
Eager, crowding diggers swiftly disclosed the gold
at Forest Creek and its tributaries, Barker’s Creek
and Bendigo Creek to the north, and soon Bendigo
flamed into dazzling splendour, eclipsing for a time
the glories of all other fields. The lid of the colony’s
amazing treasure chest had been lifted. The Mclvor
and the Ovens River rushes came in the following
year.
The Gold Fever Spreads.
The gold fever spread like an epidemic until the
whole colony was inflamed into a delirium. The talk
was gold-gold-GOLD! Sensational tales of rich
finds came constantly from the interior, and soon
every able-bodied man was off to the diggings;
sailors deserted their ships, clerks left their desks,
mechanics ran away from workshops, policemen left
their beats, the civil service was disorganised by
resignations. Three weeks after the first gold rush,
Latrobe wrote to the Governor-General in Sydney:
“Melbourne and Geelong have been almost emptied
of many classes of inhabitants. In some suburbs


not a man is left, and women for self-protection
group together to keep house.”
Old and young, drove, rode or walked to the
diggings, all bent on reaching the El Dorado of
their dreams. They went in bullock waggons,
lumbering drays, carriages and pairs, some with
w'heelbarrows and even perambulators to carry their
blankets, stores and tools. The unmade roads were
deeply trodden by tramping feet and cut by the
endless train of wheels. Drays sank in the mud,
and men strained at ropes pulling them out. By
night the roadsides were red with camp-fires.*
The scene at Ballarat, as described by W. B.
Withers, was typical of most of the fields. “The
quiet sheep-run, with its grassy slopes and its green
valley, where the Yarrowee poured its limpid waters,
became suddenly transformed as by the wand of an
enchanter. The Black Hill then looked upon the
valley with a densely timbered head and face; the
valley was sprinkled with trees and the ranges with
the spurs were well-timbered. Soon the solitary
blue columns of smoke from the prospectors’ camps
were indistinguishable amid a host. The one or two
white tents were lost in crowded, irregular lines
of tents that dotted the slopes and flats, or spread
out along the tortuous tracks made by the bullock
teams of the squatter. The green banks of the
Yarrowee were lined with tubs and cradles; its clear
waters were changed to liquid yellow, and its banks
grew to be long shoals of tailings. Everywhere
little hills of red, yellow and white earth were
visible. In a few weeks Golden Point appeared like
a fresh, rudely-made burial ground.”
Before the end of the first year the diggings
yielded more than £600,000 worth of gold. Reports
of the enormous yield astonished the world, and into
*An excellent portrayal of life on the diggings in the ’fifties
is given in the trilogy of “The Fortunes of Richard Mahony,”
by Henry Handel Richardson.


the primitive ports of the young colony poured ship-
loads of immigrants from almost every country under
heaven. Victoria became the most crowded colony
by the influx of nearly 200,000 people. The arrivals
in Hobson’s Bay averaged 1800 weekly.
Deserted Churches.
Such was the restless, wild, often lawless situation
which confronted William Butters. For a time the
rush to the goldfields threatened the extinction of
hitherto flourishing congregations. Churches were
deserted, classes were broken up, and in some cases
churches had to be temporarily closed for want of
local preachers. These conditions, however, were of
comparatively short duration, for soon the luck-
less and disillusioned people began to return to the
centres of population. But a restlessness and
excitement prevailed everywhere, which rendered
spiritual work very difficult.
Opportunity does not create greatness, but only
reveals it. It was now that Butters’ capacity for
wise administration shone like a guiding lighthouse
amid the confusion. When local preachers and
officers were deserting the city in shoals, he laid hold
of any promising men he could find, closed up the
ranks of his workers, and saved the Church from
loss and wreck. He protected the causes already
planted, and provided for the ever-swelling crowds
on the diggings. Added to this he was besieged by
new arrivals, many of whom were disappointed if he
could not tell them where to pick up gold in the
street. The Wesleyan Immigrants’ Home was
erected at a cost of £3OOO to shelter families who
came with every tide.*
The Melbourne Quarterly Meeting, held on the last
day of 1851, minuted the fact that: “In consequence
of the disorganised state of society occasioned by the
gold-diggings (a great number of the members having
gone there), it is found impossible to answer the
♦See page 109.


96 A CENTURY OF VICTORIAN METHODISM.
question (What is the number of members in this
Circuit?) with accuracy.”
In answer to the question, 1 ‘ What can be done to
promote the work of God in the Circuit? ’ the
record was, “It having been computed that at this
present time there is a population of 20,000 persons
residing at the gold-diggings, ‘Mount Alexander,
among whom, it is conjectured, there are about 4000
members of the Wesleyan congregations, this meeting
is of opinion that it is the duty of this Circuit, as
far as practicable, to provide the means of spiritual
instruction, and would recommend that a minister be
appointed to that district.”
Butters Writes Home.
A few weeks later (21st January) Butters wrote
to the Missionary Committee: * ‘ Great changes have
taken place amongst us, with which, I think, you
ought to be made acquainted. From other sources
you will have learnt that large portions of this vast
country have been proved to be immense goldfields of
surpassing richness, and that already several tons of
the precious metal have been brought into Melbourne.
The news of our wealth has brought thousands of
persons from the adjacent colonies, who, with many
of the inhabitants of our towns and villages, are
now congregated where the rich deposit is found.
“It is impossible to imagine the wild excitement
which has been induced, and the effects which have
followed in every department of the work. At the
date of the discovery everything was in a healthy
and flourishing condition; our chapels were filled to
overflowing, our class and prayer-meetings were well
attended, our members in society were steadily and
rapidly increasing, our Sunday and day schools were
in great prosperity, our Tract Society was in vigorous
and efficient operation, and our members and office-
bearers generally seemed to feel that they were
called to be workers together with God, and with us,


f'-l&ynJ /&/ /&*. /J
&7SL/ rftes /7ny& Yc^UUsl^yC.
75T- — /#U0—-^-
#*o. i I | T
~ ~ Jb/y
I I 9 'A H H i
// / j U 2 z 6
I 6 / /y r 2j2 h 3 1 /i L J M
y h. 6. J. 2 — /_<=L 9-U'tty-'‘
.TtovytS J _ h U 6 k /> 'JlTLJlJL 2 &
3 h J U_J/JlA-JlJlJl hf- e/Ux-^h'
2 7 6 3 7 J 6 6-
I -p======= = _=___ r -_ = __ =f===
vof 7 3 U \/> 7 3 h (1 Y 3 7j
T y /> ,7 *y U it — — =
THE FIRST PREACHERS' PLAN.


I! ’• * ' 000^' '" ' ' **-
JP > N
/|F || .*
Fiev. SAMUEL WILKINSON. Rev. EDWARD SWEETMAN.
THE COLLINS STREET CHURCH—IB4O.


in spreading Scriptural holiness through the land.
But the gold has, for the present, sadly deranged
all our plans. Many of our members, and more than
half of our local preachers, are scattered over the
length and breadth of these extensive goldfields.
Some of them have become suddenly and unexpec-
tedly rich, while others have been greatly
inconvenienced by the changes which have taken
place; and there is manifest danger lest the
all-absorbing subject of the day should turn away
their minds and hearts from things unseen and
eternal.
“We require, at least, four ministers for this
Circuit, or rather, the Circuit ought to be divided
into three, with two preachers in Melbourne, one at
Collingwood, and one at Brighton, as recommended
in our last minutes. .
First on the Gold Fields .
Methodism was the first Church to have a resident
minister and to erect a place of public worship on
the goldfields. Samuel Waterhouse was the first
preacher to appear on the scene at Mount Alexander.
He prepared the way for others, but his removal to
Fiji left the field for a time unoccupied. A successor
appeared from an unexpected quarter. Men in
thousands from South Australia —one-fourth of the
population—had crossed the border, lured by the
tales of gold. Churches were half-emptied and the
preachers bereft of their flocks. With quick decision
the sagacious Daniel Draper in Adelaide despatched
his young colleague, John Christian Symons—
formerly of Melbourne* —to follow the trekkers. He
was instructed to find and keep together the
Methodist diggers from South Australia, and remind
those who struck gold of the derelict chapels they
had left behind and to collect funds for them. But his
chief instruction was to preach the Gospel wherever
*See page 88.


opportunity offered, and save as many souls as lie
could. He was to return to Adelaide in six months ’
time. Symons carried out his commission magni-
ficently save only that instead of returning at the
appointed time he stayed in Victoria for thirty-
four years.*
He reported himself in Melbourne, and remained
there while Butters visited the diggings. After the
chairman returned, Symons proceeded to Mount
Alexander, and pitched his tent at Pennyweight Plat
between Post Office Hill (Chewton) and Barker’s
Creek (Castlemaine). In a week or two he was
joined by Joshua Chapman, a young probationer
from Tasmania, who broke down in health and had
to retire after a few months. Other ministers had
gone to the diggings with parties, and some living
in the neighbourhood visited the diggings, but they
did not live with the diggers as did Symons.* He
held his first service at Forest Creek on the first
Sunday in March, 1852, and from that time services
were conducted regularly both at Forest Creek and
Bendigo and elsewhere. With his own hands he
built of slabs and canvas the first place of
worship at what came to be called Wesley Hill. He
was greatly helped by local preachers, who stood up
among their fellow diggers in their rough clothes,
under the shade of some wide-spreading gum tree,
and proclaimed the glorious Gospel.
Cornish and Irish Diggers.
Butters visited as many of the goldfields as he
could, where he rallied around him local preachers
and class leaders—some of them recalled to duty
from backsliding—and set them to work. There were
many Cornish miners and Irish Methodists aflame
with the fire of Methodism, and by their frank and
♦He remained, at the instruction of Rev. W. B. Boyce, the
General Superintendent. Symons became the first superin-
tendent of Gollingwood, which was curiously given in the
English Minutes of Conference as “Collingwood Goldfields.”


fearless piety they won a singular respect among the
wild and reckless men who abounded at the diggings.
They maintained religious services in many a gully
and on many a creek side, where on the Sunday the
sound of singing, the voice of prayer and the
proclamation of the Gospel was heard, and companies
of rough, bearded, earth-stained diggers gathered
round and joined in worship. Companies of
Methodists held their class and prayer meetings in
each other’s tents. They were a leavening influence
amid the riot of gambling, drinking and moral havoc.
John Harcourt was the next minister on the
diggings. Melbourne cheerfully gave him up for a
time to Mount Alexander, where he arrived in
December, 1851. His first sermon was preached by
the Commissioner’s tent, near to the site on which
Castlemaine now stands. He visited from tent to
tent, and searched out his people, disguised as they
were in strange clothes and engaged in unusual occu-
pations. On his rounds one day he met a cart laden
with “stuff” descending an incline towards the
creek to wash out the gold—the carter at the horse’s
head was a well-known schoolmaster, and the two
hanging on behind were one a doctor and the other
a baker, all members of the Church in Melbourne.
Butters’ letter* aroused the Missionary Committee
in England, and three new men were sent imme-
diately—Thomas Easton and Richard Hart, who had
seen service in Sierra Leone, and Isaac Harding a
young candidate. Other helpers were secured from
the Australian Districts, and thus the ministers
increased from four in 1851 to nine in 1852, and in
1853 the number had grown to thirteen. The Church
membership was then given as 1190, having doubled
in three years.
On 14th December, 1853, Butters said in his letter
to the Missionary Committee: “We have three
ministers at present employed on these fields: one at
*See page 96.


Ballarat, one at Mount Alexander, and one at
Bendigo. . . Our brethren have twelve places of
worship—ten of canvas and two of wood; the cost
of these erections has been about £BOO. They will
accommodate three thousand persons, and are
generally filled to overflowing. We have also places
for out-door service. There are seventy-two local
preachers and other subordinate agents employed
on the goldfields. The number of religious services
conducted weekly is about one hundred. I do not
think that more than from four to five hundred
persons meet in class, but our number of members
is much greater than this. We have ten Sunday
Schools and three day schools, in which there are
about five hundred children. . . .
“The migratory habits of the diggers greatly
militate against the formation of societies and the
carrying out of our own peculiar church arrange-
ments. But experience has proved that no system
is so well adapted to meet the extraordinary
circumstances of these goldfields as our own; and the
inconveniences and evils incident to perpetual change
are being abated. Many of the people are settling
down to digging as their ordinary occupation, and
have their families with them. The presence of
wives and children greatly tends to check the dispo-
sition to rove from field to field. . .
“This altered state of things is leading us to make
arrangements for more permanent houses for the
brethren, and for chapels of a more substantial
character. At the principal fields the Government
have laid out townships, which are now being sold
in small allotments, and on which buildings will, no
doubt, soon be erected. In each of these townships
we have grants of land, on which we hope to erect
endurable establishments with as little delay as
possible. Subscriptions are already commenced
towards the erection of a stone house at Ballarat, to
displace the tent in which the preacher now lives. 99


Writing to the Committee again in 1854, he
reported that “ Early in the year about five thousand
persons took up their abode on the banks of the
Yarra. We erected a large tent outside the
encampment, in which we conducted public worship
and a Sabbath School. . . Our ‘lmmigrants 7 Home’
is more than meeting our most sanguine expectation.
It has cost upwards of £3500, £IOO of which w r as
granted by the Government, and it is now free of
debt. Since it was opened in December last 1361
persons have been accommodated, of whom 652 have
been members of our own Church, and the rest
respectable persons of other denominations, among
whom have been several ministers of religion. 7 7
After mentioning 4 ‘ a reviving influence 7 7 at
Brunswick, he reports “at Williamstown . . . the
chapel (which had been shut up) reoccupied and
improved. 77 The Collins Street Chapel was not
nearly large enough to accommodate the crowds, and
the chapels at Collingwood and Brighton were being
enlarged.
Methodists shared in the flood of prosperity, and
gave liberally to the funds of their Church. The
years 1852 to 1854 saw Circuit debts wiped out and
church buildings multiplied.
Rev. Robert Youngs Visit .
The outstanding event of 1853 for Australian
Methodism was the visit of the Rev. Robert Young,
representing the parent Missionary Society and the
British Conference. Robert Young had done excel-
lent pioneer work in North America and understood
the Colonial mind. The main purpose of his embassy
was to discuss the establishment of a self-supporting
Methodism in Australasia with its own Conference.
He embarked in the new steamship “Melbourne, 77
but after twice narrowly escaping shipwreck the
disabled vessel put in at Lisbon, and he returned to
England. Re-embarking in the “Adelaide 77 on 9th


December, 1852, he landed at Williamstown very
early in the morning of 11th May. Eager to reach
Melbourne, he tried to engage a cab, but when the
driver refused to take him for less than £2/10/- he
determined to walk. After plunging into sundry
bogs, he presented himself at the Mission House in
Collins Street at eight o’clock. His entrance into
Melbourne would have been very different had the
ministers known of his arrival. When he mentioned
the cabman’s attempt to impose upon him he was
assured that the sum demanded was not exorbitant,
as the cost of keeping a horse was great —oats being
22/- per bushel and hay £4O per ton.
On 14th May a breakfast meeting was held at the
Wesleyan Immigrants’ Home, when an address of
welcome was presented to him. The ladies “not
having been invited to the breakfast . . . felt disap-
pointed,’’ and determined to give him a tea meeting.
Six hundred people sat down to tea, after which
speakers urged upon him the necessity of a large
increase of ministerial assistance. In a few minutes
£6OO was subscribed to cover the expenses of their
passage. A man came to him after the meeting and
reminded him that he had been converted under his
ministry in London. The diggings with which he was
connected, he said, was so destitute of ministerial help
that he would give another £IOO to defray the
expenses of a minister from England. Handing Mr.
Young a cheque for that amount, he said, with deep
feeling, “O, sir, when you found me in London no
person would trust me for a joint of meat; but now
my banker will trust me for thousands of pounds.”
Young was greatly impressed with the effective
work of the Immigrants’ Home, and praised it
warmly.
He wrote an excellent account of his tour,* with
delightful touches of humour. Butters took him to
♦The Southern World. Journal of a Deputation from the
Wesleyan Conference to Australia and Tasmania, by the
Rev. Robert Young.


inspect the diggings. Provided with bine veils to
protect them from dust and flies, they set out in a
cart, and “the roads being so full of ruts and roots,
we had jolting extraordinary, and bumping in the
superlative degree.” The traffic on the road was
considerable —families were on their way to the gold-
fields with various vehicles, containing all their
goods and chattels. “Parties were camped by the
roadside, a la gipsy, and one man was seen crawling
out of a hollow tree, where he had been reposing for
the night. ’ ’
They reached Malmsbury, where they remained
for a couple of hours, during which “Mr. Butters,
with his usual discernment and promptitude, selected
a site for a Wesleyan Chapel.” The Rev. W. C.
Curry gave them the hospitality of his bachelor tent
at Forest Creek. They went on to Campbell’s
Creek, where they saw men working in holes —“they
were covered with clay, their very beards being clotted
with it.” After seeing the “process of gold
digging,” said Young, “I was forcibly reminded
of gold being, in more senses than one, ‘filthy
lucre.’ ”
Life on the Gold Fields.
“In the evening I had a walk among the tents,”
he recorded in his journal, “and heard the inmates
of several of them singing Wesley’s hymns, which
forcibly reminded me of another land. I also gained
much information from some parties I met with.
One person told me that the most successful diggers
were Cornishmen and convicts. The previous
employment of the former as miners gave them
great advantage as diggers; and the State-education
of the latter had made them well acquainted with
the use of the pick and the shovel, which they used
with good effect in obtaining gold. Another person
informed me that the Cornish Methodists on the
goldfields, to whose singing we had just been


listening, were very zealous, and would not object
to a minister killing himself with hard labour, but
would rather praise him for it, and then, gathering
devoutly about his corpse, they would lustily sing—
‘Rejoice for a brother deceased.’ ”
The journal goes on to tell how they “left Forest
Creek for Bendigo, 35 miles distant, but another
part of the Mount Alexander goldfields. We started
early, and, after travelling nine miles, called at
the ‘Porcupine Inn,’ and were told by the landlord’s
father that his son had been twelve months there,
and, having during that period realised a handsome
fortune, was now about to retire. I greatly marvelled
at this statement, but when our bill was presented,
which showed we were charged 7/6 for a feed of
corn, and 6/- for a bottle of weak ale, the profit on
which must have been at least 1000 per cent., I
ceased to marvel, excepting at the flagrant extortion
practised upon us.’’
At White Hills ‘ ‘ the tea meeting, with its saffron
cake, was got up in the best style of Cornwall.
Having been requested to give the assembly an
account of my recent visit to the Polynesian Islands,
I spoke for an hour and a half, after which I
baptised five children, gave an address on baptism,
and then preached a sermon. ’ ’ They were evidently
very Cornish at White Hills.
But what rejoiced him was that many people at
the diggings had found that which was more precious
than gold, and were laying up treasure in heaven.
No fewer than a hundred conversions to God had
taken place at Bendigo, and the old members had
been greatly quickened and invigorated. One
person told him that he had come in search of gold,
and had found the “pearl of great price.”
He presided at the District Meetings in Sydney,
Hobart and Melbourne, at each of which the plan to
constitute the Australian Missions into a Church


affiliated with the British Conference was readily
adopted, together with a proposal submitted by Mr.
Young, that the management of the South Sea Mis-
sions should be committed to the Australasian Church,
and ultimately that it should bear the entire expense
of these missions. After eighteen months’ absence
he reached home in April, 1854, and reported the
loyalty of Australian Methodists and their readiness
and competence to sustain the responsibilities of their
own Conference. Thus did Methodism in the
Southern World become self-governing, it being felt
on all sides “that the vast field could no longer be
well worked from London as the official centre.”
Among the results of Mr. Young’s visit, so far as
Victoria was concerned, was the sending out of addi-
tional ministers, among whom were J. S. Waugh,
William Hill, William P. Wells, Theophilus Taylor,
Joseph Albiston and Charles Akrill. Previously Isaac
Harding, Thomas Easton, Richard Hart and James
Bickford had arrived.
First Australian Conference.
The first Conference began in Sydney on 18th
January, 1855, at which forty ministers and preachers
on trial were present. The Rev. W. B. Boyce was
nominated President (the “Young Plan” provided
for the formal appointment of President by the
British Conference on the nomination of the
Australasian Conference). The Conference sent
William Butters to Adelaide and Daniel J. Draper to
Melbourne, who thus became the first Chairman
under the new order. Butters spent four strenuous,
constructive years in Victoria, during which he had
witnessed the most astonishing and rapid transforma-
tion in the history of any community. “His energy
and judgment, his courageous faith and commanding
personal influence secured for the little Church he
shepherded a leading spiritual part in the course of


development through which the group of agricultural
settlements at the head of Port Phillip grew into a
populous mining and commercial province. Nowhere
else has colonial life advanced at such a speed, and
seldom has its advance taken place under better
auspices; in no other period or place has Methodism
taken larger and swifter strides forward. To William
Butters in chief is to be ascribed the success with
which our Church met this most critical emergency.”*
•Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society. Findlay and
Holdsworth. p. 100.


CHAPTER IX.
WALTER POWELL—AN EARLY METHODIST
MERCHANT.
The commercial depression which followed the
Napoleonic wars set flowing a tide of migration
towards Van Diemen’s Land. Henry Powell, a
merchant in London, whose firm had suffered
reverses, determined to seek his fortune overseas.
His son, Walter, was born at Tottenham in May,
1822, just on the eve of sailing.
The family settled on the Macquarie River. It
was a lonely life, and young Walter, with few play-
mates, became a keen observer of the habits of
insects and birds. He was thrown very much upon
his own resources, and had to make his own
playthings. Having no manufactured “ alleys/ ’ he
was one day making “taws” of clay, rounded by
hand and burned in the fire, when one of these red
hot pellets flew up and struck him in the eye,
permanently depriving it of sight.
His mother, who was a cultured lady, educated him
both in mind and heart. He was determined to
retrieve the family fortunes by his indomitable
energy and industry. We see him as a lad of twelve,
a clerk in a Launceston office, and three years later
entering the auctioneering business.
About this time he began to attend the Methodist
Chapel, and was powerfully influenced by that
intrepid pioneer missionary, the Rev. Nathaniel
Turner. What Mr. Turner impressed upon him was
the personal equation in Christianity—that “God so
loved,” Walter Powell, “that He gave His only-
begotten Son,” that he “should not perish, but have
eternal life.” It that realisation which marked
the creative experience in his life.


Spiritual Reality.
The reality of his spiritual life shines from every
page of the journal which he kept for twenty-three
years, from 7th January, 1844, to 13th November,
1867. Benjamin Franklin attributed whatever he
enjoyed of the serene happiness which flows from
moral healthiness to the 4 ‘ little artifice” of keeping
a diary, in which he noted down his failures on any
point, even of minor morality. The like “ little
artifice” was of equal service to Walter Powell in the
cultivation of spiritual mindedness. This journal is
a deeply moving record of a growing soul,
strengthened and guided by regular study of the
Bible, prayer, fellowship and service.
In the autumn of 1844, when he was twenty-three
years of age, Walter Powell came over to the new
settlement of Victoria. He lost no time in taking
up Sunday School teaching at Collingwood. ‘ l O
Lord, save Melbourne!” he writes in his journal-
such was his compassion for the spiritual well-being
of the young settlement.
As a clerk he had been thrifty and industrious in
accumulating capital. He was not content to be a
clerk all his days, and, after taking stock of the
situation in Melbourne, decided to visit England
and make connections with a group of wholesale
houses. Thus he became an importer of hardware.
At first there was plenty of hard work, but little
profit. Then came the gold rush of 1851, when
Melbourne was almost depopulated by the rush to
the diggings, but Walter Powell had sense enough to
see that his gold mine was at home. Hundreds of
spades and pickaxes brought gold to his till. But
then, as always, he had a soul above his business, and
he served his Church with vision and devotion. ?
Tens of thousands of people were streaming into
the small and ill-appointed town, and there was very
little decent accommodation. Schoolrooms, vestries
even churches, were devoted to the charitable object


of providing a place where bewildered strangers
might lay their heads, who otherwise must have
passed the night in the streets.
The Immigrants’ Home.
The Eev. William Butters called a meeting “to
devise means for obtaining additional ministers.”
Mr. Powell rose to speak under strong emotion
which, for some time, he was unable to control. He
stated that on that day, in passing along the street,
he had observed a woman weeping in deep distress.
On inquiring the cause he learnt that she was a
member of the Wesleyan Church, who had landed
on the preceding day, having come from Tasmania to
join her husband at the Ballarat gold diggings. She
had been unable to obtain shelter, every available
spot being crowded, and had been compelled to pass
the night on the wharf with no other protection than
that afforded by a cask. He concluded his narrative
by asking, “Why not have an Immigrants’ Home of
our own?” “Why not?” was re-echoed from various
parts of the chapel. “I will give £SO towards it,”
said the proposer. “I will give £50,” said another.
“I will help,” said a third. “I will give all the
ready money I have,” said a fourth. The scheme
thus incidentally started was promptly and vigorously
carried out.
The object was not only to give a few nights’
shelter aw 7 ay from the squalid discomfort and the
moral and physical contaminations of the lairs called
lodging-houses, but also “to save from utter apostasy
those who might have suffered spiritual loss” during
a long voyage, amidst a promiscuous and unimproving
companionship, and to remind them, in the most
kindly and telling manner, that their abandonment
of country and kindred, in the hope of finding a short
cut to wealth and ease, did not lessen the importance
and urgency of their eternal interests.


The building comprised one dining-room accommo-
dating two hundred persons, a sleeping-room for one
hundred, one hospital for males, another for females,
a library and reading-room. It had also a large
store for immigrants’ luggage, a kitchen, a servants 7
room, a washhouse, and a bakehouse. The amount
of bodily, mental and spiritual refreshment, solace
and protection, which was thus afforded to thousands
deprived of all their wonted supports, cannot be
estimated. The facilities were equally open to people
of all Churches.*
Consistent Generosity .
Walter Powell gave generously and consistently to
this institution. He also contributed handsomely for
the provision of new churches to meet the needs of
the fast-growing colony, particularly on the goldfields.
There was scarcely a Methodist Church at that period
which he did not help to build. The Methodist Book
Depot owes its existence to him. He gave £SOO to
found the Depot and £l5O worth of stock. His
journal reveals him as a consistent reader, and he
was greatly concerned to make good literature avail-
able to the people.
To no man was Wesley College so much indebted
as to Walter Powell. His first gift was £ISOO, and
this was followed by many other noble benefactions.
He not only gave money but served enthusiastically
on the Committee, and brought his great commercial
ability to the organisation and development of the
College.
He was making money rapidly, but he regarded
himself as a steward, and continued to live simply
in a little home at South Yarra with its verandah
festooned with honeysuckle and jasmine.
When it became known that Hargraves, the
discoverer of gold in Australia, had made very little
out of the discovery which had enriched so many
thousands, he sent him £250 as an acknowledgment
♦See page 101.


of his own personal indebtedness and his sense of
Hargraves’ claim on public gratitude.
When Powell moved to St. Kilda he became
organist of the St. Kilda Church and superintendent
of the Sunday School. He writes in his diary, 15th
September, 1858: “ I have now what I never before
possessed—a large library, and a room for reading
and study. ’ ’ But his drawing-room went unfurnished
for a year because the St. Kilda Church needed
money.
He declined an invitation to become a director of
the National Bank in order that he might be at
liberty to serve the Church.
As the business prospered he used his leisure to
continue his education, and worked to a time-table
on mathematics, grammar, history and music. He
studied the dictionary from Ato Z. Realising also
the educational value of travel, he made extensive
tours of Europe, Canada and America.
In 1861 he entered into partnership with Henry
Reed, whom he had known as a lay preacher in
Tasmania. Walter Powell settled in London, and
established his office within a few minutes’ walk of
that which his father had left more than forty years
before.
Heroic Spiritual Training.
Benjamin Gregory, who edited Walter Powell’s
Memoirs,* said that the striking thing about him was
his conscientiousness, his simple regard for the will
of God. “He carefully studied the principles of
legitimate success in trade. He had also habituated
himself to a heroic spiritual training, by means of
which he kept in check the trading spirit, and
maintained an internal isolation —the life and peace
of spiritual-mindedness in the midst of brisk arid
arduous commerce. . . Business was part of his
religion, whilst religion was the whole of his
business.”
♦The Thorough Business Man. Memoirs of Walter Powell


What a keen business brain he had may be judged
from his axiom that returns and stock should be so
managed that a sum of seventy to seventy-five
thousand pounds should be turned over three times a
year. He insisted on the immense importance of
turning over stock quickly. He was quick to see
the value of wool as a means of remitting money to
England.
Successful he was in the best sense, but he always
had a lively sympathy for those who suffered reverses
and those who failed. Scores of men were re-estab-
lished by his timely help. One-tenth of his income he
regarded as the minimum to be given away. A
guiding rule with him was: ‘ ‘ Some of our good deeds
should be performed publicly, for example’s sake,
but the greater part, quietly.”
Walter Powell was a Melbourne man to the end,
and regarded London only as a temporary residence.
In London he was always saving and scheming for
his beloved Melbourne.
Never robust in health, he died in London in 1868
at the comparatively early age of forty-six. Nearing
the end. he said: “I have not to go to heaven
to be with Christ; He is here;” (laying his hand
upon his heart) “He is here —it is Christ in you—
heaven within. I have Him here.” And truly “the
men of grace have found glory begun below”—heaven
on this side of the hills of death. His doctor said:
“I have attended men of rank and men of genius,
men who have made a stir and noise in the world,
but no man ever so impressed me as that man.”
A Grecian marble tablet on the western wall of the
nave of Wesley Church reminds us of this man who
“perseveringly sought the glory of God.”


<Cu/ y^"*-v*#Cy ,
1858—1935.


' MSHBKEf WSW « -®s?-'i -
Rev. WILLIAM BUTTERS.
Rev. D. J. DRAPER.
Mr. WALTER POWELL.
“CALIFORNIA” TAYLOR.


CHAPTER X.
DANIEL DRAPER—A MASTER BUILDER.
If Daniel Draper had died peacefully in his bed
he would still be remembered as a remarkable man —
one of the master-builders of Australian Methodism.
He was born in 1810 in the quiet Hampshire village
of Wickham, celebrated as the birthplace of that
great educationalist and cathedral builder, William
of Wykeham. His father, the village carpenter and
builder, regularly attended the parish church. In
the neighbouring village of Fareham there was a
Wesleyan chapel, and young Draper often lingered
listening at the door, as John Bunyan listened to the
pious women of Elstow T who as they spun talked of
holy things. He could not be induced to enter
the chapel, and the doorkeeper sharply rebuked him
for hanging about the door instead of going in. This
reprimand so hurt him that he declared he would not
go near the place again.
Converted by a Dream .
The Captain of the soul calls men in many ways,
and no one goes through life without hearing His
call somehow 7 , somewhere. Like St. Francis of
Assissi, young Draper was converted through a
dream. He had spent an evening playing cards at
the house of a neighbouring farmer. In the night
he dreamed that he was dealing out the pack, and
while doing so saw Christ, Who, with mingled
sorrow and anger in His face, pointed to a dust-
covered Bible, and bade him read it.
The dream so disturbed him that he could not
work the next day. A few weeks after, he went


again to the chapel in Fareham, and there surrendered
himself to Christ. The record of his subsequent life
is the story of a man enthralled by Christ.
His joining the Methodists was distasteful to his
family, and he endured considerable opposition. At
that time Methodism was not quite “respectable.”
To-day it is respectable, and that is always dangerous
—for Churches die of prosperity rather than
persecution and poverty.
Young Draper held on his way, remaining loyal
to the Church where he had found the light. Those
who knew him in those early days testified to his
love of the Scriptures and Wesley’s hymns and his
great gift in prayer. He frequently quoted the
verse:
“Happy, if with my latest breath,
I may but gasp His name;
Preach Him to all, and cry in death,
Behold, behold the Lamb! ’ ’
Little did he imagine how truly he was to realise
that wish in his last hours. His friends recalled him
with closed eyes, uplifted face, hands clasped behind
his back, rocking himself very slightly to and fro,
the tears sometimes coursing down his cheeks, singing
this verse with earnest and deep feeling.
He was a builder by trade, apprenticed to his
father, who sent him to Southampton to perfect
himself in certain branches of the business. When
the Methodists decided to erect a chapel in his native
village it was built by Daniel and his father.
At twenty he became a local preacher. Two years
later he went to live at Brecon, in South Wales, where
he joined the Methodist Society and quickly
impressed the ministers with his fitness for the work
of the ministry. He was recommended to the Con-
ference as a candidate, and in 1834 was sent
to the Chatteris Circuit, in Cambridgeshire,
where he displayed great energy and luminous


enthusiasm. The Missionary Society heard of his
work, and after his ordination in the Southwark
Chapel, appointed him to labour among the settlers
of New South Wales. By these stages he came to
board the “Bencoolen” at London Bridge on an
October day in 1835, bound for Sydney. Dr. Jabez
Bunting, who went on board to bid him farewell,
said: “You will meet with many discouragements.
However, success is certain. It must come! It must
come!” With these words he often encouraged
himself in days of despondency.
Ministry in Three States.
His first appointment was at Parramatta (N.S.W.).
Then he went to Bathurst, which at that time was
the outermost limit of civilisation. Next he went to
Sydney. As a pioneer missionary he was a tremend-
ous worker, riding long distances in the saddle,
comforting the early settlers, extending and con-
solidating the work of Methodism.
The wdiole of the Australian Church felt the force
of his sterling character and his bold initiative, which
was always supported by sagacious planning and by
unrelenting labour.
In 1846 Mr. Draper was made the first Superin-
tendent of a Circuit which embraced the whole of
South Australia. Often did the rotund little man
ride fifty miles a day visiting the scattered congre-
gations. There was plenty of scope for his
hobby of building churches, and among those
he built was Pirie Street, the cathedral church of
the State.
Draper came to Victoria in 1855. He was in
charge of the Collingwood Circuit and Chairman of
Victoria, which was then one District. The experi-
ment of a “separated” Chairman, which had been
tried in 1854, was not continued with the appointment
of Draper. He had charge of the Collingwood
Circuit, but in 1856 he was freed from Circuit work.


For two years he was a Methodist 4 4 bishop/ ; travel-
ling extensively through the country, encouraging
and promoting the interests of his Church.
The Church Beautiful .
Draper was not the equal of Butters as a preacher,
but he was his peer in administrative ability and
shrewd sense. His early training as a builder was
of inestimable value throughout his ministry. He
had a perfect passion for building beautiful churches
which would set a standard for those which followed.
Throughout his diaries there are records of selecting
church sites, meetings called to erect churches, and
the laying of foundation stones up and down the
land. Something of the building spirit of William
of Wykeham blossomed in him. The lovely four-
teenth century Gothic of AVesley Church came from
his inspiration. There was no little opposition to
a Gothic building; large numbers were ready to
pronounce that it was the “mark of the beast/ ’ and
to regard it as the first step towards Rome.
In a speech at the laying of the foundation stone
of Wesley Church by Sir Henry Barkly in 1857 he
said: “I trust we are not unduly influenced by forms
of architecture, but I know that some of our friends
are apprehensive that in the erection of these Gothic
structures we are departing from the simplicity of
original Methodism. My experience, however, is full
in proof of this, that a good Gothic place of worship,
attractive in its forms and commodious in its
arrangements, will always command a much better
congregation than an ill-constructed place.”
How greatly he rejoiced in the building of Wesley
Church is revealed in his letters: “Our cathedral in
Lonsdale Street is being roofed in. It is a splendid
affair —the best in the colonies:
‘AA T ith storied windows richly dight,
Casting a dim religious light/ ”


He watched it rise course by course, and often
knelt down in a quiet corner to pray that souls
might be saved within those rising walls.
His love of beautiful churches recalls a story of
how he said at the opening of Lydiard Street
Church in Ballarat (now the Museum) that the
stone finial at the apex of the roof might be safely
worshipped, for it was not the likeness of anything
that is in heaven above or that is in the earth beneath,
or that is in the w r aters under the earth.
He had a rich vein of humour and keen sense of
the ridiculous. One day in Collins Street his hat
was blown off by a blustering north-west wind, and,
while he wistfully followed it with his eyes, a young
man who was with him started in pursuit. When it
was captured and returned to its owner, Mr. Draper,
with a merry twinkle in his eye, said to him: “I
don’t know how to thank you sufficiently; for of all
the sights that appear to me ridiculous, that of a
stout man with short legs chasing his hat along a
crowded street on a windy day beats all, and you
have saved me from cutting that ridiculous figure.”
The Connexional spirit of Methodism was strong
in him, and he gave conspicuous service to the affairs
of the Church. He helped to establish the Super-
numerary Fund, and was appointed the first
Ministerial Treasurer. His brethren elected him
Secretary of the Conference in 1857, 1858, and again
in 1860. In 1859, on the nomination of the Methodist
ministers in Australia, he w T as appointed by the
British Conference the President of the Australasian
Conference.
Physically, he was a strong man; a man of medium
height, vigorous build, with the honest, open face of
an English yeoman —a man capable of fatigue but
who could endure hardness; decided, resolute,
cheerful, and withal gentle and kindly. He was
eminently straightforward, practical, manly, liberal
in spirit and catholic in mind, ready to learn and apt


to teach; and above all, a man of strong faith and
devotion.
His biographer # says of him: "He was remark-
able for his farsightedness. In all his plans and
efforts ... he had constant regard to their
bearings upon the future. Having the firm convic-
tion that Australia was destined to become a great
nation —satisfied that its progress, though sometimes
interrupted, must be certain—he did not merely
regard present appearances and present wants, but
felt sure that in devoting himself to securing good
sites for churches, erecting substantial buildings and
extending the ordinances of religion, he was both
serving the present and preparing for the advance-
ment and benefit of future generations. ” He was
an enthusiastic advocate for the cause of education,
and his name will be identified for all time with
Wesley College, of which he was one of the founders.
Such was this pioneer minister —a passionate lover of
souls, a wise administrator with long-range wisdom,
who laid foundations for others to build upon.
The tug of his native land was very strong in him,
and every now and then his heart yearned to revisit
the scenes of his boyhood days. In 1865 the way
opened for him to carry out his long cherished desire.
He was given a great send-off in Wesley Church and,
with his wife, embarked at Hobson’s Bay in the
"Great Britain.” His heart was charmed by the
familiar scenes and the beauties of old England. He
preached in many churches, and among them the
chapel at Fareham where he used to listen at the
door.
The Rev. J. D. Geden, Classical Tutor at the
Richmond Theological College, who met Mr. Draper
in England, wrote of him: "I was much impressed
with Mr. Draper’s . . . bearing. . . He was in
command of himself. . . His centre could not be
doubted. Christ and Christ’s were conspicuously
*The Life of the Rev. D. J. Draper, by J. C. Symons.


the objects around which his whole thought and
being revolved.”
Wreck of the London.
On 29th December, 1865, the “London,” an iron
beauty, left the East India Docks with 125 passen-
gers and a crew of eighty-three, bound for Melbourne.
Many watched the vessel as she steamed impressively
down the river and died away in the glory of the
setting sun. Among the fifty-five passengers who
joined her at Plymouth on sth January was the Rev.
Daniel James Draper, returning to Melbourne. The
anchor was weighed at daybreak on Saturday, 6th
January. There was little or no sea running, and
only a light wind from the north. But soon after
they sighted the Lizard lights, the wind veered to
westward, and the sea began to rise. All through
Sunday the wind increased in violence, but it did not
prevent a service being conducted in the saloon by
Dr. Wooley, President of Sydney University, and
Mr. Draper. It was not until Monday that the
passengers became genuinely concerned for their
safety. The captain stopped the engines, and ordered
sail to be made.
On Tuesday morning, the 9th, the ship was
violently pitching, taking whole seas over her bows.
A lifeboat was swept away. Then she gave a
tremendous pitch forward, as if to bury herself nose
foremost. The next moment the sea tore away the
jib and flying jibboom, which carried away with them
the foretopmast, the foretopgallantmast, foreroyal-
mast and mainroyal-mast with all their gear. The
violence of the gale was such that the wreck of these
spars could not be cleared, and they swung about
doing serious damage. On through the wild dark
night and surging sea the dismantled “London”
drove.
Early the next morning Captain Martin turned
the ship round to return to Plymouth. But in the


afternoon fearful seas broke over her, carrying away
the second lifeboat. That night a veritable mountain
of w r ater swept away the main engineroom skylight,
filling the engineroom in three minutes and
extinguishing the fires. Sails, mattresses, blankets,
tarpaulins were used to stop the opening in the deck,
but they were swept away by the gigantic waves.
It was just a matter of time as to wdien the doomed
“London” would go down. Furious w r inds and wild
waves wreaked their vengeance on the helpless
barque.
At midnight Mr. Draper commenced that memor-
able prayer meeting which lasted until the ship sank
at two o’clock the next afternoon. The passengers
gathered in the saloon without distinction of class.
There was no cry or shrieking, no frantic behaviour.
Mothers were weeping bitterly over their children,
w 7 ho pitifully asked what they were crying for. In the
midst of these heart-stricken people Mr. Draper held
a general prayer meeting, and between the prayers
earnestly besought them to come to Christ for salva-
tion. Moving about among the crowd, one and
another w r ould say: “Pray for me, Mr. Draper!”
which he did. Many read their Bibles. Captain
Martin joined them for a few minutes from time to
time. Thursday, 11th January, dawned, and the
captain entered the saloon, and in answer to an
appeal calmly told them that all hope was over. Then
Mr. Draper stood up, the tears streaming down his
face, but with a clear voice said: “The captain of
this ship tells us there is no hope, that we must all
perish, but the Captain of our salvation says there
is hope for all. Although we must all die, and shall
never see land again, w r e may all make the port of
heaven.” Up to the time the ship went down he
prayed, and was heard to say repeatedly: “Oh, God,
may those who are not converted be converted now —
hundreds of them. ’ ’ He was last seen speaking with
deep emotion, but in a clear and distinct voice and


saying: “Those of you who are not converted, now is
the time, not a moment to be lost; for in a few
minutes we shall be in the presence of our Judge.
‘Prepare to meet your God.’ ’’ Of the 263 on board,
nineteen managed to get away in a little boat, and
were picked up by the Italian brig, “ Marianople. ”
The last man who left said: ‘ ‘ The last I heard, they
were singing
‘Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in Thee.’ ”
So lived and laboured this man of Christ, knowing
in Whom he had believed, and unafraid in the storm
through which he sailed to meet his Pilot face to face.
His memory is perpetuated by a Draper Memorial
Church in Adelaide, a marble tablet in Wesley
Church, and an endowed scholarship at Wesley
follesre


CHAPTER XI.
FROM COLLINS STREET TO WESLEY
CHURCH.
Owing to the continual influx of population into
the colony the provision of adequate church accomo-
dation was an ever-pressing problem. Draper
mentioned to his brethren as they were returning by
steamer from the District Meeting at Geelong that it
had been suggested to him (apparently by Mr. D. C.
Mac Arthur, Superintendent of the Bank of Aus-
tralasia) that the Collins Street property might be
sold for £40,000. His fertile brain was quick to see
the possibilities of expansion that such a sum of
money would afford—-an elegant (a favourite word
of Draper’s) church might be erected on the Reserve
in Lonsdale Street and a group of other churches
at strategic points in the suburbs. The idea rooted
in Draper’s mind, and he rejoiced at the prospect of
doing this great work for Methodism. The Confer-
ence of 1856 appointed the Rev. W. L. Binks to the
Superintendency of the Melbourne First Circuit, in
whom Draper found a willing ally for his statesman-
like scheme. On 22nd April, 1857, a meeting of the
Trust was called in Collins Street to consider the
expediency of selling the property. The Rev. D. J.
Draper, Chairman of the Victoria District, the Rev.
W. L. Binks, the Rev. W. P. Wells, and eight trustees
were present. They decided ‘ ‘ that the cause of God in
connection with the Methodist Church in Melbourne
would be greatly promoted by the sale of the Collins
Street property.” The half-acre block was sold to
Mr. James Webb of Brighton for £40,000. In the
meantime a site had been purchased at the corner
of Bourke and William Streets for £5610.* This
•Where Goldsbrough, Mort and Co.'s Wool Warehouse now stands.


nest egg was to finance a scheme which provided for
the building of two large churches with schools and
parsonages, one in Lonsdale Street and the other in
Bourke Street, and also to afford substantial assist-
ance in the erection of five more chapels.
The full appropriation was as follows: Lonsdale
Street —Chapel, £12,000; minister’s dwelling, £2000;
school-house, £3000; book-room, £2000; total, £19,000.
Bourke Street scheme, £IO,OOO. North Melbourne —
Chapel, £2000; dwelling, £IOOO. Emerald Hill —
Chapel, £1500; dwelling, £SOO. St. Kilda —Chapel,
£1500; dwelling, £SOO. Victoria Parade —Chapel,
£IOOO. Brunswick Street —Chapel, £1000; dwelling,
£SOO. Balance to liquidate debts on Collins Street
property, £ISOO. Total, £40,000.
Competitive designs were invited for the buildings
in Lonsdale Street, the winner being Mr. Joseph
Reed. The plan, as submitted, proved too costly,
and Mr. Reed suggested leaving out one bay in the
nave. To this the Trustees agreed.
The Light of Other Days.
And so the “Dear Old Collins Street’’ Chapel
ended its honourable career. It was a hallowed place
to multitudes of men and women who had helped
to build the glory that is Melbourne. Many a lone
soul, newly landed in a strange country, found there
spiritual refuge and warm fellowship. It was no
uncommon sight to see tears of joy in the eyes of
fresh arrivals as they stood in the porch.
An old Methodist, recalling the light of other days,
thus described the old chapel;* “To enter into it
you had to walk up a number of steps, there being
a gallery from one side of the chapel to the other
which was used for Sunday School purposes. At the
other end was the orchestra, and in front a pulpit.
The chapel was divided into three parts, the centre
with pews each side of the passage. The pews were
•“Spectator/* 14th December, 1906, p. 2061.


straight up and down, with no room to stretch your-
self if you wanted to do so, and they were not made
for sleepers or loungers, and, if any did get drowsy
during the sermon, you would see them standing up
for a few moments to arouse themselves (a fact).
“The congregation was made up of Church of
England, Baptists, Presbyterians, Wesleyans and
others. To meet the wishes of other denominations,
the Church of England services were introduced,
consisting of singing, chanting, prayers from the
Church of England prayer book, etc. etc., which took
about fifty minutes. Then a sermon for another 50
minutes. Then a collection. For this purpose a
rod about three feet long, with a box at the end of
it, was passed from one end of the pew to the other
by the collector without troubling anyone, and
if you wished to put a sovereign in it you could do
so without being seen. Then followed a suitable
hymn with a good old-fashioned tune. A short
prayer and the benediction closed the morning
service, with an invitation that if they were seeking
salvation the preacher would meet them. The evening
services commenced at six o’clock, with a few prayers
from the prayer book. Then a sermon for one hour,
and at the close a good prayer meeting, at which
could be heard the cries of those who had been pricked
to the heart, consisting of men, women, boys and
girls, who having been invited to seek salvation were
to be seen going to the forms provided for the
penitent, 'and soon the song of those who had found
salvation was heard,’ and the hallelujahs of response
from those who were the disciples of Christ and had
proved the truth of the words of Jesus, that those
that came to Him He would in no wise cast out.”
Sunday School met at 9 a.m. and 2 p.m. The
teaching given was mostly from the Catechism. At
morning service the scholars sat in the gallery, the
boys on one side, the girls on the other. The
superintendent sat between them, having close at


hand a long rod, with which he administered
discipline to unruly scholars.
The Lost Foundation Stone.
His Excellency Sir Henry Barkly, Governor of
the Colony, laid the foundation stone of Wesley
Church on 2nd December, 1857. Every effort to
locate this stone has so far failed. During the
ceremony some eager onlookers climbed on to the
mason’s shed, which gave way under their weight
and created a sensation. Draper made a notable
speech, in which he traced the coming of Methodism
to the colony, explained the polity of the Church and
defended the beauty of Gothic architecture against
the criticism of those who thought it rank popery.*
In the interval between the closing of Collins
Street Church and the building of Wesley, the con-
gregation worshipped in the Temperance Hall and
in the Lonsdale Street School-chapel.
Wesley Church was opened on Thursday, 26th
August, 1858, at 11 a.m. Prayers were read by the
Rev. D. J. Draper, Chairman of the Victoria District
and Secretary of the Australasian Conference. The
Rev. William Butters, at this time President of the
Australasian Conference, preached from Zechariah
4: 6, 7. The evening preacher was the Rev. A.
Cairns, D.D., minister of Chalmers Free Presbyterian
Church. On Sunday morning, 29th August, Rev.
William Butters preached, and Rev. W. L. Binks
read the prayers. The Rev. Isaac New, of the
Baptist Church, preached in the afternoon, and the
Rev. Joseph Dare, of Sandhurst, in the evening.
The church is a lovely example of decorated English
Gothic in the form of a Latin Cross. Seen from an
aeroplane, the perfectly-proportioned cruciform is
very striking. In its beautiful garden setting, with
the slender fingers of the poplars to match its spire,
Wesley Church is a fitting Cathedral of Victorian
Methodism. The bluestone in random courses is
enriched with free-stone dressing. The gabled nave,
♦See p. 116. Also Symons* Life of Draper, p. 208.


the mullioned tracery windows, the tower surmounted
by a graceful, octagonal spire rising 175 feet —the
whole forms a balanced, harmonious architectural
gem of which the city is increasingly proud. When
Dr. F. J. Jobson, the representative of the British
Conference, visited Victoria in 1861, he said that it
was the finest ecclesiastical edifice in Methodism
which he had seen, either in England or America.
For many years the slender spire could be clearly
seen from Hobson’s Bay, and was used by the
adjusters of ships’ compasses.
Internally there is a decided departure from
tradition necessitated by the galleries to provide
increased accommodation. The difficult problem, has.
however, been skilfully treated, and the Gothic arches
rising from massive pillars are satisfying to the eye.
The church, as originally furnished, had a high
octagonal pulpit, ascended by (< a light geometrical
stair on the east side and a reading desk on the west
side. They were so placed as not to hide the
communion table on a raised platform beneath a
projecting carved Gothic canopy. The present
pulpit-platform was built in 1881, the earlier pulpit
being incorporated.
The Liturgy and Pew Rents.
Originally the Church of England Liturgy, as
abridged by John Wesley, was always followed at the
morning services. In 1877, however, the Quarterly
Meeting objected to this reading of prayers, but the
Trustees were not impressed by the arguments for
discontinuing the practice. By 1878, however, feeling
ran high, and a vote was taken among the seat-
holders. A large majority voted for the discontinu-
ance of the reading of prayers, and thereupon the
Trustees requested the Superintendent to do so, and
retain two chants only.
In the early years of Wesley Church, Methodist
soldiers attended from the barracks—the scarlet
uniforms lending a splash of colour to the services.


Pew rents in the new church were fixed at five
shillings each per quarter, and the Collins Street pew-
holders had first choice, provided all their arrears
had been paid up. Pained suprise was expressed in
1861 that so few pews were let. A reduction to
eighteenpence was made for the “less eligible seats.”
Things did not improve, however, and in 1878 the
gallery seats were fixed at two shillings for the front
rows and one shilling for the others.*
A Cavalcade of Memories.
What historic Conferences have met in this old
bluestone house of prayer! What memories the very
name “Wesley Church” starts in the mind! What
faces it conjures up out of the dear dead days beyond
recall! It was here that the historic General Con-
ference of 1901 consummated Methodist Union. Its
vaulted arches have resounded with triumphant Te
Deums and its solemn silence has been broken with
sobs as when John Eggleston improved Draper’s
heroic death. To many it has been an altar of
consecration and a place of ordination to the holy
ministry.
A number of unexpected difficulties rose in the
transactions connected with the sale of the Collins
Street property and the building of Wesley Church.
A deficiency was discovered in the area of the Collins
Street land. Some neighbouring building had
encroached upon the site, and the trustees had to
compensate the purchaser. Then a defect was found
in the title which could only be rectified by an Act
of Parliament, the costs of which had to be borne
by the trustees. The purchaser of the land, who lost
heavily in connection with the construction of the
Geelong and Ballarat Railway, was unable to pay
£SOOO of the £40,000.
There was a lengthy discussion as to whether the
parsonage should be built on the Lonsdale Street
•The Diamond Jubilee of Wesley Church, by A. J. Derrick, p. 10.


land, or on land adjoining the Immigrants' Home in
Carlton. A committee appointed by the Trustees
recommended the church property as the more suit-
able, and added; “Itis a locality not unhealthy when
properly levelled and drained."
The School Room and the Book Room were built in
1859 to Mr. Reed’s plans at a cost of £3229, plus
£1996 for the residence. The day school, which had
been conducted in the old school room, was trans-
ferred to the new building and continued until
1873, when the new Education Act came into
operation. The Education Department rented the
school buildings from 1874 to 1878. His Excellency
the Governor-General of Australia, Sir Isaac Isaacs,*
was a scholar at the Wesley School House at this time.
The trustees of the Bourke Street land began to
doubt the wisdom of building so near to Wesley
Church, and, after arguing the matter until 1860, they
decided to sell the property and divide the proceeds
equally between Wesley Church, North Melbourne,
St. Kilda, and Brunswick Street. The land was sold
to Mr. Goldsborough for £3OO0 —a loss of £2687 on
the purchase price. The trend of the city thus far
has served to confirm the wisdom of disposing of
the Collins Street property, although for some years
Wesley Church was regarded as being out of the
way, and dubbed “a blunder in bluestone,” but
Lonsdale Street may yet prove to be the centre of
the growing city.
*The first Australian-born citizen to be appointed to the office.


CHAPTER XII.
REVIVAL AND CHALLENGE.
The revival of religion, which was kindled in
America in 1858 and leapt across to Britain and
several other European countries, spread also to
Australia. In Victoria the work of grace broke out
in the Circuits —which is always the healthiest and
most abiding form of revival. The first glow burst
into living flame at Brighton at a love-feast on 22nd
May, 1859. Tears of penitence began to fall, and
nine seekers effectively found Christ. Services were
held daily, and complacent churchgoers were trans-
formed into eager soul-winners. The studious, even-
tempered superintendent, the Rev. Edward King,
was filled with love and led the revival. Other
ministers came to his help, and so the contagion of
grace spread to various Circuits in the metropolis.
Then the power and glory appeared in Castlemaine
and Bendigo. At Drysdale the work began with a
group of men and youths—the Rev. J. D. Dodgson
directed it, and whole families were converted —and
the movement spread right through the Bellarine
peninsula.
It was a time of religious fervour. Geelong was
moved under the challenging preaching of Joseph
Dare, Joseph Albiston and Francis Neale. Hundreds
were gloriously converted to God, and scarcely a
Circuit went untouched by the holy fire.
Matthew Burnett.
This spiritual movement was fed and strengthened
by two remarkable evangelists—Matthew Burnett
and William Taylor.
Matthew Burnett arrived in August, 1863, and
was soon at work in the Brighton and Berwick


Circuits. Revival services were held in quick suc-
cession at Clunes, Creswick, Ballarat, Sandhurst,
Geelong and all over the State. He was an ardent
temperance advocate, and hundreds of drunkards
were redeemed. Thousands signed the pledge during
his campaigns. The South Yarra Home was brought
into existence when a number of fallen women were
reclaimed in his mission at Wesley Church. He was
a man of overflowing energy and invincible love.
The common people—the unchurched and the dis-
inherited —heard him gladly. His unconventional
methods evoked no little criticism in the press and in
the Churches, but he won his way and public men,
almost unapproachable to others, were found presid-
ing at his meetings. Dr. B. I. Wat,kin said of him;
“He loved sensational methods; he delighted in
torchlight processions; he gloried in excitement.
But the novel character of his services attracted
crowds wherever he preached, and wherever he went
the hand of the Lord was with him. ’*
After nine years of ceaseless work, during which
he is reputed to have delivered over 4000 public
addresses, his health broke down under the strain,
and he sailed for England. After an absence
of two years he returned to Victoria in 1874. The
“Loch Maree,’’ in which he was a passenger, was
dismasted in a gale, and had to put into Gibraltar
to refit. While he waited there, he set to work among
the soldiers in the garrison and the sailors on the
battleships, and won many of them for the Kingdom.
With health restored, Mr. Burnett returned to
his evangelistic missions with renewed energy. For
five years, under the direction of the Home Mission
Committee, he visited every part of the colony, and
there was “added to them day by day those that were
being saved.”
♦Jubilee History of Wesley Church, p. 12.


California Taylor.
16th June, 1863, is a day to be gratefully remem-
bered in the history of Victorian Methodism. On that
day the Rev. William Taylor landed in Melbourne.
There was no one to meet him as he disembarked from
the steamer “Bombay”—he came unexpected and
uninvited. “There I was,” he said, “a stranger in
a strange land, with two dollars and fifty cents in
my pocket.” Though he came unheralded, he was
not unknown, for his book on ' Street Preaching in
California” had found many appreciative readers in
the colony. He had been a street preacher in Balti-
more, San Francisco and other cities in America.
His open-air evangelism and his work among the
sailors in San Francisco was signally effective,
and many hardened sinners were liberated. The
commercial panic and the great fire which destroyed
his Seamen’s Bethel involved him in serious financial
difficulties, for which he accepted full responsibility.
He wrote the story of his experiences in books full
of quaint originality, recounting graphic instances of
conversion, and giving his impressions of men he
met and things he saw. He conducted evangelistic
missions and lectured in the United States, Canada,
and Britain.
These missions were entirely self-supporting. He
refused to accept gifts of money, but before leaving
explained his embarrassment due to the destruction
of the Seamen’s Bethel and his efforts to relieve the
situation. By means of his books he paid his own
expenses, supported his family, and devoted the
surplus to liquidate the debts caused by fire and
flood in California, and he announced that any who
wished to lend a hand could find his books at the
stores. In this way he paid off the Bethel debt of
twenty-three thousand dollars.


In a Canadian Forest.
In February, 1862, he was preaching at Peterboro,
in Canada, and met Dr. James Brown, who had
spent some years in Australia, and who strongly
urged him to visit the great South Land. Charac-
teristically enough, Taylor went out into the forest,
knelt down in the snow, and prayed until, as he
said, “I was certified by the Holy Spirit that the
Lord wanted me in Australia.” Thus guided, he
came here from England, visiting Palestine by the
way.
As soon as he introduced himself, he was warmly
welcomed by the Rev. D. J. Draper and other leaders
of the Church. Draper invited him to preach at
Wesley Church on the following Sunday. His word
was with power, and from his first services there
began a fruitful revival. Meetings were held each
week evening, and Draper joyfully testified that
“many found peace, and a deepening of the work of
God was experienced in many of the church
members.” Night after night scores knelt at the
communion rail in surrender to Christ, until one
night ‘ ‘ there was a perfect breakdown; many sought
and found mercy.” He was urged to continue, and
so he went on with ever-increasing power until
Melbourne was thoroughly awakened.
One of his converts —the Rev. Joseph Nicholson-
described him thus: “His striking personality and
spiritual power made it impossible to regard him
with indifference. His physical stature of over six
feet in height, and well-proportioned frame, with
keen eyes, long flowing beard, and commanding voice,
all arrested attention. His direct method of speech,
flavoured with an American accent, and telling
illustrations, embodying a well-reasoned message of
Gospel grace, accompanied by the demonstration of
the Spirit and power, could not fail to attract large
audiences, and produce marked results. . , Hig


method of presenting truth was original and
striking. .
He visited Geelong, Castlemaine, Bendigo, then
found his way to Echuca, and subsequently made a
tour to Kyneton, Kilmore and away on to Beech-
worth, and from thence by stage coach to Albury.
On the return journey he held a memorable mission
at Ballarat.
The Man who Could Not Turn the Other Cheek-
“ From Ballarat, I went to Creswick,” he says in
his “Autobiography.'' “There we had a blessed
work of God during a week of special services. I
became acquainted there with an old California
miner whose Christian name was Tom. He was a
pugilist and desperado in his way. But he was
induced to come to the meeting. A short time before
my visit there, he was awakened and sought and
found the Lord. On being invited to join the
Wesleyan Church he said, ‘I can't join the Church
till I read the New Testament and see whether I can
live up to it.' "
“So they gave him a New Testament, and he read
it carefully through. Then said he, ‘I accept every-
thing I have read in the Testament as the truth of
God, and I consent to obedience to the best of the
ability that God shall give me. But I read in one
place that if a man shall strike me on one cheek I
must not strike him back, but must turn the other
cheek and let him strike it. I have been a pugilist
for many years, and I think my habit of striking
back is so fixed that I shall not be able to keep that
command, and I will have to wait a little bit longer.'
“Soon after, a fellow-miner by the name of Bob
came into Tom's tent in a terrible rage, and swore
at Tom and threatened to thrash him. Tom silently
prayed to God for help, and kept his mouth shut. As
Bob increased more and more in the violence of his


threatening gesticulations, Tom said to his partner,
‘Come, let us go to work.'
“Bob followed after them, storming and threaten-
ing. Bob had a big dog with him, and hissed his
dog on Tom. Just as the dog was going to seize his
leg, Tom brought his miner's pick around with a
sweep and knocked the dog into the miner's
prospecting hole, wdiich was four or five feet deep.
Bob had to stop to get his dog out, then he came
tunning after them as hard as he could run, and,
rushing up, struck Tom with his fist on one cheek,
and Tom turned the other cheek, saying, “There is
another cheek, Bob; fire away.'
“Bob turned suddenly about and hastened away.
He came again that night, and begged Tom not to
sue him for assault. He inferred from Tom's refusal
to retaliate with his fist that he meant to sue him
through the law. Tom shook hands with him, and
assured him that he wasn't going to sue him. All
he wanted for him was that he should seek Jesus.
Bob began to come to meeting with Tom from that
time. When I saw T them Bob had not yet professed
to experience salvation, but he was seeking it.
“So Tom said to the minister, ‘I am ready now to
join your Church. I have read the rules, and I have
proved the sufficiency of the grace of God to enable
me to keep them.' "
A Living Legacy .
After Scarsdale and Linton, “My next appoint-
ment, '' he says, ‘ ‘ was at Hamilton, eighty miles
through the open prairie." Then down to Portland,
across to Belfast and Warrnambool, and elsewhere,
and everywhere he was wonderfully used by God in
bringing men and women to a saving knowledge of
Jesus Christ. Many of his converts became minis-
ters, local preachers, class leaders, and active church
workers. He set others working, and the flame of
revival spread to Circuits which he did not visit.
He twice visited Victoria— in 1863 and 1869.


The Annual Conference of 1864 declared, by reso-
lution, that “it recognises with gratitude to Almighty
God the piety, zeal, and very acceptable pulpit
labours of the Rev. W. Taylor, and also his remarkable
success in winning souls to Christ.”
The years confirmed his own statement —“My
mission to Australia was in fulfilment of an
unmistakable providential programme and the
accomplishment of a great providential purpose.”
“California” Taylor, as he was affectionately called,
left his mark on Australian Methodism, and his work
abides. Not only did his converts endure, but
he re-created evangelism in the Church and left, as
a living legacy, a new passion for souls. Howsoever
the figures may be analysed, the Church in Australia
reported a net increase of twenty-one thousand
members over the seven years covered by his visits.
He preached on all the five continents, won multi-
tudes of souls, and planted Missionary Churches in
India and South America, and was finally made
Bishop of Africa by the Methodist Episcopal Church.
The flourishing eucalyptus, of which California is
justly proud, is said to have grown from seed
taken home by the Rev. William Taylor after his
first visit to Australia.
Two other visitors who came about this time
deserve mention. The Rev. Frederick J. Jobson,
D.D., came as the representative of the British Con-
ference to discuss the relation of the South Sea
Missions to the Australasian Conference. He arrived
on 10th March, 1861, and spent two weeks, during
which time he was conducted by Mr. Draper to
Ballarat, Geelong, and other centres. His rich
evangelical sermons, delivered in the grand style,
created a deep impression on the crowded congrega-
tions which gathered to hear him. He was a shrewd
observer, and his impressions were published in his
book, “Australia, with Notes by the Way.”


Ebenezer Jenkins’ Challenge.
The Rev. Ebenezer E. Jenkins, who was General
Superintendent of Missions in Continental India,
paid a welcome visit on his way home to England.
He came in June, 1863, and stayed until the end
of January. Ebenezer Jenkins was a truly great
preacher—a clear thinker with a living spiritual
freshness and an instinctive love for the dramatic
grandeur of Biblical imagery. His sermons anc}
lectures on India awakened great interest in all the
denominations.
He conceived the idea that God had led
Englishmen to colonise Australia for the purpose of
planting a Christian people in the neighbourhood
of India, China, and Japan, so that, as the Australian
colonies grew and prospered, they might undertake
the greatest share of the work of evangelising the
East. His lecture in Wesley Church, on 19th
November, at which His Excellency Sir C. H. Darling
presided, was acclaimed as a masterpiece.
yif this other half of the world/’ he said, “con-
taining nearly two-thirds of the human race, is to be
discipled, and if the means of conversion be in this
case the preaching of the Gospel, and the effusion of
the Holy Spirit attendant thereupon, Australia must
gird herself for the largest share of the work. All
objections that may be offered on the ground of pre-
occupation with interests that sufficiently tax the
attention and resources of the colonies do* not touch
m J position; I am not affirming what you may now
attempt, but what you must hereafter do. I will not
presume to foretell the political destiny of these
colonies; but history cannot furnish us with the
origin of a country more strikingly marked by the
finger of God than the birth of Australia. AVhy was
this soil so many ages silent as to what lay beneath
it * . was waiting until God should bid it speak.
While China and Japan were closed against the
Gospel, while the Hindus were groaning under the


yoke of the East India Company, while voyaging was
long and hazardous, Australia, by God’s command,
kept her finger on her lips; there lay the reefs and
alluvial deposits of Victoria, not hiding their wealth
in mines, but pushing up their gold to the surface
to knock at the passengers’ feet; there slept the
treasures of Bathurst and Otago, surpassing the
dreams of avarice: the mighty gold, the tyrannic idol
of the world, the magician whose spells, if God were
not to interfere, would make the world a puppet show,
was as innocent of enchantment and power as if he
had been a stone statue. He lay there the passive
agent of prophecy. 'Thus saith the Lord, For brass
I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver,
and for wood, brass, and for stones, iron.’
Gateways of Opportunity.
"But when the gates of the Eastern nations were
thrown open, and the cry of millions on this side of
the globe, from India and China, a cry for deliver-
ance from the long captivity of superstition and the
long oppression of despotism, reached the ear and
touched the sympathies of the West; and when
statesmen, philanthropists, and the leaders of
Churches w r ere wondering what these changes in the
East portended, and how the emancipation they
called for could be effected, the God of nations spoke
to England suddenly and decisively through the
discovery of gold, and one hundred thousand English-
men heard the command, ‘ Get thee out of thy country,
and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s house
into a land that I will show thee; and I will make
thee a great nation, and I will bless thee and make
thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing.’ And
they departed, as the Lord had spoken unto them.
They did not all understand or acknowledge that they
were drawn hither by the voice of the Lord. But
what if some did not believe? Shall their unbelief
make the promise of God of none effect ? God forbid!
Thousands of God-fearing families, children of the


Abrahamic convenant, brought that promise with
them. They landed upon these strange shores, they
built altars to the Lord and gathered round them,
and the bush was vocal to the new melodies of
Christian worship; families were knit into societies,
and societies grew up into Churches. And while I
look with admiration and wonder at the wealth, the
intelligence, the sinew, and the massive proportions
of the colonies, I believe it is the salt of Christian
life, killing all tendencies to decay and quickening
all tendencies to progress, that will make you and
keep you a great people. And as sure as the Bible
is with you, as sure as its doctrines of universal love
are the themes of your ministers and the cement of
your Churches and the daily lesson of your children,
so surely will you regard your own greatness as an
elevation heavenward, whose stepping-stones shall
invite and help the grovelling tribes of India and
China to climb to God. They will go up upon your
institutions, upon faith in Jesus Christ, upon the
acknowledgment of common rights, upon the recog-
nition of woman’s equality, upon those humane and
philanthropic efforts for young and old which are
the buttresses of a Christian nation. What a glory
for Australia to be followed by the strange and long-
forgotten millions of the East amongst whom she has
been so singularly and providentially neighboured;
and, when she has conducted them to the summit of
faith and liberty, to deliver her charge to the Father
of Nations, ‘Here am I, and the children whom Thou
hast given me!’ ”
In this and other such stirring speeches he called
Australians to realise the responsibilities of their
privileges.
The Conference of 1864, which met in Melbourne,
recorded “its high appreciation of his eminent gifts
. . . and the profit which has accrued to many of our
congregations from his effective pulpit labours.”


CHAPTER XIII.
THE ROMANCE AND REALISM OF CIRCUIT
LIFE.
The expansion of Methodism in this State is truly
apostolic, and resembles in many respects the
Christian Church of the first century. The early
Methodists were evangelists who, with a new colony
as their field, went everywhere preaching the Gospel.
With —but more often without—“permissive legisla-
tion,” they established preaching places which were
destined to become Circuits. The deep seriousness of
many of the brethren is proverbial, but to their
amazing initiative and unique originality we are
indebted for the romance of Methodism in this
land. As in the apostolic age, private dwellings were
first used as meeting houses for believers, and in
them “Heaven came down their souls to greet”; nor
were unbelievers excluded, for the invitation was to
all, and again and again men who previously made
no profession of religion were led to accept Christ
as their Saviour. New settlers were eagerly
sought out and warmly welcomed to these house
churches.
Naturally, it took many years to organise the
Methodist Church as it operates to-day, maintaining
services in 850 church buildings and 450 other
preaching places, and ministering to the needs of
more than 150,000 people. For years some of the
groups were without any ministerial oversight, or
were only visited at long and irregular intervals, and
it is with this period of development that this
chapter is mainly concerned.


“The Church in Thy House ”
The experience of Mr. and Mrs. Gibbs in the
Shepparton Circuit, as related by their daughter,
Miss C. E. Gibbs, is typical of the times. “My
parents,” she writes, “with eight children, arrived
in Kialla from Taradale on 10th November, 1872.
We travelled up by road, bringing furniture, cattle,
fowls and other live stock to found a home in the
heart of the ‘bush. ’ That afternoon Mr. J. Furphy,
a neighbour, introduced us to the Rev. John Green
of the United Free Church, and invited us to a
service to be conducted by Mr. Green in Mr. Furphy’s
house. Lovely, wasn’t it, to have a service on the first
Sunday after our arrival ? It was a lovely morning, so
church was held under a big shady tree —that service
is still vivid in my mind. . . For some time the
services were held monthly; alternately at Mr.
Furphy’s and our home. On Sundays when there
was no preaching service, the neighbours gathered at
our home, and spent the evening singing hymns and
talking of ‘the best things.’ As other settlers
came along, a bark church was built on land given
by Mr. Charles Laws at a spot where four roads met,
and in that little edifice many a sweet and hallowed
service was held, backless benches and mud floor
notwithstanding. ’ ’
So frequently and so regularly do the Circuit
records repeat the statement, “Mr. and Mrs.
opened their home for service, ’ ’ that the very
frequency becomes an embarrassment and, however
gratifying such a statement may be to the descendants
of these devoted pioneers, it is to be regretted that the
fullest use cannot be made of it within the scope of
the present volume. But what a recognition of God
the repetition of such information implies! What a
deep regard for the Lord’s Day it indicates! And
what an estimate of spiritual values! What a
prospect for a young country it suggests! In its
pioneers Methodism has been truly blessed. Of these


little home churches, which were like islands of rest
in a sea of worldliness, the exigencies of space permit
a brief mention of a few only. It must be distinctly
understood, however, that the number given could be
multiplied indefinitely without exaggeration. The
“sod hut” where Henry Reed held the first service
in “Batman’s Village”; the home of Henry Wilkin-
son, in which in 1839 services were conducted at
Brunswick; Mrs. Sutton’s house at Williamstown,
where services were resumed after the opening of a
church in the vicinity; the Jeffrey home at Preston;
Key’s homestead at Keysborough; Evans’ at Burke
Road; and King’s at Mernda are historic. As regards
the ministry at Mr. King’s, it is related that on one
occasion the Rev. B. S. Walker, spending the night
at that hospitable home, took advantage of the oppor-
tunity to preach, and that the precentor whistled
the tunes, explaining that he could sing songs but not
hymns.
Among many others worthy of mention were
Alexander Shand’s “primitive home” among the
timber at Main Creek, on the Mornington Peninsula,
where sawyers gathered to hear the Word of God,
and where for fifty years such meetings have been
continued; Jacob Thomas’ at Leongatha, where
probably the first preaching service in South Gipps-
land was held; Camm and Judd’s, in the Beeac
district; Dennis’ at Irrewarra, where the first Wes-
leyan chapel in the Colac district was erected; Bath’s
at Donald; Mrs. Lyttleton’s at Kerang; Murdoch’s
at Swan Hill; Sehonfield and Cleator’s at Mooralla;
Smith’s at Byaduk; Mrs. Harris’ at Port Fairy;
Osborne’s at Coleraine; Elliott’s at Euroa; Cook and
Clifton’s at Maffra; Richard Hosking’s at Ballarat;
John Smith’s at Warracknabeal; Mutton and Star-
buck’s at Rupanyup; Lumley’s at Traralgon;
McKenzie’s at Beulah; Freeman’s at Yanae; Tolley
and George’s at Drouin; Gill’s at Omeo; Barbary’s


at Woomelang; Jones’s at Underbool; Smith’s at Lal-
bert; Le Contour’s at Curdies; Hopper’s at Terricks
South; Burchett’s at Poowong; Watson, Purphy,
and MacDonald’s at Kyneton; Adams ’at Buninyong;
and Wyke’s at Mortlake. Among the house churches
in what are now the suburbs of Melbourne were those
of Rohead’s at Moreland; Guide’s at Clifton Hill,
Lord and Belcher’s at Northcote; Turner’s at St.
Kilda, a two-roomed cottage by the way; Gill’s at
Balaclava; Reed’s at Auburn; Reynold’s at Burwood;
Brooks’s at Camberwell; Copeland’s at Kew; Black-
ledge’s at Richmond; and Trenoweth’s at Brunswick
West. It may rightly be said that words fail utterly
to do justice to the spread of the Gospel through
the opening of private houses to the heralds of the
Cross. Indeed, nothing short of a map of Victoria,
each locality dotted with the sites of these home
churches, could adequately portray the extent to
which Methodism is indebted to them. The State
was literally covered with them, and in many
instances they were the foundation of wider enter-
prises which ultimately culminated in the Methodist
Church of Victoria.
Services in Barns and Sheds.
When the accommodation of private houses proved
inadequate through the settlement of new families
in the neighbourhood or the conversion of the way-
ward, other buildings of a miscellaneous character
were requisitioned. At Brunswick, for instance,
where religious services were held first in the late
thirties, a ti-tree shed was used as a chapel, while
Preston provided a barn in which the Rev. William
Butters met the members of his flock. It is said
that the barn was so draughty that Mr. Butters
preached with his hat on, and that squirrels, opossums
and even “big spiders” contributed to the general
discomfort of the congregation. Yet there were folk,
such as the Hurlstones, who esteemed it a privilege


to attend these services, though they had to walk from
the Plenty River, seven miles away. In 1850
Meagher’s barn at Greensborough served a similar
purpose, and out of the services held therein has
grown Greensborough Methodism with a Sunday
School in whose interests two superintendents, Mr.
Britnell and Mr. Henry Mitchell, spent seventy
happy years in all. At Janefield, Christie’s barn was
used, and in 1840-42 the ministry at Brunswick Street,
Pitzroy, began with open-air services in “the bush.”
Dr. Waugh conducted the first service in Carlton in
a shop belonging to Mr. William Jones. The
Methodists at Williamstown, after a period out of
doors, resorted to the school house in which Mr.
Charles Stone taught his day scholars. At Boundary
Road the good folk courageously secured a dancing
hall of ill repute for public worship, and at East
Burwood a prayer meeting was held in a cowshed.
That cowshed service was the preliminary to a
meeting in the home of Mr. W. Moore. It appears
that the Rev. George Grey, who had come to preach,
found Bro. Moore milking his cows. “Let us make
a beginning here,” said Mr. Grey, “by having a
word of prayer alongside the cows.” At Yarraville,
God was first publicly worshipped amid a clump of
sheltering gums, and at Beaumaris, in 1857, the first
local “meeting” was held under a verandah. At
Mordialloc, on Easter Sunday, 1877 (as mentioned
elsewhere), Mr. Rigg, a worthy schoolmaster,
and as many Methodists as could be induced
to take part, gathered in the local Anglican
Church for worship, the Methodist order of
service being used. Mr. R. E. Rigg was the
preacher, and Mr. S. 6. Rigg presided at the organ.
Later a Methodist Church was erected and opened
on 25th February, 1883. One may infer that the
nimble fly was as great a pest in those days as it is
at present, for the doors of the church were provided
with fly-screens—the gift of a generous brother —and,


in addition to his usual offices, the door steward was
enjoined to brush the flies off the backs of the wor-
shippers as they entered the building. Verily it may
be said that there were no flies on the Mordialloc
Methodists in those days.
Bags of Grain for Seats.
Not only were halls utilised for public worship,
but buildings of all shapes and sizes were made use
of as occasion demanded, a shed in a brickyard at
Malvern and a butcher’s shop in Toorak thus serving
a double purpose. The first service at Hawthorn,
held under a tree, was made vocal by a choir of
magpies and kookaburras in the adjoining branches.
At Ararat a shop was requisitioned, while at Stawell
the little congregation met under canvas. Later, the
good folk built a church on wheels, a sort of caravan,
that could be trundled from place to place. Dungey’s
barn served admirably at Kaniva, and Kirk’s barn,
with bags of grain for seats, provided the requisite
accommodation at Elmore. Similar buildings were
utilised at Colae and Arthur’s Creek. The oppor-
tunity of meeting for worship in the court houses
at Wangaratta and Echuca was promptly seized. A
bark hut sufficed at Greta and a log cabin at Drouin,
but Creswick was able to boast of a structure of both
bark and logs. Stratford Methodists, though
accommodated in a bark hut, took the precaution to
procure good seats. The folk at Clifton Hill,
evidently troubled by late arrivals or long sermons,
stipulated that out of the sum of £2/10/- raised for
the purchase of planks, which were to serve as seats,
a clock should be provided.
Whale O-Blow.
The Methodists at Ballarat worshipped in a mia-
mia, while the Primitive Methodists at Geelong
accepted the shelter of a clump of trees in the
Market Square. Spacious wool stores were promptly
converted into commodious chapels, and tents, with


roofs so low that it was difficult for the members
of the congregation to stand erect, and which com-
pelled the preacher to stand directly below the ridge,
were used in many places. At Portland worshippers
gathered in Henty’s wool store. As the major por-
tion of the congregation consisted of whalers, their
attendance depended on the absence of whales from
the bay. The appearance of these denizens of the
deep at times coincided with the hour of worship,
and, on one occasion to the consternation of the
preacher, a man’s head appeared in the doorway and
a voice proclaimed, “Whale o—Blow,0 —Blow, Blow, Blow.”
The thoughts of the worshippers were readily
diverted from spiritual topics to the harvest of the
sea, and the preacher lost his congregation. In the
Maldon area in 1850 a calico tent was provided,
similar provision being made at Muckleford and
Sandon. At the latter place, however, the possession
of a calico tent was too great a temptation to some
needy folk, for, when the congregation arrived, they
found that someone had stolen the roof of their
tabernacle, leaving them but the framework of the
structure and —the open sky.
At Merrinee the first religious gathering took place
in the waiting-room of the local railway station,
twelve people being present, while at Warrnambool a
room in a hotel was used for the same purpose. At
Alexandra accommodation was found in the
Shire Hall, the seats being provided by the hotel
proprietors. At Cobram Methodism graduated from
a foundry to a general store, while at Lancaster a
boundary rider’s hut served for a chapel. In the
Mallee improvised structures of hessian, which in
many instances proved unequal to the onslaughts of
winds and drifting sands, were the best that could be
provided, and stories are told of the giant trees of
South Gippsland, which fire had hollowed, being used
for many purposes, including that of public worship.
Space alone forbids the inclusion of other instances,


but enough has been written to enable the reader to
gauge the aggressive spirit of the early settlers who,
in the face of great difficulties, provided the
means of grace in places where the Methodist witness
was deemed necessary.
Spreading the Good News,
To the Methodist pioneers revivals were as essential
to their spiritual life as food is to the body, and
evangelism was an integral part of their creed. They
seemed to be always on the alert to seize an oppor-
tunity to spread the Good News of the Gospel. At
Prahran on Sundays, when a considerable number
of pleasure seekers took their walks abroad in what
was then bush country, and weary with their
journey lay down on the heath under the trees, the
local preacher who knew their haunts and “lay in
wait for them” would strike up a hymn and conduct
an open-air service. Into the Brighton district in
the early forties Messrs. Pemberton and Orr made
their way, distributing tracts from Sunday to Sunday.
This method of evangelism was much in vogue, being
used effectively at Richmond, Belfast and many other
places. A local preacher on a visit to Dandenong
sought to improve the occasion by conducting an
open-air service, but Mr. Robert Kidd, the black-
smith, provided him with an empty house in which
to deliver his message.
These primitive Methodists were not content with
leaving the announcement of a service at the local
store, nor with a rude placard nailed to a tree near
the roadside. They prayed that wanderers might
return to the fold, and backed up their petitions by
seeking the lost. They endeavoured to bring both
young and old to Christ. At Clifton Hill, in 1874,
Mr. George Horner conducted a class which at first
consisted of four members only. At Emerald Hill
Mr. John Bee, in 1851, gathered a dozen children
into his cottage, and thus began a Sunday School


which was to have a profound influence on Methodism
in South Melbourne. Sunday School work at More-
land began in the home of Mr. and Mrs. Mulley. On
the opening day four children were in attendance,
and on the following Sunday eight children came,
but before long forty-eight scholars were enrolled.
Taking advantage of the presence of a preacher in
their midst, the residents of Tuckfield, now Drysdale,
in 1849, assembled on the corroboree ground of a
native tribe to hear the Word of God. The “ Geelong
Advertiser, ’ ’ of September, 1841, informed its
readers that “The Wesleyans hold regular meetings
twice a week at Corio under the direction of local
preachers. ’ ’
On the Gold Fields.
On the goldfields the aggressive spirit of Methodism
found ample opportunity for expression. Here came
the inevitable public houses, wine shanties, dancing
halls and gambling saloons, but here, too, were stal-
wart men who were determined that the powers of
evil should not be permitted to flaunt their attractions
without rebuke. The men at Lydiard Street, Ballarat,
for instance, seeing that a large permanent popula-
tion was likely to settle there, resolved that the need
of a place of worship should be met without delay.
Maryborough as early as 1854 had a large population
at Samson’s Ranges, near the site of the present
town. ‘ ‘ There all classes of the community gathered, 99
so we are told, ‘ ‘ and among them were a few
Methodists —a band of men whose hearts the Lord
had touched —who did not fail to testify to the Grace
of God.” At Tarnagulla Jonathan Falder —“a man
strong in his convictions and independent in action”
—on Sunday morning, 12th September, 1858, stood
on a tree-stump, announced his text, and addressed
any who cared to listen. In 1870, at Castlemaine,


the beloved pastor of the Chinese Church, Leong-on-
Tong, was ministering to his countrymen. Fortu-
nately, his diary, which is full of interesting details,
is available. An entry of 10th May of that year
shows the character of this man and the nature of
his work: “Morning, preached at Pennyweight Flat
and went to see Chinese gardeners. Asked them to
come to church. They said, ‘Very well, but we have
no time to-day.’ I said, ‘Why, you have plenty of
time, for on this day everything should rest.’ They
said, ‘We must repair our dam for the rain washed
it away.’ I said, ‘You should not work on this day,
for all work should be done on six days. You sin
against God by working on Sunday.’ ” Surely this
is a Gospel which is aggressive and definite. Bendigo
Methodism will always be associated with the name
and ministry of James Jeffrey, a Cornish miner who
in 1852, from a tree-stump, preached the first sermon
at Golden Square. A minute from the Quarterly
Meeting report of the Kerang Circuit informs us that
the Chairman intimated that the congregation at
Kerang was small, and the financial returns insuffi-
cient to pay working expenses. Then follows this
very significant addendum: “A Sunday School was
about to be opened by two young men.” It may be
inferred that under the circumstances there was no
thought of withdrawal.
Some of these devoted laymen may have been
rough and uneducated, as that term is understood,
but they had “the root of the matter” in them, and
were able to use language which their mates clearly
understood. They felt themselves pressed into the
service for want of better men, and assumed only
such grace as God gave them. One can readily
appreciate the attitude of Phillip Burgoyne in the
home of Isaac Evans, of Diggora, in the Rochester
Circuit, as he explains to his congregation that he
is not a local preacher but an exhorter, and that the
best he can do is to try to expound a chapter from


the Word of God. Thereupon they sing a hymn,
join in prayer, listen to a practical exposition of a
chapter of Scripture, and go their ways feeling that
they have taken part in an act of conscious worship.
When, by some unforeseen mishap, “the leading
lights of the Church” were unable to take the service,
local preachers stepped into the breach. Even when
a local preacher was not available, a good brother in
the congregation would read a sermon. Such an
office frequently fell to the member in whose home
the service was being held. The frequency with
which Bro. Copeland officiated in his own dining-
room at Warragul is a case in point. Mr. E. J.
Stranger writes of Methodist beginnings in the
Narraean district. Appointed to the charge of the
Narracan State School in 1878, in that year he also
began religious services. “In June I began a fort-
nightly service in the hall where the day school was
held, and a Sunday School on alternate Sundays.
This practice I kept up for twelve months, until I
brought my family from Melbourne to reside on my
own land six miles away. At the latter place,
Narraean West, I began a Sunday School in my
home. About that time a local preacher from Bal-
larat, Robert Dickson by name, settled five or six
miles off at Childers. He also held service in his
house. Soon we heard of one another, joined our
forces, and made our first ‘plan.’ Thereafter we
held fortnightly services at each place alternately.”
And is there not something Pauline in the work of
William Witton in the Drouin area? This good man,
who figures prominently in the history of Methodism
in Melbourne and also in the Western District,
even as “an aged local preacher,” lost none of his
former zeal, for in connection with the local
churches “he circled round the various preaching
places, conducting services and inspiring all to come
along.” Considering that he walked, aided by a


stick, the spirit of this old campaigner can well be
imagined.
At this juncture it may be well to remember that
promiscuously covering the map of Victoria with
dots and place-names, and appending thereto the
names of first preachers and the dates of opening
services, gives but a very inadequate idea of the daily
life of the Methodist pioneers. To cut a home out
of the primeval forest, or to bottom the shaft in
which they hoped “to strike it rich,” they toiled
from day to day. They had their joys and sorrows,
their defeats and triumphs, their gains and losses.
Their privations were many. Far removed from
the Homeland to which their hearts still clung, they
yearned for news from their folk across the seas.
Sometimes sickness invaded their tents and the
sorrows of death were not unknown, yet they
heroically held their ground, and smiled in the face
of misfortune. What the consolation of religion
meant to such people it is not difficult to realise, nor
is one surprised that the erection of a little chapel
became the outward expression of their faith and
trust.
The Church in the Wilderness.
The good folk at Drik-Drik named their House
of Worship, “The Church in the Wilderness” —a
structure of slabs and bark with rude seats and an
earthen floor. The opening services are tersely
described as follows: 1 6 The afternoon congregation
consisted of twelve swarthy bushmen, one accom-
panied by a shaggy hound. The evening service
held around a blazing bonfire for want of light and
room. Tea meeting next evening, after which the
Rev. W. Lightbody addressed the gathering from his
buggy.” Other speakers must have been present,
for from the minister’s buggy “telling addresses
(note the plural) were delivered.” At Curdles
Captain Robilliard often walked ten miles to his
appointments, and “preached well” in spite of the


long journey. Mr. John Starbuck, in 1872, visited
Rupanyup with a view to taking up a “selection,”
and remaining over Sunday he gathered up a few
settlers and preached to them. Further north, Mr.
Nattrass rode over the sandhills to Woomelang—a
distance of twenty miles —to lead a few settlers in
worship. At Underbool the folk gathered in an iron
shed which through the week served as a green-
grocery store. At Werrimul worship was conducted
in a grain shed. Of interest, too, is the beginning
of Methodism at Warracknabeal, now one of the
most important towns in the Wimmera. There, on
a spot about six miles from where the town now
stands, in 1874 Mr. Samuel Clarke, a local preacher,
held a service, there being about forty people
present. At that meeting it was agreed “to con-
tinue the services.” For fifty-five years he con-
tinued to preach, often walking from twenty to
thirty miles on Sunday to fill three appointments.
His worthy colleague of the early days, Mr. William
Reed, still continues the good work at Warrnam-
bool. A glimpse of Methodism as it operated in
the Wimmera may be gained from the following:
“On Friday, 13th May, 1872, three families, hailing
from the Hamilton district, pitched their tents not
far from Verandah Swamp, now known as
Pimpinio, intending, by the blessing of God, to
carve out their destiny. Two days later, on Sunday,
15th May, this handful of people met to worship
God. Their temple was a tent, and the congregation
consisted of six adults and a few children, Mr.
Thomas Freeman, one of the new arrivals, conducting
the service. Here was the nucleus of the Methodist
Church in the Wimmera. To seize opportunity by
the forelock was evidently the precept of the pioneers,
for, when Mr. John Addinsall visited Yanac to see
his sons, he gathered up the adjoining settlers for a
religious service.


Aggressive Evangelism,
This aggressive spirit also stirred in the heart ol
Mr. C. R. Bassett, of Donald. Disappointed at find-
ing on the first Sunday after his arrival that the
Presbyterian service which he had hoped to attend
was not being held, and that the Sunday School was
not in session, in the afternoon he soothed his feelings
by persuading four little boys whom he found at a
game of marbles to sit with him under a spreading
gum tree. Here, it is related, he read to them from
his pocket Testament and sang a hymn. Next Sunday
six lads were present. Then, too, one can appreciate
the impressions and observations of a visitor to the
mining areas of Stawell and Ararat who writing in
1858 stated, when describing the Wesleyan Metho-
dists on the fields, “that among this mass of people
the Wesleyans had repeated their tactics and efforts.
They stood up as witnesses for truth and righteous-
ness, gathered a congregation, put up a tent as a
preaching place, and then sent off a message to the
nearest Circuit for ministerial help. ,? He might
have added, however, that, in places where the “mass
of the people was unknown, where families were
few and far between and conditions still more primi-
tive than on the diggings, the same enterprise was
shown and the same attention paid to spiritual
requirements. Wherever there were people there
was a need, and wherever there existed a need there
were good souls who eagerly seized an opportunity
to meet it.
In those early years remarkable zeal was shown,
and in the hearts of the preachers there was a passion
for souls which made their appeal compelling. To tell
the Story of Jesus and His Love they never wearied;
to urge His claims upon the hearers was the objective
which they pursued with relentless persistence.
Still here and there a few unique references to the
old sermons preached so long ago survive, and among
them the Confession of a Digger. * 7 "We quote from


a back number of the “Spectator”: “All the religion
I’ve got about me ain’t worth much, but I mind the
time I came mighty nigh to joinin’ the Methodists.
You may laugh, boys, as much as you like, but it’s
a fact, I tell you, and it wasn’t a parson as got hold
of me neither. It was that digger chap as used to
preach at Old Bendigo standin’ on a tree-stump
before e’er a parson came up to these diggings.
Jimmy Jeffrey they called ’im. I was strollin’ along
one Sunday morning and I saw a crowd of chaps
standin’ round someone as was atalkin’. He was
tellin’ them the story about the Prodigal Son, and
he was tellin’ it proper, too. He’d got ’im into the
far country when I came up, and he fair made you
see the young feller spreein’ round, and feedin’ of
the hogs when ’is money was all gone. ‘That’s me,’
says Ito myself, and there was more nor me a sayin’
of it I could see. They stood there with the tears
a-rollin’ down their cheeks and they a-rollin’ down
his’n, too. Then ’e starts the lad ’ome again, and
when ’e came to the father seein’ ’im a long way off,
’e stops a bit, and then ’e says, ‘I ’aven’t got no
father myself,’ ’e says, ‘ ’E’s dead and gone years
ago, but,’ says ’e, ‘my old mother’s alive yet, God
bless ’er. And I know right well, if I was cornin’
along the road ’ome again, and she ’appened to be
standin’ at the front door, or, maybe, ’angin’ out
the washin’, she’d see me a long way off, she would.
She’d cry out, “Why there’s my Jimmy,” and she’d
run to meet me sure enough.’ I don’t know what
it was as made me, and a lot more of the chaps,
too, burst into a cackle at that —it wasn’t to say a
laugh, or, if it was, it had a cry in it. I goes back
to our claim after Jimmy had done, and felt as
miserable as a bandicoot.”
The Unnamed Saints .
While giving due credit to those whose names are
more or less familiar, and whose work has come
under notice, it is quite obvious that many godly


people whose very names are forgotten gave faithful
service to the cause. Paul’s epistles contain appre-
ciative references to many “who laboured with me,”
and this volume would be incomplete if no mention
were made of the hundreds of men and women who
have passed from memory, but whose devotion and
sacrifice gave emphasis to the Methodist witness.
The majority of them were just ordinary folk whose
prayers and co-operation count for so much wherever
and whenever Christian work is undertaken. Occa-
sionally we read of a supply of hymn books being
part of a settler’s outfit —a very suggestive provision
which seems to indicate a desire for fellowship.
Indeed, the Methodists of the olden time forgot not
“the assembling of themselves together as the manner
of some is,” and Sunday was a “full” day. This
feature of Methodism stands out clearly in the
following extract from a Ballarat journal of 1853:
“The tent was subsequently removed from Winter’s
Flat to Wesley Hill, Ballarat, and at a meeting of
the society, held on the 26th May, Mr. Hill in the
chair, the following regulations and appointments
were made. For Sunday—Prayer Meeting at 7 a.m.;
Sunday School at 9.30 a.m.; preaching services at
11 a.m. and 6 p.m. For the week —Prayer Meeting,
Monday, 7 p.m.; Bible Class, Wednesday, 7 p.m.;
Preaching and Prayer Meeting on alternate Thurs-
days 7 p.m. The society classes met as follows: The
one in the chapel on Tuesday, 7 p.m.; the other in
Mrs. Reynolds’ tent on Wednesday, 7 p.m.”
With such activity as is indicated by the week’s
doings one is not surprised to learn from the same
journal that a site had been chosen in the “township
of Ballarat” for the erection of a permanent chapel
and a minister’s residence. It was in connection
with this charge, by the way, that the meeting for
worship on Christmas Day was held at 6 a.m. It is
this intense spiritual concentration which wins our
admiration, and reveals the secret of a century of


progress. Such enthusiasm was general, and burst
into flame here, there and everywhere, as though
fanned by the very Spirit of God. Imagine that
woodsplitter who, after holding prayer meetings at
Richmond and Prahran, was asked to arrange for
similar meetings at St. Kilda. See him carrying
forms on his shoulders and beginning his mission
near what is to-day the St. Kilda Railway Station;
think, too, of the Rev. George Cole entering Murtoa
from Hamilton in response to an invitation from
the members of his communion at that place. On his
arrival he is met by Bro. J. B. Miller, who “throws
his hat in the air’ ’ for very joy, and his revered
minister responds to the greeting in a similar fashion
—an expression of enthusiasm that needs no apology.
Everywhere was the will to spread Scriptural holiness
throughout the land, and thrice welcome were the
men who could help.
The migration of godly diggers from field to field
was instrumental in spreading the Gospel. “Early
in 1854,” we are informed, “several members and
local preachers went from the Ballarat diggings to
the Mount Alexander goldfield. Naturally desirous
of having the services of one of their own ministers,
at their request the Rev. M. Clarke, who had arrived
on 6th December, 1853, followed them. On arrival
at the township after a hazardous journey of two
days, he sought the place of meeting. From a tent
over which floated a large blue and white flag the
hearty singing of men in a class meeting reached his
ears. As Mr. Clarke entered the meeting his soul
was thrilled by the testimonies of these devout
diggers. ‘We are all witnesses to the efficacy of
the Savioiir’s blood/ they jubilantly exclaimed. ”
When the Rev. E. S. Bickford was appointed to the
charge of Italian Gully, in the Searsdale Circuit,
“Father” Crosthwaite exclaimed, “Thank God! All
the Gully is going to get converted.” Samuel Ham,
or it may be Wesley Anderson, for reports differ,


kneels on “that steep hill where the scrub was very
thick 77 —the site of the old Lydiard Street Church—
and prays, ‘ ‘ Lord! let this be the birthplace of many
souls’ 7 —a prayer which was to be abundantly
answered in years to come.
By Candle Light .
From time to time a great deal has been said of
the candles with which the early chapels were
lighted, and facetious writers have ventured that
worshippers sometimes received “more grease than
grace 77 —a witty criticism which was probably true
in isolated cases. For instance, it is reported that a
good brother at Brunswick, who had fallen asleep
during the service, was awakened by a stream of
warm wax trickling into his ear, and that an old
lady at Lah, whose eyes had grown dim, was com-
pelled to hold her hymn book very close to the light
and, in doing so, set fire to the trimmings of her hat.
The criticism may also be true of the “light 77
steward, whose duty it was to keep the candles alight
and to snuff them when required, sometimes with the
snuffers and at other times with his fingers. Still,
the lighting of the chapel provided but little amuse-
ment to those immediately concerned, for it was not
only a tedious job but an expensive item in the main-
tenance of the church. So the good folk at Byaduk
found, for they instituted an inquiry into their
“candles 7 bill. 77 The result of the inquiry silenced
all complainants for “meetings are held every night,
and sometimes far into the night, and all for the
salvation of souls. 77
Open-air preaching was a conspicuous feature of
early Methodism. Repeatedly men were found
declaring the Gospel under the open sky whose only
excuse was that they had “a message of mercy 77 to
deliver. They spoke from strange pulpits, these
stump orators —a packing-case, a fallen tree, a heap
of stones, and even a wheelbarrow, for it is said that


at Forest Creek men like Jimmy Jeffrey, Martin Hill
and the Rev. S. Waterhouse did not hesitate to use
a barrow to secure sufficient elevation to be seen and
heard.
CAass Meetings .
The germ-cell of early Methodism, as every one
knows, was the class meeting to which reference has
already been made. It was “an open fellowship of
believers in prayer, meditation and praise. ’ ’ Over it
presided a leader who “though not ordained for this
office was yet solemnly and deliberately chosen. ”
The leader shared the pastoral office with the minis-
ter, and was responsible, under the minister, for the
spiritual oversight of the members of his class. The
class meeting, whose function it was to interpret
church membership in terms of privilege and obliga-
tion, admirably fitted an era when fellowship was
the keynote of worship.
In the early days of the Settlement, Brunswick was
colloquially known as the “Glue Pot” on account of
the sticky character of the soil through which
pedestrians, horses, vehicles and wandering cattle
plodded their toilsome way. Indeed, it is related
that in 1899, on the occasion of the second anniver-
sary of the Moreland Church, the tea meeting was
nearly a “wash out,” for, assembling at two o’clock,
the folk were compelled to do a couple of hours of
spade work before the land around the building was
sufficiently drained to permit the ladies to enter.
When we read that a small church building which
was being removed from Fitzroy to Collingwood
spent three days on the journey, and that the roads
were in such a state that gentlemen often had to
wade and ladies to be carried, we can understand how
delighted the preachers for Preston were when they
found Bro. Jeffrey’s bullock-dray awaiting them at
the foot of Rucker’s Hill. Doubtless, many a preacher,
whose appointment lay beyond “the unfathomable


mud 77 of Clifton Hill, envied his more fortunate
colleague. Although only five miles from Melbourne,
pioneers in the Fairfield district experienced many
thrills and, maybe, “spills. 77 None dared to go out
at night without a lantern, and long detours had to
be made to escape the flood waters. It is on record
that a preacher from Brighton on his way to a tea
meeting at Glen Iris lost his direction, and failed
to put in an appearance. But, if it is true, as
reported, that tea meetings often lasted for three
days, this good brother had ample time to reach his
destination before the Doxology was sung.
The Old Country Roads .
There is ample evidence of the impassable condi-
tion of country roads. The road to Walhalla, for
instance, is described as being “positively danger-
ous. 77 At Leongatha “walking the plank 77 was the
familiar term to denote local conditions. When
President of the Wesleyan Conference, Dr. Waugh
visited Sale “in the depth of winter 77 to open a new
church. As Oakleigh was then the terminus of the
Gippsland line, the doctor had to journey by coach
“over a wretched bush track on parts of which three
or four miles an hour was considered good going. 77
On one of his trips to Gippsland, the Rev. W. H.
Walton, of the Primitive Methodist Church, spent
five days on the road. At Kerang a wooden church
which was being removed to a new site in 1875 was
held up for some weeks on the road. The condition
of the country between Pyramid Hill and Canary
Island and to the north of these settlements was
such as at times to test the strength and courage of
both man and horse. A road journey from Dimboola
to Nhill was spoken of as a four hours’ run over an
unspeakably dusty track, so dusty that a wash and
brush up at the end of the journey left a sediment
of mud in the basin and dust-stains on the towel.
At Warragul in the church porch hung the lanterns
which lighted the worshippers along the track. At


Wunghnu there were “no roads, just bush tracks,
dense forests of timber and scrub, unbridged creeks,
few fences and these of brush.” At Murrayville
there were “no made roads, sand-hills in all direc-
tions, long distances between preaching places.” Of
Cnrdies, where Methodism has been for years, and
where indeed we were the pioneers, a resident writes:
“We lived on horseback. There were no roads, and
scarcely a wheeled vehicle of any sort. It was wet
and cold in winter, and frequently there were raging
bush fires in summer. The preacher’s horse knew
the tracks, and could be trusted to swim the river
when in flood or take the missionary home when lost
in the forest.” South Gippsland was covered with
“dense almost impenetrable scrub,” while Colac “was
a sort of ‘terra incognita’—one of the outposts of
civilisation.” At Kyneton, “drays were the ordinary
means of transport and, during the summer months,
two four-horse coaches, built on the old English
model and called ‘The Argus’ and ‘The Herald,’
brought mails and passengers from the metropolis.”
The fare was £5, no reduction being made for ser-
vices rendered in extricating the coach from the bog,
a frequent occurrence on the Carlsruhe Flat. At
Rochester the house of worship was so inaccessible
in winter that folk might reasonably be excused for
not attending, but they came, some on foot after a
tramp of five miles or more, some on horseback,
others in spring carts drawn by heavy draught
horses, and others, again, in lumbering drays. Of
John Addinsall, of Hamilton, it is said that “Neither
weather nor distance deterred him from keeping his
appointments, although Mount Eccles, 28 miles on
one side of his home, Mooralla, 25 miles on the other
side, and Gritjurk, 20 miles in yet another direction,
were included in his itineracy.” Space alone forbids
the mention of many others who are justly worthy of
recognition. Their heroism, their faith, their loyalty
compare favourably with what is written in the


“Acts of the Apostles/’ and are a reminder of our
obligations to God and our indebtedness to these
great souls of the olden time.
Let us look again at our map of Victoria dotted
all over with Methodist preaching places, and draw
circles round the groups of dots which represent
places of worship under the charge of the superin-
tendent ministers. The places within any one of
these boundaries constitute a “circuit,” the summary
of appointments being set out on the “Preachers’
Plan. ’ ’ How extensive these Circuits were! On a
plan of 1840-41, in the handwriting of the Rev.
Joseph Orton, are found the names of the following
places: Melbourne, New Town, Brickfields, Williams-
town, Forest, Merri Creek. In 1881 the Preston and
Heidelberg Circuit included Alphington and Whittle-
sea. At one time the old Pentridge Circuit extended
to Mickleham, Phillipstown, Rock Waterholes, Back
Creek, Tullamarine, Plenty, Doutta Galla, Box
Forest, Greensborough, Kilmore, Keebundoora, Upper
Plenty, Merriang, and “other sundry farms and
stations.” In 1883, at the Quarterly Meeting of the
Brighton Circuit, it was resolved “that an effort be
made to visit the outlying villages of Prahran and
St. Kilda.” When it is borne in mind that Dande-
nong, Frankston, Dromana, Oakleigh and Moorabbin
have been excised at various times from the Brighton
Circuit, the missionary spirit of Methodism cannot
fail to be recognised.
Vast Areas,
But metropolitan Circuits, however vast, pale into
insignificance when compared with many of those in
the country. Think, for instance, of the St. Arnaud
Circuit having within its boundary Carr’s Plains,
Waterloo Plains, Gregre, Stuart Mill, Mogg’s Plains,
Wallaloo, NicholPs Plains, Mount Jeffcott, Suther-
land’s Plains, Dooboobetic, Wooronook, Avon Plains,
Tyrrel Creek, Bunbuluke, Quambatook, Armenian


and Barrakee. Consider, too, the Portland Circuit
stretching across to Warrnambool and including
Belfast. No wonder that of the Key. William
Lightbody it is written that, “He encountered no
little fatigue and peril in crossing rivers when going
from one side of the Circuit to the other —a stretch
of nearly one hundred miles.' ’ Picture the Rev.
James Hilliard setting out in 1874 to mission the
Wimmera, and establishing a Circuit comprising
Horsham, Murtoa, Kewell, Kalkee, Warracknabeal,
and other places. Think, too, of the Rev. W.
Tregellis being commissioned in 1856 “to explore
the regions from the sea to the Mallee," and being
provided with “a horse, saddle and bridle" for this
purpose. The appointment of a minister to Echuca
was made at a time when there was no ministerial
oversight over a vast area between Sandhurst and
Deniliquin, a distance of one hundred miles. The
gold rush at Stawell and the subsequent “coo-ee"
which echoed to the Pyrenees found the Rev. W.
Goodall making his way from Avoca to Pleasant
Creek. Ignorant of the way and distance to be
traversed, it turned out to be a weary ride of fifty
miles. Arriving at dusk, he had the happy experience
of visiting the canvas church and finding a number
of people met for prayer. It is not altogether sur-
prising that his own petition that night was couched
in terms of Scripture —■ ‘ that the tent they had
erected might become a Bethel to many a weary
Jacob, the birthplace of many souls."
The Noradjuha territory, in which both Wesleyans
and Bible Christians were represented, comprised an
area of one hundred square miles. It was originally
supplied from Horsham, and the journey necessitated
the crossing of the Wimmera River, the horses
swimming it when in flood. Easy it was, too, to get
off the track, and preachers were not always successful
in avoiding a night out. In 1884 the Kerang Circuit
included Durham Ox, Pyramid View, Yarrawalla,


Woodlands, Terricks West, Mincha, Canary Island,
Kerang, Loddon Vale, Macorna, Dry Lake, Tragowel,
Hawkinston, Koorop, Bald Rock, Jarklin, Bear’s
Lagoon, Pyramid Hill, Swan Hill, and Pompopiel.
To answer an urgent call from an outpost meant at
times a three days’ journey on horseback over flooded
creeks and lonely plains. Some idea of the area of
the Kyabram Circuit may be imagined when it is
known that the Shepparton, Nathalia, and Rushworth
Circuits now share the territory formerly worked
from Kyabram. When the Rev. W. H. Pitchett was
appointed to Mortlake in 1886, he found on arrival
that his Circuit boundaries were undefined, and that
at headquarters there was “neither church nor
home.” On a Warrnambool plan of 1860 there
appeared a note to the effect “that places not
provided for will be visited according to arrange-
ment.” These places were Allansford, Terang,
Mortlake, Camperdown, Cudgee, Woodford, Purnim,
and McCreddin’s. What an insight into the will and
desire to serve! —a desire attested by the fact that
week-night meetings were held at Dry Lake and
Russell’s Creek, Sunday services being conducted at
Warrnambool, Wangoon, and Dennington. In the
days of which we are writing, the Casterton and
Coleraine Circuit (once known as the “Merino” and
later as the “Merino and Coleraine” Circuit) covered
an immense field, and stretched from Heywood to
Horsham, and from Hamilton to the South Aus-
tralian border. What significance there is in the
brief record which says: “The Rev. W. C. Curry
rode over from Belfast to Ararat in 1858.”
When the Rev. A. T. Holden, as Superintendent
of Home Missions, in 1911 paid a “flying visit” to
Murrayville, the last part of the journey—seventy
miles —was covered by buggy and pair. This visit
led to the appointment of a Methodist agent in that
district. The letter which induced Mr. 0. J. Boyle
to accept the position is illuminative in that it reveals


the initial difficulties pertaining to the new station.
“We are wanting a special man whom we can trust
to found a new Home Mission Station in the North-
west Mallee, with Murrayville as headquarters. The
choice has fallen on you. W r e want you to be pre-
pared to commence work there on the first Sunday in
December. It will take you two or three days to
get there, and you will need two or three days to
look around to get a congregation together. If you
have a bicycle, you will find it very handy in your
work. ” In a station which ultimately extended from
Underbool to the South Australian border, a bicycle
would certainly be “very handy.” Very interesting,
too, is the graphic description given by Rev. J.
Trathan of his journey to Mildura in 1888: “In the
month of April of last year, the writer, in obedience
to the powers that be, to wit, the Methodist Confer-
ence, might have been seen journeying along, mile
after mile, towards the farthest point in the north-
west of the colony, with the object of opening a
Home Mission Station in connection with the
Methodist Church. For absence of beauty or objects
of interest, commend me to the 150 mile ride through
the Mallee. Mile after mile w r as travelled in a little
cramped box called a coach, and the monotony was
only broken at intervals by stopping at wayside
shanties where we were regaled with meals of tough
goat and with a mixture dignified by the name of
bread, the whole being washed down with a vile
compound called tea, but which required a consider-
able stretch of imagination to make it pass muster.
But it is wonderful what a man can swallow on
compulsion and with his eyes shut.”
Attending Conference.
Mr. Trathan’s reference “to the powers that be”
leads one to surmise that the ministers of former
days came to the Annual Conference with something
less than present-day alacrity. That they had valid


reasons for regarding the long journeys seriously, the
following letter, written in 1863 by the Rev. Thomas
James to the Rev. J. B. Smith, then stationed at
Warrnambool, will show: “You will surely come to
Conference. If it will help you in any way, you may
use my mare, now at Terang, for the up journey.
This would cost you but little. You could spend the
first night at Napthines’, Terang, or at Mr. Cooper’s
at Camperdown. They would be very glad to see
you. Camperdown is a good 120 miles from Mel-
bourne, and that spell of journeying on horseback
would entitle even a travelling preacher, I should
think, to something more restful than Conference
usually is.” The man from Warrnambool might
well be forgiven if he were “not coming,” for the
alternative to the overland journey was a sea trip
which might mean anything from three to six weeks
in a trading schooner. And the Station Sheet!
What an interesting document it must have been in
those days to the brethren who were moving and to
the committee which had to pay the removal
expenses. It is on record that about 1870 the
removal of the Rev. J. D. Dodgson and his belongings
from Beechworth to Daylesford cost £72. But it
must be noted that his belongings included one ton
of books and a crate of fowls, and the only means of
transport was the mail coach.
It is interesting to note that the first Circuit horse
in Victoria was bought for £4O. By 1883 the value
of horses had evidently eased somewhat, for in that
year the Rev. B. Taylor, of Charlton, so it is reported,
kept five animals in his stable. On one occasion the
Rev. R. Fitcher, then stationed in the Ballarat Bast
Circuit, urged the Quarterly Meeting to consent to
the sale of the Circuit horse “because it has twice
jeopardised my life.” Little wonder that Mr. David
Ham promptly donated the sum of £2O for the
purchase of a more trustworthy animal.


The Gospel Chariot.
In many Circuits the ‘ ‘ Gospel Chariot, ’ ’ a spacious
waggonette, took a number of preachers to their
appointments, dropping them one by one at a spot
nearest to the churches at which they were planned.
These men were picked up again on the return
journey, and woe to him who, on account of a long
service or otherwise, kept the chariot waiting. At
times preachers travelled on “loan” horses, kind
neighbours coming to their rescue, and it is said of
one such horse that he insisted on pulling in to every
inn and shanty along the road. A draught horse
was occasionally used, and in one of the Goulburn
Valley Circuits a brother thus mounted might be
seen setting out for a service twenty miles distant.
Bro. Pearse, of Nyah, tells of riding ninety-two
miles on a Sunday to conduct three services. Of
Mr. John Spalding, the pioneer Methodist of the
Lara district, it is said that, “He travelled hundreds
of miles, mostly on horseback, often preaching three
times on a Sunday and returning home late at night.
James Smith, in the early days of South Gippsland,
rode 200 miles in three weeks, visited forty families,
and conducted six services, one of which was held on
the bank of the Tarwin River. But, be it remem-
bered, the usual mode of locomotion was on foot.
There are many instances of preachers walking
twenty miles to keep their appointments and, not
infrequently, men whose employment took them far
from home were to be found in their old class meeting
on Sunday morning. After a happy day spent in
worship at their home church, these men w T ere to be
met, late at night, going forth again to their work —
a journey of anything up to sixteen miles.
Tea Meetings.
The limitations of space allow of a brief mention
only of anniversaries and the accompanying tea.
meetings. Both the Sunday services and the tea


were very popular events, and from them and pew
rents the Trust obtained the major part of its
revenue. It is interesting to learn that one tea
meeting in the Brunswick Circuit, which was held on
26th April, 1853, realised £650, and one at Preston,
the first by the way to be held there, yielded a cash
return of £2OO, although many of the folk came in
bullock-drays. The viands for the teas usually
prepared and donated by the ladies of the congrega-
tion, and it is said that on one occasion a lady and
her daughter did all the cooking for one of these
festivals in a camp oven.
It may be some consolation to those who to-day are
harassed by the vagaries of youth to know that,
judging by reports, it was always so. At Preston,
for example, in 1857 six boys and one girl were
reprimanded for throwing stones at the church bell,
but when we learn that at this church the superin-
tendent was directed to “ stand at the back of the
children at prayer time,” such an escapade as stone-
throwing may w r ell be deemed a minor offence. For
originality of conception and for prompt execution
we commend the folk at Ballarat, for, when a brother
in 1887 complained of the annoyance caused by
youths running up and down the stairs during the
Sunday evening service, it was agreed “that he
should take the matter in hand.”
Long Sermons .
Concerning preachers, it is difficult from the
records to assess their w r orth w T ith any degree of
accuracy. As a general rule, long sermons were a
cause of complaint. At Carlton, however, Bro.
Pybus not only conducted the morning and evening
services in connection with the first anniversary of
the Palmerston Street Church, but spoke at the
public meeting on the following evening for “an
hour and a quarter, and was listened to with fixed
attention.” The folk at Neil Street, Ballarat,


appear to have possessed less power of concentration,
for in 1872 they complained “that long sermons have
been preached by certain of the local preachers/ ’
and, twenty years later, in another Ballarat Circuit,
it was considered prudent to take up the collection
“before the sermon.” The attitude of Drysdale is
not clear, but must be considered as being favourable
to certain brethren, at least after some special ser-
vices which, we infer, would come well within the
category of “Revival Services,” for the trustees
voluntarily agreed to pay extra to the caretaker and
“to repair the damage to the seats.” Evidently the
folk were having “a good time.”
Attendance at the devotional week-night meetings
was not always as good as it might be, for, in 1886,
the chairman of a Leaders’ Meeting had occasion to
refer to the sparse attendance at the Wednesday
evening services, and asked by what means an
improvement could be made. In the same Circuit
and about the same time, “the desirability of forming
an afternoon class to meet the needs of young women
whose friends objected to their being out after dark,
was discussed. The experiment, if attempted, failed,
for, two years later, the class leader produced his
class book and referred to the attendance in his class
being seriously affected “through six of the members
being recently married.”
In 1856, when the minister’s residence at Creswick
was but a tent, it is recorded of Rev. Thomas
James that “during his hours of leisure his feet
frequently protruded for some distance beyond the
‘parsonage’ to the intense delight of the unregenerate
wayfarer. ’ ’ This undoubtedly is a case of extremes.
Other stories come readily to mind. There is, for
example, the terse and suggestive description of one
of the leading preachers of early days given by a
Cornish miner, who, when asked his opinion regard-
ing the minister, replied, “Deep sinkin’, Sir, deep
sinkin’.” And what of the layman who would


insist on giving to the new minister his opinion of
his predecessor, particularly as to his not being “a
good visitor”? When begged not to discuss his
former pastor, he stated that he had no intention of
doing so, but merely wished it to be known “that he
kept himself unspotted from the world.”
The Hymn Starters.
_ Many stories are told of the precentors of the olden
time, the tune-starter filling a very important office
in pre-harmonium days. At Little Bendigo, in the
Ballarat East Circuit, that duty was left to a viva-
cious Cornishman, fondly referred to as “Good Old
Jonathan.” At times his zeal was greater than his
ability, and somewhat frequently he attempted to
make a short-metre tune fit a long-metre hymn, or a
six-lines-eights bear the burden of an eight-lines-
sevens hymn. When he got so far with the first
verse as to enable him to discover his error, he would
face the congregation with a smile, and after inform-
ing those present that “ ’e weant do, ’e weant do, we
must try ’un agen,” would start up another tune.
It was a rare thing for him to fail a second time.
It is related of Punt Road that a minister began a
service by announcing a six-lines-sevens. A solemn
silence ensued, broken only by the footfalls of Mr.
Bailey, the chapel keeper, as he went up one aisle and
down the other seeking in vain for someone to start
the tune. At last he found a man who thought
that he could manage a common metre, and the
hymn was changed for one of that measure, the
people, we are told, “rising to the occasion.” In
the pre-choir days at Nicholson Street, Fitzroy, there
were two hymn “starters.” Sometimes, however, a
hymn was announced which caused the “starters”
to look blankly at each other. After some delay
and a ■whispered consultation in the pulpit, a fresh
hymn was announced. On one occasion, it is reported,
both the precentors were absent. The hymn having


been announced, the congregation rose and looked
at the preacher, and he in turn looked at them, but
no song was to be heard. Meanwhile one good
brother, who with shaded eyes had scanned the
congregation, looking in vain for the lady the occa-
sion required, went to the door of the church and
peered down the street. There he observed the lady
for whom opportunity waited. He waved his hands
wildly, and apparently she understood, for she hurried
to the church door with a baby in arms and, while
the good brother held the book, she from the church
porch saved the situation with, “When I survey the
wondrous cross. . . ”
Unfortunately, few references to the musical
development within the Methodist Church are to be
found in early local records, yet we know full well
that among the first settlers were those who could
read music at sight, and who had brought with them
from the “Old Land” their manuscripts of hymn
tunes and anthems. Again, it was natural that, with
Wesley’s Hymn Book and the grace of God to inter-
pret its message, song should be an outstanding
feature of the church services. In some places there
were brass bands, but this was exceptional. In
many records the names of individuals appear who
rendered service by means of the flute, clarionette,
and violin, but of organs and organists, choirs and
choirmasters the records are strangely silent. A
report from Creswick, however, informs us that the
present organist, Miss Emma Malton, has completed
fifty-nine years of continuous service as organist and
choir conductor.
Thus w r e bring to a close our inadequate survey
of early events in the establishment of Methodism in
Victoria. Truly, the half has not been told, but
sufficient has been written to portray the romance of
out* history, a romance to which only a bard of the
olden time could do full justice. The days of immi-
gration, the discovery of the goldfields, the opening


up of the Wimmera, and, later still, the settlement
in the Mallee, the introduction of irrigation and the
extension of the railways—all these have found a
Church ready to advance. Wherever there were
people, there our agents found their way. One can
scarcely believe that the century has seen the rise
and fall of towns, yet such is the case. It seems
incredible that 40,000 people should ever have lived
in Dunolly or Creswick, and that other mining towns
should have attracted equally large numbers —places
which are now little more than villages. The fluc-
tuating fortunes of these mining towns is reflected
in the rise and decline of Methodism in such places.
Yet, notwithstanding the loss of population, the
Methodist Church continues its ministry in these
“deserted villages” for the sake of those who remain
and for the sake of those noble souls who gave such
splendid service in the “good old days.” It saddens
one to look upon some of our most beautiful country
churches, to think of the vast congregations that once
met within their walls, to recall the long roster of
class meetings and other means of grace, and to draw
comparisons. In an age when the simple pleasures
of the people satisfied the mind and the transforming
fellowship of the Church met all spiritual needs,
these inland Circuits were of the greatest importance.
Whether they and our city churches have maintained
their strength or suffered a decline, the majority of
them have glorious traditions. They may have had
humble beginnings, but all can boast of a noble origin
for their foundations were laid in the hearts of men
and women who believed in God and in His Son
Jesus Christ; w 7 ho valued the means of grace and
felt the need of Christian fellowship.


CHAPTER XIV.
THE HOME MISSION ENTERPRISE.
Methodism in Victoria owes much to its home
missionaries. On the whole they have been brave,
godly men, self-sacrificing and earnest, and in the
districts where they laboured their lives have left an
abiding sense of reality. These men have been the
“shock-troops’ ’ of the Church, and, like soldiers, they
can never be paid. Their reward must be in the
thing done. Of them Carlyle’s words are true —“The
wages of every noble work do lie in heaven or else
nowhere ... A brave man has to give his life
away. ’ ’
Origins and Financial Policy.
At the Conference of 1875, Home Missions were
constituted a department by the setting aside of a
minister, the Rev. John Watsford, to organise the
Society, which had been commenced in 1871 in con-
junction with the Loan Fund. In 1872, the Society
was made a separate entity, and the Rev. James
Bickford w T as appointed Secretary. For the ensuing
two years the Rev. James King filled that position.
During the sessions of the first General Conference
of the Wesleyan Church, which happened to meet
in Melbourne in May, 1875, a public meeting was
held for the formal inauguration of the Department.
The first committee decided to adopt the policy of
raising a year’s income before commencing opera-
tions. Thus it had the money in hand before it was
allocated. With the exception of two lapses, both
of which were made good, this commendable policy
has not been departed from. The people’s gifts


have never been absorbed in paying interest on over-
drafts on money spent by conjecture in the hope that
it would be raised. At the Annual Conference of
1877 (which incidentally was the first Conference at
which laymen met with ministers), it was resolved
that the name 4 ‘Methodist Home Mission Society”
be adopted.
The Land Rush .
The creation of the new department under
“Father’ ’ Watsford was opportune. The gold fever
had begun to abate, and the early “rushes” of sur-
face goldmining had spent themselves and subsided.
Settlement was limited practically to Melbourne and
a few coastal towns and the goldfields. These
restricted areas were swarming with people, and it
was natural that the cry should ring through the
colony, “Unlock the land!” This demand had found
expression in the Land Act of 1869, which threw
open for free selection immense areas in various
parts of Victoria. Thousands of families who had
been living in the towns and on the goldfields
migrated to the new districts.
Some idea of the position in 1875 may be gained
from the following extract from that year’s Home
Mission report presented to the Annual Conference:
“We have an opportunity of doing a blessed work
among the thousands w T ho are selecting land in almost
every part of the country, and, if the responsibility
is felt as it should be, and the work is vigorously
done, we shall, with God’s blessing, have great and
abiding success. A minister ought to be sent to the
Wimmera. Another should be sent to East Charlton,
which it is said is to be the centre of about 1000
selections. Toolamba must have a minister this
year. From Kerang, on the North Loddon, through
the Terricks to Echuca, a distance of about 60 miles,
all the land is taken up by free selectors, and there
is only one bush missionary labouring among them.
The country about Wedderburn and away on to


Boort may become an important district. There are
many selectors, and some of them our own people, in
the valley of the Goulburn, and we have no minister
there.” The minister at Yackandandah spoke of the
Upper Murray region as ‘ ‘ being most suitable
for a Home Mission Station.” He also stated that
“Chiltern, Corowa, Rutherglen, Wahgunyah, with
other places in the district, would form another good
station.” And so the tale proceeds.
A Creative Period.
Next to the gold rushes, this was Victoria’s most
picturesque and creative period. It was full of life
and movement, colourful, elemental, but dark
shadows were ever in the background. Waggons,
beneath whose weather-stained tilts were stacked the
household furniture and supplies, with the inevitable
sea chest containing the “precious things” brought
from “Home,” lumbered onwards and outwards to
the west, east and north. Many settlers also came in
from South Australia. The selector-teamster, with
eager, hopeful eye uplifted, took in the trend of the
country; his wife, often sorely tried by the trackless
journey, smiled her loyal encouragement, while their
excited children revelled in the daily adventure.
The dark enigma of South and Central Gippsland
was attacked less joyously. Deep sunless valleys,
high steep ranges, endless rain, and soft rich soil
had combined to produce a dense jungle of vegetation
that rose three hundred feet from the earth. Here
grew some of the largest trees in the world. In later
times a Methodist family named Penny lived for
years in the stump of one of these forest giants at
Pumina; while another, near Foster, was used suc-
cessively as a church, a potato and onion store and
a stable for horses.
When Count Strzelecki first penetrated through
South Gippsland from Boolarra in 1840, and emerged
at Westernport, he and his few hardy followers had


occupied 22 days in travelling 50 miles. On some
days, with almost superhuman exertion, they man-
aged to cover a mile only. Into this wilderness, about
the middle of the seventies, the settlers came, but not
in wheeled vehicles. With pack-horses they wound
through the dark, boggy, narrow tracks, winding and
ever winding, now clambering upwards, now down
slippery slopes, between walls of scrub and trees of
monstrous proportions. The only alternative to
pack-horses were bush sledges, and many of these are
still in use to this day. A good old Scotch body, who
as a bride went back into this incredible wilderness
with her husband, did not see another white
woman again for four years. It was eleven years
before they saw the back boundary of their property
which was only a mile away. The house was built
on a hilltop, and she had either to carry her washing
down an almost perpendicular mountainside to the
creek at the bottom, or carry the water for it
back to the house. Looking back on it all, she used
to say, “Aye, but they were happy days! We were
verra poor, but I had ma children aboot me, and God
was verra near. ’ ’ Of such stuff w T ere the pioneers
made.
Taking the Strain.
It has been well said that “the veil that
covers the face of the future is woven by the hand of
mercy.” The pioneers knew not what awaited them.
I orty years some of them waited in the wilderness
for roads that never came. The soil was “sour,”
and modern fertilisers and machinery unknown.
Dry fallowing on the plains and “hillside” ploughing
on the hills and all the technique suited to new con-
ditions had yet to be found out by long processes of
trial and error. Crops were light and prices low.
Before the State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission commenced its amazing work, the grim
spectre of drought hung over the selectors in the


north, while in the south their crops and stock were
destroyed by floods, hail and snow. Toil unrelieved by
holidays, crude housing, rough and sometimes scanty
food —a life of hardship, poverty and loneliness, with
a strong flavouring of disappointment was their lot,
yet, as the old lady said, they were wondrously
happy. Like all noble life, the toil of these settlers
was vicarious. They toiled on and died at their toil,
not having received the promise. We have entered
into the heritage of their achievement, not only in
the smiling provinces which they cleared and com-
menced to cultivate, but also in the strong Methodist
communities which exist throughout the State to-day.
First to Enter and Last to Leave.
As these selectors spread out over the State, the
Methodist missionaries went with them, sharing their
privations, but bringing into their lives Divine
pleasure and resolution. In many districts the
settlers had no religious ministrations other than
those of the Methodist ministry. These solitary
ministries often continued for years, and earned for
Methodism the description of being ‘ ‘ the first to enter
and the last to leave.” Our men did not proselytise,
and they did not discriminate. From the earliest days
it has been one of the proud boasts of Methodist Home
Missions that we sought the salvation of men, women,
and children, irrespective of class, creed or colour.
The missionaries not only preached, but were
the embodiment of every sort of helpfulness. If
they did not, like St. Paul, earn their own living
with their own hands, they at least helped the settlers
to earn theirs. Like our founder, John Wesley, they
lived in the saddle. If they were not good horsemen
when they set out, they were before they finished,
and, in the meantime, they added some gaiety to the
drab life of the settlers while “learning to ride.”
Lithe fellows, wdio lived in the open air, “spent


cheerful days and nights without a groan,” and were
untormented by motorist’s liver!
Volumes could be filled with vivid stories of their
work, but space forbids. But
“Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts;
Into a thousand parts divide one man,
And make imaginary puissance;
Turning the accomplishments of many years
Into an hour-glass.”
Thus we see the tall slip of a lad, still in his Teens,
named William H. Scurr, 55 years ago gathering the
settlers near the South Australian border to worship
in a rude bark kitchen. Again, we see Albert T.
Holden, later to become the head of the department,
conducting services in the hotel bar amidst the
mountains at Glen Wills; or again, James Smith,
dauntlessly penetrating McDonald’s and other tracks,
seeking out the settlers in the dark forests of South
Gippsland; or later still, Henry Clarke, preaching to
Mr. and Mrs. Coghill and the only neighbouring
family in their tent at Manangatang, but unfortun-
ately, “he was so tall that he could not stand erect
beneath the ridgepole. ’ ’
Let us attempt to compress poignant grief, acute
suffering and stark tragedy into another sentence or
two. AVhile assisting to dig the graves of a family
of children who were trapped in the flames of a great
bush fire on Mount Best and burnt to death on
their way home from school, Harry Keck received
the full force of a pick through the back of his hand,
the point protruding through his palm. The Home
Mission agents go not only to those who need them,
but to those who need them most.
They Waited Not.
When, through the Society’s lack of men or money,
the early settlers were left temporarily without the
means of grace, they waited not for the official


representative of the Church, but started services
themselves.
Over beyond the Dandenong Ranges, Henry Dennis
erected a slab pulpit under the trees, and thus the
Monbulk Circuit was started. On the 30th Decem-
ber, 1877, at three in the afternoon, Caleb Burchett
and his wife commenced service in one of their
rooms at Poowong. Mrs. Hatton, a sturdy
little woman with merry blue eyes, the mother of
a delightful family, trudged from her primitive
paling home, up the hills and down the gullies, along
a narrow track of her own where the bracken ferns
were higher than her head, every Sunday for thirty-
two years to superintend the Sunday School which she
started at Crossover, in the Neerim district. All
the children in that area, including her own, were
led to Christ by her. As they have scattered over
the Commonwealth, the work of Mrs. Hatton lives
on in the service that they are rendering. From
such humble and obscure origins, multiplied inde-
finitely, has emerged the vast network of Methodist
Circuits and Stations which covers Victoria from
Croajingalong to the Mallee, and from the Murray
to the sea.
The Eyes of the Church.
At first merely designed to provide the means of
grace for isolated families who were too few, too
poor, and too remote to be incorporated into the
Circuit system, the Home Mission Department soon
assumed wider significance. It became the Church
Extension Agency. Under its initiative, guidance
and control, Circuit after Circuit sprang into being.
The Society became the “eyes of the Church,” quick
to see and seize every opportunity to extend its
work. With settlement spreading in all directions,
it is difficult to see what Methodism would have done
without this vigorous pioneering policy. The work
of the Society has been responsible for opening up at


least two-thirds of our preaching places, and sustain-
ing them through the years of their immaturity until
they became such centres of Methodist life and
influence as Warragul, Korumburra, Benalla, Shep-
parton, Numurkah, Kyabram, Rochester, Bchuca,
Kerang, Swan Hill, Mildura, Donald, and last, but
not least, the wonderful Wimmera, whose Circuits
all grew out of the original Horsham, Warrackna-
beal and Lillimur Home Mission Stations. Space
forbids a catalogue of the names of all the other
Circuits and Stations that cluster round the great
centres already mentioned. In 1875 there were
only five Circuits east of Melbourne. From the
beginning, Home Mission Stations rapidly became
Circuits; new Stations hived off from them again to
become other Circuits, and in almost all this wonder-
ful process of subdivision, which has continued
increasingly to the present day, the Home Mission
Society has fostered, sustained, and guided these
nurslings until they could walk alone. All through
the years it has been the aggressive and at the same
time the sheltering arm of the Church. Without it,
Victorian Methodism could scarcely have become
what it is now in point of numbers and influence.
When the Society was founded in 1875, there were
60 Circuits and Stations in Victoria. To-day the
number is 230, with 1312 churches and preaching
places.
. m;i y thought that in such a State as Victoria
pioneering efforts would of necessity have ceased.
But it is not so. For there are to-day 70 appoint-
ments on the Home Mission Station Sheet, two new
Stations having been opened during the present
year.
The Murray Valley.
With the building of the Hume Weir and the
locking of the Murray River, a new vista opens to


our Church in that vast and fertile valley. Enorm-
ous irrigation channels are now in course of
construction, exceeding in size and importance any
hitherto attempted. The Murray Valley itself has
become the chief irrigation channel of the continent.
With more settled ecomonic conditions, thousands of
families will make homes where there were only hun-
dreds before. The Society has anticipated these
possibilities, and has opened Stations at Robinvale,
Barham, Moulamein, Mathoura, and reopened at
Yarrawonga. These Stations, in addition to the Cir-
cuits previously established along the Murray, may
yet become more important than our best country
Circuits in Victoria. Most of the agents at these
Stations operate on both sides of the river, as the
territory is economically and socially related to
Melbourne rather than to Sydney.
Decadent but Not Forsaken.
In contrast to the fresh, vigorous growth in agri-
cultural and horticultural regions was the decline
of the old gold-mining centres. That the gold would
ever become exhausted, that a new nugget would not
grow in the place of one taken out, and that the
gravelly soil of most of these regions would be
almost useless for agriculture were contingencies
that do not seem to have occurred to the minds of
those who lived in the early days on the goldfields.
They built magnificent churches, leaving heavy
burdens of debt to posterity. To these decadent
Circuits, as well as others where agriculture and
grazing pursuits have not proved as successful as
was anticipated, the Home Mission Society has
rendered assistance by grants.
There have, of course, been many unforeseen
failures, but many more unexpected successes.
Looking backward, we see some very promising
regions deserted, and many that were then despised
and seemingly useless, such as marvellous Mildura


and its environs, filled with population and wealth.
A remarkable feature of some of the places whose
development has been arrested, or where there has
been real retrogression, has been the fruitfulness of
these stunted branches. For example, Curdles River
Station was opened in the same year as Warrackna-
beal, but while the latter place has a magnificent
church and a £SOOO Sunday School building,
Curdies Station, with its little wooden churches and
parsonage, still struggles desperately to maintain
some semblance of life. Yet out of Curdies River
came families like the Robilliards and Le Couteurs,
the latter to give to our State and Church a Rhodes
Scholar and former headmaster of the Methodist
Ladies’ College, now at Newington, Sydney; and
Mr. George Beckett, our Conference Evangelist,
whose work for 25 years has been honoured
by God throughout the Commonwealth in turning
thousands to Christ. Another of these stunted causes
is Apollo Bay, once a Circuit, now a single Home
Missionary’s Station. But out of this remote place,
situated between the Otway Ranges and the deep
blue sea, have come more ministers, Mission sisters,
and missionaries, both Home and Foreign, than from
many of our large suburban Circuits. Other instances
could be quoted, but these two must suffice, save to
point out that the last three Presidents-General of
our Australasian Church commenced their lives or
their Christian service in out-of-the-way country
places in Victoria. The Rev. Frank Lade, M.A. was
born at Strath Creek, in the Kilmore Circuit. The
Rev. Dr. Holden commenced preaching at Newham,
now in the Lancefield Home Mission Station; while
the Rev. A. J. Barclay’s earliest recollection of
Church life is that of helping his mother to carry
a basket of cakes for a tea meeting at Digby, where
he was born. The latter is a little preaching place
in what was once the Merino Circuit, but is now the
Coleraine Home Mission Station.


Four Great Leaders .
In an age which produced men of marked indi-
viduality and strength of character, the early leaders
of the Society stand out boldly, even in the company
of their great contemporaries. In a rather small
way, in comparison with older lands, Victoria is
developing something of an historical consciousness.
Already men are trying to assess the influence of
great figures in our Church life during the century.
We are sure that the Revs. John Watsford, Edmund
S. Bickford and Albert T. Holden have an abiding
place amongst the great determining forces that
moulded the life of our Church in Victoria; but
perhaps the future will give the place of honour to
John Watsford who was the first General Secretary.
Originally a pioneer missionary in Fiji, Watsford
returned to proclaim the need of a strong Church
in the Homeland if ever we were to fulfil our
obligations to the brown races of the Pacific.
Strong in intellect and of powerful physique, he
possessed spiritual capacity and power beyond most.
The tremendous impetus given to sane evangelism by
his personal example and advocacy has not spent
itself, but abides to this day. He was one of those
rare souls capable of originating and imparting a
tradition. Throughout the sixty years, his soul-
saving passion has characterised the work of the
Department which he founded. Victoria is a mis-
sionary-spirited State to a large extent as a result
of his impact upon it. Nor is it without significance
that from the ranks of Victorian home missionaries
have come many of the finest workers in our Missions
Overseas
At one period a few years ago, more than half
the European staff overseas were originally home
missionaries in this State. In the crucial years
between 1875 and 1883 (when he retired) he spread
our Church to the limits of new settlement.


In the ensuing three years, namely from 1883 to
1886, the Rev. Spencer Williams was in charge of
the administration; a period too brief for him to
have left any distinctive mark on the still growing
activities of the Society. He ably carried on the
traditions of enterprise and zeal established by
“Father” Watsford.
In 1886 a meteoric figure appeared on the horizon
in the person of the Rev. Edmund S. Bickford who
was elected to succeed Mr. Williams. A man of
restless energy, magnetic leadership, dauntless enter-
prise, shrewd insight and fervent evangelism, all
blended together in the charm of a winsome
personality, he was greatly loved and trusted by the
people within and without the Church. Just prior
to his election, millions of acres of Mallee land pre-
viously regarded as useless were successfully opened
up for settlement. Like his predecessors, he estab-
lished Stations throughout the whole of this area,
while maintaining the work which they had
begun. With steadily increasing revenue, and under
Mr. Bickford’s stimulating and imaginative influence,
the Society entered a new realm of service in rela-
tion to the growing city of Melbourne. When Wesley
Church was constituted a Mission in 1893, and that
lover of humanity, the Rev. A. R. Edgar, placed in
charge, the new venture was supported by a grant
of £l5O per annum from the Home Mission Fund
until it became self-supporting. In subsequent
years Missions at Collingwood, Fitzroy, South Mel-
bourne, Carlton, and North Melbourne were
established to meet the changing conditions in these
industrial suburbs. The policy of support for this
work, instituted by Mr. Bickford, has continued
until the present day in the case of the latter five
Missions.
Bickford established the Methodist Sisterhood
in 1897, and who can assess the value to the
cause of such devoted women as Sister Agnes, Sister


Emily, Sister Faith, Sister Bessie and all the
other Sisters who have rendered such Christ-
like service to the poor, the lonely, the fallen and the
sick, in the gloomy homes and crowded streets of
the inner areas of Melbourne. Our Child Rescue
work at Cheltenham owed its origin and establish-
ment largely to the sympathetic understanding of
this great and good man. It was during his
administration that the Mintaro Home for wayward
girls was established at Monnegatta. These institu-
tions will be referred to subsequently.
In the year 1904 the Rev. A. T. Holden, B.A. was
chosen to assist Mr. Bickford, but within four months
of their happy association Mr. Bickford died. In
the choice of a colleague he had made no mistake,
and the young man gave himself to his great task
with all the thoroughness, devotion and self-sacrifice
that had characterised his predecessors in office.
The Watsford tradition persists, and indeed
dominates the diverse personalities called to this
work. As the years passed, there began to
unfold in the life and work of Mr. Holden evidence
of one of the greatest personalities that God has
given to Methodism, and indeed to Australia. A
man great in all the dimensions of manhood, far-
seeing, wide-minded, and spacious-hearted, he com-
prehended all the factors and forces in an
ever-growing Church. He possessed the rare and
divine quality of patience in a unique degree.
Men felt strong when he was near. Conferences,
Synods, Committees and Commissions felt safe under
his guidance. Reserved in speech, and not a rhetori-
cian, he possessed a mind swift and accurate in
analysis and a delicately balanced judgment. His
zeal, thoroughness and energy, if possible, surpassed
those of his predecessors. He built more loftily on
their wide and deep foundations. During his
regime the Home Missionaries’ Training College was


established; and the most romantic of all Home Mis-
sion enterprises was inaugurated, largely owing to his
courage and initiative, in the great adventure known
as the Methodist Federal Inland Mission. Mr. Holden
served as a Chaplain in the South African War, and
after his return was affectionately known for many
years as Major,’ 7 which later became “Colonel,”
when he was promoted on his appointment as
Methodist Chaplain-General of the Military Forces in
Australasia. # For his conspicuous influence in this
realm he was honoured by His Majesty the King,
who conferred on him the Order of Commander of
the British Empire.
It was inevitable that such a man should reach the
highest position in our Church, and he was elected
President-General at the Conference held in Sydney
in 1932. It is a tribute to his greatness that he
seemed to take the chair automatically, and the
election was only an unimportant detail. He was
the chosen delegate of the Methodist Church of Aus-
tralasia at the consummation of Methodist Union in
London in 1932. There he represented us with
conspicuous ability. On his return it was discovered
that he was afflicted with a dangerous malady, but
he evinced such patience and heroism, and such forti-
tude in carrying on his work until his voice ceased
and the pen fell from his nerveless fingers, that he
evoked the admiration of everyone within the Church,
and many thousands outside. In 1934 the Univer-
sity of Toronto conferred on him the honorary degree
of Doctor of Divinity, an honour fittingly bestowed
and richly deserved.
Ten years prior to Dr. Holden’s retirement, owing
t°. the growth of the Department, Conference deter-
mined that he should have an ordained colleague in
addition to the probationer usually attached to the
office staff. The choice fell upon the Rev. T. C.
Rentoul, who had served as a home missionary in
♦ See Chapter xxii.


Gippsland and subsequently in metropolitan Cir-
cuits, until the outbreak of the Great War, when he
enlisted as a chaplain from the Hawthorn Circuit.
On Dr. Holden’s retirement in 1932 he was elected
to the position of General Superintendent, bringing
to his task vision, courage, sympathy, resolute deter-
mination, untiring energy and an implicit faith
in God. And so the Watsford tradition continues.
Lay Treasurers .
One of the glories of Methodism has been the ser-
vice of its laymen, and it is remarkable that during
the sixty years of its history the Society has had only
three lay treasurers —Messrs. S. G. King, J. Jamie-
son, and W. E. Whitehead —names that are highly
honoured throughout the Connexion. Mr. Whitehead,
who has held the office for 28 years, has managed
the investments of the Society with great skill, and
has ever been a helpful counsellor in the general
policy and direction of the Society.
Distinguished Missionaries .
Mr. John Donnes, the first home missionary, who
subsequently entered our ministry, was appointed
to Benalla, the first Station, in May, 1875. In June
of the same year Mr. H. Clarkson was sent to North
Loddon.
Amongst missionaries who rendered conspicuous
service for long terms are the following: Mr. John
Lee, Mr. Lynex (who was known as “The Circuit
Builder’’), Mr. R. W. Dean, Mr. E. C. Perkins, Mr.
A. Coates, Mr. H. W. Ford and Mr. George R.
Hexter.
Not being subject to laws relating to the itineracy,
home missionaries have been able to remain for
longer terms in their Stations than ministers. The
following cases, which are not by any means exhaus-
tive, afford an illustration of their ability and
the esteem in which they were held. Mr. Richard


Dunstan, of Ballarat, served for 16 years, and
had two Stations only, six years at Merino and ten
years at Forrest; Mr. F. A. McMurdie, nine years at
Devenish; Mr. G. R. Hexter, 11 years in the Colling-
wood Mission.
Deputations.
A popular feature of Home Mission activity has
been the deputation system, and from time to time
the Society has been fortunate in securing the ser-
vices of gifted men and women for this purpose.
Prominent amongst these was Professor Christopher
Mudd, one-time botanist to King Edward VII when
he was touring India as Prince of Wales. For long
years without abatement until the time of his
death in 1920, crowded audiences gathered to listen to
his inimitably original lectures. Next to him, but
exceeding him in consistency of financial results, is
Sister Bessie (Coates). Both of these deputationists
were more than mere money-raisers—they were
warm-hearted and successful evangelists. Many
bright Christians throughout our Connexion are the
fruit of their ministry.
In recent years the Department has been greatly
helped by the almost full-time voluntary service of
Captain J. E. Jenkins, and during the last three
years Mr. J. R. Wilkinson of Essendon has also
rendered valuable voluntary help.
INSTITUTIONS.
The Training College.
The Home Mission Department established, as the
Jubilee Memorial in 1925, the Home Missionaries’
Training College, the residence of the late Mr. Henry
Berry, at “Otira,” 73 Walpole Street, Kew, being
purchased for this purpose. Facilities are provided
for both residential and day students, and from that
year onwards every missionary has had at least


one year’s training in divinity and secular subjects
before going to his appointment. In conjunction
with the College a system of correspondence tuition
has been carried on, and some of the missionaries
have had preliminary instruction in this way before
entering the College. Further, the students are
required to continue the correspondence courses for
at least one year after appointment. This branch of
the work w r as placed in the competent hands of the
Rev. J. R. Haireourt, B.A. Compelled to retire
prematurely from active Circuit work, Mr. Harcourt,
as lecturer, correspondence tutor, and Vice-Principal
of the College, has exerted a unique influence. He
retired in 1934. Perhaps no other minister in the
Commonwealth has guided the studies of so many
home missionaries and candidates for the ministry.
But in addition to this, he has influenced hundreds
of young men, and occasionally a few young women,
who were trained by him in order to qualify as local
preachers.
Of the students themselves quite fascinating stories
could be written. For the most part the sons of
poor families who left school as early as possible in
order to earn something to swell the family revenue,
they were overtaken by that One ‘ ‘ Who follows
with unhurrying chase, and unperturbed pace,
deliberate speed, majestic instancy.” “That voice
is round them like a bursting sea. . . Rise, clasp
My hand and come!” And, ignorant and unlearned,
they obeyed, not knowing whither they went. The
results of ten years’ work have proved that amongst
the unprivileged young men are intellects of the
finest quality, and what is far more important from
the point of view of the Methodist ministry, qualities
of personality and capacity for spiritual under-
standing not exceeded by those reared under gentler
and more favourable conditions. During the years
the College has been in existence 148 students have


been enrolled, 108 resident and 40 non-resident.
Thirty-five have been accepted for the ministry of
our Church, six have already qualified for an Arts
degree, thirty-three are now serving as home mis-
sionaries, and seven are members of the Sisterhood.
At least eight are now in the Foreign Mission fields,
while several others have entered the ministry of
other Churches. Some who were in the College
have returned to secular employment, but are now
serving as Local Preachers, Circuit stewards, and in
other departments of Church life.
Methodist Homes for Children, Cheltenham.
Like many other great movements, our Child
Rescue work had its origin in a particular case of
need. Mrs. Yarcoe, then a Bible Woman at Wesley
Church, had, as she said, “a little baby left on her
hands. ’’ About the same time she found two little
boys in a Melbourne street in dire need. She took
them to her home, and solicited the aid of the Central
Dorcas Society. This committee of ladies subse-
quently became the Methodist Neglected Children’s
Aid Society and as such, inaugurated a movement
which has developed into an agency of great
significance. Through the efforts of the Aid Society,
a property was secured in Carlton (called Living-
stone House), and there in 1888 the work of child
rescue was formally undertaken. The present
property at Cheltenham was subsequently purchased,
and Livingstone Home opened in 1891.
Later the Queen Victoria Cottage was built in
1902, the Bickford Wing added, and the Agnes
Crook Cottage erected in 1913. An attractive school
was built, the teachers being supplied by the State
Department. In 1922 the Home Mission Committee
purchased an additional 22 acres on which stood a
brick villa, the former home of Mr. James Jamieson,
and in which his daughter, Mrs. J. W. Tuckfield, was


born. In 1923 a separate home was built as a resi-
dence for the Sisters. A gift of £IOOO in 1926 by
Sir Aaron Banks enabled the Domestic Economy
School to be provided, while in 1933 a gift of £3OOO
by Mr. and Mrs. Fred. J. Cato renovated, enlarged
and furnished Mr. Jamieson’s old villa, and provided
the equipment and stock to enable the bulk of the
property to be used as a Training Farm for Boys.
The transformed dwelling is known as the Frances
Cato Home.
The Homes are under the capable management of
a Committee of Ladies, in conjunction with a Men’s
Advisory Committee largely composed of the
Trustees of the property. The line of lady Presi-
dents is a noble succession. Mrs. Crisp, Mrs. P.
Oakden, Mrs. H. R. Rush, Mrs. Presley, Mrs. Bath,
Mrs. Raven, Mrs. Webb, Mrs. J. W. Tuckfield, Mrs.
F. J. Cato, Mrs. H. G. McCutcheon, Mrs. A. E.
Pizzey and Mrs. F. G. Kumm. From 1882 to 1919,
when she was married to Mr. E. C. Be Garis, Miss
M. W. Waugh acted as Secretary to the Committee,
her work being characterised by much charm,
devotion and ability. She was succeeded by Miss
Emily Adamson, who died suddenly, after several
years of sympathetic and zealous service. Acting
from a sense of duty and loyalty to her old friend,
Miss Adamson, Miss Hilda Harding offered and was
accepted for the position of Secretary. She
resigned in 1935, and was succeeded by Miss Emilie
Hitch from the Home Missionaries’ Training Col-
lege. It is impossible to rate too highly the great
service which the Committee, Secretaries and
Treasurers have rendered to the 1644 boys and girls
who have been in their care.
Inextricably interwoven into the traditions of the
Homes are the names of Mr. and Mrs. Trudgeon, who
for so long acted as father and mother to the little
waifs and strays who came under their loving,
homely care. One of the boys ultimately became a


Methodist minister, namely the Rev. D. T. Reddin,
now in the South Australia Conference. Another
recently entered the ministry of the Congregational
Church, while others, notably John Livingstone who
left his estate to the institution, served with
distinction in the Great War.
Work Amongst the Chinese.
In the early gold-mining days there were no
immigration restrictions, and thousands of Chinese
entered Victoria. The Foreign Mission Com-
mittee attended to their needs, and, at that period,
employed as many as six ministers and catechists.
Sixty-three years ago a church was built in Little
Bourke Street, where services have continued until
the present day. It is the oldest Chinese Mission
in Victoria, and is nearer to the Melbourne G.P.O.
than any other Christian Church. When immi-
gration restrictions were introduced, the older
Chinese, in accordance with their custom, returned
to their native land, and, in this way, the number
dwindled until at the census of 1932 the Chinese
in Victoria totalled only 1690. In 1913 the
Mission was taken over by the Home Mission Com-
mittee. Towering above all other phases of this
work was the ministry of the late Rev. James Moy
Ling, who laboured amongst his countrymen in
Victoria from 1873-1911, and whose family still carry
on a splendid tradition of Christian service. Mr.
Moy Ling was succeeded by Mr. Fay Loie, an utterly
devoted and delightful Christian gentleman, who
came to us from New Zealand. When his son
David secured a lucrative position as Government
analyst in Hong Kong, he sent for his father and
mother, that they might be his guests for the rest
of their lives. David paid the fares of the whole
family ostensibly to give them a six months’ holiday,
but when he got them over there declined to pay the
return fares, and, in a quite delightful way, intimated
to his parents that they could work in the Christian


Missions in Hong Kong, but it was his privilege to
support them. While the Home Mission Committee
waited for Mr. Fay Loie’s return, and he himself
persisted in the hope that he might get back, the
work at the Mission was carried on by a young
Chinese layman, who, many years earlier, had been
led to Christ by Mr. Moy Ling. The young man’s
name was Ernest Leong Gie, who did all the work at
the Mission for three years without fee or reward.
At the end of that time the Rev. A. T. Holden asked
him if he would accept the position of catechist, and
with much modesty and self-sacrifice he abandoned
his cabinet-making business and was appointed to
take charge of the Mission. The present member-
ship of the church is small, but there are no more
loyal, consistent or generous members of Methodism
than this little Christian remnant from the Orient.
Colporteur.
This agency also owed its origin to the Rev. E. S.
Bickford, and under Mr. James Arnold, a somewhat
eccentric character, but with a genius for this type
of service, it was carried on with conspicuous success
until his retirement in 1923. Mr. T. L. Parnell
continued the work until it was discontinued in
December, 1932. The coming of wireless made this
form of ministry less necessary than in the early
days, when mails were few and newspapers rare.
But here, too, the enterprise of the Department
is shown by adapting to its service the use of elec-
trical amplifying equipment for special Open-air
Missions to the holiday crowds at the hills and on the
beaches. This new work commenced in September,
1935.
“Mintaro” Home.
Another enterprise which the Rev. E. S. Bickford
launched was a home for wayward girls. A property
named “Mintaro,” near Monnegatta, was purchased
in 1903. Owing to various causes, chief of which


was the increasing unwillingness of the Courts to
commit this type of girl to a reformatory, the insti-
tution was closed and the property ultimately sold.
Inland Mission.
Following on several visits to Queensland and
Western Australia by Mr. Holden, who had been
invited to confer with the Home Mission Committees
in those States regarding their tremendous problems,
the Victorian Committee gave substantial money
grants over a period of years. The inadequacy of
this method to cope with the problem of States that
were respectively eight and eleven times the size of
Victoria soon became apparent, and as a result of
conversations with the Rev. A. J. Barclay, of Western
Australia, the proposal to establish the Inland Mis-
sion was moved and seconded by these ministers
in the General Conference held at Brisbane in 1926,
and was carried with much enthusiasm. In the
following year the work commenced.
All the territory west of the 137 th degree of longi-
tude was excised from the Queensland Conference,
and all the territory north of the 28th parallel of
latitude from the West Australia Conference. To
these two enormous tracts of country was added the
whole of the Northern Territory, approximately six
times as big as Victoria, making a total area for the
new Mission of 1,500.000 square miles.
The Mission is Federal in character, and is con-
trolled by a Board representative of all State
Conferences, the cost of the Mission being borne
proportionately by them. The Executive of the
Board is the Executive of the Victorian Home Mission
Committee, and from its inception the Rev. A. T.
Holden, assisted by the Rev. T. C. Rentoul, has been
the Director.
Commencing with five missioners in 1927, the full
complement of ten agents is now actively at work,
completely covering the whole area. The Mission


|||N' ' •••:■ "••/*. .;'\„ 1
Rev. J. C. SYMONS.
Rev. J, WATSFORD.
Rev. JOSEPH DARE, D.D
Rev. J. S. WAUGH, D.D.


Mr. “JIMMY” JEFFREY.
Rev. SAMUEL KNIGHT
Rev. HENRY BATH.
Hon. ALEX. FRASER


has succeeded beyond expectation, and has carried
the Gospel, both in word and deed, to places where
previously there had not been any religious agencies.
The Babies’ Home.
Under the leadership of Mr. F. 0. Barnett,
M.Com., and Dr. Douglas Thomas, this project
took shape in the thought of some Methodist young
men. As a result of their revulsion from the con-
ditions under which little children are being reared
in our slum areas, on the 31st March, 1925, a
proposal to erect a Home for slum babies was
approved by the Home Mission Committee, and on
7th December, 1929, the building was opened free
of debt; the cost of the land, buildings and equipment
approximating £28,000.*
Up to September, 1934, 298 babies had been
received into the Home, and 198 adopted. The daily
average of babies in the Home is between 50 and 60.
The Home is provided with a staff of competent and
qualified nurses, and is splendidly served by an
honorary medical staff—Drs. Douglas Thomas, D. M.
Bmbleton and Alan McCutcheon.
Women’s Home Mission League.
The Women’s Home Mission League was estab-
lished in 1932 to aid the work of the Department,
both spiritually and financially. One half the
financial returns are devoted to the support of the
Sisterhood, and the other half to the Children’s
Homes at Cheltenham. Miss Lilian Scholes, M.A.,
8.D., Dip.Ed., accepted the invitation of the newly-
formed League to become the Secretary. Branches
of the League have been established in many churches,
and numbers of Guilds have been enrolled as
Associate Branches.
Employment Bureau.
To cope with the alarming and distressing
growth of unemployment, the Society in 1934
♦See page 238.


decided to inaugurate a Methodist Employment
Bureau. The Rev. R. Bruce McConchie, 8.A., who
had to retire from the active work of the ministry
prematurely, was placed in charge of the Bureau.
Up to date 650 positions have been found. This
enterprise is also of great service to country Circuits,
not only in finding secular employment, but also in
providing Christian workers for churches greatly in
need of help.
Evangelistic Department .
At a meeting of the Home Mission Executive Com-
mittee held on Friday, 9th July, 1875, Mr. Matthew
Burnett was engaged as Home Mission Evangelist.
Prom that time onwards special evangelists have had
their place within the Home Mission system. When
the altered conditions and temper of the times are
taken into account, perhaps no evangelist the Society
ever employed has had more numerous and lasting
results than Mr. George Beckett, who is now in his
twenty-fifth yeafr of service. In 1910 an Evan-
gelistic Committee was appointed, but, owing to
financial difficulties, did not function successfully.
From the year 1917 the Committee has been a sub-
committee of the Home Mission Department, of which
the Rev. G. P. Dyson has proved an able and devoted
convener. In 1931, a special crusade was undertaken,
and has been continued year by year. These special
services are State-wide in character and, as far as
circumstances permit, are held simultaneously. In
these missions many ministers, missionaries and local
preachers have rededicated themselves to the work
of winning souls through the faithful preaching of
the Word. Apart from the number of souls that
made decision for Christ, and they were many, the
reflex influence of these crusades has been a great
blessing to the ministry and church people generally.


Chaplaincies.
The Home Mission Society does collectively for the
Church nearly all the things which the Churches and
Circuits individually cannot do for themselves. We
therefore find the Society at work in our great public
hospitals, ministering to the sick, as well as caring
for the interesting and pathetic community who are
placed under restraint in our prisons for their own
and society’s welfare. The records of this work,
which requires much patience and tact, are a blending
of light and shadow in which possibly the shadows
predominate. When circumstances warranted it, an
Immigration Chaplain was employed, with much
benefit to our Church and to Methodist settlers from
overseas.
Miscellaneous.
In the present year the Home Mission Department
is assisting, in some form or other, more than half
the Circuits, Missions, and Home Mission Stations in
Victoria, chiefly by grants to the Circuit Fund.
Indeed, so important is its main purpose, and so
many its ramifications, to use a favourite and time-
honoured phrase, it may be aptly described as “the
backbone of the Church.”


CHAPTER XV,
VICTORIA AND THE WORLD TASK.
“I look upon all the world as my parish ” —Wesley.
This chapter will endeavour to support the fore-
going statement and illustrate what God has enabled
the Methodists of Victoria to contribute to the world
task of Missions during the first hundred years of
our history.
The First Missionary Meeting .
In the columns of the “Port Phillip Patriot” it
was reported that on Sunday, Bth September, 1839,
Divine services were held, the preacher in the
morning being Rev. W. Waterfield (Independent
minister) and in the evening Rev. J. Forbes (Presby-
terian). The audience on both occasions was large
and attentive, and contributions were made at the
close of each service. On the following evening the
friends of Missions in general, and Missions to the
aborigines in particular, assembled in the Wesleyan
Chapel for the purpose of forming a branch in con-
nection with the parent society in England. The
audience at this meeting included friends of all
denominations and the preachers already mentioned.
On this interesting occasion the chair was taken by
Mr. A. Thompson, of Geelong, the chief address
being delivered by Rev. Francis Tuckfield. He
furnished the meeting with a very luminous account
of the rise and progress of the Wesleyan Missionary
Society, and outlined the work of the Mission among
the much-abused aborigines of Australia Felix, relat-
ing signs of improvements already seen in the lives
of these benighted tribes.


The Aborigines.
The missionary spirit of this meeting found
expression in the following resolutions: —
“Moved by the Rev. B. Hurst, and seconded by the
Rev. W. Waterfield: 1. That this meeting feels grate-
ful to Almighty God for the success which has
attended the operations of the AVesleyan Methodist
Society, and resolves that a Society be formed in this
place, to be called ‘The Port Phillip Branch Meth-
odist Missionary Society/ the object of which shall
be to augment the general funds of the parent
Society by weekly, monthly, quarterly and annual
subscriptions, or other occasional contributions.
“Moved by Robert Reeves, Esq., and seconded by
the Rev. James Clow: 2. That the following persons
be appointed to be the committee for the ensuing
year, and that they be requested to make arrange-
ments for canvassing the town of Melbourne, and the
district of Port Phillip and Geelong.
“Committee: Rev. B. Hurst, E. S. Parker, Esq.,
J. E. Dredge, Esq., Mr. J. Fenton, Mr. J. J. Peers,
Mr. W. AVitton, Mr. J. T. Smith. Treasurers: Dis-
trict of Geelong—A. Thompson, Esq.; District of
Melbourne —Mr. George Lilly. Secretaries: Rev. F.
Tuckfield, Mr. AVm. AVilloughby.
“Moved by Dr. Patrick, and seconded by Rev.
James Forbes: 3. That in order to the accomplish-
ment of the Society’s object it is necessary that
collectors be immediately appointed, and that those
persons whose leisure hours would allow them to
engage in this delightful and honourable work be
respectfully and earnestly requested to volunteer
their services.
“Moved by E. S. Parker, Esq., seconded by Rev.
P. Tuckfield: 4. That this meeting earnestly and
affectionately recommends to the friends and sup-
porters of the Society, while they continue to exert
themselves in the support of the Mission cause, to


combine with all their efforts fervent and persevering
prayer for the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on
heathen nations, on missionaries engaged in preaching
the Gospel in distant lands, and on the managers and
directors of the several Missionary Societies at
Home/ 9
Messrs. Parker and Dredge, above mentioned, were
Assistant Protectors of Aborigines.
A liberal contribution was made by those present.
The audience united in praise and prayer, and the
first Methodist missionary meeting concluded with
the Benediction.
The newspaper report closed with these words:
“We heartily wish the Society all prosperity. ’’
This is believed to have been the first missionary
meeting held by any church or society in Melbourne,
and was the forerunner of many splendid missionary
meetings held in connection with the Methodist
Church.
Missions Abroad .
The failure of the Mission to the Aborigines,
related in a previous chapter, did not chili the
ardour of these earnest souls. They threw
themselves into the general programme of the
Wesleyan Missionary Society then operating in
the South Seas. Regular meetings were held,
prayer was offered and gifts made to the mother
Society, and not many years later, from our own
land missionaries went out to give their services to
the heathen. Let us now endeavour to give not a
complete history of each Mission field—for that has
already been done in other works —but rather to
relate what the Methodists of Victoria have accom-
plished by their missionary enterprise. In doing
this, pen pictures of the missionaries and sketches of
the fields of action will serve to vivify the simple
tale of human endeavour in many lands. Chrono-
logical order cannot be observed, and it will certainly


make for economy of time and space if we deal with
each field separately.
T onga.
When Captain Cook visited the group of islands
now known as Tonga in 1773, he was received with
much apparent friendliness, and the great captain,
in innocence, wrote in his log-book, “These must be
the Friendly Islands.” This gave them the name
by which they were known for many years. But
behind those seemingly friendly faces were warlike
hearts as subsequent history proved.
This group of islands became a Methodist kingdom,
self-governing and self-supporting, with its own
queen and parliament.
It was to this romantic field that Victoria, in
1855, sent her first missionary volunteer —the Rev.
John Whewell. With his bride he went to Haapai,
and threw himself into the task of learning the lan-
guage, conducting the schools, preaching to the
newly-formed Church and visiting the scattered
archipelago in the crazy canoes of those early days.
To this field he gave ten valuable years, until
forced by ill health to retire to New Zealand in
1866.
In 1858 the Rev. William G. R. Stephenson fol-
lowed him, and spent thirteen years in happy, useful
service. His was an apostolic ministry, at the
end of which he transferred to the New South Wales
Conference. He died in 1890.
The first Australian-born minister to be sent from
Victoria was the Rev. George Minns. He rapidly
acquired the language, read the prayers on the fifth
Sabbath after arrival, and preached his first sermon
on the twelfth. He approached his work in an excel-
lent spirit, remarking in an early letter: —“My
experience has convinced me that the happy and
useful missionary is he who lives near to God, and
attends only to the duties of his appointment.” He


had a particularly difficult appointment at Mua,
where French Papists had caused conflict. During
his ministry a gracious visitation of the Spirit of God
was experienced, and many people came under His
influence. Minns was forced by domestic affliction
to return at the end of his seventh year, and to spend
three years in Victoria. As soon, however, as his health
was restored, nothing could dissuade him from return-
ing to the loved land of Tonga, where he served for a
further term of three years, at the end of which
time, broken in health, he came home, so weak as to
be unable to take a Circuit appointment.
These noble men were succeeded in turn by Revs.
Henry Greenwood, Jas. Thomas and Charles Sanders,
who gave varying periods of service to the little
kingdom.
In 1876 a very choice spirit in the person of Rev.
Henry C. Oldmeadow went forth and won the affec-
tion of the people during his seven years’ residence
in the three Circuits of Mua, Haapai and Vavau.
He experienced much hardship during the terrible
hurricane of 1880, but succeeded in comforting his
people and encouraging them to rebuild their
churches, King George Tubou giving a fine pulpit to
the Central Church. Mr. Oldmeadow never
recovered from these trying experiences of hurri-
canes, earthquakes and seafaring exposures.
It was from this State that the Rev. Shirley
Waldemar Baker went to Tonga in the year 1860.
There, in the days of schism, he became associated
with the Free Church. Details of this unfortunate
division have been told in “Century in the Pacific”
(Colwell); in “George Brown” Autobiography; and
“Moulton of Tonga” (J. Egan Moulton).
Forty years have passed since the rent took place,
which caused much sorrow and loss, but time,
in the overruling providence of God, has healed the
wounds. This unhappy page of Tonga’s history
closed in 1926, when a basis of Reunion, promoted by


Queen Salote Tubou and the President of the Tonga
Conference (Rev. Rodger C. G. Page), was accepted.
The Rev. E. E. Harkness, of Bendigo, spent ten
years as colleague to the late Rev. Jabez Watkin, of
the Free Church of Tonga. On completion of his
term of service he went to New Zealand, and rejoined
the Methodist Church of the Dominion.
In connection with this branch of Methodism, a
school teacher and local preacher went forth —John
Hartley Roberts —as principal of the Government
College, and to it he gave many years of valuable
service, as described by his son in “Tamai” (S. C.
Roberts).
Though born in Victoria, a gifted son of Rev.
A. J. Collocott, Rev. E. E. V. Collocott, M.A., 8.D.,
Litt.D., entered the Methodist ministry in New South
Wales, and began service in Tonga in 1911. After
five years at Haapai, he was called upon to succeed
Dr. J. Egan Moulton at the Tubou College, and for
eight years did splendid service till the ill health of
his family necessitated his return. His translations
and writings on the history and folklore of Tonga
have been recognised by the Melbourne University
conferring upon him the degree of Doctorate of
Letters.
Another Victorian to serve in Tonga was the Rev.
Harold F. Allen. He entered the ministry in South
Australia in 1910, and in 1921 he was appointed to
Haapai, where, at the beginning of a promising
career, his wife’s serious ill health forced his
retirement.
Still another Victorian, Rev. A. Harold Wood,
M.A., 8.D., who was born at Geelong, saw service
in Tonga. He entered the ministry in New South
Wales in 1921, and in 1924 was appointed to succeed
Mr. Collocott at Tubou College. Here for eleven
years he has rendered distinguished service. The
establishment of the Boys’ School and the Theological
College has been a great contribution to the Church


of Tonga, for from them has come a remarkable
Tongan youth—Jotham Sau Faubula —who recently
secured the diploma of Theology of the Melbourne
College of Divinity, (L.Th.). At the request of the
Tongan Government, Mr. Wood compiled text-books
of history and geography that will remain for many
years the authentic handbooks of the country.
In 1926, the first of two brothers went from the
Victoria and Tasmania Conference to the little king-
dom. There, Eev. G. C. Harris, M.A., spent eight
years of his ministry—difficult years, unbroken by
holiday or rest; then the ill health of his family
compelled him to return home. His brother, Eev.
Edwin G. Harris, 8.A., followed two years later, and
is still at work on the field.
No story of Victoria’s share in the District of
Tonga would be complete without some reference to
the missionary sisters from this State. The Misses
Bennett, Knight, and Eunice Bowden, 8.A., Mrs.
Smith (nee Barber), and others gave of their best
to the schools, while for many years Mrs. Thompson
(nee Waldron) has given long years of devoted
work, and, latterly, rendered purely honorary service
for “love’s dear sake.”
Who can estimate the value of such work to this
little Methodist island kingdom?
Samoa.
The beautiful group of Samoa will ever be asso-
ciated with Eobert Louis Stevenson. It was Samoa
that gave him his last few years of joyous and
adventurous life, and provided the scenes for his
fascinating books, including the delightful Vailima
Letters. It became his adopted home, until the day
when
“Home is the sailor home from sea
And the hunter home from the hill.”
Samoa has ever been the battlefield of tribes, of
politics and of adventurers, and several European


nations have been mixed up in generations of dis-
putes. Unfortunately, a misunderstanding arose
between the London Missionary Society and the
Methodists of Samoa, and eighteen years later we
were requested to reopen the Mission. To take up
this delicate task Victoria, in 1857, sent a very able
missionary—Rev. Martin Dyson. On arrival he
found a remnant of the 13,000 Wesleyans, whom
we had abandoned, in a deplorable condition.
Although Martin Dyson was somewhat disappointed
by the weakness of the Church, yet he vigorously
defended our right to return to those whom we had
abandoned, and wrote “Samoan Methodism/ ’ a
defence of the action of Conference. Methodism
owes much to him for his leadership during this
critical period of history. After working in Samoa
for eight years he was transferred to Tonga, where
he continued his labours for four years, and at the
end of this period he returned to Victoria.
The next Victorian to go to Samoa was the Rev.
J. Mathieson, who arrived in 1873, and served the
District for 12 years. His chief work was done at
the Training College at Lufilufi, where his name is
still fragrant.
Then followed the Rev. S. Churchward, M.A., in
1908. He, too, was appointed Principal of the
Theological College, and is remembered in the group
for his scholarship. After his return to the home
work he continued his studies in the language, and
wrote “A New Samoan Grammar/ ’ which was
published by the District in 1926, and is still a
standard work.
The Rev. G. S. Shinkfield, 8.A., succeeded Mr.
Churchward at the College in 1917. He became
Chairman of the District in 1919, and served in that
capacity for fourteen eventful years. During a
period of political unrest he proved himself a leader
and an administrator of outstanding ability. To him
our Church owes the acquisition of a good property


in the capital of Apia—the founding and building of
the Girls’ Memorial School and the Technical and
Agricultural Mission.
The Rev. N. Graham spent a short time in the
District, after which came two more Victorians in
1920 —the Revs. A. L. Sherlock and F. G. Lewis.
The former served the Church effectively at Gagae-
malae for five years, while the latter served for a
similar period on various stations and, finally, at the
College, where he is remembered for his linguistic
ability. For several years he was loaned to the
Samoan Government for educational and native
administration.
In 1925 the Rev. E. B. Blake succeeded Mr. Lewis
at the College, and there continued until 1930.
He, in turn, was succeeded by the Rev.
Horace W. Laity, who served the District faithfully
at Satupaitea during a very difficult and stormy
period when the country was in the throes of a
nationalistic movement, and missionary work, espe-
cially in places remote from the capital, was fraught
with great difficulty. Mr. Laity returned home in
1934, after serving the Samoans for seven years.
The higher educational work among the girls has
been almost entirely in the hands of Victorians from
the beginning. Although the pioneer work was done
by Miss Noble, the District Girls’ High School was
really founded by Miss W. E. E. Watsford, M.A.,
who was ably assisted by Miss Paterson, another
Victorian. The school was originally housed in the
Boys’ High School, Satupaitea, but was afterwards
transferred to Faleula, near the capital, in 1918.
Here a fine residence was built for the sisters, and
later a magnificent school building was erected for
the girls in memory of 25 per cent, of the members
and adherents who lost their lives in the epidemic
of 1918. Miss Edwards, now Sister Martha of the
Carlton Mission, succeeded Miss Paterson as Miss
Watsford’s assistant, but returned to the homeland


when the school was temporarily closed. It was
reopened in 1922, when Miss A. Lade, of Tasmania,
was appointed Principal of the school. Miss Lade
devoted herself to the girls for eleven years, and
returned in 1933 on account of ill health, the cause
of most retirements from the mission field.
Fiji.
Many able missionaries, ministers, laymen and
women served the famous field of Fiji during the
past century. It is difficult, however, to supply a
complete list of their names and records. Among
them are teachers of ability, administrators, educa-
tionists, doctors, nurses, missionary sisters, artisans
and business men, whose lives were devoted to the
noble task of saving Fiji. The foundation so faith-
fully laid by British missionaries under the blessing
of God has been built upon and extended by
missionaries from this State. From the first appoint-
ment in 1858 to the present day, Victorians have
played a very important part in the mission of
Methodism to Fiji, and their number includes many
very attractive personalities.
One of the earliest and most striking figures that
ever left this Conference for the mission field was
Dr. Frederick Langham. This remarkable man was
born in Launceston, Tasmania, on 24th April, 1833.
His boyhood was spent in that city, and at an early
age he was a scholar in the Patterson Street Methodist
Sunday School. At the age of fourteen he removed
to Victoria, and became attached to the Methodist
Church at Fitzroy. Thence he went to England,
where he trained as a teacher. On his return to
Australia he became the headmaster of the Wesleyan
denominational school at Castlemaine, where he
earned the reputation of being a just man and a
strict disciplinarian. An old gentleman, who had
been one of his early pupils, told the writer that on
one occasion he had been wrongly accused of telling


a lie, and, believing the charge to be true, Langham
thrashed him. Subsequently the truth came out,
and the master was so overcome with shame and
sorrow for punishing an innocent boy that he publicly
apologised to the victim, and insisted on taking an
equal number of strokes of the cane himself.
At 25 years of age he offered for the Methodist
ministry, with a preference for Foreign service. He
was accepted and appointed forthwith to Fiji.
He began his work in Lakemba in 1858, but 23
years later than Cross and Cargill, and encountered
great hardships and many perils in that wind-swept
archipelago.
His term in Fiji covered the transition from
savagery to Christianity, and entailed some hair-
breadth escapes from death by drowning and by the
hands of treacherous cannibals. He travelled through
the country with an intrepidity that was really
uncanny—so much so that the Fijians believed he
lived a charmed life.
Rev. Henry Worrall, who was one of his later
colleagues, described him as “a man of heroic mould,
stern, and at times awful in his denunciation of
evil, brave as a lion, yet with a heart as tender as
that of a woman. He was the St. Paul of Fiji, and
this mighty preacher moved savage multitudes at
will. ’ ’
When on 12th April, 1884, the coolie ship,
Syria,’ ’ from India, foundered on the reef of
Naselai, natives bore tidings to Langham, then
stationed at Ban. Without a moment’s delay he
organised a relief party, and made all speed to the
scene of the wreck; there he took a gallant part in
rescuing more than 600 Indian indentured labourers
from the waves.
He was the friend and counsellor of King
Thakombau, over whom he exercised a strong
influence. This native king, who had once been a
cannibal of infamous character, became a local


preacher of the Methodist Church. Langham
attended his deathbed, and says that just before the
end the old king raised himself on his bed, and lifted
up his hands crying, “Tauri Au, Jisu” (Hold me,
Jesus).
When Dr. Langham’s labours in Fiji were drawing
to a close he was released to go to Australia and
England to carry out a very necessary revision of
the Fijian Bible. At the farewell service at Bau the
great church was crowded to the doors, and the
congregation broke forth with an irrepressible wail
as he spoke his parting words.
With his faithful wife and adopted daughter he
went to England to carry out the momentous work
of revision. His trained mind and long residence
in the group enabled him to acquire an accurate
knowledge of the language, from which he was able
to enrich the version with such idiomatic phrases as
have made it a classic. For this work the University
of Glasgow conferred upon him the Doctorate of
Divinity. Thrilling stories from his rare experiences
made him the greatest Foreign Mission deputation of
his generation.
Just as the translation was nearing completion
their greatly loved adopted daughter, Annie Lindsay,
died, to be followed six weeks later by the brave and
devoted wife. A few months later, on 21st June,
1903, the old warrior died at Stoke Newington.
In the gift of Frederick Langham and his wife the
Victorian Conference gave two of its noblest mis-
sionaries to the South Seas.
In 1859, a year after Frederick Langham, Jesse
Carey, a fine type of hard-working Methodist mis-
sionary, went forth. He was born in Loxton,
England, in 1832, and was accepted for the ministry
in 1859 and appointed that year to Fiji. In Fiji he
began his missionary career of seventeen years spent
in several difficult Circuits. He was there during
the heroic period before the islands became part of


the British Empire, and when a missionary carried
his life in his hands.
He will ever be remembered as the Superintendent
of the Rewa Circuit at the time his young colleague,
Thomas Baker, and seven Fijian companions were
martyred, roasted and eaten by cannibals in the
mountains. His was the sad office of comforting the
sorrowful widow and her little children, and
arranging for their transport to the colonies. Subse-
quently he had the task of following the same track
as his brave colleague, and also the joy of witnessing
the confession of faith of many mountaineers from
the tribe responsible for the terrible massacre.
After this experience he was called upon to estab-
lish the training school for pastor-teachers at
Richmond, Kadavu, until it was transferred to
Navuloa, and to this important work he gave seven
years of very valuable service. His book, “Kings
of the Reef,” written to the metre of Longfellow’s
“Hiawatha,” presented the story of Fiji in an
inspiring poem.
On his return to Victoria he served in Circuit
work for eighteen years, and, for ten years, he was
the Foreign Mission agent for this State, “in which
work,” says the Missionary Review, “he exercised a
conscientious care.” Assuredly his strict attention
to business details, together with his unflagging zeal,
did much for the cause of Missions.
Of all the remarkable personalities sent forth from
Victoria to the Kingdom of God overseas, none,
perhaps, was more versatile or romantic than Dr.
Lorimer Fison. This extraordinary man was born
of Anglican parents at Barningham, Suffolk, on 9th
November, 1832. He commenced a University course
at Cambridge, but, after spending two terms there,
left for Australia to make his fortune on the gold-
fields. He joined the ship “General Wyndham” in
1857, in company with an interesting and varied
party of passengers.


%y ~ v ' »' A ''■*** *'' #■■ • *•* x_ s v. ••_ ...'■ . ' ■s.'-\ :<< y *• ■•
A MOTHER OF CHURCHES— LEONGATHA, GIPPSLAXD. tSSfi


a JIm
/ , \ /M b\
Rev. E. S. BICKFORD.
Rev. A. T. HOLDEN, C.B.E
BA., D.D.
Rev. A. McCALLUM, D.D
Mr. FRED. J. CATO.


The story of his conversion has been well told in an
old copy of “Folk-Lore”: “While on the diggings
he received news of his father’s death. It was quite
unexpected, and affected him very deeply. In his
distress he was taken to a mission meeting held in
the open air, and there under the influence of sorrow
and the solemn words which he heard, he fell to the
ground and underwent one of those sudden conver-
sions of which we read in religious history.” He left
the goldfields in 1861, and entered the Melbourne
University to complete his degree, and whilst there
joined the Wesleyan Church. It was then the call
came for missionaries for Fiji. He volunteered at
once and was accepted. He married Miss Jane
Thomas, of Pembroke, Wales. In 1863 they sailed
for Fiji in the Mission ship, “John Wesley.”
During the term of the Rev. A. Wesley Amos as
a missionary at Lakemba, he visited the bedside of a
dying trader named “Jimmy” Mackay, on the island
of Thithia. The old fellow was the ship’s carpenter
on the Mission boat when the Fisons first wfent
to Fiji. Among other stories, he told of the hurri-
cane that smote the vessel on the outward journey.
For a day and a night the vessel was in great peril,
and once the topmast carried away. Mackay went
aloft to try to repair the damage, but was unable to
accomplish the difficult task. Then man after man
went up, but each failed. Fison had been down
below doctoring his poor wife who was very ill at
the time, but, when he came on deck and saw the
need, he volunteered for this dangerous job. Up the
mast he went, his burly form swaying in the storm
as the boat rolled violently, and, with the courage
for which he was noted, stuck to his task, effected
repairs, and saved the situation. During his term in
that storm-swept archipelago he proved to be an
intrepid sailor, qualifying as a captain and skippering
the Mission ketch.


For seventeen years he served the cause of Missions
in Fiji with great ability, winning the confidence of
the natives wherever he went. He was an imposing
figure, standing over six feet, with a cheery and
frank countenance, full of fun, of ready speech, and
with a gift of sparkling repartee.
He commenced his missionary career only 29 years
after the landing of the first missionaries, and many
Fijian cannibals were then still untouched by Chris-
tianity. With his courageous missionary colleague,
Rev. Dr. Frederick Langham, he made long and
perilous journeys into the very heart of the cannibal
country. The Rev. Henry Worrall, who later was
a colleague of Langham’s, relates that on one occasion
they were surrounded by a great company of moun-
taineers in full war-paint. Langham was engaged
in attempting to persuade the old chief of the party
to abandon his intention of attacking a neighbouring
tribe, and did not recognise the grave peril that
arose through the anger of the wild soldiery crowding
around. Fison, though at the time knowing little
of the language, heard and saw quite enough to con-
vince him that the natives were about to commence
hostilities. “Look out, Langham,” he cried, “These
fellows mean mischief! ’ ’
Thoroughly alarmed, Langham, facing the crowd
said, “Stand back and let us pass!” But this was
precisely what these rude warriors would not do, till
Fison, with characteristic coolness and wit, took
his artificial teeth from his mouth, and, by the
pressure of finger and thumb, made them snap and
grin in the very face of the foe, until the untutored
savages, with a series of heart-rending yells, broke
their ranks and fled as if all the demons of the Fijian
Pantheon were after them.
Fison won the admiration of the chieftains of all
tribes, and his very success created a difficulty.
Chief Maafu, of the Eastern group, conceived the idea
of founding a big school out in his province, and


King Thakombau in the west vied with him, and
gave valuable property to Navuloa for a district
college. Of this institution Dr. Pison became the
principal. Here he did magnificent work, training
the flower of Fijian youth for service, and, through
them, influencing the whole race for good.
During his term there Pison published a “Life of
Christ,’’ in the vernacular called “Ai Tukutuku kei
Jisu,’’ that would be a classic in any language.
In addition to his valuable translations for the
Fijian people, his facile pen has given us the intri-
guing “Tales of Old Fiji” that are worthy of
standing on the shelves alongside the world’s best
fairy stories.
During his long residence in the islands Dr. Pison
made a close study of the intricate system of land
tenure in Fiji, and, after patient industry and
scientific investigation, he set out in clear terms the
whole complicated formula. This treatise has been
invaluable to every British Governor and Land Com-'
missioner whose duty it has been to administer the
law in a widely-scattered group among people who
hold tenaciously to their tribal rights. For many
years his work has been the basis of all land tran-
sactions, and, on the recommendation of Hons. J.
Chamberlain and A. J. Balfour, His Majesty the
King was pleased to recognise his services to his
country and to science by granting him a pension
of £l5O a year.
From his researches Lorimer Pison made valuable
contributions to both ethnology and anthropology,
which were published in both English and American
journals, and for which an American University
conferred upon him the well-deserved honorary
degree of Master of Arts. In January, 1892, he
presided over the Anthropological Section of the
Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science at Hobart, and, two years later, as a repre-
sentative of the Australian Section of the British


Association for the Advancement of Science, he
visited England to attend the Annual Meeting at
Oxford. On this occasion he met the distinguished
Sir J. G. Frazer, editor of the “Golden Bough/ ’
who wrote these gracious words concerning him;
“His frank, manly, genial nature won me at once,
and we were friends to the end of his honoured and
useful life.”
Nor were his investigations confined to the South
Seas. On his retirement to Victoria he interested
himself in the aborigines of South-East Australia.
In collaboration with Dr. A. W. Howitt, he published
“Kamilaroi and Kurnai” and other valuable trea-
tises, which appeared in the Anthropological Journals
of Great Britain and Ireland.
Among the men that went from Victoria to our
Overseas Missions was a forceful man of Irish birth
and temperament, the Rev. Isaac Rooney, F.R.G.S.
He began work in Fiji in 1865, and served
for fifteen years at a time when life was
beset with hardships and not always safe. When
Dr. George Brown was invalided home from
New Britain, Mr. Rooney was selected to succeed
him as Chairman of that almost unknown country.
On the way to his new work, the collier stopped at
one of the islands of the Solomons and there his wife
contracted malaria and died in a few days, leaving
three children, one of whom was a little babe just
being weaned. This was enough to daunt the
bravest, but not this man. Making temporary
arrangements for the care of the babe, he proceeded
to his destination and took up the duties of Chair-
man of the District, an office which he continued to
discharge for eight years. Less than a year after his
arrival, his friend and colleague, the Rev. Benjamin
Danks, broke down in health, and had to return to
Sydney, and for the next seven months Mr. Rooney
was alone in New Britain.


He had a distinct gift for languages, and threw
himself into the w T ork of translating the Word of
Life into the Duke of York dialect, thus giving the
natives the Gospel of St. Matthew and portion of
the Old Testament in their own tongue. The Rev.
R. H. Rickard described Mr. Rooney as an indefatig-
able student of the language, careful in research
and ungrudging in labour.
Despite much sickness he laboured on for eight
years, and returned only when his health broke
down completely. He made a fine contribution to
the work of the Kingdom abroad. On his return he
became one of the best of deputations.
He had the joy of giving three sons to the ministry
of the Methodist Church, one of them serving in the
mission field of the Solomon Islands.
It may be mentioned that Fiji was not only the
training ground for the Rev. Isaac Rooney, as indi-
cated, but also of the Rev. Dr. and Mrs. Bromilow,
who served the Fijians for ten years before taking
up work in Papua. Reference to their work will be
found under that section.
One of the ablest missionaries of the present gener-
ation was the Rev. Charles Oswald Lelean, a
descendant of the late Rev. John Waterhouse, Super-
intendent of South Sea Missions, whose family gave
many missionaries to the Pacific. Mr. Lelean spent
32 years in all on the mission field, the last twenty
as Principal of the Baker Memorial College at Davui-
levu. There he did work of outstanding value, for
the change of outlook of the Fijian, due to the
encroachment of the European and Indian on his
native country and the breaking down of tribal
and communal customs, created many difficulties.
To these Mr. Lelean gave careful thought and prayer.
Due largely to his vision and sound judgment, a
policy has been evolved that should do much to
enable the Fijian to adjust himself to the impact of
European and Asiatic customs. By him, Fijian


native ministers and teachers have been trained in
sane methods to enable them to apply the Gospel
of Christ to the solution of many pressing questions.
The Rev. Richard Lewis Mac Donald hails from
Victoria, and has been on the field for a quarter of
a century. The last ten years, during which he has
been Chairman of the District, has been a period of
financial stringency and other pressing problems,
To this high and difficult office he has brought con-
spicuous energy and business ability, and has borne
a heavy burden with courage and devotion.
Rotuma .
One of the most isolated of our mission fields is
Rotuma, lying 300 miles north of Fiji, and
reached only by an occasional vessel. This field is
occupied by a captivating Polynesian people
speaking a distinct language of their own. Jesse
Carey was our first representative on this field, going
there in the year 1859. He met with serious oppo-
sition, and “ endured hardness as a good soldier of
Christ. ” Later he was transferred to Fiji. In
recent years Victoria has supplied two fine mission-
aries to this oft-neglected people.
Rev. Henry C. Roget, who was born in Warr-
nambool and educated in this State, entered the
Methodist ministry in New Zealand, and was selected
for mission work in 1904. The following year he
went to Rotuma, where he spent eleven years—a
record term. He won his way to the affection of his
people, learned their language, translated several
books of the Bible, hymns, catechisms, and other
matter, and, with his own hands, printed them for
his people. His wife, who was a trained teacher,
helped him immensely, and, for years, gave over-
sight to the school work.
In 1923 one of Victoria’s ministers —Rev. C. M.
Churchward, M.A., who had spent a year in Fiji-
heard the call of the people of this lonely outpost,


and volunteered to go and complete the translation
of the New Testament. Possessing remarkable
linguistic gifts, he studied hard to learn the lan-
guage, and in a few months prior to going to Rotuma
acquired such a knowledge of Rotuman that on
his very first Sunday there he preached in their
own language. His knowledge of Hebrew, Greek,
Fijian, Samoan, and other Pacific languages greatly
helped him to prepare a grammar of the language,
to introduce a new system of spelling, to re-translate
many of the Scripture portions and translate afresh
the whole of the New Testament, truly a monu-
mental task. His unique gifts are now being availed
of by the Government of Fiji and our Church to
revise the dictionary and hymns in the Fijian
language.
To the foregoing may be added the names of others
from Victoria who served in Fiji in many ways and
for varying periods. Among these were Revs. William
Wear Lindsay, J. F. Horsley, C. J. Baird, A. J.
Collocott, J. C. Jennison, T. W. Butcher, W. J.
Chambers, Harold Chambers, A. G. Adamson, M.A.,
P. C. Nye, H. Polkinghorne, J. C. Lawton, N. R.
Greenwood, S. Albon, J. W. Strickland, L. Barnard,
G. S. Crouch, 8.A., and A. C. Cato, M.A., B.D.
Many devoted Sisters also have served on the
mission fields, to whom reference will be made in the
sections dealing with women’s educational and medi-
cal work. Nor must we forget the devoted laymen
—teachers, printers, artisans and others. The work
of Mr. R. A. Derrick and other teachers is referred
to elsewhere. Mr. A. E. Barker, too, for more than
fifteen years, has served our Society with great devo-
tion as our business agent in Suva. He also renders
valuable service to the European and Indian
Churches and Sunday Schools.
India in Fiji.
The Mission to the Indians in Fiji first engaged
the attention of Victoria when the Rev. Henry


Worrall returned from Fiji in 1897. In response to
his appeal Miss Hannah Dudley, of New South
Wales, went out as the pioneer missionary.
The interest of the Laymen ’s Missionary Move-
ment was captured by the building of the ‘ ‘ Morrissey
Memorial Church ” at Dilkusha, and by the visit of
Mr. W. C. Thomas and the Hon. Robert Beckett to
its dedication on 20th November, 1910.
Miss Alice Watson gave 24 years of devoted ser-
vice to the Indian people. On her sturdy New
Zealand-bred horse, “Pakura,” she travelled up and
down the valleys and plantations visiting the coolie
lines and their little thatched huts. Later, she
assisted in the work of the orphanage and school,
and, during the last seven years, conducted the Jasper
Williams Orphanage at Lautoka, an institution for
which we are indebted to the bequest of the late
Mr. Jasper Williams, of Omeo. Miss Watson worked
long and hard, and, returning to her home in Vic-
toria, after a few months’ lingering illness, was
called to receive the “crown that fadeth not away.”
In 1912, Nurse Hester J. Clark, of the Neil Street
Methodist Church, Ballarat, went out in the steps
of the Great Physician. For 22 years she has min-
istered to suffering women and children, and her
medical work, village visitation and bazaar services
have been owned and blessed of God. This good
Sister still carries on her ministry of healing.
The first ordained minister appointed to this
field was Rev. A. E. Lapthorne, who, though born in
Victoria, entered the ministry in Queensland.
He was appointed to Navua, Fiji, in 1906, but,
after one year’s service, ill health compelled him to
return home. He was succeeded by the Rev. H. C.
Kent, who, too, was driven home by ill health after
but two years’ service.
The wave of missionary enthusiasm generated by
the Student Christian Movement in the early years
of this century claimed many young Victorians for


Foreign fields, and two of them, the Revs. L. M.
Thompson, M.A., Dip.Ed., and John F. Long, 8.A.,
who with their wives had graduated at Melbourne
University, offered for India. These were sent to
India in 1914 for language training and experience,
and subsequently took up work in Fiji. Mr. Thomp-
son reached the field in 1916, and continued to serve
there until 1931. His special services in educational
matters, referred to elsewhere in this chapter, were
highly appreciated. In the Circuits of Navua,
Nausori and Suva he rendered long and efficient
service.
In 1919 Mr. Long and family arrived on the field,
and for seven years Mr. Long devoted all his strength
to the welfare of the Indian population. His con-
structive work at the Ba Station, particularly in
connection with the hospital, merits special mention,
and is referred to in the Medical Section.
In addition to these worthy men and women, there
are many missionary sisters and laymen—teachers,
evangelists and nurses —whose meritorious work is
referred to elsewhere.
Victoria has taken a very deep interest in the task
of evangelising the Indians in Fiji. By the gift of
the “Morrissey Memorial Church/ ’ the liberal con-
tributions to the building and equipment of the Ba
Hospital, and the supply of a fine body of workers
the State has done much for the cause.
New Britain .
In the development of the New Britain field
Victoria has had an honourable share. The respon-
sibility of founding the Mission was placed upon the
sturdy shoulders of Dr. George Brown, then of
Samoa. Two years later he asked for a colleague,
and the choice fell upon Benjamin Danks, who had
spent but three months in Wesley College, Melbourne.
Mr. Danks came of a family devoted to
the cause of Christ, and the call found him


ready and willing. In the daughter of the late
Rev. John (Father) Watsford he found a partner
of rare quality. She embodied the missionary spirit
of her distinguished father and of her devoted
mother who had lived on Ban, Fiji, a place of
infamous memory. They sailed from Sydney for the
scene of their labours on 17th September, 1878.
Thus began seven years of Christlike work in a
wild and dangerous country, where barbarism was
rampant, where diseases lurked, and where wild men
lived by the cunning of the brain and the weapons
of their hands. With superb courage, great physical
strength and indomitable spirit Benjamin Banks and
his little wife faced dangers, savagery and disease.
A colleague, Rev. R. H. Rickard, of Sydney, wrote
of him thus: ‘‘ He had a quick ear for detecting
words in the rapid and indistinct utterance of the
native, and, being the first pioneer missionary of
New Britain, he learned the Blanche Bay dialect
that has since become the ‘ lingua franca 7 of the
group. 7 ’ He gathered a vocabulary of four thousand
words, which he embodied in a dictionary. He trans-
lated the Gospel of Matthew, a “Life of Christ, 77 a
reading book, a catechism, and Scripture portions
and hymns. He bought a printing press, taught
himself and his native boys to use it, and produced
four Gospels and the Book of Jonah in the New
Britain dialect.
This work was accomplished amidst great sorrow,
caused by the illness and death of colleagues both
European and native, and his biography, “In Wild
New Britain, 77 by Rev. Wallace Deane, relates the
thrilling narrative of these sad and difficult days.
By his sympathetic nature and evangelistic fervour
he won his way to the hearts of his people.
Subsequently the Rev. Isaac Rooney, F.R.G.S.,
whose work in Fiji is described elsewhere, joined
the staff of missionaries in New Britain.


When the Rev. Benjamin Banks was forced by
illness to relinquish the work so dear to him, he was
succeeded in 1887 by the Rev. F. B. Oldham, who
spent eight strenuous years in this district. Only
when repeated attacks of malaria forced him to do
so, did he reluctantly retire from the field.
Then followed in April, 1893, Rev. W. J. and Mrs.
Chambers, who spent several terms in both New
Britain and Fiji. In his relations with native
people, German officials and settlers, Mr. Chambers,
by straightforward, courteous and frank dealing, won
the respect of all. The record of their long years
of service has thrilled many an audience, and few
deputations have won such appreciation as Mr.
Chambers. In the acquisition of the Ulu plantation
for our Society he earned the gratitude of the New
Britain Church.
Victoria produced yet another missionary couple
who were to establish a long-service record for New
Britain, for the Rev. W. H. and Mrs. Cox were
privileged to spend no less than thirty years in that
malarial district. Though both were born in Victoria,
Mr. Cox entered the ministry through the New South
Wales Conference, and, with the exception of but two
years, all his ministry was spent on the mission field
of New Britain. During the years of the Great War
he suffered much from German officials with whom he
had previously enjoyed many years of close friend-
ship. Quite wrongfully he was brutally attacked and
left battered and wounded in the bush, and from
these experiences he continued to suffer to the end of
his life. The Rev. J. W. Burton said of him: 4 ‘ He
was one of the most devoted and single-eyed sons of
our Church, a man of simple faith, whose loyalty
to our Lord and Master was unwavering.”
When Mr. Cox retired, the Rev. Frank G. Lewis
was appointed Chairman of the District, thus
perpetuating the goodly succession of Victorians to
fill that difficult office.


In response to the oft-repeated appeal to extend
the work in New Britain to the wild country of
Nakanai, where some appalling murders of white
men took place, Mr. and Mrs. F. J. Cato came to our
help, and provided the entire cost of upkeep for the
first five years. This generous deed has enabled the
Methodist Church to establish a very successful
mission, from which an abundant reward has already
been reaped.
Among the numerous men and women who have
served in this field are: Revs. D. T. Reddin, T. B.
Lancaster, Ira J. Mann, W. B. Davies, M.A., J. W.
Ackroyd, H. J. Williams, L.Th., A. W. Pederick,
L. C. Mannering, L.Th., and Misses I. Ashwin,
M. Harris, R. Dorr, A. Williamson and Edna
Williams.
Papua.
When that great administrator, Sir William
McGregor, went to the newly-acquired territory of
New Guinea, as Lieutenant-Governor, he wisely sup-
ported the Conference of Missionaries of 17th June,
1890, at which certain denominational assignments
of territory were agreed upon. The mainland areas
having been amicably defined, there remained the
Eastern Archipelago to be allotted.
Having seen the work of the Methodist Mission in
the scattered island group of Fiji, and appreciating
the success of such work, Sir William requested one
of our ministers in Queensland to ask the Board of
Missions to establish a mission in the archipelago.
The Conference of 1890 accepted the challenge, and
on 27th May of the following year the party sailed
out of Sydney Harbour in the barque “Lord of the
Isles.’ ’
The leader of this pioneer party to an unknown
land of savagery and disease was a Victorian
Methodist, William Edward Bromilow, who was
born at Geelong in 1857.


He was received as a minister in 1878, and in the
following year he married Miss Harriet Lily Thom-
son, of Little River, Werribee. Appointed to Fiji,
there they served faithfully and efficiently for a
period of ten years. This period he describes as the
“preparation” for his subsequent ministry in
Papua. He was richly endowed by God, for he had
a sound mind in a sound body, and, may we add, a
warm heart, consecrated to his Lord.
The party included two other Victorians and their
wives—Rev. J. T. Field, a carpenter and house
builder of great ability and diligence, who did self-
sacrificing service at Dobu and Paneati; and the
junior member of the party, Rev. Jas. Watson, from
Bendigo, who had engineering experience.
Of Dr. Bromilow, Mr. Watson writes; “He had a
cheerful courage, and a strong faith in his God; I
do not remember in the most hectic of times by sea
and land, or by reason of cannibals and their ways,
seeing the poise of our Chairman affected, he 4 endured
as seeing Him Who was invisible. ’ ”
He was a born leader of men, and under his direc-
tion the work was firmly established. After return-
ing from the mission field he spent 12 years in New
South Wales in Circuit work —a most successful
ministry. Then came the call to return to his
beloved Papua. There he completed his “Magnum
Opus”—the entire Bible in Dobuan language. To
him came the great joy of handing to his converts
the Bible in their own tongue. For his work as
translator, the University of Aberdeen conferred
upon him the well-merited Doctorate of Divinity.
Enfeebled by his long, arduous and adventurous
service, having spent ten years in Fiji, fifteen in
Australia, and twenty-one in Papua, he became a
supernumerary minister. Not to be idle, however,
for in the next three years he completed his life
story, “Twenty Years in Papua.” Just as it issued
from the press he went home to God, 24th June, 1929.


A long period of very efficient service has been
rendered by Rev. Alfred W. and Mrs. Guy. With a
break of but three years, these devoted workers have
given sixteen years to the station at Bunanxa. Into
the Tubetube tongue Mr. Guy has translated the
Gospel of Luke, Pilgrim’s Progress, and about one
hundred hymns.
The Rev. A. Ballantyne left in 1904, and after
devoted service laid down his life in Papua in 1915.
The Rev. J. K. Arnold brought teaching gifts
to the solution of some of the educational problems
of the islands, and Rev. G. P. Lassam, L.Th., has
endured much hardship in the East Cape Station.
Several years ago he was the survivor of the wreck
of the “Bromilow.” In 1934, after eight strenuous
years, he retired on account of the illness of Mrs.
Lassam.
The Rev. Hedley Shotton, M.A., was appointed to
the District in 1932, and continues the goodly suc-
cession of Victorians. The present Chairman, Rev.
J. Ronald Andrew, is a Victorian by birth.
Victoria has had the honour of supplying many
other workers to this field. Mr. A. J. Andrews, a
pioneer lay worker, and Mr. J. R. Williams, who
after a term of 15 years was admitted to the ministry.
One of the first two missionary sisters to leave
Australia for the South Seas was Miss J. Tinney, of
Ballarat, who did excellent work in Papua.
Miss Truscott, too, a sister of this State, gave her
life in loving devotion to the women and girls of
Dobu on 4th November, 1908—the first mission sister
of Australia to die on the field. Another woman
worker is Miss F. J. Pearce, a Cornish Methodist,
who is completing twenty years’ unbroken service in
that malarious district.
Solomon Islands.
Victoria’s share in the pioneer party to the
Solomon Islands consisted of a brave iittle woman —
Miss Mabel Davidson—who married the Rev. S. Ray


Rooney in 1903, and together they have given twelve
years of service under circumstances that would have
tested the bravest.
In 1907 a missionary of original gifts and intrepid
character was sent, in the person of Rev. Reginald C.
Nicholson. He endured much hardship and even
serious illness. He and his wife did excellent
pioneering w T ork at Vella Lavella in days of
great peril and difficulty for the long period
of 13 years; recurring ill health forbade a
longer stay. The subsequent deputation work
of Mr. Nicholson, accompanied by his charming
companion, the late Daniel Bula, greatly moved the
Methodist people of this Commonwealth. The story
of this field and of this great trophy of God’s grace
has been well told by Mr. Nicholson in the book,
“The Son of a Savage.’ ’
The pioneer to Ontong Java in this District in
1908 was Rev. E. E. Shackell. This devoted worker
suffered much in the face of peril and opposition.
Miss Mabel Davey, F.R.G.S. (who subsequently
married Rev. Prof. Ross, of China), went out in
1909 to commence the work of a missionary sister,
and was later joined by Nurse Yandell. Of them
Rev. J. F. Goldie writes: “Their work has been
owned and blessed of God.” A worker of remark-
able devotion was appointed in 1915 —Sister Ethel
McMillan —who is still “at work for God in loved
employ” among the former head hunters of Choisseul.
Miss Mansfield, of Geelong, served for several years
in the Solomon Islands, and on becoming the wife of
Rev. T. Dent continued in the District until 1934,
when, for health reasons, they retired to New
Zealand.
Miss Jennings, of Portland, also rendered good
service until her marriage to a British magistrate.
Miss Ivy Stanford, of this State, proved a very
devoted mission sister, later becoming the wdfe of
Rev. J. R. Metcalfe, who was appointed to the


Solomon Islands District in 1920, and there they
still bravely serve. Three years were spent by them
in pioneer work on the station of Bougainville
(Mandated Territory).
With the transference of this field to the New
Zealand Conference in 1922, Victoria ceased to send
workers to the Solomon Islands, but these earlier
links bind us closely to this interesting District.
India.
The needs of the indentured Indian coolies in Fiji
directed the attention of our Society to India. In
1909 two ministers, Rev. J. H. Allen, B.Sc., of South
Australia, and Rev. Frank L. Nunn, of Western
Australia, were appointed for language training and
experience with a view to their subsequent
appointment to Fiji.
A new and untouched field for Christian service
called for help at Mau, India. When a proposal to
mission this area was brought before the General
Conference of 1910, opinion was sharply divided.
It is recorded that the late Dr. W. H. Fitchett, a man
of imperial vision, championed the claim for Aus-
tralian Methodism to take up this work. He had
recently paid a visit to India, and had been impressed
with the immense problems which that land pre-
sented. It appealed to his sense of British loyalty
that, as members of the Empire, Australia should join
hands with British Methodism in her unwieldy task.
A leader of missions in another State ridiculed it as
“going thousands of miles to dig a post hole.” With
his rapier-like repartee Fitchett retorted, “But in
that post hole we shall plant the standard of the
Gospel.” He carried the day, and in 1911 Australian
Methodism began a mission in the United Provinces
to carry the Gospel to one and a half millions of
people who live in an area where there are no other
Christian missions. The work entails not only the
preaching of the Gospel in church, bazaar and open


air, but teaching it in the Great Wesley High School
and in the trade schools.
One of the most needful spheres of missionary
enterprise is among the “ untouchables ’’ —the Dorns
(criminal tribes) —to whom the Gospel brings new
hope for life both here and hereafter.
To India Victoria has given noble types of well-
educated missionaries, who have rendered excellent
service. A valuable contribution to India missions
was made when in 1915 Rev. T. Clement
Came, 8.A., took up this work. He was a student
volunteer, and was joined in marriage to Dr. Elsie
Thomas. They were both enthusiastic missionaries,
born of warm-hearted missionary-minded parents,
and they brought splendid gifts to their ministry.
For the long period of eighteen years they laboured
in this far-away field. In village preaching and in
social service, and as headmaster of Wesley High
School, Mr. Came exercised his versatile gifts, taking
an important place in the community as a counsellor.
He gathered a wealth of information concerning
India, and his numerous contributions to our Meth-
odist literature, including “ Christ of the Indian
Mind” and “Children of India/ 7 have been much
appreciated. Revs. Austin James, M.A., and 0. K.
McCutcheon, 8.A., are our present representatives.
The scheme for the hospital in India will be
referred to in another section of this chapter, when
mention will be made of the four doctors and one
nurse sent by our State.
A Christian educationist, Prof. H. R. Hamley, of
Queen 7 s College, heard the call of India, and for
some years served in a Christian College of South
India until appointed Director of Education in one
of the larger provinces. In this important position
he served with great distinction, until he was made
Professor of Education in the University of London.
The Poona and Village Indian Mission employs
several Victorian Methodists.


Thus for a quarter of a century Australian Meth-
odism has borne witness to the grace of God in the
midst of this vast multitude. For a share in the
stupendous task we are thankful, but it is quite
inadequate to the tremendous need, and reinforce-
ments of workers and money must be forthcoming if
we are to hold our ground and make some definite
impression on the vast non-Christian world of
Northern India.
The Australian Aborigines.
It has already been related in an earlier chapter
how an unsuccessful attempt was made in 1839 to
do something for the native people of Victoria.
From time to time the need of the Aborigines became
an urgent matter, and in 1915 Victoria had the
honour of sending the Rev. Jas. Watson to lead a
mission party to North Australia. Mr. Watson's
practical gifts, love of adventure, good humour
and robust health made him an excellent type
of pioneer missionary, and to the Aborigines
he gave two terms of service each of three
years ’ duration. On his retirement another
ex-Victorian, Rev. J. C. Jennison, succeeded him, and
now for the past eight years the Rev. T. Theodor
Webb, of this Conference, has been the trusted
champion of the native race. Bringing a trained
mind and great practical gifts to his tasks, he is
doing constructive service not only for our Church,
but for Australia.
By irrigation, the cultivation of the land, and the
production of suitable crops, such as yams, sweet
potatoes and kassava; by the building of suitable
homes, the erection of a sawmill, and providing a
good water supply, Mr. Webb and his colleagues have
established a fine centre of industry that is attracting
these nomadic people and building up a settled
Christian community in which these wandering tribes
may find sanctuary. The latest achievement is the


construction of a church, strongly built of cypress
pine, the planks being sawn in the Mission mill. The
simple church furnishings are a gift from Victoria.
For a brief term Rev. R. F. Bye, L.Th., and his
wife spent a period at South Goulburn Island, where
the Rev. G. T. Goldsmith and his wife are now T com-
pleting their fourth year of service.
The recent gift of £IOOO by Mr. F. J. Cato to
establish a new station on Arnhem Land is the
beginning of a larger work for these neglected folk.
China .
Although Australian Methodism has not had a
definite sphere in China, that field being served by
British Methodism, she has made some interesting
contacts with the people of that ancient land.
In 1851 the news of the discovery of gold in Aus-
tralia reached China. Large numbers from the
district of Kwangtung left their homes to try their
fortunes in the “New Gold Hills” (as they called
Australia). In the early sixties Victoria had no less
than 40,000 Chinese scattered over her numerous
diggings. A considerable number also sought to
make money by market gardening, whilst others set
up in the cities as furniture-makers and traders to
their own countrymen, with Little Bourke Street,
Melbourne, as their headquarters. Reference to this
work has been made in the chapter on Home Missions.
Under the aegis of the China Inland Mission,
during the past 43 years no less than 40 avowed
Methodists have served in China, and of that number
one half are still telling the story of Christ. Their
number includes teachers, nurses, chemists and
engineers.
Africa.
In co-operation with other denominations, however,
our Methodist Church accepted the call of the Sudan,


and has, unofficially, shared in the sending of num-
bers of workers to this field under the auspices of
the Sudan United Mission. Victoria has supplied
many devoted workers, and several are still engaged
on this field. Many of the committee men, too, have
been Methodists, and given generous help in the pro-
motion of this mission. Further, other mission areas
have been staffed by men and women who have gone
from their Mother Church of Methodism.
Medical Missions.
Prom earliest times missionaries of most Churches
realised the value of a knowledge of medicine in
the treatment of diseases. Rev. Dr. R. B. Lyth
practised medicine in early Fiji, and Dr. Henry
Miller used his surgical skill in Tonga during the
early days of our missions.
When Dr. Olive Rivett Long, M.D., went to India
in 1914, she and her husband conceived the idea of a
medical mission for Azamgarh, and at a later date
Dr. Elsie Came, wife of Rev. T. C. Came, 8.A.,
carried the idea a step further. Rev. Richard Piper,
in Fiji, had visions of a mission hospital for Fiji,
but no specific effort was made until the Chairman
of Papua (Rev. Matthew K. Gilmour) established
a hospital at Salamo. To this hospital Dr. H. G.
Judkins was appointed in April, 1925, as represen-
tative of the young men of Victorian Methodism.
Dr. Judkins threw himself into his work with much
enthusiasm and great success, when death claimed
both his wife and child. Despite his bereavement he
bravely held his post until invalided home in 1928,
after three years’ heroic service. The capable nurse
at Salamo for the past seven years has been Miss
Purnell, the gift of Geelong Methodism.
The following year proposals for the erection of
a hospital for our Methodist mission station at Azam-
garh, India, were accepted, largely owing to the
gift of £IOOO from Mr. and Mrs. F. J. Cato. To


this hospital Dr. Adelaide Gault, who had already-
served other hospitals in India, was appointed, and
continued to give excellent service until a breakdown
in health forced her retirement. Sister Jessie Fenton,
a very capable woman, was the first European nurse
in Azamgarh. She served for three years until ill
health necessitated her return to Australia.
Another Victorian, Dr. Aren Stephens, stepped
into the breach, and is still doing excellent work in
this hospital. Thousands of lives in the United
Provinces are dependent on our ministry, for ours
is the only Zenana hospital in a population of one
and a half millions.
Another Methodist doctor from this State to serve
in India is Dr. Horace Thomas, a highly-qualified
doctor attached to the American Missionary Society’s
hospital at Madura. His distinguished services
have just merited the bestowal of the Kaiser-I-Hind
medal.
The needs of suffering Indian women and children
in Fiji appealed to the sympathies of Dr. Olive
Rivett Long and her husband, Rev. J. P. Long, B.A.
An appeal for this cause was made by them, and
Victoria responded both quickly and generously, Mr.
T. Thomas giving the last £SOO. A well-built modern
hospital was erected in 1926.
The first doctor —Dr. Doreen Hensley—hailed from
this State, and on her marriage she was succeeded
by Dr. Mavis Boyt, an old Methodist Ladies’ Col-
legian. Both doctors have done excellent work, and
Nurses Kathleen Ahearn, Annie Banks, Esther
Anderson and Ella McKindlay have all given
ungrudging and able service. Mercifully the doors
of this hospital have never been closed, and its
influence upon the community is beyond our power
to compute.
When the Jubilee Celebrations of our New Britain
District took place in 1925 the Australian Commis-
sioners on their return pleaded, and with success, for


a medical mission for the sick and suffering people
of that district. The Hon. F. H. Stewart,
of New South Wales, strongly supported the proposal
by a very generous gift. A hospital was built, and
the first medical superintendent was a Victorian.
Dr. Raymond Penington, who had won first place in
the School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta, was
appointed. He gave quite remarkable service to New
Britain until he, too, fell seriously ill, and was
invalided home. But the foundations were well and
truly laid by him, and the hospital firmly established
in the confidence of both Government and people.
Four well-staffed and well-equipped hospitals are
ministering to the needs of suffering humanity in
Foreign fields, where there are no other facilities for
treatment. Tropical diseases such as malaria, yaws,
and even leprosy are being skilfully treated, and onr
doctors are making a definite contribution to the
relief of thousands of men, women and little children.
Medical patrol and child welfare work are carried
on with much success in lands where no other pro-
vision is made. Truly, such is the w r ork of the Great
Physician.
Education.
To the function of education in the mission field,
Victoria has given great attention. The foundations
of our system had been truly laid and built upon by
such worthy men as Jesse Carey, Lorimer Fison and
William Weir Lindsay of this Conference; but a new
era began when a trained teacher in the person of
Rev. William Ernest Bennett, M.A., of Ballarat, was
appointed to the Training Institutions in Fiji. Under
his leadership the momentous work of transferring
the institution from Navuloa to Davuilevu took place,
and his work was consummated in the building of a
noble college in 1913. Mr. Bennett was succeeded by
Rev. C. Oswald Lelean, and during this period a
further advance was made.


The services of Victorian teachers were secured,
notably those of Miss Olive Morrissey, M.A., Dip.Ed.,
and her sister, Miss Evelyn Morrissey. This period
synchronised with the introduction of a Government
system of education, and to meet the new conditions
much constructive thinking was required.
At this juncture the Rev. Leslie M. Thompson,
M.A., Dip.Ed., gave valuable assistance. He made a
definite study of Christian education for native
peoples and for fifteen years he was the Methodist
Secretary for Education and a member of
the Government Education Board. To gather
information for the guidance of Fiji, Mr. Thompson
visited both India and the Philippines, and in
1927 attended the Imperial Conference on Educa-
tion, which was held in England. As a member of
the Royal Commission on Education in Fiji his
experience did much for education in the colony.
Thus originated a system of education which has
become the policy of Fiji, and which is greatly
influencing various Pacific groups. Since the retire-
ment of these Christian educationists other Victorian
missionaries—Revs. A. G. Adamson, M.A., Dip.Ed.,
Harold Chambers, A. C. Cato, M.A., 8.D., Dip.Ed.—
have assumed the growing responsibilities of this
great educational task.
The natural outcome of these developments is an
advanced system of teacher-training, a need supplied
by teachers from the Victorian Education Depart-
ment who have been loaned to Fiji. In fact, the
whole policy of district and village education in
these islands has been shaped and helped by this
department. Under this scheme the following
teachers have given valuable service: Messrs. W. N.
Norton, H. J. Bennett 8.A., Dip.Ed., the late W. H.
Wilson 8.A., Dip.Ed., C. Sharp 8.A., L. H. Collins,
R. I. Stebbins, A. T. Mowson 8.A., Miss I. Lap-
thorne, Miss B. Wallace 8.A., Dip.Ed,, and Miss
Esther Williams, 8.A., Dip.Ed. These teachers


enabled the Methodist Society to build up an effi-
cient system, and, after varying periods of service,
they have returned to Australia, greatly enriched by
the experience. In addition to these we received help
from the late Messrs. T. W. Bartle (killed in the
war), Cyril Derrick and F. L. Edmunds.
To Mr. W. N. Norton Fiji owes the introduction of
the Boy Scout Movement, a form of service which
has done much to effect inter-racial contacts of a
helpful character, and to train both Fijian and
Indian youths for community service.
To the girls’ school at Matavelo, Fiji, Victoria
gave some valuable teachers, including Misses B. M.
Forward, F. Campbell 8.A., Millar, G. Turner, Mrs.
J. R. Williams, Miss Joy McCallum M.A., and Miss
Olive Russell. Miss Phoebe Brokenshire has proved
a successful teacher of boys at Vunitivi, Ba.
Laymen sMissionary Movement.
Within two years of the inauguration of the Lay-
men’s Missionary Movement in America, it was
introduced to Victoria, being established in Septem-
ber, 1909. Here it took permanent root, and has
grown into a fruitful tree. By the kind Providence
of God the first President—Mr F. J. Cato—was with
us for many years, and his value to the movement
and the cause which it serves is beyond compute.
Two other foundation members, Dr. E. L. Gault and
Mr. J. E. Poppins (Secretary for 25 years) have
never swerved from the path of duty, and are still
“abounding in good works.” The Vice-President
and Secretary of the first panel—the Hon. Robert
Beckett and James Morrissey—left behind them
memories that will ever abide.
This movement has been the inspiring force behind
the Circuit organisation of the State. Though its
work has been educational and spiritual, there are
some tangible results. On the banks of the Rewa
River, Fiji, stands a chaste little church, where


a white-robed Indian congregation worships regu-
larly. The church was built by Victorian men as a
fitting memorial to their first Secretary, James
Morrissey. On the salubrious heights of Nadarivatu,
in the mountains of Fiji, stands a commodious bun-
galow, where tired missionaries may rest and thmk
and pray. This memorial bears the name of Robert
Beckett, the first Vice-President of the L.M.M.,
whose widow and daughter have given valuable ser-
vice to the field and work which he loved. This, too,
is a love gift from the L.M.M. of Victoria.
The publication and sale of 15,000 copies of the
Rev. J. W. Burton’s text book, “The Call of the
Pacific,” was a very useful contribution to the cause.
By means of annual conferences with the mis-
sionaries, tea-table and lunch-hour addresses, lectures
and literature, the movement educates the men of
our churches, and trains them for service in their
respective Circuits.
The movement has been fortunate in attracting
men of ability and influence in professional and com-
mercial life, who have brought business acumen and
consecrated enthusiasm to the service of Christ. Prom
their ranks came the Lay Secretary and Treasurer
Mr. N. J. Jenkin—who for eighteen years has given
full-time honorary service of a very efficient kind.
To these gentlemen we must add the present
President (Mr. T. Thomas), and Messrs. E. T.
Bailey, C. H. Green, G. Harrison Russell, A. S.
Eggleston, C. H. Derrick, T. C. Reynolds, R. Nevile,
F. L. Barkla, A. E. Allen, W. Watchorn, the late
J. H. Bethehas, M.A., W. C. Thomas, W. B.
McCutcheon and Dr. J. F. Wilkinson. Co-operating
with these men must be mentioned Messrs. J. Spencer
Nall and J. F. Frier, of Geelong; D. M. Campbell
and H. Woolcock, of Bendigo; N. Whiteside and
J. A. Jelbart, of Ballarat.


Women s Auxiliary.
The part played by Victorian women has been very
considerable. To them belongs the honour of
inaugurating the Women’s Auxiliary Movement in
the Commonwealth. The formation of such a society
appears to have originated with Dr. and Mrs.
Bromilow, of Papua, and, following on their letter
dated 17th February, 1892, the late Mr. R. Howell
tabled a resolution in the Conference of that year,
for the establishment of the movement. The resolu-
tion was seconded by the late Mr. G. M. Hitchcock,
of Geelong. During the progress of the Conference
the ladies met, and the wife of Rev. Henry Green-
wood, who had seen service in Tonga, gave an earnest
address, and moved for the inauguration of a
Women’s Society. Subsequently, the Rev. Benjamin
Danks and Dr. George Brown gave the movement
hearty support. The return of Mrs. Bromilow on
furlough from Papua did much to encourage the
proposal, and, largely owing to her advocacy, teach-
ing and nursing sisters were appointed to the fields.
These “living links” gave a great impetus to the
missionary cause. The gathering of needful articles
and money for the support of the sisters called for
much effort, not a little sacrifice and earnest prayer.
Throughout the years upwards of 200 consecrated
women have gone forth from Victoria to the mission
fields “to heal and to teach.” Their names are too
numerous to be included in this article, but among
the pioneers were Sisters Tinney of Ballarat, Benja-
min and Gill of Geelong, Laura Griffiths, Truscott
(who died in Papua), and Butt of Avoca.
Two workers who gave extended service to the
Indians of Fiji were Sisters Alice Watson, for 24
years, and Hester Clark, who has served for 22 years
and is still at work.
A worker who merits the highest commendation is
Sister Ethel McMillan, who has spent twenty years


in the Solomon Islands, labouring in the islands of
New Georgia and Choiseul. Here, in a malarious
climate, this courageous little woman, at these lonely
outposts, has continued to exercise her consecrated
skill among a numerous and primitive people.
With high courage and devotion Miss F. J. Pearce,
who has already spent 19 years on several stations
and sometimes quite alone —continues to serve the
natives of the Papuan Archipelago, and for a period
of seven years Miss Purnell, who is still in charge of
the Papua hospital, has been its skilled and beloved
matron.
The raising of the support of eighteen sisters
throughout the years has been a service of sacrificial
love. From a small beginning of £BO in 1894, the
gifts increased to nearly £4OOO in 1933. The con-
tinuance and development of this work binds the
women of this State into a close fellowship, and each
month the Central meetings bring together upwards
of 100 women from all the suburbs. In co-operation
with the Central Association are 244 country
branches, all praying and working for the spread of
the Gospel in the Kingdom Overseas.
Thus by prayer, reading and service some 6000
women of Victoria are united in the world task with
their sisters in lands beyond the seas. The success
of this work may be traced to a variety of causes,
not the least being the continuous leadership of
experienced and competent presidents, tieasurexs
and secretaries. For a number of years the move-
ment has enjoyed the honorary services of secretaries,
amongst whom was Mrs. H. P. Berry, of Auckland,
New r Zealand. The work ol Mrs. A. P. Vagg as
Secretary over a period of 24 years cannot be over-
estimated. The present officers are: President, Mis.
N. J. Jenkin; Secretary, Miss I.na Mason; rreasurei,
Mrs. G. A. Judkins.


Young Women s Movement .
It has been noted already that Victoria pioneered
the work of the Women’s Auxiliary of Foreign Mis-
sions in this Commonwealth. In like manner the
Young Women’s Missionary Movement took its rise
in this State. It owes its genesis to Miss Olive
Morrissey, M.A., the daughter of the foundation
Secretary of the Laymen’s Missionary Movement,
who, with Miss A. A. Bond, enlisted the interest of
some of their girl friends in the Kingdom Overseas.
An inaugural meeting was held on 24th September,
1915, and the movement took definite shape in the
month of December of that year, when Miss Rene
McMeekin (Mrs. F. T. Cleverdon) was elected Presi-
dent. In the following year Miss E. McCaghern
became President, and Miss Olive Morrissey, Secre-
tary. By visiting the Circuits and organising study
circles Miss Morrissey established five branches in the
first year, and, in 1917, nine branches were in opera-
tion. These branches contributed the sum of £lO3.
In 1918 Miss Ivy Lapthorne, of the Victorian Educa-
tion Department, sailed for Fiji as a missionary
teacher, where she remained for seven years. The
Young Women’s Missionary Movement assumed
financial responsibility for her support—a definite
objective which did much to deepen the interest of
the members. Miss Morrissey subsequently went to
Fiji, and has continued to do most valuable educa-
tional work to this day. She is now the wife of Mr.
B. C. Meek, headmaster of the Methodist Agricultural
School at Navuso, Rewa River, Fiji.
The founders of the movement laid down the
simple and sound principles of prayer and study, to
which has since been added systematic giving, and
along these lines the movement has continued to
develop. Many consecrated members of this society
have gone forth to serve the mission fields of China,
India, and Pacific Islands, not only in connection


with our own Church, but also under the auspices
of various interdenominational societies. Through-
out the years the movement has been wisely guided
by able Presidents, Misses I. A. Arnold and 6.
Millar, the latter still holding office.
In 1920 Miss Cicely Eddy became Organising Sec-
retary, and upon her retirement in 1923 Miss A. J.
Williams was appointed to that office in July of that
year —a position which she still holds. Prom its
inception Miss Olive Hattam has been the society’s
competent treasurer.
The movement now includes 74 branches with 1200
members. Last year it supported five sisters, and
raised the sum of £1146/13/8.
The Children s Part,
The missionary education of the children was for
many years confined to occasional lessons included
in the Sunday School curriculum. This being
deemed insufficient, a group of interested workers,
drawn from the ranks of the Women’s Auxiliary,
Sunday School Department and Laymen’s Missionary
Movement, met on sth July, 1912, to consider the
matter. At this meeting it was decided to form a
Young Methodist Missionary League, Dr. Morley
becoming its first President, a position which he held
for many years. Associated with him were such
missionary enthusiasts as Mrs. J. W. Eggleston, Hon.
Robert Beckett, Rev. Horton H. Williams, and Mr.
J. E. Poppins (Secretary). Mr. Poppins has kept
in close touch with the League throughout its history,
and is now its President, his daughter (Miss A. J.
Poppins) being Secretary.
The aim of the League was to interest the young
people in missions, and to educate them as to their
value. To effect this purpose a syllabus of simple
studies was drawn up, a text book prescribed, such
as “Brown Paces” (Rev. J. W. Burton, M.A.), and


voluntary examinations held. The experiment was
highly successful. Thus encouraged, the Joint Board
of Graded Lessons incorporated missionary topics in
their curriculum. These topics cover a wide range,
and include descriptions of the world's mission fields,
stories of native sacrifice and heroism, and bio-
graphical sketches of noted missionaries. An annual
Hobbies Exhibition and a Stamp Department have
proved sources of interest and revenue.
In recognition of the gifts of Victorian children,
the Mission Board has allotted the upkeep of the
Dudley Orphanage for Indian Children at Dilkusha,
Fiji, as their special sphere. For many years a cot
in the Ba Hospital has been maintained by children
of the home land.
The Young Mens Movement,
The most hopeful movement in the Methodist
Church of this State in this generation is the
winning of our best and ablest young men to the
missionary movement. The origin of the movement
began in 1924, when the Laymen's Missionary Move-
ment, desiring to have an accession of members,
formed a Young Men's Section. Through an appeal
by the Chairman of Papua (Rev. Matthew K.
Gilmour) for a doctor, it was resolved to support the
medical mission in Papua, and subsequently one
from the ranks of the young Methodists, Dr. H. G.
Judkins, went out as their representative. Simul-
taneously the claim of the slum baby arose, and to
relieve these twin needs the movement began.
These young men have caught the vision of the
saving of babies both at home and abroad. The
imposing premises at South Yarra, built to the latest
designs, at a cost of £30,000, and managed with such
efficiency that it is free of debt, stands as a miracle
of the grace of God. It is the effect of the love of
Christ operating in the hearts and lives of conse-
crated and competent youth, who have communicated


that love to the people of the Church in such a way
as to have evoked a remarkable response. Side by
side with the movement for the abandoned children
of the slums is that of doing something for those of
heathen lands.
Like the Laymen’s Missionary Movement, the
Young Men’s Missionary Movement has enjoyed
strong, efficient and sustained leadership. Dr.
Douglas Thomas as president, Mr. A. G. Wilson vice-
president, Mr. F. Oswald Barnett treasurer, Messrs.
A. Barber, A. B. Parker, C. Paul, G. Padgham,
E. M. Harris, K. Little, D. Thorpe and a body of
capable young men are the leaders of many hundreds
of their fellows throughout the State.
From the ranks of this movement are emerging
doctors, teachers, missionaries and business men
who will enrich the life of the Church at home and
of the Kingdom Overseas.
Finance.
For the first twenty years the contributions from
Australia were paid direct to the British Wesleyan
Missionary Society, but, with the implementing of
Rev. Robert Young’s scheme of devolution in 1854,
our Auxiliary was duly constituted in 1855, and the
first balance sheet shows that the total Foreign
Mission revenue from the Commonwealth, including
New Zealand, Tonga, Fiji, was £6774, and of that
amount Victoria contributed the sum of £9BB.
How far our State has travelled in the last half-
century will be seen from the fact that the income
rose to £23,016 in 1933, the average over the past
ten years, several of which have been periods of
financial stringency, being approximately £24,000.
In 1855 the Victorian revenue was 18 per cent, of
the Commonwealth total, but in 1933 it tvas 48.6
per cent. This advance is due not so much to a
larger Methodist constituency, as to a more generous


contribution per member, which now stands at 10/1
per communicant, and at 2/10 per attendant.
Leadership.
This State, too, has had the honour of providing
no less than three General Secretaries of the Society
in the persons of Revs. Benjamin Banks, John G.
Wheen, and J. W. Burton, M.A.—a contribixtion of
considerable importance. The gift of Rev. R. C.
Nicholson to become Conference Foreign Mission
Secretary of the South Australia Conference is a
valuable service to the imperial cause.
Writing in the “Spectator” of 14th November,
1934, the present General Secretary (Rev. J. W.
Burton, M.A.) confirms the foregoing statement in
the following words:—
“During the past half-century Victoria has given
Australian Methodism a magnificent lead in mis-
sionary interest and enthusiasm. We believe in the
century to come she will continue that leadership.”
In searching for an explanation of the remarkable
service rendered by Victoria, we must pay tribute
to the many able returned missionaries who settled
in this Conference. Under the blessing of God, they
sowed the seed that has produced this rich harvest.
We were particularly fortunate to receive two
missionary giants from Fiji-—Thomas Williams and
John Watsford. Both had done heroic service in Fiji
in the stirring days of the conquest of the Gospel
over_ cannibalism. Both men succeeded to the
Presidential chair, and in their wide capacities
touched thousands. During his long period as Home
Missionary Secretary and evangelist, “Father”
Watsford influenced many lives in all parts of the
country, and won their interest for the Kingdom
Overseas. Though not born in this State, nor
entering through this Conference, the Revs. J. S. H.
Royee and Henry Worrall, who gave long and


distinguished service to Fiji, spent the rest of their
ministries in this Conference, and did much from
the platform and through the press to promote the
interests of “regions beyond.” In his ministry in
both Victoria and Tasmania, and in his Presidential
office, Mr. Worrall was a powerful advocate for
missions. In the list of returned missionaries we
must include the names of Father Quick (who saw
service in Africa), the Waterhouses, Samuel Iron-
sides, Joseph White, A. Rigg, H. C. Oldmeadow,
Henry Greenwood, and J. T. Field.
The Victorian Secretaries of Foreign Missions,
such as Revs. George Daniel, Benjamin Banks, W. E.
Bromilow, Jesse Carey, W. Hunt, J. W. Burton, M.A.,
and A. Wesley Amos have kept the missionary fire
burning brightly on the altars of Victorian
Methodism.
But we must also give thanks to God for
the response of the laymen. Those named in the
account of the Laymen’s Missionary Movement,
Circuit secretaries, and many others besides have
translated their missionary faith into sacrificial giv-
ing, unwearied service, and earnest prayer. A notable
instance of this is Mr. N. J. Jenkin, who heard the
call of Christ to serve the “other sheep,” and who
for eighteen years has given all his time, without fee
or reward, paying his travelling expenses wherever
he has gone, even during his three visits to the South
Seas to see the work for himself.
Another important factor in the response of Vic-
toria to the needs of the field has been the visits of
missionary deputations, accompanied by splendid
native trophies—Dr. Bromilow and Bliesa Duigu,
Eev. R. C. Nicholson and Daniel Bula, Wesley Stocks
and Boaz, Rev. J. F. Goldie and his Solomon Island
boys, Sewak Masih, the Indian orphan of Fiji, Dr.
Wilisoni Lagi, of Papua and Fiji, and the charming


Tongan choir boys, who captured the attention and
moved the hearts of our people.
The cumulative effect of Overseas Mission enter-
prise upon the whole corporate body of Methodism
has been reflected in generous giving, earnest prayer
and consecration to the great task. Further, the
spiritual life of the Church has been strengthened
and energised and love forces released, which have
enabled the people at home to fulfil the more
adequately their obligations both at home and
abroad. _ In giving, the Church has not been
impoverished, but richly blessed. Truly, “it is more
blessed to give than to receive,”


CHAPTER XVI.
THE CHURCH AND YOUNG PEOPLE.
Methodism was cradled in an epoch when the
English conscience was being deeply stirred in
thought for its children. Educational reformers like
Locke were attracting the attention of philanthro-
pists like Raikes and Wesley. Wesley himself placed
before the readers of his magazine the great experi-
ment of Raikes. He said to his preachers, “ Where
there are children in the Society, meet them at least
an hour every week.” His Sunday School at New-
castle was the best in the kingdom, and soon had
not fewer than one thousand children in attendance.
At the dawn of the Sunday School movement in
the seventeenth century we see an institution with
its purpose mainly philanthropic, its education
mostly secular, its teachers nearly all paid. At the
touch of Wesley it was transformed, and became
an effective religious aid to the Church, and a
sphere for the voluntary service of men and women
whose lives the Gospel had changed.
At a time when this idea had found a home in
the conscience of Methodists, came the pioneers of
our Church to Victoria. Though children were not
many, the first Sunday School left its marks as far
back as 1838. The opening of a church is generally
an event of which records remain, but a Sunday
School comes into being without observation, and is
first heard of when it is strong enough to hold its
anniversary. Our fathers did not even ask questions
about it in a Quarterly Meeting.


The First Sunday School.
The building of the first church in Swanston
Street took place in 1838. The first Sunday School,
in 1839, held its Anniversary Tea Meeting on the
occasion of the visit of the Rev. William Simpson
from Launceston. How much earlier was its begin-
ning we do not know. Nor are we clear about its
connection with the parent church. On its roll were
twelve children, children of a school-going age being
few. Scholars were evidently harder to find than
teachers. The teachers included Miss Howell (after-
wards Mrs. Silas Harding, of Geelong), Miss
Wilkinson, Messrs. Peers and Trotman, and Mr. and
Mrs. Smith. During Mr. Orton’s visit of 1839 a
Sabbath School was “put in order.’’ It was not the
first nor the last time that such a duty had fallen
to a minister, and most Sunday Schools are vigorous
enough to retain their vitality under such an opera-
tion. But whether this school was the same as that
which pioneered the tea. meeting—and so made much
subsequent history—is not clear. The former
apparently met in a rude structure at the end of
Russell Street near the Yarra Bank. The latter
probably was held in the new church.
The six teachers have left their names. Three of
those names reappear in our later history. Two of
them belonged to the countless family of Smiths.
Early in 1839 Mr. James Dredge and his family
arrived. Their advent must have been a godsend to
the newly-established school, for the three elder
children, Theophilus, William and Sarah, were
appointed teachers, and not long afterwards
Theophilus was made the secretary. The younger
members of the Dredge family became scholars in
1839, but the original scholars have left no record.
For every child in that first school there are 4500
children in our schools in Victoria, and for every
one of that band of teachers there are now 1500.


The first six who taught the first twelve no doubt
served God in their day and generation. Their work
had its inspiring moments, but they often grew
weary of its routine, and thought little beyond the
needs of the present. But could time have been
foreshortened, and could they have seen from some
Pisgah top whereunto their work would grow, their
rude structure and crude appliances would have
become for them the workshop and the work of God,
and they themselves the makers of a future whose
magnitude was beyond their power to imagine.
They sowed a handful of corn. The fruit thereof
has shaken like Lebanon.
How the Schools Spread.
The lineal successor of the parent school has seen
many changes both of location and of constituency.
From Swanston Street it went to Collins Street, and
thence to Lonsdale Street. In the early days of
Wesley Church the stalwarts of Methodism were its
teachers, and many of our most distinguished people
its scholars.
Brunswick Street School began its illustrious
history at about the end of this period. Probably
in 1839 four scholars were enrolled, and from
this unostentatious group arose an institution which
has had a unique influence on the youth of
Methodism. Later, and for a long period, Elijah
Stranger was its superintendent. His Society classes
often numbered 150 young people of both sexes. He
was able to give nearly his whole time to pastoral
work, carried out on his own lines. His school was a
centre of power right down to the nineties. Young
men who came under his influence became churchmen
of note throughout the State.
To the same period belongs the birth of the Y arra
Street School at Geelong. Inseparably connected
with its foundation is the name of Mr. James Dredge.


Mr. Dredge’s journal contains one entry of great
interest. He was appointed as hired local preacher
at Geelong in 1842. On Boxing Day of the same
year was held the first Yarra Street Sunday School
picnic. Here is the description:—“At two o’clock
this afternoon the children of the Sunday School,
about 45 in number, attended at our temporary
chapel to celebrate the return of Christmas. After
taking a bun each, and singing a verse or two of a
hymn, they walked in procession accompanied by
their teachers to the cliff in front of the town, where
they sang ‘Hark, the Herald Angels Sing,’ and
then returned to the chapel, where a plentiful repast
of buns and tea was provided, after which a short
address was delivered to them, when they sang,
‘Here We Suffer Grief and Pain,’ and were dis-
missed.”
Later in its development there came to this school
Mr. G. M. Hitchcock, who, for a long period, assisted
by his large-hearted and talented wife, guided its
destinies, and made it a warm spiritual home out
of which young men and young women, won to
Christ, went forth to serve the cause of Methodism.
These two schools are outstanding examples of the
crucial importance of work among the young.
In our day, when statistics loom larger than
dynamics, and we are apt to think that the only
results of importance are those which can be
tabulated, it is of interest to know that old Con-
ference records show no trace of what was being
attempted for the youth of the Church. In 1851
appear the first figures. On the eve of Victoria’s
golden age, which was to test so severely the Church
that had quietly but surely developed in the fourth
decade of the century, Methodism had under its
observation and in its service 142 Sunday School
teachers and 1283 scholars. In four years from that
time the numbers of each had trebled. There were
401 teachers and 3507 scholars.


In Stirring Times.
Behind these cold figures lie concealed the stirring
story of the gold rush, the desertion of Melbourne
and Geelong, and the populating of Ballarat,
Bendigo and lesser inland towns which grew into
cities, and have since become villages again.
Methodism sobered and saved the goldfields, and
made good citizens of their youth. The Church that
did this was unofficial, and even casual. The people
who stabilised and regulated came later, and built
our fine churches and schools, and put them into
working order. But among the pioneers were lads
from our own and other lands, and their staying
powers and evangelistic zeal were the product of
their own religious experience, gained and enriched
in the churches of their fathers. Methodism had
proved its adequacy to meet new personal needs and
social situations and shown its flexible missionary
spirit. Through its Sunday Schools, the Church had
impressed its spirit on the young, and they, with
adventure in their hearts, followed the gleam of the
gold, but faithfully tended the light within and let
it shine out in the dark and dangerous places, for
the safety of their own and the saving of others’
souls.
So may we account for the treble increase of 1855
and for the amazing and rapid upspringing of our
fine and stately church buildings on the goldfields.
They housed a church spirit, which, true to the
spirit of Methodism, felt that the criterion of a
standing or falling church was the presence or
absence of a Sunday School. What the goldfields
schools have meant to our whole Church throughout
the State has not yet been fully told. When their
scholars no longer sought the yellow harvest beneath
the soil of their own cities, but in waving cornfields
in the Wimmera and Mallee, or in the business of
the city, they brought with them their love of music,


gained from Welsh and Cornish choirs, their equal
love of school and church, their strong emotions
tempered by the modern spirit, but more powerful
because more controlled. The product of the schools
of Bendigo and Ballarat became a gift to all the
Churches.
What the Old Schools Were Like.
We may not hope to see again schools like those
of Golden Square or Eaglehawk, with their two
superintendents and double set of teachers, each
group taking the whole school on alternate Sundays.
For the teacher it was a fortnightly function; for
the scholar, a weekly. There were the married
men’s and the married women’s classes. The whole
family attended—grandfather and grandson wended
their way there together. They realised the ideal
of American churchmen that the school was the
church in its teaching aspect. Every year came
the anniversary, when the whole school became
a unit and expressed itself in music and elocution,
and. the picnic when it gave itself over to social
festivities. The Methodist Sunday School has from
the beginning been true to type. Its methods of
teaching have changed, its aims have widened, its
housing has become more elaborate and artistic, but
it has never failed to make the Bible its spiritual
centre, or the anniversary and the picnic its social
functions.
, r^'^ ie contribution of Methodism to State education
nas been steady and valuable. Many of its outstand-
ing personalities have come from Methodist homes
and churches, and multitudes of its teachers are the
gift of our Church. They have taken with them
Christian ideals and given devoted service. In
town and country they have given their time and
talents to the work of Sunday Schools, and have
been the most powerful factors in bringing the best


educational spirit and methods into our religious
work among the young. Men like T. C. Camm, J.
Hulme and Joseph Hocking have vitalised and
modernised all our school work, and have never let
the trees obscure the wood. Educational method has
been the ally of evangelistic work, and the supreme
aim has been to lead the children to Christ and to the
service of His Church.
In the seventies the living centres of Methodism
were the cities and the goldfields. Superintendents
were men of vision and sympathy, and leaders of
adult classes saw their opportunities. Strangely
enough, the value of the infant class was hardly
recognised. The very young children were rather
to be kept and guarded for the opportunities of
teaching presented in the more formative years of
early and later adolescence. The Kindergarten had
yet to come to its own, and its specialists to be
developed. The Church had not grasped the fact
of the supreme importance of the young child. To
set him in the midst was a later achievement of the
Spirit of Christ.
Victoria was moving outwards to possess its
possessions. Gippsland, the Wimmera, the Mallee
were attracting the sons of the city and of the mines.
The Western and the North-Eastern Districts were
taking their places on the map. It was the period
when the Methodist Church was the pioneer Church,
providing worship and teaching until other Churches
should come in and claim their own. Its enthusiasm
for its Sunday Schools never waned. The little
groups among the giant forests of South Gippsland
and the Wimmera wheatfields caught the spirit of the
historic schools of the inner suburbs of Melbourne
and the newer institutions of the gold areas, and
quietly but strongly the process went on. These
older schools had their most remarkable days and
reached their greatest strength at this stage, and


their children founded schools like them throughout
the land.
Graduation in Service.
The typical school of this period had some interest-
ing features. If a young man had made his decision
and joined the Church, the natural outlet for his
activities was in the school. The expectation was
that he would become a teacher or officer, and in
this way try his wings for further flights of service.
Most church workers graduated in the Sunday
School. The day came when they ceased to be
taught in its senior, and began to teach in its junior
class. The lesson material was becoming standard-
ised, the International System being increasingly
used, and America was supplying abundant and
valuable helps in Peloubet’s notes.
The Sunday School address was practically
universal. When the classes had finished their work,
the whole assemblage, from the youngest to the
oldest, listened to a teacher, who was expected to
fill about fifteen minutes, but was unpopular if he
exceeded the limit. It was a duty rather than a privi-
lege, and each male took his turn on the school plan.
The audience sometimes suffered, but public speaking
was a recognised function of the Church, and both
schools and churches showed a readiness to hear
and to judge the lad who had lately been a scholar,
and might become an ornament of the pulpit or
public platform. The whole Church of those days
was rather given to sermon tasting, and the school
was as interested in an initial breakdown, and as
ready to overlook it as to acclaim a first success.
In after years local preachers might become
eloquent mouthpieces of their Church, or might sway
their country’s destinies, as many of them did, but
they began by passing through the fires of a Sunday
School address. Then they became stars or daggers
on the Circuit plan, and if the star, in the judgment


of keen watchers, emitted any perceptible light, or
the dagger succeeded in wounding any conscience,
a name was disclosed on the succeeding plan, and
a new preacher had been found.
Senior Bible classes were not organised from any
centre, but were characteristic of the school of the
time. Young men and women who did not become
teachers remained at school at least till marriage.
The Hon. James Campbell, of Ballarat, was a typical
leader. He had the true teacher’s instinct, it being
his business not so much to impart as to elicit. He
was always thought-provoking. Behind all his work
there was a spiritual challenge. He thoroughly
understood the somewhat blatant secularism of the
time, and successfully met and countered it both in
his classes and his public debates, to which young
Methodists eagerly resorted. Strong leaders like
him were numerous, and the Bible Classes helped to
mature and to stabilise the convictions that had been
won in our schools.
Social Developments .
Almost every school had a Band of Hope, and
temperance sentiment was steadily inculcated. The
Band of Hope has died in most of our schools, but
it was, while it lasted, the effective means of creating
the Methodist attitude toward temperance reform,
and its spirit abides in a Church definitely pledged
to hostility to the liquor traffic.
The Mutual Improvement Association, attended by
old and young, trained its members in the love and
appreciation of literature and in the knowledge of
public questions. It also developed debating power.
In a time when most people had to be content with a
primary education, and secondary education had
not yet felt that one of its duties consisted in
developing the love of literature and skill in debate,
the Church again met the need.


Old men of to-day remember their Sunday School
cricket club, and applaud its social value. Players
walked miles to meet another club, and were then the
only representative of that wise spirit of encourage-
ment which in the present has made sport an adjunct
of the Sunday School, and by so doing has purified
its spirit.
The Sunday School Union, the parent of our
Young People’s Department, had its inception in
1873. Till that time schools had been left to develop
along their own lines, but the problem of providing
help for teachers had become urgent. England and
America had already moved, and at a meeting held
in Wesley Church this effort to unify and improve
the work of the schools was taken in hand. Competi-
tive examinations in Scripture were introduced in
1878. The new organisation began its life feebly,
and undertook financial tasks beyond its strength.
But it was meeting a strongly-felt need, and was
served by men who never knew defeat. A question-
naire was sent out to Quarterly Meetings in 1882,
asking whether they were in favour of setting
apart a minister to take charge of work amongst
the young. But the time was not yet, and the
answer was a stony silence. The scheme had
originated in the brain and heart of the Rev. Thomas
Grove. Some twenty-five years later the Conference
appointed his son to initiate the work of a Sunday
School Department.
The Christian Endeavour Movement.
Toward the close of the century the Christian
Endeavour Movement attracted the attention of
several of the Victorian churches. It met the need
for religious fellowship, whose absence had been
felt when the Class Meeting gradually failed, and
gathered together the young. It emphasised the value
of consecration formally renewed at stated times as
a corporate act and provided spheres of activity. It
found its warmest welcome and secured its strongest


hold in Methodism. Looked on at the first as some-
what of an interloper, the C.E.S. was adopted and
legislated for by the General Conference of 1897. It
has bound together the young men and women of
various churches in many enterprises of faith and
service, and has been among the factors that make
for spiritual union and an appreciation of the aims
and work of Churches akin to Methodism. Periodic-
ally it gathers thousands at its conferences, and has
rid itself of provincialism and developed an Austra-
lian sentiment. The movement has been most fruitful
in the production of preachers and Christian workers,
and is the spear point of the activity of many churches.
Two Notable Sunday Schools.
Two schools which, beginning in the goldfield
days, reached their best during this period, have
left well-remembered impressions.
Lydiard Street, Ballarat, is famous for the number
of men and women of culture and character who
over a long period laid their talents at the feet of
youth. Probably no school has produced a roll of
teachers of such varied accomplishments and
temperaments all joining harmoniously in the work
of instruction. Among them may be mentioned
James Oddie, a pioneer of the fifties, and a great-
hearted city father; the three Doanes, versatile and
gifted, one of them superintendent for twenty-two
years; W. Oakey, later a champion of the Gospel
against infidelity on the Yarra Bank and in city
halls; A. A. Buley, M.A., headmaster of Grenville
College; R. Carrol, a man of colour who taught an
infant class for a quarter of a century; and the
Honourable James Campbell.
A vivid picture of the Forest Street School,
Bendigo, has been left by Christopher Mudd;
“Standing on the parsonage verandah about 4 p.m.
on a bright day in summer, a wonderful sight met
my eyes. The Sunday School was dismissing. First
emerged from the church vestry two or three groups


of elderly people in friendly conversation. Then
gaily from the upper vestry came a troop of happy
girls, and from across the street to meet them came
another crowd, as the members of the young ladies’
class filed out. The church doors were now opened,
and out came, from one side, forty little boys, and
frorn the other, fifty little girls. Suddenly they were
lost in the crowd, for the big school doors flew open
and there burst forth at least two hundred scholars
over sixteen years of age, and then, with measured
tread, as if loath to part, the young men appeared.”
A Time of Transition.
Looking back on this picture as it could be seen
during the closing decades of the nineteenth century,
we see the Sunday School holding its place in the
affection and conscience of the whole Church. It
had enlisted in its service the brains, hearts and
activities of worthy leaders; it had secured the
loyalty of its scholars; its organisation was flexible
and could adapt itself to new needs and make use
of many types of workers. The day was coming
when its resources would be severely tested, and it
would have to undergo radical changes to meet a
changing constituency. From its small beginning it
had grown almost haphazard. It owed little to the
ecclesiastical statesmen, but had proved a potent
servant of the future Church, and a successful
winner of souls.
In 1902 came Methodist Union. Four churches,
which had had a common creed and a polity nearly
alike, became one, and into their union they brought
932 schools and 77,748 scholars. To those who look
back it did not seem to be a time of decline, and,
judged by any other standard than that of the
statistician, it was not so. All the uniting Churches
began to feel the energies of a larger life. There
were adjustments to be made, churches and schools
to be closed. Uniformity had slowly to realise its


purpose in unity. We were losing numbers, but
gaining a new outlook and power. It was inevitable
that all loyalties should not be transferred, but a
new loyalty was being won. That our Sunday
Schools shrank is true, but for the causes of
this shrinkage we must look not to Methodist Union,
but in other directions. State school education was
intensely alive. The aim, and consequently the
methods of education, were shifting. Teaching was
becoming a fine art. It was recognised that the
kindergarten child, the primary and the adolescent
needed radically different treatment. The teacher
must be in sympathetic touch with the needs of his
or her own department. The conviction came home
that the Sunday Schools must submit their methods
to the educational specialist for guidance. Teacher
training became an urgent necessity. The child who
found his day school a delight sometimes felt that
the Sunday School was dull. We were learning all
this, and, while the time was difficult for our
teachers, they gathered in throngs to any expert who
would tell them how to teach. A few schools
attempted the new methods, but equipment was
difficult, and there was some suspicion that the new
devices were meant as a substitute for, and not as
an instrument to make effective, the old spiritual
urgency. Fortunately, men and women of our State
schools felt the need and saw the fallacy of the
objection. To their loyalty both to Christ and to
education it is due that we were able to meet the
need of boys and girls who came fresh from the new
education, and soon recognised that its counterpart
was gaining place in our Sunday Schools. In addition
to our temporary lagging behind in teaching methods
and our confused first attempts to use them to
subserve our own aims, there were two other reasons
for our trouble. One was the increasing secularisa-
tion of the Sabbath. This could be partly, but not
wholly, met by creating new interest in the school


itself. The other was the fact that in modern life
the Church, with its school, was no longer the only
social centre. What it had done to keep the children
was being largely undertaken by other organisations.
All these difficulties combined to arrest the
attention of the Church and to make it realise that
it must take its schools more seriously and endea-
vour, by organisation and inspiration, to restore
their former glory and widen their usefulness by
intensifying their appeal. Though the schools had
lost ground, there was much searching of heart, and
the period was really constructive of the great
movements which were to come later.
The Sunday School Department.
It was in response to this need and to guide this
new interest that in 1910 the Conference set apart a
minister to act as Organising Secretary of the newly-
formed Sunday School Department. To denote its
wider sphere, it afterwards became the Young
People’s Department. The minister chosen to do the
initial work of the Department was the Rev. J. W.
Grove. Taking as his basis the old Sunday School
Union, he was commissioned to bring all the schools
within its scope. The inaugural Sunday was cele-
brated in every church in Victoria, and the first of a
memorable series of Sunday School Conferences was
held in the Auburn Church, where Mr. Joseph
Hocking made a fine appeal, and gave a most
informative address. Similar meetings were held in
every town and country centre, and an intensive
campaign, in which many took part, resulted in the
aims of the new Department being widely known,
and its ■willingness and ability to help being
gratefully recognised. Teacher training classes
became popular, and departmental schools were
begun. After two years’ pioneering work, Mr.
Grove gave way to the Rev. Horton Williams, who
occupied the position until 1930.


To the credit of Mr. Williams belongs the fine
progress the Department has made through the
eighteen years of his work. His optimism, his love
of children, his financial ability, and his power of
securing the help and confidence of so many fellow-
workers have been a great asset to the Church. One
of the best things the Department has done is the
inauguration of an Australian series of Graded
Lessons, with helps for scholars and teachers. This
has been undertaken in partnership with the
Presbyterian Church, and has now reached very
large proportions. The scheme has been taken up
throughout Australia and New Zealand. The
Methodist Junior, Intermediate and Senior Cate-
chisms are also rendering fine service to the whole
Church. General literature for schools has been by
no means neglected. Schools have been visited,
teachers advised, new organisations formed, training
classes and conferences assiduously eared for, and the
whole enterprise has been put upon a self-supporting
basis. Bible Classes for young men and women have
been formed, and their annual camps are sources of
spiritual inspiration and social enjoyment.
Scripture in State Schools.
At first the work of religious instruction in day
schools was spasmodic and unorganised. The Young
People’s Department then took the matter up, in
consulation with other Churches, and the Joint
Council for Religious Instruction in State Schools
was formed. This Council, working in close associa-
tion with the Youth Departments of all the Protestant
Churches and with the State Education Department,
has organised this work wisely and well. With Mr.
G. E. Peart, one of our own laymen, as its secretary,
the Council has evolved a system that works almost
without friction, and makes a most effective and
valuable contribution to the religious education of
the youth of Victoria.


A group of athletic activities has come into being,
and Methodist physical culture classes and tennis,
cricket and football associations are at work under
the aegis of the Department. Before Mr. Williams
finished his work, it had so grown that it became
necessary to appoint an assistant, so that the Depart-
ment has now a minister always in training for the
more complete responsibility which is to follow.
The first assistant to be appointed was the Rev.
A. V. Ballard, who, when Mr. Williams resigned,
became Director, and who retired after five years
of competent and useful leadership. He was suc-
ceeded in 1935 by the Rev. J. Mcllroy, who had been
his assistant.
Thus, in the Centenary year of Methodism in
Victoria, it can be said that the Church’s care for
its young has been constant. It has caught up with
the general educational standard of the State, and
probably constitutes a warmer home for its young
people than it did at any period of its history. It
endeavours to care for body, soul and spirit. The
young people are happy and useful within its
borders, and the future is assured.


CHAPTER XVII.
THE CHURCH AND EDUCATION.
Methodism was born in a university. John and
Charles Wesley, sons of a father and mother both of
rare scholarship, were Oxford graduates. It is little
wonder, therefore, that among the people called
Methodists education has always walked hand in
hand with evangelism. Early Victorian Methodism
did not fail of this spiritual comradeship.
Perhaps the earliest demonstration of the fact is
to be found in the issue of the “Port Phillip Patriot”
dated Thursday, sth September, 1839. “The Wes-
leyans,” states this journal, “have a neat and com-
modious place of worship, which they use as a public
school also.” It is likely, however, that this first
venture failed, for less than two years afterwards,
16th August, 1841, to be exact, we read of a little band
of Wesleyan Methodists meeting at Mr. Wilkinson’s
“to consider the propriety and practicability”—as
James Dredge, a prominent layman, puts it in a diary
which is still extant —“of instituting a Day School
in connection with our society and congregation,
when the propriety (how exact is our early Methodist
Pepys!) was accorded.” Three weeks later (6th
September) “the practicability” also having evi-
dently appeared above the horizon, a school was
begun with Mr. Dredge himself as master, and as
pupils “5 boys and 2 girls, the girls being under the
care of a young woman named Mitchell. May the
undertaking,” continues our diarist, “have God’s
blessing. ’ ’
The five boys and two girls of September, 1841,
were, in reality, the precursors of the goodly succes-
sion of thousands who, in following years, were to pass
through the early Wesleyan denominational schools


of Victoria, and the still later thousands who were
to enjoy the privileges of great public schools like
Wesley and the Methodist Ladies’ College. Mr.
Dredge, in taking over the little school, all unthink-
ingly, began a notable line of Methodist educationists
which, before the first century of the Church’s history
ran out, was to give to the service great names like
those of Drs. Waugh, Cofrigan, A. S. Way, W. H.
Fitehett, and Mr. L. A. Adamson, M.A.
Wesleyan Denominational Schools.
It is possible that a second breakdown in these
early educational efforts occurred, for in “The Early
Story of the Wesleyan Methodist Church in Victoria,’’
Revs. W. L. Blamires and John B. Smith state that
“the first mention’’ (surely, an error) “of a Wes-
leyan Day School in Melbourne was at the Quarterly
Meeting of October, 1845, when it was determined
to establish one. This was shortly after in efficient
operation.” Prom this point on there was no further
turning back. Subsidised by Government grants,
school houses were built (one in Lonsdale Street on
the present site of Wesley Church), children gathered
into classes, and teachers appointed. How wide-
spread was this good work is illustrated by the
fact that in 1854 we find a sehoolhouse erected at a
cost of £I2OO in Beeehworth, earlier named May-day
Hills, with two teachers on the staff. The first Dis-
trict Meeting in September, 1851, reported 20 day
school teachers and 699 scholars on the roll. Six
years later Rev. D. J. Draper was able to declare
that the day school scholars had increased from 339
in 1849 to 5000 in 1857. Dr. E. H. Sugden, in “A
Century in the Pacific” (p. 288) states that in 1870
when the denominational schools were finally abol-
ished in this State, that “the Wesleyan Church had
70 day schools and 8861 scholars.” That the early
Methodists did their work thoroughly is apparent
from the returns of the Registrar-General in 1862, in


which it is shown that the standard of education in
Wesleyan schools was far in advance of that of any
other denomination.
Government Grants.
The decision of the Government to allot grants to
denominational schools on a basis of church associa-
tion, and not, as formerly, on the number of scholars
actually in attendance, imposed so grave a hardship
on the Wesleyans that many of their schools had to
be abandoned and, in some cases, for months at a
time, their teachers carried on without salary.
Unable to get a juster distribution of Government
funds, leading men among the Methodists, like Rev.
D. J. Draper, became ardent advocates for the State
taking over the whole responsibility of primary edu-
cation. This was done under Stephen’s “Educa-
tion Act” of 1872, which made primary education
“free, secular and compulsory” for all children of
school age.
The Building of “Grey Towers”
The strangely secular character of State education
turned the minds of prominent ministers and laymen
to the possibility of founding a grammar school
which would offer the children of Methodist people
an education more closely linked up with their own
religious traditions. As early as 1854 the idea of
Wesley College was in the air. A gift of land on the
St. Kilda Road and a grant of £2768 on the part of
the Government led to an effort being made to raise
funds. A bazaar in the old Exhibition Building in
March, 1858, produced £1925. The moving spirits
were Mr. Walter Powell, a generous-hearted Mel-
bourne merchant, and Rev. D. J. Draper, in whose
diary of the time such entries are frequent as “At
Powell’s in evening. Much conversation about
the grammar school.” After innumerable committee
meetings extending over years, at last, in 1864, it


was finally decided to build, and on 4th January,
1865, the foundation stone of Wesley College, poetic-
ally called “Grey Towers,’ ’ was laid by His
Excellency, Sir Charles Darling. The same year Mr.
Powell added another £IOOO to his previous gifts as
an inducement to others to subscribe, and, on 11th
January, 1866, this now famous public school was
opened with Rev. (afterwards Dr.) James S. Waugh
as its first President in residence. A tragic circum-
stance connected with the opening was that, almost
at the very hour that the happy function was taking
place in Australia, Rev. D. J. Draper, his wife, and
243 of their fellow passengers were, through the
foundering of the steamship “London,” perishing in
the cold, boisterous seas of the Bay of Biscay. It
was this tragic happening, and Mr. Draper’s heroic
bearing on the occasion, which led to the founding
of the Draper Scholarship which, since July, 1866,
has kept green the memory of this splendid friend
of the College and devoted servant of the Church.
With Mr. Waugh (affectionately nicknamed “Pax”)
as its first President, and Dr. James Corrigan of
Trinity College, Dublin, as its first headmaster, the
grammar school, now called Wesley College, was
from the outset a success. It closed its first year
with 80 pupils, its second (1867) with 120; while
seven years later (1874) there were 271 boys in its
class rooms, of whom 59 were boarders. Wesley was
fortunate in having as headmasters men of dis-
tinguished scholarship, high ideals and wide vision,
men who commanded the respect of the boys as well
as that of the Church and the community. Amongst
these, Dr. Corrigan, Professors M. H. Irving, H. M.
Andrews, Mr. (afterwards Dr.) A. S. Way, and in
later years Mr. L. A. Adamson, M.A., were out-
standing personalities. It was largely through the
influence of the two first-named that deserving pupils
of State schools had a public school secondary educa-
tion opened to them by means of Government


exhibitions —an advantage which, Rev. E. Nye tells
us in his “History of Wesley College,” gave to the
school “many of its most distinguished scholars.”
If the early “Rules and Regulations to be Observed
by the Pupils” read curiously to-day, and the duty
of prefects “to see that there is no fighting for
fighting’s sake” provokes a smile, the spirit of the
school itself was high, and may be judged from an
appreciation of Professor Irving by Dr. Felix Meyer,
a pupil of the time. “Irving’s idea of a great public
school,” writes the doctor, “was that its scholars
should be a democracy of gentlemen. Himself a
living example of the truth that ‘manners makyth
man,’ he demanded and enforced a mutual courtesy
and forbearance among his boys.”
Although each President and Head contributed
much to the success of the school, it was
left to Mr. L. A. Adamson to develop, to
its finest quality, Wesley’s public school spirit.
The name of “Adamson of Wesley” will for
Victoria and, indeed, for Australia, rank with
Arnold of Rugby and Thring of Uppingham.
Educated at Rugby himself, he brought to Wesley
the tradition and spirit of that great English public
school. An Oxford graduate, he became senior resi-
dent master of Wesley under Dr. A. S. Way in 1887,
and, with the exception of four years, was, till his
death in 1933, intimately associated with the life of
the College. The collapse of the land boom saw the
College sink to its lowest. In July, 1897, it had but
74 boys on the rolls. During these years Mr. Gold-
straw and Mr. A. R. Stephenson carried on bravely
until, in 1902, Mr. Adamson stepped into the posi-
tion of headmaster. With this event began a steady
rise in the size and influence of the school until it
reached its zenith in 1919, when there were 560 boys
in its class rooms, and a waiting list. At that time
a comparatively wealthy man, Mr. Adamson gave not
only of his talents and spirit to the College, but of


his wealth as well. For many years he relieved the
Council from financial loss by becoming personally
responsible for any deficit in the working costs of
the College. His own personal gifts for necessary
enlargements of the school buildings and the erection
of Adamson Hail amounted to close on £4OOO. His
standing in the community as a member of the Coun-
cil of Public Education and of the Melbourne
University Council, his keen interest in sport, the
high place which he held in the official life of the
Church of England, and his own personal character
added much to the prestige of the College in the eyes
of the general public. Indirect—and for that reason
the more valuable—testimony to his own high ideals
of duty and his personal religious devotion can be
had by any one who cares to read his article on “The
School and the War” in the College history. How
proud he was of the youths who gave their all to
the cause—over a thousand old boys and pupils
enlisted. Of these 148 made the supreme sacrifice,
and a Wesley boy, Captain Robert C. Grieve—“the
nrst Victorian public school boy to gain this coveted
honour’’—received, at the hands of His Majesty, the
King, the Victoria Cross.
. The retirement of Mr. Adamson in 1932 owing to
ill health called forth_ from the press, the Church
and the whole community encomiums rarely enjoyed
by any public man, while by his lamented death a few
months later the State lost a great citizen, the
Church one of its noblest sons, and education one of
its most inspiring leaders.
The College as It Is.
Mr. Harold Stewart, M.A., for many years Mr.
Adamson’s right hand man on the staff, as his suc-
cessor is worthily carrying on the Adamson tradi-
tion. Mention should also be made of Rev. Edward
Nye, 8.A., who for 27 years has given devoted
service to the College as chaplain, and whose “History


of Wesley College, 1865-1919” contains a fund of
valuable information. With this the history of
Wesley College might close, were it not that the last
two years of the first century of Methodism in
Victoria was to record a further romance in the story
of Wesley College. In 1933 Mr. A. M. Nicholas and
his brother, Mr. G. R. Nicholas, unexpectedly
came forward with plans for a rebuilding and
enlargement of the College on such a scale
as would place it, as far as accommodation
and general equipment were concerned, among the
front-rank public schools of the Empire. With Mr.
H. A. Norris as their architect, the school vacation
of 1933-4 saw class rooms, laboratories, lecture hall,
offices, lounge rooms, dormitories, a dining hall,
domestic quarters rise, it verily seemed overnight as
by the rubbing of Aladdin’s lamp. To these, a year
later, were added a College chapel, preparatory
school buildings, a swimming pool and gymnasium.
In all, these, and the complete renovation of Adam-
son Hall, inside and out, meant a gift to the College
of close on £200,000. Rarely has a public school
enjoyed so great a benefaction, and few schools enter
on the new century in greater heart than Wesley.
The Daughters of Methodism .
Referring to the provision of land made by the
Government (in each case ten and a half acres) for
Wesley and Queen’s Colleges, Dr. Fitchett once
wrote: ‘ ‘ Girls are left out of the benevolence of the
State and, it may be added, have little place in the
concern of the Churches.” Indeed, it was not till
1872 that the Conference considered the subject of
a girls’ secondary school at all. Although it then
passed a resolution affirming that “the time has
arrived when provision should be made for the
superior education of the daughters of our people,”
it allowed another six years to pass before, on a
resolution of Dr. (then Rev.) W. H. Fitchett, it


appointed a committee to go into the question of
founding such a college. A still further delay took
place, for the succeeding Conference of 1879 found
nothing done and, again on a resolution of Dr.
Fitchett, it appointed another committee of enquiry.
But, alas, another three years were to pass in seeking
information and discussing plans. As, however,
there was a fear of the scheme being still-born on
the question of finance, the Conference handed over
to the committee a half share of the two acres of land
on which the Wesleyan Immigrants’ Home had been
situated in Rathdown Street, Carlton, the other half
share going to Queen’s College. The possession of
this (it was sold later for £7500) gave some confi-
dence to the hesitating committee which, after
examining various sites for the college, fixed, at last,
upon Kelly’s Paddock of three acres fronting Barker’s
Road and Glenferrie Road corner. This was pur-
chased for £2600, and plans for the present main
building were prepared by Messrs. Crouch and
Wilson. The committee decided to erect that portion
only which lies to the west of the present tower.
But, even at this long last, had it not been for the
faith and indomitable will of Dr. Fitchett himself,
the whole project would have fallen to earth, for, on
the resolution to proceed with the erection being
declared carried on the casting vote of the chairman,
the dissenting half of the committee resigned out
of hand. In spite of so prolonged pre-natal travail,
the College, once it came to birth, proved to be a lusty
child, and, within four short years of this unpromis-
ing beginning over £32,000 had been spent on
buildings, equipment and additional land. “That
courageous policy,” wrote Dr. Fitchett forty years
afterwards, “explains the M.L.C. of to-day.” In
those 40 years over £BO,OOO had been spent in
developing the various activities of the school and
in interest. Its various erections now include the


majestic main front, principal’s quarters, offices,
a dining hall to seat 160, kitchens, Fitehett
Assembly Hall, Diploma school and class rooms,
hostel, gymnasium, a swimming bath and studio
block, maids’ quarters, and a cottage hospital, also
tennis courts and a fine sports’ ground. In later
years, through the generosity of Mr. Fred. J. Cato,
a member of the College Council, was added a two-
storied Kindergarten School and boarding house,
called “Cato House,” and through a like generosity
on the part of Mr. G. R. Nicholas, another member
of the Council, a handsomely-equipped Domestic
Science School and an up-to-date refectory were
added.
That the College met a felt need in the community
was more and more clearly manifested as the years
went on. At the time of its fortieth anniversary in
1921 there were 514 girls in its class rooms, of whom
128 were boarders, receiving the attention of a
teaching staff of 27 and a domestic staff of similar
dimensions. Later, the number of students increased
to nearly 700, this maximum figure being, afterwards,
reduced owing to the world-wide depression following
on the war to about 500, at which it now stands.
The M.L.C. draws its students from every State in the
Commonwealth, and from far afield in the Pacific,
the late Princess Fusibala, half-sister to Salote, Queen
of Tonga, being at one time a resident pupil.
In 1930 a branch of the M.L.C. was opened at
Elsternwiek and, a second time, through the gener-
osity of Mr. Cato, the College was presented with
a fine property valued at something over £SOOO in
Gladstone Street of that suburb. Here is now a
vigorous school of 140 pupils, entitled “Methodist
Ladies’ College, Fred. J. Cato Branch,” which bids
fair to increase in size and usefulness. A smaller
branch of the M.L.C. was also opened in 1932 by
taking over a private school at Canterbury. This is
called the Carisbrook Branch.


The First Principal .
In the matter of its first principal, Rev. Dr. W. H.
Fitchett, the M.L.C. was extraordinarily fortunate.
To him, more than to anyone, Victorian Methodism
owes this great public school for girls. His own life
was a veritable romance. The son of a schoolmaster
and, in his boyhood, working in a stone quarry to
aid his widowed mother at Ceres, near Geelong, later
a jackaroo on an outback station of Queensland, he,
the while, struggled for an education and a know-
ledge of literature. How, once he was accepted as
a candidate for the ministry, he rose step by step
to the highest positions in Australasian Methodism
our Church annals of its first century abundantly
show. A successful Circuit minister for 16 years, a
man of remarkable insight and power in the counsels
of the Church, he had the unique distinction of being
President of the Victoria and Tasmania Conference
(1895), first President of the same Conference in the
United Methodism of 1902, and first President-
General of the now combined Methodist Church of
Australasia, 1904-1907. All through the years of his
busy life he was gaining world-wide distinction with
his pen. As a writer the nimbleness of his mind,
his versatility, his clarity of style, his quick appre-
ciation of the romance of events won for him an ever-
widening circle of readers. The rapid succession of
books which issued from his study at the Methodist
Ladies’ College, such as “Deeds That Won the
Empire,” “Fights for the Flag,” “The Unrealised
Logic of Religion,” “Wesley and His Century,” and
“How England Saved Europe” (4 vols.), was the
amazement of all who knew him. At the same time
he was touching for good the life of his own country
as editor of the “Southern Cross” and the Australian
Life. 9 9 ' Any fame, how T ever, which his writings
brought him, Dr. Fitchett consecrated to his first and
supreme love and interest, the M.L.C. With a mind
above the ordinary, a natural gift of leadership, a


genius for business detail, a wide vision, a quickness
of decision and courage in execution—and all these
brought into captivity to high Christian ideals
through his own deep, personal, evangelical piety —
who cannot but feel that he was specially called of
God to the office of Principal of the College, to which
he gave forty-five long and strenuous years of notable
service? His intended retirement was anticipated by
his death, at the age of 86 in 1928, within the walls
of the College, which is his best memorial.
The Rev. J. W. Grove, M.A., LL.B., Dip.Ed., was
chosen as Dr. Pitchett’s successor, and is still worthily
filling the position of Principal. In noteworthy ser-
vices as headmasters Mr. (afterwards Rev.) Prank
Wheen, M.A., Otto Krome, and Philip R. Le Couteur,
M.A., deserve special mention, nor should Mrs. Landen,
M.A., who for sixteen years as a teacher and five years
as headmistress did good service, be forgotten. Mrs.
Tiddeman, Miss Fitchett and Miss Hunt, all for long
terms as lady superintendents, did much for the inner
life of the College. That the school more than
fulfilled its purpose will be apparent to anyone
who examines its class rolls through more than
fifty years of its history. “Deo Domuique” has
been more than a motto. The words have found a
realisation in thousands of lives of Australian girls
who, drinking at the wells of knowledge and religion
which the College provided, have gone out in the
spirit of their motto to make homes of their own and
become the mothers of the nation.
Board of Education and Box Hill Grammar School.
For long it has been felt that something further
should be done to meet the cultural requirements of
an ever-expanding city and State, and in 1919 the
Conference appointed a Board of Education to take
this matter within its purview. After considering
various propositions in both Melbourne and provin-
cial centres, the Board took its first definite step in


1929 in taking over the Box Hill Grammar School,
and in purchasing at a cost of £IO,OOO Gwynton Park
Estate of 24J acres. With Mr. C. F. Walker, M.A.,
as headmaster, the school, upon the erection of brick
class rooms, moved to its new site on 17th October,
1930. Plans for extensive College buildings and
four playing fields were prepared by Messrs. Bates,
Smart and McCutcheon. In 1934 an expansion of
the school premises was decided upon, and the school,
though heavily encumbered by debt, is showing signs
of taking an increasingly important place among the
educational institutions of Methodism in Victoria.
Already there are 50 students, including 12 boarders.
Queen’s College.
“Compared with Oxford’s ancient piles, we haven’t
much to show,
But then you see, we were not born a thousand
years ago.
No! we weren’t! No! we weren’t!
We really cannot help it, but we weren’t!”
So sang Queen’s students at the College Founda-
tion Day celebrations in 1892. And true it is! For
even at this Centenary year Queen’s is but 46 years
old. Yet what a Home of Memory is here for the
hundreds who have passed through its halls! As
early as 1855, but a year after the Melbourne Uni-
versity itself was founded—as Dr. Sugden’s still
unpublished history of the College informs us —the
idea of a College affiliated with each of the Uni-
versities of Sydney and Melbourne found voice in
the first Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Confer-
ence. Though ten acres in the University reserve
at Carlton had been set aside by the Government for
this purpose, over twenty years were to pass before
the Victoria and Tasmania Conference took steps to
utilise the concession. The Conference of 1878


appointed a committee to raise funds for the purpose
of building a College for general educational pur-
poses, and also “if possible to house the theological
students. '' Rev. W. A. Quick undertook the task of
canvassing for money in both States, and by Decem-
ber, 1884, was able to report money in hand and
promises amounting to £6370. A small endowment
fund was also provided, chiefly from a half share in
the land of an earlier Wesleyan Immigrants' Home
in Carlton. With further help from the Jubilee
Thanksgiving Fund in 1886, the Conference resolved
that the College should be erected in the Jubilee year
of Queen Victoria's reign and, for that reason, be
called Queen's. With Mr. Percy Oakden as architect,
and Messrs. Mullin, Bennie and Oliver as contrac-
tors, the foundation stone was laid on 19th June,
1887, by His Excellency Sir Henry Brougham (later
Lord) Loch.
Who was to be its first master? To Rev. J. S. H.
Royce, at that time on a visit to England, aided by a
commission of ministers of the British Conference,
was committed the choice. As a result Rev. Edward
Holdsworth Sugden, B.Sc., an English Wesleyan
minister, son of Rev. James Sugden, was appointed.
With seven years' service as Assistant Tutor at
Headingly College, Leeds, and six years of Circuit
work in Bradford behind him, Mr. Sugden, with his
wife and family, arrived to take charge in January,
1888. Two months later, on 14th March, the College
was officially opened by the Governor. The Council
appointed by the Conference to administer the affairs
of the College elected Rev. W. A. Quick as its first
chairman and Rev. E. Wason Nye as its secretary.
In the first year the College had ten students, nine
men and one woman, with Mr. A. H. S. Lucas, after-
wards headmaster of Newington, Sydney, and Dr.
Wiechmann on the tutorial staff, to which, later, Rev.
J. R. Harcourt and Mr. R. J. Barnard were added.


Though in the number and work of its students
the College in its first years was successful, ever-
increasing financial difficulties caused much anxiety.
By 1895 the accumulated debt was close on £IB,OOO,
with an annual loss on working of over £SOO. To
meet the situation Revs. W. A. Quick, Charles Lan-
caster, the Master himself and Rev. J. G. Wheen did
notable service in canvassing for subscriptions. The
last-named raised over £12,000 in promises, and at
the 1904 Conference was able to report £10,775 of
this amount in hand. This fine effort, added to £6OOO
loaned without interest by the Church Building and
Loan Fund, lifted the College above its financial
difficulties.
A series of liberal scholarships greatly aided the
College by enabling it to increase the number and
quality of its students. Chief among these were the
Hague Scholarships, named after the late Mr. George
Hague, of Geelong, who had, by his will, made the
College the residuary legatee of his estate. This
meant £13,150, the earnings of which have been
equally divided between General and Theological
Scholarships.
From time to time enlargements of the premises
have been made. The buildings on the south side,
comprising the dining hall and 26 students’ rooms,
were opened by Sir Matthew Davies, Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly, on 2nd April, 1890. Sir
Matthew allowed the announcement to be made tliat
both he and his lady would give £SOO each to the
cost. The year 1910 saw the eastern facade of the
College filled in by the removal of the wooden kit-
chens. In 1919 a truly heroic work of expansion
was attempted. Inspired by a generous benefaction
on the part of Mr. J. T. Tweddle, who since 1915 had
been a member of the Council, and by a courageous
pledge on the part of Mr. W. T. Hattam to collect the
balance of the money necessary, the Council decided
to build the central main tower (now the Sugden


WESLEY COLLEGE.


I tt ll« 1 11 1 ,f
QUEEN’S COLLEGE.


Tower) and complete a new front wing, including a
new chapel at a total cost of something over £50,000.
More amazing than the decision was the fact that
at the date of its opening, through the work and
indomitable faith of Mr. Hattam, the funds (or
promises to pay) for the extensions were practically
in hand. Moved by the success of this venture, Mr.
Hattam undertook to raise further amounts to pay
off the whole of the old debt on the College buildings.
A story is told that, on the morning of the day that
he was to announce to the Conference the completion
of his task, Mr. Hattam found himself £2OOO short of
the required amount. Hastily informing three
staunch friends of the College who had already given
liberally, these, at once, made up the deficiency
among them. Amongst the most liberal benefactors
of Queen’s were the late Mr. Henry Berry, Mr.
Fred. J. Cato, Mr. J. T. Tweddle, to mark whose
gifts the Tweddle Wing was named, Dr. Georgina
Sweet, the late Mr. George Hague and the late Mr.
John Cross. Included amongst these must be men-
tioned Mr. A. M. Nicholas and Mr. G. R. Nicholas,
who in 1929 added to their other gifts the cost of
the building of a new and spacious Science
Laboratory.
In regard to notable personalities connected with
the College, special mention should be made of Rev.
William A. Quick, to whose faith and devotion the
College owes its inception, and who for twenty-one
years was the honoured president of its Council, con-
tributing during that time more than any one else,
outside the Master, to the well-being of the College.
Following him as president of the Council were Rev.
Dr. W. Morley, Mr. F. J. Cato and Mr. J. T. Tweddle.
Mr. W. A. Mewton has done excellent service as
treasurer for forty years, and Rev. T. B. Reed, the
first theological student in Queen’s, as secretary for
over twenty years.


The First Master.
No one who has served the College can
compare, however, with its first Master, Rev.
E. H. Sugden, M.A., B.Sc., Litt.D. The son of
a Yorkshire minister, he was a comparatively young
man when he took charge of the infant College, but he
grew with it, as it with him. A genial, broadminded,
scholarly man, and withal a most devout evangelical
Christian, he was essentially a young man's man.
From the outset he won not only the respect but also
the affection and admiration of his students in all
the faculties. He was a man of catholic tastes and
of great versatility. While being an arrestive theo-
logical teacher he was, at the same time, an expert in
music, a master of English literature, especially of
English drama and of the literature associated with
John Wesley, the founder of Methodism. A bare list
of Dr. Sugden's published works will of itself give
the measure of the man. These include “Wesley's
52 Standard Sermons, with Notes" (2 vols.), “John
Wesley's London," “Commentary on the Epistle of
St. James," “The Psalms of David" (a translation
from the original Hebrew into modern English
verse), “Israel's Debt to Egypt" (Fernley Lecture),
“Translation of Five Plays of Plautus into English
Verse," a “Topographical Dictionary to Shakespeare
and His Fellow Dramatists," and shorter contribu-
tions in such books as “A New History of Meth-
odism" and “A Century in the Pacific." The place
which Dr. Sugden won in the estimation of his
Church is seen in his election as President of the
Victoria and Tasmania Conference in 1906, and his
call to the highest office in the gift of Australasian
Methodism, that of President-General, 1923-1926,
and in the fact that for many years, until the increase
of the work demanded the appointment of a Pro-
fessor of Theology, he had committed to him the
charge of the theological training of its students for
the ministry. As a preacher he excelled. His clear


and scholarly expositions of Scripture, his large
sympathy, charming simplicity of manner, and mani-
festly evangelical zeal won him a ready welcome in
the pulpits not only of his own but of other Churches,
including, on one occasion, St. Paul’s Cathedral,
Melbourne. Outside his activities as a minister of
his own Church, and in addition to his publications,
he did useful service as a member of the Melbourne
University Council and as president, up to the time
of his death, of the Trustees of the Public Library,
Art Gallery and Museum. After forty years of
splendid service as Master of Queen’s, Dr. Sugden
retired in February, 1928. A presentation fund of
generous dimensions to mark the high esteem in
which his personality and work were held being
raised by his many friends. This enabled him to
live in comfort till his deeply-lamented death on
22nd July, 1935. Such a record cannot close without
mention of his wife, Ruth Sugden, whose gracious
Christian character during all these years contri-
buted the touch of home to the inner life of the
College. Following Dr. Sugden’s long service (now
“Master Emeritus”) came Queen’s second Master,
Rev. F. Walwyn Kernick, M.A. (Oxon.), who with
increasing acceptance during the next five years
maintained the high traditions of the College till his
lamented death in 1933. Mr. Kernick was followed
by the present Master, Dr. Raynor C. Johnson, who
in October, 1934, brought to the office a record of
exceptional academic distinction in a Doctorate of
Science and a Doctorate of Philosophy of the
University of London, and an international reputation
in scientific research.
Queen’s in addition to its distinguished Masters
has also been honoured in its Fellows. Amongst
these were men like Dr. A. S. Way, headmaster
of Wesley, translator of Homer’s Iliad and
Odyssey and the ‘ ‘ Letters of Paul ’’; Dr. A. W.
Howitt, an anthropologist who led the rescue party


in connection with the ill-fated Burke and Wills
Expedition; Rev. Dr. Lorimer Fison, missionary and
anthropologist, the first Australian scientist to be
invited to attend sittings of the British Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science; Professor
Baldwin Spencer, of Inland Australia research fame,
who died later in the Patagonian expedition; and
Professor L. J. Wrigley. Among its Vice-Masters
or Acting Masters were Professor K. H. Bailey,
Professor H. A. Woodruff, and Mr. John Foster.
Of Queen’s students who rose to positions of note
were Walter Rosenhain, head of the National Phy-
sical Laboratory, Twickenham, England, and F.R.S.;
Dr. Georgina Sweet, first woman Doctor of Science in
Australia; Rev. Frank Lade, M.A., President-General
of Methodist Church of Australasia (1929-1932);
Mr. Justice Macfarlan (Supreme Court Bench,
Victoria) ; Sir David Rivett, Managing Director
of Board of Scientific and Industrial Research for
the Commonwealth of Australia; Dr. Joseph Bald-
win, Government Astronomer; and many others.
Theological Institution.
To complete the circle of Methodist Church contri-
butions to the educational life of Victoria, something
should be added relative to the training of students
for her ministry. The first official step taken by the
Victoria and Tasmania Conference in this matter
was in 1878, when, after directing that action be
taken for the erection of a College affiliated with
the Melbourne University, the resolution concludes:
“Such College to be made available as far as prac-
ticable for the training of our Theological Students.”
The subject had been seriously considered at a much
earlier date by the first General Conference of Aus-
tralasia. In an address to the British Conference in
1860 learn from a manuscript History of
Queen’s, by Dr. E. H. Sugden), it is stated: “We
require and much desire an educated as well as an


earnest ministry.” The efforts to found a Central
Theological Institution for the whole of Australia
made during subsequent years broke down, however,
on the matter of finance, appeals failing of the
response expected. This being so, arrangements
were made to train the men in existing educational
establishments, and in 1871 the Provisional Theo-
logical Institution for Victoria and Tasmania was
linked up with Wesley College, Melbourne, students
going into residence for both general and theological
training. Dr. Waugh, Rev. W. P. Wells and other
ministers were the theological tutors. It was here
under such conditions, that men like Dr. Henry
Howard, of New York, were prepared for their life’s
work. In 1889 the students, thirteen in number,
were removed to Queen’s College, where, in a resi-
dence near the College, they received training under
the new Master, Dr. Sugden, aided by Revs. J. C.
Symons, W. P. Wells, and J. R. Harcourt. Their
housing, later, in a cottage in the College grounds
and, subsequently, their residence in the College
itself was found, in the case of non-matriculated
students, to be an evasion of the Affiliation Statutes
(No. XXV.), which declares that “every student at
the College shall within six months after he has
entered into residence, either be matriculated or
admitted ad eundem statum therein.” To put the
matter, long held in abeyance, beyond question the
Conference finally (1933) passed a resolution “ that
accepted candidates shall not be sent to reside in
Queen’s College unless they have qualified for
matriculation. ’ ’
The Theological Institution was at first under the
control of Queen’s College Council but, in 1892, its
administration was transferred to a separate com-
mittee of the Conference. In 1895 arrangements
were made with the Baptist College for joint tuition
in certain selected subjects, and this, Avhen it ceased,
was followed on with a similar agreement with the
Congregational College. The General Conference of


1897 constituted Queen’s College, for the time being,
the Central Theological Institution for Australasia,
and students were entered from South Australia,
Queensland and Western Australia. This, however,
ceased with the founding of King’s College, Brisbane
(1913), Wesley College, Adelaide, and Leigh College,
Sydney (1914) —all three Colleges being under the
administration of former Queen’s students.
The most notable event in the history of the Insti-
tution was the appointment in 1920 of Rev. A. E.
Albiston, M.A., 8.D., as theological tutor (later
named Professor of Theology), with full oversight
of the curriculum of the students. No one could
have been named more eminently fitted for the
position. Himself of great pulpit ability, by nature
a student and philosopher, possessing a vital and
infectious personality, Professor Albiston at once
set a high standard of cultural attainments for the
Institution, and it is not overstating it to say that
he has fired the zeal and enhanced the quality of
every student who has passed through his classes.
The foundation by Act of Parliament of the Mel-
bourne College of Divinity with power to grant
diplomas and degrees in Divinity, did much to
stimulate the students of the Institution. The
bringing of its curriculum into line with the syllabus
of the College of Divinity has enabled many of its
students, while enriching their knowledge of theo-
logy, to qualify for the academic honours which it
offers.
The finances of the Institution in its earlier days
constituted a difficult problem for its committee, until
in 1911 the Conference granted a 1% levy on all
Circuit income for the Theological Fund. At
various times the levy has been increased according
to the number of students in training. Much relief
both to the Fund and to the Circuits came through
a fine effort by Rev. Dr. C. W. Atkinson, when as
secretary to the committee he organised an appeal for


an endowment fund which resulted in the raising
of close on £BOOO.
If this chapter serves to show how loyal the Church
in Victoria has been to the high educational tradi-
tions of Methodism which had their birth in the soul
of John Wesley, how devotedly its ministers have
given themselves to the cause of religious education,
and how generously its laymen have supplied the
funds necessary for the erection of the building of
colleges and the founding of scholarships necessary
for carrying on the work, it will have achieved its
end. Such a story should not only fill the soul with
gratitude, but prove also an inspiration for genera-
tions to come. Only a great faith and a noble con-
secration could have achieved so much in so brief
a time.


CHAPTER XVIII.
THE CHURCH AND THE COMMUNITY,
One cannot read the records of Methodism in
Victoria in its first century without realising
how deeply interested the Church has been in the
general welfare of the community. Indeed, even
before Melbourne Methodists had a minister of their
own, the Wesleyan Missionary Society of Great
Britain, as is shown in the earlier pages of this
volume, took to its heart the evangelisation, educa-
tion and protection of the aborigines of Southern
Victoria. Amongst the earliest Methodist laymen of
Melbourne we find Mr. E. S. Parker and Mr. James
Dredge with Government appointments as assistant
protectors of the native races. The contribution
which the Church in those early days made to
community needs in the matter of general education
through its day schools, and, later, through its
colleges, has already been enlarged upon. Matters
of more general social concern were not overlooked.
The story of the Immigrants’ Home, for example,
has also been told in previous chapters.
At a later date the needs of young men whose
occupations brought them to the city so appealed to
Rev. J. C. Symons that he, with others, was instru-
mental in haying the Y.M.C.A. established in
Melbourne, which during the next sixty odd years
did much for youth welfare. If through the
years the social needs of all classes, and especially
of the sick and poor, made an appeal to the
ministers and leading laymen of the Church, it
is safe to say that rank-and-file Methodists were
never backward in doing personal social work and
subscribing to public charities. Abundant witness
to this is given in the splendid work described


elsewhere in this volume for the rescue of neglected
children through the Methodist Homes for Children
at Cheltenham, the Mintaro Home for Wayward
Girls, the various institutions of the Central Mission,
and, later still, in the organisation of the young
men of the Church for the rescue and care of slum
babies, through the instrumentality of the South
Yarra Babies ’ Home.
The Central Mission .
But in no way did Methodism show its social
spirit more graphically than in the inauguration of
the Central Mission at Wesley Church, Melbourne.
For years the needs of the crowded and often
depraved population resident in the streets around
this city church had disturbed the minds of leaders
of the Church. The first practical suggestion to meet
the need came from the Home Mission Committee
in 1889, when proposals were made to erect a mission
hall for evangelistic services on Wesley Church
grounds, facing Little Lonsdale Street. This failing
to actualise, the Conference of 1890 appointed a
committee to consider the practicability of establish-
ing a Central Connexional Mission and the relations
of such a mission to existing Circuit arrangements.
It was not, however, till three years later that the
proposals were finalised. The carrying of the
necessary resolutions and the unanimous appoint-
ment of Rev. A. R. Edgar as first superintendent by
the Conference of 1893 aroused much enthusiasm.
Winning the consent of Mr. A. J. Derrick, a Geelong
architect, to take up the full-time work of organising
secretary of the new mission, Mr. Edgar, with some
trepidation, be it said, settled in to the work at
Wesley Church, which, by this time, through
removals and the changed character of the surround-
ing population, could hardly have sunk lower in
attendance at its services without complete
extinction. No sooner was the new superintendent


in charge than the evil of sweated labour
commanded his attention. Hard times and the
widespread unemployment following on the reaction
from the boom years had put the worker at the
mercy of the exploiter of his labour. Mr. Edgar
accompanied a deputation of the bootmakers’ and
tailors’ trades to the Premier, and was so horrified by
the facts produced that he asked the speakers to say
the same things at Wesley Church the following
Sunday afternoon. Handbills, headed “The Sweating
Evil—Hear what the Workers have to say of this
Dreadful Evil!” were widely distributed. Among
the speakers were Mr. S. Mauger and Dr. Maloney
(afterwards Labour member of the Commonwealth
House of Representatives). Of this meeting Mr.
Edgar afterwards said: “In this way a beginning
has been made, and we are not going to look back.”
Thus, seemingly by accident, was inaugurated the
famous P.S.A. platform of Wesley Church, from
which, over a period of forty years without a break,
has sounded forth a call throughout the State, and
indeed, throughout Australia, for civic and social
righteousness. Named at first “Conferences,” such
subjects as “Out of Work, and Why?” “The
Unemployed Difficulty,” “The Drink Curse and
Village Settlements,” “The Opium Evil,” and “The
Gambling Evil” were publicly ventilated. From the
spiritual force generated by such gatherings came
the establishment of village settlements on co-opera-
tive lines, like that at Kardella, in South Gippsland,
which removed hundreds of families from the sordid
conditions of congested city life to the healthier and
more hopeful atmosphere of the country.
Wesley Church became a centre for “a free labour
bureau” and a relief depot for the distribution of
produce and clothing to the poor; its schoolroom was
made available as a shelter for the unemployed. Here
they held their meetings and established their
headquarters. These developments, off the usual line


of church activities, and especially the use of Wesley
Church on Sunday afternoons for the discussion of
social evils, strange to say, roused opposition, and
even bitterness, amongst the more conservative, and
the good superintendent had to face criticism, not
only of churchmen, but of the daily press. Later, for
expressing righteous indignation at what he felt to
be a public evil, he was even called to answer for
his words at the bar of the House of Assembly. On
the other hand, hundreds of men were influenced
whom the Churches, up to that time, had failed to
win. It is certain that Wesley Church, with its
P.S.A. platform, was a potent influence in the
appointment of wages’ boards by the Government, in
the inauguration of old-age pensions, and the
winning of women’s suffrage. Indeed, Mr. Edgar
was the first chairman appointed under the Wages’
Board Act, and actually sat in this capacity on the
white-workers’, the coopers’, and jam workers’
boards. Even at the close of the Church’s first
century, this early and intimate association of the
Central Mission with economic reform is seen in the
appointment by the Government of Rev. J. H. Cain,
to a public commission of enquiry into the
causes of unemployment.
Life Changing.
In addition to social work of this more public sort,
the mission, by means of the employment of a staff
of heroic Christian women as sisters of the people,
sought out the sick, rescued lost and wayward girls,
converted wastrels, and carried on all the multi-
farious activities of a great spiritual and soul-saving
centre. Besides the ordinary services for public
worship, the holding of week-night meetings of a
devotional and educational character, the formation
of Bible classes, guilds, clubs, a cookery school, an
Endeavour society, a Christian evidence class, a


summer school, the organisation of Quiet Days with
God, and a preachers’ training class all showed how
vital a concern was felt by the mission authorities
for the highest interests of the people.
Among other important services rendered to the
community by the Central Mission have been its
various institutions. The South Yarra Home for
fallen women, established in 1879 on undenomina-
tional lines, and taken over by the mission in 1895,
the Memorial Home at Fairfield, (the buildings a gift
of Dr. Georgina Sweet) for the help of unfortunate
girls; the Men’s Hospice, begun in 1894 as a soup
kitchen and night shelter, and now the seat of the
mission’s good-will industries; the Bi-chloride of
Gold Institute, for the cure of inebriety and of drug
addicts, purchased from Dr. Wolfenden in 1900 —
have all in their respective ways ministered to social
need. Add to these the excellent work begun for
boys by Rev. G. H. and Mrs. Cole, of the Lygon
Street Primitive Methodist Church, in 1898, which
led later, in 1903, to the founding of the Tally-ho
Training Farm at Burwood East, where, with fine
buildings and under capable management, hundreds
of boys, rescued from the city streets, have been
given education under government supervision and
a training in agricultural pursuits; also the Princess
Mary Club, a beautiful building adjacent to Wesley
Church, erected and equipped at a cost of something
like £20,000 through the efforts of Rev. Dr. S. J.
Hoban as “a home away from home” for young
women at work in the city, and it will be seen
that the Central Mission has a record for
community service of which any church might
justly be proud. Following the deeply-mourned
death of Rev. A. R. Edgar in 1914, Dr. A.
McCallum, Dr. S. J. Hoban, Rev. J. H. Cain, 0.8. E.,
and Rev. C. Irving Benson, as succeeding superin-
tendents of the mission, have maintained its fine
traditions both in pulpit power and social activity.


As early as 1906 the Central Mission area of opera-
tions was extended to include important churches
at Howard Street, North Melbourne, and Brunswick
Street, Fitzroy, both of which later became indepen-
dent mission centres. Similar work was also begun
with Gipps Street, Collingwood, under Rev. T. S. B.
Woodfull, with Palmerston Street, Carlton, under
Rev. George P. Dyson, and with Cecil Street, South
Melbourne, under Rev. Charles Tregear, as their
centres. In all cases the distribution of relief to the
poor, rescue work among the fallen, carrying
sunshine into the lives of hard-pressed mothers, old-
age pensioners, the dwellers of slum homes, and such-
like activities have been energetically carried on.
Deserving of special mention are the free kinder-
garten associated with the Collingwood Mission and
the Hostel for Girls, and a boarding house (estab-
lished by the Young People’s Department, but now
part of the local mission), at North Melbourne.
Epworth Hospital.
Along other lines, too, in its first century, the
Church has striven to meet the needs of the com-
munity. Not the least beneficent of its contributions
to social welfare was the founding of the Epworth
Intermediate Hospital in 1920. And to no one is more
due the honour of bringing this about than to the
late Rev. W. J. Palamountain, its first secretary, and
afterwards its honoured chaplain. The gift by an
anonymous donor (now known to be the late Sir
Aaron Danks) of a big dwelling house and grounds
in Erin Street, Richmond, enabled the Conference to
launch a scheme which has brought within the
reach of thousands who possess but moderate means
the best that modern surgical, medical and nursing
attention can provide.
Since its opening this great hospital, under the
capable management of Matron E. Gray, has proved
an unqualified success financially and socially. The


committee appointed by the Conference to adminis-
ter its affairs has again and again been able to
enlarge its buildings and to add new wards and fresh
equipment (the last extension in 1934-35 at a cost
of nearly £100,000). As our Church enters on its
second century, this beneficent institution will be
able to accommodate two hundred patients, and will
require for its full working, besides the matron,
a staff of 125 nurses and of 51 domestic helpers, and
will embrace, in its services, all the essential
auxiliary clinics of a fully equipped modern hospital,
such as deep therapy, radium, physio-therapy, X-ray,
and pathological departments.
Social Righteousness.
Apart from its educational and its specifically
religious work, the Methodist Church has through
the years consistently stood in the forefront of the
fight for the purification of public and social life. Its
courageous fight against the evils of gambling, drink
and impurity reached a head in the first decade of
the present twentieth century, when Rev. T. S. B.
Woodfull (father of the famous cricketer) and others
of a similar spirit set out to clean up and clean out
a notorious tote, which had its home in Collingwood,
and which, in defiance of the law, persisted in its
evil work of corrupting the working population of
that congested suburb. This gambling centre, with
barricaded entrances and secret passage ways, resisted
every effort on the part of the authorities to interfere
with its operations. There is little doubt that a weak
administration of the law and cleverly-scattered
largesse were amongst the factors by which the evil
enjoyed its immunity. Leaders in other churches,
like Dr. Bevan, of the Collins Street Independent
Church, were loud in protest. The Central Mission
joined hands with Mr. Woodfull. Led by an intrepid
and talented layman, Mr. W. H. Judkins, there began
in 1906, from the P.S.A. platform, what has been


called “one of the greatest social reform fights in
the history of our State.” Revs. A. R. Edgar, S. J.
Hoban, H. Worrall, and R. Ditterieh, and Mr. S.
Manger and others stood in with Mr. Judkins in a
struggle which culminated in the calling of Mr.
Worrall to the bar of the House of Assembly on
31st July, 1906. A crowd on Flemington racecourse,
infuriated by a young bookmaker not being able to
meet his obligations, had there and then cruelly done
him to death. Mr. Worrall thereupon announced
himself to preach in his Bendigo pulpit on the
subject, “Who Killed Donald McLeod?” charging
the lax administration of the Chief Secretary’s
department and its official head with being accessory
before the crime. Brought before the House, little
was done except to pass a mild censure on the
courageous preacher. So great, during the succeed-
ing months, was the excitement roused by the
campaign, that Wesley Church was frequently not
only crowded to the doors, but the yard outside at
the time of the services was the scene of big meetings
for and against the reform movement. So bitter
was the hostility shown that Mr. Judkins had to be
protected to and from his many meetings by a body-
guard of chosen friends. The final result was the
creation of a public opinion which compelled the
Government to close down the offending tote and
to pass legislation which has since acted as a
wholesome restraint upon evil doing. A memorial
window in Wesley Church commemorates the
courageous devotion of this modern Sir Galahad in
the cause of reform, all too soon, alas, to be the
victim of a serious illness, which ended with his
early and widely-lamented decease.
To keep the Church, the public authorities and the
people generally alive to the perils facing the
community through the spread of such evils, the
Methodist Church of the State, through its Con-
ference, later created a Social Service Department,


setting aside from Circuit work, as its Director, Rev.
George A. Judkins, a brother of the late reformer.
This department, under his leadership and in asso-
ciation with the Council of Churches, has done much
to develop a healthy social conscience in the com-
munity on matters of sex purity, gambling and
temperance.
Beyond all these organised and institutional
activities for the general good, the Methodist Church,
like other Churches, has never ceased to contri-
bute a personal equation of high quality to the
community. Through the influence of its pulpits,
Sunday Schools and educational institutions it has
sent out into every calling men and women of sterling
moral character and lofty spiritual ideals who have
done much to raise the tone of individual, domestic,
social and business life throughout the whole State.


METHODIST LADIES’ COLLEGE


EPWORTH HOSPITAL.


CHAPTER XIX.
HOW FIVE CHURCHES BECAME ONE.
Uniting the Methodist Family.
A generation has grown to manhood and woman-
hood to whom such names as Wesleyan, Primitive
and Bible Christian are obscure, if not unknown.
The year 1902 will ever be memorable in Australian
Methodism as the year of Union.
When John Wesley died, he left Methodism one
and undivided, though there were indications that
difficulties lay ahead. It is not within the scope of
this history to trace the causes of the separations in
the Methodist family.* Suffice to say that each branch
sought to defend and maintain some deposit which
it regarded as vital to the life of Methodism. From
the early days in Australia, Methodists of the
different Churches cherished the hope that the
divisions of the Old Land would not be perpetuated
beneath the Southern Cross.
Primitive Methodism.
The earliest Primitive Methodists to reach Port
Phillip were Henry Woodyard and Tom Lord, who
arrived in 1848. William Belcher came early in
1849, and was quickly followed by William Rogers,
George Parnell and W. G. Lawry. The first society
class gathered at Lord’s home, 41 Greeves Street,
Fitzroy, on 14th January. Tom Lord was chosen
as leader, with William Belcher as his assistant.
These earnest souls, with some few others, hoisted
the banner of Primitive Methodism on Flagstaff Hill,
*See “A New History of Methodism,” by Townsend,
Workman & Eayrs.


where they held an open-air service on 21st January.
The service was interrupted by the hammering of tin
kettles and stones were thrown at the little band,
but they were not to be cowed by persecution. The
following Sunday saw them again on the hill. They
were ridiculed, and an attempt was made to mob
them, but there were other onlookers who, with
commendable British tolerance and respect for
freedom, interposed and restored order. Mayor Bell
heard of the disturbance and sent his police to
preserve peace. The services grew, crowds gathered,
and some who came to mock remained to pray.
These godly laymen next organised a party to
visit vessels on arrival and scout for any Primitive
Methodists among the passengers.
Land was purchased in Latrobe Street for £52,
and there the first chapel was built, costing between
£6OO and £7OO. Mr. J. M. Bryant laid the foundation
stone on 17th December, 1849. This church,
measuring 24 by 16 feet, had a schoolroom under-
neath. On the same day as the foundation stone was
laid the first Quarterly Meeting was held, at which
eight local preachers, two classes and forty members
were reported. An urgent request was sent to the
Missionary Committee in London beseeching the
appointment of a minister. Before they called, they
were answered, for the Rev. John Ride was already
on the water, and landed on 17th January, 1850.
Sixty years of age though he was, he threw himself
into the work with a will, and soon had services
established in Collingwood, Brighton, Brunswick,
Heidelberg and Geelong. He urged the completion
of the church, which was proudly opened at the end
of March.
John Ride's Ride.
Riding home from Brunswick one night, this
pioneer minister was mistaken for a bushranger.
Two men called on him to stop, and trained their


rifles at him. His horse took fright, and dashed off at
high speed. Away he flew until he came to Lygon
Street, where two other men with rifles summoned
him to stop. Again the horse sprang forward, and
only halted at the parsonage door in Swanston
Street. Next morning the preacher reported to the
superintendent of police that he had been held up
by bushrangers. “I knew all about this last night,”
replied the smiling superintendent. “There was a
mistake on the part of my informants, and also on
yours. The men whom you took for bushrangers were
constables, whom I had ordered to keep watch, as
there has been some sticking up in that locality
lately. They informed me that shortly after eight
o’clock they saw a bushranger, apparently an elderly
man, mounted on a splendid horse, and a devil of
a rider!”
The December Quarterly Meeting reported 100
members and 75 Sunday school scholars. They
requested that Geelong should be made a separate
station, with a minister in charge, and recommended
an additional minister for Melbourne. The Rev. G.
Watts came in response to this appeal, and Ride
was appointed to Geelong. But by the time Watts
arrived in November, 1851, the gold fever had
begun, and excited crowds were flocking to the
diggings. So many people had deserted Geelong
that it was deemed advisable for the two ministers
to reside in Melbourne.
The Church was not a happy family in 1853;
indeed, the Rev. Michael Clarke says that “it was
nearly ruined.”* The unsettled state of the
community and the excitement which prevailed
combined to make it a difficult period. Sufficient
care was not exercised in receiving some people into
membership and trouble resulted. Ride’s health
gave way, and “certain ex-ministers assumed the
♦Primitive Methodism in Victoria, page 8.


ruling power and exercised it arbitrarily. Suspen-
sions and expulsions were by no means uncommon
occurrences. ’* In those days of dissension and
sorrow there were faithful, peaceable men such as
Thomas Peters, Elias Crozier and William Cadwal-
lader, who kept an even mind and saved the Church
from disaster. The tall, quiet, far-seeing Michael
Clarke, who came to Melbourne at the end of this
critical year, was directed by the Missionary
Committee to call a special meeting of the officials
and endeavour to unravel the tangle. The meeting
was duly called, and, although party ran
high, Clarke’s patient guidance led to a basis of
settlement which was confirmed by the Committee.
Meanwhile Watts had reopened the work in
Geelong. Services were held under a gum tree which
grew in the market square. Mr. Watts preached in
the morning, and Mrs. Watts in the evening. This
arrangement continued for a year, until the church
was erected.
Michael Clarke.
Clarke, learning that several members were at
work on the Mt. Alexander and Ballarat diggings,
and a few more at Kilmore, wrote asking them to
form classes and report to the Quarterly Meeting.
This they cheerfully did, and requested him to visit
them. A seat in the conveyance to Castlemaine cost
£B. On arrival he was hospitably entertained in Elias
Crozier’s tent. He found that services were being
held in the open air, and Richard (“Glory”)
Smith had gathered fellowship groups in various
tents. During his fortnight’s stay he witnessed a
“digger hunt”—troopers chasing miners who were
without mining licences—a condition of things which
culminated in the riot at Eureka Stockade. Clarke
conducted services at Castlemaine and Campbell’s
Creek, administered the Lord’s Supper, attended a
tea meeting, visited his members, and returned by
♦lbid, page 8.


Cobb’s new coach at the cost of £6. Thirty-four
members were reported to the Quarterly Meeting,
and William Calvert was sent as a hired local
preacher to this promising station.
In July, 1856, Clarke visited the group at
Kilmore, and encouraged them in building a church.
On the Sunday morning he preached on the hillside
overlooking the town and in the afternoon by the
creek side.
The church at Heidelberg was opened in 1854,
and, in the year following, Gardiner’s Creek,
Collingwood, Essendon, South Brighton and Camp-
bellfield, Ballarat and Creswiek were added to the
Melbourne plan.
Numbers were growing, the Church was extending
and missioning new areas. The Rev. L. Dobbinson
and Rev. G. T. Hall were sent out to augment the
ministerial staff. Dobbinson went to Eaglehawk,
and Hall remained in Melbourne.
Melbourne was formed into a distinct Circuit —
the first in Australia —in December, 1856. Thomas
Peters became the first Circuit steward, in which
office he served for several years.
The first District Meeting was held in the Latrobe
Street Chapel on 2nd January, 1858. The authorising
letter from the British Conference included Sydney
in the Melbourne District. The Rev. John Sharpe
and Messrs. J. Bennett and J. Wooster attended as
the Sydney representatives. Michael Clarke was
the general committee’s delegate, and Joseph Berry
the district committee’s delegate. The Melbourne
Circuit delegates were Rev. John Ride and Messrs.
Tom Lord and Isaac Swan. The delegates from the
Geelong Circuit were the Rev. Geo. Watts and
Messrs. John Spalding and S. Rush. Castlemaine
sent Rev. G. T. Hall and Messrs. G. Kitching and R.
Craig. Rev. L. Dobbinson and Messrs. John Wood
and F. Maekerell formed the Bendigo delegation.
The venerable John Ride was elected chairman.


Statistics showed that Victoria had 687 members
and New South Wales 292. They decided that they
would not accept State aid to religion, whether in
the form of land or money.*
The Church Builders.
It is not possible to follow in this chapter the
engaging story of the Circuits, but the zeal of
Primitive Methodism may be illustrated by the
rapidity with which a network of churches spread
over the metropolis. Sir Charles Darling laid the
foundation stone of the Lygon Street Church on the
22nd December, 1863, which was completed in the
following year at a cost of £2020. The Latrobe
Street Church was sold, and the proceeds helped in
the erection of the Lygon Street building which
became the headquarters of the denomination. The
Rev. Joseph Langham began, and the Rev. Michael
Clarke completed the building of it. The Rev. G.
Grey built the Sunday School, and was also respon-
sible for erecting the churches at Yere Street, Col-
lingwood, and Williamstown. The Rev. William Hunt
inspired the building of churches in North Carlton
and South Melbourne. Samuel Braeewell built the
West Melbourne and enlarged the South Melbourne
Church. The East Brighton and South Yarra
churches were built during the pastorate of
Rev. H. Richardson. The Rev. W. H. Walton
was a wholesale church builder—Campbellfield,
Miekleham, Essendon, Pootseray and Spottiswoode
reveal his constructive zeal. The Northeote
Church was planned during the Rev. Frederick
Sinden’s ministry, and he also enlarged the
Brunswick Chapel. Rev. J. T. Kearns—intense
Protestant, powerful preacher, acute thinker-
promoted the raising of churches at Burwood, East
Burwood and East Doncaster. The deeply spiritual
Rev. W. J. Bray inspired church building at
*This decision was reversed at the Fifth District Meeting in 1862.


Coburg and East Brunswick, and the Rev. C.
Anthony that at Elsternwick, while Rev. Brian
Wibberley erected the church in Male Street,
Brighton. The rapidity with which churches were
built and the raising of so much money were the
outward signs of active spiritual life and evangelistic
vitality.
No sooner was Primitive Methodism established
in the colony than Sunday schools were formed for
the spiritual education of the young. The work
continued with varying success until the year 1885,
when an anointed youth leader appeared in the
person of Mr. George Sweet, P.G.S. With vision and
organising ability, he travelled far and wide through
the State, visiting the schools. He introduced new
methods of work, chief among which was a system
of lessons. George Sweet was a leader of men who
served the Church as local preacher and Sunday
School superintendent over a long period of years.
He also promoted the Sunday School Union in 1886.
At his own expense, he visited and improved the
Sunday School methods in all the Australian States
and New Zealand.
A connexional book depot was built in Lygon
Street, Carlton, in 1874, at a cost of £I2OO, the site
being provided by the Lygon Street Church Trust.
Most of the church committees met in the bookroom,
and much of the business of the denomination was
transacted there.
A quarterly periodical, “The Primitive Methodist
Miscellany,” which contained the whole of the station
plans, appeared in 1864, the price being sixpence per
copy. The “Miscellany” continued until 1873, when
it was superseded by “The Victorian Primitive
Methodist,” and this journal continued until the
year of Union. In addition to this, a fortnightly
penny paper began publication in May, 1885, which
pursued a career of usefulness for seven years under
the title of the “Sword and Shield.”


Old King Cole .
One of the original characters of Primitive
Methodism was the Rev. Henry Cole, affectionately
known as Old King Cole. In 1854 he was sent, with
his young wife, as a missionary to South Australia.
While at Mount Gambier he rode over to Hamilton,
in Victoria, and held two camp meetings there, which
made a stir in the district and attracted hundreds
of people. His diary records that at Byaduk all
the shops and the mill were closed for two and a
half hours during the time of service. A little
later he was stationed at Hamilton, and spent
much of his time in the saddle as an intrepid and
enterprising missionary. Clad in his oilskin coat
and sou'wester, with a bag strapped to the saddle,
no weather could stop him. In his bag were rugs and
a small case of homoeopathic medicines, and many
a mother said that she owed the life of her child to
the doctoring and prescriptions of this man of God.
In settlers rough huts, far and wide, he conducted
worship, praying for each child by name, or gathered
them all to some central home for worship. In
1869, when the Wimmera was thrown open for
selection, he rode north, visiting every tiny hamlet
within sight, where with a homely jest, a cheery
word, and a fervent prayer, he won the settlers'
hearts and spoke a good word for his Master.
With Hamilton as his centre he reached down
through Blackfellows' Creek and Condah to Port
Fairy on the coast, and northwards, through
Mooralla and Woolpooer, away into the Wimmera,
where his name is still a memory to the very old
and a legend handed dow r n to the younger genera-
tions.
A Thirty-Shilling Horse .
The Rev. John Thomas Pithouse, a little man with
a big voice, was one of the Wimmera pioneers, and
rode there from Melbourne on a thirty-shilling horse.


On the upward journey, in time of drought, he had
to provide food for the horse by climbing into trees
for “buloke.” He missioned Stawell, Murtoa and
the Horsham district. He had a healthy sense
of humour which kept him sweet in all sorts of
trying circumstances. At one shack where he lodged
for the night, he woke in the morning to find the
good woman of the house holding an umbrella over
him to keep off the rain which was pouring through
the roof.
Methodist Union had a staunch advocate in the
Rev. Thomas Copeland. He was one of the first to
see the value of a united Methodism, and he paved
the way and blazed the trail for it among his people,
bravely contending against strenuous opposition
which would have daunted a less ardent spirit. A
man with an insatiable thirst for knowledge, quiet,
genial and brotherly, he lived to see his dream come
true.
William Hunt was a mathematician—always very
precise and neat. He was not at first favourably
disposed towards the suggested Methodist Union.
In his speeches defending the continuance of the
old order, he frequently quoted the verse:
Woodman, spare the tree,
Touch not a single bough;
In youth it sheltered me,
And ITI protect it now.
Yet, when the vote went in favour of Union, he
threw the full weight of his influence into it, and
laboured for its success. One of the difficulties in
the way of Union was the Supernumerary Fund.
Mr. Hunt went as special representative to the
British Conference to argue Victoria’s case. His
reasonings convinced the Home Conference, and so
saved his Victorian brethren from severe loss. He
was warmly commended for the success of this
difficult mission.


The Rev. Samuel Bracewell came to the colony
with the fire of Cornish revival about him. He had
wonderful seasons of power in many Circuits. A
man of God, he was mighty in prayer. It was his
delight to lead open-air processions, singing with
great enthusiasm, “Turn to the Lord and seek
salvation.’ ’ In the Dunolly District he was collecting
for a new church, and was staggered with surprise
when a man gave him £5, whereupon he said, “Lord,
grant that he may find a good nugget.” This man
very soon afterwards discovered one of the largest
nuggets ever found in the Tarnagulla District.
The Rev. Alfred Madsen was a lawyer by training
and had a clear, analytical mind. He stood high in
public esteem for his outstanding pulpit and platform
ability. A leader in the Conference, a militant
Protestant, he served the Church with distinction in
important centres.
The Rev. Henry Heathershaw, twice President of
the Primitive Methodist Assembly, was one of the
most practical men who came into the United Church.
The quiet, courteous Rev. Henry Robinson was
another of the many worthy ministers who graduated
from Primitive Methodism. After forty-four years
of service, he began in 1911 what he called his
“second innings.” He appointed himself Chaplain
to the Austin Hospital for Incurables and at the
Mont Park Mental Hospital. When Mont Park
became a Military Sanatorium during the war, this
old minister was gazetted chaplain, and became a
guide, philosopher and friend to the young Anzacs.
He was probably the oldest man in the British Army
holding the King’s Commission.
The Rev. George Cole began life as a farmer, and
to the end of his days could plough a furrow or drive
a team of bullocks with any man. He gave up his
farm, and with little educational advantage, went
out on probation. By sheer force of character and
patient industry, he wrought much good for his


Church and the people. He was buoyant, humorous
and adaptable. An effective evangelist, he was
appointed to the Lygon Street Church in 1897, when
the Annual Assembly decided to change its policy and
work it as a mission church. He was particularly
successful in his work with boys, and this led to
his appointment as the first superintendent of the
Central Mission Boys’ Training Farm at Tally Ho.
The last Annual Primitive Methodist Assembly
met at South Yarra on 30th January, 1902, when
the Rev. Thomas Copeland was elected President,
and the Rev. William Hunt Secretary. They brought
into the United Church 37 ministers, 10 home
missionaries, 275 local preachers, 100 class leaders,
4180 members, 116 Sunday schools, 992 Sunday
school teachers, 9109 Sunday school scholars, and
125 chapels. Their property was valued at £84,907,
carrying a debt of £25,156.
Since Methodist Union, the following former
Primitive Methodists have been Presidents of the
Conference William Hunt, Alfred Madsen, J. H.
Cain and H. W. Frederick.
The Bible Christian Church.
Reviewing the record of his Church in this State,
the Rev. Francis Mason said: ‘ ‘ Standing in compari-
son with the leading Churches of Victoria, she can
claim to have done as much in proportion, with less
material, than they have. She has not had the
same commanding social influence which some of
them have been able to exert, neither have her
members possessed the large amount of wealth with
which others could endow the enterprises of the
Church. Furthermore, she has not had the
great numerical strength which could make it
possible for her to cover the colony with a
network of mission stations, and thus keep within
her own fold adherents and members who were
compelled, by the exigencies of colonial life, to move


away from the few Circuits of the denomination.
The result of this is that some thousands of her
people have been involuntarily contributed to the
other Protestant Churches, but principally to her
elder Methodist sisters.”
The Bible Christian Church came to Victoria as an
extension of the mission already operating in South
Australia. The Rev. William Hocken began his
ministry with the English Conference in 1837, and
sixteen years later was appointed to South Australia.
Shortly after his arrival he was sent to pioneer the
cause in the adjoining State of Victoria. He opened
services at Gore Street, Fitzroy, North Melbourne
and Carlton. He also inaugurated a cause at Mount
Moriac, where the first chapel was erected in 1856.
Another church was built at Barrabool Hills, and
its trust deed became the “Model Deed” of the
denomination in the colony. The original trustees
were S. Pitchers, B. A. Allin, W. Naylor, J. Morris,
G. Batty and F. Treadwell.
The energies of the ministers, apart from
Melbourne, were principally devoted to following up
their people as they settled about the various gold-
fields. Thus, during this early period, Bendigo,
Ballarat, Castlemaine, Clunes, Daylesford, Maldon
and Wood’s Point Circuits were established.
During the second decade an appeal was made
from Elmore (then Runnymede) residents for church
ministration. This proved to be a most advantageous
step for the Bible Christian Church, for not only
did it lead to the establishment of one of the
strongest Circuits in the denomination, but led to
the occupying of further fields such as Numurkah
and Eehuca.
Victoria was formed into a separate district in
1860, and the Rev. James Rowe was transferred from
South Australia as the superintendent, with head-
quarters at Gore Street, Fitzroy. The Rev. Thomas
E. Keen and the Rev. W. Furseman were also sent


from South Australia. Two ministers from the
English Conference, William Wedlake and William
Alfred, both died after a few years’ service, and
were buried at Bendigo.
There were eleven Circuits in 1872, with sixteen
ministers, 68 local preachers, 863 members, 49
churches, 555 teachers and 3407 scholars. The
laymen whose names appear at the District Meeting
were John Roberts, Ambrose Wilcox, Walter Everett,
Thomas Arthur, John Hill, John Hooper, William
Watts, Thomas Aitken, Thomas Moreom, Phillip
Mitchell and Henry Parsons.
The developments at Elmore and Rochester neces-
sitated the appointment of the Rev. John Orchard,
a man of great practical ability and true pioneering
spirit. It is not the purpose of this chapter to detail
the work in Circuits, but enough has been written
to indicate the vigour and missionary enterprise
which the Bible Christians invested in the establish-
ment of their Church.
The first Annual Conference of the Bible Christian
Connexion was held at Gore Street, Fitzroy, in
February, 1887, the Rev. Joseph Teague being
elected President. The most important business
transacted by the Conference was the formation of
the following Districts Melbourne, Western,
Ballarat, Bendigo, Wimmera and Numurkah.
The Rev. W. E. Secomb, who rendered yeoman
service as Circuit minister and later as prison
chaplain, was a scholar at the Gore Street, Fitzroy,
Sunday School. Madame Evelyn Scotney, who won
international fame as a singer, came from the same
Sunday school. Sir Thomas Dunhill, now surgeon
to the King, was a scholar in the Bible Christian
Sunday School at Daylesford. Mr. J. A. Arthur,
M.A., LL.M., Minister for Home Affairs in the Fisher
Government, whose remarkable career was cut short
at the age of 39, belonged to the Skipton Street
Church, Ballarat.


The final returns, reported in 1902, were as
follows: —Ministers 36, local preachers 123, churches
107, members 2684, teachers 754, scholars 6240. The
last President of the Conference was the Rev. G.
Netherway, and the Secretary the Rev. D. Daley.*
Writing on the threshold of Union, the Rev. F.
Lockwood well said of the Bible Christian Church
that, “As a separate section they have sustained an
honourable warfare in the cause of Jesus Christ
and for their own existence, which they felt to
regard with the same affection as other Methodists
regarded theirs. At times the pressure of circum-
stances has been trying both to members and
ministers, but loyalty to the Church which
Providence had placed them in made them heroic,
strenuous and faithful. They kept a firm hand to
the plough, a stout heart for the work, and an open
mind to every new ray of light.”
United Methodist Free Church.
In the year 1848 Mr. J. A. Marsden, of Geelong,
and Henry Frencham, of Melbourne, Port Phillip,
wrote to the Connexional Committee in London
asking for the immediate appointment of a
missionary to Victoria. The correspondence and
the committee’s recommendation were considered
by the Annual Assembly of 1849, and the station
list for that year included “Australia, one to be
sent,” and the numerical returns showed “25
members in society.” At the autumn meeting
of the Connexional Committee, held at Bury
in 1850, the name of the Rev. Joseph
Townend was suggested as a likely person
for Australia. The committee requested him
♦This sketch owes much to the patient researches of the Rev.
D. Daley. The early official records of the Bible Christian
Church were kept in the Gore Street Parsonage until 1902.
When the property was sold, the safe in which they were
preserved disappeared, and was never recovered.


to retire for a few minutes. He says in his auto-
biography : ‘‘ I went into a corner of the schoolroom
and poured out my soul in prayer, that we might
all be directed, for my impression was the brethren
were thinking and talking about my being sent to
Australia. ’ ’
A unanimous request was presented to Mr.
Townend to go out to Australia and establish a
mission there. His wife at first did not like the
idea and refused to go, but after prayer, and upon
the advice of her old mother, she said, “Tell them,
Joseph, we will go cheerfully.” They sailed for
Australia on 12th May, 1851, in the “Asia,” and
landed on the 18th October. They were joyously
welcomed by Messrs. Marsden, Stevens, Evans,
Maynard, J. Woods, H. Frencham, G. R. Cox and
others. The Society had been holding preaching
services in a room in Collingwood, and there Mr.
Townend preached on his first Sunday morning in
Melbourne to about 40 people. So the Australian
Mission commenced by singing:
“What shall we offer our good Lord?
Poor nothings for His boundless grace.”
The text for the occasion was 1 Samuel 10: 24.
Subsequently the Temperance Hall, in Russell Street,
was rented at the rate of £2O per annum for Sabbath
services and Sunday schools.
The first church was erected in Albert Street,
Fitzroy, costing £2675.
Modest progress only was made during the first
ten years. The Church resources were deemed
insufficient to hold a watch-night service to
commemorate the advent of 1857. Mr. Townend
therefore joined the service of the Wesleyan Chapel,
Collins Street, which he described as “a good chapel,
beautifully lighted with candles, and some good
addresses were given.”


The membership returns for December, 1862, were :
Ballarat 22, Geelong 34, Heatheote 25, Melbourne
First 80, Melbourne Second 51, Melbourne Third 66.
The Rev. Thomas Adam Bayley, an ex-President
of the British Annual Assembly, arrived in the ship
“Lightning” on 29th June, 1862. Bayley was set
upon vigorous extensions, and threw his heart into
extending the Gospel to “regions more distant, and
the spots where there was no open vision, and the
people were perishing for the lack of knowledge.”
The British Assembly saw the need and the possibili-
ties for expansion in the new colonies, and increased
the annual grant to £6OO. This was generously
supplemented by William Hicks, of Liskeard, Corn-
wall, who subscribed hundreds of pounds to the work
in Australia. During the first ten years of Mr.
Bayley’s regime, stations were opened at Amphi-
theatre, Healesville, Heatheote, Lilydale, Box Hill,
Richmond, Murchison, Sandhurst, Stawell, Toolamba
and Williamstown. The membership had grown
considerably, and property acquisitions increased in
proportion. When Bayley came on the scene in
1862, there were seventeen places of worship and
345 members; when he became a supernumerary, in
1881, the number of chapels had grown to 59, and
the membership to 1322. He was a man of scholarly
habits and a cultured evangelical preacher.
The Rev. R. Miller was very successful in building
United Methodist Free Churches. Ably assisted by
his noble wife, he was instrumental in erecting
churches in Tasmania and Queensland, and at
Kedron Brook, Chinamen’s Creek, Ballarat, and
Geelong.
John Roberts, who came to Victoria in 1857, was
an outstanding layman. He purposely moved
from Emerald Hill to join the enfeebled cause at
Richmond, which had only five members. He took
charge of the Sunday School and was active in
every phase of Church life. Attendances increased,


PRINCESS MARY CLUB.


Mr. GEORGE SWEET, F.G.S.
Rev. CLEMENT LINLEY.
Rev. JOSEPH TOWNEND.
Rev. JOSEPH TEAGUE.


souls were saved, and the work prospered. A new
stone church was built, which became a thriving
centre of evangelistic ministry, John Roberts did a
like work in Geelong and Ballarat, and served the
Church in almost all the connexional offices. He was
Connexional Secretary for four years, Missionary
Secretary for twelve years, Chapel Fund Secretary
and Treasurer and a member of the District and
Connexional Committees for a period covering 31
years.
Until 1892 the three States of Victoria, New South
Wales and Queensland were worked as one assembly,
but from that year they became separate entities.
The final returns, reported in 1902, were as
follows: —Ministers 17, churches 48, other preaching
places 25, local preachers 60, church members 1619,
Sunday schools 49, Sunday school teachers 346,
Sunday school scholars 3082, class leaders 64. The
last President was Rev. Henry Wallace, and the
Secretary, Rev. William H. Chapman.
* * * *
The Wesleyan Church returns at the time of Union
were:—Ministers 178, churches 724, other preaching
places 379, local preachers 1047, church members
22,151, Sunday schools 705, Sunday school teachers
6409, Sunday school scholars 61,137, home mission-
aries 68, class leaders 725.
The Methodist New Connexion.
As early as 1888 two of the Methodist Churches
united. The Rev. James Maughan, who was
appointed to inaugurate work for the Methodist
New Connexion in Adelaide, came to Melbourne on
the Ist September, 1862, and during his short stay
visited Ballarat and Gordon. Not until 1865,
however, was a minister appointed, when the Rev.
Clement Linley was sent out by the British Confer-
ence. He ministered in Victoria until the year 1871,
when he was removed to Adelaide to fill the vacancy


caused by the death of the Rev. James Maughan.
The Rev. Herbert Fenton, who had arrived in South
Australia in 1869 as Maughan’s assistant, was
transferred to Melbourne to succeed Linley. The
task was too great for one man, and his ministry
was attended by great difficulties. The Rew Thomas
Masterman, who had been in charge of the Irish
Mission, was appointed to the control of the
Melbourne work in 1864. The Mission, however,
continued to be a severe drain on the funds of the
British Conference, and the feeble condition of the
churches in the colony awakened much concern.
The Batley Conference of 1882 determined to
send out the Rev. Dr. Ward as a deputation of
enquiry. His report led to the selection and
appointment of two ministers to succeed those
returning in due course to England. The Rev. Enoch
Gratton was appointed to Adelaide, and the Rev.
William Shaw to Melbourne. Mr. Gratton was a
minister of 21 years’ standing, while Mr. Shaw had
travelled only five years.
The British Conference hoped that under these
new conditions the Adelaide and Melbourne missions
would become self-supporting, but these hopes were
not realised, and it soon became apparent that the
work of each mission could be done quite as well, if
not better, if they were united with one of the
Methodist Conferences already established in
Australia. The English Conference of 1887, having
regard to the general interest of the Christian cause
rather than mere denominational credit, agreed with
earnest goodwill to the proposals that the Church
at Adelaide should unite with the Bible Christian,
and the Church at Melbourne with the Wesleyan
Methodist Connexion of Victoria. The Wesleyan
Conference of 1888 welcomed the Rev. William Shaw
into the brotherhood of the ministry and appointed
him to continue in the Richmond Circuit with the
Rev, John Watsford as the superintendent. The


church at North Richmond, the only one of the
Methodist New Connexion in Victoria, decided to
unite with the Wesleyan Methodist Church. Mr.
Shaw was a great spiritual acquisition to the
Wesleyan Church, and, after Union, to the
greater Methodism. For 21 years he served as
Chairman of Districts, including Launceston and
Hobart, in Tasmania. He removed to South Australia
in 1905, where he has fulfilled an honoured ministry,
and was elected President of the Conference in 1918.
At the request of the General Conference, he wrote
a manual of Methodist theology, in recognition of
which he received the honorary degree of Doctor of
Divinity from the Toronto University.
Forging the Bond.
The Union of the Methodist Churches was forged
in the fires of searching criticism and strenuous
debate. The years have proved it to be a sound
piece of work because it was so forged. Like other
great movements, it began with “the voice of one
crying in the wilderness.” The Rev. George Daniel
moved a resolution at the Wesleyan Conference
which even failed to find a seconder. The Bible
Christians in South Australia first adopted a resolu-
tion in favour of Union. Gradually the idea began
to be discussed and slowly gained support, until in
the year 1876 the Wesleyan Conference resolved:
“That this Conference, believing that the prayer of
the Great Head of the Church that His Church may
be one necessarily involves the duty of Christians to
maintain as far as possible a visible unity; and
remembering that the various branches of the
Methodist Church are one in doctrinal views and in
all essentials, and considering the unnecessary
expenditure of strength and money by the present
divisions, would express its conviction that the estab-
lishment of a United Methodist Church for Australia
is highly desirable.”


Having expressed this pious sentiment about
Union, the Conference rested from its labours for
five years. In 1881 the Rev. George Daniel was
President, and the Conference recommended the
General Conference “to take such steps as in its
wdsdom it may think proper to bring about such a
union. ” Moreover, the Conference directed the
Home Mission Committee to act with committees
from the other Churches to “reduce the waste of
time and power by the existence of several Methodist
churches in sparsely populated localities in this
colony. ’ ’ The General Conference, held in Adelaide
the same year, advanced the cause a step further by
a declaration: ‘ ‘ That, in the interests of Christian
charity and Union and in the hope of economising
the energies of the various Methodist Churches, this
Conference declares its readiness to consider any
well-devised scheme that may come before it for
effecting a Union of those Churches. ”
Definite progress w r as made by the Victorian Con-
ference of 1884, which appointed representatives to
confer with delegates of other Churches to devise a
Basis of Union. This basis was sent on to the 1885
General Conference, held in Christchurch, New
Zealand, and after a lively debate the Conference
declared its approval of Union, and advised the
Annual Conferences to take steps in conjunction
with other Methodist Churches.
Progress and Setback-
For a time the movement flagged again. The
Victorian Conference of 1886 did not even mention
it, but vigorous action was taken in the following
year, when the question was sent down to the Quar-
terly Meetings. The District Meetings were directed
to tabulate the replies, and to consider the whole
matter and report to Conference. The result was
very discouraging, and the next Conference carried
a resolution: “That in the opinion of this Confer-
ence, the desire for Union is not sufficiently strong in


any of the Methodist Churches to justify any steps
being taken at present for effecting it. That we
regret the absence of enthusiasm on the subject, and
assure our brethren of the other Methodist Churches
of our respect and affection, and also our desire for
their success in carrying on the work of God. ’ ’ Those
were dark days for Union. The Primitive Methodist,
United Methodist, and Bible Christian Churches
began to discuss the possibility of Union among
themselves.
In 1892 the Wesleyan leaders of the movement
took heart again, and carried a series of reso-
lutions approving of Union, and appointing repre-
sentatives to another joint committee. This com-
mittee did its work so thoroughly that the basis
it recommended was substantially that which was
finally adopted. It now became the burning question
in Church politics. Yet there was still another set-
back. In 1893 the land boom burst, and Victoria
lay under a dark cloud of business depres-
sion and financial loss. All parties agreed that under
this depression it was impossible to face the strain
of adjustments for Union, and action was delayed
until better days returned. The committee was, how-
ever, appointed to work with the other Churches in
every possible way. The year 1894 saw another
change of front. The idea was adopted of relaxing
all pressure from the General Conference and asking
that body simply to define the basis on which Con-
ferences might unite. The formation of Federal
Councils was recommended and their duties broadly
defined. The basis submitted was that prepared by
the Joint Committee in 1892.
An Historic Debate .
At the General Conference of 1894, which met in
Adelaide under the Presidency of Dr. William
Morley, the basis of Union was adopted by a large


majority. Dr. W. H. Fitchett led the debate in
favour of Union, a debate which was truly historic.
The Victorian Conference of 1895 appointed its
Federal Council, invited the sister Churches to join
therewith, and requested this Joint Council to pre-
pare all available information and, if possible, a
scheme showing how organic Union could be accom-
plished. The Rev. W. H. Fitchett, President of the
Conference for 1895, organised a great public demon-
tration in favour of Union. Wesley Church was
crowded to the doors. Sir John Madden was in the
chair, and Sir Samuel Way made a very telling
speech. The next Annual Conference approved the
plan sent forward by the Federal Council, and
decided to take a vote of the members of the Church
of 21 years of age and over, as well as a vote in the
Church Courts. The vote showed a large majority
in favour of Union.
With the issues clearly defined the Conference of
1897 had to face the question of organic Union. The
situation was tense. The galleries of Wesley Church
were crowded with spectators. Members stood and
voted by raising the hand. The President (Rev.
William Williams) and the Secretary (Rev. Thomas
Grove) counted the votes in favour, and reported
158. When the contrary was put it was seen that a
considerable number were opposed. The hands were
gravely counted, and reported as 98. There was not
the required two-thirds majority, and the motion
was declared lost. The disappointment was great,
and deepened into dismay. The following day a
small committee consisting of both parties met to
allay the excitement which had been roused. Mr.
F. J. Cato, as convener of the committee, moved a
series of resolutions expressing the hope that Union
might yet be achieved, and inviting the other
Churches to continue to co-operate with that end in
view. These resolutions were carried almost
unanimouslv.
•/


Close of the Struggle.
The Conference of 1898 saw the close of the
struggle. There was not much discussion. When
the matter was put to the vote, the non-Unionists
announced that, wTdle they could not conscientiously
support Union as presented to them, they would
retire beyond the bar of the Conference. The reso-
lution was carried by 176 votes. Assurances were
immediately given that the non-Unionists would do
all in their power to help forward in every way the
Union now determined. The date for Union was
fixed for 1902, and from that day all controversy
ceased.
Before the Conference of 1898 closed, a special
Conference was held, composed of representatives of
all the Uniting Churches. This assembly had no
legal powers, but it sealed the bond of fellowship.
The Government of the day made the Methodist
Union Bill a Government measure, and Sir Alexan-
der Peacock, leader of the Opposition, supported it
so that it was read a third time without amendment,
and thus became law.
“Those Whom God Hath Joined Together.”
The historic Conference of 1902 opened in Wesley
Church on 25th February. The Wesleyan section
being seated, the representatives of the United Free
Methodist, Bible Christian and Primitive Methodist
Churches entered. They all rose and sang heartily,
“Onward, Christian Soldiers.” The retiring Wes-
leyan President, Rev. A. R. Edgar, happily applied
the words of the marriage service. The Union was
“for better or for worse,” and when he pronounced
the sentence, “Those whom God hath joined together
let no man put asunder,” the Conference broke out
in great applause. The Rev. Thomas Copeland spoke
on behalf of the Primitive Methodist Church, the


Rev. Henry Wallace represented the United Metho-
dist, and the Rev. G. Netherway the Bible Christian
Church.
Dr. W. H. Fitchett was elected the first President
of the newly-united Church. “For the last genera-
tion/? he said, “Methodism has been like an exploded
planet, flying in fragments through the ecclesiastical
sky, but God’s hand has united the fragments, and
set the star in the sky again. God’s hand is turning
over a new page in our history. What shall He
write there? Surely a record of achievement beyond
that of our fathers.”


CHAPTER XX.
SOME MEN AND WOMEN OF THE
CENTURY.
“All service is the same with God —
. . . there is no last nor first.’ ’
—Browning.
Victorian Methodism has been so rich in Christian
manhood and gracious womanhood that it is impos-
sible to attempt a review of them with any preten-
sions to completeness. It would be an inviting task
to write a book of Victorian Methodist Saints, or a
series of biographical studies of those who have
helped in the making of the Church. The purpose
of this chapter is simply to beckon a representative
or an interesting figure here and there out of the
varied cavalcade. Some of them are well-known,
they 4 ‘ took the eye and had the price ’ 9 ; others were
but little known beyond the bounds of the districts
wherein they lived and loved and laboured. The
Church has not grown to be what it is by the leader-
ship of commanding personalities alone, but by the
faithful and devoted service of the rank and file.
John Eggleston ( b . 1813, d. 1879).
The Rev. John Eggleston had an apostolic share
in the development of Australian Methodism. He
came out in 1838 at the call of the Rev. John
Waterhouse, who had been appointed General Super-
intendent of Australasian Missions. The early
years of his Australian ministry were devoted to
Tasmania and South Australia, and his middle life
was spent in Victoria and New South Wales. In
1857 he became General Secretary of Foreign Mis-
sions, and for eight years he organised and planned
the missionary work of the Church with insight and
313


foresight. He was a leader of men, and every man
in the field felt that John Eggleston was his personal
friend. The year 1860 saw him presiding over the
Australasian Conference. He played a leading part
in fashioning the constitution of the Church, whereby
Annual Conferences were established in the States,
and a Triennial General Conference. Dr. Carruthers
describes him as being of the Johannine school in
pulpit manner and personal address.* On one occa-
sion Eggleston was addressing the Conference, when
a ministerial member interrupted him, exclaiming:
“Mr. President, I rise to a point of order.’ ’ Where-
upon, Eggleston immediately sat down, remarking,
“Very well, Mr. President, I decline to be
disorderly. ’ ’
His intensely spiritual sermons were saturated
with Scripture. A good example of his pulpit power
is printed in “The Shipwrecked Minister,” by J. C.
Symons. The sermon was preached in Wesley
Church when the news reached Melbourne of the
death of the Rev. D. J. Draper in the wreck of the
“London.” He was superintendent of Wesley
Church and many influential Circuits. A man whose
character matched his ability, he faithfully served
the Kingdom of God in his generation.
His son, John Waterhouse Eggleston, a lawyer by
profession, was a gifted musician, whose beautiful
anthem, “Sweet is the Sunlight After Rain,” is
sung by choirs the world over.
The Rer. Samuel Knight {b. 1835, d. 1919.)
A picturesque personality was Samuel Knight, the
first minister ordained in Victoria. In one week he
was received as a local preacher, nominated as a
candidate for the ministry, and sent to supply a
vacancy in the Portland Circuit. He was a young
man, innocent of theological training. His pulpit
♦Memories of an Australian Ministry, by J. E. Carruthers,
page 46.


stock-in-trade, he said, consisted of two sermons.
He had not learned the alphabet of the preacher's
art. But he had a living spiritual experience; he
knew himself to be a converted man, and his theory
of preaching was condensed into Wesley's admoni-
tion: “You have nothing to do but to save souls."
He had abounding energy and a very fertile mind.
In Portland he struck a vein of popularity, and the
church was crowded morning and evening. Although
he had great congregations, he could not win souls,
and this distressed him very much. So great was
his distress that he began to doubt his call, and
thought very seriously of giving up and returning
to Melbourne. One Monday morning he was praying
aloud in his room, pouring out his troubles to God,
and telling Him that he could not remain in the
ministry unless He gave him fruit for his labours.
On the roof of the house was a plumber
doing some repairing work when he heard Knight
praying in such distress. The plumber was a
member of Knight's congregation, but although
he was an admirer, his conscience had never been
quickened. When he heard that agony of soul he
felt he must do something to prevent Mr. Knight
from giving up. That prepared his heart, and the
next Sunday he was converted. His conversion was
the beginning of a great revival in Portland.
Pour years later he went to Daylesford, then the
scene of a gold miners' rush. At his farewell meet-
ing the inspector of police testified that, as the result
of Mr. Knight's work, “many public houses have
been shut, the gaol is not needed, and life in Dayles-
ford is changed beyond the power of words to
express.''
Knight's ministry is really the story of a chain
of revivals and a succession of kindled churches.
After one of his services at Brunswick, the congre-
gation began to sing the Doxology for each seeker
who went forward. “We cannot do that for every


convert, ’ ’ said Knight, ‘‘ but we will sing the
Doxology for every dozen. ” There were fifty con-
verts at eleven o’clock. “We did not close at nine
o’clock on those days,” he used to say, “and I have
been up till six o’clock next morning with difficult
cases. ’ ’
Knight had fine personal gifts, a fearless courage,
an ardent temperament, natural grace of speech, a
spiritual instinct sure and swift for all the greater
aspects of religion, a temper of the finest generosity,
a memory saturated with the hymns and the heroic
traditions of his own Church.
Scant as were his early opportunities for education,
he gave generously to Queen’s College and raised
funds for it. Altogether he collected £30,000 for
the work of the Church, but his greatest contribu-
tion was the gift of his own sanctified personality.
James Bickford, ( b . 1816, d, 1895.)
Before he began his Victorian ministry at
Brighton in 1854, James Bickford had served as a
missionary for eleven years in the West Indies and
four years in British Guiana. He was at Bendigo
and Ballarat during the digging days, and consoli-
dated the Methodist Church in both places. At
Ballarat he built a new church in Lydiard Street to
accommodate 1200 people. He was wise and useful
rather than dashing and brilliant. “Ruling was as
natural to him as obeying is to others,” wrote Martin
Dyson. “He ruled no better than other elders, but
he excelled many of them in his voracity for work,
and was not inferior to any of them in his great
conscientiousness and fidelity to his Divine Master.”
James Bickford was one of the very few ministers
to preside over three Conferences. In 1868 he was
President of the Australasian Conference, and in
1875 and again in 1883 he was elected President of
the South Australian Conference. His “Christian
Work in Australia” and “Autobiography” are


artless records of men and events of his time, and of
real historical value. The accounts which he gives
of his pioneer journeys to Echuca and into Gipps-
land reveal a mind that was ever alert for the
extension of Methodism.
“Major” Flockart. {b. 1820, d. 1898).
The first Scot to become President of the Victorian
Conference was the Rev. Robert Colquhoun Flockart,
in 1885. Born in Glasgow, like many others of his
race he sought his fortune in London, where he and
the Rev. J. C. Symons were together received as
local preachers in the Lambeth Circuit. At the
close of 1845 Mr. Flockart was engaged by the
British Government to act as chaplain on board of
one of Her Majesty’s convict ships bound for Aus-
tralia. On his arrival, the Rev. Nathaniel Turner
and others wished him to accept the charge of a
Circuit. He returned, however, to England, and
completed two other voyages of a similar nature.
On the last one, in 1849, he was accompanied by
Mrs. Flockart, and in that year he began his ministry
in South Australia, where he proved himself a sturdy
pathfinder and successful soul-winner. He came to
Victoria in 1868, where, as chairman of country
districts, he did the work of a bishop with all dili-
gence. No journey was too long and no task too
arduous that he might take the precious Gospel to
the last man or woman geographically in the country,
or socially in the city.
A characteristic passage from his rough journal
conveys an impression of the man: ‘ ‘ Last Sunday
was a good day. Preached at Warrenheip church
anniversary; built Solomon’s Temple, costing 8000
millions of pounds, and left no debt! In the after-
noon preached again on Mount Zion, and struck
infidelity on the cheekbone, and sent the toothless
thing spinning! In the evening, at the Springs
church anniversary, preached from Esther, and


finished up the long and heavy day by hanging old
Hainan! (good day’s work for a young man of 68). M
Rev. William P. Wells ( b . 1826, d. 1896).
When gold was discovered in Victoria, and the
increased population called for more ministers,
among those who came from England was the Rev.
William Poole Wells. He had already served an
apprenticeship to mission work in Newfoundland.
In his first appointment at Castlemaine, then a hive
of gold-seekers, he quickly showed his powers as an
administrator, a preacher who sought a verdict and
an affectionate pastor. If a Methodist is one who
does everything by method, then he was a Methodist
indeed. He had that rare intellectual combination
—a comprehensive outlook and a carefulness for
detail. As the years went on he became a Father-
in-God to the Church. It was an education to watch
him rescue a debate from cloudy disputation and
disentangle the real points at issue. He had no
higher ambition than to be an all-round, effective
minister. He graced the office of President both in
Victoria and South Australia, and for three years
presided over Prince Alfred College. Together with
J. C. Symons he codified the laws of the Church.
All his days he lived the life of a student. His
genial goodness made Christianity attractive.
William Laurence Sinks ( b . 1819, d . 1890).
Had the Rev. W. L. Binks remained in the Roman
Catholic Church wherein he was born, he might
have been a cardinal or at least an archbishop.
His youthful adoption of Methodism was born of
heroic conviction. He entered the ministry in
1841 and went out to the West Indies, where
he laboured for nearly ten years. Smitten
with fever, he returned to England to recuperate,
and continued in Circuit work, until 1855, when he
heard Australia calling. His first appointment was


Collins Street —the first Melbourne Circuit. During
his term there the church proved inadequate
for the growing congregation, and, in co-operation
with the Rev. D. J. Draper, the scheme for
the sale of the property and the erection of
Wesley Church was effected. In Victoria, and during
the eight years he spent in South Australia, he was
Superintendent of the leading city Circuits and
Chairman of important country districts. For two
years he was President of Prince Alfred College,
Adelaide.
W. L. Binks belonged to that group of adminis-
trators who by their vision and practical ability
builded wisely upon the foundations which the
pioneers had well and truly laid. In 1869 he
became President of the Australasian Conference,
and had the honour of being the first President of
the Wesleyan Conference in South Australia. He
had the energy, courage and courtesy of a leader,
and an instinctive faculty for saying the right thing
at the right time.
Hon. James Campbell ( h. 1845, d. 1893).
Taken to Ballarat as a child, James Campbell
witnessed as a boy the exciting scenes of the Eureka
Stockade, # and saw the dead bodies of the miners
lying in the enclosure after the fight. Ballarat
grew from a tent-town to a city during his short
lifetime, and he played an active part in its develop-
ment. At the early age of eighteen there came to
him the responsibility of a great business and the
test of ample wealth. He proved himself an honest
merchant and a humble-minded Christian. Friend
and foe knew him as “Campbell the Incorruptible.’ ’
A man of strong character, cultured mind and
with a poet’s love of beauty and travel, he adorned
the doctrine in all things. The class for young men
which he conducted in the Lydiard Street Church
*See “A Short History of Australia,” by Ernest Scott, page 212


was a determining influence in many lives, and out
of it came men who nobly served the Church and
State.
Elected to the Legislative Council in 1882, he
was made Postmaster-General, and later, as a member
of the Legislative Assembly, he held the portfolios
of Minister of Education and Customs. The
Methodist fraternity at Ballarat chose him to
lay the foundation stone of the new Lydiard
Street Church in 1883. A son of the Church, he
loved it and gave generously to its enterprises. One
of his “young men,” the Rev. E. T. Cox, said of
him: “Amidst all his social elevation he never spoke
ill of any man, nor in the arrogance of wealth
brushed any from his path. He was a just man,
and recognised in his enemy the thing which was
best in him, and always gave him credit for the
best motives.”
The quality of his discipleship may be gathered
from the fact that he made it a habit of mind to
pick out the good from a poor sermon.
Joseph Albiston ( b . 1829, d. 1919).
Included in the band of seven ministers who came
to Victoria in 1853 at the importunate plea of
William Butters, following the discovery of gold,
was Joseph Albiston. Beginning at Warrnambool
in the year of his arrival, he exercised a faithful min-
istry for thirty-six years, retiring from Castlemaine
in 1890. He was not a beacon blazing on some lone
height, but he left behind him a spiritual influence
like a lingering fragrance. A refined Christian
gentleman, he practised the presence of God. His
musical voice and his rich knowledge of Methodist
hymns led to his appointment as Conference Pre-
centor for many years. He had a sense of the sacred-
ness of language, and felt an obligation to use the
purest and most exact diction at his command. But


Rev. LORIMER FISON, D.D
Rev. FREDERICK LANGHAM, D.D.
Rev. W. E. BROMILOW, D.D.
Rev. BENJAMIN DANKS.


I J *'* ***** I
Rev. W. H. FITCHETT, 8.A..
LL.D.
Rev. E. H. SUGDEN, M.A.
B.Sc., Litt.D.
Sir AARON BANKS.
Rev. A. R. EDGAR.


his chaste speech was not an end in itself —it was the
sharpened and polished tool of a decided evangel-
istic gift. He lived as seeing Him Who is invisible,
and he played cricket.
Henry Cooke, Founder of “The Age.”
Henry and John Cooke came from New Zealand
in the ’forties, and established themselves as mer-
chants in Bond Street, Melbourne. Henry opened
the Sydney branch of the business in 1851. During
the gold activity in Victoria in the following year,
it was found that the Melbourne and Ballarat busi-
ness required the presence of both brothers, and
Henry returned to Melbourne, where he identified
himself with the Collins Street Church, of which he
became one of the trustees, and afterwards, when
the removal to Lonsdale Street took place, a class
leader and superintendent of the Sunday School. In
1852 he was a member of the City Council, and one
of the first directors of the Hobson’s Bay Railway
Company, from which he resigned when the Company
decided to run Sunday trains.
The brothers owned several stations, including
Brenanah, Richmond Plains and Spring Hill.* In
1854, when the disputes between the diggers and the
Government with reference to mining were increas-
ing in intensity, it occurred to John and Henry Cooke
that there was an opening in Melbourne for a third
daily newspaper, and, having decided to embark on
the enterprise, they started a journal which they
named “The Age.” The proprietors had no very
definite views upon the great political questions of
the day, but hoped to make their newspaper more
readable than its rivals, and they took the side of
the Nonconformists in the agitation which wms at
that time beginning against State aid to religion.!
♦Pastoral Pioneers of Port Phillip, by Billis and Kenyon.
f“David Syme,” by Ambrose Pratt.


During the last twenty years of his life Henry
Cooke was a most earnest worker in tract distribu-
tion, and on a Sunday morning many a city lodging-
house and wharf-side trading vessel were made
brighter by his presence, while the unwilling Sabbath
morning inmates of the watchhouse heard from him
words of hope and encouragement that in some
cases nerved them to fresh and successful exertions
to retrieve the failures of the past. His last public
act was to offer prayer in the sacramental service at
Oakleigh.
Henry Bath, a Seer ( h . 1839, d. 1916).
Among the greatest gifts of Cornwall to Australia
shines the Rev. Henry Bath. Entering the ministry
in South Australia in 1859, he was transferred to
Victoria in 1870. He had charge of most of the
important Circuits, including Wesley Church.
Highly endowed with natural gifts, he disciplined
his mind and toiled as though he had no gift at all.
A master in the pulpit, he seemed completely
unaware of it. The secret which explains him is the
beatitude, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. 77 He knew God for certain. He dwelt
much alone with the Alone. His mind was nurtured
by the masterpieces of Jeremy Taylor, Howe, Owen,
Baxter, Wesley and Fletcher. To secure breadth as
well as depth he made frequent excursions into the
realms of science, history and art. Early in his
ministry he milled himself through a stiff course of
theology and philosophy. He had the natural
endowments of a great preacher—a noble presence,
a commanding voice, a look, which, to quote Milton,
“drew audience and attention still as night. 7 7
Singularly rich in imagination, he had a swift vision
for analogies of truth which gave him a match-
less felicity in the use of illustration. He loved to
translate the great truths of religion into pictorial
form. His sermons were prose poems, and it is


cause for regret that he left no written works, for he
had it in him to produce a spiritual classic.
John King, a Methodist Explorer.
The story of the ill-fated expedition of Burke and
Wills, which set out from Melbourne in August,
1860, is too well known to need repetition in these
pages. The object of the expedition was to explore
the Australian continent from Bass Strait to the
Gulf of Carpentaria, an object which was practically
achieved but at great cost, for of the advance party,
consisting of Burke, Wills, Gray and King; King
was the sole survivor. What agony he must have
suffered as the lives of Gray, Wills and Burke faded
out it is impossible to conceive. Alone in the track-
less areas of the vast inland in the months of a
scorching Australian summer, without food and
other necessaries, himself as emaciated as mortal
could be and live, oblivious of the Howitt Relief
Party hurrying to his rescue, for three months this
intrepid explorer subsisted on roasted rat, broiled
fish and nardoo prepared for him by friendly blacks.
On the 15th September, 1861, a member of the
relief party came upon a camp of blacks, who
fled at his approach, “leaving,” he said, “one soli-
tary figure, covered with some scarecrow rags and
part of a hat, prominently alone in the sand. As I
passed, it tottered, threw up its hands in an attitude
of prayer, and fell on the sand.” “Who in the
name of wonder are you?” asked the rider. “I am
King, sir,” was the reply.
“King?” “Yes, the last man of the exploring
expedition.” “What! Burke’s?” “Yes,” he said.
“Where is he —and Wills?” “Dead, both dead,
long ago,” said this haggard figure, and collapsed.
Meanwhile, prayer was being offered for the
safety of John King, whose sister was a member of
the St. Kilda Methodist Church. She poured out her
troubled heart to the minister, Rev. James Bickford,
for she was deeply attached to her brother, who was


the youngest member of the expedition. The minister,
with the full support of his people, held special
prayer meetings.
Dr. F. W. Boreham relates how a lady who was
a member of the Church at that time told him that
“during all those long and trying months that fol-
lowed, the prayers of that congregation ascended like
incense in private and in public to the Throne of
the Heavenly Grace. King’s sister was always there.
How they prayed! And the more persistent the
tales of disaster became, the more earnestly these
people gathered together for prayer. The most
circumstantial stories of the utter extinction of the
exploratory party never daunted them. Until the
worst was confirmed, they clung desperately to their
faith. Night and day they called upon God to spare
the youth who had gone to hazard his life in the
wilderness. ’ ’
A service of thanksgiving was held at St. Kilda
for the preservation of King.
James Bickford notes in his diary on 24th Novem-
ber, 1861: “John King, the only survivor of the
Burke and Wills party, came to St. Kilda to-night.
He was a mere shadow 7 .” Again on sth December
he writes: “I accompanied Mr. King to Melbourne,
and introduced him to Sir William Stawell, the Chief
Justice, who received from him Mr. Burke’s note
book. His last record “King has acted nobly/ ’
The power of intercessory prayer is only faintly
understood, but truly “More things are wrought by
prayer than the world dreams of.”
James Swanston Waugh, D.D. ( b . 1822, d. 1898).
An Irishman, Dr. Waugh gave fourteen years of
ministry to his native land before transferring to
Victoria in 1853. Opening his commission at St.
Kilda, he was appointed successively to Fitzroy,
Wesley Church and Ballarat. At Ballarat he
gathered young men into a class, some of whom


became shining lights in the Church and State.
Among them was W. H. Fitchett, whose speech at a
valedictory gathering was symptomatic of his
growing command of English. He said: “ A mere
recital of what had been done in the theological class
could give no idea of the worth of Mr. Waugh’s
labours, any more than telling a man how many
bricks and how much mortar there was in a building
would give him an idea of its architectural beauty.
Mr. Waugh had such a happy method of imparting
information in the kindliest manner, so warm and
so humorous, that, while it pierced and stirred up
those to whom it was addressed, it never stung. Mr.
Waugh’s services had far wider claims than the
class. ’ ’
When Wesley College was founded in 1866, Dr.
Waugh’s public influence and scholarly attainments
made him its natural head, and for sixteen years he
was its president, and did much to make the College
one of the foremost public schools in Australia. For
some years he was, in addition, theological tutor, and
had a formative influence upon men who became
honoured ministers of the Church. His warm heart
won friendship everywhere, his strength of character
made him a leader, his perfect knowledge of Metho-
dist theology and of Methodist history and law, and
his loyalty to his Church won for him, in
succession, every honour and every office his Church
had to bestow. He was President of the old Aus-
tralian Conference in 1885, and President of the
General Conference in 1881. A minister of fine
gifts, of saintly character, of single and loyal
purpose, his memory lives and is perpetuated by the
Waugh Scholarship at Wesley College.
Edwin Iredale Watkin> D,D. ( b . 1839, d. 1916).
The Rev. James Watkin—father of Dr. E. I.
Watkin—roused the world by writing his famous
plea, “Pity Poor Fiji,” and rallied support to that


deserving mission. His son Edwin, began his fifty-
nine years of active ministry at Williamstown in
1857. He was a Circuit minister of outstanding
effectiveness, and the Church scarcely made the best
use of him when it turned him aside into adminis-
trative offices. His strength lay in Circuit life, where
he shone as a preacher, pastor and organiser.
Well versed in affairs, with the spiritual ideals of
the Church at heart, he revelled in its Conferences.
He debated keenly, but never with weapons unbecom-
ing to a Christian. When he was on his feet in
Conference he was always sure of a “full house/ 7
It was regarded as a field-day when in some “full-
dress 7 ’ debate Dr. Watkin addressed himself to the
subject. There was always happy excitement when
he came into the clash of controversy with Dr.
Fitchett. These two leaders, when fully roused,
would give stroke and counter-stroke, thrust and
parry, would argue like skilled lawyers and deal in
satire and jest, would sparkle with aphorisms, para-
doxes and all manner of jewelled phrases. And the
Conference had a proud joy in them both. Watkin’s
versatile, gifted service was rewarded with the Chair
of the Conference in 1883.
For six years he was President of Wesley College
and Managing Treasurer of the Supernumerary Fund
for eight years. The cause of Methodist Union had
in him a strenuous advocate and, strangely enough,
he became a supernumerary in the year that Union
was consummated.
A man of catholic, generous mind, he had a fine
taste in literature and a remarkable knowledge of
hymnology. He studied the folk-lore of the abori-
gines, and wrote a book on “Australian Names and
Their Meanings.” It is cause for regret that his
researches into early Australian history were never
published in permanent form. A ready wit and a
racy conversationalist, he was a master of the uncom-
mon art of telling a story well.


“Nipt by the wind’s unkindly blast,” Dr. Watkin
failed in later years, largely through ill-health, to
come to the best that was in him.*
Hon. Alexander Fraser ( b . 1802, d. 1888).
The Honourable Alexander Fraser was a strong-
minded, independent Highlander, who came to
Victoria in 1852, and made his way in business.
But Mr. Fraser did not confine his energies to busi-
ness pursuits. In 1857 he was returned at the head of
the poll as a member of the first Municipal Council
of St. Hilda, and was the second Mayor. In 1858
he was elected to the Legislative Council as one of
the representatives of the North-western Province,
which seat he retained until 1884, when he resigned
through advanced age.
He was a member of the Francis Ministry, and
held the office of Commissioner for Public Works and
Vice-President of the Board of Land and Works.
For a great number of years he was a magistrate,
and gave a considerable amount of time to the duties
of that office.
Prom the time of Mr. Fraser’s residence in St.
Kilda, in 1853, he took an active and prominent
position in all church work. He was a trustee of old
Collins Street Chapel, and was associated with Mr.
Draper in the sale of the property.
Probably no man in the Church, in the same time,
presided over so many public meetings, was invited
to preside at so many “reopening” services, and to
occupy the chair at so many anniversary gatherings
as Alexander Fraser. He presided at the valedictory
meeting to Mr. and Mrs. Draper on 14th March,
1865, and at the inauguration of Wesley College on
the 10th January, 1866.
During his long life he worthily held every office
which a layman can occupy in the Church, excepting
♦See a critical estimate in “Lights in the Southern Sky,” by
J. E. Carruthers, page 78.


that of a local preacher. He was the Lay Treasurer
of the Supernumerary Fund for nearly thirty years.
In that office he was associated for a considerable
period with Mr. Draper. He watched and took part
in its organisation, and by his business ability was
able to render great aid to the fund.
Rev. W. A. Quick (b. 1820, d. 1915).
When “Father” Quick died in 1915 he was the
oldest Methodist minister in the world. His life was
not only long in years, but fruitful in achieve-
ment. He began his ministry in the Cornish Circuit
of Liskeard. In 1843 he was a missionary at Sierra
Leone—“the white man’s grave.” After further
service in England and Scotland, he came to Aus-
tralia in 1853. The Conference of 1889 appointed
him to the Presidency of Horton College, Tasmania,
where for thirteen years he gave valuable service.
He was President of the Australasian Conference in
1866. In Victoria he ministered at Wesley Church
and in other important appointments.
It is to his strong, persistent advocacy and cease-
less service that the Church owes the establishment
of Queen’s College in the Melbourne University. He
coveted for coming generations of ministers an intel-
lectual training unsurpassed by any other Church.
For twenty-one years he was President of the College
Council.
A gracious, cultured, Christian gentleman with a
lucid, logical mind, he was in himself a blessing.
For thirty-one years he was a supernumerary whose
old age was bright with optimism. The golden age
of Methodism, he insisted, was not in the past—in
the future it would be more intelligent and useful
than it had been in the days of his active ministry,
and he helped to make it so.
Henry Berry ( b . 1836, d. 1923),
A courtly Englishman of Kentish stock, Henry
Berry came to Melbourne as a youth of nineteen, and


soon became a leading business man and a prominent
citizen. He had a keen brain, remarkable industry,
far-sightedness, and, through all, a fine integrity.
His Methodist convictions were carried into all his
commercial activities. A local preacher, he spoke
from church pulpits, and for twenty years held
services for the mentally afflicted children in the
Kew Asylum. He generously supported the enter-
prises of the Church, and provided by his will that a
share of the earnings of his business should be
devoted to educational and charitable purposes. Dr.
W. H. Fitchett said of him: “Henry Berry was
simply the most absolutely loving soul I ever met.
He was a man made beautiful by Divine grace/ ’
There is a story of Henry Berry sitting through a
long summer afternoon with the Eev. Joseph Albiston
on the verandah of a cottage at Portsea. They sat
in happy companionship and silent communion.
Finally Henry Berry broke the stillness, “Well,
well!” he said. “Yes, indeed!” remarked the
veteran minister.
The Dunks —Father and Son.
Men of character and grace were John Danks
(1828-1902) and his son, Sir Aaron Danks.
The blood of honest forefathers, for generation
after generation, ran in their veins. John
Danks was a man of marked individuality,
strong will, rich in common sense, with a
genius for organisation and a natural power
of commanding men. Soon after landing on
these shores, there came the crisis in his life,
which w r e call conversion. For some time he could
not say that he felt the touch of God’s healing hand,
but night after night he walked by the beach, and
there sought silent communion with God. At last in
the little wooden church at South Melbourne, with
Dr. Waugh officiating at the prayer meeting, John
Danks committed himself to the service of Christ,


and entered into a definite religious experience. That
was the turning point in his life, and ever after God’s
blessing continually rested upon him. By sheer
ability he built up one of the greatest businesses in
the city of Melbourne, and yet “his soul was like a
star and dwelt apart.’ ’
To John Banks religion was a cheerful thing, and
his was not an idle faith. His generous gifts were
as judicious as they were unostentatious. He gave
thirty years of faithful service to the Sunday School,
and for nearly forty years he proved himself to be
a loyal and wise class leader.
What pathos there is in the action of the little
“Herald” boy, who, on hearing of Mr. Banks’ death,
went out to his house, asking that he might be
allowed to take a last look, because Mr. Banks always
had a kind word and a loving pat on the head for
the little fellow! And on the day of the funeral
service in the church, there forced herself through
the solemn crowd a nameless woman, who put her
hand on the coffin in which lay the man who had at
some time helped her.
Sir Aaron Banks (1861-1928) was a master of
industry, deeply interested in the betterment of
industrial conditions and with a tender concern for
those who suffer. For twenty-three years he served
the Melbourne Hospital as a member of the com-
mittee, during ten years of which he was the
honoured President. He was interested in medical
research, and his devotion to children found expres-
sion in the Child Welfare Association over which
he presided. Epworth Hospital came from his
inspired vision. He bought the original property,
and presented it to the Church for an intermediate
hospital. A Christian of rare charm, he was the most
modest of men. When the Rev. John Thomas went
to the Canterbury Church, this lover of music, with
the soul of an artist, said, “If there is anything you
want me to do, please tell me. I will scrub the floor


if you ask me.” Not long before his end he was
seen in a street near his home sitting on the edge
of the gutter with two children, showing them some
mechanical insects which he had bought. A great
man with a childlike heart —such was Sir Aaron
Danks, who left half of his estate to form a perpetual
trust for religious, educational and charitable
purposes.
Portrait of a Methodist Woman .
Mary Jane Norwood {b. 1840, d. 1917).
Through the latter half of the Victorian era Dr.
Joseph Parker stood in the great white pulpit of the
City Temple in London, and spoke to the world.
Almost every ship that sailed from England brought
his sermons and books to Australia, where they were
eagerly read. Men said that no one else could do
such a work —they trembled to think of what would
become of the City Temple when he went to his
reward. But here in Collingwood a poor Methodist
woman was rearing a boy who was destined to stand
in Parker’s pulpit and become a Crusader for peace
in a war-weary world. Dr. F. W. Norwood, in his
autobiography, draws a portrait of his wonderful
mother.*
“She was a sturdy, vigorous woman, with great
strength of character. Ido not believe she ever told
a lie, or half a lie, in all her life. She pushed blunt-
ness to extremes. She carried herself straight, and
her form was the sign of her character. . .
“She was religious to the last fibre of her being.
She knew her Bible through and through. Her
prayers were redolent of the Psalms and the
Prophets. With eight children to care for —and she
did care for them, washing everything, sewing every-
thing—she had time for her church and a class in
the Sunday School. . .
“When she had passed away, more than thirty
years afterward, I claimed for my ‘ heirloom’ one
♦The Indiscretions of a Preacher, page 21.


little treasure from her private drawer. It was the
first class meeting ticket she had received on joining
the Methodist Church in the days of her girlhood.
It is faded with age, but the Scriptural passage upon
it reads, ‘ Trust in the Lord and do good: so shalt
thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed.’
I carry it in my own Bible to this day. . .
“Life had dealt hardly with her. It never soured
her; she was a radiant optimist, as certain that right
would win as that the morrow’s sun would rise.
She was of the true fighting order. Like another
Horatius, she was always keeping the bridge for her
youngsters, but the softness of her heart was like
the odour of the ointment which belonged to another
Mary; it has filled the whole house the more since
the alabaster box was broken. . .
“It was not until we had closed her eyes that I
came away on the adventure which led me to the
City Temple. She had always loved that place, and
I wish she might have stayed till her boy carried
there the fulfilment of her prayers.”
Alexander Robert Edgar * ( b. 1850, d. 1914).
Not many in any sphere of labour ever influenced
more lives for good than the Rev. A. R. Edgar.
Born in Tipperary, arriving in Australia at the age
of four, he graduated from the “university of hard
knocks. ’ ’ In his youth he knew what it was to carry
his swag and break stones for a living. Through
suffering he learned sympathy. He had the key to
men’s hearts, for his own heart was big with pity.
Many men win admiration by their gifts; he won
love by his own capacity for loving. To him as to
a great brother, all sorts and conditions of people
turned with all kinds of problems and found
consolation.
*See page 281, also the autobiography contained in
“A. R. Edgar,’* by W. J. Palamountain.


It was characteristic of him that when asked why
lie kept on helping men who kept proving them-
selves undeserving, he replied, “I spend my life in
giving men another chance.” He held, too, that
religion, if good for anything, was good for every-
thing, and he helped to make life easier and safe
for many people. He did much to improve their
temporal condition; at the same time he emphasised
the supreme importance of the spiritual, realising
that “the soul of all improvement is the improve-
ment of the soul.”
While carrying the sorrows of others, he bore a
heavy load himself. He had buried five children,
and often, after spending the day in comforting
others, he went to a home stricken with sorrow.
A big man with a kindly face and cheery manner,
his presence arrested attention, while his rich Irish
voice captured the ears of any audience. But it was
his loving, generous nature, his hopeful, cheerful
outlook, his tender, Christlike compassion for the
multitude, that won for him the high place he held
in the love and esteem, not only of the Methodist
people, but of all classes in the community.
William Williams, D.D. ( . 1848, d. 1913).
The son of a Cornish miner, William Williams
worked two days a week as a boy in the Burra
copper mine to help the family finances. At the
early age of twenty he was appointed to the Dayles-
ford Circuit, and so began his distinguished ministry
in Victoria. His outstanding characteristic was
strength. He was a many-sided man, but on every
side he was strong, and his strength lay in the
quality of his spiritual power. Dr. Williams had all
the qualities of a leader —clearness of perception,
strength of will, skill in debate and a marked
capacity for organisation. Like Goldsmith’s parson,
it could be said of him, “Unskilful he to fawn, or


seek for power by doctrines fashioned to the varying
hour. ’ ’
What ruled in him was the judicial temper. He
had trained his mind to regard questions in a
detached sort of way, as though each particular
question was a specimen in natural science only to
be understood by linking it up with its history and
environment. He saw all round a question, and his
judgment was balanced and reliable. As a debater
in Conference he was almost without an equal.
In 1900-1 he rendered valued service to the Church
as director of the Twentieth Century Fund, which
realised the sum of £20,412 for Trusts and other
Church purposes. He was elected President of the
Conference in 1897, Secretary of the General Con-
ference in 1901, and President of the General
Conference in 1907.
His profound knowledge of Methodist law, his keen
insight, sturdy common sense and wise tactfulness
made him a trusted ecclesiastical statesman. Science
was his hobby, and on the nomination of Baron Von
Mueller he was elected a Fellow of the Linnaeus
Society. The Toronto University recognised his
services to Methodism by conferring upon him the
degree of Doctor of Divinity.
William Morley D.D. ( b . 1842, d. 1926).
Dr. Morley was a leading figure in New Zealand
before he came to Victoria in 1902 to manage the
Supernumerary Fund. A thorough Methodist,
steeped in the traditions of his Church, he exulted
in its history and its visions. Naturally conserva-
tive, he was always adding to his capacity for service.
An early tendency to autocracy mellowed as he grew
in age and grace. With a firm grasp of fundamental
principles, a tireless attention to details, an unwearied
patience in acquiring information, an intense sym-
pathy with the mission of Methodism, he represented
all that is best in the Church he served so long.


He reached the highest office within the gift of
Australian Methodism when, in 1894, he was made
President-General.
Dr. Morley became President of the Queen’s
College Council when its finances were a burden.
The courageous scheme to liquidate the debt and
extend the buildings was initiated by him. He
secured the energetic services of Mr. W. T. Hattam
to raise the money required, and a new chapter
opened in the College history when its heavy debt
was lifted and new equipment provided. To no
one more than William Morley could the Hebrew
poet’s simile be applied: “Thou shalt come to thy
grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn eometh in
his season.’’
Samuel John Hoban, D.D.
The mingling of Irish and Cornish blood in his
veins gave Dr. S. J. Hoban a sunny, optimistic out-
look on life. No one was excluded from the hospit-
able hearth of his fellowship. In his presence men
and women were made to feel their potential good-
ness. To a remarkable degree, he was, like his
Master, “a friend*of publicans and sinners.’’ He
became colleague to the Rev. A. R. Edgar at the
Central Mission when the “Bishop” was broken in
health. The buoyant enthusiasm, the kindling
affection and warm sympathy of young Hoban did
much to maintain the prestige of the Mission in the
community.
The peak period of his ministry was during his
Superintendeney of the Sydney Central Mission from
1915 to 1921. He wielded an immense power for
good, and made an indelible impression on the life
of the city. Returning to his native Victoria, he
became Superintendent of the Melbourne Central
Mission, and quickly gripped the community.* A
striking personality, with ready sympathy, broken
men and women instinctively turned to him for help
♦See page 284.


and healing. With many of the gifts of a born
orator, he was one of the best platform speakers of
his day, and as a preacher his sermons, rich in
thought and diction, had real converting power. The
Toronto University granted him the honorary degree
of Doctor of Divinity.
A Chapel of Meditation has been built at Wesley
Church in thanksgiving for his life and service.
Hon. Robert Beckett ( b. 1862, d. 1917).
Among the gifted and devoted laymen who have
served both Church and State is Robert Beckett.
If a man is best judged by his peers, Robert Beckett
stood in the front rank of the profession. He was
for many years a prominent member of the Council
of the Law Institute of Victoria, which specially
honoured him by choosing him as the President in
its jubilee year.
A councillor, he came into prominence as an
authority on municipal affairs. In matters of local
government he was an advanced thinker. Genera-
tions yet to come will benefit by «his sound financial
guidance in council affairs, and his strong lead in
securing proper breathing spaces.
In 1913 he became member of the Legislative
Council for East Yarra, and held the seat until his
death. His analytical mind, obvious honesty and
his chivalry towards opponents combined to give
him an honoured position in the House.* He showed
himself to be a very able lawyer, and his expository
speeches on measures under discussion were heard
with great respect.
Through all the years of public service the Church
knew him as a thorough-going Christian, loyal,
generous and simple-hearted. He was for many
years treasurer of the Surrey Hills Church, a class
leader, and held all the positions open to laymen in
♦See Parliamentary Debates, July, 1917.


Circuit life. For thirty years continuously, right up
to his death, he was a Sunday School superintendent,
and no claims upon his time and attention were
permitted to encroach upon his work in this
department.
Foreign Missions were not an embroidery to his
faith, but the passion of his heart. He twice visited
the mission stations in the Pacific, and his grasp of
the science of mission work was of great practical
value to the Board of Missions, of which he was a
working member.
Albert /. Derrick, J-P- {b. 1862, d. 1931).
As Matthew left his office at the call of Christ, so
did this Geelong architect surrender his professional
prospects to serve his Master.
It was in April, 1893, that the Methodist Confer-
ence awoke to the necessity of a forward movement
in the city of Melbourne, and established the Central
Mission. The Rev. A. R. Edgar said that if only he
could induce Mr. Derrick to work with him he would
be satisfied. The carrying on of an established pro-
fessional practice, the obligation of articled pupils
and many other ties made such a step so unlikely
that when Mr. Edgar first mentioned it to him in the
street one day the suggestion was not taken seriously.
Mr. Edgar was, however, importunate, and enlisted
on his side the influence of many friends. At
last the sense of a Divine call settled the matter, and
Mr. Derrick yielded. Thus began twenty-one years
of the closest, most confidential and intimate rela-
tions which were a joy and a blessing to both.
With no disparagement of Mr. Edgar’s great
qualities, it is safe to say that without A. J. Derrick
he would have been overwhelmed by the correspond-
ence, financing and general administration of the
departments as they grew around Wesley Church.


Among his papers was a letter from Mrs. Edgar,
dated March, 1915, headed: “To my husband’s faith-
ful friend and helpful colleague.” One sentence
reads: “How my beloved leaned on you, trusted,
admired, and loved you, none but his family know.”
Mr. Edgar used to say that Mr. Derrick was as
essential to the Mission as he was.
St. Paul declared that it is required in stewards
that a man be found faithful, and this man fully
and happily accomplished that.
The communion furniture and a window in the
western transept honour his memory in the Church
which his father helped to build, and where he served
right nobly.
The Hon . Howard Hitchcock? M.L.C.
{b. 1866, d. 1932).
The son of George Hitchcock, founder of the well-
known Geelong firm, and for over thirty-five years
the superintendent of the Yarra Street Sunday
School, Howard Hitchcock inherited a family tradi-
tion of church and civic service. All his life he was
identified with Geelong. During his distinguished
civic career he was elected mayor for five successive
years. The progress of the city in recent years is
admittedly due mainly to his initiative, energy and
generosity. The Great Ocean Road owes its concep-
tion and construction to his enterprise, perseverance
and liberality, and may be regarded as a national
memorial to him. During the Great War he dis-
tinguished himself as a worker for the men at the
front and their dependents at home. Returned
soldiers had in him a friend and champion.
He was intimately connected with the Yarra
Street Church in Geelong and served for many
years as superintendent of the Sunday School,
in which office he succeeded his father. In 1930 he
built, as a memorial to his father, the narthex and


two chapels —one dedicated to pioneers and the other
to soldiers.
Here was a Methodist with a love of beauty in his
soul —who beautified his native city, and in the
eternal fitness of things he left the earth scene
inhaling the fragrance of some blooms from his own
famous garden.
Walter B. McCutcheon ( b . 1864, d. 1934).
A guiding mind in the concerns of the Church
was W. B. McCutcheon, who brought legal judgment,
spiritual insight and clarity of expression and high
Christian ideals to the tasks of Methodism. He
rose to eminence in the legal profession, and was
implicitly trusted by leaders in the commercial world
of the stature of Henry Berry and Sidney Myer—
the latter appointing him a director of the Myer
Emporium. The Church had the love of his heart
and the energy of his active intellect. From the
foundation of the Central Mission he was a hard-
working member of the executive. He was also pre-
sident of the Old Wesley Collegians ’ Association and
one of the original group of the Laymen’s Missionary
Movement. At the time of his death he held the
Victorian record for continuous election to General
Conferences. He had a great love for Methodist
hymns and music, and helped in the early stages
with the compilation of the Australian supplement
to the new Methodist Hymn Book. One of his
favourite hymns was Xavier’s “My God, I love Thee,
not because I hope for Heaven thereby to gain.” He
cherished the hope of retiring from business and
devoting the eventide of his life to the services of
the Church, but this was denied him. The grave
which he chose for his mortal remains is within
sight of Queen’s, the College which he served as
treasurer for half a lifetime.


John Francis Wilkinson, M.D. ( .1864, d. 1935).
Dr. Wilkinson, a Collins Street specialist, endeared
himself to ministers by reason of his care for them
in times of sickness and his unfailing interest in
their work. His first practice was in Bright, and
during those early years, with Edward Carlile, a
cattleman, he opened the first tracks up the preci-
pitous slopes of Mount Buffalo. One of the chief
landmarks bears his name —“Wilkinson’s Lookout.”
In 1897 he opened practice in Collins Street,
Melbourne, and became one of the leading physicians
of the State. He was an honorary lecturer in the
University, and during the War devoted much of his
time to home service, holding the rank of Honorary
Major in the Australian Army Medical Corps
Reserve. For many years he served the University
as a member of the Council. The Victorian Branch
of the British Medical Association made him its
President.
Dr. Felix Meyer said: “He brought honour to his
profession, and his name takes its place among our
great physicians. ’ ’
“Dr. Wilkinson,” wrote Professor W. A. Osborne,
was ‘ ‘ the foremost clinical biochemist in Melbourne. ’’*
A gentleman has been defined as one who puts
back into life as much as he receives from it, and in
this sense, as in every other, Dr. Wilkinson was a
true gentleman. Through all and always he was a
humble Christian, a faithful son of the Methodist
Church. His unaffected goodness was contagious.
He lived a well-balanced life, and he was always
alive while he lived. He maintained his interest in
people and things. Of him this rare thing could
be said —that life never lost its halo of wonder. His
friendship was a sacrament —a means of grace,
strength and encouragement. A marked feature was
his faith in young men.
*The Medical Journal of Australia May, 1935, page 604.


Fred. J. Cato, A Prince of Philanthropists.
Born at Stawell, Victoria, in 1858, the career
of Fred. J. Cato is one of the commercial
romances of Australia. He left Stawell at the age
of nineteen, and landed in New Zealand owing thirty
shillings! He had nothing save his clothes and a
few books, but he had the ambition to succeed. In
New Zealand he entered the Education Department,
and spent two years teaching in the South Island.
Then came a letter from his cousin, Mr. Thomas
Edwin Moran, inviting him to become his partner in
the grocery business which he had opened in Mel-
bourne. These two Methodist men began with a
capital of £3OO, but by the time Mr. Moran died, in
1890, they had forty branches. The business spread
from Victoria into other States, and became the
largest grocery organisation in the Southern Hemis-
phere. His unrelenting industry, agile brain and
moral force made him a merchant prince.
Success crowned his efforts on a scale which, if the
boy at Pleasant Creek could have foreseen, must
have seemed as extravagant as an Arabian Nights’
tale. But as he earned he gave. He regarded him-
self as God’s steward, and administered his money
as a trust. There are many tests that come to men —
the test of adversity, the test of suffering, but surely
the most searching test of a man’s spirit is provided
by money. Mr. Cato was never hardened nor
narrowed by the lust for gold. He kept his soul
alive by generously giving.
Fred. J. Cato’s life was an expression of God, and
his light so shone before men that he made God
thinkable and believable to many whom the fell
clutch of circumstance would else have made atheists.
His lavish benefactions to education, charity and
religion are known in part, but his vast private
giving was done in secret.
In 1920 he set aside a sum of £20,000 to form a
Benevolent Fund, and in 1924 he established a


Charitable Fund with a further £30,000 —the income
being devoted to philanthropic, religious and
educational objects.
Amongst his larger benefactions are his many
scholarships to the Methodist Ladies’, Wesley, and
Queen’s Colleges, his gift of Cato House to the first-
named college, and the property of its Elsternwick
(Fred. J. Cato) Branch, at a cost of over £6OOO.
In addition to these are the Boys’ Home and
Training Farm (in association with his wife) at
Cheltenham, Cato Park given to the city of Haw-
thorn, various large contributions to Wesley Church
and Auburn Church, to Home and Overseas Missions,
and to the Sudan United Mission.
With his son, Mr. E. A. Cato, he commissioned
Mr. Paul Montford to execute a life-sized bronze
statue of John Wesley to be erected in front of
Wesley Church, Melbourne, as a Centenary gift to
Victorian Methodism.
In 1930 he presented to Wesley’s Chapel, London,
a window by Mr. Prank Salisbury to commemorate
the sending of Methodist missionaries to Australia
in the early nineteenth century. Among his last
gifts was the Cato Lecture Foundation, of which
Dr. Russell Maltby was the first Cato Lecturer, and
£15,000 to the Methodist Centenary Fund of Victoria.
He was a true Methodist, for he lived by method
—planning his days with a wise economy of time,
and giving every flying minute something to keep
in store. At heart he was a mystic. Every morn-
ing, before the flush of dawn, he had spent an hour
with his Bible in meditation and prayer. He relied
upon personal Divine guidance, and faced the day’s
programme only when his soul had been girded by
God.
At the back of his private diaries were written
scores of texts, which nourished his heart, and the
hymns which expressed his faith. One warning
verse he kept ever before him: “Take heed


that ye do not your alms before men to be
seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward
of your Father Who is in heaven.” Then
followed in his diary a list of the seven deadly sins
against which he watched and prayed. He was a man
with resources in his soul fed from the fountain of
life. To a very remarkable degree he fulfilled Christ s
injunction, “Make to yourself friends.”
J '* * * *
And what shall I more say ? for the time would fail
me to tell of this one and that one and another who
wrought righteousness ... out of weakness were
made strong. And these all, having obtained a good
report through faith, received not the promise; God
having provided some better thing for us, that they
without us should not be made perfect.


CHAPTER XXI.
THE LOCAL PREACHERS.
The Methodist Church in Victoria dates its begin-
ning from the coming of a local preacher to Port
Phillip in 1835, and by such local preachers as
William Witton, James Dredge, B. S. Parker,
Charles Stone and Thomas Wilkinson, the infant
society was cradled and nursed. By the time a
minister arrived there was a living society.
Indeed, in most of the places that are now flourish-
ing Circuits the pioneering work was done by
laymen. They travelled long distances to preach
to a handful of people. An item of Circuit
expenditure was boat hire, the cost of preachers
crossing from Sandridge to Williamstown.
The first Local Preachers ’ Meeting was held on
sth July, 1840, in the Swanston Street preaching
house, presided over by the Rev. Benjamin
Hurst, at which James Dredge, William Witton
and Thomas Wilkinson were present. The busi-
ness transacted was to receive Charles Stone on
trial as a local preacher, and to “open preaching
places at Collingwood, and amongst some sawyers
who were following their business in the neighbour-
hood of the South Yarra.”*
Scattered Abroad.
As in apostolic days “they that were scattered
abroad went everywhere preaching the Word,” so
up and down this State services were opened by
these brethren. The formula for the history of most
of the Circuits written in this book is—first the local
preacher, then the class, then the society, followed
by the organisation of a church and the application
♦Thomas Wilkinson, in a letter to Mrs. J. J. Peer*.


for a minister and the full development of church
ordinances. Not only the Church but the whole
community is indebted to these lay preachers. They
helped to keep life sweet in rough places, and
reminded men of the eternal when earth seemed all.
The local preachers have numbered in their ranks
Ministers of State, doctors, lawyers—men of high
academic distinction —and with them labourers,
miners and axemen. The dust of many of them
rests in forgotten places where the wattle rains gold
upon the unnamed earth they made for ever holy;
others with rough headstones lie in quiet country
burying grounds guarded by sentinel gum trees
tall and straight, their russet spires trembling in the
sun-drenched breeze. These were the men —and
women, too —who counted no distance too great, no
track too difficult to reach some tiny settlement, and
tell the story of redeeming love.
Robert Cray, of Wandiligong, after a hard week’s
work underground in the mines, would walk twenty-
five miles on a Sunday, and, after preaching twice,
get home in time for the Monday morning shift.
Caleb Powell, a highly-esteemed local preacher, was
one of the first to preach the Gospel in Hawthorn in
1853 or 1854, before there was any place of worship
in that neighbourhood. He often walked from his
home in Collingwood to what was then known as
Red Gum Flat, and, mounted on the stump of some
fine old tree, preached to the congregation who were
accustomed to open-air worship.
“I would rather be a local preacher than the
Governor of the Colony,” said Henry Hooper, of
Sandhurst, who frequently rode over twenty miles
through rain and wind to preach to a mere handful
of people. He was one of the men who raised the
status of local preachers in the land.
Through every day and night of the week his
thought ran in a deep, strong undercurrent on the
sermon for the succeeding Sunday, and he thought


out more things in his “ study, ” as he was wont to
call it, in the mine underground, than others
who had tenfold of his leisure. The people greatly
loved him, and listened to him as an angel of God,
for he gained their utmost confidence by the humble
heartiness with which he laboured for their souls.
An Eccentric Cornishman.
A local preacher famous in his day was the eccen-
tric Cornishman, Jimmy Jeffrey. He would have
made a companion picture to Mark Guy Pearse’s
“Daniel Quorm.” Jimmy was a diamond in the
rough. His native wit made him a very popular
platform speaker. Quaint illustrations wreathed his
hearers ’ faces with smiles and his mastery of pathos
brought tears to their eyes. In the early days of
the goldfields he led scores of men and women to
Christ.
Alma, near Maryborough, was “ opened ” three
weeks before Bro. Jeffrey could reach it. He had
come from New Zealand. On arrival he asked his
old fellow-workers, “Have you established preach-
ing? ” “No.” “How is that?” “There are too
many rowdies.” “If you will help me, I will try.”
On Sunday the Methodists assembled; their singing
brought the multitude round them. Little Bro.
Jeffrey, elevated on a stump, looked round
on the upturned faces of his new audience.
A critical moment was reached, but the man
was equal to the difficulty. His tact now
stood him in good stead. Addressing the outskirts
of the assemblage, he said, “My dear friends” (then
casting his eyes on the knot of professing Christians
round him), “these Methodists here ought to be
ashamed of themselves. They have been here three
weeks among you, and never given you the benefit of
one public service.” This raised a laugh and “Hear,
hear.” “But they intend now to mend their ways,
and if you will listen I will try to preach.” He had


won the crowd to his side. He preached undisturbed;
and every Sabbath from that day to the present,
there has been service at Alma.
In Old Ballarat there were few anniversaries or
tea meetings held in the district where Jimmy
Jeffrey did not turn up; his ‘‘praiching ’’ and
“spaichmaking,” as he himself termed them, always
being acceptable as well as highly edifying and
amusing. “Jimmy’ ’ was a character in his way,
and did not care whether anything he said in the
pulpit or on the platform gave offence, for
he spoke “plain truth,” and, as he said himself,
cared little whether the people were “plaized” or
“displaized. ”
Jimmy was preaching one Sunday in a little chapel
in Ballarat East. His subject was Martha and
Mary, and the latter’s choice. After giving out his
“tex” as he called it, he brought his head down
level with the pulpit Bible, and spreading out his
arms at full length, as if about to swim, shouted out
as a beginning, greatly to the amusement of his
hearers: ‘ ‘ The Lord have mercy on all peevish, feezy
women,” evidently hinting at Martha’s over anxiety.
At a meeting at the Mount Pleasant Wesleyan
Chapel, Jimmy was called for a “spaich.” He was
sitting just below the platform with a child upon
his knee. He rose, took the little one and handed
it to Mrs. Jeffrey, saying, “Here, mother, take the
1 chile’ while I go up on the platform and ‘halp
passon’ to talk.”
Jimmy Jeffrey died at Moonta Mines—a good,
honest fellow, a “ Preaching Methody,” whose career
has become almost a legend.
There was a time when the two most popular
preachers of special sermons in Victoria were Dr.
Joseph Dare and Thomas Pybus. Converted early
in life, and beginning to preach, Pybus soon showed
such ability that he was invited from far and near
to preach special sermons. In the largest Methodist


chapels of Yorkshire he preached on the same day
with men as eloquent as Joseph Beaumont, and as
philosophical and profound as James Dixon. He
was asked to enter the ministry, but declined, as he
was the only support of his mother. The young man
broke road metal on the week day, and preached
sermons profound in thought and powerful tb appeal
on the Sabbath. He came to this colony seeking
gold, and for many years was unsuccessful. At
Tarnagulla he worked on what was called by some
“The Twelve Apostles’ Claim,” owing to the number
of Methodists who were the working partners in the
mine.
Although not always equal as a preacher and plat-
form speaker, Thomas Pybus was always above the
average. Some of his sermons and speeches reached
the highest order. Two of his great platform
addresses were on “Is Christianity a Failure?” and
“The Greatness of a Little Child.” He was not
an extempore preacher or speaker. Everything that
he gave from the pulpit or platform was the result
of the most careful preparation and elaboration.
“Sammy” Ham.
Among the local preachers who have done noble
work in Victoria, Samuel Ham occupies an
honoured place. His sermons were strong in com-
mon sense, sharp with incisive sentences, and lit up
with apt quotations from Charles Wesley’s hymns.
He arrived on the Ballarat goldfields in 1852. On
the first Sunday he went through the diggings, and
was astonished to find a great many men working
as usual, having perhaps forgotten the Lord’s Day.
He invited them to a service on the flat at Golden
Point, and, improvising a pulpit from the stump of
a tree, he preached to those rough miners from the
text, ‘ ‘ For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ:
for it is the power of God unto salvation.” This
was the first religious service held in Ballarat.


For forty years he was a welcome figure in the
Geelong pulpit. Strangers who saw him enter the
pulpit did not expect much from him, but when he
began to pray they felt that there was a man who
communed with his God, and when he preached they
soon saw that they were listening to one of the
“ princes of the pulpit. ”
Walking with God, he seemed ever to bring God
with him. No prayer meeting could be prosy, and
no class meeting could be dull where “Sammy” Ham
was. Happy—always happy in the light and love
of God he unconsciously imparted something of
the same spirit to all around him.
His famous sermon on “The Rainbow Throne” is
published in a memoir of him written by William
Berriman.*
There lived in the dunes district for many years
a local preacher named William Henry Collins, who
as he grew old was affectionately known as Father
Collins. He was very successful as a winner of
souls, and quite a number of remarkable conversions
took place under his fruitful ministry.
One Sunday morning he was appointed to preach
at Coghill’s Creek. As he walked towards the
church he overtook two men who were “new chums.”
He invited them to go with him to the church, but
one of them excused himself on the ground that he
had no coat. Mr. Collins offered to lend him his,
and the offer was accepted. When they arrived at
the church the strangers were shown into a seat and
provided with hymn books. Imagine their surprise
however when they saw Mr. Collins enter the pulpit
in his shirt sleeves! He preached that morning and
the message went home, for the man to whom he
lent his coat was converted, and afterwards became
a local preacher.
A Northumbrian, Abraham Harkness, preached his
trial sermon as a local preacher before the Rev.
Joseph Kipling—grandfather of Rudyard Kipling.
*lncidents in the life of Samuel Ham, 1898.


Arriving in Melbourne in 1875, he walked the hun-
dred miles of rough, dusty road to Bendigo. For
half a century he preached the Gospel in the Golden
City, and toiled and prayed for its moral uplifting.
For half that time he was a member of the City
Council, and thrice Mayor.
A well-remembered local preacher was Martin
Hosking, for twenty-one years the Ballarat town
missionary. The friend of the friendless, a lover
of the fallen, he was beloved by thousands both for
his own and his work’s sake. Rich and poor, young
and old, Jew and Gentile honoured this man of
Christ. When he died the whole city of Ballarat
was in mourning for a great Christian and a great
citizen, whose religion was “pure and undefiled.”
Not all the local preachers were men. There was,
for example, Mrs. Grant, of Lowan, in the Noradjuha
Circuit, who for years rode on horseback taking two
or three services a Sunday, and covering thirty-two
miles on some Sundays.
Martin Paseoe was a faithful local preacher
of the Violet Town Circuit. He had an accident,
and broke a bone in his leg and set it him-
self, but it always left him with a limp. Still, he
would take his staff and walk nine miles to Violet
Town to conduct a service, and sometimes another
nine miles to Baddaginnie and then nine miles home
again, and be ready for work early on Monday
morning.
In other pages will be found the record of how
they lifted a standard for Christ on the goldfields—
how under the shade of some wide-spreading tree or
by a creek-side they proclaimed the Gospel. “ Other
men have laboured and ye are entered into their
labours.* *
Local Preachers * Association .
The Local Preachers* Association began in this
way—About the middle of the year 1869, Leclra


Noal, a local preacher in Ballarat, died, and a group
of his fellow preachers gathered round his grave.
Some of these brethren had been members of the
Methodist Local Preachers’ Mutual Aid Association
in England. As they wended their way from the
burying place, they talked of many things, and men-
tioned the need of an Association in Victoria.
Matthew Morgan, one of the local preachers pre-
sent, offered to give £IOO towards its establishment.
Preliminary meetings were held in June, and on Bth
July the first General Meeting was held in the office
of Henry Bell, in Armstrong Street. The officers
appointed were: President, Matthew D. Morgan;
vice-president, Richard Benny; general secretary,
Richard Tregaskis; general treasurer, Henry Bell;
trustees, M. D. Morgan, David Ham, and W. H.
Hotchin; auditors, William Thacker and William
Coltman; members of committee, John James, James
Kernick, J. Polkinghorne, and John Letcher. This
was regarded as the first general meeting of the
Association, and it was followed on the same evening
(Bth July) by the first branch meeting. Bro. James
Kernick was voted to the chair, and there were also
present R. Tregaskis, R. Benny, A. Smith, S. Stone-
man, H. Bell and W. Jennings.
An application was made to the general meeting
for a charter to form a branch in Ballarat. The £1
charter fee was paid over, the charter granted and
handed to the applicants.
The Melbourne Branch began with a meeting on
17th March, 1874, in the Wesleyan Book Depot in
Elizabeth Street. Richard Hodgson was appointed
chairman, James Callaghan vice-chairman, T. G.
Pascoe treasurer, and Robert Nicholson secretary.
Those who have held the branch secretaryship for
the longest periods are R. Nicholson, N. Wimble,
Frank Wheen, Thomas C. Camm, R. T. Chenoweth
and R. Harvey.
Abraham Harkness was chairman of the Sand-
hurst (New Bendigo) Branch for nearly twenty-five


years. A. J. Derrick helped to fashion the Associa-
tion and served with great faithfulness as its general
secretary for nearly 37 years. Other secretaries
were Messrs. R. Tregaskis (17 years), N. Wimble
(8 years). Mr. C. S. Clucas has held the office for
four years.
The list of presidents is a roll of men honoured
for their service in the life of the Church and
esteemed for their own and their work’s sake. In the
fellowship of the faithful are such names as: Henry
Bell, James Russell, David Ham, and John James
(all members of Parliament), M. D. Morgan, T. B.
Hunt, R. Hodgson, J. Atkin, J. S. Kelly, J. Dawborn,
A. J. Smith, G. Fizelle, J. Raddenberry, J. A. Mars-
den, G. L. Carter, T. Featonby, W. Humble, C. Stone,
W. Burall, W. Coltman, Jas. Scott, R. Balding, A.
Harkness, S. King, N. Wimble, T. Peters, J. D.
Mowbray, R. Hosking, J. Letcher, T. Bond, W.
James, T. C. Camm, W. Strong, T. W. Comstock, S.
Giblett, D. P. Capper, E. Thomas, J. M. Cargeeg, W.
Baldwin, R. T. Chenoweth, W. H. Day, G. W. Cump-
ston, J. V. Kitchen, Geo. Chessell, J. L. Allingham,
Thomas Lewis, A. J. Derrick, C. S. Clucas, A. C.
Bowman, H. Tonkin, S. W. King, H. Outram, W. H.
Collins, C. J. Graham, S. Hanna, W. Caldwell, R.
Harvey, H. H. J. Roberts, W. Buck, J. J. Peart,
I. Quick, A. Coates, and A. D. Freeman (twice).
The Association has been able to meet every call
for help from local preachers and their widows and
orphans, thus ministering to those who deserve well
at the hands of the Church which they have served
with sacrificial devotion. £15,452 has been distributed
in this way.


CHAPTER XXII.
THE CHURCH IN TIME OF WAR.
On two occasions contingents from Victoria have
taken part with Great Britain in wars across the seas
—the South African War, 1899-1902, and the Great
War, 1914-1918.
Previous to the outbreak of the South African
War, the Methodist Conference confined its attention
to the appointment of chaplains to serve in the annual
military camps established for the training of the
defence forces. The first minister to serve in this
way was the late Rev. R. C. Flockart, who filled this
position from 1891 to the time of his death in
January, 1898. On the death of Mr. Flockart, the
Kev. A. T. Holden, 8.A., was appointed Methodist
Chaplain-General, a position which he held for 22
years until his death in 1935. A Committee for
Naval and Military Alfairs was operative in each
State, all being linked up with a similar committee
of the General Conference, of which the Victorian
committee was the executive.
The South African War.
When the South African War broke out seven
contingents were sent from Victoria. All but the
first two of these were trained for service in the
Langwarrin Camp, and there the Rev. A. T. Holden
served as honorary chaplain. He was the first chap-
lain to share camp life with the men, as heretofore
it had been the practice for military chaplains to
visit the training centre merely on the oceasipn of a
church parade. The earlier contingents went with-
out a chaplain, and, though complaints were made in
the daily press, the authorities pleaded that they


were unable to incur the expense. Mr. Holden then
offered his services without payment. On his offer
being accepted, he embarked on Ist May, 1900, with
the Fourth Contingent (The Imperial Bushmen)
for Beira, in Portuguese South Africa. Other
chaplains were appointed to the third and subsequent
contingents, but Mr. Holden was the only Victorian
chaplain to serve with the troops in South Africa.
For his services he was awarded the Queen’s and the
King’s medals. Though details concerning the local
men are scanty, a faded wreath seen occasionally on
the war memorial in St. Kilda Road, and the little
band of South African Veterans who take part in
the annual Anzac March through the City, are
reminders of Victoria’s participation in that war.
The Great War , 1914-1918.
When Great Britain and her allies entered upon
that titanic struggle with the Central European
Powers, the loyalists throughout the Empire threw
themselves wholeheartedly into the conflict. Believ-
ing that Great Britain was fully justified in her
action, and that the issues at stake were of vital
importance, they were left without any choice as to
their attitude. It was generally accepted that not
only were the fates of Belgium and Prance involved,
but that the very existence of the British Empire
was seriously threatened. All the daughter nations
of the Mother Land took up her quarrel and, soon
after war was declared, the Federal Government of
Australia cabled to London an offer of an Australian
Expeditionary Force. The offer was readily accepted,
and in the various States camps were formed, volun-
teers enlisted and trained for active service overseas.
Methodists have always proved a loyal people, and
from Methodist homes throughout the length and
breadth of Australia young men from station and
farm, from school, college and university, from the
public service, from shop and factory, indeed, from
every walk in life volunteered for active service.


Along with other denominations the young men of
Methodism, and the young women, too, nobly
responded to the call of Empire.
The appointment of chaplains to the training
camps for the citizen forces in pre-war days, and the
existence of Conference Committees for Naval and
Military Affairs, together with a General Conference
Committee for the same purpose, enabled the Metho-
dist Church to undertake its war duties without
delay. On the Victorian committee, which in addi-
tion to its State obligation served as the executive of
the Methodist Church of Australasia, heavy and
onerous burdens were cast, burdens, however, that
were lightened by the sane judgment, long experience
in military affairs and the close association of the
chairman of the committee, Rev. A. T. Holden, with
the headquarters’ staff. In 1913 Mr. Holden was
appointed Chaplain-General to the Commonwealth
Military Forces, and in the same year the Rev. E.
Nye, 8.A., was appointed Senior Methodist Chaplain
for the Third Military District (Victoria). On Mr.
Holden devolved the duty of nominating chaplains to
serve with the Australian Imperial Forces.
The First Training Camp.
The first Victorian training camp was held at
Broadmeadows, and consisted of the 2nd Infantry
Brigade, comprising the sth, 6th, 7th and Bth Infantry
Battalions. On 21st August, 1914, the Senior Chap-
lain, Rev. E. Nye, reported that the Methodist
chaplains were doing regular duty, and getting into
personal touch with the men in camp, and taking
part in the church parades.
The first Victorian Methodist minister to be
appointed to a chaplaincy in the A.I.P. was the Rev.
E. Nye. He was attached to the Third Brigade of
the Australian Light Horse, going into camp at
Broadmeadows with the Bth Regiment. Mr. Nye was
subsequently chosen for duty with the Australian
Army Medical Corps, and was attached to the First


Australian General Hospital, and sailed in the hos-
pital ship “Kyarra.” Rev. A. P. Bladen then took
up duty at Broadmeadows, remaining there until he
left in the transport “Ajana.” In 1915 the Confer-
ence relieved the Rev. F. T. Cleverdon from Circuit
work, thus enabling him to become a permanent
chaplain. He served at Broadmeadows, and at Sey-
mour, where a training camp was established; also
in France. During the year 1915 a special Methodist
building was erected at the Broadmeadows camp, with
one large room for meetings of our Methodist soldiers
for religious purposes, and smaller rooms for reading
and writing. The building was designed by Mr. A. S.
Eggleston, the cost being borne by the Home Mission
Executive working in conjunction with the Military
Affairs Committee of the Conference. On Ist July,
1915, the Rev. J. A. Gault was nominated by the
Chaplain-General for continuous service.
By this time the nature of the gigantic task which
the Empire had undertaken was clearly seen. The
news from the front was by no means reassuring, the
casualty lists published in the press were steadily
growing longer, and people began to talk of “the
last man and the last shilling. ’ ’ Further enrolments
of volunteers were made, and additional training
camps established at Flemington, Geelong, Ballarat,
Bendigo, Castlemaine, Warrnambool, South Mel-
bourne and Royal Park. At all these camps, as well
as at Broadmeadows and Seymour, Methodist chap-
lains were serving, and buildings and marquees were
erected to enable them to carry on their work effi-
ciently. Dr. Sugden, the Master of Queen’s College,
reporting from the Royal Park camp on 11th Novem-
ber, 1915, stated there were many decisions for Christ
and many total abstinence pledges.
Again Victoria was made aware of the awful
results of war when the broken men from the front
began to return. To meet their needs and to do all
that was humanly possible to relieve their suffering,


the Base Hospital, St. Kilda Road, was established,
and to this hospital, in July, 1915, the Rev. J. H.
Cain, of the Central Mission, was appointed chaplain.
Mr. Cain rendered good service not only to the
wounded Methodist men, but to the sorrowing rela-
tives whose sons and brothers would return no more.
Throughout the Connexion the Methodist ministers
were messengers of consolation to the smitten families
of their own flocks, sad ministers indeed, but doubly
so, when they themselves had suffered irreparable
loss as was the case with the Revs. H. J. Cocks, R. O.
Cook, J. R. Currie, W. H. Hodge, A. T. Holden,
J. A. Jeffreys, G. S. Lloyd, J. Mcßride, F. B. Old-
ham, F. J. Rankin, L. J. Rowlands, H. Saloway, L.
Tait, J. Thomas, H. Worrall and C. Tregear.
Victoria Cross Winners.
The Gallipoli campaign levied a very heavy toll
on our men and, though this is not the time to
review that fierce and bitter struggle, mention may
be made of two winners of the Victoria Cross during
the terrible happenings at Lone Pine. Lieut. W. R.
Dunstan and Capt. W. J. Symons had both been
scholars in Victorian Methodist Sunday Schools, and
on 15th October, 1915, both were awarded the highest
distinction of the British Army. The following are
their official records, taken from the Army List of
the Australian Imperial Forces: —
“Corporal William R. Dunstan, 7th Battalion,
A.I.F. For most conspicuous bravery at Lone Pine
trenches, in the Gallipoli Peninsula, on 9th August,
1915. In the early morning the enemy made a deter-
mined counter-attack on the centre of the newly-cap-
tured trench held by Lieutenant Tubb, Corporals
Burton and Dunstan and a few men. They advanced
up a sap and blew in a sandbag barricade, leaving
only one foot of it standing, but Lieutenant Tubb,
with the two corporals, repulsed the enemy and
rebuilt the barricade. Supported by strong bombing


parties, the enemy twice again succeeded in blowing
in the barricade, but on each occasion they were
repulsed and the barricade rebuilt, although
Lieutenant Tubb was wounded in the head and arm,
and Corporal Burton was killed by a bomb while
most gallantly building up the parapet under a hail
of bombs.”
“Lieutenant William John Symons, 7th Battalion,
A.I.F. For most conspicuous bravery on the night
of Bth-9th August, 1915, at Lone Pine trenches, in
Gallipoli Peninsula. He was in command of the
right section of the newly-captured trenches held by
his battalion, and repelled several counter-attacks
with great coolness. At about 5 a.m. on the 9th
August a series of determined attacks were made
by the enemy on an isolated sap, and six officers were
in succession killed or severely wounded, a portion
of the sap being lost. Lieutenant Symons led a
charge and retook the lost sap, shooting two Turks
with his revolver. The sap was under hostile fire
from three sides, and Lieutenant Symons withdrew
some fifteen yards to a spot where some overhead
cover could be obtained and, in the face of the heavy
fire, built up a sand barricade. The enemy succeeded
in setting fire to the fascines and woodwork of the
head cover, but Lieutenant Symons extinguished the
fire and rebuilt the barricade. Plis coolness and
determination finally compelled the enemy to dis-
continue their attacks.”
When the evacuation of Gallipoli took place, most
of the Australian troops were transported to France,
no Victorian Methodist chaplain accompanying the
Australian Light Horse during the campaign in
Palestine and Syria. At this juncture the work of
the chaplains overseas had become so complicated
through a variety of causes, among which were the
formation of training camps and the establishment
of general hospitals in England for Australian sol-
diers and work among the troops in France, that the


Commonwealth Defence Department deemed it wise
to arrange for the Chaplains-General in Australia to
visit the chaplains overseas, to enquire into their
work and, if necessary, to reorganise it. The oppor-
tunity to visit Egypt, England and France was
readily accepted. On 11th July, 1916, the Methodist
Chaplain-General met his committee and explained
the position, and shortly afterwards proceeded over-
seas on active service. The visit of Mr. Holden was
of great benefit to our Methodist men, chaplains and
combatants alike, and after thoroughly organising
the chaplaincy work among the men of the A.1.F.,
he returned to Victoria early in 1917.
Mr. Holden’s experience abroad led to an import-
ant conference of the senior chaplains of the military
districts of the Commonwealth in September, 1917.
The conference was held in Melbourne, and occupied
three busy days. The whole work of the Methodist
Church of Australasia in regard to its men on active
service was reviewed, and important decisions made.
The resolutions which concerned Victoria more par-
ticularly were: (1) “In view of the importance of
the administration at Headquarters, London, affect-
ing, as it does, the efficiency of the work of all the
chaplains and also the status of the Methodist
Church of Australasia in relation to our soldiers, the
Conference feels that the Chaplain-General himself
should be asked to proceed to London and take charge
as soon as possible.” And (2) “The conference
recommends that a sum of at least £IOOO be placed
at the disposal of the Chaplain-General to use for
the spiritual and social benefit of our Methodist sol-
diers in England and at the Front, to assist the
chaplains in any way the Chaplain-General may deem
necessary, and to cover all official incidental
expenses. ’ ’
By the second resolution a sum of £IOOO annually
was practically guaranteed, for in the minds of the
men and women at home there could be no thought of


leaving our chaplains in difficulty or limiting their
efficiency and, as to our sons and brothers at the
front, everything which would minister to their wel-
fare or promote their comfort must be done. The
sum to be raised was allocated to the areas of the
various State Conferences, Victoria’s quota being
£320. To raise this amount the late Mr. W. T.
Hattam was appointed organising treasurer, and he
also undertook to raise an additional sum for the
work in the training camps. The expenses of these
were heavy, for buildings had to be erected and
kept in order. The work of Mr. Hattam was highly
commended and very successful, one effort alone —a
Garden Fete in the grounds of the Methodist Ladies’
College, Hawthorn —realising a net profit of £6OO.
With means at his disposal, the work of the Rev.
A. T. Holden in England was of inestimable value,
not only at Horseferry Road, London, but in the
war hospitals throughout England and among the
men in the trenches; and not only among Methodist
soldiers. The authorities recognised Mr. Holden’s
services to the Empire by conferring on him the dis-
tinction of the military C.B.E. —an honour not easily
won.
In December, 1917, it was reported that Chaplain
V. R. Bradbury had been nominated by his Brigadier-
General for the Military Cross. Two Methodist
chaplains of Victoria, the Revs. A. P. Bladen and
J. A. Gault, received the military 0.8. E. decoration.
Mr. Bladen served as a brigade chaplain on Gallipoli
and in France, and had the longest term of service
of any of our chaplains. Mr. Gault was attached to
the Helouan Convalescent Hospital in Egypt and to
the big camp at Havre, in France, through which a
constant stream of reinforcements passed to join the
various units at the Front. It was here that Mr.
Gault* developed his wonderful repertoire of
“stunts” by which he captured the interest and
*Cf, “Indiscretions of a Preacher,” by Dr. F. W. Norwood, p. 78.


attention of the soldiers, and prepared the way for
his spiritual messages and devotional hours.
In addition to the chaplains already mentioned,
thirty-one who are now ministers of the Victoria and
Tasmania Conference were in various branches of
the Australian Imperial Forces.
Several others served on transports conveying
troops to Egypt and England, while others, again,
were attached to training camps or visited the broken
men in the home hospitals.
Their Name Liveth for Evermore.
Unfortunately there are no records of the total
number of Methodists from Victoria who went to the
Front, but there is a fairly complete record of those
who fell in the Great War. They number 1430.
Their names and service records are preserved in the
archives of the Queen’s College Memorial Chapel.
Among them are the names of nine ministers and
probationers who, enlisting as privates, gave their
lives for freedom. The Queen’s College Roll of
Honour contains 213 names of men who enlisted,
and of these 30 laid down their lives. On the Wesley
College Honour Roll are inscribed 1016 names, and
its dead number 160. The Honour Roll of the
Methodist Ladies’ College keeps in memory the
eighteen old girls who served as nursing sisters.
Wesley Church, the Cathedral of Victorian Metho-
dism, has three beautiful memorial windows —one to
the Victorian chaplains, one to the sons of Methodist
ministers who gave their lives, and one to the Metho-
dist soldiers of the State. Wesley College possesses
two beautiful windows in the Adamson Hall which
commemorate two old students who made the supreme
sacrifice, and in all the churches are to be found
inscribed the names of Methodist men who freely
gave their all for God and King and Empire.


CHAPTER XXIII.
A SHEAF OF STORIES.
Be Not Unequally Yoked.
The early colonists took the apostolic injunction
“Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers ’’ very
seriously. On 10th February, 1841, the Leaders ’
Meeting expelled William Willoughby for marrying
an unbeliever, to wit Mrs. Batman, widow of John
Batman. James Dredge, who was present, remarked
that although he could not but condemn the step as
dangerous on the part of Brother Willoughby, yet he
had not sufficient evidence of the character of Mrs.
Batman to warrant him voting for such an extreme
measure.
A Nice Point in Sabbath Propriety.
The Rev. W. Butters was a heavy gentleman. One
very hot Sunday he persuaded Mr. Marsden, a local
preacher, to drive him to his appointment at St.
Kilda, and, starting on the journey, the horse became
restless, broke away from the trap, threw them
out, and rushed down the footpath in Collins Street
with the two shafts attached to him. At the Quar-
terly Meeting Bros. Butters and Marsden received a
few words of caution and admonition. They were
not to use horses and traps on a Sunday.*
Riding in the saddle to an appointment on Sunday
was right, but riding in a trap was decidedly
improper.
Crinoline Days.
In the ’sixties, when crinolines were in vogue, the
Church paper sounded a solemn warning against the
slavery of fashion. “Comfort is of no consequence,
♦“W.F.” in the “Spectator,” 1906.


if the vagaries of fashion direct its banishment.
Health is not for a moment to be considered in
opposition to fashion. Life, even, is scarcely of so
much value in the opinion of many as is submission
to the behests of fashion.’ ’ “We might fill our
pages,” said the editor, “with records of death
through wearing crinolines.”
So much more room was required in the pews by
the wearing of crinolines, that the seating capacity
of churches was seriously reduced at a time when
there was insufficient church accommodation.
“A Seatholder” wrote to “The Wesleyan
Chronicle” in 1861 stating that “Pews which
formerly seated eight persons comfortably will not
now allow room for more than five, if even two out of
that number be males; and, if all females, four is the
outside number they will hold. . . The question is
this, How is this difficulty to be met? Supposing, to
meet the present style, a revision of the seats in the
various chapels was made, the number of seats in
each pew reduced —or convert two pews into one —
and the rents advanced accordingly, you would still
have the same receipts, but not the same accommoda-
tion, in fact, less; and consequently, would be in a
worse position than before. . . Well, then, the only
feasible plan will be to charge those ladies who so
pertinaciously persist in claiming so much more room
than fairly belongs to them the additional rent, and
allow those who choose the alternative to pay the
present rate. lam a seatholder, and generally
deposit my hat under the seat, but I do not exag-
gerate when I say that nine times out of ten, on
looking for it, I find it has been whipped along to
the other end of the pew, which, of course, adds to
the cost of my sitting. Perhaps, if the respective
Superintendents would drop a gentle hint from the
pulpit, or read the third chapter of Isaiah, the long-
looked-for result might be obtained without adopting
such stringent methods as I have suggested.”


True Catholicity.
Those early ministers were not exclusively con-
cerned with shepherding their own flocks—certainly
they could not be accused of coddling the saints.
With apostolic zeal they were for ever endeavouring
to reach the outsider and the unsaved. See the Rev.
George Richards, of Geelong, setting out with the
Rev. Isaac Harding in February, 1856—riding to
the foot of the You Yangs, then striking inland
across pathless plains and through trackless bush,
ever on the look out for the smoke of a settler’s hut,
and praying in every house they visited, and
preaching wherever they could muster a congregation.
Near the Anakies they came across a family of
Irish Roman Catholics. What they did was to sing
that grand hymn of St. Bernard’s:
Jesu, the very thought of Thee,
With sweetness fills my breast,
and then read a passage out of Thomas a’Kempis.
“We made these the groundwork of our remarks,”
wrote Richards, “carefully avoiding allusions to
Popish errors as would shock their prejudices. They
pressed us to visit them again, should we journey
in that direction.”
Guided only by a pocket compass and the position
of sun, but impelled by a love of souls, these
two ministers struck inland, fearful lest any whom
they could humanly reach should live and die without
Christ.
A Hat With a History.
Among the men whose sermons have been long
remembered is the Rev. Nathaniel Bennett (b. 1833,
d. 1923). All over the State there are men and women
who say: “I heard Nathaniel Bennett preach at
and I can tell you what he preached about.” He was
primarily a preacher, and ministered in many of the
best Circuits. At Clunes he had a regular Sunday


congregation of a thousand, and he promised them
that, if they would come out to the week-night
service, they would receive just as good as he gave
them on Sundays. The result was that for the
years of his term at Clunes there were five hundred
people at his week-night services.
Nathaniel Bennett had among his souvenirs an old
hat with a hole in it. The history of it was this:
In 1873 he was stationed at Longford, and riding out
of the town he was fired at by a bushranger, who
mistook him for a trooper. The shot passed
through his hat without touching his head. The
old parsonage at Longford had iron bars as a
protection against bushrangers.
Free Trade in Beards.
The gallery of Methodist men through the
century shows marked changes of fashions. At
one time they were clean shaven but later began
to glory in their beards. It would appear that
beards were out of fashion in the ’sixties, for “A
Local Preacher” wrote to the Church paper com-
plaining of persecution. “I submit to daily self-
inflicted woe because public opinion, or at least
Methodist public opinion, compels me. . . When I
heard of the arrival, from ‘ parts beyond the seas,’
of the reverend gentleman* who has been labouring
so successfully among us, I rejoiced because I heard
of the power which accompanied his preaching—l
rejoiced still more when I saw him, and observed that
he allowed his hair to grow where Providence
ordained. . .
“Alas! I soon found myself exposed to a storm
of persecution. I was told that it was scandalous
and disgraceful for a local preacher to go beyond
the orthodox whisker —it was conforming to the
world —it was absurd vanity, and so forth. All these
railing accusations I bore meekly, till at length one
of our hearers told me that ‘if John Wesley were to
♦Rev. William Taylor.


see me entering a Methodist pulpit with a face like
that, he would kick me out.’ This was the last
feather on the earners back. I gave in all at once,
went off to a barber’s, threw myself into the operating
chair with a flop of despair, and was shaved. I have
been hoarse ever since, but I suppose a man had
better lose his voice than not conform to the
prejudices of society.
“Now, Sir, it really appears to me that I am an
ill-used individual. We have free trade in corn—
let us have free trade in beards also. . .
“Why, let me ask —why were they given us, if it
were not intended that they should be allowed to
grow? There is nothing superfluous in any created
thing, and I don’t think that we can improve on the
design of Him Who made us. lam told that a beard
is allowable, but a moustache is an abomination!
Where then is the line which it is iniquitous to pass?
At which hair does the sin commence? Can we not
have the orthodox limits prescribed by lawfully
constituted authority ? 9 ’
A Cornish Testimony .
Religion was very real to the Cornishmen who
planted Methodism on the goldfields. They were at
their best in the class meetings, where their quaint,
forthright testimonies touched the heart of things.
John Rowe was the class leader of the early morning
class meeting at Long Gully, Bendigo. One winter
time, in giving his testimony, he said, “This morning
whilst lying in bed I gave thanks to God for a warm
pair of blankets, and was tempted to lie in and enjoy
them. But I remembered that God had given me
a good warm suit of clothes and good boots, so I
thanked Him for them and got up and came to
class.”
What power these men had in prayer! The Rev.
H. S. Heath tells of Jacob Perry praying in the
California Hill Church, Bendigo. “Oh Loord, our


lives as we do live them deown here ’pon earth are
sometimes like the course o’ the moon fightin’ her
way through trackless cleouds to paths of perfect
light.”
What It Cost to Feed the Preacher’s Horse.
The Kev. Henry Saloway,* who opened the first
church in Warracknabeal in 1876, recalls that it was
a very dry season. Farmers could not procure hay
or chaff for their beasts. At one of the hospitable
homes near Warracknabeal, where he sometimes
stayed on a Saturday night, the settler reserved the
growth of a small paddock of English ryegrass to
feed the horses of visiting preachers. Knowing,
however, that grass is very scarce in times of drought,
Mr. Saloway packed a small bag of hay-chaff, crushed
oats and bran in the valise, which he carried on his
saddle. On reaching the friend’s house, he received
the usual hearty welcome, and was told to go inside
and rest. Noticing a wheat bag partly filled outside
the door, he felt curious, and said he would take his
horse away first. His host picked up the bag and
walked with him, saying, “I am sorry we have no
feed for your horse,” to which the preacher replied,
“My horse will be all right, for I have brought some
feed with me, but what have you got in that bag?”
He blushed and said, “I don’t like to tell you.”
“Well,” said the preacher, “I am not going to put
my horse into your stable until you tell me. ’ ’ Then he
confessed. “My wife and I knew you would be
coming, and so we robbed the bed.” They slept on
a mattress containing chaff. Mr. Saloway was
greatly touched by this sacrificial kindness, as well
he might be.
A Conference Problem.
The Conference was gathered in its annual sessions.
The matter of stationing ministers was under con-
sideration, when it was discovered that there was one
of the Conference, 1909.


minister too many, for whom no Circuit could be
found. The problem was acute, and neither the
statesmen nor the wire-pullers could see a way out
of the difficulty. Then one of the humorists of that
day rose and ventured a solution of the dark
problem.
The Rev. A. R. Edgar was a member of the Con-
ference, a man of generous physical proportions. At
the same time there was a brother who was very
small, the shortest man in the ministry. Remem-
bering these facts he said, “Mr. President, I have a
solution to this grave problem. The light has dawned
upon me; the light is risen upon me. I move that
the President be requested to ask Mr. Edgar to
swallow Bro. Littleman, and so solve our problem.”
There was a roar of laughter, and the tension was
relieved. The problem was not solved in the novel
way suggested, but it was solved.
Drawing the Customer.
Ralph and Jessie Longstatf were pioneers in the
Goulburn Valley, and settled at Shepparton even
before it was a village. Mr. Longstatf opened a little
store to serve the farmers as they came. There was
no church, and the mother would take her numerous
brood under her wing and hold a Sunday School.
Most of the ministers who went that way were lodged
in the Longstatf’s hospitable home. Their son, Sir
John Longstatf, the famous portrait painter, early
revealed his talent for art, but the practical father
was bent on a business training—art was right enough
as a hobby. One day he was left in charge of the
store, when a farmer from an outlying district came
in, and ordered a number of articles which were to be
booked. Young John carefully made out the order,
and reported it to his father when he returned.
But he had forgotten to ask the farmer for his name
and address. When his father asked what the man
was like, he picked up a pencil and drew the man on a


piece of wrapping paper —drew him so unmistakably
that his father immediately knew the customer, and
inserted his name on the bill.
One of the Heroes.
There is a red strand of heroism and sacrifice
running through these hundred years of Methodist
life. William Rogers was a member of the Eaglehawk
Church, meeting in an eight o’clock Sabbath morning
class. In 1892 he was working in the Virginia Mine
at Eaglehawk, when he faced almost certain death
in an attempt to save the life of his mate. The
frightful peril he encountered was of such a nature
as to daunt the stoutest heart. He went down
alone in the darkness, where the spluttering fuses
were glowing with four charges of dynamite under
them, and carried his mate, Sampson Bray to safety.
“When the accident happened,” he said, “my first
thought was for his poor soul, and I resolved to try
and give him another chance.” Bray was an uncon-
verted man for whom he had often prayed and spoken
to concerning his soul. As they lay in the hospital
he said, “Sampson, I have been able to save your
body, but the Lord alone can save your soul. Give
Him your heart now.” Whereupon the poor fellow
wept and cried like rain. The story has a fine sequel,
and Rogers had his true reward, for his mate,
Sampson Bray, was soundly converted.
Errors of Darkness.
In the Williamstown Circuit a good Methodist
woman was getting ready for church one winter
evening. The practice of delaying preparation for
church until the last few minutes, and until someone
suddenly said, “There’s the bell,” was unfortunately
common in this house. The woman was hustling to
complete her toilette and be in time for service.
The rest of the family save one daughter had already
gone. “Put out the light, Ethel,” the mother said,
and in a few minutes they were “under way.” They


had not gone many steps, however, when the mother
said, “Oh, I’ve forgotten my fur.’’ She hurried
back, and with gloved hand reached her fur from the
wardrobe and again set out for church. When they
entered the brightly-lighted porch of the church, and
were about to proceed up the aisle, the daughter said
with a start, “Mother, look!’’ The lady to her
dismay and chagrin found instead of her fur a pair
of her husband’s pants dangling from her arm.
With nervous hands, blushing face and lightning
speed the pants were whipped off, rolled up and
deposited under the seat. It needed more grace than
the lady possessed to forget the pants, especially
during the anthem, “As pants the hart for cooling
streams.” The sermon failed to impress her, and
it was a relief when the benediction was pronounced.
As they were leaving the church Ethel, with a twinkle
in her eye, said, “Mother, put on your fur!”
This happening is vouched for by the Rev. W. T.
Hiatt, a minister of unimpeachable veracity.
Learning by Teaching.
The Rev. William Harris has treasured the story of
a miner who was converted, and on the first Sunday
sought the church. Finding that he was early he
went into the Sunday 7 School, where the superin-
tendent, noticing the stranger on the back seat, asked
if he would help. Now this dear brother had been
at work underground since he was nine or ten, and
didn’t really know the letters of the alphabet, but
he took the infant class, and as he tried to teach so
he learned. Holding up the printed cards of the
alphabet, he enquired, ‘ ‘ What letter is that ? ” “‘A, ’
sir,” came the reply, and confirming the accuracy
of the answer by the replies of the other children,
he exclaimed, “Quite right”; and that day in the
Sunday School he taught and learned the alphabet.
This lovable Cornishman became an able, devoted
and popular local pfeacher.


Rigging the Gas Meter.
When Dr. Alexander McCallum was Superin-
tendent of the Central Mission he married a plumber
to the lady of his choice. When the marriage service
was over the man asked him what was the ‘ t damage. *’
“Oh,” said Dr. McCallum, “you do not seem
too well off. I will make you a present of the fee. ’ ’
The man was overwhelmed by the kindness, and
turning to the Doctor, said, “See, mister, you have
been very good to me. If you like, I will show you
how to rig your gas meter so that it won’t register.”
When Dr. McCallum Raised His Hat.
Dr. Alexander McCallum was once travelling in a
train with several working men, and, as he was not in
clerical garb, they did not know he was a minister.
Several times they indulged in blasphemous language,
using the name of Christ. Bach time they did so the
Doctor quietly raised his hat. After a while this was
noticed by one of the men, who remarked, “There is
something doing here,” and turned to Dr. McCallum
for an explanation, who said, “You will excuse me,
but you have mentioned a good many times the name
of a very dear Friend of mine, and so great is my
respect for Him and my reverence for His name
that I felt that I must raise my hat every time that
name was uttered.” “I don’t know who this bloke
is, mates,” responded the man, “but we are a lot
of rotters, that’s what we are.” Dr. McCallum said
that his silent rebuke was so effective that, during
the remaining part of the journey, which lasted a
long time, Christ’s name was not taken in vain again.
When Howard Ran Away.
The Rev. Henry Howmrd, a preacher of inter-
national fame, after serving in Victorian Circuits
with commanding success and exercising a State-
wide ministry for twenty years from Pirie Street,
Adelaide, became —as a supernumerary—pastor of


the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, New York.
Dr. Joseph Dare was the first to call him to the
work, and initiated him as a local preacher at the
age of seventeen.
Howard’s first attempt at public speaking was a
decided failure. It occurred at the Brunswick Street
Church, Fitzroy, where he had been brought up as
a lad. It was an anniversary occasion. He had
prepared a most elaborate speech, and had hardly
gasped out the first sentence when the audience, like
a dissolving view, faded out of the back wall of the
church; and thereupon he lost his self-possession.
He was only aroused to consciousness by the cheers
of the audience, and the chairman, Dr. Dare, saying,
“Have you got no notes?” He replied, “No.”
“Then take a drink of water.” Notwithstanding the
drink, taken in orthodox fashion, he still remained
speechless. The doctor’s voice again sounded,
“Plunge into the middle of it,” but to Howard the
middle and both ends had disappeared, and seeing
an open door he escaped into the vestry.
He waited on Dr. Dare very early the following
morning and declared his resolve not to make any
more attempts at public speaking; and when, as if
nothing had happened the night before, the Doctor
asked, “Why?” he replied that he had broken down
so horribly that it was vain his making any further
attempt. He replied, “My dear boy, I don’t call
that a breakdown.” “What, then, do you call a
breakdown?” said Howard. “When a man gets up
and talks for an hour and says nothing,” he replied.
The Plastic Moment.
Howard used to describe himself as a sort of eccle-
siastical glazier who set windows into dark subjects.
His sermons were distinguished by striking illustra-
tions. Speaking of the plastic moments of life, he
told how he went upon one occasion with a friend
to the studio of a sculptor. After they had knocked


for about eight minutes they were admitted, to see
a shapeless wooden block upon the table before them.
The owner apologised profusely for keeping them
waiting, but said, pointing to the block, “I dare not
leave it!” What was it? Inside that block was a
plaster cast of an angel, and he had been engaged
in pouring in the last few drops of plaster when
their knock came. “What would have happened if
you had left it?” he asked. For answer he pointed
to a ruined heap of headless and wingless angels.
Mr. Howard used this as an illustration shortly after-
wards, and the following morning he was going on a
journey when a friend met him and invited him into
his railway carriage. He said, “You know, Howard,
that illustration of yours won’t work?” He asked
“Why not?” “Because plaster of Paris can easily be
turned into its constituent elements by passing it
through the furnace.” “Can it?” he asked; “then
that completes my illustration, ’ ’ he exclaimed
triumphantly. “When once the plastic moment has
arrived in the history of the cast, of the youth or
the maiden, nothing but the closest attention will
serve to keep it from disaster; and if that is lacking,
then there is no hope for it but to pass through the
furnace of affliction. ”
Have Ye Not Read?
In April, 1881, the Rev. John Inskip began evan-
gelistic services in the old bluestone church in
Lydiard Street, Ballarat. The meetings were very
simple. There was no large choir —no special attrac-
tions beyond the Gospel message, but it proved to be a
great harvest time throughout the city. One of John
Inskip’s powerful sermons was on “Infidelity,” in
the course of which he remarked that many who
attacked the Bible had never read it.
He told of an infidel lecturer who had been making
a terrific attack upon the Bible, and, at the close of
his lecture, which was given in the open air, he invited


questions. A farmer’s son stepped up to the plat-
form and said, “I would like to ask you a question,
sir. ” “ Yes, what is it, my man ? ” “ Have you ever
read the Bible?” “Why, yes.” “Have you read
Paul’s Epistle to Job?” “Of course I have.”
A Whitsuntide Testimony.
The superintendent minister was appointed to
preach at Tooleen, the weakest place in the Circuit.
The place was some miles from Elmore, the roads
were bad, and there were no motor cars in those
days. The largest congregation which he ever saw
there numbered eleven, including organist and
minister. On this particular morning the service
was a good one; the sermon was delivered as
if to a congregation a hundred times as large.
The Benediction was no sooner announced than
a quaint old man hurried to the church door,
and stood there before anyone left. With his
old hat in one hand and his hymn book
wrapped in a coloured handkerchief in the other,
he cried out: “It’s Whitsunday to-day! Pentecost!
On Whit Tuesday it will be twenty-seven years since
God pardoned my sins and made me His child.”
Everybody was impressed. That simple testimony
did more good than the sermon.
The Scotch Steward.
Rev. Thomas Collins, who was very fond of a good
horse, found on his arrival in the Yarram Circuit
that the horse provided was anything but satisfac-
tory. After using it a few times he decided that it
was useless to attempt to work with such a poor
animal. He therefore consulted with the Circuit
stewards to see what could be done. The stewards
advised him to look out for a suitable horse, and the
Circuit would buy it. Before long a horse was bought,
and proved very satisfactory. The young minister
was greatly pleased with his purchase, and visiting


the home of one of the church stewards he asked him
what he thought of the new Circuit horse. _
1 < Surely ye ha ’ nae bought a horse wi oot the
consent of the Quarterly Meeting ?’ ’ asked the
steward, who was a Scotchman. “Oh, yes,” replied
the minister, “the old horse was really useless, and
the Circuit stewards agreed for me to buy this one
at once.” “But,” said Sandy, “suppose the Quar-
terly Meeting will nae agree to take it, what will ye
do? No, young man, ye should ha’ waited till
the Meeting.” “Well, said the minister, “I do not
mind whether the Circuit buys the horse _ or not. I
have already been offered £3 on my bargain.” “Na,
na,” replied the steward, “ye must no do thaat.
No more was heard about the Circuit objecting to
buy the new horse.
A New Amen.
The Rev. A. J. Collocott, during the course of his
Victorian ministry, gave much time and thought to
work among prisoners. He prayed with a man who
was on the eve of discharge, and prayed that if they
did not meet again on earth they might meet in
heaven. “I second the motion,” said the prisoner,
without a suspicion of irreverence or insincerity.
It was his version of the “ Amen.”
Another prisoner expressed his admiration _ot
Moses by saying quite naturally, “A cunning
gentleman was that bloke.”
Worship and Weight.
The Rev. James Smith noticed a very stout lady in
his congregation one Sunday afternoon. He won-
dered how she had managed to travel the five miles
from her home. The family had but recently arrived
in the district, and there was no road for a vehicle.
She informed him that she had ridden a horse. As
she weighed in the vicinity of eighteen stone, he
was puzzzled as to how she had mounted. After the


service he saw how this feat was accomplished. She
piled up boxes a little higher than the saddle, and
then mounted. The horse gave way considerably
when her weight came on its back. “I thanked
God,” says Mr. Smith, “that there were people who
loved worship so much as to triumph over difficulties
such as presented themselves in this case.”
He Never Won Another Soul.
The Rev. Henry Yeo recalls stirring times at
Pimpinio—a little township between Horsham and
Dimboola. There he began his probation, as did
also the Rev. Frances Mason.
Pimpinio, along with Kalkee, West Wail, and
Armstrong’s Woolshed, was for all practical purposes,
except for the superintendence of the Horsham
minister, an independent Circuit. Before a proba-
tioner was sent, the Circuit w r as worked by a
remarkable man named Charles Rundle. Mr. Rundle
was a single man—if he had been married neither
domestic storms nor curtain lectures would have
affected him much, for he was almost as deaf as a
post. He had no settled home, but he lived
amongst the farmers. The farmers fed his
horse, fed him, and gave him enough money
to satisfy his needs without any fixed salary.
During his time the fire of a great and glorious
revival spread through and beyond his Circuit. In
the revival many were converted who afterwards
became pillars in the church. The results were
splendid, and for the most part they were lasting.
In that revival one man walked more than a hundred
miles,, going from his home at Greenland Dam to
Pimpinio on eleven successive nights, seeking salva-
tion. Seeking, he found, and after his conversion
he carried himself as one who had found a pearl of
great price and knew it. 1 * One does not care to say
it, writes Mr. Yeo, “but it may do good to
those whom God may be using in a similar


way. Mr. Rundle, speaking at a public meeting
soon after the revival, seemed somewhat elated, and
referred to his success and the real or seeming failure
of the minister to get conversions. The minister, who
was present, wrote on a piece of paper and passed it
to Mr. Rundle, ‘ One soweth and the other reapeth. ’ ’ ’
So far as Mr. Yeo knows, Mr. Rundle never won
another soul.
In the Days of the Kelly Gang.
The Rev. F. C. Vian’s first appointment as a pro-
bationer in the ministry of the Primitive Methodist
Church was at Benalla, where he arrived on Good
Friday, 1880. The town was the headquarters of
the special police force, which, under Superintendent
Hare, had been despatched for the capture of the
Kelly Gang.
Mr. Vian’s first night at Greta was spent at the
home of Mr. Tom Smith, a respectable farmer, who
with his son George and the police had gone in
search of some valuable horses taken from his
property before the murder of the police at Stringy
Bark Creek, near Mansfield. The Smiths were
known to have suspected the Kellys, and it was a
common opinion that Mr. Tom was a “marked man”
in consequence.
On the Sunday morning Mr. Yian was with the
Smiths in their milking yard when a rider—sug-
gesting an expert stockman—passed by simply saying
“Good morning,” and riding on in the direction of
Oxley. Smith failed to recognise him, but a girl
engaged in milking positively asserted that this was
Ned Kelly, an assertion which Mr. Yian verified a
few weeks later when in a wounded condition the
outlaw was taken to the Benalla police station.
Smith’s companion that morning procured for him
the “benefit of the clergy,” as Kelly had gone out
in quest of his life.


When Ned himself was caught and deposited
in the lock-up at Benalla, Mr. Yian visited him in
the cell. He complained of the heat. At last,
his bleeding being somewhat staunched, “I prof-
fered my hat to the constable supporting him, who
made an improvised fan of it,” says Mr. Vian. From
there, a few hours later, Kelly was conveyed to
Melbourne for medical attention, for trial, and for
execution.
Improving the Occasion.
When the Rev. George Cole was minister at the
Lygon Street Church, he was walking to his appoint-
ment on a Sunday morning and saw a number of
boys playing football with an empty tin. Seeing an
opportunity for saying a good word, he approached
one of the boys and asked, “Son, do you know what
day it is?” The lad appeared to have been ren-
dered temporarily speechless. Gradually edging
away towards one of his mates, he recovered his
tongue and said, “I say, Bill, this bloke’s been out
all night and he doesn’t know what day it is.”
The Changed Sermon.
One of the oldest local preachers in Ballarat was
John Polkinghorne —a most lovable man with a very
tender heart. Going to his appointment one Sunday
morning in the “Gospel Chariot” with a number of
his brethren, he told his experience of the previous
Sunday when his appointment had been at the
Ballarat Gaol.
Said he, “I went there intending to preach on
repentance. I had divided my subject into five parts:
Conviction, Contrition, Confession, Resurrection and
Restitution. But dear me, when I went in and saw
all these poor men before me I felt that I could not
preach as I intended. So I took as my text, ‘God so
loved the world! ’ ”


1 he Circuit Horse.
When the late Rev. A. R. Edgar was stationed at
Sebastopol, a horse and buggy was provided for him.
A former owner of the horse had been in the habit
of pulling up at a certain wayside hotel, and Mr.
Edgar found that he could not get this horse to pass
the hotel. At first he thought that it was because
there was a water trough in front, but he found that
the horse did not always drink when he stopped. The
truth came out at last, and Mr. Edgar had to endure
a deal of good-natured chaff from the local preachers
who sometimes used the buggy and found that the
horse would stop at the hotel as of yore.
Postponed Weddings.
In 1888, when the Rev. Charles Angwin was sta-
tioned at Wodonga, arrangements were made for him
to perform a marriage ceremony in the Tallangatta
Home Mission Station. The day was pouring with
rain, and he had a wet journey, riding a distance of
twenty-five miles. It was so wet that the bride and
bridegroom thought that the minister would not
come. He found the bride scrubbing the kitchen
floor, and the bridegroom in the paddock cutting
wood. Having brought them in, he performed the
ceremony, and left them quite satisfied.
When the same minister was stationed at Pyramid
Hill, he arranged to go a few miles out and marry a
widower and widow at 9 p.m. A thunderstorm
flooded the countryside, and creeks had to be forded.
As, under the circumstances, he was not expected,
he found on arrival at 10 p.m. that the bridegroom
had gone to bed, and the bride had retired to rest
in an adjacent house. He roused them both, and
the ceremony was duly performed.
The Son Who Remembered.
In the Avoca Church there is a memorial window
which was unveiled in honour of the memory of a


mother who died thirty years before, the cost of
the window, over £2OO, being borne by a son. At
the time of her death he could not have afforded it,
but, some years later he went to Adelaide, where he
prospered in business. But he did not forget his
dear old mother, and what he owed to her.
Job on the Arm of Moses.
When Miss Job first presented herself at the Con-
ference as a representative, the fathers were rather
aghast, and the question was raised as to whether a
woman was eligible. She was asked to take a seat at
the back of Wesley Church until the point was settled.
Their verdict being given in her favour, the Rev.
Moses Bullas went to the lady and, offering her his
arm, led her to the platform and presented her to the
President. One of the Conference wits remarked
that “It was a most impressive sight to see Job
walking down the aisle on the arm of Moses.”
On Speaking in Conference.
The Rev. Gervase Smith, D.D., was the represen-
tative of the British Conference to the General
Conference of Australasia in 1878. He attended
several sessions, and displayed great interest in all
its proceedings. On one of these occasions the dis-
tinguished visitor showed how observant he was. One
of the ministers was in the habit of rising in his
seat to speak on nearly every item of business
introduced, whether trivial or important. He yielded
to his weakness at times when Dr. Smith was present.
Thereupon the Doctor told of a member of the
British Conference who was very loquacious, and
wasted much precious time. When the President
asked him how it was that he rose so frequently
to address the Conference, he said, “Mr. President,
an idea strikes me and I rise to give expression to
it.” The President retorted, “Brother, if you only
waited till then, it wouldn’t matter.”


Some Quaint Prayers.
In the days when the mines of Western Australia
were flourishing, great numbers of miners left the
Eastern States to seek their fortunes in the far
west.
At this time there worshipped at Pleasant Street,
Ballarat, an old Cornishman named John Prater.
One Sunday evening, at the after-meeting, he was
leading in prayer, and in the course of his prayer
he quoted lines from one of the hymns, and so his
prayer ran:
“0 Saviour Christ, our w r oes dispel,
For some are sick and some are sad.
And some have gone to Western Australia.”
The Rev. W. J. Palamountain used to tell of a
brother in one of the Melbourne suburbs who had a
style in prayer that was all his own. One Sunday
evening his prayer was as follows: “0 Lord, the
people come to church nowadays, and they hear the
Gospel preached, and then they go away and forget
all about it. O Lord, it’s just like pouring water
over a duck’s back, it goes in at one ear and comes
out at the other.”
The Prizefighter’s Conversion.
The Rev. David O’Donnell was an effective evan-
gelist, who exercised an Australasian ministry. He
was conducting a series of revival services at a
diggings known as Greytown. One evening there
came into the meeting a burly man in his shirt-
sleeves, and sat just inside the door. Before the
Benediction was pronounced he was outside and
away.
Mr. O’Donnell asked one of the men who the
stranger was. “Oh, don’t you know? that is Tom
Pearce.” “And who is Tom Pearce?” “Why, the
prizefighter of the gully.” “Bring him to-morrow


evening/ ’ said the preacher. And Tom Pearce
was brought, but this time with a coat on.
Mr. O’Donnell began his address, but had only
spoken a few minutes when Tom began to move the
seats in the church. No one dared to interfere
with him. When he had cleared a space of
about ten feet square, he knelt down in the middle
of it and began to cry to God for mercy. His agony
was terrible to witness. Mr. O’Donnell went to
speak to him, but he waived him aside with his am.
“Let me alone,” he said, “Let me alone.”
After some time his cries for mercy ceased. He
rose from his knees and, looking round the little
church he said, ‘ ‘ What a change! What a change!
What a change! ” his voice rising higher and higher.
The change had surely come. His face was changed,
the brutal lines were smoothed. He was a new man.
The change was permanent. Tom Pearce lived for
many years a living witness to the power of God.
An Old Church Minute Book-
It was a Sunday afternoon on Mount Korong in
1856. On the newly-opened goldfields motley groups
were scattered. The largest was at an open-air
service. The preacher was a coloured man, a native
of Jamaica. He had the oratorical gifts of his race,
and the fervour of the Methodist preachers of half
a century ago. A little girl went home to tell her
mother of the preacher and the service, and of the
announcement which he had made, that on next Sun-
day there would be a Sunday School in the Wesleyan
Chapel which was to be erected during the week.
The mother’s remark was, “I am not going to send
you where a black man preaches.”
Little did that mother know that she would live
to regard the coloured preacher as one of the best
of men, and to sit gladly at his feet as a religious
teacher. The preacher was George Buntine He
was known for years as the Methodist Bishop of


Mount Korong, preaching three Sabbaths out of the
four with wonderful variety, acceptability, and
unction. Many a dying digger was helped to the
Cross by his exhortations and prayers, and the
miner’s mates respected the coloured man, who,
standing by their comrade’s grave, read, so sympa-
thetically, the service for the burial of the dead.
One of the items of business at an early trustee
meeting was to authorise the purchase of a bell. Mr.
Buntine, ready for every good work, was appointed
bellringer, and a minute authorised the ringing of
the bell for a quarter of an hour before the service.
The watchnight service in 1857 commenced at
nine o’clock. Candles were of the well-known Neva
brand. In 1859 they cost 1/6 a pound. The
candles’ bill for that year amounted to £4/12/7-|.
The following year 1/9 and l/10i a pound were paid
for Neva candles. In 1860 the church lighting was
revolutionised through the introduction of kerosene.
Lamp glasses cost 1/6 each and kerosene was 10/-
a gallon.
A Pocket Edition.
At Maldon, a man of large stature appeared as
a deputationist at the missionary meeting. With
little tact and less grace he made the undersized Rev.
T. Easton the butt of a joke: “Why, a man could
almost put your little Superintendent into his
pocket.’’ Jimmy Jeffrey, also a man of short stature,
followed. “Mr. Chairman,” said he, speaking in his
drollest manner, “the former speaker said he could
almost put Mr. Easton into his pocket. One thing I
am sure of, if he got our little Superintendent in
there, he would have a great deal more in his pocket
than ever he had in his head.” It was like an
electric shock. There was a moment’s dead silence,
then a burst of deafening applause.


The Little Minister.
Rev. Edward Wason Nye (b. 1834, d. 1907) is
remembered as a courteous, scholarly little gentle-
man with a legal mind. For all that he was short-
sighted and wore thick glasses, he was one of the
far-seeing men of his generation. This precise little
man was at California Hill when the fire of revival
swept through Bendigo. A big, burly Cornishman
went forward and knelt at the communion rail seek-
ing forgiveness and peace. When the light came
after an agonising struggle, in his ecstasy he picked
up the little minister from within the communion
rails and carried him up one aisle and down the
other, rejoicing and exclaiming, “God bless the little
man! ’ ’
Sometimes a Light Surprises.
Samuel Coombe, of Timor, in the Maryborough
Circuit, was a typical Cornishman. His love of
music kept him in the church choir even when he
was not living the Christian life. When over fifty
years of age he was singing in the anthem on a
Sunday morning, when suddenly he dropped his
book and shouted, “Hallelujah.” He took the girl
standing in front by the shoulders and said, “Shut
up singing and shout Hallelujah, Sam Coombe’s
saved.”
From that decisive day he gave himself royally to
church life, and within two years was a class leader
and local preacher. He was very emotional and
original. When he prayed in public he could be
heard a long way off. Quaint phrases were often
used by him.
“If our souls ain’t no fatter in twelve months’
time than they be to-night, we’ve been feeding on
mighty poor diet. Lord, do’ee give us a better
appetite.”
On one occasion in the Inkerman Street Church,
at a meeting conducted by the Rev. J. W. Grove,
then Director of Young People’s Department, he


called “Praise the dear Lord.” A young lady
nudged him and said, “Sh, Mr. Coombe, you’re not
in Timor now.” He retorted, “It’s the Father’s
house, and if I want to praise the dear Lord I’ll
praise the dear Lord.”
Freshness in Preaching.
The preachers who have kept the dew of freshness
in their sermons over a long period of years have
written them with the diligence of inspired crafts-
men. Henry Drummond used to say that the crime
of evangelism is intellectual laziness. The Rev.
John Nall was an evangelist, who trained his mind
and pruned his words. He was a born preacher
who never took his natural gifts for granted. His
sermons were carefully written in shorthand, and the
moment he wrote the last word he had it all by
heart. He was not a slave of his manuscript. His
mind was free to thrust in an unprepared sentence
or an idea inspired at the moment. At St. Kilda he
quoted an unpremeditated verse of Scripture: ‘ ‘ And
whatsoever is not of faith is sin,” and that very
word wrought the conversion of a young man in the
service. Wherever John Nall went there was a
revival and the fruit remained. One striking sen-
tence of his is often repeated, “Conscience is no
guide unless God be the guide of Conscience.”
Crayfish and Temptation.
In visiting Maryborough, Charles Angwin went
to attend an early morning class meeting. One
brother in giving his experiences said: “I had a
dreadful time last night. I dreamt I was not
saved. I passed through an awful experience.”
The Cornish leader in reply said: “Of course,
brother, you are saved, that was a temptation from
the devil. My advice to you is—in future avoid late
crayfish suppers.”


The Purloined Sermon.
The Rev. John Williams, who was for some years
Secretary and later Chairman of the Tasmanian
Assembly, was associated as a probationer with the
Rev. Brian Wibberley, one of the best preachers of
the Primitive Methodist Church, and one who loved
a practical joke. On the occasion of a Sunday
School Anniversary when Mr. Williams was to take
the evening service, his superintendent artfully
drew from him the text and substance of the sermon
he intended to preach. Sitting in the congregation
in the afternoon he was dismayed to hear his
precious sermon delivered almost verbatim with
great power and unction by the superintendent.
History does not record what provision was made
for the spiritual edification of the evening congre-
gation, but sweet revenge came at the Public
Meeting which followed during the week. The
church was so crowded that access to the pulpit
was blocked except by means of a stepladder, and
the superintendent made a somewhat undignified
figure as he climbed by this means over the side
and fell into the pulpit. When the young proba-
bationer’s turn came he gave a good account of
himself, as he dealt with the text, “He that
entereth not by the door but elimbeth up some
other way the same is a thief and a robber.” The
congregation roared with laughter as he wittily
depicted the super, sacrificing his dignity by
climbing into the pulpit, and then proceeded to tell
the whole story of the purloining of his sermon.


CHAPTER XXIV.
THE GOSPEL IN INK.
The Church Paper and Its Editors.
In July, 1857, there appeared the first number of a
shy little blue-covered octavo monthly burdened with
the cumbrous title of “The Victorian Miscellany and
Wesleyan Chronicle. 7 ’ The publishers were Messrs.
Shaw, Harnett and Co., of 36 Bourke Street East.
Three months later it shed “The Victorian
Miscellany, 77 and became simply “The "Wesleyan
Chronicle. 77 Its declared design was “to record and
widely disseminate among our people accounts of
revival of religion, notices of missionary meetings,
chapel and Sunday School anniversaries, intelligence
of our missions, and of the affairs of the Connexion
generally, with reports of committees or statistics
furnished by the several District Meetings to the
Annual Conference. 77
The Rev. Isaac Harding was the father of the
newcomer, and he was its first editor. He did not
reign long in the editorial chair, for he was appointed
by the Conference to New Zealand, and sailed thither
on 31st March, 1858. That forerunner of the
honourable line of scribes was a gracious, cultured
spirit, though without any pretensions to literary
grace. Howbeit, he made a good beginning.
The Rev. J. S. Waugh, freshly returned from a
visit to England, succeeded Mr. Harding. An
erudite man of scholarly mind with a flowing style,
he nursed the infant journal on to its feet. For
some time the “Chronicle 77 did not pay its way, and
the advisability of ceasing publication was seriously
contemplated. Better counsels prevailed, however,
and it was decided to issue a larger and better


journal, and in January, 1861, it came out boasting
sixteen quarto pages. From that date it managed
to keep abreast of expenses. The insistent itinerant
system swept the editor away to Ballarat in 1862,
and the Rev. William Hill took up the pen. The
Conference was no respecter of editors, and after
one brief year, just when he was learning to wield
the imposing editorial “we,” he was moved on to
Castlemaine. The sixth volume
“published under the direction of the Wesleyan
Methodist Conference.”
John Christian Symons.
Thus far the editors were ministers in full Circuit
work, but the Conference, growing in wisdom, decided
to relieve a minister from Circuit work and officially
appoint him “Book Steward and Editor.” John
Christian Symons was fittingly chosen for this
newly-created office. Henceforth the “Chronicle”
was published from the Wesleyan Book Depot,
Wesley Church, Lonsdale Street.
Symons (b. 1820, d. 1894), who took part in the
founding of the Y.M.C.A. both in London* and
Melbourne, combined literary with practical and
administrative gifts. His “Life of Draper” is an
excellent piece of work, and provides a valuable
survey of the period through which his subject
moved. He was a man of conspicuous executive
ability, who dwelt in the Innermost. In the affairs
which required negotiation with the Government he
was the trusted representative of the Church. His
wise counsels and the respect in which he was held
by men of authority were of real service to the Con-
nexion. An ecclesiastical lawyer, he played a great
part in drafting the Constitution which became
necessary with the establishment of the General Con-
ference, and also in framing the Model Deed upon
♦He shared the honour of founding the Y.M.C.A. with
George Williams, and was the first secretary.


which Methodist property is held. His painstaking
work in compiling the Book of Laws, in which he was
associated with the Rev. W. P. Wells, evoked the
gratitude of the whole Church in Australia. He was
honoured with the Presidency of the Victoria and
Tasmania Conference, and later of the General Con-
ference. The one miscalculation of his useful career
was the ill-advised building of the Conference Hall,
which proved unsuitable, and plunged the Church
into financial difficulty.*
During the thirteen years in which he edited the
“Wesleyan Chronicle,” he gave leadership on all
great public questions—particularly those concern-
ing education, temperance and Sabbath observance.
Moreover, he championed the Church when it was
attacked, but his strength was given to expounding
and defending the Christian faith.
The Editorial in the January number for 1867
remarked: “With the present issue we commence
the tenth volume of the “Wesleyan Chronicle.” For
the colonies this is a venerable age to reach.”
The Murdered Editor.
The year 1869 was a tragic one for the
“Chronicle.” Symons was away in England, and
the Revs. William Hill and Benjamin Field became
acting-editors. After breaking down in health as a
missionary in Ceylon, Hill came to Victoria in 1853.
Slowly rebuilding his health, he became one of the
best preachers in the colony—his praise was in all
the Churches.
On Thursday, 13th May, 1869, he was murdered
at Pentridge Gaol by a prisoner into whose cell he
went to give spiritual counsel. He was not the
prison chaplain, but regularly visited the prisoners
out of compassion. The officials welcomed his visits,
* Built in 1889. The Conference Hall was never suitable for
the purpose intended. It was too small for the Conference,
and the acoustics were very bad. At one time it was let as a
clothing factory, but in recent years the Foreign Missionary
Society and the Conference OiHce have been located there.


and a warder opened each cell in turn and gave him
time to talk privately with the prisoners and pray
with them. On his last fatal visit he was locked in
with Ritson, who was serving a life sentence. He
talked to him kindly, and then knelt down to pray.*
As he prayed Ritson quietly drew an iron bar from
his bed, and did his fell deed. “ Devout men carried
him to his burial, and made great lamentation for
him. ” An In Memoriam volume of his sermons
was published with a sketch of his life and character
by Dr. E. I. Watkin, who described him as an “able
minister of the New Testament, in conduct unblame-
able, in doctrine uncorrupted, he had a good report
of all men, and of the truth itself.”
Field’s Theology.
The other acting editor only survived four
issues of the “Chronicle,” and was writing for it
as he lay dying. Never physically robust, his work
in India took heavy toll of his strength. His diary
at this time reveals him as a sincere, obedient Chris-
tian —a ravenous reader with a deep love of the
Greek New Testament. On his retirement from
India he was appointed to Paris, and later to several
Circuits in England, including the City Road Chapel.
During those years he became increasingly known
as a theologian and expositor of the Bible. Labouring
amid much weakness but with marked success, it
became clear that he must seek a more genial climate.
He came to Melbourne in 1866 on the day that the
wreck of the “London” was announced. For some
months he preached once a week in Bendigo, where
his noble sermons created a stir, while his “bowed
form . . . hollow voice, and pallid cheeks excited
the deepest sympathy.” He was next invited to
preach once on Sundays and lead a class at Haw-
thorn. During his two years spent in Victoria he
♦Another version is that he was in the act of closing the door
of the cell, but this was more likely to have been done by
the warder.


was never well enough to undertake regular Circuit
work. It was a very happy arrangement for him to
edit the ‘‘Chronicle ’’ and live in the “Home
Cottage ’’ at Carlton. He expressed himself as “truly
thankful at having such a means of employing my
solitary hours, and of extending an influence for
good throughout the colony. My heart burns with
anxious desire to make this paper, so long as it is in
my hands, a religious power amongst us.” But it
was not to be in his hands for long —his healthy spirit
was “liberated from its frail, suffering companion”
on Ist September, 1869, and all that was mortal
of him was laid in the Melbourne Cemetery in the
grave adjoining that of the martyred William Hill.
Field’s “Handbook of Christian Theology” was in
the press when he died. It served as a text book
for many years on both sides of the Atlantic and in
Australia.
After the two acting editors had been thus swift y
removed, the Rev. G. Daniel brought out the next
seven issues until the return of J. C. Symons in
March, 1870.
By 1871 the circulation had reached the respect-
able number of 2400 monthly, and had a fund of
accumulated profits. . .
For some years there had been a growing desire
for a weekly paper, and the Book Committee was
urged to alter the form and character of the
“Chronicle,” and issue it weekly. But the risk of
such an undertaking frightened the Committee, and
it was resolved to form a limited liability company,
which resulted in the publication of the Spectator.
The new paper, in folio form, appeared on Bth May,
1875, printed by Messrs. Mason, Firth and McCut-
cheon. J. C. Symons retained the editorship, and
the Conference recognised the “Spectator as the
organ of the Church.
Through the ’seventies the Rev. W. H. Fitchett
contributed a regular feature, entitled “Easy Chair


Chat,” and signed XYZ. His racy comment on
men and events gave evidence of that pictorial and
pungent style which was to give him international
fame as a writer.
Dr. Joseph Dare.
Symons resigned in 1876, and the Rev. Joseph
Dare became editor. Dr. Dare (b. 1831, d. 1880)
brought a great reputation to his new task. He was
one of the greatest pulpit orators of the first century
of Victorian Methodism. His noble presence,
sonorous voice, eloquent language and his stirring
evangelical message set him among the princes of
the pulpit, while as a platform speaker he was a
master of the grand style who had no superior in
Australia. The music of the Authorised Version
and the organ notes of Milton were in his speech.
It is said that he could repeat “Paradise Lost” from
memory. With all his rich, natural endowments, his
simple piety, unfeigned humility and happy spirit
commended the Gospel he proclaimed. “Honoured
more than most men, he never boasted, never assumed
any superiority over his brethren, but learned of
Him Who was meek and lowly, and walked humbly
with his God. His was a kind and truly catholic
spirit. * Prom 1856, when he came from South
Australia, he laboured in many important Circuits,
and was made President of the Conference in 1878.
Failing health compelled him to relinquish the
Spectator” in August, 1879, and he died the next
Easter Day. About half-past four he asked the time.
On being told he said, “At evening time it shall be
light.” And it was so.
Following the resignation of Dr. Dare, the direc-
tors decided to appoint an Editorial Council, of
which J. C. Symons, E. I. Watkin, and J. B. Smith
were members. The Rev. B. I. Watkin became
editor again in 1880, and J. C. Symons in 1883.
♦Minutes of Conference, 1881.


Then came the Rev. E. S. Bickford in 1884, who
edited the “Spectator” until his appointment as
Home Mission Secretary two years later. In another
chapter is told how the funds of the Society were
vastly increased, the bush work extended into terri-
tories almost unknown, and some of the best
philanthropic work ever attempted in the State was
inaugurated. In Conferences his judgment was
trusted and he had a guiding influence in debate,
particularly in consideration of ministers and Cir-
cuits. “He had,” said Samuel Knight, “a wider
outlook and a more infallible solution for every
difficulty in stationing than any other man.” Twice
he was elected President —in 1896 and 1903 —and
on both occasions worthily led the Church.
Father Wats ford.
Bickford was editor of the “Spectator” at the
threshold of his life’s best work, whereas his suc-
cessor, the Rev. J. J. Watsford, had accomplished
the greater part of his fruitful ministry. He was
the first Australian-born Methodist minister. His
father, converted under Samuel Leigh, was one of
the original Parramatta Methodists. He himself
owed his awakening to Draper in 1838 —a period
which he had thought peculiarly unproductive.
His ministry stretched through sixty-six years.
In his early years he played a great part in the
heroic age of South Sea Missions. His active min-
istry extended to every part of Australia, and every-
where there were hundreds who traced to him their
spiritual birth. During his term in South Australia
he w r as largely responsible for the founding of Prince
Alfred College. In 1871 he was President of the
Australasian Wesleyan Conference. Seven years
later he became President of the first General
Conference. In 1881 he was in London as represen-
tative to the Ecumenical Conference. To a
remarkable degree he was representative of every-
thing that is characteristic of Methodism. Ardent,


fearless, untiring—he burned with a Divine discon-
tent if a Sunday passed without some visible fruit
in the shape of a conscience convicted of sin, a human
soul brought to the point of surrender to God. His
autobiography, “Glorious Gospel Triumphs/ ’ is a
book of singular spiritual power. The Conference
of 1886 appointed him to organise the Jubilee
Thanksgiving Fund, whereby the sum of £30,968
was raised for various Church purposes.
“Watsford,” wrote Dr. Fitchett, “would have
been a man of mark in any calling. He has many
of the qualities of an orator, and a natural faculty
for leadership which is felt by everyone who comes
within the range of his influence. A fearless man,
who speaks the truth and does the right in scorn of
consequence; rich in a strong-fibred, clear-eyed
common-sense, which sees the path to be trodden
when subtler intellects often stumble and grope!”
During sixteen years of retirement he was known
and revered as “ Father ” Watsford —the saint and
patriarch of the Church. For the last three or four
years he felt that God had given him a ministry of
intercession, and he lived in an atmosphere of prayer
—prayer for the Church, prayer for the unconverted,
prayer for Christ’s Kingdom.
During part of his editorship of the “Spectator”
he was assisted by the Kev. Barnard Butchers, B.A.
The Vagabond's Libel Case .
Rev. Lorimer Fison, M.A., D.D., edited the
“Spectator” for seventeen years, which constitutes
a record. In the perspective of time he stands out
as one of the greatest men Australian Methodism has
produced.* He returned to Victoria after giving
magnificent service to the Kingdom in the Pacific.
He could win the heart of a sundowner, and with the
same ease be a welcome guest in the most scientific
circles in the State. His splendid scientific work
*See page 210.


was the incidental result of his sympathetic interest
in the natives of Fiji. Oxford invited him to the
meeting of the British Association in 1894 as one of
the representatives of Australian men of science.
During his long editorship of the “Spectator” he
made it a power in the Church, but it is to be
regretted that he did not write more from his rich
and varied store of memories.
The Rev. A. E. Gilford for some years acted as
assistant editor to Dr. Fison.
Julian Thomas was a journalist, who sailed under
the nom de plume of “The Vagabond,” a clever
writer, an enormous braggart, an egotist who
ascended to sublime heights of self-assertion and
transcendent impudence. In January, 1887, he
lectured in the Melbourne Athenaeum Hall on
“Convicts and Cannibals,” and made an offensive
attack upon Wesleyan Missions in Fiji by sneering at
the Christianity of King Thakombau, and affirming
that he “became an exemplary Christian when he
had lost his teeth and his digestion,” and that “he
died in the odour of sanctity and a dirty blanket.”
The “Spectator” remarked that Thomas was
“further off from the truth than when he was a
boy,” and that in making such statements respecting
King Thakombau he was “unworthy of all credence
and confidence.” Thomas regarded himself as
libelled by these comments on his lecture, and esti-
mated the hurt to his honour at £2OOO. The case
was tried in the Banco Court before Mr. Justice
Kerferd and a jury. It began on Friday morning,
16th September, 1887, and the verdict of one farthing
damages was returned on the evening of Monday,
the 19th. The trial created intense public interest,
and the Court Avas crowded to hear Mr. J. L. Purves,
Q.C., cross-examine Dr. Lorimer Fison, who had
known King Thakombau intimately in Fiji. He
bore eloquent testimony to the reality of Thakom-
bau’s conversion. Completely self-possessed, the


veteran missionary’s flashing repartee and telling
home-thrusts afforded abundance of fun to the
hearers. “The Vagabond” refused to go into the
witness box. The judge said he thought a good deal
of provocation had been given by the plaintiff in his
lectures and writings which seemed to be a sneer
at missionaries and the results of their work, and
his not going into the witness box to prove that he
had been injured was against him, and therefore His
Honour declined to give him costs.
Richard Ditterich.
The Rev. Richard Ditterich, who followed Dr.
Fison in 1905, was an editor whose pen was a sharp
weapon for righteousness. By instinct and habit he
was one of the best-equipped editors in the whole
succession. Few have more strenuously aided the
causes of social reform and Protestantism. His
critical insight and wisely wielded gift of irony,
together with his command of terse and keen-edged
phrase, all contributed to the effectiveness of his
literary work. Always well-informed, ready of
speech—sometimes silver-tongued—he was a strong
debater in the Conference, and in due course became
President. As a preacher he kept close to the centre
of the faith, and his sermons were marked by evan-
gelical passion and a penetrating, searching,
personal appeal. His organising and administrative
ability found memorable expression in his campaign
on behalf of the Centenary Thanksgiving Fund in
1915, which marked the centenary of Samuel Leigh’s
landing. By this effort although the celebrations
clashed with the Great War, and, so far as Victoria
was concerned, with a terrible drought—£4l,7o7 was
raised for Church purposes.
The Rev. F. J. Rankin, Rev. C. W. Atkinson, M.A.,
D.Litt., and the Rev. Alfred Madsen were assistant
editors during Ditterich’s regime.


Robert Philp, who followed Richard Ditterich,
was a Scot of Presbyterian stock. Quiet and
undemonstrative, he was a member of the noble order
of the towel and basin —a servant of all. He was
versed in the deep things of God —one who dwelt in
the secret place of the Most High. An appreciative
reader of the best literature, he had an educated
taste and a rich fund of wholesome humour. “At
the Window’ ’ —a regular page of friendly philosophy
in which he collaborated with Mr. J. E. Poppins—
added to the popularity of the “Spectator” in his
time.
On the retirement of the Rev. Robert Philp through
increasing blindness, the Rev. J. E. Warren ably
carried on the work of editor for some months till
the next Conference appointed Mr. Philp’s successor.
The Rev. H. J. Ham, M.A., brought to the editorial
chair the distilled experience of a Circuit minister
who had seen pioneering work, and under his
guidance the journal was characterised by quiet
effectiveness.
Dr, Alexander McCallum,
Dr. Alexander McCallum (b. 1860, d. 1933)
became editor when he resigned from the managing
treasurership of the Supernumerary Fund in 1930.
Preacher, pastor, administrator, he stands out as one
of the best all-round men the Victorian Church has
produced in the first hundred years. Great tasks
were given to him, and likewise great honours. He
was President of both the General and Annual
Conferences, offices which he discharged with con-
spicuous success. Wise in judgment, shrewd in
estimating men, frugal in speech, clothed with
humility, warmhearted and genial, he was cherished
in the heart of the Church. An ecclesiastic, he
retained the evangelical fire of his youth, and served
the community nobly during his eleven years at the


Central Mission, first as colleague to the Rev. A. R.
Edgar, and later as his successor in the superin-
tendency. During his tenure of office as managing
treasurer of the Supernumerary Fund, he endeared
himself to the aged ministers and ministers’ widows.
As president of Wesley College he won the esteem of
both boys and masters. His editorial work displayed
a true poet’s outlook upon nature and human life,
and the poet’s gift of exquisite language wherewith
to express his thoughts. The Toronto University
conferred upon him the honorary degree of Doctor
of Divinity.
In 1934 the Rev. H. A. Overend, 8.A., came into
the succession of editors when he was compelled
through impaired health to withdraw from the regu-
lar ministry in which he had gained an honoured
position. A lover of the mystics, at home with the
classics and the moderns, at the touch of his spirit
the “Spectator” has become an increasing spiritual
force in the life of the Church.
When the present Spectator Publishing Company
was launched in 1889 Mr. T. W. Rashleigh was
appointed manager, and later managing director.
The directors were John Coates, C.E.; E. C. De
Garis; Peter Johns, of Johns and Waygood Limited;
T. K. Dow, of “The Weekly Times”; and George
Chaffey, the originator of the Mildura settlement
and irrigation scheme. In 1889 the Conference
handed the journal over to the new company for
a consideration. The Hon. George Swinburne, then
Minister for Water Supply and Agriculture, was
chairman of directors for many years.
The “Spectator” is the official organ of
the Church which appoints the editor, and yet
the property of a private company. Its literary and
business interests are, therefore, under quite separate
control. This curious arrangement has led to no
friction, as neither the Conference nor the company
has sought to invade the province of the other. By


the generous gift and legacy of Mr. Nelson Rudduck,
chairman of directors, the Church now owns the
majority of the shares in the Company. Mr. J. B.
Poppins, a missionary enthusiast, and one of the
founders of the Laymen’s Missionary Movement,
has been the faithful manager for over twenty years.




APPENDIX




APPENDIX I.
NOTES ON THE CIRCUITS.
Hitherto we have endeavoured to depict the romance
of Methodism. Let us now attempt to show how the
little unofficial beginnings, in a multitude of places,
became Circuits, thus providing the means for a deeper
appreciation of the Methodist witness. The methods
which have been employed to ensure its continuance
suggest an evangelism which has been both aggressive
and progressive. Not only have Circuits been consti-
tuted, and churches built, but Circuit boundaries have
been rearranged, their borders extended, and churches
enlarged and increased in numbers, as circumstances
demanded. It may be that we have been too ready to
advance, and are experiencing embarrassment on that
account to-day. The fact remains, however, and is
clearly observable, that Methodism in Victoria has been
conceived and expressed in terms of the “World Parish,”
and for its members and adherents has contrived to
make adequate provision.
A review of Circuit records—which, by the way, are
neither exhaustive nor complete—is included, so as to
furnish some idea of the rapid expansion and extent of
the Methodist organisation.
Fitzroy. —At Brunswick Street, Fitzroy, the first
service was held in the open-air, at the corner of Bruns-
wick and Moor Streets, in 1841. In that year a wooden
church was erected on the corner referred to, on land
leased from Mr. R. T. Webb at a nominal rental. The lease
expired in September, 1848, and in that year the Rev.
Wm. Sweetman secured the present site for 12/- per
foot and to it the wooden church was removed in
two sections. In 1850 a beginning was made
towards the erection of the first stone church. Later,
Fitzroy became part of the Second Melbourne Circuit,
which was formed in 1852, and was then known as the
“West Melbourne and Circuit.” That
Circuit was afterwards divided into the North
Melbourne, Fitzroy, Northcote, Collingwood and Rich-
mond Circuits. The foundation-stone of the present
church was laid on 2nd October, 1860, by Mr. J. T.
Sumner and opened for public worship on 10th March,
1861. Because of the magnificent contribution which it


made to the religious life of Melbourne, and more
particularly because of its ability to produce preachers
both ministerial and lay, this church was facetiously
and affectionately known as “The Factory.”
North Melbourne. —Here are three churches which
bear testimony to pre-union days. Howard Street was
built in 1856, some of the material which the old Bourke
Street Trust had retained from the Collins Street
Church being used in its construction. The opening
services took place on sth June, 1859. As it required a
series of six services to launch the enterprise, three
on Sunday, one on Monday and two on Wednesday,
one is not surprised to find that the occasion demanded
such a galaxy of talent as Rev. D. J. Draper, Rev. Dr.
Cairns, Dr. Dare, Revs. W. L. Binks, J. G. Millard and
W. P. Wells.
A wooden building, however, had been previously
erected, and opening services conducted on 18th
December, 1853. The baptismal font at Howard Street
bears the following interesting inscription, “Presented
to this church, June, 1877, by George A. Thompson,
Esq., who first visited this locality, June, 1836.”
Howard Street, with two other churches which have
since been closed, became a Circuit on 29th June, 1883,
the Revs. J. White and Henry Howard being the first
ministers. Miller Street had as its first resident minister
the Rev. Henry Heathershaw. Its memorial stones bear
the names of George Sweet, Esq.—Vice-President of the
Union, 1882 —and C. J. Ham, Esq., Mayor of Melbourne,
1882. Brougham Street, which benefited by the closing
of the Hotham Hill Church, is the other place in this
Circuit. North Melbourne has suffered heavily by the
removal of its members, but is to-day a mission centre
ministering to a dense and needy constituency.
Carlton had a considerable population in 1857.
Many of these folk attended Wesley Church, until, on
7th April, 1860, the first local service was held in a shop
in Lygon Street, which belonged to Mr. Wm. Jones. It
is believed that Dr. Waugh preached the first sermon
in the shop, and that Mr. A. J. Smith was the leader of
the first society-class. The first church was opened on
17th February, 1861, the preachers being Revs. J. S.
Waugh, W. Hill, and J. Hutchison. Mr. Peter Johns
was the first Sunday School Superintendent, and Mr. J.
T. Eckersell the first Secretary.
The present church was opened on 6th March, 1870,
when the preacher was “California” Taylor. Included
within the bounds of the Carlton Mission, are the


Drummond Street and Station Street Churches. The
new premises in which the Mission activities are
accommodated were opened in 1933. Names which are
well remembered here are Lavers, Oakley, H. P. Sugden,
Jones, Johns, Smith, Gray, and many others whom
limited space precludes from mention.
Clifton Hill —Here, apparently, a little coercion
was required to establish Methodism. A grant of land
having been made by the Government, it was not until
a threat to revoke the grant was hinted at in 1873 that
steps were taken to erect a church. A building com-
mittee was formed, consisting of Messrs. E. John, R.
Corben, J. Came, Dr. Daniel, E. Corben, J. Avery, H.
Preston, Oxley, G. B. Lowe, John Haines, Clarke
and W. Nettleship, and within four months a brick
church, 38 feet by 28 feet, was built and furnished. It
was opened, on the 12th April, 1874, the preachers being
the Revs. John Watsford, Spencer Williams,
Shaw. Within a week of the opening services a society
class was formed with the following members: George
Horner (leader), Reuben Corben, George Lowe, John
Haines and his wife, Martha Haines. Clifton Hill
Methodists appear to have required the urge of
authority on more than one occasion, for, soon after the
Wellington Street Church was built and only partly
fenced, Mr. Horner, the energetic “general,” was
horrified to find a notice from the Collingwood Council
fastened to the fence, informing the people concerned
that, unless the rates were paid by a certain date, there
would be an auction. Although it was the Sabbath, the
notice did not remain where it had been placed, for this
good, if irate, brother had it removed and placed face
downwards inside the fence. An interview with local
authority followed, and the rates were in all probability
paid. It is interesting to recall that in the Sunday
School which began operations immediately after the
erection of the first church there were 600 scholars on
the roll. Clifton Hill was part of the Brunswick Street
Circuit until 1895, when it became a separate Circuit
under the Superintendency of Rev. R. W. Thompson.
In June, 1887, a new church was built, and the Sunday
School building enlarged, and, two years later, the
Spensley Street Church was opened for public worship,
and a Sunday School organised.
Nicholson Street, like many other places, was the
result of a need. The majority of the Methodist folk
had previously attended the Brunswick Street Church,
but distance and bad roads led to a desire for a place
of worship near at hand, and a room in the home of


Mr. Guille was set apart for this purpose, Mr. R.
Beckett providing the family Bible and two brass
candlesticks.
Among the preachers was “Daddy Young” of
Brunswick Street and R. Beckett, Sen., who conducted
the first service. These house services were well
attended and prepared the way for the new church at
the corner of Nicholson and Church Streets which was
opened on 17th March, 1872. It is described as a small,
weatherboard structure, 25 feet by 35 feet, lined with
canvas. The pulpit was “rooted out” of the Immigrants’
Home, in Carlton, to find a use in the new building.
January 10th, 1875, witnessed the opening of a brick
church which was designed to meet the requirements
of the increasing population. In addition to the men
already mentioned, Methodism is indebted to Messrs.
J. Hunter, Abbott, B. Abbey, H. McCracken, C. Rouch,
J. Butson, W. F. Walters, Brockhouse, J. Odgers,
Britten, R. Beckett, S. King, A. Jenkin, J. C. Nankervis,
C. E. Bowen, and many saintly women.
Northcote —At first included in the Primitive
Methodist Second Melbourne Circuit, Northcote is indebted
to zealous laymen, particularly of the Primitive Methodist
Church, for its rise and progress. In 1854, however,
when part of the Brunswick Circuit, its first church was
built, and on 9th November, 1869, the foundation-stone
of the present church was laid by the Rev. William
Taylor, of California. At a later date the opening
services were conducted by Revs. Dr. Waugh, Joseph
Dare and J. Eggleston.
In 1895 it formed part of the newly-constituted
Clifton Hill Circuit, and in 1916 it became an independ-
ent Circuit, under the Superintendency of Rev. Robert
Bayles.
At Prince of Wales Park the first church was
opened on 2nd November, 1891, a new church which
took its place being opened 10th June, 1923. “Father”
Jenkin, a devoted class leader, Mrs. Andrews, who served
in a similar capacity, and Mr. Butler, the first Superin-
tendent of the Sunday School, are well remembered.
At St. George’s Road, a church was opened for
worship on 30th June, 1891, a class having been estab-
lished in the preceding month by Mr. Jensen. In a
small, weatherboard building, purchased for the purpose,
a cause was established at Croxton in 1909, the first
services being held on 10th October of that year. More
accommodation was soon required, and in August, 1912,
a building which had been purchased from the High
Street Trust was removed and re-erected. December


23rd, 1929, marked the opening of the present beautiful
church. Associated with Methodism at this post have
been Mr. and Mrs. J. Stone, Mrs. Pearl and family, Mr.
and Mrs. J. C. Newnham, Mr. and Mrs. Woolhouse, Mrs.
Petrie, Mr. and Mrs. Doran, Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood,
Mr. and Mrs. Clark, Mrs. Leith and family and Mr. and
Mrs. Roberts and family. As we think of Bros. Lord
and Belcher opening their homes for public worship in
1849, we cannot but admit that the Methodist tradition
has been worthily maintained at Northcote by such men
as N. Wimble, A. H. Dennis, Samuel Johnson, S. Robin-
son, W. Unthank, John Bedford, F. E. Beaver, and many
others.
Brunswick. —Here Methodism has a long and
honourable history. Its beginnings can be traced to a
ti-tree shed. Later, in 1889, Mr. Thomas Wilkinson
opened his house for divine service and gave two-thirds
of the land upon which the church stands. It was on 27th
December, 1841, that the Rev. W. Waterfield, a minister
of the Congregational Church, laid the foundation
stone of the first chapel, a building which is believed to
have been the first brick structure in Brunswick and,
when Brunswick was proclaimed a municipality, the
Council, it is said, held its first meeting there. Its pulpit
was originally in the first Methodist Church built in
Melbourne. The foundation stone of a new church was
laid in October, 1853, by Mr. Henry Jennings, and,
when finished, the church was opened for worship by
Rev. Robert Young. Soon, extra accommodation was
needed, the building being enlarged in 1862. In 1870
the Rev. Francis Neale first occupied the parsonage in
Park Street. The new Sydney Road Church was
opened in February, 1873, by Rev. Dr. Kelynack of
Sydney. In 1888 a new Sunday School was erected,
but not without difficulty, for the collapse of the “Land
Boom” made it impossible for many folk to redeem their
promise of financial support. Thanks, however, to loyal
men and women, the burden was borne and now the
trustees are relieved from undue financial strain.
Nicholson Street is associated with the name of Mr.
Knott who opened his home for worship in 1877. A
church was erected in 1878. The present church was built
in 1932. At West Brunswick the home of Mrs. H.
Trenoweth was made available for services. At the
latter place a church was opened on the 10th November,
1889, and, in 1934, a beautiful brick church was
erected in Albion Street. The cause at Union
Street was established by the Primitive Methodist
Connexion. Beginning with services in the open-air in


1852, Brunswick appeared on the plan of the Melbourne
Circuit of that denomination. In 1860, the Union Street
Church was opened for worship during the ministry of
the Rev. Samuel Bracewell. The building was enlarged
in 1875. In the early days the Rev. J. Ride was closely
associated with this centre. Daly Street, 1887, and South-
West Brunswick, 1930, are the other places of the Circuit.
Coburg and Moreland. —Formerly, Coburg was
associated with the Brunswick Circuit, but to-day it is,
with Moreland, a separate Circuit. Coburg was originally
Pentridge, and the first minutes recorded in the
Wesleyan Circuit Trust Minute Book are signed 20th
September, 1858. In 1848, however, a church was
erected in Bell Street, the second one, 1857, being built
on Sydney Road. To-day our property forms part of the
beautiful Civic Centre. A minister was stationed at
Coburg in 1857. Services were held at an earlier date,
however, in the homes of Messrs. Sidebottom, Harding,
and Kendall. At West Coburg the Primitive Methodists
established a cause and attached it to Union Street,
Brunswick, the foundation stone of their church being
laid in July, 1887, during the superintendency of the
Rev. W. J. Bray. The building which originally stood in
Reynard Street was later removed to Munro Street,
where re-opening services were held on 25th October,
1914. With its Sunday School was amalgamated that of
West Coburg, which had been held in the home of Mr.
G. R. Carter, 4 Bellevue Street, since 1910. The
minister in charge at the time was the Rev. G. S. Lloyd.
Associated with this cause are the names of Edwin
Davis, A. Thornton, John Coates, Mary Middleton, G.
Bachelor, R. Woolacott. At Munro Street G. R. Carter,
A. G. Campbell, L. Seeley, Whitmore, Schmidt and
Whitehorn are remembered with gratitude.
At Balmoral Avenue (Pascoe Vale South),
formerly known as “Soldiers’ Settlement,” a Sunday
School was established early in 1926 in the home of
Mr. W. McWiggan, Bell Street. For a time, afternoon
services were conducted by Pastor R. Tippett,
the first being held on 31st October, 1926, at 4 o'clock.
Later, in August, 1927, evening services were substi-
tuted. On 19th August, 1928, a church was built, the
opening services being conducted by the Rev. W. H.
Guard and the Rev. Wm. Cannam. Early families
include those of McWiggan, Gillard, Gunn, Gay, Agar,
Pomeroy, Adams, Ashton, Lovekin and Payers.
At Merlynston services were carried on in the Hall
by Mr. El. H. Clark, before the opening of the church on
10th July, 1932. Here, too, we have had good Methodist


people, such as Wm. Tinkler, R. S. Clark, E. H.
Clarke, C. Haacke, J. Moore, R. Nutt, C. A. Hodges, D.
Ferguson, J. Powell and Mrs. Quinton.
The building at Holmes Road first served as a church
at Fawkner, and was removed to its present site in 1916.
Thos. Barnes and Trezise were early local preachers,
while such families as those of Albert, Philp, Holden,
Cant, Pearson and Jenkin are numbered amongst the
faithful.
At Moreland, in 1886, a Sunday School began
operations in the home of Mr. and Mrs. Mulley of
Moreland Road. For a time this school was conducted by
the Rev. J. J. Watsford, Mr. T. W. Clark then becoming
Superintendent. In 1887, the first preaching services
were held in Mr. Rohead’s home on Sunday afternoons
by the Rev. A. McCallum, assisted by a band of local
preachers.
Moonee Ponds. —This preaching place appears on the
first plan of Melbourne Methodism. Services lapsed,
however, for some years. The original Circuit was divided
in 1883, the new Moonee Ponds Circuit including Flem-
ington, Kensington, Moonee Ponds and Tullamarine. The
Rev. Thomas Grove was its first Superintendent.
Tenders for a brick church at Moonee Ponds were
accepted in July, 1882, and the building was
opened for worship on 26th November of the same year.
In February, 1883, a Sunday School began with
twenty-one scholars and four teachers.
In 1888 it was realised that additional accommodation
was necessary for the increasing congregations. Hence,
on sth April, 1891, the present beautiful church in
Gladstone Street was opened.
The name of Mr. W. R. Little, which appears on one
of the foundation stones, is that of a man who worthily
served his Church. The Puckle Street Church, the
original building of 1882, which for long served as a
Sunday School building, became too small for require-
ments. To meet the need a comprehensive building
scheme was undertaken. It embraced all departments.
In Gladstone Street a Junior School Hall was opened on
23rd February, 1918, a Senior School on 3rd November,
1923, and a Primary Department in 1931. The total
cost of these buildings was £8430. Among the brethren
of other days appear the names of Messrs. J. Allen, G.
F. Dominey, R. C. Baulch, G. G. Richards, J. H. Trathan,
W. D. Williams, C. E. Cripps, J. Grierson, H. Clarke,
J. Roberts, S. Grierson, E. P. Pearce, J. J. Rogers, R.
P. Onge, J. Sadler, D. Amos, C. F. White, W. Hulme, R.
Lumb, P. A. Blumfield and J. McNeil.


Essendon South, now part of Moonee Ponds Circuit,
has a long and interesting history. In 1846 the home of
Mr. Pitches and family was used by the Primitive
Methodists as a place of worship, and in 1850 the Rev.
John Ride was one of the first ministers to be enter-
tained by these good folk.
In 1854 Mr. and Mrs. Chapman Woods came to
Essendon and joined this society. In 1856 Mr. Pitches
gave a piece of land in Nicholson Street, Essendon, and
on it a small church was soon built. This building was
later removed to Alexander Road. Under the guidance
of the Rev. W. H. Walton, the brick church was erected
in 1882. Here, too, adequate provision has been made
for Sunday School work. The opening of the Kinder-
garten Hall on 16th March, 1924, completed a compre-
hensive scheme at a cost of £4400. Mr. Charles H. Woods
who was Sunday School Superintendent for 45 years and
also Secretary of the Trust, and Mr. E. Harvey, whose
tenure of office as Secretary of the school was of equal
length, are worthy of special mention.
Kensington, too, owes its existence to a few people,
who, in 1878, desired to worship locally instead of going
to North Melbourne. A small wooden building in
McCracken Street was first used for occasional after-
noon services which were conducted by Revs. R. Potter
(C. of E.), W. H. Fitchett (W.C.) and P. Phillips
(Baptist). On 16th December, 1880, a site for a chapel
was purchased, and on it the first wooden church was
built, being opened by the Rev. W. P. Wells on 23rd
April, 1882. A Sunday School was opened by Mr. Ed.
Wales on 30th April of the same year with an
enrolment of 34 scholars. Later both church and school
were enlarged, and in August, 1889, the memorial stone
of the present brick church was laid by Hon. C. H.
James, M.L.C. The present accommodation adequately
meets all requirements. Space alone forbids reference
to all who might be mentioned, but Mr. A. Barham, the
first Sunday School Superintendent, and Mr. Edward
Wales, the first Church Steward, may well be thus
honoured.
At East Essendon work began in the home of Mr. and
Mrs. W. T. Wheeler, where, for years, a branch Sunday
School of the South Essendon school was held. The
Bible Christian Church at Ascot Vale was closed as a
result of Methodist Union in 1902 and removed to East
Essendon.
Flemington, too, in 1885, had good friends in Mr. and
Mrs. Wickham who opened their home in Mt. Alexander
Road, Flemington, for services. A society class was


established in 1856 and about 1857 a wooden church
was erected. Particulars of the present church are not
available, but it was enlarged, and reopened in 1887.
At Pascoe Vale services were first held in a
private house, Mr. T. H. 0. Gyles opening his home for
the purpose on Sunday, 18th July, 1909. The Rev. G.
Doherty conducted the first service. For fifteen months
this home served as a chapel, Mr. Crew’s shop at the
corner of Pleasant and New Streets being then used.
Later still, services were held in the State school,
until, on Sunday, 3rd November, 1912, the new church
was opened by the Rev. S. Adamson.
Essendon. —In 1887 the Wesleyans who lived more
than a mile away from Puckle Street (Moonee Ponds)
decided to establish the Methodist cause in Mt.
Alexander Road near Thorn Street. A church was
erected and duly opened by the Rev. E. H. Sugden,
M.A., B.Sc., and Dr. Lorimer Fison, on 25th February,
1888. The original trustees included Messrs. James,
Fred. Scholfield, Sanders sen., and jun., Sadler,
Reid, Leach and W. H. Hill. In 1890, a demand being
made for a Sunday School, it was duly built. Mr. Leach
was its first Superintendent and occupied that position
for 28 years. Mr. T. R. Hill has also given 25 years of
service to the school.
Ascot Vale secured a brick building which was
originally intended for the Salvation Army. Early
trustees included Messrs. Rogers, Leith, Williamson,
Vial, Richards, Grierson, Raynor, Beckwith, Farley, and
Little, while among the local preachers were Messrs.
Francke and Raynor. Among the families may be
mentioned those of Angwin, C. Luke, J. W. Walklate,
Brett, Trotter, Hocking (2), Griffin, Russell, William-
son, Benton, Davey, Mamwell, Smith, Bennetts, Pretty,
Burns and Gray. This cause so benefited by Methodist
Union that in 1909 a Home Missionary was appointed and,
later, in 1913, the Rev. T. C. Came came as a proba-
tioner. In 1927 the present church was built.
In 1921 the Aberfeldie folk moved the Primitive
Methodist Church to suit their need, but the cause
developed so rapidly that on 22nd May, 1926, a new
brick church was erected. The Buckley Park cause
was born in a Sunday School, Mr. W. Mansfield beginning
with six girls in the Aberfeldie school. In 1928 new
quarters were found in Buckley Park and in 1929 a
Kindergarten room was necessary.
In 1870 a church was built at Tullamarine, but before
that date services were held in the village school house
by ministers of Wesley Church. For nearly half a


century Mr. James H. Parr, successor to Mr. Wallace
Wright, has superintended the Sunday School.
At Maribyrnong the first service was conducted in the
open air by Rev. Ernest Smith in the presence of Mr.
Porteus and eleven children. There an old building was
subsequently used as a Sunday School, and, later, a tent
costing £7 was erected for the same purpose in a local
yard, but a hurricane is said to have blown it beyond
recall. Later a church was built and, later still, in
1933 it was removed to higher ground. Mr. George
Peitzfch has been the devoted Superintendent of the
Sunday School for many years.
Pootscray.— Here a wooden building near the Saltwater
River was first utilised. The bluestone church, however,
bears the date, 21st December, 1869. The new stone
church was opened on 10th October, 1871, by Revs. J.
Bickford, J. Eggleston, and R. C. Flockart. Previously
a stone house in Albert Street sufficed. At a
later date a tent near the Saltwater River was utilised.
Later still, a wooden building was removed to Hyde
Street and is being used to-day for Sunday School
purposes. Services at Hyde Street were supplied from
Wesley Church. The Rev. Barnard Butchers was the first
minister to be stationed there. In 1887 the Hyde Street
Church was enlarged and the present parsonage built.
During the ministry of the Rev. George Tregear,
Sunshine was constituted a separate Circuit, and in
1935 Yarraville was excised from Footscray.
The Victoria Street cause was originally a Bible
Christian constituency and was part of the North
Melbourne Circuit. The first church stood in
Alexander Street, but about 1894, (Turing the ministry
of the Rev. George Netherway, it was removed to its
present position. Later the Primitive Methodist Church,
in Paisley Street was added to it. This building was in
use till 10th February, 1935. Soon afterwards it was
demolished to make room for more attractive and com-
modious premises which were opened in the same year.
The original trustees of the Hyde Street property
include Solomon, Leek, Hansford, sen., Davis, E. Hop-
kins, W. and J. Hansford, Park, Sutcliffe and Russell.
The minutes of the first Trustee meeting are signed by
the Rev. James Bickford.
Yarraville.— Bay View Road Church had an association
with the Primitive Methodist Williamstown Circuit.
The church at Yarraville was opened for worship
on 4th November, 1888. Its original trustees
being Messrs. T. N. Brooks, Samuel Waterson, H. J.
Lucas, E. Gick, M. Peterson, H. Nutting and C.


Collister. The first services were held under a gum
tree. Later, services were conducted in Hamilton
Street. The present church in Simpson Street is about
to celebrate its jubilee. Here, another building appears
to have been previously used.
Sunshine. —An inducement to build was offered when
industrial developments began to make Sunshine an
important centre. The initiative of the Rev. Ernest
Smith led him to interview local residents in regard to
the establishment of a Methodist cause, with the result
that arrangements were made to sell the blue-stone
church at Albion and the land which had been purchased
in 1857, and to erect a church at a site which would
meet the needs of the people at Sunshine and at the
same time provide for those “few devoted women” who
had retained a Sunday School, and attended an after-
noon service in the old church at Albion. The proceeds
of the sale helped to build the present church which was
opened in March, 1910.
Amongst the first families to attend, mention may be
made of Mrs. J. Newman, Mrs. Nash, B. Grieg, W. Grieg,
Derham, Leonard, Porter and Scotts. Miss H. Grieg
was the first organist, and the first home missionary
was Mr. H. W. Hughes, now a Methodist minister.
Services at Maidstone began in 1856, and were resumed
at Albion in the State school in December, 1928. The
Deer Park cause was reopened in 1933.
Williamstown. — Here Methodism was introduced in
1840, when Mr. Charles Stone, local preacher and
schoolmaster, conducted services in his schoolroom. In
1841 the first church was built in Ann Street, the Rev.
Joseph Orton being its minister.
Its first members were Mr. and Mrs. C. Stone and
Capt. and Mrs. Sutton. Others associated with it at an
early date were Messrs. Little, Witton and Bromley.
In 1854 the second church, a blue-stone structure, was
built, and Williamstown became the second Circuit of
Methodism with the Rev. W. C. Currey as resident
minister. In 1876 the present fine church in Electra
Street was erected.
At John Street, both Wesleyans and Primitive
Methodists had endeavoured to establish causes before
1874, but without success. In that year, however, the
latter denomination made another attempt and erected
the present church. The first evangelist was Mr. Wallace,
a blind brother; the first Superintendent, the Rev. George
Grey. Among the first members were Mr. E. Garlick, Mr.
John White and Mr. George Moon. The first services at


Newport, formerly Greenwich, were held in the State
School. The first church was built in 1886, the preacher
being the Rev. William Burridge. Its first members
were Mr. and Mrs. Courtis, Mr. and Mrs. Metcalf, Mr.
and Mrs. N. Candy, Mr. and Mrs. G. Coe, and Messrs.
J. and T. Beanland, Delap, Penhalluriak, Sangster, and
Smith.
Spotswood, at one time known as “Edom,” opened its
first church about 1892, its minister being Rev. W. H.
Walton. Among the original members were Messrs.
Lancaster, Cook, Elmer, Haughton, Hodgkins and
Verity.
The Pasco Street Society, now united with the Electra
Street cause, was originally a United Methodist Free
Church. The building in which they worshipped was
erected in 1868 and its first minister was the Rev. J.
Marmaduke Rose. Among its first members were Capt.
and Mrs. Dalgarno, J. John, W. Ross, T. Rodda, Lee
Huray, L. Gray, A. C. Ramsay, G. Blackburn, J. Sim-
mons, Freeman, Clayton, Joel and Claringbould,
At Mt. Cottrell, services were first held in 1860, when
the Presbyterians and Wesleyans united for the purpose.
Mr. John Corr was the first preacher and the Superin-
tendent of the Sunday School. In 1862 Mt. Cottrell
became part of the Williamstown Circuit of which the
Rev. W. L. Blamires was Superintendent. The church
at Melton was erected in 1865, and among its honoured
workers was Mrs. Westlake.
Preston.— The first services in the Preston district
were held in Jeffrey’s barn, The barn gave place to a
wooden church which was opened in 1854 by Rev. Wm.
Butters. The present church was erected in 1863 and
enlarged at a later period. The first minister of the
church was the Rev. F. E. Stephenson, and Mr. Abbey
was its first class-leader. The name of Hurlstone is a
name well remembered in local Methodism.
South Preston— Originally part of the Preston Circuit,
it shared in the results of services conducted in
Jeffrey’s barn. Services appear to have been held in
1859-60, the Primitive Methodist Church being also
represented in the district at that time. About the
same period, the first church—a brick structure —was
built in High Street. A second church was erected in
1879, and a third in 1885. Owing to its cost and the
effect of the land boom, this building has created a
problem which has necessitated assistance from the
Church Building Fund.


Yan Yean. —The Yan Yean Circuit is the great grand-
daughter of the Melbourne Circuit, its grand-parents
being the Pentridge Circuit and its parents that of
Preston. The cause at Yan Yean has had a great
number of worthy families associated with it. At South
Yan Yean, Messrs. King, Jeffrey, Popple, Turner,
Fletcher, Horner, Louden, Hunter, Lewis, Mason and
Mrs. Carr are remembered with affection, and at Hazel-
glen, Messrs. H. Reid, Stockdale, W. Lade, Kingston,
Abbey, Lobb and J. Reed worthily upheld the cause. At
South Morang, Messrs. Turner, Russel and Le Page are
held in grateful memory. At Whittlesea, the church was
nobly supported by Messrs. Lockwood, Freeman, Beatty,
Horsley, Christie, Robinson and Cunningham. At
Wollert, too, Mrs. Hayes and Mr. Bodycoat gave loyal
assistance to the cause—and all because of Him Who
died that they might live.
Alphington.— Alphington Methodism, judging from
its present Circuit, appears to have worked from the
circumference to the centre. In Meagher’s barn at
Greensborough and in the home of Mr. A. Grimshaw,
himself a local preacher, services were held in 1850 by
the Rev. S. Waterhouse, the Rev. J. Harcourt and a
number of local preachers. The present church, the
second, was opened on 11th May, 1873.
At Eltham, in Mr. Crozier’s home and elsewhere,
services were conducted in 1850. The first Wesleyan
Church was erected in 1860, the Primitive Methodist
connexion being also represented in this locality. At
Heidelberg services were first held in 1851 and in 1859
a church building was erected. Research was pioneered
in 1855 by the Rev. B. Walker.
At Fairfield a church was opened by the Rev.
Ralph Brown on 23rd October, 1887. At Ivanhoe
a modest beginning was made in the State school on sth
October, 1890, the Rev. J. Lowe being the preacher. On
9th August, 1903, the Rev. E. S. Bickford opened the
newly-erected church. The Rev. S. Harris became the
first Superintendent of the Circuit. The present church
was built during the superintendency of the Rev. W.
Vawdon.
Services at Heidelberg West began in 1920, and in
1925 a church was erected. At Perry Street services
commenced in 1927. Alphington is associated with Mr.
William Horden who provided a wooden building in
which he or (and) Mr. C. H. Fletcher conducted services
as early as 1852-3.


Amongst the workers in the Alphington Circuit have
been T. Latham, A. R. Fenton, A. H. Scott, John Jenkin,
G. B. Duff and J. E. Jenkins (Ivanhoe) ; A. B. Lewis, J.
Morrissey, W. C. Thomas, A. J. Lugton, W. Lugton, W.
H. Waddell, J. E. Poppins, G. B. Poppins, F. Trelevan,
H. Evans, J. H. Stone, W. McDowall, A. Freeman, D.
Couch (Fairfield) ; Messrs. Hobson, Williams, Robinson,
Pascoe, Gale (Heidelberg); Foley, Harmer, Harding,
Rodda, Ford, Rosier (Eltham); Sack, James, C. W.
Hutton (Heidelberg West); Grimshaw, Hobson, Mitchell,
Partington, Britnell and Fletter (Greensborough) ; W.
Ponsford, J. Adams, C. H. Knight, J. W. Smith, J. Ward,
W. Frost, Tame, Mrs. Kings (Alphington).
Kilmore and Broadford. — Here, land for a Wesleyan
Church was acquired and the foundation stone laid on
20th October, 1858, by Rev. D. J. Draper, assisted by
Rev. W. L. Binks. The building committee consisted of
Messrs. Green, Paxman, Lowe, Lee and Clark. The
church was opened on 14th February, 1859, but owing
to unforeseen circumstances the building was not actu-
ally completed till 6th April, 1862. A Circuit plan of
1861 shows Kilmore, Mickleham, Merring, Donnybrook,
Lancefield, Broadford, Spring Hill, Seymour, Tallarook,
Heathcote, Tooboorac, Redcastle and Wild Duck as
preaching places within the Circuit. The old parsonage,
built in 1861-2, is now being demolished to make way
for a more suitable residence.
Diamond Creek appears very early in the records of
Primitive Methodist activity at Heidelberg. The cause
was established in September, 1861, by the Rev. Henry
Heathershaw. A small chapel was erected on the allot-
ment of ground now owned by Mr. E. R. Shanhun of
Diamond Creek. The original trustees were W. Wilson,
E. Peers, W. Farmer, P. Cummings and W. Ellis.
Gold seekers created a need which resulted in the
erection of the Nillumbik Church in 1871. The trustees
were J. Allen, Robert Godber, J. Bear, J. Ashmead and
G. Gilbert. Later, the Rev. T. Glasson was appointed as
the first resident minister.
Lancefield, Sunbury, Campbellfield, and Bacchus
Marsh are now Home Mission stations within the bounds
of the North Melbourne District.
MELBOURNE SOUTH DISTRICT.
South Melbourne.— Methodism in South Melbourne
(Emerald Hill, as it was first named), had its birth in
the Sunday School. The school was held in the home of
Mr. John Bee, who, in 1853, gathered a dozen children
together for religious instruction. Soon afterwards the


older people met for worship, first in a canvas tent, from
which they removed into a small wooden building and
later to one of larger size. In 1862 the Mechanics’ Hall
was used. In the following year the erection of the
present commodious Gothic Church, in Cecil Street, was
undertaken. In 1857, the Rev. W. S. Worth, then a
probationer, was appointed to the charge, the first
Superintendent being the Rev. J. Hutchison, who
assumed control in 1859. Mr. J. Bromley was a pioneer
preacher.
Port Melbourne. —First known as Liardet’s Beach and
later as Sandridge, it first appears on the West Melbourne
Wesleyan plan, in 1853. The cause grew so rapidly that
a church was opened in March of the following year and
a Sunday School established by Mr. Jesse Carey who
later entered the Wesleyan ministry. It is probable that
Sunday School activity may be traced back to an earlier
date, when Mr. J. G. Newman formed a Society class
and gathered the children around him. About 1871, Port
Melbourne was joined to the Emerald Hill Circuit. In
1906 it was included in the Albert Park Circuit, but in
1910 it was again associated with the South Melbourne
cause. In 1917 Graham Street, Boundary Road and
Farrell Street Churches became the Port Melbourne Cir-
cuit. Messrs. Newman, Carey, Withers and Adam are
numbered among the pioneers of the sea-port.
In 1860 the present church, a neat building of Gothic
design, was erected, and the pulpit from the old Collins
Street Church utilised. The first resident minister
appointed to the Sandridge Church was Rev. J. Spence.
His ministry there dates from 1865. In 1915, thanks to
the generosity of Mr. J. Cross, 8.A., a building was
erected to serve the Primary and Kindergarten Depart-
ments of the Sunday School. The Farrell Street Church
was opened in April, 1885 and to it was transferred the
Sunday School which had been carried on in the home of
Mr. and Mrs. Cathie, by Misses Hall, Tozer and M. Dean.
Among the workers in the Port Melbourne Circuit
are also remembered Mr. S. Edwards, Mrs. Holmes, Mr.
R. Knight, Miss Hopkins, Mrs. Wyatt, Mr. and Mrs.
Feast, Miss Trewavistill, Mr. Cartwright and Mr.
Staunton.
Elsternwick-St. Kilda —This Circuit comprises Elstern-
wick, Balaclava, Elwood, Kooyong Road, Hawthorn
Road, Caulfield and Bundeera Road (South Caulfield).
At a meeting held at Balaclava on 18th August, 1887,
steps were taken to build a church at Elsternwick. This
church was opened for worship on 11th March, 1888,
during the superintendency of the Rev. Charles Lancas-
ter. In the following year it was found necessary to


increase the accommodation, and, to meet the need, the
Primitive Methodist Church in Nepean Road was
moved to the Elsternwick site to be used for the
purposes of a Sunday School. The present church was
opened on 4th November, 1923. Its first pastor was the
Rev. J. M. Catterall, the Rev. T. C. D. Trueman being
the first probationer appointed to the Circuit. In the
early history of St. Kilda, mention is made of a class
meeting which in 1851 was held at the home of Mr.
Jennings, a solicitor. We also read of prayer meetings
being conducted there, and of Mr. Robert Watchorn and
another brother carrying seats from the cottages along
rough tracks, which are now streets, to a school-room in
Fitzroy Street, St. Kilda. In 1854 a weather-board
building was erected in Fitzroy Street to serve as a
chapel and a society class met in Bro. Watchorn’s home,
Mr. T. Smith being the leader. The verandahs of the
homes of Messrs. Beaver, Stevens and Bell are also
mentioned as having been availed of for services from
time to time. It is interesting to learn that “Preachers
passing from Melbourne to Brighton tried to do some-
thing for the villages of Prahran and St. Kilda.” The
original trustees at Elsternwick were Messrs. Goodrich,
Byers, Powell, May and C. Davies.
At Balaclava, a meeting was held on the 18th July,
1874, to take steps to build a church, and three years
later the church was opened for worship. In 1884 a
probationer was appointed to Balaclava and four years
later the Rev. D. S. Lowe became its first ordained
minister. Mesdames Turner, Layton, Bartlett, Cooper,
Crouch, Whitehead, Jenkins, Gill, Tuckett, McDonald,
Miss Dixon, and Messrs. McNaughton, Peterson, Gardiner,
Christian, Bartlett, Bastard, Morris, Jenkins, Scott and
Crouch formed themselves into a committee to foster
local Methodism. To their efforts its growth is mainly
due.
At Elwood ? the first church was erected about the
year 1910. Six years later it was moved to its present
position, and the church now in use was opened 20th
October, 19J8.
At Kooyong Road services began in 1913.
At Hawthorn Road in 1894, services were held in a
house in Master Street, Mr. Thos. Marriott being the
This good brother also conducted a class-
meeting in his home. The Hawthorn Road cause was
first associated with the Primitive Methodist Church at
Male Street, Brighton, of which the Rev. Brian Wib-
berley was the first minister. The church was removed to
Hawthorn Road in 1917.


The Bundeera Road Church, built by voluntary labour,
was opened in May, 1926.
Albert Park.— Here Methodism began with the open-
ing of a Sunday School in Albert Hall, Bridport Street,
on 15th July, 1882. Seven months later a society class
met under the leadership of Mr. Robert Beckett, the
members being Mrs. Langham, sen., Mrs. Beckett and
two sons, Mr. Bate and Mr. Alfred Dunn. The first
church was opened on 21st October, 1883, and the
present church on 27th July, 1890.
At Middle Park a Sunday School was opened in Mills
Street State school on sth February, 1888. The first
church was built in 1891 and was opened for worship in
September of that year. Another church has since been
erected.
Prahran —The first services were held in the home of
Mr. T. Turner, Windsor, and later an iron church was
imported and placed on a site at the corner of Com-
mercial Road and Margaret Street. The iron church,
called colloquially “The Iron Pot”, was opened on 21st
August, 1852. On Ist January, 1865, the present
church was opened, and twelve years later a Sunday
School was built. In the early days the Rev. W. Butters
was stationed at Prahran, and Messrs. John Smith,
James Moorhead, William Martin, Thomas Turner,
James Cartledge and Powell did much to strengthen
the cause.
Toorak.— lt is recorded elsewhere that the first ser-
vices at Toorak were held in a butcher’s shop. At one
time, too, prior to the building of the church, services
were held in an old jam factory in Chapel Street. A
church, however, was opened in 1887 and a Sunday
School building at the same time, the first Superin-
tendent of the school being Mr. John Whiting. The Rev.
H. Howard was the first minister to be stationed at
Toorak. The land upon which the church stands was a
gift from Messrs. Robb, J. Whiting and James. Among
the pioneer workers were J. Whiting, E. Millard, Misses
Clayfield, Warnock, J. Hiles, Curtis, Letcher, J. Robb, H.
Pollard, S. Best, W. Rogers, J. Walker, Durston, Welsh-
man, N. Baker, Morrows, and Mitchell.
The Millswyn Street cause was established in 1889,
the church being a gift from Mrs. C. S. Haley. Among
its early supporters were Messrs. Thompson, Crocker,
Coghill, Wyatt, Armstead and William Smith.
Malvern. —Originally part of the St. Kilda Circuit,
its history goes back to the middle years of the nine-
teenth century, for in 1855 Mr. W. Edwards and a little


band of Christian people commenced services in Mr.
Stephenson’s brick-yard. In summer they gathered
under a tree. Later they met in the homes of Mr. Beams-
ley and Mr. A. Gemmell. In 1859 land was purchased at
the corner of Malvern Road and Elizabeth Street on
which, in 1860, the first Methodist Church, Malvern, was
erected and opened with a membership of seven. A
Sunday School was opened at the same time. Thirty
years later, the church in Spring Road was built.
To St. Kilda belongs the credit of the rise of Method-
ism at Glen Iris, but its local history is that of many
other places. In 1862 devout people, including Messrs.
T. Robinson and E. Stocks, met for worship in Mr.
Robinson’s house in Albion Road. Soon Mr. Bruce
associated himself with them. In 1863 steps were taken
to build a church and, although many of the folk lived
at a distance and the only means of conveyance were
spring carts and drays, yet their enthusiasm achieved
its object. Soon the new church was ready for occu-
pation. The opening services conducted by Dr. Dare
were a great success. In 1876 the church was enlarged
and in 1932 the present building was erected.
Methodist history in Armadale began in June, 1881,
when a hall and the land on which it stood in Kooyong
Road were purchased for £2OO. Two months later, the
opening of the church was celebrated, the preachers for
the occasion being Mr. Attenborough, the Rev. F. Neale
and the Rev. C. H. Ingamells. About the same time a
Sunday School was organised. The cause grew so
rapidly that five years later a new church was required.
Again the accommodation proved inadequate, and the
church was enlarged in 1889. The Sunday School also
grew apace and the buildings were twice enlarged to
accommodate the scholars. The original trustees of the
Armadale property were Messrs. H. Harris, W. M. Jones,
J. B. Crews, J. M. Scott, J. A Wise, H. Ryall, J. Morgan,
W. Frewin, J. E. Beck, G. W. Cumpston and W. J. Irwin.
Burke Road is really an offspring of Spring Road.
At first, in January, 1913, services were held by the
Rev. L. Williams in the home of Mr. J. D. Evans and,
soon after, a wooden building was erected and a Sunday
School organised, with Mr. J. D. EVans as Superintend-
ent and Mr. E. J. Gosbell as Secretary. This building
was enlarged as more accommodation became necessary.
In November, 1924, the present church was opened at a
cost of £5500.
In 1885 the Bible Christian brethren established a
cause at Grandview Grove, the Rev. F. Mason being the
minister. The names, too, of Mrs. Lyons, Jenkins,


Dennis, Bush, Lowe, Mitchell, Maddern, Knight, Lloyd,
Peters, Clucas, Hargreaves, Turner and others are also
held in high esteem.
Malvern South. —This Circuit was excised from the
Malvern Circuit when it was divided in 1926. Glen-
dearg Grove Church is the centre of a very progressive
area, a site for which was secured in 1890 and sanction
for building a church given. Then followed a period of
depression during which the financial capacity of our
folk was seriously taxed. Times improved, however,
and in 1904 it was decided to build a new church. So
rapid was the development in this new cause that,
instead of a probationer being sent, the Rev. F. Lade,
M.A., was appointed to guide its destinies. Mr. and
Mrs. Grant, Mr. and Mrs. Daft and Mr. Calvert White
are a few of many who gave loyal support to the enter-
prise.
In 1906 the Epping Street locality came under the
notice of our laymen and in 1907 services were held in
Queers Hall, East Malvern. The attendance at these
services was so encouraging that Mr. L. Chambers was
engaged as a hired local preacher and a building site
purchased. In December of that year, the new building
was completed and opened for worship. In 1913 plans
for a new Sunday School and for enlarging the church
were prepared and on 4th June, 1922, the present
church was opened.
Darling Road Church was opened on 20th September,
1919, the first Sunday services being held the following
day. Seventeen members were enrolled and twelve
scholars presented themselves at the opening session of
the Sunday School. Among the early trustees were N.
J. Jenkin, W. B. McCutcheon, W. H. Harrison, E. Simms,
H. Kent and M. D. Cock. Among the first families to
worship there were Mr. and Mrs. T. J. Schofield and
family, Mr. and Mrs. J. F. Hill, Mr. and Mrs. Curnick,
Mrs. Curnick and daughter, Mr. and Mrs. Chambers and
family, Mr. and Mrs. T. J. Smith, Mrs. Grant, Mr. and
Mrs. H. Tamblyn, Mr. and Mrs. Lindsay and family, Mr.
and Mrs. Pascoe, Mr. and Mrs. I. J. Odgers.
The Ontario Street Church was opened for worship on
10th July, 1921. Later, the building was removed to
Reservoir and a new brick church took its place. The
new church was opened on 15th May, 1926. Messrs. J.
Davies, Pettitson, Denmead, and Ponsford were very
zealous in this cause.
At Bambra Road, the first church, built by voluntary
labour, was opened on 7th March, 1926 and about four


years later a new brick church took its place, being
opened on 22nd November, 1930.
At Alma Street, services were first held in August,
1926, at the home of Mr. and Mrs. Andrews and con-
tinued until the opening of the church on the 19th
February, 1928, the Rev. H. S. Heath, 8.A., being the
first minister.
Brighton. —Here we enter territory which received
attention from Methodist agents at an early date. Mrs.
Battrick, who settled at Brighton in 1841, tells of
her finding Messrs. Dendy and Ware living in tents, and
Mr. G. Thomas in possession of a two-roomed cottage.
She speaks also of the periodical visits of Messrs.
Pemberton and Orr, the tract distributors, and of the
occasional visits of Mr. Witton and other local preachers
from > Melbourne. Being attached to the Melbourne
Circuit, Brighton was visited from time to time by the
Rev. W. Schofield (1843-44). In 1845, Mr. Charles Stone
came to reside at Little Brighton and with his advent
the real history of our Church commences.
This good man became pastor to the little community,
and began to preach in the home of Mr. G. Thomas.
Later, a * wattle-and-dab” building, with thatched roof
and equally primitive appointments, became the head-
quarters of Methodist activity. Mr. Stone supplemented
his preaching by holding prayer meetings and conduct-
ing society classes. Indeed, he did all that was possible
to establish the Methodist witness over a very
extensive area. It is related that at East Brighton,
where Mr. Stone preached in Mr. Knight’s house as early
as 1846, a furrow was ploughed through the bush from
Mr. Stone’s home at Little Brighton to East Brighton
to guide preachers to their appointments.
Meanwhile, in “Big” Brighton, Mr. T. Walton’ s home
and, subsequently, the home of Mr. Joseph James were
used for public worship, a cottage prayer meeting being
held in Mrs. Battrick’s home. In 1851, the names of
Messrs. Stone, Webb, Cameron, Head, and Barker
appear as class-leaders. During this period the Mill
Street Church was built and a church erected at Great
to the Brighton Circuit, which, to permit of more inten-
sive work, had previously been divided. In the following
year the Rev. E. Sweetman, Mr. Byrnes’ successor,
undertook the erection of a church, the completion of
which, however, was left to the Rev. James Bickford,
At the time of Methodist Union, in 1902, the
Wesleyan Brighton Circuit included within its bounds
the causes at New Street, Mill Street, Were Street, and


Sandringham. At East Brighton, now Bentleigh,
Heatherton, Cheltenham, and Mordialloc constituted
another Circuit. The Primitive Methodists were well
established at Male Street, Tucker Road (Bentleigh)
and Highett. Since Union, the church at Highett
has been closed and the following new places opened up
—Hampton, Gardenvale, Black Rock, Hemming Street
(Moorabbin) and West Bentleigh. At present the
Methodist constituency embraces the following Circuits:
Brighton, which includes New Street, Male Street, Haw-
thorn Road (formerly Mill Street), Were Street, and
Gardenvale; Sandringham, which includes Hampton
and Black Rock; the Moorabbin Circuit, within
whose bounds are Hemming Street, West Bentleigh,
Centre Road, Tucker Road and Heatherton. Cheltenham
and Mordialloc are also well established Circuits.
Sandringham. —ln an area now comprising Sandring-
ham, Hampton, Black Rock, Sandringham East, and
Sandringham South, the first church was erected in
Gibson’s Road, in 1871. The opening services were
conducted by the Rev. E. I. Watkin and the Superintend-
ent of the Brighton Circuit, Rev. H. Richardson. In
1900 the church was removed from Gibson’s Road to its
present site and reopened for worship on 21st October
of that year. A new church, which has since been
enlarged, was opened on 27th December, 1903. Among
the pioneers at Sandringham the names of Mr. and Mrs.
Barnett are held in grateful memory.
At Hampton, in 1910, services were first held in the
local hall in Hampton Street, the first service being
conducted by the Rev. Wesley Johns. Two years later
a small wooden building was erected, and enlarged in
1923. The present church was opened on 27th October,
1928. From its inception Mr. and Mrs. Charles Stanley
have been closely associated with the cause at Hampton.
The church at Black Rock was opened on 6th
December, 1914, Rev. S. Adamson and Mr. E. C.
De Garis being the preachers.
At South Sandringham, the first service was held on
4th March, 1928, and on the same day a Sunday School
was formed. At East Sandringham, in 1929, a Methodist
Church was erected by voluntary labour. The Sand-
ringham Circuit was divided in 1919, the Rev. F.
Delbridge, 8.A., being the first Superintendent of the
newly-constituted Circuit.
iMoorabbin-Bentleigh. —Services were first held in this
area in 1854, and the present church was built in 1866.
The first resident minister—or missionary—was Mr.


Edsmead, and the first Sunday School Superintendent,
Mr. Josiah Preston. Among the early local preachers
were Messrs. William Daff, S. Clayton, J. Mills and
Blencowe.
The cause at Bentleigh (Centre Road) dates back to
1854. At Tucker Road the Primitive Methodist brethren
provided the means of grace as early as 1866. The first
church was built in 1868 and the present building in
1885.
At Heatherton, Methodism set up its banner in 1860.
Here, for thirty years, Mr. Robert A. Mills was the
Superintendent of the Sunday School. Mr. A. H. Castle
has also spent 20 years in its service.
Services at Hemming Street were first held in 1928.
The erection of a church was taken in hand in 1929 and
completed in 1931. In 1915 the Circuit was divided into
the Moorabbin, Cheltenham, and Mordialloc Circuits.
Mordialloc. —ln 1877 Mr. R. E. Rigg took charge of
the local State school and, noting the lack of facilities
for Methodist services, sought and gained permission to
use the local Anglican Church on Sunday evenings. This
good brother duly arranged for services and preached,
his brother, Mr. S. G. Rigg, assisting at the
organ. A Society was soon formed with Mr. R. E. Rigg
as class-leader. February 25th, 1883, witnessed the
opening of a church, the preachers on that occasion
being the Rev. R. Brown and the Rev. W. R. Cunning-
ham. To Mrs. Cumpston is due the credit for estab-
lishing a Sunday School in connection with the church.
Cheltenham —Services in this district were
apparently begun at Beaumaris by Mr. Stone of
Brighton, who held service on the verandah of Mr.
Charman’s residence on 31st August, 1854. On 6th
April, 1857, the Rev. D. J. Draper opened a new church
which was subsequently removed to Langwarrin.
The assistance of Mr. and Mrs. Woff, who arrived in
the district in 1865, was invaluable in extending and
consolidating the influence of Methodism in this area.
Half a century ago a church was erected at Chelten-
ham, but it was later destroyed by fire. In 1893, by
mutual consent, the church at Beaumaris was closed and
a new one erected near Weatherall Road. This church
was opened for worship on the sth February, 1922. The
Circuit was separated from the Brighton Circuit in
1893, and later, as indicated elsewhere, from Moorabbin.
Oakleigh. —Mr. Charles Stone is spoken of as the
pioneer preacher at: Oakleigh, but there appears to be
some misapprehension as to whom this honour belongs.


The Rev. James Bickford records in his diary the result
of a visit paid by him in 1853. “September 13, 1853.
To-day Mr. William Head and I rode over to Oakleigh,
a small township about seven miles from Brighton, to
see if there were any religious services held there. We
found that up to this time there were none. But there
were three public-houses and the desecration of the
Sabbath was dreadful. We called upon several families,
all of whom were anxious for us to provide for their
spiritual wants. There is an ‘open door’ here, but, as
soon as we shall enter it, we shall have many adver-
saries.
In the same journal we read: “October 19th, 1854. I
went to Oakleigh to meet the people about building a
church-schoolhouse, who subscribed then and there £30.”
Soon afterwards tenders for a building were accepted
and a church built. Unfortunately no information is
available as regards early developments. It is known,
however, that at Glenhuntly, in 1907, cottage services
were conducted in the residence of Mr. A. W. F. Smith
by the Rev. John Leslie who was then stationed at
Oakleigh, and that a church was purchased from the
Closer Settlement Board in 1908. With this event Mr.
Retallack was closely associated.
In 1910, the old Chinese Mission Church at
East Brighton, was acquired for £IOO and removed to
Glenhuntly. The opening services on 20th March, 1910,
were conducted by the Rev. S. Adamson, then Superin-
tendent of the Oakleigh Circuit. April, 1910, marked
the appointment of Mr. T. C. Came, now one of our
respected ministers but then a student, to the oversight
of this locality. In 1912 Mr. F. Wright was engaged
as a home missionary, and in 1914 Rev. R. E. Hooper was
appointed as the first probationer. The present brick
church was erected in 1913, the foundation stone being
laid by Mr. A. W. F. Smith who for 25 years has been
Secretary of the Trust. A new Sunday School building
was opened in 1932. Beautiful buildings have also been
erected at Murrumbeena and Carnegie.
Frankston, Mornington, Dromana Circuits are bound
up with Methodism on the Mornington Peninsula—a
story which is in itself an epic. The Rev. John Seccombe,
who is described as the “Pioneer of the Peninsula,” and
a number of very able and devoted men and women
figure prominently in its history. Following Mr.
Seccombe’s visit to these parts, Mr. J. Cowley Coles was
appointed home missionary, and, after fifteen months of
excellent work, a church was erected at Dromana in
1878. Then came the Rev. William Presley in 1879 as


a second-year probationer. Making Hastings his head-
quarters, he worked over an area which included Frank-
ston, Dromana, Red Hill, Somerville, Balnarring, Main
Creek, Rye, Rosebud, Portsea and Sorrento. With the
aid of a noble band of local preachers, including Messrs.
Mcllroy, Barker, Ault, of Red Hill, Alexander Shand,
and Gunson, of Main Creek, Carr, of Frankston, Spargo,
of Mornington, Patterson, Spicer, Nelson, of Hastings,
he was able to provide twelve or thirteen services for
each Sunday.
With the arrival of the Rev. D. J. Flockart in 1882, a
“Lovefeast” is planned for Red Hill, “A Society Tea,”
at Frankston, and a “Quarterly Fast Day” throughout
the Circuit. On the Preachers’ Plan for 1883 the name
of Samuel C. Flockart appears as a local preacher, his
first quarter’s work being twenty-five appointments.
About this time also, the name of Nelson Rudduck
appears, and the work of this man as preacher, trustee,
circuit steward, and Conference representative for over
half a century will long be remembered.
In 1886 Circuit division took place, the Rev. George
Daniel being appointed to Frankston and the Rev. C.
Angwin to Dromana. At this time the Methodist cause
at Frankston included three churches and 98 members.
The Dromana Circuit embraced four churches with 99
members. In 1908 another change was made by the
Annual Conference, the Circuit taking the name of
Mornington and Dromana.
In 1923 Mornington, together with adjacent places,
became a Circuit, and Dromana a home mission station.
In 1927, however, Dromana was placed in the charge of
a probationer and soon after it assumed the full status
of a married man’s Circuit.
Springvale.— Springvale Circuit comprises five places
which originally belonged to the Oakleigh and Dande-
nong Circuits. The history of the Spring Vale Methodist
Church goes back to 1887, for in December of that year
a church was opened for public worship and a Union
Sunday School established. This property later was
transferred to the Wesleyans. Local church history,
however, can be traced back to 1865, for in that year
a church was built at a spot within a quarter of a mile
of the present church and attached to Moorabbin. With
it the name of Blencowe has an honourable association.
This church was known as “Lightwood Church.” It was
subsequently sold, and, later on, when services were
the waiting room of the local Springvale rail-
way station was used, local preachers from Dandenong
providing the services. In 1926, Springvale became a


Home Mission Station with a probationer in charge. The
names of Seamer, Seccombe and Trebilco are well
remembered here.
Glen Waverley, or Black Flat Church is older than
the Spring vale Church of 1887. Originally it was part
of the Brighton Circuit, until it was considered too far
for local preachers to travel to the evening services. Mr.
John Cotter, however, held the fort, taking services
and conducting a Society class. Clayton, Clayton North
and Noble Park are preaching places in the Springvale
Circuit, and at these posts Methodism is alert and ample
provision is being made for its requirements.
MELBOURNE EAST DISTRICT.
Collingwood. —The first step towards the permanent
establishment of Methodism in the Collingwood area
began with the removal of a small church from Fitzroy,
and its re-erection in Charles Street. Later, this building
was transferred to Hoddle Street, but, even with addi-
tions, it soon became too small for requirements. A
brick church was then erected, but, like its predecessor,
was soon overcrowded. It was decided, therefore, to
build a church worthy of the cause on a new site in
Gipps Street, and on 14th September, 1874, the Rev.
J. S. Waugh laid the foundation stone of the present
buildings. The trustees of the property were Messrs.
Edward John, Anthony Brady, Robert Gallagher, Isaac
Swan, Joseph Bowering, William Davidson, William
Rawlings Bennetts, William G. Raven, John Puckey,
John Little, Adolphus Henry Trott, George Hendy and
James Gillman. The church was duly opened on 13th
May, 1875. Collingwood became a Mission on 19th April,
1904, with the Rev. T. S. B. Woodfull as its first Super-
intendent.
At Sackville Street, the Gospel, apparently, was first
preached in a hut which, because of its size, made it
impossible for the preacher to stand inside. He there-
fore stood outside, while his congregation remained
under cover. It is more than likely that the cause really
commenced with a Sunday School in 1855, for it is
recorded that Mr. Elijah Stranger and Mr. Nettleship
were appointed by the Brunswick Street Teachers’
meeting to explore the possibilities of a Sunday School
in North Collingwood. The result was the formation of
a cottage prayer meeting in the home of Mr. Dickens
in Budd Street, and from 14th June, 1856, a Sunday
School was carried on in Mr. Morgan’s home, A year
later, a church building was erected and 45 scholars
from the house of Mr. Dickens were transferred to it.


It was used also as a place of worship. The results were
so gratifying that further accommodation became neces-
sary. In 1935 new Kindergarten and Primary rooms
were built at a cost of £llOO.
At North Richmond, religious services were first
provided by the Methodist New Connexion in Baker
Street, and, later, in Church Street North. There the
foundation stone of the present church was laid on Ist
January, 1868, by Hon. G. G. Francis. At that function
addresses were delivered by the Rev. Mr. Maughan of
Adelaide and the Rev. Clement Lindley, the minister in
charge of the cause. In 1887, this property was trans-
ferred to the Wesleyan Methodist Connexion. Mr.
George Powell's name is well known and highly
respected in this area.
Richmond. —Until 1853 Richmond was part of the
Melbourne Circuit. In that year Richmond and Bruns-
wick were separated from the parent Circuit and in
1863 another division took place, the Richmond Circuit
being formed. Included within its area was the present
Hawthorn Circuit. In 1888 the Hawthorn area was
excised from Richmond and became a separate Circuit.
Methodist history in Richmond began as early as 1843,
for, at a Quarterly Meeting held on 11th April of that
year, two additional tract distributors were appointed
to serve this area.
In 1844, services were held in the home of Mr. and
Mrs. Blackledge and were so well attended that it was
difficult to accommodate all the worshippers. In 1846
a brick building was erected on land in Brougham
Street, the site being the gift of a sawyer. In this
church many remarkable conversions took place. Among
the zealous workers who supported the Richmond cause
in the early days were Mr. N. Gutheridge and Mr. W. 0.
Parnham, devoted class leaders, Mr. R. Gutheridge,
Superintendent of the Sunday School, and Mr. Robert
Watchorn, a teacher, and Messrs. E. S. Parker, James
Lewis and T. Trengrove. At a Quarterly Meeting of
this period it was reported that “Our chapels are full,
and if we had accommodation for 2000 more we could
fill it all.” To meet the need, the Brougham Street
property was sold and a larger wooden building erected
on the site of the present church and opened
on Sunday 17th July, 1853. Again the cause
outgrew the accommodation, for in 1854 the
foundation stone of the present church was laid, and in
the same year the building was opened for worship by
the Rev. William Butters. In 1858 additions were again
necessary.


The Cremorne Street Society dates from 1863, when a
Sunday School was held in a private house. In the
following year a weatherboard building was erected,
and, twenty years later, a new church was built.
At Burnley a church was erected in 1884. In 1890
another was built in a different locality. Out of the
two buildings, removed to the one site, the present
church was constructed, and opened for worship on Ist
February, 1894. Among the respected names in this
locality are Hopkins, Gaylard, Murray, Rayner, Moad,
Hewett, Woods, Cotter and Bicknall. Other men and
women whose names remain unchronicled also rendered
good service.
Hawthorn. —Once known as “Red Gum Flat.” The
progressive stages through which local Methodism
passed, until it was permanently housed in the spacious
and beautiful church in Oxley Road, are thus described.
“A gum tree, a framed tent, a brick church (30 ft. x 22
ft.), a weatherboard building a mile away, the fusion
of these two into the Burwood Circuit, and the present
handsome pile of buildings.” Services were first held
in the home of Mr. Reed, in Auburn Road, Mr. Reed
sometimes taking charge. In April, 1853, local preachers
from Collingwood, Messrs. Wimble, C. Powell, Gallagher,
Gray and others began to preach at the junction of
Riversdale Road and Auburn Road. Here, first under a
spreading gum, and later in a tent (20 ft. x 12 ft.), the
Gospel was preached and a Sunday School opened, of
which Mr. Jabez Chambers was the Superintendent.
The first minister to take charge of the cause in this
locality was the Rev. J. C. Symons.
In 1855, at Lower Hawthorn, an unused school-house
was utilised by Mr. Thomas Vasey for the purposes of a
Sunday School, and, in this building, from the 6th
August, 1855, divine service was held. On 15th
December, 1867, a new church, designed to meet the
needs of the Methodists of both Red Gum Flat and
Lower Hawthorn, was opened. To this amalgamated
cause, the Rev. R. Lamb, then a probationer, was
appointed in 1869. Subsequently, in 1885, land was
acquired in Oxley Road, and the new buildings dedicated
on 12th September, 1889. The Summerhill Road Church
was built and opened in 1924.
At South Camberwell, on 7th April, 1930, the founda-
tion stone of a beautiful brick church—to take the place
of a wooden building used for many years—was laid
by Mr. F. J. Cato. During the ministry of the Rev.
Ernest Smith an ornate church building was erected at
Barker's Road, in 1933.


The first religious services at Camberwell were
conducted in the home of Mr. Isaac Brooks,
Pleasant Road. There Mr. Baldwin held his
Society class. Later, in 1868, open-air services were
held in what are now the public gardens. The first
preachers were Messrs. A. J. Smith, Baldwin, Orton, and
Luke Chambers. These services led to a proposal to
build a church, and in 1871 a wooden building, capable
of holding about 70 people, was erected in Camberwell
Road on a block of land which had been granted by the
Government for church purposes. In 1884, the building
of a more commodious church was under consideration,
and in the following year a Church Trust was formed,
consisting of Messrs. A. J. Smith, E. G. Dunn, J. E.
Page, Henry Brooks, James Brooks, R. G. Howden,
Samuel Dunn, W. Cleverdon, C. R. Ricketts, J. Watson,
W. Brooks and George Brooks. In 1885, the present
church was erected at a cost of about £1350; in 1888 a
Sunday School was built at a cost of about £900; in 1890
a parsonage was added for the sum of £1400; in 1911
a pipe-organ was installed at the cost of £500; in 1918
additions to the value of £I7OO were made. The services
at Rathmines Road are much appreciated by a number of
elderly folk and by the youth of the locality.
In regard to the Denham Street cause, the Rev. W.
H. Fitchett made a stirring appeal to the Teachers'
Meeting at Hawthorn to take up work among the
neglected fields of Lower Hawthorn. His advocacy
brought fruit, for soon a Sunday School was held in
a private school, and a church was opened on 2nd May,
1886.
Kew—Methodism in Kew originated in a preaching
service conducted by Mrs. Thomas in the home of Mr.
J. V. Morgan, Prospect Hill, in January, 1853. In 1857
a Primitive Methodist Chapel was built. In 1860
services were held in the home of Mr. J. Copeland, and
there Mr. Baldwin conducted a Society class. Mr.
Eaton's house was also used for church purposes. Rev.
W. A. Quick reports thus in regard to the rise of
Methodism: “I was privileged to found our Church at
Kew by holding a little service in the back room on a
Sunday morning and by writing about six names in the
class-book." Services began at Highbury Grove in 1880,
and on 7th October, 1883 the newly erected church
was opened. The foundation stone of the Sunday
School was laid on 21st December, 1886. Both buildings
have since been enlarged. History records that in 1880,
Mr. Eyre bought a drapery business in Kew and found


next door to him, in High Street, a grocer named Arthur
Brown who was a Wesleyan local preacher. These two
resolved to commence services in the name of their
Church. First a canvass was made to discover all
Methodists living in the neighbourhood and, soon after,
a meeting was held at Mr. Eyre’s house, and a church
committee formed. “We held services from that on in a
large room over my shop for about three months.”
Owing to limitations of space it is impossible to do
honour to all who established and maintained Methodism
in the Kew district. The following names, however,
are to be found in an old class-book of 1881:
Arthur Brown, Richard Eyre, Florence Eyre, John J.
Arnall, William J. Arnall, Ann Arnall, Thomas Eaton,
Agnes Eaton, Thomas Mouncey, Susan Mouncey, Cyrus
Kinder and Mary Kinder. At Burke Road and East Kew
developments, which have become churches and war-
ranted the appointment of ministers, have taken place.
Canterbury. —Here, services began on 22nd August,
1886 in Golding’s Hall at the corner of Mont Albert
and Balwyn Roads. These services were con-
ducted by the Rev. S. Cuthbert. On 6th November, 1877
a Trust, consisting of Messrs. James, A. Golding, R. 0.
Tucker, W. H. Sanders, A. Sanders and S. Bullock,
was formed, and at a meeting of the Trust
held on 13th July, 1888, it was reported that
a block of land, 100 feet x 280 feet, and
having frontages to Balwyn Road, Erica Street and
Boronia Street, had been purchased for £7OO. On 22nd
February, 1891, the Rev. Henry Bath opened a church
for worship. The honour of introducing Methodism to
this place is claimed for Revs. W. Burridge, S. Cuthbert
and Mr. Vasey, the first service actually held being
conducted in the home of Mr. James. Amongst the
pioneer families are recalled James, Golding, Sanders,
Tucker, Pierce, and Bullock. The Rev. H. J. Ham was
the first minister. The Rev. J. J. Watsford and
family, after this good man had been superannuated,
rendered great help to the cause.
Highfield Road was established in 1911. Through the
advocacy of Mr. Robert Beckett a trust was formed, and
on a block of land given by Mr. Beckett the first church
was erected. It was opened on 4th August, 1912. At the
same time a Sunday School was started. In 1929 a new
Gothic church was built. The original trust included
E. T. Bailey, S. D. Hodge, F. A. W. Clarke, W. Bailey, J.
John, E. Dunn, F. C. Jeffrey and H. S. Leigh. The
Church at Benson Street was opened in June, 1914,
Mr. Walduck being the preacher. The Rev. J. T.


Duggleby was the first minister appointed to this cause.
The names of Walduck, A. E. Parker, N. Wilson, H.
Beck, James Year and A. E. Jope, are held in grateful
memory.
At Mont Albert, the first Methodist service was held
on 26th June, 1917, and a church erected, which was
opened on 3rd February, 1918.
Services began at Cooloongatta Road in January,
1927, and the church was opened on 12th June, 1927.
Messrs. McCutcheon, Bedford, W. A. Hotchin, T. P.
Tregaskis, W. H. Mason and V. Langsford were among
the first families to support this cause.
At Surrey Hills the first service was held in the
Recreation Hall on the 7th August, 1887, by Mr. West-
cott, and the first Society class was conducted by Mr.
Robert Beckett, senr. A church was opened on 23rd
September, 1888, and, two years later, the Rev. H. J.
Ham became the first resident minister.
Burwood. —Three of the present churches in the
Burwood Circuit bear testimony to Primitive Methodist
activity. The Wesleyan Methodists, however, were first
in the field, and in 1855 services were held at the home
of Mr. Reynolds by the Rev. J. C. Symons. In 1856 a
small wooden building was erected at what was known
as Damper Creek and on 26th December, 1861, the
foundation stone of the present brick church was laid.
In the following year it was opened for worship.
As stated elsewhere, the church at East Burwood had
its origin in that memorable visit of the Rev. G. Grey
to the hojne of Mr. W. Moore, and in the prayer meeting
which was held in the cowshed. In 1887 a church was
brought from Burwood and erected on the present site.
At Mt. Waverley, the home of Mr. Lechte was used
for divine service in 1877, and later a church was
erected. Amongst the folk who have served local
Methodism are Messrs. Fisher, Stocks, Hill, Tainton,
Cornell, Muir, Petterill, Marriott and Brookes.
The Boundary Road Church is now the head of the
Circuit. In 1856 Mr. W. Blanksby, a local preacher,
came to reside in Burwood and, shortly after, com-
menced a service in the house of Mrs. Sharp. Later, an
appeal for assistance was made to the Rev. Michael
Clark of Collingwood who came and established a
Society in an old building which was brought from
Camberwell. This building was placed on a site in the
main street, the land being a gift from Mr. Blanksby.
Five years later, a brick church was built in front of
the weatherboard structure. The foundation stone of
the present church was laid in 1887.


Box Hill. —Until Methodist Union there were three
Methodist Churches in the Box Hill district—Wesleyan,
United Free Methodist and Primitive Methodist.
The two latter denominations had churches in
Whitehorse Road, neither of which now exists. The
United Free Methodist cause began in 1856 as a part
of the Collingwood Circuit. The Wesleyans began
operations in 1883 by associating Box Hill with the
Richmond Circuit. The first service was held on 13th
May, 1883, in Barkly Hall which stood in Whitehorse
Road. A church was built at the corner of Station
and Oxford Streets, and was opened on 13th June, 1886.
The present church was opened on 14th February,
1926. iEarly workers include Messrs. J. W. Aspinall,
Robert Sutton, George Blood, E. Bishop, F. McMurdie,
G. W. Cumpston and S. Yeomans. The Rev. John Thomas
was the first minister to be appointed to Box Hill in
1886.
The United Methodists, who were first in the field at
Box Hill, decided to extend work to Blackburn and on
the 3rd September, 1888, they entered on their mission.
A gift of land having been made, a wooden building was
erected and opened for public worship early in 1890 by
the Rev. John Barton of Box Hill. In July, 1891, a
Sunday School was organised, and soon had 100 scholars
in attendance. About this time the Wesleyans began
services at Blackburn, and on 20th February, 1891, the
foundation stone of a brick building was laid and ser-
vices, usually on Sunday afternoons, were held. When
the union of the churches was consummated in 1902,
the Wesleyan church at Box Hill was used by the united
body and a wooden building, belonging to the
United Free Church at Box Hill was removed to East
Ringwood.
At East Doncaster, services were first held in 1866,
the locality being missioned by the Rev. J. H. Brown of
the Heidelberg Primitive Methodist Circuit. With the
help of Messrs. Nixon, Gilbert, Scott and Pyrn, services
were conducted in “Granny” May’s house. A building,
which was originally a chapel but which at this time
was an empty butcher’s shop, was purchased by Mr.
Brown and removed to the present site on bullock
waggons. The site was the gift of Mr. James Kent. The
present church was erected in 1884 during the ministry
of the Rev. J. T. Kearns. In 1910 the present Sunday
School was built.
At Mount Pleasant, services began in the home of Mr.
A. Rook on Sunday, 23rd April, 1865. The preacher
was Mr. Walter Brookes of Damper Creek. A class


meeting was formed in 1865, and in June of that year a
Wesleyan Church was opened. In 1916 the old building
was sold and a fine brick church took its place.
The Woodhouse Grove cause began in a private house in
1854, the church being opened on Good Friday, 1856, by
Dr. D. Draper. It was then part of the Richmond Circuit.
At Mitcham the first service was conducted on 6th May,
1888, by the Rev. W. P. Wells. A church was built in
Whitehorse Road, but when the present church was
erected it was built on a new site on the Mitcham Road.
The Rev. David Provan was the first ordained minister
to be appointed. This was in 1927. Mr. E. E. Walker
and Mr. F. J. Voutier are closely associated with Mitcham
Methodism.
Ringwood— The pioneers of Methodism at Ringwood
were Mr. A. Kennedy and Mr. Fuller. It began with a
Sunday School which was opened in 1876. Some time
later the Rev. J. C. Freeman, who had charge of the
United Free Methodist Church at Lilydale, commenced
a monthly preaching service. Week-night meetings were
also held in the homes of Messrs. Kennedy, Ciaridge,
Sherburn, Addison and Dickson. Mr. Thomas Grant
was also a stalwart supporter. The first church was a
modest structure, measuring 24 feet by 16 feet. In
1885 the Wesleyans regarded Ringwood as an outpost
of their Richmond Circuit. Mr. Westcott, Mr. and Mrs.
John Hill, Mr. F. E. Head and Mr. T. Stanbury were
among the pioneers of Ringwood. In 1887 a church was
built, the Rev. R. L. Reed being the first ordained
minister to be stationed in that area. During his
ministry additions were made to the building. At this
time the centre of church activity was at East Ringwood.
With union, congregations amalgamated and in 1904 a
church was erected in the centre of the new town. Soon
after the fine brick church was built.
In the readjustments consequent upon union, the
Wesleyan Church was removed to Croydon, where the
cause owes much to the Morris family. To-day at
Croydon there is a flourishing Society including a fine
band of young people.
Bayswater, which has just become the head of a new
station, had among its pioneers, Mr. and Mrsi. J.
Ramage and Mr. and Mrs. Charles Finger. An outpost
of this station is the little cause at Wantirna.
The Basin, Montrose, Kilsyth, Bayswater North,
Wonga Park, Ringwood North, and South Warrandyte
are being developed by local Methodists.


Lilydale. —The United Methodist Free Church began
to mission this area in June, 1866, services being held
apparently in the home of Mr. Samuel de Purys at Red
Hill and that of Mr. Paul de Castella at Bering.
At Lilydale, the first services were held in the home
of Mr. Richard Hand and continued there until the
first church was built and opened in The Rev. J.
Westacott was the first minister to reside in the Circuit.
At the end of 1867 services were held at Wandin in the
home of Mr. Payne. The work spread rapidly, and soon
such places as Birt’s Hill, Anderson’s Creek, Warran-
dyte and Ringwood appeared on the plan. Among the
local preachers who rendered valuable assistance were
Bros. Weeks, of Ringwood, Tunder, of Birt’s Hill, Wilson,
S. White and Ward of Lilydale, Swift, of Stonyford,
Silvan and Parkyn, of Wandin. In emergencies, Mr.
Downham and Mr. Hogg could also be relied upon.
Healesville. — Healesville was missioned from Lilydale
by the Rev. J. Westacott soon after his appointment to
Lilydale. The first Wesleyan Church stood on the
muddy bank at the back of Hurlstone’s corn store in the
main business street, but was moved later to its present
site. It was enlarged in 1889, the first minister being the
Rev. H. J. Beck. The records of the original church are
lost, but old residents speak of its struggling adherents
and the difficulty which they experienced in reaching the
church in wet weather. By diligent work on the part
of the early members under aggressive leaders, services
were held at such places as Dixon’s Creek, Badger
Creek, Toolangi, Woori Yallock, Marysville and Chum
Creek. The first home missionaries in this area were
Mr. Blanksby and Mr. J. Winter. About the year 1875
the first services at Dixon’s Creek were held in a shed
by a visiting evangelist named Sherwell, and for five or
six years a Sunday School was held in this shed by Mrs.
Hargreaves, preaching services being conducted by the
Rev. Mr. Hamsell, of Lilydale. About 1889, the first
church was built during the ministry of the Rev. H. J.
Beck. At the request of Mrs. Mountjoy, arrangements
were made for divine service at Chum Creek in the
home of Mr. W. Trewin. These services were provided
by local preachers from Healesville. A church was built
later, and in 1911 there was erected what is regarded
as the smallest non-conformist church in Australia, a
building 25 feet by 15 feet.
Belgrave. —ln the vacation of 1922-23 Mr. C. W.
Turner, now a Methodist minister, was sent by the Home
Mission Committee to open up Methodist services in


suitable places throughout this area. People were visited,
halls engaged, meetings held, and arrangements made
for Divine worship at Belgrave, Upper Fern Tree Gully
and Lower Fern Tree Gully. The first service was con-
ducted at Belgrave on 17th December, 1922, there being
24 people present. At Upper Fern Tree Gully a Sunday
School was opened on the same day and the first service
was also held.
At Lower Fern Tree Gully on 14th January, 1923,
26 people met for worship. An attempt to mission this
locality had been made in 1880, and in 1884 h brick
church had been erected. In this building services were
now resumed after a lapse of more than a quarter of a
century.
At Fern Tree Gully, services were held in Dobson’s
Hall as early as 1870 by preachers from the Richmond
Circuit. At Boronia, the first divine service was con-
ducted in the second quarter of 1923.
At a meeting at Badger Creek, the little community
discussed the problem of Sabbath observance, worship,
and the possibility of establishing a church. All denom-
inations were represented at this meeting, and it was
agreed to begin cottage meetings in the homes of Mr.
O. H. Potts sen., Mr. C. Ozanne and Mr. William Smith,
and to arrange for church services. The Wesleyans,
apparently, were the only preachers available for the
services, and local preachers from Melbourne, including
Sister Hannah of the Central Mission, took over the
responsibility of conducting divine worship. A piece of
ground was purchased by Mr. John Green, but it was
not until 1910 that a church was built, and that in a
day, under the able supervision of the late Mr. William
Smith. It was destroyed by fire in 1926 but another
has taken its place, a monument to individual and col-
lective effort and devotion.
iMionbulk. —The first services were conducted by Mr.
Dennis in 1893, and the first Home Missionary to be
appointed was Mr. J. Anthony who came in 1901.
Although a few class meetings were held about 1900,
the church was not erected until June or July of 1903,
being opened by Rev. J. W. Crean, of Lilydale on 2nd
August of that year. The first services in this locality
were held out of doors, and so continued for about six
months, when an abandoned hut built of slabs
and bark was utilised. The change was of doubts
ful advantage, for the roof was anything but rain-proof,
and the smoke from a much-needed fire in winter
almost hid the preacher from view. It was in this hut
that the first Sunday School sessions were held. Later,


when the State school was erected, use was made of it.
Towards 1900, services were held at Silvan, Mount
Dandenong, Mernda Road, and Sassafras.
Silvan, originally Wandin South, had good folk who
opened their homes for services until the local
Mechanics’ Hall was available. They were con-
tinued until that building, with many others, was
destroyed by a disastrous bush-fire in 1906. For a
time the State school was used, but later in the year a
church was erected and opened on 30th September,
1906, by the Rev. Mr. Chenhall. At Kalorama, prior to
1911, services were held in the State school, the home
missionary at the time being Mr. J. M. Amos. On 17th
December, 1911, a church was opened, the preacher
for the occasion being the Rev. Charles Tregear. It
might well be said that the church was erected by three
working-bees under Mr. E. Hargreaves, the home mis-
sionary.
Mernda Road, Olinda, was visited by the Rev. R. L.
Reed of the United Methodist Free Church when in
charge of the Lilydale Circuit. Previously, the good folk
worshipped at Monbulk. The local church was opened
on 24th March, 1901, the morning service being taken
by the Rev. R. L. Reed, and the evening service by Mr.
James Griffiths of Ferndale. The block of ground upon
which the church stands was the gift of Mrs. Warner.
It is claimed that this church was the first church
building to be erected in the Dandenongs. Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis, Max Brown, R. Bradshaw, T. Brown, H. Boyce,
Clifford, Warner, Pringle, Wyles, Spencer, W. Chap-
man, W. H. Hand and Mrs. E. Jeeves are a few of the
many faithful people who have stood loyally by local
Methodism in these parts.
Fern Tree Gully, Yarra Junction and Bayswater are
the Home Mission Stations of this district.
GEELONG AND BALLARAT DISTRICT.
Geelong. —Geelong very early enjoyed the attention
of the Methodist Church for, in addition to enthusiastic
laymen, it lay in the path of ministers whose duty took
them to Melbourne from Buntingdale. However, from
the “Geelong Advertiser,” 20th September, 1841, we
learn that, “the Wesleyans were having regular services,
under the direction of local preachers.” From the same
source we discover that a temporary chapel was opened
on the 20th February, 1842, the Rev. Mr. Wilkinson
preaching in the forenoon and the Rev. B. Hurst in
the evening. Of this undertaking, the local press of 7th


most munificent manner, entered into arrangements for
the erection of a temporary chapel in North Corio, by
advancing out of his own pocket the price of the ground
and the cost of the building. Of course we hail this act
of generosity for its own sake and freely give Mr. Hurst
the credit to which he is thereby entitled. The site fixed
for the chapel is on the line of Yarra Street, between
Malop and Little Malop Streets, being part of the allot-
ment purchased by Mr. Austin at the late Government
sale. Mr. Hurst has purchased the large wooden build-
ing at the rear of Mr. Gray's store, and, as there will be
little difficulty in conveying it in an almost complete
state to the new locality, hopes are entertained that the
new Place of Worship will be opened in the course of a
fortnight or three weeks. No resident minister is to be
appointed, but preachers will come from Melbourne and
from the mission station on alternate Sundays. The
whole proceedings in this matter are characterised by a
degree of activity and zest which is highly commend-
able." From the same files we further quote (30th May,
1842) : “We formerly observed that the Wesleyan
Methodists, at their last Quarterly Leaders' Meeting, had
discussed and sanctioned the adoption of means for the
appointment of Mr. Dredge as minister for this place.
The resolutions of the Quarterly Meeting were sub-
mitted for the apnroval of the Chairman of the Mission,
the Rev. Mr. McKenny of Parramatta, and, the object
having met his approbation, Mr. Dredge is now
appointed, and, we understand, will enter on his import-
ant duties on Sabbath next, sth June, 1842."
On 27th November, 1844, the stone of the new
Wesleyan Chapel was laid. This, doubtless, refers to
Yarra Street —and on 25th October, 1846, another
chapel was opened for worship.
The following places, to-day, constitute the three
Geelong Circuits:—*
Yarra Street Circuit. — Yarra Street, 1842; Belmont,
1893; South Geelong, 1854; Grovedale, 1853: Duneed,
1853; Barwon Heads, 1885; Waurn Ponds, 1864, where
the first service was conducted in French by the Rev.
A. Stubbs for the benefit of the French and Swiss
settlers; Freshwater Creek, 1864; Bell Brae, 1873.
Geelong West Circuit, which was separated from
Yarra Street in March, 1871, comprises the following
places: Noble Street, where services were held in 1850,
preceded by services, however, in Kardinia Park, and in
Barnes' slab hut in Saffron Street, Chilwell,


in 1849, if not earlier. A building was erected
at this time, particulars of which are lacking,
and in 1854 the present church was erected; Newtown,
where services began in 1847 in the home of Mrs.
Wimble, a church being erected on a site donated by
Mr. James Austin in the following year. The present
church is the third building to be erected.
The Pakington Street cause was the result of open-
air preaching in the Market Square by the Primitive
Methodists. In 1853 the church stood in Weller Street,
but in 1878 it was erected on the present site.
Ashby. From the “Geelong Advertiser,” Ist May,
1858, we learn, “a public tea meeting took place
last evening at Latham’s iron store, Mercer Street, the
proceeds of which, and a collection that was afterwards
made, are to be devoted to the erection of a Wesleyan
Chapel in Wellington Street, Ashby.” This church was
built and opened on 19th September, 1858. Herne Hill,
North Geelong, 1909; Ceres, 1855; Highton, 1853;
Lara, 1858; Lovely Banks; Mt. Monac, 1856;
Moriac Railway, 1934, are all within the bounds of the
Geelong West Circuit.
Geelong East.— This Circuit comprises Shenton,
Leopold, 1860, Moolap, St. Albans and Ocean Grove.
Shenton, or “Shenton House ” as it was originally
called, is the outcome of a movement which sought to
provide education for children when such was the duty
of the church. In 1855 or 1856, the Rev. Isaac Harding
secured “Shenton House,” which was an imported
cottage from England, and was so named after Miss
Shenton. In it this work began, Miss De La Hay being
the first teacher to be appointed by the Board of Edu-
cation. ~ _ , , ,
Shortly afterwards, the Wosleyans decided to start a
Sunday School in this building, and so gratifying were
the results that on 21st December, 1863, a new building
was opened in which the school was more comfortably
accommodated. , ,
In October, 1884, a request for services was made
and favourably considered. With the appointment of
the Rev. Edmund Turner to the pastorate of Shenton,
it was necessary, in 1903, to erect a larger building.
Amongst Geelong Methodists the names of Ham,
Hitchcock, Humble, Hague, Strong, Peters, Pescott,
Francis, Brown, Hunt, Perry, Joyce and others are
remembered.


Ballarat.— ln 1851, on 28th August, Mr. James Oddie
came to Ballarat (Hiscock’s Diggings), and on the fol-
lowing Sunday morning arranged a class meeting. The
first service is claimed to have been held on Sunday,
28th September, 1851, by Mr. John Sanderson. This,
however, is disputed, for the Rev. Mr. Tuckfield states
that Mr. Samuel Ham met Bro. Sanderson on his way
to Ballarat, as he was returning to Geelong. On sth
October, 1851, the Rev. F. Lewis of Geelong visited
Ballarat, and on the 12th October, 1851, the first tent
church was opened. In 1853, a few devoted men, who
met for worship m a digger’s tent at Winter’s Flat
now called Magpie—decided that the time had come to
form themselves into a Society and to purchase a tent
for chapel and Sunday School. At the beginning of
March, 1853, the little party purchased a tent from Mr.
Adams of Buninyong. As winter was coming on and
the population moving towards Ballarat, the tent was
not erected at Wdnter s Flat, but on the top of Penny-
weight Hill and to the left of the main road leading to
Buninyong, not far from the Canadian Lead. A large
signboard was set up in front of the tent, with the
inscription, “Wesleyan Chapel,” and an announcement
o± the opening services. From these circumstances the
hill was called “Wesley Hill.” Early in 1854, a wooden
building was erected on Clayton Hill, about 400 yards
to the south of the tent site. A few months later this
structure was removed to Mount Pleasant, the Rev. R.
Taylor, the minister of the church, preferring to hold
services in a tent on the mission ground in Lydiard
Street. The building—now the School of Mines
Museum—was opened for worship on 18th July, 1858,
by the Rev. James Bickford. In 1884 the spacious and
beautiful Lydiard Street Church was erected.
In the early days, the various branches of Methodism
which formed the United Church in 1902 were all
firmly established in Ballarat, and the Methodism of
to-day is a happy blend of the best traditions of these
separate denominations. It is no wonder, then, that the
cause has been well sustained and that the three
Ballarat Circuits—Lydiard Street, Neil Street and
Pleasant Street are able to send their preachers far
into the surrounding country. From the following list
of preaching places, which is not exhaustive, one may
get some idea of the extent of the field covered, Sunday
by Sunday, by ministers and local preachers—Lydiard
Street, Neil Street, and Pleasant Street (the head
churches of the respective Circuits), Sebastopol (mis-
sioned in 1856, and later served by both Wesleyans and


Primitive Methodists), Skipton Street (from 1862),
Armstrong Street (a Bible Christian cause from 1861),
Burnbank Street (a Primitive Methodist post in 1859),
Little Bendigo (from 1857), Brown Hill (from 1851),
Wendouree (from 1858), Barkly Street (from 1852),
Rubicon Street (from 1869), Canadian Gully, Mount
Pleasant, Buninyong, Durham Lead, Black Lead, Cardi-
gan, Dead Horse, Rubicon Street, Hardie’s Hill, Eureka,
Darling Street, McArthur Street, Humffray Street, Gong
Gong, Warrenheip, The Springs, and other places.
Around each of these places has gathered a romance
which is well worth preserving, but the limitations of
space preclude its mention. Behind such activity, what
splendid men and women! What stirring times! What
gracious seasons of revival!
Drysdale.— The first service in Tuckfield, as Drysdale
was once called, was held in 1849 in the open-air. Later,
a move was made to a house which afterwards became
the parsonage. In 1855 a brick chapel was built, and
the present church was erected, and opened on 16th
September, 1888. In 1857 Drysdale was excised from
the Geelong Circuit, the Rev. G. B. Richards being the
first resident minister. Miss Newcomb and Miss Drysdale
occupied an honoured place among Methodist pioneers at
this centre.
Colac. —Methodism was introduced into this district
as early as 1839, when the Buntingdale Mission
Station was established. Early in 1840 services were
held in the home of Mr. A. Dennis, and in 1858 the first
Methodist Church was built at Warncoort. At Colac,
Mr. E. Usher, who had settled there in 1856, was a tract
distributor as well as the organiser of prayer meetings
in the local Presbyterian Church. In this work he was
assisted by Mrs. R. Willis and Mr. M. Farndale. Mr.
Usher was instrumental in persuading the Rev. William
Hill of Geelong to visit Colac and to take steps to
establish a church. Mr. Hill arrived on sth September,
1858, and conducted a morning service in the home of
Mr. Dennis. Soon afterwards Mr. John Hiskens was
appointed as home missionary. This good man came on
a three months’ engagement, and stayed for six years.
The first regular service was held in Lyons’ Barn, the
rental of which was 5/- per week. Class meetings were
established and the work grew apace. In 1863 Kettle’s
barn at Birregurra was used for a similar purpose. The
20th March, 1859, witnessed the opening of a church at
Colac, and of a Sunday School four or five months later.
In 1864 Colac became a Circuit under the Superintend-
ency of the Rev. J. Catterall.


A new church was opened on Ist March, 1874. This
was enlarged in 1903, the present beautiful church
premises being erected in 1926.
Amongst the pioneer families are those of Mr. A. Chap-
man, Mr. and Mrs B. J. Miller, Mr. R. Willis, Mr. T.
Butcher, Mr. E. Usher, Mr. and Mrs. W. Priscott, Mr.
and Mrs. J. Parkes, Miss M. Hebb, Mr. G. Marriner, Mr.
and Mrs. Coney, Mr. and Mrs. Farndale, Mrs. R. Darby,
Mr. and Mrs. Heron, Mr. A. Maxfield, Mr. A. Bramley,
Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Selwood, Mr. and Mrs. Michelmore,
Mr. and Mrs. J. McCure, Mr. and Mrs. T. Collyer, Mr. and
Mrs. J. Gaylard, Mr. and Mrs. E. J. Belyea, Mr. B. Rout,
Mr. A. Rea, Mr. J. Osborne, Mrs. J. Coleman and Mr. and
Mrs. R. Webster.
Beeac. —Services were held in the homes of Mr. Judd
of Beeac in 1861, and Mr. T. C. Camm at Turkeith. As
a result of a visit by Dr. Dare, an application was made
to the Government for a grant of land, and on 15th
March, 1862, a church was opened. Two years later
extensions were needed. On the 6th October, 1878, Dr.
Dare opened the new Gothic building, and this, too, in
1896, had to be enlarged. The Rev. E. Nye was the
first probationer to reside at Beeac. Such names as
Barnard, Judd, Pink, T. Bevan, E. G. Adams, Rawborn,
Burnett. G. H. Bevan, J. H. Stimson, F. and L. Missen,
are well remembered in connection with the establish-
ment of Methodism in this locality.
Beaufort. —A mission was established here in 1861,
and was, as far as can be ascertained, part of the Primi-
tive Methodist Ballarat Circuit. A modest little chapel,
unlined for the first ten years, and possessed of a shingle
roof for twenty-eight years, was part of its history. For
many years the songs of Zion were sung unaccompanied,
for it was not until 1871 that a small harmonium was
procured. The original trustees were John Hosking,
William Chellew, James Prentice, William Noles,
William Stevens, William Cobden, William C. Thomas
and David Owen.
Services were also held at Raglan, Main Lead, and
Stockyard Hill. Among many honoured preachers is
Mr. Charles Waldron who has given fifty-five years of
service to this work.
In 1886 the present church was built, and in 1902 a
new one was also erected at Raglan. Methodist Union,
strangely enough, made no changes locally.
Creswick.— The Primitive Methodist, the Bible Chris-
tian, and the Wesleyan Churches were all represented in
Creswick. The Wesleyans erected a slab hut in which


the first service was held on 7th May, 1854. Soon the
slab hut gave place to an iron structure, and finally to
the present church which was erected in 1860. In 1859,
Creswick became an independent Circuit with the Rev.
George Daniels as its first Superintendent.
The Primitive Methodist brethren set up their
standard in 1854, and their first service was conducted
by a local preacher in the open-air, near “Slaughter-
yard Hi 11 .,, A slab hut then served as a chapel. Later, a
small brick church gave place to a commodious edifice
for which, unfortunately there is now no use. The Rev.
William Hunt was the first Superintendent of the
Primitive Methodist Circuit.
The Rev. Amos Uglow was the first Bible Christian
minister to be stationed in Creswick. Of these brethren
there are no records. Kingston, 1854, Newlyn, 1858,
Springmount, 1860, and Smeaton represent a few of the
Wesleyan outposts. Broomfield and Clarke Hill were
missioned by the Primitive Methodists, Sulky Gully and
Allendale by the Bible Christians.
dimes. —Though the discovery of gold in 1851
brought a large population, no religious services seem to
have been held until 1855, when a local preacher, Mr.
Whitfield Raw, conducted service under the shade of a
large gum tree. Amongst those who were present were
Mrs. Dixon, Mrs. Allen and Mrs, Marflet.
Some time later, Mr. Raw conducted services in the
blacksmith's shop at the Port Phillip mine. From the
mine a move was made to a wooden church erected in
Fraser Street which was built by Mr. H. Baker in his
spare time and is a tribute to this man's faith. Soon it
became necessary to erect a larger building adjoining
the wooden church. In 1863, however, a new site was
secured, and to it the two buildings were removed. In
the latter part of 1863, or the early part of 1864, the
first portion of the present church was built and ready
for occupation. The Rev. Samuel Waterhouse preached
on the first Sunday and on the following Sunday Mr.
G. Pybus and Mr. “Jimmy" Jeffrey conducted the ser-
vices. Clunes became a separate Circuit in 1864, being
excised from the Ballarat Circuit. In 1871 the church, a
spacious Gothic structure, was completed and opened for
Divine worship in the month of March.
The Primitive Methodists built a church in 1859, or
1860, and the Bible Christians, in 1863. Glengower,
Waubra, Learmonth, The Swamp, Coghill's Creek, Tour-
ello, Mt. Beckworth, and Evansford, were all preaching
places within the bounds of the Clunes Circuit. To
attempt to give a complete list of the worthies who were


associated with this once important station is an impos-
sibility. However, the names of Jabez Usher and
family, Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Collins, sen., H. Baker, E.
K. Hotchin, William Richards, J. Robson, George A.
Cuthbert, J. Preston, Ben Angwin, and Mr. James and
the Grills, of Coghill’s Creek, are not easily forgotten.
Scarsdale and Linton. —The earliest records of the
Scarsdale and Linton Circuit which, until 1863, was
known as the Smythesdale Wesleyan Methodist Circuit,
date back to 26th March, 1860, when the Rev. James
Bickford who had visited the district previously from
Ballarat was appointed as its Superintendent. Upon
his arrival there were forty-two adult members on the
class rolls, but in less than two years the number had
increased to 105, and in September, 1865, there were
493 full members in the communion and 39 on trial. In
1860 the Government of the day set apart blocks of land
for church purposes as follows: 2 acres at Brown’s
Diggings, 2 acres at Linton, 1 acre at Smythesdale.
The church built at Brown’s was subsequently
removed to Scarsdale. At Carngham a cause was estab-
lished in 1861, at Snake Valley in 1862, and at Black
Hill, where the day school building was used until 1861.
In 1863 a church was erected at Scarsdale and in 1863
one at Smythesdale. In 1922 the Scarsdale Church was
removed to Newtown, It is interesting to note that
between 1863 and 1866 seven churches were erected
within a radius of ten miles to serve a constituency of
25,000 people. Mr. Kersall has the honour of being the
first Sunday School Superintendent to serve in this
locality. The work at Italian Gully began in a tent in
1861, and in 1862 the Primitive Methodists came. Mr.
Mesley bears an honoured name for work at Italian
Gully. In 1862 cottage services were held at Monkey
Gully and with this place the name of Mr. Thomas
Crosthwaite is held in gracious memory. At Newtown,
preaching services were held in 1863, a Sunday School
being opened in the same year. At Linton also the
Gospel was first preached in 1863. What a period of
aggressive Methodism were the years of 1861, 1862 and
1863!
QueensclifF. —On 20th May, 1861, a meeting was held
in the home of Mr. Simkins to consider the establish-
ment of Methodist services at this resort. Those present
were Revs. Dr. Dare and Blamires, and Messrs. Hawse,
Reed and Grey. The local reading-room was secured for
three months, at a rental of £4/10/- per quarter. The
Rev. W. Blamires conducted the first service. On Ist


March, 1868, a brick church was opened by Rev. J.
Bickford, and the Rev. J. Sted, a minister of the Presby-
terian Church. The present church was opened on 17th
March, 1889. Services are also held at Point Lonsdale.
Wallace. —On 18th September, 1865, a meeting was
held in the Sunday School of the Anglican Church at
Steiglitz to consider the advisability of building a
Wesleyan Chapel. The Rev. W. P. Wells of Geelong
presided over this historic meeting, and, by resolution,
the building of a church was agreed to. Later, the
Steiglitz Circuit was formed, including a wide area of
surrounding territory—Steiglitz, North Steiglitz, Maude,
Emily Park, Morrisons, Bacchus Marsh, Ballan, Elaine,
Mt. Mercer, Egerton, Gordon and Lai Lai.
In 1867 Egerton became a flourishing centre on
account of its mines, and in 1878 it became the head of
a Circuit. Among the families who have served the
cause here, such names as Trounce, Cocking, Watkinson,
Hoskins, McKenzie, Harrison, Leslie, Yelland, Farrar,
Hicks, Barclay, Knuckey, Hickson, Pickford, Tinney,
Downey, Norton are fondly remembered.
In 1884 a church was built at Millbrook which, after
forty years of service, was removed to Wallace. In
1906 Egerton was reduced to a probationer’s Circuit
and in 1909 it became a home mission station. At Mill-
brook, Mr. Westcott’s house was used for service for
many years. Bannockburn, Apollo Bay, Beech Forest,
Forrest, Cressy, Lismore, and Berringa are home mission
stations within the bounds of the district.
CASTLEMAINE AND MARYBOROUGH DISTRICT.
Castlemaine and Maryborough. —This inscription on
a tablet in the Wesley Hill (Castlemaine) Church, tells us
something of the history of Methodism in this district:
“To commemorate the original Wesley Hill Methodist
Church. The first place of worship on the goldfields,
July 4th, 1852. Rev. J. C. Symons, minister; unveiled,
February 16th, 1930. All honour to our pioneers.”
Gold having been discovered at Forest Creek, Mt.
Alexander, in August, 1851, within four months there
were 20,000 diggers on the field. The spiritual needs of
such a community led the Wesleyan authorities in
Melbourne to appoint a minister to labour in that
district and their choice fell on the Rev. J. C. Symons.
Leaving Melbourne on sth March, 1852, he arrived at
Mt. Alexander on Saturday, 7th March. Next day he


preached to large and appreciative congregations, thus
following up the good work which was being done by
the occasional visits of Revs. Harcourt, Turner and
Butters, and by the open-air services conducted by the
local preachers. The first church was erected, and duly
opened on Sunday, 4th July, 1852, and a week later a
Sunday School began operations. This primitive struc-
ture appears to have served until May, 1861, when, on
the first Sunday of that month, another church was
opened at Wesley Hill. This building was destroyed by
a cyclone on 14th November, 1901, but another church
was erected on the same site, and opened for worship on
16th April, 1903. The first Wesleyan Church at Castle-
maine, in reality a slab hut, was opened in 1853, and the
stone building in 1856.
The Primitive Methodist Society at Campbell’s Creek
held a meeting in December, 1855, and passed the fol-
lowing resolution: “We request the brethren at
Melbourne to station Mr. Dobinson to us as preacher.”
Once established, churches soon dotted hills and valleys,
and to them folk came to worship. The heartiness of
those services is proverbial. Nor were the Chinese resi-
dents neglected, for Chinese ministers were appointed,
Leong On Tong being mentioned elsewhere.
Maldon.— From the stump of a tree in Tarrangower,
afterwards Maldon, a local preacher in 1853 testified
to the grace of God. The cause grew and a church
which was erected in 1855 soon proved too small for
requirements, for here, as elsewhere, within a few years
the advancement of the cause demanded additional
accommodation. This led to the erection of the present
church which was opened on 18th October, 1863. It
is interesting to note that Mr. Henry Ralph and his two
mates gave twelve ounces of gold, valued approximately
at £SO, towards the cost of the building. Maldon,
originally part of the Castlemaine Circuit, was declared
a separate Circuit in 1859.
At Muckleford, services began, apparently, in 1857,
but after a short time they were discontinued, and
resumed in 1863. The land for the Muckleford Church
was the gift of Hatton Bros., and on it a brick church
was built, and opened on 17th July, 1864. Nine years
later, the present church was opened. A church was also
built at Eaglehawk, or North Maldon, but all that
remains of it is a granite slab, with the inscription,
“Wesley Church, 1861. : ” A Bible Christian Church
opened in 1864 has also been demolished. At Walmer a
Bible Christian brick church also disappeared. It was


replaced, however, by a weatherboard building in May,
1899.
The Rev. W. Chester was the first minister appointed
after Maldon became a Circuit, the Rev. J. Teague
being the first minister of the Bible Christian Church to
reside in this locality. Among the pioneers was Mrs.
Cousins who was present at the first service in Maldon,
and who, it is said, baked 70 lbs. of cake in a camp-oven
for the first tea meeting. Other loyal members of the
Church were Mr. and Mrs. Mitchell, who held a class-
meeting in their home and spent their spare time in
distributing tracts. Mr. and Mrs. B. Thomas, Mr. M.
Morgan, a pioneer local preacher, Mr. Boots, Messrs.
James and Edward Jeffrey, Mr. Stebbins, Mr. James
Jenkin, who often walked from Campbell's Creek to
preach, Mrs. Thomas Austin of the open house, Mr.
John Dare, Mr, John May, Miss B. Young, Mr. J. Young,
“Granny” Toy, Mrs. Woodfull, mother of the captain of
the Australian Eleven, Mrs. Winsor, Messrs. William
Watts, Joseph Denny, James Penrose, and “Father”
Dibb, who was regarded as the patriarch of Muckleford
Methodism.
Newstead. —Between 1860 and 1870, the Primitive
Methodist Connexion built the first church in the main
street of Newstead, and among its foundation members
were Mr. Williamson, Mr. Horsfall and Mr. Booth. The
present church was built in 1907.
At Strangways, services were first held in Kimpton's
Barn, and in 1865 the present church was erected. R.
Barkla, J. Turvey and D. Johnson were closely associ-
ated with the work at Strangways.
At Sandy Creek the first church was opened in 1859,
the minister being the Rev. Mr. Chester. At an earlier
period services were held under a tree, in Mr. Crockett’s
tent, and, later, in a log cabin. The Crockett family are
held in kindly memory at Sandy Creek, for one brother
was a local preacher, another the Sunday School Super-
intendent and Miss Crockett, the leader of the choir.
At Yandoit, services began in a tent and were con-
tinued until some one stole the “church.” Sixty years
ago a fine brick building was erected there.
At Kooroocheang, a church was built 51 years ago.
At these outposts, the names of Tonkin, Higgins, and
Yourn are well remembered.
Kyneton. —ln 1849 there was sufficient inducement
for the Rev. John Harcourt to visit Kyneton. Here, as
elsewhere, Methodist homes were available for services
before a church was built. In 1854, a small band of


Methodists resolved to erect a church, and in the
following year a wooden building was opened for wor-
ship by the Rev. D. J. Draper. In 1859 this church had
to be enlarged, and at length gave place to the beautiful
blue-stone church in which Divine worship is now held.
It was opened by the Rev. Dr. Dare on 7th December,
1870. In 1885 a vestry was added, and from 1912 to
1916 many interior improvements were effected.
Kyneton, like so many other places where folk have
expressed their faith in blue-stone, has been true to the
best traditions of Methodism, and among the families
worthy of mention are those of Thomas Watson, W.
Hood, W. Carr, G. W. Johnston, W. Ward, S. Furphy,
T. Lister, A. Scope, Sutherland, Mannack, W. Southern,
J. Southern, Lumley, Pocock, Hicks, Watson, Morris,
Connell, Andrews, Jacobs, Kelley, Maling, Newton,
Ballam, Vail, Rogers, Groves, Williams, Moorman, Weeks,
Bodkin, Thrum and the Castles, whose influence has also
been felt at Colac and Warrnambool.
Maryborough.— To the übiquitous “Jimmy” Jeffrey is
given the honour of being the pioneer preacher at Mary-
borough, for he is credited with having preached “three
weeks before the rush set in.” Be that as it may, there
is no doubt that Thomas H. Evans and Edwin Peters
took an ample share of the work in the open-air, and
when the Rev. M. Dyson arrived to take up the Super-
intendency at Alma in April, 1855, he found the ground
ready for sowing and a band of local laymen eager to
assist. His Circuit covered an immense area, compris-
ing Maryborough, Carisbrook, Daisy Hill, Avoca, and
Fiery Creek (now Beaufort). The first church was a
canvas tent situated in Nolan Street. The second
church was a modest wooden building lined with green
baize and situated in High Street, not far from Inker-
man Street. The third church was a more pretentious
structure, though only weatherboard. It stood on a
two-acre block of ground which the Government had
granted for church purposes. This church was opened
in April, 1857.
A brick church came next, and was opened on
Christmas Day, 1860. To-day, with additions, it is
Wesley Hall. Yet another church was erected—that in
use at present—the foundation stone of which was laid
on 23rd June, 1886. The Argyle Street Church was
originally the Primitive Methodist Church in Napier
Street, which, at the time of Methodist union, was
removed to its present site.


At Timor, a Primitive Methodist Chapel was erected
in 1876. A Wesleyan Church was also built there at
an early date, but later it was sold and removed to
Homebush.
At Carisbrook, worship began in a tent on Harrison’s
Hill in 1854. In 1855 a weatherboard church was
erected, and on 27th September, 1857, a brick church
was opened by Rev. D. J. Draper. Owing to damage by
a storm in 1864, this church had to be rebuilt. The
present Sunday School building was formerly the Alma
Wesleyan Church. At Craigie services were held in a
weatherboard building in 1855. Later, this building was
removed to Timor, its place being taken by a stone
edifice which was opened for worship in 1868.
Daylesford. —lt is claimed that Methodism virtually
began at Mount Franklin in 1841, when Mr. E. S.
Parker, Protector of the Aborigines, settled there. Of
the incidents between this date and the opening of a
church on 30th January, 1859, little information is
available. It is known, however, that at a meeting held
at Mr. Parker’s home, it was agreed to ask the Confer-
ence of 1859 to appoint a minister to Mount Franklin.
In the following year the Rev. J. Harcourt visited Spring
Creek and conducted service on 28th May. Next day
he went on to Daylesford, and in the course of a few
months the “Franklinford Circuit” came into being. The
first Superintendent was the Rev. W. Baker who had
been designated for foreign missions but was then
waiting for a ship. Private homes were available for
worship, and local laymen ready to assist. They were
guided by the wise counsels of the Revs. J. Harcourt and
J. Catterall who visited at intervals of six weeks. Thus
was truly laid the foundation of Methodism in that
area. A class was established in Mr. Howe’s home on
Wednesday evenings under the leadership of Mr, J.
Andrew. At the first meeting were Messrs. W. J. Rash-
leigh, Emmanuel Trembath and William Jenkin.
In 1861 the Rev. S. Knight was appointed to reside at
Daylesford, and, in order to give him a good start,
tenders for a new church had been let and £240
gathered before April of that year. The original trustees
of that church were John Andrew, James Barkla, James
Andrew, William John Rashleigh and Stephen Betheras.
At this time the Circuit was designated “Franklinford
and Daylesford Circuit.” The stone of the church was
laid on 23rd April, 1861, but a severe winter, bad roads
and other circumstances delayed progress to such an


extent that the church was not opened before 20th
October, 1861. In the meantime, services were held in
the Municipal Council Chamber, but, owing to local
enthusiasm and the successful ministry of Mr. Knight,
it soon proved too small to accommodate the congrega-
tion. Not to be outdone, the good folk erected a
wooden building, 30 feet
boards and covered with drugget carpet ” to serve until
the new church was ready for occupation.
The first public service in Daylesford was conducted
by Rev. J. Catterall, in an unfinished building at the
corner of Raglan and Jamieson Streets on the evening
of 10th June, 1860. Fourteen candles were used to
furnish light for the service. The present pile of beauti-
ful church buildings was opened on 10th December,
1865. The Primitive Methodist Connexion began work
here in 1862, a church being built in Stanbridge Street.
The Bible Christians came in 1864. Their first service
was held in a house in Albert Street, and later a church
was erected which, subsequently, was removed to Ballarat.
In 1866 Daylesford became a senarate Circuit.
Dunolly and Tarnagulla.— From the diary of Mr
Edwin Peters, dated 3rd January, 1857, we glean, “The
little chapel is finally erected after the colonial style,
having been built in a day.”
At Tarnagulla, Jonathan Falder, a recent arrival from
California Hill, preached to the people of Sandy Creek
his pulpit being a tree stump. On the evening of the
same day, 12th September, 1858, a service was held by
a Wesleyan local preacher in a private house. At
Dunolly, the gold rush of 1856, within a year had
brought nearly 40,000 people to the locality. Here, as
elsewhere, Methodism put up a canvas building for wor-
ship, but, after two years, to the dismay of the faithful,
the canvas chapel was sold for £1 and for a time public
worship was discontinued.
A little later the folk joined up with the United
Methodist Free Church under the ministry of the Rev.
W. Calvert. When he returned to England a small brick
church was built at old Dunolly and opened by the Rev.
R. S. Bunn in the early part of 1860. The first society
class met in the home of Mr. J. Nonmus under the
guidance of Mr. Job Hansford. Soon afterwards a
committee, consisting of Messrs. Job Hansford, E. F.
Peters, A. T. Peters, Thomas Rooney, R. Ritchie, E. Car-
wardine, and guided by the Rev. J. Mewton, was formed.
A room in Broadway was used until the brick church
was opened on 29th March, 1863. A Sunday School
was started with Mr. Job Hansford as Superintendent,


Messrs. A. T. Peters, E. F. Peters, George Stafford and
Mrs. Rooney taking their places as teachers.
Meanwhile, in 1859, a wooden church had been built
at Tarnagulla and in 1864 the present brick church took
its place. Four years earlier the Tarnagulla and
Dunolly Circuit was formed under the superintendency
of the Rev. Robert Bunn.
The Primitive Methodists rendered fine service in the
Tarnagulla district at an early date. The Rev. S.
Bracewell was stationed there in 1862 and gave five
years of splendid service, building up an extensive
Circuit which embraced the present Circuit of Laane-
coorie and Moliagul. At such places as Bromley (1862),
Bealiba, Old Dunolly, Goldsborough and Murphy's
Creek, the Methodists bore witness to the Truth.
Dunolly district has a noble history, to which
Methodism has undoubtedly made a valuable contribu-
tion. It is interesting to note that the Revs. J. Stafford,
Samuel Cuthbert, John, Luther, and Robert Williams,
James Smith, Ernest Smith, Edward Davies and R. H.
Crook all spent their early days in this district. The
beautiful buildings at Dunolly reveal the fidelity of
Methodists to their Church. The church itself, the model
Sunday School of 1886 and the fine Kindergarten build-
ing, of 1905 are features of local Methodism which
win general admiration.
Laanecoorie. —As previously indicated, this post was
associated with the ministry of the Rev. Samuel Bracewell
in 1862. Services, however, were evidently held before
that date, probably about 1858. A church was built the
following year, the preachers coming from Bendigo.
At Eddington the Gospel was first preached in 1862
and during that year a church appears to have been
built. West Shelbourne was missioned in 1871. Wood-
stock West was a Bible Christian outpost dating back to
1869 as part of the Maldon Circuit.
Faithful work was done in this district by the Revs.
W. Robinson, Doderidge, and Gudridge, and in a long
list of honoured laymen one finds Messrs. J. Grimmett,
A. Foster, Stone, J. Faulks, J. Edwards, G. Nicholas, G.
Punton, Davies, Poole, Curnow, Shearer, Charles, Beas-
ley and Jamieson.
Avoca. —Methodism was established in Avoca by a
layman, Mr. John Meaden, who arrived in 1854 and
immediately gathered the folk for worship. Later, the
Rev. W. P. Wells occasionally visited Avoca, and for
his services a canvas tent was secured. In April, 1855,
the Rev. Martin Dyson w T as appointed to Alma, and in
October, 1855, he pitched his tent at Avoca. In 1857-8


a brick church was erected at Avoca, the present church
being built during the ministry of Rev. F. J. Fitchett.
At Natte Yallock, Mr. Henry Mills persuaded two
others to accompany him to the Rev. H. Greenwood, who
was then filling the vacancy caused by the death of the
Rev. F. J. Fitchett, to ask for services at Natte Yallock.
Their request was granted and arrangements made for
public worship which was conducted in the sitting-room
of the local hotel. At Redbank, in 1866, a galvanised
iron church was built and used until 1890, when a
wooden structure took its place. In 1856, Moonabiel
benefited by the immigration from Lamplough, the
incoming Methodists bringing their church, a galvanised
iron building, with them. Later, a beautiful brick church
was built. At Rathscar, Percydale, Lexton, and Amphi-
theatre the Primitive Methodists and the United
Methodists were well represented, preachers travelling
from Avoca. At Lexton, another outpost within the
bounds of the Avoca Circuit, services were first held in
1856, at the home of Mr. John Simpkin, sen.
Trentham was formerly the Blackwood Circuit and
had early associations with Daylesford. Mr. B. Trewhella
came to reside at Barry's Reef in 1860 and forthwith
commenced services in his home, being assisted by
preachers who walked all the way from Daylesford. At
Simmond's Reef services were probably held at an
earlier date, for the bell from Simmond’s Reef, which is
now at Blackwood, bears the date of 1854.
In 1863 the Gospel was preached at Blue Mount, then
an outpost of the Kyneton Circuit. In 1869 the first
services were held at Little Hampton, the pioneer of
which was Mr. Thrum. A separate Circuit was formed
in 1875 with Rev. J. de Q. Robin, M.A., as its first
superintendent.
The first Quarterly Meeting at Red Hill was attended
by J. Barkla, John Robinson, W. Mounter, W. Whit-
stable and J. B. Garland. In 1877 services began at
East Trentham and a year earlier Blue Mount appeared
on the Circuit plan. The first meeting of the Trust was
held in 1886. A church was opened on 3rd April, 1892.
Talbot and Amherst is a home mission station within
the bounds of this District.
NORTH-WESTERN DISTRICT.
St* Arnaud. —Services in St. Arnaud began in 1861,
when the Rev. A. Inglis, of Avoca, accepted the invita-
tion of Mr. Pemberthy to come over and investigate.
As the result of that visit, a monthly service was


inaugurated and in 1878 a church was built. Stuart Mill
was added to the Circuit plan in 1869, and in 1894 a
church was erected. At Kooreh a church was built about
1878. Coonooer Bridge has a beautiful church of recent
date. Pioneers of Methodism in the St. Arnaud Circuit
include Messrs. Hart, Heal, Cheeseman, Hicks, Avery,
Dower, Mahaffy, Edgar, Opie, Robertson, Hoskin,
Brewer, Wells, Jeffrey, Palmer and Osborne.
Donald. —The earliest settlers at Swanwater, in 1869,
gladly accepted the offer of Mr. Thomas Bath to use
his house for services. The dwelling proving inadequate,
the congregation moved to this good man’s barn. Soon,
however, the need of a chapel in a central position
became apparent, and a wooden building, 30 feet by 20
feet, lined with hessian and paper, and lighted with
kerosene lamps and candles, was erected and first used
on 28th October, 1873. The present church at Swan-
water was built in 1924. At Donald, the storeroom o±
Mr. J. A. Meyer did duty as a chapel, bales of wool and
sacks of potatoes serving as seats. Later the State school
was used. In 1878 a church was erected in Campbell
Street, but eventually the property was sold and its
place taken by the present church which was opened in
1916. The association of Mr. C. R. Bassett with the
Sunday School is referred to elsewhere. At Jeffcott, on
the property of Mr. F. Harris, about 1877, the Rev.
Ralph Brown preached under a gum tree to a company
of worshippers. Soon a church was erected, which was
followed by the beautiful structure of 1924.
At East Laen the church of 1882 gave way in 1924 to
a modern building. Here it was that Mr. C. R. Bassett
superintended the Sunday School for 39 years. Donald
became a separate Circuit in 1890, the Rev. C. Angwin
being its first Superintendent. The Donald Circuit has
had the support of very worthy laymen, among whom
may be mentioned, Messrs. S. Morley, E. G. and A. P.
Bath, the latter being a Sunday School Superintendent
for forty years, C. J. Sparrow, a local preacher of fifty
years’ standing, Jennison, Reseigh, Grewar, C. R. Bas-
sett, Reardon, Harris, Williams, W. N. L. Pearse, F.
Harris, D. Ham, J. S. Tonkin, S. Sellick, F. Beckham, S.
Coats, J. Tyson, R. Hancock, W. S. Pope, Came, Pace
and Mrs. Wells.
Mildura. —Here Methodism is associated with the
ministry of the Rev. J. Trathan who built a bark hut
in Deaidn Avenue on what is now the site of the “Sun-
raysia Daily” Office. The structure, however, was unequal
to a local whirlwind and collapsed just as a service had


concluded. Another building soon took its place. In
1889 a church was built in Ninth Street and the present
church, a fine brick edifice, was erected in 1910.
Methodism at Merbein owes not a little to Mr. H. C.
Lapthorne who organised a Sunday School and suc-
ceeded in securing Mr. J. C. Rose as its Superintendent.
This school was held in the goods shed at the railway
station. In 1911 a building, 12 feet by 30 feet, and
known as “The Church,” was erected on the property
of Mr. C. James. Here services were continued until
1917, when the present church took its place. The Rev.
S. Albon was the first minister to be stationed at
Merbein.
Wentworth.— This town is just across the river from
Mildura, and, although actually in N.S.W., is a Circuit
within the bounds of the Victoria and Tasmania Confer-
ence. It was transferred from the New South Wales
Conference in 1906 or 1907. Unfortunately, its history
is obscure, but baptisms and marriages in 1880 are
recorded over the signature of the Rev. Thomas
Northcott. Prior to 1882, the Wesleyan services were
held in the Court House, and, later, in what is now known
as St. John’s Anglican Church, then a community
church. The Wesleyan Church, of which Mr. William
Bowring laid the stone, was opened in 1882.
Among those who, in face of great difficulties, spread
the good news of the Gospel in these parts, mention
may be made of Mr. William Bowring, who for 27 years
was a Sunday School Superintendent, Mrs. Perrin
and “Peggy” Geake, who were teachers in the school.
Messrs. Absalom and Samuel Tonkin, Carbis, Goodwill,
Summers, Woodhead, Upton, Gorman, Mason, Gazley,
Mrs. Green, Mrs. Kerridge and Mrs. McGeorge also
served with acceptance.
Birchip. —Services prior to 1891 were held in a small
mud-brick structure—a sort of union church, public
worship being conducted by the Methodist ministers
from Charlton and Wycheproof. In 1891 Mr. (now Rev.)
Horton Williams was stationed here and in that year
the first Methodist church was erected, the Rev.
William Harris journeying from Wycheproof for
the opening services. In that year also Birchip
was excised from the Wycheproof Circuit and
constituted a home mission station. The name of Mr.
J. B. Hillgrove is closely associated with Methodism at
Birchip.


Woomelang. —Mr. Nattrass, the home missionary at
Hopetoun, visited the locality and made arrangements
for public worship at the home of Mr. and Mrs. P. D-
Barbary. For five years fortnightly services were held
in this home and afterwards in the State school until
1907, in which year a church was erected and opened by
Mr. A. M. Yates. The Rev. E. Swan, M.A. was the first
resident minister. Messrs. Rowe, Cook, Mitchell,
Barbary, Duthie, Hamlyn and Watson were worthy
pioneers of this cause.
Ouyen. —Public worship was first held here in 1909.
The first home missionary was Mr. (now Rev.) B. R. Toi.
The first church was a flimsy hessian structure. The winds
blew, however, and it fell. In 1913 the present church was
built and opened by the Rev. H. McCraw. A vestry has
since been added and a parsonage built.
Underbool. — First services were held in an iron shed
which on week days was a greengrocery store. Some
time previously, however, Mr. H. Jones conducted a
Sunday School in his home. From the iron shed public
worship was transferred to the Public Hall, erected in
1913. On 15th November, 1925, the new church was
opened. Underbool was a home mission station in
1913, Mr. A. Ray being the first missioner. In 1926 it
became a probationer’s Circuit in the charge of the Rev.
A. R. Newnham.
Red Cliffs. —In February, 1920, the folk at Red Cliffs
used the Recreation Hall as a place of worship, Mr.
George Christian, with his baby organ and Sankey hymn
books, going out from Irymple for six months to conduct
services. The first minister to preach at Red Cliffs was
the Rev. T. H. Indian, the place of worship being a bag
“humpy” dignified by the name of “Druids’ Hall. In
1921 Mr. A. J. Jenkin took up work as a home mission-
ary, and on 2nd July, 1922, a church was opened. Most
of the original “flock” were returned soldiers. In 1924
Red Cliffs became a Circuit. Among many faithful
supporters, Messrs. M. G. Nippe, J. Roberts, W. T. West,
J. T. Marchband and C. P. Howie are worthy of mention.
Murrayville and Cowangie. —The old Town Hall was
first used for divine service on Christmas Day, 1912, and
on sth October, 1913, a church, which was built by
working-bees under the direction of Mr. George Lyons
was opened for worship. The first Superintendent of
the Sunday School was Mr. Camp. The ppenmg up of
Murrayville as a home mission station is referred to
elsewhere.


At Merrinee, on Sunday afternoon, 24th June, 1925,
twelve people met in the waiting room of the local rail-
way station for divine service conducted by Mr. G. G.
Goldsmith. In the evening a similar number gathered in
a grain store at Werrimull. Later, when the store was
burned, a near-by pine tree gave sufficient shelter. This
locality has not yet been provided with a suitable
building for church purposes.
Werrimull and Speed are home mission stations.
BENDIGO DISTRICT.
Bendigo. —ln March, 1852, “Jimmy” Jeffrey preached
on the spot near where the Golden Square Church now
stands.
The Rev. J. C. Symons, who was stationed at
Forest Creek (Castlemaine), naturally maintained
an oversight of, and an interest in, the sister gold-
field. In 1852 the Rev. J. Chapman purchased for £l3O
a weatherboard dwelling on Golden Square which may
be regarded as the first Methodist Church at Sandhurst,
as Bendigo was then called.
In August, 1852, the Rev. Thomas Raston arrived to
take charge, and at the close of 1853 was able to
report that there were five places of worship in use. In
1854 the Sandhurst Circuit was formed under his
superintendency. The 21st January, 1855, witnessed
the opening of a new church at Forest Street. It has to
be remembered, however, that services were previously
held in Bendigo proper at Howard Place in Fraser
Street, and that early in 1853 a canvas-covered building
was purchased and removed to a site near the same
spot. This building was removed later to a site in
Forest Street near where the present parsonage now
stands.
On the present Forest Street block a wooden-framed
and canvas-covered church was erected in 1853.
Whether this was the building referred to as being
removed to Fraser Street we are not told. However,
it really marks the establishment of the Forest Street
Church. So prosperous were the times that in addition to
the erection of a church in 1855, a bigger and finer
structure—the present church—was commenced in 1862,
the foundation stone being laid on 20th October by
Sir John Barkly. The opening ceremony took place the
following year. On an old Preachers’ Plan of 1858, the
following names of accredited local preachers appear:
Dare, Dubourg, Fizelle, Marrack, Nevinson, Hayton,
Stevens, Inglis, Graham, Brown, Faider, White,


Dower, Coombs, Opie, Harkness, Oliver and Barkla. At
the same time there were on trial Messrs. Pearse,
Benson, Foster, Nankervis, Long, Baker and Hopson.
Golden Square has a noble church which recalls such
men as Harkness, Allingham, Harvey, Evans, Jones,
Crump, Saunders, Enticknap and Henderson. These men,
and many others, loyally stood by the cause in the
pioneering days, and some of them are still doing so.
Public worship was first held at Long Gully in 1853, first
in the open air and, later, in a tent; at Lockwood and at
Kangaroo Flat in 1854, and at Epsom in 1866; McKenzie
Street, where the fire still burns, Quarry Hill, Arnold
Street, Specimen Hill, Ironbark, where services are held
in a delicensed hotel, Bagshot, White Hills, East Shel-
bourne, Mandurang, Strathfieldsaye, Buckley Street and
Bridge Street. These are all hallowed spots despite the
ups and downs of the years. To-day, the Circuit is rich
in traditions bequeathed to it by the Wesleyan, Primitive
Methodist, and the Bible Christian denominations. At
the Annual Conference of 1935, the Bendigo Circuit
was divided into three Circuits.
Eaglehawk. — At Eaglehawk West, in 1853, a canvas
chapel at St. Mungo, at the head of the Eaglehawk
Gully, bore witness to the activity of the Methodist
Church. A second structure, a slab building, was erected
soon after near the Specimen Hill Mine. In November,
1854, a new building to accommodate both congregations
was built on the present site. Of this church the Rev.
Thomas Easton was the minister. At “The East,” Primi-
tive Methodism was firmly established in 1855, the pioneer
minister being the Rev. L. Dobbinson. In 1864 the Rev.
Joseph Langham was stationed here. For ten long years
an old slab-church served as a place of worship and in
1865 the present church was erected.
At California Hill, services were first conducted
Jonathan Falder in his slab hut, a church being erected
in 1856. In 1857 a brick church was built. So rapid
was the development, however, that in 1867 the present
church was provided. At Upper Road, in 1864, a Bible
Christian Chapel was erected, and opened by the Rev.
Thomas Keen, the present church being opened in 1882.
At Nerring, one of the country outposts, a church was
built in 1889, the State school being used previously.
Leichardt is another outpost. What men are thought of
when history is written! John Pearse, John Elwood,
Samuel Hollis, John Peake, William Lampard, Samuel
Bowles, William Counsell, William Coombs, John Coombs,
William Lanyon, Williams, C. Ellis, Richard Cole, P.


Trevean, Anthony Stevens, Joseph Davey, John Bassett,
John Besgood, John Derham, Batkin, Falder, Fawcett,
Benson, Matthew, Stroble, Moore, J. Chenhall, R.
Geake, D. Hore, H. Daws, H. Millman, S. Abbot, L.
Crowle, W. C. Phillips, R. Hobba, J. Ennor, E. Phillips,
H. Williams, S. Eastman (Upper Road), G. McNaughton,
T. Ingham, T. Gill, T. Hughes, T. Gregory, S. Green, H.
Fletcher, H. Treloar, G. Willis, W. Gordon, J. Shadbolt,
Charles Priest,, Flett and Featherstone (Nerring).
Boort. —ln the Circuit Schedule of 1875, reference
is made to the new districts of Kinypaniel, Fernihurst,
Boort, Catumbla and Kurracca. Such appears to have
been the official beginning of our work in what is now
the Boort Circuit.
In 1877 Societies were formed at Boort, and Boort
North with ten members, Messrs. Davey and Odgers
being leaders. At the time the influence of the Rev. A.
R. Edgar was being powerfully felt throughout the
district. A block of land was secured at Boort North
and a building erected. Although the land is still held,
the building was sold in 1905.
A church was built at Boort in 1881, and has since
been enlarged. This area became a separate Circuit in
1886, its first minister being the Rev. J. W. Rowse. It
reverted to a home mission station in 1891, but its
status as a Circuit was restored in 1895.
A Society class of seven members was established at
Fernihurst, under Mr. Crockett and the good work
continued until 1890. In 1878 services were held at
Woolshed Lake, and a society class of eight members,
with Mr. J. Proctor as leader, was formed. The preach-
ing services were discontinued after a year's trial owing
to the proximity of Catumbla. North Mysia was holding
services in 1879 in a public building. Although a site
was secured, the erection of a church was not under-
taken and finally the land was disposed of and the
services terminated.
Services began at Mysia in 1880 an*d were discon-
tinued in 1905. At Barraport a preaching service was
provided in December, 1880, and a church was built
soon afterwards but the services lapsed in 1886. What
a story of bad harvests the closing down of these remote
places tells! Yando had a class of six members in 1881
under Bro. Maynard. A church was opened at an
early date and rebuilt in 1932, the opening
services being held on 14th August. Terrappee
was on the Circuit Plan in 1884 but services ceased
four years later. As far back as 1885 divine service
was held at Lake Marmal, at which place Messrs. Edwin


Poxon, Proctor and Martyn were accepted as local
preachers. A church from Catumnal was removed to
Lake Marmal and reopened on 3rd June, 1934. At
Boning, services were first held in 1886 and discon-
tinued in 1906. At Minmindie, too, the services were
discontinued in 1887 after a two years’ trial but were
restored in 1909. At Oakvale services were established
in 1932.
At Catumbla —later Catummel, now Catumnal —a
humble beginning was made in the home of Mr. Thomas
Wescott and good progress has been shown. This good
brother, in addition to holding office in the church, in
1877 formed a Society class of twelve members.
Mr. William Birch, too, was a respected local preacher
at this post. William Wingfield is another brother whom
we delight to honour and Bro. William McLaren, a
local preacher of fifty-five years’ standing, has been
very closely associated with the Boort cause. A church
was erected at Catumnal in 1877 and used until 1934.
It was then sold to the folk at Lake Marmal and a new
church built to take its place.
Wedderburn. —Here Methodism gained a footing in
1866, and to such men as Mr. William Craig, Mr.
John Craig and Mr. Stafford, it owes much.
■ At Burke’s Flat, work dates back to 1869 and really
represents a union movement. Methodism, however,
owes much to Messrs. Rodger, Gallacher, Gray and
their families.
At Kurracca, Messrs. Holt, Brett, Galloway, Hannan
and others have served well. Services at Berrimal began
about 1880 and have been sustained by such families
as the Wingfields and Polkinghornes. Korong Vale, too,
has had its faithful folk who have stood loyally by that
little cause.
Kerang. —ln 1868, the Rev. J. Nicholson of Ingle-
wood paid periodical visits to Kerang and held services
in Mrs. Lyttle'ton’s home at Old Kerang. Not till
1875 was a wooden church provided for worship. Sub-
sequent developments proved it to have been erected in
the wrong place and in December, 1875, it was removed
to a more central site and reopened for worship in the
early days of 1876. In 1887 or 1888 it was blown down
by a cyclone and a brick building took its place—the
church now in use.
In 1880 the Rev. Ebenezer Taylor was appointed to
reside at Durham Ox. In 1885 the Superintendent
Minister came to reside at Kerang, a probationer taking
his place at Durham Ox. The ministry of Mr. E. C.


De Garis is well remembered. In the minutes of a Quar-
terly Meeting of 1883, the following resolution is
recorded: “That this Quarterly Meeting heartily
approves of the action taken by Mr. De Garis in regard
to matters of water conservation and irrigation, and
requests the trustees throughout the Kerang Circuit to
place their buildings at his disposal when he is ready to
lecture.” Macorna North celebrated its jubilee on 15th
November, 1931.
Pyramid Hill. —This Circuit is much indebted to Mr.
Henry Clarkson who came to Durham Ox sixty years
ago as the pioneer Methodist missionary. His “slab
hut” is still remembered and his work still honoured.
As the result of the faithful ministry of Mr. Clarkson
and a band of laymen, Pyramid Hill was constituted a
Circuit in 1894. It was separated from Kerang during
the ministry of the Rev. T. S. B. Woodfull, its first
minister being the Rev. R. H. Crook. Services began
at Pyramid Hill early in 1885. The place of worship was
the home of a contractor, the preacher, Mr. Service.
The Durham Ox Church was built in 1876, the Shire
Secretary, Mr. Sheridan, taking the opening services.
The timber for the church was carted by bullock dray
from Kyneton, 97 miles away. The block of two acres
on which the building stands was a gift from Mr.
George Holloway. Prior to this, services were held on
the verandah of a local store.
Canary Island Church was erected in 1878, but
services were held previously in the home of Mr. Samuel
Bear.
At Terricks West a church was built by a “working-
bee ” in 1885 but has since been sold.
At Yarrawalla public worship was first held in 1876
by Mr. Clarkson in the home of Mr. Hercus. Here the
name of Mrs. Joseph Roberts sen. is remembered with
affection. The folk at Yarrawalla sold their building
to the Methodists of Loddon Vale for the sum of one
shilling, a new and up-to-date structure taking its place.
The name of Mr. Judkins figures largely in the spiritual
movements of the seventies, and that of Mr. Woods, in
whose home at Woodlands worship was first held.
At Loddon Vale, Methodism was established in the
seventies, services being first held in the home of Mr.
Humphrey Twigg. “Here,” we are told, “the shilling
church still stands.”
At Mincha West, in 1876, the farm house of Mr.
Armstrong was used as a preaching place, five families
attending. The names of Bramley, Spowart and
Wallace are well remembered here.


Charlton. —Originally part of the St. Arnaud Cir-
cuit local services began after the visit of the Rev.
Ralph Brown in 1874. The first church was built in
1876 and a larger one in 1886, during the ministry of
the Rev. E. Taylor. The first local preachers’ meeting
was held in 1881, and those present were Rev. E. C.
De Garis, E. Serpell, J. Dew, H. Trevan, C. Procter,
Tucker and J. Procter. These brethren travelled—and
freauentlv walked —to such places as Corack, Teddy-
waddy, Nardoo, Nineyeanook, Woosang, Narrewillock,
Jeffcott, Tyrell Creek and Narraport.
Wycheproof. —Here meetings were first held in
private houses until a schoolhouse was made available
at Mount Wycheproof. In this building Mr. J. E. Free-
man also conducted a Sunday School. In June, 1882,
at a Local Preachers’ Meeting at East Charlton, it was
decided to supply the town of Wycheproof with fort-
nightly services in the United Methodist Free Church then
vacant. At that same meeting, over which the Rev. E.
C. De Garis presided, there were present Messrs. Trevan,
C. and J. Procter, F. Tucker, D. Stavely and Grimmett.
In 1885 Mr. Crocker was asked to make arrange-
ments for services at East Wycheproof. The waiting
room at Glenleith railway station also served for a
period. In 1886 a church was opened, which has been
described as “a wooden structure 24 feet by 36 feet,
and the finest on the Mount.” At Wycheproof the Rev.
L. Tait was the first resident minister.
Corack Church was opened in 1891 by the Rev.
William Harris, but services were held at an earlier date
by Mr. Madder in a shepherd’s hut and by Mr. Gilsenan
in Goldsmith’s home. After 1881, the year in
which the St. Arnaud Circuit was divided, Wycheproof
appears on the Charlton plan. In 1887, however, it
became a home mission station.
The earliest district church, however, appears to have
been built at Tyrell Creek during the ministry of the
Rev. Ralph Brown. In 1892, at Dry Tank services were
held in the homes of Symonds, Bradbury, Vina-
come and Baker, and a Sunday School was also in
operation. Mr. Horton Williams had charge of this
area. About 1910 the church from Tyrell Creek was
removed to Nullawil. At Townannie, public worship
was first held about 1878 in Mr. T. Bevan’s home and
a church built in 1884. At Teddywaddy, at the request
of Mr. W. Reddie, the local preachers of Wycheproof,
on 15th October, 1908, resolved to hold fortnightly


services in the State school. These services still
continue.
Echuca. —As early as 1857-58 a Methodist denomina-
tional school appears to have been established at
Echuca, and early records speak of the existence of a
church in 1857. In 1860, Mr. G. Watson held
regular services in the local court house and, after
his departure, Mr. F. Payne carried on the good work.
In that year the Rev. James Bickford, of Sandhurst,
visited Echuca, and on 27th May preached at Echuca
morning and evening, and at Moama, just across the
Murray, in the afternoon. His visit gave great encour-
agement to the good folk of the locality and a Sunday
School was opened in a private house. In 1861, a block
of land was secured as a site for a church and parson-
age and a strong committee was appointed to discuss
ways and means. The committee consisted of Messrs.
F. Payne, George Air, Thomas Jones, J. R. Snead,
Thomas N. Freeman and S. H. Hayward. A church
was built and opened on 24th April, 1864.
Of this church the Rev. F. T. Jenkin was the first
minister. With the arrival of the Rev. W. H. Fitchett,
who declared that “the building was not fit for a cer-
tain humble quadruped, much less a church/' something
naturally had to be done to improve matters. In 1869
a new church was erected. Mr. Fitchett also held
services at Tataila, first under a tree and later in a
farm house. A church was built and opened on 18th
February, 1869. Much credit is due to the Bible
Christian Connexion for work in the Echuca district.
For half a century they had been here, spreading the
Good News, the Rev. John Orchard being their represen-
tative, although then residing at Rochester. Through
his advocacy, a wooden church and a parsonage were
erected, and the Rev. John Garde was duly appointed
to take charge of an area which to-day embraces not
only Echuca, but Womboota, Moama and Cohuna.
Such men as Berryman, Lawry, Ware and Cunning-
ham are a few of many faithful brethren whose
names linger long in memory.
Ray wood.— ln 1874 John Lee was appointed to Ray-
wood as a hired local preacher, and during his time a
block of land was secured for church purposes. In 1876
a building committee, consisting of Messrs. W. Waugh,
H. Pascoe, J. Waugh, J. Harry, Keene and Henderson
was appointed. The church was opened on 2nd April,
1887. For five years prior to this, services were held in
the Presbyterian Church. The name of Mr. West Lau is


well remembered in the Raywood district. This Circuit
stretches out to Yalloak, Dingee, Summerfield, Neil-
borough, Neilborough East, Kamarooka and Drum-
martin. At Yallook the name of Harry is highly
respected. Kamarooka, too, is justly proud of Mr.
Miles sen. a local preacher now in his 90th year. The
names of Wood, Donaldson, Gaywood and McKay are a
few of very many devoted families.
iMitiamo. — In the Quarterly Meeting Minute Book of
the Terricks Bible Christian Circuit, it is recorded that,
on 31st July, ISO'S, it was resolved, “That the President
of the Conference be asked to give a series of lectures
to liquidate the Circuit Buggy Fund.” In the Circuit
were such gifted local preachers as R. H. Roberts M.
Pollock, W. H. Hopper, Joseph and R. Roberts and G.
Neilson. Apart from the fact that the church at
Mitiamo was opened on 2nd November, 1884, no definite
information is available in regard to it.
At Terricks South, the first service was conducted in
the home of Mr. D. Hopper in 1876 by the Rev. J.
Orchard. The home of Edwin Bucklen was also used
for this purpose. Later, services were held in the State
school, but local misunderstandings interfered with the
work. A move was then made to a small room which
was soon crowded out. Under the Rev. W. J. Treloar,
the first resident minister, this room was enlarged and
ultimately a new church erected. At Mologa a church
was built in 1884, services being previously held in the
State school by ministers from Rochester.
At Pine Grove, services were first held in an empty
house by Mr. H. Clarkson, local preachers from Elmore
supplying as occasion demanded. A church was opened
at Pine Grove on 3rd February, 1895, and another at
Prairie on 15th December, 1912.
Cohuna.— A church at Patho was erected, and opened
on Ist July, 1876 —a Union Church, built by working-
bees. In 1912 it became Methodist property. Mr. Penny
of the Bible Christian denomination is regarded as the
first Methodist agent to preach in Cohuna. He was
followed by the Rev. R. H. Brown, and a church was
erected soon afterwards, the date assigned being 15th
December, 1884. Cohuna certainly benefited by
Methodist Union, for all denominations seem to have
been previously on the field. Between 1913-15 churches
were built at Wee-wee-rup and Gunbower. On 22nd
August, 1926, a new church, attractive in appearance
and adapted to the needs of the locality, was opened at
Cohuna during the ministry of the Rev. E. A. Hinson.


Rochester. —This Circuit dates back to 1873, the year
in which the old church was built. Doubtless before this,
services were conducted in private homes. The new
church was built in 1910.
At Diggora it is recorded that Mr. Isaac Evans, and
Phillip Burgoyne opened their homes for service about
1868 or 1869. Amongst the local preachers were Miss
Sleep, Mr. T. D. Sleep, Mr. Bryant and Mr. Abbott. In
1873 the settlers discussed the building of a church, and
in September or October of that year the new church was
ready for occupation, the first service being conducted
by the Rev. J. Orchard. Other churches were built in
the district as opportunity offered. Mr. F. Grants
services as local preacher and the singing gifts of Mr.
C. Nicholls are gratefully remembered.
Elmore is indebted to the Rev. J. Orchard for its
Methodism, for, after interviewing the local residents,
he established a cause here. Later, the Rev. Samuel
Bryant came to live at Elmore, then part of
the Rochester Circuit. A church was built in 1874.
The Wesleyans also erected a church which has since
been removed. Amongst the Methodists are mentioned
Isaac Alt, William Jones, John Clements, John Shotton,
T. M. Trewick, Henry Parsons, H. Swindale, D. Bremer,
William Colee, James Maddren, Thomas Dodd, H. J.
Fudge, John Hughes, H. Melguard, Thomas and James
Parsons, William Lewis and J. Forshaw. In 1870 the
Rev. John Orchard began services at Toolleen, in Kirk’s
Barn, and Mr. Robert Kirk formed a Sunday School. A
church was opened on 17th May, 1875. This building
was afterwards transferred from the Bible Christian
Connexion to the United Methodist Free Church.
Swan Hill.—Here Methodist began in 1880, a prayer
meeting being held in the home of Mr. R. M. Murdoch. In
1885, Mr. Edmund Baker came as the first home mis-
sionary. A church was erected in 1886. Those
present at the first Quarterly Meeting were Messrs.
Ramsay, G. and J. Walker and W. Murdoch. A Circuit
was established in with the Rev. William Harris
as its Superintendent. At the first Quarterly Meeting
there were present the following brethren: Rev. William
Harris, James Castles, Holloway, Teague, Bell, Dennis,
Murdoch, Dunstan, J. and H. Stevens, Bath, Coburn
Holland, Dew and Le Leivre. Like all other Circuits
it has sponsored work in many places, some of which
are now separate Circuits.
The Swan Hill Church was built in 1918. To such
preachers as James Castles, his worthy sons, and J. Le
Leivre, local Methodism is deeply indebted.


Lake Boga. —This area became a separate Circuit in
1922 when it was excised from the Swan Hill Circuit.
Womboota. —Settlers arrived at Womboota, New
South Wales, in 1870, some of: whom were
Methodists. Messrs. Francis Edmunds and James
Denny opened their homes for public worship,
and in them, for nearly two years, Mr. Denny
preached the Gospel. When Womboota was added to
the list of stations ministered to by the Bible Christian
denomination, the services of Mr. Denny were grate-
fully retained. Twelve miles away, at Bunaloo, the
homes of Messrs. John Tomlinson, a member of the
Anglican Church, James Beer and W. Marsh were also
used for public worship. Bros. Beer and Marsh being
local preachers, their services were much appreciated
when vVomboota was made the head of a new Circuit
under a probationer of the Bible Christian denomina-
tion. The first minister of the Circuit was the Rev. Mr.
Parsons.
Sea Lake. —In September, 1893, the Rev. J. E. War-
ren came to Nine Mile, a place nine miles north of
Berriwillock, and conducted a service in the home
of Mr. W. McManus. Later, when Mr. Warren had
charge of the Waitchie station, the services were held
regularly. At that time Sea Lake was a township of
bag houses, the first service being conducted in a tent.
In 1892, Mr. H. H. Williams, then a home missionary
at Birchip, visited Berriwillock and conducted the first
service in the home of Mr. D. Camp.
Some time later Mr. W. R. Beckett, a home mission-
ary, was appointed to the district, with Berriwillock as
his headquarters, and in 1898 public worship was held
regularly at six other places. The cause at Sea Lake
developed, and is now the head of a Circuit. The name
of Mr. John Mills is honourably associated with
Methodism at Sea Lake.
Nyah West. — Until April, 1910, Nyah West was part
of the Swan Hill Circuit, the first home missionary being
Mr. Edmund Baker. In January, 1894, a private house
at Nyah was used for worship, conducted by Mr. Sykes,
and on 25th November, 1894, public worship was conducted
in a private house by the Rev. William Harris, of Swan
Hill. At a later date services were held in the local
hall, and continued for many years. In 1910 Mr. W. Payne
was stationed here as a home missionary, and in 1921
the Rev. F. H. Jenkin was placed in charge of the Cir-
cuit. A Sunday school was opened by Mr. A. C. Heath


in January, 1894, and for the past twenty-two years,
Mr. W. A. J. Pearse has been its Superintendent.
At Nyah West, public services were first held in the
State school in April 1915, and in the same year
Sunday School work was undertaken under the guidance
of Mr. A. Harrop. At Bulga, the first preaching service
was held out of doors in 1896, Mr. Edmund Baker
being in charge. Later the local hall was used, and later
still a church was built, and opened on Bth October,
1905. This church has since been closed. Mr. W. A.
J. Pearse opened a Sunday School at Bulga on Ist
November, 1897. Among the pioneer local preachers
in this district were Bros. Sykes, A. E. Heath, W. A. J.
Pearse, Dunstone, Anderson, F. Newnham, C. Richards
and A. E. Lloyd.
Manangatang.— ln 1911, Mr. Ellis Pryor, the home
missionary at Sea Lake, rode over and arranged for
preaching services, the first of which was held in a tent
belonging to the Coghills—a pioneer Methodist family.
As the seating accommodation was inadequate, the
children sat on empty tins.
In 1912 Manangatang was placed on the Sea Lake
Plan, and monthly services were conducted. The Rev.
Henry Clarke of Sea Lake was associated with Mr.
Pryor in this work. From CoghilPs tent to CoghilPs iron
kitchen was but a step, and, when the services had been
held here for some time, another change was made, for
the erection of a State school offered facilities which
could not be refused. In this building, too, a Sunday
School was opened. As time went on, a home mission-
ary was appointed. In 1924 a church hall was
erected on land given by Mrs. Coghill, Mr. Cyril
Derrick, the home missionary, and Mr. V. 0. Bait
being the carpenters.
Heathcote. —Formerly Mclvor, services being held here
in 1859. It was then part of the Kilmore Wesleyan Cir-
cuit, of which the Rev. J. Mewton was the Superin-
tendent. In that year a church was built. Rev. E.
Taylor was appointed Superintendent of the newly-
constituted Circuit in 1861. The first Quarterly Meet-
ing was held in the home of Mr. Travaski on 10th July,
1862, those present being E. Taylor, Travaski, Rowe,
Crowle, Jacka, Medlyn and Hughston.
Lalbert.— ln 1890, the first service was conducted
in the home of Mr. Joseph Smith by Mr. Coon, the home
Missionary at Berriwillock. Later, public worship was
conducted in a small building which had been erected
for school purposes. Preachers who assisted from time


to time were Jesse Stevens, a settler from S.A., and
Mr. Basham. About 1898 Mr. J. H. Langdon, now one of
our ministers, was appointed as the first home missionary.
If, at Lalbert, nothing else was achieved, it gave respite
to a mother who sometimes took her five children to a
service 25 miles away, Piangil, Inglewood, Ultima,
Mittyack, Barham (N.S.W.), Moulamein (N.S.W.), and
Robinvale represent the home mission stations of this
district.
WESTERN DISTRICT.
Warrnambool. —'Methodism was firmly established
here in the early days, mainly through the untiring
energy of a layman, Mr. William Witton, to whom grate-
ful reference has been made elsewhere. The first
church appears to have been built in 1850, and in the
following year the Rev. W. Lightbody was appointed
to take charge. Another church was erected in 1858, and
a Sunday School building in 1872. To men like Messrs.
Beardsley, H. H. Smith, Earle, Oakley, Wright, Walter
and Dr. H. Holmes Methodism owes a great deal. Mr.
James Earle was associated with the Sunday School for
fifty-five years, and for thirty-four years was the
Superintendent.
Port Fairy and Koroit. —Port Fairy was visited in
1848-49 by the Revs. F. Tuckfield and J. Harcourt, but
it was in the home of a good woman, Mrs. Harris, who
resided at the Duck Holes, now Rosebrook, near
Belfast, that the work really began. In her home a
prayer meeting was held for those who desired fellow-
ship, and it was there that Daniel Love was stirred by
the reading of a tract on “Eternity.” Afraid to stay
to the “after-meeting,” he was, nevertheless, so moved
that he became one of the outstanding men of God in
the Western District. It was also by the influence of
Mrs. Harris that William Watson and his wife, who
two years after their arrival with Mr. Jealous in 1844
came into an experience of salvation which made him a
tract distributor, and one of the best gifts of God to our
church. Somewhere about this time, a church appears to
have been built at Rosebrook, which soon gave place to a
larger building. In 1854 the Rev. J. Albiston was appointed
to Port Fairy and in the following the Rev. R. Hart
became the Superintendent of the Circuit. On 24th
August, 1855, the foundation of the present church
was laid by Mr. Witton. At Yambuk, one of the distant
outposts, Mr. Handhaugh gathered the Methodists into
his home for worship. The church which was built at


a later date is now in ruins. In 1863-4, a church to
serve Koroit and Kirkstall, was built at Kirkstall. This
was superseded by the present church at Koroit.
Portland. — When Messrs. Hedditch and Wilkinson
arrived in 1841-42 from Tasmania, they found that
prayer meetings were being conducted in the hut of
Jimmy Chapman, the brickmaker, and when Mr. Kittson
arrived at about the same time from Geelong,
he opened his house for worship. Henty’s wool-
store was also used as a church. At these services
three men gave valuable assistance—Messrs. Wilkinson,
Saunders and Deacon. A church was built in 1842, its
dimensions being 30 feet by 20 feet, and in its erection
Mr. McDowell took a leading part. The corner stone of
the present church was laid on 2nd January, 1865. The
Rev. F. Tuckfield was the first minister to visit Portland,
and the Rev. Mr. Lightbody, the first minister to be
stationed there in 1850. The homes of Bros. Kittson
and Hedditch at Bridgewater were early made avail-
able for worship, regular services being held in 1848.
Two churches have since been built at different periods.
At Gorae for many years, services were held in the
home of Mr. and Mrs. Williamson. A church was
erected in 1898. At Bolwarra, a wooden building for
public worship was erected in 1918, the foundation of
a flourishing cause. At Mt. Richmond, a church still
stands, but it has not been in use for a long time. On
Ist January, 1864, parents and children, 250 in all,
assembled to take part in the opening of a Wesleyan
school-house at Wattle Hill. Mr. Fred. Hawkins, and
Misses Adamson and Deacon being the prime movers
in this venture. The names of Lightbody, Kittson,
Jarrett, Hedditch, Adamson, Dimond, Dusting and
Williamson are honoured here.
Hamilton. —The Rev. W. Tregallas seems to have
been the first minister to visit Hamilton in the fifties.
At Muddy Creek, where there was a sprinkling of all
members of the Methodist family, he endeavoured to
bring about a union in favour of the Wesleyans, but
without success. The next minister to call was the Rev.
E. S. Burns, of Belfast, and he is regarded as the
founder of Methodisin in that locality. The Rev. H.
Baker wras the first minister of this charge, his chapel
being the reading-room, a little cottage, or the old
National school-house. The present suite of beautiful
buildings was built in 1913. The first meeting of Sun-
day School teachers was held on 10th June, 1861, there
being present the Rev. E. B. Burns, and Messrs. Holmes,


Shipham, Rogers, Course, lies, Mrs. Spencer, and Miss
Renfrey. Among the early stalwarts were Mr. and Mrs.
P. Learmonth, the latter being a niece of Sir James
Young Simpson, the discoverer of chloroform.
Byaduk. —'Before the arrival of an ordained minister,
James Harman, S. Clarke, and S. Freeman were preach-
ing the Gospel. In Mr. Smith’s home folk gathered for
worship, while in the neighbourhood Mr. Holmes was
carrying on temperance work. A church was opened in
1864, the Rev. J. B. Smith being its first minister.
Dunkeld and Penshurst. —Services began at Pens-
hurst, or Mt. Rouse as it was then called, in the
home of Henry Walter who was both preacher and
class leader. No exact date can be named, but it was
not later than 1857. The Rev. E. B. Burns visited
Penshurst in 1858 and sought assistance for erecting
a church. Success crowned his efforts, for in 1860 or
1861 a church was built. The Rev. W, C. Currey’s
name appears in connection with the conveyance of the
land, and the date is given as 16th May, 1861. The first
trustees were H. Walters, James Sharrock, John Shar-
rock, Matthew Gibb, Peter Learmonth, Thomas Leeson
and Charles Rogers. Penshurst was then part of the
Hamilton Circuit, and the first Superintendent appears
to have been the Rev. H. Baker.
The first resident minister was the Rev. J. W. Tuck-
field who arrived in 1864, and he it was who conducted
the first Wesleyan service in Dunkeld on 22nd May,
1860. The Rev. Thomas Adamson was the first Superin-
tendent of the Penshurst cause after its separation from
the Hamilton Circuit in 1871.
A church was erected in Dunkeld in 1872, the build-
ing now being used as a Sunday School, as a new church
has taken its place. At Dunkeld the name of Richard
Howell is very closely associated with Methodism.
Camperdown.— The Bible Christians were conducting
services in the Temperance Hal] in 1861, and in 1862,
on the 25th November of that year, the foundation
stone of their church was laid. The Wesleyans arrived
later. In 1890 Camperdown was excised from Terang
and became a separate Circuit.
Casterton. —Services were held here in the common
school as far back as 1867. The Rev. J. J. Watsford
was the minister at Merino at that time, and worked
strenuously to spread the Gospel through the
adjoining districts. Society classes were formed at
Merino, Coleraine, Muntham, and Dymer’s Creek.


Churches were built at Merino, in 1870; at Coleraine,
in 1873; and at Casterton, in 1877. Parsonages have
also been erected at Merino in 1875, Coleraine in
1933-34, and at Casterton in 1887.
Heywood.— This very wide Circuit was once part of
the Portland Circuit. The Rev. W. Lightbody was its
first minister, and in 1856 the Rev. S. Knight was
appointed to this charge. Soon after his arrival the
Heywood Church was built.
Cavendish. —This place is associated with the names of
Schonfield and Cleator, Methodist pioneers in whose
homes services began. Mr. John Addinsall, that great-
heart of the early days, was, no doubt, the preacher. In
1876 a church was built at Mooralla, and here Mr.
Schonfield, Mr. Stevens, and Miss E. J. Rogers carried
on a Sunday School until a church was built on a site
three miles north. Mr G. S. Carton then took charge
of the school. In 1928 the old chapel was demolished
and a new church erected by voluntary labour.
Originally part of the Hamilton Circuit, it became a
home mission station in 1914; and in 1931 was included
in the Cavendish Circuit.
Mortlake and Terang.— Services at Mortlake were
well established before the arrival of the Rev. W. EL
Fitchett in April, 1866. In the farm kitchen belonging
to Mr. W. Wykes, and later in the old blue-stone Shire
Hall, public worship had been held and a society class
formed under the leadership of Mrs. Shaw, sen. A
small wooden temple had also been erected. Mr. Fitchett
not only conducted services at Mortlake but preached
in the Presbyterian Churches at Hexham and Elephant
Bridge. In November, 1867, the foundation stone of a
new church was laid, and when the building was ready
for occupation Mr. Fitchett came from Edhuca to
preach at the opening services.
At Terang, in 1867, the Rev. Charles Lancaster held
the first preaching service, but the honour of erecting
the first church in this town belongs to the Bible
Christian Connexion. Mortlake and Terang became one
Circuit in 1876, and in 1885 Cobden and Carpendeit
were added to it. The original trustees at Terang were
Thomas Emery, Joseph McMillan, Henry Sumptes, Fen-
wick Tate and William Smithers. The names of
James Pascal, J. Murfett, C. A. Brown, H. S. Tippett,
Mr. and Mrs. William Matthews, Mark Jones, Love,
Brown, McPherson, West, Miller, Nelson and Penrose are
gratefully recalled by Dr. Fitchett. No list of the
pioneers of Mortlake is complete, however, without the


name of Mr. Thomas Montgomery whose unfailing
liberality meant much to local Methodism.
Timboon. —In the Heytesbury Forest, Methodism
has done much pioneering work, and here the cause has
been supported by a number of fine men. Such names
as Sleeman, Emery, Taylor, Beckett, Robilhard and Le
Couteur come readily to mind. In Mr. Alfred
Beckett’s home it was customary for such men to gather
for nrayer, and, through those meetings, work at
Curdie’s River was undertaken. In 1881, Mr. Arthur
Wade, a home missionary residing at Cobden, minis-
tered to the needs of this locality, and a church was
opened in 1887. A Sunday School was formed in the same
vear Between 1895 and 1898 a church was erected at
Timboon, and here and at other placesi difficult to
reach and not numerically strong, the Gospel has been
faithfully preached,
Nullawarre. —Until 1914 this station was attached to
Timboon. Services were first held in the Union
Church in March of that year, Bro. William Castles
being the preacher. The first Methodist Church was
opened on 11th November, 1918, and a new building at
Mepunga was completed in 1928. Mr. William Trigg
and his family have been warm supporters of Methodism
in this area. . .
Coleraine is a home mission station attached to this
District.
GIPPSLAND NORTH DISTRICT.
Sale. —In October, 1863, the Rev. James Bickford
visited Sale for the purpose of “spying out the land.
In March. 1864, eight persons—Messrs. N. Guthendge,
G. Ross, J. H. Waters, J. E. Derrick, G. E. Hawkins, R.
Gibbs, J. J. Drew and J. James —held a meeting and
courageously resolved to petition the ensuing Confer
ence to appoint a minister to Sale with a view to
establishing Methodism in that district. A month later
the Rev. H. Baker arrived. Arrangements were speedily
made for holding preaching services in the Mechanics
Institute, the only hall available, and that only cm
Sundays. The institute was poorly adapted for public
worship, and preparations for the Sunday services
entailed a great deal of labour. The Saturday clean
up” kept the folk busy far into the night. The seats, for
instance, had to be brought from the School, and
returned on the following morning. On Ist May, 1864,
Mr Baker held his first service, and, so rapidly grew
the cause that on 9th July, 1865, a church was opened.
In 1886 a Sunday School building was erected.


Society class meetings were established at an early
date in the homes of Mr. M. Gutheridge and Mr. G.
Ross, and a weekly prayer meeting in the house of Mr.
T. E. Hawkins. Later, the Primitive Methodist Con-
nexion established a cause at Sale. In addition to the
eight aggressive members already mentioned, the names
of Messrs. Henry Amey, R. Gutheridge, J. W. Baker,
Gibbs, H. White, E. W. Calloway, J. Webb and T.
Jackson are held in grateful memory.
Maffra.—As early as 1865, Mr. Baker held services
in the homes of Mr. Cook and Mr. Clayton, and at
Tinamba in the home of Mr. Osborne. Later, in the
wooden chapel with the shingle roof many happy years
were spent. The present brick church was built in
1912. The Rev. J. C. Lawton, then a probationer, was
the first minister to be appointed to Maffra in that year.
Heyfield, with its fine property, has been a good
Methodist outpost for many years. At Boisdale, ser-
vices were held in the local hall until a Union Church
was erected. The Maffra cause has been well served
by many devoted people, among whom were Mr. and
Mrs. James Shingles who continued their work for
church and Sunday School until age laid them by.
At too, men like Mr. J. Powell, a local
preacher, G. Little, S. Pearce and Colin McCrae, a local
preacher for sixty-two years, and who reached the ripe
age of 98 years, have given whole-hearted support to
the cause. At Heyfield, the names of Mr. and Mrs.
Fitzpatrick, Mills, Huffer, Buchanan and Stagg will
not be forgotten.
Bairnsdale. —This town was visited by the Rev. H.
Baker during his ministry at Sale, and in 1871 it was
added to the Conference Plan. From 1865-1867 many
Methodist families arrived in the locality, amongst them
being Messrs. White, Hill, Yates, Cooper, Armstrong,
Grose, Bull and Mrs. John Patterson. Soon a request was
made to the Government for a grant of land for church
purposes. A block of three acres was secured, and in
1868 the first portion of a wooden church was built.
Within a few months the rapid growth of the congre-
gation made additions necessary. The Methodist
Chapel was the second Protestant church to be erected
in the town. From 1868-71 services were supplied
from Sale by ministers and laymen, but in 1871 Con-
ference appointed the Rev. J. W. Tuckfield to the
Circuit. The first part of the brick church was opened
on 18th January, 1877, and additions were made the
following year.


At Lower Nicholson, services began about 1876. The
church at Wy Yung West was opened in 1898, and a
cause at Bulumwaal was established in 1896-97. Among
the local preachers were Messrs. Rashleigh, Andrews,
Cooper, Morrow, Armstrong, Nowell, J. D. Stocks and
J. Slater, the G.O.M. of Bairnsdale Methodism.
Drouin and Bimyip. —Among the pioneers of Drouin
were George Pryor and Alfred Gardiner. These men
arrived in February, 1877, at a time when Drouin
though not far from Melbourne was difficult to reach.
The Rev. J. C. Symons arranged for services in
Drouin South and Longwarry South in the homes of
Mr. S. Tolley and Mr. R. B. George. Visits were paid
later to Warragul and Poowong. The first building
which was erected for worship was at Mr. J. Bowen’s
settlement. Within a year came Mr. J. S. Holmes as
the first home missionary. He was followed by Mr. J.
West Lau who established a post at Drouin in Mr.
Lyons’ blacksmith shop, later moving to the local hall
and, later still, to the Presbyterian Church. A church
was erected in Drouin in 1887. Amongst those who
helped Mr. J. West Lau to build the church were Wil-
liam Gardiner, George Pryor, Alfred Gardiner, John
Coomes, Peter Faragher, A. Pickering, F. Bosanko,
George West, F Jackson, W. Watts and A. Watts. To
these men much credit is due. At Drouin West a
church was built, but it was later removed to Warragul
where it still serves for Sunday School purposes.
At Drouin a handsome brick church has been erected.
At Bunyip there is a fine wooden building, and at Gar-
field a serviceable structure has been built. Long-
warry, too, has prospered.
Warragul. —lt was not till 1881 that the first
Methodist Church was built at Warragul, although a
Union Church had been erected at Brandy Creek in
1875, and used by various denominations. The
Methodist representative on the Trust was Mr. J. Cope-
land. Many of the settlers, however, could not attend
services at the Union Church owing to natural difficul-
ties. Services were therefore held in private houses.
“Drumlarney,” the home of Mr. J. Copeland was used
in this way, and there public worship was conducted by
him and occasionally by a local preacher from Poowong.
Mr. J. S. Holmes came to Brandy Creek as home mis*
sionary in 1878, and two years later Mr. J. West Lau
was appointed to Warragul, Meanwhile, services were
held in a building which was used as a State school. On
10th October, 1878, a meeting was held to discuss the


formation of a Circuit, those present being, Rev. John
Harcourt, Chairman of the Gippsland District (chair-
man) ; Mr. J. S. Holmes, home missionary, and Messrs.
J. Copeland, B. D. Smith, A. H. Walters and E. Roberts.
It was proposed that the new Circuit should embrace
Warragul, Drouin, Drouin West, Buln Buln,
Longwarry, Neerim and Poowong, that the ser-
vices at the homes of Messrs. Copeland, Gar-
side and Sargent should be continued and
that the homes of Messrs. Sussex and Dickenson, at
McDonald’s Track, should also be used. As already
stated, the first Methodist church in Warragul was
built in 1881, and eight years afterwards the brick
church was opened for worship. The Rev. Henry
Howard was the first Methodist minister to be stationed
at Warragul.
Trafalgar. —Associated with local Methodism are the
names of two laymen, Mr. Elijah Stranger and Mr. S.
Giblett. At Trafalgar, in 1887, Mr. Giblett conducted
the first service in the State school. He and Mr. W.
Prest also held class meetings. Services at South
Trafalgar, however, were held two years earlier. Mr.
Stranger arrived at Narracan at Easter, 1878, and
rendered noble service in that district. Mr. Dickenson’s
admirable work at Childers has also been mentioned.
In 1881, Mr. Charles Ditterich was appointed to
Trafalgar as hired local preacher. He remained until
“changing time,” Mr. Alfred Came being his successor.
The first Methodist Church at Trafalgar had already
seen service at Boolara, but in 1934 a beautiful brick
church was erected, and opened in June of that year.
Traralgon.— From the report of the first Quarterly
Meeting, held at Mr. Lumley’s home on 3rd June, 1878,
we learn that those present were Rev. William Batten,
T. C. Lumley, W. Whately and I. Sykes. A church was
opened for worship on 2nd November, 1879, services
before that date being held probably in the Mechanics’
Institute. Traralgon was constituted a home mission
station in 1877, the year in which the Gippsland District
was formed. In 1878 it became a probationer’s Circuit,
the Rev. William Batten being appointed to its charge.
Orbost. — Fifteen years before the arrival of the Rev.
R. Hooper, the first probationer appointed to Orbost, a
block of land had been secured as the site for a church,
and during Mr. Hooper’s first year a church was built.
In the meantime, services were held in the State school.
From Orbost as a centre, the Gospel spread to < the
regions beyond, and now services are conducted within
a radius of sixty miles.


Morwell. — The Methodist history of Morwell is closely
associated with that of Traralgon, for from the latter
place the Rev. William Batten visited Maryvale and
there conducted services, there being then no members
of the Methodist Church residing at Morwell. About a
year later the Rev. D. J. Flockart came to the district,
and, taking advantage of the opportunity which the new
State school offered, engaged it for a service which was
held on 29th June, 1879, fifty-five persons being present.
In 1883 a church was built. Among its loyal sup-
porters were Messrs. Williams, Buckley and Geale.
Yallourn. —A Methodist cause was established here in
1922. It was then considered an outpost of the Mor-
well Circuit. In 1923 steps were taken to build a church
under conditions which were quite unique. No land
was available for purchase and building blocks were
let on lease. However, whatever difficulties such a tenure
presented were readily overcome and a new church was
opened for worship in November, 1924, most of the
work being done by voluntary labour. Yallourn became
a separate Circuit in 1929.
Omeo.— At this isolated outpost, a tent on the pro-
perty of Mr. S. Gills was the first House of Worship.
The early dates are obscure, but in the seventies good
progress was being made. A church was built at Hinno-
munjie, and at a number of other places services were
held.
Walhalla. —A Circuit in 1869, is now a home mission
station —once a thriving mining town, now an almost
deserted village, but still a very romantic spot. Its very
ruggedness gave to it an aspect of grandeur when the
sun lit up the deep gorge in which it lies, and brightened
the little homes of the miners, perched like eagles’ nests
along its craggy sides. Of work at this outpost, an
extract from the pen of an esteemed brother, the Rev.
H. J. Ham, M.A., is very descriptive. “Receiving orders
from the Home Missionary Society to visit the outback
regions and bring to them the preaching of the Gospel,
I started out from Walhalla for Toombon, a place thirty
miles beyond, where dwelt a small mining community in
a precipitous gully into which no wheeled vehicle had
ever entered, and into which the necessaries of life
were brought on pack-horses. Mining machinery was
first hauled along the crest of the ridge by bullocks
and then lowered* into the gorge by ropes. It was a
wild, weird place. There an old, abandoned hut was
cleaned out and a service held.” Mr. Ham tells of
worship at midnight at the bottom of a mine 600 feet


below the surface, where the light of flickering candles
threw strange shadows along the wall; of work at
Wood’s Point, thirty miles away over the ranges, and of
a service at Red Jacket where thirty men gathered in
the school house, and where Mrs. Kelly, the local hotel
keeper, imposed a fine on every man in the bar who
refused to attend the service. By this means the sum
of £1 was raised and duly handed to the missioner.
Lakes Entrance, Neerim South, Boolarra, Gann River,
Noojee are the District home mission stations.
GIPPSLAND SOUTH DISTRICT.
Dandenong.— A suburban Circuit, although part of the
Gippsland South District. In 1855, the first service in
the locality was held by Mr. Reynolds, a school teacher
from Oakleigh, an unfurnished house belonging to Mr.
Robert Kidd being used for the purpose. Among the
members of the congregation were Bro. William Sykes,
a local preacher from Brighton, many friends from
Keysborough, Mr. Joseph Foster, Mr. Monger, and
family, Mrs. Bowman and Mrs. Burrows. A fortnight
later, the Rev. James Bickford, of Brighton, conducted
public worship and steps were immediately taken to
provide a chapel. In the following year a building was
erected and duly opened by the Rev. J. S. Waugh on
17th March, 1856. On Sunday, Ist November, 1868,
a more commodious church was opened by the Rev. W.
P. Wells. From 1875 to 1885 the town grew rapidly,
and on 31st July, 1887, the present church was opened
for worship. For many years Dandenong was included
in the Brighton Circuit, services being provided mostly
by local preachers, among whom were Messrs. Stone,
Wellard, Baker, Sykes, Webb, Blencowe, Tooall and
Reynolds.
At Keysborough, Methodism had a great asset in the
Keys family, in whose homestead the first service
was held in 1853. In 1861 the Keysborough folk
possessed a church, but, being progressive people, they
erected another which was opened for worship in April,
1877. Dandenong has been ably supported by many
excellent brethren among whom were Messrs. Samuel
Rudduck, Keys, Powis, Renfree, Bryant, Facey and Kidd.
Wonthaggi. —Here we were the first Church on the
coalfields. On the arrival of the first batch of miners,
thirty-five in all, they were met by the Rev. Courtenay
Thomas, who, sensing the possibilities of the place,
promptly secured a tent, which would accommodate 200
men, and, obtaining meanwhile a supply of red-gum
planks for seats, was ready to begin operations. A


Sunday School was opened under the guidance of Mrs.
Gardiner, and before long its success became an
embarrassment, the number of children in attendance
passing the 400 mark. Later, Mr. M. D. Cock provided
an iron building, which was placed on the site secured
for the Methodist Church, and, after this had been in
use for a while, in 1911 a wooden structure, 66 feet by
34 feet, was built.
Yarram. — Methodist activity began in Yarram about
1865. There were signs of life, however, at a much
earlier date, for in April, 1856, the following notice
appeared: “To Wesleyan Methodists: Members of the
above-named Church are desired to communicate with
W. H. P., Bank of Victoria, Port Albert.” But not till
1863 is the Yarram district mentioned in the Conference
minutes, and not until 13th July, 1865 was a Quarterly
Meeting held. Yarram had a good friend in Mr. J.
Bland.
Korumburra. —A visit to Korumburra in 1885 by the
Rev. E. S. Bickford resulted in the appointment of Mr.
James Smith, as home missionary, with whose name and
work Methodism in South Gippsland is closely associ-
ated. Working from the home of Mr. Jacob Thomas
at Koonwarra, Mr. Smith missioned a wide area, which
covered many square miles, and, notwithstanding roads
which were almost impassable, established preaching
places at strategic posts, some of which have since
become Circuits. Mr. W. 0. Thomas rendered yeoman
service.
With the extension of the railway, Korumburra
gained in importance, and in 1887 it became necessary
to divide the home mission station, Mr. Albert Stafford
being appointed. This brother held the first service in
Korumburra in the home of Mrs. Guy. Soon after-
wards a probationer was appointed, and later on Mr. E.
C. Perkins became his colleague. The present church
was built in 1910. Korumburra Methodism owes much
to the Holmes family, J. M. Reed, William Witton and
John Western. Kongwak is one of the strong outposts
of this Circuit.
Leongatha— Methodism began here in 1886. Its
history is one of triumph over difficult travelling and
primitive conditions. A church was erected in 1891, the
first church to be built in the town. A later survey
necessitated turning it round to face the street. Rev. J.
W. Crean, 8.A., was the first probationer to be
appointed to Leongatha, the first trustees being Messrs.
G. E. Peart, R. Long, W. Bolton, Gostelow and Jacob
Thomas.


Foster. —The Methodist Church began its ministry at
Foster in the eighties. Progress has been slow owing
mainly to the difficulty of travelling. However, in
Foster we have a nice property and some faithful
people.
Dumbalk has been fortunate in that its early settlers
numbered amongst them some ardent Methodists.
Amongst them was Mr. Frank Dodd in whose home on
14th August, 1887, the first service was held by Mr.
James Smith. The home of Mr. Thomas Trease was
sometimes used for church services.
In 1903 a church was built at Dumbalk and one
opened at Meeniyan soon afterwards. For a time the
cause was a probationers Circuit, but in 1912 it
reverted to a home mission station. Messrs. Dodd,
Furphy, Jones, Goad, Harrison, Brooks, Fixter and
Odgers have worthily supported the Church of God in
this district.
Pakenham. —At Pakenham the opening services were
held on 9th and 16th April, 1911. Mr. C. C. McPhee is
regarded as the first “official” missionary, although
other missioners appear to have been in the adjacent
places before the above date. The local church was
opened in 1914, and the Nar-Nar-Goon church on 30th
June, 1918.
Nyora.— As far back as 1877, on a memorable Sunday
In January of that year the Rev. J. C. Symons visited
Poowong and conducted the first service. The chapel
was a tent which Mr. W. V. Hill had erected on
McDonald's Track for the occasion. In that year
Methodism began in earnest in the home of Mr.
Caleb Burchett. The 30th December, 1887, was
a red-letter day for many, particularly for Mr. and Mrs.
Burchett, Mr. and Mrs. Horsley, their two daughters
“from up the track” and Mr. Hill from “the
Bass.” These good folk constituted the first congre-
gation at McDonald's Track. The following Sunday
came the Cooks, McCords, Gardners, Mottons and
Beckett, making a congregation of nearly thirty
worshippers. So the work went on, until a church was
opened on 3rd November, 1878, with a tea and public
meeting next day. The building was enlarged in 1890,
and is to-day the House of God to many devout
worshippers.
The mission stations at Glen Forbes, Toora and Koo-
wee-rup are in this District, each having its own services
and each being supported by loyal Methodists.


WIMMERA DISTRICT.
Stawell. —About 1856 the gold rush brought an
influx of people to Ararat and Stawell. The usual tent
was soon erected, and services commenced. Temper-
ance meetings were arranged, the Methodist Church
undertaking the task in real earnest. In this work great
assistance was rendered by such men as George Middle-
ton, James Taylor, J. Howes, William Johnston and
“Father” Galloway. Within a short time more adequate
provision for church purposes was required. A committee
was therefore formed to discuss ways and means of pro-
viding the requisite accommodation. Inquiry resulted in
the erection of a canvas chapel which cost £llO, with
seating capacity for two or three hundred. This
meeting-house was opened by the Rev. Mr. Woodall on
his first visit to Stawell in 1858. During that year,
monthly visits from Bro. Woodall were all that could
be given, as his headquarters were at Avoca, but in
December, 1858, Mr. Woodall came to reside at Pleasant
Creek, as pastor of the flock. The cause benefited by
his oversight, and on Bth February, 1860, a new church
of wood and corrugated iron was erected. In 1863 a
brick church was built, the old edifice being used as a
Sunday School. On 3rd June, 1858, a church was built
at Cathcart, and in 1862 a wooden church was opened at
Great Western, which was replaced later by a brick
building. At Moyston a brick church was built in 1863.
About 1874, the Primitive Methodists and the United
Free Methodists opened places of worship. Stawell became
a separate Circuit in 1876. Pomonal, Callawadda
and Carr’s Plains were associated with the Stawell
ministry. Many excellent people, of whom, unfortun-
ately, no mention can be made, were connected with
Methodism at Stawell in its stirring days. Among
the names which have come down to us are Makepeace,
Merfield, Heal, Cato, Lodwick, Freeland, Perry, Wil-
liams, Dalkin, Bond, Batten, Hutchings, Hird, Robson,
Webster, Smith, Jory, Harris, Giles, Wardman and New-
ton.
Ararat. —In this district Methodism followed the gold
rush of the fifties. About 1856 a church was erected at
Ararat and a Sunday School opened with an enrolment
of 18 scholars. With the “slump” due to the removal
of miners, the church was taken down, and, for a while
the services were held in the open-air. In 1857, however,
it was re-erected on the Canton Lead where a larger
building was soon required. A weatherboard structure
which cost £l6O was then procured. When Rev. W. C.
Currey visited Ararat from Belfast in 1858, he found a


neat church and a fine fellowship. It was from this time
on that Ararat began to lose its population, mainly
through an inadequate water supply. However, in 1861
regular services were being held, and class meetings
were in full swing. A church was built in 1863, and is
now used for Sunday School purposes, the present brick
church taking its place.
Like most mining centres, Ararat has had the
help of a goodly number of local preachers, among
whom were Arthur Boatman, Henry Boatman, John
Wilson, John Butt, Peter Young, William Harper,
Edward Peck, Daniel Harris, Luke Johns, Alfred Bass,
J. E. Jenkins, Samuel Wilkinson and George Gordon.
Among the “locals” of the very early days were Make-
peace, Kirkwood, Bowe, McDonald and J. A. Marsland
who later entered the Methodist ministry.
Horsham— The romance of Methodism in the
Wimmera District began at Pimpinio on 15th May,
1872, when on the first Sunday after his arrival Mr.
Thomas Freeman held public worship in a tent. Later,
Mr. Freeman invited the other settlers to his home for
service, and, when the place was too strait for them, he
arranged for services to be held in the afternoon for
the older folk, and in the evening for young people. In
1873, the Rev. Thomas Adamson visited the district and
in the following year a probationer was appointed to
reside at Horsham. The Rev. James Hilliard preached
his first sermon in Horsham on the second Sunday in
April, 1874, the Temperance Hall being used. Two
years later, a small church was built in McPherson
Street. The Circuit then covered an area which has
since been divided into six progressive Circuits, and it
is estimated that in 1879 the Horsham Circuit was
spread over 3000 square miles. In 1880 a married
minister, the Rev. J. Lowe, was appointed to Horsham.
In 1876 the Bible Christian denomination filled a large
place in the Horsham District, and during the ministry
of the Rev. F. Lockwood an immense area was covered.
The church at Pimpinio was built in 1876. Horsham
represents one of our best inland Circuits. It has
buildings which are a credit to Methodism and a fellow-
ship of which any place might be proud.
Murtoa. —Like many other places Murtoa has to
thank Methodist laymen for blazing the trail. The visit
of the Rev. George Cole, elsewhere recorded, bears
testimony to that fact. The Rev. J. T. Pithouse was the
first minister • r visit the district. He came in the
seventies, riding nis horse from Melbourne to his


appointment. On a headstone in the local cemetery is
the inscription, “Rev. Joseph Goodyear, first minister,
Murtoa Wesleyan Methodist Circuit. Died 18th May,
1884. Aged 26 years.” The work of these and other
brethren and of such men as Bros. Hately, Hazeldene,
G. Evans, Starbuck, Parish, Dunn, Paine and Baker has
resulted in a compact Circuit.
Rupanyup —ln the early seventies settlement took
place in this locality. When John Starbuck and his
daughter arrived in September, 1872, he stayed one
Sunday, but on that Sunday he gathered the few people
together in Mr. Mutton’s house and conducted worship.
Thus began Methodism in Rupanyup. About 12th April,
1873, regular services were held in Mr. Starbuck’s tent
and with the erection of houses services were trans-
ferred to them. Amongst the folk who made available
their homes were Mr. Chappie, Mr. Dyer and Mr. Star-
buck. Visiting local preachers often helped the home
folk in this good work.
The Rev. G. H. Cole visited the district and, soon
afterwards, in 1874, the Rev. J. T. Pithouse was
appointed. Rupanyup was then the head of a very large
Circuit, the Wesleyans being represented by the Rev.
J. Hillard. The Rupanyup property, church and school
being on a central site is evidence of a vigorous
Methodism.
Warracknabeal. —Here, in 1874, Mr. Samuel Clarke
conducted public worship in the home of Mr. John
Smith, and a few weeks later he began a Sunday
School, Mr. William Reed lending him assistance. The
first minister to visit the district was the Rev. J. Hillard
of Horsham in 1874, and from that year Warrackna-
beal appears on the Horsham plan. Amongst the
pioneers were G. P. Hayter, William Reed, George
Clarke, J. C. Devereaux, Joseph and G. Griffiths, J. W.
Gould, J. Landt, W. Tarrant, W. Gardner and J.
Jamouneaux. To such folk the extension of Methodism
is largely due. The first church was built in 1876. The
first home missionary was Mr. William Wills, and the
first probationer, the Rev. W. T. Hiatt. The first
ordained minister was our esteemed Conference precentor,
the Rev. W. J. Palamountain. The new church was
erected in 1908.
In 1889 the Bible Christians commenced work in this
area, but no details are available. In connection with
the church at Warracknabeal, the name of Mr. Robert
Smith, who for forty-six years has been a trustee and


an officer of the Sunday School for sixty years, and that
of Mr. W. T. Dungey will always be remembered.
In 1882 a weatherboard church was built about ten
miles along the Dimboola Road. Later it was taken to
East Cannam and later still it was replaced by a brick
church.
Beulah. —This place received attention in 1890, when
the Rev. W. J. Paiamountain conducted service in the
home of Mr. McKenzie. In the same year Mr. Evans
was appointed as a home missionary. In 1890 the first
church was built, and later a Kindergarten room was
erected. In 1930 the Baptist Church was purchased
for Sunday School purposes and a more worthy build-
ing erected for public worship.
Brim. —Originally Brim was part of the Warrackna-
beal Circuit. Services were first held in the shearing
shed of the Brim station in 1887 when the Rev. R.
Ditterich was Superintendent of the Circuit. A church
was built in 1891 during the Superintendency of the
Rev. W. J. Paiamountain. The first home missionary to
be appointed was Mr. Crocker. In 1904 Brim was trans-
ferred to the Beulah Circuit of which the Rev. F. H.
Flentje was Superintendent. In 1923 it was constituted
a separate Circuit with Rev. D. Gibbs as its minister.
Among the pioneers are remembered Messrs. R. J.
Dixon, J. Swann, G. Paine, William SherrifF, John
Marshman, Frederick Marshman, J. J. Marshman, John
Quick, William Quick, J. B. King, J. K. Morton, W.
Kendall, A. Bannerman, Freeman and Mrs. Albert
Milbourne. The church at Willenabrina was erected in
1891, and that at Lah in 1894.
Nhill. —The first services were held in the home of
Mr. John Oliver, and later in the Mechanics’ Hall on
the site where Wesley Hall now stands. Here, in 1897,
Methodist Union was accelerated by a cyclone which
destroyed the churches of the town, the congregations
uniting in a reconstructed building. This circuit once
embraced Lorquon, Yanac, Jeparit and Dimboola, but
the development at these places has entitled each of
them to independence. Among its helpers are men-
tioned F. W. Day, Daniel Love, Colonel Dean, Silas and
Aaron Cole, W. Barber, F. W. Bond, W. Walkenden,
F. J. Sanders and W. E. Goldsworthy.
Noradjuha. —This Circuit formerly embraced Natimuk,
and is the centre of a big tract of country in which for
over fifty years Methodism has been established. Here
the Wesleyans and Bible Christians laboured. In 1^22


these Circuits took their present boundaries. The first
minister at Noradjuha was the Rev. F. Lockwood, who,
in 1875, conducted services in the home of Mr. Walter.
A church was built in 1882. Warm supporters of the
cause were Messrs. A. W. Walter, J. Treadwell, W.
Symons, W. N. Tucker, R. Northfield, R. Hammond and
G. H. Hill. . , . ,
Work at Clear Lake began in 1878 with a service in
the home of Mr. J. H. Edmonds. The first home mission-
ary was Mr. John Lee. The church, built of local
timber served for 25 years. The present church is a
gift from Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Edmonds on the occasion
of their golden wedding. In 1884 a church was built at
Nurrabiel. At Salt Lake work began in the home of
Mr. W. Hobbs, sen.
On 22nd July, 1890, the Rev. T. B. Reed opened the
Methodist Church at Natimuk, with which place Mrs. R.
Jory and Mr. J. P. Watkins have had a long and useful
association. Others who share the same distinction are
Messrs. E. Jory, A. Scholes, Bennett, Tootell and
Taylor. At Grass Flat the Rev. R. B. Roberts conducted
the first service on 11th April, 1906. Quantong and
Mitre Lake each has a history of progress and a record
of religious activity which is worthy of acknowledgment.
Lorquon —ln September, 1882, the friends met in a
church which had been erected by voluntary labour. The
opening services were conducted by the Rev. R. B.
Roberts of Nhill. Later, the site was considered to be
“not central enough,” and on 26th November, 1887, the
first church in Lorquon was opened by the Rev. W. H.
Evans. Services were subsequently undertaken at Lake
Hindmarsh, Lorquon West and at Baker, and, as the
years passed a compact Circuit was formed. The
Rev. A. McKay was the first minister. To-day, Lorquon
has a fine concrete parsonage and a new church which
was opened on 19th August, 1927. Mr. J. C. Dufty has
a long and honoured association with local Methodism.
Mr. A. P. Dufty is also a stalwart churchman. Messrs.
Stott, Luhrs, Affleck, Dorrington, Diprose, Deckett,
Morrison and Trease are also worthy of mention.
Kauiva.— ln 1881, Mr. Dungey soon after his arrival
arranged for a service in the open-air. His sermon was
on “Keeping the Sabbath,” a very suitable subject for
a new district. At this service Mr, Harry Rich, his
wife, and Mr. John Martin were present. As the con-
gregation increased, a hut was built. It was necessary,
however, within a short time, to remove to the mill of
which Mr. Dungey had charge, and, when this proved


inadequate, an application was made for a building site
and for the appointment of a home missionary. Both
requests were granted and Mr. Frank Jolly was
appointed. Charles Randall, the evangelist of the
Wimmera, did a fine work locally and is graciously
remembered because of it. Kaniva has a fine church,
and Methodism is serving an extensive area.
Dimboola. —Here, a slab hut seems to have been in
use for public services for a long time before churches
were built, all denominations, apparently, using it. At
a later date services were conducted in the Shire Hall,
Mr. Presley preaching there in 1882. The eagerness of
Methodists to possess their own church is gauged from
the meeting which was held in the business place of
Harcourt and Saunders in that year to discuss the
position. After long negotiations, a church was opened
by the Rev. William Presley on 25th February, 1883.
This town now possesses a property worthy of Methodism.
Jeparit. —This remote locality received attention from
the Methodists at Nhill and Dimboola, probably in the
eighties, and, thanks to loyal people, the cause has
grown into a compact and attractive Circuit. There are
churches at Tullyvea and Antwerp and a beautiful
church at Jeparit. Here we owe a great deal to Mr.
James Menzies, a Presbyterian, who appreciated the
fact that the absence of his own Church was no excuse
for non-attendance at any other. Mr. Menzies, for
many years the member of Parliament for the district,
rendered fine service as Sunday School Superintendent
and lay preacher. Among others worthy of mention are
Messrs. Laing, Pearce, Gawith, Flavel, Bell, Strauss and
Hornsby.
Rainbow. —In 1897 a company of settlers, many of
them from South Australia, met together for divine
service at the residence of Mr. Kemp at Werrap, Mr.
Oxbrow, home missionary at Jeparit, being the preacher.
Amongst those present were Messrs. C. A. Perkins, F.
Chaplin, J. H. Sleep, R. Staples and C. Helyar.
At Yaapeet, in 1902, the missionary from Hopetoun
held services! in the open-air, his efforts to
spread the Gospel being supported by Messrs. J. C.
Butler, E. Matthews, A. and S. Marshman and W.
McCallum. In 1905 Mr. W. H. Walkenden was
appointed to Rainbow as home missionary. Services
were held in the Public Hall, but in November, 1909,
the foundation stone of a concrete church was laid by
Mr. C. A. Perkins. In 1910, Rainbow was constituted a


Circuit with, the Rev. W. E. Lancaster as Superin-
tendent.
Hopetoun. —In 1893 Mr. H. L. Balcke was appointed
as home missionary to Hopetoun, and, gathering the people
about him in an old woolshed, he laid a firm foundation
for future progress. A church was built in 1893, but
was sold later to the Lutherans. On Ist September,
1927, Mr. John Marshman laid the stone of the present
fine church. Although not allowed a lengthy sojourn
in Hopetoun, this good man, who in different places had
preached the Gospel for fifty-four years, rendered very
acceptable service. The names of E. C. Carter, C. G.
Carter and W. Richards will long be remembered with
affection. The Rev. F. Ivory was the first ordained
minister to be appointed to the Circuit. He assumed
control in 1912. At Chipric a church was built in 1898,
where under difficult conditions Mr. A. J. Blake and
his loyal people are working courageously.
Yanac- —Among the families that took up land in the
Yanac district in 1881 and the year following, were a
few Methodists. During the next year or two others
arrived. In July, 1883, a few folk gathered for
worship in the home of Mr. John Freeman, the
preacher being Mr. John Addinsall. Later, Mr. Cooper
opened his home for services, and a request was made
for the appointment of a minister. Rev. A. McCay, a
minister of the Bible Christian Connexion, responded
to the call and through his efforts Methodism gamed
a firm footing in that area. A Sunday School was soon
in operation and accommodated in a building, the
erection of which meant much personal sacrifice. Yanac
to-day has a neat little church and is the head of an
efficient Circuit. . ~
At Diapur, a church was built in the eighties by the
Primitive Methodist brethren, their ministry being
accompanied by an evangelistic fervour which kindled
enthusiasm in the hearts of the people.
Goroke. —At Karnack, which is within the bounds of
the Goroke Circuit, Mr. John Lee, a home missionary
from Sea Lake, conducted a service on 9th August,
1880, in the home of Mr. A. T. Lane. These home
services were continued for about four years. In 1884
a church was erected, and opened on 14th December.
At Goroke a church was opened for worship by Mr. W.
H. Scurr, now in the Methodist ministry, on 12th
August, 1888. In 1905 Goroke was made a home mis-
sion station but it is now a Circuit in the charge of a
probationer.


Minyip. —ln 1873 the Rev. J. T. Pithouse visited the
Minyip district from Stawell, and in 1876 a church
was built, which, probably about 1882, was replaced by
a more suitable building. Prior to being an independent
Circuit Minyip was included in the Murtoa constituency.
Willaura, Patchewollock, and Elmhurst constitute the
home mission stations.
COULBURN VALLEY.
Shepparton. —Here the United Methodist Free Church
was established in 1874 in Welsford Street, the Rev.
R. L. Reed being the first of its ministers. Among its
members were Messrs. John Furphy, A. Broad and
Rhodda. The Wesleyans erected their first chapel in
this centre in 1879, the pioneer minister being the Rev.
J. J. Brown. In 1885 the building which first served as
a church was replaced by a more adequate structure.
This, in turn, gave place to the splendid property of
1908. The names of Ralph Longstaff, J. T. Kittle,
Caleb Roe, Wallis, Archibold, Ford, Padley, Knight,
Robison, Little, Palling and Bowen are well known and
affectionately remembered in connection with this
cause. Church Union in Shepparton was consummated
before 1902, a fact which shows how amicably the two
bodies had worked in conjunction. The two “stones” in
the new church are therefore appropriately worded.
The one, laid by Mr. Ralph Longstaff, bears the
inscription, “God is Light”; the other, placed in position
by Mr. John Furphy, the words “God is Love.”
The two ministers whose names have been mentioned
in connection with Shepparton Methodism, also
pioneered Tallygaroopna, the United Methodist Free
Church in 1875, and the Wesleyan Methodists in 1878.
Here were to be found such men as Edwin Gribben, R.
Trewin, R. Nankervis, H. Coldwell, J. Argus, H. Crocker,
M. Griffiths, W. Pearce, J. Coldwell, W. Cox and
R. Gullie. The present brick church was erected in 1914.
At Caniambo, the Primitive Methodists were repre-
sented in 1880, their pioneer minister being the Rev.
Mr. Snooks. Here, Messrs. J. Frederick, W. Cole, D.
Broster, G. L. Danes, W. Danes and J. Thomas
rendered splendid service.
At Pine Lodge the United Methodists established a
cause in 1877, and the Primitive Methodists in 1880.
The Rev. T. A. Bayley represented the former and Mr.
S. Richards, hired local preacher, the latter. The pre-
sent church was built in 1924. At Pine Lodge, the


names of Wright, Laws, Powles, Blight, Rudd, Robinson,
Roe Jeffreys and H. North are highly esteemed.
At Tank Corner the United Methodist Free Church
brethren held services in 1878, the Rev. Mr. Bayley
being the pioneer minister. R. Roe, E. S. and
0. G. Green, Clark, Creed, B. Opie, G. Fletcher, J.
Doherty, H. Doherty, Surrell and Wiseman have nobly
served this station. The present church was erected in
1905.
At Coneupna the Wesleyan Methodists held services
in 1874, the church being built in 1880. The pioneer
nreachers were Mr. Freeman and the Rev. D. S. Lowe.
Messrs. Allan Nixon, James Phillips and W. A. Craze have
been of great value to the local cause. _
Orrvale, 1914, and Grahamvale, 1915, are associated
with the ministry of the Rev. E. Smith, and Marrion-
yale, 1933, with that of the Rev. Norman Higgs. Shep-
parton is not only an important town but a strong
Methodist centre supported by a devout and loyal-
hearted people.
Mooroopna and Tatura.— As a Circuit, Mooroopna
and Tatura is comparatively young, having been
excised from the Shepparton Circuit in 1915. Services
however, were conducted at Mooroopna in the old
Athenaeum Hall by ministers of the United Methodist
Free Church. A church was erected in 1877 during the
Superintendency of the Rev. W. Chapman. Mr. and Mrs.
Clarkson and family were prominent in connection with
the erection of this building. Associated with the
Mooroopna cause at its inception were Mr. and Mrs.
Tuckett and family, Mr. and Mrs. W. Lane and family,
Mr. and Mrs. Bailey and family, Mr. and Mrs. Knight
and family, Mr. and Mrs. H. Barker and family and Mr.
and Mrs. F. J. Cramp and family. . ,
At Tatura, services were first held in the Mechanics
Hall by the Revs. 0. Dowsing and R. L. Reed, ihe
present church was erected about 1898. Among its
early supporters were Mr. and Mrs. Martin and family,
Mr. and Mrs. H. Hall and family, Mr. and Mrs. J- Taylor
and family, Mr. and Mrs. S. Hill and family, Mr. and
Mrs. Sutherland and family and Mrs. Blackney and
family.
Kyabram. —The Circuit was originally the Toolamba
Circuit. At Toolamba, Mr. John Lancaster selected land
about 1872. He realised the need of public worship
and through his influence a Methodist agent was
stationed in the Lower Goulburn. The United


Methodists were doing well for the district by conduct-
ing services at Toolamba, but the great area towards
Echuca, which had recently been thrown open for
selection, had yet to be missioned. The Rev. Samuel
Adamson was the first minister appointed to this area.
The first Quarterly Meeting was held at the minister's
residence—the home of Mr. and Mrs. R. H. Trevaskis—
on 15th July, 1874, those present being, Rev. S.
Adamson, Bros. Ponsford, J. Lancaster, S. Lancaster, T.
Lancaster. The preaching places, mostly selectors'
homes, comprised, Toolamba (Mr. Manning's), Spring
Vale (school house), Girgarre and Tatura (school
house), Wyuna (Mr. Trevaskis'), Mundoona (Mr. Pons-
ford's), Kyabram (Mr. Hinde's) and Kialla (Mr.
Pither's).
By September, 1876, churches had been erected at
Kyabram (now Lancaster), Girgarre (now Cooma),
Kyabram East (now Merrigum) and Pine Grove (now
Kyabram). In 1878, under the Rev. E. C. De Garis,
the work grew apace and there were fifteen preaching
places on the plan. In 1879, places east of the Goulburn
were constituted a home mission station, and shortly
afterwards services were held in what is now the town
of Kyabram, the Rev. Samuel Harris being the first
minister to occupy the parsonage. Henley Hall was the
first place of worship, but in 1888, a wooden church
was erected. During the ministry of the Rev. E.
Taylor, 1891-4, a brick church was built at Kyabram,
which was replaced, however, by a beautiful edifice
in
erected in which devout men and women nav homage
to the God of their fathers.
Kyabram, with its boundary rider's hut, Lancaster,
with Mr. Ponsford's home and the church with the
shingle roof, Merrigum with services in Mr. Hinde’s
blacksmith shop, Cooma with its church of log and
iron, Tongala, where, in 1877, the Gospel was preached
in Mr. S ; Acheson's home, and later in Mr. Day's,
Wyuna, in Mr. Rowlands' house, Girgarre, all inter-
pret the spirit of the people called Methodists. To
worship God and unite in Christian fellowship any-
where so long as worship was possible was their great
desire.
Samuel Lancaster, William Andrews, W. Ponsford,
S. J, Hicks, James Robinson, John Hicks, Mr. Lee w!
Baldwin, G. Peel, Thomas Ratcliffe, D. Edis, R. Breen
John Watson, W. Pell, F. Crothers! J. T. EUis, George
Watson, S. Robinson, J. Manley, John Poole, John


Robinson, J. Coram, John Watson, T. Black, W. Robin-
son and Mr. Pickering, with their families, represent the
strength of Methodism in the Kyabram district.
Numurkah. —Methodism here was first represented
by the Bible Christian Church, its mission beginning in
1879, with headquarters at Wunghnu, where the Rev.
John Orchard was in charge. On 21st December, 1879,
he opened the church at Numurkah. This building was
later destroyed by fire, and the brick church, built during
the ministry of the Rev. T. J. Cory, was severely
damaged by a similar visitation. In 1882 church build-
ings were erected at Baulkamaugh, Yalca, Bunbartha and
Bearii. The Wesleyan followed close on the heels of
the Bible Christian denomination and the churches
worked amicably side by side. In 1900, however, during
the ministries of Rev. J. A. Osborne (Wesleyan), and
Rev. T. J. Cory (Bible Christian), # Methodist Union
was anticipated, the two congregations forming one
united church.
Wunghnu. — The Bible Christians established a cause
at Wunghnu in 1879, the Rev. John Orchard being their
pastor. In the same year the church at Wunghnu was
built. From this centre a Circuit of no mean dimensions
was formed. In the meantime both the Primitive
Methodists and the Wesleyans erected their churches.
The former was eventually sold to the Bible Christians
and the latter removed to Numurkah. Among early
workers are remembered Mr. and Mrs. Carlisle, Mr. J.
Mapletoft and sisters, Mr. M. A. Dockery, Mr. G.
Graham, Mr. and Mrs. Dixon, Mr. and Mrs. Watters, Mr.
Nailor, Mr. and Mrs. Ambler, Mr. and Mrs. Roberts and
Mr. (later Rev.) H. Pattinson. During the ministry of
the Rev. J. Wilson a parsonage was erected at Wunghnu
of which the Rev. R. B. Roberts was the first occupant.
Wunghnu became a separate Circuit in 1916, and in
1918 the present church building was erected.
NatKalia. —The first church was built in 1878, but
services were held in settlers' homes, many of which
were bark huts, at an earlier date. It is said that
to complete the roof Mr. Broaden took some
shingles from his own sheds. A brick building was
erected in 1886. A church was also built at Yielima
in 1878, but was later removed to Nathalia to become
the transept of the old church which now accom-
modates the Sunday School. Churches were also built
at Yalca in 1882, Picola West in 1885, Narioka in 1886,
Kotupna in 1892, and at Yalca South, a Bible Christian
preaching place, which, with Bearii, came into the


Circuit at the time of Methodist Union. A church was
erected at the latter place in 1904. The name of the
Rev. Dr. A. McCallum is associated with early
Methodism in this locality, but, unfortunately, the
records are not available.
Katamatite. — The celebration of the church's jubilee
in 1932 affords some clue to the beginning of local
Methodism. Allowing for the usual pioneering,
together with its association with the name of the Rev.
J. J. Brown, who was stationed at Shepparton in 1878,
it may be inferred that the first attempt to mission the
district was made between 1878 and 1880. Originally
part of the Shepparton Circuit, and later of the
Numurkah Circuit, Katamatite is to-day an independent
unit. Dunbulbalane dates back to 1879, and Youanmite
from 1878. Of Youarang we have no record.
Among the pioneers may be mentioned Messrs. Wright,
Arthur, Charles, and Sidebottoms, of Katamatite;
Messrs. White, Patrick and Hodge, of Dunbulbalane;
Mr. W. Hodge of Youanmite and Bro. Lawrence of
Youarang. In the days of long distances and bad roads
this Circuit provided its share of hardships which,
however, were cheerfully borne.
Rushworth. — Here the first preaching service was held
on 15th December, 1868, by the Rev. John Truscott, a
Sunday School being opened two months earlier. A
church was erected in 1869 or 1870, and a new building
to take its place was opened in March, 1891. At Carag
Carag, the first service was held in the home of Mr.
Thomas Crothers in 1877 by the Rev. E. C. De
Garis, then a probationer stationed in the Elmore
Circuit. Later, the services were transferred to Mr.
John Stewart's barn, but, when this building was
required for the harvest, other arrangements were
made. An abandoned house was next secured, which,
by the removal of internal walls, provided sufficient
accommodation for the time being. During the ministry
of the Rev. F. J. Watsford at Lancaster, a Wesleyan
Church was built on a block of land donated by Mr.
Allan Stewart. The church was opened free of debt.
Thomas Crothers, John Hicks, S. J. Hicks, William
Downie, Allan Stewart and Hugh Stewart were the
original trustees.
At Stanhope fortnightly services were first held in
the State school. Steps to build a church were
taken in February, 1921, when an acre of land was
secured for £SO, and on this block the trustees erected
the church which they had purchased from the good


folk at Undera. The opening services were conducted
by the Rev. R. Bayles on 21st September, 1921. The
Rev. W. T. Johns was its minister, and among the
founders were Messrs. James Williams, A. W. Williams,
T. C. Williams, Charles Cann, C. D. Hick, J. D. Crothers,
B. Bryant and T. M. Matthews.
Seymour and Nagambie.— The original site and
buildings were sold and a new position secured on which
the present property stands. Methodism has had a long
and honourable association with Seymour, and has had
some excellent folk within ifs Circuit boundaries.
Captain and Mrs. Adams, of Sandy Creek, Mr. Chittick,
Mr. Day, of the Victorian Railways Department, Mr.
and Mrs. Gloster and Mr. James Jordan are among those
mentioned in the records.
Alexandra. —With local Methodism is associated the
name of the Rev. J. C. MacDougall who arrived by
coach from Tallarook in 1876. At the Anglican service
which he attended on the first Sunday of his visit, he
met the son and daughter of Mr. and Mrs. W. Cocking
who were Methodists. Invited to their home, he soon
enlisted the support of the family and a Methodist
service was arranged in the Shire Hall. During the
ministry of the Rev. J. A. Osborne a church site was
secured, and a church building opened for public wor-
ship on 10th October, 1880. Meanwhile, a Circuit con-
sisting of Alexandra, Gobur, Yarck, Thornton, Yea
Road, Crystal Creek, and Durham Gully had been
formed. The opening services in connection with a
church at Yarck were held on 13th September, 1891.
At Kanumbra, a church was opened in February, 1899.
Cobram. —Methodist services were first held at Cobram
in 1887, Grant and White’s foundry and, later, W. H.
Curtis’ general store being used for the purpose. In 1890
a church was opened. Cobram at that period was part
of the Numurkah Circuit. The Rev. J. E. Warren was
then in charge of the Cobram Church, the trustees being
Messrs. C. Quick, J. McCullagh, J. Grant, McCormack,
W. White and Joseph Easton. About four years
later the church was sold to the Presby-
terians, and Methodist services lapsed for a
time. However, the position was not acceptable to some
of the original worshippers who approached the new
owners and succeeded in arranging for alternate services
in the building. These services were conducted by the Rev.
W. Vawdon then stationed at Katamatite. In 1898 it
was decided to erect a new church between the present
township and that part of Cobram known as the “110 th


Section Reserve.” In 1908 the brethren requested that
Cobram be included in the Numurkah Circuit to which
it formerly belonged. Their request was favourably
considered by the Katamatite Quarterly Meeting and
approved. Later, Cobram became a home mission
station and in due course received a ministerial
appointment.
Mansfield. —Methodism for years has worked this large
area. Never numerically strong, it has nevertheless had
stalwarts who rendered splendid assistance. Messrs. J.
Thompson and family, J. Elvins, T. M. Williams and
others are well remembered. We have a fine property in
Mansfield.
NORTH-EASTERN DISTRICT.
Beechworth. —This place prospered by the incoming of
miners to the Spring Creek diggings in 1852-3. As usual,
there were ardent Methodists among them, who set about
the establishment of their church. In 1852, one of them,
Mr. C. Williams, commenced services in the open-air. This
good man might have been seen standing under a gum-
tree, Bible in hand, singing, praying, and expounding
the Word of God for the benefit of the inhabitants of
Madman’s Gully. A tent was subsequently purchased for
£2O and used for public worship, friendly miners provid-
ing slabs for seats. The arrival of local preachers made
regular Sunday services possible, and for nearly two
years, without any ministerial visits, these loyalists main-
tained the Methodist witness. Representations to head-
quarters led to the appointment of the Rev. Mr. Arkill in
1854. In order to provide accommodation for the increas-
ing congregations, an auction room was availed of, and
later on a schoolhouse was erected, at a cost of £llOO,
on the present central site. In 1856 the Rev. J. C.
Symons succeeded Mr. Arkill, and at Easter, 1857, a new
stone church was opened, the occasional preacher being
the Rev. D. J. Draper. Local preachers such as Abbot,
Symons, Bailey, Tinckler, and Gillard rendered gallant
service; while men like J. Wilton, C. Williams, Hunt,
McLean, Nixon, Gregory, Wade, Abbott and others, faith-
fully assisted. At Stanley a church was early established.
Wangaratta. —The first service in Wangaratta was
held in the local Court House in 1869, the preacher
being the Rev. Henry Moore. In the following year a
church was erected, the name of the Rev. R. W. Camp-
bell being associated with the opening. In 1875 the
Rev. C. H. Ingamells came as the first married minister
to reside in the Circuit. On Bth November, 1885, a
brick church was erected. Amongst the pioneers are


recalled the names of Messrs. Catts, Mitchell, Rule,
Weir and R. Hughes. At Everton a Sunday School was
established in 1868, and in 1907 a new brick church was
built.
Benalla. —The Primitive Methodists were represented
locally in 1859, the Rev. John Ride being their agent
and in the habit of conducting occasional services. The
first minister to be stationed at Benalla was the Rev.
W. H. Walton who came in 1860.
The first Wesleyan services, really class meetings,
were held in April, 1875, by Mr. John Donnes, then a
home missionary. The first Wesleyan Church was
opened on 2nd July, 1876, and in 1929, during the
ministry of the Rev. W. Bridgborn, the present hand-
some church was erected. Benalla Circuit has had
within its borders some estimable preachers and
workers. Messrs. Turner, Gregerson, Clarke, Williams,
Hodgskin, Helme, Guppy, Sharpe, J. Cook, Reeves,
Nielands, Harrison, Saunders, Arnold, Kerville, Roberts,
May, Knox, Amery and others may be remembered.
Euroa.— The first Methodist services were held in
private houses in 1874. Mr. W. S. Reeves, a retired
Government surveyor and an aged local preacher, held
services in the home of Mr. Stewart and the Elliott
family allowed their home to be used for the same
purpose. Later, the Benalla Quarterly Meeting sanctioned
the holding of services in the Mechanics’ Hall near Seven
Creek Bridge.
In 1877 Euroa became a married minister’s Circuit
and the Rev. H. Saloway was appointed to take charge.
The Circuit was very extensive, including such places
as Benalla, Kilfeera, Goorambat, Lake Rowan, Hill
Plain, Waggarandall, Duck Ponds, Major Plains, Swan-
pool, Warrenbayne, Violet Town and Euroa. Later,
Strathbogie was added. The first church was erected
in 188] and the Circuit was divided in 1888. Messrs.
Came and Palmer are remembered for their useful
work in this Circuit.
Violet Town.— ln December, 1860, the Quarterly
Meeting—presumably of the Benalla Circuit- —resolved
“That Mr. Walton be allowed one Sunday a month for
Violet Town and Euroa.” Whether services began
immediately, or whether they began and were discon-
tinued, is not clear. Very early a room in a local hotel
and known as the Court House was used by all denomina-
tions, and men came from Benalla to conduct the
services. In 1866 the records disclose, “That the
Wesleyans also built a chapel in Crocus Street; the


land was presented by Mr. Hillias.” There is a local
tradition that a Rev. Mr. Webster was the first
Methodist minister to conduct services in this place, but
this is uncertain. At all events Methodism does not
appear to have flourished, for the Benalla Quarterly
Meeting lost interest and withdrew its agents. However,
with the appointment of Mr. Mordecai Wilson as
school teacher in 1877, the position altered. He wrote
to the minister at Benalla urging the claim of Violet
Town and asking that arrangements be made for
divine service. He was told “that it would not pay
for horse-shoes. ,, A letter was then sent to the minister
of the United Methodist Free Church at Shepparton to
which a favourable reply was received, a monthly ser-
vice being arranged. The church of 1866 having been
shifted to Euroa, public worship was held in the school
house, until permission to use it was withdrawn. The
situation was met by Mr. S. Fenton, a member of
another denomination, offering his sitting room for
worship. This room was so used until other provision
was made. On the arrival of the Rev. William Dixon,
who was an architect, a building was erected in 1880.
Messrs. M. Wilson, J. R. Peacock and L. Johnston were
members of the original trust. The present church was
erected in 1908.
Wodonga and Bethanga. —With the appointment of
the Rev. Francis Neale to Albury in 1856, work in this
area can be reckoned.
Wandiligong and Bright. —Once known as Growlers’
Creek, and, in 1866, as Morse’s Creek, later still receiving
its present name, this Circuit is associated with the
ministry of the Rev. J. W. Crisp. This brother was
stationed at Beechworth in 1860, and from this place he
missioned the surrounding country. So successful was
his missionary enterprise, that in 1865 the Rev. Thomas
Edmeades was appointed to reside in this locality. Messrs.
Gillard, Nuttall, Cook, Schofield and others, including
Mr. Morrison, a local preacher of Yackandandah, who
had a sixty-mile ride on horseback each way, have
served Methodism in this difficult area with great
devotion.
Yackandandah. — This was an outpost of the Beech-
worth Circuit in 1857. The Rev. W. L. Blamires, the
minister in charge at that time, appears to have conducted
the first service in Jarvis’ Hall, using the billiard room
for the purpose. He also conducted services in a
restaurant at Allen’s Flat, five miles away. At one time
a Circuit, it is to-day a home mission station.


Myrtleford. —The present church was erected in
October, 1885, by Mr. Abe Milne. The Rev. A. E. Albis-
ton of Beechworth conducted the opening services on
Sunday, 18th October, 1885. Mr. White was the first home
missionary to be appointed. Previous to the appoint-
ment of Mr. White, however, services were held in the
Athenaeum and were conducted by Simpson’s Band
from Stanley and by Mr. Biddington and other local
preachers. An occasional visit was paid by the minister
at Beechworth. Amongst the pioneers are Messrs. James
Smith, Lees, Trezise, Thomas and Henry Lowerson,
Charles Grant, James Green, sen., D. Nuthall, R. Trahair,
D. S. Daniel and James Aiton. A Circuit was formed in
1934.
Cudgewa*— lt is said, though without evidence to
support it, that the first service at Cudgewa was held in
1876, the State school being used for the purpose. A
church was opened on 24th February, 1889. Amongst
the pioneer local preachers were Mr. T. B. Carkeek and
Mr. H. Nankervis.
Lima East. —Here, in May, 1892, a bark hut did
service as a chapel. Thanks to such local preachers
as Messrs. A. Stafford, Tredinnick, Blamires, Harris,
G. M. McKeam, G. a’B. Cook and Gorwell, the
means of public worship were ably and adequately
provided.
Greta. —The Rev. Mr. Palfreyman appears to have
arranged for the first services at Greta. A church was
erected in 1868 or 1869. The first resident minister was
the Rev. S. C. H. Ramage.
Yarrawonga, Rutherglen, Strathbogie, Devenish, Chil-
tern, Tallangatta and Mitta Mitta, and Whitfield are
District home mission stations.


APPENDIX 11.
*
THE CHURCH BUILDING FUND.
The Building and Loan Fund must needs find a place
in any record of the rise and progress of Victorian
Methodism. Arising out of resolutions passed at the
Wesleyan District Meeting of Victoria, in November,
1856, the first meeting, consisting of five ministers and
nine laymen, met in the Collins Street Chapel, on 22nd
January, 1857, to establish “A Wesleyan Chapel and
Building Fund.” The Rev. W. L. Binks presided, and
there were present the Revs. W. Hill, J. Bickford, J.
Albiston and Charles Creed, and Messrs. Walter Powell,
T. Davies. P. P. Fletcher, W. Little, Parnham, J. Webb,
Wilkinson, N. Guthridge and R. Guthridge. Although
Daniel Draper was not present at the inaugural meeting,
the idea of the fund sprang from his fertile brain. As
Chairman of the District —with all Victoria for his pro-
vince—he knew the urgent need for such a fund, and
realised the service it could render to the Church. His
position made him acquainted with the condition of every
important Church Trust, and Trustees came to him
naturally with their problems and anxieties. Some of
the trustees innocently imagined that he had an
inexhaustible coffer out of which he could ladle money
for the building of new churches and the paying of
debts.
Writing to the Rev. J. C. Symons, in 1857, Draper said:
“We are holding meetings to raise £IO,OOO for the
Chapel and Loan Fund, and have good promises and
cash to the amount of £3OOO. I think this Fund will
take.” A few days previously a public meeting had been
held in the Collins Street Chapel to raise the necessary
capital. The Mayor of Melbourne presided, and the
speakers were the Revs. Daniel Draper, Isaac Harding,
Thomas Williams, together with the Honourable N.
Guthridge and Mr. W. Little. £2500 was contributed
at this meeting.
Meetings were held in Melbourne and various
country towns and, when the Committee met again,
three months later, under the chairmanship of Draper,
a liberal response to the appeal enabled the committee to
assist the trusts of newly erected chapels at Beechworth
and Belfast, and the parsonage at Kyneton. In July they


were able to make grants amounting to £3210. Among
the places to which aid was given were Castlemaine,
Sandhurst, Creswick, Warrnambool and Geelong. The
first year of the Fund saw it well established and in
active operation. The scheme, however, did not receive
the quick response which Draper had anticipated, and he
deplored the failure as one of the greatest mistakes
ever committed by Victorian Methodists. Two reasons
for this failure were the claimant call of local needs, the
building of churches, schools and parsonages, and the fact
that the “anticipated speedy removal of the Government
Grant for religious purposes,” did not immediately
eventuate. A determined effort was being made to
abolish such State aid, but a Bill which came before
Parliament was thrown out by the Legislative Council.*
The Rev. D. J. Draper was appointed Clerical Trea-
surer of the Fund, and continued as such until he left to
visit England in 1864. During most of Draper's
Treasurership, Mr. Walter Powell was Lay Treasurer.
The Rev. J. S. Waugh became Clerical Treasurer in
1865, and held office for nineteen years. He was also
Custodian of Deeds and the Authorised Representative.
In these capacities he did sterling work for the denomi-
nation.
While it was the intention of the Committee in 1857
to loan money, in practice actual grants had been made
to a large number of Trusts. During Dr. Waugh's
management it was decided that money should only be
advanced in the form of loans, to be repaid in instal-
ments spread over a period not exceeding ten years.
The Minutes of the Building and Loan Fund Com-
mittee reveal the fact that in May, 1878, Mr. R. Balding,
of Geelong, appeared before them to advocate
a scheme of Connexional Insurance. He was, however,
a man born out of due season, and was unable to
persuade the Committee. He came again and again in
an effort to persuade them of the wisdom of such a
provision, and his name recurs in connection with this
matter over a period of 18 years. Finally, in 1891, the
scheme was definitely abandoned. It was not until 30
years after Mr. Balding's first advocacy that the present
Fire Insurance Guarantee Fund was launched. During
its comparatively short existence this Fund has accumu-
lated approximately £50,000.
The Rev. E. I. Watkin, then minister of Wesley
Church, succeeded Dr. Waugh as Treasurer in 1884, and
♦State grants to religious bodies ceased in 1876. £3013 was
received by the Wesleyans that year. The capital of the
Building and Loan Fund by that time had reached £31,457.


held office for ten years. In 1886 a Fund was launched
to celebrate the Jubilee of Victorian Methodism, and out
of a total of £30,968, £12,442 was added to the Capital
of the Loan Fund. The Rev. W. L. Blamires succeeded
Dr. Watkin as Clerical Treasurer in 1894, and held the
position for nine years.
The Fund showed to great advantage and rendered
immense service during the troubled time of the
financial crisis which followed the collapse of the Land
Boom. It came to the rescue of distressed Trusts
and it was well for the credit of the Church that it
existed.
The Rev. Thomas Adamson, who had been a member
of the Committee since 1887, was appointed Clerical
Treasurer in 1904. During the twelve years in which he
administered the Fund he was “set apart,” except for two
years during which he also did Circuit work. He grap-
pled with problems of the Fund, and, by patient work
and courageous faith, rebuilt and extended its utility.
The consummation of Methodist Union increased the
claims upon the Fund, at a time, too, of general financial
stringency. But with characteristic energy Mr. Adam-
son set to work to establish the Fund upon a new
basis. After a close examination and searching inquiry,
he found that out of the nominal capital of £47,728 only
£11,079 was liquid. The arrears of instalments were run-
ning from £12,000 to £16,000 per year. Every effort was
made to restore the Fund to its original strength, and,
though between £SOOO and £6OOO of the capital had to be
written off altogether, his efforts were to a large extent
successful. A special Distressed Trust Relief Fund was
formed with the object of relieving the more urgent
cases, especially those that arose out of Union adjust-
ments, and also to reduce the difficulty which was press-
ing upon the Connexion owing to the erection of the
Conference Hall. Thomas Adamson's vision was expressed
in a Closer Settlement Fund which he founded for the
purpose of helping to erect churches in new areas. The
Rev. Robert Bayles continued and developed still further
the work laid down by Thomas Adamson until his death
in 1928, when the Rev. H. G. Secomb was called to he
the Clerical Treasurer, to which office he brought a legal
mind, wise judgment, and a Christian spirit of service.


APPENDIX 111.
THE BOOK DEPOT.
The Book Room in London was established by Wesley
as a means of diffusing evangelical literature throughout
the Kingdom. He was quick to perceive the service that
good and cheap books could render to the furtherance
of the great purpose of his life —the moral elevation
and religious instruction of the people. He was the first
cheap publisher, and was, in this way fully half a cen-
tury ahead of his time. Such was his faith in the
ministry of literature, that he insisted on all his travel-
ling preachers being colporteurs. They carried books in
their saddle bags, and sold or distributed them wherever
they went.
The Melbourne Book Depot was inaugurated at a
meeting held on the 12th June, 1857, presided over by
the Rev. D. J. Draper. It was not until the end of 1859
however, that Mr. Draper was authorised to import
a stock of books from England. The first Book Room
was opened in the Immigrants’ Home, at the corner of
Rathdown Street and Queensberry Street, Carlton. In
May, 1860, Mr. Draper was further empowered to order
stock to the value of £IBOO, and thus the Depot was fairly
launched, with the Rev. W. P. Wells as its Secretary,
and the Rev. D. J. Draper as its Treasurer. From the
Immigrants’ Home the Book Room was removed to
Wesley Church, occupying the front of the lower portion
of the school building. It continued there until 1873,
when premises were leased at 46 Elizabeth Street. The
next location was at 147 Swanston Street, and the
Minutes of the Conference of 1878 were published from
that address. The Rev. W. L. Binks was then Book
Steward. By 1879, however, the Depot was back again
at Wesley Church, with the Rev. J. C. Symons as
Book Steward.
At a meeting of the Book Committee held on the 13th
June, 1894, Mr. Thomas Gordon suggested that the
Depot should be moved to a more centrally situated
position. The business had been steadily declining
for a period of eight years. At the following meeting
it was decided to move to 265 Little Collins Street. The
Rev. Thomas Grove was Book Steward in 1911, when the
499


present site in Little Collins Street was acquired. The
old building was demolished and the new premises
erected. The total cost of the land and buildings was
£27,776.
The profits of the Book Depot in recent years have
been devoted to building up a Capital Fund, which now
stands at £ll,lOO, and to reducing the debt on the
building. The interest on a sum of £SOO is donated
annually to the Theological Institution Fund.
The following is the list of ministers who have served
as Book Stewards: 1863-77, J. C. Symons; 1878, W. L.
Binks; 1883, W. P. Wells; 1887, W. L. Binks; 1892, W. P.
Wells; 1895, Thomas Adamson; 1898, Thomas Angwin;
1904, J. W. Tuckfield; 1907, H. Heathershaw; 1908,
Thomas Grove; 1916, H. H.
B.A. The first manager was Robert Nicholson, a brother
of the Rev. Joseph Nicholson. Among the managers
through the years have been; G. H. Hotchin, C. Pitcher,
J. E. Watts and G. Grattan Stewart.


APPENDIX IV.
CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
The centenary of Victorian Methodism covers three
main periods:
1835-1854
Affiliation with English Methodism through the Aus-
tralasian and Polynesian Missions.
1855-1873
Affiliation as a “district” with the Australasian Con-
ference under the authority of the English Conference.
1874 —The Centenary Year.
An Annual Conference under the authority of the
General Conference of Australasia, self-governing
within the limits of the constitution assented to by the
English Conference.
When Joseph Orton visited Melbourne, in April,
1836, he was a missionary labouring under the direc-
tion of the Missionary Committee of the English Con-
ference. At that time Methodism in Australia formed
part of the Australasian and Polynesian Missionary
Society. The District Synod was the chief centre of
authority until 1855.
In 1852 the English Conference resolved to investi-
gate the case for giving the Australian Church a
measure of freedom in the management of its own work.
Robert Young and John Kirk were accordingly commis-
sioned to visit Australia. The latter lost heart after being
shipwrecked in the “Melbourne,” but Young arrived in
Adelaide in 1853, and thence journeyed to Melbourne,
Sydney, the Island Missions and Tasmania. On his
advice the English Conference, held at Birmingham in
1854, formed the Australasian and Missions
into a distinct and affiliated connexion. Provision was
made for the holding of the Australasian Conference at
Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Hobart Town, and, if
found practicable, at Auckland and other places.
Victoria and the other colonies were “Districts” under
the jurisdiction of the Australasian Annual Conference,
which was in turn subject to the English Conference.
The first Australasian Conference met at Sydney, under
the Presidency of W. B. Boyce, in 1855.


Full local autonomy was not conceded to the Wesleyan
Methodist Connexion in this land until 1873. The nine-
teenth and last Australasian Annual Conference, which
met at Sydney in 1873, resolved to divide the adminis-
tration of the affairs of the Church amongst four
Annual Conferences:
New South Wales and Queensland (including South
Sea Missions).
Victoria and Tasmania.
South Australia (including Western Australia).
New Zealand.
These Annual Conferences were to be comprised in
and governed by a General Conference, which was to
meet once every three years, or at such other intervals
as it might deem expedient.
As soon as the new system of autonomous govern-
ment by Annual and General Conferences was adopted,
doubts arose as to whether it was constitutionally
sound. The matter was finally put beyond question by
an Act of the Imperial Parliament, passed in 1876,
whereby the English Conference was empowered to
confer its “powers, privileges and advantages” upon any
Conference or Conferences elsewhere than in the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
Prior to 1875 the Conference consisted of ministers
only. The first General Conference held at Melbourne,
in 1875, drew up the constitution of the Annual and
General Conferences, making provision for the repre-
sentation of laymen. A keen sense of responsibility
for preserving the status of the ministerial office is
reflected in the terms of the resolution affirming the
principle of lay representation. It was resolved that,
“whilst such Conference distinctly asserted its mainten-
ance of the New Testament doctrine that the ministry
derives its existence from Christ, and that upon
Christian ministers, to whom is entrusted the duty of
taking “heed to all the flock over which the Holy
Ghost hath made them overseers, to feed the church of
God,” devolves the solemn responsibility of enforcing
godly discipline, and administering the pastoral govern-
ment of the Church; and whilst it regarded this
principle as being essential to the Scriptural fulfilment
of the ministerial office, and so vital to the constitution
of Wesleyan Methodism that in the admission of laymen
as members of the Conference it must be held to be
sacred and inviolable—it appeared to such Conference
to be advisable that the principle of Lay Representation
should be applied with the least possible delay to the
Annual and General Conferences of the Australasian


Wesleyan Methodist Connexion, and that the Constitu-
tion thereof should be accordingly amended.”
The new constitution provided for equal repre-
sentation of ministers and laymen for both Annual and
General Conferences. Matters of a purely pastoral
character were reserved for the pastoral session of the
Annual Conference.
Prior to 1886 Wesleyan Church properties throughout
Australia were held upon the trusts of the Sydney
Model Deed, which was based on the English Model
Deed. They were therefore held for and on behalf of
the English Conference which had the right to make
appointments of ministers to the various churches. The
consent of the British Conference was required also to
the sale of any properties.
The Fourth General Conference, held at Christchurch,
New Zealand, in 1884, directed the several Annual
Conferences to prepare a Model Deed setting forth the
trusts upon which the church properties were to be held.
The fundamental principles of Wesley’s Deed Poll and
of the English Model Deed were to be incorporated. In
particular the standards of doctrine were to be retained.
Authority was also given to the Annual Conferences to
procure Acts of Parliament for the settlement of such
properties on the trusts of the Model Deed.
Accordingly, in 1887, the Victorian Model Deed was
drafted by Thomas Crisp, solicitor, in the form of a
Conveyance on trust of a piece of land adjoining the
Electra Street, Williamstown, property. In the same
year the Victorian Legislature passed “The Victorian
Wesleyan Methodists’ Act, 1887” “to adapt and assimilate
the trusts of Wesleyan Church properties to the present
constitution of such Church in Victoria and for other
collateral purposes.” This Act embraced many advant-
ages and reforms in relation to church properties and,
in the words of Thomas Crisp, “cannot but be regarded
as one of the greatest boons the Legislature could con-
fer on the Church —a boon the more graceful in this
case from the fact of the Act having passed both
Houses unaltered and without a dissentient voice.”
By “The Methodist Union Act, 1901” the properties of
the Primitive Methodist, Bible Christian, and United
Methodist Free Churches were brought under the provi-
sions of “The Victorian Wesleyan Methodists’ Act, 1887.”


APPENDIX V.
STATISTICS, 1935
Victoria Tasmania Total
No. of Churches 848 . . 161 . . 1,009
Other Preaching Places . . 433 . . 66 . . 499
Parsonages 262 . . 43 . . 305
Schoolrooms 429 . , 64 . . 493
Ministers and Probationers 322 . . 37 . . 359
Catechists, Home Mission
Agents or Sisters. ..... 75 . . 13 . . 88
Local Preachers 1,235 . . 158 . . 1,393
Church Members 43,204 . . 5,669 , .48,873
Junior Church Members ..10,238 .. 973 ..11,211
Schools 801 . . 151 . . 952
Officers, Teachers and
Helpers 8,802 . . 1,054 . . 9,856
No. of Scholars 55,039 . . 7,098 ..62,137


APPENDIX VI.
IN MEMORIAM
Names of Ministers and Probationers who have died since the
formation of the Victoria and Tasmania Conference as a Separate
Conference.
♦♦ President-General of the Methodist Church of Australasia.
♦President of the Conference (Victoria-Tasmania).
t President of the Wesleyan Methodist Conference.
§ President of the Primitive Methodist Conference.
0 President of the Bible Christian Conference.
t President of the United Methodist Conference.
Date Entry Date
Name Birthplace of Ministry of
Birth Death
Abbott, William T Castlemaine .. .. 1861 1883 1927
Adams, John .. ..Newtown (V.) .. 1853 1878 1929
Adamson, Samuel* .. . .Portland 1850 1874 1929
Adamson, Thomas .. ..Sunderland 1848 1870 1916
Albiston, Joseph .. ..Manchester (Eng.) 1829 1853 1918
Alday, Thomas .. ..Heywood (V.) .... 1858 1885 1927
Alford, Richard S. .. ..Cornwall 1855 1877 1887
Alfred, William .. ..Cornwall 1842 1864 1872
Allen, Robert Essex 1825 1865 1899
Allen, William .. ..Cornwall 1851 1881 1923
Angwin, Thomas .. . .Cornwall 1828 1858 1904
Annear, David .. . .Cornwall 1833 1863 1909
Anthony, Charles .. . .England 1841 1861 1918
Bailey, Robert H. .. . .Lincoln 1865 1894 1904
Baker, Henry .. . .London 1828 1861 1887
Barningham, John .. ..Norfolk 1848 1875 1925
Bath, Henry Cornwall 1839 1859 1916
Batten, William .. ..England 1850 1878 1879
Bayles, Robert* .. . .Suffolk 1864 1890 1928
Bayley, John Derbyshire 1819 1864 1882
Bayley, Thomas A. .. ..England 1817 1837 1902
Bennett, Nathaniel .. ..Herts. (Eng.) .. .. 1832 1854 1923
Bennett, William M. ..Cambridgeshire .. 1834 1857 1916
Bettiss, William 0 .. ..Cornwall 1845 1874 1900
Bickford, Edmund S.* . .Devonshire 1843 1867 1904
Bickford, Jamest .. ..Devonshire 1816 1838 1895
Binks, William L.t .. ..England 1819 1843 1890
Blackwell, William Y., M.A. -Fitzroy 1850 1890 1914


Date Entry Date
Name Birthplace of Ministry of
Birth Death
■■■■■ ■■ ,
Blamires, William L. ..London 1834 1858 1916
Bracewell, Samuel .. ..Yorkshire 1831 1853 1909
Bray, William J Norfolk 1855 1875 1897
Brooks, Joseph .. ••Manchester .. .. 1890 1916 1918
Brown, John Jame* .. ..Toronto (Canada) 1851 1878 1933
Brown, Richard .. ..England 1843 1867 1908
Brown, Robert .. ..Netherton (Eng.) 1841 1870 1907
Brown, William .. ..Yorkshire 1832 1854 1892
Brownell, Henry J Hobart 1861 1882 1898
Burns, Edward B England 1828 1859 1873
Burridge, William .. . .Evindon (Eng.) .. 1848 1871 1912
Butchers, Barnard, B.A. ..Devon 1848 1873 1893
Butters, Williamt .. ..Lincolnshire .. .. 1810 1833 1877
Cameron, George ~ . .Peacheybelt (S.A.) 1867 1893 1933
Campbell, Robert W. ..Victoria 1843 1869 1886
Oannam, William M. ..Prahran 1861 1890 1935
Carey, Jesse Loxton (Eng.) .. 1832 1859 1914
Carnegie, Arthur Ernest ..Melbourne 1866 1889 1890
Catford, Henry .. ..England 1844 1867 1875
Catterall, John .. ..Lancashire 1827 1856 1898
Catterall, John M Maryborough ~ .. 1873 1908 1922
Chamberlain, Horace .. . .England 1889 1915 1918
Chapman, William Henry* ..Cornwall 1852 1874 1926
Clark, Henry .. .. ..Victoria 1848 1874 1878
Clarke, Michael .. .•Northumberland .. 1820 1842 1892
Cocks, Henry J. .. ..Bendigo 1860 1882 1921
Cole, George H. .. ..Miekleham 1859 1882 1919
Cole, Henry Lincolnshire .. .. 1825 1850 1891
Cook, Richard Osborne . .Gloucestershire .. 1831 1859 1923
Cook, Richard Osborn© ..Colac 1876 1901 1923
Cope, John .Cheadle (Eng.) .. 1825 1851 1909
Copeland, Thomas .. ..Northumberland .. 1810 1860 1926
Cory, Thomas J.° .. ..Devonshire 1850 1874 1921
Cowperthwaite, John B.A. ..Cumberland 1848 1 874 1904
Cox, Edward Thomas .. . .Victoria 1852 1877 1930
Crisp, James W Hobart 1832 1854 1917
Crook, Robert H Moonambel (V.) .. 1862 1888 1914
Cuthbert, Samuel . ..Avoca 1855 1883 1921
Daniel, George .. .. . .Bristol 1823 1846 1896
Dare, Joseph, D.D Dorset 1831 1851 1880
Davies, Edward .. . .Cornwall 1837 1865 1880
Dawson, William .. . .Chines 1854 1879 1886
Ditterich, Alfred .. ..Maldon 1860 1880 1920
Ditterich, Richard* .. . .Maldon 1865 1887 1928


Date Entry Date
Name Birthplace of Ministry of
Birth Death
Dodgson, James D Yorkshire 1824 1849 1892
Donnes, John .. ..Sydney 1844 1883 18&4
Down, Richard Devon 1830 1858 1907
Draper, Daniel J.t .. ..Hampshire 1810 1834 1866
Dnbourg, Charles .. . .Surrey 1828 1856 1886
Dyson, Martin Yorkshire 1830 1856 1910
Edgar, Alexander R Tipperary 1850 1874 1914
Edwards, Jabez Williams ..Amherst (V.) .. .. 1860 1886 1933
Edwards, William C Ballarat 1862 1887 1897
Eggleston, Johnt .. ..Newark (Eng.) .... 1813 1834 1879
Ellis, Alfred E. .. . .Carraragarmungee
(Y.) 1887 1910 1918
Farley, Henry C. .. ..Victoria 1859 1885 1917
Field, Benjamin .. ..England 1826 1845 1869
Fielding, Louis Illenden . .Westbury (Tas.) .. 1872 1898 1931
Finger, R. W. T., M.A., B.D.Doncaster (Y.) .. 1893 1921 1935
Fison, Lorimer, M.A., D.D. -Suffolk 1832 1864 1907
Fitcher, Richard .. . .Cornwall 1841 1867 1925
Fitchett, Francis J. ..Grantham (Eng.) - 1841 1866 1868
Fitchett, William Henry,
8.A., LL.D.** • .. ..Lincolnshire .. .. 1841 1866 1928
Flockart, Robert C Glasgow 1820 1850 1898
Fowler, Henry M. C. . .Heidelberg 1862 1884 1915
Freeman, Joseph C.° ..Cornwall 1854 1878 1915
Goodyear, Joseph .. ..Ballarat 1855 1882 1884
Gould, William .. ..Limerick (Ire.) .. 1837 1864 1902
Graham, James .. ..Dublin 1840 1866 1893
Green, John Ezra Thomas ..Kilmore 1864 1889 1933
Green, John L .t ~ ..Lancashire 1847 1874 1925
Greenwood, Henry .. ..Yorkshire 1842 1865 1910
Greer, John Shaw .. . .Meaghere (Ire.) .. 1838 1863 1931
Grewar, Archibald .. . .Dundee 1846 1872 1908
Grey, George .Lincoln 1831 1854 1902
Grove, Thomas .. .. ..Dublin 1843 1864 1916
Gudridge, E. E. .. ..Cornwall 1826 1863
Hall, George Tudor .. ..Bristol 1825 1852 1871
Hamilton, William .. ..Maryborough .. .. 1862 1886 1910
Harcourt, John .. ..Birmingham .. .. 1817 1845 1893
Harding, Isaac .. . .England 1815 1836 1897
Harris, Samuel .. . .Bendigo 1858 1882 1903
Harris, William .. ..Wiltshire 1844 1869 1904
Harrison, George W.t ..England 1858 1882 1917


Date Entry Date
Name Birthplace of Ministry of
Birth Death
Hart, Richard Birmingham .. .. 181'8 1847 1907
Haslam, James .. .•Bolton (Eng.) .. .. 1843 1867 1910
Haslam, J. Lloyd .. . .South Australia .. 1873 1898 1935
Hauser, Philip Happy Valley .... 1862 1885 1919
Heath, Bendry Wilmot* ..Creswick 1862 1886 1931
Heathershaw, Henry § ..Isle of Man 1833 1860 1907
Heyward, George T. .. . .Hobart 1840 1865 1904
Hicks, William .. ..Cornwall 1841 1860 1909
Higgins, John .. ..Ireland 1819 1843 1895
Hill, William Wolverhampton .. 1826 1849 1869
Hillard, James .. ..Victoria 1847 1874 1876
Hoban, Samuel John ..Lit, Bendigo, Bahat 1864 1887 1931
Hodge, William Henry ..Linton (V.) 1861 1884 1933
Holden, Albert T., C.8.E.,
8.A., D.D.** • .. ..Geelong 1866 1887 1935
Hosken, William H Cornwall 1821 1847 1907
Hunt, William* .. ..Wiltshire 1844 1862 1926
Hunter, Robert M Edinburgh 1839 1865 1894
Hutchison, Henry K., M.A. *Cork 1853 1876 1912
Hutchison, James .. . .Glasgow 1824 1845 1908
Ingham, James H. A. ..Surrey 1847 1871 1914
Inglis, Andrew .. ..Scotland 1829 1860 1890
Ironside, Samuel .. ..Sheffield 1814 1837 1897
James, Thomas .Lelant (Eng.) .. .. 1832 1855 1912
Johns, Wesley .Ballarat 1864 1886 1933
Jolly, Francis Kooringa (S.A.) .. 1859 1883 1929
Joyce, Robert S. .. ..Geelong 1863 1887 1921
Kane, Thomas .Armagh (Ire.) .. .. 1840 1862 1906
Kearns, John Thomas ..Armagh (Ire.) .. .. 1843 1865 1921
Keen, Thomas E.° .. ..Devonshire 1827 1851 1913
Kent, Thomas H Ballarat 1863 1890 1895
Kernick, Fredk. W., M.A. ..West Indies 1881 1905 1933
King, Edward Wiltshire 1825 1846 1905
Knee, Ephraim Orlando ..Wiltshire 1847 1873 1915
Knight, Samuel .. ..Liverpool 1835 1856 1919
Lamb, Robert Manchester 1842 1867 1873
Lancaster, Charles .. ..Yorkshire 1844 1867 1905
Lane, Charles .. .. • .Dorset 1823 1856 1910
Langham, Joseph .. ..Leicestershire .. .. 1827 1849 1883
Laurance, Thomas Clarke ..Ireland 1831 1856 1916
Lavers, Henry John .. ..Devon 1843 1864 1930
Lawther, Michael .. . .Ballarat 1860 1887 1919
Lelean, Arthur .. . .Tasmania 1862 1886 1896


Date Entry Date
Name Birthplace of Ministry of
Birth Death
— — 1 - 1 ■ ■——■■■ - ■ ■■ ■■ - —■ . - - ..
Lelean, William D Mevagissey (Eng.) . 1834 1855 1875
Leslie, John Melbourne 1848 1873 1931
Lester, William G Daylesford 1866 1889 1911
Lightbody, William .. ..Ireland 1818 1844 1879
Lindsay, David S Glasgow 1842 1869 1910
Lindsay, William W Glasgow 1845 1870 1900
Lloyd, Christian P Tasmania 1866 1889 1899
Lloyd, Edwin T. .. . .Staffordshire .. .. 1858 1881 1915
Lockwood, Frederick 0 ..Yorkshire 1841 1866 1907
Lowe, James Glebe, Sydney .... 1848 1874 1932
Lucas, Charles D Tasmania 1885 1911 1916
Madsen, Alfred* .. . .Maryborough .. .. 1864 1883 1930
Marsland, James A Sale, England .. .. 1844 1870 1917
Mason, Francis 0 .. ..Campbell's Creek - 1860 1883 1921
Mathieson, James ~ ..Campbell!'n (Scot.) 1845 1873 1923
Merriman, Henry E London 1844 1871 1907
Mewton, John .. , .Cornwall 1831 1856 1873
Millard, John G Somerset 1827 1848 1897
Miller, Richard .. , .Devonshire 1824 1854 1899
Minns, George Tasmania 1841 1867 1884
Molyneaux, Charles T. ..Camfield (Eng.) .. 1852 1876 1881
Moore, William .. ..Tyrone (Ire.) .. .. 1855 1877 1914
Moore, Henry .Woolwich (Eng.) .. 1845 1867 1931
Morley, William .. ..Notts (Eng.) .. .. 1842 1863 1926
Moy Ling, James .. ..China 1832 1873 1911
McCallum, Alexander*** ..Williamstown .. .. 1860 1884 1933
McCann, Jonathan P.* ..Geelong 1855 1876 1914
McKay, Alerander .. ..Ballarat 1862 1887 1922
McKim, Percy J., B.A. ..Geelong 1878 1901 1902
McPherson, Bertram T. ..Buninyong .. .. .. 1884 1914 1914
Kail, John Castlemaine .. .. 1858 1881 1935
Nance, Francis James, M.A.* Camborne (Eng.) - 1857 1881 1930
Neale, Francis Gateshead 1840 1862 1907
Netherway, George 0 .. ..Devon 1842 1863 1911
Newell, Reuben .. ..England 1851 1875 1926
Nicholson, Joseph .. ..Cumberland (Eng.) 1845 1868 1921
Nye, Edward W. .• ..Plymouth 1843 1864 1909
O’Donnell, David ~ . .London 1845 1869 1914
Oldmeadow, Hemy C. ..London 1849 1876 1922
Orchard, John .. ..Devonshire 1839 1861 1907
Orton, Joseph Hull 1795 1826 1842
Osborne, John A Melbourne 1852 1878 1912
Overend, Richard .. ..Ireland 1843 1867 1867


Date Entry Date
Name Birthplace of Ministry of
Birth Death
Palamountain, William J. ~Ballarat 1863 1886 1935
Pattinson, Henry ~ ..England 1855 1881 1918
Pemell, John .. .. •.London 1820 1848 1904
Philp, Robert* •• # .Fifeshire (Scotd) • 1850 1873 1926
Pithouse, John T. .. ..Eton 1835 1859 1920
Pointon, Harold .. . Staffordshire .. .. 1903 1929 1933
Polkinghorne, John •» •.Sebastopol 1862 1885 1932
Porteous, David* .. ..Ireland 1830 1874 1916
Portrey, Jabez B. .. ..Norfolk 1851 1871 1882
Powell, Arthur* .. .. Barnard Castle ... 1850 1875 1927
Presley, William .. ..New Zealand .. .. 1850 1878 1917
Prior, Samuel F Bedford 1851 1875 1919
Quick, William A.t .. ..Exeter 1820 1841 1915
Rankin, Francis Joseph . .S'mythesdale .. .. 1863 1888 1932
Reed, Richard Louist ..Fryerstown (V.) .. 1855 1885 1922
Richards, George B. .. ..Oxford 1828 1854 1904
Richards, William 0 .. ..S. Yorkshire .. .. 1870 1899 1927
Richardson, Henry .. . .Tasmania 1844 1871 1925
Ride, John Derbyshire 1790 1821 1862
Riding, Thomas .. ..Lancashire 1860 1883 1922
Rigg, Alfred Yorkshire 1832 1861 1891
Roberts, Thomas .. . .Cheshire 1858 1884 1924
Roberts, Richard Birch . .Warrnambool .. .. 1858 1884 1931
Robin, James De Q., M.A. ..Liverpool .. 1845 1868 1900
Rogers, Alfred .. .. . .Strathloddon .. .. 1864 1886 1915
Ross, Joseph Leeds 1834 1871 1912
Rowe, James 0 Cornwall 1824 1845 1903
Rowlands, Lewis Jones ..North Wales .. .. 1855 1889 1934
Royce, James 8. H Kent 1829 1854 1907
Sanders, Charles .. ..Tasmania 1845 1871 1900
Schofield, George .. . .Sydney 1843 1868 1924
Scholes, Samuel* .. . .Ceres, Geelong .. 1863 1885 1931
Seccombe, John .. ..Cornwall 1844 1870 1934
Secomb, William Edward 0 . .Fitzroy 1857 1880 1927
Shaw, Joseph T. .. ..Yorkshire 1826 1859 1894
Simpson, James Y Edinburgh 1843 1866 1898
Sinden, Frederick .. ..Brighton (Eng.) .. 1842 1864 1897
Smith, John B. ~ ..England 1829 1854 1903
Smith, Joshua .. ..Hants (Eng.) .. ~ 1829 1850 1901
Spence, Joseph .. ..Ireland 1840 1865 1909
Stapleton, Albert G Dublin 1888 1914 1915
Stephenson, Francis E. ..England 1829 1860 1885
Stephenson, Jabez B. ..Norfolk 1840 1863 1901


Date Entry Date
Name Birthplace of Ministry of
Birth Death
Sugden, Edward H., M.A.,
B.Sc., Litt.D.** * .. ..Yorkshire 1855 1874 1935
Swift, Alfred Austria 1839 1866 1908
Symons, John C. .. ..Cornwall 1820 1849 1894
Tait, Lawrence .. ..Carlton .. 1861 1887 1925
Taylor, Ebenezer .. ..England 1830 1865 1896
Taylor, James A England 1839 1863 1908
Taylor, Theo England 1829 1852 1859
Taylor, Robert A Ballarat 1865 1887 1924
Taylor, William H Ballarat 1861 1885 1935
Teague, H. Henwood .. ..Cornwall 1851 1876 1905
Teague, Joseph 0 .. ..Devon 1831 1852 1915
Thomas, Thomas J Creswick 1864 1888 1933
Thompson, Robert W. . .Manchester 1852 1876 1921
Tonkin, John Cornwall 1834 1857 1894
Trathan, James .. ..Ballarat 1854 1887 1930
Tregear, Charles .. . .Cornwall 1861 1886 1934
Treloar, William John 0 . .Castlemaine ..... 1860 1882 1923
Trevena, Alfred J Geelong 1863 1887 1888
Truman, Thomas G. D. . .South Melbourne .. 1888 1910 1918
Tuckfield, Francis .. ..Cornwall 1808 1837 1865
Tuokfield, James W. .. . .Victoria 1840 1864 1908
Tuckfield, John H Geelong 1847 1871 1924
Turner, Edmundt .. . .Lancashire 1838 1876 1915
Tylee, John .. .. ..Illabrook (V.) .. .. 1866 1886 1894
Uglow, Amos° Devonshire 1842 1864 1924
Dasher, Peter R. C Dublin 1835 1858 1899
Vawdon, William .. ..Geelong 1867 1891 1929
Wallace, Henry t .. . .Parramatta 1846 1874 1916
Walton, William H. .. ..Yorkshire 1833 1859 1910
Warren, Richard .. ..Cornwall 1840 1863 1898
Waterhouse, Joseph .. ..England 1828 1849 1881
Waterhouse, Samuel .. . .England 1830 1850 1918
Watkin, Edward 1., D.D. ..Sydney 1839 1859 1916
Watkin, Jamest .. . .England 1805 1830 1886
Watsford, Johnt .. ..Parramatta .. .. 1820 1841 1907
Watsford, James J Fiji 1844 1865 1911
Watts, George Hants 1815 1836 1898
Waugh, James S., D.D.t ..Ireland 1822 1840 1898
Webber, Samuel P.° .. ..Cornwall 1842 1865 1897
Wedlake, William .. ..Barnstaple 1832 1859 1872
Wells, William P Lincolnshire .. .. 1826 1850 1895
Westacott, Johnt .. ..Barnstaple 1830 1868 1919
Whewell, John -. ~England 1825 1854 1886


Date Entry Date
Name Birthplace of Ministry of
_____ Birth Death
White, Arthur Flemons . .Fiji 1862 1886 1926
White, Joseph .. ..Lincolnshire .. .. 1835 1860 1905
Williams, James R Ballarat 1869 1910 1913
Williams, Spencer .. ..Wales 1825 1852 1894
Williams, Thomast .. ..Homoastle 1815 1839 1 891
Williams, William, D.D. ..The Burra (5.A.).. 1848 1869 1913
Wilson, James Yorkshire 1851 1878 1922
Wilson, Jeremiah 0 .. ..Exeter 1844 1868 1905
Withington, Samuel T. ..England 1843 1869 1907
Wong, George Geelong 1876 1904 1934
Woodall, William .. ..Yorkshire 1830 1857 1892
Worth, William S England 1828 1857 1903
Wykes, William .. ..Mortlake 1857 1878 1927
Yeo, Richard Devonshire 1855 1880 1916


INDEX
A
Page
Aberfeldie . . . . . . . . 411
Adamson, A. G 231
Adamson, Emily . . . . 189
Adamson, L. A
260, 262 et seq.
Adamson, Thomas . . . 498
Addinsall, John . .
159, 470, 485
Africa 227
Aitken, Thomas . . . . 301
Akrill, Charles . . . . 105
Albert Park 419
Albiston, A. E 278
Albiston, Joseph . .
105, 129, 320
Alexandra 491
Alfred, William . . . . 301
Allen, Harold F 201
Allen, J. H 224
Allin, B. A 300
Alphington 415
Amos, A. Wesley . . . 241
Anderson, Wesley . . . 155
Andrews, A. J 222
Andrews, H. M 262
Angwin, C 379, 385
Anthony, C 295
Apollo Bay 180
Ararat 479
Armadale 420
Arnold, James . . , . 191
Arnold, J. K 222
Arthur, Governor ... 24
Arthur, J. A. 301
Arthur, Thomas . . . . 301
Atkinson, C. W 278
Australian Aborigines 226
Avoca 379, 451
B
Page
Babies' Home 193
Bacchus Marsh . . . . 90
Baddaginnie 494
Bailey, K. H 276
Bairnsdale 472
Baker, Shirley Walde-
mar 200
Baker, Thomas . . . . 208
Balaclava 418
Balding, R 497
Baldwin, Joseph . . . . 276
Ballantyne, A 222
Ballarat . . 100, 378, 440
Ballard, A. V 258
Band of Hope . . . . 251
Barclay, A. J 180
Barker, A. E 215
Barkly, Sir Henry 116, 125
Barkly, Sir John . . . 456
Barnett, F. O 193
Barwon Lakes 80
Bassett, C. R. . . 152, 453
Bath, A. P 453
Bath, Henry 322
Bath, Thomas 453
Bathurst 115
Batman's Hill 40
Battrick, Mrs 422
Batty, G 300
Bayles, Robert 498
Bayley, Thomas Adam 304
Beaufort 442
Beaumont, Joseph . . . 348
Beckett, George . 180, 194
Beckett, Hon. Robert
216, 232, 336, 431
Beeac . . . . ~ .. .. 442
Belcher, William . . . 289
Belgrave 435
Bell, Henry 351
Bell, The Mayor . . . . 290


Page
Benaiia 377, 492
Bendigo 93, 456
Bennett, J 293
Bennett, N 364
Bennett, Wm. Ernest . 230
Benny, Richard . . . . 351
Benson, C. Irving . . 284
Berry, Henry . . 273, 328
Berry, Mrs. H. P. . . 235
Berry, Joseph . . . . 293
Beulah 482
Bible Christian Church
299 et seq.
Bickford, E. S
165, 181, 182 et seq., 393
Bickford, James . . . .
105, 171, 316, 317
Bi-chloride of Gold In-
stitute 284
Binks, W. L. 122, 125, 318
Birchip 454
Birrell, Augustine . . 13
Blackburn 433
Bladen, A. P 356
Blake, E 204
Blanch, John 73
Bland, J 477
Board of Education , 269
Bohler, Peter 5
Bolwarra 468
Boort • • 458
Booth, General . . . . 31
Boreham, F. W 324
Boronghoop 76, 79
Boundary Road .. . . 432
Bourne, Robert Eben-
ezer 37, 71, 72
Bowden, Thomas ... 19
Bowerman, H. B. . . . 66
Bowring, William . . . 454
Box Hill 433
Box Hill Grammar
School 269
Boyce, W. B 98, 105
Boyle, O. J 162
Boyt, Mavis 229
Bracewell, Samuel . .
294, 298, 451
Bradbury, V. R 360
Page
Bray, W. J 294
Brecon 114
Brentani, Charles ... 92
Bright 494
Brighton 85, 88, 97, 101,
422
Brim 482
Bristol 9, 10, 13
Britnell 143
Bromilow, William E.
220 et seq.
Brookes, Walter . . . . 433
Brooks, George . . . . 430
Brooks, Isaac 430
Brown, Dr. James . . 132
Brown, George . . 212, 217
Bruhn, George 92
Brunswick . . 85, 157, 407
Brunswick Street, Fitz-
roy 403
Brunswick Street
School 245
Bryant, J. M 290
Buckley, William . . 40, 42
Bula, Daniel 223
Buley, A. A 253
Bullas, M 380
Buntine, G 382
Bunting, Jabez
44, 59, 115
Buntingdale 30
Bunyan, John 113
Bunyip 473
Burchett, Caleb . . 177, 478
Burgess, John 35
Burgoyne, Phillip . . . 464
Burke Road (Malvern) 429
Burnett, Matthew . . .
129 et seq.
Burton, J. W 240
Burwood 432
Butchers, Barnard . . . 394
Butters, William . . 28, 70,
90, 91, 95 et seq., 105,
125, 142, 362.
Butterworth, Joseph . . 19
Byaduk 469


C
Page
Cadwallader, William . 292
Cain, J. H. 283, 284, 299,
357
Cairns, A 125
California Hill 457
Callaghan, James . . 351
Calvert, William . . . . 293
Camberwell 430
Cambridge History of
England 14
Cambridge Modern His-
tory 8
Camm, T. C. 249, 351, 442
Campbell, James . .
251, 253, 319
Camperdown 469
Candy, James 35
Caniambo 486
Canterbury 431
Carey, Jesse
207 et seq., 214, 230
Came, Elsie 228
T. Clement . . 225
Carrol, R 253
Carvosso, Benjamin 23, 25
Casterton 469
Castle, A. H 424
Castlemaine . . . . 99, 445
Cathcart 479
Cato, A. C 231
Cato, Frances, Home . 189
Cato, Fred. J. 189, 220, 227,
228, 232, 273, 310, 341
et seq.
“Cato House” 267
Cato, Fred. J., Branch 267
Caulfield, John 34
Cavendish 470
Cecil Street (South
Melbourne) 417
Central Mission 281 et seq.
Chambers, Harold . . . 231
Chambers, Jabez . . . . 429
Chambers, L 421
Chambers, W. J 219
Chaplaincies 195
Chapman, Joshua ... 98
Page
Chapman, Thomas . . 92
Chapman, William H. 305
Charlton 461
Cheltenham Home . . 183
Cheltenham-Mentone . 424
Chenoweth, R. T. . . . 351
China 227
China Inland Mission 227
Chinese Mission . . . . 190
Christian Endeavour
Movement 252
Christian, George . . . 455
Churchward, C. M. . . 214
Churchward, S 203
Church Building Fund 496
Church Candles . . . . 156
Church Government . . 501
Church in the Wilder-
ness 150
Circuits of Vast Areas
160 et seq.
Clark, Hester J. . . 216, 234
Clark, Samuel 151
Clarke, Henry 176
Clarke, Michael . .
155, 291 et seq.
Clarke, Samuel . . . . 481
Clarkson, H. . . 185, 460
Class Meetings . . 10, 157
Cleverdon, F. T. 356, 360
Clear Lake 483
Clifton Hill Circuit . . 405
Closer Settlement Fund 498
Clow, James 197
Clucas, C. S 352
Clunes 443
Coates, A 185
Coates, Mrs. (Sister
Bessie) 186
Cobram 491
Coburg 408
Cohuna 463
Coke, Thomas 16
Colac 441
Cole, George H. 155, 284,
298, 378
Cole, Henry 296
Collingwood . . 88, 97,
101, 427


Page
Collingwood Free Kin-
dergarten 285
Collins, David (Lieut.-
Col.) 26
Collins Street Chapel
84, 88, 123
Collins, T 374
Collins, William Henry 349
Collocott, A. J 375
Collocott, E. E. V. . . 201
Coltman, William . . . 351
Committees for Naval
and Military Affairs 355
Confession of a Digger
152, 15?
Connexional Insurance 497
Cooke, Henry 321
Coombe, S 384
Coneland, Thomas 297, 299
Coriyule 81, 82
Corrigan, James . 260, 262
Cotter, John 427
Country Roads . . 158, 159
Cousins, Mrs 447
Cox, E. T 320
Cox, W. H 219
Craig, John 459
Craig, R 293
Craig, William . . . . 459
Creswick 442
Creswick Creek . . . . 93
“Crinoline Days” 362, 363
Crockett, Andrew ... 37
Cross, John . . . . 273, 417
Croydon 434
Crozier, Elias 292
Cudgewa 495
Curdies River 180
Curry, W. C 103, 162
Cumpston, Mrs 424
D
Daley, D 302
Dandenong 476
Daniel, George 307, 308,
391
Banks, Benjamin 212,
217 et seq., 240
Banks, John 329
Page
Banks, Sir Aaron 189,
285, 829 et seq.
Dare, Joseph 125, 129, 392
Darling, Sir Charles
136, 262, 294
Davey, Mabel 223
Davidson, Mabel (Mrs.
Rooney) 222
Davies, Sir Matthew . 272
Daylesford 449
Dean, R. W 185
De Garis, E. C 460
Denham Street . . . . 430
Dennis, A, 441
Dennis, Henry 177
Denny, James 465
Derrick, A. J. 281, 337, 352
Diamond Creek . . . . 416
Dibb, “Father” . . . . 447
Dickson, Robert . . . . 149
Dimboola 484
Ditterich, R 287, 396
Dixon, James 348
Doanes Brothers . . . . 253
Dobbinson, L. . . 293, 457
Dodgson, James D. 82, 164
Donald 453
Donnes, John . . 185, 492
Bonn, Charles 23
Draner, Daniel J. 97, 105,
113 et sen.. 122, 125,
132, 262, 497
Draper Memorial Church 121
Dredge, James 34, 59 et
sea., 244, 245, 259
Dredge, J. E 197
Dredge, Theodore ... 37
Dromana 426
Dronin 473
Drysdale 81, 441
Drysdale, Anne . 76 et seq.
Dudley, Hannah . . . . 216
Dudley, Ornhanage . . 238
Dufty, A. P 483
Dufty, J. A 483
Dunbalk 478
Dunhill, Sir Thomas . 301
Dunkeld 469
Dunolly 450


Page
Dunstan, Lieut. W. R. 357
Dunstan, Richard . . . 185
Dyson, G. F 194
Dyson, Martin 203
E
Eaglehawk . . . . 369, 457
Earle, James 467
Early Methodists 139 et seq.
Echuca 462
Edgar, A. R. 182, 281
et seq., 311, 332, 458
Edmonds, J. H 483
Education Act of 1872 261
Eggleston, John 127, 313,
314
Eggleston, J. W 313
Elmore 374, 464
Elsternwick St. Kilda . 417
Eltham 415
Elwood 418
Employment Bureau . . 193
Epping Street 421
Epworth 1, 3
Epworth Hospital 285
et seq.
Erskine, George .... 23
Esmond, James 92
Essendon 411
Essendon South . . . . 410
Euroa 492
Evangelistic Depart-
ment 194
Evans, Isaac 464
Evans, Thomas H. . . 448
Everett, Walter . . . . 301
F
Fairfield 415
Fairfield Memorial
Home 284
Falder, Jonathan 147,
450, 457
Fareham 114, 133
Faubula Jotham Sau . 202
Fawkner, John Pascoe
54, 56
Fenton, Herbert . . . 306
Fenton, James . . 35, 197
Page
Field, Benjamin 389
Field, J. T 221
“Field’s Theology” . . 391
Fiji 205
First District Meeting 91
First Methodist Chapel 21
First Missionary Meet-
ing 196
First Quarterly Meet-
ing 37, 71
First Sunday School . 244
Fison, Lorimer 208 et seq.,
230, 276, 395
Fitcher, R 164
Fitchett, F. J 452
Fitchett, W. H 162
260, 265 et seq., 268,
310, 312, 392
Fitzroy 85, 403
Flagstaff Hill 289
Flockart, D. J 426
Flockart, Robert C. 88,
317, 353
Flockart, Samuel C. . . 426
412
Forbes, James 84, 196, 197
Ford, H. W 185
Forest Creek 93
Forest Street 456
Forest Street Sunday
School . 253
Forster, Thomas . . . . 37
Foster 478
Foster, John 276
Franklin, Benjamin . . 108
Fraser, Hon. Alexan-
der 327
Fraser, Sir J. G. . . . 212
Frederick, H, W. . . . 299
Freeman, John . . , . 485
Freeman, Thomas . . 151
Frencham, Henry . . . 302
Fry, Captain 10
Furphy, John 486
Furseman, W 300
Fyans, Captain . . . . 51
517
INDEX


G
Page
Galloway, “Father” . 479
Gardiner, Alfred . . . 473
Gardiner, John .... 56
“Garryowen” . . . , 56, 72
Gault, Adelaide . . . . 229
Gault, E. L 232
Gault, J. A 356, 360
Geden, J. D 118
Geelong 88, 437
“Geelong Advertiser”
92, 437
Geelong East 439
Geelong West 438
George, Lloyd 17
Georgia 4 et seq.
Gibbs, Miss C. E. . . . 140
Giblett, S 474
Gilmour, Matthew K. 228
Gipps, Sir George . . 41
Gipps Street 427
Glendearg Grove . . . 421
Glenelg, Lord 63
Glen Forbes 478
Golden Point 94
Golden Square 456
Goldsmith, G. T. . . . 227
Goldstraw 263
Goodall, W 161
Goodyear, Joseph . . . 481
Goroke 485
Gospel Chariot . . . . 165
Graham, N 204
Grandview Grove . . . 420
Grant, Mrs 350
Gratton, Enoch . . . . 306
Gray, Robert 345
Great Western 479
Green, John Richard . 14
Greenwood, Henry . . 200
Gregory, Benjamin . . 11l
Greta 495
Grey, George . . 143, 294
Grey, Matron E. . . . 285
Grieve, Robert C. . . . 264
Grove, J. W. . . . . 256, 269
Grove, Thomas . . . . 310
Guy, Alfred W. . . . . 222
Page
H
Hague, George . . 272, 273
Haley, Mrs. C. S. . . . 419
Hall, G. T 293
Ham, David 351
Ham, H. J 897, 475
Ham, Samuel . . 155, 348
Hamilton 468
Hamley, H. R 225
Hansford, Job 450
Harcourt, John 89, 91 99
Harcourt, J. R. . . 187, 277
Harding, Hilda . . . . 189
Harding, Isaac . 99, 105,
364, 387
Hargreaves, Edward 91, 110
Hargreaves, Mrs. . . . 435
Harkness, Abraham 349, 351
Harkness, E. E 201
Harris, Edwin G. . . . 202
Harris, G. C 202
Harris, W 370
Hart, Richard . . 99, 105
Harvey, E 410
Harvey, Richard . . . . 351
Hattam, W. T. . . 272, 360
Hatton, Mrs 177
Hawthorn 429
Hawthorn Road . . . . 418
Healesville 435
Heathcote 466
Heathershaw, Henry . 298
Hebblewhite, Samuel . 83
Heidelberg 415
Hensley, Doreen . . . . 229
Henty Family 26
Hexter, George R. 185, 186
Hey wood 470
Hiatt, W 370
Hicks, William 304
Highbury Grove . . . . 430
Highfield Road . . . 431
Hill, John 301
Hill, T. R 411
Hill, William 105, 388, 389
Hillgrove, J. B 454
Hilliard, James . . 161, 480
Hiscock, Thomas .... 93
Hitch* Emilie 189


Page
Hitchcock, Hon. How-
ard 338
Hitchcock, G, M. . . . 246
Hoban, S. J 284, 335
Hocken, William . . . . 300
Hocking, J 249, 256
Hodgson, Richard . . . 351
Holden, A. T. 162, 176, 181,
183 et seq., 353 355, 359
et seq.
Holmes, J. S 473
Holy Club 3
Home Mission Enter-
prise 171
Home Missionaries’
Training College 183, 186
et seq.
Hooper, Henry . . . . 345
Hooper, John 301
Hopetoun 485
Horner, George 405
Horsham 480
Horton, William .... 23
Hosking, John 19
Hosking, Martin . . . . 350
Hotchin, W. H 351
House Churches 140 et seq.
Howard, Henry 277, 371,
474
Howard Street, North
Melbourne 404
Howell Family . . . . 35
Howell, Miss 244
Howell, Richard . . . . 469
Howes, J 479
Howitt, Dr. A. W. 212, 275
Hulme, J 249
Hume Weir 178
Hunt, W. 241, 294, 297,
299
Hurst, Benjamin 36, 41 et
seq., 85, 197
Hymn Starters . . . . 168
I
Indented Head 81
India 224
India in Fiji . . 215 et seq.
Inland Mission . 192 et seq.
Page
Inskip, J 373
“In Wild New Britain” 218
Irving, M. H 262
Isaacs, Sir Isaac . . . . 128
J
James, Austin 225
James, Thomas . . 164, 167
Jamieson, J 185
Jasper Williams Orphan-
age 216
Jeffrey, James . . 148, 153
Jeffrey, “Jimmy” 346,
347, 383, 448, 456
Jeffrey’s Barn 414
Jenkin, Mrs. N. J. . . 235
Jenkin, N. J. . . 233, 241
Jenkins, Ebenezer E. . 136
Jenkins, J. E 186
Jennings, Miss 223
Jennings, Thomas ... 35
Jennings, W 351
Jennison, J. C 226
Jeparit 484
Job, Miss 380
Jobson, F. J. . 126, 135
Johns, Luke 480
Johnson, Raynor C. . . 275
Johnston, William . . . 479
Jory, Mrs. R 483
Jubilee Thanksgiving
Fund 271
Judkins, George A . . 288
Judkins, H. G 228
Judkins, W. H 286
K
Kaniva 483
Kardella Village Set-
tlement . . 282
Katamatite 490
Keck, H 176
Keen, Thomas E. 300, 457
Kent, H. C 216
Kent, James 433
Kerang 459
Kerang Circuit 161
Kernick, F. Walwyn . . 275
Kernick, James . . . . 351
519
INDEX


Page
Kew 430
Keysborough 476
Keys Family 476
Kilmore 90
Kilmore & Broadford 416
King, Edward 129
King, James 171
King, John . . . . 323, 324
King, S. G 185
“Kings of the Reef” 208
Kirk, John 501
Kitching, G 293
Knight, Samuel 314 et seq.
Knopwood, Robert 28 (note)
Koo-wee-rup 478
Koroit 468
Korumburra 477
Krome, Otto 269
Kyabram 487
Kyneton 447
L
Laanecoorie 451
Lade, Frank . . . 180, 276
Lade, Miss A 205
Lagi, Wilisoni 241
Laity, Horace W. . . . 204
Lake Boga 465
Lalbert 466
Lancaster, John . . . . 487
Landen, Mrs 269
Lang, John Dunmore . 80
Langham, Frederick
205 et seq., 210
Langham, Joseph . . . 457
Lapthorne, A. E. . . . . 216
Lassam, G. P 222
Latrobe, Lieut-Gover-
nor 48, 83, 92
Latrobe Street Chapel 290
Lau, J. West . . 462, 473
Lawry, Walter . . 22, 55
Lawry, W. G 289
Laymen’s Missionary
Movement 216
Leach 411
Le Couteur, Philip . . 269
Lecky, W. E. H. , . . 7
Lee, John 185
Page
Lees, John 21
Leigh, Samuel 20 et seq., 23
Lelean, Charles Oswald
213, 230
Leongatha 477
Leong Gie, Ernest . . . 191
Leong-on-Tong 148
Letcher, John 351
Lewis, Frederick ... 91
Lewis, F. G 204, 219
Lightbody, William
91, 150, 161
Lilley or Lilly, George
35, 54, 55, 197
Lilydale 435
Lima East 495
Lindsay, William Weir 230
Linley, Clement . . . . 305
Livingstone Home . . . 188
Livingstone House . . 188
Lobb, John 35
Local Preachers . 344, 378
Local Preachers’ Asso-
ciation 350
Loch, Sir Henry
Brougham 271
Locke 243
Lockwood, F 302
Loie Fay 190
London Missionary
Society 203
Long, John F 217
Long, Olive Rivett . . 228
Long Gully 457
Long Sermons 166
Longstaff, Sir John . . 368
Longstaff, Ralph 368, 486
Lord, Tom . . . . 289, 293
Lorquon 483
Love, Daniel 467
Lowe, William . . . . 88
Lucas, A. H. S 271
Lydiard Street Sunday
School 253
Lygon Street, Carlton
378, 404
Lynex 185
Lyth, R. B 228


M
Page
Macaulay 13
Mac Arthur, W. C. . . 122
Mac Donald, Richard
Lewis 214
Macfarlane, Justice . . 276
Mackenzie, Peter ... 31
Mackerell, F 293
Macquarie Harbour . . 24
Madden, Sir John . . . 310
Madsen, Alfred . . 298, 397
Maffra 472
Maldon 446
Malmsbury 103
Malton, Emma 169
Malvern 419
Malvern South . . . . 421
Manangatang 466
Mansfield 492
Mansfield, Miss (Mrs.
Dent) 223
Mansfield, Ralph . . 23, 24
Manton, John . . . . 24, 54
Marsden, Joseph Ankers
72, 302, 362
Marsden, Samuel . . 19, 21
Marshman, John . . . . 485
Marsland, J. A 480
Martin, Captain 119, 120
Maryborough . . 385, 448
Mason, Francis 299
Masterman, Thomas . 306
Mathieson, J 203
Mauger, S 282, 287
Maughan, James . . . 305
Maxfield 9
May, “Granny” . . . . 433
McCallum, A 284, 371, 397
McCrae, Colin 472
McCutcheon, O. K. . . 225
McCutcheon, Walter B. 339
McDonald’s Track . . 478
McGregor, Sir William 220
Mcllroy, J 258
Mclvor Rush 93
McLaren, William . . 459
McMillan, Ethel . . 223, 234
McMurdie, F. A 186
Meaden, John 451
Page
Medical Missions . . . . 228
“Melbourne Advertiser” 85
Melbourne College of
Divinity 278
Melbourne Local Prea-
chers’ Association . . 351
Men’s Hospice 284
Menzies, James . . . . 484
Merbein 454
Metcalfe, J. R 223
Methodist Book Depot
110, 499
Methodist Federal In-
land Mission . . . . 184
Methodist Homes, Chel-
tenham . . 188 et seq.
Methodist Ladies’ Col-
lege . . 260, 266 et seq.
Methodist Ladies’ Col-
lege Honour Roll . . 361
Methodist New Con-
nexion . . . 305
Methodist Union 307 et seq.
Mewton, W. A 273
Meyer, J. A 453
Meyer, Felix 263
Michel, Louis 93
Middleton, George . . . 479
Mildura 163, 453
Miles, Mr 463
Miller, Henry 228
Miller, R 304
Mills, Henry 452
Mills, Robert A 424
Minns, George 199
Mintaro 191
Mintaro Home 183
Minyip 486
Missionary Sisters . . . 202
Mitchell, Henry . . , . 143
Mitchell, Phillips . . . . 301
Mitiamo 463
Moloney, Dr 282
Monbufk 436
Montgomery, Thomas . 471
Moonabrel 452
Moonee Ponds 409
Moorabbin-Bentleigh . 423
Moore, W 432


Page
Mooroopna 487
Moravians 5
Morcom, Thomas . . . . 301
Mordialloc 424
Moreland 409
Morgan, Matthew . . . 351
Morley W. 273, 309, 334
Mornington 426
Morris, J 300
Morrissey, Evelyn . . . 231
Morrissey, James . . . 232
Morrissey Memorial
Church . . . . 216, 217
Morrissey, Olive . . . . 231
Mortlake 470
Morwell 475
Moulton, J. Egan . . . 201
Mount Alexander . . 93, 96
Mount Macedon .... 90
Moy Ling, James . . . 190
Moyston 479
Muckleford 446
Mudd, Christopher . . 186
Murrayville and Cow-
angie 455
Murtoa 480
Mutual Improvement
Association 251
Myrtleford 495
N
Nall, J 385
Nathalia 489
Natimuk 483
Natte Yallock 452
Naylor, W 300
Neale, Frances 129
Netherway, G. . . 302, 312
New Britain 217
New, Isaac 125
Newcomb, Caroline
Eliz 75 et seq.
Newstead 447
Nhill 482
Nicholas, A. M. . . 265, 273
Nicholas, G. R. 265, 267, 273
Nicholson, Joseph . . . 132
Nicholson, R 351
Nicholson, Reginald C. 223
Page
Nicholson Street . 405, 407
Nicholson, William 92, 93
Nokes, Benjamin .... 23
Noal, Ledra 350
Noble, Miss 204
Noradjuha . . . . 161, 482
Norris, H. A 265
Northcote 406
North Melbourne Hos-
tel . . . 285
North Richmond . . . 428
Norton, W. N 232
Norwood, Mary Jane 331
Nullawarre 471
Numurkah 489
Nunn, Frank L 224
Nurrabiel 482
Nyahwest 465
Nye, Edward . . 264, 355
Nye, E. Wason . . 271, 384
Nyora 478
O
Oakden, Percy 271
Oakey, W 253
Oakleigh 425
Oddie, James . . 253, 440
O'Donnell, D 381
Oldham, F. B 219
Oldmeadow, Henry C. 200
Omeo 475
Ontario Street . . . . 421
Open-air Preaching . . 156
Orbost 474
Orchard, John . . 301, 462
Orton, Joseph 25, 32 et seq.,
35 et seq., 41 et seq., 46,
56, 57, 69, 71, 83
Ouyen 455
Ovens River Rush . . 93
Overend, H. A 398
Overton, William ... 35
Oxford Methodists ... 3
Oxley Road 429
P
Page, Rodger C. G. . . 201
Pakenham 478
Palamountain, W. J. . 285


Page
Papua 220
Parker, Edward Stone
34, 59, 62 et seq., 86,
197, 449
Parnell, George . . . . 289
Parr, James H 412
Parramatta 115
Parsons, Henry . . . . 301
Pascoe, Martin . . . . 350
Pascoe, T. G 251
Patrick, Dr 197
Pearse, Miss F. J. 222, 235
Pearse, W. A. J 466
Peart, G. E 257
Peers, Edward . . 34, 244
Peers, John Jones 34, 35,
64 et seq., 197
Penshurst 469
Pennington, Raymond 230
Pentridge 85
Perkins, E. C 185
Peters, Christopher . . 93
Peters, Edwin . . 448, 450
Peters, Thomas . . 292, 293
Philp, Robert 397
Pimpinio 376, 480
Pine Lodge 486
Piper, Richard . . . . 228
Pirie Street 115
Pitchers, S 300
Pithouse, John Thomas 296
Ponsford, W 488
Polkinghorne, J. . . 351, 378
Poowong 478
Poppins, J. E. 232, 237, 399
Port Arthur 90
Port Fairy 476
Portland 468
Port Melbourne . . . . 417
“Port Phillip Patriot”
qk 9^o
Powell, Caleb ’ 345
Powell, George . . . . 428
Powell, Henry 107
Powell, Walter 107 et seq.,
262, 497
Prahran 419
Preston 85, 414
Primitive Methodism . 289
Page
Primitive Methodist
Book Depot 295
“Primitive Methodist
Miscellany” 295
Prince of Wales Park . 406
Princess Mary Club . . 284
Pryor, George 473
Pugh 92
Purnell, Miss 228, 235, 238
Pybus, Thomas 347
Pyramid Hill . . 379, 460
Q
Queenscliff 444
Queen’s College 270 et seq.
Queen’s College Honour
Roll 361
Queen’s College Me-
morial Chapel . . . . 361
Quick W. A. 270, 272,
273, 328
R
Raikes 243
Rainbow 484
Randall, Charles . . . . 484
Raston, Thomas 99, 105,
qqq /jK7
Raw, Whitfield . . ..’ 443
Raywood 462
Red Cliffs 455
Reed, Henry, 24, 27 et seq.,
11l
Reed, Joseph 123
Reed, T. B 273
Reed, William . . 151, 481
Reeves, Robert . . . . 197
Reeves, W. S 492
Rentoul, T. C 184
Revival of Religion . .
129 et seq.
Richards, G 364
Richardson, H 294
Richmond . . . . 85, 88, 428
Rickard, R. H. . . . 213, 218
Ride, John . 290, 291, 293
Rigg, R. E 143, 424
Rigg, S. G 143, 424
Ringwood 434
523
INDEX


Page
Rivett, David 276
Roberts, John . . . 301, 304
Roberts, John Hartley 201
Robinson, Grant .... 9
Robinson, Henry . . . 298
Rochester 464
Rogers, W 369
Roget, Henry C 214
Rooney, Isaac 212 et seq.,
218
Rooney, Ray 223
Rosenhain, Walter . . 276
Rotuma 214
Rowe, James 300
Royce, J. S. H 240
Rudduck, Nelson 399, 426
Rudkin 86
Rundle, C 376
Rupanyup 481
Rush, S 293
Rushworth 490
S
Sackville Street (Col-
lingwood) 427
Sale 471
Saloway, H 367
Samoa 202
“Samoan Methodism” 203
Sanders, Charles . . . . 200
Sandringham 423
Scarsdale and Linton . 444
Schofield, William . . 24,
86, 87, 422
Scotney, Madame Eve-
lyn 301
Scott, James (Sergeant) 22
Scripture in State
Schools 257
Scurr, William H. . . . 176
Sea Lake 465
Seamen’s Bethel . . . . 131
Seccombe, John . . . . 425
Secomb, W. E 301
Seivwright, C. W. . . . 47
Services on Goldfields
147 et seq.
Seymour 491
Shackell, E. E 223
Page
Sharpe, John 293
Shaw, William . . 306, 307
“Shenton House” . . . 439
Shepparton 486
Sherlock, A. L 204
Shinkfield, G. S 203
Simpson, William 35, 37,
73, 244
Sinden, Frederick . . . 294
Smith, A. W. F 425
Smith, Gervase 380
Smith, James 62
Smith, James 165, 176, 477
Smith, J. T 197
Smith, Mr. and Mrs. . . 244
Smith, Robert 481
Social Service Depart-
ment 287
Solomon Islands 222 et seq.
South African War . . 353
South Preston 414
South Yarra Home 130, 284
Spalding, John . . 165, 293
Sparrow, C. J 453
“Spectator,” The 387 et seq.
Spectator Publishing
Company 398
Spencer, Baldwin . . . 276
Springvale 426
Stanford, Ivy (Mrs.
Metcalfe) 223
Stanhope 490
Starbuck, John 481
St. Arnaud 452
Stawell 479
Stawell, Sir William . . 324
Stephen, Leslie 13
Stephens, Aren 229
Stephenson, A. R. . . . 263
Stephenson, William
G. R 199
Stevenson, Robert Louis 202
Stewart, Allen 490
Stewart, Harold . . . . 264
Stewart, Hon. F. H. . 230
Stewart, John 490
St. Francis of Assisi . . 113
St. Kilda 420
Stocks, Wesley 241


Page
Stone, Charles 35, 54, 56,
67, 143, 413, 422, 424
Stranger, Elijah J. 149,
245, 474
Strzelecki 173
Strzelecki, Count ... 92
Sudan United Mission . 228
Sugden, E. H. 270 et seq.,
274 et seq.
Sugden, Ruth 275
Sunday Schools 243
Sunday School Address 250
Sunday School Depart-
ment 256
Sunday School Union . 256
Sunshine 413
Supernumerary Fund . 117
Surrey Hills 432
Sutch, John 35
Swan Hill 464
Swan, Isaac 293
Swanston Street Chapel
36, 65
Sweet, George 295
Sweet, Georgina 273, 276.
284
Sweetman, Edward 86
et seq.
“Sword and Shield” . . 295
Sydney Road 407
Symons, Captain W. J. 357
Symons, John C. 67, 88,
97, 277, 280, 388
T
“Tales of Old Fiji” . . 211
Tally Ho 299
Tally Ho Training
Farm 284
Tarnagulla 450
Tatura 487
Taylor, E 164
Taylor, James 479
Taylor, Theophilus . . . 105
Taylor, William 129 et seq.
Teague, Joseph SOI
Tea Meetings 165
Terang 470
Terricks South 463
Page
Thacker, William . . . . 351
Thakombau, King . . . 206
“The Call of the Pacific” 233
The Church Paper and
its Editors 387
“The Circuit Horse” . 379
The Crocketts 447
“The Factory” 404
“The Iron Pot” 419
“The Son of a Savage” 223
The Vagabond’s Libel
Case 384
Theological Institution
276 et seq.
Thomas, Courtenay . . 476
Thomas, Douglas 193, 239
Thomas, Horace . . . . 229
Thomas, James . . . . 200
Thomas, T 229
Thomas, W. C 216
Thompson, A. . . 196, 197
Thompson, L. M. 217, 231
Thomson, W 76
Thorpe, Abel, 37, 71 et seq.
83
Timboon 471
Timor 384
Tinney, Miss J 222
Tonga 199 et seq.
Tooleen 374
Toora 478
Toorak 419
Townend, Joseph . . . 302
Trafalgar 474
Trathan, J. H. . . 163, 453
Traralgon 474
Treadwell, F 300
Tregaskis, Richard . . . 351
Tregear, Charles . . . . 285
Tregellas, W. . . . 161, 468
Trentham 452
Trewhella, B 452
Trotman 244
Truscott, Miss 222
Tubou, King George . . 200
Tubou, Queen Salote . 201
Tuckfield, Francis 36, 41
et seq., 58, 77, 196, 197
Trudgeon, Mr. and Mrs. 189
525
INDEX


Page
Turner, Nathaniel 24, 25,
69, 107
Tweddle, J. T. . . 272, 273
“Twelve Apostles’
Claim” 348
“Twenty Years in
Papua” 221
U
Underbool 455
United Methodist Free
Church 302
Unnamed Saints . . . . 153
Upotipotpon 494
Usher, E 441
V
Vagg, Mrs. A. P. . . . . 235
Varcoe, Mrs 188
Vasey, Thomas 429
Vian, F. C. . . . . . . . 377
Violet Town 493
W
Waddy, George (Cor-
poral) 23, 24
Waldron, Charles . . . 442
Walhalla 475
Walker, B. S 141
Walker, C. F 270
Wallace 445
Wallace, Henry . 305, 312
Walter, Henry . . . . 469
Walton, W. H. . . 158, 294
Wandiligong 494
Wangaratta 492
War, The Church in
Time of 353
Ward, Dr 306
Warracknabeal . . 367, 481
Warragul 473
Warren, J. E 397
Warrnambool 467
Watchhorn, Robert . . 418
Waterfield, J 84
Waterfield, W. 37, 196, 197
Waterhouse, John ... 35
Page
Waterhouse, Samuel 90,
91, 97
Watkin, Edwin I. .
180, 325, 392
Watkin, Jabez 201
Watkins, J. P 483
Watsford, John 171, 181,
393
Watsford, Miss W. E.
E 204
Watson, Alice . . 216, 234
Watson* James . . 221, 226
Watson, Richard .... 62
Watson, Thomas .... 54
Watson, William . . . . 467
Watts, G 291, 293
Watts, William 301
Waugh, J. S. 105, 158,
260, 262, 277, 324, 387
Waugh, Miss M, W. . . 189
Way, A. S. . 260, 262, 272
Way, Sir Samuel . . . 310
Webb, T. Theodor . . . 226
Wedlake, William . . . 301
Wells, William P. . . .
105, 122, 277, 318
Wentworth 454
Wesley, Charles 3 et seq.,
7, 11
Wesley Church . . 116,
125 et seq.
Wesley College 110, 118,
260
Wesley College Honour
Roll 361
Wesley Hill . . 98, 440, 445
Wesley, John 1 et seq., 243
Wesley, Samuel . . . . 1, 4
Wesley, Susanna . 1 et seq.
Wesley’s Journal 11 et seq.
“Wesleyan Chronicle” 387
Wesleyan Day School . 90
Wesleyan Denomina-
tional Schools . . . . 260
Wesleyan Immigrants’
Friendly Committee 90
Wesleyan Immigrants’
Home, 95, 101, 102, 109,
266


Page
Wetherall, Captain . . 26
Wheen, Frank . . 269, 351
Wheen, John G 240
Whewell, John 199
Whitehead, W. E 185
White Hills 104
Whitfield, . . . . 8, 9, 13
Wibberley, Brian . 295, 386
Wickham 113
Wilberforce . . . . 15, 19
Wilcox, Ambrose . . . . 301
Wilkinson, Miss . . . . 244
Wilkinson, John Francis 340
Wilkinson, J. R 186
Wilkinson, Samuel 39, 66,
83, 85, 480
Wilkinson, Thomas, 35, 36,
38, 68 et seq.
Willoughby, William 197,
362
Williams, J. R 222
Williams, Horton H.
256, 257
Williams, J 386
Williams, Spencer . . . 182
Williams, William 310, 333
Williamstown 85, 88, 369,
413
Willis, John W 83
Wilson, Mordecai . . . 493
Wilson, President . . . 13
Wimble, N 351, 352
Withers, W. B. 94
Witton, William 34, 36, 56,
57, 65, 83, 149, 197, 422,
467, 477
Wodonga 379
Womboota , , 465
Women’s Auxiliary of
Foreign Missions . . 234
Women’s Home Mission
Leagup 193
Wonthaggi 476
Page
Wood, A. Harold . 201, 202
Wood, John 293
Woodfull, T. S. B. 285, 286
Woodhouse Grove . . . 434
Woodruff, H. A 276
Woods, Charles H. . . . 410
Woodyard, Henry . . . 289
Wooley, Dr 119
Woomelang 455
Wooster, J 293
Worrall, Henry 208, 210,
215, 287
Worthy, George .... 56
Worship in Barns and
Sheds . . . . 142 et seq.
Wrigley, L. J 276
Wunghnu 489
Wycheproof 461
Wykeham, William of
113, 116
Wykes, W 470
Y
Yackandandah 495
Yallourn 475
Yanac 485
Yandell, Nurse . . . . 223
Yan Yean 415
Yarram 374, 477
Yarra Street 438
Yarra Street School 245, 246
Yarraville 412
Yeo, H 376
Young, “Daddy” . . . . 406
Y.M.C.A . . . 280
Young Men’s Move-
ment . .. 238
Young Methodist Mis-
sionary League . .. 237
Young, Robert 101 et seq.,
501
Young Women’s Mis-
sionary Movement . 286
527
INDEX


3 1508 00225833 0




I Hfflp I
rrTiiiBTlT
_ NATIONAL
lOStC UUe LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
— C r^ — % Li '
J Kjh.U L-'J i '
rU 'A S


3 1508 02008061 5


