

Tt ppm
,
BRIDGE BUILDING.
WITH PARTICULARS OF THE
THREE COMPETITIONS FOR THE DESIGN
OP THE
GREAT SYDNEY BRIDGE,
Instituted by the Government of N.S.W,
from 1900 to 1903.
Also the method proposed in the Accepted Design for
Founding the unprecedentedly
DEEP PIERS.
And the Present Position of the Movement,
-BY
selfe,
Memb. Insfc. C.E., &c., &c.
Tenderer of the Accepted Design.
1906.
Re-printed from the Proceedings of the Engineering
Association of New South Wales.




A CENTURY
BRIDGE BUILDING.
WITH PARTICULARS OF THE
THREE COMPETITIONS FOR THE DESIGN
OF THE
GREAT SYDNEY BRIDGE.
Instituted by the Government of N.S.W.
from 1900 to 1903.
Also the method proposed in the Accepted Design for
Founding the unprecedentedly
DEEP PIERS.
And the Present Position of the Movement.*
—BY—
ISrCDTtI&JLISr SELFB,
Memb. Inst. C.E., &c., &c.
Tenderer of the Accepted Design.
1906.
lie-printed from the Proceedings of the Engineering
Association of New South Wales.




PLATE X.
: ' * • , V
. . ' S'
' -/ft t4f^ : ft^^E
WNM?- \ ” . *
5*7 _ *i * l ;k*m < ■***
? ,i ; «?
COST.
Tender for Main Bridge, 3,030 ft. Long ... £1,365,050 Northern Approach of Kailway from Bay Koad Station
Southern Approach of Kailway to and Koad way tofmeet Tram Lines . . £180 000
Grosvenor Hotel and Koadway to Grand Total of Bridge and Approaches connecting the
Argyle Street—Estimate £330,000 Kail way Koadway and Tramway Systems of
Land Kesumption ... £65,000 Sydney and North Sydney ... £1,940,050
Cr. to Cr. of Main Towers ... ... 1,350 feet Width of Kailway on Bridge 25 feet
' n idth H f H ,ear 0l r itlg „- , w f - S 2 ™ ” Width of Tramway 26
1 ofT e ow"r° m " iso’,: Width of Wood.Blocked Roadway ... 35 ”
Depth of Foundations below High Water 165 ,, Width of each of Two Footpaths ... 11 ,,
, Total Height of Tower above Foundation 615 „ Width of Bridge Deck, extreme ... 118
PROCEEDINGS OF THE ENGINEERING ASSOCIATION OF NEW SOUTH WALES, SESSION 1905-6,


M
w
<1
A
&
yj
Of ■
Q %
E I
g .
o
□= 4
CD % I
T" %N
H~ | "•
cr 4 /
O | V
3C &
' ■-■■
Ui ■■>■
sc
H "
CO
I
EO
o
o>
tH
x
o
I— t
CO
CO
w
an
CO
w
v-i
**!
£
X
H
D
O
02
£
w
25
Pm
O
X
o
H
«5
»—«
O
O
02
CO
«J
O
25
*-H
CCS
w
w
2
3
»
w
w
a
H
Pm
O
co
O
25
»-H
o
w
w
o
o
X
X


14th june, 1906.
A CENTURY OF BRIDGE BUILDING
AND THE GREAT SYDNEY BRIDGE
COMPETITIONS, WITH A DESCRIP-
TION OF THE FOUNDATIONS OF
THE ACCEPTED DESIGN.
(By NORMAN SELFE, M.1.C.E.)
HISTORICAL.
While many branches of engineering are of quite
recent origin and others had no existence at all be-
fore the beginning of the nineteenth century, the dawn
of bridge building is lost in the mists of antiquity.
The fact that London Bridge possesses an unin-
terrupted record of over nine hundred years, is suffi-
cient to show that although the bridge engineer might
not for many centuries have been very progressive, yet
he has a venerable past. With the advent of the nine-
teenth century, however, things were altered, and the
world has since witnessed such giant strides and mar-
vellous developments in the theory and practice of
bridge building as to practically create a new art.
This great advancement came about in two ways.
In the first place, scientific education and training
were then brought to bear on the principles involved
in the stability of the structure; and secondly, new


materials were placed in the hands of the constructor
himself, of greater strength, and possessing other pro-
perties than those to which the hands of his older bre-
thren had been confined.
In all ages of the world men have arisen qualified
to lead by virtue of their intellectual imaginative or
creative powers, and among these the great bridge
builders of history must be placed. These men did
not posses a fraction of the theoretical knowledge
which is now within the reach of a junior student, but
by a close observance of physical processes and results,
and the possession of strong common sense, they
advanced their art with the passing years, although
their individual steps were often no doubt only small
ones.
During the latter half of the eighteenth century,
the foundations were laid of the science of construc-
tive statics which has since been so extended and sup-
plemented by a succession of able investigators that
it now possesses a literature of its own. Consequent-
ly, where the older bridge builders could only learn by
hard out door experience—and thus put more material
in a weak place simply because their previous efforts
had there failed —their followers to-day sit down and
calculate every strain or stress to be resisted in
their structures —whether due to load, wind pres-
sure, or temperature—before the work is begun.
Thus mathematical precision is now substituted for
clever guess work, in the apportionment of material
tr the ends in view.
From the earliest years until the middl of the
eighteenth century, stone, brick, and timber practi-
cally had a monopoly as materials for the bridge buil-
ders’ work. At this time the manufacture of iron in
Britain had fallen off to only 18,000 tons a year—


four-fifths of the iron used in the country being im-
ported from Sweden. With Buddy’s use of pit coal
in the smelting furnace, and the enterprise of iron-
masters like the Darbys, of Colebrook Dale, a new
iron era began in England, which witnessed the first
iron bridge in the world. This was cast at Colebrook
Dale, and set up over the Severn in the years 1776
to 1779.
About this period also there appears to have been
a general movement both in Europe and America for
building new bridges and reconstructing old ones.
With increasing knowledge of the manciples involved
greater feats of construction were time after time ac-
complished to startle the world by their boldness and
novelty. Among timber bridges that at Schaufhau-
sen, in Switzerland, 364 feet in length (burnt by the
French in April 1799) was a most notable example, with
a span of 193 feet. Another bridge at Wittengen, also
burnt, had a still greater span. The magnificient
forests and suitable timber then becoming available
in the United States to the enterprise of the young
nation, it was only natural that its emulation of the
Old World progress should produce local results. Thus
we find a most notable bridge was built of timber by
Wernwag in 1813 over the Schuylkill at Philadelphia,
of the extraordinary span of 340 feet, while the Dela-
ware Bridge at Trenton N.J. with spans of 200 feet
was built by Burr in 1804, with a versed sine of 32
feet.
In older countries, however, Stone was still the
favoured material. Old London Bridge (of which a
rare engraving is shown) had at this time 20 openings,
the widest being only about 35 feet span. In a pro-
posal for its improvement presented to the Lord Mayor


in 1746, the span of the widest arch was only 100 feet.
Notwithstanding the progress that has since been made
through the use of iron and steel, we cannot altogether
regret its late introduction, as otherwise the world
ißighc have missed a number of monumental masonry
bridges which have now had for nearly a century world
wide renown.
In the early years of the 19th. Century the more
imperishable material still asserted itself in great cities,
and under the hands of the elder and younger Bennie
both Waterloo and London Bridges were built to be
examples for all time. The former with nine eliptic
arches of 120 feet span was commenced in 1811 by the
elder engineer, while the latter —recently widened —was
commenced in 1824 by his son. London Bridge has
a centre span of 152 feet, the next arches being 140
feet, and those at the abutments 130 feet. There are
thus only five openings to replace the twenty of the
old bridge which it superceded. As far as span goes
London Bridge has since been completely beaten by
the Dee Bridge at Chester with a 200 feet span, the
keystone being 12 feet above the water.
To digress for a moment it will be interesting to
compare this span of 200 feet with that of the Second
Premium Design for the North Shore Bridge (First
Competition) submitted by the Author; this has (a
clear span of 1800 feet and a clear headway of 180 feet,
while another design for a steel arch bridge sent from
England had a clear span of 2000 feet. The structure
of London Bridge—loos feet long—cost £425,000; the
bridge across Sydney Harbour for which government
received designs and tenders is 3000 feet long, it is
also one and a half times as wide, and five times as
high for headroom as London Bridge. Therefore under
the same conditions and on the basis of plan area alone


it would be worth say four and a half times as much
as London’s great structure, or nearly two millions of
money. But inasmuch as the actual conditions involve
greater span, greater height and unprecedented depth
of foundations, it would really warrant a much greater
proportionate expenditure. The tenders were how-
ever—owing to modern progress—very much lower than
such proportionate rates.
As the first cast iron Bridge at Colebrook Dale
was esteemed a successful experiment, Southwark
Bridge followed, with three Oast Iron Archefs; the
centre span in this case being 240 feet, and the cost
about £BOO,OOO.
About this time also a bridge was projected to
cross the Thames with a Single Cast Iron Arch of
600 feet span, which led to a scries of questions as to its
feasibility being submitted to eminent men, for the in-
formation of Parliament.
Reading their reports in the light of present day
experience is very interesting, Mr. John Playfair who
was consulted, evidently had a poor opinion of theo-
retical men and said “the most valuable information
in such a case is not to be expected from them,” and
“from men educated in the school of daily practice and
experience the soundest opinions could be obtained.”
In the present day a Bridge Builder, even with a
life’s practical experience, must have the highest theo-
retical knowledge at his command if he is to succeed.
The special properties of Wrought Iron and its
increased production led to Cast Iron being supplanted,
and the great 600 feet Cast Arch was never erected.
Wrought iron then held its sway until the discoveries
of Bessemer, Martin, and Thomas, between the years
1855 and 1880, provided a still superior material, and
introduced the Steel Age of Bridge building.


The Wrought Iron age, however, coming at a time
of great industrial activity, saw numbers of bridges
of remarkable character erected that will always—even
after they have ceased to exist—have an historic in-
terest for engineers, as marking new epochs or phases
in bridge design.
Telford the first President of the Institution of
Civil Engineers commenced the Menai Suspension
Bridge with a span of 570 feet (then thought marvel-
lous) in 1819. The Freiburg Bridge in Switzerland, 1833-
31, was a still greater advance to 870 feet span and was
167 feet above the water.
In Girder Bridges Stephenson made his notable
departure, thirty years after Telford’s work, by build-
ing the Britannia “Tubular Bridge” over the same
Menai Straits with spans of 166 feet —the trains going
through the inside of the girders; and he followed up
the system by the erection of the Conway and the St.
Law r rence Victoria Bridges on the same principle.
Brunei gave us a new type in the Saltash Eoyal
Albert Bridge in 1857-1859. This was erected 102 feet
above high water at a cost of £230,000 —and the design
was a novel form of parabolic Bow and Chain.
Owing to the facility with which it was found iron
bridges could be constructed, hundreds of useful struc-
tures of less notable types and designs came rapidly
into existence. Many of these were so unsymmetric-
al in their utilitarian simplicity that a great and fully
justified outcry arose as to the way engineers were
disfiguring cities and landscapes with their ugly works.
Few would pretend to say for instance that the Black-
friars Eailway Bridge at London, the Poughkeepsie
Bridge over the Hudson in New York State, or the
Hoogly Bridge in India are graceful structures —not-


withstanding the admittedly scientific character of their
designs.
This outcry against the appearance of many of the
early iron bridges, practically contemporary with the
introduction of steel into their construction, has been
followed by a total change of practice. The man of
taste in Art is now often associated with the mathe-
matician and the constructive engineer in the design
of great works, so that the economic fulfilment of re-
quirements in the use of material is combined with
aesthetic proportions, while at the same time full con-
sideration is given to the harmony of the completed
structure with its surroundings.
Between the years 1867 and 1874, utilitarian
America built one of the most beautiful bridges that
have yet come into existence —the celebrated three
arched steel bridge over the Mississippi at St. Louis —
at a cost of £1,307,000. This is practically the same
amount as the tender for the selected design for the
North Shore Bridge, although the latter is twice as
long and twice as wide. The St Louis Bridge is how-
ever, double decked, —the railway being below —,but
the centre span is only 520 feet, while that of the North
Shore Bridge is 1200 feet in the clear. Captain Eads
great Monument at St. Louis has however, shared the
same fate as has overtaken Stevenson's “Tubular” and
Brunfels “Parabolic Girder” bridges hnd which a)lso
awaits the great Forth structure; for while they all
mark epochs in bridge building, they have never been,
and are not likely to be, repeated; bridge building has
since made such progress as to leave them hopelessly
behind from the economic standpoint.
America, of late years, has witnessed much ex-
perimental bridge building, and has seen many great


works carried out as well as hundreds of shoddy
structures.
These no doubt evidence the ingenuity and origin-
ality of that great people, but at the same time the
solid and substantial character of English bridges has
become proverbial. If, however, we desire to see the
highest development of scientific design and faithful
construction, combined with aesthetic considerations
as applied to bridges, it seems certain we must go to
Germany, France or Belgium.
No reference to late American bridges would be
fair that omitted to mention the works of the two great
Grerman engineers the Roeblings—; father and son. The
former built the Niagara Railway Suspension Bridge—
recently replaced by Mr. Buck with a single arch of
550 feet span, while the latter was the author of the
world famed Brooklyn Bridge at New York which for
a quarter of a Century held its position as the greatest
bridge in the World; it has a centre span of 155 feet
and a headway of 135 feet.
In the last quarter of the last Century the great
Forth Bridge broke the record (which it still holds)
with a span of 1700 feet, this however was exceeded in
several designs for the Sydney Bridge—as before re-
ferred to.
Owing to the Main Compression members of the
Forth Bridge lying in curves like the haunches of an
arch, the general outline of that great structure does
not present the abrupt and uncouth appearance which
many Cantilever designs suggest; and situated as it
is amid the wild scenery of the Forth its immensity does
not dwarf the landscape. The late Advisory Board of
the New South Wales Government however showed
clearly that even if such a design had been an eco


nomical one it would not harmonise with the adjoining
shores of Sydney Harbour.
In Germany public sentiment is too powerful to
permit its Mediaeval Cities and classic rivers to be
disgraced by hideous structures, and thus we find
magnificent Arched bridges, with approaches and towers
all in harmony with the surroundings, now span the
Rhine, Danube and other Continental Rivers. (See
illustrations of Bridges at Worms, Bonn, etc.).
Engineer Lindenthal of New York has a mighty
proposal for bridging the Hudson river on the Sus-
pension principle with a 3000 feet span, but the Tunnel
now nearly completed under that River will probably
put back this bridge project. Two or three other
bridges, one of which is now completed, have been
recently planned to cross the same esturay of the sea
as the Brooklyn Bridge. There is a lofty Arched bridge
of 541 feet span and 356 feet head room by French
engineers at Truyere, and another over the Douro in
Spain. There is an arch over the Kiel Canal and the
Great Kaiser Wilhelm Arch at Mungsten —both design-
ed and erected by the firms associated with the Author
in the North Shore Bridge Competition; the latter has
a span of 557 feet and rises 354 feet above the water
in the Valley below.
The greatest span of arch bridge at present isi
840 feet by Mr. Buck at Niagara Falls, but the pos-
sible limit is not reached. There were arch designs
for the North Shore Bridge up to 2000 feet one of them
a five jointed Arch —Motto “Funfgelenkbogen”—sub-
mitted by the Author’s colleagues in the First Com-
petition,—was most remarkable for novelty of design,
being a three jointed arch carried on the ends of two
jointed cantilevers.


With the whole worlld of Bridge engineers ever
alive to meet new probhems as they arise, and with
each having a natural pride in his own and his country’s
work, it is easy to understand how great a stir was
made in the camp of the* bridge binder six years ago,
when the Premier of New South Wales, Sir William
Lyne, and the Hon. Minister for Works, Mr. E. W r . O’Sul-
livan, publicly announced ithe intention of their Govern-
ment to build the Nortlu Shore Bridge, for which
Parliament had refused permission to private syndic-
ates.
This interest was iin ten sided when the Govern-
ment of the State issued printed plans and conditions
for the guidance of Competitors, and invited the whole
world to send in designs and tenders.
Some disappointment was felt in America at one
of the conditions, owing to the fact that the amount
offered as premiums was only the comparatively small
sum of fifteen hundred pounds, “Partly to recoup
competitors for their trouble”. This arose from the
fact that the conditions insisted on the supply of the
most complete details, working drawings, strain sheets,
specifications, and schedules for every design—worth
more in each case if the design was any good, than the
whole amount of the two premiums. No provision
was made for preliminary supply of sketch plans, to
be followed by further particulars if the proposal was
sufficiently approved of by Government to warrant
further action. This of course entailed on each con-
scientious competitor an enormous outlay to which the
two prizes of £l,OOO and £5OO respectively, bore only a
small relation.
When Mr. Bruce Smith, as Minister for Works in
1891 invited designs for the comparatively unimportant
Pyrmont bridge, only drawings general description and


estimates were required, and there was no obligation
to deposit money as security; yet premiums of £7OO,
£3OO and £2OO respectively were offered. Consequently
when Mr. O’Sullivan’s conditions for the infinitely
more important work stated that the small premiums
then offered were only 'Tartly to recoup competitors
for their trouble” there were grounds for believing the
Government meant what it said. Therefore the bridge
builders of the world (who were then asked to supply
much more information as well as tenders for the
mighty structure intended to cross the main harbour,
and to back up their offer by the deposit if required
of £10,000) had solid grounds for believing that the
Author of the Accepted design would be fully "re-
couped” by the acceptance of his tender. Otherwise
there was no justification whatever for responsible
people entering the competition.
During the years 1884 and 1885 the Author was tra-
velling in Europe and America when he visited a number
of the most notable bridges then in existence. In the
year 1890 he prepared the "Notes” for Sir Henry
Parkes under which the Royal Commission of enquiry
on the City Railway and the North Shore Bridge was
instructed; and later on he submitted a proposal for
a Double Cantilever Bridge to that body. Subsequently
he prepared a design for a Three Arched Bridge to con-
nect Sydney and North Sydney which had a double deck
after the manner of the St. Louis Bridge. Consequently
when the Government of the State called for designs
and tenders he was to a large extent prepared, and
decided to take an active part in the Competition as
a matter of business.
As a result of his investigations he had become
convinced that while America was the place for a
rough and ready bridge quickly built, or a highly


elaborate structure regardless of cost; and while
England could be relied ufpon for a substantial work
regardless of appearance; :yet Germany was the home
of the scientific Bridge Buiilder where the fullest con-
sideration would be given to strength and durability,
and where also economy would be combined with an
effective outline in full harmony with the surroundings.
He then corresponded! with a Great German
Engineering Company thaot had works in Nurnburg,
Augsburg and where about ten thousand
men are employed, and ascertained that they had al-
ready built some fourteen hundred bridges. Further
enquiry so satisfied the Aufthor of the high and eminent
position held by this concern. The Maschinenbaugesell-
schaft of Nurnberg, that hie made arrangements—since
fully carried out—to act conjointly with them in the
Competition.
THE GREAT SYDNEY BRIDGE.
(FIRST COMPETITION)
In the first Competition, opened Ist. September,
1900, out of 24 designs sennt in three of them were sub-
mitted by the Author on behalf of himself and Col-
leagues. they were: —
1. The Author’s Three Arched Bridge, Motto
“United Sydney.” This was a non-competitive
design because thie routes of the incoming and
outgoing shipping; w T ere separated by a pier,
instead of being under one span as required
by the conditions-
2. A Suspension Bridge of 1800 feet span, Motto


“In Suspense”. This received the 2nd Premium
of £5OO.
3. A Five Linked Arch 1640 feet span. Motto
“Funfgelenkbogen”.
The Bridge which received first prize of £lOOO was
on the Cantilever principle, Motto “Sablazo”, designed
by Mr. Crutwell, Memb. Inst. OLE. and tendered for by
Sir William Arroll and Co.
Other prominent designs were two American
Bridges one on the “Suspension” the other on the
“Cantilever” principal. These had cheap and perish-
able decks of soft pine, instead of steel and concrete
as in other designs; but they received great attention,
partly owing to the comparatively low price at which
they were tendered for.
Other designs were most interesting and some pos-
sessed remarkable features, particularly one for a sin-
gle Arch of 2000 feet span.
Although one or two valueless proposals were con-
tributed, information worth at least £30,000 was obtain-
ed by Government from the Great Engineers of the
World, in return for the £ISOO paid in premiums. When,
however, this information was laid before the Advisory
Board the anomalies and defects of the original con-
ditions became so apparent, that although there was
no fault on the part of the Bona-fide Competitors, for
being guided by such conditions, the Board could not
recommend the' acceptance of any tender. An entirely
new set of conditions was therefore prepared in the
light of the knowledge thus obtained, and a second
competition was instituted by the Government. As no
premiums were offered on this occasion this second in-
vitation to bridge builders could of course only bear
the one interpretation, that it was the settled in-
tention of the Government to proceed with the erec-


tion of the bridge. Otherwise, what other object could
possibly induce Ministers ito put respectable firms to
the further expense of terns of thousands of pounds
after it was in possession (of such a number of designs
and tenders.
THE SECOND COMPETITION.
The Specification and Conditions for the Second
competition were about siixteen times as voluminous
as those for the First one,, but even then they did not
express a preference for, mr an objection to, any par*
ticular type of bridge, as tlhe Advisory Board did later
on when the designs were in. Therefore in order to
meet any possible views oir prejudices of the Govern-
ments Representatives, as to type, the Author and his
Colleagues sent in this time six different designs, all
with their Specifications, Schedules and Tenders com-
plete, out of the total number of twelve submitted.
After full investigation into* these designs by the Board,
when all the arch designs were summarily rejected,
further most important and radical modifications were
again made with regard to the views and requirements
of the Government, and thms again although conditions
were fulfiilled no tender was accepted; but three of
the designs were selected tentatively as the basis for
a Third Competition unden* the further modified con-
ditions. The Advisory Boanrd then wrote to the Author
and the Representatives of the other two designs ask-
for fresh Tenders, and forwiarded a list of such entirely
altered conditions as meant the preparation of an al-
together new bridge. The} Board also had a number
of interviews with the Autflhor and the Agents of the
other competitors to discuses the new requirements.
The three conditionally' approved designs were (a)
An American Suspension Bridge (Modification of one
submitted in first competition), (b) An English Can-


tilever Bridge (similar to the first premium design in
the First Competition). And (c) The No. 1 Design,
Cantilever Type—sent in by the Author and his Col-
leagues in the second competition. After the cor-
respondence and interviews with the Advisory Board
before referred to, the Author prepared sketch plans
for an entirely new design, to embody the Board’s
latest views as to the superstructure, and sent them
to Europe. While these were being worked out in de-
tail (and it must be remembered the calculations
alone for such a bridge might take one mathematician
about twelve months), and the plans were being made
for the superstructure, the author devoted himself to
the substructure, and devised ten separate methods for
founding the Great Northern Piers on the solid rock
at 166 feet below the water line.
Under the conditions of the third competition, as
supplied by the Advisory Board on the 18th August,
1902, it was made imperative that all the foundations
should reach the rock, which had been found at 166
feet below low water level, where there is only 33 feet
of water, thus leaving 133 feet of silt and clay over-
lying the rock.
In the course of his private practice the author has
driven the longest piles of which he has any record,
at three separate jetties very near to the site of this
bridge; some of these piles—made of two trees—were
140 feet long, and some single trees ran up to 108 feet.
As the bottom was pierced right down to the rock be-
fore these piles were driven, a very fair idea had been
gained of the consistency of the strata overlying the
rock in this neighbourhood. It was found to be very
stiff, but still so yielding to continued pressure that
the piles were all put down to the rock, being easily
driven with a 3-ton ram.


Thus (although it not imperative) the founda-
tions in all the six designs submitted by him in the
Second Competition weire carried to the rock at 166
feet, while those from America, England, and the Con-
tinent of Europe mostly trusted to a bearing on the
clay at from 60 to 90 feet.
Towards the end off their labours the Advisory
Board had a test sunk on the site of the Nor-
thern Pier, this cylinder 1 was then loaded, and its rate
of sinking recorded. Tlhe result was such as to fully
justify the action of thie Board, and its anticipation
by the author; a full account of the same being given
in the report.
With regard to the actual tenders, it is well
known to members of this Association that the author
has never traded, or ever held an agency for machinery;
therefore, as a purely professional man, entering this
Bridge Competition witE as advertised for,
he sought a responsible local contractor of means pre-
pared to contract for such great works. In Messrs.
J. Stewart & Co. he is pleased to say he found col-
leagues who accepted the position, and put a price to
all his local quantities, and who supplied him with
tenders for ten bridges, upon the schedules with which
he supplied them. These tenders the author forwarded
to the Government with his plans, specifications, and
descriptions.
The result of the Third Competition was made
known to Parliament on the 25th November, 1903, and
as probably there was never a more flattering and
unanimous report signed by a board of adjudicators
iu connection with a competition of this magnitude, a
few paragraphs from the same may be appropriately
quoted here.


“Of the tenders submitted, we have no hesitation
in recommending for selection that of Messrs. J.
Stewart & Co. This is in our opinion the most satisfac-
tory design received in this or the previous competi-
tion, not only as regards its compliance with the con-
ditions of tendering, and provisions of the specification,
but also in respect of the scientific design of the de-
tails of the superstructure, the substantial nature of
the substructure, and its elegant appearance as a whole”
“In the design recommended the constructional
lines are correct, the outline is graceful, and the
bridge will harmonise with its surroundings, and not
detract from the natural features of the Harbour.”
It may be here mentioned that the tender for the
bridge complete, 8,000 feet long, was £1,365,050, and
that the report is dated November 25th, 1903. After
this date other plans and documents were returned to
the author and other competitors, but all those con-
nected with the adopted design were retained, and
then, without the slightest reference to him or his col-
leagues, they were copied and printed at the Govern-
ment Printing Office. They were then issued with the
report as a Parliamentary document, and made public
property. Subsequently (as copies of this report seem
to have been sent abroad), the principal plans, together
with an abstract of the report, were reproduced and
published in the pages of the “Engineer,” on August
Ith, 1904.
Now, by the printed conditions of the First and
Second Competitions the Government clearly and un-
mistakably undertook to return “all designs not
awarded premiums,” and “all designs, tenders for which
are not accepted,” but, notwithstanding this contract,
two sets of the author’s plans have been retained, and


the approved set has beeni copied, without a premium
or the acceptance of a temder. The Hon. Minister for
Public Works, Mr. C. Lee, has, moreover, so far abso-
lutely repudiated all respomsibility on the part of the
Government in the matteir, on the ground apparently
that the competitors we me not compelled to believe
the statements of his predecessors, or to respond to
the invitation which a prewious Government so widely
advertised.
Mil.
THE DEEP PIERS AND FOUNDATIONS OF THE
APPROVED DESIGN FOR THE
NORTH SHORE BRIDGE.
Up to the time of tine competition for the Great
Sydney Bridge, there were practically only three sys-
tems in use under which the piers of bridges were
founded below water level, although each of these
systems' admitted of many modifications in details.
They may be classed under the respective heads' of
the coffer dam, the open dredged caisson, and the
Pneumatic Process which includes the diving bell.
In the older method, which has been recently adop-
ted in Sydney for founding the main pier under the
swing bridge at Glebe Island, the area to be laid open
and kept dry is first enclosed by a wall of piles driven
into the bed below the water, and when this enclosure
is water-tight it is pumped dry. It is evident that the
depth below water attainable in this way is limited
by several factors; at Glebe Island other piles were
driven from the bottom of the excavated enclosure
down to the rock, and on thieir heads and the surround-
ing clay the concrete pier was built.


Under the second system a much greater depth is
attainable, because the water is not removed, and the
excavation is made by wet dredging. At the time the
Hawkesbury Bridge was built, the record for depth of
such piers was broken, the deepest casing there reach-
ing 162 feet below high water Spring tides. The Haw-
kesbury casings are 48 feet long by 20 feet wide, with
rounded ends and the bottom 12 feet length is splayed
out 24 inches all round to the cutting edge. Each
caisson has three dredging wells 8 feet in diameter
(also splayed out to the cutting edge), for the removal
of the excavated material.
The third, or Pneumatic system, is an adaptation
of the diving bell, so much in use in former years. The
casings or caissons are here enclosed on the top and
made air-tight, the water being kept out by air pres-
sure equivalent to that of the water at the same depth.
The excavation is thus carried out in a closed chamber
and air locks are provided for the ingress and egress
of both men and material.
This system of movable caissons was first proposed
in Australia by the author, to a Select Committee of
the New South Wales Parliament, on the 24th June,
1874, in connection with the construction of new sea
walls for the improvement of the Circular Quay. It
has since been adopted at the Antwerp Quays, and all
over the world. With permanent caissons or cylinders
it was used for the foundations of the great Forth
Bridge, and in numerous smaller works in New South
Wales.
The greatest depth below water level to which men
can carry down air-locked caisson is that which gives
a pressure equal to about four atmospheres, say, 100
feet, and only then at great risk of life. Several men


were lost by caisson fever when the Five Dock Bridges
were in hand, and one mian died as a result of work-
ing in the trial cylinder on the site of the Northern
great pier for the North Sfiiore Bridge, at lesser depths.
These facts must be Ikept in mind when consider-
ing the problem that wais presented by the require-
ments of the northern piiers of the Great Sydney
Bridge. In the first plaoee it is imperative that they
should be most accurately in position; and, secondly,
they have to be carried doown to the solid rock at least
166 feet below low water*; and, thirdly, under the fol-
lowing terms of specification:—
1. The pressure upon tthe foundations (that is, upon
the rock bottom), due to the weight of the structure
and its loads, without amy allowance for friction, or
for water or other mateirial at present overlying the
rock, must not exceed 25,(000 lb. upon the square foot.
Say, 11.16 tons.
2. The limiting load on the concrete is 2001 b. per
square inch. Say, 12.857 tons upon the square foot.
3. The weight of the concrete itself is to be taken
at 1351 b. per cubic foot—equal to, say, 16.59 cubic feet
to the ton.
Under these conditions it will be found that
whether we multiply 16.59 by 11.16, or divide 25,0001 b.
by 1351 b., we obtain the same result, namely, 185 feet,
as the maximum height o*f a column of concrete that
the conditions would allow to be carried upon the rock
bottom. Such a column would, of course, have no
margin of supporting power whatever left to carry the
bridge or its loads, or even the metal casing in which
the concrete column is enclosed. It is also clear that
under such conditions no increase whatever in the di-
mensions of such a pier would help matters so long


as it was a cylinder or other form parallel form top
to bottom.
As it would be possible, with a movable caisson
under air pressure, to build the upper part of such a
pier with a gradually reduced section —say, between
the mud line and low-water mark—after the parallel
portion had bottomed, then in such case the relation
which the total weight would bear to the base area
could be reduced, and so leave a margin to carry the
bridge and its load. (Plate VII.) Suppose, for in-
stance, one fourth of the height was taken off such a
fully loaded foundation 185 feet high, leaving it only
139 feet, then under the foregoing conditions any given
area of base would have a carrying power available for
superstructure, equal to one-fourth of the weight of
the whole loading permissable upon such base. The
foundation in such case would require to be of such an
area that 1 ~ or 2.79 toms was the limit of super-
imposed weight, apart from and above the pier, per
square foot on the rock bottom. In other words, if
the pier itself below the 139 feet level made up three-
quarters of the total load of the bridge and pier in
tons, then the whole weight in tons divided by 2.79
would give the base area in square feet.
Now, in the selected design the approximate maxi-
mum weight imposed by each one of the four legs of
the Northern Pylon, through its steel base plates upon
the granite pier, is 7,000 tons. The drawings (See Fig.
1.), show that the granite masonry under the base
plates has been designed to be carried down to 11 feet
under low-water mark, while below this a conical head
of concrete which caps the cylinder continues down to
33 feet below low water, or approximately to the mud
ine. Below this the casing must be made parallel


if it is to be sunk by wet dredging, because there does
not appear to be anything in past experience to war-
rant the assumption that it would be possible to sink
a conical or tapering caisson to such a great depth as
166 feet deep—either by open dredging or under air
pressure—with any prospect of keeping it truly in
place. This being granted, the use of a parallel casing
becomes imperative, and simple calculation shows that
one so proportioned as to meet the conditions of the
case under consideration, "would have to-be 65 feet in
diameter from the mud lime to the rock, as shown in
Fig. 1., where the contents are given as 17,907 cubic
yards.
With such foundations the concrete filling for each
of the casings, at current rates, would cost, say,
£31,337, or over £125,000 for the four legs of the pier.
This, it must be observed, is quite apart from the cost
of the four steel casings, which, at 250 tons each and
£3O a ton would mean £30,000 additional, or, say, a
total of £155,000 for the under water legs of one Pylon.
Another difficulty presents itself in the fact that
the Government borings made on the site show a "very
uneven bottom, and indicate that rock might be reached
upon one side of these foundations many feet higher
than on the opposite one. In order to cope with this
difficulty, should further and more accurate borings
show that the rock surface is really so very irregular,
the annular caisson shown by Plate VII. was designed
to enable the excavations to be continued through
separate wells upon the low side after the main casing
touched bottom. The cost of this scheme, however, was
found to be so enormous, that several other proposals
for getting the foundations in were investigated before
a thoroughly approved scheme was arrived at.


In the course of these investigations, it became
apparent that if it were possible to put in a founda-
tion of profile somewhat like (Fig. 3), so that all the con-
ditions as to pressure on the rock would be met, while
the concrete w T ould be under a practically uniform pres-
sure throughout its entire height, without surplus ma-
terial as useless load; then something less than one-
third of the mass of concrete which is involved in the
parallel caisson would be sufficient to meet these con-
ditions. As such a reduction of material from 17,907
cubic yards to 5,778 yards in each leg, would mean a
saving of £BO,OOO in concrete alone, there was at once
an inducement to look for a method under which four
such bell-shaped foundations —44 feet diameter at the
bottom, and only 32 feet diameter at top—could be
carried up truly in position from the rock under the
harbour bottom at these unprecedented depths.
The enormous difficulties which attended the com-
paratively simple task of sinking the casings for the
Hawkesbury Bridge, with only a 24 inch splay at the
bottom, is well known to engineers. Some of these
casings could not be kept in their position nor truly
vertical, neither could they be brought back into place
after they had got out of line. One of the main girder
spans of the bridge was actually lengthened in conse-
quence, and one masonry pier still, it is understood,
overhangs the foundation. Such experience as this, of
course, quite precluded a second thought being given
to any proposal to sink in a similar way, and to a still
greater depth bell-shaped casings, with the base twice
the area of the upper surface. As the legs of the
Pylons are over 400 feet high above water, and must
be erected absolutely accurately as to centres, no modi-
fication, after thought, or lengthening of a girder as


was done at the Hawkesbmry, would be possible in the
case of the North Shore Bridge piers.
Having for over 40 y©ars had more or less experi-
ence in artificial refrigeraition —both as; patentee and
as the designer of plants for the Ether, Gold Air and
Ammonia systems, the amthor went into the question
of freezing the clay and overlying the rock, as a
substitute for coffer dams or caissons, and worked out
the scheme since approved! by the Advisory Board.
Under this it is intended tto freeze the mud under the
harbour waters right dowm to the rock. Such a pro-
cedure would enable the foundations to be put in to
any profile desired, because it would permit of an open
excavation or shaft, enabling the work to be done in
the full light of day. Simply as a question of compara-
tive cost, this proposal has shown itself to be a most
economical one, should the strata not be otherwise
water-tight and safe for excavation.
It will be observed from the accompanying plans
that the harbour has comparatively shallow water at
the site of these piers, where the rock is deepest, Plate
IX. illustrates the proposed method of founding them.
A very strong wharf would first be built around
the positions the piers are to occupy, leaving the four
open spaces for the foundation so clear as to be easily
filled up to a foot or two above high water. This filling
might be dredged clay or material lightered from the
shore, and it would of course be a detail whether such
artificial island was left to form its own natural batter
under water, was enclosed by a wall of sheet piles, or
confined by an iron casing. If it were left to form its own
slope then the earth filling might form one large island
in the harbour sufficient to embrace all the four founda-
tions, in which case less timber wharflng would be neces-


sary. On this island or wharf, as arranged there would
be erected two or three powerful Refrigeration machines
each at least equal to the melting of 150 tons of ice per
day; they could be driven by their own steam engine
and have their boilers alongside, or otherwise the ma-
chines could be driven by electric motors operated by
generators placed on the shore. Under either ar-
rangement there would be all the brine tanks, expan-
sion coils, and circulating pump system, provided for
the freezing medium.
Figures 4 and 5 show how a double ring or annu-
lus of circulating tubes would be sunk around the
required excavation. Similar work has already been
many times successfully carried out in mine sinking,
and through quicksands. In this case the double pipes
would surround a cone of the overlying material right
down to the rock, and the cold brine would be circu-
lated down the outer tubes and return by the inner
ones—see detail Fig. 6. The beat which the cold brine
would abstract from the soil in its course through the
tubes would be given up in the refrigerator, and then
the brine would pass to the brine tank to be cooled,
whence it would be again circulated. By this contin-
ual abstraction of heat an annulus of the strata would
soon be frozen so hard that the centre or core could be
excavated just as an ordinary pit or shaft; and this
shaft would be open to the sky, and have walls of
artificial frozen rock to keep out the water. In mak-
ing calculations as to the time that would be required
before excavation might be safely commenced, the
crushing strength of ice, as given by authorities, has
been allowed for, quite apart from the natural strength
of the ground, It is evident that as the depth of the
excavation increases, and the consequent pressure
upon the sides of the shaft, or tendency to collapse


increases also, so the thickness and strength of the
frozen casing would also be increased owing to the
longer continued action of the refrigerating machines.
Figure 4 shows a Piling engine erected over the
right hand foundation, with a double set of “leaders”
to drive independently the inner and outer rings of
circulating pipes. The whole machine is mounted
upon a circular railway or turntable, so that when
once adjusted in position, the two sets of circulating
pipes would be driven accurately in their places. The
descent of the pipes would be facilitated in the usual
way by a stream of water under high pressure being-
forced down them while being driven. From experi-
ence with similar w T ork in the harbour, it is expected
that their own weight should suffice, and it is not
thought the use of a ram wall as a rule be necessary
to get them to the rock.
The filling above the mud on one side of the plan
is shown as kept together by a timber enclosure.
The left hand foundation shows an iron casing to
the filling above the mud line, and a frozen annulus
from the surface down to the rock. The staging or
poppet heads, for the purpose of excavation and low-
ering the concrete would replace the revolving pile
engine after all the pipes were in position.
The most important thing to remember after what
lias now been said is the fact that the amount of the
tender by the author’s contractors, Messrs. J. Stewart
and Co., for the foundations as per Figs. 8 and 4,
carried to the rock at 166 feet below low water, and
in an open shaft, was practically the same as that for
the pyramidal pier as appendix “K” of the Advisory
Board’s Report (see Fig. 7.) This, like the founda-
tions of rival designs, was to be founded on the clay


with its base 90 feet below high water level, or 76
feet above the rock.
In the latter case the total pressure due to the
enlarged base was 6.3 tons per square foot, or 2.5
tons additional to the natural pressure at that depth.
The tender for the foundations built in annular
caissons, as in Fig. 2, was approximately £150,000
higher than that of those in the frozen ground.
As it may be thought the circulating pipes would
tend to diverge greatly from their desired positions
before reaching the rock bottom, it may be pointed
out that the outer tubes are of comparatively large
diameter, and of such strength that the guidance
afforded by the lofty leaders of the machine should
ensure an arrival at the bottom without any signifi-
cant deviation, as the clay is washed away by the
water pressure.
It is very possible that as extensive excavations
would be connected with the bridge approaches, the
spoil might be deposited in the harbour and form a
large island to embrace the four separate foundations
of the Northern Pylon, and thus render the construc-
tion of a pile wharf unnecessary. If this bank was
afterwards dredged into shape and faced with bal-
last, it would form a permanent protection to the
whole pier and save the bridge after completion from
damage by collision.
In conclusion the present position of the North
Shore Bridge project may be briefly sumtmarised.
Parliament having refused permission to private
syndicates to construct a bridge, the State Govern-
ment advertised for competitive designs and tenders
on the 4th January, 1900, and offered premiums of


£IOOO and £SOO respectively, “partly ,to recoup the
trouble and expense in preparing the designs and par-
ticulars.” The contract was, of course, the only goal
for which genuine bridge building competitors aimed
in their responses.
On the 30th September, 1900, the Government
was in possession of nineteen sets of designs from
America, Europe, and Australia, with all the infor-
mation connected therewith, worth at a moderate es-
timate £30,000; for this the £l5OO was paid in prem-
iums, but no tender was accepted.
Having this thirty thousand pounds' worth of
information from the bridge engineers of two Conti-
nents to guide them, the Government then prepared
an entirely new set of conditions, differing widely
from the original ones, and ten times as elaborate,
and invited a second set of designs and tenders. This
time no premiums were offered, but both Prime Minis-
ter Lyne and Secretary for Works, O'Sullivan, made
statements to the effect that the Government “meant
business." The great bridge engineers accepted such
statements in good faith, and again responded with
tens of thousands of pounds' worth more of designs
and tenders, fully warranted in believing that if the
conditions were fulfilled, one design and tender would
be accepted.
No tender was accepted, however, even this time,
although all the advertised conditions were fulfilled
and the reason was that the Government requirements
were again so radically altered as to demand further
entirely new designs. Three competitors, as already
pointed out, had their designs selected tentatively,
and these were asked to again modify their tenders to
the latest new T requirements.


The three competitors responded, and at very-
great expense his colleagues sent their leading bridge
engineer out from Europe to assist the author, which
he did by giving any information desired to the Ad-
visory Board. The report of the Board, as already
stated, was absolutely and unanimously in favour of
this last set of plans and the tender of Messrs. Stew-
art and Co., as sent in by the author, but it need not
be again quoted here.
As one set of plans alone costing £4OOO was offered
to Government for £BOOO, * £60,000 is a very moderate
estimate of the value of the whole of the sets that
have been supplied to the Government in response to
their invitations. Most of them have been returned
to their authors as per the contract in the printed con-
ditions; but while eight out of the ten designs sent in
by the author have been returned, one set of plans in
the second competition, and the accepted design and
plans of the third competition have now been held by
the Government for over three years, and the latter
have been copied, printed, and published without one
word of communication as to the Government’s inten-
tions.
The present Government has informed the author
that it does not intend to build the bridge; he there-
fore asked that a small payment should be made for
the plans retained, such amount to go towards the
contract should a tender be accepted within a given
period. The Hon. Chas. Lee, Minister for Public
Works, has personally informed the author for him-
self and colleagues that as the competitors were not
compelled to respond to the official invitations to
compete, his Government absolutely refuses to recog-
*By the Fives Lille Campagnie of Belgium.


nise any claim, and declines to consider the question
of justness, the successful competitors 7 position, or the
honour of the State in the connection. Although the
Government has appropriated the plans, it is neverthe-
less true, as Mr. Lee says, that competitors were not
obliged to accept previous Ministers in good faith, nor
forced to believe that the Government would abide
its own printed conditions, and there the matter rests
for the present.
E. T. & J. Kadcliffe, Printers, 729 George-street, Sydney.


ADDENDA.
The following additional memoranda are submitted as a proof that
■ the competitors were justified in taking the Government of the State in
earnest , and incurring the expenditure of tens of thousands of pounds for
the preparation of designs under the three competitions ; also for
expecting that their costly responses would meet with proper
acknowledgment:—
1. Although the design for a span of the Hawkesbury Bridge
represents less than one-cwenty-fifth part of the relative importance of
the North Shore Bridge, a tender was accepted, and within three months
(in May, 1886; a gold medal, with a special letter of thanks, was
ordered to be presented to each of the unsuccessful competitors.
(Note. —Although the successful plans in the North Shore Bridge
Competition have now been retained by Government for three years,
and copied by them, no communication has yet been received by their
authors as to the Government’s desires or intentions.)
2. On July 23rd, 1900, the Hon, Minister for Works, speaking at
the North Shore, said “he was very sorry there was any misunder-
standing about the bridge. The Government meant business.
3. At the opening of the Spit Tramway the same Minister said,
“ All that remained teas to select the most suitable design and proceed
forthwith with the work.”
4- On the 26th November, 1900, Sir William Lyne, Premier, said, in
replying to a deputation, “He intended to bring in a Bill to enable the
Government to go on with the bridge without reference to the Public
Works Committee .”
On the strength of the above competitors accepted the Government
in good faith, and responded with design upon design, as the conditions
were altered, until finality was reached.


Plate TO
Annular Pielr in Caisson
Pier with uniform
Loading
Solid Pier in
THROUGHOUT
Parallel Caisson
PROCEEDINGS
of the ENGINEERING ASSOCIATION
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Session 1305-6


PROCEEDINGS of the ENGINEERING ASSOCIATION of NEW SOUTH WALES Session 1905-


Plate EC
PtJe itir/rtng tihc/me on It/miaOie
mti Jovok sets of issaittrs io owti pis
fast lions of fatter ar<iOo&r crrc/es of
Circv/&fois H/>sfS'
Fig. 6.
mat# twro/i/y
. mwstetuM
7T& TMHt
SWM£ C/ffC£/LA7//VO MA/NS.
General Plan of Wharf and
the Four Foundations
to Northern Great Pier
With Timber Coffer Dam
With Iron Caisson
PROCEEDINGS of the ENGINEERING ASSOCIATION of HEW SOU i H WALES Session 1905 ~D.


3 1508 00062685 8




