

A CELESTIAL UTOPIA.
Extracted from the “New York Sun" of April 30 th, 1869.
We devote a good deal of space this morning to an account of
the new Community in Chautauqua county, on the shores of
Lake Erie, which has been founded by the Rev? T. L. Harris
and Mr. Laurence Oliphant. The former of these gentlemen
is well known in this community, but of Mr. Oliphant some
account may be desirable. He is now 37 years old, and has
had an experience of life far exceeding- that of ordinary men.
He was educated in England,, and at an early age went to
Ceylon, where his father, Sir Anthony Oliphant, was Chief
Justice. Here he made the acquaintance of Jung Bahadoor,
Nepaulese Ambassador to London, who visited Ceylon in 1850
on his way home, and was invited to accompany him to the
capital of Nepaul. As we learn from the “New American
Cyclopaedia,” on his return from that country young Oliphant
published “A Journey to Katmunda,” a work remarkable for
vivacity, and for a maturity of thought scarcely to be expected
from so youthful an author. He soon afterwards came back
from India, studied law at the University of Edinburgh, and was
admitted to the bar in Scotland and subsequently in England.
In the latter part of 1852 he visited Russia, descended the
Volga, traversed the country of the Don Cossacks, and spent
some time in the Crimea. His second work The Russian
Shores of the Black Sea,” appearing on the eve of the Crimean
war, passed through four editions in a few months. He was
soon after appointed Civil Secretary to the Earl of Elgin, then
Governor-General of Canada, and went to Quebec, where he
was made Superintendent of Indian Affairs. He travelled
extensively, both irU the United States and Central America,
and gave his impressions on the North-western States of the
Union in a book called “ Minnesota, or the Far West.” After
his return from America, he went to Turkey, and as a correspon-
dent of the press, accompanied Omar Pasha in a campaign, of
which he gave, in 1856, an account in “The Trans-Caucasian
Campaign of Omar Pasha.” In 1857, when Lord Elgin was
sent as Minister Plenipotentiary to China, Mr, Oliphant became
his private secretary, and on his return, published in iB6O, a
“Narrative of the Earl of Elgin’s Mission to China and Japan,”
an entertaining and instructive account not only of the embassy,
but of the manners and customs of the Chinese and Japanese.


His latest work is “ Patriots and Filibusters, or Incidents of
Political and Exploratory Travel.” He was subsequently
appointed Minister to Japan. While discharging the duties of
that office in 1861, at Yokahama, he was attacked by assassins
and seriously wounded. He then returned to England, and
was subsequently elected to Parliament from the borough of
Stirling, in Scotland, and held that office until the conclusion of
the last Parliament.
This accomplished young Englishman is said to be thoroughly
happy and contented in his new home, and finds his harmonious
destiny in digging in the soil on the shore of Lake Erie, in the
name of the Lord.
PROPOSED PARADISE ON THE SHORE OF LAKE ERIE.
1600 Acres of Land and 80 Acres of Grapes.
A MOST UNUSUAL COMMUNITY.
A British Diplomatist and Member of Parliament among them—Also
Japanese Notables—Also Five Orthodox Clergymen—Likewise Ele-
gant Ladies — Abd-el-Kader Looking into the matter—Likewise other
Mahometan Magnates■—A Neiv System of Religion-—Lofty and
Strenuous Views of Marriage—Hard Work in the Name of the
Lord , and no Chance for Vagabonds.
Nine miles beyond Dunkirk, on the southerly shore of Lake
Erie, in the village of Brocton, township of Pomfret, and county
of Chautauqua, in the State of New York, is a Community which,
in some respects, and especially as to the central idea around
which the members gather by attraction, as particles gather
around a magnet, is probably without a parallel in the annals of
mankind.
THE FOUNDER OF THE COMMUNITY.
The founder of this community is the ftesr. Thomas Lake
Harris, an Englishman by birth, but whose parents came to this
country about the year 1827, when he was only three years old ;
so that he has had American characteristics ineradicably stamped
upon his nature, and woven into the very fibre of his being.
Mr. Harris was for several years a noted preacher of the
Universalist denomination in this city, to a congregation of able
and radical thinkers. The Hon. Horace Greeley was one of the
trustees of the society, and other gentlemen of eminent ability
were habitual attendants upon Mr. Harris’s preaching, which, by
his friends, was considered something very remarkable.
Mr. Harris subsequently went to England, where he had a
noticeable career as a preacher of strange and new doctrines.


Between five and six years ago he returned to this country, and
settled in Amenia, Duchess county, where he prospered as a
banker and agriculturist, until, in October 1867, he (as he claims),
in obedience to the direct leadings of God’s Spirit, under which
he has always sought to act, took up his abode at his present
residence in Chautauqua county, on the southerly shore of Lake
Erie, and founded the Community of which it is our purpose to
give an account.
Mr. Harris is a tough, wiry, compact man, some forty-five
years old, of medium height and much muscular activity. His
eye is keen, clear, and firm, and his intellect strong and
practical. We were surprised, phrenologically speaking, to find
his intellect and common sense so predominant over his imagina-
tive and spiritual faculties. Judging from his personal presenta-
tion, not even Gradgrind himself had a better appreciation of
“ hard facts,” nor was less a dreamer, than this founder of a
Community which it would probably be impossible to persuade
the world to believe does not wholly rest upon mental chimeras
and spiritual hallucinations.
THE REAL ESTATE —A SHREWD PRECAUTION.
The tract of land owned and occupied by the Community
comprises a little over 1,600 acres, and is about two and a half
miles long by one mile in breadth. One-half of this tract was
purchased by Mr. Harris with his own money ; the residue was
purchased with the money of his associates, and at their request
is held by him in trust for the Community.
The main building on the premises (for there are several
residences) is an ordinary frame mansion, such as well-to-do
country gentlemen who have plenty of land usually build, it
being a low, two-story edifice, straggling over much ground. It
can be seen from the depot at Brocton, and seems nigh to the
beholder, but access to it is by a circuitous road, three miles in
extent. One can take a short cut of a mile across lots, however,
if he feels so disposed, and is willing to run whatever risks may
lie in his path.
Brocton is the point of junction of the Lake Shore and the
Buffalo, Corry, and Pittsburg Railroads. All the depot build-
ings, and also the only hotel in the vicinity, stand on the land of
the Community, Mr. Harris having taken the precaution so to
order matters that the Community might control the nucleus,
and to a sufficient extent the destiny, of the village which is
rising on their borders.
THE LAY OF THE LAND.
A deep valley runs through tbft. estate, and along the bed of
the valley winds a copious creek, on the northerly bank of
which, at a well-selected site, stands % saw mill, which seems to
have constant use for all its teeth. Along the northern boundary


of the estate Lake Erie stretches like a broad “ ribband of blue ”
(see Numbers xv. 38, 39) on the fringe of the border of the
garment of their domain, typical of their alleged efforts to
incorporate religion into the minutest duties and enjoyments of
their daily lives; and to bind the whole around with the zone of
absolute truth, tempered and mellowed with Divine love.
The land for the most part lies warm to the sun, and its quality
and position are such that it does not require under-draining,
which is a great advantage. It is bountifully supplied with wood
and water, and is variegated in surface and in soil. A large
portion of it is shale and clay, and the residue sandy loam.
Portions of the soil are impregnated with gasoline to such an
extent that it is thought the gas may be utilized for light and
fuel.
GRAPES, DAIRY, AND CHAOS.
About eighty acres are in grapes, of several varieties, among
which are the Concord, Isabella, Salem, lona, Roger’s Hybrid,
and others. They expect much from their grapes. The inten-
tion is to strive for quality rather than quantity, and to run
principally to table-fruit of an excellence which will command
the highest prices.
It is the intention of the Community to go extensively into
the dairy business, and considerable progress has already been
made in that direction. Other industrial matters are also being
driven ahead with skill and vigour; but a large portion of the
estate has yet to be brought under cultivation, and there is a
deal of hard work yet to be done to make 1,600 acres presentable,
and to secure comfortable homes for the workers. Although the
general movement of things which is visible to the naked eye
gives token of a firm and competent guiding hand, yet, take
it all in all, and notwithstanding that the native beauties of the
situation and the great natural advantages of the place suggest
enchanting and opulent possibilities in the future, the entire
domain is now in a raw, crowded, transitional, undress state,
not only wholly unprepared for company, but also without the
means of making the members themselves physically or domes-
tically comfortable.
This is not considered a disadvantage by the Community, how-
ever, but rather an advantage ; for they do not want to be troubled
with visitors, nor do they want members who seek their own per-
sonal ease and comfort, or who enter the Society for any purpose
except that of doing God’s will as the Community understand it.
And what they understand God’s will to be, and how they think
it is to be done, we shall try to show hereafter.
THE PEOPLE WHO ARE THERE.
There are about sixty adult members of the Community


besides a number of children. There is also a corps of hired
labourers, mostly Swedes, who are employed because the regular
home force is not sufficient to push on the necessary work fast
enough.
The membership, take it all in all, presents a most remarkable
aggregation of persons and a singular coalescence of characters.
The personage whose presence in such a Community will
probably excite most surprise in the fashionable world is an
English gentlewoman, Lady Oliphant by name, the widow of
Sir Anthony Oliphant, C. 8., formerly Chief Justice of Ceylon.
But the most romantic case, not only in this particular move-
ment, but so far as we know, in any similar movement, is that
furnished by Mr. Laurence Oliphant, the son of Lady Oliphant,
to whom special attention will hereinafter be given.
The exigencies of time and space forbid the special mention
of every singular or important individuality of this extraordinary
Community. There are five orthodox clergymen there ; and
representatives from Japan ; and American ladies of high social
position and exquisite culture ; and a great variety of personages
who, as things go in the outside world, range from the highest to
the lowest ranks of social life.
LADY OLIPHANT AND HER MAID.
But in the Community there is no difference of social rank,
They are all equal before God, and in the estimation of one
another. Lady Oliphant and her former servant-maid live on
terms of perfect equality, without condescension on the part of
the lady, without servility on the part of the maid—children of
the same Father, sisters in the same Saviour, heirs of the same
heritage.
A BRITISH GENTLEMAN’S RELIGION.
And Mr. Oliphant, a pet of the British Government ; an ac-
complished scholar and successful author ; a young man whose
extraordinary capacity caused him to be put in training, while
yet a boy, for the highest duties of diplomacy ; who was Lord
Elgin’s private secretary during that nobleman’s remarkable
mission to China ; who was subsequently sent, while less than
thirty years of age, as British Ambassador to Japan, whence he
returned on account of having been severely wounded during
the memorable attack on the foreign Ministers, which was insti-
gated by the Daimios in opposition to the Tycoon ; who was
then elected to parliament for the borough of Stirling by a
Liberal constituency, where his ability, his eloquence, and his
character gave him an influential position ; —this high-bred
gentleman, to whom the most alluring worldly honours were
and still are proffered in bounteous measure, works side by side,
and on terms of perfect equality, with fellow-labourers who are
without culture, or wealth, or anything except a love for God


manifested after a fashion which makes the aristocratic young
Englishman feel in his heart of hearts that they are in very
truth children of the same Heavenly Father, and brothers in
the Lord Jesus Christ.
These are strange matters. They are facts which it is vain to
question. What do they signify ? We shall come to that—or
at least we shall come to what the actors in this unparalleled
drama say is that—by and by.
JAPANESE CHRISTIANS.
There are other facts no less surprising and significant, which
are in truth far more surprising and significant than the foregoing,
although perhaps they are not so romantic. Take those pre-
viously idolatrous Japanese for example, who by this same
religious presentation and influence have been brought, as our
Methodist brethren would say, into the same state of gospel
freedom. We made a short call on one of them, who was
engaged in his study (to wit, the corner of a workshop), after
his day’s work had been done, studying the Scriptures. The
tawny pagan actually seemed to have been born again physi-
cally as well as spiritually. How happy he was ! His face
shone as though it were reflecting rays from the Sun of Right-
eousness. We will make a clean breast of it, and say that we
went into that rough room with a sneer on our lip, and cynical
emotions in our bosom, and that we came out of it with tears
in our eyes, and with profitable humility of heart.
One of the most influential of the Japanese members (we
forget the name) has gone home, having been appointed, as we
were told, one of the Commissioners to revise and settle the
national affairs of his native island. A letter had recently been
received from him, stating that a large company of Japanese,
who through him had become interested in the religious doc-
trines and life of the Community, were preparing to emigrate
to the shore of Lake Erie, there to learn of Christ, and to
subordinate their daily lives to His teachings.
ABD-EL-KADER AND MAHOMETAN PILGRIMS.
A few days before our visit, a letter had been received from
Abd-el-Kader, who is now living at Port Saide, in Egypt, and
who has become interested in the new doctrines. A letter had
also recently been received from one of the members of the Com-
munity now travelling in the East, who had been requested to
explain the doctrines to a band of Mahometan pilgrims, whom
he accompanied some distance on their way to Mecca. This
letter interested Mr. Oliphant exceedingly, even more than
Abd-el-Kader’s did. He said he knew so well the virulent super-
stition of those pilgrims, and their bitter hatred of the Naza-
renes, as they call all Christians, that he regarded the interest
manifested by them in the doctrine as a fact of unusual signi


ficance. Hitherto, he said, any Christian who should have
ventured to address them on religious topics would have been
put to death. Mr. Oliphant seems to be familiar with the lan-
guages of Asia, and has no trouble in communicating by letter
with Turks, Chinese, Japanese, or Arabs. Being also person-
ally and officially known in the East, his name doubtless helps
to gain a respectful hearing in those regions for any cause with
which he is known to be identified.
THE TOUGHEST CASE OF ALL.
But what struck us as being one of the most surprising facts
in the whole business, was the resolution into Christian harmony
of some of the toughest theological discords. Take the five
orthodox clergymen, for example, and a number of persons who
not long ago were avowed infidels; their hearts and faith and
non-faith have all been melted into one ; and one of them was
formerly a Virginia, slavcholding, orthodox clergyman ; he was
rich, too, and owned thirty slaves. Just think what a combina-
tion was there ! It beats even that presented by our friend
Mark Lanigan, the Fourth Ward, Irish Catholic, Black Repub-
lican rumsellcr. And yet that man, who spent years in preach-
ing that the Bible not only justifies slavery, but that Christianity
requires its devotees to enslave pagans, is now a tender-hearted,
humble worker in this Community, with no taint of snobbery
left in him. He now believes in the universal brotherhood "of
the race, negroes not excluded, and that religion is ■& matter v
of daily life, and that the life of religion is to do good.
WHAT IS THE SECRET ? .* >
And now, what is the secret soul which animates this wide-
spreading body ? What is the hidden magnet resting on that
lake-shore domain, whose attractive powers arc felt in remotest
lands, and run from top to bottom of the social gamut in both
hemispheres ?
Wc put these questions, and many others bearing on the same
focal point, to Mr. Harris, to Mr. Oliphant, and to some of the
ladies; and they answered them with alWrankness; and we
understood them ; and if we shall not be able to set the truth
of the matter forth, it will be our not theirs. We are
afraid it is going to be a heavy piece of won J—but not sp heavy
for the reader, wc hope, as for the writ* - .
<> v.
THE RELIGIOUS STATUS.
We will first state, generally, that Swedenborg furnishes* die
original doctrinal and philosophical bases of the whole fabric,
to which Mr. Harris, as he conceives, has been led by Providence
to add other and vital matters, which were unknown until they


were revealed through him. They reverence the Scriptures as
the very Word of God.
The fundamental religious belief of the Community may be
summed up in the dogma, that there is one God, and only one,
and that He is the Lord Jesus Christ.
The religion of the Community is intensely practical, and may
be stated as Faith in Christ, and a life in accordance with His
commandments.
And here comes in the question, What is a life in accordance
with Christ’s commandments ?
Mr. Harris and his fellow-believers hold that when a man is
“ born of the Spirit,” he becomes a child of the Infinite Parent,
and, by virtue of such Divine adoption, is affiliated to the uni-
versal brotherhood, and consequently begins to lose his desire
for individual, selfish prosperity, and yearns to be conjoined, not
only with his Heavenly Father, but also with all the other mem-
bers of the Divine-human household, for the purpose of co-
operating in the promotion of the common spiritual-domestic
happiness thereof, and so is inevitably drawn into communal
relations with his brethren, in accordance with the declaration
that “ the disciples were of one heart, and one mind, and had
all things in common.”
These doctrines have been held by myriads, and repeated
attempts have been made, but made in vain, to embody them
in actual life. It is natural, therefore, to distrust any new at-
tempt in the same direction. Mr. Harris is aware of this general
distrust, and of the reasons for it; but he claims that he has
something which places his attempt beyond the vicissitudes of
chance, and bases it upon immutable certainty; that hitherto there
has been no palpable criterion whereby the existence of God could
be tested—no tangible test whereby the indication of His will
could be determined ; but that such criterion and test have now
been vouchsafed, and that on such criterion and test to him com-
municated his Community is founded.
THE GRAND SECRET.
We have now led up to, and are prepared to consider the
pivot on which this movement on the shore of Lake Erie turns,
the foundation on which it rests, the grand secret of the whole
matter.
This secret is known in the Community as “ open respiration,”
also as “Divine respiration and the starting point of the theory
is, that God created man in His own image and likeness, and
breathed into him the breath of life. That the breathing into
man of the breath of life was the sensible point of contact be-
tween the Divine and human, between God and man. That man
in his holy state was, so to speak, directly connected with God,
by means of what might be likened to a Spiritual respiratory
umbilical cord, which ran from God to man’s inmost or celestial


nature, and constantly suffused him with airs from heaven,
whereby his Spiritual respiration or life, was supported, and his
entire nature, physical as well as Spiritual, kept in a state of
God-like purity and innocence, without, however, any infringe-
ment of man’s freedom.
That after the fall of man this Spiritual respiratory connection
between God and man was severed, and the Spiritual intercourse
between the Creator and the creature, brought to an end, and
hence Spiritual death. That the great point is to have this
respiratory connection with God restored. That Mr. Harris
and those who are co-operating with him have had it restored,
and are in the constant enjoyment thereof. That it is by this
Divine respiration, and by no other means, that a human being
can get irrefragable, tangible, satisfactory evidence that God is
God, and that man has, or can have, conjunction with God.
WHAT THIS NEW RESPIRATION DOES.
This Divine respiration (we give Mr. Harris’s own language as
nearly as possible) retains all that is of the natural respiration as
its base and fulcrum, and builds upon and employs it for its
service. Take an illustration: The good man, for example, who
possesses mere natural respiration, seeks God in prayer ; but
when he rises to heights of communion where language is drawn
up to thought, then thought stilled in the quietude of love, there
is hardly a breath left in the body. He comes down from his
altitude from lack of lungs in which to breathe. The step
beyond is respiration’s end, and the exit of the spirit from the
abandoned frame.
But with the new respiration which God gives to Mr. Harris
and his fellow-worshippers, it is claimed that the phenomena are
diametrically the reverse. Highest prayer with them is attended,
not with breathlessness but with breathfulness ; and the nearer
one approaches the Omnipotent Object of his worship, the more
copious becomes the river of that diviner atmosphere, which,
pulsing through the spirit, expands and invigorates the breast.
There is in every act of true worship a wedding in the breast,
the heavenly atmosphere sliding down into the bosom of the
earthly atmosphere and impregnating it with its own eternal
qualities.
In the new respiration, God gives an atmosphere that is as
sensitive to moral quality as the physical respiration is to natural
quality ; and this higher breath, whose essence is virtue, builds
up the bodies of the virtuous, wars against disease, expels the
virus of hereditary maladies, renews health from its foundations,
and stands in the body as a sentinel against every plague. When
this Spiritual respiration descends and takes possession of the
frame, there is thenceforth a guiding power, a positive inspiration,
which selects the recipient’s calling, which trains him for it, which
leads him to favourable localities, and which co-ordinates affairs


on a large scale. It will deal with groups as with individuals ;it
will re-distribute mankind ; it will re-organize the village, the
town, the workshop, the manufactory, the agricultural district,
the pastoral region, gathering human atoms from their degrada-
tion, and crystallizing them in resplendent unities.
Man, whose breath is in his nostrils, is as the flower of the field,
to-day brilliant in the summer sunshine, to-morrow withered in
the autumn blight. He labours, and an unknown race enters into
his inheritance. He is the architect of an abortive fortune,
gathering possessions from the universal waste and anarchy of
man. The fortunes of individuals, of families, and of nations,
are houses built upon the sand ; they fall, they are swallowed up
in ruin. But in the Divine respiration all is different. Men,
families, peoples, who shall breathe in God, will by Him labour,
endure, achieve, obtain prosperity, diffuse the riches of art,
letters, religion, and civilization; executing as He plans, their
work being permanent on the foundations of His decree.
This is a fair statement of the doctrine of “ open respiration,”
as it is held by Mr. Harris and his associates.
THE COMMUNITY’S VIEWS ON LOVE AND MARRIAGE.
Out of this fundamental doctrine there flowers forth another
principle which is dear to the Community, and which we will try
to state in Mr. Harris’s own language. It is this :
In heaven the basis of social order is marital order, and so it
must be in this world. There, all the senses are completed and
included in the sense of chastity, and so it must be in this
world. That sense of chastity is there the body for the soul of
conjugal desire, and so it must -be in this world. There, the
corporeal element of passion is excluded from the nuptial senses,
and so it must be in this world. There, the utterly pure alone
are permitted to enter into the Divine state involved in nuptial
union, and so it must be here below. The “sense of chastity” is
the touchstone of conjugal fitness, and is bestowed in this wise :
When the Divine breaths have so pervaded the nervous
structures that the higher attributes of sensation begin to waken
from their immemorial torpor, and to react against disease, a
sixth sense is as evident as hearing is to the ear, or sight to vision.
It is distributed through the entire frame. So exquisitely does
it pervade the hands that the slighest touch declares who are
chaste and who are unchaste. And this sixth sense is the sense
of chastity. It comes from God, who is the Infinite Chastity.
Within this sense of chastity, nuptial love has its dwelling-place.
So utterly hostile is it by nature to what the world understands
by desire and passion, that the waitings of an atmosphere bearing
these elements in its bosom affect it with loathing, This sense
of chastity literally clothes every nerve. A living, sensitive
garment, without spot or seam, it invests the frame of the


universal sensations, and gives instant warning of the approach
of impurity even in thought.
In true nuptial love, which is born of love to God, the nuptial
pair, from the inmost oneness of the Divine Being, are embosomed
each in each, as loveliness in loveliness, innocence in innocence,
blessedness in blessedness. In possessing each other they possess
the Lord, who prepares the two to become one heart, one mind,
one soul, one love, one wisdom, one felicity. “ I shrink,” said
Mr. Harris, “from repeating these doctrines. To cast them
upon the world’s thought is like throwing a wreath of white lilies
upon the black current of a sewer. In nothing is man’s depravity
so evident as in the coarseness of his thought concerning sexual
love. This vein of his ordinary sensation is obviously a jet of the
infernal fire ; yet this subject cannot be passed over, for out of it
come all the issues of renovated life.”
By questioning, we learned that there are ladies and gentlemen
in the Community who claim to have attained this “sense of
chastity” to such a degree that they instantly detect the presence
of an impure person. With them, marriage is the holy of holies
on earth, and family relations are held to be absolutely sacred
and inviolate.
WHO won’t, and who will, attain the new respiration.
Mr. Harris says there are five classes who will be moved to
seek the Spiritual or open respiration.
First, men and women of a diseased religious imagination, who
would seek in it at once a spiritual soothing and exhilaration,
who would make the Lord’s breast a dram shop and resort to it
for purposes of spiritual intoxication.
Secondly, individuals who live upon the sympathy which they
extract from others; evaders of responsibilities, shufflers and
shirkers of duty, who would make the Lord’s breath a sponge,
and live upon it in indolent absorption.
Thirdly, those who, without having been faithful over a few
things, are always asking to be made lords over many things.
Fourthly, those who will seek it under a mistaken sense of their
advanced conditions in the regenerate life—unconscious Pharisees
of doctrine, who will desire to possess it as a visible crown and
emblem of righteousness.
Fifthly, those who will crave it with the poor publican, crying,
“ God be merciful to me a sinner.” And such will get it, and
thrive upon it, and become fit temples for the indwelling of the
Holy Ghost.
Those to whom Mr. Harris says this respiration will readily
come are such, in the churches, as mistrust, and at heart, reject
the doctrine that there is any malignity in the Divine nature ;
whose hearts in whatever creed they are, have outgrown their
theology; who believe more than they know, and love more


than they can express ; who, without ability to evolve a Divine
faith, possess the immense force of a concentrated affection.
QUESTIONS ASKED AND ANSWERED.
Such, in substance, are the facts of this Community, and the
theories of its members. That they believe in them, and that
they believe they possess the Divine respiration, and thereby
live, and move, and have their being directly and sensibly in, and
through, and of God, there can be no doubt.
We put the question directly to Mr. Oliphant and to others,
and they replied frankly and fully in the affirmative. One sees
at a glance that Mr. Oliphant is a thoroughbred, and the incar-
nation of courage and of truth. He is certainly in pursuit of no
worldly advantage. He gets up and goes to work at 4 o’clock in
the morning, and is never so happy as when helping some less-
gifted worker through his labours. He has a fine mind. He is
robust. There is no dyspepsia or morbidness in him. He is
cheerful, and fond of jokes. We know he is, for we tried several
on him. With all his understanding and appreciation of eternal
matters, he is as blithe and jocund as a boy. When such a man,
who, as our lamented friend Joseph L. White would have said,
“ exhibits the romance of religion, and the poetry of righteous-
ness,” tells you that he knows there is such a thing as this “ open
respiration,” that he has felt it, that he feels it constantly, that he
lives by it, what are you going to do about it ?
We leave every one to decide the matter for himself. For
our part, we are so miserably sceptical that we have never yet
been able to believe that anybody on this earth ever saw what
is called a “ spiritual manifestation and we suppose that we
shall never be able to believe in Divine Respiration until we ex-
perience it for ourselves—if, happily, such a thing shall ever be.
HOW THE RESPIRATION OPERATES.
The members of the Community strive to be led by the Spirit
of the Lord in all things, and this new respiration is their means
of testing what is, or is not, from the Lord. Under its informing
influences, their whole being (we are now giving their statements)
becomes pervaded, as it were, with the Divine elements, and they
feel, unmistakably, what is God’s will, and what is not His will.
If one of their number is unhappy, they all feel the influence
immediately, and can at once trace out the unhappy one and
see what is the matter, and administer needed consolation or
relief Even the children of the Community seem to experience
the regenerating effects of this new respiration. They are always
glad to get back home when they go to the village, or elsewhere,
because, as some of them said, there seems to be such an ugly
spirit among strangers. Not even a circus, usually so irresistible
to the young, can attract them from their home studies and
amusements.


NO SYMPATHY WITH SPIRIT RAPPINGS.
It may surprise the reader to hear that what is called
“ Spiritualism ” finds no favour in this Community. All phases
of the spirit-rapping business are abhorred. Tennyson’s lines—
“ How whole of heart, how sound of head,
With what Divine affections bold,
Should be the man whose thought would hold
An hour’s communion with the dead ! ”
were quoted as expressing the thought and feelings of such of
the members as admit that communication with the departed
could be tolerated under any circumstances whatever.
ABSOLUTE SPIRITUAL DEMOCRACY.
A cardinal principle of government, as to their own affairs, in
the Community, is unity of conviction. The Council of Direction
consists of nineteen members ; and if any one of them fails to
perceive the propriety of a course or plan agreed upon by the
other eighteen, it is accepted as an indication of Providence that
the time for carrying out the course or plan has not yet come ;
and they patiently wait until the entire Council becomes “of
one heart and one mind” as to the matter proposed.
NO PROSELYTING —WHY THE ASIATICS LIKE IT.
They do not hunger for proselytes, nor seek public recognition.
They know that the spirit is the great matter ; and that an en-
terprise, as well as a human being, or a tree, must grow from the
internal, vital principle, and not from external agglomerations.
Whosoever, therefore, applies for admission to their circle is
subjected to crucial spiritual tests and a revealing probation.
Unconditional surrender to God’s will, absolute chastity not
only in act but in spirit, complete self-abnegation, a full accept-
ance of Christ as the only and true God, are fundamental
conditions even to a probationship. It is this last point—the
oneness and personality of God in Christ—which, as Mr. Oli-
phant told us, so readily enlists the interest of the Japanese and
Mahometans. He says the Asiatics consider the doctrine of a
trinity of Gods as idolatrous, and that they cannot understand
it, and are indisposed to tolerate it in the least degree.
A POINTED DIALOGUE WITH MR. OLIPHANT.
As we were about to take leave of the Community, we said to
Mr. Oliphant, “Your case interests us exceedingly. Will you
permit us to ask if you do not sometimes long for the flesh-pots
of Parliament, and the allurements of aristocratic life ? ”
“ Not in the least,” he replied. “ I was saying, only the other
day, that it seemed to me as though I had died to my old state
and risen to an entirely new and different life. I take no inter-
est in Parliamentary discussions, or European affairs. I received


a package of papers from London a few days ago, but have not
had the heart to look at them.”
“ Do you consider such a state of mind a desirable one? ” we
asked. “Is it not best for us to take an interest in the affairs of
mankind, and to play our several parts on the stage of life ? We
could do this in the name of the Lord, and perhaps thereby
accomplish some good.”
“Very true,” responded Mr. Oliphant; “ but my present work
is an internal and Spiritual one. I have all that I can do to com-
bat and eradicate the evils of my nature. When I shall have
accomplished that work, and become so Spiritually pure that I
can touch pitch and not be defiled, I may return to public life.
I should then be in a condition really to benefit mankind and to
do God service in the prosecution of worldly affairs.”
“ Another thing we wish to ask,” we said. “ Why is it that
you all seem to think that in order to become regenerate you
must take to digging in the ground—to agricultural pursuits ?”
; “I do not know that such a course is necessary to such an end,”
replied Mr. Oliphant; “ but Ido know that it is helpful thereto.
It seems to be the natural way for a man to measure himself
with his mother earth, and to extend himself into the universe.
There is something got by digging one’s bread out of the ground,
which can be got in no other way. Although the hearts of the
disciples burned within them as the Saviour walked and talked
by their side, they did not recognize Him until ‘ He blessed the
bread and brake it.’ Then, recognition came. So, too, when a
man raises the fruits of the earth by his own labour, and imparts
thereof to his neighbours, he in a sense, gives them of himself.
Then the bread is blessed and broken, and the conjoining prin-
ciple of Spiritual brotherhood is revealed.
“ Are you happy here ?” we abruptly asked. “ Are you con-
tent ? Is your highest and inmost nature satisfied with this
life ? ”
“Yes, ”he answered. “ I feel—l know that lam doing what
is best for my soul’s welfare; and that is the sum of the whole
matter.”
HORACE GREELEY ON VAGABONDS OF REFORM.
It may save many people from disappointment and the morti-
fication of rejected applications, if we state that there is no
chance in this lake-shore Community for any of those persons
whom Mr. Greeley so happily characterised in his article in the
New York Ledger on “ Efforts at Social Reform,” and which is re-
produced in his Autobiography, as “ the conceited, the crotchetty,
the selfish, the headstrong, the pugnacious, the unappreciated,
the played-out, the idle, the good-for-nothing generally ; who,
finding themselves utterly out of place and at a discount in the
world as it is, rashly conclude that they are exactly fitted for
the world as it ought to be.”
