

A CHARGE,
DELIVERED BY THE
tlje
The Eight Eeverend the Metropolitan Bishop of Sydney held a Yisitation in St. John’s Chureh, on ifonday, July 18th. Service commenced at eleven
o’clock, and the prayers were read by the Rev. J. Bliss. About one half the number of clergymen of the Chureli of England, resident in (J'leensland,
were present, as follows: —The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Brisbane, the Rev. Messrs. Moseley, Tomlinson, Mod'att, Bliss,
Iloare, Rumsey, Shaw, Boole, and Jones. After the first portion of the service had been cc
delivered the following address, which was listened to attentively by a large number of
prised the congregation :
My RiaiTT Reverend Brother and
Reverend Beetiikkn, —
In A'isiting you as your Metropplitan, it is my
heart’s desire and prayer that, under the Divine
blessing, I may be made the means of helping
forward the great work we have in common,
tlie advancement of the Redeemer’s kingdom,
by bringing souls to the knowledge and love of
Himself.
In these colonies, where the intercourse of
the clergy with each other is infrequent, and
where from the distances to be traversed, the
bishops of the different dioceses can with diffi-
culty meet, it is an advantageous arrangement
which on Cl in five years brings togellier the
metropolitan, the bishops, and the clergy, to
take counsel on matters belonging to our
Master’s work, and to help each other to over-
come the difficulties which beset our path.
In conformity with the requirements of the
Queen’s letters patent, I have already visited
tiie older dioceses of Tasmania, Melbourne,
Adelaide, and Newcastle, and take this my first
opportunity of coming to you, earnestly desiring
with the apostle to impart to you some spiritual
gift, and to be helped by your counsels and
prayers in the work committed to my care.
May the gracious Spirit be present with us to
direct, sanctify, and govern both our hearts and
bodies in the ways of God’s laws, and in the
works of His commandments, so that now and
hereafter M-e may glorify our Heavenly Father.
The first observation I will make is, that there
is much encouragement to be derived from the
■ fact of our assembling together for the present
purpose, so early in the history of the colony.
Ilow many years did the scattered members
of the Church of England in our North Ameri-
can colonies vainly sue for the extension of the
e])iscopate to the lands in which they had found
a home, unable to obtain an increase to the
number of the ordained pastors from amongst
themselves, save by a perilous voyage and
hazardous residence in the mother-country.
No marvel that the chureli in North America
rather resembled a sickly plant in an ungenial
soil than a vigorous offshoot from the parent
'stem. Long too was it ere the church in these
colonics could receive the benefit of such govern-
ment and administration as the Church of Eng-
land provides.
Thirty years ago the Bishop of Calcutta was
Bishop and Metropolitan of Australia. The
Archdeacon of New South Wales recognised him
as his ecclesiastical head, and received from the
energetic diocesan who then filled the episcopal
chair of Calcutta, such exhortations and coun-
sels as in the warmth of his zeal and affection,
he was ready to offer to this distant portion of
his province. How great the change which
a quarter of a century has witnessed ! wheiv
one bishop presided over Australasia, including
New Zealand, now fourteen bishops, and be-
tween 400 and 500 clergymen are found. In
Australia there are eight bishops, wdth 360
clergymen, and in New Zealand six bishops,
including the excellent missionai’y bishop Batte-
-8011, and about 100 clergymen and missionaries.
The most recently formed diocese of Goul-
burn was taken from that of Sydney, and is
endowed mainly by the colonists themselves,
nobly led on l>y one family contributing £5OOO.
The next bisho])ric will jirobably be on the
sbufhern boundary of Queensland. One gentle-
man has already given £2OOO towards the en-
dowment of the see of Grafton and Armidale.
For this remarkable increase in the episcopate
and clergy, we are in, a great measure indebted
to the Ibresight and liberality of
my predecessor, the first Bishop of Aus-
tralia, who by divesting liimself of
a portion of his income, and by ob-
taining the sanction of the Imperial
Government to his plans, had the satisfaction
of ultimately seeing his unwieldy diocese
divided into five; and it has been comparatively
easy to follow in his steps, and to obtain the
fonnation of three additional sees.
The advantages of this subdivision are very
great, and are deeply impressed upon my own mind
by what is now going on in a considerable por-
tion of my former diocese, the present diocese
of Goulbum. A triennial visit was all that I
could hope to afford, and that not without con-
siderable inconvenience. Too infrequent to
keep up plans which had for the moment
been cheerfully adopted, too hurried to see all
or to do all that was requisite, tliese
visits occupied one-fourth of the year,
left the impression that much remained to be
done which could never be accomplished, and
accumulated a considerable arrear of business at
the centre of our work. Now, with respect to
the southern and south-western part of New
South Wales, all this is changed. My right
reverend brother and dear friend throws all his
considerable experience and energy into work
which I could only occasionally approach. His
selection of clergymen in Englanu, an.l his loca-
tion of them m his own diocese, have been cha-
racterised by great prudence, and attended with
success ; and my former anxieties are now ex-
changed for abundant thanksgivings to Almighty
God.
concluded, the Right Reverend Bishop of Sydney
)f members of the Church of England who com-
Obviously, afid in the experience of those who
hear me, itisanimmensc advantage to th. Cimndi,
not only to have the full organisation vvhieli her
system requires, but that one qualified
by education, disposition, and experience, should
be charged with the overs ght of her affairs,
should be responsible for the prof)ortionate in-
crease in the number of the clergy, and for their
performance of the duties of their sacred office ;
should bring all his influence and powers to bear
upon the well-being of the Church, and by his
example, exhortatioti, and prayers, bo to all her
ministers and members truly a “ Father in God.”
One advantage to this diocese arising out of
the extended eiibrts and increased energy of the
Ciiureh 1 mayiiere notice, it is the eonneetlon
of Bishop Batteson’s mission to the Melanesians
with similar work on behalf of the aboriginals
of this country. He has vindicated the early
claim of Christianity to be the power and wisdom
of God unto the sal ration of the heathen, and
has shown that its original eflicacy is not
lost. It requires only to be fairly ap]ilied by
men devoted to the work, and duly qualified for
it; and its might will be seen in giving light
and life to them who sit in darkness, and are
dead in trespasses and sins.
It is a cause of thanksgiving to Almighty
God, that we have in the work of that mis-
sionary bishop, not only an instance of devoted
self-denying zeal, but of success. I earnestly
hope that the link by which his mission is to be
connected with this colony may, under God’s
blessing, be one in the chain 6f events by which
a missionary spirit, to be followed by missionary
effort, shall be drawn forth on behalf of the
aboriginal natives of Australia. Truly this is
greatly needed. We require such a spirit of
zeal and love for souls as shall bear down all the
opposition, and overcome all the difficulties
which missions to our own heathen have to
encounter.
The increase of the episcopate has thrown
new and unaccustomed duties on the mem-
bers of our church in these colonies, and it
can hardly be doubted that we labor under
some disadvantages in our endeavors to build
up the eliureh of our fathers in a new country.
One of these difficulties arises out of the habits
formed by the settled character of our church in-
stitutions at home. There tlie House of God
has long been built, the income of the clergy-
man is certain and secured by law, his position
is well defined and recognised, the exemplary
discharge of his duties' never fails to meet with
grateful acknowledgments in a population of


which the members of the Established Church
form a very large majority.
In the United Kingdom every kind of talent
finds its appropriate sphere of lhe
man of Icariung, the aged and experienced
divine, incapable of mucli physical exertion, is
yet the valued counsellor, the tried and honored
friend of the church. Here society has
for the jnost pai-t one form. Great activity
and energy are displayed, and are required.
If the duties of the ministry are to be success-
fully discharged, the office must be filled by men
of A'igor of mind and body. They must be
strong to labor, wise, patient, and conciliatory,
able to address mixed assemblies with intelli-
gence and readiness. Men of sensitive or timid
feelings cannot successfully encounter the ac-
tive and occasionally rude wordliness they meet
with. Learning and experience are of less
esteem than a certain promptitude of disposition
and fluency' of speech. Much that we have
been accustomed to regard as characteristic of
the Church of England clergy, and which is
highly appreciated at home, is held in small
esteem here, because of little practical value in
the busy life in which we move. .
It is, however, the wisdoin and the
duty of the Church to adapt itself to
the times and circumstances in which our lot is
cast. At home, avc had, perhaps, been engaged
in caiTying on our work in some
of the quiet plea-ant places of our beloved
country, or, in the crowded city, or in
the manufacturing town ; but wherever we
were placed, we had all the help which numbers,
sympathy, the association of friends, and the
sanction of the law could give. Everything was
])ossible, because everj’ work of a similar
character had already been accomplished,
and every facility we required was ready to
our hand. The spirit of the age was with us.
Much indeed was expected from the clergy in
(omparison with former times, but much
valuable a'd was granted. The church
was built or restored, the schools re-modelled,
the curate or the Scripture reader obtained, by
the as.«istance of societies long established for
these jmrposes.
In this country we have commonly everything
to begin, and in the midst of a pojnilatiou
gathered fi'om all parts of the world, and rc])re-
si'iiting every kind of creed or denomination.
The previous training of the members of the
Church of England does not ordinarily qualify
them for sudi a state of things. I'hey have
something to uidearn, and everything to do
for themselves. The oidy object of legislation
in rcs]»ect to the churdi may be to prevent it
from obtaining ]K‘cuniary aid from the state.
'I he efi'ect of legislation in respect to education
may be to impede the Chui-ch’s action in her
endeavor to impart scriptural knowledge to the
young. To these difficulties the Church has
nothing to present but her own excellencies,
and these by many are not recognised. On the
contrary, their existence is denied, and can only
be proved by their practical exhibition. In
answer to the'claim of being a branch of the one
Catholic and Apostolic Church, which
Christ has founded,“and to whose pastors
He has committed authority and promised
His presence and 'blessing, the enquiry will be
madi —what are you doing and how arc you
doing it? —Are aou truly engaged in the work
of your Divine Lord, and are you carrying it on
with wisdom, zeal, and love, with an intelligent
knowledge of the great evils which afllict the
world, and with a skilfid and effectual applica-
tion of the remedy provided by Christ in His
Gospel ? Our Liturgy may be unrivalled in the
firvor and purity of its devotion —our govern-
ment in accordance with Holy Scrijiture and
ancient usage, but then it is required of us that
we so bring the Church to the pc'ople, as to
prove that it is capable of meeting the require-
ments of modern times and changed circum-
stances, and that men shall be compelled to ac-
knowledge its excellence by experiencing its
power to convey to them the blessings of
Christ’s Word and ordinances, -
A groat step has been taken towards this end
by the formation of the diocese of Krisbane,
There is this advantage in the government of
the Church of England, that one mind originates
and directs the ellbrts made to plant religion in
a new' country. And where Episcopal authority
is lodged in the hands of one endowed with the
meekness of wisdoin, devoted to his work, and
bringing the varied ekperieiice obtained at home
to bear upon the spiritual wants ot the commu-
nion of which he is the acknowledged head,
time and opportunity, and the liberal support
of his own people, will, under the Divine bles-
sing, enable him to scatter the seed of spiritual
life°over the vast field comiuitted to his charge.
L’pon him, in the first instance, rests the care
of selecting suitable men for the work ot the
ministry.
And here another dilßculty has to be en-
countered. Tile want of men —ot men ot edu-
cation, piety, experience, and love. At home
the numbers of such men do not in-
crease in proportion to the wants of
of the population. Complaints are heard on
every side that curates cannot be obtained. I
am inclined to think that the small remunera-
tion olfered is one of the causes
of the reluctance of parents to devote
their children to the ministry of the
Word. The prospect of a maintenance is a
consideration which will enter into the mind
wdien one is called upon to choose a profession ;
and if the Church of England can oiler no more
to some of her clergy tiian the earnings of a
laborer or a mechanic, it is no wonder that such
oilers should find little favor. “ The Lord hath
ordained that they who preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel.”
This leads me to speak of the means of pre-
venting the ditllculty I have named Irom be-
commg permanent in the cluirch in the colonies.
Sufficient provision must be made tor the main-
tenance of the clergy, if suitable clergymen in
sufficient numbers are to be located in
the diocese. If the service of the
church falls into disrepute for its poverty,
or the precarious nature ot its remunera-
tion, the consequence will be that unsuitable or
inefficient men will be iound in the ranks ot her
ministers. .
This, it may be said, is rather a question tor
the laitv. iSo doubt it belongs to them to pro-
vide th*e means of supporting the clergy, and
thev are deeply interested in the character ot
the clergy who minister to them and to their
families ; but it is also the duty of the clergy to
provide suitable;, nstructioii for the laity on this
subject. The church has done tins in one ot
the most solemn of her services. Some of the
offertory sentences are selected for the purpose
of reminding those who are taught in the \V ord
to iiiiiiibtt'r to liiui lliut touolictli in ull
things. I have been surprised to find that on the
occasion of making a collection for the common
lund of the diocese, the officiating minister
through a false delicacy, has omitted the very
sentences which were most suitable lor reading
at such a time, and thus has lost the opportu-
nity of instructing the people that we " go not
to this warfare at our own cost. ’
If the state repudiates the obligation of sup-
porting I'eligion, and we are reluctant to speak
upon This duty to the members of our own
chureh, our mission must languish, if not fail.
In the towns, and in the richer pastoral dis-
tricts, a clcrgvman may be maintained, but
1. -jg short of u vigorous, imited, and s\is-
tained effort to obtain contributions from tiie
whole diocese, will enable the church to over-
take the work which is entrusted to her. And
that this union and liberality may be pro noted,
the clergy must not be silent touching the duty
of the laity in these matters.
There is, however, another and higher consi-
sideration which may properly be brought be-
fore us, as we dwell upon the difficulty of ob-
taining suitable clergymen. The remedy pro-
vided by Christ himself is very simple : “ The
harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are
few ; pray ye, therefore, the Lord of the harvest
that l£a wju/d send fortlt laborers into the
harvest.” W'e want men—men whom not ne-
cessity, or the will of friends, or the mere pre-
ference for a clerical life, have sent forth —but
men whom Christ has qualified, an I chosen, |
and called out, and made faithful. These men
are from above. Tliey are given in answer to j
prayer, a.id if we ask we shall have, and if we !
obtain them in su.lleient numbers the cause of
religion is, humanly speaking, safe.
Bueh men will seek the great end of the |
ministry, and will seek it in the in inner ap- i
pointed by G-od. i
Let me dwell for a few moments on these
topics. VV’’hat, then, is the great end we have 1
in view, and for what purpose do we conceive '
that we have been put into the ministry ? The
great end for which we live and labor is the
saloalion of the smil ; w'e seek the restoration of
the soul to the image and favor of tdod.
Naturally it is far gone from original righteous-
ness—astray, lost —nay, dead in trespasses and
sins. It is in danger ;in danger of perishing
under the just displeasure of Him who can de-
stroy both body and soul in hell. And yet, if
Christ be offered as the true and living way to i
the Father, and a divine power accompanies j
tlie Word, this soul is quickened and brought
into union with Christ the Head. It the :
pardoning love of Clod in Christ is trecly '
proclaimed ; if while w 6 persuade men by the i
terrors of tiie law we assure tiiem of forgiveness ;
and peace in coming to Hod by his blessed Son ; j
the soul is drawn to Him who said, “It I be |
lifted up from the earlh, will draw all men unto ;
me.” As when Christ addressed the paralytic, I
and bade him arise and walk, power accompanied !
the command ; so to one who hears the oifers ot
salvation, and desires to embrace them, grace is
given from above.
The gospel preached according to Christ’s
Word and example, never fails of proving its
divine origin, by the change of which it is
the mighty agent. In Koine and in Corinth, it
became the power of Hod unto the salvation
of the soul. The thief, the drunkard, the
idolater, the man of impure life, the
covetous, the reviler, the extortioner, became a
new creature in Christ Jesus, washed, sanctified,
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by
the Spirit of our Hod. The same cause will
produce like clfects. Let men preach and labor
as the apostle, and they will be blessed with his
success. Observe his aim, “If by any means
1 might save some.” Observe his method, his
dependence upon the power of the I loly Hhost;
his motive, the love of Christ; the means he
used, prayer and the preaching of the VV'ord —
“ My heart’s desire and prayer to Hod for Israel
is that they might be saved.” In his directions .
to Timothy a ])romise is conveyed to ourselves,
“ Take heed to thyself and to the doctrine ;
continue in them, for in so doing thou shalt
both save thyself and them that hear thee.”
Yes, you shall save them that hear you. Y'ou
shall be the h mored instruments of bringing
them to repentance, to faith and calling upon
God. Y’ou shall bring them to the foot of the
cross, you shall bring them back to their father’s
M


hotise ; shall see them clad in the best garment
of the Kedeemi'r’s rightcOnsncss, and rejoicing in
the tokens of Ilislove ; shall witness their blame-
less life and conversation, and finally join with
them in the ascription of praise to Ifim that
loved and washed them in His blood. This is
the high honor and glorious reward of the
Christian ministry. It is a eomfort that our
Lord intrusts to us so great a power, it is an
additional comfort that He has the residue of
the Spirit, and can enable us rightly to use that
power.
The Holy Ghost, the Lord, is the Giver
of life, and to Him it belongs to make
tbe Word a quickening sjiirit, so that
our ministry shall he spirit and life.
True, we weak and unworthy ; bnt from the
beginning this treasure has been committed to
such, and the greatness of the grace has been
magnified in the weakness of the instrument.
Let: us only give ourselves wholly to these
things, and gird ourselves to the work in faith
and prayer, and we shall turn many to righteous-
ness.
In a diocese such as this, so large in extent,
with a population so sparsely scattered, it is
important that the clergy should u.se every
opportunity of enforcing the momentous truths
of saving Ghristanity with eonscicntious earnest-
ness, and with dirc'ctncss of application. The
time is short in which anything can be done ;
the opportunities infrequent ; and the utmost
that can be aimed at is in a few brief
words to set forth the sin of man and the
grace of the Redeemer —to offer a welcome and
rest to the weary and the wanderer returning to
God through His blessed Son —to warn the im-
penitent —“ by all mc'ans to save some.” At
the evcming servicv' at the station, in the shep-
herd’s hut, to the wife and children, to the
lather as he follows the liock, to the settler as
he alfords the ready hospitality of the bush, the
missionary clergyman is ready like his Divine
Master to give instruction to all, even to the
stranger whom he encounters by the way.
His ciforts for this purpose are greatly
assisted by the many excellent publications put
forth by dilferent societies. The ( heap Prayer
Book and New Testament of Ihe Christian
Knowledge Society are so portable that even
when travelling on horseback some copies tnay
be taken, and used with other books as incen-
tives to the young to prcpart; the catechism, or
])ortions of scripture, for repetition on the next
visit of the clergyman.
I may here suggest that it is better not to
attempt to compass a very large district in too
short a time, and that a really elllcicnt visit in
which all the persons on a station are seen, and
the children are catechised, is more valuable,
even though only occurring once in three or
four months, than hurried visits paid at shorter
intervals.
In this, as in every part of our work, system
is of the last importance, and when a
clergvman has obtained sullicicnt acqtiaintance
with his district to be able to arrange his visits
to the best luhanlage, he will do well to make
them known at the commencement of the year,
and most scrupulously to keep the engagements
he has thus made. Rcgidarity and devotedness
to the work arising out of deep interest in it,
cannot fail in time to tell upon the moral and
social condition of a district. Let it be
(jstablished that nothing but the impossibility of
rc'achiug the appointed station will prevent the
clergyman’s arrival, and the attendance will be
imnctiial on (he part of the people. Let it be
felt that he who comes has a ])urpose in his
visit, that he can say “ We seek not yours, but
you,” and good must spring out of such ministra-
tions.
Family prayer will be established, Sunday
services will bo heltl, unnecessary labor on the
Lord’s Day will be avoided, the children will be
instructed and prepared for the pastor’s visit,
the servants will be eared for, vicious practices
restrained, dilfercnces bcaletl, the dyiu" embers of
piety will be re-kindled, and the inlluence of the
visit felt long after the visitor has passed for-
ward on his way.
On topics of more general interest, I have not
time to dwell. I will refer to one or two.
In common with all who honor the Scriptures
as the inspired W”ord of God —“ God’s Word
written,”. 1 deeply deplore the attacks maile on
the plenary inspiration of the sacred volume.
It is distressing and humiliating that the Ciiurch
should be wounded by those who call them-
selves her friends, and who minister at her
altars, while they are betraying the cause they
had solemnly engaged to defeiiil.
The enemy does indeed come in as a flood —n
flood east out of the mouth of the serpent.
Nevertheless, the spirit of the Lord is lifted up
as a standard against him.
It was a subject of deep thankfulness to me
during my recent visit to England to observe
the active energetic zeal which animated the
clergy and the laity, and how the latter especi-
ally are .anxious to carry on every work which
promotes the social, moral, and spiritual well-
being of their fellow men.
If attacks on revealeil religion are frequent
and varied, and proceed from unusual quartei’s,
the defenders are able, zealous, learned, and
efficient ; one hundred answers are ready to re-
fute the objections brought forward by the
Bishop of Natal and his aides.
And so in other matters; if an evil is proved
to exist, a remedy is at hand. The power of
gooil and ill are manifestly drawn out in battle
array, but I si-e no reason to be discouraged as
to the result. God is prospering our church at
home and abroad. Missions to the heathen are
bringing forth fruit, and we are reaping the har-
vest oft he last half-ccntury’s labors in Africa and
the East.
The large assemblies of members of the
Church of England in the Congress held
first in the L’niversities, and recently
at Manchester, are worthy of the at-
tention of all who wish to know what
is the spirit and the work of the Church at the
present time. The Congress is very numerously
attended. There is free discussion. Much
valuable information is given under circum-
stinices calculated to ensure accuracy, and by
men selected for their knowledge of the sub-
jects on which they speak. It is a movement
likely to have an impoidant inlluence upon the
church; and an inlluence, as it appears to me,
of a beneficial character. I’rcjudiccs are re-
moved, differences diminished, important facts
are placed on record, and the deliberate coun-
sels of able laymen are obtained.
In a diocese such as this, it is difficult to say
how best the bishop, ckrgy, and la.ty can meet.
North America alfords some analogy, and
particularly the diocese of New Brunswick,
'dhe Bishop of Fredericton has by
means of a church society associated the laity
with the clergy and himself in t arrying on the
work of the church, and hitherto this has been
the practice in New tSoutli Wales. My right
reverend brother the Bishop of Newcastle and
myself liave made an unsueeessful attempt to
obtain legislative sanction to our snio.iical
action ; whether we shall ultimately j)revail with
the legislature to give us this security I cannot
tell, but some council to assist the bishop should
exist in every diocese.
If from the circumstances of the cOiOny it is
found that the metropolis can alone supply the
materials rsquisite for a church as.-eniu y, the
rest of the diocese must be content to intrust
the man.agement to those who are able to meet
and advise with the bishop and elergy.
A very brief experience of the manner in which
the business was earried On would serve to show
that the interests of the country districts were
carefully regarded by the eommittee. This is
our own experienec. The metropolis supplies
by fiir tiio greater part of the free contributions ;
yet these funds are chielly expended in the
country. Centralisation may be an evil; but
localisation, by which [ mean confining all ellbrt
to the district in which the contributors live, is
more to be apprehended. The church can never
flourish if the members look only on their own
things, and not on the things of others. Wo
are not so much members of independent eon-
gregat ions as members of one body, and should
be willing to give up our imlividual prefereuec,
for the sake of the common good. It may be
dilllcult to induce the members of the Church of
England in a widely extended colony to place
their contributions for the payment of the clergy
in a common fund; but sucli a plan is by far
the best, and ought to be carried out wherever
practicable. Tlie clergy themselves may do
mueli in this matter ; and it is certainly worth
their while to promote that orginization whicli
tends to secure their own independence ; and,
at the same time, brings the members of the
church into closer union.
Whatever may be the arrangement, I trust
that the members of the C'hureii generally will
consider themselves bound to carry it out by all
the means in tlieir power. Wo may have our
own idea of wliat is good, and be I’oluetant to
depart from it; but it is far better lor ourselves,
and for the cause we have at heart,
to co-operate in that which wo may
not fu ly approve, than to lose time and waste
stivug h in a vain endeavor to force our views
on others, or to weaken the cause by withdraw-
ing our help. but principle shoukl
be sacrificed for internal peace and unity of
action.
Our position iii a colony makes this duty of
followMig after pcui e most imperative upon us.
We 1.10 not possess the sources of strength which
serve tlic cause of the Charih at home, and
shouhl endeavour to make up for our deficien-
cies in numbers by that ui ijii, without which
suvugtli cannot be. W'e are necessarily separ-
ated Irom others ; let us be true to ourselves.
If the Reformation be a b.essing, we
can have no co.nuiunion witli a churcii which
denies our baptism, our orders, and our faith,
and which will admit of union upon no other
terms than our reception of ‘•fond things
vainly invented and grounded upon no warranty
of scripture, but rather repugnant to the Word
of Govl.”
Some of us can unite with members of other
denominations in the aistribuiioii of that
Sacred \ olunie whicii we, in eommo.i with
them, believe to be inspired by the Holy
and whose translation in the authorised version
we all receive, but our book of coniiuon prayer,
our form of puolie worship, our episcopal
government, and our orders which vve
value as precious gdts, handed down
to us from the cardest agts of the
Church, and preserved to us by the pro-
vidence of God, these, which are the bonds of
union amongst ourselves, necessarily keep us
ilistaict from others. Nor shall we lose respect
or mill.cnee by lonsistent adherence to the prin-
ciples and ceremonial of our church.
A church which upholds the sutllciency of
Holy Scripiure tor salvation, which receives and
believes the ancient crecils of tbe Church uni-
versal, which teaches that we are accountcvl
righteous bcfoie God only for the merit of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Clirist by faith, and not
for our owil works or ilescrvings, a Church wide


m.
i 's confessedly the strong bulwark of Christendom
{ against the pretensions and aggressions of
! the Church of Rome, may well engage the
sympathy and prayers of all who love the Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity. And surely it is pos-
I sible to maintain our own position without
breach of that charity that rejoiceth in the
i truth. Only let the spirit of love be cherished,
j let all our things be done in charity, and peace
I will be maintained between those who have one
' common end in view and are seeking to bring
I souls to the knowledge and obedience of the
I true faith. If we are careful to maintain a deep
I sense of the responsibilities and proper duties of
our office, endeavoring to approve ourselves to a
heavenly master, it will be a small thing
* with us to be judged of man’s judgment ;
' we shall neitlier have time or disposition to
I contend with those who differ from us. As
much as lietli in us, and if it be possible, we
shall live peaceably with all men.
I add a few brief observations of a practical
character.
To my brethren in the ministry, I say—give
attention to reading, that your discourses. may
be full of matter. Take heed to your delivery,
your manner, the composition and arrangement
of your discourses, tliat no just exception be
taken against you in these particulars. With
us, as ministers of God’s Word, and in His
House, notliing can be unimportant that influ-
ences our liearers, or disposes them to unite with
us more fervently or intelligently in our com-
mon prayer.
Be much in ]irivate prayer. The religious
services in which ive are eonstantly engaged
make it needful for us to exercise vigilance, lest
familiarity with sacred things should induce
coldness, formality, and iudilference. The
remedy is with the heart. Reviewing its
spirituality and vigor at the throne of grace, by
union with our Divine Head, by supplies of the
Spirit, wiio is the spirit of grace and supplica-
tion, and who helpeth our infirmities by helping
us to pray.
In society be watchful over yourselves.
You can never divest yourselves of your sacred
olfice ; and it should not appear that you wish
to do this. Our Lord went into society, but, He
was ever the same; His discourses grave, natu-
ral, instructive, faithful.
Be often in the house of mourning and the
chamber of sickness. For ourselves and others
these are opportunities which should never be
lost. Our best lessons for the pulpit are learned
in ministering to the poor, the sick, and the
dving.
' Make much of time. Let it be felt by you to
be one of the great responsibilities laid upon
you to use it aright—to be filled up for God, for
His church, for your own souls. Fver have some
useful devotional work at hand, so as to keep
up a prayerful, thoughtful spirit. Keep the
end in view. At present we are in tiie way.
Distractions, temptations, and cares continually
arise to tiirong our path, obscure our vision
and occupy our minds. Get above and beyond
them, by thought and meditation upon the end,
the great, the glorious, the blessed end.
Are we, indeed, serving a Heavenly Master,
engaged in His work, seeking His glory, looking
for his appearing ? then happy are we. We may
be thwarted, wearied, misunderstood. We may
be disappointed in some we trusted, or in others
of whom we hoped better things, but the day is
at hand wliieh will make amends for all —the
day of the revelation of tiie Son of God,
wiien every cloud will be removed, when
every dillieulty will bo solved, when
we shall never make an enemy —nor ever lose a
friend, when our sins shall be forgotten, and
our services remembered —when we shall kuovv
as we are known, and see as we are seen—when,
with spirits wholly sanctified, and bodies like unto
the Redeemer’s, we shall, through never ending
ages, rejoice in the presence and service of our
God.
How small will then appear the matters that
have greatlv troubled us below, —how short the
path which erewhile seemed so long,—how full
of grace and goodness the trials we encountered
by the way,, —how rich and free the mercy which
first inclined the heart to God, —how glorious
and blissful the rest into which the Redeemer
hath Himself received us, —how full of joy and
gladness—of deep humiliation and of trium-
phant praise the song in which we join, when
with angel and archangel, with prophet, martyr,
saint, witli the highest and the lowest, we stand
before the throne and before the L imb, clad in
the robe of rigiiteousness and bearing the palm
of victory—'while with loud voice we say, “ Salva-
tion to our God, which sitteth upon the throne,
and unto the Lamb.”
—•—
At the conclusion of the address, the service
was proceeded with by the Bishop of Brisbane
reading the prayers. Tiie Lord’s Supper was
then administered to a large number of com-
municants.
ADDEESS AND EEPLY.
Ax address, numerously signed by the most
influential members of the Church of England
resident in Brisbane, was presented to the Right
Reverend Prelate, in St. John’s schoolroom.
on Friday, July 22. There was a very large
; attendance of members of the Church, and the
chair Avas occupicil by the Right Rev. Bishop of
Brisbane. His Excellency the Governor and
Ladv Bowen were present, and Chisf Justice
i Cockle, the lion. R. G. W. Herbert (Colonial
Secretary), the hon. T. de Lacy Mofl’att (Colo-
nial 'J'reasurer), the hon. Colonel O’Connell
(President of the Legislative Council), the hon.
J. Bramston, M.L.C., H. Buckley, Esq. (Audi-
! tor General), R. R. Mackenzie, Esq., M.L.A.,
i J. Douglas, Esq., M.L.A., and a large number
of ladies and gentlemen.
The Chairmax, having offered up prayer,
said that it required no words of his to bring
before the notice of the meeting the object for
which they had been called together—that of
presenting* an address to his right reverend
brother and metropolitan. It was much to be
: regi'cttedthat the distant portions of. the colony
I had been deprived of the advantages derivable
from the personal presence and conversation
1 of his right reverend brother —as the extent
of his visit Avould not permit it. But the mem-
hers of the Church of .England in Brisbane had
obtained all the more benefit in con-
sequence of that fact. He (Bishop Tuf-
nell) believed that every congregation in the
municipality had been made aware of the saving
truths of Christianity by his right reverend
brother, whose forcible and convincing language
\ was well calculated to bring home the truth to
the hearts of his fellow men. He (Bishop Tuf-
nell) would call upon his Excellency the Go-
vernor to read the address.
His Excellency proceeded to read the follow-
ing address :
“To THE Right Reveuend Father ix Gdu,
Fredekic, by Divixe Per.missiox, Bishop
OF Sydxey axd Metuopolitax.
“We, the undersigned members of the United
Church of England and Ireland, resident in the
colony of Queensland, and dioccsc of Brisbane,
desire to approach your lordsliip with the ex-
pression of our affectionate respect tor your
office and person, and of our love and devotion
to the churcn over which it has pleased God to
make you the chief pastor in the continent of
Australia.
“We feel much pleasure and satisfaction in
welcoming your lordship on the occasion of your
first visit to this diocese. We feel confident
that your experience and advice Avill, under the
blessing of providence, render great assistance
to our own revered bishop in removing many of
the difficulties attendant on the establishment of
our cliurcli in this colony; and more especially
in orgrnising such a system of administering its
temporalities, through the conjoint action ot the
clergy and laity, as may give due publicity and
stability to its financial position, and may thereby
increase its claims upon the Christian liberality
of its members.
“ Witli our earnest prayers for your health
and happiness,
“ We remain, my Lord,
“Your faitliful servants and Ijrethrenin
“ Christ.
Tlio Bishop of Sydxey said that he had pre-
pared a written reply, which he woul I rea 1,
afcer which ho would deliver a few remarks
on the principal topics contained in the a Llress.
Tlie written reply was as follows :
“To the Members of the United Church of
England and Ireland, resident in the colony
of Queensland, and diocese of Brisbane,
who liavc addressed me on the oceasion of
my visit to the diocese.
“My dear Friends,—l thank you very cor-
dially ' for the expression of your affectionate
respect for my office and person, and am much
gratified to find that the members of the
Church of England form so large and influen-
tial a proportion of the population of Queens-
land.
“ In the older dioceses of Australia, the visit
of the metropolitan has been the means, under
God’s blessing, of uniting and strengthening
the Church, and I trust that the same results
will follow on the present occasion.
“I am persuaded that the measures taken i
by your own revered bishop for meeting the ,
financial difficulties of the churcli, in a colony
Avhcre state-aid does not exist, are thus far pru- i
dent and successful. The further and adequate ■
endowment of the see, and the formation of a ]
common fund for church purposes, in connection !
with the Cliurch Society, are matters in whicli |
Ido not doubt that your cordial co-operation |
will be given.
“ The help and counsel of the lay members
of the Churcli are essentially necessary, for the
success of our endeavors to promote the cause
of religion and education in our dioceses. The |
m --


precise manner in which this co-operation may
be best secured is a question of some difficulty ;
but for mvself, and my right reverend brother,
I can affirm that we are most anxious that the
laity should be joined with us in the adminis-
tration of the temporal affairs of the church.
“ I am grateful for the kindness and attention
with which I have been received, and with my
earnest prayer that the blessing of Grod may
rest upon you, and that the righteousness which
exalteth a nation may be the inheritance of your
children’s children to all suceeding ages.
“ I remain,
“ My dear friends,
“ Your faithful and affectionate servant in
“ Christ,
“ F. Sydney, (M).”
His LoKDSHTr, after a few preliminary re-
marks, proceeded to state that he intended to
take the opportunity afforded him by a sugges-
tion of his riglit reverend brother, their own
bishop, to make a few remarks in a familiar
manner on the principal topics suggested by
the address. He would first advert to that
portion of it which expressed a hope tliat
his presence would conduce to the stability
of the financial affairs of the Church. He
might state t’lat one of his objects in visiting
Brisbane «as that he might be able to help the
Bishop and members of the Church of England,
in all things, high and l>w.. He was thankful to
know that an opportunity would be afforded to
the members of the church by his right reverend
brother of forming their own judgment as to
the disposition of the funds which had been
entrusted to his care. He had written
a letter to Colonel O’Connell, which would
be read by that gentleman, at the conclusion
of his (the bishop’s) address. That letter con-
tained a lucid account of the financial condition
of the church. It must be understood that
there were two fumls in connection with tlie
church—the endowment fund, ami a special
fund which had been collected by the bishop
himself. He (Bishop Barker) intended to say
a few words with reference to la h of
those funds. He thought' it was doubtful if
the members of the Church were aware of the
extent to which the endowment fund had been
assisted in Queensland —the total amount had
not reached £l5OO, which sum had been invested
by the committee in such a mninier that it
woul 1 shortly amount to £2OOO ; but up to tlie
present time the income of the bishop had not
been increased by cither the princi]ial or interest.
The income of the bishop was derived fiom the
sum of £S(XK), which had been secured by the
Bishop of Newcastle ns an endowment for the
see. The interest of that amount, £2OO a-year,
•vv'as the whole of the income derived from the
endowment of the see, augment o 1 by a sum been
collected in England. By the exercise of great
economy, and by living at a parsonage instead
of episcopal residence, the bishop had hitherto
avoided falling into difficulties, such as in-
debtedness, or anticipating his income by
any portion of the capital. He
(Bishop Barker) trusted that the statement
made in the letter referred to would be satisfac-
tory, so that they might be enabled to take ad-
vantage pf the further sum which he had referred
to, in order that the affairs of flie Church might
be put in a position woi’tliy of f lie greatness of
the colony. Before proeecding further he
would observe that it was necessary to keep
in mind the wide and obvious distinction which
existed between an endowment fund and a fund
collected in England by the bishop from his
personal friends, or from other sources, to
be applied by him to various objects. It was
usual for colonial bishops to maintain the entire
control of money so collected, or if any
explanation was accorded as to what wi.s
done with the money, it was given to those
"by whom it had been contributed, and to no
one else. It was true, cireumstances might
arise which would make it desirable that some
statement should be given, and it appeared to liis
right reverend brother that the time had now
arrived. He (Bishop Barker) did not think it was
always prudent that publicity should be given to
all that had been done, or how money had
been expended. However, for a general state-
ment as to how the interest on £5OOO had been
expended they were indebted to the bishop him-
self. Much depended upon the prudence and
management of money entrusted to colonial
bishops, which it was easy to expend in
fifty different ways, and it would be found that
the bishop, instead of having expended the
cajjital sum had used the interest in bringing
clergymen to the colony, laying stipends
where they were not provided by the people,
besiJis assisting in the erection and maintenance
of schools in ditferent portions of his diocese,
and had really not touched the capital at all. He
might observe that according to the bishop’s
letter, £lOOO of the amount he had collected in
England would be added to the endowment of
the see, provided that it was met by another
£lOOO collected in the colony, in addition to the
£2OOO wlhcii was to be augmented by the Colo-
nial Bislioprics’ Council. There could be no
doubt but that much more good could be done,
provided that the fund could be relieved from
the charges some of which at present existed on
it. For instance, if it could be relieved from
the outlay necessary for the maintenance of
schools. It was much to be regretted that when
two sets of persons —he did not like to call them
parties—were both equally anxious to promote
education they could not be brought into unity,
or harmoniims union. He could see few just
reasons why there should not be harmonious
action with the Church of England in the
matter of education. In Ireland this had been
attempted in national schools, viz., the division
of them into vested and non-vested schools.
It was obvious that a mixed school must be
founded upon a co nproinise somewh tc —-a
compromise applicable to the support of non-
vested schools. He believed that if the Irish
system were fairly carried out in this country,
there was no reason, why the bishop. of the
diocese should not cordially help in carrying
out education throughout the colony. The
object of Grovernment was that education of the
best possible kind should be extended to all
classes of persons. Surely they (the clergy)
desired the same thing.. Speaking for the clergy
of this colony, they wislied that education of
the best possible kind should be supplied to
the people. They (the clergy) desired not only
that secular instruction might be extended to
the people, but that it should be such as might
meet the dema'.ids of the Government, and
satisfy the requirements of their inspeGors.
That instruction might be communicated to all
persons without any exception or hindrance.
They felt the vast importance of religious edu-
cation, but did not therefore set asitle secular
education. They did not make religious in-
struction so indispensable as to thrust children
out of the school because they refused to take
it, or exclude them from a valuable secular
education. They threw their schools open to
the inspector, and every school was regulated
by the conditions required by the Board. If
the schoolmaster was unable to pass the
examination prescribed, he would have to be
dismissed, and another appointed, to meet the
system of Government education. If a parent
did not wish his child to receive religious in-
struction, it should not receive it. They were
even prepared to make arrangements to autho-
rize a religious instructor of a cUlferent creed to
come and teacli tlie children during school
hours, if it were desired. Now, he asked, upon
what plea could the Church of England schools
be excluded from Giovcrnmcnt assistance ?
Where everything was correct —where there
were no children excluded from schools on
account of religious instruction —surely it was
not in accordance with the character of the
English nation —-a nation loving freedom and
fairness as it did; that their (the clergy’s)
efforts should be crushed out on behalf of edu-
cation. Without at all denying that the board
of education may give, and desire to give, and,
according to its own definition, does give ample
religious instruction to the childreu in their
schools, still the clergy said that it was not
such as they believed ought alone to be given
to the children in their schools. They (the
clergy) did not believe that Scripture history
or chronology, or even Scripture morality, was
suflicient to give that saving knowledge which
was necessary for the soul’s salvation. Surely
they ought to be allowed to cherish in tlie
minds of tlie young those deep an I vita’ prin-
ciples which pervaded an I lay at the founda-
tion of all religious instruction. lie trusted
that the question might be so regarded and'
settled as that the eilbrts of the bishop of the
diocese, and those who agreed with him upon
the subject, might be united in the great
common cause of the education and enlighten-
ment of the people. The speaker went on
to argue that great advantage would result
from the formation of a church society in
Queensland, and said that if every member of
the church, young and old, were to pay one
shilling per month, there would be an ample
fund at the disposal of the society. lie believed
in the working of a common system of synodical
action, and proceeded to detail at length ’he ex-
ertions which he had made and was about to
make in order to promote the system in New
South Wales. There was no doubt that when
the time came it would be wise that people
living in the remote districts of the colony
should semi down representatives to Brisbane to
confer upon church affairs, and that a synod
should be formed consisting of representatives
of the clergy and laity. He believed that no
one was more willing to adopt such a system
than his right reverend brother, who was of
opinion that no better plan could be adopted in
the management of the financial affairs of the
Church. He (Bishop Barker) had not much
ihore to dilate upon. He might state that he
felt very thankful when he heard of the meeting
which was held in that room some time ago, in
order that Bishop Patteson might name an
opportunity of explaining to the members of
the church in Brisbane matters in reference to
the Melanesian mission. That mission was likely
to have a marked effect in assisting any efforts
which might be made on behalf of the aborigines
of the colony. The condition of the aborigines
was a perplexity, and a reproach. He (Bishop
Barker) trusted that the efforts of Bisliop Pat-
teson would' succeed in helping materially to
solve the difficulty and roll away the reproach.
It was, therefore, to be hoped that the clergy
and laity of the Church of England would unite
their endeavors to assist him in carrying out his
intention. But the mission of Bishop Patteson
was not alone suflicient for the work. It would
be very desirable, if jiossible, to secure the ser-
vices of a Christian body which was unexception-
able in charactir, and whose missionary opera-
tions must secure the symjnithy of all
Protestants. He referred to the Moravians,
whose missions had been so successful in all
parts of the world, and who would doubtless bo
of essential service in extending the blessed
truths of Christianity to the aborigines. He
concluded an eloqv ent peroration, in the course
M


w.
,
, eY-?
<■' of Avliich ]io cxliortod Ihe members of tlie
' - Clutreh tlint unity imcl prnyer were absolutely
I _
neeesscry to suceess, by handing the letter of
llishop Tufnell to Colonel O’Connell for that
gentleman to read.
Colonel O’Coxxn.L expressed himself as
being much gratified at the eonfidence in him
which had been manifested by asking him to
become a medium of communication between
the bishop and members of the Church. llow-
CAcr, as the light was bad, and as the writing of
the right rever‘>nd gentleman must be more
legible to himself than anybody else, he (Colonel
O’Connell) would ask him to be kind enough to
•read it.
Eishop Ti'FXELI proceeded to read the letter,
as follows: —
St. John’s Parsonage,
July 21st, 1864.
IVly Pear Colonel O’Connell, —I have been
told that some members of the Church in my
diocese have been deterred from responding
to Ibe appeal which was addressed to them bj'
the committee who kindly undertook to endeavor
to raise a fund for the augmentation of the en-
dowment of the see of Erisbane by the two fol-
lowing considerations: —
Ist. That they did not know what was the
amount already provided, and how it was in-
vested and secured to the see.
2nd. That large sums of money were sup-
posed to be in the hands of the bishop for the
general purposes of the Church ; and as you
were kindly one of those in whose names the
original endowment of the see was remitted to
this colony by the Colonial Eishoprics’ ( ouneil
in England, I have thought, and others have
thought with me, that it would be well if I was
to take the opportunity of addressing to you for
the information of the immibers of the Church
generally, a letter containing a simple statement
with regard to the endowment of the bishopric,
and the luiglish monies placed at my disposal.
'J'he endowment of the see at present consists
of the following items : £ s. d.
Original endowment ... ... 5000 0 0
Collected by the committee in
Queensland ... ... ... 1-198 9 5
Grantfrom f heColonial Eishoprics’
Council to meet £lOOO raised
by the trustees in the colony ... 500 0 0
Contributions received by the
hishop in England, with some
which were added after the
arrival of the bishop in the
colony ... ... ... ... 1754 13 8
’J his last sum is ]daccd at the
disposal of the bishoj) to be by
him applied at his discretion
either for the endowment of
the see or towards jiroviding a
residence for the bishop.
I ),ell my lirst arrival in the diocese my cjiis-
copul income consisted of £2OO per annum, paid
to me half-yearly by the Colonial Eishoprics’
Council as the inti'rest of the £5OOO ; and 1 ]iro-
]tosed to the council that the £5OOO should be
remitted I'or investment in Ihe colony, otfi ring
to give a 1 oiul to the council for the security of
this cajiital sum if so remitted. This was not
< onsidered necessary ; but in April, 18fi3, £4907
lOs. was remitted to the colony (rc]ircseiitiug
the £5000) in the names of the bishop, the
lion. Colonel O’Connell and Mr. Kobert Little,
and I was authorised to invest this sum cither in
the ]uirchase of lands of growing value, or in
first mortgages, to not more than half the value
of the laud —the investment to be in the name
of the bishop and his successors. Of this sum
£I6(K) has been invested in first mortgages,
aj'proved of by Mr. Little, and standing in the
name of tin* bisho]i and his successors, and the
ba aiiee of £lOO will be so invested.
The sum of Pl7OO, collected by the bishop in
England, and of £5OO contributed by the Colo-
nial Eishoprics’ Council, have also been invested
by the bishop in lirst mortgages.
The contributions received by the trustees of
the fund in Queensland, amounted on the 2nd
of February, 1864, to £l-158 9s. 51., which
arises partly from the contributions received in
the colony and partly from the accumulating
interest arising from the investment of these
monies. The annual interest of these monies
as it arises should, I presume, strictly speaking,
have from time to time been handed over to tiie
bishop in augmentation of his annual income ;
but as it was represented to me as being the
wish of the trustees, and it would be for the
eventual benefit of the see, I have been content
that they should for the present be permitted to
aceumidate as .an augmentation of the endow-
ment. The honorary seeretar}’, Mr. Euckley—
to whom I feel that the see is much indebted
for his exertions in the matter —informs me that
I may reckon upon the interest of this money
becoming available for the maintenance of the
bishop in the course of the year 1865. I'may
add that I have made arrangements with regard
to my private estate, by which, I think, it is
scarcely possible that, in the event of my death,
any loss could arise to the see with reference to
these mortgages ; and eventually, I presume, it
will be desirable that the endowment should be
vested either in land or in government securi-
ties.
With regard to the monies which were col-
lected by my personal exertions, with the assist-
ance of kind friends in England, and the
appropriation of which has (with the excep-
tion of some donations for special
purposes) been placed at my disposal,
1 find that on the 19th of May, 1862, when I
forwarded a statement of the account for eircu-
lation amongst the contributors in England, it
stood as follows. After the payment of the fol-
lowing items, viz. : —Outfit and passages "of
clergy, £832 11s. 7d.; church buildings, £374
19s. 4d.; schools, £135 ; books, £92 12s. 5d.;
clergy stipends and sundry expenses, £207 17s.
9d.; printing, £9 Is. fid. ; in all, £1652 2s. 7d.,
—there remained in my hands the capital sum
of £4577, which produces an annual income of
£420 ; and that interest and the principal, if
necessary, are responsible for the maintenance
of school teachers in my diocese, the jiassages of
clergy from England, the supplying any defi-
ciencies which may arise in the guaranteed sti-
pends of clergymen, and other incivlcntal ex-
penses. Hitherto I have happily been able to
avoid diminishing the eapital sunß as I have
been further assisted by the receipt from Eng-
land of annual subscriptions, which were pro-
mised to me lor five years, but which have now
expired ; and in future 1 shall, I fear, find it
necessary to draw upon my capital, unless I am
able to carry out my purpose of (God w illing)
visiting J'ngland in 1865, and can then obtain
fiom Jinglish frieu !s a renewal of assistance.
1 trust, however, that by the hi arty l o-ojiera-
tion of the clergy and laity, our Diocesan (. hurch
B'ocicty may ere long be brought into such
working efliciency and order as to be able
to give cHcctual assistance towards the ereetion
of church buildings ; the maiutenanee, in whole
or in i>art, of additional clergy, esjiecially of
some whose duty it should be to itinerate in the
intirior of the colunv ; the providing the outfits
and ]'as ages of clergy and candidates for holy
orders ; a mission to the aborigines ; and otl.er
ini] ortant works which our Diocesan Church
ought, in dependence u]>on the Divine blessing,
to endeavor to take in hand, if we are in any
way to attcmjit to f.dlil the duty which we owe
to that large number of our fellow-countrymen
whom we are inviting to people the interior of
the colony, and to the native races of the land. i
I still continue to hope our dilflculties with the
Hoard of Oeneral Kducation may ere long be so
adjusted that our schools may no longer be de- !
barred from participating in the benefits to be i
derived from the parliamentary grant, because,
to an efficient system of secular instruction we j
desire to add that element of a sound religious I
education which we in our consciences believe |
to be of primary importance.
In collecting the English funds to which T
have before ailverted, i had not intended to
appropriate any portion of them to the endow-
ment of the see, for reasons which I need
scarcely ment ion ; but as the circumstances and
endowment of the see are not such as I ex-
pected that they would be at the time when I
received the intimation of her Majesty's gracious
pleasure to confer upon me the appointment,
and as the endowment of the see is a matter of
primary importaiice, I feel sure that my English
friends will approve of my saying that I sliall
be prepared to appropriate £IUOO as an aug-
menraliou of the eudov\'mcnt of the bishopric,
wiienever the committee in the colony are able
to provide an endowment ofitlOOO in addition
to the original ii2ooo which the Colonial
15ishoprics’_ Council have kindly promised to j
augment. j
Eelicvc me, my dear Colonel O’Connell,
Very truly, yours,
E. W. EKISEANK.
Chief Justice Cockle rose and said he hoped
that before the meeting dispersed some means
would be taken of showing their appreciation
of the ellbrts which had been made by their
metropolitan on behalf of the Church, and he
would move accordingly. He considered that
the various Australian colonies had reason to
be proud of their metropolitan.
C'olonel o’CoxxEi.L seconded the motion. |
Mr. Shepherd Smith rose and addressed the '
meeting at some length, to the eilect that he
hoped the present system of church government j
would not long continue to exist in the colony
—that some practical result would ensue from '
the suggestions which had been made at that |
meeting, and which had, no doubt, been die- |
tated by experience. He, as other lay members !
of the church, could not but acknowledge that
the operations of the church had beei. very sue- i
cessi'ul. Eut he could not accept the fact, I
without further inquiry, that the success had i
been so great as it might have been under the i
best possible management. Although many
clergymen had been brought out from home, he
scarcely thought that their circumstances were
such as the colony might be proud of. He di.l
not consi.ler that the i.uoeesan Church Society, of
which he had been treasurer since it was
started, was, at the jiresent time, am tiling but j
a dead letter. ]So proper orgaiiLa!ion e.\i?tc I
by which the clergy and laity were allorded an i
oiiportuiiiiy of giving expression to their feci- I
ings on the all'uiis of the church. He believed i
that if the majority of the members of the
Church were asked they would say that the j
church government had consisted of tiie bishop,
and the bishop alone. There were many ques- '
tions ail'ecting tenqioralities of the Churcii in
which the la ty should have a voice—with re-
ference to many import.mt trusts, Ac. There j
was an impression on the minds of the laity j
that the bishop had an inexhaustible fund upon j
which he lould draw for any purpose. He t.vlr. |
Bmilh) differed in opinion from the rev. the
metroflolitan that the bishop shouhl account
only to the peojile of England for funds sub-
scribetl by them. It was very objectionable,
indeed, that any secret lunds should be in pos-
session of the bishop. He, as a member of the !
Church of England, resident in tiie colony, ,
would much rather not accept of the money


collected in England on behalf of the Cinirch, if
by so doing tlie bisiioj) won d be backed up by
a secret fuiul, in the disposal of which no one
but himself had a voice, lie considered it to be
only right that all funds at his disposal should
be accounted for, if not administered, by a coun-
cil of the Church. He (Mr. .Smith) was very
glad to know that a statement had been made, a
])ortion only of which he had heard, ami he
trusted that that statement would be ])ublishetl.
In conclusion, lie would express his wish that
before the right reverend the metroiiolitan left
the colony, some steps woul 1 be taken towards
the formation of a synod, without which he was
afraid that the present condition of the church
would scarcely be improved.
Hishop B.utKEH expressed himself as being
much indebted to Mr. Smith for the observu-
tions he had made. It was much more gratify-
ing to know that a gentleman should have the
manliness to come forward and say w hat he felt,
than that he should write anonymous letters,
containing matter of a very objectionable nature,
when not substantiated by the name of the
, writer. He (Bishoji Barker) had sjiOiieu to
several of the gentlemen comjiosing the laity of the
Church as to the propriety of establishing a
synod at once, and they ha 1 all agreed w ith him
that the time ha 1 not, yet arrived wdieii it would
be wdse to adopt that course of action. If clergy-
men w'cre to be brought down from some of
the more remote districts of the colony to attend a
synod, it would h.ive the elfect of virtually in-
terdicting those districts, and the only
resource that was left would be to appoint
representatives as they did to parliament.
It was his intention to take necessary steps
for the establishment of a synod, the pre-
liminaries of which would occupy some time.
It w'as probable that the same amount of
time would be consumed in the formation
a synod in (Jueensland ; and, as the Bishop of
Brisbane intended leaving for England in
January next, it was only reasonable to suppose
that no great loss would result by waiting until
his return, otherwise it was possible they m'ght
do in haste wdiat they would repent of at
leisure. \Vhat was neeessary, in his opinion,
was that steps should be at once taken to put
the committee of the Church Society in posses-
sion of funds, when there would, doubtless, be
no lack of attendance at the various meetings
wdiich might be hel.l to deliberate upon the
manner in which the money shoMd be spent.
£T/",v y >. ■ .'■'■’^y'j'^
■' 1 k
There was no time like tlie pi-esent—let an
amount of money be subscribed, and there was
no doubt but tiiat it would be disposed of satis-
factorily. 11l eouelusion, he adjured them to
have eonfldence in one another; aud, above all,
to have confi lence in Grod.
IJisiiop Tl-f.vell said he w'.as a w'arm advo-
cate of synodical action wdth regard to the atlairs
of the church, and he might state that during
the visit of the right reverend the nietropolita.i
to Brisbane, he (Bishop Tufiidl) had taken the
opportunity of consulting the lea ling clergy aud
laity on the s.ibject, and they had been
unanimous in declaring that in their opinion it
w'ould be premature to initiate the movement at
the p.’esent time. There were many diillculties
in tlie w'ay, o.ie of the principal of wdiich was
the trouble of getting the persons who would
assist in the formatio i of a synod together.
However, it w.is his intention, as soon as. he pos-
sibly could, to call together a conference wdiose
business it would be to deliberate upon the
matter.
I'lie Right Reverend Metropolitan Bishop of
Sydney pronounced the benediction, and the
meeting separated.
m' ' ■
>.
I '■
i "■
i
!
I
1
pniNTKI) .\T TJIE fOrUIEri CENERAL I’UlJtTtNa OFEU’E, OEOliaE STRE;:T, mUSRAVfi.


M ■
• MUO
H MAR 1995
■ '-"vr-
J
