

Charles '*jß*é*Hory
C IT A li Gr E,
DELIV ERED TO
OF THE
DIOCESE OE NEW ZEALAND,
THE DIOCESAN SYNOD,
IN THE CHArEL OP ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE,
On Thursday, Seftember 23, 1847.
BY GEORGE AUGUSTUS,
BISHOP OF NEW ZEALAND.
SECOND EDITiON.
LONDON :
FRANCIS & JOHN RIYINGTON,
ST. PAUL’s CHURCHYARD, AND WATERLOO PLACE.
1849.
Pi •ice Is. 6t£.
A






/<■
br
| V , '
'
A '/>
ffnr\
M ■ \
i


C H A R G E,
DELI VE RED TO
t&fyt Cingi?
OF THE
DIOCESE OF NEW ZEALAND,
THE DIOCESAN SYNOD,
IN THE CHAPEL OF ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE,
On Tiiursday, September 23, 1847.
BY GEORGE AUGUSTUS,
BISHOP OF NEW ZEALAND.
SECOND EDITION.
LONDON:
FRANCIS & JOHN RIYINGTON,
ST. PAUL’s CHTJRCH YARD, AND WATERLOO PLACE.
1849,,


[This Charge has been reprinted under thè direction of a near
relative of thè Bishop,froma Copy at
thè Press of St. John!s College, New Zealand. Any prqfits
which may arise from thè sale, will be devoted to thè New
Zealand Chuech Fune.]


THE CLERGY
THE DIOCESE OF NEW ZEALAND
%\)iz Cijarge fé SJitómfceìf
THEIR AFFECTIONATE FRIEND AND BROTHER
G. A. NEW ZEALAND.




A CHARGE,
tt'C.
Quisquis liaec legit,
übi pariler certus est, pcrgat mecum ;
übi pariter haesitat, quserat mecum ;
übi crrorcm suum cognoscit, rcdcat ad me;
übi mcum, rcvocet me.
Ita ingrediamur simul caritatis viam, tendentcs ad
eum, de quo dictum est ; “ Quaerite faciem ejus
scmper.”
A uff. de Triti, 1, 5.
The time has at length come, my Reverenti
brethren, when I am enabled, by thè blcssing
of* God, to meet you in solernn Convocatìon,
and to take counsel with you of thè state and
prospcct of thè work of Christ comrnitted to
our charge. bave already often met in
seasons of sorrow and of fear, and bave been
bound together in one common interest by tbe
afHictions wbich it has pleased God to lay upon
us. We cannot scardi out thè designs of tbat


mysterions Providence, which has taken from
us so many loved and yalued brethren, when
we seemed to need, more than ever, thè aid of
every holy and earnest servant of Christ ; and
which has allowed thè growth of thè Gospel to
he checked by war, when it seemed on thè
point of overspreading thè whole land. But
we can acknowledge thè wisdom of God, when
we feel that private sorrows and public troubles
bave brought us nearer together in brotherly
love, and bave wrought in us more of that
unity, which our Lord prayed might be thè
sign of bis disciples, that thè world might be-
lìeve that God had sent Him. When we look
upon our numbers, thinned by death, and see
many of those who remain, enfeebled by sick-
ness, and all becoming day by day more in-
adequate to thè work, which increases upon
us, we may stili take comfort, and persevere,
if we can feel that we bave amono; us thè sigm
O &
appointed by our Lord himself for thè con-
version of thè world.
There are sure truths revealed by God, which
are our comfort in thè midst of thè sorrows and
uncertainties of thè world. When we mourn
over brethren who are taken from us, we re-
member that there is an eternai ministry, of
which we hope to be made partakers with
them. When we see, or think that we see.


any sìgns of failure in our native Church, we
think of that Church which is built upon thè
Rock, against which thè gates of hell will not
prevail. When we see thè growth of false
opinions, and various forms of religion, per-
plexing men’s mìnds, and distracting them from
thè simplicity of thè Gospel, we turn to thè
assurance given to us in Scripture, that there is
a truth of God, whether men can discern it or
not, which, like its Author, has no variableness
nor shadow of turning.
The object, I conceive, of all such meetings
us this is, in one word, thè better discernment
of that Truth of God, which must be thè guide
of every act of our ministry, and without
which every step that we take is certain to be
wrong. Our highest duty is to proclami thè
truth of God to men ; and it becomes usto
bave first comprehended it ourselves. Nor must
we allow ourselves to be led away by thè hasty
assumption that we already know, and can
easily explain, all that is necessary to be under-
stood by men, for thè assurance and comfort of
their souls. If it were so, our meeting here
' o
would be an idle ceremony, as we could bave
nothing to impart one to another. The dis-
tracted state of all thè Churches of Christendorn
is thè convìncing proof that thè Truth of God,
though fully revealed in his written Word, has


not been fully nor effectually comprehended by
men.
Our present meeting therefore may be looked
upon as one of a long series, begìuning at thè
Council of Jerusalem, in which it has been
attempi ed, with very various success, to dis-
cover thè will of God by thè assembling
toffethcr of thè ministers of Christ for social
prayer and mutuai counsel.
We cannot ascribe a necessary or absolute
infallibility to any such meetings, even when
convened by thè highest authority, and attendcd
by representatives from all Christian Churches;
neither on thè other hand cari wc deny, that
even an humble meeting like our own, com-
posed of thè Clergy of one of thè youngest
branches of thè Church of Christ, may hope
for a sharc in that peculiar blessing which is
promised to those who shall agree together to
ask anything in their Master’s name. The
whole history of Synodical meetings of thè
Clergy is full both of encouragcment and of
warning. The cases of failure are so numerous,
that many not only question whether a Divine
blessing be granted to their deliberations, but
also reject them on thè mere human ground of
inexpedicncy. Others again, who look to thè
♦xlorious stand in defence of Catholic truth
<D
which was made by thè first General Councils,


can scarcely recognise any other forai of
Church Government as likely to be effectual.
Even in our own Church, thè treasure which
we enjoy in her Articles and Liturgy rnay well
make many thoughtful men lament thè fallen
authority of her Convocation.
In thè midst of thìs balanced state of opinion,
it became my duty to decide, whcther I should
follow thè course pursucd by my brcthrcn in
England, of addressing to thè Clergy of thè
Diocese a Charge resting upon thè Episcopal
authority alone, and appealing to them upon thè
principio of canonical obedience ; or whether I
should avail myself of thè freedom in which
thè Colonial Church is loft by thè equal recog-
nition by thè State of all religious comraunitìcs,
to cast my Primary Charge into a synodical
forni, as containing suggestions for thè consl~
deration of thè Clergy, rather than authoritative
declarations, ex cathedra , of my own opinion
and will.
It will be readily understood, that before I
so far ventured to deviate from thè practice of
my brethren, I reviewed with much anxious
thought my own peculiar position, as of one
consecratcd to thè office of a Bishop at an early
age, from thè difficulty of finding a person of
more mature experience to undertake thè work.
The circumstances of thè country as a field of


Missionary exertion; thè various modes in
which thè System of thè Church of England
might require to be adapted to thè use of con-
verts from heathenism ; thè changes rendered
necessary by a difference of language ; thè
complex relatìons of thè two races after thè
colonizatìon of thè country ; all these and many
other similar points were questions of vital
interest, on which I could bave no experience,
and on which thè documents of thè Church of
England could not be expected to furnish me
with information.
The delay which has been complained of in
thè publication of my Primary Charge, is no
more, I conce!ve, than was due to a full con-
sideration of thè state of New Zealand. If I
had at once addressed you on my arrivai in thè
language of authority, thè experience which I
have since had of your affection and respect
leads me to think that I should have been
obeyed ; but I more than doubt, whether your
obedience would have been thè result of con-
viction. Even now lam no more able than
before to speak to you of my own authority;
because, though I may have gained experience
in thè live years which I have spent in New
Zealand, yet thè confidence in which I shall
speak, is in thè collective wisdom of my Clergy,
rather than in my own. It has been my hap-


piness to hold continuai intercourse with you
all, not merely on formai occasiona, and on terms
of ceremony, but in that domestic and social
intimacy which discloses all thè secrets of thè
heart. It is not to he supposed that we were
silent upon thè subjects foremost in our
thoughts ; we bave conversed upon doctrìne and
discipline, upon thè interests of thè native
people, upon thè prospects of thè Colonial
Church, and many wise and holy thoughts bave
heen receìved into my mind in those seasons of
Christian brotherhood, which I cannot now
separate, or ascribe to their rightful authors.
It was impossihle that I could so live in thè
hearts of an affezionate and faithful Clergy,
wlthout hecoming, at least in some measure,
thè representative of their thoughts and feel-
ings, and thè depositary of their wisdom and
experience.
Most of all then I would deprecate that per-
sonal idea of my office, which supposes thè
Bìshop to stand alone, and to express his own
thoughts, and issue his own instructìons to his
Clergy. We bave no thoughts that we can
cali our own, but all come from one common
fountain ; and whosoever they be who draw, it
must be thè same water of life. The one great
question to be placed contìnually before us is,
how we may attain to thè truth of God, and be


conformed to thè mlnd of Christ. W Hate ver
may be thè peculìar power and blessing of my
office, which I would neither appear to boast of
nor to disparage, I can claim no other credit to
my suggestione than is due to thè opinion of an
ordinary man, desiring indeed Divine guidance,
yet liable to human error. Our chief reliance
must be on thè power of united prayer, and on
thè combined wisdom of many counsellors of
one heart and one soul.
I need not disguise from you my belief that
thè cause which has led to thè almost entire
suspension of thè synodical action of thè Church
has been thè forgetfulness of thè spiritual cha-
racter of such an assembly of thè Clergy.
Convocations and Synods have been made thè
battle-field on which questions relating to thè
prerogative of kings, thè authorìty of Bishops,
and thè rights of thè Clergy, have been fiercely
disputed. They seem to have followed thè State
in thè form and manner of their deliberations ;
to have sheltered themselves under its power ;
to have availed themselves of thè secular arm to
enforce their spiritual censures; and so, by dose
alliance with worldly systems, to have lost their
own inherent strength, and to have become
unable to wield thè sword of thè Spirit. It is
not surprising that in bodies so constituted, thè
earnest endeavour to attain to a closer likeness


to Christ, should have been postponed to thè
old question, “ whicb should be thè greatest.”
The heavenly nature of our Lord’s kingdom, and
His spiritual dominion over all thè Churches
of thè earth, could not fail to be neglected
amidst questìons of dignity and prerogative
between thè rulers of thè Church and thè
State.
If I did not believe that our position in this
country, both as regards thè simplicity and
primitive character of our Church establish-
ment, and its entire freedom from all politicai
connexion, gìves us good reason to hope that
we may be enabled to avoid thè evils into
which other Synods have fallen, I should have
shrunk from thè course which I now propose to
you, and fallen back upon thè practice, sane-
tioned by custom, if not approved by reason, of
a formai Charge ex cathedra, upon thè authority
of thè Bishop alone. I might then have found,
as has often been thè case, that some would
have assented ex animo , some without assenting
would have obeyed conscientiously, some would
have deni ed that theìr promise of canonical
obedience applied to thè points of which they
disapproved. At thè best there would have
been much to check cooperation and engender
dìstrust.
But if we resolve, God being our helper, to


conduci our dellberatìons in a spiri! of humility
and prayer ; contending neither for honour,
nor superiority, nor victory ; but sìmply and
bumbly seeking thè truth as it is in Jesus, and
desiring above all tbings to follow in ms steps ;
if we avoid those stumbling-blocks of former
Synods, thè pride of order and dignity, and thè
opposite but no less fatai error of servility to
thè ruling powers of thè State ; if we are one
and all content to take thè lowest room, to
accept thè smallest remuneration, and to do thè
meanest work ; upon this exclusion of all earthly
causes of disagreement we may rest our hopes
of obtaining that fulness of light which is thè
promised fruìt of singleness of eye. There
were disputes arnong thè Apostles which should
he thè greatest, and there were murmurings
against those who arrogated to themselves thè
post of honour by their Master’s side ; but there
was no rivalry for thè post of danger in thè
judgment hall, at His cross, or at His tomb.
If God be with us, we will seek thè mind of
Christ; and see how that mind has impressed
itself upon thè institutions of his Church. Where
thè points before us relate to doctrine, we must
believe that thè Word of God alone is our
guide. We canno! believe that canon of Scrip-
ture to be defective, which St. John has closed
with his awful malediction against those who


shall add anything to thè written Word, or
take any thing from it. The Bible, therefore,
reraains unalterable as thè Divine standard of
perfection to which every question must be
referred, even in those lower points of discipline
on which no express commandment has been
given. It is a sufficient condemnation of any
doctrine or practice that it is not in agreement
with Scripture, or with thè spirit of thè teach-
ing of Christ. Let us never multiply examples
or testimonies of men for any other purpose
than to be able, out of many conflicting opinions,
to select those which are most in agreement
with thè mind of our Lord and Master.
It is possible, that, in this inquiry, we shall
be fully persuaded in our own minds, and yet
be unable to convince all that we are right. It
seems as if thè discovery of truth were sub-
jected by our heavenly Father to this useful
law, that it may be self-evident to ourselves,
and yet not apparent, in all cases, with sufficient
clearness to others. We lack nothing that is
necessary for our own conviction ; and yet we
cannot judge uncharitably of those who differ
from us. Enough is certain to make us believe
fìrmly ; enough is uncertain to make us judge
mercifully. Such is thè course of Christian
inquiry propounded by Augustine, u to follow
Christ in thè path of charity, agreeing in all


tliings certaln, inquirlng in all tliings doubtful ;
not more ready to reprove thè errors of others,
than to confess our own.”
If it be possible for meetings of thè Clergy
to attain to thè mind of Christ, snrely we may
hope for His blessing, in thè midst of thè signs
which prove thè field of onr ministry to be a
land of peculiar promise. If ever Clergy were
found to work faithfully, and with a single eye
to thè glory of God, snrely we may hope for it
in a land where thè blessings of thè Holy Spirit,
shed so abundantly, supersede every other
motivo and hope of reward. If we were fed
only with bread of affliction and water of afflic-
tìon, it would be comfort enough to be allowed
to take a part in sudi a ministry as this. For
there is no spot upon earth on which thè
prornises of God have been so sìgnally fulfilled.
These are thè ntmost parts of thè earth, which
God, in answer to thè prayers of his Son, has
given to Him for a possession. This is thè last
and most distant of thè multitnde of thè isles
which rejoice in thè message of salvation. Here
is thè proof that thè Spirit has been shed upon
all lands ; that thè whole earth has been filled
with thè glory of thè Lord, as thè waters cover
thè sea ; here is thè farthest shadow of thè
branches of thè tree of faith which has over-
spread thè world.


Within thìs land of promise thè signs of thè
Spirit bave been manifested ; thè word of God
has prevailed to thè overthrow of heathenism, to
thè control of savage passions, to thè reforma-
tion of moral character, to thè teaching of a pure
faith,to thè gatheringtogether of manythousand
souls into thè fold of Christ. Those who bave
ministered to these native Christians on their
death-beds, thè time when depth of feeling and
sincerity of heart is most surely ascertained,
bave reason to thank God that thè Gospel has
bere done its appointed work, in preparing
many souls for eternity and for heaven. We
may think with pure and unmingled pleasure
of thè infants who bave bere been saved in
Baptism, and of thè many adult believers who
bave died in thè Lord.
If thè prospect be not so bright for thè future,
if thè colonization of thè country bave brought
with it its attendant evils, we must ask our-
selves whether it was ever otherwise in thè
history of thè Church. The extraordinary gìfts
of thè Holy Ghost were bestowed as evidences
of thè power of God in supplying thè defi-
ciencies of bis human agents; but were not
intended to supersede their exertions. These
miraculous powers were withdrawn when thè
Gospel had become its own evìdence, by its
influence upon thè hearts of men, and by its


progress through thè world. Then carne thè
reai work of thè ministry ; thè day was past
when three thoasand souls could he converted
by a single dìscourse ; and when it was onorigli
that thè shadow of an apostle should be cast
upon thè sick, or that a garment should be
carried from bis body. The work of a minister
was to be carried on by patient appeals to con-
science, and with thè ordinary gìfts of thè Holy
Spirit. It seemcd as if thè second age of thè
ministry bore a greater burden than thè fìrst ;
that, with less aid of thè Spirit, it had to con-
tcnd with more enemies without, and more
lukewarmness within thè Church itself. Yet
it is ccrtain that, whether with miracles or
without miracles, thè work of Christ advanced.
Churches seemed to be overthrovvn or to decay
of themselves ; many candlesticks, lighted even
by apostles, were removed out of their places ;
yet, one time with another, thè work never
went back. Thcre were ages of darkness, venal
Popes, corrupt Prelates, an ungodly Clergy, a
blasphernous and sacrilegious laity; hordcs of
barbarìans were let loose by God upon Chrìst-
endom ; and ambitious monarchs pampered thè
Church for their own ends. Every kind of
difficulty sccrned to bcset thè progress of thè
Gospel ; thè hearts even of thè best raen failed ;
and there were no miracles to raìse them up ;


there was no open vision ; yet stili thè work
advanced ; its rear was smitten, Satan had power
to bruise its heel, but on it went, like thè chariot
of thè prophet, because thè spirit of God was
in thè wheels. It bore with it thè promise of
its Lord, that it should overcome thè world,
and that thè gates of hell should not prevali
against it.
Our ministry in like manner has been blessed,
I firmly believe, by extraordinary gifts of thè
Holy Spirit, as pledges of God’s continued
blessing, and as arguments also to us, for grcater
earnestness and devotion. The greatness of thè
work is proved by thè abundance of thè gracc
which has been already bestowed upon it. It
cannot therefore be God’s will that His work
should fail, but it may rest hereafter more on
our personal efforts, aided, rather than enforced,
by thè ordinary gifts and graces of thè Spirit.
We have need of better organization, of more
unity of purpose, of more combination of effort,
of closer communion in cornici], of more per-
se vering earnestness in prayer. We have heard
it said, that Church polity is not prcscribed in
Scripture : thè answer is that it was not needed
when thè New Testament was written. So lone*
O
as miracles remained to attest thè divine mission
of thè Apostles ; while thè Lord worked with
them, and confirmed thè word with signs follo wing,


it was not likely that thè Divine will and
impulse should be fettered by positive ordi-
nances, prescribed, not to bind thè Spirit, but
to guide and control men. So also in thè
second stage of a mission; there is need of
more personal effort, and also of more combina-
tion of purpose ; and this is no disparagement
of thè sufficiency of thè Spirit (God forbid),
nor any sign of distrust in thè work already
accomplished, but thè just inference from all
Church history, by which we learn that God
multìplies enemies to his Church, at thè same
time that he seems to withdraw a portion of
his grace.
But we must remember, that in thè second
stage of a mission, though we lament a decay
of spirituality, yet we bave a new power and
sign which seem to be designed to compensate
for those extraordinary gifts which are with-
draw n. The Gospel has become itself thè
evidence of its own power; it.has asserted its
mastery over thè hearts of men ; it is, as it
were, a standing miracle to which we can always
appeal, that a heathen people, a land devouring
its own inhabitants, has changed its character ;
that thè words of prayer and thè songs of praise
are now heard throughout every village in thè
country. It is against thè nature of things that
such a land should remain a paradise. When


thè fear of its savage inhabitants was removed,
it followed as a thing of course that men of all
nations would resort to it, for its fertility, its
beauty, or its trade. The Missioiiary must
always expect that colonization will follow in
his train, that he will not be allowed to retain
bis own authority unimpaired, nor to draw a
line around his native converts, within which
no contamination shall be allowed to enter.
The world will find its way to them, or they
will break forth into thè world. It is thè sanie
with our own children ; w T e may train them
throughout youth in thè strlctest seclusion,
apart from every thing that can pervert or
corrupt thè youthful mind ; but thè time will
come when thè strength of their religious prin-
ciple must be tried in actual conflict with Satan;
and then will be seen thè dilference between a
mere negative ignorance of sin, and that strength
of moral sense, which has pow T er, given to it by
God, by an active faith to overcome thè world.
«/
Our duty seems to be, to oppose thè sword of
thè Spirit to every form of sin and error, as
they arise. Atone time, it may be idolatry
and heathenism against which we contend; at
another, thè vices which follow in thè train of
civilization. We cannot teli from day to day
against which peculìar form of sin we may next
be called upon to protest ; but we are assured,


tliat there is a power in thè Church of Chrlst,
whìch none of its enemies shall he able to gain-
say or withstand. It may he found, that thè
very causes which seem most to hinder us for a
tìme, will he overruled by God for thè better
accomplishment of bis work. If there was
danger of our growìng slack and lukewarm in
our ministry when thè great point was gained,
and a whole nation of heathens was added to
thè Church, may not thìs new difficulty he
ordained by God, to ronse us up again to
greater efforts even than before; to convince
us that our work is not yet done ; that we must
stili tight thè good tight of faith, and persevere
unto thè end, before we can win thè crown?
Apart from its effect upon thè native cha-
racter, thè colonization of New Zealand may
be looked upon with almost unqualitìed satìs-
faction, as thè recoomition for thè tìrst time of
a great prìnciple both in thè State and in thè
Church. By thè State it was avowed from thè
tìrst that justice to thè native people must be
thè ground work of all its legislation. On thè
part of thè Church thè principle was avowed
and carried into effect, that in a new colony thè
Church ought to be planted at once in all thè
integrity of its System. And though it mìght
have been wished, that in thìs tìrst and great
experiment thè Elders of thè Church had not


been forced to go so low in thè scale of thè
English Minlstry, to fìnd one willing to bear
thè burden of thè Episcopale, yet we may
rejoice that some advance has been made, and
live in hope that thè tìme will come when our
Mother Church will send forth her matnrest
wìsdorn, and most tried experience, on her em-
bassies to heathen lands. Such was thè mìssion
of Angustine, which we owe stili, as a debt
unpaid, to thè unconverted natìons of thè
earth.
The tìme will come, and God grant it may
not be far distant, when thè full fruit may be
seen of thè establishment of these Bishoprics
in thè Southern seas. Even in thè favoured
islands of thè Pacific, though mudi has been
done to spread thè Gospel, much stili remains
to be done to build up thè native Churches,
and confimi them in thè faith. There are
enemies in thè field against whom thè dìsjointed
efforts of single Missionarles will be of small
avail. Though it is far from my wish to reap
thè fruit of other meAs labours against their
will, or to invade thè territory which they ha ve
won, yet I live in hope that we may be per-
mitted to frame an uniform System of education
for thè youth of all Polynesia; that from New
Zealand, as from a Missionary centre, thè strie t-
estknowledge, and thè most confirmed faith, may


be carried back by our students to theirdistant
homes. We cannot consider our work accom-
plìshed till every dialect in thè South Sea has
its representati ve members in our Missionary
College.
God has already so abundantly blessed thè
work of his servants, that not an island remaìns
to thè eastward of New Zealand to which thè
Gospel has not been preached. But there is
stili a dark expanse, over which thè banner of
Christ has not yet been advanced. If any
moti ve could justify thè wish to live thè full
period of thè patriarchal age, it would be to
see Borneo, Celebes, New Guinea, and all thè
islands on our north, converted to thè faith. It
may be presumptuous to wish, yet it cannot be
wrong to think of sudi things ; for it seems to
be an indisputable fact, that however inadequate
a Church may be to its own internai wants, it
must on no account suspend its Missionary
duties ; that this is in fact thè circulation of its
life’s blood, which would lose its vital power if
it never flowed forth to thè extremities, but
curdled at thè heart. We may hope that a
statement of thè highest aims, and most com-
prehensive definition of duty, will be a means
of raising thè whole tone of our minds ; that
we shall feci thereby thè full weight of thè
unfulfilled purposes of our ministry; and be


humbled, even in thè mklst of our success, by
thinking how far greater is thè work which stili
remains, than that which has been done.
Surely such a work as this requires a Clergy
of rare devotion and steadfastness of heart. If
this be a land remarkable for thè abundance of
Divine gifts; a land of promise, which has
already witnessed a signal outpouring of thè
Holy Spirit ; if it be fitted by its positìon and
its climate to be a Missionary centre to thè
Pacific Ocean ; if it be blessed with a settled
forra of Church government, unfettered by con-
nexion with thè State, and therefore free to seek
thè mind of Christ in holy convocations of thè
Clergy ; if we bave neither wealth nor temperai
power to mislead us, or to make us an occasìon
of offence to others ; if thè whole heart and thè
single eye of every one of us, in our free state,
can be given to Christ and to thè minìstry of His
word ; with such advantages as these, what holy
men ought we to be in all manner of con-
yersation ! What talents we bave received !
What an account we shall bave to gìve ! W hat
a work is laid before us ! How can we be
equal to these things ?
Extraordìnary cases cannot be judged by
common rules. One frequent cause of neglect
of duty is thè applying to our own state a stan-
dard of principio borrowed from another. I


liave endeavoured to show that we have much
in this Diocese which is peculiar to our own
ministry ; many hlessings and gifts imparted to
ns as a Missionary Church; many exemptions
from evils which press heavily upon our brethren
at horne ; and I have brought these subjects
forward, not as reasons for bcasting, but as
arguments for a greater earnestness of life, and
a more entire devotion to thè work of Christ.
If, in thè course of thè following suggestìons, I
should seem to speak of duties which do not
fall upon thè English Clergy, I can assure you
that I desire nothing more than I believe to be
fairly due to thè peculiarity of our positìon.
I would not innovate upon thè practice of thè
Church of England, but rather attempi, to carry
out ber discipline in full. May God give us
strength and wisdom to use our present advan-
tages to set forth thè excellence of our Holy
Mother, by showing what ber System might
have been, if all thè wise intentions of her
founders had been carried into effect.
Doctrine. —It will not need many words to
prove to you that purity of doctrine is thè one
great point upon which thè success of our min-
istry must depend. To preach thè pure and
undefiled word of God, drawn from thè fountain-
head, and unmixed with glosses and traditions
of men, must be thè earnest endeavour of our


lives, and thè subject of our most frequent
prayers. To set before thè eyes of our people
thè Saviour of mankind in all thè varied acts of
His ministry ; to refer all our hopes of pardon
to His death, and all our hopes of heaven to
His resurrection ; all thè efficacy of our prayers
to His intercession ; all our comfort in sorrow,
our strength under temptation, and our truth in
doctrine, to thè gift of His Holy Spirit ; this
avili he thè tone of Christian preaching which
will touch thè hearts of our hearers, and thereby
correct their lives. No reasoned morality, or
human philosophy, or example of men, can
avail without this; nor even with it, unless
they bow thè knee before thè one name which
is above every name, and consent to be thè
handmaids, and not thè rivals of thè Gospel.
On thè subject matter of your doctrine what
shall I say? You have heard of controversies,
as thè roaring of a distant sea; but thè troubles
which have perplexed thè world have not ex-
tended to us. Our duties have been so intensely
practical ; we have seen so rauch of reai sorrow,
and lìved so mudi in fear fronti without; that
we have had little or no experience of fightings
from within. If I were now to enter upon thè
discussion of disputed points of doctrine, I
might impair thè simplicity of your faith, and
chili that warm and childlike love with which


we renard our Mother Church, and are blind to
O '
her faults, or even love lier with all ber faults.
Even if we felt any doubts among ourselves, we
should all agree in concealing them from our
o O
native converts; for it is our duty to teacli
them thè clearest doctrines of thè Gospel, to
explain to them all things really necessary to
salvation, and to withhold everythìng which
could encourage a false pride of human reason,
or distract their simple minds with thè sub-
tleties of theologìcal discusslon. The very
defect of language would deter us from at-
c!) O
tempting to ìmpart to them thè refinements of
speculative opinion, upon which even our own
wisest and best Divines are not yet agreed. It
may be well to bear this cautìon in mind, be-
cause it is a common fading of human nature
to attach an undue importance to thè present
question, however small it may be in comparison
with thè interests of thè world at large, and of
eternity. A mind thus prejudìced begins to
teach at thè point where its teaching ought
more naturally to end : some deep and myste-
rious question relating to a sacrameli! is raised
before thè minds of men, who have not yet
known or felt thè efficacy of a Savìour’s blood,
or thè sanctifying influence of thè Spirit. The
prejudice of thè teacher’s mind inverts thè
naturai order of his instruction. He teaches


first, what seems most important to himself ;
but he does not reflect that in his own course
of religious experience, he had mastered thè
simpler and more vital doctrines before he carne
to those which are abstruse, and that to teach
children, or those who are stili babes in Christ,
he must become a child again; he must feed
his hearers with thè sincere milk of thè word,
by which he grew himself when he was of a
like stature with them in his growth of grace.
He must unite thè qualìties of wisdom and
simplicity, with which our Lord, in thè first act
of His public ministry, astonished thè Doctors
at Jerusalem.
Of controversy in generai I would say, that
it is thè bane of thè Gospel among a heathen
people. When we preach to them of one God
of perfect truth and wisdom; and one Mediator
betwcen God and man; and one Spirit per-
vading all things, and sanctifyìng all thè people
of God ; they can understand far more easily thè
mysterìous doctrine of thè Trinity, how all thè
works and Persons of that heavenly Being
agree in one ; than, how that Being can be thè
one, only, true God, and yet His doctrine and
His worship not be one also. I can never for-
get thè poìnted illustratìon of thè old chìef of
Taupo, when I asked him why he stili refused
to believe. “ Shew me thè way,” said he. “ I


bave come to thè cross road. Three ways
branch out before me. Each teacher says his
own way is thè best. I am sitting down and
doubting which guide I shall follow.” He re-
mained in doubt ; till a landslip burst from thè
mountain under which he lived, and rushing
down at midnight, overwhelmed him with all
his house. In another place I have found a
fìerce dispute on thè subject of thè Reforma-
tion ; thè one side alleging thè fires of Queen
Mary’s reign ; thè other retorting similar acts
of Edward and Elizabeth. Ido not scruple to
avow my opinion, that such subjects are not
merely injurious to thè influence of thè Church,
but are even a hindrance to faith in thè Chris-
tian religion itself. To commit a living body
to thè flames, an act which a New Zealander
would scarcely have done, in his wildest
paroxysm of savage fury, or in thè indulgence
of thè most devilish revenge, can not be recon-
ciled with thè history of a merciful Saviour,
and thè doctrines of a Gospel of Peace. That
such deeds should have been done in thè name
of Christ, after thè Gospel had been preached
on earth fìfteen hundred years, must be to him
a doubt, admitting of no solution, but sapping
thè very foundations of his faith.
The simple course seems to be to teach truth,
rather by what it is, than by what it is not.


Let us give our converts thè true standard, and
they will apply it themselves to thè discovery
and contradiction of error. Above all, let us
teach them thè right use of thè Holy Scriptures,
by prayer, by class reading, by catechising, by
comparison of parallel passages, by analysis of
doctrines, by careful definition of words, and
every other method by whìch they may be able
to refu te error, and give a reason for thè faith
that is in them. All this may be done with no
other weapon than thè Word of God itself;
and there is no other which a simple people can
wield.
Much of what has been said applies also to
our relations with our own countrymen. We
cannot expect unanimity ; let us at least seek
peace. Much has been written upon unity,
but as yet little has been done towards a union
of all relìgious bodies in one. This at least
seems to be clear, that sudi a union, however
highly desirable, must not be effected by a com-
promise of truth. When all shall have tho-
roughly examined thè grounds of their own
belief, and rejected such errors as they may find,
then it is certain that all must come to unity of
doctrine, because all will have been conformed
to thè same unalterable standard of Truth.
To fuse together all religious persuasions in
their present state, while they are stili mixed


with alloy, would be to make thè process of
refinement stili more difficult than before. Let
each purify itself to thè uttermost, and then thè
day of union wìll not be far distant. In thè
meantime, let Christian nnity be thè subject of
our prayers, as it was of our Lord’s, and wìth
especial reference to our pecnliar ministry for
thè conversion of thè Heathen.
It follows from what has been said, that in
thè present state of thè Christian world we
should seek peace rather than union with othcr
religious bodies. We bave no power to com-
promise or alter one jot or tittle of our own
doctrines, or liturgy, or System. That there
are errors in them we are not prepared to deny,
so far as they are thè work of men, interpretìng
imperfectly thè oracles of God. But we can
assert thìs ; that our statements of doctrine and
forms of worship bave been submitted to thè
most searching inquiry of friends and advcr-
saries during three hundred years; and that this
fìery trial has discovered nothing which could
invalidate our claim to be a Church in which
thè pure Word is preached, and thè Sacraments
are duly administered. We find our version
of thè Bible generally received by English
Christìans, and circulated by them in millions
throughout all thè nations of thè earth among
which our race and language has been spread.


Our Liturgy and Articles are adopted by some
communities, differing in otlier respects from
ourselves, and are held in such respect, even by
those who do not receive them, that I bave
heard it said by one who objected on principio
to all forms of prayer, that he thought thè
Prayer-book thè most sublime composition in
thè English language, next to our version of
thè Bible. We admit then that there may be
errors in our System, for it was framed by
fallible men ; but we bave yet to learn what
those errors are. It is not for usto search
them out, for we love our Church with thè
affection of children ; we cannot see ber blem-
ishes, and we would not curiously pry into them
if we could. If they are forced upon our
notice ; if we are convinced that souls are being
lost, that our blindness and partiality is dotage
rather than love ; then let thè powers of our
Convocation be revived ; let holy Bishops and
Archbishops, mature in years, in piety, and in
judgment, meet in prayer, and in thè grace of
thè Holy Spirit, and correct whatever may be
amiss ; but let not us, who bave again and
agaìn expressed our assent to all thè doctrines
of our Church, presume to alter or to omit one
single word of that sacre! deposit of prayer
and truth, which martyrs attested with their
dying breath, and sealed with their life’s blood.


Your hearts, I am sure, will go with mine,
wlien I urge you to pray for God’s grace that
we may make our New Zealand Church a pure
and fruitful shoot of its Anglican Mother, as
we are assured that she is a living brandi ot
thè vine of Christ. Let no fear of idle sus-
picions, or hard names, or uncharitable impu-
tations, deter us from working out, so far as
God may give us strength, thè whole distinctìve
principle of our own Church. If we desire to
resist Popery, let us follow closely thè footstep?
of those fearless men who knew best thè power
of Pome, by thè death-struggles which they
waged against it. A mere weak and frittered
imitation of their System, divested of its nerve,
its self-denial, and its discipline, will never cope
with that gigantic power whose arms now en-
compass thè world with an assertion of uni-
versa! empire. We must ask ourselves thè
question, why, in thè face of light, and reason,
and thè issue of millions of Bibles, and tens of
millions of tracts; in spìte of sermons, and
meetings, and public education; stili, not in
England only, but in every one of her colonìes,
thè same dark front of error is advanced, with
no one assumption abated; no one doctrine
reformed ; no one concession made to thè spirit
of thè age ; nothing compromised to gain pro-
selytes ; but all combìned, as of old, with con-


summate policy, to subjugate opinion, and to
enslave thè world. The answer is, that thè
power most fitted to defend thè trnth is not
united withìn itself; that we are wasting in
intestine quarrels thè powers which ought to
he directed against thè common adversary.
To he strong in defence of our own doctrlne,
we must he united araono; ourselves. And to
o
this end we must have some uniform standard
of agreement. It is little to say that we have
that standard in thè Artìcles, thè Liturgy, and
thè Homilies, unless we are prepared to sacrifice
every point of private feeling and judgment to
make our assent to those formularies both prac-
tical and sincere. If we have views of our own
opposed to them ; if we promise to use them,
and then find a conscientìous objection ; if we
invent for ourselves some gloss or sidelong
meaning, by which we can assent and dissent at
thè same time ; it is no uncharitable censure to
say, that we might stili have been good and
useful laymen within thè Church, but that we
ought never to have offered ourselves as candi-
dates for thè ministry.
Stili I am not prepared to expect that all
men’s mìnds will at once receive thè doctrines
of thè Church exactly in thè same sense. No
human writing has ever yet been entirely
exempt from misconstruction. It may be that


some of you will hold peculiar opinions, be-
lieving them in your liearts to be in agreement
witli thè doctrines of thè Church.
such, it is my solemn and deliberate purpose,
never, except in extreme cases, to issue any
public or authoritative declaration. As Clergy-
raen of thè Church of England we have all
subscribed again and again thè same Articles
of Bellgion. No plainer words are likely to
be written than those which our holy Fathers
vveighed with prayer, and reading, and medita-
tion, It is not likely that a mere degenerate
stripling in a line of giants can add force or
dignity to thè tradition of his forefathers. My
own comments on thè Articles must, by thè
nature of thè case, be weaker and more liable
to crror than thè Articles themselves. But this
we may do, under God’s blessing, by brotherly
conference among ourselves. We have stores
of sound learning, thè accumulated wisdom of
ages; we can trace thè thoughts and inter-
pretations of thè holiest men through every age
of thè Church ; we will fetter ourselves to no
party, to no age, to no prejudice; butwherever
we find holiness, there we will expect to find
also light ; and if we discern at every point thè
footsteps of a Cranmer or a Parker who has
gone before, and see that thè sense of Scrip-
ture was traced by those patient seekers of


Truth, through thè mind of every faithful and
pious commentator in all ages of thè Church;
and then emhodied by them in their statements
of doctrìne, as that interpretation of thè Word
of God, which had been received always, in all
places, and by all men; we will accept their
judgment rather than our own, because no one
can sqjt up his own opinion against such a cloud
of witnesses, without assuming to he wiser and
more pious than thè whole Christian world.
- In thè use of these means of inquiry we will
not hind ourselves to one class of commentators,
to thè exclusion of others. We will attach no
superstitious reverence to thè name of a Father,
nor avoid thè work of a nonconformist with
undue suspicion. We will take no uninspired
composition upon trust, as an infallible autho-
rity ; but endeavour to use each according to
its reai worth, expecting to meet with error in
all, but hoping to be able to separate it from
thè truth. Next to thè comparison of Scrip-
ture with itself, there is no surer way of
ascertaining thè truth, than thè unprejudiced
comparison of thè thoughts of holy men, en-
dued with thè same means of grace to draw
forth wisdom from thè same unpolluted source.
We may add to these means of attaining to
purity of Doctrine, thè careful study of thè
originai languages of Holy Scripture. Contro-


versìes are often waged upon thè words of thè
version, which could bave no place if both thè
contending parties understood thè originai. I
am well aware that thè present state of thè
Diocese allows bnt little leisure for theological
O
study, and I bave abstained on that account
from exacting thè full standard of acquirement,
which I may hereafter expect from Candidates
for Holy Orders. For thè order of Deacons
especially, I bave relaxed thè usuai quali-
fication; to make thè way to Holy Orders
open to many faithful men, who, by thè very
nature and sphqjre of their duties, were not
likely to bave made much advance in literature
or speculative theology. But I must not on
this account be supposed to undervalue thè
knowledsre of thè originai lano'ua<2:es of thè
O O O o
Bible, or to believe that a clerica! education
can be complete without them. In thè exam-
ination for Priest’s orders, I am not prepared
to relax thè English standard of qualification.
But there is one aid to truth of Doctrine
from which we may hope for better fruit than
even from learning itself : it is thè simplicìty of
our condi tion, and thè practical character of
our duties. We are representatives of no par-
ties in thè Church ; on thè contrary, we should
probably all agree in thinking, that thè very
name of a party is contrary to thè nature of a


Church. We live for thè most part widely
separated one from another, with little oppor-
tunity of conference, much less with any lei-
sure for cabal. The absorbìng interest of our
duties, thè simple faith of our native converts,
thè seclusion of our lives, all tend to dìvest us
of party prejudice, and to confine our thoughts
to thè really essential points of doctrine and
discipline. We could not be theologians if we
would; and thus thè groundwork of contro-
versy, which rests eommonly upon points too
subtle for men of ordinary education, is taken
away. We can receive thè doctrine of thè
Atonement in all its fulness, because thè one
thing' that we feci to be necessary is, that there
must be one to reconcile usto Grod. No human
substitutes for this one hope of salvation are
likely to delude us in our isolated ministry.
We can hold no specious reasonings with men
of proud and self-conceited spirit; we bave no
counsel of our fellow men, which we can seek
for at all times ; thè greatest part of our minis-
try is carried on with no other aid than thè
Holy Spirit ; and therefore we must be led to
rely upon that support alone, and upon thè
Saviour by whom it was given to us. We
eannot fail to be conscious day by day how
helpless we should be, if an unseen and Al-
mighty arm did not bear us up and carry us


onward. Thus sliut out from intercourse with
others of our own order, we lose indeed thè
benefit of thè guidance of higher minds; we
have no Gamaliels at whose feet we can sit;
but, as it is God’s providence to compensate all
spiritual losses in his servants by some peculiar
blessing, we gain also an exemption from pre-
judice and party, we are not blinded by an
excess of zeal for thè peculiar opinìons of our
teachers ; for we have no teacher and no guide
but Christ and his Holy Spirit, no standard of
truth but his written Word, no authority to
which we bow, but thè voice of his Church.
The events which for past years have convulsed
thè Church of England seem to prove that it
is better in many cases to have no human
teacher, to be a Baptist in thè midst of thè
wilderness, often cast down for want of friends,
and often erring in simplicity and ignorance,
than to attach our hearts, and defer our judg-
ment, to thè wisest, thè most pious, thè best
beloved, thè most self-denying of men: or to
live in thè very metropolis of knowledge, with
store of books, amidst learned professors, with
opportunities of counsel, leisure for meditation,
with daily Services, and moving sermons, with
all appliances to knowledge, and all aids to
feeling. The search after heavenly Truth may
be as hopeful in thè lonely Mission station, or


even in thè vast solitude of a New Zealand
foresi, as in thè schools of theology, or thè
retirement of a college.
Another aid to purity of Doctrine is thè
Book of Common Prayer. We are scarcely
conscious of thè effect which has been produced
upon our minds since childhood by this prac-
tical commentary upon thè Bible. It has
reduced to System and applied to practice thè
doctrines of thè Gospel. It has taught usto
analyze and dìstinguish thè varìous acts of
Chrìst’s ministry : to express our wants, and to
confess our sins, in language thè most appro-
priate that could be used ; it has arranged thè
whole Christian year in a series of devotional
exercises, to bring before us thè whole circle of
our Christian faith and duty, so that nothing
be omitted. On every Sunday in thè year thè
Prayer-book places before us thè example of
Christ, thè teaching of thè Holy Spìrit, or thè
mystery of thè Trinity, diyiding first thè bread
of life from Advent to Trinity, that it may be
more readily received, and then uniting all
Persons and acts in one, and allotting thè other
half of thè year to thè contemplation of thè
undivided Godhead. This careful tracing of
thè footsteps of Christ and his apostles cannot
fail to lead us on in thè path of true doctrine to
a closer likeness to our Lord ; and this is thè


Service which our Prayer-book has rendered us
from our youth up. It is easy to undervalue a
privilege and a blessing when we bave reaped
thè benefit of it. When thè Liturgy of thè
Church has secured to us thè habit of thinking
clearly and practically upon all thè several
doctrines and acts of Christ, then we may be
able to use extemporaneous prayer, with less
danger either of error or of omission. But is
it not true, that all thè bodies which bave most
frequently and irretrievably fallen into error of
doctrine, bave been those which bave given up
thè holy guide of thè devotions of their
fathers, and bave trusted to thè individuai piety
of thè Minister, as he to thè inspiration of thè
moment ? They dìd not reflect that thè wor-
ship of a whole congregation was imperilled
upon thè mind and upon thè lips of one man,
pray he well or ili ; and not only their devotions
for thè time, but thè soundness also of their
doctrine for generations to come. And so it
carne to pass, that congregations swerved from
thè faith, and passed into heresy by such im-
perceptible degrees, that thè most searching
inquiry can scarcely ascertain thè time of their
first deviation from thè truth. Of those who
stili hold thè fundamental doctrines of thè Gros-
pel, in separation from thè Church, there are
many, I believe, who are ready to confess, that,


under God, they owe much of theìr stabilìty of
doctrine to thè scriptural System embodied in
our Liturgy and Articles of Religion.
It is not my intention to obtmde upon your
attention more than is necessary, any personal
matter affecting only myself ; but as I am re-
sponsive to you in my public character, and
you bave a right to know my opinion, I may
briefly state once for all, and I trust I shall
never bave occasion to repeat thè assertion,
that so far as an unworthy child can love its
parent, thè Church of England has not a more
dutiful or loving son than myself. You, I well
know, bave never suspected me of any contrary
opinion, but bave put your hands to a touching
declaration, presented to me even with tears,
that both in public ministratìon, and private
ìntercourse, I had borne no other testimony
than such as accorded with thè Catholic doc-
trìnes of thè Anglican Church. But since it
has pleased others (whom God forgive ! ) to put
forth vague suspiclons, and to attach uncharit-
able names, I hereby enter my deliberate pro-
test agaìnst all attempts to sow discord among
thè united Clergy of this infant Church, and in
their name and my own I declare solemnly, (if
there be one dìssentient, let him now speak and
interrupt me,) that to thè best of our know-
ledge and means of grace we bave acted and


will act only upon thè principles of thè Anglican
brandi of thè Church Catholic : we trust that
her Baptism, through thè power of thè Holy
Spirit, has made us thè children of God, thè
members of Christ, and inheritors of thè king-
dom of heaven ; that her Liturgy will be thè
guide and strength of our lives ; that her Com-
munion will be thè comfort of our death-beds ;
and that her Burlai Service will be offered up
over our graves. We cannot be dissatisfied
with our Holy Mother, till we bave requited
all her benefits ; we can desire no better guide,
till we bave overpast her course of teaching,
and are craving in vain for higher and more
spiritual gifts. But while we cannot but sit
down and mourn over our own deficiencìes ;
while we see thè holiest of her gifts, thè nerves
and sinews of her System, her diffusive ener-
gies, impaired by our infirmity or neglect ; if
there be blame on thè Church of England, let
us bear it ourselves, as her Members and Min-
isters, and wait in faith, in patience, and in
prayer, till thè day shall come when it will
please God to awaken usto higher deeds of
Christian enterprìse, to more earnest self-denial,
to more entire devotion, to deeper piety, to
more Constant perseverance. If there were no
other thought to bind usto our own com-
munion, it would be enough to trace thè signs


already begìnnìng to be seen thronghout thè
world, that God has mercies stili in store for
us, and designa to make our Mother Church a
praise upon earth.
More than this, it is said by some, is required
of thè Bisliops of“ thè Church. We are called
upon to join thè ranks of unreasoning men,
who, while they are tolerating and uniting with
every other form of error, are pouring out their
unmeasured invective against one. We dare
<D
not so abuse our sacred office, as to lend our-
selves to cursing, when we bave received com-
mandment to bless. May God of his infinite
mercy bless even our bitterest enemies, every
class of Christians, who, with thè misguided
zeal of Saul, persecute our Church, and think
that they do God Service : may He have mercy
upon thè Church of Rome, reform all her
errors, pardon all her subtleties, and abate all
her false assumptions; and so restore to all
Christendom that unity of heart and purpose,
in which thè wounds of religion were healed in
thè first ages, by thè Catholic Councils of thè
Church. And in a more private, and therefore
on a lower ground, on which I might have been
silent, if I had not been called upon to speak,
lest silence should be misconstrued into agree-
ment with error, or fear of rebuking it ; bere
also, when we are expected to censure, we find


it rather in our hearts to bless—to bless those
servants of God, who, wben much of our apo-
stolica! discipline had been decayed and lost,
devoted all thè energies of their mind, and all
thè intensity of their prayers, to building up
again thè walls which seemed to be tottering
to their fall—those three men, mighty in thè
Scriptures, who, when they found us hemmed
in with enemies, and thirsting for Catholic
unity, went forth to draw water for us from thè
well of primitive antiquity ; but cne was taken
captive by thè foreign armies which had
usurped thè well. May we not respect thè
motive, commend thè effort, and bless thè men,
even while we reject thè gift?
You are entitled to receive thìs statement of
my feelings, that you may know how far I
syrapathise with thè religious raovement of
which Oxford was thè centre, and at what point
I stop. lam not called upon to censure men
whose private character I revere, while I differ
widely from thè conclusion to which some of
them have been led. While it seemed that thè
one object of all their endeavours was to
develope in all its fulness thè actual System of
thè Anglican Church, neither adding ought to
it, nor taking away ought from it : but purify-
ing its corruptions, calling forth its latent
energies, encouraging its Priesthood to higher


aims, and to a more holy and self-denying life ;
exhorting usto fast, and watch, and pray, more
frequently and more earnestly ; to be more
abundant in our alms-giving, more diffusive in
our charity ; and to that end to retrench our
expenditure, and to look upon ourselves as thè
stewards of God—in one word, while they
seemed to teach usto do in our own System and
ritual what thè apostles did in their days, and
what our own Church stili prescribes; I felt
that I could not dìsobey their calling, because
it was not theirs, but thè voice of my Holy
Mother whom I had sworn to obey, and thè
example of thè apostles which it was my heart’s
desire to follow. But when a change carne
upon thè spirit of their teaching, and it seemed
as if our own Church were not good enough to
retain their allegiance ; when, instead of thè
Unity for which we had prayed, we seemed to
be on thè verge of a frìghtful schism ; then in-
deed I shrunk back, as if a voice had spoken
withìn me : Not one step further ; for I love my
Church in which I was born to God, and by
His help I will love her unto thè end.
The doctrines, then, my reverend and Chris-
tian brethren, which it is our holy commission
to preach, are those which have been drawn
from thè pure written Word of God, received
throughout thè Churches of all Christendom,


and embodied in tlie Liturgy and Formularies
of our own Anglican branch. To tliese we bave
again and again declared our assent, in thè most
solemn and unqualified manner, admitting of
no doublé meanings or mental reservations ;
but with our whole hearts, and in all simplicity
and faithfulness, avowing our belief that, so far
as thè writings of uninspired men can embody
thè doctrines of Revelation, our Liturgy and
Articles do fully and faithfully represent thè
Word which God first revealed by his prophets,
and then lastly spake to us by his Son.
It cannot be necessary to spend many words
to suggest to you how these pure and holy
doctrines are to be preached. With our hearts,
with our lives, with all our mind, and with all
our strength : and, if need be, even with our
deaths. And if death itself be within thè scope
of a preacher’s oblìgatìon, mudi more everything
that Comes short of death. Our earnestness and
self-denial is now all that we have to attest our
ministry, instead of thè signs and miracles of
thè apostolic age. Yet stili there is a power
given to thè meek and patient servant of Christ
which none of his adversaries can gainsay or
resist. Stili there is a inorai beauty in thè feet
of him that bringeth good tidings, and publish-
eth peace. Stili there are hearts that bum at
thè breaking of thè bread, and consciences that


tremble when they bear of righteousness, tem-
perance, and judgment to come; stili there are
awakened sinners, who ask on bended knees,
“ What must I do to be saved ?” and doubting
readers of thè word of God, who desire to be
guided, that they may understand what they
read : and to all these it is our appointed
ministry to dispense thè pure Word and thè
Holy Sacraments of Christ ; and above all, that
word of words, ic Believe in thè Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shalt be saved.”
The subject itself will teach us thè manner of
our preaching. Who can be tame and listless
when he feels that souls are pending upon his
ministry of thè word ? Commissioned as we are
to proclami doctrines so awfully, it may be so
fatally, true, can we teli them as if they were
mere fables, uninteresting to ourselves, and
unimportant to others ? Sermons will be
effective only so far as they are expressive of
reai feeling. No artificial gestures, or studied
cadences, or polished sentences, or flowers of
rhetoric, will supply thè want of that inimitable
grace, thè abundance of thè heart, out of which
thè mouth speaks. This is thè true, and per-
haps thè only distinction which we can draw.
All shallow opinions on thè use of action, or ex-
temporaneous delivery, are thè ordinary error
of party spirit, which will allow nothing to be


rìght but what it practises itself. Everything
is rìght which is done to edifying, and every-
thing is edifying which proceeds from an honest
and true heart. If there be any deception, any
affectation of display, any desire of human
praise; anything, in short, but thè pure love
of souls, and thè thankful remembrance of
Chrìst’s death ; then thè charm of preaching is
broken ; it may amuse thè hearer and exalt thè
preacher, but it will not touch thè heart or
reform thè life ; it will not reclaim thè sinner,
or save thè lost.
This inward feeling, which is thè soul of
Christian eloquence, must first sprìng from a
sense of our own unworthiness. We must teli
to our fellow-sìnners what God has done for
our souls. This will beget a fellow-feelìng
which, next to thè truth itself, will give thè
greatest weight to our words. If we preach
as sinners to our fellow-sinners, not only shall
we, preach thè truth, but also they who bear
us will feel our words to be true. This fellow-
feeling is thè soul of thè parochial ministry,
thè secret of its influence and power over thè
hearts of men. He who, in thè exercise of his
cure of souls, Stores up his mind, and softens
his heart, with thè confessions of contrite sin-
ners; and watches thè slow and paìnful pro-
cesses of moral cure, by which a depraved life is


gradually reformed ; or hears thè solenni thoughts
of dying men, and thè remorse of a conscience ili
at case ; and feels in every case for his beloved
parishioner as if he were his brother or his
friend : that preacher will never lack argument
for his sermons ; and thè word preached by him
will bave such success that it will never be sjioken
in vain. We, who bave tastedthese joys of thè
parochial minìstry, and from it bave been called
to thè Episcopato, can teli from our own expe-
rìence, how much we bave lost in ceasino- to be
thè bosom friends of thè sufferìng poor, and thè
dying penitent. It is well for us, if we can
fìnd compensation for thè loss, in ìmparting to
those upon whom we lay our hands, thè same
source of ministerial comfort—Live in thè
hearts of your people, rejoice with them that
do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. So
will your words never fail of power, nor your
minìstry lack its meed of joy.
Sacraments. —The second great part of your
duty as mìnisters of thè true Church is to take
care that thè Holy Sacraments are duly admin-
istered. On this point, as I bave already said
on thè subject of doctrine, I presume that no
differences of opinion exist among Clergymen
who bave subscribed thè same Articles of
Eeligion, and solemnly promìsed to use thè
same Liturgy. If in my intercourse with you


I should fìnd that differences of opinion exist
on thè subject of thè Sacraments, it is my wish
to he allowed to discuss such points in private,
with cairn and thoughtful reference to thè Bible,
and, if necessary, to thè best commentators ;
that any differences which are found among
ourselves may at least be concealed from our
dock, and be no stumbling-block to therm
Most earnestly would I deprecate thè introduc-
tion of any modern publications of a polemical
kind on these solemn subjects, lest we should
be led away from thè single and simple object
of seeking thè tmth, into party spirit and a
blind following in thè track of some human
teacher. We ha ve thè Bible, and that, if
rightly used, will generally be enough ; but, if
not, then let us take some age remote enough
from our own, and see how thè same subjects
were discussed in thè time of our forefathers,
and in what forni thè truth emerged out of thè
cloud. We shall find, unhappily, bitterness
enough, but it will be an historical strife, not
tending to a breach of charity among ourselves.
We need not awaken new passions, or take thè
burden of them upon ourselves ; for if heat and
strife could bave elicited thè truth, thè virulence
of Church controversies would have set all such
questions at rest for ever. We shall rise from
such an inquiry, furnished with all thè argu-


ments on both sides of every question ; and I
thìnk, with thè strongest loathing of thè un-
christian tone and temper in which, too often,
those arguments were advanced. We shall gain
frorn thè experience of former controversies,
both thè clemente of truth, and thè warning to
use them rather for meditation than for strife.
The age of thè Reformation, more especially,
will enable usto examine thè Anglican doctrine
of thè Sacraments ; and will teach us at thè
sanie time thè strongest lesson of thè length to
which controversy may be carried.
There are some generai suggestions which
I would offerto your notice, in thè hope that
we may be so guided, even in thè points on
which we differ, by a spìrit of charity and can-
dour, as to be able to seek for truth, as men
who value it above every other good ; and yet
to hold fast thè bond of brotherly concord one
with another. First, let us avoid all contests of
mere words. Ecfore we discuss a subject, it
becomes usto define well thè sense in which all
technical words are to be used. Regeneration,
Sacrament, Adoption, Renewal, Conversion,
Justification, Sanctification, are words of very
wide and generai import ; and bave been used
variously by religious writers, and by different
persuasions of Christians. Men of piety and
dispassionate judgment seldom dispute about


thè realities of doctrines : but thè names which
men bave given to thè leading poìnts of thè
Gospel are contìnually discusscd ; chiefly, as it
scerns, bccause two persona may use thè same
name to express very differcnt acts of grace.
What fcarful danger, for instance, there is in
thè light use of solemn words ; when, in thè
current language of thè day, some men are said
to talee a low, and some a high yiew of thè Sacra-
mcnts. What is thè reai of these words?
If we mean by a Sacrament an act orordinance
of Christ, it is impossible to forni a low opinion
of it ; if we mean by it an act or ministry
of man, it is equally impossible to think highly
of it. So far, then, as we bclieve a Sacrament
to be an act of Christ, ordained by Ilis example
and His word, blessed by His spiritual presencc,
accomplished by His power; we cannot think
lowly or lightly of any act of Ilirn, whose
shoe’s latchet even thè grcatest of thè chìldren
of men was not worthy to bear. On thè other
hand, it is impossible for usto believe, that
a Sacrament is in any respect thè act of a man ;
for we shall all be found to agrec in thè words
of thè twcnty-sixth Artide, that Sacramcnts be
effectual, because of Christ’s institution and
promise, although they be ministered by evil
men. What then is meant by a low view of a
Sacrament ? We can understand thè high and


holy feeling with which all truc Christiana look
upon everything that is so uniteci with Christ
as to he part of himself. St. Paul did not put
thè cross of Christ in thè place of Christ, when
he said, God forbìd that I should glory, save
in thè cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. So
neither do wc put thè Sacramcnts in thè place
of Christ, when wc teach our children that they
are means of gracc, and plcdgcs to assurc us
thcrcof. When wc speak of a Sacramcnt, we
mean an act of Christ, and thereby no more to
be disparagcd or thought lightly of, than thè
Saviour himself. Tt is true, that an outward
mìnistry seerns to he given to men ; but not so,
that they can add to, or irnpair thè gracc and
power of thè Sacramcnt: exccpt so far as to
in alce it incffectual to thcrnselvcs, and a means
of conderanation rather than of gracc. So also
there was a hem of Christ’s garrnent, which
a falthful woman touched, and was healed : and
there was a brazen serpent, to which thè Isracl-
ites looked up and were saved: but they werc
not saved by what they saw or by what they
touched; but, (it is truly said in Wisdom,) by
“ Thec, that art thè Saviour of all.”
That every act and every ordinancc of Christ
must be in itself a means of grace, must be
evident frorn thè consideration that God can
do nothing in vain. It may he permitted for
wise cnds that some men should rnake thè grace
D


of God of none effect ; but they cannot make
grace to be no grace; they cannot alter thè
character of thè Divine perfection by thè im-
perfection of man. God cannot be said to
hold his power subject to any condition or con-
tingency whatever: his grace is no less divine
and perfect, when it is rejected of man, than
when it is received. Christ was no less thè
Son of God when he carne to his own, and his
own received him not, than when he was seen
of angels, and received up into glory. And
everything which is His, His Cross, His Body,
His Blood, His Sacraments, even thè hem of
His garment, may be at His will a means of
grace, as part of Hìmself, and so united with
His own Divine nature, as to be able to trans-
mit thè power and virtue of thè Godhead. Can
w r e believe that handkerchiefs and aprons car-
ried from thè bodies of thè Apostles, were thè
means of healing to thè sick, and that even thè
shadow of an apostle was believed to have a
like virtue; and yet doubt whether Christ im-
parts His power to any ordìnances of His own
appointment, which are stili His own acts, not
thè acts of His ministers ; for we are but thè
clay which He moulds according to His will,
when he puts forth His heavenly power to give
sight to thè blind.
Whenever therefore I speak to you of a
Sacrament, I wish to be understood to mean an


act of Christ himself, a covenanted course of
grace by which He works according to His own
appointment and will. Let us be thè clay, thè
hem of thè garment, thè handkerchief, thè
shadow, anything which may best express our
convictìon, that we are mere instruments in thè
hand of our Lord, and could bave no power at
all, except it were given us from above. We
can neither make nor mar a Sacrament, except
so far as to cut ourselves olf from all share in
it ; we can add nothing to its efficacy, except
thè generai power of intercessìon, by which, in
these as well as in every other ordinance, thè
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avaìleth much. It is not to exalt thè Priest-
hood that we think highly of thè Sacraments;
but it is to give glory to Christ.
We come now to inquire what is necessary
to thè due elfect of thè Sacraments. Our
course of thought upon this subject will flow
naturally from thè first recognition of thè holi-
ness and excellence of a Sacrament in itself.
For if a gem be beyond all price, though its
setting can never be of equal yalue, yet thè
owner will take care that it shall be of thè
purest metal, and thè best workmanship that
can be obtained. Our belief that thè Sacra-
ments are thè work of Christ himself, must lay
upon us thè obligatìon of seeking for thè best


System by which they rnay bc duly minìstered.
But this System will always be thè mere set-
tìng, not tbc gena itself; and must ori no account
bc confounded with thè Sacrament. Such a
System tbc Fathers of thè Church of England
desired to frame ; and though mudi of their
intcntion has fallen into disuso, there scerns to
bc no part of it which docs not deserve to
be revived.
First, it is cvident tbat thè wbole Church
System for thè admìnistration of thè Sacrament
of Baptisrn depends upon thè sponsorial office,
and thè ordinance of Confermatimi. This is
thè safeguard which slie provides for thè in-
cstirnable jcwel of Baptisrnal gracc, which she
believes to bave been irnparted to thè ìnfant.
As ber prayer is, that every child regenerated
in Baptisrn rnay lead thè resi of bis fife accord-
ing to that beginning; so ber endeavour is, by
wisc prccautions and pious courisei, to act
in thè spirit of ber prayer, in training up
thè child of God to be a pcrfect man in thè
“rncasure of thè stature of thè fulness of
Christ.” The only valid objcctions that can be
madc to infant Baptisrn are grounded upon thè
neglcct of thè sponsorial dutics, and thè ornis-
sion of Confirmation. “ Corruptio optimi est
pessima,” is a sound rnaxim, tcaching us, that
to suffer a baptized child to grow up as a


heathen, is a sin of a dcadly kind ; bccause thè
more pure and holy bis state in infancy, so mudi
thè more deploratile will bc bis fall from grace.
Ifthejewel liad been of* srnall vaine, \ve should
not bave mourned for tbc loss of it: li ut wbat
remorse cari e ver atonc for tlie loss of a soni,
once born to be a cbild ol' God, and tben
suffered to perish by our neglect? It were
bettcr, .said our Lord, tbat a mi listone were
hanged about a man’s neck, and he drowned in
thè deep of thè sca, tlian tbat be should offend
onc of tbesc little oncs.
It is not ncccssary to say anytbing now of
parental care, because it bclongs to tbc laws of
nature, ratber than to tbc System of thè Churcb ;
but I invite your rnost serious attention to thè
sponsorial duties, in order tbat we may agrce
among oursclves in wbat way wc may earry out
tbc rulc of thè Churcb witb thè fullest elice t.
it appears to bc higbly ncccssary to reetrict thè
unlirnìtcd admission of all persone to thè office
of sponsor. The twenty-nintb Canon excludes
parente from thè office, witb a view, no doubt,
to provide an addìtìonal seeurity for thè edu-
cation of thè cbild; thè parente being presurned
to be al ready ìntcrcsted in thè work. Tbc
sanie Canon also excludes young persons, who
are not of agc to rceeive thè Holy Communion,
not, as some bave supposed, all persons, but


those who are regular Communìcants. The
♦ o
object clearly is to take care that none but per-
sona competently instructed in thè doctrines of
Christìanity be received as sponsors. Follow-
ing out thìs princìpio, it appears to be necessary
that we should carefully enrol thè names of all
persona in each district fit and willing to under-
take thè sponsorial office : and that thè parents
be allowed to select from that number thè per-
sona in whom they have most confìdence. It
will forni part of this pian to add a column
to thè Baptismal Regìster for thè names of thè
sponsors ; and that thìs should be considered in
thè lìght of a compact between them and thè
Church, that they will dìscharge to thè best
of theìr ability thè duties which they have
undertaken.
For thè satisfactìon of all persona soengagìng
themselves as godfathers and godmothers, it is
necessary that thè duties undertaken should be
clearly defined. The Church System has suffered
in this respect, not only from laxity of principio
and ignorance, but also from right feeling car-
ried to an excess. Those who are best qualified
for thè office often shrink from it for fear of
thè solemn responsibìlity which they incur.
The reckless promise every thìng, and discredit
thè System, which seems to connive at falsehood
and hypocrisy. It is evident that there must


be something wrong, when a provìsìon, so neces-
sary in itself, and so highly revered by many,
is for that verv reason refused and tbrust off
•/
upon thè unworthy.
We shall fìnd thè cause of thè evil in thè
rìght feeling which some carry to an excess, in
judging of thè duty of a sponsor. First, thè office
has no necessary connexion with thè sacrament
itself, for thè private baptìsm of ìnfants in sick-
ness follows out thè simple Scripture forra.
Nor is it thè taking upon ourselves thè Bap-
tisrnal Covenant on behalf of another, so as
to incur responsibìlity for his sins. Nor does
it involve any duty of temporal support, suoli
as a naturai parent owes to his chìldren ; for
then thè number of our godchildren must be
limited by our worldly substance, instead of
being increased according to our power to
impart spiritual good. But thè oblìgations of
thè office are those only which are defined in
thè Baptìsmal Service ; and are all summed up in
thè one duty of Christian teaching and example.
And surely no true Christian can shrink from
this, which is no more than his covenantcd duty
to give to others as freely as he has receìved.
An organized body of sponsors in every parish,
composed of thè Sunday School Teachers and
District Visitors, holding themselves responsìble
for thè education of their godchildren, till they


should bave dìscharged their obligatlon by pre-
senting them to thè Bishop to be confìrmed,
would do more to remove all prejudices against
Infant Baptisrn than thè most elaborate argu-
ments founded on thè practice of antiquity. Let
men be taught to believe that there is a seed
sown by thè Spirit in Baptisrn ; a daily grace to
give it increase ; an ordinance of thè Church to
fence it round ; and a tìme appointed for its
maturity, at which if it prove not itself to be a
fruitful brandi, it will be cut off from thè root.
All of us are interested in this tree of God’s
planting; and we must all combine our efforts,
that “thè wild boar of thè wood may not root it
up, nor thè wild beast of thè field devour it.”
In pressing this point upon thè laity, let us
not be unmindful of our own greater share in thè
same duty. The peculiar state of this country
makes it necessary that thè Clergy should con-
sider thè sponsorial duty as peculiarly their
own. There is an absolute impossibility in
many places of procuring duly qualified sponsors
for thè chìldren of thè settlers living dispersed
over wide tracts of country. One then of three
courses must be taken : either we must accept
unfit persons, which must be thè worst course
of all ; or we must omit that part of thè Bap-
tisraal Service, which I haveno power to allow ;
or, which is not only thè best, but thè only


course, we and our families must be ourselves
thè sponsors, with a written covenant with thè
parents, that we shall be allowed to discharge
thè duties to whlch we pledge ourselves. Every
one of us will thus become a Christian school-
master, bound to instruct thè young, and to
feed thè lambs of Christ, not only by his ordi-
nation promise, but by thè sponsorial obligation,
renewed again and again in frequent adminis-
tration of Holy Baptism. The System by which
I trust that God will enable usto disellarle
this duty in thè most comprehensive manner,
will be detaìled hereafter when I come to that
branch of my subject. There is one point of
view in which this clerical sponsorship particu-
larly recommends itself to our regard, namely,
that we may be enabled thereby to baptize
many children whom we must otherwìse reject,
from want of confìdence that thè parents will
bring them up to a life in accordance with their
baptismal promise. But I wish it to be dis-
tinctly understood, that I do not put this for-
ward as a compulsory System, or one of which
any parent may claim thè benefit as a right, but
as a mode in which Clergymen, at their own
discretion, may fulfil thè strict letter of thè rule
of thè Church, and at thè same' time admit
many infant children to baptism, with less
danger of thè sacrament being discredited by


thè ungodly lives of parents, or by thè igno-
rati ce of sponsors.
On thè administration of baptism to adulta
I have much to suggest, both from thè obser-
vation of thè present state of thè native people,
and from careful inquiry into thè course pursued
at all thè Mission stations. In my remarks
I shall endeavour to erabody thè substance of
all thè best opinions which I bave taken upon
thè subject.
It seems to be almost gencrally agreed, that
a hasty admission to baptism of candidates not
duly prepared, is a course full of danger at thè
present time, when thè first zeal of thè native
converts ìs begìnning to grow faint. There is
no resemblance between thè case of New Zea-
land and that of India, or other countries where
an obstinate superstìtìon, and a strict round of
positive duties, require thè whole course of a
man’s life and thouglits to be chancred before
O O
he can consent so ranch as to profess Chris-
tìanity. There is no pride of caste to be given
up by him who is taught by thè Spirit to fol-
low Christ. On thè contrary, a New Zealander
now gains in every respect by his conversion;
he is set free from thè tyranny of many use-
less and many dangerous customs ; he is more
respected by his countrymen ; he is better re-
ceived at every Mission station ; he may look


forward to employment as a native teacher,
with a power and influence often exceeding that
of thè chief of his tribe. So far are our native
people from being unwilling to profess Christ-
ianìty, that I question whether a Missionary
travelling throughout thè whole country, would
meet with a hundred persone who would posi-
tively refuse to he baptized. If it were looked
upon as a forni, a mere outward compliance
with an ordinance which involved a change
neither of heart nor of life, there are very few
whose adherence to their old System would be
so strong as to make them reject thè new. In
fact, it is not an uncommon thing to find a party
of natives living to all appearance in an entìrely
heathen state, but professing some form of
Christian worship as a new badge of strile
against their hereditary enemies. They bave
learned from us, that religion may be an occa-
sìon of schism, as well as a bond of charity.
It follows from thia observation of thè native
character that it is no wholesome exercise of
zeal in a Missionary to swell thè number of
nominai converts by indiscriminate baptism. In
my own case, so great is thè difficulty which
I feci in deciding upon thè qualifications of
candidates by a mere cursory examìnation,
without a prolonged knowledge of their con-
sìstency of character, that I bave been glad


to avail myself of St. Paul’s practice, as an
example to abstain from baptizing, except in
extreme cases, where thè persons were at thè
point of death, or where there was no resident
Missionary to whom thè candidates could be
referred.
Another point of great importance, is uni-
formity of System and standard. We may not
be able to come to an agreement with other
religious bodìes, but at least we may agree
among ourselves. Thongh we may not be able
to prevent our candidates from going elsewhere,
in thè hope of more speedy admission to Bap-
tism ; yet we may be able to take care among
ourselves, that thè laxity of some Missionaries
shall not bring into disrepute thè work of their
neighbours, who think it their duty to be more
strict. Let us agree upon our System of proba-
tion, which will perhaps be too tardy to please
thè ardent zeal of some, and too speedy to satisfy
thè extreme caution of others ; but will at least
bave thè merit of unity and consistency, thè
importance of which, those who know most of
thè native character will best be able to ap-
prodate.
To secure these objects of a due and uniform
probation of Candidates for Baptism, I bave
recommended thè strict adherence to thè Biibrie
for aclult Baptism, where it is enjoined that


timely notlce aliali be given to tlie Bishop, or
whom he shall appoint for that pur pose ; that so
due care may he talcenfor their ,
ther they he sufficiently instructed in thè principles
of thè Christian religion. The persona appointed
by me for that purpose, are thè Archdeacons,
with full power to delegate that authority to
any clergyman sufficiently acquainted with thè
native language and character, provided he be
willing to conform to thè generai mie by which
thè length of probation and standard of qualifi-
cation is fixed.
It is evìdent that thè Bubric quoted above
applies more strongly to New Zealand than to
England, for in this extensive Diocese thè
Bishop must delegate his duty to his officiai
representatives, or cause a delay which would
amount to a serious hindrance of thè Mission
work ; and for thè reasons already stated, there
can be no country where more care is necessary
for thè “examination of candidates whether
they be sufficiently instructed in thè principles
of thè Christian religion.” If it be said, that
thè intervention of thè Archdeacon impairs thè
personal influence of thè locai Missionary, I
would ask, whether that influence be not thè
very danger against which St. Paul cautioned
thè Corinthians, of dividing Christ by attachìng
converts to thè name of Paul, or Cephas, or


Apollos. Every other personal tie and holy
sympathy between a Pastor and bis dock is
lawful and good, but Baptìsm is thè admisslon
of a soni into thè whole family of God, not into
thè school or class of one of His ministers.
If, on thè contrary, this be said to be a Sys-
tem which exalts thè Archdeacon above other
presbyters, I pray, in thè name of our crucified
Master, that we may never here discuss thè
question, “ Which shall be thè greatest ? ” It
is to be hoped that thè title of a “ Dìgnitary ”
of thè Church will never be heard in New
Zealand. It is well said by thè Yenerable
Bede, “ that thè title of Bishop is a name,
not of honour, but of work ; ” and I appeal to
one of my Archdeacons, whether I did not teli
him, when he was following me on foot along
thè narrow track of a native path on thè side of
a wild hill, with a few faithful natives for our
only retinue, that if I designed thè office of
Archdeacon to be a mere peacock’s feather, to
distìnguish one clergyman above his brethren,
I would not offer it to thè acceptance of any
one who had borne his Master’s cross, in retire-
ment and self-denial, in thè Mission field. No
earthly dignity, either in Church or State, can
equal thè moral grandeur of thè leathern girdle
and thè raiment of camels’ haìr, or thè going
forth without purse or scrip, and yet lacking


nothìng. The course of life to whìch I invited
thè Archdeacons, was to unite with me in a
combined System of helpfulness and work.
There will he always some among us inexpe-
rienced in thè ministry, and imperfectly ac-
quainted with thè native language ; there will be
some whom age or sickness hinders us from visit-
ing their extensive districts, often exceeding thè
dimensions of an English county ; there will be
some who feci their loneliness, and think of* thè
time when our Lord sent forth his first Mission-
aries two and two ; there will be some who will
feel that their converts need some new voice to
confimi their counsel and make it sink into their
hearts ; there will be some who, trusting that
thè effectual fervent prayer of a rìghteous man
availeth mudi, stili trust even more to thè
special promise of our Lord to thè two or three
who shall be gathered together in His name,
and shall agree as touching anything that they
shall ask ; there will be some who, knowing thè
carelessness of thè native mìnd, will desire to
invest their celebration of Holy Baptism, not
with superstitious rites, but with thè solemnity
of a concourse of ministers, with thè fervency
of their united prayers, and thè deep instruction
of their varìed exhortations, all leading men to
Christ ; and these and thè like feelìngs will
make many desire thè presence of their Bishop


or their Archdeacon, and rather claim it of us
as a due, than resent it as an intrusion, when
it is felt that we come, not as being “ lords
over God’s heritage, or as having dominion over
your faith ; ” but as “ ensamples to thè flock,
and as helpers of your joy.”
Discipline. The careful preparation of
Candidates for Baptism may be advantageously
followed up by a further interval before thè
Converts are admitted to Confirmation, and to
thè Lord’s Supper. Many of you must bave
observed, that Baptism, followed by partaking
of thè Holy Communion, is often looked upon
as an act to be done once for all, rather than
as thè beginning of a course of relìgious duty
to be contìnued through li fé. We do not find
that thè steady number of our Communicants
increases in proportion to thè number of Bap-
tisms. Many shrink from thè continuai effort
which is required of those who attend regularly
thè preliminary instruction before thè adminis-
tratlon of thè Lord’s Supper. To meet this
naturai tendency of thè weaker order of minds,
it seems to be desirable to prolong thè interval
before Confirmation; and to require thè sanie
stated attendance on thè instruction of thè Mls-
sionary, as was necessary for a candidate for
Baptism. The dutìes of religion, and especially
thè Holy Communion, may thùs be represented


to their mìnds, not as single acts, but as steady
habits of Christian duty requiring a sustained
zeal and perseverance till death. It will be
my desire to give full effect to this System by
personally examining all thè Candidates fòr
Confirmation before their admission.
On thè admission of Native Converts to thè
Lord’s Supper I bave nothing to remarle, be-
cause I find thè good practice of previous in-
struction generally adopted. I bave only to
encourage my Missionary brethrento persevero
in thè pian, which they bave long followed, of
assembling their Communicants for prayer,
Scripture reading, and catechizing, at least one
day before thè celebration of thè Sacrament.
But I bave mudi to remark under thè head
of Discipline, on thè exclusion of offenders from
thè Lord’s Supper. I find that thè native
mind has run wild upon thè love of power, and
thè eagerness to wield thè censures of thè
Church. A native teacher will often do in bis
own village what I should bave recourse to
with fear and trembling, and only in extreme
cases, in thè English towns. It is a matter of
history, that nothing is more fatai to thè exer-
cise of reai discipline, than thè assumption of
unwarranted authority. The excessive rigour
of native judgments, thè publìc and unscrip-
tural mode of trial of thè offender, thè absence


of all desire lo bring back and reconcile those
wbo bave been cxcommunìcated, are evlls which
lic at thè root of thè whole Native Teacher
System, and thrcatcn to overthrow it beforc a
supply of Clergymcn can bc trained up to un-
dertake their work. No bctter course can be
adopted, than to follow strictly thè rule of onr
Lord in Matt. xviii. 15—17, bcginnin" first with
y o o
private admonition ; then with thè addition of
two or three witncsses ; and lastly by an ap-
peal to thè authority of thè Church. It ought
to be impressed upon thè Native Teachers, that
they bave only authority to adraonish and rc-
port to their minìster, but no authority what-
cver to excornmunicate thè offender. By hold-
ing a public trial, and exposing a weak brother
to thè shame of having bis offence dìscussed
before all thè men, women, and even thè chil-
dren of thè place, wc shall harden bis heart
against evcry thought of penitcnce, and defeat
thè main objcct of Church discipline, which is
not punishment, but repcntance and reconcili-
ation.
You will sce thè difficulty in which I am
placed by thè excessive and arbitrary rìgour of
discipline in thè Native Church, and by thè
total absence of it in thè English settlemcnts.
'—' ♦
We cannot allow this state of to con-
tinue without exposing alike our laws and our


lawlessness to thè contempi of all thinking
mcn. A moderate exercise of penitential cor-
rection, uniformly acted upon in all cases with-
out dlstinction of persona, would bc a blcssing
to thè country, and fulfil thè wish whìch we
expresa on Aah Wcdnesday, that thè godly dis-
cipline of thè primitive Church may he rc-
stored. I am well aware that there is no
function of my office more difficult of adminis-
tration than this; and that I shall incur thè
suspicione of many in attempting to exercise it.
llut it is impossible to doubt, that a law is
right which is enjoined in Scripture, and that
a coursc is practicable which is actually prac-
tiscd by all other Christian comrnunitics but
our own. The strict communions and thè
prompt expulsion of notorious evil livers are
thè boast of all thè dissenting bodics, and thè
point of all others upon which they regard their
System as superior to that of thè Church. Not
that we can be said to recognisc no penitential
System of discipline, but that we scldom put it
into operation. And thus we are consumi for
evcry ungodly sinner who continues among us
unreprovcd ; and for evcry notorious prodigate
whose remaìns we consign to thè cardi with thè
same words of “suro and ccrtain hopc of a
joyful resurrection.” And worse than all, it is
not we alone that suffer, for it may be good for


usto be reviled, but our erring brethren, for
whom Christ died, may be lost for ever by our
timidìty, for lack of that solemn andeven awful
warning which thè Church prescribes, but
which we dare not pronounce.
If we seek thè cause of all failure of Church
discipline among ourselves, while it remains in
force among other religious communities, we
shall find, I think, that our Church departed
from her vantale ground when she sought thè
o o O
aid of thè secular arm to enforce her censures.
It was not thè mourning of thè mother over
thè child whom she repels from her bosom ; it
was not thè Church of thè apostles holding thè
keys, and one day using them to exclude thè
sìnner, and thè next day to readmit thè peni-
tent : but it was thè merging of her own spiri-
tual authority in worldly ordinances ; and, “as
if unworthy to judge thè smallest matters,”
vacating thè power which she had received to
judge angels and thè world. (1 Cor. vi. 2,3.) In
thè train of this false alliance with thè civil
power carne thè vain and fatai attempts to con-
strain men to uniformìty, not by force of reason,
or by her own purìty of doctrine, but by thè
terrors of thè law : till men “ started aside like
a broken bow,” and thè power which had been
abused to coerce conscience, became useless for
its own proper work of reforming sin.


In endeavouring; to establish in our infant
Church a moderate and guarded System of dis-
cipline, we seem to be guided by two great
principles : to assert no more authority than
Christ gives and requires usto use, and in thè
exercise of that authority to rely only on thè law
of Grod, and thè inherent power of thè Church.
First of all we must make it clear to all men
that Church discipline is a mlnistry of love ; a
warning given in this world to save a soul from
perdition in thè life to come. It must never be
confounded with human notìous of retribution
li i * -
or punishment ; for we know Him who has
said : “ Yengeance is mine, I will repay.” It
must never be severed from its twin principle
of reconciliation ; for thè door of forgiveness is
open to thè repentant sinner, to thè number of
seventy times seven sins.
The last solemn warning, when all other
bave failed, is thè sentence of excommunicatìon.
And if we cannot be safe in withholdino; thè
O
lower and less strìking warning, how can we
dare, in extreme cases, to keep back that whìch
is thè most solemn and impressive of all ? To
allow a man to go down without repentance to
his grave, while any means remained untried
for his conversion, would be worse than thè act
of a physician, who, having tried many of thè
usuai remedies in vain, suffered thè sick man to
* i *


die without trying thè effect of thè strongest of
all. What a false charity is this, to shrink
from giving pain,while time is stili allovved for
repentance ; and so to leave thè pain to he felt
first in all its agony, when repentance will he
unavailing.
Neither can thè conscience of a clergyman he
at case in consigning to thè grave thè corpse
of a notorious evil liver, with thè same solemn
words of faith and hope, which he pronounces
over thè grave of thè penitenti and this has
been felt by many clergymen as so heavy a
burden, that they bave risked legai penaltìes,
and thè ili-will of their parishioners, rather than
read thè Burial Service over those who bave
been cut off in unrepented sin. And it is true
that thè law of thè Church, which is also thè
law of thè land, expressed in thè rubric before
thè Burial Office, directs that it shall not be
used for any that die excommunicate. But if
thè appointed warnings of thè Church bave not
been pronounced, if thè sinner has not had thè
benefit of every motive to repentance that thè
Gospel supplies ; we are not thè persons to cast
thè first stone at hìm, but must take a share
of bis guilt upon ourselves, upon thè Church
which has not worked out its penitential System
of discipline, and upon thè Minister who has
withheld from bis sinful brother thè last and


strongest warning to repentance. On no ac-
count can we express over thè dead corpse thè
censures which we ought to have addressed to
thè livingc man for thè reformation of his life.
In no other way can we come to peace of
conscience in thè discharge of onr ministry,
than by fulfilling thè law of thè Church relating
to discipline. Neither can a clergyman dis-
charge his full duty to a sinner while he with-
holds from him any of thè appointed warnings
of thè Gospel ; nor can he avoid thè obligation
to use thè Burlai Office, without alteration or
oraission, unless thè final warning shall have
been given in thè most solemn form of excom-
munication. It remains then only to state,
what seems to be thè practical course to which
we are bound to adhere. In few words :if any
parishioner, after repeated warnings, contìnues
to live in such a state, that his Clergyman could
not with a safe conscience use thè Burlai Ser-
vice over his grave, he must be presented for-
mally to thè Bishop, to be by him again and
again admonished and exhorted to repent. As
a last resource, and with fear and searching of
heart, I would pronounce thè sentence of ex-
communication, which would release you from
thè obligation of violating your own consciences
by giving Christian burlai to one who persisted
in an unchristian course of life. This burden


falls upon me, and not upon you, and, with
God’s help, I will not shrink from it. God
forbid that you should incur thè hatred of your
people, or raise up angry passions over thè
graves of thè dead ; let it he known to he your
plain duty, from which you cannot swerve ;
founded on a law which you cannot alter; com-
mended to your conscience by reasons drawn
from thè word of God itself ; and directed in
its special application by an authority to which
you bave promised obedience.
The question has sometìmes been asked, how
far a clergyman may be corapelled by law to
bury a corpse. In England there is no doubt
that he may be compelled to bury all persons
except those who come within thè three classes
specified in thè Rubric, viz. those who die un-
baptized, or excommunicate, or who bave laid
violent hands upon themselves. But thè poìnt
has not yet been settled how far thè generai
principle adopted in thè colony, of thè equal
rights of all religious bodies, implies also an
equal responsibility for all duties of a burden-
some nature. Where thè burial-grounds are
exclusively in thè possession of thè Church,
and thè rites of sepulture can be administered
only by thè clergyman, it is reasonable that he
should bury all persons against whom none of
thè excepted objections can be alleged. But


where every community of Christians has its
own burlai - ground, and space is allowed,
where all who bave decllned to attacli them-
selves to any religious body may be buried
accordino; to thè discretion of tbeir friends, it
will probably be seen to be a just conclusion,
that thè Church of England should not be re-
quired by law to admlnister its ordìnances to
any but its own mernbers. But I must at once
warn you, that no System of Eccleslastical law
has yet been framed for thè Colonies, though
thè subject has not escaped thè attention of His
Grace thè Primate. In many essential points
thè Eccleslastical law of England seems to be
inapplicable to thè Colonial Church ; but at
present we can do no more than conform our
practice as closely as we canto sudi laws as we
bave.
There are many other questions of discipline,
upon which, for thè same reasons, I cannot give
you complete satisfaction. The Marriage Law
of thè Colony has been discussed by thè Colo-
nial Legislature. As regards our own Church,
thè difficulty is felt only in thè case of marriages
formerly performed by laymen among our own
body, in places where thè presence of a Clergy-
man could not be obtained. Such cases bave
been brought under my notice ; and I bave
been unable to certify that thè marriages were


legai, though, under thè circumstances, I should
be far from asserting that thè contracting partles
were guilty of sin. The safe course which I
bave recommended is, that thè marriage should
be again solemnized by a Clergyman, which
would remove all doubts of conscience, and thè
question of thè legitimacy of thè issue already
born is settled by thè Colonial ordinance. Our
course of proceeding is now more clear ; and
I must request you, my reverend brethren, to
attend scrupulously to all thè formalities of
marriage required in England ; vìz. thè pre-
vious notice by application for banns ; thè
canonical hours of thè forenoon ; and thè publìc
celebration in thè church or chapel of thè
parìsh or district. You will remember that no
laxity permitted by any Colonial ordinance in
favour of any other body of Christians, can set
aside thè obligation by which we are bound to
conform to thè Church law of England, till it
shall have been altered by an authority equal
to that by which it was enacted.
A very important branch of this subject
arises from thè interraarriage of thè two races.
In many instances, especìally in thè Southern
Islands, alliances with native wornen were
formed by our countrymen, before they had
any opportunity of being lawfully married.
Wherever I have found upon inquìry that such


persons have lived faithfully together as man
and wife, (in some cases for many years,) 1
have not scrupled to marry them immediately.
Every other case will have to be judged upon
its own merits. The danger on thè one hand
is, that marriage will be contracted as a mere
cloak for sin, and that thè native wife will be
deserted by her husband as soon as it suits hìs
convenience. On thè other hand, there are nu-
merous instances of a union apparently not less
sincere or lasting than those contracted between
persons of our own race. To discourage such
marriages altogether, or to refuse to solemnize
them, would be to attempt to resist thè inevit-
able progress of arnalgamation, whlch may be
desirable if conducted with thè sanctions of
religion. You will use your own discretion in
examinìng thè circumstances of each case as it
occurs, with especial reference to thè proba-
bility of thè permanence of thè union. If you
have reason to believe that thè husband and
wife would soon be put asunder, it will clearly
be your duty to refuse to pronounce that
they have been “joined together by God.”
Many questìons having been addressed to me
on thè subject of divorce, I am thankful to be
able to state at once that I have no power or
jurisdiction whatever in such matters. I believe
that thè difficulty of obtaining a divorce is one


great securltyagainst thè occurrence of thè only
cause for which it could he claimed, in accord-
ance with thè precept of thè Gospel. Most
certainly I will never consent to assist in intro-
ducing into this country any System by which
thè offending parties, if they are rich enough
to incur thè expense of thè process, can obtain
legai sanction for their unlawful desires, and
bring in a second breach of thè law of Christ as
a direct consequence of thè first. Though 1 am
in doubt upon thè generai questìon, upon this
point it is my duty to speak clearly and deci-
sively, that in thè event of any power being
created in thè Colony by which divorces can
be pronounced, you bave my full authority to
refuse to remarry those who bave been divorced,
and I will take upon myself thè consequences
of your refusai. We must obey thè law of
Christ at all hazards, whatever may be thè
ordinances of men.
In thè case of those persons who bave lived
tosether in a state of sin, and then desire to be
married, thè old rule of thè Church was, (and
in some cases I bave already seen thè good
effect of thè regulation,) that they should
consent to a temporary separation, lest thè
Church should seem to lend its ordinances to
gloss over sin, without requiring any sìgns or
acts of repentance. The time of this separation


will depend upon thè cìrcumstances of each
particular case, but I think that it ought ne ver
to exceed one year.
A doubt seems to bave occurred, whether
unbaptized persons could be married with thè
rites of thè Church. In thè case of unbelievers
I think that we ousdit not to use thè Christian
O
ordinances ; but where persons bave already
professed their beliefj and are only hindered
from baptism by thè prescribed course of pro-
bation, I see no reason to think that they may
not rightly receive thè marriage benediction.
As a practical observation, founded upon thè
state of thè native people, I should very much
prefer that marriage should be allowed first, to
be followed by baptism in its own convenient
season, than that baptism should be unduly
hurried as a qualification for marriage. There
is a doubt in either case which may be expressed
in thè form of a dilemma. We hesitate to
marry persons because they are not baptized ;
and we hesitate to baptìze them because they
are livlng in sin. No doubt thè clear course
would be to postpone marriage and enforce sepa-
ration till both persons had been duly examined
and baptized; but we must remember that we
are legislating for a Church of proselytes, and
that there is a rule of thè Gospel which teaches
us not to put new wine into old bottles. The


doubt is of a ternporary nature, and in thè next
generation, we may hope, will he entirely re-
moved by thè administration of infant baptism.
On thè generai discipline of thè Church as
prescribed in thè Prayer-book, I feel bound
to offer a few words of earnest advice. It is
generally an unsafe prìnciple to accept part
of a benefit, and to reject thè rest. It is as
true of thè Prayer-book as it is of thè Bible,
that thè hook, thè whole hook, and nothing
but thè hook, is thè standard of our prac-
tice. Not indeed that they are enacted by thè
same law, for one is of God, and thè other of
man ; but a law, by whatsoever power it be
enacted, may not be broken or impaired by
those who accept its benefits and place them-
selves under its protection. If they disapprove
of thè law, provided it be of man, they may use
all lawful influence to procure thè repeal of it,
either altogether or in part ; but as long as it
reraains in force, it is one law, to be taken as
a whole, with thè caution of St. James, that
whosoever shall keep thè whole law, and yet
offend in one point, he is guilty of all. I cor-
dially unite with all those who devoutly thank
God for all thè blessings of thè Reformation,
and acknowledge thè sacred deposit of pure
truth and scriptural devotìon which we have
inherited in thè Liturgy and Artìcles of our


Church. But I cannot go one step with those
who maintain thè right to alter and omit such
portions of our formularies as may not he in
accordance with their own feelings and views.
There seems to he no alternative, but either to
take thè whole, or to reject thè whole. If once
we be*nn thè work of alteration, each in his
own narrow circle of prejudice, under thè in-
fluence at least, perhaps under thè dominion, of
our thè substance of that sacred
c o *
deposit will melt away till scarcely a trace of it
remain, while we are glorying in thè deaths
of thè martyrs who fought thè good tight of
faith at thè Beformation, and boastìng of our
devoted antagonism to Rome. With calmer
feelings perhaps than some of which we have
heard and read, but with no less stedfast oppo-
sition to error, without railing accusations, or
hard names, or private interpretations of prò-
phecy, or any other of thè false and carnai arms
of controversy, may we be strengthened by
Divine grace to oppose army to army, discipline
to discipline, unity to unity, order to order ;
adding to thè truth, in which we are already
strong, thè bond of System and thè watchword
of obedience.
I freely avow, (and who can do otherwìse
with a safe conscience ? ) that there is no rule
of thè Prayer-book which I feci at liberty to


alter, or which I do not desire to practise my-
self, and to recommend to you. In thè present
circumstances of thè country I shall not at-
tempt to prescribe thè exact degree of con-
formity to thè letter of thè liubric which is to
he expected from every one. lam well aware
that my own ministrations are as irregular as
those of any of my brethren ; that in vestrnents,
Services, timcs, and modes of Divine worship,
I am guidcd by thè state of thè case, rather
than by a rigid adhercnce to any prescribed
mie, It is a sound principle, ne verto sutfer
any point of prìmary importancc to be neglected
for want of some secondary adjunct. It is our
duty to be ready to preach thè Gospel at all
places, at all times, and under all circumstances :
and many are thè times when we bave all
gathered our native congregations under some
shady tree, with as mudi comfort as if we had
met within thè walls of a cathedral. But it is
a rule no less sound than thè other, never to be
disorderly where it is possible to do all things
decently and in order. We can avoid super-
stition, without running into thè opposite ex-
treme of denying to thè Service of God thè
ordìnary proprieties of cleanliness and arrange-
ment, which we value and practise in our own
domestic life. The care of sacred things is not
an idolatry of inanimate matter, but a recog-


nitìon of tlie unscen God, to wliose scrvlcc they
have been dcdicated. It has bcen dcemed
worthy of record in thè Gospel, that Christ,
when he had ended his reading, closed thè hook,
and delivercd it to thè minister, to bc deposited
no doubt in its proper place, to bc preserved
from injury and desecration. No event ever
happened on carth more awful than thè Resur-
rection, yet it was a work not unworthy of thè
care of thè angels, even at that solemn scason,
to lay thè linen clothes by thernselves, and to
wrap together thè napkin that was about thè
head in a place by itself. Even thè linen cloth
which had touched thè inost holy Sin Offering,
was holy in thè sight of those heavcnly minis-
ters. In a like spirit, thè last words which St.
Paul wrotc to thè Corinthians before he began
his sublime discourse on thè rcsurrection, were
thè words of thè rule already quoted : “ Let all
things be done decently and in ordcr.” The
more solemn thè subject or occasion, thè more
contrary to its tone and spirit will be thè appear-
ance of irreverence and neglect.
In thè use of thè Liturgy, to which you are
well aware that we are bound to confine our
public ministrations, I can freely authorize you
to return to thè practice, in use before thè time
of Archbishop Grindal, of dividing thè distinct
Services of Morning Prayer, thè Litany, and


thè Holy Communion. Most of us are engaged
in foiir public Services every Lord’s Day ; two
in thè native language, besides thè usuai
school ; and two to our English congregations.
Even if it be within thè compass of our
strength to perforai thè whole Service in every
case, it often happens that thè time will not
admit of it, when thè places are far apart.
Some consideration is also due to thè feelings
of our native converts, who are naturally less
capable than ourselves of deriving benefit from
any long Service. All that I have to request
is, that thè separate Services may be performed
entire, and not mutilated or garbled by omission
or intermixture ; and that such an order may
be observed, as will give to all an equal promi-
nence, and thereby impress them all equally
upon thè minds of thè people. Where there
are three congregations, thè Morning Prayer
might be read in one, thè Litany in another,
and thè Communion Service in thè third ; and
thè order should be so observed, that thè whole
Morning Service may be read in all thè congre-
gations every three weeks. Where there are
two congregations, thè Morning Prayer might
be read in one, and thè Litany with thè Com-
munion Service in thè other ; thè order being
alternated as before. In all cases a sermon
ought to be added, and thè mie to be observed.


tliat thè Communion Service shall always be
read on thè day appointed for thè Holy Com-
munion. The same principle will apply to all
places where thè church accommodation is not
sufficient for thè inhabitants. You will be at
liberty to divide thè Morning Service into two
parts, and perforai thern to different congre-
gations assembling in thè same church, with a
sermon to each. This regulation will apply
particularly to thè garrison towns, where thè
military are in sufficient numbers to forni a
congregation by themselves. But I must cau-
tion you against allowing thè military Service
to be conducted on any other than thè generai
rule, as we are taught to look upon all men
alike as members of our congregation ; and we
would rather see them United with ourselves in
social prayer, if thè size of our churches would
admit of it. At least we can take care that
thè same uniform provision both for prayer
and instruction be made for all classes of our
people. I commend especially to thè care of
thè Clergymen of thè English towns, this
deeply interesting body of our inhabitants, of
whom, while we require that they shall risk
their lives in our defence, we must also take
account that they may not be unprepared to
enter suddenly into eternity.
System.—The generai survey of thè state


and prospects of thè Diocese, has convlnced me
that we shall requìre a most comprehensive
System of church polity to give effect, under thè
Divine blessing, to our ministerial efforts. In
a country as large as Great Britain, and mudi
more difficult to he traversed, I should feci
myself almost powerless, if there were not
reason to hope, that by a wise combination of
all thè parts and members of our body, we may
multìply thè powers of every single ami by
thè moving force of a body “compacted with
that which every joint supplieth.” This is thè
point in which you have been weak hitherto,
for want of an authorized head, to gather to-
gether in one all thè scattered elements of good
which God has so bountifully bestowed upon
your minìstry. Where we have so little oppor-
tunìty of communication one with another ;
and where every clergyman is therefore left to
act in great measure according to his own dis-
cretion, whenever any difficulty occurs; it is
most important that we should agree upon
certain generai principles, which may be our
guide on all occasions when no counsel can be
obtained. In conducting our Missionary duties
thè sanie necessity arises of doìng everything
as a part of a preconcerted pian ; in order that
we may be certain that all that we do is likely
to promote thè generai work, and that no part


of our eftorts will be lost to tbe permanent
interests of religion. “ Let all things be done to
edifyìng,” said St. Paul, reproving thè too de-
sultory and unsystematic zeal of his Corinthian
converts. Remember that you bave a twofold
work ; not only to convert souls now, butto
build up a Church which may be a means of
blessing to generations yet unborn.
You will probably expect from me some re-
marks upon thè character of my own office,
and its hearing upon thè Church System both
of thè Mìssion and of thè Colony. I have reason
to know that much anxiety was felt upon this
point before my arrivai, and even now I am not
certain that it is so entirely removed, as to
obviate thè necessity of any further explanatìon.
Convinced that one great hope of success in
our ministry, is thè most perfect understanding
and cordial co-operation one with another, I
shall not scruple to avow freely my under-
standing of thè nature, powers, and obligations
of my office.
You have heard already thè definition of thè
Yenerable Bede, that thè Episcopate is a title,
not of honour, but of work; and in that spirit
I trust to be enabled to exercise my office. I
do not consider myself exempt from any duty
which can fall upon any Priest or Deacon in
thè Diocese, except so far as my own purely


Episcopal dutìes shall absorb my time, and
demand a priority of attention. “ Only on thè
throne will Ibe greater” than you. It is not
so much that I bave vacated any other order to
which I was formerly ordained, but that I bave
been consecrated to another office, thè duties
of which are added to those for which I was
responsible before.
Upon this principio it follows at once, that I
am placed bere to act, not so much over you,
as with you. For one point in which I seem
to be placed over you, that is, in thè power of
coercion and government, there are many in
which I am associated with you in thè discharge
of thè duties of thè same Divine Ministry.
And even in thè power of coercion, which I
seem to exercise, it is not so much in my own
person that I so act, as in thè spirit of thè
whole Clergy, or rather of thè Church Catholic,
thè execution of whose decrees is vested in me.
I believe thè monarchica! idea of thè Episcopale
to be as foreign to thè true mind of thè Church,
as it is adverse to thè Gospel doctrine of humi-
lity. Let it never be thought that I alone am
interested in thè good government of our
Church; and that you are merely subjects to
obey. Whatever interest I bave in thè work,
you bave also. If an offending brother is to be
brought under thè censure of thè Church, what


am I but thè organ of thè generai sense of thè
Clergy, which demanda that thè unclean thìng
shall he put away, as a scandal to their order ?
I might consult my own case hy conniving at
disorder; but you would reap thè bitter fruit
in thè decay of your influence, and in thè
growing indifference, if not contempi, of your
people. You must recognise therefore a joint
interest in thè office of thè Bishop, looking upon
him not as a tyrant to compel you to do what
you would not; but as your own agent and
instrument to carry into effect what you know
to be righi, and wish to do, but which you could
not accomplish of yourselves.
It was in days of persecution and of danger,
when thè crown of martyrdom was at hand,
that Cyprian said to his presbyters, “I will do
nothing in your absence and in proportion as
we feel thè difficulties and sorrows of our work,
thè loss of our dear brethren in thè ministry,
thè fading away of our native converts, and thè
growth of evil ; so much thè more are we
drawn together into one cause, resolved to
allow no questions of dignity, no private inter-
ests, to rend asunder our social System and
divide our house against itself. We bave diffi-
culties enough to overcome, without adding to
them thè only one which is insuperable, that of
disunion among ourselves. The expressive


of our native language, I pray may always be
affixed to my name. I would rather resign my
office, than be reduced to act as a single and
isolated being. In sudi a position, my true
character, I conceive, would be entirely lost.
It remains then to define, by some generai
principles, thè terms of our co-operation. They
are simply these : tbat neither will I act with-
out you, nor can you act without me. The
source of all diocesan action is in thè Bishop ;
and therefore it behoves him so much thè more
to take care that he act with a mind informed
and reinforced by conference with hìs Clergy.
He cannot delegate his power of action to any,
for it is inherent in himself ; but he may guard
himself from arbitrary and ill-considered acts,
by giving to his council a salutary power of
control. In works of which thè effect must
depend upon moral influence and willingness of
heart, it is better not to act at all, than to act
against thè declared opinion of those who are
conjointly interested in thè pian, and mainly
responsible for thè execution of it. The evil
of not acting at all is generally less than that of
acting wrong. But in all such cases of doubt,
leading to a suspension of action, thè safe course
will be to refer thè whole question to thè Arch-
bishop, and to receive his decision as final.
Upon these principles, thè power of our


Diocesan Synod may be tlms defined : tbat it
lias no power to act of itself, butto advise thè
Bishop in thè exerclse of thè functions of
his office, and in extreme cases of dìfference
of opinion, to refer thè questìon by appeal to
thè Archbishop. But it must be clearly im-
derstood, that a council so constituted has no
power to advise thè Bishop to act beyond thè
authority inherent in his office. It cannot make
or confer new powers, but can only direct thè
use of sudi as are already vested in him by thè
decrees of thè Catholic Counclls, or thè laws of
thè Enodish. Church. We shall not be at
O
liberty to discuss alterations in thè Liturgy, or
points of doctrine, or thè authority of our ver-
sion of thè Bible ; for all these and sirailar
points bave been decided by a generai Convo-
cation, and by thè same power only can they
be altered. But our chief work, restricted
within its own proper sphere, will be to fraine
and carry out such a diocesan government
among ourselves, in things peculiar to our own
state, as may tend to give stabilìty to our work
already begun, and by God’s help to perpetuate
thè same blessings to our children.
I bave already offered some remarks upon thè
office of thè Archdeacons, which will bave
shown that I regard their office in thè same
light as my own ; not as a dignity, but as a


designatici! to a particular work in thè minlstry.
It has been suggested to me by some of my
brethren, that by thè appointment of Arch-
deacons an addition is made to thè three Scrip-
tural orders of Bishop, Priest, and Deacon.
I bave never met with a Clergyman who ob-
jected to be placed in authority over his Parish
Clerk, on thè ground that thè latter office is not
recognised in Scripture. I fear that we all, by
thè tendency of our fallen nature, prefer “having
soldiers under us,” to being ourselves f ’ men
under authority.” The sanie objection will
apply to thè office of Archbishop, but I trust
that I shall never be tempted on that account
to withdraw my allegìance, even in thought,
from that meek and holy servant of God, at
whose hands I received thè epìscopal consecra-
tion, and who, I doubt not, while he exercises
his mild authority over us, daily offers up his
own humble submission to thè Spiritual Head
of thè universal Church.
It ouodit to be remernbered, that thè office of
O 7
Archdeacon has existed from time immemorìal,
even in thè limited Dioceses of Great Britain ;
and therefore may be presumed to be tenfold
more necessary in a Diocese like this, where
nothing but thè continuance of health and
strength could enable a Bishop to exercise a
personal supervìsion over thè Clergy. And


I raay also remark, that thè question was not
whether Archdeacons should be appointed in
this Diocese or not, for it had long been thè
practice of thè British Government to appoint
ArchdeacÓns for thè Colonies. The only ques-
tion was, whether they should be appointed by
thè Crown as thè fountaìn of honour, or by thè
Bishop as thè representatlve of thè minìstry of
thè Church, to be by him incorporated with thè
generai System of thè Diocese. My reverend
brethren, by whom thè objection has been
raised, would bave found, I think, more reason
to object to State Archdeacons, as placed in
invidious distinction from their brethren. But
so long as Bishops and Archdeacons are dis-
tìnguished chiefly by thè more onerous duties
which are laid upon them, and by thè thousands
of miles of sea and land which they are oblìged
to traverse, they can plead with truth that it is
a hard-earned distinction, which, but for their
duty, they would be content to resìgn.
It is my intention, as soon as thè state of thè
Diocese shall seem to require it, to subdivide
every Archdeaconry into Rural Deaneries, with
thè same object of promoting thè work of thè
Clergy by more effective organization. The spe-
cial duty of thè Bural Dean withìn his District
will be thè administration of thè Holy Commu-
nion in places where there is no resident Priest,


and thè periodical visìtation of newly formed
communities and straggling settlements, not yet
reduced into regalar Parishes. He will also he
charged with thè duty of inspecting schools,
and recommending thè most promislftg scholars
for admission into thè Collegiate Institutions.
Wherever it may he possible, he will assemble
thè Clergy of his Deanery half yearly or quar-
terly for prayer and counsel, and receive their
reports of thè state and wants of their Parishes.
He will provide, as far as possible, for thè regu-
larity of thè ministrations of Divine Service
throughout his Deanery, by lending his own
personal assistance during thè sickness or
absence of any of his Clergy. For these pur-
poses, thè Archdeacons and Parai Deans will
usuallyhave another Clergyman associated with
them in their work, to leave them free to visit
any place where their presence may seem to
be most required.
It is not necessary to enlarge upon thè duties
of those who belong to thè holy Order of thè
Priesthood, fnrther than to say, that it wdll be
my endeavoar to exempt them from all those
complex cares, which in parochial duty, as
practised in England, dìstract them from thè
main purpose of their ministry. The cure of
souls alone is thè object to which they ought to
be free to devote all thè powers of their body


and mind. The day may stili he far distant,
when every order of thè Ministry will know its
own appointed work, and he free to follow it ;
we may all of us for a time he obliged to be-
come “all things to all men, that we may save
some;” but let us steadily keep in view thè
principio, on which thè Apostles appointed thè
Deacons, that they might “give themselves
continually to prayer, and to thè ministry of
thè word.”
On thè restoration of thè distinctlve charac-
ter of thè Order of Deacons will depend much
of thè efficiency of our System. We must not
put off upon hirelings thè duty of feeding thè
lambs of Christ. That expedient has been
tried in thè mother country, and has failed. It
does not succeed, even where trained school-
masters are to be obtained ; how then can it
succeed, where such men are not to be found ?
It fails chiefly because it does not teach Christ-
ianity. It teaches thè Bible as a class-book,
and religion as a System of forms, and doctrine
as so much head knowledge ; but it does not
impart thè living spirit, without which all know-
ledge is vain ; it does not purify thè affections,
or sanctify thè heart. There is no reraedy in
England, none in New Zealand, but one. Those
who teach religion, must be those who feci its
power. We must be ourselves thè school-


masters. This must be thè dìstìnctive office of
a Deacon, and I, as a Deacon Bishop, will take
my full share in thè work.
The state of thè native youth requires usto
direct our most earnest attention to thè oro-an-
izatìon of a complete School System throughout
thè Mission. As a sketch of thè pian to be
pursued, I would suggest that Day Schools be
formed under thè direction of thè Native
Teachers in every village ; and that thè Mis-
sionary of thè district, at his periodical vìsits,
select from these thè most hopeful scholars, to
be kept in probation under his own eye, at
thè Mission Station, till he can safely recom-
mend them to thè Archdeacon, on his annual
visitation, as eligible candidates for thè Central
School. The most hopeful of thè scholars of
thè Central School may be trained in thè Native
Teachers’ Institution, to be thence allotted,
from time to time, as schoolmasters under thè
Missìonaries, to reside with them, and assist
them in thè duties of their Stations, till they see
fitto place them out as teachers in thè native
villages at a distance from thè Station. From
among thè teachers so trained and approved I
should hope to be able hereafter to select Can-
didates for Holy Orders. Unless we gather in
thè rising generation they will be scattered
abroad. When I look at thè state of thè native


youth, many hundreds of whom I bave ex-
aminedj I cannot fall to cali to mind thè words of
a late eminent commander in Canada, founded
on bis observation of thè North. American
Indians, “ Unless you can succeed in gettìng
thè entire control of thè rising generation, I
fear that thè labours of yonr Missionaries will
disappoìnt you.”
If Education in this Dlocese must be maìnly
conducted by thè Clergy, it is evident that we
shall require large reinforcements of raen. But
we must not look to thè English Universities,
for thè Missionary spirit is not yet strong in
them ; nor must we trust to thè effect of Mis-
sìonary Meetings, or Sermons, for many give
their guìneas, or their speeches, or their pulpits;
but few give themselves or their children. We
raay hope for some help from thè College of St.
Augustine, lately revived at Canterbury, and
presided over by one, who himself has known
by long experience thè wants of a Colonial
Dlocese. That institution was founded and
fostered by thè dearest friends that I bave in
thè world, to whom this country is indebted for
more benefìts than I can ever duly acknow-
ledge ; and from it I may expect such a measure
of assistance as may be compatible with thè
duty which it acknowledges to thè world at
large. But our main dependence must be in


God’s blessìng upon our own united and sys-
tematic endeavours to gather from withìn our
own Colony, all that is most hopeful and pro-
misìng both of thè Englìsh and native youth.
It is my deliberate purpose to open thè door
of admlssion to thè ministry to all classes of
thè community, by providing such a System of
education throughout thè country, as may bring
thè most deserving youth under thè eye of thè
Clergy, to be by them recommended to thè
Diocesan College, for thè completion of their
education. It will be my endeavour so to
regniate thè expenses of thè System, that
poverty shall never be a bar to any young man
of exemplary character. The generai outline
of this pian has already been sketched in thè
Church Almanac, and contains thè following
prìncipal features.
The Primary or Parochial Schools being
under thè charge of thè Deacon of thè parish,
it will be his duty to recommend to thè Bishop
from time to time his most promìsing scholars,
to be admitted into thè Grammar School of thè
place, or into thè class of thè Deacon’s private
pupils. The expense of thè education of thè
pupils so recommended will be paid, in some
cases, from thè public fund. All vacancìes in
thè Exhibitions and Scholarships at thè Dio-
cesan College will be filled up by election of


thè most deserving of thè exhibìtloners in thè
District Grammar Schools. From thè Scholars
of thè Diocesan College thè Bishop will select
his candidates for Holy Orders.
Every Pupil will he required to learn and
practise some useful art, by which he may ob-
tain a livelihood, if he should not ultimately
he considered eligìble for thè Ministry. The
necessity will thus he avoided of requiring from
thè scholars a declaration of their wish to enter
thè Ministry, at an age when their feelings
can scarcely he trasted. Whenever it shall
please God to make their course clear before
them, and to show thè power of His Holy
Spirit in calling them to thè Ministry, they will
receive every encouragernent to enter upon a
more carefnl course of preparation.
I bave now to cali your attention to thè
proceedings of thè Diocesan Synod of 1844,
and to thè revision of thè Canons then asfreed
upon provisionally. They bave not yet been pub-
lished with any stamp of authority ; and I do not
wish that they should be considered as finally
determined, tìll thè fullest opportunity has been
afforded to thè whole Clergy of thè Diocese to
express their opinion, either in person or by
writing. The only Protest which has been
received against any of thè Canons is now laid
before thè Synod.


The new subject for our consideration this
day is one of vast importance to thè interests
of thè Church in New Zealand. It is thè
formatici! of a pian of Church Government, to
be submitted to thè Parochial Yestries, and to
thè Archbìshop of Canterbury, as thè basis of a
body of Church Law for thè Diocese of New
Zealand. My attentimi was directed to thè
subject by Mr. Gladstone, while Secretary of
State for thè Colonies ; and I will referto thè
Synod his letter and correspondence with thè
Archbishop of Canterbury.
I bave already detained you too long, my
Reverend brethren, but I must plead as my
excuse thè infrequency of our meetings, and
thè importance of a Primary Charge in opening
a clear principio of free communication between
a Bishop and his Clergy. I shall now be most
anxious to receive your remarks and sugges-
tions, both on points of importance which I may
bave omltted to explain, and also on any state-
ments or opinions in which I may seem to you
to be in error. To all such suggestions I will
give thè fullest and most dispassionate con-
sideration ; and will either insert them in thè
corrected copy of my Charge, to be entered in
thè Registry of thè Diocese, or, if I cannot
assent to them, I will append them in thè forni


of a protest, in order that it may be seen how
far objections were raised at thè Synod to thè
opinions expressed by myself. In thè case of
plans involving a courseof action, I have already
stated that I shall not force any measures
against thè declared opinion of thè generai
body of thè Clergy.
In conclusion, I will only in a few words
referto thè same subject with which I began
my address ; viz. thè importance of thè duty
which falls upon us from thè peculiar state and
prospects of thè Church in this country. We
ought not to be satisfied with any low scale of
goodness in our Diocesan System ; but aim at
thè best and most comprehensive measures that
can be devised. We may hope everything for
a Church so free and youthful as this. The
model which I propose for our careful imitation,
is thè System of thè Church Catholic, as restored
and adapted to thè use of thè English Church
by Archbishops Cranmer and Parker. By this
I mean thè pure spiritual System of thè Church ;
but not thè corruptions and abuses which were
incrusted upon it by thè statesmen of that
time. The present state of thè Church of
England is a proof of thè enormous evils which
have sprung from thè abuse of patronage, thè
perversion of ecclesiastica! offices, and thè world-
liness of mind induced by thè unequal distri-


butìon of thè revenues of thè Church. These
we are not bound to imitate, butto cast them
off, as evils which thè Fathers of thè Reforma-
tion recognised as blots upon theìr System,
forced upon them by thè State as thè price of
its support. The spiritual System of doctrlne
and discipline fixed by thè Reformation is that
to which we owe our unqualìfied allegiance, as
agreeing with Scripture and with thè practice
of thè Primitive Church.
While we adhere closely to this model, let us
fear no remarks or censures by men of small
experience and imperfect information. We must
take thè highest ground, both as a means of
dignifying our work and of humbling ourselves.
The more exalted thè character of our duties,
thè more we must feci our own unworthiness ;
as St. Paul most keenly felt thè sting of thè
thorn in thè flesh, when he had been caught up
into thè third heaven. We do not humble
ourselves by dlsparaging our ministry, nor
exalt ourselves by magnifying it. If it be true
that thè Fathers of our Church believed them-
selves to be ordained in an unbroken line of
succession from thè Apostles themselves ; can
we doubt that they felt their own inferiority to
their great forerunners, for thè same reason for
which thè Jews wept over thè building of thè
second tempie ? If it be true that they believed


thè Sacraments to be means of grace, ordained
by Christ himself ; can we doubt that they felt
their own unfìtness to minister such holy mys-
teries ordained for thè strengthening and re-
freshing of mankind ? It is surely a false
humility to lower our opinion of such truths as
these, lest we should seem to take too much
upon ourselves. We would not dare to lower
thè value of thè rìghteousness of Christ, because
we are sinful men to whom it is imputed. The
highest yiew of every ordinance of God is thè
surest argument for our own self-abasement. Our
dwarfish stature is seen at once, when we stand
under thè roof of a vast cathedral. To bring
down God and His works to a level.with our-
selves, has thè effect of raising us up, in our own
conceit, to a level with God. When we think
of Him in His glory which no man can approach
unto, we must be content to cover our faces,
and sit down at His footstool in thè lowest
place. The loftiness of His work is thè proof
both of His sufficìency, and of our unfìtness
for His ministry. This then is thè suramary
of our practical duty : to glorify God in His
Son, in His Church, in His Word, and in His
Sacraments ; and, as we exalt these things
which are divine, to learn, in thè like propor-
tion, to abase ourselves. In thè words of Arch-
bishop Leìghton, “If they that are called to


this holy Service, would themselves consider
this aright, it would not puff them up, but
bumble them ; comparing theìr own worthless-
ness with this great work, they would wonder
at God’s dispensation, that should thus have
honoured them, as St. Paul in this connexion
speaks of himself, as ‘ less than least of all
saints So thè more a man rightly extols
this his calling, thè more he humbles himself
under thè weight of it.”
* Comm, St. Peter, I. c. ii. v. 1.


APPEAL IN BEHALP
THE DIOCESE OF NEW ZEALANE.
On thè Bishop of New Zealand’s appointment to his Diocese, he
was informed by thè New Zealand Company that they would make
very liberal grants towards thè endowment of thè Church in their
different settlements, provided thè Bishop would meet these grants by
equal contributions on thè part of thè Church. To this arrangement
thè Bishop gladly acceded ; and by thè assistance of thè Society for
thè Propagation of thè Gospel, and of his private friends, has been
enabled to proceed to a certain extent in thè fulfilment of his engage-
ment. In consequence, however, of thè present pressure on thè funds
of thè Society, it is unable to continue to contributo to thè fund so
largely as it had hoped and desired.
In thè meantime, thè piantilig of thè Church in thè settlements
belonging to thè Government and to thè Company, has been com-
menced in a most encouraging manner. A large expenditure of
money is necessary in thè first instance : but thè readiness of thè
settlers to exert themselves for this purpose, combined with thè zeal
of thè native inhabitants, affords a good ground for hoping that, if
assistance be freely given at first, thè Church in this new Colony may,
under thè Divine blessing (which hitherto has been so abundantly shed
upon it), be built up in all its integrity, and be enabled to support
itself without further aid from thè mother country.
Under these circumstances, it is earnestly hoped that thè friends of
thè Bishop, and other persons interested in this Mission, may be will-
ing to give thè required assistance, either by Donations or by a promise
of Annual Subscriptions.
Contributions for tbe Ufocm of Nd» Scalanti.
Annual Subscriptions.
£ s.d.
A. F. P 1 1 0
Anonymous, per Brentwood
Church Union 5 0 0
Bodding,Miss,Bircher,Kington 1 10
C. B. per Rev. C. B. Dalton
(for fi ve years) 1 1 0
Copleston, Rev. R. E 1 10
Courtenay, thè Lord 3 0 0
Dalton, Rev. C. B 1 10
Downes, Mrs. 61, Harley-st... 2 2 0
Eew, Robert, jun. Esq 2 2 0
Pitzherbert, H. Esq 1 10
Gaskell, Miss Ann 1 10
Hobhouse, E. H. Esq 1 0 0
M. A. W 1 1 0
Paul, Mrs. Finedon 1 0 0
Rouse, Mrs. E. A 110
Selwyn, Rev. W 26 5 0
£ s.d L
Shadwell, Alfred H. Esq 110
Sharpe, H. Esq 10 0 0
Storey, B. Esq 1 10
Wilks, Miss 2 2 0
Donations received sirice thè Publìca-
tìon of thè last List .
A Lady, per Drummonds 50 0 0
Church, Mrs 2 0 0
Gaskell, Miss (third don.) 10 10 0
Herbert, Lady L. C 5 0 0
Hobhouse, Rev. R 2 0 0
Loder, Rev. C. L 5 0 0
Ditto (second don.) 5 0 0
Selwyn,W.Esq. & Mrs. Selwyn
(for Church Ship) 73 15 0
Selwyn, Bev. W. for ditto .... 26 5 0
Sharpe, J. C. Esq. for ditto ... 10 0 0
Sharpe, Miss, for ditto 1 10


1846.
£ s.d.
Bakewell, Lich. for Cathedral 2 0 0
Burney, Rev. C 1 10
Clayton, Miss 5 0 0
Cotton, Miss 5 0 0
Cutfield, Miss, Chichester 5 0 0
Dalton, Rev. C. B 110
Fitzherbert, E. H. Esq. 1844-5 2 2 0
Greenwood, Mrs 1 10
Hobhouse, H. Esq 1845 1 1 0
M. A. W 1 1 0
M. A. W 1 10
M S. and E. N 15 0
Newcome, Rev. T. for Music. 10 0
Plowman, Mrs 2 0 0
Richardson, W. S. Esq 10 10 0
Taylor, Mr. Home-office, Ex-
ecutor of Anne Firth 5 0 0
Two Friends, by Rev. W. C.
Cotton, for thè Industriai
School 50 0 0
Bath Dioc. Bath&Wells 1 10
Chester Chester 1 0 0
Finedon,Higham| peterboro 4 n 6
Ferrers )
Guernsey Winchester 10 0 0
Huntingdon Ely 10 0 0
Leeds R1p0n..,..., Il 0
Fortman ch a pe,, » L 1 10 0
Marylebone ....)
Richmond Winchester 10 0
Stoke Newington London 3 10 0
St. Vincent Barbados... 27 5 10
Topcroft, Brooke Norwich.... 4 10 0
Topcroft, Burnh. Norwich.... 412 10
Walworth,St.Pet. London 5 0 0
1847.
Bath 1 1 0
Bremhill 1 0 0
Burney, Rev. C 110
Cambridge 5 3 8
Copleston, Rev. R. C. Barnes,
1846, 1847 2 2 0
Dalton, Rev. C. B 110
Finedon 3 1310
Finedon.
Framland 1 0 0
Greenwood, Mrs 1 10
Hudson, Mrs. Wimbledon 2 0 0
Orde, Miss 5 0 0
Portman Chapel, Marylebone 1 0 0
Ditto 10 0
Richmond, Surrey 50 0 0
£ sd.
Richmond, Surrey . 5 0 0
Sharpe, Mrs. Rectory, Barnes,
1846, 1847 2 2 0
Stoke Newington 4 4 0
Sutton, Canterbury... 4 3 0
Thorverton, Exeter 10 3 0
Ticehurst 1 10
Walworth, St. Peter’s 5 0 0
1848.
Ashby, Peterborough 1 0 0
Baker, Miss C 10 0
Bath 1 1 0
Chester 1 0 0
Colson, Rev. C 5 5 0
Copleston, Rev. R. C. Barnes. 1 10
Dalton. Rev. C. B 1 10
Edensor, Lich 2 0 0
Finedon, Pet. 2 0 0
Framland, Pet 1 0 0
Frere, B. Esq 20 0 0
Friend 5 0
Friend, by Rev. J. Webb 5 0
Friends 50 0 0
Girardot, Rev. W. L 1 0 0
Greenwood, Mrs.Bradf.Yorks. 1 10
Harrison, Mrs. E. G... 1 10
Ilsley, Oxford 3 12 0
Kirkwood, J. T. Esq 3 3 0
Knight, E. jun. Esq. Alton ... 1 0 0
M. A. S. & D. N 15 0
Norton, St. Philip 5 0
Portman Chapel, Marylebone 1 10 0
Richmond, Surrey 56 0 0
Rotherham, York 1 0 0
Schoolmistress, per Rev. N. J.
Ridley 6 6
Sharpe, Mrs. Rectory, Barnes 1 10
Stoke Newington 3 3 0
Sutton, Canterb 4 110
Ticehurst, Chic 1 0 0
Willock, Kev.C.W.Chevening,
Sevenoaks 1 0 0
Ditto, 1849 1 0 0
Woodcock, Miss M. E 2 2 0
New Zealand College —
F. L 10 0 0
Martyn, Miss, Thorverton ..200
M. S. D , 40 0 0
New Zealand Churck Society —
Hildyard, Miss 1 0 0
Contrihutions may he seni io thè Treasurers of thè Society for thè Propagation
of thè Gospel , 79, Pali Mail; or may he paid to thè Districi Treasurers
and Secretaries ; or to thè Bishop of New Zealand 1 s Church Account , at
Messrs. Gosltngs & Sharpe’s, Bankers , Fleet-street .


SPECIAL APPEAL
IN BEHALF OF
ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE, NEW ZEALAND.
It is already well known to thè friends of thè Bishop of New
Zealand, that soon after his arrivai in his Diocese he coramenced a
Collegiate Institution at thè Waimate, near thè Bay of Islands, for thè
training Candidates for Holy Orders, catechists, and schoolmasters.
comprising also Elementary Schools for thè children of Natives and
British settlers. This College thè Bishop has repeatedly spoken of in
his letters as “ thè key and pivot ” of all his operations. Eight
stndents of thè College bave already heen admitted to Deacon’s
orders, and stationed at various places in thè Islands, where they will
bave under their inspection Schools for thè children of settlers and
natives ; thè most promising of whom will in course of time he elected
to thè Bishop’s Collegiate School, and ultimately prepared for those
offices in thè Church for which they may seem hest fitted by their
capacities and acquirentients. With respect to thè most important part
of thè College System, thè preparation for thè Ministry, it is evident
that thè circumstances of an infant Colony, like New Zealand, render
it indispensable that thè Bishop should bave personal and intimate
knowledge of thè candidates for ordination, which can only he attained
by their residence for a fixed period under thè Bishop’s eye, at thè
Collegiate Institution.
The College having been in operation for more than two years at
thè Waimate, where thè buildings w ere all of wood, and of which thè
tenure was only temporary, thè Bishop found it necessary to remove,
and obtained an excellent situation about four miles from Auckland,
easily accessible both by land and w r ater, which has been purchased
with part of thè legacy left by thè Rev. T. Whytehead, as an endow T-
ment for thè College ; and he feels that thè time has now arrived for
making an endeavour to erect suitable Collegiate buildings, which may
at thè same time secure to himself and all future Bishops a settled
episcopal residence, and give permanence to an institution which it is


J. C. Sharpe, Esq
5
0
0
Earl Powis
25
0
0
J. C. Sharpe, Esq (second donation)
c;
• • • • •
0
0
W. Jeffs, Esq
i
1
0
hoped may he liereafter thè nursery of thè ministry, and thè centre of
sound learning and religious education to thè islands of New Zealand.
The Bishop of New Zealand wishes therefore to invite thè assistance
of thè members of thè Church of England, and especially of his own
friends, in an undertaking which he justly considers of sudi essential
importance ; and he entertains a confident hope, that by their cóntri-
butions he shall soon he enabled to erect, of solid and enduring mate-
riate, thè fabric of
St. Jofm's College, Btsìjop's aucftlattìr, Keto ZtalmìJ.
The Bishop wishes to erect Collegiate buildings of stone, including—
Theological College,
Collegiate School,
Native Teachers’ (Adult) School,
Native Boys’ School,
Infant Scliool, (including Orphan Asylum,)
Hospital,
The Bishop feels deeply grateful for thè great exertions which bave
already been niade in his behalf: but thè writer of this address is
confident that none who bave hitherto assisted him will he backward to
do so again, according to their power, feeling that they can thus most
effectually further thè cause of Christ and of His Church, and gladden
thè hearts of that faithful band who bave left their native country and
thè comforts of home, at thè cali of duty, and for thè love of God.
Conthibtjtions for St. Johis College , New Zealand , since thè
publication of thè last List .
£ s. d.
Suhscriptions for St. John’s College, New Zealand, will hereceived
hy thè Rev . C. B. Dalton, Rectory , Lambeth; thè Rev. William
Selwyn, Ely ; C. J. Selwyn, Esq. Lincolris Inn ; and hy Messrs.
Goslings & Sharpe, Bankers , Fleet-street , for thè Bishop of New
Zealand's Church Account (College Fund).
Suhscriptions of £5O and upwards may he paid hy two or more
instalments .
R. CLAY, PRINTER, BREAD STREET HILL.


♦


NEW ZEALAND.
• * t *• v*V
À *" .•
A-NNALS
THE DIOCESE OF NEW ZEALAND.
Prìce 3 s. id.
11.
A JOURNAL
Ww 23tei)op’s Fìsitatton tfjrougt l)te Bioase,
INGLOBINO
A VISIT TO THE CHATHAM ISLANDS, IN THE YEAR TB4B.
Price One Shilling.
PRINTED POR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
GREAT aUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’s INN FIELDS,
AND 4, BOYAL EXCHANGE;
AND MAY BE HAD OF ALL BOOKSELLEHS.
R. CLAY, PRINTER, BREAD STREET HILL, LONDON.
