

Bo« 4,
CHARGE
DELIVERED BY
FREDERIC, BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
AND METROPOLITAN OF AUSTRALIA,
AT HIS
PRIMARY METROPOLITAN VISITATION
OF THE DIOCESES OF
TASMANIA, ADELAIDE, MELBOURNE,
AND NEWCASTLE,
IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD,
1 8 6 0.
i Uthi.CKV
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLE AN K,
BRIDGE STREET.




THE RIGHT REVEREND THE BISHOPS
THE IIEVEREND THE CLERGY
OF THE DIOCESES
TASMANIA, ADELAIDE, MELBOURNE, NEWCASTLE, PERTH,
AND BRISBANE,
THE FOLLOWING CHARGE,
PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THOSE BEFORE WHOM IT WAS DELIVERED,
IS DEDICATED,
WITH MUCH AFFECTION AND ESTEEM,
AND WITH A PRAYERFUL REMEMBRANCE
OF THEIR KINDNESS,
THEIR FAITHFUL FRIEND AND BROTHER IN CHRIST,
F. SYDNEY.




A CHARGE,
There are occasions in the life of the
Christian in which it is his wisdom rather to re-
gard the power of his Divine Master to direct
and sustain him, than to dwell upon his own
weakness and insufficiency for the great and respon-
sible duties he may he called upon to discharge.
In this spirit I desire to seek the strength and
counsel which are treasured up in our Lord and
Saviour for the service of His Church, and to ask
that lie who in his Divine Providence, has called
me to the office of Bishop and Metropolitan in this
portion of His heritage, would vouchsafe to make
use of His weak and erring servant for the purpose
of uniting and strengthening the various members
of His body, that so “we may come in the unity of
the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fulness of Christ.”
It is my earnest prayer that we may have cause
to he thankful for the provision in the Queen’s
Letters Patent, by which, in conformity with pri-
mitive practice, one of the Bishops of this Province
is entrusted with the grave responsibility of visit-
ing his Bight Beverend Brethren and their Clergy
in the capacity of their Metropolitan.*
See Note A.


I shall make hut one observation upon the
manner in which, as it appears to me, the duties of
such an office should he discharged.
If the individual placed in this important
position had been appointed to it on account of his
age, his learning, his experience, or for other reasons
which would at once have secured the suffrages of
his brethren, it would be unbecoming, even for
such an one, to assume any other character than
that of a friend or a father in the Church. For
myself, conscious as I am that I have no claim to
be placed in a position of superiority over my
brethren, and deeply sensible of the peculiar deli-
cacy and moderation which should characterise the
acts of one who holds this office, I sincerely trust
that whatever I say may tend only to edification
and union, to the exercise and increase of brotherly
love. I request your prayers on my behalf, my
brethren, that this my coming amongst you may
be accepted and blessed of God, “to the end ye
may be established; that is, that I may be com-
forted together with you by the mutual faith both
of you and me.”
At the commencement of my address, I wish to
disclaim any intention of obtruding my own senti-
ments, or of usurping the authority of my Eight
Eeverend Brethren in their own Dioceses. I speak
but according to the wisdom given to me, and the
observation and experience of an Episcopate of
scarcely five years’ duration. I speak, however,
with an unfeigned desire to promote the spiritual
well-being of Christ’s Church, and though there


may not be an entire agreement with all the
opinions expressed, I have every confidence that
they will meet with a kind reception and a candid
interpretation.
Among the advantages to be derived from this
assembling of the Bishops and their Clergy, we
may hope that our hands may he strengthened and
our hearts comforted by the counsel given and the
information received, that, by mutual knowledge,
mutual confidence will be increased, that the
consideration of our common difficulties will tend
to their diminution, that some measure of unifor-
mity in practice may be attained, and above all that
in answer to the devout prayers of His Church,
God will be pleased to pour down upon us the
abundance of His grace, and qualify us for the more
diligent and faithful discharge of our high and holy
calling.
Moreover, as each Diocese becomes completely
organized, and internal arrangements for self
government are carried out, it is of great impor-
tance to ascertain how far, and in what manner,
the several Dioceses of this Province can be more
closely united in council and in action. Upon
this subject it is my purpose to confer with my
Bight Beverend and Beverend Brethren, and to
obtain from them such an expression of opinion,
as may hereafter assist us in the practical
consideration of this question.
In our present assembly, however, I shall most
effectually carry out the design of the Church, by
seeking to increase a spirit of love and union


amongst ourselves, and by selecting those topics for
our consideration, which are most likely to promote
our own usefulness and the well-being of the Church.
I will first advert to the position of the Church
of England in these Colonies. And here it may
not be inappropriate to remark, that while we do
not possess the exclusive privileges which belong
to the Established Church of England and Ireland,
we maintain the same scriptural principles, and are,
in fact, members of the same body. We are ready
to acknowledge the grace which is given to others,
but we cannot abandon those claims to catholicity
and apostolicity, which are amongst the distinc-
tive marks of the true Church of Christ. We are
one with the Church of England, and do not so
properly speak of our relation to her, as of our
identity with her. These Colonies are a part of
the Queen’s dominions, and we form an integral
portion of that Church of which Her Majesty is the
Supreme Governor. We are not called upon to
consider those painful questions which agitated the
members of the Church of England when North
America separated from Great Britain. The policy
of the Empire has left the Colonies no reasonable
ground of complaint, and under the mild sway of
our gracious Queen, whom may God long preserve,
the Canons of IGO3, may with, the same authority
here as at home, continue to declare that “ the
Queen’s Majesty under God, is the only Supreme
Governor of this realm, and all others Her
Highness’s dominions and countries, as well in
all spiritual and ecclesiastical causes as temporal.”


We arc not severed from the United Church or
essentially distinguished from it because we are not
established. The establishment of the Church in
England is not a necessary condition of its being.
Were the designs of those who are opposed to the
principle of an establishment to be completely
successful, and the temporal privileges now con-
ferred by law to be removed, it would remain the
same body, the Church of England, still. And we
who receive our orders from it, have the same
formularies and articles, and acknowledge the same
temporal head, are not merely in communion with the
United Church of England and Ireland, but are that
portion of it which has its locality in this hemisphere.
We are, it is true, an Episcopal body, and are
practically a missionary Church; but we have
other characters than Episcopacy impressed upon
us, and our mission is not only to the professed
members of our own communion, but to all who
require and are willing to receive our ministrations.
We are a reformed Protestant Church, holding
scriptural truth and adhering to primitive prac-
tice ; and as the United Kingdom is the chief seat
of our communion, and gives its honoured name to
that branch of the Church catholic to which we
belong, we trust that the blessings which in our
own land have flowed from the Church to the
nation, will extend to these shores, and that in all
their wanderings, her children will continue to
drink of the spiritual streams which follow them
from Christ the rock.
It is a great privilege to belong to this church,


and we are thereby placed in the possession of
many advantages for which we have reason to he
thankful to Almighty God. Upon these I shall
not now dwell, and only refer to them in order that
we may be reminded, what manner of persons we
onght to he in the place and work which God has
assigned to ns.
If the English nation is great, the Church of
the nation has had no inconsiderable share in form-
ing the English character, and implanting those
principles which constitute a nation’s strength and
glory. If in that land, legislation springs out of
Christianity, and righteous laws are righteously
administered; if personal liberty is secure while
public license is restrained; if the sacred volume
and the House of God are open to all; if efforts for
the well-being of the whole human race are carried
on with a vigour and benevolence unexampled in the
history of the world, it is to the Church of England
that these blessings are in a great measure due.
I need not remind you, my brethren, how largely
we, in these Colonies, are indebted to the venerable
Societies for Propagating the Gospel, and for Pro-
moting Christian Knowledge. By most liberal
grants of money; by sending forth Clergymen;
by endowing additional Bishoprics; by large contri-
butions of hooks and tracts, have these Societies
supported our infant Churches. At a later period,
similar assistance has been given by the Colonial
Church and School Society. Erom these and other
sources we have received much, and much will he
required from us.


While then we are thankful for the privileges
which the Providence of God has conferred upon
us, and gratefully acknowledge the many blessings
with which His bounty has loaded us, we must
remember that an account for our stewardship will
be required, and that the rule of the Lord’s judg-
ment is, “ unto every one that hath shall he given
and he shall have abundance; hut from him that
hath not shall be taken away, even that which he
hath.” Our aim must be to have not only the
good report of all men, but of the Truth itself, a
testimony which can only be obtained by fidelity to
Him who has “ called us to glory and virtue.”
Let us, then, consider what is our calling and
what should be our aim in the work which is
appointed us of God.
An inspired Apostle has defined our calling.
“We are ambassadors for Christ.” Ours is a min-
istry of reconciliation, our work is to bring men to
God, and the great instrument which He has put
into our hands, is His word —the word of reconcilia-
tion to be publicly preached and privately taught.
The prediction of our blessed Lord concerning
His own death, and the effects of its proclamation
to the world, has been marvellously fulfilled. “I,”
said he, “if I be lifted up from the earth, will
draw all men unto me.” How powerful an
influence was exercised upon mankind, by the
exhibition of a crucified Saviour ! How speedily
did the little one of the infant Church become a
thousand, when Peter and his brethren declared to
the house of Israel, that God had “ made that same


Jesus, whom they had crucified, both Lord and
Christ.” In the temple, and before the council,
the same truth is repeated, “ God hath sent his
Son to bless you, in turning away every one of you
from his iniquities.” “ Neither is there salvation
in any other, for there is none other name under
Heaven, given among men, whereby we must
be saved.”
The world is full of instances of the mighty
efficacy which followed the declaration of these
truths. “ Where,” asked the proud Assyrian,” are
the gods of Hamath and Arpad? where are the
gods of Sepharvaim and Hena and Ivah ?” A
similar enquiry may now be made concerning the
idols of Assyria and Egypt, and the deities of
Greece and Home. The reply is, that not by
carnal weapons ; not with enticing words of man’s
wisdom; not by imposture and deceitful handling
of the Word of God; not by the gratification of
pride, of lust of conquest, and of sensuality; but
by the foolishness of preaching, were the strong-
holds of Satan pulled down, and men in every land
brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.
If we endeavour to trace the connexion between
this preaching, and the conversion of both Jews
and Gentiles to Christianity, it will appear that the
following causes may be assigned for the efficacy of
the Gospel.
I. Our Lord commanded the Apostles to preach
repentance and remission of sins in His name
amongst all nations. That command was accom-
panied by the promise of His presence and blessing.


When, therefore, they went forth and preached
everywhere, the Lord himself wrought with them;
their word was mighty through God. It was
received “ not as the word of man, but as it is in
truth, the Word of God, which effectually worketh
in them that believe.”
11. The promise of the Holy Spirit was also
attached to this command. “ Behold, I send the
promise of the Bather upon you.” As Christ by
the finger of God cast out devils, so by the power
of the Holy Ghost did the Apostles cast down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalted
itself against God. It was when the Lord “ opened
the heart of Lydia,” that “ she attended to the
things spoken by St. Paul.” Those Corinthians of
whom the Apostle says, “ye were idolaters,
adulterers, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers,”
were “ washed, justified, sanctified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.” It
was by this Spirit that light and life were given.
“ God, who commanded the light to shine out ot
darkness, is He who hath shined in our hearts
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the person of Jesus Christ.” And this
light is the light of life ; the Holy Ghost, the Lord,
in glory equal, in majesty co-eternal with the
Bather and the Son, is the Giver of Life. “It is
the Spirit that quickeneth.” When the seed,
which is the word, is hid in the heart, the Holy
Spirit causes it to spring up and bring forth fruit,
even the fruit of the Spirit.
HP. There is, moreover, a natural and neces-


sary connection between this ministry of the
Gospel, and obedience to God. Under the influence
of their fears, men endeavour to hide themselves
from the presence of Jehovah. It is only as hope
is kindled, that they can be induced to come back
to Him. In the gospel God commends His love to
us, and invites ours in return. When, therefore,
the faithful ambassador approaches us with this
invitation, <c be ye reconciled to God,” all doubt
concerning the Divine intention towards us is
removed, distrust is exchanged for hope, faith
finds room to expatiate amidst the promises of God,
and fear is cast out by love; thankfulness is ex-
pressed by the willing obedience of a holy life, and
joy anticipates the employment of the eternal
world, by breaking forth into the praises of “ Him
who loved us, and washed us from our sins in His
own blood.”
If then we regard the preaching of Jesus Christ
and Him crucified, as an act of obedience to the
Divine command, or as having the promise of the
Holy Spirit specially connected with it, or as
attracting men by influences which affect their
natural desire for peace, we shall find sufficient
reason for believing that, as it is agreeable to the
will of God, so will it be accompanied by his
blessing, when, by the exhibition of the love of God
through Jesus Christ, we endeavour to induce men
to believe in Him to the saving of the soul.
And here it might be useful to enquire how it
comes to pass, that the ministry which in the
Apostle’s days, was so efficacious, should in our


own appear to haye lost much of its power, so that
comparatively few are now brought by means of it
to such a state of knowledge and holiness, as to
give a reasonable hope of their eternal safety. A
full investigation of this question would occupy
more- time than we can now afford. We may,
however, observe, that if it he not “ another
gospel ” which is preached, hut the same saving
truth proclaimed by the Apostles, its efficacy may
he weakened by defective modes of statement,
or by the neglect of other important parts of the
Christian Minister’s work.
The doctrine of the cross is one according to
godliness. As the reception of it should be eviden-
ced by holiness of life, so the statement of it should
be made in the manner required by St. Paul, when
writing to Titus, he says, —“these things I will
that thou affirm constantly, that they which believe
in God, should he careful to maintain good works.”
An error may he committed in not giving sufficient
prominence to the connexion between faith and
good works, by which the latter do spring out
necessarily of the former. A want of diligence in
preparation for the public ministry, or of clearness
in the arrangement, or of animation in the delivery
of a discourse, may prevent the entrance of that
word, which would otherwise have given light and
understanding “to the simple.”
The conscientious pastor will, moreover, feel,
that his work is by no means accomplished when
the public duties of his office are The
example of an Apostle, who from house to house,


night and day, warned and taught every man; the
ordination vow by which he engaged to use private
monitions and exhortations as well to the sick as
the whole ; his own conscientious desire to prove
himself faithful to God and serviceable to man,
constrain the Pastor to diligent, systematic, and
continual visitation of his charge.
It is only thus that he can become acquainted
with the character and condition of his people.
The physician applies the remedy suited to each
case ; the advocate enters into the peculiar circum-
stances of the cause entrusted to his care; and he
who desires to be successful in winning souls must,
like these practitioners, be discriminating and skil-
ful. The “ faithful and wise steward,” is one who
has such knowledge of the people, as to be able to
give to each member of the household, “ his portion
in due season.”
The neglect of parochial visitation, and private
converse with the people upon the subject of their
souls’ salvation, is as injurious to the Pastor as to
the flock. The most useful topics for public
discourses are suggested in this intercourse; the
actual difficulties of the weak or of the enquiring
are discovered; objections are met and answered;
the careless are admonished; and the ignorant
instructed. The experience thus obtained, gives to
the pulpit ministrations a vigour and reality which
nothing else can supply.
The practice of catechizing is also one which
the clergyman should diligently pursue. He will
thus find how little is known ; how difficult it is to


impart the knowledge of divine truth to the unedu-
cated ; and while performing a very important
duty towards the young, he will be qualifying
himself for the better discharge of his office as
teacher. He who said, “ feed my sheep,” also gave
the command, “ feed my lambs and while Ido
not think that any schoolmaster is duly qualified
for his office, who cannot be intrusted with the
religious instruction of the young, yet it is
undoubtedly a prime duty with the clergyman to
examine into the nature and amount of that
instruction, and especially to ascertain that the
children understand such portions of the scripture
as they are able to read, and also the catechism of
our Church.
I take this opportunity of reminding my rever-
end brethren, that their chief hope of imparting
spiritual blessings is in labours connected with the
young; in the day and Sunday school; in the classes
for confirmation, and for reading the Scriptures.
It is a noble ambition to aim at implanting the
seeds of holiness, righteousness, and temperance in
these lands, and the ground which will most
successfully repay the husbandman’s toil, is that
which has been untrodden by the world. A few
hours in each week devoted to this work, will not
be without their reward. The respect and affection
of the young ; the increased facility and experience
in communicating knowledge; the consciousness
that the work there begun will not be in vain, will
make the time spent in the school a happy and
most useful portion of the ministerial life.


A Bible class, or one for the preparation of
candidates for confirmation, will retain some of the
elder children under the Pastor’s care and direction,
after they have left the school.
The ordinance of confirmation is a vantage
ground of which we may with good effect avail
ourselves. The rite itself is so scriptural and
reasonable, that wherever it is properly explained,
there will be a ready response to the Clergyman’s
appeal for candidates. And while the attendance
upon the course of instruction forms one of the
tests of willingness and fitness on the part of
candidates, the instruction itself may be so length-
ened, detailed, and personal, as to be, under God,
the means of imparting that knowledge which
makes wise unto life eternal, through faith in
Jesus Christ.
Bearing in mind the time of life at which con-
firmation ordinarily occurs; the peculiar relation
in which the Pastor and catechumens stand to each
other; the authority with which he speaks, and
the willingness with which they hear ; it is impos-
sible to estimate too highly the importance of this
season, or the beneficial effects likely to result from
such a course of instruction, as the full and
scriptural explanation of the Church catechism
supplies.
Those who have been confirmed, may still con-
tinue to receive instruction, and if with the other
communicants they were statedly assembled for
reading the word of God and for prayer, previous
to the monthly administration of the Lord’s Supper,


the bond of union between the Pastor and these
members of his flock, would be much strengthened;
while cottage lectures at times convenient for the
aged, the infirm, and those who are remote from the
House of God, would serve to elicit and maintain
an interest in religion, which might otherwise
languish and expire.
In the contemplation of this portion of the
work of the ministry, we may ask with the
Apostle, “ who is sufficient for these things ?”
And while with him we gratefully acknow-
ledge that our sufficiency is of God, who alone can
make us “ able ministers of the New Testament,”
we must ever bear in mind, that this work requires
such devotedness and entire surrender of ourselves,
as will afford neither time nor inclination for other
pursuits. We are “soldiers,” and “no man that
warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this
life, that he may please Him who hath chosen
him.” We are “ ambassadors,” and have no pri-
vate interests to serve. Our work requires that all
we have and are should be given to it, and in no
other spirit can it be successfully and happily
carried on. Mark the emphatic words of the
Apostle. “ Meditate upon these things, give thy-
self wholly to them ;” and then may this effect be
expected to follow, “ thy profiting will appear in
all things.” The man of business keeps his
designs continually in view : they are his thought
by day, his dream by night; in these things he
lives, and thus intent upon his end, he commonly
succeeds. It was the remark of one who had long


and carefully observed the career of his contem-
poraries, that he never saw a man fail of success,
who steadily persevered in his calling. These
things are done for an earthly prize, for a temporal
reward. Shall the minister of Jesus Christ be less
devoted ? Can he venture to mingle secular
pursuits with his holy occupation ? Can he, with
due diligence and constant zeal, study, and pray,
and preach, and catechize, and visit the sick and
the whole, if he allows the calculations of gain and
loss, the cares of this life, the deceitfulness of
riches, and the lusts of other things to enter into
his heart ? May not these intruders prove too
strong for every other interest, and finally cast out
even the desire to be a minister approved of Christ?
Considering the requirements which the Lord
makes upon us, and the nature of the work itself,
success in the ministry seems impossible, unless the
whole man is engaged therein.
It may also be observed, that our own happi-
ness, as well as our ministerial success, depends
upon this devotedness to our sacred calling.
The private Christian deeply interested in his
personal salvation, reconciled to God and enjoying
the hope of everlasting life, in intelligent com-
munion with the Lather and the Son through the
Spirit, has within himself a never-failing spring of
joy, a peace which the world cannot give.
The Christian minister possessing the treasure
of Christ’s gospel, and by his office called to impart
it to others, finds his work a source of enjoyment,
so pure, so peaceable, so full of mercy and of good


fruits, as to be a very anticipation of the life
which is yet to come. He is that “ good man,”
who in an eminent degree is “ satisfied from him-
self.” It may not always he granted to him to
find satisfaction in his success, hut the earnest,
diligent, conscientious Pastor, will never he left
without some foretastes of his Master’s joy. He
piay in passing through the wilderness he occa-
sionally sorely bestead and weary, hut like his
divine Lord, he will drink of the brook in the way,
and so lift up the head. There will he some
seasons in which he will rejoice in spirit, and see
of the fruit of his labour, and he glad.
But as there is no occupation in the world
which provides such unfailing enjoyment to one
who is with his whole heart engaged in it, so is he
unhappy who has entered upon a work for which
he has no vocation, and in which he finds no real
interest. A careless, undevout, or worldly-minded
clergyman is, or ought to he, one of the most
miserable of men. Well for him will it he, if a
sense of his sinfulness and inefficiency, shall lead
him with deep repentance to seek forgiveness for
having touched the ark with unhidden haste.
Better that he should know, and keenly feel his
past transgressions, and seek the grace which an
almighty Saviour can supply, than that blindly
leading the blind, he should fall under the condem-
nation of a righteous judge.
A ministry in which the Pastors are wise and
faithful, men of intelligence and zeal, apt to teach
and able to influence society, is one of the chief


blessings which God can bestow upon a country.
It will he a time of great mercy when He fulfils
that promise to His ancient people, “ I will give
you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall
feed you with knowledge and understanding.”—
Jer. iii. xv.
The means by which a ministry of this kind
may he provided, and afterwards maintained, are
questions which call for the most anxious and
prayerful consideration of the members of our
Church. The Colonial governments have readily
acknowledged the advantages of a liberal education,
and have expended large sums in making provision
for it; hut in these Colonies, even more than at
home, it is necessary for the Church to put forth
special efforts for the purpose of giving religious
instruction to young men. No one passes through
an English University without some acquaintance
with the Greek Testament and the Evidences of
Christianity, and thus the foundation is laid for
the acquisition of theological knowledge. But it
does not enter into the plan of the Government
schools and universities, already in existence, to
impart even the rudiments of divinity, and the
only mode of supplying this want is, to supplement
the University course hy affiliated Colleges for
undergraduates, or to maintain Theological Col-
leges, in which graduates of the University and
others may receive special instruction and training
for the ministry. Each of these modes is, in itself,
good, hoth appear desirable. The graduate of the
University will he greatly benefited hy a course


of theological reading and practical preparation
for the ministry; and there are yonng men, who
in the most essential points, are qualified for the
work of Evangelists, hut for whom two years of
theological training, is not merely the best, hut,
perhaps, the only advisable way of admission
into Holy Orders.
Such an Institution has been founded in the
Metropolitan Diocese, and has sent forth some
promising labourers into the ministerial field. It
has received students from the Diocese of Mel-
bourne, and judging from the small number of
young men, who have presented themselves as
candidates for admission, the College may offer
its advantages to the other Australian Dioceses,
without fear of its being overcrowded. It owes
its existence to the well-directed benevolence of the
late Mr. Moore, of Liverpool, New South Wales,
and bears the name of its munificent founder.*
In a preceding paragraph, I have adverted
to one of the difficulties connected with the
ministry in these Colonies; the small number of
candidates, from among the young men horn
in Australia. Several reasons may be assigned
for this. The pastoral pursuits of this country
are peculiarly attractive to young men; the re-
muneration which a clergyman receives, is small
compared with the incomes of other professional
men, and I fear I must add, that the feeling
of society, is not strongly in favour of our native
youth dedicating themselves to this sacred office.
* See Note.


The clergy have hitherto been too few, and
have exercised too little influence, to produce a
decided preference in favour of the ministry as
a profession, and although it may with some
truth he affirmed, that a spirit of worldliness
is one cause of this reluctance to engage in
the work of a clergyman, yet we can hardly
wonder if a young man, choosing his future
calling in life, should he slow to select that
which, in a temporal point of view, offers few
present advantages, and in which the prospects
are not very encouraging.
The true remedy for this state of things
is, however, not to he sought so much in en-
deavouring to increase the attractions of the
ministerial profession, as in a more general
diffusion of religious earnestness, and of higher
views of Christian responsibility. When the
worth of the soul, and the excellence of Christ’s
gospel, and the privilege of serving a Heavenly
Master are subjects in which a deep interest is
more commonly felt, the influence of pious parents
will extend to their children, and praying mothers
will see the desire of their hearts fulfilled, in
the dedication of their sons to the service of the
sanctuary. Our duty in our present circum-
stances is taught us by our Lord Himself; His
remedy for our ministerial wants is this, “ pray
ye, therefore, the Lord of the Harvest, that He
would send forth labourers into His harvest.”
It is further a matter of grave importance
to consider the mode in which the Clergy are


to be maintained. The difficulty involved in this
question is readily solved by some; their reply
is, the maintenance of the ministry must be
left to the people. In some instances, it may
be admitted, that this can be done. That it
can be done generally, and with advantage to
all parties, we do not at present know; there
are not wanting examples of its failure. That
it is the best way, or even a good way of
maintaining the ministry, is denied by many,
who from experience are entitled to be heard;
while some do not hesitate to affirm, that of
all ways of paying the Clergy, it is the worst.
To members of the Church of England, the
system of voluntary payments made directly from
the people to their Pastor is unusual and dis-
tasteful; but one thing is evident, that whatever
may become of existing Government aid, if the
amount and number of stipends is to be in-
creased, and the ordinances of religion are to
be extended, the self-denial and liberality of
the members of the Church of England, must
supply the means.
We may regard it as an unwise thing, that
when the foundations of these colonies were
laid, the British subject had not his religious
as well as his civil privileges secured to him,
his Church as well as trial by jury; but we
must now deal with this question in the form
in which we find it.
In the older Colonies the principle of reli-
gious endowment by the State was either not


fairly tried or soon abandoned; and others, to
avoid the difficulties and anomalies which beset
the question, speedily adopted the voluntary
system.
To the manner in which State aid is ad-
ministered in some of the Colonies, this objection
is commonly made, that it is given to religious
denominations fundamentally opposed to each
other. The obvious reply to this objection is,
that the responsibility of any departure from the
proper principle of religious endowments, does
not rest with the Church, but with the govern-
ment of the country. We believe, that it is
the duty of the State to support the truth,
and, therefore, to support that branch of the
Church of Christ to which we belong; and
while the State is not freed from its obligation
to us, because under a mistaken idea of its
duty it gives assistance to others, so neither
are we obliged to refuse the aid which is
offered to us, because similar assistance is
received by those, to whom, in our opinion, it
is not due.
Moreover, as members of the commonwealth,
and believing that the advantages which in
our ecclesiastical character we are able to
confer upon the country are considerable, there
need not be any hesitation or scruple of con-
science on our part in accepting that aid
which the State bestows. The equivalent it
receives fully justifies such an expenditure.
It would at the same time be ungrateful, not


to acknowledge the advantages we have received
from government aid. If in the older Colonies
we have glebes, substantial churches, and schools
in almost every part of the Diocese, we owe
this state of things principally to the liberal
aid afforded by governments, which regarded
it as a part of their duty to provide the
ordinances of religion and the means of edu-
cation for those committed to their care.
The difficulties connected with this question
have not unnaturally led politicians to desire its
settlement; and, if this can he effected with
a due regard to the rights of parishes as well
as of clergymen, and so as to keep faith, not
only with individuals, but with the Church, it is
most desirable that so fruitful a source of debate
and difference of opinion should be removed.
On this subject of the maintenance of the
Clergy, I may be permitted to suggest, that
endowments and the establishment of a common
fund for the support of the ministry, appear
to be necessary, in order to preserve in these
Colonies such an intelligent and educated body
of men as we desire to see engaged in the
service of the Church of England. It is by
men of this description that all classes of
society are influenced. The lowest as well as the
highest, acknowledge the power of a cultivated
mind, and the force of u right wordsunedu-
cated piety, accompanied by fervent zeal, may
be extensively useful, yet cannot supply the
place of learning, and of that knowledge of


mankind which are amongst the proper fruits
of a Collegiate course of training. But men
of education and refinement, are, more than
others, painfully affected by the evils of the
voluntary system, and as they can avoid them
by declining to labour in that portion of the
Church in which they exist, I fear that the
tendency of an unmodified system of voluntary
payments will he to deter highly qualified
men from entering into the ministry; the reli-
gious ordinances of our Church, will, no doubt,
be maintained, but, it will not he easy to
secure the services of men such as these
Colonies require.
In considering this question, the members
of the Church of England will naturally revert
to that system of endowments which is identi-
fied with the Church at home, and which has
preserved in the nation, and for the nation’s
benefit, that influential and valuable body of
men, the Clergy of the Established Church.
I am glad to observe, that in one of the
Dioceses of this Province, an effort is being
made to form an Endowment Society. The
object is so excellent and so necessary, that
I trust the proposal will be carried out with
a zeal and liberality proportionate to the wis-
dom with which it appears to have been
designed, and will, by its success, stimulate the
members of the Church of England in other
Colonies to imitate so good an example.*
See Note.


It is not very probable that our endow-
ments will be of such great value, as to enable
the holders of them to dispense with a certain
amount of supplementary voluntary assistance.
This combination appears to be the best prac-
ticable mode of maintaining the Christian ministry
in a state of independence and activity. It
affords to the parishioners an opportunity of
contributing to the Clergyman’s stipend, and at
the same time secures to him in respect to a
portion of his income, that freedom from anxiety,
which is necessary to his entire devotedness to
his work.
I will here take the liberty of observing,
that for the benefit of newly formed parishes
or districts, where a Government stipend is not
granted, and no endowment at present exists,
it would seem -to be desirable to provide a
common Church fund, out of which the stipends
of the Clergy of these unendowed parishes may
be paid. A large portion, or even the whole
of the Clergyman’s salary, may be collected in
the district in which he labours, but whatever
the amount obtained, it might with advantage
be placed in the common fund, from which
these clerical stipends should be paid.
The regularity and certainty of the payments
to the Clergyman are thus secured, and the
voluntary system is deprived of one of its most
objectionable features, when the stipend is not
paid directly by the people to their pastor.
In these cases also, it seems to be the


duty of parishes which are more favourably cir-
cumstanced, to contribute largely to the common
fund ; and I greatly commend the principle
adopted in one Diocese, that a sum equal to
one half of the stipend received by a parish
from government should be returned to the
common fund.
I regret, however, to say, that at present,
there is far too little of that spirit of Christian
charity which regards the duty of seeking the
well-being of the whole body as incumbent
upon each member of the same; and this, doubt-
less, is one of our great difficulties, and a
difficulty which is not without its apparent
excuse. When a parish is burdened with heavy
pecuniary responsibilities, or where a willing
people, under the guidance of a zealous Clergy-
man, are contributing liberally towards the
completion of their Church, or School, or
Parsonage, or the maintenance of an additional
Clergyman, it is natural under such circumstances
to urge, We are fully engaged in the Church’s
work, and until we have accomplished what we
have in hand, we cannot be expected to con-
tribute towards the supply of others’ wants. It
is natural, but if I may be permitted to use so
strong a term, it is not Christian to say this,
and I will add, it is not politic in those who
are desirous to promote the well-being of their
flock, to encourage this feeling.
The Christian rule is, that the strong should
bear with, and so help the weak; that he is


our neighbour who requires our aid, and to
whom we have the power and opportunity of
affording it; and surely it is not possible to
say, of any one parish, that the people are
doing so much for their own local objects as
to be unable to contribute to others, in which
the well-being of the Church at large is con-
cerned. Moreover, it will ordinarily be found,
that the charity which is diffusive, is also the
most active and earnest at home; as the
natural body is kept in health by exercise,
and the mind is relieved and strengthened by
variety of effort, so is it with the moral and
spiritual well-being of a community; in pro-
portion to the intelligent interest taken in the
work of Christ throughout the world, will be
its care for those of its own household. The
love which reaches to the remote interior, will
not overlook the children of the family; and
the same vigour and earnestness, which are put
forth in efforts on behalf of those who are
wandering on every high hill, and in every
dark valley, will protect those who are within
the fold. There may be exceptions to this rule,
and there must be limits to its operation; but
it will generally be found, that the charity
which is most comprehensive, is that upon which
the parochial Clergyman can best rely for assis-
tance in carrying out his local designs; and
that where parochial objects are alone avowedly
supported, the support is of a feeble kind; the
growth of charity is dwarfed and stunted, by


reason of the narrow limits within which it
is confined.
This is a subject of very great importance
to ns all, and I desire to impress upon yon, my
Brethren, the necessity of cultivating a spirit
of brotherly regard for the members of our
Church scattered abroad in the remote districts
of these Colonies, and for their pastors. Those
of you especially, to whom the good providence
of God has assigned the settled parish, the
church, the school, and the parsonage, remem-
ber, there are many of your brethren for whom
nothing of this kind is prepared, and that
they demand our sympathy in their isolation
and privations; and where such a common
fund as I have described exists, it will be your
privilege to render that assistance which, while
it lessens their anxieties by placing them in a
less dependant position, in no respect diminishes
your own means of usefulness, nay, rather does
undoubtedly increase them, inasmuch as the good
of the whole ministers to the comfort and ad-
vantage of each member of the body.
The question of patronage is closely allied
to the subjects we have just considered. It is
a well understood principle of our own Church,
that parties who provide an endowment adequate
to the maintenance of a Clergyman, have the
privilege of presenting to the incumbency. It
was thus that parishes at home were originally
formed, and more recently, the Act of Ist and
2nd of William IY., commonly called the “ Trus-


tees Act,” gave to three or five Trustees the
presentation to a Church, built under certain
conditions, and having an endowment of not
less than one thousand pounds. As giving to
the laity a deeper interest in the well-being
of the Church, and maintaining amongst our-
selves one of the modes of patronage in use
at home, it seems worthy of adoption.
The stability and usefulness of the Church
in England has, in a great measure, arisen
from the variety of modes in which patronage
is exercised. It is not administered by one, but
by nearly every class in the community. Erom
the Sovereign and her nobles to the parishioners,
in some instances, of a country village; from
the Universities and great corporate bodies to
the trustees in our commercial and manufac-
turing towns; from the Bishop to the incumbent
of a parish comprising many chapelries, all have
an interest in the Church’s well-being, because
of the powers of patronage with which they
are invested.
It is not the least of the advantages of this
general diffusion of patronage, that, where it
exists, no particular class of society, and no
erroneous form of religious opinion can obtain
exclusive possession of the ministrations of the
Church.
The subdivision of dioceses in this province
still goes forward, and is attended with benefi-
cial results. At present, there is not much
danger in Australia of confining the sphere of


Episcopal action within too narrow limits, and
the additional interest and energy brought to
hear upon the severed portion of a diocese, is
perceptible in the immediate and rapid increase
of Clergymen, Churches, and of the various
means of grace and education.
In some dioceses, considerable advantage
would arise from the appointment of Clergymen,
whose principal occupation should be to organize
new districts, or to supply the lack of service
occasioned by death, or by the insufficient number
of labourers in the field. If such could be
placed as assistants to, and under the direction
of the Archdeacons, portions of a diocese at
present deprived of the ordinances of religion
might be occasionally visited. At the same time,
the liberality of the people might be called forth,
and their efforts united so as to provide a
maintenance for a Clergyman amongst them-
selves.
Of Missions to the Islands and to the Abo-
rigines of Australia, there is not much to
record. The Bishop of New Zealand continues
his zealous efforts in behalf of the Melanesian
Mission, and has made arrangements for its
being permanently carried on. Hitherto, I regret
to say, he has not received much assistance
from other dioceses.
The Missionary efforts of the Church of
England in this hemisphere, are principally re-
presented by the Church Missionary Society in
in New Zealand.


The Australian Board of Missions, was formed
at Sydney, in the year 1852, for the purpose
of sending Missionaries to the Aborigines and
to the Islands; hut the spiritual wants of the
members of our own communion, have absorbed
all the means and occupied all the labourers
at our disposal. With the exception of the
Church of England and the Moravian Missions
in the Diocese of Melbourne, and the Poonindie
Mission in the Diocese of Adelaide, the Aborigines
of Australia are left apparently in an uncared
for and hopeless condition, not creditable to our
Christianity.* Erequent attempts have in former
years been made to convey the knowledge of
Christ’s Gospel to them, but their peculiar
character, and the circumstances under which these
Colonies have been peopled, combined to frustrate
the earnest endeavours of devoted men. Indi-
viduals amongst them have shewn that they
are capable of receiving religious instruction, and
when their confidence and affection have been
secured, and careful oversight has been bestowed
upon them, they have received and adorned the
doctrine of their God and Saviour.
We trust that the Missions which are now
being carried on, both in Melanesia and in
Australia, will be blessed of God, and that the
measure of success they have attained, will stir
up the Church to obey the Divine command,
to go into all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature.”
See Note.


I may also take this occasion of expressing
a similar desire with respect to populous cities
and towns. The Scripture reader, the District
visitor, the lay assistant, all should he called
into requisition. The aid of suitable well-quali-
fied laymen in conducting Divine Service during
the absence of the Clergyman, has been found
useful in the country, and there seems no
reason why they should not be more commonly
invited to give the same help in our towns.
Schools for classes not reached by other insti-
tutions ; Sunday Schools in districts where none
exist; and readings to the poor in their own
houses, are works in which Christian laymen
may he engaged with most happy results.
The organized hand of voluntary visitors,
should form a part of the machinery in every
well ordered parish, while the Scripture reader
paid and exclusively set apart for this work,
might seek out and instruct the poor, the
ignorant, and the dying.
In all these departments of labour, much is
everywhere to he done, and if we would accom-
plish anything effectual for the spiritual improve-
ment of our people, we must “he steadfast,
unmoveahle, always abounding in the work of the
Lord;” our encouragement being, that we know,
that our “labour is not in vain in the Lord.”
I trust that with respect to these matters,
the action of the Church will he more uniform
and vigorous, in consequence of the establishment
of Diocesan Synods.


Some at least of the subjects I have named
can there receive the careful consideration they
require, and the conclusions of the Church
upon them he carried out with a general concurrence
not before attainable.
This is of great importance, and the pro-
ceedings of the Bishops, Clergy, and Laity, in
their ecclesiastical assemblies have thus far proved,
that the members of the Church of England
can maintain an order and exhibit an earnest-
ness, gravity, and ability in debate, which are
highly creditable to them, and afford good
grounds for believing that great advantages will
arise from the exercise of their Synodical
powers.
It is, perhaps, to be regretted, that the
mode of constituting our Diocesan Synods was
not more uniform, but in this diversity there
may ultimately be found some advantages, and the
different circumstances in which the Church is
placed in relation to the Government in the
various Colonies made an application to Par-
liament in certain cases indispensable.
The members of the Church have, however,
reason to congratulate themselves, that in the
constitution of Diocesan Synods, the fundamental
principles of the Church of England have been
maintained.
One of these is the government of the
Church by Bishops; and while the laity are
recognized as a portion of Christ’s Church
militant on earth, and entitled and qualified


to take part in the management of ecclesiastical
affairs, the privileges of the Bishops and clergy
have not been invaded.
We trust that publicity and freedom of
debate will serve to ensure a very general con-
currence in the measures adopted, and that the
harmonious consent of the three estates of
“Bishops, Curates, and the congregations com-
mitted to their charge” will never he wanting.
In the present day the clergy will not he
suffered to put forth unwarrantable pretensions
to authority without challenge from the laity.
On the other hand, it should be the care of
the laity that their influence in the Church
is wisely and temperately exercised ; being assured
that the independence of the clergy and the
active interest of the laity are alike necessary
for the well-being of the Church.
It is not very probable that the Episcopal
assent will he withheld from measures in which
the clergy and the laity are unanimous. The
power of giving or withholding that assent
appears to be inherent in the Bishop’s office,
and will serve to restrain any tendency on the
part either of the clergy or of the laity to
infringe upon each others rights.
The great means, however, of maintaining the
usefulness of these Church assemblies, is to comply
with the apostolic injunction, “ Let all your things
he done with charity.”
Individuals and Churches need more of this
grace. Animated by it, the Christian bears and


forbears, believes and hopes in tbe midst of many
provocations and temptations.
In our love for one another, consists onr
strength. Onr vigilance need not slumber, nor onr
protest against error in doctrine, or viciousness in
life, be less decided, if only all our matters are
done with charity.
Love is the divinely appointed remedy for many
of our ills.
“ Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfil
“ the law of Christ.” “ All the law is fulfilled in one
f< word, even in this —thou shalt love thy neighbour
“as thyself. But if ye bite and devour one another,
“ take heed that ye be not consumed one of
“ another.”
If the spirit of party can unite men for political
purposes, if the spirit of emulation can impel men
to undertake the most dangerous services, surely
the principle of Christian love should be strong
enough to bind together the members of the Church
of England, in one compact body, and constrain
them to sacrifice their personal preferences for the
sake of union and the common good.
Love will make us kind and forbearing towards
those who do not agree with us; jealous for the
honour and reputation of our brethren; not for-
ward to dwell upon points of difference, and
anxious to cover the fault of an offending member.
Love will make us candid and conciliatory in
public discussion, as well as in private intercourse;
we shall be ready to honour all men, and give a cheer-
ful submission to authority where obedience is due.


Where the spirit of love is shed abroad, the
weak are home with and instructed, and the whole
body makes increase of itself in unity and strength.
Debates conducted in this spirit will elucidate
truth, will leave no sting, and will issue in wise
decrees and firm resolves.
Let the members of the Church of England in
these colonies he true to Christ, to each other and
to their profession, to the Scriptural principles and
Apostolic practice of their Church, and a glorious
career of usefulness is before them.
Let, then, prayers for godly union and increase
of spirituality he more abundant, let your practice,
my Reverend Brethren, he ever in accordance with
your ordination vows, and with the spirit which
animates the services of our Church, and you will
he blessed and a blessing to others.
Oh ! that it would please the God and Eather
of our Lord Jesus Christ to send forth a rich supply
of that grace which He has treasured up in His
beloved Son, and which is held by Him for the
benefit of His waiting Church ! that so the windows
of Heaven being opened we might receive the pur-
chased promised blessing from on high.
How delightful it is, my Reverend Brethren, to
turn our thoughts from the anxieties and distrac-
tions of earth to the contemplation of our Heavenly
Eather’s willingness to hear and answer the prayers
of His people, and to the advocacy provided for
us at the right hand of the throne of God.
Prayer is our consolation and our strength.
If we were not faithless and unbelieving, how often


should we walk firmly and peacefully over those
troubled waters at which we are too often filled
with apprehension and dismay. An almighty
Saviour lives, why do we not more habitually and
confidently betake ourselves to Him, and rely upon
His promises and do His bidding with constancy
and cheerfulness ? We have not, because we ask
not. The Lord’s arm is not shortened, His ear
is not heavy. But the Church is not awake, we
slumber and do not pray.
Yet surely there is enough in our own condi-
tion and in that of the world around us to make us
watchful and prayerful, and there is abundant en-
couragement in the word of God and in the work
and in the promises of Jesus Christ, to make us
feel that to pray is to overcome; to pray is to
bring the Lord Jesus himself to our relief; to pray
is to draw down that Holy Spirit who can cause
the dry hones to rise up an exceeding great army
of living men.
We need more union, more spirituality, more
love to each other, more compassion to a world
lying in wickedness, more wisdom, zeal, and power.
These are not the fruits of nature hut of grace.
Ask and it shall be given you.
We require men, spiritual, holy, earnest, loving
men, as Ministers of Christ’s word, as Missionaries to
the heathen, as fathers of families, as lay members of
the Church supplying the lack of clergymen, wise
in council, liberal of their substance, not sparing
in personal effort; but these are not horn of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,


they are horn from above, born of God. The direc-
tion given to the prophet must still he obeyed,
“ Prophesy unto the wind,” unto that breath of the
Almighty which giveth life, “ Come breathe upon
these slain.”
While they “continued with one accord in prayer
and supplication” the Holy Ghost came down upon
the Apostles, and thus again, my Reverend Brethren,
it will he when the Church assumes her proper at-
titude, and with bended knees and outstretched
arms, prays, “ Oh! that thou wouldest rend the
Heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the
mountains might flow down at thy presence,” then
will there he a renewal of those Pentecostal bless-
ings under whose mighty influence multitudes
became obedient to the faith.
And truly, though as yet, we see not our signs
in this portion of the earth, the Lord is undoubtedly
causing His power to be known amongst the
children of men.
The most jealous observer of the recent events
which have taken place in America and Great
Britain, must acknowledge that great things have
been wrought, and we do not suppose that Satan’s
kingdom is so divided as that he should cast out
the evil spirits of intemperance, profanity, and the
neglect of religious ordinances.
That work may have human imperfections
mingled with it, but no one who has carefully
examined it, can doubt that it is the work of God.
“ Are there any of the vanities of the Gentiles that
can cause rain ?”


And wlien some portions of the earth are re-
ceiving this his blessing, let not us, my Brethren,
through our unbelief or worldliness, provoke the
Lord to say, “ I have withholden the rain from you,
ye have not returned unto me.” But let our
prayers arise unitedly, privately that He would
cause it to come down upon us, and would pour out
His spirit upon all flesh, that whosoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord, may he saved.
We may, my Brethren, have fallen upon evil
times and perilous days, we may he in the last
period of this dispensation. “The great and
terrible day of the Lord” may soon come, hut
prayer, fervent, constant, importunate, believing
prayer for the Holy Spirit can never he ill-timed.
To he found praying, is to he found ready when
the Master comes. For yourselves you need a
hiding place till these calamities he overpast.
Enter into your chamber and it shall he a little
sanctuary, a sprinkled threshold over which the
destroyer does not come. A praying Church is
spiritual, active, loving, life-conveying. Pray for
your Bishops that they may he men of God, full
of love and of the Holy Ghost, and that being
ensamples to the flock of Christ, they may feed it
with a ready mind. Pray for the Clergy, that
they may take heed to themselves and to the
doctrine, and that in doing this, they may both
save themselves and them that hear them. Pray
for the people, that they may he wise and under-
standing, fearing God and hating iniquity. Pray
that the principles of true religion may be im-


planted in the hearts of the young, that our sons
may he as trees of righteousness, planted in the
courts of the Lord, our daughters adorned with
every Christian grace, polished after the similitude
of a palace—that from these lands, light and salva-
tion may go forth to the many peopled islands of
the Pacific, that some blessings may yet he imparted
to the remnant of the ah original tribes of this
country, and be received by the stranger from
China who dwells in our gates, that by the various
efforts put forth by the Church, its own spiritual
strength and activity may he increased, that so
righteousness may he our portion and the heritage
of our children, and truth and peace he established
among us for all generations.


NOTES.
Page 5.
Extract from Letters Patent, dated 1 9th October, 1854.
And we will and grant to the said Bishop of Sydney and his successors
full power and authority as Metropolitan of Australia, to perform all functions
peculiar and appropriate to the office of Metropolitan within the limits of the
said Sees of Newcastle, Adelaide, Melbourne, and Tasmania, and to exercise
Metropolitan Jurisdiction over the Bishops of the said Sees, and their successors,
and over all Archdeacons, dignitaries, and all other Chaplains, Ministers, Priests,
and Deacons in Holy Orders of the United Church of England and Ireland
within the limits of the said diocese. And we do by these presents give and
grant unto the said Bishop of Sydney and his successors full power and authority
to visit once in five years, or oftener if occasion shall require, as well the several
Bishops and their successors as all dignitaries and all other Chaplains, Minis-
ters, Priests, and Deacons in Holy Orders of the United Church of England and
Ireland resident in the said diocese, for correcting and supplying the defects of
the said Bishops and their successors with all and all manner of visitatorial
jurisdiction, power, and coercion; And We do hereby authorize and empower
the said Bishop of Sydney and his successors to inhibit, during any such
visitation of the said dioceses, the exercise of all, or of such part or parts of the
ordinary jurisdiction of the said Bishops or their successors as to him, the said
Bishop of Sydney, or his successors, shall seem expedient, and during the time
of such visitation, to exercise by himself, or themselves, or their commissaries,
such powers, functions, and jurisdictions in and over the said dioceses as the
Bishops thereof might have exercised if they had not been inhibited from
exercising the same.
Page 5.
Extract from Barrow on the Pope's Supremacy.
SECTION X.
ON THE ORIGIN OF THE OFFICE OF METROPOLITAN.
At first each Church was settled apart under its own bishop and presbyters
was independently and separately to manage its own concernments; each was
dvTOKtipaXoc and cLvrovpoQ governed by its own head and had its own laws
But because little, disjointed, and incoherent bodies were like dust, apt to
be dissipated by every wind of external assault or intestine faction; and peace-
able union could hardly be retained without some ligature of discipline; and
churches could not mutually support and defend each other, without some
method of intercourse and rule of confederacy engaging them; therefore, for


many good purposes, (for upholding and advancing the common interests of
Christianity; for protection of each Church from inbred disorders and
discussions; for preserving the integrity of the faith ; for securing the concord
of divers Churches; for providing fit Pastors to each Church, and correcting
such as were scandalously bad or unfaithful;) it was soon found needful, that
divers Churches should he combined and linked together in some regular form
of discipline; that if any Church did want a Bishop, the neighbour Bishops
might step in to approve and ordain a fit one; that if any Bishop did noto-
riously swerve from the Christian rule, the others might interpose to correct or
avoid him ; that if any error or schism did peep up in any Church, the joint
concurrence of divers Bishops might avail to stop its progress, and to quench it
by convenient means of instruction, reprehension, and censure; that if any
Church were oppressed by persecution, by indigency, by faction, the others
might be engaged to afford effectual succour and relief; for such ends, it was
needful, that Bishops in certain precincts, should convene with intent to
deliberate and resolve about the best expedients to compass them, and that the
manner of proceeding (to avoid uncertain distraction, confusion, arbitrariness,
dissatisfaction, and mutinous opposition,) should be settled in an ordinary
course, according to rules known and allowed by all.
In defining such precincts, it was most natural, most easy, most commo-
dious, to follow the divisions of territory or jurisdiction already established in
the civil state; that the spiritual admonitions, being in such circumstances
aptly conformed to the secular, might go on more smoothly and expeditely, the
wheels of one not clashing against the other; according to the judgment of the
two great Synods, that of Chalcedon and the Trullane, which did ordain, that
if by Royal authority, any city be or should hereafter he re-established , the order
of the Churches shall be according to the civil and public form.
Whereas, therefore, in each nation or province, subject to one political
jurisdiction, there was a metropolis or head city, to which the greatest resort
was for dispensation of justice and dispatch of principal affairs emergent in that
province; it was also most convenient, that also the determination of ecclesias-
tical matters should be affixed thereto; especially considering, that usually
those places were opportunely seated ; that many persons upon other occasions
did meet there; that Churches in those cities did exceed the rest in number,
in opulency, in ability, and opportunity, to promote the common interest in all
kinds of advantages.
Moreover because in all societies and confederacies of men, for ordering
public affairs, (for the setting things in motion; for effectual dispatch; for
preventing endless dissensions and confusions both in rushing upon and
executing things;) it is needful that one person should be authorized to
preside among the rest, unto whom the power and care should be intrusted to
convoke assemblies in fit season, to propose matters for consultation, to mode-
rate the debates and proceedings, to declare the result and to see what is agreed
upon may be duly executed; such a charge then naturally would devolve itself
upon the prelate of the metropolis.
Wherefore by consent of all churches grounded on such obvious reason of


things, the presidency in each province was assigned to the Bishop of the Me-
tropolis, who was called the first Bishop, the Metropolitan (in some places the
Primate, the Archbishop, the Patriarch, the Pope,) of the province.
The Apostolical Canons call him the first Bishop (which sheweth the anti-
quity of this institution;) the African Synods did appoint that name to him as
most modest and calling him primate in that sense ; other ancient Synods style
him the Metropolile and to the Metropolites of the principal cities they gave the
title of Archbishop. The Bishops of Rome and Alexandria peculiarly were
called Popes; although that name was sometime deferred to any other Bishop.
Page 23.
Report presented to the Trustees of Moore College, New South Wales, by the
Rev, the Principal. September 29, 1860.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
Since the First Report of the proceedings at Moore College was laid
before you, sufficient time has elapsed for gathering a few particulars, which, it
is hoped, will not prove altogether uninteresting to those who desire to see the
Church in these Colonies supplied with well trained and efficient ministers.
The College certificate has been granted to six gentlemen, who are now in
Holy Orders, and are labouring usefully and satisfactorily in the various posts
to which they have been severally appointed. Of these six Clergymen three are
in Priest’s Orders, while three are still making proof of their ministry as Deacons,
and may be expected in due time to apply for and to receive admission to Priest’s
Orders. Tt affords ground for much thankfulness that the blessing of Almighty
God has evidently rested upon the efforts which these young men have been
enabled to make for the promotion of the Redeemer’s kingdom, whether among
the bustle of the crowded city or in the retirement of settled country parishes, or
among the population scattered along the rivers of the interior, who are not to be
reached except by those who, with the ardour of true missionaries, are willing to
travel literally thousands of miles, and to think their toil well requited if only,
through their instrumentality, souls can be won to Christ. The work, to which
they have been called and for which they have been, at least in some degree,
prepared by their connection with Moore College, is in itself so important, and
in its bearing upon the well being of the community so full of promise, that it
will scarcely be thought an unnecessary, unmeaning, or improper request, to beg
that earnest and persevering prayer may be offered at the throne of grace in
behalf of those who have gone forth from this Institution, that they may be
sustained and prospered by the Spirit of the Lord according to “ the fulness of
the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.”
During the month of June in last year the College was honored by a visit
from the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Melbourne. His Lordship, after
making enquiries concerning the course of study and the methods of training
adopted, was pleased to express his approval of the plan and working of the


College: and, as no such Institution exists in his own Diocese, has decided to
give his countenance and support to that which is situated in the Diocese of the
Metropolitan of Australia, and which is under the Metropolitan’s especial
superintendence.
Among the results of this visit of the Bishop of Melbourne I may mention
that one student has already been prepared for Holy Orders in that Diocese;
and also that the Melbourne Church Assembly have, upon the recommendation
of the Bishop, established exhibitions of £lOO per annum each, towards defraying
the expenses of one or more students at this College. One of these exhibitions
is now held by Mr. H. C. Watson, having been awarded to him after examina-
tion at Melbourne. We have also from Melbourne, three other students who are
not exhibitioners; and our numbers are now sufficient to fill all the five students’
rooms, which are contained in the College buildings.
During the present year I have received an official letter of enquiry from
the Secretary to the Diocesan Synod of Tasmania. From this letter I make the
following extract: —
“We have a Committee appointed to consider the means available for the
“ education of our candidates for Holy Orders. Nowin Tasmania, unfortunately,
“we have no recognized means : but the next best thing to this would be, if we
“might connect ourselves (through scholarships and the like) with such a
“ College as yours in another Diocese.’’ It seems, therefore, to be recognized in
other Dioceses besides our own, that such an Institution is much needed; and,
as in the present state of the population, more than one is scarcely likely to be
adequately supported, it is not perhaps too much to expect that the College
under your care, may, under proper guidance and with God’s blessing, event-
ually become the Theological College of the Province, and as such be resorted
to by Students from all the Dioceses of which the Province consists.
As the times, at which the College Terms have hitherto closed, have not
been found to correspond conveniently with the usual seasons, at which the
Ordinations are commonly held, I propose, that for the future, the First term
in each year shall commence on January 20th, and end twenty days before
Trinity Sunday, and the Second term shall commence on July Ist, and close
on November 15th. According to this plan, sufficient time will be allowed
for students from other Dioceses to reach the places at which they may be
required to attend for the customary ordination examinations.
Of the five students now in residence, two will probably leave us in order to
be admitted as Deacons, at Christmas next. But’ as the names of seven or
eight gentlemen have been mentioned to me as being desirous of shortly entering
the College as resident students, and as there may be others with similar inten-
tions, who are altogether unknown to me, it becomes a plain duty to propose for
the consideration of the Trustees the question whether the time for completing
the original plan for accommodating twelve students has yet arrived, and to
ask in what way the probable addition to our numbers is to be provided against.
Since February 1859, when the last Report was presented, the students
have, according to the plan previously described, been employed under the
sanction of the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, in visiting the sick and the whole in


districts where such assistance has been desired, and in conducting services in
places, which would otherwise have been left altogether without any public
ministrations. In this department the number of services held has amounted to
94, and the pastoral visits have exceeded 270. This latter number however, is
not an exact criterion of the work done, as in many cases that which is registered
as a single pastoral visit has included the visits paid to eight or ten families, or
to as many sick or infirm people.
There is one other topic requiring notice. I have to return my thanks to
the Trustees, not only for the kind and liberal treatment which I have ever ex-
perienced at their hands, but especially at the present time, for the repairs which
they have ordered and sanctioned for the Principal’s residence. However neces-
sary such repairs may be thought to be as conducing to the continued preserva-
tion and wellbeing of the property of the College, they have contributed so
much to the comfort of the Principal, that I should be deficient in common
courtesy, if they were allowed to pass without being gratefully acknowledged.
I have the honor to be,
My Lord and Gentlemen,
Your obliged and faithful Servant,
WILLIAM HODGSON, M.A.,
Principal of Moore College.
Moore College,
September 29th, 1860,
Page 28.
“CHURCH OF ENGLAND ENDOWMENT SOCIETY,” FOR THE DIOCESE
OF ADELAIDE.
1. The object aimed at is Permanent Endowment for the Clergy and
Church purposes in this Diocese.
2. The acquisition of such Endowments is sought to be obtained through
the purchase of land within the colony, by means of borrowed capital, at five
per cent, interest, to be redeemed by a Sinking Fund as after mentioned.
3. The selection of lands for purchase will devolve upon a Sub-Committee
of the Board of Directors, consisting of a gentleman whose intimate knowledge
of the territory and well-known reputation afford the amplest assurance for the
effecting only such purchases as shall be judicious and advantageous.
4. Properly selected lands let readily at Ten per cent, on tbeir first cost
on improving leases, and such lands in this young and prospering community
often advance in value in the ratio of Ten per cent, annually.
5. Clauses giving right of pre-emption of the freehold at an advance of
One Hundred per cent, in seven years have, in cases of well-selected lands in
this colony, been found equally advantageous to the tenant as to the landlord.
6. The income derivable from rents and the proceeds of re-sales of land
would thus exceed by One Hundred per cent, the interest on the money
borrowed.


7. It is obvious, then, that for the redemption of capital borrowed at Five
per cent, interest an adequate Sinking Fund will be created, by means of which, at
no very long deferred periods, Endowments will be, from time to time, provided
for the Church, in perpetuity ; free from incumbrances.
8. Any member of the Church of England, desirious of aiding the objects
of the Society, has the opportunity of doing so in all or any of the three
following modes:
I, By donation, however small, in land, or money to be invested in land ;
11. By annual subscription, constituting membership, to be applied also
to the purchase of land;
TIL By subscription to the Guaranteed Interest Fund.*
9. In order to the borrowing of capital for a period sufficient to admit
of the due operation of the Sinking Fund, it is all-essential to provide a
Guaranteed Interest Fund for a Term of at least Seven Years.
10. Members so subscribing will be required to pledge themselves to the
Trustees of the Society, by a proper instrument, for the payment for a Term of
not less than Seven Years from the date of their respective engagements, of such
annual sums, payable quarterly in advance, as they may determine to give.
11. So scon as the Guaranteed Interest Fund shall amount to £lOOO per
annum for Seven Years, the Directors are authorized to apply to Parliament for
Incorporation of the Society, and propose thereupon to take immediate measures
for raising capital for the objects of the Society.
Page 35.
There are five localities in which Missions to the Aborigines are carried on.
1. In the diocese of Melbourne, there is a “ Church of England Mission to
the Aborigines of Victoria,” which has now been in existence about six years.
A Catechist whom it is intended shall be admitted to Holy Orders, a mechanic
and his wife constitute the Missionary staff. The station at Yelta, near the south
bank of the Murray, not far from the junction of the Darling and Murray Rivers,
is favourably placed. The Blacks visit the Missionaries, and are visited by
them. The Rev. E, Synge, Chaplain to the Bishop of Sydney, has twice
visited the Mission, and speaks highly of the piety and devotion of Messrs.
* As it is of every importance that the third of the several modes of aid, suggested by
the preceding note, should he rendered thoroughly effective, the Directors call attention
to its peculiar value to the operations of the Society. An annual Subscription of £5 for
seven years is, in reality, worth more to the Society than £lO, though given year by year,
yet without any pledge for its continuance; because the Society, for each £5 subscribed to
the Guaranteed Interest Fund, can borrow £lOO, which, invested in land, returns 10 per
cent, interest, while the land so purchased, increasing yearly in value, affords ultimately
large additional profit; whereas £lO gifts, even though continued over the same period,
from their purely uncertain character, neither amount to a guaranty nor facilitate the
acquisition of capital for profitable investment. Under proper management, therefore,
the £5 pledged for the term proposed will, in beneficial results (not over-estimated, perhaps
in the proportion of four to one) be found to exceed the comparatively useless, because
uncertain, £lO. Hence, if the Members of the United Church in this colony will only give
to her cause their guaranteed and certain subscriptions, which may be rendered available
for the purposes of this Society, they become the authors of benefits of a far more extended
character than ever can be the result of gifts, at best but desultory and uncertain, however
well intended-gifts which (with every respect for the motives which may prompt them) the
Society hopes gradually to see commuted to reproductive subscriptions.


Goodwin and Bulmer. They instruct the children as they have opportunity ;
and travel up the rivers to hold intercourse with the parents. They have
acquired the confidence of both settlers and natives, and amidst many difficulties
and discouragements, are endeavouring “ by all means to save some.”
The funds are supplied by voluntary contribution, principally by members
of the Church of England, and the Government of Victoria has given stores.
2. The Moravians have also re-established a Mission in Victoria, under
favourable auspices, and already some happy and encouraging results have
appeared. There has been an awakening amongst the members of one tribe,
and an intelligent Aboriginal has been baptised, and has already endeavoured
with some success, to collect his own people for prayer, and hearing his
exhortations. There is much ground for hope in this Mission, which is assisted
by some of the neighbouring settlers. The Revs. Messrs. Spieseke and
Hagenauer are the Missionaries.
3. “The Poonindie Mission” is one established, and for some years
carried on under the auspices of the present Bishop of Perth, at Port Lincoln,
in the diocese of Adelaide.
“ A village of civilized Aborigines live happily together, and employ their
time in cultivating land, while they seek daily to acquire a further knowledge
of their Creator and Redeemer, and strive to worship him in Spirit and in
truth.” This Mission is carried on at the expense of the Government. The
Bishop of Adelaide visits it from time to time.
4. “The Aborigines Friends’ Association,” in Adelaide, is a voluntary
Society, supported by all denominations; maintains a Missionary and his
wife (Mr. and Mrs. Taplin), at the junction of the River Murray with Lake
Alexandrina, Encouraging reports are given of this Mission. The situation is
well selected, and a number of Aborigines engaged in fishing and other
occupations, are under instruction. A Sunday School, with 40 scholars, and
a class of 10 young men, from the age of 15 to 21, are mentioned.
5. There is a Natives’ Institution at King George's Sound, Western
Australia, where about 20 children are under the maternal care of an excellent
and devoted lady, the wife of the Resident.
A very pleasing account of this School, and of the good results produced
by it, is given by the Rev. Dr. M'Kay, who visited it when calling at King
George’s Sound, on his way from England to Australia, in 1859.
Other attempts for the benefit of the Aborigines, are made by private
individuals, but on the whole, there is little to record.
The night comes on rapidly, as respects all that can be done for the
Australian Blacks.
The Bishop of Brisbane has expressed his intention and hope of estab-
lishing a Mission in his diocese, which offers, perhaps, the most favoorable field
for additional effort.
“It is necessary, in looking at the state of the Aborigines, to look again
and again at the plain command under which we are acting”—“Preach the
Gospel to every creature.” “Wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant
that is left,”


APPENDIX.
An Address upon the state and prospects of the Chur cliff of England in the
Australian Colonies , delivered by the Metropolitan at Melbourne, on
Saturday, July 28th, 1860.
I fear that the terms in which this address has been announced, will raise the
expectation of my hearers somewhat too high. I am neither a historian nor a
prophet. lam naturally interested in the condition and prospects of the
Church of England in the Colonies, which form the Province of Australia. I
have recently visited the greater part of the province, and it has been thought
that I might state the facts which have come under my observation, and express
the opinions I have formed, in such a manner as to interest the members of the
Church of England in this diocese.
I shall be glad if I can communicate anything which may lead to a bene-
ficial result, and stir up the members of the Church of England to the conside-
ration of the very grave questions which are now lying before us, and which
ought to be taken up speedily and earnestly, if our beloved Church is not to
suffer great, and, perhaps, irremediable loss.
The dioceses which now form the province, of which that of Sydney is the
Metropolitan, are at present seven, that is to say, Sydney, Tasmania, Adelaide,
Melbourne, Newcastle, Perth, and Brisbane. New Zealand, which was former-
ly in the Diocese of Australia, is now a separate province, with its own five
dioceses. There are at this time, therefore, twelve Bishops, where formerly an
Archdeacon, under the nominal oversight of the Bishop of Calcutta, was the
chief dignitary of the Church of England. In my address, I must confine
myself to the Dioceses connected with Sydney. New Zealand moves in an orbit
of its own, and under the care of its well-known zealous Bishop, now the
Primate of New Zealand, will no doubt abundantly prove that he has impress-
ed his own vigour and earnestness upon that portion of the Church of which he
has the oversight. In the Australian Province also I have not much to say
concerning Perth and Brisbane. I was not able to visit the former, and the
latter, as a separate diocese, is barely in existence. The advantages of separa-
tion from the original Dioceses have in these cases already shown themselves.
Perth could with difficulty be visited from Adelaide, but being now placed
under the care of one well known as Archdeacon Hale, the numbers of the
clergy are increased, and in their Bishop they enjoy the counsel and assistance
of one whose experience and zeal eminently qualify him to be the head of that
portion of the Church.
The town, or as I presume it will in future be called the city, of Brisbane,
was occasionally visited by its indefatigable diocesan the Bishop of Newcastle.


This, however, was accomplished with some difficulty. Direct communication
by land involved a most tedious and toilsome journey, and was at some seasons
impracticable. To go there by sea required that Sydney should first be reached,
and the voyage made from thence, and after that a journey of one or two thousand
miles would be necessary, in order to pass through the whole of the diocese. If
any one could have been expected to accomplish this, my right Rev. brother of
Newcastle, whose equestrian powers are well known, would have been the person,
but the task was too great even for him, or at any rate could only have been
performed by neglecting other important duties ; and the remoter parts of the
new colony of Queensland have never enjoyed the advantage of an episcopal
visit. But now a seventh Australian Bishop is, as we trust, within a short
distance of the shores of New South Wales, accompanied by seven clergymen
and certain school-masters and helpers, on his way to the Diocese of Brisbane,
and will pour his experience as a parochial clergyman, his ability as a scholar,
and his earnestness as a Christian Bishop, into that new land —a colony destined
in all probability to take a very high place among the dependencies of the
British Crown.
In these seven dioceses there.are 250 clergymen in charge of parishes,
besides others engaged in tuition, and of these about three-fifths receive some
Government assistance, the other two-fifths being supported without any State
or Government aid.
From an extensive acquaintance with them, and from the fact of my having
been a parochial clergyman in England for upwards of 25 years, I believe that
I am correct in saying that the Australian clergy will bear to be compared with
a like number of their brethren at home, in any given area, and that such com-
parison would commonly be in their favour. From their position, and from the
nature of their duties, they are for the most part practical and active clergymen,
rather than persons who can unite the cultivation of science, philosophy, or lite-
rature with their chief pursuit. They are devoted to their profession, and
amidst many difficulties discharge the duties of their calling with fidelity and
diligence. In the cities and settled districts the services are conducted with the
same propriety, order and attention to the customary practice of the Church of
England as at home. In the bush, along the rivers, and in the smaller gold
fields, the school-room or the private dwelling is used in the regular or occasional
visits of the missionary clergyman. In the colony of New South Wales a
very considerable proportion of the population is collected in the city of Sydney,
and there also the greater number of the clergy are naturally found. But there
has been an endeavour made to follow the population into the remoter and more
distant parts of the colony. The Church of England population in the
diocese of Sydney is about 100,000 souls, and for these there are now
80 clergymen, being an increase of nearly one-half within the last five
years. This increased number of the clergy has been for the most part
appropriated to the districts which have not hitherto enjoyed the advan-
tages of the regular ministrations of the Gospel. The settled districts
where good land has invited a population to form the township, the pastoral
plains, the rivers and their numerous tributaries, or the creeks, where the stockman


and his companion are the only occupiers of a cattle station, have been brought
within the operations of our missionary clergy. At Wellington and Dubbo,
places 260 miles north and west of Sydney; at Deniliquin, 500 miles to the
south west; at Bombala, 290 miles to the south, near to the Snowy River j at
Wagga Wagga, on the Murrumhidgee; on the river Lachlan ; and in the interior
mountainous district between Goulhurn and Bathurst, there are clergymen
whose principal duty it is to itinerate from week to week throughout the year.
In the adjoining diocese of Newcastle, the work of the ministry is carried
on in a similar manner; the only difference being that the distances are greater,
and the proportion of clergy employed in itinerating larger than in the diocese
of Sydney. Estimating the population of the Church of England in the
diocese of Newcastle at 60,000, it is supposed that from ten to twelve thousand
will he taken off by the new diocese of Brisbane, and from the character of the
Bishops, there is reason to believe that under the Divine blessing the supply of
clergymen will he adequate to the wants of the population. It is an advantage
enjoyed by the three dioceses, formed out of the colony of New South Wales,
that the increase of the population has not been of too rapid or overwhelming a
character. It has been possible in some measure to keep pace with the popula-
tion, and although very much is pressing on the church in each diocese, yet I
do not think that there is any considerable extent of country without the
ministrations of a clergyman, except in the most northern and new diocese of
Brisbane, whose wants will he soon supplied.
Considerable activity in building churches and school-houses is to be found
in these dioceses. In one not less than £27,000 has during the past year been
expended upon these objects, exclusive of the cost of the cathedral upon which
an average of more than £2,000 has been spent for many years past. The
maintenance of one-third of the clergymen is provided by the contributions of
the members of the Church of England. The subscriptions are paid into a
common fund managed by a committee, the members of which are chosen by
the subscribers, or are sent as representatives of the Associations contributing
the funds. The rest of the clergy receive a payment of £2OO per annum from
the Government, and this should be supplemented by the parish or district to
the amount of £3OO per annum, which sum with a house, in most cases (I regret
to say not in all) together with fees, is the ordinary income of the clergy in the
dioceses of Sydney and Newcastle, of which I have hitherto spoken.
In Tasmania, the whole population is not more than 82,000 souls (in 1857
it was 81,500.) The proportion of members of the Church of England, to the
whole population is greater in that colony than in any other. It appears to be
50,000 souls, or nearly two-thirds of the whole population. There are 36
clergymen in the diocese; hut, as in the case of Sydney, the hulk of the popula-
tion being in the city of Hobart Town and in Launceston, there are agricultural and
pastoral districts very insufficiently supplied with the ministrations of religion.
Missionary clergy are much needed, especially for the agricultural population
which is rapidly extending in the north-west portion of the island. The with-
drawal of a very large annual expenditure on account of the Imperial Govern-
ment, has left a portion of the country in a depressed state, and the attractions


of neighbouring colonies and their gold fields, tend to increase this depression by
unsettling and withdrawing the population. The church must share these
difficulties, and, to some extent, feel their effect. But there are good reasons for
hoping that the crisis which has already begun, will be passed through with
safety, and the efforts of the Bishop, clergy, and laity, be crowned with success.
This expectation is founded upon the attachment to the Church of England,
which exists in a large proportion of the population ; and which, in some nota-
ble instances, has evidenced itself by most liberal endowments for the mainten-
ance of the clergy, and contributions for the erection of churches. The working
of the Church of England Synod also appears to have been useful in giving to
the laity and the clergy an interest in the well-being of the church, whose affairs
are now in a great degree under their own management. The questions of
patronage and the position of the clergy have been settled ; and the laity have now
the power, under certain regulations, of administering the patronage which they
may themselves create. When the discussions upon other subjects yet unsettled
have ceased, there will be time and opportunity, as there is inclination, to place
the financial condition of the church upon a proper footing.
The withdrawal of State Aid is now under consideration in Tasmania. A
Bill for effecting this was introduced and passed by the Colonial Legislature,
but did not receive the Royal assent. While justice requires that the present
recipients of Government aid should be regarded as having a life interest in
their stipends, some consideration is also due to the parishes which have sub-
scribed considerable sums of money in the expectation that the State would pay
the clergyman attached to the Churches which were built. The capitalization
of the annual income was the method proposed by the Tasmanian Bill; and if
the terms had been more liberal, the arrangement would undoubtedly have been
a good one for the Church of England.
The chief difficulty arising from the present state of uncertainty in respect
to financial matters is, that of providing suitable clergymen and a sufficient
number of them. The Patronage Committee of one important parish have
agreed with the Bishop to send home for a clergyman, and hare guaranteed his
stipend for three years. An arrangement of this kind, while it tends to evince
the good understanding which exists between the Bishop and the laity, is yet of
two expensive a character to be frequently resorted to, nor would it be possible
in all cases to find laymen willing to become securities for the payment of a
considerable sum for passage money and salary. The Church in the Colony
must eventually obtain clergymen from the Colony itself.
In Tasmania the means for supplying the Church’s wants appear to me to
exist. Both in Hobart Town and Launceston, Grammar Schools are established
from which it is in contemplation to found exhibitions to the English Uni-
versities. While it is to be expected that when the Church of England College has
recovered from the state of pecuniary embarrassment which caused its temporary
suspension, it will be the means of training up the young members of the Church
of England. With the advantage of a considerable endowment, and the expe-
rience arising out of past circumstances, and the earnest desire of the trustees
that it should fulfil the intention of its founders, it will be strange indeed


if it does not eventually prove one of the most valuable institutions in the
Island.
It is in such seminaries of sound and religious learning, as we may hope
that these schools will prove to be, that the ministers of the word of God must
be educated; and lam especially thankful to know that in this, as well as in
other dioceses of Australia, their value is recognized, and that in this beautiful
building* in which we are now assembled, you possess the means of training up
the young members of the Church of England, in the principles of their own
Church, and in the nurture and admonition of the Lord ; and if hereafter, in
England, or in a central theological college, the graduates of the university can
gain that further instruction and experience necessary for the thorough furnish-
ing of the ministerial character, all will be done which under existing circum-
stances is practicable or necessary.
Tasmania possesses one great advantage in its delightful and healthy
climate. The ruddy cheeks and well developed frames of the children, evince
its suitableness to the requirements of an English constitution. Clergymen who
are unable to encounter the heat of India, or of some of the Australian dioceses,
are enabled to labour there with comfort and efficiency. Its settled and agricul-
tural population, the presence of English trees, hedge rows, fruits and flowers,
the charms of mountain, river, and lake scenery, all combine to make this most
southern of the dioceses the most attractive to those who delight to revive the
recollections of their native land.
Of that which is merely personal, it is not the object of this address to
speak, but I shall ever gratefully recal the kindness, the attention, the hospi-
tality, and the confidence with which I was everywhere received.
It is indeed a remark which applies to every part of my recent tour, but I
cannot leave Tasmania without mentioning my reception there. I felt it deeply
at the time, and it still calls forth gratitude for the past and gives encourage-
ment for the time to come. We left the island after one month’s stay in differ-
ent parts of it, and remained a few days at Melbourne on our way to Adelaide.
In my visit to the diocese of Adelaide I was accompanied by the Bishop of
Melbourne, —his presence added much to the interest and advantage of my stay.
The Diocese of Tasmania had been favoured with the presence of one colonial
Bishop—the Bishop of Victoria—before I arrived there, but the Diocese of Ade-
laide had never received any other Bishop than its own, and the anticipated ar-
rival of three Bishops (for the Bishop of Tasmania had been invited and was ex-
pected) called forth an extraordinary amount of interest and sympathy. This
feeling was maintained throughout our stay of one month, and the various
meetings, sermons, lectures, and addresses which followed our arrival, rendered
the visit one of continuous and gratifying occupation. The colony of Adelaide
was founded without much notice on the part of the Church of England. One
colonial chaplain was long deemed sufficient to supply the wants of the members
of the church. The chief promoters of the colony at home, and a great nnmber
of the early settlers were of different denominations, so that the appointment of a
Bishop was looked upon by some as an act of intrusion. It was accomplished
* “ Church of England Grammar School.”


in a great measure at the instigation of my very reverend predecessor, the late
Bishop of Sydney, and through the liberality of Miss Burdett Coutts, and there
are few persons of any denomination who would not now he ready to acknow-
ledge that it was an act which has been highly beneficial to the cause of religion
and education, and to the general well-being of the colony. Owing to the cir-
cumstances under which the colony was founded, the proportion of the members
of the Church of England to the whole population is smaller in this diocese than
in any other in Australia. The population of South Australia is about 120,000;
44,000 are nominally in connection with the Church of England, and to these
28 clergymen are appointed to minister.
The church of this diocese has now for six years held its meetings in Synod.
The Bishop, who had visited England in 1854, in the expectation of being able
to obtain powers from the Queen for the members of the Church to meet in
Synod, returned without having accomplished his object. Fortified by the
opinion of Mr. A. J. Stephens, that there was nothing in the act of the submis-
sion of the clergy, or of the Queen’s supremacy to prevent them from meeting
in diocesan Synod, he proceeded in 1855 to summon them ; and a consensual
compact having been signed, and certain deeds of trust drawn up, the diocesan
Synod has ever since continued to meet and transact the business of the Church.
The Bishop and clergy of this diocese receive no assistance from the state; with
the exception of one government chaplain, they are principally thrown upon
the members of their own church for their maintenance. The bishopric is
endowed, and there have been some additions to the church’s income from
England; hut ordinarily the maintenance of the clergy is left to the people.
It is not a state of things to be desired, but there was no help for it, and it has
been met and some of the difficulties overcome in an admirable manner. The
character of the population, and its comparatively slow rate of increase, has
been of advantage to the church and the clergy. The country has not been
inundated with people from every part of the world —the land has been gradually
taken up, and a great portion of South Australia, within easy reach of Adelaide,
is “studded over with small thriving farms, cultivated by the working man,” who
has raised himself and hik children to a position of independence and prosperity.
As a wheat growing country, “ South Australia has been able to hold its
way amidst all the attractions arising from gold fields in other colonies,” while
the settled character of an agricultural population is favourable to the introduc-
tion and maintenance of a parochial ministry. There are, however, serious
drawbacks in this system of voluntaryism—the uncertainty and occasional
withdrawal of income—the difficulty of obtaining an adequate supply of clergy-
men from home—and the want of any provision for retirement, from sickness
or old age, make the position of a South Australian clergyman a somewhat
trying one. Nevertheless these difficulties have been cheerfully met. One
clergyman to every 1,500 members of the Church of England is not a very
deficient supply, although the scattered population require many more, in order
that the outlying districts may be visited.
The Bishop having “ all his life been more or less connected with School
and University life in England,” was very early at work in the establishment of


a Collegiate School. The building is a great ornament to the suburb in which
it stands, and under the management of its principal and three or four as-
sistant masters, is educating a considerable portion of the rising youth of the
Colony. By means of its teaching and support, it has added one to the number
of the clergy. We were present at his ordination to the priesthood, and rejoiced
to hear from all quarters an excellent report of his ministerial character. He
has since proceeded to take the oversight of a considerable pastoral district on
the eastern border of the Colony.
The precarious position of the clergy in respect to their stipends having
been felt by some of the laity, endeavours are at this time making to raise an
endowment fund, and a society for this purpose has been formed.
The object is to raise money, by means of guaranteed interest, for the pur-
chase of freehold lands, from the rents and re-sales of which a sinking fund may
be established for the re-payment of the capital borrowed, and clear endowments
in land and money obtained.
A very large and enthusiastic meeting was assembled to inaugurate this
society, at which it was our privilege to assist; and as the parties engaged in
the formation and management of it have proved the practicability of the
scheme by their own success, we may hope and trust that the anticipations of
the friends of the Church will be fully realised, and in due time the sum of
be acquired for the purposes of the Church of England.
The appropriation of the income is to be under the control of the Synod,
and its primary application is to be for placing the “ stipends of the clergy on
a footing which shall be permanent, becoming, and liberal:” and further, for
the purpose of adding to the number of the clergy. I was much struck with
the manner in which this project was brought forward, and with the number of
intelligent laymen who took part in the proceedings, his Excellency the
Governor being in the chair.
The Synod has no doubt served to call forth and sustain the interest of the
laymen in the affairs of the Church which they have contributed to establish,
and which must depend upon their efforts for its permanence and usefulness.
A new church was consecrated during our visit, a handsome ecclesiastical
structure, commodious and free from debt. It is indeed much to the credit of
the management in these matters that debts upon all the churches have been
all but extinguished. The consensual compact under which the Diocesan
Synod of Adelaide has been assembled, not being binding upon the successors
of the bishop, it had been agreed to petition the Queen that in the case of
future appointments of bishops to the diocese their letters patent should recog-
nise the fundamental provisions and regulations, and forms of trust deeds, as
valid and binding. A petition to this effect was drawn up while we were at
Adelaide, and transmitted to England with the signature of the Metropolitan
attached to it. The Synods of Tasmania and Adelaide have signified the wish
that a provincial synod should be established. On my arrival in Adelaide the
subject was carefully considered, and the conclusion to which we came was, that
as such Synod could not be established without Her Majesty’s consent it would be
necessary that a petition to this effect should be presented to the Queen. This


will in due time be done. The advantages of such an arrangement as shall
bring together the bishops and representatives of the clergy and laity in the
different dioceses, and enable them to consult upon matters touching the common
welfare of the church, are too obvious to require me to enlarge upon them, but
there is one subject of great interest to all the members of the Church of
England, which may be mentioned in connection with the formation of a pro-
vincial synod, that is, the constitution of an appellate tribunal. The appeal
from the decisions of a bishop, or a Diocesan Synod, is at present to the Metro-
politan. It would be satisfactory to him and to the church at large if his power
of receiving and hearing appeals could be shared by others, and the decisions
given by such a tribunal be accepted by the different dioceses as final and
binding upon the church.
In Adelaide we found that efforts were being made in two localities for the
conversion of the aborigines. The Poonindie mission commenced by the
present Bishop of Perth is continued in its original locality at Port Lincoln.
A mission has lately been commenced at the junction of the Murray and Lake
Alexandrina, which has been supported by members of all Protestant denomi-
nations.
In addition to these efforts, a lady residing at King George’s Sound, has
undertaken the education of some aboriginal children, and all accounts agree in
speaking of the attempt as very successful. Wherever kind Christian influence
is brought to bear upon these neglected children of the soil, they show neither
unwillingness nor incapacity to receive the instruction given them.
We assisted at a meeting held on behalf of the mission at Lake Alexandri-
na, and much additional interest was created in the subject by the accounts
given by the Bishop of Melbourne of the success which has attended the Mora-
vian mission in the Wimmera district in this diocese. May the Holy Spirit be
abundantly poured out upon those faithful men and upon the Church of
England Mission, also under the charge of Mr. Goodwin on the borders of the
Murray.
The impression we received from our visit to Adelaide afforded much en-
couragement with respect to the future condition of the church in that diocese.
The foundations appear to be well and wisely laid. The church system has
grown up with the growth of the colony. While the political constitution is of
the most liberal and even democratic character, there is evidently a deep regard
for those institutions in which, for ages, the affections of the members of the
Church of England have taken root.
The freedom and publicity of debate in the Church Assembly is well adapt-
ed to the state of the popular mind, and the good sense and good temper which
have hitherto characterised the proceedings of the Synod, even where considera-
ble difference of opinion prevailed, affords reasonable hope that the ecclesiastical
affairs of the Church of England will be managed with the same success which
has attended the efforts of the South Australian statesmen.
Here, as in Tasmania, more clergy are required, and the same practical
difficulty meets the Bishop in each diocese. A suitable maintenance for a
clergyman cannot always be guaranteed. If the clergyman is once located in


his parish, his stipend may ordinarily be regarded as secure : but the induce-
ments to enter a diocese where the voluntary system prevails, are not great, and
the expense of obtaining a clergyman from England is considerable. Contribu-
tions to a common church fund can alone meet this difficulty, and until the
different parishes feel this, and contribute according to their ability, the church
can hardly be said to be fairly planted in the land. Every effort ought to be
used in order that a feeling of interest in the common well-being of the church
may be first excited and afterwards maintained. I took the liberty of suggest-
ing in one diocese that a deputation, consisting of the Bishop, and some of the
principal clergy and laity, should visit every parish and district in order to ex-
plain to all the parishoners the necessity of contributing to a common church
fund, and that the deputation should remain a few days in each place to orga-
nise an association, and to solicit subscriptions. The idea met with approval,
and if carried out, will, I doubt not, be successful. In a parish in England,
there are generally two or three foreign objects, missionary or other, for which
subscriptions are made. It is a very poor or very ill managed parish which
does not annually send a few pounds for designs in which it has no particular or
private interest. Let the missionary work of the church in these colonies be
regarded in the same light, and surely from every district something might be
obtained. If the pence of the poor in England form a very considerable part of
the magnificent incomes of our great societies, let Australian churchmen contri-
bute tbeir gold in somewhat of the same proportion to their incomes, and the
pecuniary difficulties of the Church would be greatly relieved.
To arrange the plans for doing this work and to keep them in successful
operation, requires labour, time, and money ; but all this cost will, I am persuad-
ed, be amply repaid, and will in various ways be beneficial to the Church. It
is not only that the income of the Church will be augmented, but that the
thoughts and habits of members of the Church of England will receive an im-
pulse and direction which at present they greatly need. With some few honora-
ble exceptions, the Apostles’ description is applicable to our parishes, “ All seek
their own.” Much no doubt is done in them, and for themselves, but the com-
mon good is not generally sought and the injunction to every man “not to look
on his own things but on the things of others ” has not been obeyed in respect to
a general or common Church fund.
From such a fund as this also very important and valuable assistance
would be afforded towards the erection of Churches. The interest upon a loan
might be guaranteed for a short term of years, and in that time the debt be
paid off. When a Church is once built, and the congregation collected, the
debt is paid off with comparative ease, if the interest upon the loan is defrayed
out of a common fund.
These remarks are applicable to each diocese, but I introduce them here
because suggested chiefly by what I have observed in the two already mentioned.
In this assembly, it is scarcely necessary that I should propose to give
information upon the state of the Church in the diocese of Melbourne, the
numbers of the clergy, or other topics of this nature. It is known to most
amongst you that in this colony, containing more than half a million of persons,


the Church of England has between one-half and one-third, or 200,000 souls,
belonging to its communion, and that taking the clergy and lay readers at 80,
there is but one religious instructor for every 2500 persons. To preserve the
same proportion between the clergy and the population as in Adelaide, the
Diocese of Melbourne ought to have 160 clergymen, or double the number
which it now possesses.
The population of Victoria, is, however, much more densely packed
together than in the other colonies, and the disproportion between the numbers of
the people and the clergy is not practically so great as would at first sight
appear.
Still there is no question that 40 or 50 additional religious instructors might
be very usefully employed in the Diocese, if they could in the first instance be
obtained and afterwards maintained. These suppositions are of a very grave
character, and they should be fairly considered. Is it possible to secure the
services of more clergymen and lay readers, and is it possible to maintain them 1
The response to these enquiries must be given by the laity, but I think also it
is the duty of the clergy to place the matter before the laity, and it is the
duty of all the members of the Church of England to give this subject their
early and serious consideration. The most proper time and place may be at
a meeting of the Church Assembly. And yet I feel that so much depends upon
the solution of these practical difficulties, the history of our Church depends so
much upon that which is now required being done now, and done well, that I
trust I shall stand excused if, in my place as the Metropolitan, I say more upon
this point, than I might otherwise have ventured to do.
In my Charge, I have spoken of the necessity for a ministry which shall
beneficially influence the people of these Colonies, and of what kind of men it
should be composed. I need not repeat that the ideal of a clergyman of the
Church of England is, that he should be a true Christian, an educated well
informed man, and from his knowledge of the world, and by his manner,
capable of influencing all classes of society for their good. To induce such
men to come to this colony, they must have something more than a bare
maintenance offered to them, and what is offered should not be altogether an
uncertainty. The Church Assembly, or the Council of the Diocese, ought to
have at its disposal a fund for paying the passages of such men, and the
Church should be prepared to maintain them. Some sacrifices must be made,
and some risks run. I do not think the members of the Church of England
generally, undertake responsibilities so freely as members of some other religious
denominations. The Congregationalists, for example, were comparatively few in
number, but by an organized arrangement for bringing out ministers to this
Colony, and placing them in suitable localities, their numbers have been
considerably increased.
The members of the Church of Scotland also appear to me to do much
more as individuals than the members of the Church of England; their
subscriptions in proportion to their means are larger than are generally given
by members of our own church. I say generally, because I know that in the
Church of England there are some munificent donors, and men whose liberality


in either annually subscribing to the Church Fund, or in permanently endowing
the church, is greatly to he commended.
These persons are, however, at present the exception rather than the rule,
and I do not think the members of the Church of England generally are at all
alive to the real exigencies of the Church. It may require some shock such as
the Church of Scotland received at the disruption to give the necessary impulse
to our zeal and liberality ; and some foretell that the Abolition of State Aid will
in this respect he beneficial to us. lam not of this opinion, but hope if that
event should take place, the prediction may prove true.
The apathy of the members of the Church of England is to he traced partly
to their want of knowledge as to their duty of providing for the good of the
whole Church, and their ignorance of the real exigencies of the Church, in part
also to the fact that they are actively engaged in supplying their own wants,
and further, because of two fallacies which are received as verities amongst us.
The first of these is, that in this colony a number of small subscriptions can
supply the wants of the church. The penny snbscriptions in England, of
which I have spoken, come from a population of tens and hundreds of thousands,
where we only reckon tens and hundreds. It is most desirable and necessary
that we should invite and obtain the pence and the shillings of the labouring
class; hut in a community such as ours the aggregate amount of such
subscriptions must be small.
The subscriptions of the wealthy are required in proportion to their means.
The second fallacy I refer to is, that an individual, whatever his income may
be, has discharged his duty when he has given his £5 or £lO a year to his own
parish, or to one or two other objects.
To give as God has prospered us, or more definitely, to lay aside one-tenth
of our income for religious and charitable purposes, is the rule which a con-
scientious man would deduce from the word of God. And can we say, looking
at our church subscriptions, and knowing as we do the amounts generally con-
tributed in parishes, that this rule of giving is at all prevalent ?
I would venture to urge that while it is the duty of the Clergy to assist in
forming such associations as shall make it possible for every member of the
Church of England to contribute, it is the hounden duty of us all to consider
the claims which our church, as the handmaid of the Gospel, has upon us, and
whether we are meeting those claims in the large-hearted liberal spirit which is
becoming Christian men and members of that pure and time-hallowed branch of
Christ’s church.
Two things have been especially impressed upon me in my recent visitation.
The immense importance of the Church of England as a social and national
institution, as an element of stability and order, as a witness to the value of
learning and higher education, and a means of preserving those principles and
elevating those tastes which are essential to a people’s well-being and progress.
Also that the present is a most important period in the church’s history in these
colonies. The church is now upon her trial. It is to he seen whether she is
capable of adapting herself to this new country, and to the strange circumstances
in which her children find themselves. That she may be preserved as a blessing


to these lands ; that she may retain a forward place in their evangelization ; that
disencumbered of the weight of tithe and church-rate and possibly of Govern-
ment aid, she may not be outstripped in the race of Christian well-doing, must
be the prayer of every lover of Christ’s Gospel and this country’s good.
But especially it is incumbent upon her own children to place her in that
commanding position in which her influence may be most extensively felt, and
her blessings most widely diffused. It is, I repeat, a narrow view to take of the
work of the Church, and of our own duty in respect to it, if we think that we
have done all that is required of us, when we have assisted in providing for our
own parochial wants. If the church ceases to be missionary, she will lose
Christ’s promised presence and blessing, and she can only be missionary as her
members are actuated by a missionary spirit. Is that a missionary spirit which
contents itself with a contribution towards the support of the parochial clergy-
man, and payment for the rent of a pew ? Our work is much greater, our field
much wider than this. Not only for ourselves, and for our own time, but for all
in this land, and for all time, should we feel that provision is to be made; and
that, to a member of the Church of England, there is no one thing that can be
named, so worthy of a patriot’s or a Christian’s zeal, as the establishment and the
extension of the church of his fathers.
I remember, during the agitation respecting the Corn Laws in England,
being much struck with a remark made by a person who contributed toward the
fund for obtaining their repeal. Some one expressed surprise at the large
amount of his donation. He was a manufacturer, and his reply was “ Oh, it’s a
money question !” He regarded his donation as a good investment. The repeal
of the law would abundantly compensate him for his outlay. I would that
Christian principle led men to act with as much forethought, zeal, liberality,
and true patriotism, in their support of religion.
It is “ a money question,” but it is also much more than a moftey question.
The true prosperity of the country depends upon the hold which true religion
obtains upon the people. If the tree be not there, the fruit will not be found.
Every one will admit that industry, sobriety, order, truth, and peace, are the
proper fruits of godliness. Now, I feel most deeply and conscientiously, that
the interests of godliness are inseparably connected with the progress of the
Church of England, and therefore do I call upon every one who values
righteousness in a nation to seize upon the present time, and to use the Church
of England as a means of diffusing God’s best blessings throughout these lands.
My attention has been called to another important point with reference to
the position which the Church of England is likely to obtain in these Colonies.
Is she to be the Church of one class, or of all classes ? Are her members to be
of the wealthier, or also of the middle and labouring classes ? I have heard it
doubted whether any denomination of Protestants have hold of the working men
of these Colonies, at least in the large towns. I am inclined to think that the
influences of religion are not generally brought to bear upon our labouring
population.
The congregational, as distinguished from the parochial system, will never
effect this. So far, therefore, as the present state of things in our church tends


to Congregationalism, so far will the labouring classes, who cannot pay for
sittings, and do not contribute to the clergyman’s stipend, be neglected, and our
church become not the church of the poor, hut of the rich. This is a result
greatly to be deprecated, and I fear it is not merely a danger which is imminent
but a plague which has begun.
What is the remedy for this evil ?
I am glad that your own Church Assembly has recognized the parochial
system in its acts.
I regard this recognition as of great importance. It serves to impress upon
the minds of the clergyman and his helpers that the whole district is committed
to his care, and that he is not merely the minister of those who attend his
church, but of all persons who need and who do not reject his ministrations. A
clergyman actuated by a missionary spirit will feel that it is incumbent upon
him to make provision for the spiritual wants of all the people in his parish.
He will not be satisfied with his own well-filled church and duly paid stipend,
so long as there are hundreds for whom no church accommodation is provided,
and over whom no pastoral care can he exercised.
Now, it is obviously one of the dangers of the voluntary system that the
missionary spirit of the clergyman may be checked by the consideration that
another church and another pastor might interfere with his own congregation
and with his own arrangements. The parochial zeal may he restrained by the
necessities arising from the system of voluntary support.
But here again let it be observed that if the true missionary spirit be
generally diffused amongst all the members of the Church of England, this
danger will be avoided. If the laity feel it is incumbent upon them to extend the
blessings of Christ’s Gospel to all, they will do it in such a manner as not
injuriously to interfere with the work which has been already done. They will
not dry up tiie flowing springs of benevolence by the manner in which they open
another fountain. Large-hearted Christian principle will suffice for both.
The cultivation of a missionary spirit, and the preservation of the parochial
system, I regard as means by which the advantages of a Church of England
ministry may be secured to all classes of society.
I have already spoken of the necessity for a common fund in each diocese,
and of associations in each parish in aid of such a fund. I have said something
as to the necessity of a more liberal scale of contributions, a scale framed upon
the model of Scripture, and in some proportion to the greatness of the cause,
the necessity of the time, and the abundance of the means which God has given
to us.
There is still another part of this subject on which I could say many, but
must content myself with few words. Our object is to place the Church, that is,
the clergymen and the people, together with the various institutions by which
they carry on Christ’s work, in such a position as that by God’s blessing the
institutions shall be permanent, and the mutual relations of the clergymen and
the people, be that which, on the whole, is best for both parties. Ido not think
that these objects can be gained without endowments—endowments in land, in
money, or in houses ; partial endowments, if you will, but still, endowments of


some kind. I know how difficult it is to effect this at the present time, how
much may be said in favour of supplying the wants of the day by the efforts
of the day, and of trusting to the liberality of the Christian people to carry on
Christian work ; and how it will be urged that, when all our powers are taxed to
meet existing necessities, posterity may very properly, be left to take care of its
own interests. In answer to these preliminary objections, I have to say that the
endowment of the Church is a work which ought to be done, which has been
done in former times, and which may in part, at least, be done now.
I hold it to be as scriptural to endow the church as to lay money at the
Apostles’ feet, and that it makes no real difference in the religious character of
the act whether a man retains the principal and gives the interest to the church,
or gives the principal (in his lifetime or at his death) in order that the church
may enjoy the advantage of the interest of the gift for ever. Tam further
certain that a partial endowment, a small certainty of income, is necessary for
the comfort and usefulness of the clergymen, and for the true well-being of the
church. It is not fair to subject the clergymen to undue or unneccessary
anxiety as to his income, and to a certain character of mind any anxiety on this
subject is destructive of usefulness in the ministerial work. Ido not think
that it is the best possible arrangement to make the clergymen wholly
independent of the people, so that whether he does his work or not he shall
receive his stipend, but I do think it equally unadvisable that the clergyman
shall be so dependent on the people that it shall be in their power to deprive
him of his stipend at their will. The endowment of some parishes, or the
partial endowment of all, I regard as necessary to the perfection of the
financial arrangements in the church. And why should this not be commenced?
What is there to prevent the possessors of fifty acres of land in any locality from
giving five to the church ? Or when £5OOO has been made by the favourable
sale of land, why should not £5OO be given as an endowment ? These things
have been done within a short distance of the place in which we are assem-
bled, and had such gifts been more common, the prospects of the church in
this respect would have been more hopeful.
The Island of Tasmania may well afford examples for Victoria. How
many of those who have been enriched by the discovery of gold have endowed
their parish church with £4OO a year, or have, as in two other instances, made
provision for the partial maintenance of a clergyman ?
The Diocese of Adelaide has moved in this matter in a way which may,
perhaps, only be applicable to the state of that Colony; but the skill which
seizes upon the peculiar and favourable circumstances of the country to advance
this object, the interest taken in the question by all the leading members of the
Church of England, the time and labour bestowed upon it, the liberality with
which it is supported, these need not be confined to South Australia. Let the
members of the Church of England in Victoria set about the endowment of their
Church in the same spirit, and the way of doing the work will be discovered and
the work itself will be done. But for this or any other work you want men,
not many perhaps, but men deeply impressed with its importance, and
determined, by God’s help, to give themselves to its accomplishment. The


Church Assembly is most valuable and necessary for the well-being of the
Church, but there is a danger lest the work of the Church should he so laid
upon the Assembly, as to cease to be the work of individual members of the
Church. To refer matters to a select Committee is a very easy and sometimes
a very effectual way of disposing of them. It may happen that they are never
heard of again. An endowment fund may exist, and persons may put their
money into it if they please; but the knowledge of its existence may he as
uninfluential as the sight of the poor-box calmly reposing near the Church
door. It is necessary that the box should be taken down and be perseveringly
handed from pew to pew, and from person to person, before you can hope to
have it filled. So if this endowment scheme is to succeed, it must be taken down
from the shelf of a Committee, and some one or two earnest men must take it
up and go to the landed proprietor and ask for a few acres, and to the house
proprietor and ask him for a cottage or two, and to the millionaire and suc-
cessful speculator, and ask him for a tithe of his property to he securely
invested in endowments for ever.
Whilst, however, I speak of this as the work of individuals, I would
earnestly hope that it will he felt by all to be a common cause—a cause in
which they and theirs are interested in no common degree. It is a cause in
which the present, the permanent, and the eternal well-being of numberless
individuals is concerned ; and in this light let it be regarded, and with these
feelings be taken up.
May I further venture to ask that while individuals are necessary, it should
not he thought necessary that one individual should he at the head of this or
any other financial scheme. I speak of the Bishop. In Adelaide, with a
degree of consideration and of common sense which does them honour, they
have indeed placed their Bishop in the Chair of their Committee, hut have, at
the same time, intimated that he need not occupy it. His time may be better
employed, and another may do the work better than he. I know by experience
that it is sometimes necessary, if a work is to he done, that one must do it for
one’s self, hut I do trust that the laymen of this diocese have learned how to save
their Bishop from unnecessary labour in matters of finance, and leave him to the
more congenial and suitable occupation of the spiritual oversight of the Church
of Christ. It is not desirable —it is indeed painful—that he who is called upon
to care for all the churches, should he compelled to think and hear so much
about money matters.
They must he thought of, hut let the men of honest report and of wisdom
who will do this work, as unto the Lord, be ready to do it, and leave us to the
Word of God, and of prayer. My friends of the laity, you owe this to your
Bishop, to your Church, to yourselves. You owe, indeed, much more to him
who dedicates his time, his thought, his means, his very life to your own, your
children’s, and you country’s good. I can hear witness with what care and
earnest desire for the spiritual welfare of all your own beloved Bishop and my
dear brother, labours on your behalf, and I would ask you for his sake, and
your own, and for the sake of that cause which we all have deeply at heart, that
you would help him much in the Lord —that by your prayers you would sustain


his hands, by your attention to and interest in these outward affairs you would
lessen his cares, and that by your self-denying liberality, you would carry out
the designs I have ventured to commend to your notice at the present time.
I rejoice much in what I have heard and learned of the condition of the
Church in Victoria. Your order and your works are apparent. The intercourse
I have enjoyed has been most gratifying, the rising churches and parsonages are
testimonies to your zeal. My object has been to endeavour to direct the same
zeal to fresh objects, and to still more fervent action—much has been done—
much remains to be done. May you resolve that in God’s strength it shall be
done. May His blessing rest upon the endeavours which shall arise out of such
resolves and crown them with success.
The prospects of the Church in this Colony may occasionally receive a
tinge from the circumstances in which the Colony is placed. Depression in
commerce may affect efforts in well-doing. But this can only be for a time.
And this condition is not without its advantages. At such seasons we feel our
dependance, and betake ourselves to Him who is the source of all wisdom and
strength, and who bids us remember that it is not by might nor by power, but
by His Spirit, that the mountains become a plain, and a highway is made in the
wilderness of this world for the coming of our God.
May you, my dear friends, be found one and all faithful to Him whose
name you bear, doing His will in your day, serving your generation, and finally
resting in him.
A Church thus animated, and thus living in the world will be blessed and a
blessing. This is the condition in which I wish our beloved Churcb to be.
Her prospects —yours my dear friends, and mine, will then indeed be glorious,—
to shine as the stars in the firmament of Christ’s kingdom for ever.


LIST OF THE CLERGY IN THE PROVINCE OF
AUSTRALIA.
DIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
The Right Reverend FREDERIC BARKER, D.D.,
Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan.
Dean.— The Very Reverend William Macquarie Cowper, M.A.
Canons. —The Rev. Robert Allwood, B.A.
The Rev. William Horatio Walsh, M.A.
Chaplains. —The Rev. Edward Synge, M.A.
The Rev. Robert Lethbridge King, B.A.
The Rev. Thomas Hassall, M.A., St. Paul’s, Cohbitty, with Narrellan.
Henry T. Stiles, M.A., St. Matthew’s, Windsor, with Clydesdale.
„ William Macquarie Cowper, M.A,, St. Phillip’s, Sydney.
„ Thomas Sharpe, M.A., All Saints, Bathurst.
„ James Gunther, St. John the Baptist’s, Mudgee.
„ William Stack, 8.A., St. Mary’s, Balmain.
George N. Woodd, 8.A., St. Mary’s, Denham Court and Cahramatta.
„ William Sowerby, St. Saviour’s, Goulburn.
„ George E. Turner, S.C.L., St. Ann’s, Ryde.
Hart Davis D. Sparling, 8.A., St. Mark’s, Appin, with Bargo.
„ Edward Rogers, Holy Trinity, Sydney.
„ Edward Smith, 8.A., St. Peter’s, Camphelltown.
William B. Clarke, M.A., St. Thomas’, Willoughby.
” William Horatio Walsh, M.A., Christ Church, Sydney.
„ Robert Allwood, 8.A., St. James’, Sydney.
„ William West Simpson, M.A., St. Luke’s, Dapto.
)f George Vidal, 8.A., St. Thomas’, Mulgoa, with St. Mark’s, Greendale.
„ John Elder, St. Peter’s, Richmond, with Currajong.
Chas. C. Kemp, St. Stephen’s, Camperdown, and Chaplain to
Cemetery.
„ William Stone, B.A.
William Lisle, Holy Trinity Church, Kelso, with O’Connell Plains.
„ James Allan, Braidwood.
~ William Francis Gore, 8.A., All Saints’, Parramatta, and Chaplain
to Gaol.
Thomas Horton, Sutton Forest and Bong Bong.
„ Henry Tingcomhe, St. John’s, Camden.
„ Thomas Campbell Ewing, St. Michael’s, Wollongong.


Reverend Robert Lethbridge King, 8.A., St. John’s, Parramatta.
„ James S. Hassall, Trinity Church, Berrima.
„ Thomas H. Wilkinson.
„ George King M. A., St. Andrew’s, Sydney.
„ Charles Frederick D. Priddle, St. Luke’s, Liverpool.
„ Alfred Hewlett Stephen, 8.A., St. Paul’s, Redfern and Chippendale.
„ Thomas Druitt, Christ Church, Cooma;
„ Elijah Smith, St. Stephen’s, Penrith, St. Mary Magdalene, South
Creek.
„ H. A. Palmer, Sofala Gold District.
„ E. B. Procter, Christ Church, Bungonia.
„ Thomas Donkin, 8.D., St. Bartholomew’s, Prospect, and Seven Hills.
„ Hulton S. King, 8.A., St. Michael’s, Surry Hills.
„ Frederick Armitage, M.A., Head Master of King’s School, Parramatta.
„ Samuel Fox, Tumut and Gundagai.
„ Edward Synge, M.A., Yass.
„ P. G. Smith, M.A., Canberra.
„ Forster Ashwin, 8.A., Kiama.
„ Thomas Hayden, 8.A., St. John’s, Darlinghurst.
„ Thomas Wilson, 8.A., Pitt Town and Wilberforce.
„ John Allman Burke, 8.A., St. Paul’s, Carcoar.
„ William Hodgson, M. A., Principal of Moore College, Liverpool and
Incumbent of Holdsworthy.
„ P. P. Agnew, Chaplain to Immigrants, Cockatoo Island and Gaol
Sydney.
„ William Allworth, Pyrmont.
„ George Walter Richardson, St. Mark’s, Alexandria,
„ Charles Hamor Rich, Araluen Gold District.
„ Ralph Barker, Deniliquin, Edward River District.
„ Daniel Paul Meek Hulbert, M.A., Collector and Gunning,
„ Abraham Smyth King, 8.A., Shoalhaven and Ulladulla.
~ Alberto Dias Soares, Christ Church, Queanheyan.
„ Robert Hanson Mayne, B.A.
„ Percy Jennings Smith, Canterbury.
„ J. Carter, Picton and the Oaks.
„ George H. Moreton, Curate of St. James’, Sydney.
„ William Drake, M.A., St. John’s, Bishopthorpe.
„ William Coomhes, Hartley.
„ Thomas Warhurton Unwin, Castlereagh, Emu, and Agnes Bank.
„ John Steele, Bomhala.
„ James D. Brennan, Paddington.
„ A. H. Bull, M.A., St. Peter’s, Cook’s River.
„ G. M. Fox, Orange and Molong.
„ R. Potter, 8.A., Alhury.
„ H. D. H. Garvin, 8.A., Wellington.
„ S. Mitchell, Waverly, Randwick, and Coogee,


Reverend M. B. Brownrigg, Bundaburra, Lachlan River.
„ W. Lumsdaine, Ashfield, Enfield, and Burwood.
~ George Gurney, 8.A., Jamberoo.
„ Richard William Young, Wagga Wagga, Murrumbidgee District.
„ Richard Leigh, Curate of St. Saviour’s, Goulburn.
„ Thomas Smith, St. Barnabas, Bishopthorpe.
„ Thomas Kemmis, Abercrombie District.
„ Robert Taylor, Castle Hill, Dooral, and Pennant Hills.
DIOCESE OE TASMANIA.
The Right Reverend FRANCIS RUSSELL NIXON, D.D.,
Lord Bishop of Tasmania.
ARCHDEACONRY OE HOBART TOWN.
The venerable ROWLAND ROBERT DAVIES, 8.A., Archdeacon of Hobart
Town, and Chaplain of the Cathedral Church of Saint David, in
Hobart Town.
The Rev. James Norman, Senior Chaplain St. George, Sorell.
„ Edward Freeman, M.A., St. Clement, Kingston.
„ Thomas James Ewing, St. John’s, Newtown.
„ Joseph Mayson, Swanport.
„ John Burrowes, St, Mark’s, Pontville.
~ Robert Wilson, St. Matthew’s, Rokeby.
„ Charles Dobson, St. John's, Prosser’s Plains.
„ George Wright, St. Peter’s, Hamilton, and St. John’s, River Ouse.
„ Arthur Davenport, 8.A., Holy Trinity, Hobart Town.
„ Wickham Meyer Hesketh, M.A. St. James’, Bothwell and Montacute.
„ David Galer, St. Luke’s, Richmond, and the Chapel at Jerusalem.
„ John Leaverack Ison, 8.A., St. James’, Jericho, and St. Peter's
Oatlands.
„ WTlliam Wallace Fullarton Murray, M.A., St. Matthew’s, New
Norfolk.
~ Benjamin Ball, 8.A., St. Augustine, Broadmarsh.
„ George Banks Smith, St, George’s, Hobart Town.
„ William Trollope, M.A., St. Mary’s, Green Ponds,
„ Frederick Holdship Cox, 8.A., St. John’s, Hobart Town.
~ William Robert Bennett, Bridgewater, and Kensington.
„ Samuel Parsons, D.D. All Saint’s, Hobart Town.
„ Thomas Garrard, 8.D., St. Mary’s, Macquarie Plains, and St. John’s,
River Plenty.
John Dixon, St. Mark’s, Kangaroo Point, and Cambridge.


Reverend Thomas Stansfield, St. Mary’s, at Franklin, and Victoria.
„ George Eastman, The Penal Etablishments, Port Arthur.
„ John Benwell Seaman, 8.A., The Convict Establishments,
Hobart
Town.
„ John Richard Buckland, 8.A., Head Master, Hutchin’s
School,
Hobart Town.
„ Richard Deodatus Harris, M.A., Head Master High School,
Town.
Hobart
ARCHDEACONRY OF LAUNCESTON.
The Venerable THOMAS REIBEY, M.A. Archdeacon
The Rev. William Henry Brown, LL.D., St. John’s, Launceston.
„ William Richardson, 8.A., St. Thomas’, Avoca.
~ Alfred Stackhouse, M.A., St. Andrew’s, Perth, and Franklin.
„ William Dry, 8.A., Christ Church, Longford, and Holy
Cressy.
Trinity,
„ John Fereday, M.A., St. Mary’s, George Town.
„ Montagu Williams, St. Andrew’s, Westbury.
„ Francis Brownrigg, 8.A., St. Peter’s, Paterson’s Plains,
Paul’s, White Hills.
and St
„ Samuel Berjeu Fookes, St. Matthew’s, Windermere.
„ William Brickwood, St. Andrew’s, Evandale.
„ Howard Elwall Drew, St, Paul’s, Stanley, Circular Head.
„ Francis Hales, 8.A., Holy Trinity, Launceston.
„ James Marsh Norman, Bishopshourne, Adelphi, and the Oaks,
„ Zachary Pearce Pocock, St. George’s, Emu Bay.
„ Augustus Barkway, St. Paul’s, Launceston.
„ John Mclntyre, St. Mark’s, Deloraine.
„ Edward Patten Adams, North Down, Port Sorell,
„ Henry Offley Irwin, 8.A., Quanihy Hagley, Westbury.
„ John Chambers, St. Andrew’s, Carrick, (Curate.)
„ Frederick William CJuilter, M.A., Head Master, Grammar
School,
Launceston.
~ Henry Plow Kane, M.A., Launceston, (Private School.)
DIOCESE OF MELBOURNE.
The Right Reverend CHARLES PERRY, D.D.
Lord Bishop of Melbourne.
The Rev. H. W, H. Adeney, St. Paul’s, Geelong,
The Ven. T. H. Braim, Archdeacon of Portland.
The Rev. C. P. M. Bardin, Brunswick.
„ T. Budd, Heathcote.


Reverend R. B. Barlow, St. Mark’s, Collingwood.
„ J. Barlow, Kyneton.
„ L. A. Baker, Tower Hill and Woodford.
„ W. Bean, Inverleigh.
„ P. T. Beamish, Warnamhool.
„ C. Booth, Wangaratta.
„ W. Byrnes, St. Mary’s, Melbourne.
„ Dr. Bromhy, Unattached.
„ W. Baxter, Richmond Flat.
„ R. T. Cummins, St. Paul’s, Ballarat.
~ S. L. Chase, St. Paul’s, Melbourne.
„ W. Carter, Pentridge.
„ W. Copeland, Whittlesea.
The Ven. A. Crawford, Archdeacon of Castlemaine.
The Rev. W. R. Croxton, Sandhurst.
„ J. Darling, St. John’s, Melbourne.
„ J. M. Donaldson, St. J ames’, Melbourne.
„ R. B. Dickinson, Emerald Hill.
„ T. Dowell, Yackandandah.
„ J. Freeman, Benalla.
„ T. B. Garlick, Avoca and Amherst.
„ G. Goodman, Christ Church, Geelong.
„ J. H. Gregory, Prahran.
„ W. M. Guinness, Christ Church, South Yarra.
„ J. Gilbertson, Unattached.
„ T. Heron, Hamilton.
„ H. H. P. Handheld, St. Peter’s, Melbourne.
„ P. Homan, Ararat.
„ W. L. C. Howard, Beechworth.
„ J. Linskea, Maryhoro’.
„ J. S. Low, Taradale and Malmshury.
„ J. Lynar, Heidelberg.
„ H. W. W. Liddiard, Oakleigh and Malvern.
The Very Rev. H. B. Macartney, Dean and Archdeacon of Melbourne.
The Rev. W. McJennett, Kensington and Queenscliffe.
„ L. Moore, St. Paul’s, Geelong.
„ C. T, Perks, Richmond.
„ J. Potter, Ballarat.
„ R. Potter, Belvoir.
„ E. Puckle, Essendon.
„ G. Pollard, Creswick and Clunes.
„ R. Postlethwaite, Miners Rest and Lake Learmonth.
„ F. C. Platts, Castlemaine.
„ G. J. Russell, Buninyong.
„ F. T. C. Russell, D.C.L., Wannon.
„ R. Stephens, Maldon and Muckleford.


Reverend J. Stone, St. Peter’s, Melbourne.
~ J. C. T. Stretch, St. James’, and St. Peter’s, Geelong.
„ J. B. Stair, Broadmeadows.
„ W. Singleton, Kilmore.
„ P. K. Simmons, Sale.
„ D. Seddon, Christ Church, St. Kilda.
„ C. Searle, Melbourne Hospital, &c.
„ F. Smith, White Hills.
„ G. Studdart, Melbourne Goals.
„ J. Sullivan, Kew.
„ S. Taylor, Brighton.
„ E. Tanner, Winchelsea.
„ J. Thomson, Sandridge.
„ G. O. Vance, Unattached.
„ B. S. Walker, Gisborne.
~ G. Wilkinson, Williamstown.
„ H. E. Windle, Ballan.
„ W. Wood, Hawthorne.
„ J. Y. Wilson, Portland.
DIOCESE OF ADELAIDE.
The Right Reverend AUGUSTUS SHORT, D.D.,
Lord bishop of Adelaide.
The Very Rev. James Farrell, Dean of Adelaide, and Incumbent of Trinity
Church.
The Ven. W. J. Woodcock, Archdeacon, and Incumbent of Christ Church.
The Rev. James Pollitt, St. Luke’s, Adelaide.
„ Alexander Russell Russell, Rural Dean and Canon, Incumbent of
St. Paul’s, Adelaide.
„ Astley Cooper, Incumbent of St. Mary’s, Sturt, and Christ Church,
O’Halloran Hill.
„ Thomas Richard Neville, St. Stephen’s, Willungo, and St. Phillip,
and St. James’, Noralunga.
„ John Walton, St. Jude’s, Port Elliott.
„ John Stuart Jackson, St. Peter’s-, Glenelg.
„ Charles Marryat, St. Paul’s, Port Adelaide, Examining Chaplain and
Canon.
„ Fitzwilliam Evans, St, Margaret, Woodville.
„ John Brisbane Pitherington, All Saints, Hindmarsh,and St. Bartho-
lomew’s, Norwood.
„ Edmund Jankins, Incumbent of St. Matthew’s, Kensington.
„ Edmund King Miller, St. George’s, Woodville.


Reverend Daniel Packard, St. Andrew’s, Walkerville.
„ Richard William Needham, St. Michael’s, Mitcham, and St. Saviour’s,
Glen Osmond.
„ William Buckton Andrews, St. James’, Blakeston, St. Mark’s, Wood-
side ; St. Mary’s, Echunga ; and St. Thomas’, Belhannally.
„ William Henry Coombs, St. George’s, Gawler, Rural Dean, and Canon.
„ William Wood, St. Mark’s, Penwortham, and St. Barnabas, Clare.
~ Thomas Sabine, Christ Church, Kapunda.
„ Dewzil John Holt Ibhetson, St. Mary’s, Kooringa.
„ George Henry Farr, Canon and Officiating Minister of St. Peter’s
College Chapel.
Octavius Hammond, St. Thomas’, Port Lincoln.
~ Frederick Philip Strictland, Trinity Church, Riverton, (Curate).
„ John A. Boake, Salisbury, (Curate).
~ John Sheldon, Penola and Mount Gambier, (Curate).
„ Charles John Martin, Port Augusta and Melrose, (Curate).
„ William Murray, Barossa and Gumeracha, (Curate).
„ Richardson Reed.
DIOCESE OF NEWCASTLE.
The Right Reverend WILLIAM TYRRELL, D.D.,
Lord Bishop of Newcastle.
The Rev. R. G. Boodle, M.A., Morpeth.
„ R. T. Bolton, M.A., Lower Hawkesbury.
„ R, Chapman, St. Mary’s, West Maitland.
„ J. F. R. Whinfield, Wollombi,
„ E. Williams, Liverpool Plains.
„ T. O’Reilly, Port Macquarie.
„ Coles Child, 8.A., Scone.
„ A. Glennie, Brisbane Water.
~ J. Blackwood, 8.A., Singleton.
„ J. R. Blomfield, Raymond Terrace.
„ F. R. Kemp, McLeay River.
„ A. E. Selwyn, Clarence River.
„ S. Hungerford, New England.
„ S. Simm, Stroud.
„ L. Tyrrell, 8.A., Locbinvar.
„ J. R. Thackeray, St. Paul’s, West Maitland.
~ J. A. Greaves, M.A., East Maitland.
J. J. Nash, M.A., Murrurundi.
„ B. E. Shaw, M.A., St. John’s, Newcastle,
~ W. W. Dove, Jerry’s Plains.
„ G. C. Bode, Glen Innes.


Reverend E. K. Yeatman, M.A., Christ Church, Newcastle.
„ F. D. Bode, Warialda.
„ W. C. Hawkins, Manning River.
„ W. E. White, 8.A., Muswellbrook.
„ Whitmore Carr, M.A., Williams River.
„ D. G. Birds, 8.A., Cassilis.
„ C. Walsh, Paterson.
DIOCESE OF BRISBANE.
The Right Reverend EDWARD WYNDHAM TUFNELL, D.D.,
Lord Bishop of Brisbane.
The Rev. B. Glennie, 8.A., Darling Downs.
„ J. Mosely, Brisbane.
„ L, H. Rumsey, Ipswich.
„ John Sutton, B.A.
„ Duncan C. Mackenzie.
„ Vincent F. Ransome.
„ Thomas Jones.
„ Edmund G. Moberly.
„ John Tomlinson, B.A.
CENSUS
OF THE
MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
IN THE PROVINCE OF AUSTRALIA
(Extracted from Official Records.)
Members of the
Church of England
Per Centage on
Total Population
Population.
Colony.
As perCen. of Mar., 1856.
266,189
As per Cen. of Mar., 1857.
410,766
As per Cen. of April, 1860.
119,000
As per Cen. of Mar., 1857.
82,997
New South Wales
132,112
175,418
Victoria
43,587
South Australia
47,714
Tasmania
As per Cen. of Dec., 1858,
59,328
New Zealand
30,492
As per Cen. of Dec., 1859.
14,837
Western Australia
67-00
Printed by Reading and Wellbank, Bridge-street, Sydney.


