

CHARGE
DELIVERED TO THE
CLERGY OF THE DIOCESE OF SYDNEY,
NEW SOUTH WALES,
DtftUiam gtctutmm'j
Bishop of Sydney,
avzyzaQz rov Xoyov
rrjg ir apa kAtj a tug.
gtitfcneii:
Close to the Cathedral.
At his Primary Visitation, June 13, 1893,
Metropolitan of N.S.W.,'and Primate of Australia and Tasmania.
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 490, KENT STREET,
gtmiiij, SLIL,




Metropolitan of N.S.W., and Primate of Australia and Tasmania.
tov \6yov
Trig Trapaic\ri<jeu)g.
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 490, KENT STREET,
Close to the Cathedral.
I893-
CHARGE
DELIVERED TO THE
CLERGY OF THE DIOCESE OF SYDNEY,
NEW SOUTH WALES,
At his Primary Visitation, June 13, 1893,
BY
gUtUiant gtattmarrj gtmitJj, fLJJ,,
Bishop of Sydney,




M33SSP
CHARGE.
My Brethren, —
The occurrence of a Bishop’s Visitation brings with it grave
thoughts concerning the personal responsibility of all who have
been called to any special office and administration in the
Church. Its intention is to keep us mindful of the duties
which we owe, .one to another, in the Diocese to which we
belong, and to combine the results of local experience with the
advantages of centralised rule in our common work for Christ.
The returns asked for, taken in conjunction with the experi-
ence personally obtained by the Bishop in visiting the different
places in his Diocese, help him to realise the condition and
needs of the various parishes and districts; and the charge
given is for the counsel and encouragement of the Clergy, re-
garded as a body of fellow-helpers, acting in a recognised
sphere of Episcopal jurisdiction. This object is, indeed, to a
considerable extent covered by the Synodal system in use in
these Colonies; but I think it obvious that a periodical citation
by the Bishop of his Clergy with the view of giving them a
special charge, apart from the more technical discussions and
proceedings of the Synod is a custom worth while maintaining;
and is calculated to promote that sincere feeling of mutual re-
gard which should ever strengthen the tie which binds together
the Bishop and Clergy of a Diocese, in a brotherhood which is
personal as well as official.
What I have to say to you to-day will be no attempt at a
rhetorical, or literary, effort. Even if I wished to make such
an attempt, the time for preparation would not be forthcoming.
All I can do is to select from the many topics on which advice
ad clevum might be profitable, a few on which to concentrate a
little practical thought and counsel, as God may enable me to
do so.


A few words I feel bound to say—they shall only be few—
about myself. The third year of my Episcopate is now
drawing to a close. I have endeavoured during that period
to make myself acquainted with every part of my Diocese;
and I am grateful to Almighty God for the health and
sustaining grace which have enabled me to visit, and to
minister in, every parish and district, as well as to perform
the many administrative duties falling upon me when I am in
Sydney, without any interruption by illness or accident. I
desire also to express my gratitude for the many kind
courtesies, and pleasant hospitality, given to me by Clergy and
Laity in the various places I have visited.
I have also endeavoured, and am daily endeavouring to
fulfil the promise I made to be “ frank and friendly, fair and
firm,” in the discharge of my Episcopal duties. A Bishop,
like any other person in a high official position, cannot but
become the object of convergent, and contradictory, criticisms.
He is not infallible in judgment, nor is he always able either
to have at his disposal all the information he desires, or to have
before him all the circumstances he wishes for, in coming to a
decision, even in important matters. The critics, however,
should remember that they, too, can make mistakes, both
from want of accurate information, and from the prejudice
which partial or “ local ” views of a matter tend to foster. I
intend, by God’s help, to pursue a straightforward course,
neither puffed up by praise, nor disconcerted by blame, although
I would fain deserve the one, and not justly incur the other ;
always remembering, however, that “ He that judgeth me is
the Lord.” I should like to say that I will gladly
receive and consider all counsel that is tendered to
me, directly and respectfully, from any quarter. I am not
bound to any clique or to any party in the Church, in a “ par-
tizan ” sense ; and, without concealing my opinions or convic-
tions when it is necessary to declare them, I wish to recognise,
welcome, and join in, all that is good in every stratum of our
ecclesiastical organisation.
I thank you, my brethren, for the returns sent in in response
to my Visitation enquiries. Ido not propose to deal with them


in my Charge to-day. I have not had time to peruse, still less
to classify or tabulate, the information contained in them. But
I am sure that they will aid me in understanding the range and
character of the Church work and worship throughout the
Diocese; and I shall study them with interest. On some
points I shall probably have private correspondence with the
Clergy ; with regard to others, I may perhaps make some re-
marks in my Synod address in August; and if there are any
statistics or notes which I think ought to be appended to my
Charge, when it is published, I will see to their being then
printed. The special subjects which have been brought under
my notice in the returns, in response to my invitation, will
receive due attention.
I shall now proceed to offer a few suggestions for thought
upon the five following topics. Hindrances to Ministerial
Efficiency; Duties in regard to Diocesan Administration;
Church Comprehensiveness, and Unity; recent Biblical
Criticism ; and National Religion.
I. We shall all be at one in recognising certain main
essentials of an efficient Christian ministry ; e.g., adequate
educational preparation, personal character, whether viewed
in regard to spiritual earnestness and sincerity of conviction,
or in regard to moral and upright conduct among men;
diligent performance of professional duties, in church and out
of it; cultivation of social sympathy and friendliness ; and a
maintained endeavour to promote the increase of “ true
religion in all classes of society. But it is far easier to
theorize than to practise; easier to commend high ideals
than to make genuine, strenuous, efforts to reach them. We
are apt to allow our recognition of what “ ought to be,” to
take the place of striving persistently to attain what we
acknowledge to be the right thing. It is well therefore at
times plainly to face (in order that we may the more earnestly
repudiate) what ‘ ought not to be: ’ and then to take heed lest,
being led away with the error, we fall from our own sted-
fastness.
Let us, then, remind ourselves of some of the things to be
avoided by those who wish to exercise their ministry duly,
and to become a real power for good in the world.


There is the danger of intellectual indolence. No Clergy-
man should allow himself to think that because the exigencies
of parish work and administration are multiform and onerous,
he can dispense with study, and reading, and what I might
call, ‘ hard thinking.’ It may be that he can do but little ;
yet, at any rate, he ought to do something to develop
intellectual activity, and to keep his mind from intellectual
stagnation. Ido not, of course, imagine that the majority of
the Clergy can be, nor do I think they need be, “ learned
men (only few, in any profession, comparatively speaking,
can be ‘ scholars ’or ‘ experts ’of a high order); but Ido think
that a Clergyman ought to strive after all the intellectual
culture that his circumstances permit, and that he should be
able to take an intelligent and genuine interest in the moral
aspect of the many social and political problems which beset
us, as well as in the theological and ecclesiastical questions
necessarily connected with his profession.
There is the danger of professional arrogance. A self
complacent view of our official position as Clergy may some-
times blind our eyes to our own deficiencies, and have
mischievous effects upon the best interests of the Church to
which we belong.
An opposite error to be guarded against is a subservient
regard to temporary popularity, which may lead a Clergyman
into an abandonment of the proper level on which one who is
commissioned to minister in sacred things ought to stand. If>
for instance, we allow ourselves to lose hold of some definite
religious truth, because that truth is not in vogue among
those to whom we minister, we are disloyal to Christ, and are
marring the efficiency and the reality of our ministerial work.
Another danger against which I would solemnly warn all
my brethren, not neglecting to take the warning myself, is the
temptation—which is so common, and a temptation not easy
to resist—to become impatient, and discontented, and com-
plaining, because things do not go exactly as we wish them to
do : e.g., when expectations of some removal to another sphere
of duty are disappointed: when fluctuations in the circum-
stances of some locality render a man’s position more irksome


and difficult than it used to be: when a man deems himself
* passed over ’: and similar uncomfortable contingencies,
which may have been experienced, or observed, by all of us.
Now, what is the true spirit of the Christian Minister in such
contingencies ? How should he view these trials and dis-
appointments ? Ido not say that he is * not to mind them ’;
but I do say that he should regard them as intended discipline
from God, and as God’s proffered opportunities to him for
displaying that patient cheerfulness in doing one’s duty in any
circumstances wherein God’s Providence places us, which
more than ought else glorifies God, and commends religion to
men.
Another source of hindrance to ministerial efficiency is ad-
mission of ‘ worldly ’ motives into our plans, and of * worldly ’
methods into our procedure. By ‘ worldly ’ motives I mean the
merely * commercial ’ view of things, uninspired by spiritual
enthusiasm, and uncontrolled by the dominating influence of
personal religious purpose. By * worldly ’ methods I mean any
methods of getting money for Church objects which are likely
to justify the reproach that we are, under the guise of asking
for charitable aid, encouraging the spirit of gambling, or the
excessive pleasure-seeking which characterize the ordinary
secular view of life. I think that we need to keep in check the
tendency to substitute for direct giving, and for real self-
denying in working for God, those indirect and attractive
methods of appealing for aid which, although the use of them
may be to a certain extent a legitimate and necessary adapta-
tion to human nature, are too apt to degenerate into an expen-
sive advertisement-kind of charity, where there is ‘ much cry,
and little wool.’
One other great cause of weakness and failure in ministerial
work I desire to mention. It is the giving way to personal
pique, and jealousy, and allowing resentment for some fancied,
or real, injury to keep possession of the mind, until brotherly
feeling disappears, and sourness and suspicion usurp the place
where love and forbearance should rule.
I will conclude this portion of my Charge by entreating you
to remember that the Clergyman’s conduct and behaviour


constitute a most important factor in ministerial work. He
must endeavour to set an example of, as well as to inculcate,
the higher life into which Christ’s Spirit leads all His true
disciples : he must make it his object to show that our religion,
whilst it does not consist in an unpractical or unsocial
asceticism, is discipline as well as doctrine, and self-sacrifice
as well as self-culture.
11. I ask you now to turn from the consideration of
Ministerial efficiency to the consideration of Diocesan duties
—from the thought of personal character to the thought of
consociated responsibilities. The Bishop of a Diocese, and
those who act with him in any official capacity as coadjutors
and counsellors in regard to Diocesan affairs, must ever have
before them the fundamental problem of all statesmanship,
which is, to combine in harmonized and vital activity “ local ”
resources and energy with the “central” exercise of a
regimen intended for the common weal. This problem can
never be solved by the central authority per se : its happy
solution depends much upon what may be called the
“patriotic” spirit of the community. And the inculcation
and cultivation of such a spirit in a Diocese can be much
aided if every Clergyman will strive to show those among
whom he ministers that the recognition of Diocesan claims is
a duty, a privilege, and a strength: a duty because our
system of Church government is not “ congregational; ” a
privilege, because our sympathies are thereby enlarged; a
strength, because it saves parishes from that isolation of
interests which would make the poorer place hopeless, and
keep the richer place selfish.
Diocesan administration means much work; it demands
much personal zeal, and careful attention; it cannot be
effectively carried on without considerable cost. The work is
multiform; it may be characterized as legislative work,
regulative work, distributive work, unitive work. Our Synod,
and its Standing Committee ; our Cathedral, and its Chapter;
the Diocesan Registry with its diversified official labours, and
its accumulated official records: the existence of various


Diocesan Funds needing careful and continued management;
all illustrate the manifoldness of work to be done that is extra -
parochial, and is at the same time intimately connected with
all that touches the welfare, the good order, and the helpful
inter-association of the parishes themselves.
We need to be impressed with a distinct sense of the
corporate and collective idea of the Diocese, as well as anxious
for the particular welfare of the individual parish to which
any one of us belongs. The conjunction of the patriotic
spirit of which I have just spoken with prudent and patient
rule from the centre will consolidate Church progress, and
make all of us mutually helpful, one to another, contributing
what each may to the common welfare, and doing our best to
avoid narrowness of outlook, and narrowness of sympathy.
I charge you, therefore, to encourage a constant mindfulness
of Diocesan obligations. This, far from hindering the dis-
charge of ‘ local ’ duties will help you to fulfil them better by
the consciousness that you are not benefitting your own locality
only, but doing what promotes wider welfare, and that you are
not only ministering to one parish, but promoting common
Church life and fellowship.
I ask you to be loyal to the Diocese. By this, I mean that
you should take a real interest in what concerns the central
management of affairs, whether by Synod, or by Bishop, or by
Committees; and this, not merely by criticising (which of course
you will do) when you think anything is being mis-managed,
but also by careful consideration how you may best suggest, or
effect, any needed reform without impatience, and without
bitterness.
Questions of Diocesan import, e.g., questions connected with
Synod representation—with parish assessments—with equitable
distribution of Diocesan funds—with difficulties felt in regard
to patronage and preferment—are always recurring in some form
or other, and will give plenty of opportunity for exercising that
patient considerateness to which I have just referred.
I will not ask you to be loyal to your Bishop, because I
would fain believe that none of you would be deliberately
disloyal to one who has been called to be your chief Pastor,


under Christ, in this Diocese; and I trust that when any of
you differ from any decision that I may officially make, you
will give me credit for acting faithfully and eoncientiously to
the best of my ability and judgment. But I do ask you all
to remember that in the part which I, as Bishop, have to take
in Diocesan administration, I occupy a position which has its
peculiar difficulties ; and that you can best help me by daily
interceding for me that I may ‘ use the authority given me, not
to hurt, but to help ; ’ that I may be ‘ so merciful that I be not
too remiss, and so minister discipline that I may not forget
mercy ; ’ and that in all things I may be enabled to combine
Christian faithfulness with Christian love.
There is one duty in connexion with the administrative work
of the Diocese to which I desire to call your attention, although
some of you may possibly think that I am laying great stress
on a small matter. You all know that there is necessarily
connected with the carrying on of Diocesan work a great deal
of correspondence; that there is signing, and registering, of
various deeds, and documents to be attended to; that there
are many “ office ” details, attention to which is tedious ; and
we are apt to apply, glibly enough, such terms as “ useless
routine,” “ tiresome red-tapeism,” and so on; and to feel
bothered because we think things might be done more simply,
and with less formality. We may be sometimes mistaken in
this, but simplify as we may, there will always remain the
duty of cultivating business-like habits in dealing with official
details, and records for reference or for decision, and in
correspondence about the various matters which claim either
the attention of the Bishop or of the Registrar, or of Secretaries
of the various Committees by whom official work is done, or
vice versa, of those to whom communications are sent.
Carelessness in reading letters, or in replying to them ; care-
lessness in stating a claim, or a grievance, or in formulating a
petition ( e.g ., for the consecration of a church or burial-ground)
may sometimes impede administration, cause loss of valuable
time, and entail extra work and trouble which might have been
avoided. We are all tempted at times, I suppose, to kick
against details such as I have mentioned ; but I desire to re-


mind you that habits of accuracy, promptness, regularity in
keeping public accounts and official records; painstaking effort
to avoid delay and to prevent mistakes are not only of great as-
sistance to the administration of a Diocese or a Parish, but form
an effective part of our moral training and discipline. For it is,
in truth, a want of considerateness and an absence of moral
effort that makes us careless in these matters.
In concluding these brief suggestions concerning our “ con-
sociated responsibilities ” in respect of the Diocese, I would
remind you of a wish expressed in a circular letter to the
Clergy last December, that the meetings of the Ruridecanal
Chapters may be so used as to be made profitable in increasing
this consciousness of helpful and responsible fellowship. I
then pointed out that a regular use of such meetings would
tend “to promote harmonious co-operation for the welfare of
the whole Church, amid those differences of opinion and
method which are inevitable factors in the organic growth of
any community.”
111. The sentence which I have just quoted makes an
appropriate transition to my next topic, namely, that of the
Comprehensiveness and Unity of the Church.
I will begin by reference, which may be expected, to a
cause celebre in our ecclesiastical annals. Last year witnessed
the result of the appeal in the suit of Read and others v. the
Lord Bishop of Lincoln. The Archbishop of Canterbury’s
Judgment was delivered in November, 1890, and was a
learned, interesting, and able investigation of the points under
dispute. This Judgment was confirmed by the Privy
Council Judgment of August 2, 1892.. This “ Lincoln Judg-
ment,” as it has come to be called, though in itself only an ad
personam decision upon certain “specific complaints of rubrical
irregularity” has a wider interest than that which would attach
to a mere isolated decision on a ritual dispute in England. It
involved historic considerations of an important nature as
bearing upon the continuity and comprehensiveness of the
National Church of England; and at the same time it dealt
with important questionings as to the amount of liberty in


ritual which can be legitimately conceded without comprom-
ising the reformed position which the Church took up in the
16th and maintained in the 17th century. For it is patent that
the promoters of the suit against the Bishop of Lincoln
was actuated by conscientious scruples as to the legality of
certain ceremonies, and symbolism, which to them seemed in-
consistent with the Protestant position of the Church of Eng-
land. And the careful way in which the doctrinal indifference
of the “ Eastward Position ” is asserted in the Archbishop’s
judgment shows the consciousness on the part of the Court that
liberty in ritual was not to be permitted to be made a plea for
retrogression to mediseval doctrine concerning the Eucharist.
According to the final decision this “ Eastward position ” is not
to be regarded as an “ ecclesiastical offence ” ; it is to be per-
mitted as an optional position in the ritual of the Communion
Office, provided that the manual acts are not hidden from the
people. The result of the appeal on this, and the other points
brought before the Court in the first instance, and the Appellate
Court afterwards, has been received as “a legal victory for
toleration,” which is to “ make for peace; ” and so I trust it
will, and that prosecutions, and suspicions, and recriminations
of a purely partizan kind may disappear. I cannot but observe,
however, that if we are to be at peace in regard to these
matters of ritual, diverse from the simpler ritual to which
many have been accustomed, and which many prefer, the
“ victory ” must not be abused into exclusiveness towards those
who still object to, and decline to use, the permitted items of
ritual. I think it may be well, and lam sure it will be candid,
that I should here state my own view in regard to the
“ Eastward Position,” about which there has been so much
discussion. Personally, I cannot approve of it or recommend
it, for the simple reason that I verily believe it to have been
adopted for the purpose of encouraging a sacerdotal view of
the Eucharist, which is out of agreement both with the
Communion Office, and with the Articles of Religion to which
all Clergy of the Church of England subscribe. I know that
according to the Archbishop’s Judgment, “ the imputed sacri-
ficial aspect of the eastward position is new and forced, and


can take no effect in rendering that position either desirable on
the one side or illegal on the other; ” and that the same
judgment speaks of “ill-informed recent maintainers of
this position as essential; ” but I know, also, that the require-
ment of this position has been undoubtedly associated with
extremist teaching, and intended to convey “ some sacrificial
doctrine of the Eucharist against the doctrine of the English
Church.”
Personally, therefore, I do not think that I shall ever will-
ingly take the “ Eastward Position,” even if circumstances
occur which may render it a matter of courtesy to do so; nor
shall I be able to do so in any circumstances, without making
some declaration explanatory of my scruples in this matter.
I consider that the North side position, which “is beyond
question a true liturgical use in the Church of England,” is
both by reason of its almost universal adoption until recent
years, and by reason of its freedom from the suspicion of
doctrinal symbolism, least likely to encourage party spirit, and
most likely to be generally acceptable.
But this whole dispute, and its result, viz., that a consider-
able variety in ritual is permitted, is an illustration of the
comprehensiveness of our Church life. The historical develop-
ment of the Church of England as a National Church has
made such comprehensiveness to some extent a natural
characteristic of its position, and what I am now concerned to
impress on you is that this comprehensiveness is an advantage,
if only a certain boundary line be not passed. There is room
for the evangelical, the ecclesiastical, the rational, factors of
our Church life to act, and re-act, and interact, beneficially ;
if only we adhere to the “ Principles of the Reformation,”
and do not abandon that increase of breadth and liberty
which we gained in the 16th century by becoming a Protestant
Church. The term, “ Protestant,” is, I fear, obnoxious to
some good men who belong to our own Communion ; and
they would prefer the term “ Anglican.” Well, as a matter
of distinctive terminology, this may be at times convenient;
but the “ Anglican Church ” is by historical development,
by constitutional reform, and by authoritative statement of


doctrine, Protestant as well as Catholic, and, (let me add)
Protestant because truly and genuinely Catholic. The
term Protestant, like the term Catholic, may be applied
in a misleading manner; but rightly applied, in its historic-
ecclesiastical meaning, it is a watchword of liberty and
progress based upon the Word of God. The great move-
ment, or disruption, in Christendom, which we know as the
Reformation, drew a dividing line between those who, on the
one side, maintained the authority of the Pope as supreme in
religious matters, and those, on the other side, who, vindicating
liberty of conscience in the worship of God, maintained the
religious authority and sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures, and
repudiated mediaeval additions to, and corruptions of, Scriptural
teaching. The Church of England is undoubtedly on the
“ Protestant ” side of the line.
I do not wish to forget that there is a Comprehensiveness
of Christendom which is larger than that which we predicate
of our own Church, and embraces all who profess, and call
themselves Christians; but of this I am not now speaking;
nor am I now dealing with the questions of the Re-union of
Christendom, or of closer association with other Protestant
communions.
What I wish to urge upon you, my brethren, is this, that
within the Church of England limits there is full and legitimate
scope for much variety of thought, and ritual; and that this
variety is advantageous to our Church work, so long as the
Principles of the Reformation are not repudiated.
If we consider, thoughtfully, the interdependence of all the
sectional tendencies which are exhibited in what we call
parties, or schools of thought, amongst us, we shall see how
necessary each is to the other if we are to have fulness of
organic life in the Church.
In my address to the General Synod in 1891, I spoke of the
cycle of religious thought, co-hering in Christ, as being sug-
gested by the three terms, faith, form, freedom. Might we
not say that “ faith ” strikes the Rock from which the living
stream for which we thirst flows : that “ form ” digs a channel
in which the stream may run : that “ freedom ” widens the
channel, and makes others ?


Various epithets have been used by way of intimating the
direction of the dominant tendency in each party or section of
the Church, e.g., Spiritual, Sacramental, Scientific: Emotional,
Formal, Critical: and similar distinguishing adjectives. Can
we not perceive that it is the combination, not the severance,
of these lines of thought and action that we need ? The
Bible ; the Church; Reason ; are watchwords one of which
may be dearer than another to different minds. But these
need not, they should not, be disunited.
Attention to purity of doctrine ; adaptation of art to religious
worship; free use of literature ; these are phrases which might
be connected with the various sections or tendencies of which
we are thinking. But who can claim, or wish to claim, a
monopoly in these matters ?
Heart, hands and head are all needed for full life. Without
the heart no life-flow; without the hands a maimed life,
without the brain-power an unintelligent life ; we want all in
in harmonious contributions of varied functions.
But when we come down from philosophizing to actual
Church work, some practical difficulties must come in, because
there are circumstances which cause a kind of clashing between
certain minds, and certain methods. Amid these inevitable
differences, where uniformity is unattainable, and complete
unanimity impossible, what is it which can unite us ? Not
definitions, but devotion ; not laws, but love; not externa!
regulations (however needful these may be in their proper
place), but spiritual sympathy. It is the Holy Spirit of our
God—our Father and Saviour —which can alone fuse the
different elements into a healthy operative organism, filled with
vital energy, and working towards a maturity of fuller growth,
and knowledge, and power. It is in proportion as we submit
our wills to the Spirit of God working through His Word, in
His Church, and within our own consciences, that we can
harmonize varieties of intellect, temperament, method ; and
being many members, act as one body, because we have been
made to drink in of one Spirit.
And “ the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffer-
ing, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, temperance.


Put these inward dispositions in the first place, and all will
come right. We shall, then, be earnest without being
exclusive; we shall argue without anger; we shall differ
without discord; we shall be enabled to avoid self-
complacency, whilst we do not abandon the line of our own
genuine convictions ; we shall be willing to learn from each
other, and to help one another as much as we can, without
exacting complete uniformity, or demanding a rigid Shibboleth.
And the result will be, what is the eventual result of all honest
co-operation and conference among men desiring to advance
not themselves, but the cause of truth and righteousness, and
equity. Extreme tendencies will be moderated; a useful
resultant of diverse spiritual, intellectual, practical, forces will
mark the Church’s progress, and as we move onward, God will
yet more abundantly teach us what His will is, as we try to
deal truly, in love; and we shall still “ grow up in all things into
Him which is the head even Christ, from whom all the body
fitly framed and knit together, through that which every joint
supplieth according to the working in due measure of each
several part, maketh the increase of the body unto the building
up of itself in love.”
IV. I now proceed to make some remarks, which, I trust,
may be useful, upon “ the higher criticism ” of the Old Testa-
ment, of which so much has been heard in recent years. Its
consideration has perhaps, a more appropriate place in a
Charge to the Clergy than in an address to a Diocesan Synod.
Yet it is a subject which, although it may appear to have a
primary interest for the Clergy, is one which no thoughtful lay
member of the Church should neglect to consider. For it is
not merely a literary question which is raised, but a religious
one. It is not merely a question concerning the origin,
authenticity and genuineness of certain ancient writings ; it is
a question which has a serious bearing upon the trustworthi-
ness of the Bible as a Divine Revelation, and as a supreme
standard in religious matters.
But it would be a great mistake to deal with the subject in
any spirit of panic, or impatience. “An indefinite dread ” of
imagined disaster when some novel theories are promulgated


which pvima facie seem to be hostile to the faith of Christians,
or to traditional views of the Holy Scriptures is irrational, and
mischievous. The truth will always stand criticism of a
proper kind. If the criticism be sound and genuine every
truth seeker will welcome it; if it be unsound, and baseless, its
blunt edge will do no harm. Within my own memory several
“ panics ” have arisen from the publication of various criticisms
upon Christianity and the Bible, but the panics were not justi-
fied by the results. The Tubingen theory, which made a great
stir once, is now essentially discredited; the book called “ Essays
and Reviews” brought out fresh defences of the Faith, adapted
to the modern presentation of old problems; Bishop Colenso’s
criticisms of the Pentateuch led to careful research, and effect
tive vindication of the substantial truth of the earlier history of
Israel; “ Ecce Homo ” viewed, at first, as a hostile treatise
fell into its place as an interesting contribution to conjectural
interpretations of the Marvellous Personality of Jesus Christ;
the anonymous criticism brought forward in “ Supernatural
Religion ” evoked the brilliant and trenchant reply of the late
Bishop Lightfoot.
In each case, whatever of truth there was in the criticisms
was acknowledged, and assimilated ; the errors were exposed
and repudiated: and the resultant of controversy was the
removal of misconceptions, and the clearer enunciation of
truth. Dogmatism, either of a positive or of a negative kind,
is gradually corrected by calm controversy, conducted in a
serious and earnest spirit. Extreme views on either side give
place to that which is reasonable and true, so far as we are
enabled to verify and interpret the facts that form the basis
of doctrine.
We have no reason to fear, and we have no right to forbid,
criticism even of the most things. We have a right,
however, to claim that the critic of books that have been
reverenced as sacred for centuries should carefully consider
the due weight to be attached to long standing traditional
views and interpretations, and should not too hastily assume
that modern theories must be right, because they are new and
revolutionary.


The advocate of traditional beliefs, on the other hand,
should be open-minded, ready to consider, and to weigh with
all due attention what is advanced by those who may be
termed “ progressive ” theologians and critics, who are eager
to bring up to date and to modern requirements, all enquiries
concerning religion, and religious documents.
And what is this “ higher criticism ” ? In investigation of
ancient documents, two branches of criticism come into notice
which are to be distinguished one from the other. There is
“ textual ” criticism which attempts to verify, and decide on the
original “ text ”of the documents in question. To this belongs
the study of Manuscripts, and of Versions, and of citations in
other writings, and the comparison of the conclusions to which
other textual critics have come upon disputed points. Then
comes the “ literary and historical ” investigation to which the
name of “ the higher criticism ” has been given. This deals
with the authorship, and contents, and purpose of the ancient
documents. This field of investigation is wide, and various,
and calls for patient diligence and caution, as well as for
eagerness and curiosity. All historical criticism necessarily
involves some exercise of the imagination ; and the formulation
of tentative hypotheses becomes a necessity when the data of
known facts are insufficient for exact knowledge. We are
obliged to conjecture how such, and such a book may have
originated ; how it was preserved and transmitted; whether
it is rightly attributed to some particular author, or not; and
so on. But it is obvious that conjectures should not be
rashly, or heedlessly multiplied; and that all due attention
should be given, first, to the facts and statements of the books
themselves, and secondly, to all reasonable traditions concern-
ing their structure, and character, and claims, which have
come down to us from ancient times. It may be well to
observe here that the term “ Higher Criticism,” although it
is not really open to the objection that it implies arrogant
claims, is sometimes used, or regarded, as if the criticism thus
described were something which absolutely demanded our
allegiance, and should not itself be criticised. This is, of
course, a mistake, as may be perceived from what I have


already said. The “ higher criticism ” belongsto all students,
whether they incline to the ‘ traditional,’ or to the ‘ progres-
sive ’ school of critics.
For a succinct statement, and comparison of the two com-
peting theories concerning the composition and structure of
the Old Testament Scriptures, I may refer you to Bishop
Ellicott’s useful little collection of addresses entitled Christus
Comprobator. The Bishop takes a cautious conservative position,
in regard to the dispute; and speaks of “ the genuineness,
integrity, and trustworthiness of the Old Testament ” as “ im-
pugned and traversed by the industrious ingenuity and really
limitless assumptions of modern analysis.” The older, or
“ Traditional ” theory, broadly stated, is “ that the Books of
the Sacred Volume, in its historical portions, have been written
or compiled from contemporaneous documents by a succession
of inspired writers, beginning with Moses and ending with Ezra
and Nehemiah.” But the Bishop admits that “ modern in-
vestigation and modern criticism have introduced certain
changes and rectifications.” The recently elaborated theory,
he terms the “analytical” theory, because its alleged con-
clusions are deduced from learned and ingenious “ analysis ”
of the documents criticised. To enter into any examination
of this modern theory would be neither possible nor desirable
on the present occasion. Suffice it to say that this analytical
theory relegates the composition of the first five books of
the Bible, together with the Book of Joshua to a much later
date than the time of Moses, and finds in this so-called
“Hexateuch” “three strata of narrative and legislative
details, of different dates and distinctive peculiarities, which,
after having been revised and re-edited, possibly several
times, have at last been not unskilfully combined in the
form in which they have now come down to us.” The
historical trustworthiness of these earlier books is therefore
called into serious question; the relative position of “the Law”
and “ the Prophets ” is inverted; and the presentation of the
history of Israel in the Bible is thrown into confusion by the
assumption that “ the Law ” in the most of its details origin-
ated late in the time of the Babylonian exile, instead of being


substantially the production of Moses, acting and legislating
under Divine direction. Some of the foreign critics go so far
as to hold “ that the Tabernacle of Witness, or as it is now
commonly called, the Tent of Meeting, and everything
connected with it, had never any existence except in the
fabricated history composed in the days of the exile, and that,
far from the Tabernacle being the prototype of the Temple, it
was the Temple that suggested the deliberate and elaborate
fiction of the Tabernacle ! ”
The divergence between the two theories is startling ; and
the traditional theory, with certain reservations and acknow-
ledgments, is still the theory which has more intrinsic
probability. The constant conjectural analysis, and arbitrary
assignment by the modern critics of this and that portion of
the documents under review to one and another writer, and to
different periods, make an excessive demand upon our faith in
regard to the reliability of this internal criticism. We cannot,
however, close the controversy by denouncing literary research,
or ignoring what the literary specialists allege in opposition to
the traditional theory.
The considerations pressed upon us by this controversy,
bring before our minds a duty, an anxiety, and a hope.
The duty is to exercise our reason boldly, patiently, rev-
erently. God has chosen in many parts (n oXvpepoog) and in
many different fashions (7ro\uTp6rroos) to make progressive reve-
lations of his will, in preparation for that culminating Revelation
of Divine Love and Righteousness which he made in the
Person, and Teaching, and Work of Jesus the Christ. God
made these special revelations in, and through, the history and
polity of a particular people. This people had its documents
and records from which gradually certain “ Scriptures ” came
to be selected, as authoritative in religious matters ; and these
scriptures were set apart as “ sacred,” and were so regarded
by Christ and His Apostles. They were decreed to be in a
special sense “inspired” (“God-breathed,” ©gowveuo-Toi) and
thus to be specially profitable for moral, and religious purposes.
But, however divine the purpose and character of those “ holy
scriptures,” and however wonderful their providential preser-


vation, and their doctrinal coherence, and the convergence of
all the history and teaching in them to Christ, may be, the
treasure was in “ earthen vessels,” and the human instrumen-
tality through which the divine truth was conveyed cannot be
rightly or reasonably excluded from criticism—provided that
such criticism be exercised, not in a scornful, hostile, or flippant
spirit, but with honesty and reverence; and above all with due
regard to Him who in His testimony to what was written “in
the law of Moses, and the Prophets and the Psalms,”, set a
most important imprimatur on the Old Testament Scriptures as
a whole.
Our anxiety, in regard to this much talked-of “ Higher
Criticism ” is lest the religious authority of the Old Testament
should be unduly depreciated, and its value in religious
matters be insufficiently regarded; and lest from the study of
the Bible coming to be considered too much as a mere matter
for specialists and linguists, people should be tempted to forget
that, apart from all questions of literary criticism, these older
Scriptures are now, as in the time of the Apostle Paul, Holy
Scriptures able to make men wise unto salvation through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. Practical and prayerful study of
the Bible will, I make bold to say, never be in vain. It may
be, indeed, that some—especially perhaps among those who
have in their reverence for the scriptures held a too rigid and
literalist theory of inspiration, will have their minds for a time
disturbed by the free handling which the higher criticism
makes prominent. It may be, also, that some, who have
taken lax views of the inspiration which guided “ Holy men
of God ” in old time, maybe led further away from recognising
the claims of the Bible to be, in a sense in which no other book,
or collection of books, can be, the Word of God.
But our hope predominates over any anxiety that we may
feel. No controversy, no research, no criticism, —be it ‘ ana-
lytic,’ or ‘ synthetic ; ’ relentlessly destructive, or imaginatively
constructive, —can be eventually harmful to the cause of
religious truth. In the case of the Old Testament as in the
case of the New, truth will be vindicated, and faith confirmed.
We shall discover how far our traditional notions are reasonable,


—in what points they should be corrected, and in what points
they should hold their ground. Assuredly, the practical value
of the Old Testament is permanent, and indisputable, what-
ever critical questions may have to be left open, or acknow-
ledged as insoluble. This wonderful “ Divine Library ”
present a historical outline of the history of Israel, as of a
nation through whose religious development a progressive
revelation of God was given which is admittedly, a purer,
holier, more gracious, more personal, knowledge of the
Divine Being than we can gather, or infer, from any other
source previous to Christ’s own teaching; a revelation which
was wonderfully preparatory for the culminating wonder of
Christ Himself, God’s Word Incarnate among men. Consider
the Old Testament’s blending of ethical obligation with
religious devotion ; its maintenance of monotheism amid all
varieties of idolatrous worship, whether outside of Israel or
within their borders ; its consistent presentation of the One
Living God as ever exercising lovingkindness, righteousness,
and judgment in the earth, —and the Saviour of all who
trust in Him; its hopefulness as regards the future of the
world’s history in the light of that promise of the ‘ after time ’
to which God’s people were taught to look forward when
“ the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of
the Lord as the waters cover the sea ”; —and you will find
that the elaborate analysis and conjectural audacity of modern
criticism need not interfere with the continued use of those
Holy Scriptures, “ for reproof, for correction, for instruction
which is in righteousness, that the man of God may be com-
plete, furnished completely unto every good work.”
Add to this consideration of the Old Testament as a collec-
tion of sacred documents, the thought of the authority (already
referred to), which is given to its religious claims by Jesus
Christ, who quotes Moses, and David, and Isaiah, and tells
the Jews to search the Scriptures because they testify of Him,
and you will not allow controversies as to the particular
amount of revision, or modification, under which documents
have passed before they assumed their final form in the Jewish
Canon, to shake your faith in “ the sufficiency of the Holy


Scriptures ” for the enlightening and saving purpose for which
God’s marvellous Providence, and inspiring Spirit, designed,
shaped, and preserved them.
The Bible, in its totality, will still remain for us the un-
shaken basis of highest moral, and religious instruction; and
a more complete and coherent presentation of God in history
than anything else which human literature has produced.
Modern tendencies to materialism, to scepticism, to agnosticism,
to a vague and vacillating view of God’s relation to mankind,
are best corrected and held in check by the knowledge of God
given to us in the Bible, and concentered in Jesus Christ.
Objections to the religious claims of the Bible, be it
remembered, are often only objections to some theory of
inspiration that does not take sufficient account of the human
element in the composition of the various books ; but after all
reasonable regard—l will not say “ concessions,” for the term
is a misleading one—to the critical researches concerning the
growth, and shaping of the Scriptures, we may rest confident
that these Scriptures, in their gathered unity in Christ, are
pre-eminently God’s Word, inspired by His Spirit, and
illumining with heavenly light the way for all men up to God.
V. One other topic remains on which I desire to suggest
duty and express hope. It is the subject of National Religion.
The relation of the Christian religion to national life should be
clearly recognised, and the permeation of national life by
religion should be strenuously attempted, if a nation is to truly
prosper. These Australian Colonies are not yet a nation, but
they aspire to become one; and there are many indications of
possible progress to follow an already marvellous development
of material prosperity and of civic and political activities. The
financial crisis and depression through which we are now passing
may, in the Providence of God, be a help and not a hindrance
to this progress, if it has a sobering, and a stimulating effect in
the direction of more genuine industrial, effort, and of an in-
crease of that federative spirit, which is to unify the Colonies as
one people. National life is growing; and if it is to be healthy
and strong it must be accompanied by national religion. What


is the responsibility of the Church of England in this matter ?
We have no “ National Church ” here. The conditions under
which the connexion between Church and State grew up, and
formed an important integral part of the historical development
of the English people do not exist here. Yet I venture
to think that the Church of England in these Colonies, if
its Bishops and Clergy and Laity do their part faithfully and
in a right spirit, should enjoy a position of vantage in religion-
izing society. It has a large number of adherents, and some
sort of social prestige ; it has a closer continuity, in its historic
evolution, with the whole growth of Christendom than the
younger, and lesser, Churches or sects of more modern
origination have. It has released itself, on the one hand, from
the ecclesiastical exclusiveness and accretions of erroneous
dogma, which limit the power of the Roman Catholic Church to
move the public conscience; and, on the other hand, it has not
allowed the claims of private judgment, whether exercised in
the more mystic, or the more rationalistic, line of divergence,
to carry it into the vagueness and tenuity of that religious
individualism which, by ignoring what is due to historic and
traditional considerations, multiplies sectional disruptions in a
needless and perplexing variety. I do not, in speaking thus,
wish to imply that this vantage-ground makes it right for the
Anglican Church to stand aloof from co-operating, as far as
practicable, with any ameliorating religious influences that
may proceed either from the Roman Catholic Church, or from
the other Protestant Churches, and sects. In many points
there must be what may be termed a respectful but stern
antagonism to the claims, and some of the doctrines, of the
Roman Catholic Church ; and whilst we are in far closer
doctrinal affinity to the larger Protestant sections of the Church
Universal, there are points on which we consider them to fall
short of what we hold to be the proper fulness of Church
organization, and Church doctrine; yet this will not justify
us in a proud isolation, as if we were “ the Church,” and all
others were aliens. We may be “ thankful ” (using words of
Archbishop Tait in a Diocesan charge which he made in 1880,
when he treated of “ the Church of the future ”), “ if we can
feel ourselves members of a compact and well-ordered


section of the ‘ Church Universal,’ strengthened by ennobling
traditions of its past history, holding fast by the teaching of the
Apostles, and ready to adapt itself, in its maintenance of
truth and holiness, to the ever-varying circumstances of the
changing ages.” But, while we are thus thankful, to take up
a needlessly exclusive, and self-complacent position in relation
to other Christians is as wrong as it is unwise. Let us think
then of ourselves as a definite section of the Catholic Church,
contributing our share of service in the fertilization of the world
with Christianity. The commission of the Church of Christ is
to be a witness of Him, and a herald of the Kingdom of God.
Its function is to diffuse religion; to work out in many diverse
ways Christ’s teaching, and to be the channel of Christ’s univer-
sal benediction ; to elevate the moral standard of mankind, and
to kindle a divine hope in a world of sorrow and of sin. In
all stages of Church history, and in all sections of the Christian
Church this function has been, in some measure fulfilled, but
with very varying success, and with much of mistake, and
failure and error, marring, or overclouding, the witness given,
and the work done. Yet although “Churches” may wax and
wane, sicken and recover, dwindle and revive, the primary
function and the permanent hope of “ the Church ” abide.
The term “ Christocentric ” is coming into vogue in some
quarters. It betokens a desire to look more earnestly at what
unites than at what divides Christians; and although external
“ reunion ” and “ amalgamation ” of Churches may be
impossible, there may be a definite increase of “ fraternization ”
in all that makes for national righteousness and purity and
godliness. Let us of the Church of England see to it at any
rate that we do our own part in this great work, in which
it is given to all Christians to participate; and in vindica-
ting our proper position among the Churches, be defensive,
not aggressive; decisive, but not unnecessarily exclusive.
The dangers and difficulties to be faced are many. There
is the widely spread indifierentism of nominal Christians
who are engrossed in the cares and pleasures of the world.
There are tendencies working against the restraints of
religion—in an anti-dogmatic and anarchical direction. The
trend in favour of socialistic principles, though not with-


out some elements of noble aspiration, is mainly one-sided and
secular.. Then there is a great deal of sentimental religious
flexibility, the tendency “to regard all questions as open,
and truth very doubtful.” Nor are there wanting indications
that the current of re-action from definite Christian doctrine
sometimes carries minds away in the direction of fanciful
theosophy, and of strange speculations concerning the unseen
spirit world, which may make persons who would repudiate
superstition become not a little superstitious. The Church’s
business is to keep before the world the presentation and expo-
sition of definite Christian truth ; to embody the idea of worship
in seemly and reasonable ritual; to keep alive the conscious-
ness that religious education is at the heart of real education ;
to associate men and women in the bond of religious com-
munion; to offer facilities for all enquiry into Christian
doctrine; to claim for God’s service the exercise of human
faculties in every field—in politics and commerce, in science
and art, in philosophy and literature, and in every walk of
human life and labour. This work belongs to the whole
Church, to its Lay Members as well as to its Ordained
Ministers. Yet upon us of the Clergy a special responsibility
lies. It is laid upon us in our various provinces of action—
preaching, and teaching, and pastoral visitation, and personal
example, and maintenance of family religion—to animate
(may I say ?) our Church organization, and so to lead men to
exhibit by their practical application of Christian principles to
all circumstances, that the Church of Christ is the highest
factor in the world’s healthy development.
I have already reminded you of the comprehensiveness of
the Church as a body. Strive to make its work comprehensive,
without making it indefinite. Do not isolate religion by
confining it to religious services; do not cramp religion by
narrow dogmatising; do not attenuate religion by vague
philosophising ; but show that “ true religion ” is concerned
with everything that man can do, or learn, or work for, or
hope for, or rejoice in ; and that national growth will find its
best aid, and its best security, in national religion.
Suffer one brief further word as to what are known as “ social
questions.” Some of you will have noted the remarkably


interesting and suggestive Charge delivered by the Bishop of
Durham last year. He then pointed out that “ social questions
tend to become paramount,” and that as this age has been an
age of physical science, so the next is likely to be an age of
social science. He said it was of vital importance that Ministers
of the Church should approach social problems from
a Christian point of view. For the manner in which the
Bishop expounds with masterly grasp of his chosen subject,
“ The Incarnation as a Revelation of Human Duties,” I refer
you to the Charge itself. I only mention his words here in
order to call your attention to the need which exists of the
Clergy paying due attention to these social problems ,in the
proper spirit. Sympathy with the aspirations after more
equitable social conditions should be genuine and sincere.
It must be accompanied, however, by careful endeavour to
bring the moral view of such problems to bear upon the material
view of them, and to infuse into “ secular ” plans a religious
inspiration which will control, and elevate them to a higher
level of thought and aim. Into details of economic and
political import, only those should enter who are fitted to do
so by special knowledge. And there is a special need to be
careful in the matter of labour disputes, lest the desire to con-
ciliate, or to show sympathy, should result in our being derided,
or despised, for our ignorance of the gist of the matter, and in
causing the “ interference ” of “ the Church ” to be resented.
We should strive to be mediatorial without being meddlesome;
and to show that, whilst we do not wish to stand aside in
thoughtless or scornful aloofness, we are not ready to rush into
inconsiderate partizanship.
The Church will re-iterate in reference to all efforts after
social progress the word of Christ, “Seek ye first the Kingdom
of God and His righteousness.” All social reforms, all social
re-adjustments, will be successfully worked out by the gradual
inter-penetration of merely secular aims by the religious spirit
which comes of a deep-seated faith in Jesus Christ.
I have now said my say for this occasion. May God use
what I have said for His glory! A sense of weakness, and
weariness, and disappointment with one’s self, must often ac-


company one’s most earnest efforts to perform a public duty ;
yet no such duty done in dependence upon God’s guidance and
with prayer for Christ’s Spirit, can fail to be some contribution
to the advance of truth, and righteousness, some help to that
“ fellowship in the futherance of the Gospel,” which is the in-
spiration of our diversified work now, and the pledge of perfect
harmony and joy in the end.
Accept then this word of exhortation, my Reverend Brethren,
proffered to you with all humility, and in sincere and affection-
ate sympathy with every one of you in your varied duties and
difficulties. May He who has called us to the special vocation
and ministry wherein we are employed ever help us to do our
work in the world with faithfulness as regards ourselves; with
forbearance and brotherly kindness as regards our relation to
others; and with hopefulness as regards the outlook for the
future of the Church of God!
Unto God’s gracious mercy and protection I commit you.
The Lord bless you, and keep you! The Lord make His face
to shine upon you, and be gracious unto you ! The Lord lift
up His countenance upon you, and give you peace, both now
and evermore !— Amen.


POSTSCRIPT.
The following short notes concerning the Diocese are all
that I think necessary to subjoin to this Charge, The Proceedings
of Synod, published annually, supply all requisite details.
I arrived in Sydney on September 30, 1890, and was installed
at St. Andrew’s Cathedral on October 9. of that year. Since then,
I have presided over four Diocesan Synods (one special), (besides
taking the Chair as " Primate,” and "Metropolitan " respectively,
in the General Synod of 1891, and the Provincial Synod of 1892);
I have held seven Ordinations, and 180 Confirmations, at which
4785 candidates (1750 male, 3035 females) have been confirmed.
Lists of places of worship newly opened, licensed, or con-
secrated ; of Burial Grounds consecrated; and of new Parsonages
erected, are annexed, together with a summary of the number of
Clergy now in the Diocese.
July, 1893. w - s - S -


the Chinese.) - - - - -
8
Clergy unattached, but having authority to officiate
- 28
160
Note-A.
Names of Clergy who have been ordained since my arrival at Sydney,
in September, 1890.
gVtrotittcfr to be '§eacon& x
Dec. 1890. —P. N. Hunter.
May 1891. —C. Blacket, B.A.
Mar. 1892. —E. Scarisbrick, B.A.
June 1892. —A. Gailey, B.A.
June 1893. —P. W. Dowe, B.A.
J. G. Fenton, Moore Theol. Col.
W. H. Murray, Moore Theol. Col.
gUrtwiitei* to ilje ©tffcer of x
May 1891. —E. Stanley Wilkinson.
W. Newby Frazer.
J. Olley.
Nov. 1891. —D. H. Dillon.
F. W. Reeve.
June 1892. —P. N. Hunter.
C. Blacket, B.A.
Dec. 1892. —E. Owen, B.A.
E. SCARISBRICK, B.A.
Note—B.
Parochial Clergy :—lncumbents, and Clergy in charge - - 107
Curates 17
Extra-Parochial Clergy: —(Precentor of St. Andrew’s Cathedral;
Warden of St. Paul’s College ; Head Master of the King’s
School; Principal of Moore College; Organizing Secretary
of the Church Society; Chaplain of Darlinghurst Gaol;
Assistant Chaplain of Rookwood Cemetery; Missionary to


Note—C
Newly opened Churches and Mission Rooms.
1892.
May.—Holroyd, Parramatta (Mission Room).
Helensburgh (School Church).
November.—Annandale (Mission Church).
December.—Vanderville, Picton (Mission Church).
February.—North Kingston (St. Stephen’s Mission Room.)
May.—Richmond (St. Paul’s Mission Church).
The Church of St. Thomas, High Range, Berrima Parish, was
consecrated in May, 1893.
Burial Places Consecrated.
July.—Hunter’s Hill.
September.—Burrawang.
October.—Bulli.
1892.
June. —Weromba, Camden.
May.—Bowral.
High Range.
Clifton.
Note—D.
New Parsonages.
(Since 1890.)
Croydon.
Seven Hills.
Hunter’s Hill.
Berry.
In course of erection and nearly completed.
Wollongong.
Gordon.


Joseph Cook & Co.,
Printers,
490, Kent-street, Sydney.




