

nzQot
Issued by the Natural History Association of New South Wales.
A CHAPTER ON COLLECTING AND PRESERVING
INSECTS,
Br A. Sidney Olltff.
In giving a few simple directions for collecting and preserving
insects, I think I had best confine myself to describing the
methods employed by myself. Igo out provided with a net made
of silk gauze or book muslin, a cork-lined box provided with
pins, and an assortment of pill-boxes. The morning is the best
time for butterflies and day-flying moths, but for the majority of
the species, and particularly for the smaller kinds, I prefer the
hour before dark. Many species are then on the wing that do
not stir at other times. I watch the stems of flowers, the twigs
of trees, disturb leaves and shrubs, securing each moth as it
takes wing. Searching tree trunks and sheltered palings is often
most productive, and a lamp placed in a conspicuous place after
dark nearly always yields good results. Butterflies should be
killed without removal from the net by a sharp nip applied to the
muscles, which are situated at the base of the wings, with the
finger and thumb. If this is done when the wings are over the
back of the butterfly, very little evidence of the rough usage will
be left. Thick-bodied species are best killed by means of a
killing bottle, which may be made by taking a wide-mouthed
bottle with an air-tight bung and placing three or four pieces of
cyanide of potassium at the bottom, and over this a thin layer of
plaster of paris, mixed with a sufficient quantity of water to make
it of about the consistence of thick cream. A few pieces of
cyanide with a pad of blotting paper tightly pressed down over
them will answer very well if the plaster of paris cannot be
obtained. Moths can also be killed in the fumes of ammonia,
chloroform, or benzine. Butterflies should be placed in paper
envelopes, folded in a triangular form, but care must be taken
that their wings are brought in contact over their backs. A
number of these envelopes packed in a biscuit or similar tin, will
travel any distance with perfect safety. All moths should be
pinned through the centre of the thorax, and large species should
have the contents of the abdomen removed. This is readily done
by making a longitudinal incision on the underside of the body,
removing the contents, and substituting a little cotton wool.
The small moths (Micro-lepidoptera) must be pinned. They
should be brought home alive in pill-boxes and killed in the
cyanide bottle, or the boxes (having previously had a small hole
bored in the bottom) may be placed in a tin canister with a
small piece of sponge or blotting paper moistened with chloro-
10(


form or strong liquid ammonia, and left until the following morn-
ing, when they should he pinned. The best way of collecting
these little moths is to disturb leaves and low-growing plants,
securing them as they fly out and placing each specimen in a
separate pill-box.
Beetles, or Coleoptera, are to be found everywhere. Flowers,
leaves, decaying vegetable matter, and seaweed, moss, fungi, and
dead trees abound with them. Many are found lurking under
stones and under bark, and others frequent carrion, which they
assist in removing. Perhaps searching flowers and bottling the
specimens when seen, beating shrubs and low-growing trees over
a net or inverted umbrella, and searching beneath loose bark and
under fallen logs and stones, are the easiest and most profitable
ways of collecting.
The following method of preserving beetles is the one gene-
rally adopted by collectors who are travelling from place to place,
as it not only kills the insects, but preserves them in excellent
condition as soon as they are captured. The specimens, when
collected, should be placed in a wide-mouthed bottle, about one-
third filled with sawdust, containing a small piece of cyanide of
potassium, which, it should be recollected, is a deadly poison. The
sawdust should be sifted through coarse muslin, and the chips
rejected, and should, if possible, be of some light wood containing
little colouring matter. When the day’s collecting is over, the
insects contained in the collecting bottle should be transferred to a
tin canister or stock bottle, which has been prepared by placing a
layer of sawdust at the bottom, similar to that used in the collect-
ing bottle. The sawdust should be slightly damped, not soaked,
with a mixture composed of 19 parts of methylated spirit or
benzoline, and one part of carbolic acid. Another layer of saw-
dust should then be added, then another layer of beetles, and so
on alternately until the tin is full. Tin canisters are to be pre-
ferred on account of their being free from the danger of break-
age ; but any kind of wide-mouthed bottle, or pickle jar,
will answer every purpose if it is provided with a tightly-fitting
bung. If this plan is from any reason found to be impracticable,
the beetles may be brought home alive in the collecting bottle
and then dropped into boiling water, when death is instantaneous,
or they may be killed by being placed in a bottle with a few
drops of chloroform on a piece of blotting paper or cotton wool.*
*ln localities where the common European laurel is found, a killing-bottle for
beetles may readily be made by taking a wide-mouthed bottle and partly filling it
with finely-chopped lauiel leaves. If only the young leaves and shoots are used,
the laurel will last for many months, and it has the advantage not only of killing
the specimens, but of preserving them in a relaxed condition for almost any length
of time.


Lastly, the beetles, with any other insects possessing hard
integuments, can be preserved in alcohol.
Diptera (flies), Hymenoptera (bees, wasps, &c), Neuroptera
(dragonflies, mayflies, &c.) and all pubescent insects should be
pinned. They may be killed in the same manner as the moths.
Orthoptera (grasshoppers, walking-stick insects, &c.) and
Hemiptera (plant-bugs) are best preserved in spirit, although the
latter may with safety be packed in sawdust with the beetles.
Mounting or setting butterflies and moths (i.e., spreading out
their wings, antennse, &c.) is by no means as difficult a process as
some people suppose, and the necessary apparatus is neither
elaborate nor costly. A few grooved boards of soft wood or
cork, a pair of steel forceps, a few strips of narrow paper, and
some pins are practically all that is required. Besides the for-
ceps, which are dispensed with by many, except when dealing
with the smaller moths, and the pins, none of these things need
be purchased.
The grooved, or “ setting ” boards, as they are called, are
made of narrow strips of soft wood of about a foot in length,
and are used in strapping down the wings of the insects, until
SETTING-BOARD.
they become dry and fixed. These boards should be of varying
widths corresponding to the size of the insect to be “ set ” or
strapped out upon them, and should have in the centre a groove.


also varying according to the size of the insects, on the bottom
of which a strip of cork or pith is securely glued. The most
satisfactory boards are those which are entirely covered with
cork ; indeed, when very fine pins are used, as in the case of the
smaller moths, it is indispensable that the boards should be
covered with cork. With regard to pins, it is of course neces-
sary to have a few packets of those made specially for entomo-
logical purposes. These may be obtained from a dealer in
natural history apparatus, or from any respectable furrier. And
now a word as to setting itself. Having pinned our insect with
a pin of suitable size through the centre of the thorax between
the bases of the wings, we select a setting board of suitable
width, and pin our insect in the central groove. Then, having
placed the legs in position, we set out the wings of one side and
strap them down by pinning across them narrow strips of paper,
which have already been prepared for the purpose. Next, we
repeat the process on the other pair of wings, and apply as many
strips of paper as we consider necessary. Finally, we set out
the antennae, and support the body if it requires it with crossed
pins. The insects should be left on the setting boards until they
are perfectly dry. The length of time required to effect this
will, of course, vary according to the weather, but in this dry
climate they may usually be removed in three or four days. The
several methods of setting vary considerably in detail, and
almost every collector has some pet plan of his own, but the simple
process described above will be found to answer all requirements,
at any rate in the case of the butterflies and larger moths. For
the Micro-lepidoptera or small moths it will be found advisable
to substitute “ braces ” for the strips of paper. These are made
by cutting a sheet of stiff white paper —ordinary note paper will
do very well —into pointed pieces of varying lengths.
The plan recommended and described by Lord Walsingham
in the “American Naturalist” may be adopted for the Micro-
lepidoptera. After giving particulars as to the method of killing
the moths, and stating that each specimen should be brought home
alive in a separate pill-box, the method of setting these minute
but interesting creatures is described as follows ; —“ Taking
the lid off a box, and taking the box between the finger and
thumb of the right hand, I roll out the insect on the top of the
left thumb, supporting it with the top of the fore finger, and so
manipulating it as to bring the head pointing towards my right
hand and the thorax uppermost. Now I take a pin in the right
hand, and resting the first joint of the middle finger of the right
against the projecting point of the middle finger of the left hand
to avoid unsteadiness, I pin the insect obliquely through the


thickest part of the thorax, so that the head of the pin leans
very slightly forward over the head of the insect. After press-
ing the pin far enough through to bring about one-fourth of an
inch out below, I pin the insect into the middle of the groove
of a setting board, so that the edge of the groove will just
support the undersides of the wings, close up to the body, when
they are raised upon it. The board should be chosen of such a
size, as will permit of the extension of the wings nearly to its
outer edge. The position of the pin should still be slanting a
little forward. The wings should now be raised into the position
in which they are intended to rest, with especial care in doing
so not to remove any scales from the surface or cilia of the
wings. Each wing should be fastened with a brace long enough
to extend across both, the braces being pinned at the thick end,
so that the head of the pin slopes away from the point of the
brace ; this causes the braces to press more firmly down on the
wing when fixed.
“ The insect should be braced thus: the two braces next the
body should have the points upwards, the two outer ones pointing
downwards and slightly inwards towards the body, and covering
the main portion of the wings beyond the middle. Antennae
should be carefully laid back above the wings, and braces should
lie flat, exercising an even pressure at all points of their surface.
The fore-wings should slope slightly forwards so that a line
drawn from the point of one to the point of the other, will just
miss the head and palpi. The hind-wings should be close up,
leaving- no intervening space, but just showing the upper angle
of the wing evenly on each side.” Later on in the same article,
Lord Walsingham says : “ Half the battle is really in the pinning.
When an insect is pinned through the exact centre of the thorax,
with the pin properly sloped forward, the body appears to fall
naturally into its position on the setting board, and the muscles
of the wings being left free are easily directed and secured; but
if the pin is not put exactly in the middle, it interferes with the
play of the wings. Legs must be placed close against the body,
or they will project and interfere with the set of the wings.
Practice, care, and a steady hand will succeed.”
To set butterflies which have been preserved in paper en-
velopes, or any specimens which have become dry, it is first
necessary to relax them in a jar or tin of damp sand. The best
plan is to procure a shallow earthenware pan, with a cover of some
kind, and then to place the insects in it on a layer of damp sand.
If the insects are placed in the pan overnight, they will be found
in good condition for setting in the morning. A few drops of
carbolic acid, added to the water with which the sand is damped,
will effectually prevent the growth of mould.


Beetles give much less trouble in their preservation. It is
sufficient in the case of the larger kinds—those measuring a
quarter of an inch and upwards—to pin them through the right
wing-case, or elytron, near the shoulder. The pin should be
inserted at a point which will ensure its emerging behind the
second pair of legs, after passing through the body of the insect,
and only about one-fourth of its length should be visible from
above. The smaller beetles should be mounted on card. The
BEETLE (IAMPRIMA), SHOWING POSITION OF PIN.
process is simple enough. A solution of gum-tragacanth (which
can be obtained at any druggist’s) is made by dissolving a few
clear pieces of the gum in cold water. When the tragacanth is
thoroughly dissolved, a small quantity of ordinary gum arabic
should be added, to render it more adhesive. The beetles
should then be attached by means of this mixture to thin white
card, with their legs and antennae displayed as neatly as possible.
When the insects are dry they should, if mounted in a row, be
separated, and all superfluous card cut away, each specimen being
left at the extremity of a parallel-sided strip of the necessary
width ; these narrow strips have now to be pinned near the
hinder margin, and the specimens are ready for the collection.
Beetles which have become rigid can be relaxed for pinning or
carding by a short immersion in boiling water, even years after
their capture. Whilst so much remains to be done in Austra-
lian entomology, it is sheer waste of time to arrange or “ set ”
the limbs of beetles in the manner supposed to be natural when
the insects are at rest. A collector will spend the time more
profitably in observing the habits of insects, or in adding fresh
captures to his stores. The collection, whether of butterflies,
moths, or beetles, should be arranged in the cabinet or store box,
which must be dust-proof and air-tight, and should be lined with
cork covered with white paper. If proper store boxes cannot be
procured, specimens may be temporarily arranged in cigar boxes,
which have had split winecorks glued at intervals along their


bottom. To keep away insect enemies, such as mites, and the
dreaded museum-beetle Anthrenus, which is so destructive to
natural history collections of all kinds in this country, it is neces-
sary to put a small quantity of napthaline or camphor in each
box. This may be done by wrapping the napthaline in a small
piece of soft muslin, and fastening it securely with strong
pins in a corner of the box. If by any chance the
Anthrenus. should be found to have made its way into
a collection, it may be killed with chloroform, ammonia,
or better still, with the poisonous fumes of bi-sulphide
of carbon. In conclusion I would impress upon anyone about to
form a collection, the necessity of attaching to each specimen a
label showing the locality from whence it came. Many collec-
tions made by beginners with great labour, and at a cost of much
valuable time, have lost half their value from neglect of this
simple but important detail.
Sydney, Ist February, 1889.
ittuo
fHk>\
H CflM


NEW SOUTH WALES
President: De. George Bennett, F.Z.S.
Vice-President: Dr. E. P. Ramsay, F.R.S.E. Treasurer: F. B. Ktngdon.
Committee „•
John Brazier, F.L.S.; Rev. Robert Collie, F.L.S.; E. Haviland;
Thos. Whitelegge; C. S. Wilkinson, F.G.S.
This Association nas oeen formed especially to assist those who would like to
know something 1 of the natural objects around them, and as a means of
encouraging students and assisting them by advice or technical information in
the pursuit of their studies and by naming specimens forwarded.
The subscription is one shilling a year for members under 21 years of age,
and over that age five shillings a year, there being no limitation of age or sex,
all students of nature being welcome.
As a further incentive to the study of this subject, a new rule was introduced
at the last annual meeting, under which several branches have already started,
and it is hoped by its means many more branches will be brought into existence
all over the colonies. Under this new rule, instead of an individual sub-
scription, a branch may be formed, which may conduct its own business and
have its own local secretary ; the members thereof receiving all the
benefits as members of the Association, would only pay one subscription, as
follows: —For five members and under, ss. a year per branch ; from six to ten
members, 7s. fid. a year per branch; from 10 to 20, 10s. a year per branch ; and
over 20 members, 20s. a year per branch.
The committee of the Association recommends the formation of these local
branches, but, of course, such are not absolutely necessary, and any person
wishing to join the Association may make application for membership on the
printed form provided for that purpose, and may work as an individual member.
The Association holds a general meeting on the third Monday of every
month, at the School of Arts, to which all members are invited, and have the
privilege of introducing friends. Members are also requested to bring specimens
to these monthly meetings, as through the kindness of several scientific friends,
who attend for the purpose, the exhibits can be named, And, if necessary,
directions given for their preservation, &c. At these meetings short lec-
turettes are introduced, descriptive of some special objects, and much
interesting information is given by authorities on different subjects.
Collecting excursions are also arranged under expert leaders, and a number
of these have already been held on an average of twice a month, on Saturday
afternoons. *
Friends all over the colonies are invited to join the Association, but, whether
members or not, they may largely assist in the study of the Natural History of
Australia, by forwarding specimens—botanical, entomological, geological, &c.—
to the Hon. Secretary, who will acknowledge the receipt of same, and distribute
them to the special scientists under whose branch they may come.
The recognised badge of membership of the Association is the beautiful little
shell Oliva carneola, mounted by a small silver ring from the apex. This is a
small shell of a white ground colour, with bands of a pale orange tint across it,
and is worn by all the members, to whom it is issued free of cost.
Copies of rules, forms of application, and all further information are obtainable
from the Honorai-y Secretary of the Association, School of Arts, Sydney, to
whom subscriptions may be sent in stamps of any colony.
CYRIL HAVILAND, Hon. Secretary.
