

Rif,
A LECTURE
TO TUB
print:
A CHURCH
A SOCIAL INSTITUTION
SIR WILLIAM DENISON. K.C.8.,
Governor-General of the Australian Colonies,
YdUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION.
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
.BANK,
BRIDGE STREET.




A CHURCH
A SOCIAL INSTITUTION.
-A. LECTURE
SIR W. DENISON, K.C.8.,
GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE AUSTRALIAN
COLONIES,
TO THE
YOUNG MEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION.
18 5 8.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING & WELLEANK, BRIDGE-ST.




THE CHURCH
A SOCIAL INSTITUTION.
19 3 nn
The existence of an Association such as that which I
am addressing this evening, has an important bearing
upon the subject of my Lecture# The fact that numer-
ous members of the various Christian Churches in this
colony have agreed to unite together, and to form The
Young Men’s Christian Association, affords, as it
appears to me, distinct and positive evidence of some
defect in the organization of the Churches to which
they respectively belong. You, I have a right as-
sume, have associated yourselves together to find the
means of supplying some want —of satisfying a craving
for that which the Churches to which you individually
belong are unable or unwilling to provide. Could they,
or would they do so, the necessity which has called you
together would cease to exist j you would find among
those professing their belief in the same doctrines as
those held by you, or observant of the same forms as
yourselves, that full Christian sympathy, that brotherly


affection which ought to prevail among those who be-
long to a Christian Church.
It is the absence of such a feeling which drives you
to seek from others, under a bond of union, differing in
name, but I hope identical in spirit, that which the
Church as originally constituted was intended, but which
lam afraid she has long ceased, to supply. While, how-
ever, the existence of your Association is in itself an
evidence of some defect in the organization of the Church,
it at the same time testifies to the existence on your
part, of a desire to discover some appropriate remedy.
You feel the evil, you wish to be relieved from it, and
it is this which encourages me to lay before you my
views of the nature of the evil, and of the direction
which your efforts should take to enable you to discover
and apply the proper remedy.
I propose, then, to bring before you, this night, the
Church in one of its many aspects. I shall consider it
as a Social Institution; that is, as an Institution the
object of which is to give the highest sanction to those
feelings and motives which induce men to form them-
selves into societies. This title will not, I am aware, give
you a very clear idea of the limits which I propose to
myself; but it is difficult, in dealing with a subject
which has reference to man in so many and such varied
relations, to find a title which is at once short, compre-
hensive, and definite. As that which I have adopted does
comprehend (along with several others) all the points
to which I wish to draw your attention, I have used it
in preference to a larger and more explanatory title.


Before, however, 1 begin to investigate the objects for
which the Church was constituted, it is very necessary
that I should establish in your minds a clear idea of the
meaning of the term “ Church". Many, indeed I might
almost say most, of the quarrels which have agitated
society, and have been productive of the greatest evils,
have had their origin in some ambiguity of expression ;
in many instances they have arisen from the use of the
same word in different senses by the opposing parties;
and the word, the meaning of which T am now about to
define, is one of those which has been abused in this
manner.
If we refer to the etymology of the word “ Church"
we shall find that it is derived from two Greek
words, the combined meaning of which is “ the Lord's
House” The primary signification was that which
is now in common use, namely, the actual house
or building in which men met to worship God; from
this, by a common transference of meaning, it got to
signify the worshippers in that House, the Household
of God; and by a gradual process of extension, it came
to be used to designate all those who worshipped in any
of God’s Houses, or the Universal Body of Christians.
Out of this extension of meaning, however, a confusion
of ideas has been generated. The term was applied first
to “ a Church a single building, or the body of people
worshipping in that building; and the indefinite article
prefixed to this word, shoAved that there might be a
plurality of Churches; but, when the word was used to
designate the Avhole body of believers in Christ, then it
became impossible to admit of a plurality ; and the


term “ Church ,” with the definite article prefixed, came
to express the one Catholic or universal Church, and to
be employed by each section of the Christian community
to represent (practically, at all events, if not theoreti-
cally) those only who adhered to what was by them
conceived to be the true doctrine preached by our
Saviour and his Apostles.
Now, “ The Church ,” in the sense of the universal
body of believers, is not a society according to the or-
dinary acceptation of the word. “ The Church,” as is
well said by Hind, in his History of the Rise and Pro-
gress of Christianity, “ is only one Society considered
as to its future existence ; the circumstance of its having
one common head, Christ, one Spirit, one Father, are
points of Unity which no more make the Church one
society upon Earth, than the circumstance of all men
having the same Creator, and being derived from the
same Adam, renders the whole human race one political
community. The Church is one, then, not as consist-
ing of one society, but because the various societies, or
Churches, founded by the Apostles were modelled, and
ought still to be so, on the same principles, and because
they enjoy common privileges.” As, however, the
whole human race, though not a political community,
is made up of political communities—so the Universal
Church, though not a society, is made up of a variety
of Churches or societies.
The Church of England defines “ The visible Church
of Christ” to be “ a congregation of faithful men,
in the which pure word of God is preached,


and the Sacraments be duly administered according
to OhtH'dr ordinances, in all those things which of
necessity are requisite to the same." I will not
enter upon any of the questions which arise out of
the latter part of this definition, but substituting the
indefinite for the definite article, I shall adopt the
first portion of it, and say, that “ a Church is a con-
gregation of faithful men, that is, of men who believe in
Christ, and obey his Commandments lt must not be
supposed, however, that in omitting that part of the
definition which relates to the preaching of the pure
word of God, or the due administration of the Sacra-
ments ordained by Christ, I intend in any way to depre-
ciate or undervalue the blessings which these are the
authorised means of conveying to us; on the contrary,
my object is to magnify their importance, by showing
the close and intimate relation in which they ought to
stand to all the details of our daily life, by proving that
these, which are too commonly looked upon as the ends
of our business as Christians, are but in fact the means
to enable us to do our Christian work.
A Church, then, is a congregation —a gathering
together of those whom identity of belief has joined by
closer bonds than those which unite them with the rest
of the world. It is a society, the members of which
have, besides all the ordinary motives which link men
together, the additional one of a common faith.
This definition, however, is so general that, if taken
without some further limitation, it would include the
whole of the members of large sections of the Christian
%


community, such as the Churches of England, Scotland,
Rome, the Wesleyans, the Independents. Each of these
bodies , taken with reference to the universal body of
Christians, is “ a Church taken, however, with refer-
ence to the members composing it, each may be con-
sidered to represent to these “ the Church .” Their
members are too numerous, too generally scattered over
the face of the globe, to allow of the supposition that
there can be any such identity of feeling among them
as to entitle them to be considered a society The term
“ a Church,” with reference to the remarks I am about
to make, must, therefore, be taken in its original, or
rather in its secondary sense, as including only those
who worship in the same House of God, as being a con-
gregation in the sense in which we usually employ the
word. It is not necessary that I should point out to
you the coincidence of the meaning which I have given
to the word with that in which it was employed by the
Apostles. We hear, as you must recollect, of the
Churches of different towns, and, in one or two instances,
of the Church in the house of an individual. Neither
is it necessary that I should explain to you that I do not
insist upon this as being u the meaning , that is, the
only meaning of the word j but it is a meaning , and it
is that which I shall atttach to the phrase ; and ray
only purpose in entering into this explanation has been
the removal of any possibility of misconception from the
employment of a doubtful expression.
The universal Church, and each of the separate
Churches of which it is composed, professes to be an
edifice built upon the foundation of the Apostles and


Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner
stone; in order, then, to discover the proper plan of the
building, we must search the records which have been
left to us by the Apostles. We shall find in these a
sketch of the edifice, which the first builders began to
raise, an explanation of the objects which it was in-
tended to answer, instructions to those who might be
called upon hereafter to add to or enlarge the building,
and warnings to such, as to the materials which they
were to employ in the structure. They were warned
not to employ the wood, the hay, the stubble, the perish-
able materials ot man’s providing; but the gold, the
silver, the precious stones, those indestructible materials,
mines of which have been provided by God in His Word
for our special use.
In considering a Church as a society, and in referring
to Scripture for our guidance in laying down the rules
which are to regulate the conduct of the members of
such a society, we must be careful to mark the distinc-
tion which exists (either in the rule itself, or in the
motives by which it is enforced) between the regulations
which apply to Society as a human Institution, and
those which apply to a Christian Society; between the
rules laid down by men for their own guidance, and
those which we know to have emanated directly from
God. I have used the expression “we know to have
emanated from God,” with reference to the specific in-
structions given to us in the Scriptures; but Ido not
mean to infer from this limitation, or from the state-
ment that men have devised rules for their own guidance,
that man, unassisted, has been able to do anything for


himself. I think it probable, nay, almost certain, that
the moral codes, of which we find traces in the writings
of heathen philosophers, and in the records of nations
to whom the light of the Gospel has not penetrated, are
the faint traces of a byegone revelation, that (as the
Archbishop of Dublin has clearly shewn in a lecture to
the “ Young Men’s Christian Association”) civilization
among mankind had its origin in a direct revelation
from the same God to whom we owe our being. With,
out, however, going into any speculations upon such
matters, it is sufficient for us to know that Christianity
found men congregated together in societies, yielding
obedience to certain laws and regulations by which the
relations of individuals to each other, and to society
generally, were determined; that it recognized this as
the working of God’s Providence, and adopted the laws
and regulations which were in existence, so far as they
were in harmony with the requirements of the pure
morality of the Gospel. What then were the rules
which man had devised for himself, and which Christi-
anity adopted and sanctioned ? They were to a great
extent identical with those which had been delivered to
the Jews by Moses, and which were, in fact, almost
essential to the existence of society. It is true that we
find in the writings of the philosophers and wise men
of heathen antiquity a system of ethics, which, whether
deduced from their own reason, or emanating,[indirectly,
from revelation, embodies much of that which was so
emphatically declared by our Saviour, and preached by
his Apostles; but there existed still a most marked
difference between the ethics of the philosopher, and the
code of the Christians, not only in the rules themselves,


but in the motives by which they were enforced
Harken to what our Saviour himself says; mark the
contrast which he draws between the existing code of
morals, and that which he was laying down for our use :
“Ye have heard that it was said hy them of old time,
Thou shalt not kill, and whosoever shall kill, shall be in dan-
ger of the judgment; hut I say unto you, that whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
the judgment.
“Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou
shalt not commit adultery; but, I say unto you, that who-
soever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath com-
mitted adultery with her already in his heart.
“Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time,
Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shall perform unto the
Lord thine oaths ; but, I say unto you, swear not at all.
“Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye,
a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil.
“ Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour and hate thine enemy; but I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that
hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you and
persecute you.’’
The laws of man forbid and punish the guilty act;
the laws of God are directed against the evil imagina-
tion, the motive which precedes the act.
The heathen philosopher had, it is true, warned men
against the indulgence of evil thoughts, and so far it
may be said that our Saviour’s rule differed but little
from that laid down by men ; but there are two particu-
lars in which the law given by our Saviour stands out
in marked contrast with the speculations of any human
writer: —Our Saviour says, resist not evil—love your


enemies; you will in vain seek for such a rule among the
productions of man. Again, you will find throughout
the New Testament, blessings promised to the meek and
lowly of heart, and the duty of humility is enforced in
every possible manner; the pride of the philosopher,—
the consciousness of superior knowledge prevented the
admissions of such a tenet as this into his moral code.
If, however, the system of ethics which approved
itself to the conscience of some few of the wise men of
old, (but which, be it remembered, was far from being
admitted as a correct rule of life by the mass of society),
did harmonize to a certain extent with that laid down
by our Saviour, the motives by which it was enforced
are in every respect different. Among the heathen, the
philosopher or legislator appealed to the interests of
society; he pointed out that breaches of the moral law
were incompatible with the conditions under which men
were gathered together in communities; that injury to
the person or goods of another led to retaliation and re-
venge ; that theft, if unpunished, would jeopardize the
very existence of property ; that falsehood, if tolerated,
would lead to universal distrust; in fact, the induce-
ments held out, all indeed which he had in his power
to offer, were based upon selfish considerations. But
hearken again to our Saviour. After telling us to love
our enemies, He gives the motive, “ that ye may be the
children of your Father which is heaven; for He maketh
lis sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth
rain on the just and on the unjust;” and he goes on to
'-how, with respect to the love which we owe to one
another, that we should be no better that the heathen,


if we loved only those who love us. Then again when
St. Peter says, “ Yea, all of you be subject one to an-
other, and be clothed with humility,” he adds, “ for
God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the
humble.”
The motive enforced by our Saviour and his Apos-
tles is the love of God, the wish to do, from affection
for him, that which he has commanded. The motive
held out by the philosopher is the convenience of man ;
a powerful one, it is true, as far as it goes, but one not
at all calculated to maintain itself against the manifold
temptations to the breach of the moral code which our
passions are always urging upon us.
We have seen the difference between the heathen and
Christian moral code ; let us now turn our attention
to the operation of each upon the conduct of mankind.
Listen to the description given by St. Paul of the state
of the heathen world —he was writing to the Christians
at Rome, and he appealed to them as witnesses to the
truth of his statements regarding those of whose actions,
and of whose motives, so far as these could be inferred
from their actions, the members of the Church had a
daily experience. He s"ys in the Ist chapter of his
Epistle, 28th and following verses :—“ And even as they
did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave
them over to a reprobate mind to do those things which
are not convenient, being filled with all unrighteousness,
fornications, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness,
full of envy, murder, debate, deceit,, malignity, whisperers,
backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters,


inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, without
understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affec.
tion, implacable, unmerciful.” It may be thought that
St. Paul has here drawn an exaggerated picture of the
state of the heathen world, but to say nothing of the
improbability that he would make a statement which
would be contradicted by the experience of those to
whom he addressed his letter, we have ample evidence
in the] writings of the heathens themselves, that the
Apostle, in this awful description of their moral con-
dition, was but speaking the words of truth and
soberness.
Let us now turn our attention to the picture drawn
by the Apostles of the relation in which the members of
a Church were intended to stand to each other. Turn to
the Epistles of St. Paul, and you will find that he is in
the habit of comparing the Church to the body, and in -
dividual Christians to the limbs and members of the
body, each of which sympathises with the whole body,
and with each separate member. If one member suffer,
we are told, all the members suffer ; if one member be
honoured, all the members rejoice with it. What must
have been the character of the feeling which existed
between the members of the different Churches in those
days, to justify such an analogy as that so constantly
made use of by St. Paul. We find in the Acts of the
Apostles, that, at the first beginning of the Church’s
existence, the disciples had all things in common ; but it
is evident from what was said by St. Peter to Ananias,
that this was not in any way imposed upon them as a
duty or an obligation. We learn from St. Paul that no


change was intended to be made in the ordinary rela-
tions of the different classes of society to each other,
except by the introduction of a more kindly and loving
spirit in their intercourse. The master was still the
legal owner of the slave, but he treated him from hence
forward as a fellow creature, having the same hope of
everlasting life as himself - The slave behaved to his
master as to one whom he was bound to obey for con-
science sake. The same principle regulated the inter-
course of parents and children, husbands and wives, in
fact, of all classes of the community.
It may be said that, although these rules were laid
down by the Apostles for the guidance of the members
of the Church, it by no means follows that the conduct
of the early Christians was in conformity with them.
We find, however, that as a reference to heathen authors
confirms the statement made by St. Paul, of the very
low tone of morals prevailing among the heathen, so the
same authority can be quoted to prove that the Chris-
tians, under peculiarly trying circumstances, did act up
to their professions—did follow the rules laid down by
our Saviour and his Apostles.
We learn from the celebrated letter of Pliny to the
Emperor Trajan, that the Christians bound themselves
by an oath not to be guilty of theft, or of robbery, or
adultery; that they would never falsify their word, or
deny a pledge committed to them, when called upon to
return it. We are told also by Lucian, that the Chris-
tians had a sovereign contempt for the things of this
world; that they flew at once to the relief of their


friends who were in trouble— that their Lawgiver had
taught them that they were brethren, and that they acted
by each other accordingly. From these statements,
which, it must be recollected, were made by persons
expressing contempt for Christians, and who were
not therefore likely to give an account of their conduct
or principles unduly favourable to them, we have a
right to infer that the expressions made use of by the
Apostles were not intended to be descriptive of a state of
moral purity far beyond that attainable by man, but to
shew forth the actual operation of the spirit of God
upon the hearts of believers.
If we refer again to the description given by St. Paul
of the vices of the heathen, which I have before quoted,
we shall find that they were of a character which mili-
tated against the very existence of society. When such
were habitually practised, the relation of members of
society to each other must have been rather antagonistic
than friendly. The law of the land, of course, put a cer-
tain check upon the indulgence of some of these vices;
the thief, the murderer, the adulterer, were of course pun-
ished ; but woe to that land whose inhabitants are only
restrained from the commission of evil by fear of the
punishment which man can inflict. The least interrup-
tion to the ordinary administration of the law, by with-
drawing the only check upon crime which has any effec-
tive operation, reduces society to its elements at once ;
every man follows the path to which his own passions
lead him, and we have ample evidence in history of the
fearful consequences of such a state of things.


The principles and motives enforced by our Saviour
and his Apostles, were intended to combat this evil at
the fountain head, —to repress that love of self upon
which the heathen system was based, and to substitute
for it the love of God and our neighbour, —binding
society together by ties approximating, both in character
and degree, to those which ought to unite the members
of the same family. “ Love us brethren,” says St.
Peter, "be pitiful, be courteous, —not rendering evil for
evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing
and the effect was such as might have been anticipated.
If, however, the inculcation of Christian motives pro-
duced such an effect upon the members of the early
Churches, how comes it that similar results are no
longer produced ? How comes it that the state of
Christian congregations is so different from that which
we cannot but admit it was intended to be, if we believe
in the truth and the authority of the rules laid down in
the New Testament ? As Christians, we all acknowledge
that these rules were not intended to have a mere local
and temporary application; we believe them to be a
remedy against the sinfulness of our nature, —equally
applicable to all times and to all people; but still we
hesitate to make use of the remedy for our own disease.
Can we. the members of the different Christian
Churches here present, say, with any approximation to
truth, [that our Church or Society does exhibit that
evidence of its Christian character which would entitle
it to be ranked with thase early Churches of which we
have heard or read ? Of individual Christians, there


are, praised be God, many,—many whose lives bear evi-
dence to their faith in our Lord and Saviour; but a
Christian Church, after the pattern of that described by
St. Paul, is, I am fraid, no longer to be found. This
may appear to many a startling statement. It is, I
admit, one which ought to startle us all; but still, Ido
not think that there is a single individual among you,
who, upon considering what has been said of the func-
tions and offices of the Church, will not admit that it is
true. I bring it before you in all its startling nakedness,
for the express purpose of leaving you to think, to pon.
der over these portions of the Scripture which delineate
in such clear and marked outlines—filled in with such
beautifully coloured detail—the picture of ihe Church
as it was intended by our Saviour. Do you think that
all that is said in the New Testament of our brotherly
relation to each other as children of God, is a mere
rhetorical exaggeration ? Do you think that (to use a
comparison drawn from our social arrangements) this
elaborate municipal organization was established in
order that each individual might withdraw himself
from his neighbours, hedge himself about with conven-
tional forms, and then think within himself that he was
righteous, because he went to Church regularly,—had
daily family prayer, and gave alms of all he possessed ?
No ! you cannot delude yourselves by such an imagina-
tion. Recollect the words of our Saviour, “A. new
commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another*
as I have loved you, that ye also love one another; by
this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
have love one to another,” Now, the commandment to
love one another, was not a new one. When our Saviour


asked the lawyer what his reading of the Law of
Moses was, he at once admitted that it directed him to
love his neighbour as himself; but the new command*
ment which our Saviour pressed upon His disciples, was,
that we should love one another as He had loved us ;
that as lie laid down His life for our sakes, while we
were yet enemies to Him, so we should shew our love to
our neighbour by self-sacrifice, —by an utter abnega-
tion of self.
Before, however, I attempt to make a practical appli-
cation of these rules to our conduct as members of a
Church, I wish to bring before you my views of the
causes to which the marked change that has taken
place in the feelings and habits of the members in the
different Churches may be attributed.
If we look into the books which profess to give us a
history of the Church, we shall find that they do not
give any account of what may be termed —the inner
life of the Church. They do not notice, except paren-
thetically and incidentally, the effects produced upon
society by the Gospel; but they enter at length into all
the details of the changes of opinion which took place
when men began to apply the rules of an unsound logic
to the Word of God; they record carefully the effects
produced by the attempts to substitute unity of opinion
for that unity of principle which our Saviour pressed
upon his disciples. In fact, what is called the history
of the Church, is but the history of religious opinion.
How is it that so much stress has been laid upon reli-
gious opinion as to give it such a predominance in the


annals of the Church? I think it may he traced to the
narrow and one-sided view which has been taken of the
objects for which the Church was constituted ; and to
these I am inclined to attribute, in a great measure, the
change which has taken place in the feelings and habits
of Christians generally. St. Paul in his first Epistle to
Timothy, says, that the Church of the living God is the
pillar and ground of the truth ; and from this and
other isolated texts, it has been concluded that the sole
work of the Church is that of recording and maintaining
the truth, of teaching people what they are to believe,
and how they are to act, —that the work of the Church
is, in fact, entirely educational. In works professing to
treat of the Church,* we are told that its offices are,
first, that of preserving and attesting the sacred record;
second, of dispensing the truths contained in it; third, of
conveying divine grace. Here we are met by a difficulty
arising out of the indiscriminate use of the term
“ Church,” as meaning either a single congregation, or
the whole Christian body, or the ministers of that body.
The preservation of, and attestation to the genuine-
ness and accuracy of the sacred record, may be said to
be a part of the duty of the general body of Christians.
It is obviously a work which could not be left to one
single Church, but is one in which all must join.
To dispense the truths contained in the Scriptures is
the duty, not of the Church as a body, but of each
* Hind on the Eise and Early Progress of Christianity.


separate Church, or rather, of every individual member
of the Church.
To convey the grace of the Holy Spirit through
the medium of the sacraments, is the duty, not
of the Church as a body, nor of the individual mem-
bers, but of the Ministers appointed for the purpose.
Without, however, alluding further to the confusion of
ideas arising from the use of the term “ Church” in
different senses, I would remark, that such a narrow
definition of the objects of the Church would appear to
have had its origin in a tendency to confound the
Church with its Ministers—to consider it as including
none but the clergy. We constantly hear the expres
sion used, “ such a person is going into the Church
the meaning being, that he is about to be ordained as
a Minister of the Church; and the prevalence of such
a meaning is a proof of two great evils. First, it shows
a tendency on the part of the laity to repudiate their
share in the duties and responsibilities of church mem-
bership ; secondly, it exhibits the clergy as being will-
ing to assume to themselves functions which they must
be perfectly aware cannot be adequately performed by
them. Such a, transference of meaning, for which
Scripture gives not the slightest warrant—such an un-
worthy limitation of the comprehensiveness of the term
Church, could not have taken place suddenly; the
change must have been gradual. It has been traced by
some to the ambition of the clergy, but I am more dis-
posed to attribute it to the selfishness of the laity—to
tneir anxiety to be relieved from the performance of
duties which involved a continual struggle against that


selfishness. A reference to history, both sacred and
profane, will show that the tendency of mankind has
always been to seek assistance from without, instead of
strength from within j—to crave for security against the
sense of personal responsibility, and against the sharp
remonstrance of conscience.* It is not, then, to be
wondered at that men should be found to offer us that
after which they see us so anxiously seeking ; and it was
probably this which suggested to the clergy the idea of
making use of the feeling as a means of self-aggran-
disement, the result of which has been that system of
vicarious holiness, of which we see the full effect in the
practice of the Church of Rome.
We must not, however, flatter ourselves that, though
we differ from the Church of Rome in many points, we
are exempted from the operation of those causes which
have led her to error. Men are such as they ever were,
and this dependance upon the holiness of others, which
forms part of the acknowledged system of the Church
of Rome, is, with us, though not acknowledged, equally
operative for evil. Indeed it is, with us, the more dan-
gerous, as, from the very fact that it does not present
itself as part of our ecclesiastical system, we are apt to
overlook its existence. It behoves us, therefore, to
watch carefully against that tendency to substitute the
pharisaical payments of the mint, anise, and cummin
of external observances, for the judgment, mercy, and
faith required from us by our Saviour; while, at the


same time we guard against the disposition to neglect
these observances, on the ground of their insufficiency
to do all for us which we are, if performed
in a proper spirit, a means of grace; and as such,
should be made use of. We only err when we substi-
tute the means for the end —when we look upon that
as a grace, which is only one among many appointed
means of obtaining it.
The evil, then, of the existence of which your So-
ciety is a living evidence, has, I believe, its origin in
the narrow and one-sided view which has been taken of
the objects of the Church; and the remedy is to be
sought for in a wider and more comprehensive view of the
duties which our position as members of a Church entail
upon us, in the realization of the principles by which
the early Church was guided.
If we look at the Church from an ecclesiastical point
of view, —if we consider it as composed of teachers and
pupils, of which the latter, like the silly women
spoken of by St. Paul, are ever learniug, but never able
to come to the knowledge of the truth, —then the na-
tural and inevitable result will be a continuation of the
present state of things, —congregations composed of
hundreds who attend as a matter of form, and of a few
earnest men, anxious to promote the cause of Christ
and His Church, but whose efforts, as they necessarily
act as individuals, without concert or union, must be
desultory and ineffective. If, however, we take the
Apostolic view of the Church, as a body composed of
many members, each of which, while it has a separate
duty to perform appropriate to its position and powers,


has yet, in doing this, a special reference to the good of
the body corporatej and if, on being convinced of this,
we set ourselves earnestly to work, each in our own
congregation or parish, to convince others, and to induce
tljem to take their proper share in the work of their
Church, then indeed we may hope to bring about gra-
dually a-state of things similar to that of which we read
in the history of the early Church. We may hope to
exhibit an example of the blessed effects resulting from
the application of Christian principles to all the cir-
cumstances of our social life,—to redeem ourselves from
that fearful state of similarity to the picture drawn by
St. Paul of those who substituted the love of self for
the love of God.
I will now attempt to sketch a few particulars of the
results which we might hope to see, were each congre-
gation disposed to consider itself as a body corporate,
constituted by God for the purpose of carrying out that
work which He has so plainly assigned to it in His
Word, and contrast them with those which follow from
what I must consider the neglect of our duty as mem-
bers of a Church.
A Church is a family —a brotherhood, so far as the
affection of the members for each other is indicated by
such a term ;itis a society—a municipality, so far as
it is necessary that the members should combine their
efforts in order to carry out much which individuals
cannot properly perform. I use the term municipality
for the express purpose of pointing out to you that
your duties as members of the Church include many
which you have been in the habit of considering a


purely secular, and as affording many points of analogy
in the mode in which the municipal duties are per-
formed, to that in which a Church would act in carry-
ing out its appointed work.
A member of a Church dies, and leaves his children
unprotected and destitute. The members of a Christian
('hurch would act as parents to such children ; thei„
nurture and education would not be left to individual
charity, but, as each member of the congregation would
stand in the same relation towards them, each would
strive to the best of his power to supply the place of
the parents whom they have lost. The Church would
not be contented to dole out a monetary allowance suffi-
cient for the support of the children at some orphan
asylum; but, knowing and feeling how much the cha-
racter of children must depend upon the development
of their affections, it would never consign them to an
institution where all their feelings of love and affection
would be repressed and deadened.
Let us now reverse the picture, and take a glance at
the course too generally followed in cases similar to
that supposed above. A man dies ]he has attended the
same Church as ourselves; he is, we will suppose, a
member of the Church of England, and he has, so far
as we know, always conducted himself as an honest and
upright member of society ; he dies, and leaves his
children unprotected and destitute; some kind neigh-
bour takes compassion upon them, receives them for a
time into his house, but, his means being insufficient to
maintain them, he is obliged to seek aid from others.
Does he apply, as a matter of course, to the members of


the congregation to which the deceased belonged ? No;
he seeks to interest the public at large in the fate of
the children, and by importunity he wrings a few pounds
from the pockets of those who are charitably disposed.
The children are then left to their fate. In England
they come upon the parish; in the Colonies they are
sent to an orphan school, from which, if they emerge
with any principles which may tend to make them
respectable members of society, they are exceptions to a
general rule. Which of the two, think you, is the
happiest state of society ? Which is most like our
own ?
A Church would consider the proper training of
children as a matter of the utmost importance. If the
child be, as it is said, the father of the man, then the mode
in which it is trained is not a matter of mere individual
interest to the parent; it is one in which the whole
congregation is concerned, and the members would, as a
maiter of course, willingly adopt the responsibility.
They would select carefully the schoolmaster to whom
these children are to be entrusted ; they would willingly
incur any expense which would be required to secure
the services of a thoroughly competent person ; they
would watch carefully the mode in which he performed
his duty; they would see that, whether in school or out
of school, he lost no opportunity of impressing sound
religious principles and motives on the minds of the
children ; they would aid and assist him in repressing
those ebullitions of selfishness which, if once allowed to
take root in the heart, are so difficult to eradicate. In
fact, they would show by their conduct their conviction
hat sound education has even more to do with the cul


tivation of the heart and the affections, than of the
intellectual and physical powers.
Is this the course which is adopted ? Some Churches,
it is true,do go through the form of maintaining a school;
but how ? Is it thought to be the work of the Church,
or purely of the Minister ? Do the members of the
Church interest themselves in seeking out the most
competent person for a schoolmaster ? Do they watch
over his conduct, and over the welfare of the children ?
Do they ascertain for themselves that he inculcates
sound Christian principles and motives ? I leave it to
each of you to answer these questions according to your
own experience. Mine would lead me to reply to them
in the negative.
But there are many congregations who altogether
repudiate the responsibility which rests upon them,
of maintaining their own schools, —of educating
their own children. They call upon the State
to do that which it is their business to do for
themselves. They ask to be taxed, in order that their
children may be educated in an establishment over which
they have no control. As the Government is the re-
presentative of the whole nation, not of any particular
Church, the schools maintained by the State must
admit the children of every different Church. From
this necessity spring religious jealousies, or rather, jea-
lousies which are most erroneously considered to be
based on religious principles. Fears are expressed lest
the master should inculcate particular religious opinions,
and from thence springs the startling demand that the
children at these National Schools should receive no
religious instruction, —that the instruction given should


be wholly secular, —that religious principles should not
be enforced as motives to regulate the conduct, —that
morality should be taught, not as based upon Chris-
tianity, but upon those general principles of expediency
and convenience of which we have seen the bitter fruits
in St. Paul’s description of the heathen world.
It is almost a necessary consequence of such a sys-
tem, that the schoolmaster, however able he may be as
a teacher, cannot be a man whose conduct is based upon
religious conviction. Were he fully impressed with the
importance and responsibility of his position, he would
never tie himself to a system which would prohibit him
from enforcing religious principles upon the children.
What can be the result of such a system? What
but that which experience proves it to be ?—The chil-
dren grow up without any knowledge of the ground-
work upon which Christianity is based, —without any
religious convictions, —without any sound moral prin-
ciples. Infidelity spreads its poisonous roots through
the hearts, which, were the Churches to do their
duty, would be filled with faith in, and love of God,
and society becomes but a cesspool for every species of
impurity and moral corruption.
St. James tells us that pure religion, and undefiled
before God and the Father, is this—to visit the father-
less and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world. You will observe that St.
James does not say that pure religion consists in assist-
ing the fatherless and widows in their need; that was
too well understood to be a positive duty to require any
enforcement; but what he does tell us to do is, to visit


them to bestow upon them that sympathy which we .
should do were they our brethren and sisters —to
eraplify in action that principle of love upon which the .
Church is founded. You will say, perhaps, that to do
so would be looked upon as an impertinent intrusion
upon their sorrow ; and so of course it would be, were
our relation to each other to remain as at present; but
were we in truth, what we are in name, brethren, our
sympathy would be looked for, and welcomed as an
evidence of that brotherly affection, the existence of
which can only be proved by its fruits I have said
that the duty of assisting the poor and the needy was
too well established to require to be enforced; but there
is a strange contrast between our ideas of duty and
those which prevailed in the early Church ; then, while
care was taken that the Church was not burthened with
the support of those who had relations and friends cap-
able of assisting them, every man was directed to lay
by according as God had prospered him, for the purpose
of enabling the duly appointed administrators ot the
Church funds to minister aid to those who needed it.
Nuw, however, the State steps in to do that which
ought to be the work of the different Churches. In
England the law levies a poor-rate, which is doled out
parsimoniously, and in accordance with legal provisions,
to keep the poor from starvation. In New South W ales
we have a Benevolent Asylum, &c., to which scanty
contributions are made by individuals, while the princi-
pal amount required is contributed by the G-overnmnet,
Orphan Schools, Dorcas Societies, &c.. bear testimony
to the fact, that there is much to be done in the way
of relief to the distressed ; but they at the same time


prove that which I have before stated to be shewn by
he existence of your Society, that the Churches are
ot doing the work for which they were originally con-
,tituted I might go into further details, and contrast
in a variety of particulars the condition of the Churches
as they are with that of a Church as it ought to be,
but 1 will leave you to carry out the parallel for your-
selves, asking you to put it to your own consciences
whether you have, individually or collectively, done the
work of the Church as our Saviour Christ wished and
intended that it should be done. Whether you have
done your duty, or have glided quietly down the stream
of life, content to do, not as you ought, but as others
set you the example—praying you also to remember
that, in the parable set forth by our Saviour, they who
were cast into outer darkness were not merely those
who had disobeyed their Lord’s commands, and had
done that which is evil, but emphatically those who had
left good undone. You will, from what I have said,
comprehend why I have drawn so marked a distinction
between the work of the Church universal, and that of
particular congregations. As members of a small
society we have common interests, to many of which I
have alluded. If, however, we attempt, at first, to em-
brace in our sympathies the universal body of Christians,
the result will necessarily be, not an enhancement of
the love which we bestow on mankind, but a diminution
of that which we bestow upon our immediate neighbours
—the gold will be spread so thinly over the surface as
to be almost impalpable ; our charity will necessarily*
as it too often does, expend itself in words. If, then,
we wish to become members in reality of Christ’s Church
on earth, let us study first to perform our duties as


members of a family ; let u», as husbands and wives,
parents and children, masters and servants, do our duty
as unto God, not as unto man—recollecting what our
Saviour has told us, that he who says he loves God and
hateth his brother is a liar. Let us next do our duty
as members of our particular Church or congregation,
interesting ourselves in all the duties which attach to
us as such; casting aside that selfish spirit which would
lead us to forget the Apostle’s direction to us, to bear
one another's burthens, and to look not every man on
his own things, but also on the things of others; we
shall then find that the fulfilment of these duties is the
necessary preliminary to the performance of any which
are entailed upon us as members of a national Church,
or of the universal Church of Christ; and we may reply
to him who pleads his duty to the Church universal as
an excuse for neglecting those which he owes to his own
Church, —If thou lovest not thy brother whom thou
hast seen, how canst thou love him whom thou hast not
seen ?
Before I conclude, I wish to make a special ap-
plication of the principles I have enunciated to the
circumstances of a colony.
In the mother-country society is, to a great extent
composed of members who have known each other frotn
childhood, who have grown up together, and who have
hundreds of links of relationship, neighbourhood, and
good-fellowship to unite them, in addition to that of a
common faith, or Church membership.
In a colony, however, it is different. Here men are
thrown together, as it were, at random; we meet here
—coming from all quarters of the globe, the only tie


which unites us being that of community of purpose.
If, then, there be any part of the world in which the tie
of Church membership might be usefully employed to
bind together the isolated fragments of which society is
composed, it is a Colony where all stand upon an equal
footing; where the past is as nothing, the future every-
thing; where there are no social heart-burnings to mar
the effect of that equality before God which is the
essence of a Christian faith.
L et ns, then, strive to draw closer those ties which
connect each of us with the Church of our birth, or of
our adoption. Let our efforts as a society be directed
to promote this special object, regardless of the fact,
that our success would put an end to onr corporate ex-
istence. How gladly would I hail the change in the
system of the different Churches which would enable
me to say to you that our work as a Christian associa-
tion was complete.
Till, however, that good time arrives, let me pray
you to think over what I have this night said to you.
I do not ask you to take it upon trust, but to search
the Scriptures to see whether I have rightly interpreted
their meaning,—whether I have in any way exaggerated
your duties and responsibilities as members of a Chris-
tian Church ; and if you find that I am fully borne out
in all that I have said by the Word of God, then think
how great will be the responsibilities which will rest
upon you, should you decline to act according to your
convictions. Remember, that to him who knoweth to
do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin.




F&ftoo
>. ••
IF\
-“1
