

A Chat with the Queensland Emigration Commissioner
(Reprinted from “ The Peterborough Express” of March 21st, 1889.)
Hearing that Mr. George Randall, the Emigra-
tion Commissioner for the Queensland Government,
was conducting a fortnight s campaiga in the East
Midland villages, we thought an interview with
that gentleman would prove of interest to our
readers, by some of whom he may be remembered.
Mr. Randall went out to Queensland twenty years
ago with his wife, and afar seven years’ steady,
persevering work won practical independence for
life. He then took a well-earned holiday in the old
country, accompanied by his wife and family, and
after two years returned to the land of his adoption.
Whilst in England he was struck by the stagnant
coudition of all classes, in contrast to colonial ex-
pansion and growth, and when two years laier the
Government deoiled to renew immigration, he
offered his services, and came u o England, penetra-
ting villages and spreading information till Queens-
land became a household word. During this tour,
some five or six years since, he visited Pe erborough,
addressing a large audience iu the Drill Hall. Re-
turning to Queensland he made a tour of the whole
colouy and resumed his work, during which he has
travelled thousands of miles, and addressed more
than 700 public meetings.
The first week of his present campaign was spent
in Bourh Notts, and S. W. Yorks., and last week he
Was due in .Northamptonshire. We accordingly
commissioned a representative to find Mr. Randall
and have a chat with him. This was easier said
than done, for the Queensland Commissioner was as
difficult to find as a homely insect, receiving appli-
cants for fr-eaud assisted passages at a railway sta-
tion in the morning, and flitting to a village in an-
other part of the county in the afternoon. Melton,
Bcalford, Oakham, North Luffenham, Market Har-
borough, Braybrooke, Thrapston, Aldwinkle St
Peter’s, Wausford, and Barnack were visited by Me
Randall in ihe short space of five days.
At Wanaford railway station, however, he was
brought to earth, and our representative, alighting
from the train, took a bee line for the
waiting room, where sitting over the fire and sur-
rounded by books and papers he found Mr. Randall
and Mr. John H. White, the local agent from Grims-
by. Mr. Randall, he perceived, to be a man of middle
height, with spare, wiry frame, sugges-ive of ac-
tivity, a handsome face with well-chiselled features,
and penetrating grey eyes, which spoke as plainly
as words, “ Where there’s a will there’s a way.” The
man’s character was in his eyes, and it was not
difficult to find the secret of his success. He was dres-
sed in a close fitting tweed suit with tight trousers.
Mr. White wore a soft felt hat and black clothes of
semi-clerical cut, and was an amiable gentleman who
made you feel at home the moment you saw him.
Seating himself in a third chair near the
fire, our representative had no difficulty in
turning the conversation to emigration, and lent a
willing ear to the experiences of Mr. Randall and
his coadjutor iu the country. The tour had been
fairly successful, they said. At Melton they were
very busy with applicants from a large number of
villages, and at bealford the same evening many
labourers walked in five, seven, and ten miles.
Oakham was poor business, but in the evening at N.
Luffenham Mr Randall addressed a crowded
audience. Market Harborough yielded 37 applica-
tions, and at Braybrooke there was a good meeting,
two young fellows coming from Dorsetshire to see
the Commissioner. A fair day was spent at Thraps-
ton, but the adventure of the tour was reserved for
the evening visit to Aldwinkle St. Peter’s. Mr.
Randall had sent a parcel of hand-bills to the
teacher of 'he local school with a polite note asking
him to distribute them among the scholars to take
home, and also if possible to allow him the use of the
schoolroom in the evening, he, of course, paying all
expenses. On arriving at the schoolroom he was
met by the teacher, who, with serious mien and not
a little nervousness, informed him that he had been
“ advised ” not to let the room for such a purpose.
Had he distributed the blls? No, he had been
“ advised ” not to do that. Mr. Randall, not know-
ing quite whether to be annoyed at the affront, sad
ai the narrow-mindedness and ignorance, or amused
at the comic side of the incident, proceeded to the
village inn and hired the club-room, where, in spite
of ail obstacles, a splendid meeting was held.
This brought him up to date. But these meetings
were nothing like those he had in Norfolk recently.
Wherever he went he was met by crowds of healthy,
stalwart farm labourers, just the right men
for emigrants. At Watton especially he was beset
by applicants, and after the usual lecture the agents
were hard at work from 9 till 11 giving out emigra-
tion forms. Melton Constable and Swaffham also
yielded good results. Mr. White here mentioned
that he had during 13 years’ agency sent 18,000
people across the seas to various parts of the world.
From Lincolnshire alone he had sent quite 7,000 in
six years to Queensland.
Our representative felt it was now time to “ own
up,” and hazarded an enquiry whether the Emigra-
tion Commissioner dropped across tho newspapers
occasionally.
“Oh yes,” was the reply “ sometimes the re-
porters come and interview me.”
“It seems to me,” interposed Mr White, with a
twinkle in his eye, “ that’s what he’s doing now,”
and he burst into a hearty laugh which was quite
infectious, for Mr. Randall soon jotued him and
fully entered into the humour of the situation.
“ Well,” he said at last, “ I had no idea yon were
a reporter. You did it very naturally.”
“ Thanks. Now please go on and teii me some-
thing about Queensland. Let’s start with the
climate.”
“It’s the finest climate in the world. It is hot, but
it is a dr), healthy heat, moderated by the trade
winds. People seem prejudiced against Queens-
land because it is nearer the Equator, but on account
of these favourable breezes it is no hotter than the
other Australian Colonies.
“ H)w are you off for reptiles ?”
“ A few snakes.”
“I have heard that yoa suffer a good deal from
drought. Is that so ?”
“ Yes. The squatters with their cattle and sheep
end the settlers with their farms suffer severely
when there is a really dry season, but that is for
want of artificial means of keeping water, such as
large tanks, locks in the rivers, &c. The Govern-
ment are now sinking artesian wells and undertak-
ing a system of irrigation.”
“Then there is the rabbit pest.”
“ That is confined io the south, and Government
have gone to great expense to erect miles and miles
of wire netting along the border. I sappose some
rabbi s will get through, but early stops will be taken
to exterminate them iu Queensland.”
“I suppose an emigrant finds it hard work at
first ?”
“Oh yes. He mustn’t be afraid of hard work.
If he perseveres he is sure to get on,”
“ Without capital ?”
“ His labour is his capital. A useful farm labourer
can always get employment and at good wages.”
“ Of course you have some failures ?”
“ Not more than one in a hundred sent out by
Government. You see we are most careful in se-
lecting the right sort of men for free and assisted pas-
sages. If we sent out all who apply we could send
ship-load after ship-load.”
“Do you find it easy to get at the farm
/ labourers ?”
“ No, then are slow to move and seem wedded to
the soil. But whea oace they are settled in their
new homes they show no wish to return.”
“ What do the settlers grow ?”
“ Maize, wheat, potatoes, lucerne, hay. and fruits of
tnanv sorts.”
“ Is land expensive ?”
“A farm labourer can buy land at 2s. 6d. an acre on
five years’ credit.”
“ Emigrants seem to prefer Australia to many other
colonies in spite of its distance.”
“ Yes, I suppose it is because the colony is so
thoroughly English. There are English laws and
customs; English money circulates there ; and the
English flag waves over them still. I might men-
tion that there is a splendid system of education.”
“Are there openings for other kinds of labour ?”
“ There are many developments in the way of rail-
ways, harbours, mining, and manufactures. There is
a demand for railway men, both train officials and
workshop men. But the farm labourer is in
greater demand. He is the real settler. The others
will come afterwards.”
“ What are your railways like ?”
4 ‘ They are light lines like tramways and worked
on the American system. Many of the wayside
stations up country have no houses in sight, though
{probably there is the site of a township mapped out
on paper. You experience a strange feeling when
you alight at such a station and find yourseif in the
heart of the bush. I may say that more and more
railways are beiog built by Government every year.
If the latest vote is passed, thsre will be 300 miles
constructed this year and 400 next year. The Rip-
pingale stationmaster has gone out to Queensland.”
Our conversation was interrupted by the advent
of some applicants for emigration forms. Two young
gardeners came from Stamford. They had been out
of work for some time and were quite willing to go.
One -»f them bad been for some time in the army.
Mr. Raudall was not, however, willing to take them
free of expense, though he might have entertained
the idea of an assisted passage, and having come to the
conclusion, after a number of questions as to their
likes and dislikes, that they were not the men for
him, he declined to take them. Mon with too many
likes and dislikes were not the men to settle down
and work hard as colonists, he said. The right man
came at last, a fresh, cheerful looking young
labourer, used to ploughing and milking, and other
farm pursuits. He had a brother in Queensland and
wanted an assisted passage to join him.
Mr. Randall, giving him some pleasant words
of encouragement, handed him a form, and Queens-
land gained another pair of willing hands and a stout
heart.
Our representative asked whether Mr. Randall or
Mr. White ever heard from the many colonists they
had sent out.
“ Oh yes,” said Mr. White, and he fished out of
a black bag a bundle of letters. “ Here are several
letters with their envelopes.”
And an interesting collection they were with their
curious vernacular and spelling. Here are one or
two extracts: —
A young colonist writes to the old folk at home ;
—“ Have well settled here now and I don’t think
we shall come back to England to work again, so wo
think you had better come and then we shall be all
here, and if you have good luck and get safe here
you will like it better than where you are. If you
have no money when you get here we can let you
have some. You will have a better chance than
we had when we started, but we have done better
than we should if we had stayed in England. You
can tel' Bill that I am getting £4O a year and he is
getting £l3, and I don’t get up at three in the morn-
ing and work while eight at night for it. I think
that will make him leave. Tell him if he
comes here he can have a horse to ride as good
as some of them in them fens and he need not lift
his hat to the man he is working for.”
Another letter says :—“ Harry has been out for a
week to have a look round and before he came back
he took up a homestead of 160 acres of scrub land.
It is very good land. We expect to go on it in about
six months time. There is a railway line going to
start about Christmas withiu two mile 9. It will be
very handy.”
A young baker’s driver, a native of Aldwinkle,
Norrhants, writes from Rockhampton : —“ The
weather is hot, but you can stand it hotter here.
It seems a different heat. It is a grand climate
and a grand country. I had to work hard, but a
man is treated like a man, and not like a nigger.
There are no aristocrats to lord it over a working-
man ;no game laws. A working-man in Queens-
land can reach the highest position in the colony—
in fact oar Treasurer is only a butcher, and has rose
up. My wages to start were £1 15s. a week, and
now they are £2 sa. with bouse rent, fire, light,
bread and flour.”
“ Have you read Mr. Randall’s poem on emigra-
tion ?” queried Mr. White.
Our representative had not done so, and accepted
a copy of “ The Emigrant: His thoughts, feelings,
and aspirations ; an appeal to the working millions
of my fellow-countrymen,” by George Randall.
“ It was written more than 20 years ago,” said
Mr. Randall, apologetically, “ but, as you see in the
preface, I have re-issued it, not for its poetic value,
but for its trath, and if possible with ten-fold in-
tensity of emphasis.”
Here is an extract from Mr. Randall’s poem :
“ Can you gain no home in England? ’ Yes ; but look at yon-
der smoke
Eising from your mighty cities; listen to the falling stroke—
Stroke of many hammers falling ; listen to the noise and roar
Of machinery ever going, factories growing more and more.
See the overflowing markets; every pathway, high or low,
Leading to the desk, the workshop, to the loom, and to the
plough:
See the strife and see the tumult; listen to the noise and din,
For this is the competition we shall have to enter in;
“We may enter in and conquer.” Yes, there are a few that
will:
But how many human lives if takes one purse with gold to
fill!
Do the great and wealthy think or know how struggling mil-
lions strive
To keep the lamp within them burning—to keep it just alive ?
See the stunted forms aud pallid faces, void of healthy bloom
Oh the shadow of their early graves o’er Britain 11 spreads
gloom.
Doubtless you will call me “coward,” that I shrink before the
strife ;
That I enter not these surging, swaying ranks of human life.
And he adds:—
So I long for room—for freedom —where to strive and where to
toil ;
And where doing which the hard-earned gains from none I
shall despoil.
And there is room, and there is freedom, there is virgin soil to
till ;
There to gain an independence, all that’s wanted is—the will.
There is health, and there’s enjoyment; there is plenty for
us all.
Who will follow ? who is going ? who will answer to the
call ?
Call for labour —call for arms and brains, and energies to work—
Call that gives you independence, if these things you will not
shirk.
“ How long have you been from homo I mean
your new home ?”
“ Just about four years. I shall be glad to get
back again,” said Mr. Randall, with a smile and a
far-off look as if he were thinking of those he held
dear at the other side of the globe. “Itis a grand
country; there is no place like it in the world. Why,
it’s twelve times as big as England and yet there are
only as many people there as half the population of
Liverpool. Just see what scope there is there.
And the climate is beautiful, very different from
your chilly, changeable, English climate.”
‘‘ Why if you talk like that,” said our representa-
tive with a shiver, for the weather was not a bit too
warm,“you will almost persuade me to become a
Colonist.”
“ Why not, there is a good field for newspaper
work there.”
“ Well, the only thing I have heard about Antipo-
dean journalism is a yaru about a country editor
(who was also his own reporter, overseer, printer, and
machinist) being washed out of his printing shanty
by a flood, and being obliged to take refuge up a
tree.”
“ Perhaps you would be surprised to hear that it
really happened, and in Queensland. The hero of
that little adventure was the present editor of the
Brisbane Courier , the Evening Observer , and the
Queenslander , splendid properties. Of course his
up-couotry experience was earned in his earlier
days.”
Now an engine-driver came in to tell the gentle-
men that the train to Barnack was going, and hastily
packing up books aad papers they hurried out to
the train. As the train moved off our representa-
tive wished his genial companions of a pleasant hour
farewell and good-luck.
“ Good-bye,” answered Mr. Randall, with a hearty
Queensland grip, “ I shall be delighted to meet you
again in either Hemisphere.”
Mr. Randall and Mr. White visited Peterborough
station oq Saturday aud were kept busy from 11.30 to
2.0. Applicants came from Whittlesev, Horsey Toll
Must Farm, Sawtry, Stilton, Gedney Hill, Fleet Fen)
Maxey, and Farcet. Proceeding to Spalding the
hour allotted to interviewing applicants was fully
occupied, drab-jacketed, rosy-cheeked young
labourers, straight from the plough, coming from
Haccoubv Fen, Corby, Bourn, Holbeaoh, and Spald-
ing Marsh, One young fellow cune with his sweet-
heart and both were accepted. At Boston Mr.
White was invaded by applicants from Algarkirk, Sat-
terton, &c. ; and so a fortnight’s bard cotupaigning
came, as all chiugs must come, to an end.
Mr. Randall proposes returning to Lincolnshire
in two or three weeks’ time, after visiting the West
of England. He expects again to send a large
May-day party by special train to London en route
f or the Antipodes.
For application forms and all further particulars as to Land Orders, Free & Assisted Passages, apply to the authorized Local Agent: —
J. H. WHITE, Osborne Street, GRIMSBY. Please see other side.]
