



.,- ;%■
:
'
■
■
I
L George Howe
’Sydney Gazetteers
tSiiiiL
1
I
fit
1
\
1
[Jj^
top
L
I
i m i
gM
fnf
if
» ■
si
pill
Jtj
Collec
Canberra
!
" f '
jg
w
V
vf
i '
f * ‘.y
.
*
V " f '
•
-
*
v
i


A CHAEGE
DELIVERED TO
THE CLERGY
OP THE
DIOCESE OF MELBOURNE,
HIS FOURTH VISITATION.
Charles Perry, D.D.,
LORD BISHOP OF MELBOURNE,
l^jelhuutnu:
SAMUEL MULLEN, 5 5 COLLINS STREET EAST.
MDCCCLXX.


FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


BISHOP’S CHARGE,
1870.
Beloved Brethren in the Lord,
if-T7 .77
Four years have gone by since I last addressed introduction,
the clergy of the Archdeaconry of Melbourne in
this cathedral church. So much nearer have we
all come to the close of our ministry on earth,
and to the day when we must give an account
of that ministry at the judgment seat of Christ.
This is a solemn thought, which our meeting to-
gether to-day naturally suggests. May it lead
us all to reflect upon the past, and humble our-
selves before God for our manifold known and
unknown errors and shortcomings ! And may
it make us ail to resolve that we will, by God’s
grace, henceforth redeem the time, and conse-
crate ourselves more entirely to His service !
Moreover, the purpose for which we are met
together is of a very solemn character —solemn
in respect to you, yet more solemn as regards
myself. The duty which I have now to per-
form, of speaking to you ex cathedra upon a
number of topics relating to your ministry,


would always, under any circumstances, be one
of very grave responsibility. But at the present
time, when so many momentous questions agitate
men’s minds, and so much strife of tongues and
bitterness of spirit prevail —certainly among the
clergy of the Church in England, and, I fear, to
some extent among them in this diocese —I should
shrink from undertaking it but for the fact that
the Lord, the great head of the Church, has im-
posed it upon me, and for the assurance that He
will, according to his promise to his apostles,
be with me in fulfilling it. I trust I am not
presumptuous in expressing a hope that the
words which I shall now speak, whatever ad-
mixture of human infirmity they may exhibit,
will be substantially such as the spirit of God
puts into my mouth. Except for this confidence,
I should not dare thus authoritatively to address
them to you.
While, however, I myself have (as I think
every servant of God, when fulfilling the duties
of his office, ought to have) this trust in the
divine guidance, I do not ask you to receive
every opinion which I shall express as indisput-
able. Listen to me as your bishop with respect-
ful attention, and pay due deference to what I
say, but do not so call any man master upon
earth as to divest yourselves of individual
responsibility. By the exercise of your own
reason and conscience in the reading of the Bible,
with prayer for the teaching of the Holy Spirit,
“ prove all things,” and then “hold fast that
which is good.” Let me, however, ask you to lift
up your hearts to God, and while I am speaking
pray that He will so bless my words as to make
you all, through their influence on your life


and doctrine, more fully to set forth his praise,
and more effectually set forward the salvation
of those committed to your charge. To-day I
shall omit all mention of matters relating to the
external condition and prospects of the Church,
which may more properly be introduced into
my address to the assembly of clergy and lay
representatives to-morrow; and shall confine
myself to such as peculiarly concern you, your
ministry, and the mutual relation in which we
stand toward each other.
During all the years of my episcopate, but J^ c yf al the
especially of late, my thoughts have been much un-
occupied with the severe trials of faith and
patience to which, from their position and
circumstances, many of the parochial clergy
are subjected. These arise from various causes,
and greatly differ, both as to their nature and
intensity, in different cases. Some of them
very little, if at all, affect the body of the clergy
in this archdeaconry. But lam not therefore
afraid that you will regard the subject with in-
difference, for you will feel that no one mem-
ber of the body can suffer without all the mem-
bers more or less suffering with it. The causes
of the trials to which I now especially allude
are the four following: —First, the insufficiency
andirregular payment of their stipends, whereby
in several cases faithful and earnest ministers
of Christ have been reduced to so great penury
as scarcely to be able to procure the necessaries
of life for their families; secondly, an inability
to provide a suitable education for their children,
which naturally occasions great anxiety to
parents, who know how much the character of
a man depends upon the early training of the


boy; thirdly, their isolation from their clerical
brethren, and often from all intelligent Christian
friends capable of advising them in difficulties
and sympathising with them in distress; and,
lastly, the pressure of over-much work, which
is beyond their time and strength to perform.
These trials of faith and patience are often, as
I have said, very severe. But while I deeply
sympathise with those of my brethren who
are so tried, I would affectionately exhort
them not to give way to discouragement and
unbelief, or to distrust their Heavenly Father,
who has said “ I will never leave thee or
forsake thee.” Especially I would caution them
against seeking relief from their anxieties and
difficulties in any way that is contrary to the
mind and will of God. If a clergyman be
.suffering on account of an inadequate and irre-
gularly paid stipend, or be troubled because his
children cannot be educated as he wishes, or
depressed by the loneliness of his position, let
him not therefore think that he may justly claim
to be removed to some other cure, where he shall
be free from these causes of disquietude. Let
him remember that, if he be removed, either the
cure which he leaves must remain vacant, or
some brother in the ministry, perhaps equally
sensitive with himself to these evils, must be
appointed to his place. If, in the providence of
God, the opportunity for removal be afforded
him, he may rightly avail himself of it, but he
should patiently wait in a submissive spirit for
such an opportunity. Above all, a minister of
Christ ought to take heed that he never push
himself into any position, but always follow the
guidance of God. For if he have not a confi-


dence that the Lord has placed him where he
is, he cannot depend upon the Lord being
present with him in his work; and if the Lord
be not with him, he will find all his wisdom to
be foolishness and his strength utter weakness.
On the other hand, if a clergyman be assured
that the post which he occupies has been as-
signed to him by his Divine Master, then, how-
ever greatly he be tried, he can cast himself
upon that Master for support and comfort.
Let each, therefore —it may seem to some a
hard saying, but I speak advisedly—be willing
to suffer whatsoever of privation or anxiety the
Lord appoints for him. Let him, if possible,
avoid incurring debts. Let him commit his
children, as well as himself, to the care of his
Heavenly Father. Let him by his faithful,
earnest preaching, his diligent pastoral visi-
tation, his loving care for souls, commend him-
self to the consciences of his people. Then
shall he not fail in the end to experience the
truth of the apostle’s saying—“ All things work
together for good to them that love God’’
(Rom. viii. 28). How many soever, and
grievous and long-continued, be his afflictions,
the Lord shall deliver him out of them all, and
in the end enable him to testify that goodness
and mercy have followed him all his days.
The trial occasioned by the pressure of
over-much work, beyond their strength to per-
form, is that which the great majority of the
clergy of this archdeaconry have to endure;
and it deserves our particular consideration, not
only from its painfulness to a tender conscience,
but also from its tendency to harden the con-
science, and produce an insensibility to the


spiritual condition of those who, while within
a clergyman’s parochial sphere, are practically
beyond the reach of his ministry. Let me,
therefore, ask your attention to a few obser-
vations upon it. In the first place, every clergy-
man who has more ministerial work than he is
able to get through must take heed lest the
inability to do all that he wishes become,
unconsciously to himself, the cause of not doing
all that he can. This result, if it be not
watched against, is very likely to occur. Who-
ever, therefore, feels himself over-worked, ought
to be especially careful that he do not fritter
away any portion of his time, but employ the
whole thoughtfully and prayerfully to the best
advantage. Again, every such clergyman should
endeavour to do his work with a quiet mind,
and not uselessly fret himself on account of
what he is compelled to leave undone. At the
same time—and this is most important—he
should beware of becoming gradually insensible
to the trial, and ceasing to feel any pain from
it. This would be for himself, as well as for
his people, the worst consequence that could
ensue; and it is one so natural that only great
watchfulness, with the grace of God, can pre-
vent it. Many of you must be conscious how
apt we are to put away from our minds, and
practically make light of, the lamentable fact
that, in all our thickly-peopled town parishes,
hundreds—in some thousands—of grown-up
men and women, professing members of our
Church, never attend its services, or are visited
by its clergy. But it is a fact which we all,
and especially you who have committed to you
the cure of souls in those parishes, ought


continually to reflect upon, and mourn over
before God, praying that means may be devised
for bringing, by His blessing, those neglected
masses under effective ministerial influence. I
am sure, my brethren, that you all agree with
me herein. Let me then ask you, when any
schemes for their spiritual benefit are proposed,
not to suffer a reluctance to part with portions
of your parishes, or a fear lest the importance
of your own position may be lessened, to hinder
you from giving such schemes your hearty
support.
From the trials of the parochial clergy I turn Duties of the
to their duties. In the observations which I Paiotlualclergy
shall offer upon these I do not aim so much to
tell you anything new, as to “stir up your pure
minds by way of remembrance.” First, then,
I would remind you —for we all need to be con-
tinually reminded —that the whole work of the
ministry is comprised in the descriptive words
of our ordination office; “to teach and to pre-
monish, to feed and provide for the Lord’s family;
to seek for Christ’s sheep that are dispersed
abroad, and for His children who are in the
midst of this naughty world, that they may be
saved through Christ for ever.” The object towar(l t he
o DeoDle
which every minister of Christ should have con- j™ m “ e to
tinually before him is, “ to bring all such as are
committed to his charge unto that agreement
in the faith and knowledge of God, and to that
ripeness and perfectness of age in Christ, that
there be no place left among them either for
error in religion or for viciousness in life.”
Further, I would remind you that “you can-
not by any other means compass the doing of
so weighty a work, pertaining to the salvation


of man, but with doctrine and exhortation taken
out of the Holy Scriptures, and with a life
agreeable to the same.”
At this time you have all special need to re-
member these things; for, on the one hand,
success in the ministry is very commonly esti-
mated by the largeness of a congregation, rather
than by the evidences of a work of grace begun
and carried on in the hearts of individuals; and
on the other hand, it seems to be thought by
many that “ doctrine and exhortation out of the
Holy Scriptures” are no longer the means to be
used by ministers of Christ for the conversion of
sinners, and the perfecting of saints. I would,
therefore, my beloved brethren, solemnly warn
all of you against falling into either of these
errors. You may preach excellent morality;
you may extol the virtues of benevolence, mutual
forbearance, and forgiveness of injuries; you
may set forth in glowing language the social
blessings conferred upon mankind by Christ-
ianity, and hold out as an example unto your
people the perfect character of the man Jesus.
But all the while you may not convince a single
sinner of his guilt before God; you may not
impart peace to a single sin-burdened conscience;
you may not strengthen a single believer for
the conflict which he has to carry on with the
world, the flesh, and the devil. For now, as
formerly, 11 the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal.” Still, as of old, the Gospel, and the
Gospel alone, is “the power of God unto sal-
vation.” In this, the nineteenth century after
Christ, as much as in the first, is there a neces-
sity for preachers to resolve that they will know
nothing in their pulpits “ save Jesus Christ, and


Him crucified.” If you would save sinners,
“ repentance toward God, and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ,” must be the subject of your
sermons. If you would persuade the people of
God to glorify Him by their zeal and diligence
in all good works, the motive which you urge
upon them must be his mercies In their redemp-
tion by his well-beloved Son.
Again, you may have large congregations,
and yet few, if any, spiritual worshippers in
vour churches. If people assemble themselves
together for the gratification of the senses, or
for any object other than the rendering of thanks
to God for the great benefits received at his
hands, the setting forth of his praise, the honour-
ing of his holy word, and the asking from Him
of'the things which they want for their souls and
bodies, they are not likely to worship Him in
spirit and in truth. Almost surely will they,
by calling upon Him with their lips while their
hearts are far from Him, take his holy name in
vain, and so aggravate their guilt in his sight.
Perhaps, indeed, some so coming may receive
into their hearts the arrow of God’s word, and
be constrained thereby to cry unto Him for
pardon and salvation; but these will be ex-
ceptional cases. The large majority of those
who, Sabbath after Sabbath, thus profane the
house of prayer, will have their consciences more
and more seared by habits of formality and
worldliness, and at last perish in impenitence
and practical unbelief. If this description of a
congregation, composed of “ lovers of pleasure
more than lovers of God,” sound harsh in your
ears, say, my brethren, whether it is not a faith-
ful representation of what you yourselves have


seen and known. You cannot but acknowledge
that it is. I therefore solemnly charge you to
beware of using carnal means for carrying on
the work of the Lord. I charge you to beware
of attracting a congregation to hear fine music,
and so turning the house of prayer into a place of
public amusement. Music may rightly be em-
ployed by spiritual worshippers to show forth
the praises of God; and provided that it be
adapted to that object, it cannot be too good
of its kind. But if music be used to attract
the worldy-mind ed to our churches, to gratify
the vanity of choirs, or to please the ears of a
congregation, it is an abomination in the sight
of God. Instead of promoting, it will greatly
injure, the progress of pure religion and piety
among your people, and will impair, not increase,
your ministerial efficiency. Trust, my brethren,
to the simple, earnest, loving proclamation of
the Gospel, to the diligent and affectionate
pastoral visitation of your people, for filling your
churches and increasing the number of com-
municants. In the use of these means you may
be assured of God’s blessing; and if He grant
unto you to see a large attendance at public wor-
ship and at the Lord’s table, you may have a good
hope that those who are thus brought together
shall prove your joy and crown of rejoicing in
the day of the Lord Jesus.
Having spoken of pastoral visitation, 1
would express my earnest hope that you will all
remember the obligation upon you, not only
publicly, but also privately, to admonish and
exhort as well the sick as the whole within your
cures. I would not be thought to intimate that
I regarded any of you as guilty of wilful negli-


gence in this particular. I well know how im-
possible it is for you, single-handed as you are,
duly to fulfil all your various parochial duties.
More especially is it so Avith those who are
called to take a share in the general business of
the Church. Nevertheless I may, I trust, with-
out appearing to imply that you have hitherto
neglected it, affectionately urge upon you the
importance of faithfully fulfilling to the utmost
of your ability this very important part of your
ministerial work. Do not be content to leave
it—as from the inadequate number of our
parochial clergy it certainly is in many parishes
left, to the great injury both of ministers and
people —almost altogether undone; but endeavour
by a methodical arrangement of your time, by
not wasting it yourselves or allowing others to
waste it for you, to do all you possibly can for
its due performance. Endeavour also to obtain
the help of Christian laymen and women for
carrying on a system of house-to-house visitation
among those classes which usually are willing
to receive their visits. Such lay-helpers will be
of great assistance to you, not only by going
as your representatives where you are unable
to go in person, but also by communicating to you
cases where your presence is specially required.
The difficulty of procuring suitable persons as
visitors is doubtless much greater here than in
England ; but they may be found, if clergymen
are on the look-out for them.
In speaking to you of your duties, I must SoYhe°r Ward0116
not omit to remind you that, besides those of
a ministerial character toAvards their people,
parochial clergymen have others toward one
another, toward the diocese, and toward the


bishop. Clergymen of the same Church ought
especially to cherish brotherly kindness toward
one another, and, as far as circumstances permit,
cultivate a friendly intercourse among them-
selves. While, if there be necessity, they may
advise, admonish, and even rebuke, they ought
never hastily to judge, still less to speak evil'of
one another. They should endeavour to do
each other good, to strengthen each other’s
hands in the Lord, and, above all, they should
pray for one another. By the habitual exercise
of a mutual kindly influence, and by constant
mutual intercession at the throne ot grace,
the clergy will most effectually help to pre-
serve the Church from false doctrine, heresy,
and that schism of which we have most reason
to be afraid —a schism in our own body. Re-
member, then, my brethren, these duties which
you owe to one another.
You owe, also, a duty to the diocese. Our
parochial system —preferable as we believe it to
be, not only to the congregational system of the
Independents, but also to the central system of
the Wesleyans —has, like every human institu-
tion, its peculiar disadvantages. One of these is,
that it tends to isolate each individual clergy-
man, and make him look altogether “ on his
own things,” the benefit of his particular
parish, instead of looking beyond these “ on
the things of others,” extending his sympathies
to other parishes and the neglected parts of the
diocese. This selfishness —for such in fact it is
—injures, as all selfishness must injure, both the
individual and the community. It is impossible
not to perceive that the diocese at large greatly
suffers from it; and sure I am, my brethren,


that every parish where it is indulged suffers
also. For in watering others we ourselves are
watered. In doing good to others we ourselves
receive good. Do not, therefore, in your
natural anxiety for your respective parishes, for-
get your duty to the diocese at large.
You owe likewise a duty to the bishop; andS^ p owaTdthe
circumstances, which have occurred since the
delivery of my last charge, oblige me to speak
to you concerning this also. From the great
body of the clergy under my jurisdiction I have
always experienced quite as much deference,
and quite as ready a compliance with my
advice and suggestions, as I could expect or
desire. But there appears to exist in some of
my brethren an apprehension lest, through
allowing too much authority to their bishop,
they should sacrifice their own rights. It is
therefore important for you to consider what is
really your duty to him and to yourselves.
Now, besides the obligation which the law of
the Church imposes upon him, every paro-
chial clergyman has, as you know, expressly
pledged himself on two distinct occasions to
submit to the authority of the bishop—first, at
his ordination, when, the question being put to
him, u Will you reverently obey your ordinary
and other chief ministers of the Church, and them
to whom the charge and government over you
is committed, following, with a glad mind
and will, their godly admonition ? ” he replied,
“I will endeavour myself, the Lord being
my helper; ” and secondly on being licensed
to his cure, when he took the oath of canonical
obedience as follows—“ I, A. 8., do swear that
I will pay true and canonical obedience to


the Lord Bishop of in all things lawful
and honest. So help me God.” What fur-
ther obligation, then, has a parochial clergy-
man hereby incurred ? Has he incurred any ?
It has been alleged that this promise and oath
only bind a clergyman to obey his bishop so far
as a court of law, if appealed to, w 7 ould compel
obedience. But if this interpretation were cor-
rect, they would be altogether useless, and might
at once be abolished. Unless they bind the
conscience of a clergyman to render to the
bishop a deference and submission beyond
that which the law enforces, the bishop’s author-
ity is in no way strengthened by them. To me,
however —and I do not think the office which I
hold influences my judgment —it appears clear
that they impose a much wider obligation, and
that every clergyman is bound by his promise
at ordination to follow the admonitions and
submit himself to the judgments of his bishop,
unless he can conscientiously pronounce them
to be not 11 godly;” and that he is obliged
by his oath to obey the bishop in all things,
except such as are not lawful or not honest. I
have no wish to assume any despotic power
over the clergy, but I am anxious for them, that
they should in this matter keep a good con-
science toward God; and lam anxious for the
Church, lest it should suffer injury from any eva-
sion of the solemn engagement into which its
ministers have entered with it. u I speak as to
wise men, judge ye what I say,”
In the regulation of his conduct every man
who sincerely desires always to do what is
right, and never to do anything that is wwong,
will throughout this life frequently be perplexed


and troubled by questions of conscience, upon
which he is unable to come to a perfectly
satisfactory decision. This will happen to the
ministers of Christ as well as to others; and it
will be the more painful to them, inasmuch as
they are enjoined to be examples of believers,
and should therefore walk with the more wari-
ness and circumspection. Whether they should
take part in certain amusements, or be present
at certain social gatherings; whether they
should promote particular parochial meetings,
or sanction particular modes of raising money
for church purposes; —these are practical matters
on which they are from time to time called to
make up their minds, and as to which they
may often feel much hesitation. It is not my
intention now to speak of them in detail. Upon
some I have already on various occasions ex-
pressed my sentiments. But, for the help of
my younger brethren, I would give you this
general advice, the result of much thought and
long experience upon the subject. Keep ever
in mind the two sayings of St. Paul — u All things
are lawful for me, but all things are not expe-
dient; all things are lawful for me, but all
things edify not ” (1 Cor. x. 23) ; and 11 Whether
therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God ” (v. 21). After his
example, and in obedience to his injunction,
consider not only the lawfulness but also the
expediency of whatever is proposed to you; and
ask yourselves whether you can truly say that
you do it for the glory of God. Beware, more-
over, of laying down certain fixed rules for
yourselves, and then regarding the questions to
which they relate as finally settled. A thought-


ful man, as he acquires by observation and
experience greater practical wisdom, will con-
tinually find occasion to modify his previous
opinions, and alter his conduct accordingly.
Such inconsistency may subject him to reproach
or ridicule, but, as it marks a growth in grace,
and a clearer knowledge of the divine will, no
man of God ought to be ashamed of it.
generaHopics I pass 011 now f° topics of another charac-
ter. In my last charge, delivered in 1866, I
Siw ( and C m t utuai entered at great length into the consideration of
forbearance, various matters suggested by the then state of
the Church in England, and by circumstances
which had recently occurred in this diocese.
Since that time the progress of events renders
it the more necessary for me to enforce upon
you the importance of recognising, and persist-
ently acting upon, the two principles which I then
endeavoured to inculcate —namely, first, that it
is the duty of all to render an honest unreserved
submission to the authority of our Church in
those particulars upon which its judgment has
been clearly expressed; and, secondly, that
it is also our duty mutually to tolerate the
differences which exist amongst us upon
others as to which either the Church has
pronounced no decision, or its language may
fairly admit of more than one interpretation.
If these principles be conscientiously maintained,
and if the clergy will refrain from forming
parties for the propagation of their several
opinions, we may hope, by the blessing of God
—even in these critical times, when all the
various forms of error and all the elements
of strife so greatly abound elsewhere —to pre-


serve truth and peace among ourselves. May
He who is emphatically “ the truth,” and who
is also “ the Prince of Peace,” by that Spirit
whom He has procured for us from the Father,
enable us, on the one hand, to contend earnestly
“ for the faith which was once delivered unto
the saints,” and, on the other, always to exhibit
that charity from which if we swerve we shall
be in danger of turning aside unto vain jang-
ling. Pray, then, my brethren, pray fervently
and continually, for our beloved Church, that
the great Captain of our salvation may frustrate
the designs of Satan, and not permit him to pre-
vail against it, either for its corruption or its
dismemberment.
Referring to the opinions which I expressed
in my last charge upon the character of the
music, the constitution of the choir, and the
portion of the service to be sung in our churches,
I would now repeat that, so far as the Church
authorises you to exercise your own judgment,
I do not desire to impose mine upon you, but
only ask you to give the subject your serious
attention and to seek the guidance of the Holy
Spirit, remembering always the solemn account
which you must hereafter give for the manner
in which you use your discretion. As it appears
from the "joint opinion of Sir Robt, Phillimore
and Dr. Stephen that a bishop has no authority
to interfere except upon an appeal being made
to him in some particular case, 1 have withdrawn
my general order upon the intoning of any
prayers or responses respecting which the alter-
native of saying and singing is not allowed by
the rubric. But the further investigation of the
subject has only confirmed me in the opinion


that the Prayer Book does not authorise the
practice ; and that, forasmuch as its lawfulness
must be admitted to he at the least doubtful,
every parochial clergyman is bound in con-
science, according to the evident meaning of the
direction in the preface to the Prayer Book, to
conform therein to the injunction of his bishop.
I would, therefore, again express my objection
to the intoning of such prayers and responses
by the minister or the choir at Morning or Even-
ing Prayer, and to the chanting of the responses
to the Commandments in the Communion Ser-
vice; and I would ask any clergymen who may
differ from me as to my judgment herein, to put
to themselves the question whether their oath
to obey their bishop “in all things lawful and
honest” does not oblige them to submit to it ?
The further progress of controversy, both
within and without the Church, requires me to
allude to some other matters on which, as appears
to me, very dangerous practical errors at present
prevail. Understand, my brethren, that it is
with no assumption of personal superiority, but
with a deep sense of official responsibility, that
I address you upon them. First among the
questions on which it is necessary for every"
minister of Christ to be fully persuaded in his
own mind, and to be able to convince gainsayers,
is the importance of sound dogmatic teaching.
Of the truths comprehended in the Christian
religion some are confessed by all Churches to
be fundamental, a belief in them being essential
unto salvation ; while others do not, so far as we
can judge, directly affect our title as individuals
to the inheritance of the saints in light, or our
personal growth in grace; and others again


always have been, and appear likely always to
continue, subjects of controversy between men
whom we must not only acknowledge to be true
Christians, but admire for their learning and
ability. Hence, although we cannot allow that
the distinction between truth and error upon
any religious question is of trivial consequence,
we shall do well, upon matters of subordinate
importance,'and those on which consent among
the faithful servants of Christ cannot reasonably
be expected, to avoid unprofitable controversy.
We shall thus usually promote the well-being
and extension of the Church of Christ. In
respect, however, to the essentials of Christian-
ity, and to those doctrines which immediately
affect the present holiness and peace and the
future salvation of individuals, a minister of
Christ cannot, without unfaithfulness to his trust,
allow his love of peace to restrain him from the
plain declaration of the truth of the Gospel, and
the fearless condemnation of any error by which
it has been or is in danger of being corrupted.
If it be asked, as it may be, how are those
matters of doctrine which are thus essential to
be distinguished from those which are of sub-
ordinate importance ? I answer, in every par-
ticular case on which we are called upon to form
a practical decision, we must each for himself,
by the study of the Scriptures and history of
the Church, by reflection, and by such help as
we may be able to derive from the writings and
conversation of wise and holy men—above all,
by prayer for the enlightening influence of the
Holy Spirit —endeavour to arrive at a right
judgment; and then we must act upon that
judgment. If we conscientiously, and with due


pains, use these means for informing our minds,
and regulating our conduct in each separate
instance, we shall seldom, if ever, greatly err.
He who giveth wisdom to them who ask it from
Him will guide us aright. There needs, how-
ever, that, on every question with which we are
practically concerned, we should thus carefully
and conscientiously form our judgment, and act
accordingly. At this time, while some holding
high positions in the Church in England zealously
labour to propagate doctrine which I hold to be
contrary to the Word of God, and perilous to
the souls of men, others, admiring their earnest-
ness, are disposed to think lightly of their
erroneous doctrine, and to deprecate all contro-
versy respecting it. They would seek peace at
the expense of truth. I dread the consequence
of this spurious liberality, this mistaken charity.
It has no warrant in the Bible. It is wholly
unlike the charity of the apostles, and of all the
eminent saints of God in later asns of the
Church. What does the Bible—what does all
ecclesiastical history teach us, but that the truth
must be maintained and propagated by an
unceasing controversy with error? Not only
were Luther and Calvin, Cranmer, Eidley, and
Latimer, and the rest of the reformers of the 16th
century, controversialists, but so likewise were
Athanasius and Augustine, and all the early
fathers; and so also were Peter and Paul, James
and John. They not only proclaimed the truth,
but they vehemently contended against error.
Especially did they denounce those who taught
false doctrine. In how strong language did
Paul write of such to the Corinthians, calling'
# / o
them “false apostles, deceitful workers, trans-
forming themselves into the apostles of Christ


and to the Galatians, pronouncing them to be
te accursed,” and wishing that “ they were even
cut off!” How earnestly did he warn the
Colossians against those who would “ beguile
them with enticing words,” or u spoil” them
u through philosophy and vain deceit, after the
traditions of men, after the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ!” With what affec-
tionate fervour did he exhort Timothy to keep
that which was committed to his trust, “ avoid-
ing profane and vain babblings, and opposition
of science falsely so calledadding, “ which
some professing have erred concerning the
faith.” But why should I multiply references ?
Of one other passage only will I remind you,
namely, that wherein John, the apostle whom
Jesus loved, warned “the elect lady ” against
receiving into her house any one who did not
bring “ the doctrine of Christ.” Do not, there-
fore, my brethren, depreciate the importance of
sound dogmatic teaching. Do not make light
of doctrinal error. No one who does so can be
a faithful steward of the mysteries of God.
Apart, however, from the consideration ofStSwuS
how we ought individually to judge of and to doctrine-
maintain sound doctrine, there is another ques-
tion which, as it has of late provoked much dis-
cussion, we must not overlook—viz., what test
has our Church adopted wherewith to try the
doctrine of its ministers, and how does it apply
that test ? This question, or rather these two
questions, may, if we calmly consider the matter,
be easily answered. First, the test which the
Church has adopted to try the doctrine of its
ministers is obviously the volume of its authori-
tative documents—its Articles of Religion, its


Catechism, its Book of Consecration of Arch-
bishops and Bishops and Ordering of Priests
and Deacons, and the various services and offices
of its Book of Common Prayer. A clergyman
who, in preaching or teaching, affirms anything
which is denied, or denies anything which
is affirmed in these documents, is thereby,
in the judgment of the Church, guilty of false
doctrine. But with respect to all those matters
(and they are very many) upon which the
Church has not thus pronounced an authoritative
opinion, he is free to exercise his own private
judgment. To its laity the Church allows a yet
wider scope, for it requires from them at their
baptism and confirmation no other profession
of faith than that which is contained in the
Apostle’s Creed. Herein consists the comprehen-
siveness of the Church of England ; and God
forbid that it should ever lose a character by
which it is, in our opinion, so favourably dis-
tinguished from some other Churches. But let
us not forget that while comprehensive it is also
exclusive as to both its ministry and its com-
munion, and that it shuts out from the one and
the other all who transgress the limits which it
imposes upon them.
Before proceeding, however, I must beg you
not to misunderstand me as though I intended to
put the authoritative language of the Church in
the place of, or upon a level with, the inspired
Word of God. Such is not my meaning. Since
the apostolic age, the volume of the Scriptures
has been the one only original source of all re-
vealed truth, and the one final test of sound
doctrine. As such our Church expressly recog-
nises it, affirming in the sixth article that


u Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary
to salvation; so that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to
be required of any man that it should be be-
lieved as an article of the faith, or be thought
requisite or necessary to salvation.” In accord-
ance herewith, the Church also requires its
ministers to promise that they will out of the
sacred Scriptures instruct the people committed
to their charge. But you will remember that
when a man applies for admission into the minis-
try of a particular Church, he must be assumed
to have previously satisfied himself of the sub-
stantial agreement of that Church, both as
to doctrine and mode of worship, with the
Bible. He is therefore no longer at liberty
to appeal from the Church to the Bible. So
long as he retains his office therein he must
accept its dogmas and conform to its rules.
Wilfully and persistently to teach contrary to
the one, or to infringe the other, would be a
violation of his ordination vows, for which he
would be justly liable, according to the nature
of the offence, to censure and punishment. Who-
soever cannot conscientiously adhere to the doc-
trine and comply with the requirements of the
Church in wdiich he ministers, certainly ought
not any longer to retain his ministerial office.
But then the second question arises—and it which e the sby
is of the greatest importance—viz., How does JJ I^ applies
the Church apply this test of sound doctrine?
The answer is, partly by its bishops and partly
by its ecclesiastical courts. Partly by its bishops,
in the discretion which it gives them as to the
admission of persons to the order either of
deacons or priests, and also in the authority


which it empowers and requires them to exercise
in the admonition and exhortation of the
clergy. A bishop is invested by the Church
with the power of rejecting, according to his
own sole judgment, any candid ate for ordination.
If a clerk in full orders has been duly presented
to a benefice, the bishop may be compelled by
a court of law to institute him to it. But no
court of law can compel a bishop to ordain a
man whom he deems for any reason whatever
to be unfit for the ministry. Moreover, the
Church both authorises and requires a bishop—
not only by his own preaching, but also by call-
ing upon and encouraging others, especially the
parochial clergy —both privately and openly,
“ with all faithful diligence to banish and drive
away all erroneous and strange doctrine, con-
trary to God’s word.” If, then, any parochial
clergyman be, in the opinion of the bishop,
guilty of teaching such erroneous and strange
doctrine, the bishop is both authorised and re-
quired, in the manner that he shall judge best,
to admonish that clergyman of his error, and
exhort him to correct it. To do this is his plain
duty, and therefore should never be regarded
by a conscientious,clergyman as an unwarrant-
able interference with him in the fulfilment of
his ministry.
But the bishop can do no more. As I have
already noticed, he cannot at his own discretion
refuse to institute a clerk who has been duly
presented to a benefice in his diocese, nor can
he arbitrarily remove the incumbent of any
parish from his cure. This can be done only
by the judgment of an ecclesiastical court.
Through these courts, therefore, it is that the


Church, as occasion may require, enforces upon
the beneficed parochial clergy conformity to its
tenets. On these courts it depends both for
delivering its people from unfaithful men, if
any such have found an entrance into its min-
istry, and for protecting its faithful ministers
from all injustice and oppression. Thus, my
brethren, does the Church, in the application of
its test of sound doctrine, use partly its bishops
and partly its ecclesiastical courts.
The responsibility of maintaining in a diocese
sound doctrine on the one hand and a due com-
prehensiveness on the other rests, therefore, in
great measure on the Bishop. He is answerable
to the Church for not opening too widely, or
shutting too closely, the door of admission into
its ministry. If, from a mistaken liberality,
he shrink from applying to every candidate for
holy orders the Church’s test of doctrine, or if,
in his zeal for his own private opinions, he apply
any other test than that which the Church pre-
scribes, he equally incurs the guilt of an unfaith-
ful ruler. So also if, while he honestly endea-
vours to fulfil his twofold obligation, he either
misunderstands the test of the Church as to a
particular doctrine or misapplies it in the case
of a particular individual, his error may be pro-
ductive of much public mischief and do a great
private injustice. Against these evils the only
security for the Church lies in the character of
the bishop himself for diligence of investigation,
a sound and unbiassed judgment, and a strict
conscientiousness, and in the carefulness and
impartiality of him and his chaplains in examin-
ing candidates for ordination. For myself I
can say, Clod is witness that my desire and


endeavour have always been to discern and do
that which is right. But lam too well acquainted
with the liability to error in mankind generally,
and in myself in particular, for me to dare to
allege that I have not often erred, both on the
one side and on the other. May the Chief
Bishop preserve his Church from any injury
through my mistakes and infirmities ; and may
He enable me, while I continue in my high
office, so to act that both the clergy and laity
of the diocese may have a just confidence in my
decisions.
The Bishop Although it would obviously be impossible
maintain sound and unwise for me to attempt to enumerate all
certain points the particulars in which the Church requires its
Church has ministers, and in which therefore a bishop
expressed itself, g p ou jq require candidates for orders, to be
sound in the faith, yet you may justly expect
me, at this period of strife and division, to
declare plainly by what rule I have acted, and
purpose still to act, in respect to those questions
which now threaten to rend in pieces the Church
in England. This I am quite ready to do.
Already, on various occasions, I have expressed
my sentiments upon them, but I will now
publicly and officially inform you of the course
of conduct concerning them which I have laid
down for myself. Before doing so let me remind
you that I am not concerned about the tenets
or customs of particular schools of theology,
but only with the opinions held by particular
persons coming before me either as candidates
for ordination or (for the Church here has given
me similar discretionary power with respect to
them) as applicants for clerical employment in
this diocese. Let me remind you also that I


am going’ to speak only of certain points of
doctrine upon which, as appears to me, it
is at the present time especially necessary for
a bishop to endeavour to maintain among the
clergy soundness in the faith.
Among these are some on which the Church Affirmatively
has expressed itself affirmatively, e.g ., the divine
authority of the Holy Scriptures as inspired of
God, the vicarious sacrifice of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ for the sins of the world,
and the personality and godhead of the Holy
Spirit. I cannot conscientiously ordain or
admit to the ministry in this diocese any one
who does not give me satisfactory assurance
that he bond fide holds, and will faithfully teach,
these fundamental truths of the Gospel.
Again, there are others on which, as I con-Negatively,
scientiously believe, the Church has with equal
plainness expressed itself in the negative, e.g..,
the presence of the body and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, in any sense whatever, in the
bread and wine after consecration by the offici-
ating priest at the administration of the Lord’s
Supper; the offering of Christ to God, in any
sense whatever, by the officiating priest at that
holy sacrament; the practice, as distinguished
from the occasional use, of confession to and
the private pronouncing of absolution and the
imposing of penances by a priest; the addition 4
of any ceremonial in public worship not enjoined
or expressly permitted by the Book of Common
Prayer. I cannot conscientiously ordain, or
admit to the ministry in this diocese, any one
who does not give me satisfactory assurance
that he heartily approves, and will strictly
adhere to, the doctrine and directions of the


Church in these particulars. In this latter, as
well as in the former case, no other qualifications
of whatever kind —piety, zeal for God, amiabil-
ity, genius—can compensate for an indistinct-
ness or hesitation upon such vital matters.
My object at present is not to defend, but
only simply state, the position which I have
deliberately taken and, by God’s help, intend
to maintain for the preservation of the Church
here from the “ false doctrine, heresy, and
schism ” now prevalent to a great extent in our
fatherland. Herein I am responsible to God
and to the Church, and I trust that I shall
approve myself to Him and to it. I know that,
how great-soever care I may use, some men will
deceive me, and so obtain ordination or ad-
mission into the diocese; and that others, after
they have been so ordained or admitted, will
totally change their opinions and course of
conduct. In such instances, when they occur,
I am bound, so long as I can cherish a hope
that my admonitions will have any effect, to
admonish clergymen of their errors, and en-
deavour to bring them into the way of truth.
But if I am unable to convince or persuade
them, I do not think that I should, except in a
very flagrant case, do the Church any service
by’ having recourse to legal proceedings.
Unless, therefore, I am specially called upon
to interfere, I shall not ordinarily take
further action. I shall prefer to commit
the issue to the Lord in prayer, and in con-
fidence that He will either deliver such as
have thus “ erred and are deceived ” from the
errors into which they have fallen, or in His
own good time and way remove them hence.


That it practically permits the existence of so
much false doctrine in its ministry, has been n °"f e^ s not
often made a ground of complaint against our to our
Church; but those who reproach us herewith
should remember that false doctrine abounded
in the Church of the apostolic age; and that
while in their epistles the apostles earnestly con-
tended against it, they did not, usually at least,
cast out those who held or taught it. If it ever
should prevail (which God forbid) among the
clergy here as it now prevails among the clergy
in England, we might still comfort ourselves by
the saying of St. Paul — u There must be also
heresies among you, that they which are ap-
proved may be made manifest among you.
Many topics of popular discussion affecting Special topics of
the Church—some relating to doctrine and
worship, others to the constitution _of the
Church, and others again to its connection with
or independence of the State, the support which
it is entitled to from the public revenue, and
the part which it should be permitted to take
in the education of the people—are now forcing
themselves upon our attention. For arriving
at a right conclusion concerning them, and for
wisely advocating our opinions, there are re-
quired both much reading, and thought, and
prayer. We must take heed that we do not
form our judgments hastily, nor enforce them
too dogmatically upon others ; but those which
we have deliberately formed we should not
shrink, whenever occasion may demand it of
us, from avowing and defending. At present
I shall only make some further remarks upon
one matter of doctrine, and briefly notice a few
points of ritual.


I would preface what I am now going to say
with an earnest exhortation to you all, espe-
cially to my younger brethren, that you would
always examine and decide every question con-
cerning doctrine and worship by the authonta-
tive statements of the Bible and Prayer Book;
and, further, that you would judge of the
character of every other book by its harmony
in tone and feeling with these two. No other
book should ever be allowed to supersede these
or be regarded as authoritatively supplying any
supposed deficiencies in All that others
can properly do is to help us in understanding
them, and in applying to practice the principles
contained in them. For such purposes the writings
of learned men of all ages will be very valuable,
but in the use of these bear always in mind
that, if upon laying down the Bible or Prayer
Book and"taking up some other volume you feel
yourself to have, as it were, passed into another
region of thought, and to be breathing another
spiritual atmosphere, the doctrine of that volume,
whoever may be the author, is somehow radi-
cally wrong. You may not be able to detect
in it any erroneous principle, or to point out
any objectionable passages; but if you are con-
scious of a want of harmony throughout it
with the Bible or Prayer Book, its influence can-
not but be injurious, and the more so in propor-
tion as it gratifies the tastes or sentiments of
the natural man. This test will be found to
condemn a very large portion of the religious
literature both of our own and former ages;
and it especially needs to be applied to books
upon the particular subject to which I now
desire to direct your attention, the holy sacra-


ment of the Lord’s Supper. Upon the doctrine
of the Bible and Prayer Book concerning this
ordinance, every clergyman of our Church at
the present day ought to be fully persuaded in
his own mind, and to take heed that the judg-
ment which he has formed upon it is right.
On the false doctrine, which —to borrow the p^ d ’ s
languageof our homily —“ of the memory,” makes
the Lord’s Supper to be ‘ a sacrifice,’ and which
for a spiritual presence of Christ in the heart of a
believing recipient substitutes an unintelligible
mystical presence of his body and blood in the
bread and wine, has been built up all that
hideous superstructure of superstition and almost
idolatry, which now so grieves and alarms every
intelligent simple-minded member of our Church.
Such deadly heresy, as I have already said,
altogether unfits a man for the ministerial office.
But, besides and apart from it, there appear to
prevail in England (and I fear that they may
spring up and spread themselves here) very
mistaken notions, derived perhaps from the
language of some ancient writers, but cer-
tainly not warranted by the Bible or Prayer
Book, concerning this Sacrament. I would there-
fore briefly remind you of what these say
respecting it:—First, we read in three of the
gospels how our Lord Jesus Christ instituted
this supper, in the place, as it would seem, of
the feast of the passover, for the continual re-
membrance of the sacrifice of his death. Secondly,
we find in the Acts of the Apostles several ap-
parent references to its observance under the
phrase, a breaking of bread.” And thirdly, in
Ist Corinthians occur two remarkable passages,
in which distinct mention (the only such men-


tion in the epistles) is made of it. One of these
is in x. 16, 17, and the other in xi. 20 to 34.
In the former, the cup, described as “ tire cup of
blessing which we bless,” is said to be “ the com-
munion of the blood of Christ” ; and “ the bread
which we break” to be “ the communion of the
body of Christ;” whence we infer that the faith-
ful receivers of the sacrament, in eating of the
bread and drinking of the wine, do verily and
indeed eat together the body and drink together
the blood of Christ in that spiritual sense in
which our blessed Lord declares such eating and
drinking to be necessary unto everlasting life
(John vi. 53 to 58). From the latter passage we
learn that the institution of this ordinance was a
part of the revelation made by the Lord Jesus
to St. Paul, and preached by him to the Gen-
tiles as a showing forth, or proclaiming (for that
is the meaning of the word used), by the Church
of the Lord’s death until his coming again.
We, therefore, infer that it is obligatory upon
the Church in all ages, and ‘ £ generally necessary
to salvation.” We learn, also, that it is a
heinous sin for Christians (the apostle is speak-
ing of persons who ought to come to, not of those
who ought to stay away from, the Lord’s table),
to eat of the bread and drink of the wine “ un-
worthily,” so as not by the conscious exercise of
faith to discern “the Lord’s body,” thereby
symbolised. Such as act thus profanely the
apostle declares to be guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord, i.e., of doing dishonour to,
putting a slight upon, the body of Christ broken,
and the blood of Christ shed, as a sacrifice for
the sins of the world. That he may not incur
so great guilt, every true believer is exhorted


before joining his brethren in this common ex-
pression of their thankful remembrance of the
death of Christ, to examine himself, and so come
to the Lord’s Supper with due reverence and
faith.
All this our Church teaches in its Articles, its
Catechism, and its Communion Office. Both
as to doctrine and to tone, in this as in other
matters, the most 1 perfect harmony subsists
between the Bible and the Prayer Book. But
there is nothing in either to justify the exagger-
ated language used by some of the early fathers,
and lately adopted by certain modern writers.
Nowhere, either in the Bible or the Prayer Book,
is the Lord’s Supper spoken of as the central
act of Christian worship; the one chief means
of grace, in comparison with which all others
are of small importance; the one mode of spiri-
tually feeding upon Christ. Nowhere is there
an indication of any particular sanctity being
attached to the place where it was eaten, or
even to the bread and wine used for the pur-
pose. Nothing is said about the time or mode
of its administration—l should, rather say of its
reception—for, from what the Bible tells us,
there would appear to have been no kind of
formal administration. Certainly there was no
ceremonial, no ritual, no symbolic exhibition.
All these things were superadded in later ages.
They have no apostolic precedent, nor any
sanction from the Prayer Book, The allusions
in the Book of Acts, and the reasoning of St.
Paul in those two passages of Ist Corinthians,
contain all that the Bible, after recording its
institution, tells us concerning this sacrament.
In none other of St. Paul’s epistles is it


alluded to, nor is there any notice of it
in those of James, Peter, John, or Jude.
This silence respecting it is very noticeable,
for, if it had held the supreme place in the
religion of Christ which is now frequently
assigned to it, it could not have been thus
passed over in these divinely-inspired writings.
If it had been, as some represent it, the chief
source of spiritual wisdom, strength, and con-
solation to every Christian, the apostles could
not have altogether omitted to describe its
excellency, and extol the benefits to be derived
from it. If the doctrine of the writers I have
referred to concerning it were apostolical, their
writings and those of the apostles could not
present in respect to it so remarkable a contrast
to one another. Let me remind you, my
brethren, of what I just now said —that
wherever such an incongruity exists, the doc-
trine of the Bible must be right, and that of
the book which does not harmonise with the
Bible must be wrong. In this, therefore, and
in every other matter, take the Bible and the
Prayer Book for your guide. Preach and
teach the obligation upon all Christians to unite
in expressing their thankful remembrance of the
sacrifice of the death of Christ in the Lord’s
Supper. Preach and teach that all u the faith-
ful”— «.<?., all true believers in Christ—do therein
verily and indeed spiritually take and receive
the body and blood of Christ, and that their
souls are thereby strengthened and refreshed.
But do not attach to it an unscriptural pre-
eminence above other means of grace. Do not
enforce it as the one thing needful. Do not
give it an undue prominence in your sermons


and private instructions. Do not inculcate the
necessity or propriety of receiving it fasting.
If you do so teach, your teaching will not be
apostolical, for it will not be in accordance with
the Scriptures ; it will not be the teaching
of the Church, for it will not be in accordance
with the Prayer*Book.
Concerning points of ritual, I may repeat certain points
the substance of what I said in 1866—that the
duty of a bishop is not to interfere unneces-
sarily with any established usage, or to insist
upon an exact uniformity in immaterial par-
ticulars ; when necessary, to declare what,
according to his judgment, is the law of
the Church, and enjoin obedience to it;
to prevent, so far as he is able, any
alterations in the accustomed mode of con-
ducting Divine service, which are not ex-
pressly sanctioned by the rubric or obviously
expedient; and not to notice in the
way of reproof unimportant irregularities. To
these views I still adhere; and accordingly,
with reference to various deviations from strict
rubrical order, which I shall not particularise,
I will only say that I shall be glad if they can
be corrected. There are, however, two practices
which I have sometimes found adopted, and
which, as being novel and unauthorised, and
also in themselves objectionable, I would re-
quest any of my brethren who have adopted
them to discontinue. One is the reading of
the offertory sentences and the giving of the
blessing from within the communion rails
after the sermon at Evening Prayer. These
being a part of the Communion
office, ought not to be read except in their


place in that office. And when a sermon
follows Morning or Evening Prayer without
the ante-communion office, the preacher is
not warranted in leaving the place where he
has delivered it, hut ought to conclude the
service there. Another irregularity which I
have heard of being committed, and which,
although perhaps in some particular circum-
stances excusable, might, if unnoticed, occasion
offence, is the introduction into the service of
special prayers. Such prayers, if there be cause
for them, should be used cither before or after
sermon, in the pulpit. As bishop, I have as-
sumed the authority of drawing up and allow-
ing (not prescribing) the use of forms of prayer
on particular occasions; but lam not sure that
I am right herein. Certainly no parochial
clergyman is justified in so doing at his own
discretion. In themselves these things are trifles,
but in the present state of our Church such
trifles possess an adventitious importance ; and
it behoves you, my brethren, if you value eccle-
siastical order and union, to abstain from all
manner of unauthorised innovations.
I must now conclude. I dare not, with the
apostle Paul in his farewell address to the elders
of the Church at Ephesus, u take you to record
this day that lam pure from the blood of all,” I
would rather pray God, and I would pray you,
to forgive me whereinsoever I have offended
against any. But I can truly affirm that, like
him, u I exercise myself to have a conscience
void of offence toward God and toward men,”
and I know, as you also know, that u if any
man sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and He is the


propitiation for our sins.” May we all en-
joy the full consolation of this assurance. In
taking leave of those among whom he had
so long served the Lord, St. Paul experienced a
double sorrow—for himself, that he should see
them no more; and for them, because he fore-
saw that after his departing grievous wolves
would enter in among them, and that also of
their own selves would men arise, speaking per-
verse things, to draw away disciples after them.
I thank God that I cannot look into futurity.
I know not what God will do with me, or what
shall happen unto this Church, of which I have
been so long the bishop. It may be that He
will permit me to address you in this place
again. It may be that He will forthwith sum-
mon me to give an account of my stewardship.
Let Him do what seemeth Him good. Again,
it may be that He will, by the gracious influence
of his Holy Spirit, purify the Church in this
diocese from all corruption, and heal it of all
division ; or He may permit Satan to sow in it
more and more the noxious seed of “ false doc-
trine, heresy, and schism,” so that it shall be-
come in the eyes of all beholders a field of tares.
Beloved brethren, let us pray that He will bo
gracious unto us, and bless us, giving unto us
that which is good, and preserving us from all
evil. Let us ask of Him to “ give us grace seri-
ously to lay to heart the great dangers we arc
in by” the malice of the devil, and “our unhappy
divisions,” which give him so great an advan-
tage against us. Let us beseech God to “take
away all hatred and prejudice, and whatsoever
else may hinder us from godly union and con-
cord ; that, as there is but one body, and one


Mason, Firth, and M'Cutcheon, Printers, Flinders-lane West, Melbourne.
Spirit, and one hope of our calling, one Lord,
one faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
us all, so we may henceforth be all of one heart
and of one soul, united in one holy bond of
truth and peace, of faith and charity, and may
with one mind and one mouth glorify God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.” To Him, and
“to the word of his grace,” I commend you
all, beseeching you to u take heed unto your-
selves, and to all the flock over the which the
Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed
the Church of God, which He hath purchased
with his own blood.” The Lord be with you
all, evermore. Amen.




