

A CHINESE APPEAL
Against the discriminating Legislation as embodied in the
NEW SOUTH WALES FACTORIES AND SHOPS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1926.
By the Chinese Chamber of Commerce of New South Wales
52 Dixon Street, Sydney
27th November, 1926


INDEX.
Pages.
The Factories and Shops (Amendment) Bill, 1926 3
(Material Points Emphasised)
The Chinese Chamber of Commerce, 3rd Letter to the
Department of Labour and Industry (11/11/’26) . . 9
The Hon. Minister’s Reply (17/11/’26) 11
Final Protest to Department (23/11/’26) 12
Our “Appeal” 14
An Incident of 1925 17
Reprint of Addresses—
“A Chinese View of the Pacific Relations” 18
“Present Day China” . . 20
Extracts of Parliamentary Debates on the Factories and
Shops (Amendment) Bill, 1926 .. ... 22


THE PORTION OF THE BILL AFFECTING THE
CHINESE FURNITURE TRADE.
5. The Principal Act is further amended by omitting
section forty-nine and
(a) by inserting in lieu thereof the following new sec-
tion :
49. (1) In any factory where any Chinese works,
and in any other factory where any person is em-
ployed in preparing, manufacturing, or assembling
articles of furniture, no person shall perform or em-
ploy, allow, permit or authorise any person whoso-
ever to perform any work of any nature whether
connected with the business of any such factory or
not:
(a) In the case of Chinese on any day before half-
past seven o’clock in the morning or after five
o’clock in the evening Monday to Friday, in-
clusive, or on Saturday, or on Sunday, or a
public holiday at any time whatever.
(b) In the case of persons other than Chinese, on
any day before half-past seven o’clock in the
morning, or after six o’clock in the
evening, Monday to Friday inclusive, or on
Saturday after one o’clock in the afternoon,
or on Sunday at any time whatever.
(2) In any prosecution for a contravention of
this section the occupier of a factory shall be deemed
to have permitted a person to work if any person
whosoever is proved to have been working in the
factory of such occupier during the time when work
is prohibited.
(3) In order to prevent any evasion or avoid-
ance of the foregoing limits of working hours, all
work done by any person employed in a factory for
the occupier elsewhere than in the factory (whether
the work is or is not connected with the business of
the factory) shall be deemed to be done whilst em-
ployed in a factory, and the time shall be counted
accordingly.
(4) No Chinese shall be permitted by the
occupier to prepare or partake of meals, board,
lodge, or sleep on the premises of a building of which
a furniture factory forms part, nor be upon or in any
building or curtilage of a building used as
a furniture factory at any other time except a time
at which he may lawfully work thereon.
(5) No building or portion of a building or
curtilage of such building shall be used as a furni-
ture factory if such building or the curtilage thereof


has internal communication with any adjoining pre-
mises or provides for ingress or egress otherwise
than from a street or public lane or if Chinese work-
ing in such building prepare or partake of meals,
board, lodge, sleep therein, or are thereupon or
therein at any time at which Chinese may not law-
fully work therein.
(6) In any prosecution for an offence against
this section, evidence—
(a) that at any time during which work is pro-
hibited by this section in any factory, sounds
have been heard such as would ordinarily
be heard if made by persons engaged in such
factory in the usual work therein carried on;
and
(b) that during such time any member of the
Police force or inspector was refused or could
not gain immediate admission to such factory,
shall be prima facie evidence that the provisions of
this section have been contravened by the occupier
of the factory.
(7) The occupier of a furniture factory shall
not use or allow to be used as a sleeping place any
portion of such factory.
(8) If any person offends against any of the
provisions of this section, he shall, for each and
every day on which he offends, be liable for the first
offence to a penalty of not more than ten pounds,
and for a_ second or subsequent offence a penalty
of not more than fifty pounds, and in addition to the
foregoing penalty, the registration of a factory, the
occupier of which is convicted under this section for
a third offence, shall be forthwith cancelled by the
Minister.
(9) In order to meet the exigencies of trade
the Minister may, subject to the conditions and re-
strictions imposed in section forty-three, suspend
the operation of this section relating to the work-
ing hours in any factory for any period not exceed-
ing four weeks.
(10) The Secretary of the registered indus-
trial union of employers or employees in the furniture
authorised by such secretary in writing shall, in re-
industry for the time being or any officer duly
lation to a furniture factory in which Chinese are
employed, have the like powers as are conferred
upon an inspector by paragraphs one, two, and six
of section nine of this Act.
(b) by inserting in section three next after the definition
of “Factory” the following new definition:—


“ Furniture” means furniture of which wood,
wicker, pithcane, bamboo, seagrass reed-
tex or metal forms a part, and such as is
usually made or assembled by cabinet-
makers, chair and couch makers, uphol-
sterers, wood turners, wood carvers, and
mattress and wire mattress makers and
wicker, pithcane, and seagrass workers.
6. The principal Act is further amended—
(a) by inserting in Part 11. thereof next after section
forty-nine the following new short heading and
section:—
Division sa.—Marking of furniture.
49a. For the purpose of regulating the stamp-
ing of furniture manufactured in or imported into
New South Wales the provisions contained in
Schedule Five of this Act shall have effect as from
a date to be fixed by the Governor and notified
by proclamation published in the Gazette.
(b) by inserting at the end of the said Act next after
Schedule Four the following new Schedule:—
Schedule Five, Section 49a.
Marking Furniture.
1. All furniture manufactured or sent out of any factory
shall be legibly and permanently stamped.
2. All furniture manufactured or prepared either wholly
or partly in New South Wales shall as soon as it has been
practically completed so as to permit the stamp being placed
on it, and before it is sent out or removed from the building,
premises, or place in which it is so manufactured or prepared,
and all furniture imported into New South Wales shall be
legibly and permanently stamped with a stamp of an indelible
permanent ink, or stain, or impression.
3. Such stamp shall set forth in legible type the distinguish-
ing number or letter or combination of same (herein called
the maker’s mark) assigned by the Chief Inspector to each
manufacturer of furniture corresponding with the true name
and address of such manufacturer, as appearing in a register
made and kept by the Chief Inspector for the purpose. If
such furniture was only partly manufactured or prepared by
such manufacturer the words “partly prepared by” shall be
stamped above the maker’s mark of such manufacture.
4. Such stamp shall be placed on some part of such fur-
niture, and on each moveable part thereof where it can be
clearly and easily seen and read at a distance of not less than
five feet.
5. Where an article of such furniture has been manu-
factured or prepared solely or partly by the labour of any
Chinese person or on the premises of any Chinese employed,


such stamp shall also set forth in legible type the words,
“Chinese labour.”
7. “European labour” means the labour of persons born
in Europe or of their descendants whether born in any British
colony or possession or in the United States of America or
elsewhere, and “Chinese” includes persons having a Chinese
father and/or mother.
8. Every occupier of a factory or shop—
(a) who delivers or causes to be delivered to a pur-
chaser any new furniture which is not stamped
pursuant to this Schedule; or
(b) who without having previously delivered a writ-
ten statement such as is hereinafter referred to
renders or delivers to a purchaser of new furni-
ture an invoice, account, bill or receipt or enters
into any time payment or other agreement which
does not contain a written statement expressly
and clearly showing whether such new furniture
to which it relates was imported or was made by
Chinese labour or by European labour only or by
European and other labour,
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on summary
conviction for a first offence to a penalty of not -less than five
pounds nor more than fifteen pounds and for every subsequent
offence to a penalty of not less than twenty pounds nor more
than fifty pounds.
9. All furniture imported into New South Wales for the
purpose of sale shall be stamped by the importer or consignee
or buyer for the purposes of re-sale thereof within forty-eight
hours after such furniture has been unpacked, with a stamp
on such furniture in accordance with this Schedule,
10. The stamps upon all furniture—
(a) imported into New South Wales for sale; or
(b) manufactured in New South Wales for sale solely
by European labour; or
(c) manufactured in New South Wales for sale partly
by European labour and partly by the labour of
persons other than Chinese—
shall be of circular shape and shall contain the words pre-
scribed.
11. The stamps upon all furniture manufactured in New
South Wales for sale solely or partly by the labour of any
Chinese person or on the premises of any Chinese employer
shall be triangular in shape and shall contain the words,
“Chinese labour.”
12. The provisions of this Act with regard to the stamp-
ing of furniture shall not be deemed to be complied with in
the case of wardrobes, sideboards, tables, washstands, book


cases, cabinets, hall stands, hall seats, dinner waggons, bed-
steads, chairs, seats, church altars, cupboards, pedestals, meat
safes, chiffoniers, kitchen dressers, chests of drawers and com-
modes, unless each of the letters with which such articles are
stamped is at least one-half of an inch long by one-eighth of
an inch wide and in the manner prescribed.
13. Every person—
(a) who wholly or partly manufactures or prepares
furniture and who fails or omits to cause such
furniture to be stamped as in this Schedule pro-
vided; or
(b) who exposes for sale or sells or delivers after sale
or lets on hire any furniture wholly manufactured
or prepared by persons other than himself or his
immediate employees and stamps the same with
his own stamp ; or
(c) who on any furniture wholly or partly made by
persons other than himself or his immediate em-
ployees places a stamp implying or stating that
such furniture was made by himself only; or
(d) who falsely stamps any furniture; or
(e) who exposes for sale or sells or offers for sale
or delivers after sale or lets on hire, any furni-
ture manufactured or prepared either wholly or
partly in New South Wales which is not stamped
pursuant to this Schedule or which he knows to
be falsely stamped; or
(f) who removes or obliterates or obscures or erases
from or alters or adds to or attempts to remove or
obliterate or obscure or erase from or alter or add
to any stamp on any furniture—
shall be guilty of an offence, and shall be liable for the first
offence to a penalty of not less than five pounds nor more than
fifty pounds, and for every subsequent offence to a penalty
of not less than twenty pounds and not more than fifty pounds.
14. Every occupier of a factory or shop, and the agents
and servants of such occupier shall whenever so required by
an inspector point out to such inspector where any article of
furniture in such factory or shop is stamped in accordance
with the provisions of this Schedule.
Every person who contravenes the provisions of this
clause shall be guilty of an offence, and shall be liable to a
penalty of not less than five pounds nor more than twenty
pounds.
15. The provisions of this Schedule shall apply to any
furniture in any furniture factory or retail shop or warehouse
or storeroom or any such distributing place of business not-
withstanding that such furniture was manufactured prior to


the passing of the Factories and Shops (Amendment) Act,
1926.
16. Any person who offers for sale, or offers to let on hire
any article of furniture after the passing of the Factories and
Shops (Amendment) Act, 1926, shall show the stamp referred
to in this Schedule to any person seeking to purchase or hire
any article of furniture.
17. The secretary of the registered industrial union of
employers or employees in the furniture industry or an officer
authorised by him in writing shall have the like powers as
are conferred upon an inspector by paragraphs one, two, and
six of section nine of this Act.
18. The stamp which by this Schedule is directed to be
stamped on furniture shall be placed in the position thereon
prescribed by regulation, and until so prescribed in the posi-
tion directed by an inspector.
(c) by inserting in section one next before the word
and figure “Division 6” the words and figures
“Division sa—Marking of furniture, s. 49a.”


THE CHINESE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
52 Dixon Street, Haymarket,
Sydney, Australia,
11th November, 1926.
The Under Secretary,
Department of Labour and Industry,
78 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
Dear Sir,—
Re Factories and Shops (Amendment) Bill, 1926.
In acknowledging receipt of your letter of the Bth instant, in
which you state that—
“after careful consideration of the matter, the Minister is unable
to adopt any modification of the proposed amendments” as sug-
gested in our letters dated 28th October, Ist instant and subsequent
interviews, and I am directed to inform you that our Board re-
ceived this decision with profound disappointment.
At the meeting it was resolved to further request the favour
of reconsideration of the Honourable Minister’s decision before the
matter came before the House again next Tuesday, 16th instant.
This Bill if passed in its present form, it will—
(1) Unfairly discriminate the hours of Chinese and other
Factory workers;
(2) Unfairly single out the Chinese race alone for this
different treatment, without regard to international
justice;
(3) Illegally deprive natural born subjects of their rights
as British subjects;
(4) In practice, bring injustice upon the Chinese concerned
after years of hardship in working up their business.
This action will probably affect about 200 Chinese, and it is
asked whether the cause justifies the means of placing such a dis-
criminating piece of legislature on the Statute Book of New South
Wales, seeing that our Chamber of Commerce have every reason
to believe that within this month—
(a) the few old men who have been residing on factory
premises will move to other places of abode;
(b) there will be no further cooking of meals on the
premises;
(c) as regards hours—the existing Laws governs against
working more than the award hours,
and we are of opinion that with the three main causes of differ-
ences removed, it is reasonable to apply to the Honourable Minister
for his reconsideration while the opportunity exists.


In order to prove that Chinese engaged in the trade have not
hampered progress of Australian workers, nor done any harm to
the trade, it is only necessary to refer to the statistics to see how
the Chinese have diminished each year and the local firms over-
whelmingly increased during the same period.
The nationals of one nation are necessarily and economically
bound to another, and between nations every effort to improve
mutual and good understanding should be encouraged, and with
those hopes in view, our Board respectfully begs reconsideration of
the Bill, so that we will not be subject to undue hardship, and trust
this request will receive favourable consideration.
I am also directed to say that in the event you wish further
explanation, our President will be very pleased to call upon you.
Thanking you in anticipation,
Yours faithfully,
Secretary.


REPLY FROM THE HON. MINISTER FOR LABOUR
AND INDUSTRY.
Department of Labour and Industry, N.S.W.,
Sydney, 17th November, 1926.
Dear Sir, —
I acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 15th instant, with
further reference to the proposed amendment of the Factories
and Shops Act of this State.
After very careful consideration of the representations made,
I regret that I am unable to see my way clear to authorise any
modification of the legislative proposals.
In coming to that determination, may I assure you that, in
drafting the proposed amendments, no discrimination was intended
against any section of the community. The experience of this ad-
ministration and of the existing law for many years has, however,
shown that other furniture factories consistently observe the law,
whilst, notwithstanding the utmost vigilance on the part of depart-
mental officers, means cannot be devised which will prevent the
equally consistent evasion of that law on the part of Chinese
factories. It has, therefore, become necessary to further legislate
to secure a uniform observance of the statutory requirements.
As indicative of the concern with which this matter has been
approached by me, may I say that I made a personal inspection of
the Chinese furniture factories in and about Sydney and investi-
gated the working conditions and arrangements of such factories.
The arrangements which I found, including workrooms, sleeping
rooms, living conditions and the barriers to prevent the admission
of unwanted strangers, clearly exhibited that work after hours
could be and is carried on without risk of detection at present.
Whilst I unhesitatingly accept the assurance of the New South
Wales Chinese Chamber of Commerce that it has reason to believe
that the practices of residing and eating on the factory premises
will shortly discontinue, I am convinced, because of the experience
of the past, that nothing short of a positive statutory prohibition
will bring about that uniformity of observance of modern factory
standards which is so desirable. If, however, the remedies con-
templated by the Chamber are effective, no occasion will then arise
for applying those provisions of the Bill.
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) J. M. BADDELEY,
Minister for Labor and Industry.
The Secretary,
N.S.W. Chinese Chamber of Commerce,
52 Dixon Street,
Haymarket, Sydney.


FINAL PROTEST TO THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR
AND INDUSTRY.
23rd November, 1926.
The Honourable J. M. Baddeley,
Minister for Labour and Industry,
Sydney.
Dear Sir, —
Re Factories and Shops (Amendment) Bill, 1926.
Adverting to your letter dated 17th instant, received on the
22nd instant, I beg to convey to you that members connected with
the Furniture Industry met at our Board Rooms to hear the con-
tents of your reply to our further representation, and it is unneces-
sary for me to repeat how profoundly disappointed your letter was
received by them, as there was not one single point of modification,
notwithstanding the repeated representations made and assurances
given by our Chamber of Commerce.
I am directed to state that exception is taken to the remark-
able statement “that notwithstanding the utmost vigilance on the
part of the departmental officers, means? (presumably under the
existing Act) cannot be devised to prevent the consistent evasion
of the Law on the part of the Chinese factories” which in effect
accuses all Chinese firms as offending against the Law, which we
protest against as not in accordance with facts, and we maintain
that with the undertaking given by us the existing Act will suffi-
ciently guard against unfair competition.
Furthermore, it is surprising to learn that “you are convinced,
because of experience of the past, that nothing short of a positive
statutory prohibition will bring about that uniformity of observance
of modern factory standards” which is not understandable, be-
cause the basis of the new Bill is one Law for the Europeans, and
quite a different and grossly unfair one for the Chinese, so how
can there be uniformity of observance when the same Law does
not apply to all concerned.
We cannot agree to your remarks that “there is no intention of
discrimination”; the Bill says so in plain language, and we have
carefully perused your speeches in Hansard, and cannot help but
arrive at the conclusion that the Bill is directly and solely against
the Chinese and for the sake of the livelihood and protection of
the gradually diminishing number of the Chinese in the furniture
trade in New South Wales, which will be taken away from them
if this Bill is passed in its present form, we are reluctantly com-
pelled to further ask our Consul-General to take the necessary
steps to make further representation, at the same time, we shall


lay our case before all members of both Houses of Parliament so
that the handicapped position of our Chinese will be fully realized,
and if the Bill is passed notwithstanding, then we shall understand
that it was done so at the full expression of the elected Representa-
tives of New South Wales, and we must be prepared to accept the
inevitable, but we are strongly of opinion that the people of New
South Wales are fair-minded and would not consent to subject
our people to such harsh and discriminating treatment; therefore
we still hopefully look forward that the Department will not find it
necessary to insist upon this Bill going through.
Thanking you in anticipation for any further reconsideration
you may give this Bill,
Yours respectfully,
Secretary.


“APPEAL.”
When this Bill was brought before the Legislative Assembly
on the 28th October, 1926, the Chinese Chamber of Commerce
made representation to the Honourable Minister for Labour and
Industry, Mr. Baddeley, to allow the Chinese Chamber of Com-
merce to put before him its views on the matter, as it was con-
sidered that if the Bill was passed in the form as brought before
the House, it would unfairly discriminate between the Chinese and
local manufacturers of furniture. Our views were duly placed
before the Minister, who promised to give them his consideration;
but on the Bth of November the Chinese Chamber of Commerce
was notified that “after careful consideration of the matter, the
Minister was unable to adopt any modification of the proposed
Amendments.” As the Bill at that stage was still in its second
reading in the house, the Chamber of Commerce made further rep-
resentations asking the Honourable Minister for reconsideration of
certain harsh and discriminating clauses of the Bill. The Chinese
Consul-General at Melbourne also made direct appeal to the Hon-
ourable Minister for his sympathetic consideration of our views,
but, unfortunately, it was of no avail.
We cannot understand why the Minister is so strongly against
allowing the Chinese a fair opportunity to continue earning their
living in the trade, which they have taken so many years to build
up. If the number of Chinese employed in the trade was increasing
it would perhaps be understandable; but the facts are otherwise,
as statistics will show that while the number of Chinese firms in
this State has decreased considerably during the past number of
years, European makers of furniture have overwhelmingly
increased.
We quite realise that we cannot boast of perfection, and while
a small number of Chinese have, no doubt, worked more than the
law allows them to, this does not apply to all, and the law as it
now stands is quite sufficient to bring the culprits to justice. The
Chinese Chamber of Commerce has done and will do the best to
see that the law is obeyed. The effect of the Act now under con-
sideration, whether such object is intended or not, is practically
to boycott Chinese workers in the furniture trade, so far at least
as Chinese now employed by European manufacturers and, in any
case, the effect is at the best to seriously handicap Chinese in the
trade whether natural-born subjects or not.
At this present time of unprecedented trouble and suffering
of the Chinese people in their homeland, it would be expected that
a people like the Australians, known for their open-mindedness
and fairness, would not allow such a piece of discriminating legis-
lation to be placed upon the Statute Books of N.S.W., particularly
in view of the fact that the Chinese Chamber of Commerce has
distinctly assured the Department concerned that it would do
everything in its power to have the existing laws and regulations


translated, published and ingrained in the minds of all those con-
cerned in the furniture trade as to what the Government requires
the Chinese to do.
We understand the main objections of the Department are
that some of the Chinese firms work overtime and that factory
premises have been used as dining rooms and sleeping quarters.
As it was pointed out before, offenders against the hours are not
many, and eating and sleeping on factory premises only apply
to men without family connections in Australia, as men with fami-
lies and Australian-born Chinese all live out in the Suburbs. How-
ever, these infringements are being rectified, and if an inspection
were made now, it would be found that the reasons for further
complaint would be non-existent, and we would welcome the oppor-
tunity to arrange a thorough inspection, if any gentleman will com-
municate with us. But if this were the only object a large number
of the provisions of the Amending Act would be quite unnecessary
and the fact that such provisions are being insisted on, the Bill
leaves only one conclusion, and that is that the Government in-
tends to deprive the Chinese engaged in that trade of their liveli-
hood, or, at the best, to very seriously handicap them in earning
a living. A perusal of the Bill which is now ready for its second
reading on the (date) will confirm this.
Section 49, Subsection 1, discriminates between the hours
of labour by Australian and Chinese and debars the latter
from working for the same number of hours as the Austra-
lians. This is unfair, but it becomes more so when the same
rule is applied to the Australian natural-born subject if either
father or mother is a Chinese. If legislation of this class were
attempted to be passed in China it wo.uld not be allowed by
the British Government.
Subsection 10. Power of Union Secretaries. This will
in practice harass and embarrass the Chinese furniture
manufacturers to such an extent that it is questionable as to
what it may lead to.
Section 49a, Schedule 5. Part 5,6, 7 will not only de-
prive natural born Australian subjects (of Chinese parents)
of their British rights, but they would not be able to obtain
employment in Australian firms according to these Clauses.
Schedule Part 11 will ultimately by selfish and mean
practices drive the Chinese out of business altogether. It is no
use saying that stamping of furniture has been law in
other States, as we know the results of that legislation too
well. It has driven the Chinese out of business, and we will
suffer the same loss here if furniture is to be stamped as
provided in the Bill.


However disappointed we are that this Bill has reached the
first reading in the Upper House without modifications whatso-
ever, we are indeed thankful to the gentlemen of the Legislative
Assembly, who, in the name of justice, have been so fair to brave
their personal feelings against the prejudice embodied in this Bill.
We are sure those gentlemen are as anxious as we are that all the
Chinese should scrupulously conform with the local conditions in
order that there would be no unfair competition; yet they brave
their voice against the oppression of a helpless community in Aus-
tralia.
We in Australia, whether a merchant, manufacturer, or a
worker, are not mere wage earners. We, in our little ways, con-
tribute to some small degree towards the fostering of trade be-
tween Australia and our ‘huge market’ called China, We endeavour,
in our association with the Australian people, to do our level best
towards improving the mutual friendly relationship of the two
countries. Notwithstanding our sufferings in China just at the pre-
sent time, we, all Australians and Chinese alike, can render one
another service for the mutual goodwill and welfare of the two
peoples, as we must admit that in the long run we are all econo-
mically bound to one another in trade, and everything should be
done to encourage and not discourage mutual good feelings.
There are about 200 Chinese engaged in the furniture trade, some
of them natural-born Australians, who are most seriously affected
by the proposed legislation, and we are greatly concerned as to
their future if they are driven out of the trade.
In conclusion, all we ask is that fair-minded Australians should
see that the proposed Bill does not create the many injustices
which the Bill, whether designedly or otherwise must, if framed
at its present form, immediately create a most embarrassing posi-
tion for the Chinese in this State.


AN INCIDENT OF 1925.
Somehow or other our Chinese seem to come in for all sorts
of harassment, and we lay our faith in the legislators to do the
right thing by us, as we do not, as a rule, hold mammoth meetings
to pass protest resolutions. It is often misconstrued that “Silence
means acceptance,” seeing that no public protests were made, that
we have no objection to the various embarrassments shown from
time to time by sections of the people. As evidence of this, only
last year about this time, when the Farm Produce Agents Bill was
brought before Parliament, is an incident.
In that Bill there was a clause prohibiting “aliens” from carry-
ing on in the Fruit Agency business, which, in effect, meant the
barring of Chinese only, because the only other nationals engaged
in the trade who could not become naturalized were the Chinese,
while other nationals in the same business would escape the dis-
criminating provision. When the injustice was pointed
out by us, reason prevailed, and the objectionable clause was de-
leted before the Bill was made law. We truly believe that
the true position of our Chinese residents in Australia need only
be made better known and the desire to discriminate against us
would not be nearly so prevalent, because, at heart, Australians
really have no grudge against the few Chinese living in Australia.
On the following page we reprint an address de-
livered at the 1925 session of the Institute of Pacific
Relations which will greatly assist Australian friends to under-
stand the Chinese viewpoint, as of late, Chinese affairs have per-
plexed the average man not acquainted with the Chinese situation,
and it is not out of place to reprint the address, which will go a
long way in bringing some light regarding a people who are greatly
misunderstood; as it is of paramount importance that Austra-
lians and Chinese should know each other’s real aims and aspira-
tions for the mutual welfare and trade relationship of the two
people.


A CHINESE VIEW OF PACIFIC RELATIONS.
(By T. Z. KOO.)
“We are met here this morning, individual citizens from differ-
ent countries with varying cultures and philosophies of life, to try
and discover whether there is another way of settling problems
and differences other than by the time-honoured way of blacking
each other’s eye. We have a common proverb in China (quoted in
Chinese) which means “Proprieties before arms.” We are here
to give that method a trial and I, on behalf of my Chinese col-
leagues, pledge herewith our wholehearted determination to work
for the success of this our common experiment. We shall listen and
consider most carefully what others may say in this Institute, and
we ourselves shall express our views also fully and frankly when-
ever necessary. We may differ in our interpretation of facts and
situations, but we are resolved to maintain through it all a spirit of
understanding, tolerance and good-will.”
“The problems which confront the peoples around the Pacific
are varied and difficult. They touch every phase of modern life—
political, economical, social, racial. But, broadly speaking, the
situation in the Pacific can be stated very simply. On the one hand,
we find a group of nations, mainly of the white race, which
through one means or another, have in the past years secured cer-
tain privileges, rights and territories from eastern people. These
they are very anxious to maintain and keep as long as
possible. On the other hand, we find another group of nations in
which the spirit of nationalism and racial consciousness is rapidly
growing and which are, therefore, anxious to recover what has
been wrested from them in the past. And there, in a nutshell, is
the philosophy of the Pacific situation to-day. Left to itself, the
situation will inevitably lead to conflict and disaster and a general
slowing down in the process of growth of everything worth while
in human life because so much of our energy and resources will
have to be diverted for purposes of destruction. I think I am in-
terpreting correctly the sentiment of this Institute when I say it
is because we have all recognised the futility and horror of letting
the situation drift to its inevitable end that we have come together
to find another way out.”
“With your permission, I shall use the next few minutes to
interpret for you the situation in China, because some understand-
ing of China’s struggles is essential to an understanding of our
relation to the Pacific problem. The one outstanding feature of
these fourteen years of our young Republic is the growth of r. spirit
of national and racial consciousness in our people. For the first
time in our history the people of China are coming into conscious
manhood. This fact few observers of China yet realise. The ex-
pression of this national and racial consciousness can be seen in
the new movements which have sprung up in our country in re-
cent* years. Even a brief survey of conditions in China to-day will
reveal new and significant forces at work there. The time at my
disposal will only allow me to barely indicate a few of these forces.”


“First, ever since the student patriotic movement of 1918 suc-
ceeded in forcing the Chinese Government to refuse to sign the
Versailles Treaty, our people have come to realise the tremendous
power of the people when organised nationally for common action.
This had led to the coming of what is called in China the “People’s
Organisations.’’ Groups of people generally centered round a com-
mon occupational interest are organising themselves so that they
will have a channel for the expression of ideas and for common
action on any issue of common concern. It is these people’s organi-
sations which have enabled us on more than one occasion to en-
force our will on our government; for example, in the Disarmament
Conference at Washington, and, more recently, in the Opium Con-
ference at Geneva.’’
“Second, the ‘Renaissance Movement’ has practically re-made
the intellectual background of Chinese youth. This is a movement
started to evaluate our own intellectual heritage and to introduce
new ideas and ideals into China. As students of history we all
know that changes in the life of nations and peoples come as the
result of the power of ideas and ideals. The Renaissance in China
is primarily a movement to create such ideas and ideals. Very few
people realise the fact that the men who are making the New
China to-day are not our political and military chiefs but the
leaders of this ‘Renaissance Movement.’ ’’
“Third, in the old religions of China we are seeing the coming
of revivalist movements. This is especially noticeable in Confu-
cianism and Buddhism. The principal aim of these movements is to
preserve and restate the spiritual values in Chinese culture and
life.”
“Fourth, in the economic sphere new forces are stirring, notice-
ably in modern banking and industries. This foreshadows the com-
ing of great social changes in Chinese life due to the growth of
the modern industrial system in our country. Wrapped up in this
development are the seeds for much international strife. Even in
this early stage, keen competition is developing between industries
in Chinese hands and those in the hands of aliens. This situation
points to the demand for tariff autonomy.”
“The converging of all the forces in China has brought about
the awakening on the part of the Chinese people. With tills
awakening a twofold tendency has developed among the people mL
China, one internal and the other external. The determination A
keep our educational programme out of politics, the movement toJ>
wards provincial self-government, the coming of the women’s
movement, the changes in social and family life, all these represent
internal adjustments in our life.”
“Externally, our people see the urgent necessity of readjust-
ment. First, is the matter of tariff autonomy. In order that the
more highly industrialised nations may always find an open
market in China, we have been deprived of our right to fix our
own tariff rates on imports. I think I am a fair-minded man, and
yet I have never been able to find any justification for the present


tariff arrangement and the Chinese people will never be satisfied
until a more fundamental solution of the problem is reached than
by dangling before us the bait of tariff revision. Second is the ques-
tion of extra-territorial rights. You are familiar with all the rea-
sons advanced for or against extra-territorial rights in China. I do
not wish to go into these. But if I may give you my interpretation
of the situation I think the real but unexpressed reason why this
question is hanging fire at the present moment is because in the
mind of the West the question has become so much involved with
the question of Western prestige in the East. The fact of Western
prestige in the East has disappeared ever since the war in Europe,
but the paraphernalia of bolstering up this fancied prestige is
still there. Until that paraphernalia is swept away there will be no
peace.”
“Then there is the demand for the revision of so-called unjust
treaties which concern territories, ceded or leased, financial con-
cession, etc., and for an equitable readjustment in the matter of
the status of Chinese in other territories. We are also exercised in
the matter of the international traffic in drugs and arms as they
affect China.”
“In conclusion, may I say that this process of readjustment
going on in China, internally and externally, is still going on under
the “left-over” leadership from the days after the monarchy.
Because of this, the progress made appears halting, slow and futile.
This is inevitable. The real leaders of China are in the process of
maturing, and it will be ten or fifteen years before they will make
their fullest contribution to the nation. In the meantime pressure
from within and without is impinging upon us. Adjustments had
to be made and they are being made. Now you will understand
the reason for China’s plea for time and opportunity to make these
adjustments in our own way. It is the only permanent solution
possible.”
PRESENT DAY CHINA.
At the same Conference, under the above title, Mr. L. T. Chen
(inter alia) quoted:—
“To the superficial observer who looks only at outwards forms
and conventional signs, China is a Republic only in name. But as a
matter of fact public opinion in China, democratic after its own
fashion, is making itself felt in a slow, clumsy, but nevertheless
positive manner. On the part of many this recognition of the great
power of public opinion may be almost subconscious, but the feel-
ing is there even though ill-defined. How the troops feel, what
the people think, the opinion of foreign residents and even the
judgment of the outside world, all is weighed in the minds of the
military leaders, and how to influence public opinion in their favour


seems to preoccupy their thoughts far more than questions of
strategy or tactics.”
“The feeling of national consciousness was also quickened by
the Great War. Strange to say, instead of being impressed with
the organisation and machineries in the colossal conflict the
Chinese fell back to question the real worth of western civilization.
In other words, instead of blindly paying the customary homage
to the achievements of the Occident, Chinese thought searched
more carefully its own heritage, thinking that there was probably
something of more intrinsic value in what they had laid aside
and pronounced old-fashioned. In a word, the war drove the
Chinese back to revaluation of not only what they had introduced
from the West but also what they had inherited from their ances-
tors in ages past. China is re-asserting itself, believing she has
some special contribution to make to the common stock of worla
welfare and civilisation.”
“I shall not touch upon the educational forces except to men-
tion the increase of students from 1,500,000 in 1910 to 7,000,000
in 1924 and the initiation of mass education which has swept 13
provinces. Other organisations like the Good Roads Movement,
Public Health Association, the National Athletic Association, the
Association for the Advancement of Education, the Chambers of
Commerce, the Educational and Nationalist Assn., the Y.M.C.A. and
Y.W.C.A., and the church, are all exerting very positive influence
as forces of reconstruction in China. Special mention should be
made of the Citizenship Education that the Y.M.C.A. is promoting
and the efforts by the Christian forces in bringing about labour
legislation and social reforms. Two years ago there was also
started a movement for organized municipal volunteer corps. All
these serve to indicate the active interest and responsibility that
the people are taking in shaping the destiny of the nation.”
In view of the recent London Imperial Conference’s
endorsement of the International Labour Conference’s draft conven-
tion which provides “for the extension of benefits to aliens whose
Governments are prepared to reciprocate,” it does not seem out of
place to appeal to the fair-mindedness of the Australian people to
do their best to uphold that principle, which is good, and refuse to
endorse the present or future discriminating legislature, so that
people of other nations might be given a chance and let live.
The Secretary of the Chinese
Chamber of Commerce
will faciliate enquiries
Telephone, City 7996


FACTORIES AND SHOPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1926.
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
EXTRACTS OF DISCUSSIONS ON THE BILL.
First Reading:
28/10’26. Book 14—Page 6.38 —Mr. J. C. L. Fitzpatrick (Bathurst),
(inter alia).
I would like to know just what steps we should take for the
purpose of helping the Minister, and more particularly of helping
the people outside, whose interests will be affected by this measure.
Every day the newspapers are reeking with accounts of prose-
cutions that are instituted in regard to trifling matters, against
persons interested in productive enterprise and industry.
The other day a man stood for half an hour yarning to some friends
in a bakehouse, after the time had expired at which he ceased
work. That man was prosecuted, as also was the proprietor of the
establishment, and they were fined, notwithstanding that it was
proven by evidence that the baker had not done any work from
the time he relinquished duty. I suppose that in this measure there
will be some proposition to deal with matters of that kind. They
are trifling matters, but such pinpricks cause a great deal of
trouble, acrimony, and dissatisfaction.
28/10/’26. Book 14—Page 641—Mr. Ness (Western Suburbs).
I do not think the hon. member who has just resumed his seat
is quite correct in saying that members on this side are not pre-
pared to support humane measures. They are just as anxious to
provide humane working conditions as members on the Govern-
ment side, who are so blatant in their advocacy of those who work
in factories ancl shops. So far as lam concerned, I believe proper
conditions should surround all employment.
3/11/’26. Book 16—Page 778—Minister.
What I am talking about now are the Chinese. If hon.
members opposite want to put Chinese against our own people in
order to reduce the standard of living of our own people, then
this Government does not want it, and furthermore, this Govern-
ment will not tolerate it. This Government has placed certain
legislation on the statute-book, and is going to administer it. It
is going to protect the Europeans of this city against any influx
of Chinese or other foreigners, whereby the standard of living
may be impaired.
3/11/’26. Book 16—Page 784—Mr. Bavin.
So far as the greater part of this measure is concerned, it
certainly will not receive any opposition from this side of the
House. We will not oppose the second reading; we will endea-
vour to do our best to discuss the measure, thought not in an un-
friendly way. We will, however, discuss the details of the Bill
when we reach the Committee stage, and I hope the Minister
will not follow the example of his colleague this morning and
deny us the opportunity to properly discuss it. If he does, the
only consequence will be the consequence that followed the action
of Mr. Fitzgerald this morning—it will very seriously delay the
Bill.


3/11/’26. Book 16—Page 785—Mr, Bavin.
I do not imagine there is much in this Bill that can be regarded
as an unreasonable burden to place on industry. There is only
one clause in it which contains a very reprehensible provision. That
is the clause relating to Chinese, about which I shall have some-
thing to say later on. Generally speaking, the principles embodied
in the different clauses seem to be perfectly sound.
It is not a fair thing to the factory owners to impose these
obligations on them by law without their being consulted. I do
not know whether the Minister can tell us that he has discussed
the detailed provisions of this measure, with anyone representing
factory owners generally.
3/11/’26. Book 16—Page 787—Mr. Bavin.
I want to say a word or two about one clause in the Bill which
I think ought to be altered. I am calling attention to it in the
hope that the Minister will, before we reach the Committee stage,
consider some relaxation of the provision. I refer to Clause 5,
dealing with Chinese labour. I want to say at once that, if a
Chinese is allowed to live in this country and carry on his work,
he ought not to be singled out by the law of this State and have
placed upon him disabilities which do not apply to other workers.
It is absolutely wrong to single out these men and impose gross
hardships upon them. I do not want to see our workers sup-
planted by Chinese, but while these men are here, and many
of them are naturalised citizens of the Commonwealth, it is grossly
unfair an dunjust to impose upon them hardships which are not
imposed on others. They have very little political influence, they
are not members of unions, and they cannot threaten the Min-
ister, and I am afraid that on that account the Minister has not
paid as much attention to their claims as to the claims of the
members of the unions.
I quite expected to hear that kind of stuff, which is always
to be looked for when one stands in his place here and insists that
justice shall be done. I contend that this clause does a gross
injustice. It provides that in any factory where any Chinese
works, no person shall perform, or employ, allow, permit, or
authorise any person whomsoever to perform any work of any
nature, whether connected with the business of the factory or
not, in the case of a Chinese, on any day before half-past seven
o’clock in the morning or after five o’clock in the evening from
Monday to Friday, inclusive, or on Saturday, Sunday or a public
holiday. In other words, if a man employs a Chinese, however
efficient he may be, and whether or not he is a naturalised citizen
of this country and has lived here all his life, he must not allow
him to work before half-past seven in the morning or after five
o’clock in the afternoon, from Monday to Friday, inclusive, and
not at all on the other days I have mentioned. The clause is very
badly drafted, and is difficult to understand, but if such a man is
allowed to work during the prohibited hours or days, so far as
I can gather, the factory will cease to be a factory under this
measure, and the employer will become liable to a very heavy
penalty. So far as white workers are concerned, there is no
restriction of that sort at all.


Mr. Davies: They have to abide by awards!
Mr. BAVIN: Yes, I understand ail about that. They are gov-
erned by awards, and I want to know why a factory owner who
employs a Chinese should be singled out in this way and have this
stringent condition imposed on him merely because he employs
a Chinese.
Mr. J. C. L. Fitzpatrick: Is that the real interpretation?
Mr. BAVIN: Yes. The real interpretation is that the Chinese
will be “sucked”—they will not be employed—whereas so far
as other persons are concerned, there is no such restriction. Other
men may work for any hours they like. According to the clause
the restriction is not confined to furniture factories. If a Chinese
is employed in any factory at all he is not to be allowed to work
beyond the hours specified or at all on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays. What is the justification for that? Although the fac-
tory may be open on Saturdays and other workers who are white
men may be operating there, Chinamen are to be prevented from
doing so. All the Chinese will be turned loose on the Saturday,
although work is going on in the factory. What can they do?
If they play fan tan they will find the police at their heels. This
is an absolutely unfair provision.
The Minister is not satisfied with what I have indicated, but
he has gone on to provide:
In order to prevent any evasion or avoidance of the
foregoing limits of working hours, all work done by any
person employed in a factory for the occupier elsewhere
than in the factory (whether the work is or is not con-
nected with the business of the factory), shall be deemed
to be done whilst employed in the factory, and the time
shall be counted accordingly.
So far as I can understand, the result of that will be that if
there is a Chinese employed in a factory and if on a Saturday he
were to do some work in his own home, for his employer—work
such as ironing a shirt or growing some vegetables—the employer
would be liable to the penalty to which he would be subject if he
employed the Chinese in his factory. This would apply
although the Chinese was working away from the fac-
tory or doing something that had nothing to do with the
operations in the factory. I hope the Minister will explain this
clause. I do not want to go into any greater detail at this stage,
but I am directing attention to the difficulty the Bill presents so
that the Minister may know what he will have to deal with. Sub-
clause (4) of the same clause provides:
No Chinese shall be permitted by the occupier to pre-
pare or partake of meals, board, lodge, or sleep on the
premises of a building of which a furniture factory forms
part nor be upon or in any building or curtilage of a build-
ing used as a furniture factory at any other time except
a time at which he may lawfully work thereon.
Mr. J. C. L. Fitzpatrick: That is, he cannot live on the
premises.


Mr. BAVIN: That is so. I think there is a good deal to be
said for the view that Chinese should not be allowed to live on
the premises.
Mr. J. C. L. Fitzpatrick: You would not put that embargo
upon white men?
Mr. BAVIN: No. Generally speaking, I do not think it is
desirable that factories should be used as sleeping-places for em-
ployees, but I do say that in that respect white men and Chinese
ought to be on exactly the same footing.
Mr. Ratcliffe: I do not think that even a Chinese could object
to the clause!
Mr. BAVIN: But under it, if a Chinaman eats anything on the
premises—
Dr. Evatt: Outside the hours. At any time except the time
in which he may lawfully work. This is to prevent his using the
factory as a restaurant or dwelling-house!
Mr. BAVIN: If he eats anything after 5 p.m. or is there
on Saturday at all, an offence is committed against the Act.
Dr. Evatt: It is not right that the place should be a dwelling-
house as well as a factory!
Mr. Ratcliffe: A number of them used to cook for one another!
Mr. BAVIN: As I understand the interjection, what the hon.
member is trying to prevent is a number of Chinese running a
factory of their own, and sleeping or having their meals on part
of the premises.
Mr. Ratcliffe: They work there on Saturdays and Sundays,
and at all hours!
Mr. BAVIN: I am quite prepared to join in stopping that, but
I say there is other means of doing so. I am not prepared to
say that under any circumstances Chinese should be allowed to
live within the curtilage of the factory in which they carry on
their work, but you are imposing great hardship on these men.
They can be properly supervised, and any evil can be dealt with
on the merits of each case; but to lay it down as part of the law
that these men shall not, under any circumstances, live or have
their meals within the enclosed space in w T hich the factory is situ-
ated, is to impose a hardship upon them which you do not impose
upon white men. If a couple of white men were allowed to set
up a furniture factory, and to live in one part of the premises and
do their work in another, the law would not prevent it. The same
law should be applied to Chinese.
Mr. Ratcliffe: You know how they live!
Mr. BAVIN: I know how some of them live, and I join with
the hon. member in trying to stop that. In this case your object
may be perfectly right, but the means you are adopting to achieve
it will create injustice to the Chinese themselves.
I have indicated very generally some of the provisions in the
Bill which I think the Minister should reconsider, and I think that
clause will do great injustice to Chinese who are allowed to
carry on their business here. They are naturalised citizens, and
it is not fair to impose restrictions upon them which are not im-
posed on other workers.
Dr. Evatt; Why do you say they are naturalised?


Mr. BAVIN: A very large number of them are, or if they are
not, they are allowed to live here, and are entitled to the protection
of the law.
Dr. Evatt:
Mr. BAVIN: If the Federal Government, which is the proper
authority, allows them to live here, I certainly would not be a
party to deporting them.
Mr. Ratcliffe: I understand the Chinese are not objecting to
the clause.
Mr. BAVIN: In any case, these provisions, as far as I can
see, are not just to them, and will make it almost impossible for
a Chinese to obtain employment in any other factory. I think
the Minister might fairly reconsider the clause from the point of
view of removing the undue hardships which will undoubtedly be
imposed on these people. Ido not want in any way to encourage
their competition with our own workmen, but at the same time
I think it is unjust for them to be singled out by the Minister in
the way they have been. I hope the Minister will give us an
opportunity of dealing fully with the clause in Committee, and
that Mr. Ratcliffe will be able to justify his statement that the
Chinese themselves desire the clause.
Mr. Ratcliffe: I say they are not objecting to a provision which
puts them on the same footing as white men!
Mr. BAVIN: What lam objecting to is that they are put on an
entirely different footing.
Mr. Ratcliffe: There will have to be control over them. You
should see the areas in which they live!
Mr. BAVIN: I will join with the hon, member in putting an
end to those conditions, but these provisions single them out for
unjust treatment, and should be modified so as to impose the same
conditions on these men as on people of other nationalities. There
are people of other nationalities who are quite as open to criti-
cism as the Chinese, and who are not half as useful as citizens
but they are not covered by this clause. People of other nationali-
ties are carrying on trades and businesses in this city, and in many
cases the conditions ought to be altered. Why should Chinese
be singled out in this way? lam quite prepared to join in a pro-
vision which will cover all nationalities. I assure the Minister that
if he will give us a reasonable opportunity for discussing the
clause in Committee, he will meet with no factious opposition from
this side of the House.
3/11/’26. Book 16—Page 790-I—(Dr. Evatt).
Dr. EVATT: There is another matter I wish to refer to, and
that is the objection raised by Mr, Bavin to the clause dealing
with Chinese. In the first place, it often happens—l think it hap-
pens in the majority of cases—that the Chinese about whom com-
plaint has been made are not British subjects. They are people
who have come to this country and who have not taken out certi-
ficates of naturalisation. They are aliens, and they are only here
by the grace of the Federal authorities.
Mr. Scott Fell: Are you aware that Hong Kong is a British
colony?


Dr. EVATT: The hon. member asks with remarkable irrele-
vance if lam aware that Hong Kong is a British colony. I say
that the bulk of the Chinese working in the factories of this country
are aliens. It is assumed by the hon. member—and I submit
wrongly—that they are ordinary British subjects, naturalised
under the laws of the Commonwealth. That has not been shown
to be so, and this Bill will apply to all persons whether they are
aliens or not. The difficulty about the Chinese, as I understand
it, is this: They are treated differently from other persons because
their habits in factories are well known. When the ordinary
hours of the working-day are over the Chinese keep on working,
although the outside doors of the factories in which they work are
often bolted.
Mr. Ratcliffe: They do not know one day from another!
Dr. EVATT: Night is the same as day to them. The factories
in which they w T ork are not factories only. They are fan tan shops,
restaurants, dwelling-houses, boarding-houses, and everything else
thrown into one. I notice that Mr. Levy agrees with that. The
only way we can meet such a position is to apply drastic legisla-
tion to it. Ido not propose to delay the House further in dis-
cussing this measure. Its principle is perfectly sound. If the
members of the Opposition can indicate some details which are
insufficient, or which can be amended in committee, no doubt the
Minister will consider them. I ask the House to support the prin-
ciple that the Chinese must be treated differently from white
workers.
Mr. J. C. L. Fitzpatrick: Why?
Dr. EVATT: For this reason: White workers, after the ordin-
ary working hours are finished, are paid overtime, if they work,
and that is a very necessary thing. Overtime rates are higher than
ordinary rates, because it is the intention of Parliament that work-
ing hours should be limited. The Chinese are in an entirely differ-
ent position from white workers. There is no overtime for them.
Mr. J. C. L. Fitzpatrick: How do you know?
Dr. EVATT: It is a well-known fact.
Mr, Scott Fell: Would you give the Chinese British justice?
Dr. EVATT: It is a very well-known principle of British jus-
tice that our own white workers, our own British subjects, should
be protected by our laws whilst this competition exists. A Chinese
is underpaid and often unpaid, and gives no recognition whatso-
ever to the standard of living which has been won in this country.
That being so, it needs very drastic legislation to deal with the
evil.
3/11/’26. Mr. Buttenshaw (Murrumbidgee). Book 16—Page 792.
Another provision made is that no employee can sleep on the
premises. I cannot see any very great reason why an employee
should not sleep on the premises, particularly in conjunction with
a factory. Will this prohibit a caretaker from residing on the
premises? It may happen that a portion of the premises could
be partitioned off and provide better accommodation perhaps
than many men have at home. I feel sure that legislation of this
character, in some respects at any rate, is altogether unnecessary.
There are many measures the Minister could bring forward which


would do much more good. For instance, we find provisions deal-
ing with the unfair competition of Chinese, while Greeks and others
are permitted to sell tobacco and other articles after hours. Legis-
lation in the latter direction would be more beneficial to the
general community.
It is all right to stamp the furniture to show whether it has
been made by Chinese or white labour, but I do not think it is
necessary to place on the furniture the manufacturer’s name!
Mr. Ratchiffe: That will not be done. Stamps of a distinctive
character will be used to show the kind of labour which has been
employed and that is all. The time has arrived when we should
exercise closer control over the working and living conditions of
Chinese. It is impossible for white men to compete against Chin-
ese, who make no distinction between Sunday and other days, and
work all sorts of hours. In some places the lights are never out,
but whether the men are working or playing fan tan cannot
be ascertained. I know of the trouble which the inspectors have
had, and think the Bill is distinctly a step in the right direction.
3/11/’26. Book 16—Mr. Levy—Pages 795-7
I have to take exception to one paragraph in the new schedule.
I refer to paragraph 17. Certainly it only applies to the furniture
industry, but it is a provision which I think must meet with the
disapproval of every man who is not biassed on the subject: It says:
The secretary of the registered industrial union of
employers or employees in the furniture industry, or an
officer authorised by him in writing, shall have the like
powers as are conferred upon an inspector by paragraphs
one, two, and six of this Act.
Why the furniture industry is picked out for this mark of favour
Ido not know. The paragraphs of the Principal Act named really
confer the most important powers which an inspector under the
Factories and Shops Act possesses. One is the power to lay infor-
mations and institute prosecutions. Has not the Minister confi-
dence in the inspectors employed under the Act? Are they not
competent men? Do they not do their job efficiently? Why
does he pass those men by and expressly provide that in the case
of the furniture industry, the secretary of a union, whether of
employers or employees, shall have the powers conferred upon
an inspector under the Principal Act? Why should he go out
of his way to single out secretaries of unions, and give them the
powers? If that is done in the case of the furniture industry, I
do not see why it should not be done in the case of other indus-
tries. If the inspectors under the Factories and Shops Act are not
sufficient in number for the work required, let the Minister appoint
more inspectors. He has not to ask this House for permission
to do so; he can do it as an executive act. An inspector is
appointed by the Public Service Board, and there is some guar-
antee that he is a qualified man; but in the case of the secretary
of a union of employers or employees, there is no guarantee that
the man has the qualifications of an inspector. Besides, we must
face the situation that whether he is the secretary of an employers’
or of an employees’ union, he will probably be biassed one way
or the other; and that is why, in my opinion, it is not advisable to


give such a man the powers conferred by the Principal Act upon
inspectors properly appointed by the Public Service Board.
With regard to the clauses relating to Chinese workers, I have
not very much to say. I recognise that it has been the practice
in the past to make special provision for places in which Chinese
are working. That is recognised in the Principal Act, which, as
hon. members know, provides that any office, building or place in
which one or more Chinese is so engaged, is itself a factory and
comes within the scope of the Act. I recognise that it is necessary
to be exceedingly cautious in dealing with Chinese working in
factories, but I do submit that the Minister has gone a little further
than the exigencies of the case required.
(796).
(5) No building or portion of a building or curtilage of such
building shall be used as a furniture factory if Chinese working
in such building prepare or partake of meals, board, lodge, sleep
therein, or are thereupon or therein at any time at which Chinese
may not lawfully work therein.
That is to say, it shall not be used at all as a furniture factory. It
may be that most of the workers working in it are English, and
perhaps one is Chinese. If that Chinese goes out of the building,
but keeps within the curtilage, and eats something he has brought
with him, that imposes heavy disabilities upon the owner of the
factory. There may be a hundred English workmen and one
Chinaman employed in the factory, but because that one Chinaman
goes out and eats something in the yard or in a part of the curtilage
of the premises, all these terrible pains and penalties are to be
inflicted on the owner of the factory.
Mr, J. C. L. Fitzpatrick: Can a European workman employed
in a factory eat on the premises?
Mr. LEVY: So far as this Bill is concerned he can, because
it makes no reference to people other than Chinese eating on the
premises. Sub-clause (4) of Clause 5 reads:
No Chinese shall be permitted by the occupier to pre-
pare or partake of meals, board, lodge, or sleep on the
premises of a building of which a furniture factory forms
part, nor be upon or in any building or curtilage of a build-
ing used as a furniture factory at any other time except at
a time at which he may lawfully work thereon.
Nobody can define what a meal is. If the Chinese partakes of any
food whatsoever, the owner of the premises has all these pains
and penalties inflicted upon him.
Mr. Ratcliffe: He can eat there during working hours!
Mr. LEVY: Supposing he does eat there, why should all these
terrible disabilities be inflicted upon the owner of the factory?
Does not the Minister see he is going a little too far in passing
legislation of this kind?
I quite agree with the leader of the Opposition that, although
we have to see that our standards of living are not interfered with
in any way, still the Chinese who are here and who have to obey
our ordinary laws, and in many cases pay taxes, are entitled to
some little protection. We do not want to treat them as outlaws,
and we do not want to make it impossible for them to earn their


living whilst they are here. It seems to me that if some of the
clauses in the latter part of this Bill are put into operation a
number of Chinese will find it absolutely impossible to work in fac-
tories. What they are going to do then I do not know. Neither am I
very much concerned; but it is not our duty as legislators to make
things so hard for these Chinese that there will not be a place for
them in the State, that they will noCbe able to do anything at all,
that they will not be able to earn a living. I think the Minister will
see on reflection that he has gone a little too far in this respect, and
has imposed restrictions and limitations upon these unfortunate
people which are really not required from the point of view of
legislation, to meet their competition.
3/11/’26. Mr. Ness—Page 797.
I hold no brief for Chinese, I would sooner see our factories
conducted by Europeans, but, at the same time, it must be ad-
mitted that many Europeans are making furniture which requires
just as close scrutiny as any furniture which is made by Chinese.
If this principle is going to be applied to Chinese, it ought to be
applied all round.
At present the people who have to live under our laws have
no say in the framing of them; when they are enacted they have
no option but to obey them. These inspectors say that such and
such a thing is necessary, and the remarkable thing is that the
Minister gives ear to them, with the result that Bills of this kind are
brought in.
Second Reading.
10/11/’26. Mr. Ball—Book 19—Page 1030.
The Minister has not given sufficient reasons. It is not proper
that he should try to rush this Bill through when members are
on their feet, and nobody knows what is before the House. This
is a very important measure, and I object to it being rushed
through in this way. There are members who desire to say a few
words on it, and I hope they will be given the opportunity to do so.
Then there is the proposal that furniture must be branded.
That again is penalising industry. Furniture must be branded to
show whether it is of Crinese or European manufacture Nobody will
buy furniture which is branded “Ah Wong” or “Sun Ki,” and al-
though I do not hold any brief for the Chinese, it would be better
to tell them that they will not be allowed to make furniture here
at all, than to compel them to put on it such a brand as will pre-
vent them from selling it when it is made.
10/11/’26. Mr. Ness—Book 19—Page 1033.
In the first place, the Government is trying to strangle the
Chinese furniture industry. Why do not Labour members carry
the same principle into everyday dife? I guarantee they buy their
greengroceries from the Chinese.
Mr. Davidson: What advantages will the other people get
over the Chinese under the provisions of this Bill?
Mr. NESS: Europeans can make furniture just as well and
just as cheaply as any Chinese, if they like to put their minds
to it. They do not want any unfair conditions.


Then you are giving union secretaries and their deputies the
same power to go into a factory as a Government inspector has.
That is going to lead to corruption. It will lead to union secre-
taries making their own terms with employers, and saying, “If you
do not square this matter up we will take you before the court.”
That has been done in the past.
I understand that behind it all the Minister’s intention is to
put a sort of ban on Chinese-made furniture.
10/11/’26. Dr, Arthur—Book 19—Page 1033.
I believe that much of the criticism of this measure that has
been offered is perfectly well merited, but I wish to draw the
attention of the Minister to some directions in which I think the
Bill could be improved, so as to make conditions in factories, shops
and warehouses better than they are at present. I feel that one of
the things necessary is really an amendment of the Building Act.
I certainly think Mr. Ness was right in protesting against
union secretaries being allowed to dictate in any way. I also think
that the attempt which is being made in this Bill to harass the
unfortunate Chinese is something which should be beneath the
contempt of any Government.
10/11/’26. Mr. J. C. L. Fitzpatrick—Book 19—Page 1036.
To select the Chinese as the object of special legislation is
to impose an impediment on them in earning their living. Their
hours of work are to some extent unrestricted, and possibly it may
be necessary that some little restriction should be placed upon
them, seeing that they enter into competition with our own race
engaged in similar work. I have been in such out-back places as
Bourke and Walgett and can say that in those districts it would
be practically impossible to get vegetables if it were not for the
Chinese. There is no reason why the Chinese in this State should
be unduly penalised simply because they are following an occu-
pation in which our own people are engaged. I hope that in Com-
mittee the Minister will give consideration to amendments which
may be proposed.
IN COMMITTEE.
11/11/’26. Mr. Hoskins—Book 20—Page 1089.
I would like to have some explanation of paragraph (4),
which seems to me to place undue restrictions upon the Chinese.
I believe that regulations should be made to protect the health
of the people, but I would remind the Minister that others be-
sides Chinese sleep on the premises. I have known men to sleep
in a boiler at Eveleigh workshops and also to play cards there.
What is the Minister going to do with these men: will this clause
make any difference to them?
Mr. BAVIN: I think the whole clause is very unjust and un-
reasonable. I do not propose to vote against the clause, but I
would like the Minister to tell the Committee why he is not going
to allow Chinese to work after 5 o’clock on any afternoon from
Monday to Friday, and not at all on Saturday. What are the
Chinese to do? They cannot go market-gardening. Mr. Lazzarini
has a Bill to stop them from smoking opium. The police will not


allow them to play fan tan. Now we have a Bill which will
stop the mfrom working. What possible justification is there for
saying that a Chinese shall not do any work after 5 o’clock on
any afternoon from Monday to Friday, and no work at all on
Saturday ? I quite agree that, owing to the way in which Chinese
live, it is necessary to impose some restrictions on them, but these
restrictions are altogether unfair. I suggest to the Minister that
paragraph (a) should be altered, and Chinese allowed to work
for the same time as other people. It is, of course, impossible for
me, without departmental help, to draft a satisfactory clause to
take the place of this one, and I am not prepared to submit an
amendment because I do not wish to do it in such a way as to
embarrass the department. I simply point out that the proposal is
absolutely unfair. The Minister has no right whatever to tell
Chinese that they shall not work after 5 p.m, while other persons
are allowed to work till 6 p.m., and he has no right to forbid
Chinese to work on Saturdays or public holidays. Unless the
Minister undertakes to make an amendment treating Chinese more
justly, I shall vote against the clause. On the second reading I
asked the hon. gentleman if he would give reasons why a special
limitation should be placed on Chinese, and he would not do it. I
am not prepared to help him in preventing Chinese from earning
their livelihood. Ido not want Chinese to take the place of our
own workmen in the furniture or any other trade, but as they are
living here, we have no right to impose on them unfair restrictions
which do not apply to our own people. If it can be shown that
there is some reason for drawing a distinction between the hours
in which they shall work and the working hours of our own
people, I am prepared to listen to the Minister, but he has not yet
given any such reason. I want him to understand that lam not
against imposing necessary restrictions upon Chinese living in
our country.
Subclause (3) is a remarkable provision. It reads:
In order to prevent any evasion or avoidance of the
foregoing limits of working hours, all work done
by any person employed in a factory for the
occupier elsewhere than in the factory (whether the work
is or is not connected with the business of the factory),
shall be deemed to be done whilst employed in the factory,
and the time shall be counted accordingly.
Apparently, if a Chinaman were to water the garden for his
employer on a Saturday, that would be counted as work done in
the factory, and the employer would be liable to prosecution. Any
kind of work can be deemed to be done in the factory, although
it has nothing to do with the factory and is done away from it.
What is a Chinaman to do? He is not allowed to do on Saturday
work in the factory which is connected with the factory, and he
is not allowed to do work of any kind for his employer on Satur-
day, on a public holiday, or after 5 p.m. If you are going to starve
these men, say so; but do not do it in this way.
Another part of the clause about which I have something to
say is sub-clause (8), which provides for a minimum penalty if


a Chinaman is guilty of the heinous offence of doing a bit of work
on a Saturday, or after 5 p.m., or if other persons do any wor'c
after 6 p.m. or on Saturday afternoons. It may be a trifling breacn
of a perfectly ridiculous law, and yet the magistrate will be bound
to inflict a penalty of at least £3 for a first offence upon a poor
devil of a Chinaman whose only offence is that he has done some
work.
Mr. BADDELEY: To be sure of my ground, I referred this
clause to certain gentlemen, cabinetmakers in this city, who came
to me and said, “As business men we are harassed and incon-
venienced by the methods adopted by this cheap labour.” These
Chinese come here and live under different conditions, and compete
with those working under awards which we should all stand up for
and observe. I would not have submitted this clause without
being fortified in every particular. If the leader of the Opposi-
tion desires to protect our own people from the sort of competi-
tion I refer to, let him come with me to some of these Chinese
dens and see for himself what is going on. I feel I should not
permit the conditions which have been reported to me to go on any
longer. Apart from the question of competition, there is the aspect
of health and hygiene. Where Chinese are employed in a factory
they can be taking their rice in the same room as they sleep in,
and causing conditions which are unhealthy and intolerable
Surely the time has arrived when a law should be enacted to pro-
tect people who are making furniture outside. I feel it very keenly
that hon. members should endeavour to foster labour which is
regarded as cheap and inferior, and done under conditions which
should not be tolerated by Europeans. As far as lam concerned,
all these provisions relating to Chinese labour will be insisted upon.
If the leader of the Opposition wants to divide the Committee he
can do so.
Dr. ARTHUR: The Government is exercising this unfair dis-
crimination against a certain race of people simply because at the
present time they have no national backing behind them to protest
against it. If it were a case of another nation not very far
removed from the Chinese there would be a very different story
to tell. The Government would not dare to bring in any measure
which would discriminate against people of that nation, who
were residing here as citizens of New South Wales—and there
would be a precedent for that. About 1915 a Labour Government
in Queensland attempted to discriminate between Europeans and
this other nation adjacent to China —
Mr. Baddeley; Are you aware that all the other States have
these provisions in force? Take the regulations governing conditions
in Victoria!
Dr. ARTHUR: I say an attempt was made in Queensland by a
Labour Government against people of a nation adjacent to China,
and the Consul-General for that nation interviewed the Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth, Mr. Fisher, who dared not allow
it to be done.
This is an exceedingly important point. The Minister made
an appeal to the passions of the crowd by trying to make it appear
that the members of the Opposition were trying to uphold a state


of affairs which they do not for one moment seek to uphold. It
was simply political dodgery, and I, on behalf of the Opposition,
resent it. We are just as anxious as anybody to get fair condi-
tions for Australian labour. These people are living here, and they
should be treated in exactly the same way as all other workers
are. We ask no more for them. It is a most unfair discrimination
to impose upon these people conditions which are not imposed
upon other workers. The reason why those conditions are being
imposed upon the Chinese is that their nation at the present time
has no power to protest against what is being done. The Gov-
ernment, however, should remember that what it is doing may
bring about some reaction so far as Australian trade with China
is concerned, because information with regard to these matters
gets abroad. At the present time there is a boycott of British goods
in China, and that boycott may be extended more definitely to
goods coming from Australia, as in China the provisions of this
Bill may be regarded as an insult offered by a Labour Government
to Chinese nationals in Australia.
11/11 ’26. Miss Preston Stanley (Eastern Suburbs) —Book 20.
Page 1092.
I feel that what has been said by members on this side of the
House concerning the extraordinary discrimination the Government
is making between the Australian industrial worker and the
Chinese industrial worker is amply justified. Mr. Davidson could
not have read the clause he was discussing, because it states as
plainly as the English language can state, that there is to be dis-
crimination between Australian industrial workers and Chinese
industrial workers. However, other hon. members on this side of
the House feel about it, I resent most deeply the suggestion of
the Minister and Mr. Davidson that members on this side of the
House could under any possible circumstances uphold the condi-
tions under which the Chinese work so that they would have an
unfair advantage over the Australian worker. We do not uphold
that principle.
We realise to the full that the Chinese have no right to work
under conditions which are inferior as compared with the condi-
tions under which our own people work, but we also say that
the Labour party of New South Wales will find it exceedingly diffi-
cult to explain why they should make this grave discrimination
between different classes of workers in this country. All classes
of workers should be subject to the same conditions of labour, and
the same control so far as their industrial operations are concerned.
11/11/’26. Mr. Bruntnell (Parramatta) —Book 20—Page 1093.
I wish to say a few words in reply to what Mr. Davidson
said. I am as anxious as the Minister is to prevent men who
are not observing what I would call decent conditions of life from
competing unfairly with our own people, as no doubt the Chinese
have been. Mr. Davidson inferred that the statements which
were made by members of the Opposition were made at the insti-
gation of the employers. Strangely enough, employers engaged in
the furniture trade interviewed me, and they were in the fullest


accord with the restrictions the Minister has placed in this Bill
and they want the Bill to be passed in its present form.
11/11/’26. Mr. C. A. Kelly—Book 20—Page 1093.
Will you admit that a lot of furniture makers employ Chinese
labour, and that is where the “kick” is coming from?
Mr, Bruntnell: I have had experience in the furniture business.
I know there has been unfair competition on the part of Chinese
who have not observed decent conditions of living or of labour. That
is something I am just as desirous as the Minister is of putting an
end to, but when we are charged with doing something wrong,
when we ask that the same conditions should apply to the men
who are here, and who have as much right to protection under the
law T as our own white workers have, it makes one rise in protest. The
Bill does make a distinction between the Chinese worker and
the European worker, and I have no doubt that that has been done
deliberately.
We do not want those conditions to prevail, but when we
are told it is the desire of the Government to place Europeans and
Chinese on the same footing we say that the Bill does not do that.
If the Minister intends to do that he will have to amend the Bill.
Mr. BAVIN: I only want to add one word in reply to the
Minister. He has made a most unjustifiable accusation against me.
The hon, member made a direct charge that I had defended some
kind of policy which would have involved granting advantages
to the Chinese over our own workers. lam quite sure the Minister
knows that the statement is not true, and he knows, too, that
anything I have said this afternoon is not dictated by any con-
sideration for the interests of the employer. I am anxious to
protect the interests of employers. I am anxious to protect the
interests of employees, and I am also anxious to be just to the
Chinese who are allowed to live in this country. In this particular
connection I am not concerned with either the employers or em-
ployees. lam concerned with the doing of justice to our fellow-
men who are allowed to live in this country. It is a gross injus-
tice to say to these Chinese, “You shall not work on a Saturday,
and you shall not work after 5 o’clock in the afternoon from
Monday to Friday,” when at the same time you say to our own
men who are doing the same class of work, “You may work on
Saturday and may work until 6 o’clock on the other days.”
Mr. Baddeley; I have given the hon. member the reasons for
that!
Mr. BAVIN: I know the hon. member’s reasons perfectly well.
The reasons are that the furniture trades unions have been strong
enough to force their employers to give up Saturday work. They
will not work on Saturdays. You are saying to the Chinese: “Be-
cause the white men are in a union which is strong enough to force
employers to give up Saturday work, we will not allow you to
work on Saturdays.” By the same process of logic you ought
to insert a clause in the Bill that if the employees in the furniture
trade go on strike no Chinese shall be allowed to work while the
employees are on strike. Logically that follows from what you
are doing by this Bill. If the employees go a little further and
manage to get embodied in the furniture trades award the policy


of a six-hour working day, as advocated by Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Kelly—l understand that in Mr. Kelly’s electorate they have a
league for the advocacy of a six-hour day—you will no doubt say
to the Chinese, “You shall not work more than six hours a day.”
If the employees could not get it in the award, but could get it by a
strike, the employers being forced to give way to them, you would
be imposing on the Chinese that limitation which the white men
voluntarily impose on themselves to-day. If they only proposed to
work four days a week, then logically you would have to say to
the Chinese, “You shall not work more than four days a week,”
although you allow the white men to work five or six days a week
if they want to do it. If this were not a lot of elaborate hum-
bug there might be something to be said for it. We know that
those men who are howling for a live-day and forty-four hours
week are on the other days carrying out other work and doing
their own fellow-workers out of jobs. For instance, there are
places on the Blue Mountains where honest tradesmen cannot get
work because some of the people who are working on the railways
get time enough off to go around painting fences and doing other
jobs much more cheaply and undercutting men whose legitimate
trade it is to do the work. The whole thing is nothing but elabor-
ate humbug, and the five days week is the greatest bit of humbug
we have ever seen, because nearly all those men who are now
howling for a five days week are availing themselves of every
opportunity to get other work on the sixth day. I want to make it
perfectly clear so far as this side of the House is concerned, that
we do not want to give one single privilege to a Chinaman that is
not enjoyed by a white man. We do not want to give any right
whatever to the Chinese or to anybody else that is not enjoyed
by white men. I would rather see our Australian workers
doing this work than the Chinese.
I have pointed out that the Minister was very unfair when
he said we wanted discrimination. We want nothing of the kind
All I said was that it was not fair because white men will not
work on Saturday to say to the Chinaman, “You shall not.” You
allow a white man to work after 5 o’clock from Monday to Friday,
but you say to the Chinaman, “You shall not.” I do not want
for one moment to allow the conditions that the Minister described
to continue. The Minister said if I looked at the conditions under
which Chinamen worked, I would support these provisions in the
Bill. But whatever the result of an inspection might be, it could not
alter the argument I have put forward in the slightest degree. I
am quite prepared to go with the Minister to see those conditions.
The Bill provides that white men may work up till 6 o’clock from
Monday to Friday, may work on a Saturday, and may work on
Sunday if required, as well as on public holidays. All lam saying
is you should give to the Chinese the right to work until 6 o’clock
from Monday to Friday, which is the right they had under the
old Act, just as an Assyrian, an Italian, or a member of any other
nationality had the right to work up till 6 o’clock from Monday
to Friday and on a Saturday. Ido not care if you say that no
white man shall work after 1 o’clock on Saturday, and that no
Chinese shall work after 1 o’clock on Saturday. That would satisfy


me, but I say it is absolutely unfair to say to a Chinaman, “You
shall not work at all on Saturday.” I am not prepared to impose
on the Chinese who are prepared to work, all the obligations that
white men who are not prepared to work impose on themselves.
Mr. Davidson said that the bill did not make any discrimin-
ation. Obviously he has not read the bill, or has not understood it.
The Bill makes the clearest possible discrimination. There are other
matters in this clause which I will discuss unless I get an assur-
ance that the gag is not going to be moved on this clause. I want to
know whether, if the amendment moved by the Minister is agreed
to, he will allow opportunities for reasonable discussion of the
subsequent parts of the clause. If the Minister for Public Health
intends to move the gag directly I resume my seat it will be im-
possible for hon. members on this side of the House to move the
amendments they desire to make in the subsequent clauses. Under
the circumstances I am compelled to go on and point out that
in sub-clause (4) there is a most unreasonable provision, which
precludes Chinese from eating their meals in a factory or in the
enclosure attached to it. If a Chinese eats a sandwich in a factory
or the enclosure attached to it he will commit an offence, and I
want to know why a Chinese should not be permitted to eat his
meals in the factory if a white man is allowed to do so. Then,
again, in sub-clause (6) it is provided that sounds heard in a fac-
tory during prohibited hours, if such as would ordinarily be heard
if made by persons engaged in the factory in the usual work car-
ried on there, shall be regarded as prima facie evidence that the
provisions of the section have been contravened. That provision
is an outrage on British justice. I believe a similar provision is in
the Principal Act, but nevertheless it is an outrage on British
justice. Sub-clause (8), as I previously pointed out, makes pro-
vision for a minimum penalty. The principle of the minimum
penalty is absolutely wrong. Many trifling offences may be com-
mitted, and the magistrate under this provision will have no right
to impose a penalty of anything less than £3 for the first offence
or less than £ls for the second offence. I intend to oppose that
provision. In sub-clause (9) it is provided that the Minister may
suspend the operation of the Act so far as working hours are
concerned for any period not exceeding two weeks. I suggest
that that period should be extended to four weeks. I am in-
formed that under special circumstances in factories it may be
necessary to work overtime for a period extending beyond two
weeks, and I ask the Minister to provide for an extension of his
power so that he may grant exemption for a period not exceeding
four weeks. The Minister will not be compelled to grant exemp-
tion for the longer period, but his discretion will be widened.
It is not fair that I should be compelled to go on like this.
Hon. Members:
The Chairman: Order! I again warn hon members that if the
disorderly interjections which have been going on for some time
are continued, I shall take drastic action. Some hon. members
remain out of the House for the greater portion of the day and
only come here to make irrelevant interjections. Such conduct
is a reflection on them and their constituents.


Mr. Baddeley: I will accept an amendment for the extension
of the period of exemption.
Mr. BAVIN: Going back to sub-clause (8), which provides
for a minimum penalty, I propose to move an amendment which
will remove the minimum penalty from the clause.
Amendment (by Mr. Baddeley) agreed to.
Mr. BAVIN: Some hon. members on this side want to deal
with sub-clause (10), and in all seriousness I submit that it is
not fair that I should be compelled to stand on my feet because
of the fear that the gag will be applied. I want to ask the
Minister whether he will allow reasonable discussion on sub-clause
(10).
Mr. Baddeley: The discussion has already extended over a
considerable period!
11/11/’26. Mr. Jackson—Book 20—Pages 1099-0.
lam opposed to this provision. It is ‘‘over the fence” to give
union secretaries the same rights as an officer of the Department
of Labour and Industry. I agree with Mr. Tonge that union offi-
cials have a thorough grip of the situation. They have a thorough
grip of the situation from a distinctly partisan point of view. My
experience of these gentlemen is that they are selected because
of the vigilance they display in watching the interests of their
unions. I submit it is not the duty of the Department of Labour
and Industry to watch the interests of unions alone. It is its
duty to watch the interests of the community. If the interests of
the community are being assailed by a number of Chinese, the
matter ought to be dealt with by the department in an effective
way, and it can be dealt with effectively if the Government ap-
points a sufficient number of inspectors to cope with the evil. A
Labour Minister is in charge of the department, and he can appoint
the requisite number of inspectors to police this Bill, but he should
not hand that duty over to men who are not responsible to the
community. I agree that Chinese competition is undesirable, and
I would like to see it eliminated; but whilst Chinese are living
in this community, we cannot permit them to starve: they must
be allowed to work for their living in some way. We have to
accept this principle whether we like it or not. I think the Minister
will agree with me as to that. It is not right, however, to subject
the Chinese to the control of the unions when white men are not
subjected to the same control. That is a differentiation which
should not be made.
Under this Bill the utmost restraint is being put upon the
Chinese in order to prevent them from doing things which are
contrary to the best interests of the community. If it is desir-
able to do that, it should be done in an impartial manner, and they
should not be handed over to the tender mercies of the union
secretaries. I have no objection to a union secretary doing his
work in the most efficient way possible in the interests of his union,
and if he is given power to ‘‘yard up” the Chinaman I have no
doubt he will do it very effectively. The Minister is going beyond
the limits of what is reasonable when he proposes to hand over
these extraordinary powers to the union secretaries, who are


responsible not to the Government, but to their unions. The
Minister is adopting a wrong attitude, and is bringing legislation
into contempt when he colours our laws in this fashion. My ex-
perience of union officials is that, willy nilly, they will secure the
utmost possible concessions they can for the members of their
organisations. Nobody blames them for that. This House is not
a union office; it is a deliberative assembly, which has been elected
by the people to discharge its duties in the best interests of the
community as a whole. Some members of the community to-day are
Chinese, and they have a right to the same fair treatment as is
being meted out to other people in this country. To give this
power to union secretaries would be to go outside the bounds of
decency.
11/11/’26. Mr. Drummond—Book 20—Pages 1101-2.
I very heartily endorse the statements made by various mem-
bers of the Opposition with respect to the equity of the principle
involved. With regard to this clause and other clauses dealing
with the Chinese, it appears to me that there are two things in-
volved; one is the question of the equity of treating citizens who
have been received into the Australian Commonwealth and have
been naturalised as Australians dilferently from other Australians.
The other point I will refer to later. It appears to me that it is
altogether a wrong principle to hand over to people of outside
organisations the right to exercise police power. I say definitely
anyone who is appointed to be an inspector should be a servant
of the Government, he should be responsible to the Government
and to nobody else. To vest this power in men outside the Gov-
ernment control, responsible to some outside organisation and not
to the Government, is to create a system which is very unde-
sirable and open to abuse. There is something involved in this dis-
criminating legislation against the Chinese which the Minister
probably has not considered, and apparently has not been referred
to by any other member of this House. I refer to the fact that the
tenor of this legislation clearly indicates that the Labour party
has no consideration for anyone outside the Labour movement.
The producers’ associations of Australia have spent thou-
sands of pounds in endeavouring to educate the people of the
East to the value of using Australian primary products. Ninety-
five per cent, of the total exports from Australia consist of primary
products, which are getting a ready sale in the East. I ask hon.
members if they think unfairly discriminating legislation of this
character is going to assist the Australian primary producer in
finding a market in the East amongst the millions of Asiatic
people?
Mr. C. A. Kelly: I rise to order. The hon. member is not
discussing the question before the Committee.
The Chairman: I ask the hon. member to direct his remarks
to the amendment.
Mr. DRUMMOND: The object of my remarks was to point
out to the Minister that this is a discriminating clause against
Chinese, and also to point out that it was very unwise to enforce
such a clause. There are two things involved; one of equity


of the principle of discriminating against Australian citizens;
and the other the principle of interfering with international
relations which must result in very great loss to our own primary
producers. I would ask the Minister whether in regard to this
clause he has considered the question, when are Chinese not
Chinese? When a German or an American comes to this country
and becomes naturalised and goes back to the country of his birth
he is an Australian so long as he retains his gift of naturalisation.
An Australian-born Chinese is in the same position. No one has
the right to discriminate against any man who has been received
into the full status of Australian nationality. That is what this
Bill does. lam not arguing that the Chinese should be allowed
to flout the laws of this country. lam not arguing that they be
given privileges which are not extended to other residents of the
State, but I say there are clauses in this bill which discriminate
against the Chinese who have been received into Australian
nationality. Those clauses must react against the credit of this
Government and react to the detriment of Australia generally.
I do not believe that such provisions as these would stand the test
of the High Court of Australia.
Mr, Ness: The Minister would do well to consider the advisa-
bility of omitting this sub-clause. It is of a harrassing character.
I agree with Mr. Levy that inspectors appointed by the Public
Service Board should be sufficient to look after the interests of
the men. The union secretaries are always looking out for flaws
which the average man would not waste his time over.
The Market Printery Limited, 372 a Pitt Street, Sydney.
