

A CHARGE
DELIVERED TO
THE CLERGY OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
IN THE DIOCESE OF AUSTRALIA,
AT THE VISITATION HELD IN
THE CHURCH OF ST. JAMES, SYDNEY,
On IMnmlui/ , October the (Uh, 1811,
BY WILLIAM GRANT BROUGHTON, D.D.,
IVIS HOP OP AUSTRALIA.
SYffI'KIEY:
pRI NTEDB\JA M K S T E O G, 0 E 0110 ES T 11E KT.
IHII.
pvaumso AT rnn iiKQUim’ 0 P THE di.imuY.


TO THIS REVEREND
THE CLERGY OF THE DIOCESE OF AUSTRALIA,
THIS CHARGE IS DEDICATED
WITH SENTIMENTS OP SINCERE RESPECT
AN D GIIATEFUI, ATTACHMENT,
UY Tlll'Vr(I AFFECTIONATE EROTHKII
AND IIUMIILE SERVANT,
W. G. AUSTRALIA.
Sydney, llth October, 1811.


A CHARGE, &c.
My Reverend Brethren,
That I should have felt a disposition to shorten
the interval between the synodical meetings of the clergy,
rather than have allowed the full period of three years to
elapse, you will attribute I trust only to the sense which I
entertain of the advantage arising from frequent intercourse
and conference between the Bishop of a Diocese and his
officiating clergy. In England, it may be admitted that a
triennial Visitation secures every practical advantage; be-
cause the clergy being generally placed within a short,day’s
journey from the residences of their respective Diocesans,
have, at all, times ready access to them in private should
they require the advice or instruction of their appointed
superior. Independently of such facilities of personal in-
tercourse, there are so many channels of indirect comma- ,
ideation between the various classes of our profession, that
from the highest to the most humble a constant circulation
of intelligence is going on; and the principle, of mutual
concert between the many members of the same body is
uninterruptedly maintained. It is needless to remark that
we arc in possession of no corresponding advantages here.
►Scattered, isolated, and nncomliined, the clergy of this
Diocese enjoy hut very seldom opportunities of conference
and consultation with their Bishop ; and still less frequently
with one another. A General Visitation affords the only
abatement of such disadvantages which it is in my power
B


to apply; and it would grieve me to think that I had pre-
maturely or without sufficient reason required you to un-
dertake the long' and tedious journeys which some have
had to encounter in complying - with the summons to attend
here to-day. As we have thus met, I should wisli the oc-
casion not to pass away without my offering - to you some
observations upon the state of religion, and the general,
aspect of Church-affairs in this Colony, and upon the posi-
tion and prospects of the clergy themselves. I should wish
to promote such an understanding - of the principles involved
in our ecclesiastical polity, and to give such an explanation
of the terras upon which our claim to the ministerial cha-
racter rests, as may introduce unity into all our operations,
and render us more stedfast in the discharge of our several
duties, in proportion as wo are more fully convinced of the
validity of the commission under which wo arc appointed
to this' charge. At the same time I would most sedulously
warn you against admitting any such exaggerated estimate
of the effect of that commission as might lead us to attri-
bute to ourselves a larger share in imparting efficacy to the
ordinances which we administer than the Scriptures recog-
nize, or justify our assuming - .
The exertions which have been continued up to a very
recent date in so many parishes and districts to collect
funds towards the erection of Churches and parsonage-
houses, have effected a great increase in the number of re-
sident clergymen since our last meeting here.* These
measures have been attended with a marked improvement
in the manners and dispositions of the people who have
the ordinances of religion brought more immediately within
their reach, and experience the beneficial effect arising - from
their regular observance. The condition of public affairs
* Appendix (A.)


at the present moment has occasioned a natural, though it
may be hoped no more than a temporary cessation of these
exertions; but I believe that in nearly all the instances in
which the erection of a Church had been undertaken, it
may be regarded as having advanced beyond that point at
which success is doubtful. There are cases, lam well
aware, in which the completion of the buildings cannot but
require a considerable lapse of time ami much additional
exertion. Nor am I sorry to witness a few such instances;
it being- my firm persuasion that where persons, contem-
plating things not seen as yet, arc reduced to the necessity
of making with their limited resources a succession of
efforts to obtain for themselves tiic blessings of a Christian
ministry and of public worship, a more distinct proof may
•bo given of the power of faith than where the possession
of greater opulence ensures an unimpeded progress from
the commencement to the conclusion of the undertaking.
It is indeed in the gradual unfolding of a spirit of true
religion, springing from that principle of faith of which I
speak, as a branch out of its root, that I behold a promise
of those mature fruits which will be the crown and recom-
pense of our present labours. That which chiefly casts a
damp and a discouragement upon the exertions of an
earnest clergyman, is his observation of the too prevailing
want among his parishioners of habitual thoughtfulness and
concern about religion, of a becoming sense of its import-
ance, of due anxiety for its operative extension as distin-
guished from mere profession, of a disposition to provide
free scope tor the energies of the Church which is the
chosen and proper organ for spreading abroad the know-
ledge of sacred Truth. These are the dispositions, the
prevalence of which it requires all the energy of a clergy-
man’s character, and all his confidence in the promise of
divine assistance, to enable him to struggle against without
n 2


being disheartened. And even whore resolution is not
wanting to sustain the contest., what a spirit ot torbeaumee
and self-denial must he put forth, and what a clearness and
steadiness of judgment must he display, if he would bring
it to a prosperous termination ! It would be compara-
tively easy for us, all must admit, to call lorth a strong,
and as it may be termed a convulsive effort (which there-
fore could be but transient) 11 wo would have recourse to
mere appeals to the feelings, and could consent to employ
that style of address which depends for its effect upon the
degree of excitement which it produces. Hut such a course
would be unworthy of our station, and, .1 feel satisfied, ulti-
mately injurious to oar cause ; which is that ot soberness as
well as truth. Warmth and earnestness I am so far from re-
commending' you to chock, that it is the want of their suffi-
cient manifestation I principally lament. These are the very
feelings which it is my most anxious wish to behold univer-
sally diffused. But thou, it must be a steady and enduring
flame which we seek to kindle in the bosom of every
churchman; reminding him that under an habitual sense
of duty he is to let its light so shine before men, that
they beholding his good works may he encouraged to dis-
play corresponding zeal in glorifying their Bather which is
in heaven. In fact I must despair of ever seeing the di-
vine services provided for in a becoming manner, or satis-
factory evidence given that the community is influenced by
a spirit of devotion, until every one shall deliberately make
it matter of conscience to contribute, in proportion to his
station and circumstances, to maintain the visible Church of
Christ as the proper safeguard against the incursions of un-
belief and irreligion. This observation I offer with the less
reserve, because were it even true that the duty ot pro-
viding the due supports of piety was a burdensome one,
that would not furnish justifiable grounds for declining it.
Much loss can such a plea be urged when, as tilings are, it


would not be a burdensome undertaking it each man would
conscientiously act upon the principle of applying what he
could easily spare towards so holy a purpose. Nothing im-
presses a more painful conviction of the decay of a general
feeling of earnestness in religion than the comparison Which
we are too often compelled to draw between the conduct ol
professors in early and in later times :• —much to the disad-
vantage of the hitter. In the primitive Church religion
was every man’s personal concern ; it was die first object in
all their thoughts. It is now, too generally, the last. Then,
they were forward in determining that the service of God
should be at all events becomingly provided for, and that
only after this was done might attention be directed to in-
dividual wants. Now, we must lament to observe a prevail-
ing disposition to secure every temporal comfort advantage
and safeguard, present and prospective, before any contri-
bution is made towards God’s service; and in many, indeed
in a great many instances, both rich and poor venture to
consume their all upon the things of the present world.
I do not speak this without exception. There arc many
very gratifying exceptions as wo are all aware. It is a
subject of daily thankfulness with me that as in the darkest
periods of the Church’s history God has been ever careful
to preserve a remnant who complied with the precept of
seeking first of all his kingdom and righteousness, even so
at this present time also there are those (and they form an
increasing number) whose anxious desire and endeavor,
whose very meat and drink, it is to provide before all things
that God’s service should not be neglected. It is to the ex-
tension of this self-denying spirit (for such it is) that we must
principally look for the diffusion both of the form and of the
power of godliness. Had our lot been cast in a land where
the previous exertions of piety (even of erroneous piety
in some of its views) had to a wide extent provided for the
needs of external religion, even then, as the example of our


mother England is at this time shewing - , the continued sacri-
fices of an emulative piety would still require to he offered at
the altars of the living - God. How much more forcibly
must such a duty be felt to devolve upon us here, when, in
place of enjoying the accumulated provision of past ages
applied to the service of the sanctuary, we have the obliga-
tion laid upon us of founding - those institutions for our-
selves ? and the perseverance of those that shall come alter,
in the profession of the Christian faith, will much depend
upon their being provided by ns with the ordinances of
Christian worship. In striving by reasoning to break
through that formidable barrier of selfishness which seeks
continually to repel every suggestion of this nature, wo arc
entitled to deal with our Hocks as Christians by their own
profession and acknowledgment ; and in that character we
may submit to their serious consideration in what maimer
they expect the ordinances and the influence of Chris-
tianity to he supported unless it be some one’s acknow-
ledged duty to make exertions to that end. The lairer
conclnsion is that it is every Christian’s duty to contribute,
as has been already said, to maintain the institutions of the
visible Church. We have to sustain the argument against
some who profess to think that the Church should have no
appropriate revenues, no settled endowment, no title to a
legal maintenance. This is precisely the Church’s condi-
tion here. She enjoys no endowments. But in propor-
tion as this is her condition, it becomes only the more evi-
dent that the obligation of providing for the maintenance of
the Church is cast from day to day upon those who ac-
knowledge her as a divine institution. God never wills an
end without furnishing means by which it may be accom-
plished; and the means which he has in this instance pro-
vided arc the substance and resources which He has given
to those who profess a belief that it is God’s will the
Church should he supported, and who at the same time


know that this cannot bo accomplished without their assist-
ance. The profession of that belief and the possession of
those means united, constitute, I must think, a divine obli-
gation. It cannot be justifiable to detach ourselves from all
care and concern for the continuance of those benefits
which the Church confers, and to remit the whole affair to
the working of Providence. The ordinary care of Provi-
dence promises us nothing except through our employment
of the proper means which' arc granted us for its attain-
ment ; and as to an extraordinary interposition in our
favour, we can assuredly have little right to look for that
when it is our own negligence and unconcern which alone
have rendered it necessary.
In speaking of the maintenance of the Church I have
expressed myself in general terms ; and without particular
reference to the provision to be set apart for the support of
the clergy. This, however, it is obvious must form a very
important branch of the question. It is not that depart-
ment, certainly, which we can ourselves treat of with the
greatest satisfaction. Nevertheless, if, from any feeling of
personal disinclination to expose myself to the hazard of
misrepresentation, I were to pass over the subject without
notice, it might be not unjustly imputed to me that I was
wnating in duty not only to the body of the clergy but
also to the Church at large ; whose welfare is involved in
the state and character of its ministers as deeply at least as
that of the clergy themselves. In reminding the laity of
their duty to attend to the welfare of those who are over
them in the Lord, I would proceed upon no other principle,
I would make no more extended demand, I would not
claim one jot or one tittle of advantage beyond this one
admission, “ that they which preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel.”* In this however I assume that there is
* 1 Cor. ix,, 11.


more than the dead letter of a maxim. Christians must
give to it vitality and animation by currying it into effect
according to the intention of its divine Author. In seeking
to ascertain that intention it shall be my object to guard
against all extravagance, and as in fixing- the general duty
of providing for the support of the clergy, I have confined
myself to the terms of the simple, precept, so in considering
the proper extent of that support I will not go beyond the
limits of the immediate context. The subject of providing
for the maintenance of the Christian ministry (which an
inspired apostle did not deem an unfit topic for his notice)
is introduced yon arc aware by a reference to the system
according to which the Jewish priesthood was by divine
appointment maintained. “Do ye not know,” lie asks,
which according to his usual style and indeed in ordinary
language means no less than ye know full well, “ that they
which minister about holy tilings live of the temple,” that is
by the tithes and offerings annexed to it; “ and they which
wait at the altar are partakers with the altar, liven so hath
the Lord also ordained that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel.” St. Paul, it is true, disclaims all
personal interest; and forbears to use the rigid which he thus
asserts generally on behalf of the preachers of the Gospel.
But the existence of such a right he does establish not oidy
by that reference to the services of the temple, but upon the
express authority of him who is greater than the temple:
“so hath the Lord ordained.” He states expressly too that
this is said “ altogether for our sakes : for our sakos no
doubt it is written that he that ploughoth might plough in
hope;”* 1 or that the energies of the Christian husbandman
might not be smitten with torpor on beholding around him
nothing but the gloomy prospect of impending destiution.
I feel assured that the example of the Apostle justifies my
allusion to this subject; and will draw your attention once
* 1 Cor. ix., 10.


more to the use which is made of the old-law precept, that
they which minister about holy thing's should derive from
that ministry the means of their temporal support. We do
not mean any of ns, I am sure, to advance any claim to a
provision of the same kind or of the same extent with that
which was reserved for the ministry of the temple; though
my own pcrsuasou is that no interest either public or private
would bo impoverished in the slightest degree if there were
such an appropriation oi thing’s carnal for the support of
those who are engaged in things spiritual. But from the
Apostle’s premises, this deduction must follow ; that what-
ever provision may be made for a Christian ministry it
ought to be so constituted as to extend with the increase of
all other interests, or upon the principle which God sanc-
tioned in determining the inheritance of the tribe of Levi,
that it should bear at all times a fixed proportion to the ge-
neral stock of national property. “ Even so ” or in con-
formity with this equitable principle “ hath the Lord or-
dained ” that a livelihood should be provided out of the
Gospel for those who preach it. What is meant is evi-
dently this 5 that it would bo unjust, and contrary to the
tenor of the divine appointment to confine the minister of
the Gospel to one invariable rate of remuneration, while
every other class, stimulated by the artificial encourage-
ments which abound in civilized societies, is in a state of
progressive advancement. This is contrary to the essential
principle of that institution which the Scripture tells us is
ordained to bo our guide herein; and if this be departed
from, it will not fail to happen that the provision for the
Church, suffering by comparison with other interests con-
tinual diminution, will in process of time become equivalent
to no provision.
1 hese observations are offered not without a perfect ac-
quaintance with the danger of provoking by them the eus


tomary imputation of worldiy-mindedness. But I venture
to propose them because my sense ot duty to the Church is
superior to my fear of the animadversion of the world. It
is the ordinance of the Lord that they who preach the Gos-
pel should live of the Gospel, as they who ministered about
holy things were to live by the temple ; or by a fixed sys-
tem of recompense, keeping always, as to its amount, on a
level with the general fortunes of the community. It is
more necessary here to recal these principles to remem-
brance, because our clergy are placed at present in a state
of dependence upon two unstable supports; the will of gov-
ernment, and the disposition of the people. Both of these
I regard as objectionable; but especially the former, if
contemplated as a permanent measure. It cannot but pre-
sent itself to our thoughts, as lying within the limits of
possibility at least, that the control which is thus estab-
lished over the interests of the clergy may be at some future
time employed as an engine to try their independence and
fidelity. The clergy are exposed to the risk of utter desti-
tution if they withstand the trial; or else, if they sink
under it, to a general degradation of character and for-
feiture of influence. The warning delivered by our Lord
himself upon this subject must not be forgotten or disre-
garded. «He that despiseth you despiseth me; and he
that despiseth mo despiseth him that sent me.” The train
of evils which is thus described as the certain consequence
of contempt falling upon the preachers of the Gospel,
ought, I think, to awaken some consideration as to the
means of preventing its occurrence, so far as human re-
sources can guard against it. Ido not speak of what is to
happen this day or the day following. We are required to
provide against the evils of futurity ; but that, perhaps, not
a very distant one. If it be asked, how is such provision
to be made ? Ihe reply must ho, by general combination;
by a movement of the Church at large, which is constituted


a body with the express intent that many members may
combine for the accomplishment of a general object. 1
know not any object indeed which more deserves the con-
sideration of devout men, desiring the welfare and improve-
ment of the country, than that of averting- the evils which
cannot but proceed from the clergy being- left in a condi-
tion of poverty and state-dependence.
Hut while I thus speak of the importance, for the sake
of the public good, of some regular provision being made
for the support of the clergy, 1 hope it will not be con-
sidered that the estimation and respect due to that body
are dependent on their obtaining such provision. The duty
of furnishing them with becoming means of subsistence is
recognised in Scripture ; and the utility of a moderate in-
dependence, in protecting them against those trials of their
probity to which men unprovided with any substantive re-
sources must be continually exposed, is too clear to need
support from argument. But the estimation in which the
clergy are held by truly sensible and religious persons will
depend chiefly on their own conduct, whatever their worldly
circumstances may be. The highest and at the same time
the most becoming principle, upon which we can aim at
sustaining our office and ourselves in suitable respect, will
be to have always printed in our remembrance what the
character of that office is ; and to let it serve as an admo-
nition to us that we aim at walking worthy of the vocation
wherewith we are called, and of the mission whereupon wc
are sent. Wo arc ordained for men in things pertaining
to God; and men themselves cannot easily despise those
whom they behold sustaining- with faithful consistency the
character impressed upon them by a regularly continued
succession from the Apostles. I would not myself consent
to sit in the seat of authority in the Church without the
most assured conviction that it had been conveyed to me by


lawful descent from those who liad public authority given
unto them in the congregation ; and I do trust that there is
no member of the body of the clergy who does not think in
his heart that he possesses by a similarly valid title the
right and privilege of ministering in sacred things. With-
out hesitation it may be acknowledged that it is by no
means dignified, it is by no means advantageous that vve
should be prone to obtrude, whether in season or out of
season, the assertion of our spiritual claims. Much more
becoming we may be assured it is to imitate the practice of
the Apostles, who were sparing in their references to this
topic; introducing it only so far as was necessary to shew
that they maintained their own title to a mission derived to
them from their Divine Master’s appointment, and to bo
transmitted by them to others in succession. No one pos-
sessed of proper feeling will call in question that “when
we arc sure ourselves, and find others in no doubt of our
having had committed to us the word of reconciliation, we
may then cease from enlarging upon the certainty and dig-
nity of the power given us by Christ.”* But if we look
back only to times which fall within our own remembrance,
we shall find evidence enough to convince ns that the pre-
vailing disposition has been to doubt whether any ministe-
rial charge has been peculiarly committed to us, if not alto-
gether to deny it. Our title to any transmissive spiritual
authority conferred by ordination has been disputed not by
those alone who stood aloof from our communion disavow-
ing any participation in its principles; and -whose opposi-
tion was therefore natural. With them, not a few who con-
tinued to profess those principles have so far made edmmon
cause as to declare by their proceedings, if not in express
terms, that they attributed no superior validity or import-
ance to that form of ordination which their own Church
* Discourses cm Tradilion ami Episcopacy, by the Rev. C, Benson, p. 43.


professes to derive from the practice of the Apostles.*
Until a very recent period the clergy themselves have been,
in general, far from shewing any inclination to enlarge
upon the certainty or dignity of the commission -which they
bear; but had fallen, blameably it must be admitted, into
the opposite extreme. While they continued silent upon
the subject of their own claims, the reality of any Apos-
tolical succession in the office of the ministry was obstinately
disputed in other quarters; insomuch that but for the re-
vived assertion, at almost the last hour, of our just preten-
sion to be accounted of as stewards of the mysteries of God,
the title itself, and the whole train of ideas which it sug-
gests, would ere long have fallen into desuetude and
oblivion, Under these circumstances it is difficult to
account for the extreme jealousy and aversion with which
the very mention of the revival of such a pretension, apart
even from any apprehended excess or abuse to which it
may be liable, has been received. It passes my ability to
reconcile such a display of feeling with the admission which
is at the same time made that “ the Reformation beginning-
in a resistance to the unjust pretensions, has been followed
in too many instances by a denial of the just claims of the
clergy.—ln many places, and by many writers, and in not
a few Christian communities, the office of the Christian
ministry is stripped of all its sacred dignity, the teacher is
counted subordinate to the taught, and the steward of the
mysteries of the Gospel required to distribute its spiritual
treasures and divide its saving doctrines according to the
passions or pleasures of his fellow servants, rather than the
fixed, will and commandment of their common master.”j-
This is a description of the state of things within the
Church which must create uneasy sensations in every mind
* Preface to the Form of Ordaining Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
f Benson’s Discourses, p. 30.


earnest for its welfare and preservation; ami must occasion
us to pause before wo can bring ourselves to censure any
endeavour baying in view to rectify those admitted disor-
ders by the revival of a becoming feeling of respect for the
ministerial office and chai’acter. I am aware how dan-
gerous it may be for one in my situation to express even a
qualified opinion upon a point winch has given occasion to
much recent controversy. Contemplating however the
true statement which wo have just heard of the evils which
afflict the Church, and filled with apprehension that the
gates of hell must eventually prevail against any branch of
it in which such evils should continue without notice or re-
formation, I should be wanting in the firmness which be-
comes my position hero, if, after attentive consideration of
the subject, I should hesitate to express my thankfulness to
those among ourselves who have ventured, at this crisis, to
promulgate what I must consider the j aster view of the
nature of the ministerial function ; not with a desire to exalt
the office and power of the clergy, but to abate, if God
Avill, those internal disorders which have brought it may bo
said, the Church into jeopardy. In expressing my satis-
faction with these views, I would not be understood to
approve all the arguments by which, they may bo sup-
ported ; much less to concur in all the lengths to which
they may bo carried. Certainly it must be acknowledged
that in questions connected with practical Theology, the
judgment and discrimination arc never so severely taxed as
when it is requisite to fix the point at which, opinions, true
in themselves, begin to be associated with error. Truth
itself however far it may bo pushed can never be trans-
muted into error. But thus it is,- —some other prin-
ciple, not founded in Truth as the former was, is taken
up as an apparent deduction from it; and this being con-
stantly associated with the primitive truth begins to be
viewed as forming a part of it, by those who arc not very


watchful and cautious in their conclusions. Tims, for ex-
ample, there is no position for which we ought to contend
with greater stedfastness than for the reality of that com-
mission by virtue of which we undertake to preach the word
of God and to minister the sacraments in the congregation.
This is that primary truth for the bringing ot which out of
]Ol in' neglect into more general notice and becoming pro-
C 5 O ° , . i
minence, the Church is under a weighty obligation to those
who have had the firmness to declare themselves in favour
of the older and more solid sentiments. But I perceive
with regret that there are others who, not content with
temperately holding those sentiments, appear disposed to
connect them with certain consequences supposed to follow
necessarily from them ; and who will by such a course of
proceeding bring discountenance upon principles which by
themselves might command very general approval. The
first among the principles here referred to limits itself to
affirming that there exists in the Church of Christ a minis-
try of Apostolical institution, which has been conveyed by
uninterrupted succession from their hands to the present
time. But by some it is maintained that the admission of
this involves a farther consequence, that there can be no
force or validity in any divine ordinance administered by
mere laymen, or by such as do not partake of that sueces-
sional appointment to the ministry. Now this, unless lam
exceedingly mistaken, is the very turning point which se-
parates the true and beneficial from the mistaken and inju-
rious acceptation of the doctrine we are now engaged with;
namely, the doctrine of Apostolical succession. The effect
of this denial of validity to all ordinances, and to sacramen-
tal ordinances in particular, not being administered by law-
ful ministers, that is, in our sense, by clergymen episco-
pally ordained, has shewn itself in a refusal to inter in con-
secrated ground, according to the Order of the Church,
such as have received the rite of baptism from lay hands, or


tlio.se which are so reputed. This occurrence 1 have no-
ticed with regret, both as it seems likely to do mischief by
itself and in its consequences, by throwing difficulties in
the way of the admission of a sound principle, the working
of which it might be hoped would gradually have composed
the disturbed unity of the Church. In order, as far as pos-
sible, to guard against the introduction of any such evil,
among ourselves, 1 think it right to refer to the subject,
and to state my own belief that the refusal of interment
upon such grounds is not accordant with a correct view of
the nature of the ministerial office, or with the analogy of
Scripture, and that it derives no sanction from the practice
of the earlier Church, or from the ordinances of the Church
of England.*
The character which we derive from our ordination is,
wc shall none of us hesitate to own, authoritative as well as
ministerial; that is to say, the imposition of. hands confers
upon us a right and authority to minister and to preach,
which it is my firm persuasion cannot be conferred by any
other ordinary means or in any other regular way. But it
docs not hence follow that God will withhold all effect from,
acts done by others not participating with us in such im-
parted authority.|' The Scripture does not confirm that
view. It docs not contain any express declaration to that
effect; and if recourse be had to the principle of analogy,
enough may be collected by its means to shew that God by
establishing a particular channel for the conveyance of his
grace, docs not thereby restrict himself from bestowing the
same by other means if it shall so please him. Salvation
was of the Jews;s but the converse did not necessarily
follow that there should bo no salvation with the Samari-
tans. Even after the separation of the kingdom of Israel
* Appendix (1.1.) t Appendix (C.) t Jo' l - iv > 22 -


the title of prophet is not withheld from its teachers,
though they were far from any approach to regular ordi-
nation; and it is said expressly “1 have not sent these
prophets yet they run ; I have not spoken yet they pro-
phecy.lndeed it is farther declared notwithstanding
this defect in their mission,that if they had faithfully acted
up to its engagements the grace of God should still have
accompanied them and given effect to their teaching; “if
they had stood in the counsel of the Lord, and caused the
people to hear his words, then even they should have
turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their
doings.”
In the instance of the man who cast out devils, though en-
rolled neither among “ the twelve” nor the “other seventy”
afterwards sent out, (for this proceeding fell between the
two appointments)-)- the attention of the disciples would ap-
pear naturally to have been drawn to the circumstance ot
his so acting without an express and orderly mission, by
the remembrance of their own recent want of power to
expel an evil spirit. Their Lord appears to avail himself
of this opportunity to instruct them thac although he had
given them a special mission, yet they were not to gather
from this that he had made the operation of his power ex-
clusively dependent on their agency.s More than this I
do not think it necessary for our present purpose to inter
from that occurrence; but the example seems conclusive
against the position which some have taken up as to the
nullity of ordinances except from Xhe hand of a minister
lawfully ordained. So again, in the case of those of Rome
who preached Christ of contention not sincerely, or out of
mere opposition to St. Paul,§ we cannot think that these
persons were sent or ordained by him; their object being,
* Jercm. xxtii., 21, 22. t liulto is,, 1, ‘lO ; and x. 1.
;j: Appendix (D.) 5 Philipp. i., IS
c


;i.s lie says, to add affliction to las bonds. Yet it. is equally
(lillicult to believe that this their ministration, undertaken
without or rather against authority, was altogether invalid
in effect. Had it been so regarded by the Apostle, what
ground could he have had for the joy which he expressed
that Christ was preached even by them ? If baptism at the
hands of any other than a lawful minister be null, so as not
to entitle those who receive it to Christian privileges, then
also must the preaching of the Gospel by any other than a
lawful minister bo void of all spiritual effect; because the
offices of preaching and baptizing are alike included in that
commission of Christ to his Apostles from which our own
is derived.* Yet there are few probably prepared to affirm
that the converting grace of God has in no instances ac-
companied his holy word when preached by those who fol-
lowed not with us. If we turn to consult the opinions of
the early Church we shall find that there were always some
whose disposition it was to reject lay-baptism as of no
effect; but the judgment of the Church in general was
adverse to this view of the subject, and was expressed with
.sufficient clearness to prevent its reception. Indeed it must
bo admitted that authorities are not wanting which seem
lx> lean almost to excess in the opposite direction ; by
acknowledging as valid and sufficient those baptisms which
had been administered after an heretical form, by indivi-
duals under an actual sentence of heresy.f The settled line of
distinction however appears to have been this: that where
the solemnly appointed form of Christian baptism was ad-
hered to, the ordinance was admitted to be valid, even
though administered by those who having no ministerial
commission from the Church were regarded as laymen;
but the heretics who baptized after any other than the ap-
pointed form were not recognized as giving Christian bap-
* MnUli, xxviii,, 11); Mark xvi., 15 i Appendix (E.)
t Appendix (F.)


tism. They were looked upon as scarcely if at all superior
in point of religious privileges, to the aliens of the heathen.’*
The Church of England has followed the practice of anti-
quity in forbearing to pronounce the services of a minister
in holy orders essential, to the validity of baptism.f The
record of her proceedings at a very critical period of her
history and the tenor of her authorised formularies, appear
sufficiently to shew that her sense is against that supposi-
tion ; and that it never could have been her intention to ex-
clude from her office of Christian burial, such as had been
baptized duly as to the form and matter of the sacrament,
but not by persons in Holy Orders. The Rubrick pre-
fixed to the Ministration of Private Baptism in the reign of
Edward the Gth, and so continued until the time of James
the Ist, has been thought by some to “insinuate” or
“ tacitly to sanction the practice of baptism by laymen,
or even by females. The alteration introduced at the pe-
riod last named, was intended to remove any supposed
sanction given by the Church to such a practice, by re-
quiring that baptism should be the act of “the lawful mi-
nister ; ” or, as it stands since the last review, of “ the minis-
ter of the parish, or, in his absence, any other lawful min-
ister that can be procured.” This determines the question
as to the persuasion of our Church that baptism ought to be
administered by a lawful minister. But still there is a
wide distinction between declaring how an act ought to
ho done, and pronouncing it to be null and void if it, he
done in any other way; and therefore the question still re-
mains whether those baptisms which are not. solemnized ac-
cording to the mode approved by the Church of England
are regarded by her as devoid of all spiritual elleet f Ihe
proceeding’s of her acknowledged representatives at the
* Appendix (G.) t Appendix (II.)
): Dr. Sliorl’s History of tlic Clmreli of England, sect. 421 and seel. all.


period of the Restoration, enable us, it appears to me,
to answer this question in the negative. The Con-
vocation in 1661 introduced two alterations of the Li-
turgy which hear upon this point. The first of these
is the Kubrick then inserted before the Order for the
Burial of the dead, prohibiting its use in the case of per-
sons dying “unbaptized;” the second was the Office for
the Baptism of persons in riper years. The period at which
these changes were introduced renders them highly import-
ant. The condition of the kingdom then was such that,
owing to the disuse and prohibition of the Book of Common
Prayer, and the banishment, destruction, or silencing of
the episcopal clergy during so many years, the greater por-
tion of persons under age were either unbaptized, or had
received lay baptism only. To meet the case of the former,
that is of the unbaptized, the new office for such as are of riper
years is stated to have been provided, # and the Kubrick
at the same time prefixed to the Order of Burial may have
been charitably intended to admonish them what penalty
awaited those who should neglect the opportunity thus af-
forded of obtaining admission into the Church of Christ.
But was the same penalty intended to be denounced against
those also who had received lay-baptism, among whom, as
must have been known, the greater part of the youth of the
kingdom were included ? Thousands and tens of thousands
most piously devoted to the Church had failed to receive
baptism at the hands of those whom alone they regarded as
lawful ministers, not with their own free consent, not
through any offence or fault of theirs, but solely through
the cruel necessity of the times. If, then, it had not been
the persuasion of the Convocation that the baptism which
they had received was valid though irregular, is it not to
be presumed that measures would have been taken for the
* Preface to the B. of C. Prayer.


lawful baptism of the multitudes who, during the con-
tinuance of the Great Rebellion had been excluded from it?
But no such remedy was applied, or even proposed ;
whence we must infer that, in the judgment of the Church,
the lapse which would have rendered such measures neces-
sary had not occurred. If the expression “ unbapLized,”
now introduced into the Kubrick had been meant to include
all who had received lay-baptism only, the very members
of the Convocation by whom that expression was admitted
must have been continually called upon, in their ministerial
capacity, to apply it in that sense by refusing to read the
burial service over persons baptized by dissenting ministers,
or by mere laymen ; for numbers so circumstanced must have
been brought every year for interment to the various church-
yards throughout the kingdom. Yet Ido not find it stated
in any of the histories of the time that there existed among
the clergy any general disposition to decline officiating ac-
cording to the appointed form. As then the question was
not raised on the part of the clergy generally, nor, so far as
we have means of judging, even by any of those who had
been parties to the alteration of the Rubrick, although per-
petual occasions for calling it into their notice must have been
occurring, and that for many years in succession, it must
be considered as rather too late to attempt at this time to
affix a so much stricter interpretation to the term in ques-
tion. # If,'without being prepared positively to pronounce
lay-baptism invalid, the Convocation had entertained even
a strong doubt upon that subject, it is reasonable to think
that they would have made provision at least for the con-
ditional administration of the ordinance in such cases. But
it is worthy of observation that the Church of England has
no form applicable in such instances; for the use of the con-
ditional form in her service is so guarded as to exclude the
Appendix (I.)


particular case of previous baptism by laics. The inquiries
directed to lie addressed to such as bring - the child are
these : “By whom was this child baptized?” “ With what
matter ? ” “ With what words ? ” Here was certainly the
fittest occasion for repudiating lay-baptism, it its sufficiency
were questioned by the Church. Nothing - more was needed
than a direction that the conditional form should be em-
ployed in cases where from the answers it should appear
that a lawful minister had not officiated. But the Ilubrick,
passing over that defect in case it should have been brought
to light, proceeds to say only that “ if they which bring the
infant to be baptized do make such uncertain answers to the
priest’s questions that it cannot appear that the child was
baptized with Wutitr, in the name of the Father and of the
Foil and of the Holy Ghost (which arc essential parts oi
baptism) then let the priest baptize it, using the conditional
form of words.” We cannot but regard this as an admission
that the ministry of one in Holy Orders, however agreeable
to the Church’s appointment and expressed sense oi right
it may he, is nevertheless not among the things which are
“essential parts of baptism.” My duty, therefore, both
authorizes and requires me to say that I should regard
wiib disapprobation, as being contrary to the intention ol
the Church, the employment of the conditional form in any
case where baptism had been already administered with that
matter and with those words which arc pronounced to be
essential. Moreover, I should regard it us an infraction ol
the due and charitable order of the Church it the rite oi
burial, by her appointed, were withheld troin those, as being-
“ unbaptized,” who have had baptism according to the pro-
per form though not by persons holding the Orders of the
Church.
I have dwelt at greater length and with more par-
ticularity upon this point because it is important in itself,


ami is also one which for the peace and credit of the Church
and for the satisfaction of consciences ought to be deter-
mined. And I lay the more stress upon it at this juncture
because it is to be dreaded lest eagerness in carrying out
our principles, or rather in maintaining consequences which
are not legitimately to be deduced from them, should throw
obstacles in the way of the general acknowledgment of a
wholesome and catholic system. If it should once be ima-
gined that the views which I am now enforcing with regard
to the spiritual character derived from ordination cannot be
supported without bringing those further consequences
which have been glanced at, much will have been done to
foil the endeavours of those who are seeking to vindicate
our just claims to such a character upon the several
grounds of Scripture reason and antiquity. The appre-
hension appears to be that by acknowledging the validity
of a n ordinance not administered by anyone duly appointed
to that charge, we virtually make a surrender of the very
character we claim. But it has been shewn, I trust, that'
there is nothing impossible in the conveyance of spiritual
benefits through a channel not expressly designated for that
purpose, and that in such benefits being so conveyed there
is nothing inconsistent with the certain knowledge, at the
same time, that God has instituted a particular order ex-
pressly for that end. The authority of the New Tes-
tament, with the light shed upon it by the practice of the
Church, satisfies me that the body of the clergy has been
thus instituted, and that there can be ho regular administra-
tion of holy offices by any other hands than theirs. But
vve mistake the nature of our calling and exaggerate its pri-
vileges, as often as, not content with being the stewards by
whom the mysteries of the Gospel are orderly to be dis-
pensed, we assume that God has closed up against Himself
every other channel for the conveyance of spiritual gifts.
It might he so if everything were comprehended in the out


wat'd ministerial act. But we know tliat the invisible and
secret operation of the Spirit is that in which the real effi-
cacy of the Christian Sacraments resides; and God may re-
serve to Himself the power of dispensing this in such man-
ner its to Him shall seem best. 1 may myself think very
seriously of the responsibility incurred by those who under-
take that holy administration without an orderly call and
proper mission. God knows that I would not lor the
wealth of worlds incur that responsibility. But I cannot
discover justifiable grounds for saying that God never will
work by such agency. You may believe the agents cul-
pable. But even this admitted would not prove the point,
because God may express Ids displeasure against such pro-
ceedings in other ways than by denying grace to those who
irregularly partake of his ordinances. So tar as my own
judgment serves, it leads me to conclude, not that ordi-
nances so partaken of are ineffectual to individuals who arc
the recipients, but that the practice of administering them
by unauthorized hands gradually leads to incurable schisms
and disorders in all societies which permit its continuance;
and that this is the punishment which sooner or later attends
the disregard of the divinely instituted order and govern-
ment of the Church. So that in fact a ministry derived by
Apostolical succession, though not indispensible to the
maintenance of the Church in hdny, is finally essential to
its continuance in m'ff-being; as there arc things not posi-
tively necessary to life which are yet necessary to health.
It may bo objected that we ourselves acknowledge « the
Church of Home hath erred in matters of faith;”* and yet
there was never any Church more careful to uphold regu-
larity of succession in the ministry. We do acknowledge
this; but then those points of faith wherein the Church of
Horae hath erred, the Church of England lias reformed ;
* Ail., xix.


and this we regard as a manifest instance of God’s inter-
position for the re-establishment of his Truth through
means which He had himself provided to secure its perpe-
tual preservation. When we thus witness an instance of
any other than an episcopal Church, after sinking- into so
grievous a state of error, manifesting its possession of the
inherent vital energy by which it is enabled to bring back
all things to the original model, and also, as has been the
case with our own Church, while it rejects whatever sa-
vours of innovation, yet holding fast all, whether of doc-
trine or discipline, which was included in the holy deposit
delivered by the hands of the Apostles, then, but not other-
wise, we shall acknowledge that our Apostolical order is
not that precious and important object which we now verily
think it is; and, under that persuasion, contend for it, as
for one among the main bulwarks of the faith which was
once delivered to the saints.
It has been my endeavour to express in clear terms the
grounds of the conclusions which 1 have laid before you;
because we live in an age when the prevailing disposition is
to explore the foundations of things, and to enquire upon
what footing received opinions rest. Long therefore as I
have already detained you, I cannot terminate this Address
without some notice of the call which is made upon us to
vindicate once more the principles of our Reformation ; a
call with which we cannot satisfactorily comply unless our
own views upon that subject are definite, the result of accu-
rate enquiry and impartial meditation. It is not a narrow
question, nor one which is easily mastered. Whatever may
have been the case in other quarters, our first English Re-
formers never admitted a doubt that the Church into which
they were baptized was a Christian Church, though much
encumbered with error; and the ministry to which they were
ordained a lawful ministry in point of derivation. The fruit


of that spirit of enquiry which was, as wc think, providenti-
ally excited among- them, was the discovery that many points
which they had hitherto considered of divine authority and
therefore of an unquestionable certainty, wore in reality of
human origin and invention. The question between them
and the Church to whose tenets they opposed themselves
was whether their departure from some of the opinions to
which they had before subscribed, afforded just grounds for
branding them with heresy, degrading them from their mi-
nistry, and expelling them the Church. To determine this it
was necessary to fix what had been the faith delivered by the
Apostles ; for both sides were ready to admit this as the true
object of enquiry, which being determined there could be no
room for farther controversy. Both sides again were in
agreement that the entire deposit of their faith was originally
conveyed verbally, and must for a season at least have been
traditionally preserved. On the Romanist part it is main-
tained that although a portion of the Apostolical preachingwas
eventually committed to writing, many fundamental articles
continued unwritten. These however, it is believed, are no
Jess secure in the keeping of the Church, and have been
transmitted with no less fidelity and certainty than the writ-
ten portion. Indeed it is not perfectly plain what actual
usefulness there is, or can have been, in committing any
part of the word of God to writing, because according to the
approved hypothesis, no additional certainty, no greater
plainness, no superiority of any hind, is attrihutaple to the
portion which is written beyond what is possessed by the
other portion which remains, it is pretended, in the distinct
keeping of the Church.
The first objection which strikes a mind ordinarily con-
versant with the rides and habits of evidence is that no rea-
sonable proof, that is no proof founded upon an appeal to
evidence, can he furnished of the actual parentage of those


unwritten portions of the word of God. The subject does
not admit of proof of that kind. If it should be demanded,
the only reply would be that the tradition has been from the
beginning in custody of the Church; and the only voucher
for this, as well as for the fidelity of the guardianship exer-
cised by the Church, is the character of the Church; a cha-
racter of divinely appointed infallibility. Alter all the in-
genious answers which have been put forth to meet this
difficulty, there remains, to say the least, something unsatis-
factory in this mode of appealing first to the, infallibility of
the Church in proof of the fidelity of her guardianship and
then to the record, of which the Church is thus the guardian,
for proof of her infallibility.* But not to dwell upon this,
nor upon the uncertainty attending the question whether
the Church of Home is that infallible Church to whose
charge such a trust was committed, strong reasons exist for
doubting whether the possession of a divine constitution by
a Church furnishes a full guarantee for its exhibiting at each
, particular period of its existence, a true and correct exhibi-
tion of the testimony which it originally received. In the
example of the Jewish Church we find a flagrant instance to
the contrary. In that ease there is a Church unquestionably
of divine institution, respecting the identity of which no
question can be raised, (for there was no other in existence)
and in which there was no difference of opinion as to where
the authority commissioned to pronounce in the last resort
was constituted (a point which is not so well agreed on in the
Church of Rome). To the Jewish. Church belonged pro-
mises both clear and ample of divine light and guidance, and
even of perpetuity. And yet if we refer to the condition of
belief in the existing Church in the age of our Saviour, and
strive by means thereof to travel back to the uncorrupt prin-
ciples of primitive Judaism, we shall be speedily convinced
that no reliance can be securely placed upon mere Church
* ApiiimilU (lv.)


authority as a guarantee of the fidelity with which a religi-
ous system will be handed down through many ages. In the
cases both of the Jewish and of the Roman Church the same
spirit of deference to tradition has impaired the soundness of
their faith. The instance of the former plainly proves the
possibility that innovations upon the original purity of a re-
ligious system may be silently introduced ; and groundless
opinions may upon the credit of tradition be adopted as arti-
cles of faith even with the sanction of the ruling authorities,
and in a Church divinely instituted. Our Lord indeed is so
far from supplying the defects of Scripture by the fulness of
tradition that he, upon the groat article of a future life, re-
proves the insufficiency of tradition by an appeal to Scrip-
ture. Our Reformers therefore, when first awakened to the
incorrectness of the system with which they had been pre-
viously satisfied, came to the determination that no Article
of haith should be retained, or required of any man to be
believed, without evidence that it had been accepted by the
Church from the beginning. The mere voice of authority
which says, such is the present persuasion of the Church,
and the Church being infallible such must have been its be-
lief from the beginning,—was no longer listened to with
implicit deference. A distinction was drawn by them be-
tween the principles of the Church in that age and in the age
of the Apostles : or rather that difference was too notorious
to be disguised unless they would close their eyes against all
light of evidence, and bo content that every thing should be
sheltered under the cloko of infallible authority. The rule
which they decided upon following was to admit as Truth
no more than it could be shewn had been held at all times,
in all places, and by all persons acknowledged as members of
the Catholic Church. In carrying back this enquiry to the
fountain-head, that is to the belief and practice of the
Chinch directed by the Apostles, it was found to be imprac-
ticable, as common sense shews it must be, to fix with cer


talaty what that belief had been otherwise than by reference
to the writings of the Apostles, or the Book of the New
iestament. Authority, resting- upon a supposed independ-
ent and indefectible possession of all Truth, might dispense
with such a reference. A system which professed to seek
all its support in an appeal to the decision of antiquity could
not. The noblest object of contemplation which the history
of the world affords, next to the example of the inspired Apos-
tles, is the conduct of those remarkable men into whose hands
by the will of God, the management of this great cause was
committed. Their unequalled learning and comprehensive
judgment, their independence of spirit, yet becoming defer-
ence for all well ascertained authority, nay their very faults,
their caution sometimes degenerating into timidity, their
occasional coarseness, the inconsistent recourse to persecution
to the charge of which some of them, not yet released from
the shade of error in which they were nurtured, are too justly
liable,—all contributed in the appointed measure to forward
the great work of our Reformation from Popery. But prin-
cipally the blameless lives of all, and the painful deaths of
most of the Reformers, have indeed lit up that candle which
by God’s grace shall never be put out. I think it even pro-
vidential that the spirit of enquiry into their proceedings
should have been again so largely awakened; because the
more carefully such enquiries are prosecuted, the more du-
rable (I speak it with full sincerity) will be our conviction
of the solidity of the ground, hallowed by their footsteps,
upon which we stand. The distinction between the system
which they adhered to and that which they relinquished, or
between the system of the Church of Rome and ours, is the
difference between an imperfect and a perfect testimony. The
system of the Roman Church fails in establishing by motives
of sufficient credibility, first, that the promise of infallibility
to the Church includes an assurance that the Truth shall be
at all periods maintained entire by the directive body or
visible heads of that Church ; ami, secondly, that the


promise itself is limited to that portion only of the Church
which acknowledges the jurisdiction of the See of Home.
Again as to the fundamental supposition upon which the
whole fabric rests, that the decree of the existing- Church
at any given time, concerning points of faith, conveys infal-
lible assurance of correspondency with the divine prototype,
this, it has been said, does not admit of confirmation by evi-
dence, hut it must necessarily be admitted, if it be admitted,
upon the sole ground of authority. It is impossible it should
he otherwise when the final confirmation of Scripture is not
required; for Scripture is the only overt testimony which
has come down to us of the actual doctrines held by the
Apostles. Apply this test to any of the peculiar tenets of
the Church of Rome, the adoration of the Virgin Mary, de-
votion to angels and saints, reverence for images and relics,
prayers for the dead in purgatory, the sacrifice of the mass,
private masses and the like. It is well if Scripture be not
pointedly against them (as against the greater number of
these it most certainly is): but even on the most favorable
.supposition, after being traced in human writings up to some
one or other point of time, in all cases very far short of the
Apostolic age, all mention of those doctrines is lost. Neither
is there any resumption of it in Scripture. All attempts to
bridge this chasm by evidence must be for ever ineffectual.
The only substitute is authority ; or the assumption that the
doctrine contended for having been at one time held by the
Church must have been always held, for an infallible creed can
never have varied. I speak therefore with every wish and
disposition to represent tilings, fairly and as they really are
when I say that the controversy between our Church and
that of Rome, is a contest between perfect and imperfect tes-
timony. This controversy, it was publily predicted, several
years ago, was on the point of revival.* Now therefore that
this has come to pass, it will be our own faults, if, having
* Sen tin; Bishop of hincoiu’s Eodea. Hist., illustrated from Torlnllian.
ji. 207,-1826.


been thus warned, we be not duly prepared to meet the dis-
cussion, and to defend the citadel of our faith. In under-
taking- this service, let me admonish you my brethren, that
whatever may be your devotedness, it will be right that we
proceed with caution, and not without having- made ourselves
fully acquainted with the subject. This is to be recom-
mended not only because an indiscreet or an unprepared ad-
vocate may injure a good cause, but also on account of the
hazard of being disclaimed by some of those with whom we
profess to be associated, if we should warmly, affectionately
and fearlessly espouse the cause of the Church ; some of the
principles of which have been herein referred to. Its sup-
porters, that they may be prepared to meet the assault from
such opposite quarters, must “ approve themselves as the
ministers of God by the armour of righteousness on
the right hand and on the left.”* My exhortation to you
however is, not to suffer yourselves to be driven to any
concealment of your genuine Church principles, by any
dread of being misrepresented as setters-forth of strange doc-
trines. I should regret unfeignedly that any of those by
whom such principles are maintained should think of adding-
strength to their cause by disparaging reflections upon the
Reformers or upon the Reformation itself. I should regret
that any attempt were now made to unsettle any of the
land-marks then established, by bringing back, or proposing
to bring- back, into the use, of the •Church any rites or
practices which our Reformers advisedly resolved should be
discontinued. There is nothing in their principles which
prohibits us from placing their proceedings continually
under review; and having been led to do this by the events
of recent years, I have myself been more than ever con-
firmed in my persuasion of the piety, knowledge, wisdom,
and charity with which all their proceedings were carried
on, and all their determinations formed. I should therefore
* 2 Cor., vi., 4, 7.


1 repeat, unfeignodly lament to find any disposition pre-
vailing- to derogate from them or from their works; espe-
cially from their incomparable Liturgy by which so spirit-
ual, devout, and improving- a character is impressed upon
our public worship, and most eminently upon the Order for
the Administration of the Holy Communion.
At the same time duty requires me to express my opinion
that there has been shewn on the other hand an unne-
cessary disposition and eagerness to attach the name of
popery, or to impute a papistical tendency, to much which
is of the sound and genuine substance of Church of
England divinity. The arraignment of it as erroneous
appears to have been eagerly caught up on account of
its opposition to the system of quitting- the Romish ground
of infitlliblo authority only to take the opposite extreme of
maintaining an unqualified right of private judgment; a
principle which the Church of England never recognized.
I discover, however, no symptoms which should excite a rea-
sonable dread of any contemplated departure from our gov-
erning principle, that nothing is to be required of any man
to he believed as necessary to salvation except it be read in
Scripture, or may be proved thereby. If there bo any dis-
position (which I confess, though asserted, I do not dis-
cover) to revive among ns usages and ceremonies confess-
edly ancient, but which the good sense of our Reformers
saw fit upon sufficient grounds to abolish, that disposition
can extend only to a very limited number, and needs only
to be discouraged by superiors to be readily laid aside. Let
mo also express my most-earnest hope that no attempts will
be made to show, as proofs of argumentative dexterity, how
near we can shape our course to the shoals of Romanism
without making shipwreck of our own belief. It is an un-
wise and dangerous employment, and may be destructive of
those who practice it. But in fairness I ought to add, that


so fai' as relates to the doctrine of Justification, to the nature
of the Holy Sacraments, and the effect of their due reception,
to the qualifications of those by whom they may be lawfully
administered, to the sanction derived, by an appeal to anti-
quity, upon the doctrinal Articles of our Church, or upon
that interpretation of the word of God conformable with
them which constitutes the deposit of faith put into our
hands at the time of our ordination, upon these points, and
upon the authority of the Church in controversies of faith,
I know nothing and suspect nothing to have been written
by any whose kindred with us we acknowledge, whick is in
any degree contrary to the holy principles which our Re-
formers taught, and in defence of which they died. Above all,
then, let there be no suggestion of divisions or parties within
the Church. 1 thankfully acknowledge our perfect ex-
emption from them, and from any tendency to them, here ;
and my principal source of hope and rejoicing is in that
spirit of unanimity and concert which so visibly prevails
among us all. The best wish which I can form on behalf
of our Church in general is, that while a suitable freedom of
enquiry and independence of judgment, within the limit
sanctioned by the Church, are maintained there may be no
severing among our clergy, of the bond of external unity; as
I am sure there is not any of agreement in the principles of
their common faith. Indeed there appears to me never to
have been a time when a stronger tendency to agreement
upon all points of importance, or a more perfect identity of
feeling- and spirit in the views taken of the becoming dis-
charge of their duties, prevailed among the clergy, than at
the present moment. Divisive names, and feelings of pre-
judice and alienation had been wonderfully laid aside in
comparison with former periods within our own remem-
brance, and earnestly do I pray that there may be no dis-
position or endeavour to revive them now. At all times
improper and dangerous, such feelings would be so in a
D


tenfold degree at this time present when .the united sendees
of all in the sacred ministry of the Church are not more
than sufficient to “teed tiro flock of God which is amono'st
us.” To secure the common salvation, there must bo the
most perfect unity of counsels among the Bishops them-
selves ; and the best understanding between them and their
clergy. And among the clergy in general let there prevail,
I beseech yon, a spirit of unanimity, not only upon points
of doctrine, but also in their combined discharge of those
duties whereof an allotted portion is given to each, with an
accompanying precept that “as they are zealous of spiritual
gifts, they seek to excel for the edifying of the Church.”
E U U A T A.
I>. /». I. *l7 .for, (jmlouvoi- r. tmloavinir.
M. 1, XU, for, dc/ilhitimi r. (Ui.slil nliim.
‘id. 'l7. for, allriljulaplv r, iillrilmlaMr,


APPENDIX.
( A. )
The following is a brief statement of ecclesiastical edifices in New South
Wales before ami subsequently to the erection of the Bislioprick in 183 C.
Before 183 G there were in the Colony i
CHURCHES.
St. Philip, Sydney and Parsonage house.
St. James’s, Sydney and Parsonage house.
St. John, Paramatta and Parsonage house.
St. Luke, Liverpool
St. Peter, Campbell Town.,
St, Matthew, Windsor and Parsonage house.
St. Ann, Hunter’s Hill
St, Thomas, Port Macquarie
Christ Church, Newcastle,, and Parsonage house.
Eight chapels or school-houses used as such.
Since 1830 have been added i
CHURCHES CONSECRATED.
St. Thomas Mulgoa.
St. Mary Magdalene South Creek.
St. Stephen Penrith.
Holy Trinity Kelso.
St. Peter Richmond.
St. John the Baptist Mudgee.
• St. Bartholomew Prospect.
St. Peter Newtown.
St. James, the Apostle Morpeth.
i) 2


OUUIUIIIIiS OPENED BY LICENSE.
St. Peter East Maitland.
St. Saviour Gonlburn.
St. Mark Appin.
St. Simon Castle Hill.
cnunoriES in rnooiVESS.
St. Andrew Sydney.
Christ Church (pariah of St. r
Lawrence) |
Holy Trinity (parish of St. r „
Philip) „ } s y dn °y-
St. John the Baptist Ashfiold.
St. Mary the Virgin West Maitland.
St. Luke Scone.
St. Clement Fal-Brook.
St. Paul Paterson.
St. Paul.. Cobhity.
St. John the Evangelist.. .. Camden.
Christ Church Bnngonia.
St. Mary Magdalene Lower Hawkesbnry.
St. Michael the Archangel.. Wollongong.
St. James the Less Melbourne.
St. Limestone Plains.
PARSONAGES.
Complete.
Mulgon.
Mudgco.
Newtown.
Gonlburn.
St. Lawrence.
West Maitland.
Scone.
Paterson.
Uungonia.
Lower llawkcsbnry.
Hexham.
Hunter’s Hill.
In Progress.
Penrith.
Morpeth.
Raymond Terrace.
Brisbane Water.
Yass.
Liverpool.
Campbell Town.
Sutton Forest.


( B. )
The Scripture, as all admit, contains no express authority for any to bap-
tize, except such as were regularly constituted to the office of the ministry.
There was no difference of opinion upon this point in the early Church ;
there is none at present among ourselves. But the question then remained,
as it does still, what is to be determined or done when unauthorized persons
intermeddle with the duties of the clergy ; adhering, in the case of baptism,
to the appointed form, and being defective only in a regular call to the sacred
office ? After all the discussion which this question lias undergone, certain
facts remain incontestable ; proving that the Church did hy its general voice
admit the validity of baptisms administered by persona who had either
forfeited the saocrcdolal character, or had never possessed it.
There were, as lias been said, always some who would willingly have intro-
duced a different determination, and practise. In the African branch of the
Church this appears to have been one of the earliest subjects of controversy :
for Cyprian (A. D. 2,i0) says expressly that it was not then a new persuasion
in his Church that those who came over from heresy were to be baptised; any
former reputed baptism which they might have received being regarded as null
and voitl. That rule lie represents to have been established ever since the
time of Agrippiuus hy a numerous Synod of Bishops. Bnsnago very reason-
ably infers from the expression which he employs ('multi jnm mini sunt et
lnnt/a telas — JSpist. 73) that the age of Agrippinns cannot he placed later than
the close of the second century ; sixty or seventy years before the episcopate
of Cyprian.
From this latter era the controversy assumed more importance ; and the
merits of the question itself as well ns the sentiments of the ancients on either
side, have been not sparingly discussed hy the learned of later ages. Two
conclusions appear to be established hy their enquiries and labours.
First, that in oases of necessity, baptism might he ministered within the
Church by laymen holding the Catholic faith; and that lay-baptism in such
cases was sufficient ami not to be repeated.
Secondly, that if baptism wore administered hy persons in a state of heresy,
who had either been duly ordained in the Church, or, if not so ordained, yet
assumed to be iu Holy Orders, such baptism might be accepted as valid,
provided that the form of administering, ordained hy Christ, had boon
adhered to.
X. As to lay-baptism in eases of necessity, Tcrtullian (A. D. 200) says
“ It remains to wind up tins brief treatise with a rehearsal of the rules of con-
ferring and receiving baptism. The chief priest, that is the Bishop, holds
authority to baptisei nml derivatively the Priests and Deacons; hut not
without the sanction of the Bishop, on account of the subordination of the


Church, which being maintained peace is secure.* But for this, laymen
would have a right (to baptise): for what is received in common might be
given without distinction, but that Bishops, Priests, or Deacons arc already
called (to this office). They (that is the laity) will reply, As the word of
God ought not to be hid by any, so baptism, which is equally the ordinance
of God, may be administered by all. f But how ranch more becoming on
the part of the laity is a strict observance of deference and modesty, seeing
that even upon those who are over them it ia incumbent not to assume the
functions of episcopacy which arc appropriated to the Bishop ! Rivalry is the
parent of schisms. All things are lawful to me, said the very holy Apostle,
yet all things are not expedient. Let it suffice accordingly that the laity
exercise their right in cases of necessity, as the circumstances of place, time,
or person may require. For when the state of one in imminent danger
presses, then another's decision anti firmness in coming to his aid is commend-
able ; for, in truth, that other would bo guilty of the destruction of a fellow-
creature if he should omit to afford that which he is at liberty to apply,”
{Dc haptismo •• c. xvii). Mr. Dodwoll and Dr. Wiitcrland have spoken of this
as no more than Tcrtnliiau's own private opinion ; and the latter says that
the reason upon which he founds it is a weak one fFirst Letter on Lay~huji~
tism. Works. Yol X. pG.cd ; Oxford), But however this may he, Jerome
and Augustin concur, both in the opinion and in the reason. ” Authority to
baptise ’ the former says “ is often granted to laymen (provided that a neces-
sity exists) : for, as every one receives, so every one may give,” CBial; adv .-
Lucifcrian; Opp ; Vol 2. p 90). Augustin says “If any man he constrained
hy necessity to administer baptism to one at the point of death, wliicli from
having himself received, lie lias learned the obligation of conferring upon
others, I am not sure whether any can, with a safe conscience, insist upon its
repetition. For should it be done without the pica of necessity it amounts to
a usurpation of another's office; lint if there bo a pressing necessity, it is
• Interpreters luivo mil very dearly expressed Hie acme of llic original hy mnlering
" lionorem ecdcsltv," the htnwr of the Church. Mr. JCelaall parapliraaes ihu wnnls
Ilins: ‘‘ fur onlur's a.die and decency in Hie Church or God, which is necessary for Hie
preservation of peacewhich seems to convey the accurate moaning. There is n corres-
ponding passage, in the Treatise J)c prcvaorijtt: mhi: hrtreticos : where Tcrtallian de-
scribing (he order which prevails in the Church says “ ihl—promolio enierita,et snhjectio
religions, ot npparilio devola, ct proceasio niodesta, et Ecdeaia unlta.”
t The original here ia not intelligible. Dr. Waterland “ throws in two or three wnnls
in the translation to clear the sense;" but it may perhaps be more simply done, by read
ing " Dicclll, Ut Domini sermo &c.,” instead of ■■ dicenlcs nt &e.the eonstnudum
being simitar to that in Lucrclltts—
Ut aunt diaaiinilca extrinsecus, el gencratim
Jixliina inembrnnun rirrinmuve ina coereel,
Pinnule et aetninilnia dial an I. iv—Olio,


•sillier U" oft’ence or a venial one. But even though it bo usurped without
necessity, and baptism be given by any man whatever to whomsoever it may,
(a quolihcl cuilihelj still that which has been given, cannot be described as
not given, but may be rightly spoken of as given contrary to rule.” fCmitra
Ji/iint; Parmcniani. cap. xiii. 5 29). Augustin may be thought by some to
have gone very far in admitting that the intrusion of laymen to solemnize
baptism in oases of urgent necessity amounted to a venial sin, or to none at
all. lint he proceeds much beyond this when he says that baptism adminis-
tered by whomsoever to whomsoever, though irregular was not void. It
would therefore be valid if given by a layman to a person not in danger of
dying, lie puts the validity of baptism upon a totally different footing when
in another place lie asks, “ But who can be ignorant that there is no Christian
baptism, if the evangelical words bo wanting, winch arc ‘ the sign and seal.’
Cupttfmlam, see Art. 27). But it is more easy to meet with heretics who
entirely omit baptism than such as baptise with any other words than those.
And we on this account maintain that not every mode of baptism (for men
arc said to he baptised according to many sacrilegious and idolatrous rites)
lint the baptism of Christ, that is the baptism consecrated by tire evangelical
words, is every where the same, ami cannot lie despoiled of ils sufficiency
(violari) by the utmost perverseness of any men whatsoever.” (De Unplis; c,
llonat: L. VI. c. 25.) Thus lie appears not obscurely to express Ins sense of
the disparity which there was, in point of essentiality, between (lie form of
tin: Sacrament and the administrator.
2. If the Church, excepting in cases of urgent necessity, never admitted
any baptisms to lie valid except such us were solemnised liy persona
in holy orders, it will follow that she acknowledged and avouched tire
true sacerdotal character of all those whoso baptisms she recognised and
forehorc to repeat. But it will then lie difficult to show that there was any
true succession in the ministry, or any true Church. In those schismatics
who laid boon baptised and ordained in the Church, a remaining sacerdotal
character might he recognised oven after their desertion of the orthodox faith.
But this would not remove the difficulty ; because the greater number of
those who assumed the titles of bishops and priests among the heretics did
not even profess to have derived them from any warrantable source. Paul of
Samosala (A.I). 209) was the first bishop who departed into heresy j and yet the
baptisms of ids sect were annulled by the Council of Nice, while other sects
which sprang from no bishop and had therefore no continuation of orders
among them, had their ministrations confirmed. Jerome in ids Dialogue against
the Luoiferians urges against Hilary that after ids death the sect must expire with
Idm; because lie, as a deacon, could ordain none to succeed, and without a
priest no Church could exist. How is it also, lie asks, that you arc so shocked
at the admission of Arian baptisms by the Church, when you yourself wore
not only baptised hut held the office of a deacon in that same Church, which


jut lias constantly iiiliuilled nneli an whit, bapli.stnl by Manielieans anil Übin-
idles, by I'raxeas, (.'talnl bus ami Novatos? Thin, hr nays is an argumenl in
reply to which his opponent hail not a word to oll’er (advermin i/uoil tw
mulirc ijuiilmti muleat llilnrhut). If Jerome he correct in saying Hint the
Church hail ennslanUy recognised ns valid, baptisms administered hy seels
wlreh separated themselves even in the age of Hie Apostles, it is plain Dial
such admission must have been nulorior to the earliest account which we,
have of Hie denial of their validity in the age of Agrippinas, (tan it he Hap-
pened that the Church on that account acknowledged Unit the orders among
tin; Mnniehcann, Hbimiitcs and Corinthians were valid ? That is not probable,
besides, the Samoaaleiiiaus had regular orders; and yet their baptisms were
adjudged to be null. St. Augustin declares Ins persuasion Hint the reason of
this was their having abandoned the ordinance of baptism 11 in Hie name of
the Father, and of the Son, mid of the .Holy (Ihnstj” which form, he adds,
the heretics in general look with them when they abandoned the Hlmreli, and
continued to observe in their stale of separation. :|i
11 is therefore plain Hint the Church was accustomed to admit the validity
of baptisms administered hy those, whose title to Holy Orders, consistently
with her own rules, she did not and could not recognise. From an early dale
however there arc traces of a more rigid system hiaiimaling itself, and by
degrees attaining maturity. That system did not limit itself to mnintaining
that Christ hail appointed a ministry in the Church to he the jnvjier and
mlhorkvd dispenser of Ida word mill mysteries; and Unit an intrusive admi-
nistration, however it might convey the spiritual blessings of the saerinncnls
to individuals who devoutly received them, would be found ultimately sub-
versive of unity and peace in every congregation which admitted it. The
persuasion was continually more and more enconra Ke'l that sacramental grace
emdd not possibly he conveyed through any other channel Ilian Hud, of Hie
apostolical ministry; and that principle, unknown to Scriplnrc, mid Hie, mere
embryo and rudiments of which mu discoverable in the writings of the second
and third centuries, had made great advances in the age, of Chrysostom. “If
none” be says “can enter into the kingdom of heaven except In; be born of
water and of the Holy (llmst, and every one that ealeth not the Hash of Hie
lionl ami ih-inhnlli not Ids Wood is east out from everlasting life, nml if nil
these enu be mlmhmteml hy nmie elm but mtly by t/iuue huly btmife—the
pncstn, I mean —how can any onu without them escape the lire of hell, nr be
made partaker of Hu; crowns Unit are laid up for us in lieavon ?” (On the
Price/ howl ; Discourse limine' a IVimulalion, ]i. 113). It is much to be
regretted Unit no objectionable a sentiment should be found quoted, appa-
* Talier lie Iliuni!!: c. .11. Allmiiaiiiuti liowrvi'r rxprtiHiTH n Miminvlml iliirVrenl ii|iinloii;
iiniiilaliiiii); lliiil lawl'iil nr valid linplbm nmlil Me given My lliorai niily wlm lulil I In-
<Mltludic I'nilli wfmle ami innlelileil, ns wall as ulmeeveil Ilia iipiii'lnlad IMiim el' ivmd:i.
Oralio 111, i.'ontin d l/anu i. [i I 111. Vel. I, Mat 1 1 : fiifnn : lIIHII,


rmitly with »|>|>ro!inUon, by Bishop Beveridge (on Art. xxii); for it never was
so acknowledged liy thi! Church of Hnghnnl since Llio Iteformation. Dr. \Vn-
lerlaml, it is true, speaks somewhat contemptuously of those who regard her
ns recognising any validity in baptism except from the hands of a lawful
minister. “We need nut talk” he says “of the Wbitgifls, the Hookers, the
liilsons, the llanerol'ts or others. The Church’s public acts are open and
common, and he is the truest Clmrch-of-Hnghind-man that beat understands
the principles there laid down, and argues the closest from them. All the
rest are lint assertions, fancies, or practises of particular men ami are not,
binding rules to ns." (Reply to Mr. KehaW* Answer. Works. Vol. X. p. 186.
I'M. O.rfurtl). AH true churchmen will without hesitation consent to be
bound by the ascertained sense of the public acts of the Church ; which may
be I bought by some to speak dearly enough, lint when this is the very
point in debate, to whom can an appeal ho more becomingly made limn to
those early witnesses (such as Whitgift and Hooker) trained in opportunities
and habits of personal intercourse with the llcformors ? Hooker’s decision is
ton well known to require insertion here. The opinions of throe successive
Archbishops, Whitgift, Bancroft, and Abbott will bo found in Bingham,
(Snlmtmlical Uhl: qf Lni/.haji/ism. Works. Vol. 2, p. 067,) all in favour of
tin; vuliiiily of Iny-])apUsm.
To go back however to an earlier dateit is impossible not to bo moved
to suspect double-dealing in some points connected with this branch of eccle-
siastical history. On the one side Mr. Bingham shows “ Unit herelicks and
schismatics, ami degraded and excommunicated clerics, when once convicted
and legally censured, are no binger authorised to minister baptism, or to offi-
ciate as true priests and ministers of the Church ; but are reduced to the state
ol laymen, or even to a lower degree; and Unit some whose administration of
baptism was received, never bad originally any true or real ordination to the
ministerial office, and consequently were no other than unauthorised persons."
Neither Is there any portion of his laborious writings in which lie Ims shown
more extended powers of research, or has more completely established the
conclusion contended for. On the other hand his opponent, the author of
" Bay-baptism invalid,” assorts that “ according to the discipline of the ancient
Church, heretics and schismatics, even when they were out off, and cast out
o( the Church, were still allowed to be true and lawful priests, with full
power, authority, and right to baptise; and that, upon this principle only the
Church allowed of the validity of baptisms conferred by them—because they
were thou priests by commission and not mere laymen.” Dr. Wnteridml also
maintains that “the main point which St, Augustine in iris controversy with
the Donatists undertakes to prove, and in which Ire prevails and triumphs
over ids adversaries at every turn, is that heresy ami schism did not null or
vacate orders—which once validly given arc always valid; therefore can
never be deleted by any heresy, schism, or apostacy ; therefore sehismatical


clergymen still retain their sacerdotal character i therefore their ministrations,
ami particularly baptism, are still valhl.” (Second tetter in Itr/ili/ lo Mr.
Kelmll, Veil. X. p. 119-20). So far ns relates to the ease of n sacerdotal dia-
meter once validly given it is certain that very forcible proofs are urged in
support of each of these opposite opinions, lint both Mr. Uiugham s oppo-
nents have omitted the ease of baptisms conferred by such us never had
originally any true or valid ordination to the ministry, and upon this point he
clearly has the sense of the Church with him. No douht there were within
the Church many who felt unwilling to admit that baptism could ho adminis-
tered by any except a person in Holy Orders : fearing apparently lest such an
acknowledgment might detract from the sanctity and influence of the clerical
character. lienee, it may he presumed, arose the anxiety to maintain the pei-
suasioii that even heretical priests could not cease to he priests, ami lo find
some decent pretext for attributing Hie sacerdotal character to those who,
without having ever possessed it, were found administering baptism. Hie
becoming course would have been to say,These are in reality laymen, disturb-
ing till) unity of the OlmrUh, and meriting its censures for intruding inlo
another's oliiee; yet their baptisms are valid, as being administered, agieeabiy
to the form ordained by Christ, it was felt to lie impossible lo set aside
such baptisms; because the practise oi the Chureh reipiired that they should
lie acknowledged. The expedient resorted lo was therefore to endeavour to
hide, so fur as was possible, the defeet in the clerical character of the admi-
nistrators. This certainly could not lie done without some sacrifice ol con-
sistency ; but it seems to have been thought better that so it should lie, than
to admit even an apparent infraction of the Canon (expressed by Chrysostom)
Unit none except through those ordinances which depended for their ellieaey
upon their reception from the bauds of the priest “ could escape the lire of
hell, or lie made partakers of the crowns laid up in heaven.”
•With reference to the question which lias renewed this debate at Hie pre-
sent time, namely the denial of the rites of burial to the “ imliaplizcd,”,!
must remark Unit Ambrose in his oration on the death of Valeiitiniaii (who
died before baptism, lint not without an expression ot ids desire to receive it)
reeo, guises that desire ns entitling the young emperor to the privileges of an
actual baptism; and lie accordingly does not scruple to inter him in ids own
Cathedral of Milan with all the riles due to the faithful dead. Upon the
whole wo may lie led lo think Unit when those rites are, required from ns on
behalf of any who have been baptised “ with water in the name ol the Father,
ami of the Son, ami of the Holy Ghost; which things are essential to bap-
tism," that feeling which Hooker terms 11 remorse of equity,” should incline
us to give them, as Ambrose did, the benefit of Hint disposition, trusting that
(hoy desired and designed to he partakers of the true baptism of the Church.
Whatever we may appear to lose hereby in point ol exact discipline, it is to
he hoped, we shall more than recover in an augmented unity of Ihe spirit; and


iii cases of doubt it is assuredly heller to on' on the side of abundant charity
than <m that of an over-rigorous construction.
( C. )
In line sacramcnluhaplismalis celohrando, tres esse species cons'tat, qnascl
vns nee angere nee niinncrc nee pnctcrmittcrc poteritis. Prima species cst in
Trinilnlo; sccunda in crcdcntc ; Icrtia in operanto ; sed non pari Uhvarainc
pondcrundic sunt singula;: duns euini video ncccssarias, ot uiimii quasi neccs-
snriani. Prineipalem locum Trinitus possidet, sine qua res ipsa non potest
gei'i: liane sequUur fidcs crcdcnlis ; jam persona operantis vicina est, qua;
simili uuetoi'itate esse non potest. Cum ergo vidcatis onmes qui haptizant,
npcnirioH esse non dominos, et Saennuentaperse esse saueta non per homines,
quia osi qnbd voliis lanthm viudicatis ? quid cst quod Heum a minievilnis snis
cxcludcre conlciulitis ? Coiiocdile Den pnestare qua: sun sunt. Non cniw
potest id niiinns ab homine dari quod divimmi cst. Optat: Milevit; J)e
Schism : Donalisl: Lib. V. e. I.
( D. )
In quo baptizarentm' gentes a Salvatore mambilum est; per (piem bapiiza-
rcutur nulla exeeplimic diserelum est. Non dixit Aposkdis lev facile, alii
mmfaoiiml. Quisqnis in nomine Patris ot Fill! et Spirltus Saacti haptiwwcrit,
Apostolornm opus inqdevit. Denique leetum est in Evangelic, Joanne dicente,
Mai/ister, vidimus cptemdam in nomine tm expelkntcm dwmonia, et prohltml-
mus cum, quia non sequitur nohiscum, sic Cliristus ait; Nolile prohibere : qui
ciihn non est contra vos pro vobis est. Nam et ipsis sic mandatnni cst nt opus
esset illurnm Sanetilicalio Trinitatis ; nee in nomine suo tingerent, sed in
nomine Patris et Filii et Spirilus Snncti. Ergo nomen est quod signifient, non
oporarius. Intclligito vn<i, vel sorb, oporarios esse non dominos. —Id ; Lib.
V. c. 7.
( E. )
If therefore at any time it come to pass that in teaching publicly, or pri-
vately in delivering this Blessed Sacrament of Regeneration, some unsancti-
(icd hand contrary to Christ’s supposed ordinance do intrude itself, to execute
that whcrcunto the laws of God and his Church have deputed others, which
of these two opinions soemeth more agreeable with equity, ours that disallow
what is dune amiss yet make not the force of the word and sacraments, much
leas their very nature, and very substance, to depend on the minister s
authority and calling, or else thoir’s which .(Ideal, disannul, ami annihilate
both, in respect of that one personal defect? (of the minister’s authority and


calling :)* there being not any law of Cod which smith that if the minister Ins
incompetent his word shall he no wont, hiss baptism no baptism, lie which
toacbeth and is not sent, losoth the reward, hut yet rclaiucUi the mime of a
teacher; bis usurped actions have iu them the same nature which they have
in others, although they yield him not the same comfort. And if these two
cases he peers, the ease of doctrine mid the case of baptism both alike, sith
no defect in their vocation that teach the troth is aide to lake away the be-
nefit thereof from him which heareth, wherefore should the want of u lawful
calling in them that baptise make baptism tome vain? —Hooker lie i Pol; 15.
V, c. 02. § 13.
( F. )
Basil hi Ids Ist Up: to Amphiloehius (Canon I) imputes this to even the
Great Dionysius, in recognising the baptism of the I'epu'/.oiiiiins, (a sect ot
Montnnists,) “which oversight,” he says “ I am much surprised that lie, lining
in general so strict mi observer of the Canons, should have fallen into." lint,
lie afterwards says, “ though this escaped the observation even of the Great
Dionysius, wo must not defend Hie imitation of him in Unit error.” (See
Hooker IS. P. V. 02. § 0.) The above section of St. Basil which gave rise to
much observation during the controversy in the last century concerning the
validity of lay-haplism, appears to confirm the view which lias been taken of
the practise of the primitive Church in determining wind; baptisms were ad-
missible. The ancients, lie says, considered all baptisms receivable which did
not in any respect “ deviate from the faith mid what is meant by that ex-
pression lie afterwards explains, by saying that the baptism of the I’cpn/,em-
ails was null because “ (hey are manifestly heretics. They blaspheme the
Holy Ghost; wickedly and shamefully bestowing the appellation of the
Comforter upon Montunns and Priscilla—wind pretence then can their bap-
tism have to lie esteemed valid when it is administered in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, mid of Montanos and Priscilla? for (hey are not
baptised who arc not baptised according to the form delivered lo ns.” To
depart from that form was therefore in Ids estimation, the same tiling as to
deviate from the faith. Basil speaks of three classes of separation ; heresies,
schisms, and conventicles. The heretics are (hey who are completely sepa-
rated, being alienated from the faith itself: schismatics are such as dissent on
account of any ecclesiastical cause, or upon saimhle points; (i'mri/ia)
convenlicicrs are the members of congregations assembled by contumacious
• UcfeiTing to the opinion openly evprc.sHed by Tluima.s Cartwriglil, llu; purilitn, mid
embraced in (poieral by (liomo who held the pnrllan vlowh, (hat no innu could preach itiilomm
regularly ordained, "mi not iillhough he Hjieak the worth nl Sniplnre and iiileiprel
lluMii," neither haptlso “ iillhoiigli he pour water and rehearse (he worth which are lo be
rehearsed in the ministry of baptism/'


priests or bishops, and by nninstnicted people. From the very beginning
therefore it had seemed good to reject heretics altogether; such as the Ma-
niehcans, the Valontinians, and the Montauists. Cyprian and Firmilian with
their follower's, he adds, were for including under one sentence of condemna-
tion all the Cathari, Encratites, tlydroparasts, and Apotactites, upon tire plea
that schism is the forerunner of separation.* “ They who have disjoined
themselves from the Church, have no longer among them the grace of the
Holy Spirit; for the imparting of it has failed through the succession being
cut off. For they who first seceded had ordination derived from the fathers,
and through the laying on of hands possessed spiritual grace. But they who
have since been disunited have become laymen, having no commission either
to baptise or ordain.—Wherefore they (Cyprian and Firmilian) gave direction
that such as had been baptised by them should he regarded as baptised by
laymen, and be in-ought to the Church to he cleansed by the true baptism of
the Church." This was no doubt the system of Cyprian, but he was opposed
in it by the Church, and his practice set aside. It might indeed be admitted
that schism was introductory to heresy; but the Christian charity of God’s
Church did not permit it to treat schismatics ns heretics until they had shewn
that they were so, not only by acts of irregularity, but by an actual departure
from the faith and ordinances of the Gospel. Basil mentions one fact which
undcsigncdly affords convincing proof that the Church did not repeat baptism
when it had been once ministered according to the ordinance of Christ. “It
behoves us," he says “ to lie aware of the craft of the Encratitie ; namely,
that with a view to disqualify themselves for reception by the Church, they
have essayed for some time past to be beforehand by the administration of
baptism among themselves; although they thereby have stamped forgery upon
their own custom.’’ lie means that, finding the custom of the Church to he
that all who came over to it should be baptised afresh if they had been pre-
viously baptised according to any other than the regular form, these Pcpnze-
nians craftily abandoned their own rite, and resorted to the true ordinance of
Christ, as a sure means of preventing a repetition of it by the Church;
although, as ho says, they thus made a plain admission that the form which
they had used was a mere forgery. “ But,” he adds “so long as they do hut
* Mr. Silica ohaeivca, “ A certain writer of llie last century, not famed for orthodox
divinity, has nevertheless happened upon a clear and correct definition of Church Unity.
* This Unity ,* lie says ‘may be considered in two respects. First Essential; that is such
‘an union as is necessary to the Church's being. All schism in this respect is a separation
*from the body. Secondly Integral ; that is such an unity as is necessary to the Church's
‘ well-being ; and all schism in (his respect is separation in the body. A breach of inte-
* gral Unity is the worst sort of criminal schism in the Christian Church. This was Unit
* with which St. Paul charged (lie Corinthians (1. Cor.l.lo*l2).—lt has a fatal tendency to
* the dissolution of the body of Christ, according to our Lord's own observation (Multh.
* xii,2s) Every kingdom and house divided against itself fallelh."' Disc: on Furochl:
Communion, Chap. 11. p. 88.


maintain our form of baptism, lot us not lay it to heart. Not that any thanks
are on our part due to them on that account; but what we are bound to
attend to is the strict observance of the Canon.” Basil, who shows very
evidently his own inclination towards the system of Cyprian, even while lie
admits tliat it cannot lie maintained, endeavours to make it appear that the
reason why the Church recognised the baptisms of the Eneralita: was because
it had admitted two bishops of that party (Zoiu and Saturnhuis) to retain
their rank. But it is plain that this was an act of pure indulgence; that the
Eneralitca had no valid orders among them ; and that the real ground of their
being admitted was their having abandoned their former heretical peculiarities
and reverted to the Apoatilienl form of administration " with water, in the
Name of the father, and of the Sou, and of the Holy Ghost—which things,”
the Church of that age held, ns the Church of England does now, “ are
essential to baptism.”
( G. )
An account of many of those is given by Wall, Ilisly t of Infant-Baptism.
I’art 11. Ca : fi.-Vol, 2. p. 135. nil. Oxford, 1835.
C It- )
“ To conclude ; it is now called in question whether the children of papists
and cmimmmiieute persons (notwithstanding their parents be; Christians and
cannot amiUcre hupiismnm, lose their baptism, as it is determined by St.
Augustine against the Doualists) might to be baptised. And whether the
minister lie of the essence and being of baptism; and none to lie counted
ministers but snob as lie preachers : so that whosoever hath not been bap-
tised of a minister also a preacher is not baptised. The which question, and
others snob like, sprung out of the schools of the Anabaptists ; and tend to
the reliaplization of all, or the most part of, those that at this day are living.
With those and such like questions, partly impious and partly vain and frivo-
lous, is the Clin roll of Christ at this day marvellously troubled ; and men so
occupy themselves about them that they neglect those tilings that, pertain to
their own salvation, and forget due obedience.” Arclib ; Wiutgift —Sermon
before Q. Elizabeth, March 2d, 157-1.
from its being said, only twelve years after the 30 Articles were agreed
upon, “ it is now called in question whether the minister bo of the essence of
baptism,” and from the strong censure thus pronounced upon such as dis-
puted tlie validity of irregular baptisms, it appears necessarily to follow that
such questions had not been raised nor snob opinions adopted, among those
by whom the Articles were framed. At the Hampton Court Conference the
Bishops appear, by the modification of the rubric thou agreed upon, to have


expressed more plainly their view of the propriety that a lawful minister
should officiate ; yet it cannot, after what is stated above, (Appx. 15.) he
assumed that the Bishops of that day considered all as “ unbaptised ” who
had been baptised by laymen.
no
“ It remains that the gentlemen who espouse the opposite side of the
(piestion produce (if they lie able) at least one Divine of the Church of Eng-
land, of equal standing with those whom I have here quoted, giving it as his
opinion that our Church, hy altering her Kubrick, or by any other act of lior’a
hath declared lay-baptism to ho invalid. I think it cannot fairly he denied
that she once declared the contrary since the Reformation. If then it cannot
he made appear that she ever retracted that declaration, we must look upon it
as still in force ; that is, that it is yet the declared sense of the Church of
England that a lay-administration of baptism, howsoever criminal and irregular,
is not “ altogether null and invalid." “To speak the truth, her constant and
present practise is n sufficient declaration of this. In the lime of the great
rebellion, the sacrilegious invaders of our offices were men that had no ordi-
nation : (for wc are all agreed that anti-episcopal ordination is none .-) hy these
men were very great numbers of children baptised, who were horn in those
miserable dayswhich children nevertheless, after the restoration of religion
ami loyalty, were admitted by our holy Church to continuation, communion,
and all the privileges of Church-members, many of them doubtless to holy
orders too, without being rchaptised. This all the world knows. And who-
soever will dispute it ought to produce some act of her’s decreeing their rebap-
tizaliou; ought to produce some instances (I shall ho thankful, as I said before,
to any that will shew me so much as one) of persons rebaptised by lira- autho-
rity, or witli the approbation and consent of at least some one of her bishops
(as the Kubrick directs) upon that account.” (The Reverend E. Kelsall's
Answer to Sr. Watcrland’s First Letter on Lay-Baptism.) It is very observ-
able that in lus Second Letter Dr. AVaterland makes no reply whatever to the
above observation of Mr. Kelsnll. Dr. Gnuden (afterwards Bishop of Worces-
tor) in ins Ecolesiat Anylieanee Suspiria, written and published during the
usurpation, thus describes the state of religion during that unauthorised inva-
sion of the office of the clergy. “ The late licentious variations, innovations,
corruptions, and interruptions, even in this grand point of /he Evangelical
office and Ministry in England, have, partly by tire common people’s arroganey,
giddiness, madness, and ingratitude, and not a little by some preacher’s own
levity, fondness, flattery, and meanness of spirit, not only much abated and
aliased to a very low ehhe that double honour which is due; lint they have
poured forth deluges of scorn, contempt, division, confusion, poverty, and
almost nullity, not only upon the persons of many worthy minister, lint upon


the very order mul ofticc, the function and profession ; whose sacred power
ami authority, the pride, pctulaiicy, envy, revenge, cruelty, and covetousness
of some people have sought not only to arrogate and usurp as they list, hut
totally to innovate enervate anil at last extirpate* What wise and honest-
hearted Christian (that hath any care of posterity or prospect for the future)
doth not daily find as an holy impatience, so an infinite despondency rising in
his soul while he sees so many weak shoulders, such unwashen hands, such un-
prepared feet, such rash heads and such divided hearts, not only ilisown, east nil,
contemn and ahhorall ministry and mhiistersiw the Churchqf Knylmul ,but they
arepuhliely intruding themselves upon allholy duties, all sacred odiees, all solemn
mysteries, all divine ministrations after what fashion they list, both in admis-
sion and execution. Ail our iiiUcehisiays, preachings, prayings, liaplisings,
consccratings, instructing of hnhes, confirming of the weak, rcsolvings of the
dubious, terrifying and binding over to judgment of unbelieving and impeni-
tent sinners, censuring and admonishing of the scandalous, excommunicating
the contumacious, loosing the penitent, comforting the alllieted/Jiindlng up
the broken hearted, all the exercise ami operations of nj)irihuil power, yea or-
dination and holy orders, gifts mid graces, ability and authority, either from
Cod or lids Church, all those arc cither Imllicd and dispuruyed, or invaded
and usurped by seme rude Nmtellers with equal insolency and insnflieieney,
being for the most part by so much the mure impudent, by how much they
arc grossly ignorant.” (p. 160-1-2.)
Dr. Gandcu who thus expresses Ids keen sense of the profanation arising
from tin; intrusion of unwashen bands and unprepared feet into all holy duties
both of execution and admission, or of baptising and ordaining in particular,
was, it is well known, an active member of the Savoy Conference; and sat, as
Bishop of Exeter, in Convocation of the following year. Yet there is no trace
in the records of the time, or in bis own writings, of Ids ever expressing any
persuasion that the baptisms administered by those unwashen '..hands were
null, or that the receivers of them should, as “ uuhaptisod,” be denied the
rites of burial. The distinction between irregular baptisms and irregular
ordinations (both of which Dr. Ciaiidcn reprobates) is strongly marked by the
proceedings of the Church at that lime. We find no proof that the Conner
wore pronounced invalid by the same Convocation. On the other hand that
same Convocation did, by recommending and supporting tin: Act of Uniformity
(xiv. Cor : 2) declare its sentiments against the validity of irregular ordina-
tions. It is impossible not to ask, why should not irregular or lay-baptism
have been pronounced void by some similar public act if the opinion [bad
been held that it really was so ? Another point worthy of consideration is
that the same Convocation of 1601-2 which prohibited the uso'of the burial-
service over the “ unbaptised,” drew up also tin: form of Prayer for the
30th of January. Assume that among the “ imhaplised” they designed to
include all who were not baptised by a minister episeopally ordained ; and we


shall be forced to make an acknowledgment, painful and offensive to every
loyal heart; that while they instituted one service with a design that “the
memory of their martyred Sovereign might he ever blessed among us,” they
would, at tlie same moment, unite with his murderers in depriving him of the
rites of Christian burial; for it must not be forgotten, as Bingham remarks,
“ that the Royal Martyr was baptised by a Scotch presbyter only.” Scholast:
Hist; gf Lay-Baptism. Part 2, page 591. Some sensible and useful observa-
tions upon this subject will be found in the Visitation Charge of Archdeacon
Sharp.—Anno. 1733. p. 10-39. cd. Oxford, 1834.
( K. )
The continued existence of a Church from the days of Christ to the
present is a matter of fact and notoriety which requires no argumentative
proof; or rather admits of none which can render it more certain and
evident than it is. It may therefore be admitted as a principle. And if the
Roman Catholics and ourselves formed the same conception of. the Church,
there would he little or no controversy between us. Chillingworth, accurately
conveying the sense of the Church of England upon this point, says to his
opponent, “ It is superfluous for yon to prove out of St. Athanasius and St.
Augustine, that we must receive the sacred canon upon the credit of Cod’s
Church; understanding by church, as here yon explain yourself, the credit of
tradition. And that, —not the tradition of the present church, which we
pretend may deviate from the ancient, —but such a tradition which involves
an evidence of fact, and from hand to hand, from age to ago, bringing ns up
to the times and persons of the apostles, and our Saviour himself, cometh to
be confirmed by all these miracles and other arguments whereby they con-
vinced their doctrine to be true.” Retig. of Protests. Ausr. ii. § 53, vol. 1,
p. 238) But the fallacy on the opposite side is, as he observes, that they
transfer what is true of “ the Church in one sense,” to “ the Church taken
in another sense;” or they acknowledge that alone to bo the Church, which
has the note or characteristic of being in connexion with, or rather in sub-
jection to, the particular See of Rome. The inextricable difficulty expe-
rienced by the advocates of that system consists in shewing that this con-
dition or limitation has been legitimately annexed to the definition of the
Church ; and hitherto at least their endeavours to furnish proof of this have
been unsuccessful. Roman Catholics themselves are aware both of the diffi-
culty and of their own inability to solve it. In the Roman “ Catholic Ma-
gazine,” for March, 1834 (vol. v., No. 38) is a very remarkable letter
addressed to the Rev. Dr. Fletcher, by the late Mr. Charles Butler, author of
“ The Book of the Roman Catholic Church," and other well-known works
of controversy. In this letter, Mr. Butler gives an account of his having
lent Dr. Milner’s “End of Religious Controversy” to a lady of great in-
E


tellectual powers ami of highly-cultivated understanding—telling her, what
he really thought, “ that it would probably conduct her to the Catholic
faith.” But the lady returned the book with the objection, that “to prove
Ihe preliminary proposition—the existence of the authority of the Church—
a Homan Catholic must have recourse to the same mode of proof as the Pro-
testant uses to prove the truth of his religion’’—that is, she says, “you
must prove the authority of the Church from Scripture, from' general
reasoning, nr from both ;—and all Dr. Milner’s objections to this mode of
proof will then assail you. All that he says of the inability and the want of
opportunity of the immense majority of mankind to convince themselves of
the truth of the Protestant religion by Scripture or general research, applies
in an equal degree to your attempts to convince Protestants of the authority
<if your church.” (p. 177) Mr. Butler acknowledges Ids own inability satis-
factorily to meet the objection. He referred it to Dr. Milner, who con-
founded it with another and totally different difficulty; and to Dr. Poyuter,
who promised to supply an answer, hut omitted to do so. "The task,” Mr.
llutlcr adds, “ is to slate one or more facts, or one or more arguments, which
shew the title of the Unman Cii/hnlic Church to the authority claimed for
her so clearly, as to make it the duty of all to whom they are presented to
assent and yield obedience to her authority," (p. 17H) Dr.’Wiseman admits
I hat in his Kiuirtli Lecture 11 On the authority of the Church,” lie had hut
vaguely determined the existence of authority in the Church of Christ, with-
out ilclining where how or by whom it lias to lie exercised. {Lcct. viii.,
p. ”(11.) lie is evidently sensible 1.1 ml. lids effected nothing for the cause
of Ituiue ; and (herefore, anxious that he "may out appear to he building on
a frail foundation,” lie, proceeds to meet the real ililllcnlty in attempting to
prove “Hull the Pope or Bishop of Koine, as the sueecssor of St. Peter,
possesses authority and jurisdiction in things spiritual over the entire Church,
so as In ennsliluie ils visible head, and the vlee-gerent of Christ upon earth.”
(p. lifi.'l) The way ill which lie undertakes In prove this is “ from .Scripture,
Iruui general research, or from both." Independently of the objection which
is urged f lint this Hindi! of proof, even if it were .solid, could furnish no mure
iiif'iillililc grounds of fnilh limn the principles of the Unformed Church can
Mipply, there is nnlhing in the proof itself which lias net undergone most
miviono examination on the other side by men of at least equal attainments
with Ur. Wiseman ; who have remained satisfied that the claim of the Homan
bishop, to possess authority in things spiritual over the entire church, is
nllerly groundless, founded in palpable error and usurpation, nod not
tiininlailiable, by Scripture or general reasoning. “The task,” as Mr.
liuHcr very justly terms it, “of stating one. or more facts, or one or
more urginnenls which may clearly prove the title of Ihe Unman CathoUe
Church In the authority claimed for her,” remains yet to he performed.
Yet most assuredly This claim ought to receive the most rigorous proof


before so much- is buiU upon it. “ No one is or can be a* Catholic,”
Dr. Wiseman says “ but by his entire submission to the authority of the
Church am! “ they cannot bo its denizens and children if they enter not by
that one gate, of absolute unconditional submission to the leaching of the
Churchso that Chilling-worth did not misrepresent them when he said “ in
effect you say no man can have faith hut ho must ho moved to it by your
chureh’s authority.” (vol. 1, p. 235.) That foundation, then, upon which
every thing else is made to rest, ought to he itself immoveahly fixed; that
truth by which every other is to be tried and confirmed, ought to he first
made infallibly clear and certain. “ You will say, observes the great, writer
already quoted, “ dependence on your church’s infallibility is a better way of
proceeding. I answer it woidd he so if we could ho infallibly certain that
your church is infallible ; that is, il it were cither evident of itself and scon by
its own light, nr could lie reduced unto, and settled upon, some principle that
is so. But .seeing you yourselves do not so much ns protend to enforce us to
the belief hereof (namely, that your church is infallible) by any proofs infalli-
ble and convincing, hut only to induce ns to it by such as are, by your con-
fession, only probable and prudential motives, certainly it will he to very little
purpose to put off your uncertainty for the first turn and to fall upon it'at the
second ; to please yourselves in building your house upon an imaginary rock,
when yon yourselves sec and confess that this very rock stands itself at the
best but upon a frame of timber.'’ (ni. sup. sect. 28, p. 221) There was
therefore, slight ground for the assumed triumph of llossuet, who, in his con-
ference with Claude, thought he had brought the contest to a close in his
own favour by pressing his opponent with the consequence that according to
his principles " them is in your religion a point at which a Christian is not cer-
tain whether the Gospel is a fable or the truth.” {Hist, de Bommet, par. M. de
Banssct, vol 2, p. 2G) Unless ho will take everything for granted, there must
no less Ijg such a point in the experience of every Homan Catholic, when he
has not yot attained the infallible assurance, which his religion requires lie
should possess, of the infallibility of his church; for until that conviction is
fully formed he cannot, as his teachers acknowledge, know anything in reli-
gion with certainty.


POSTSCRIPT.
Sinuc the preceding pages were committed to the press, I have received
through the kindness of the Bight Reverend author “ A Sermon delivered at
the Cathedral Church of St. John Calcutta, at an Ordination holden on Sunday.
May 3rd., 1841, by Daniel, Bishop of Calcutta, and Metropolitan of India,”
wherein Ills Lordship observes “ it cannot be dissembled that a great contro-
versy is agitating the Church at home on the question of the rule of faith.”
With reference to this (pieslion the Bishop of Calcutta adds “ let men once he
laken oil'from the Inspired Scriptures, ns the sole, and adequate rule and
standard of our religions belief, and let human tradition, and the authority id
the Church be in part substituted, and a way is opened for every other cor-
ruption of faith and practise.” In tire truth of this declaration I entirely and
heartily concur. The observations contained in my Charge have reference to
principles rather than to any particular expositions of them; but I would,
without a moment’s hesitation, retract all that I have said, if I could discover
or suspect the existence of a disposition in any person or party, worthy of
consideration, within the Church of England, to substitute human tradition, or
(lie authority of the Church, in the minutest degree, in place of that of the
inspired Scriptures. 1 have however as yet met with no evidence which creates
an apprehension, much less convinces mo, that there arc any among ns who
would require any tiling to be believed of any man as an Article of Faith, or
he thought requisite or necessary to salvation, except it be read in Holy Scrip-
ture, or may be proved thereby. The Bishop of Calcutta, observes that
“ Tin; pamphlet in the Series of the ‘ Tracts lor the Times,’ No. 90, having
reached him, he has substituted some remarks upon it in place of those which
lie had delivered on similar, Iml leas open invasions of our thirty-nine Articles
nf RcUinon,” Not .having had an opportunity of meeting with Hie publication
I,ere named, lam unable (except in deference to the very high authority from
which it proceeds) to form a judgment concerning the grounds upon which
this severe censure vests; lint it will he right my clergy should understand
Hud this pamphlet is not included among the works to which my remarks in
the Charge were intended to apply.
u W i I A
W. G. A,
nth Vecemior, 1811.
