

CHARGE
DELIVERED BY
THE BISHOP OF GOULBURN,
1868.




CHARGE
DELIVERED TO THE
CLERGY OF THE DIOCESE OF GOULBURN,
at his primary visitation
BY
MESAC THOMAS, D.D.
BISHOP OF GOULBURN.
PUBLISHED AT THE BEQUEST OF THE CLEKGY.
DIOCESAN DEPOT, GOULBURN.
1868.




A
CHARGE,
&c-
My Reverend and Dear Brethren,
In entering upon the duty before me, my first
desire is, heartily to pray that God may bestow upon
us an ever-increasing measure of Divine grace, to
deepen the conviction of our responsibility as minis-
ters of Christ, and to guide and bless us in our work,
that we may become more faithful and efficient as
pastors of His flock, and more successful in winning
souls, and building up His Church.
In such an address as the present, nothing which
ccncerns the state and prospects of the Church, or
the duties of her ministers, can be regarded as out of
place. It is true that, in ordinary visitations, the latter
subject is not generally enlarged upon; yet I might
claim the indulgence, which fairly belongs to a first
occasion of this kind, to dwell upon some elementary
points, which at another time might be less required.
The territory of our present Diocese was under
Episcopal supervision, for the long period of seven-


and-twenty years, before the foundation of the See of
Goulburn. My predecessors, Bishop Broughton and
the Bishop of Sydney, names honored in the Church
of God, had, as you are aware, provided clergymen
and encouraged the building of churches and parsno-
ages in several districts. The duty with which I was
charged was, therefore, not to cultivate ground entirely
new, but to extend- the labors of others, and to carry
into effect the designs which had been already formed.
The published journals of visitation by the first Bishop
contain valuable information respecting the origin of
some of our parishes; and they exhibit evidences of
great energy and perseverance in his arduous work.
The inconveniences of travel, in the time of my pre-
decessors, were no doubt even greater than any which
exist in the present day. All honor, therefore, be to
the faithful men who, in the midst of difficulties,
traversed the interior in the service of their Divine
Master, and planted the standard of the Cross in many
a locality which has since grown into importance. It
is refreshing to observe how much such labors were
appreciated in the interior, and with what affection the
first Bishops are still regarded in many a household.
We owe them a deep debt of gratitude for thus laying
the foundations; and trust that, by the blessing of
God, our own labours may not be in vain in the Lord ;
and that we may have the spirit “of power, and of
love, and of a sound mind,” to give completeness to
that which was well commenced.
Synodical visitations, like the present, are useful,
in as much as they afford us an opportunity of together
taking a survey of those things which relate to the


welfare of the Diocese, and to the efficiency of the
ministry which we have received of the Lord Jesus.
And it is my intention to ask you to consider with me,
on the one hand, our past difficulties and encourage-
ments ; and, on the other, our present duties and future
prospects.
I.—Our Past Difficulties.
1. And first I would mention the accumulation of
requirements at the very commencement of my Episco-
pate.
Notwithstanding the advantages of Episcopal over-
sight for so many years, the Diocese presented difficul-
ties of great magnitude, when I landed in Sydney on
the 14th of March, 1864. I looked around upon the
Diocese and found everywhere a multiplicity of re-
quirements demanding simultaneous attention, beyond
all the means and resources at our command.
There were districts, comprising two-thirds of the
Diocese, without any of the ordinary parochial appli-
ances. Westward of Gunning, for nearly six hundred
miles, and along a great part of the sea-coast to Two-
fold Bay, there were no licensed clergymen except at
Albury and Wagga Wagga. Churches, parsonages,
and schools, clergymen and teachers, were all needed
at the same time in a large number of places. And
the anxious question which was ever present to my
thoughts was, “ How are the men and the means to
be obtained for this great work ? and what co-opera-


tion can I expect from the laity in the interior?” I
was constrained to feel that the case would, indeed, be
hopeless unless the Lord himself were on our side,
and stirred up the hearts of many to help us. In faith
and prayer, therefore, I committed myself and my
Diocese to Him, who ordereth all things, beseeching
Him to thrust laborers of His own choice into this
harvest, and to turn the hearts of men towards us
in sympathy with our difficulties, and in co-operation
with our efforts.
And then, without any accurate knowledge of the
ability or willingness of the people to support
the ministers of their Church, and at great per-
sonal risk, I ventured to invite a large number
of clergymen to occupy vacant places in the
Diocese. I did this in hope, and in reliance upon the
Christian principle and good feeling of the inhabit-
ants, not without a lurking hope of supplementary aid
from the state, and of support from Christian friends
and Societies in England. With regard to the results
of this undertaking, I am thankful to acknowledge that
some districts have kept faith with us, and have ful-
filled their promises by sustaining their clergymen.
Some have failed, however, not so much, I would fain
hope, from want of good will or ability, as from lack
of organization to keep the parochial machinery in
motion. While other districts have suffered seasons
of local monetary depression, and have lost, to some
extent, the ability of supporting the ministry of a
clergyman in their midst without larger extraneous
subsidies than were within our power to com-
municate.


2. We have suffered much from the depressed con-
dition of the colony generally in comparison with
former years.
During the past five years the Diocese at large has
been, more or less, in a state of considerable distress
from various causes. By direct visitations from God, and
by the altered commercial prosperity of the country,
large numbers who, seven years ago were in a position
to assist with ease all Church objects which might
have been commended to their liberality, are now sur-
rounded with difficulties, which they did not antici-
pate. They are, therefore, unable to continue the
former scale of liberality, and to support adequately
the various efforts for the Church in their own districts,
much less for general Diocesan objects. We have
suffered very severely from this cause ; and my bre-
thren, the clergy, are all more or less aware, practi-
cally, of the accuracy of this statement, and of the
consequent difficulties which we have shared alike.
3. The lack of adequate external aid has also been
a fruitful source of discouragement.
The withdrawal of state aid, instead of the re-dis-
tribution of it in the interior, was a great difficulty. I
venture to express my opinion very strongly and dis-
tinctly, that the removal of state aid at a time when
legislation upon the question of Crown lands was scat-
tering the population sparsely over the interior, and
settling them in small groups, far removed from
churches and religious instruction, w~as a heathen
policy, and one likely to act most injuriously upon the
religious future of the colony. In many instances it
would be impossible, without direct grants from the


state, to provide the ordinances of religion for the
settlers and their children. We have made great
sacrifices in the effort to do something to remedy the
evils created by this state policy; but it was an un-
equal contest, and we have failed to accomplish what
we desired. It would, in my opinion, be wise to urge
upon Parliament the alternative, either to modify the
land laws, by defining areas for selection ; or by pro-
viding for the religious improvement of the selectors,
by a renewal of state aid for a few years, with special
application to the interior of the colony.
Again, Colonial Missionary Societies in England
have not been able to provide assistance in such
measure as to supply this lack of service on the part
of the state. A very incorrect impression had been
produced in the committees of some of these societies,
that the Diocese of Goulburn was placed in more
favorable circumstances than the Dioceses of Sydney
or Melbourne, and that consequently we might be
safely left to the tender mercies of the voluntary prin-
ciple. Such was the effect of this-impression that the
Propagation Society withheld all aid for two years, and
even now only votes to the new Diocese the inadequate
sum of £3OO, divisible among six clergymen, to assist
us in planting the Church of England in a new territory.
While we are most grateful for this measure of sym-
pathy, we must importune the committee in London to
enlarge their grant as soon as it may be practicable.
4. Our fourth difficulty was the general absence of
religious life.
If the majority of those who are concerned in the
religious condition of the country had exhibited reason-


able zeal in promoting the spiritual welfare of their
parishes, the services of clergymen might have been
maintained, and the churches kept open. Whereas
now it is manifest that in many a district, owing to the
absence of religious life, few take a sufficient interest
in the work to organise a machinery for the different
requirements of the Church, and specially for the
stipend of the minister; consequently there is an
amount of spiritual destitution which is lamentable,
and which, with present resources, we are unable to
alleviate.
'5. We have shared with other colonial Dioceses
the disappointment which has been created by the
removal of several of the clergy ; some from ill-health
in their families, and some from the inability of their
districts to continue the payment of their stipends.
This has entailed upon us considerable perplexity and
pecuniary loss. The removal of the Rev. P. Lamb,
one of my valued Chaplains and an efficient Secretary
of the Synod and of the Standing Committee, I have
cause very deeply to regret.
6. Our sixth difficulty was the great deficiency of
scriptural church schools.
The real importance of religious education induced
me to put forth considerable exertion for the establish-
ment of Church of England schools, as soon as I had
secured an opportunity of doing so. But, for two
years, we received from the late Denominational
School Board £2OOO a year less than the proper and
just share of this Diocese from the Parliamentary grant.
This was secured by the other Dioceses, and our claim,
grounded though it was upon the principles of com-


mon integrity, was deliberately refused. When at
length we were permitted to receive our own, and our
due share of the educational grant was appropriated
to us, the Public Schools Bill was passed, and thus
within six months of our opportunity being secured,
and before schools could be really established upon a
firm basis —this other barrier of a still more formidable
kind was raised against us.
These circumstances acted most oppressively upon
our early energies. And it is right that you should be
informed of the true reason which prevented the estab-
lishment of Church of England schools in many parts
of the Diocese.
7. The incompleteness of the endowment of the See
at the time of my arrival was another serious impedi-
ment to the progress of our Diocesan and parochial
arrangements. For it became necessary to make an
effort to augment this fund at the time when I was re-
quired to organise the parishes, and when I needed all
the available resources for stipends and for building
purposes. To what extent this affected our Diocesan
progress lam not able to define. I merely mention
the circumstance for the purpose of bringing into view
the accumulation of work and of difficulties which
crowded upon a young Diocese as soon as the Bishop
landed.
Thus I have dwelt at some length upon our posi-
tion and trials, that we may have a fuller and deeper
sense of the grace and goodness of our Heavenly Father
in supporting us under difficulties, and surrounding
us with so many causes of thankfulness.
With satisfaction, therefore, I turn to consider


ll.— Our Encouragements in the Past.
1. A large increase in the number of appliances
for completing the parochial organization of the
Diocese constitutes our first class of encourage-
ments ; and these arrange themselves under five
divisions. In the first place, I would thank God for
the beams of light with which he has gilded our
path, He has cheered us in our work for the strength-
ening of the Church, and the evangelization of the
people scattered in the interior.
(1.) Within the past five years, nineteen additional
clergymen have been introduced into the Diocese, at
an aggregate preparatory expense of £2600. Of this
amount the Church Society provided £6OO ; for the
remaining £2OOO I and my friends in England became
responsible. When we regard the services of so many
ordained servants of God, laboring energetically over
a large extent of country, we cannot believe that such
labor has been in vain in the Lord. With my whole
heart I bless His Holy Name for the vast amount of
good which has, I am persuaded, resulted under His
Divine blessing from the self-denying services of these
faithful men of God. Of this number fourteen remain
to the great benefit of the Diocese.
(2.) It is a further subject of encouragement that,
during the period of our existence as a separate Diocese,
nineteen new churches have been erected—besides a
considerable amount of debt upon two other churches
removed involving a total expenditure of about
£12,000 for churches alone. And in this enumeration
I designedly omit all buildings of wood, as being more


or less of a temporary nature ; upon these some £6OO
or £7OO have also been expended.
(3.) Besides, six new parsonages have been erected
and two other suitable houses purchased, at an aggregate
cost of £6OOO. Schemes for two more parsonage
houses have also made considerable progress. These
are exclusive of valuable glebes, which in some in-
stances have been secured, and upon which £3OO or
£4OO have been expended for enclosure or purchase.
Other glebes have also been most generously granted,
as benefactions to certain parishes for a nucleus of
endowment.
(4.) Again, during our brief period of opportunity,
twenty-one new Church of England schools were
opened; and in seven places commodious structures
were erected for school purposes at an outlay of
£2600. Much good has been effected by the labors
of the teachers in these seminaries of sound learning
and religious education. But, alas ! several of them
have been closed, together with five of previously ex-
isting schools, by the operation of the Public Schools
Act. But I thank God that we have twenty-two
Church of England schools in operation.
This suggests the remark, that greater importance
than ever, and specially under the circumstances forced
upon us by the Public Schools Act, attaches to Sunday-
schools. Of these a large number are well sustained
by the voluntary labors of self-denying teachers. I
commend Sunday-schools to the special attention and
fostering care of my brethren the clergy, wherever it
is practicable for them to bestow personal service either
in instructing the teachers, or in visiting the schools.


(5.) The establishment and continued success of
our excellent Church Society is another source of thank-
fulness and encouragement. It has been the means
of conferring the largest blessings upon every part of
the Diocese, and is the right hand of the church of
Christ in the Diocese for every good work. It has
expended £6363 in four years. I commend it to you
as a means of bringing blessings as well upon its sup-
porters, as upon those who are the recipients of its
bounty. The recommendation of the Synod that, on
two Sundays in each year, collections should be spe-
cially made in every church for its general fund has
been most beneficial. Christian friends in England
have also more than once materially augmented our
funds by seasonable contributions in its behalf—which
fact is most cheering to us. I would also notice most
gratefully our great obligation to our stated subscribers,
and specially to those who contribute £5O a-year, and
who thus render us the double service of setting a
good example and of placing in the hands of the Com-
mittee the means of stimulating local generosity, by
making grants in aid of parochial efforts.
2. But there is another class of encouragements, and
these are connected with the spiritual results of the
appliances which have been brought to bear upon the
Diocese.
We must bear in mind, that all the appliances for
parochial organization are only the external machinery,
through which we seek the glory of Christ in the
salvation of souls. This is the true object of our
ministry, and the ultimate design of all our expendi-
ture of talents, time, and resources.


In the midst of the turmoil of external trials, toils,
and disappointments, a ray of true comfort falls upon
our drooping spirits, when from time to time we see
the effectual work of the Holy Ghost in the conversion
of souls, and in the general spiritual improvement of
those around us. It has sometimes occurred that while
the world saw nothing to commend, there has been
joy in the presence of the angels of God over sinners
repenting under the faithful ministrations of the men
of God in our midst, and turning in faith and amend-
ment of life to the Divine Saviour. These spiritual
results in the Diocese are the joy of my heart. Let
us take encouragement from the experience of God’s
favour in the past to persevere in the work, with the
assured hope that in due time, if we faint not, we
shall reap a glorious harvest of souls, to be our crown
of rejoicing in the eternal day.
One of the outward evidences of this growth of
spiritual life is the gradual increase in the number,
and visible improvement in the religious conduct of
our communicants. And lam led to believe that
this accession of persons admitted to full communion
has been in great measure the result of the careful
and anxious preparation of candidates for confirmation.
In the course of the present year 34.4 persons have
been confirmed, in the southern division of the Diocese
—204 females and 140 males. Their devout de-
meanour bore testimony to the anxious labour bestowed
upon their instruction by the eight clergymen who pre-
sented them for confirmation.
We also recognise with real thankfulness the im-
proved religious condition of many parts of the


Diocese, and attribute it to that general blessing, which
through the mercy of God is often the silent evidence
of the effectiveness and power of the Christian minis-
try, even where it is not accompanied with conversion
of souls. There is, I have reason to believe, a greater
regard to the observance of the Lord’s Day, as well as
increased and more punctual attendance at the services
of the house of God. Immorality and vice are less
rampant, drunkenness and dishonesty are less visible,
and attention to Christian duties, and to domestic and
social virtues more conspicuous.
For all these encouragements I am deeply indebted
under God to the fidelity and efficiency of the clergy
as a body. I feel that lam under the greatest obliga-
tion to you, my dear brethren, for the Christian patience
with which you have borne unexpected trials, and for
the godly zeal and untiring devotedness with which
you have discharged your ministerial duties, in season
and out of season ; as well as for the uniform kindness
with which you have received my suggestions and
given effect to my wishes. May God the Holy Ghost
Himself abundantly reward and comfort you.
I proceed now to our third division.
111. —Oue Futuee Peospects.
1. Let us contemplate them first from a parochial
point of view.
We may well pause here and inquire u what are
our hopes for the future? ” There may be ground for
the opinion that we were probably too bold in under-


taking at once so many responsibilities in connexion
with the appointment of clergymen and the erection
of buildings, within the brief space of five years, and
that therefore we must not be surprised if we are met
by a temporary reaction in a few places, in consequence
of exhaustion in some degree of their resources, and
of our inability to continue to them the same measure
of supplementary aid as at first.
(1.) Nevertheless I see no ground for becoming
weary or faint-hearted. In the retrospect of general
results and present appearances in the Diocese, so far
from thinking that there is occasion for despondency,
I perceive, on the contrary, manifest proofs of the
Divine interposition on our behalf. Relying, then, on
the same Almighty arm, I hope for the continued
presence with us of our Divine Master, and for similar
prospects and progress in the future, if we are only
true to our high calling, and work on in faith, and
labour in love with a single eye to the glory of God.
(2.) Again, wherever parochial organization has
been completed —that is to say, wherever there is a
faithful clergyman in full work, a church, a parsonage,
and a school—l trust that, the main burdens being
removed, there will be proportionally a greater facility
in obtaining the required stipend, and in maintaining
the machinery of the Church in healthy and vigorous
action. In such cases we might with advantage devise
schemes for endowments sufficient to supplement the
annual efforts locally made to obtain the minister’s
stipend. I trust that the Synod will be enabled to
suggest a plan and to render assistance in carrying it
into effect.


(3.) We have further the prospect of obtaining the
erection of seven more churches, arrangements for
some of which are in a forward state. Parsonages are
also required in seven more places, and in the case of
two of these considerable preparations have already
been made, so that we may hope to see them com-
pleted without delay.
(4.) The comparison between our first quinquennial
period and the previous twenty-seven years, leads to
the hope of further advancement.
It is evident that if in the next quinquennial period
we shall succeed, by the Divine blessing, in erecting
even half the number of buildings, and at less than
half the previous expenditure, we shall have cause for
fresh encouragement. And that we may the more
fully realise the ground which we have for thankful-
ness in the past history of the Diocese, it may be
desirable briefly to compare the results of the previous
twenty-seven years—from the year 1836, when the first
Bishop of Australia was consecrated, to the year 1863,
when the see of Goulburn was founded —with those of
the last five years.
In the former period of twenty-seven years:—l4
churches, 7 parsonages, and 10 Church of England
schools were the visible proofs of the energy of the
Church within the limits of what is now the Diocese
of Goulburn.
In the latter period of five yearsl9 churches,
8 parsonages, and 21 Church of England schools repre-
sent the efforts of the young Diocese. Besides, nine-
teen clergymen were added to the working staff.
It may not be out of place here to remark that
while some of our zealous friends were actively seeking


the co-operation of the wealthy to enable them to
found the new Diocese, they were met in some in-
stances with the remark that it would be better for
the Bishop of Sydney to raise a fund for obtaining
more clergymen than to create such new Diocese. For
it was alleged that the great need was—the multiplica-
tion of clergy, churches, and schools.
May we not fairly reply that the best, the true
answer to such an imagination is contained in the above
facts ? And that the readiest way of increasing the work-
ing power of the Church in any land, is to subdivide
the larger Dioceses, and to place centres of Christian
activity and of ecclesiastical oversight at shorter in-
tervals.
(5.) “ But how are clergymen to be provided for
some of the vacant districts?” The reply proper to
such an inquiry is—the previous question, “ Could they
be supported if appointed ? ” Many of the parishes
have made most praiseworthy efforts and sacrifices for
the purpose of securing due provision for the celebra-
tion of Divine worship. But the very effort to obtain
a suitable building has been for a time a drain upon
their resources, and the clergyman’s stipend has
suffered disturbance and diminution in consequence.
My own belief is, that if prosperous seasons are
mercifully granted, the people will be better able and
more disposed to employ the requisite active measures
for sustaining the ministry, wherever suitable ministers
can be secured.
But “whence is the supply to be obtained?”
“Will Moore College satisfy the demand?” I
scarcely believe that it will, and for this reason.
Young men who have had training for a year or two


in theological studies at Moore College, need another
kind of training which in this Diocese at present
cannot be provided. In England, when a young man
has spent three or four years at one of the Universities,
he is required to spend another year in theological
preparation, and when he is ordained he is placed as a
curate under the guidance of some experienced and
methodical clergyman. In that manner he passes
through the process of learning his business—learning
the art of managing a parish, and of the best way of
instructing the people publicly and from house to
house. But in a Missionary Diocese like this, the
requisite resources for such a system of maintaining
curates are altogether wanting ; and a young man with
only a preparatory supply of theological learning, and
without initiation into the mysteries of parochial and
ministerial skill, is obliged to commence his work,
perhaps in a place far removed from a more ex-
perienced clergyman, with whom he might take
occasional counsel in cases of novelty or perplexity ;
and yet even, under such circumstances, he is expected
to accomplish, what, in all merely human professions,
would at once be deemed impracticable if not impos-
sible. Nevertheless Moore College is our only Church
source of supply, and the College has rendered good
service in furnishing several active clergymen to this
Diocese.
Again, “ will the Church in England or in Ireland
be able to spare for us a supply of able and faithful
men in our emergency?” I believe that we might
obtain from these sources some valuable men, if we
possessed the means of providing for their outfits,
passages, and journeys ; and if, moreover, we could


guarantee an adequate income and a suitable sphere of
action in the Diocese. Hitherto we have been
dependent upon some of my Christian friends in
England, who generously placed at my disposal for this
purpose the contributions adverted to. We can scarcely
expect a repetition of such disinterested benevolence,
in the midst of so many nearer claims at home. In
future we must look more to ourselves for the means ;
and trust that in process of time we may be able to
obtain the requisite supply of clergy, without ex-
traneous dependence to such an extent for men and
money. But I must confess that Ido not know when
such time is likely to arrive !
(6.) Another important inquiry is this, “ what are
our prospects with reference to Church schools, and
the supply of an efficient staff of teachers?” The
difficulty with respect to the religious qualifications of
competent teachers for our schools, is even greater
than that last adverted to. The qualification for
teachers—piety, aptness to teach, competency from
previous training and experience—are not easily found
in combination. And when the Parliament deliberately
passed a bill—the effect of which was to close so
many of our schools before they had obtained a fair
opportunity of establishing themselves—and to exclude
the word of God from the hand of the teacher in the
daily routine of instruction in a public school—it
closed at the same time the only religious training-
school in the colony, which was available for the
supply of suitable teachers for our Church schools.
1 cannot conceal therefore from myself, and I do
not wish to conceal from you, the conviction that the
ultimate effect of this legislation cannot but be un-


favorable to the religious character of the rising
generation. What can be expected hereafter of those
who have been educated without the Bible, and conse-
quently without the source of right principle in life,
and without any solid foundation for a good hope in
death !
While our prospects as regards the ministrations
of religion in the public and private services of faith-
ful clergymen, are reasonably encouraging, those
which relate to Christian education, except in places
where Church schools have been established, are
confessedly gloomy. We cannot for a moment accept
the public schools as substitutes for our own denomi-
national schools. Religious instructors cannot be
found, gratuitously to devote one hour a day to each
public school while the secular teacher is abundantly
remunerated for the four or five hours’ tuition which
he is to impart under the regulations of the council.
I regard the measure, and the policy which dictated it,
as being adverse to the religious progress of the Church
in the colony; and trust that a more enlightened
parliament may yet arise to restore the privilege of
allowing us to establish our own schools as heretofore,
and upon terms at least equal to those which are
granted to public schools. I am fully persuaded from
careful inquiry and from observation, that our Church
schools, which have been fairly established, and fully
organised, will bear comparison with any public schools
of similar standing, in all the secular branches of
learning, while they present the additional advantage
of imparting at the same time the higher instruction
which alone gives its value to secular knowledge,


and which educates the whole man, body, soul, and
spirit as well for eternity as for time. Our hope
meanwhile is this—first, that wherever Church schools
exist, the clergy will foster and guide and guard them,
that they may become efficient for all the purposes of
their establishment; and secondly, that wherever public
schools alone exist, the clergy will endeavour to make
arrangements in the routine of their parochial
work, to visit the public schools, and to impart instruc-
tion in the Bible and in the formularies of our Church
to such children as belong to our denomination and are
willing to attend. Otherwise our loss will be
incalculably great.
2. Let us next view our prospects with reference
to the Diocese at large. I would humbly express my
hope that, notwithstanding some difficulties of a prac-
tical nature, if we are spared to labor on for a few
vears we shall have cause to rejoice in the progress of
Diocesan arrangements in the same degree as we may
now fairly rejoice in the advancement of what more
strictly relates to the organization of our several dis-
tricts and parishes.
(1.) First with regard to our Synod. We have
scarcely had experience enough as yet of the utility of
Synodical action. Time will remedy the defects which
may now appear, and remove some of the obstacles.
I am anxious that the Synod should have a fair trial
and a full opportunity of developing itself in the Dio-
cese : and request my reverend brethren with me to
exercise patience, and to consider before they meet the
Synod in session, such subjects as appear to them to
present the most pressing claims upon the time and


attention of the Diocese. I certainly share the feelings
of some who are of opinion that the formation of the
Synod here was in some respects premature, and that
the time consumed in the previous conferences could,
at least by the Bishop, have been devoted more bene-
ficially at the early stage of our existence to other
Diocesan duties, which were suspended in consequence
of these interruptions. But the Synod is now a fact;
let us therefore employ it for the furtherance of those
objects—the mere discussion of which by the assem-
bled clergy and laity will be productive of beneficial
results.
(2.) The Provincial Synod. No time has been
named, so far as I am aware, for the assembling of the
Provincial Synod. United action is therefore
postponed; and the several Dioceses are as much
isolated from each other as though they were situate in
three distinct divisions of the globe.
(3.) The endowment of the See, and the erection
of an Episcopal residence. This is a subject which
may be regarded I trust as one of general interest to
the Diocese. The contributions in money to the
Bishopric Endowment Fund amount to £IO,OOO, of
which £2OOO were voted by Societies in London,
besides £IOO a year from the revenues of the Bishop-
thorpe Estate in Sydney, by the kind arrangement of
the Metropolitan and the Government; and £SO a year
from a friend in the district of Goulburn. There are
also benefactions in land at Goulburn of 153£ acres; at
Collector of 100 acres with a house; at Taradale of
2500 acres ; and at Queanbeyan of 100 acres with a
house, —which together produce a gross revenue of


£145 a year. The unpaid subscriptions to the Fund
amount to £I2OO, upon which the kind donors pay
interest, and thus recognise the validity of their
promises.
In addition to the above, a sum of money was
placed in my hands by personal friends in England,
which has been in great part employed in preparation
of the land designed to be the site of a future building,
as a Bishop’s residence. Towards the latter also I
have obtained the sum of £I7OO, of which £l7O were
subscribed by friends in Sydney, and £7OO came from
England.
From these statements it will be understood that
the Endowment Fund is not yet completed, and that
the Building Fund has not reached more than half
the amount which is required.
IV.— Our Duties.
In conclusion I would invite you to accept a few
suggestions as to the duties, which now seem to be
incumbent upon us, generally as ministers of Christ,
and specially under the present aspect of the affairs of
the Diocese.
1. Let us in the first place resolve to keep ever in
view the ordination vow—“ Will you be diligent in
prayer ? ” “ I will endeavour myself so to do, the
Lord being my helper.” What a solemn contract was
this into which you entered when you were ordained
as ministers of the word and sacraments of Christ! It
involves the promise of diligence in this duty, the con-


stant lifting up of the soul to Christ—the drawing out
of the affections ever after Him, in earnest prayer !
This is of the deepest moment for the progress of your
own ministry. There is no instance of a successful
ministry which has not been a ministry abounding in
prayer. The minister must be “ a man of prayer,” if
he would be a minister of Christ; for he needs the
inner instruction of the Great Teacher whose personal
example in this diligence is to be our true model. It
is beyond belief how much light and unction from
above, how much vigor and strength, how much ability
and readiness for his great work flows to the faithful
preacher through this channel. The marvellous issues
of the success of the Apostolic ministry of old is
clearly traceable to the heaven-sent resolution, “ we
will give ourselves continually to prayer,” (Acts vi, 4)
<c and to the ministry of the word.” On this account
Christ was with them “ in the power of His resurrec-
tion.” And their words were the message of God to
the hearts of the hearers, which He opened so that
they took heed to the things spoken. Daily wrestle
with God in prayer for yourselves, and for your people ;
daily sigh over your own sins and the sins of the im-
penitent around you ; and daily draw supplies of grace
and strength from above for the temptations, the duties,
and the trials which are a necessary portion of your
ministerial care.
Pray likewise, in the spirit of the Ember week
petitions, that God would mercifully guide and govern
the minds of His servants the Bishops, that they may
faithfully and wisely make choice of fit persons to
serve in the sacred ministry of His Church; and also


that He would give His grace and heavenly benediction
to those who are to be ordained, that both by their life
and doctrine they may set forth the glory of God and
the salvation of men through Jesus Christ our Lord,
The great want of our times is a due supply of
godly, faithful, and learned men for the perfecting of
the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edify-
ing of the body of Christ. Let us seek them by impor-
tunity in prayer!
2. Next to direct communion with God, which is
the work of the heart, is the duty of framing and fos-
tering “ our own selves and our families, according to
the doctrine of Christ, and of making both ourselves
and them, as much as in us lieth, wholesome examples
and patterns to the flock of Christ; ” and this is the
work of the life. If we would gain an effective influ-
ence for our ministry, we must be careful to maintain
holy consistency in our conduct, and to avoid all
appearance of what is evil. If the Gospel which we
preach be powerful in filling ourselves with the graces
of the Spirit, then will it be mighty through God in
pulling down strongholds elsewhere. Levity, frivolity,
self-indulgence, conformity with the world in our inter-
course with the people will soon bring down our min-
istry, in their estimation, to the level of a cunningly
devised fable. Whereas the humble, devout, and holy
pastor will find a pervading influence for good flowing
forth from himself, and gently affecting all who come
within the action of his pastoral care. Give your
best to Christ, and He will not fail to crown your
life with blessedness and your ministry with jewels of
glory.


3. Upon the duty of parochial visiting I should
have much to say, were I not persuaded that you are
all deeply convinced of its value and necessity. It is
by this method that you learn the true spiritual condi-
tion of your people ; by this you will gain their sym-
pathy for your heavenly message, by first taking an
interest in those ordinary objects which most interest
them. Once secure their sympathy, and you readily
gain willing ears for your higher ministrations. It is
our duty to teach, not only “ publicly,” but also “ from
house to house,” if we would follow an Apostolic
model; and to use u private monitions and exhortations,
as well to the sick as to the whole within our cures,”
if we would be true to our ordination vows. It is the
house-going minister that makes a church-going people. I
do not know anything which produces more deadness
and indifference among professed members of the
Church than the ordinary neglect of this plain duty.
If we are tempted ever to follow our own ease or plea-
sure instead of seeking the salvation of the souls com-
mitted to our care, let us ask ourselves the solemn
question — u How shall we meet them before the judg-
ment seat of Christ, if through our sinful indulgence
we have permitted them to perish ? ”
The systematic visiting of our schools for religious
instruction and catechising belongs to this part of our
ordinary duties ; but I need not enlarge upon it beyond
the remark that diligence here will always repay the
labour that you expend upon it.
4. Carefulness is important in the matter of admon-
ishing those who come to the table of the Lord to be
regular in their attendance at the monthly communion,


and regular too in maintaining a course of conduct
agreeable thereto. Your people may also be reminded
of their own obligations to God, and of their covenant
with Christ, if you introduce the wholesome practice
of baptizing the young from time to time in the face
of the congregation according to the spirit of our
Church and the design of her baptismal services. I
would particularly urge upon my reverend brethren
the duty of adopting this plan, and of avoiding as
much as possible the practice of using “ the office for
the public baptism of children ” in the entire absence
of a congregation, the presence of which is supposed
and presumed in the whole tenor of it. And with
regard to the hour for administering the Lord’s Supper,
in the Church of Rome this is limited to the period
between eight and twelve in the morning; but our
own Church has not confined the celebration of the
Holy Communion to any specified hour of the day.
If therefore in any case you would find it convenient,
and would desire to administer it in the afternoon
service, there is no lawful impediment.
5. To another sacred duty I would briefly advert—
that of encouraging your people by your own example
and by your direct instruction, to cultivate the habit of
devoting part of their substance to the service of God
in the Offertory. This is an institution of apostolic
origin and of divine appointment; and has been of
the greatest value wherever fully understood and
generally adopted. It possesses the great merit of
affording an opportunity to the widow to throw her
mite into the treasury of the Lord, as well as to the
rich to cast in of their abundance. The clergyman


should persevere in inculcating the duty and in afford-
ing an opportunity for its practice, while himself
always setting the example.
6. And now let us briefly glance at the position
which as ministers you are considered to occupy in the
Church of Christ. The true designation of the office
which you bear is very clearly defined by the admir-
able Hooker:—■“ In truth the word presbyter doth seem
more fit, and in propriety of speech more agreeable,
than priest with the drift of the whole gospel of Jesus
Christ. For what are they that embrace the gospel but
Sons of God ? What are Churches but his families ?
Seeing therefore we receive the adoption and state of
sons by their ministry, whom God hath chosen out for
that purpose ; seeing also that when we are the sons of
God, our continuance is still under their care, which
were our progenitors, what better title could there be
given them than the reverend name of presbyters or
fatherly guides ? The Holy Ghost throughout the body
of the New Testament, making so much mention of
them, doth not anywhere call them priests.” (Eccl.
Pol. v, 78.3.) We are ordained to preach the Gospel,
to feed the flock of Christ, to tend the lambs, to re-
cover the wandering, to edify the body of Christ.
7. With regard to the prevalent troubles of the
Church of England, I see little need of the introduc-
tion of the subject on an occasion like this, because
we are happily free from the taint of ritualism amongst
ourselves, and are too much occupied with the realities
of missionary work to devote time to mere vestments,
or to tamper with the errors of the Romish apos-
tacy, which lie beneath the gorgeous ceremonials.


To suppose that any honest mind can find a pre-
text for these things in the language of our formu-
laries is to suppose that our Reformers, by the
employment of ambiguous language, admitted into
our Book of Common Prayer the very evils which
in truth they shed their blood to exclude. But
there is a worse evil than even this. The great
enemy has been busy in perverting the very fountains
of instruction. Scepticism and infidelity have, alas !
even in high places, found promoters and abettors. It
is an awful spectacle to see a minister of our scriptu-
ral Church seduced from the truth by German rational-
ism. How much more awful to see one in the highest
office, bringing despite upon the living oracles of God,
and robbing the Saviour of the world of the Divine
honor, with which the very angels adore him.
“ Our own course is clear, if we would be loyal to
the word of God, and loyal to our Church, it is to
have no communion with such, but to hold firmly and
to preach boldly the faith once delivered to the saints.
It is on the faithfulness of each of us in the appointed
path of his duty, that the prosperity of the Church on
earth depends. It is in your pulpits, in your schools,
in your due and scriptural administration of the sacra-
ments, in your closets, in your studies, in your pastoral
visits, in your labors of love, in your holy lives, that
your strength is found, and that the good fight is
fought and won.”
But whatever else you may be, failure must follow,
if you ever forget that you are “ambassadors for Christ,
and that to you is given the ministry of reconciliation,
to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world


unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them;
for He hath made Him to be sin for us who knew no
sin.” Like St. Paul determine to know nothing among
men but Jesus Christ and Him crucified; and like St.
Paul, you will approve yourselves as ministers of God!
Our ministry is pre-eminently for the salvation of man-
kind—but salvation is of the Lord. We are only in-
struments in His hand; quickening power is from the
Holy Ghost. Before you can expect to be employed
in the salvation of others—make sure of your own—
and then Christ being with you, you will save both
yourselves and them that hear you !
NOTE.
I thankfully avail myself of this opportunity of acknow-
ledging my great obligations to many Christian friends in Eng-
land, from whom the Diocese has received liberal contributions
during the past five years. I regret to add that these kind
benefactions which were made for a limited period are no longer
available. At the same time I would express my most hearty
gratitude to the Committee of the Colonial and Continental
Church Society , for their very seasonable annual grant in aid
of the stipends of six of the Clergy.






