

A " '" l
A CHARGE
’ t£i.l«lJji P*MS
* ■— • , .
ttOK fa
DELIVERED TO THE
CLERGY OE THE ARCHDEACONRY OF MELBOURNE,
AT THE
VISITATION,
TUESDAY, JANUARY 30th, 185 5,
IX THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF ST. JAMES, MELBOURXE,
THE
VERY REV. H. B. MACARTNEY, D.D.,
DEAX OF MELBOURXE, AND VICAR GENERAL.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY ABBOTT & PEPPER, LITTLE BOURKE STREET.




A CHARGE.
My Reverend Brethren,
Having in compliance with the direction of our much
revered and beloved Diocesan called you together, I am
anxious to direct your attention to the circumstances under
which we meet.
The Bill for enabling the members of the United Church
of England and Ireland in Victoria, to provide for the af-
fairs of that Church, in preparing which many of you have
taken an active part, has, through the good hand of our
God upon us, passed the Colonial Legislature, and has been
reserved by his Excellency the Lieut. Governor, for the ap-
proval of her Majesty. But as unforeseen difficulties have
hitherto arisen to delay every attempt to give the power of
self-adjustment to the Colonial Churches, our Diocesan felt
it to be his duty to use every possible efforfcto obtain that
consent; and therefore undertook the voyage home, in order
to be at hand to explain what might be obscure, to allay
the fears of the timid, and to satisfy the doubts of the scrupu-
lous. I trust the voyage will be to him a period of enjoy-
ment, but it certainly would not have been undertaken save
at the call of duty. In the meantime, while we follow him
with our prayers, we must not overlook the fact that our
own situation is one which demands solemn and anxious
consideration.
There is no church that must not feel the loss of a mem-
ber who was ready to devote unreservedly all his time, talents,
rank and influence, to the furtherence of its best interests —
who was able to teach, and apt to teach—whose energies
never tired—whose perceptions never became confused—to
whom the babe in Christ might resort with confidence, that
his errors would not be scorned; and the father and teacher
with equal confidence that his perplexities would be disen-


tangled; whose rebuke was the showing forth of genuine
Christian love, and whose personal feelings, ambition,
and objects, were merged in the one desire for his Mas-
ter’s glory—whose integrity and simplicity of purpose were
recognized by those who separated from his communion,
and drew around that communion the bonds of Christian
love. The loss of such a one, even for a short season,
must, I say, be deeply and sensibly felt. But if we find
that person occupying the highest office in the church, and
regard him in that office as God’s own ordinance, for holding
us together, and giving to the various communities which
form the church in this land unity of purpose and of action
—the loss becomes one which we may not regard as trifling,
and pass over as a mere ordinary occurrence; but it is one
which calls us, in all earnestness and steadfastness of pur-
pose, to labour to fill the void, to hold faster together,
and work with greater devotedness, because the visible
centre of our movement, and the guide'and stimulant of
our energies is for a season removed from our sight. If
we be simply, as some are pleased to call us, Episcopalians,
our unity will fall asunder, our efforts will languish; but if
we be, not in name only, but in reality, Christians, if the
great Risen and Exalted One be Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, His presence will be with us, and the absence of the
earthly ordinance will only bring us to seek closer com-
munion with Him, and to delight ourselves more in spend-
ing and being spent for His service.
It is now seven years and seven days since our Bishop
reached these shores, and the contrast in the condition of
the Church is the most remarkable of the many contrasts
which, in this land of our adoption, present themselves at
the extremes of that eventful period. One Clergyman
then had watch over the population settled from Bass’s
Straits to the Murray, and from Corio Bay to the Pacific
Ocean —and one Schoolmaster in one comfortless room em-
bodied the care of the Church for the lambs of her flock.
This sacred building indeed, and another, both unfinished,
showed what the aspirations of the people were, and that,
could living men be obtained faithfully to minister, there
was many a hand ready to aid in those things which were
needed for the sending forth and maintenance of the truth.
The one Minister and his one Schoolmaster were not aided
by the labours of a lay agent, paid or unpaid, so that each


may be said, emphatically, to have stood alone. In the
district I have referred to, there are now, through the great
mercy of God, twenty-seven Clergymen School-
masters or Schoolmistresses, with assistants,
besides, which there are five licensed lay agents, with a con-
siderable number of others, whose labours do not require a
license. Services are conducted in fifty-eight places, and
every Sunday seventy-two congregations are assembled to-
gether. If we look at the whole Diocese, the results are
scarcely less striking : then there were three Clergymen and
three Schools —now there are forty-four Clergymen, (I
ought rather to say forty-six, for two are only waiting to
take possession of the cures to which they have been ap-
pointed,) with eighty-two Schools, eighty-two Schoolmas-
ters and Schoolmistresses, and forty-five assistants, and ser-
vices are conducted in eighty-eight places, and one hundred
and eleven congregations are assembled. In 1848 we had
three Clergymen, to an estimated population of 40,000,
or one to 1300 scattered over the whole territory. Now
we have in the same extent of country, forty-six Clergymen,
to an estimated population of about 280,000, or nearly
one to every 6000 of the inhabitants; while instead of three
teachers for 40,000, we have 12'7 for 28,000: that is, we
have advanced from one for 13,300 to one for 2204. To
have kept pace with the population during the last few
years would have been much, but we are overtaking it, and
that rapidly. So far, however, is this vast increase from
having satisfied the wants, or exhausted the resources of
the Church in this Colony, that the cries for additional la-
bourers were never so impatient, and the expression of a
willingness to afford the necessary support was never so
readily uttered.' This fact speaks volumes as to the general
character of the men employed, for a heterodox, careless, or
imperious minister in one parish, would chili the desire for
the ordinance throughout the district subjected to his in-
fluence, or warned by his example. When therefore, we
find that each minister appointed leads to a desire for more,
we have the most satisfactory, because the most practical
and unmistakeable, evidence of his excellence. Two years
ago it was doubted whether the Church could absorb the
funds voted by the Colonial Legislature on condition of
certain local efforts; now it appears that were the grant
multiplied threefold, it would still fall far short of what we


require. Here then we may raise our Ebenezer, and say —
“ Hitherto hath the Lord helped us /’ or adopt the lan-
guage of the Psalmist, “ When the Lord turned again the
captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream; then was
our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing,
then said they among the heathen, the Lord hath done great
things for them; the Lord hath done great things for us,
wherefore we are glad.”
But while we are thus called on to praise and glorify
our God for His goodness towards us, we are nevertheless
bound to look at the other side of the picture, and to con-
template the present and pressing difficulties and dangers of
our position. And first, the very rapidity of onr progress
involves in itself many necessary evils. Of the twenty-seven
Clergymen in this part of the Diocese, one has been seven
years in the Diocese; one has nearly completed that period :
the next has been here five years and the same time in his pre-
sent post; the next, the oldest incumbent in Melbourne or
within thirty miles of it, (I speak not of his time of life but
of his incumbency,) was ordained Deacon in June 1851, and
Presbyter in the end of 1853 or beginning of 1853; and
of the total number (forty-four or forty-six) of Clergymen
now in the Diocese, twenty-one have entered since the
beginning of 1851, or in the last few days of 1853, while
twenty-seven only hold the position of incumbents. This
has arisen from the great exertions which have been madeto
obtain additional labourers, and the watchful anxiety to place
them in localities suited to their peculiar qualifications, to
which we may in great measure, under God, trace our
present prosperity; but from whatever cause arising, such
is the fact, —and, thus suddenly called together, strangers
to one another and strangers to our flocks, if we look only
at human instrumentality we are a house of sand to be
levelled by the waves or scattered by the winds; but there
is, dear brethren, a Power which binds us together and
makes us indissolubly one. But while this uniting Power
is Divine and poured forth according to the good pleasure
of our blessed Master’? sovereign will, it is in some way,
not clearly definable, but not on that account less certain,
connected with our own seeking; and, therefore, I would
affectionately and earnestly urge you, as the Members of
Christ, to pray together, and to strive together, that we may
hold “ The* unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,”


that as the old and travelled ark and the fresh gold of Ophir,
the shittim wood of the wilderness and the cedars of Lebanon,
the chiselled stones of Tyre and the brass of TVobab, united
under one plastic hand to form one glorious templefor the Lord.
So we may meet, and not merely meet together here, but may,
through the grace of our great Master Builder, grow together
for an habitation of God through the spirit. Yes, beloved,
I have confidence in you —I have confidence in God that
thus it will be —and that the year that is before us will be
a year of grace and a year of spiritual growth.
But there are other difficulties to which our attention
must likewise be directed, and which it is necessary to look
fully in the face. Our pecuniary affairs were never in so
unsatisfactory a state. First, as to School-buildings. The
Denominational Board, with which we are, I believe, ail
connected, has since its formation limited itself (we thought
by express rule) to giving according to the census, and 'as
tlie Church of England forms about one half of the popula-
tion of the colony, it has hitherto received one half of the
grant; consequently, leaving £22,000 for the support of
Schools and other annual expenses, our share for building
purposes of the grant of £50,000 for 1854, would have been
about £14,000. Knowing, therefore, that according to the
previous invariable practice of the Board we ought not to
get more, and conceiving that it was impossible such a rule
(or avowed practice having the weight of rule) could be
changed without distinct notice being given to all parties
concerned, and that, therefore, w r e would not get less, in
the first half of last year we sent in our claim for £7OOO,
which was answered ; but when we proceeded to ask for the
remaining £7OOO for the last half of that year, we were in-
formed that the Board had, without giving us any notice
on the subject, changed its plan—that the census was disre-
garded —priority of application the only claim admitted—
and that all its funds had been given to other denominations.
There are now applications in abeyance for upwards of
£IO,OOO, and many plans of usefulness which would have
been pushed forward have been checked. This is a painful
lesson, but it shows us that the Church of England in her
present position needs the wisdom of the serpent as well as
the harmlessness of the dove. The Bishop has remonstrated
strongly on this subject, but no answer has as yet been
received to his Lordship’s communication.


Our next difficulty has arisen from the great demand for
churches and parsonages, and the great efforts which have
been made to meet that demand, —so that while the money
available from Government amounted to little more than
£7OOO, the sums sought considerably exceeded £24,000.
In order to understand this subject clearly it is necessary to
remind you that the total amount available for religious
purposes in this colony is £36,000 a-year—that this sum
is really divided according to the census, and that con-
sequently the Church is in round numbers entitled to a
fixed animal sum of £17,824. Of this £3OOO is under the
schedule granted as part of the constitution at the time of
our separation from New South Wales, and this may be
applied either to buildings or to stipends in such propor-
tions and on such conditions as the Lord Bishop may point
out. Of the remaining £14,707 one half must go to build-
ings, and the remainder may go to stipends under certain
stringent regulations. The demand for stipends this year
(of which 1 shall presently speak) was so great that the
Bishop, with the approval of the Council of Advice appointed
by the Conference, felt it right to give the whole amount
which the laws permitted to that object, therefore the amount
available for building purposes was little more than £7400.
To divide this among claimants for £24,000 was no easy
matter; and the difficulty was aggravated by the fact that
there were outstanding claims from a former year which it
w as necessary to meet in full, and which reduced the availa-
ble sum to £5264. In the arrangement Parsonages were
preferred to Churches for two reasons ; first, because a
Church can be of no use without a Clergyman, but a Cler-
gyman may be of much use without a Church; secondly,
because the amount which would suffice for one Church
would supply five Parsonages. As a general rule, therefore,
£2OO was allowed to each of the applications for Parsonages
—the rest was divided with reference to the long standing
of the claim and the progress made. While thus en-
deavouring to assist as many as possible no one is satisfied,
and the claims still outlying amount to about £17,000.
The evil arising from this disappointment consists not
merely in the postponement of the benefit—in the positive
physical inconveniences to which we may be exposed by the
prolonged want of Church-room —but in the discourage-
ment which many will feel at their efforts not meeting the


assistance which (from ignorance of the extent of the de-
mand) they were led to expect; and it is on this account
that I have troubled you with so long and minute an account
of our difficulties. It will be necessary for you to endeavour
to combat this feeling—to point out the gratifying cause
from which the embarrassment has arisen—and to show
your people and those under your influence, that while self-
reliance as regards God is the extravagance of presumption
and folly, self-reliance as regards man is essential to the
carrying out of any great or good work; that while others
may help us, we are liable to bitter disappointment if we
reckon on any created aid except our own exertion. I
should mention here that in order to relieve this pressure,
a few gentlemen have, at the suggestion of the Bishop, gen-
erously offered themselves as security for £IOOO each, if his
Lordship can obtain a sum in England to be divided among
the disappointed claimants. * I do not know, however, that
his Lordship has carried with him guarantees for the full
amount he intended to raise, which was £10,000; even this,
however, would leave more than one-fourth of the demands
still unsatisfied.
Another subject of even greater difficulty than this pre-
sents itself in regard to the annual stipends of the Clergy.
Some may suppose that a proportion of the schedule might
have been given to building; but the case is simply this—a
building can wait for means to finish it, a living man
cannot wait for the means of support; and as, after every
effort, the incomes of the Clergy had to be considerably re-
duced, it was felt right to make that reduction as small as
possible. In December, 1853, about £8525 was to be
divided for 1851 among twenty-seven Clergymen, and
consequently, every one received the highest amount the
law permitted, and an available balance was left. In
December, 1854, the same sum with a small addition from
the schedule had to be divided among forty-six, and
the reduction made of one-fourth from that portion of our
incomes. It is not, however, to this reduction I refer
(which will, in many cases, be made up by your flocks, and
in all be counterbalanced by the fall in price, and conse-
quent increased value of money) but to a difficulty and
danger which has not, I think, been duly appreciated. At
the opening of 1854, the government grant of £625 re-
mained unappropriated, yet before the end of that year, the


whole of that sum was swallowed up; whereas at the begin-
ning of 1855, every shilling is appropriated—nothing left
for contingencies, and a deficiency of £IBB on the reduced
scale; and if it should please God to send us additional
labourers, we have from this source, no means of
supporting them. Again, in the opening of 1851, the
Diocesan Society had upwards of £2OO in hand. The
Stipend Board had upwards of £6OO, without any demands
on it whatsoever; and the Training Institution, likewise
without any charge on it, had £440, yet before the end of
the year all this was exhausted. This year those various
institutions are penniless, while the Gold Mission has a
charge of £450 a year, and the Training Institution at least
as much, and on the Stipend Fund we must alone depend,
under God, for the maintenance of fresh Clergymen who
may arrive, and for whom it may be impossible for a sea-
son to obtain an appointment; while the Episcopal Fund,
(consisting of money collected in England or here, and
given unreservedly into the Bishop's hands,) hitherto
a resource in all emergencies, is not only exhausted,
but in debt. Here then, beloved brethren, you are called
on to exert yourselves, and not only to exert but to deny
yourselves, seeking not your own well-being, or even the
progress of important necessary works in your own
parishes, as much as the well-being of the Church at large,
so that we may not be like the Corinthians, when one was
hungry and another had superabundance, but that there
may be equality, as it is written, “He that had gathered
much had nothing over, and he that had gathered little had
no lack." We must, if we desire the Church to pass un-
scathed through the trying times that lie before her—and I
wish strongly to impress upon your minds that it is a time
of extreme difficulty—we must look beyond local objects
and local interests, and labour to induce our flocks to pour
largely and liberally into the general fund.
But while it is thus our duty to remind our flocks that
the Church in this colony is in a great measure dependant on
their exertions, and on their liberality, for support, we must
ever remember ourselves, and not suffer them to forget, (in-
deed I am bound, in justice to the laity of this Diocese, to
say that they never or scarcely ever do forget it,) that what
we are called on to support is the Church of England—a
Church sensitively jealous of the honor and independence of


her ministers, who are bound, in the ceremonials and de-
cencies of worship, to consult alone the direction of the
Church herself, and the interpretative commands of her
Bishops, and in the preaching of the Gospel to regard solely
the word of God, and the responsibility with respect to that
word solemnly and voluntarily undertaken. Should the
day ever arrive in which our people should desire a subser-
vient or men-seeking ministry, they can readily obtain it;
but not I trust in our ranks. We can dig, we can beg, we
can starve; but we cannot pander to the passions of men —
we cannot descend from the moral dignity of our position
or preach any other Gospel than that which we have received.
Many practical difficulties will be solved by the question.
Is my first duty to extend the boundaries of the Church
among men, or to maintain her faithfulness to God ? But
one answer can be given to this question, and that answer
may be our guide. But on the other hand let us beware
of seeking to be lords over Christ’s heritage. A subser-
vient and contemptible ministry is not the only danger to
which a non established church is exposed. With able men
the very instability of their position may tempt them to climb
too high—the absence of temporal dignity may give undue
prominence to spiritual power. . The conviction that our
influence is too little—the absence of the jealousies which
watch and check an establishment, may result in a spi-
ritual exaltation, and a widely diffused and growing power
more opposed to, and more subversive of the simplicity that
is in Christ, than all the wealth, rank, and authority that
princes ever delighted to entrust to the Church they
patronized. May the power of the Holy Spirit enable us
to walk in the narrow way, not turning to the right hand
or to the left; neither drawn to the one side by the allure-
ments of interest, nor led to the other by the still more
delusive dictates of spiritual pride.
There never was a minister, from the great Apostle of
the Gentiles to the humblest that ever preached Christ in
sincerity, who did not require to be reminded of the solemn
responsibilities of the pastoral office, or who would not
speak with profit on the subject to his brethren; at the
same time not wishing to detain you unreasonably, and press-
ed by a variety of matter, I gladly pass over pastoral work
with scarcely a reference, not because I am insensible of
its unspeakable importance, but because I believe, and


bless God for the conviction, that it is a work to which you
give yourselves with all earnestness and godly sincerity.
It is true that you cannot accomplish for your parishes all
that should be done for them—for well supplied as Mel-
bourne is with churches and ministers, compared with
most parts of this country, it would require ten times
as many ministers to place it on a level in that respect with
towns at home, where the cry is that the Clergy are overwork-
ed because their number is insufficient. Addressing you then
as the Pastors of your owh flocks, I will merely say to you,
.—go on in the name of the Lord, and may lie who has
sent you prosper you, and give you grace to continue faith-
ful to the end. But the pastoral work is not that alone
to which we are called; we are messengers and missionaries,
and wherever there is darkness and spiritual wretchedness,
there is a field open for our work, there is a call to us to
come over and help. Ido not say that the minister is to
leave his own flock on any occasion, or to waste in general
and desultory efforts, power which, if rightly directed, might
accomplish much; but Ido say that we are bound to look
beyond our own 'immediate field; Ido say that the gold
fields are ours —that the neglected bush is ours —and that
the frightful spectacle of spiritual destitution there, ought
to haunt our path by day and our pillow by night. Por what?
—to be a spectre to disturb our work, and to scare away our
rest! No ! but to urge on us the question, what have I done,
what can Ido to relieve this crying this fearful evil—to press
the question upon others, and to urge those whose hands
are unemployed to present themselves to the Lord, sa}ing,
{C Here am I, send me.” Does not our hearts throb with
honest exultation when we learn that amidst the horrors of
war, the post of danger and of suffering is the post of
honor, and that our gallant countryman contend with
ardour for the privilege of standing in the hottest of the
fight, of enduring the severest privation, and the heaviest
toil; and shall the soldiers of Christ shrink from pwyateni
as indignity, and determine to walk in no path that is not
strewed with roses —shall we virtually declare that we care
not for the perishing of souls in comparison with our daily
comforts. ’ I do not mean for one moment to insinuate
that the comforts and decencies of life are unworthy of a
Christian’s attention, still less that a flock can be in a right
state as regards their own spiritual condition, if they aie


indifferent to tlie temporal comforts of their ministers ; but
I do say, and I am sure you will all agree with me, that
while our temporal wants should be their care, spiritual
wants should be our exclusive object, and we should look
out upon the religious destitution of the colony, as calling
not only for our prayers but for our efforts.
According to the power entrusted to me in the Com-
mission you have just heard I purpose as sodn as cir-
cumstances permit, to mark the boundaries of the several
parishes in this part of the Diocese, so that each Clergy-
man may not only, know what church he is to serve
and what district comes within the sphere of .his full
ministerial labours, but that he may see what is the ex-
tent of the district in which if he does not labour, no one
else can; in which if he is unable to give personal minis-
trations, he is at least bound to rouse and direct the en-
ergies of the people in procuring lay readers, schools, and
such other means of grace, and of religious instruction, as
can be afforded them as substitutes for, or rather as the
first movement towards the establishment of a regular
ministry. Indeed, we find that some of our most promising
congregations have been gathered together either by the
occasional services of the minister of another place, or by lay
agency. Dor example, Collingwood, Williamstown, Bel-
fast, and North Melbourne, in the towns, and Winchelsea,
the Plenty, Barrabool Hills, Point flenry, Castlemainc,
Phillipstown, and Pentridge, all now enjoying a settled
ministry, were originally drawn together by lay agents, or
by occasional visits from neighbouring Clergymen.
Each Minister ought to be a centre of light, a fountain
from whence aggressive and missionary operations should
flow forth on every side. He should be to his parish what
the Bishop of Melbourne has been to this Diocese. Dr.
Chalmers uttered a great truth when he said religion must
go forth with an aggressive movement —and if that be
true in our native islands, where religion is bound up in
all our institutions, and spreads herself over the length and
breadth of the land, where her truths are presented to
every mind, and her buildings adorn and sanctify every
scene —if even there the gospel finds either positive resist-
ance or absence of demand, how much more needful is
aggressive movement here where the whole land lies open
before us —where the moral and spiritual fields are still


unoccupied, where truth and falsehood meet on equal terms,
and where the principles of each individual shaken out from
their old associations like the materials of a time-worn
building, prove unfit to bear the shock of removal.
There is indeed an earnest longing after mm lustration in
the minds of many —of many of our best and noblest—
which we are bound to reverence, and with which we must
cordially sympathize—which yearns after the Pastor, the
Church, the sound of the church-going bell—the well order-
ed School with its joyous groups —the Pastor's modest
mansion, and all the calm routine of tranquil village piety;
and such minds are apt to look with fear and disgust on inter-
rupted services—on the booted and bespattered messenger
—on the inconvenient School-room or motley congregation;
but taste, even Christian and sanctified taste, must be
sacrificed to Christian principle; and until the Lord sends
forth an abundant and sufficient supply of labourers, we
must learn to bear one another's burdens, and to yield our
own religious comforts to the religious destitution of our
neighbours and our brethren; and by this exertion of
Christian generosity and Christian self-denial, the consumma-
tion of our desire will be, through the Divine Blessing, the
sooner obtained, and Victoria will really present to us a
picture of what Britain is; whereas, if we only intend to
form a few oases in the desert, the desert will send its pesti-
lential winds and scatter its withering sands to blight the
verdure of our watered gardens. The gospel is essentially
missionary, and lives in diffusion —its trunk strengthens as
its leaves expand —its roots deepen as its branches climb.
The next topic to which I shall advert is Education. A
Bill is now before the Legislative Council, which will, it may
be hoped, place the matter on a more satisfactory footing
than at present, but as we have all expressed our opinions
on the question generally, I need net enter upon that part
of the subject. I may, nevertheless, remind you that how-
ever erroneous may be the system on which a school may be
conducted, and however strongly we may feel bound to pro-
test against that system, if we are invited to teach in that
school the truths of the blessed gospel, we may surely take
advantage, nay, I conceive we are bound to take advantage
of the opportunity thus conceded, and we may do so without
the slightest compromise of principle or weakening in any
degree the force of our protest against that which is evil.


In fact, it is on this principle alone (that we can lawfully
avail ourselves of an imperfect and faulty system, provided
we are neither hampered by it in proclaiming truth or identi-
fied with it) —that w r e can make use of the Denominational
system, which is in some of its features highly objectionable.
Our only question in this colony seems to'be—Can law-
fully avail ourselves of government assistance on the terms
on which it is proffered ? And if this be answered in the
affirmative, our duty manifestly is to press forward in the
tvork. You. have deliberately thrown the wdiole weight of
your influence into the scale in favor of a system which
allows and encourages what we as Protestants must consider
the very worst possible teaching, the teaching of Home; and
you have done so on the ground that it likewise gives full
scope to the very best teaching, the teaching of, I will not say
the Church of England, but of the Bible. You admit the
sowing of tares that you may have free scope to sow the
wdieat ; be it so. I think, in the difficult position in which
you are placed, you have judged wisely ; but surely you are
bound by this act to double vigilance, for if you fail in your
exertions, the soil will not lie fallow, or be left to the weeds
that spring naturally from it, but the tares are by your
omission scattered far and wide, and will fill the land. It
is sad to sec teachers w r andering the streets in quest of em-
ployment, and children running wild in want of teachers,
and parents ready to subscribe towards having their children
rightly trained, and government offering large and liberal
assistance in the work, without our endeavouring to bring
the scattered elements together, and enable each to avail
itself of what the other can give. And now I must remind
you that the rule of the Denominational Board, requiring
an attendance of thirty children, only applies to places where
there is a School already established. No such test is ap-
plied to the first School in any district, and therefore there
is scarcely a collection of tents in the settled districts or in
the Bush which may not, if you please, have its scriptural
School. Surely, to accomplish such an object would be in
itself a glorious work, and I think I could point to one
parish where that w r ork is being steadily carried on, and I
see not why it should not progress through the length and
breadth of the colony.
And now, brethren, we are about to separate—and you
to return to your respective parishes—may you go in the


ft sfv?
V 10
N ' - fullness of the power of the gospel of Christ—may you
‘ preach that blessed gospel freely, absolutely—so that the
trumpet may not utter an uncertain sound, —and when you
speak of the all-sufficient sacrifice for sin—of the love of
the Father manifested to us in the person of his Son—of
the faith which is to us the substance of things hoped for,
the evidence of things not seen —of the everlasting love by
which the people of God are drawn to choose Him who has
already chosen them—-of the full assurance of faith—of the
spirit of adoption whereby we cry Ablja Father—of the
work of the Holy Ghost by which we are sealed even unto
the day of redemption—and of the sure and certain hope of
everlasting glory—when you bear witness of these things
may you be enabled to take up your blessed Master's
words and say, “We speak that we do know and testify
that we have seen." Our labour though blessed is not un-
mixed with pain. What faithful minister of Christ has ever
gone on his way without it ? Many a discordant note is
uttered, and the opening tones of melody are hushed as soon
as perfected—it is the tuning time of the spiritual orchestra
amid every harsh and inharmonious sound and discord and
din ; the well-tuned instrument is silent, and the chords
only vibrate when the harmony is imperfect. But the time
is coming when the full chorus shall burst forth—w r hen
those which were silent because they were perfected shall
awake once more to richer strains—when that which by
itself seemed rough and grating gives fulness and depth and
power when mingled harmoniously in the grand chorus—
when every voice shall praise Him—when every eye shall see
Him—and when varieties of taste, feeling, and habit of
. mind, which here too often produces confusion and discord,
shall mingle in sweet accordance, though with various tones,
in the general anthem, and swell the song of praise to Him
that loved us and washed us from our sins in His own
blood.
ABBOTT AND PEPPER, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.
