

A CIRCULAR LETTER
From the GENERAL ASSEMBLY'S COMMITTEE
os RELIGION and MORALS.
11 1 stir up your pure minds by way of re-
membrance ; that ye 7nay .be mindful of
the words which were spoken before by
the holy prophets.—n rsiEu m, i, 2.,
—— o—
0 the Members and Adherents
’ of the Presbyterian Church
of New South Wales,
We may preface this circular-
letter by intimating “no collection.”
We seek not yours, but you.
As the Assembly’s Blue Book has but a
limited circulation, we desire to bring
several points in the Committee’s Annual
Report more directly before our people.
I.—Family Religion.
The Committee reported that work
among the, young in its various aspects
seemed to them the healthiest and most
encouraging feature in the returns; and
further, that religious training, family
worship, and the study of God’s Word
are not forgotten. We desire to impress
these matters upon your personal atten-
tion. A minister may make the fullest
provision for his young people, but, unless
his efforts are backed up by the loyal


support of parents and office-bearers, the
results must be meagre. Although we are
assured that home religion is not neg-
lected, we feel convinced there is much
room for improvement in this all-impor-
tant matter. We appeal specially to the
Presbyterian mothers of the colony to
order their household arrangements, so
that at least once in the twenty-four
hours, family worship may be observed.
We “ stir up your pure minds by way of
remembrance; that ye may be mindful
of the words which were spoken before
by the holy prophets,”
2.—Sabbath Observance.
The Report states : —“ The Day of
Rest would appear to be well observed by
church-going people, but those outside
seem to recognise no obligation to ‘ re-
member the Sabbath-day, to keep it
holy.’” In town and country the condi-
tion of affairs is often such as to make
our hearts tremble for the ark of God,
We are largely, and often unconsciously,
affected by our surroundings; and when
Sunday-trading, outdoor amusements,
and week day employments goon around
us, there is a tendency to regard such
breach es of t h e fou r t h com m and m e n t w i t h
indifference, if not indeed with leniency.
And this isnotunfiequentlyaccompanied
by the further tendency to be less strict


m3ss*s 4^
ourselves. We therefore urge upon our
people the need for special watchfulness
in this direction. We “stir up your pure
minds by way of remembrance ; that ye
may be mindful of the words which were
spoken before by the holy prophets.”
3.—Church Attendance.
There can be no doubt that attendance
at public worship may be regarded as a
very good index of one's own spirituality.
“Where blessings are received in com-
mon, they ought to be acknowledged in
common.” Wilful neglect of God’s
house means as a rule religious decay.
But such a course affects others. We
have known cases in which the unfailing
regularity of a worshipper so stimulated
others that they were led to take a deep
and abiding interest in the Redeemer’s
kingdom. We have known those whose
continued irregularity and indifference
were deemed fitting excuse by others
for their non-attendance and careless-
ness. “No man liveth to himself alone.”
Our attendance must seriously affect
our own families. “The auld kirk at
hame,” with its big square seats (pum-
phils), in which were gathered thefamilies
of the countryside, must live in the
memory of not a few. Our children copy
us for good or evil, and, without doubt,
their future weal or woe will be deter-


