

“ No doubt but ye are the people,
And wisdom shall die with you.”
— Job. xii. 2.
fkrital and fag “ |)ppa^uim.”
OUR OWN REPORTER.
“Among other curious customs which prevailed among these strange peoples,
there was one which, I confess, sorely perplexed me. I observed that immediately
upon the accession of a new Sovereign, his palace was invaded and beset by a
bevy of sycophantic courtiers and officials, wffio vied with each other in proffering
advice to His Majesty; and in uttering mysterious warnings against certain
persons, places, and practices. I noticed also invariably, that the real object of
this apparently disinterested and patriotic policy was to secure, if possible, their
own advancement by ungenerous depreciation, if not defamation of their rivals. ”
—Mandeville {?).
Sydney, March, 1890
I&CfD


deemed it expedient to entertain—was most certainly “ valid ”; and in
this case the objections (technical merely) raised by the Bishops of
Marmalade and Henbane were of course worthless. We desire, more-
over, to express our admiration of the pluck and persistent tenacity
with which, ah initio , you clung to your manifest rights. As the
occupant of the Primatial See we now proudly recognise the reward
you have gained !
S. Aidan, Sydniensis, Primate (with evident uneasiness) —Is the
resuscitation of these, happily by gone, contentions touching my election
at all necessary ? Had we not better proceed to our legitimate busi-
ness ? Mr. Diocesan Manipulator, I think you were in possession of
the chair!
D.M. [continuing) —On entering Port Jackson, your Grace
may have noticed a lightship, meant to guide the adventurous
mariner and enable him to steer clear of the perilous reef which in mid-
channel is found. So it is, that, upon the entrance of your Grace to the
See of Sydney—pardon the play on words— we are anxious, as faithful
and wise counsellers, to hold out the beacon light, that so, D.Y., under
your auspices, the ark of the Church may be safely guided to that
“haven” and stronghold of administration, where all Australian Bishops
“ would surely be.”
S.A.S. —Might I ask, Mr. Diocesan Manipulator, to what “haven”
in particular you allude
D.M. —There is but one reply, your Grace—the haven afforded by
staunch, unyielding, uncompromising “ Protestantism ” ! —the only real
safeguard and refuge in these dangerous days from the rocks and quick-
sands of apostate Rome and her sister Ritualism, whereon so many
unwary souls make shipwreck of their faith ! (Partial, but, Emphatic
assent.) We, your Grace, are all staunch members of the Reformed
Protestant Church. We glory in that spiritual inheritance, won for
us and our children by the tears and blood of martyred thousands !
For it was through the heroic efforts of such men
S.A.S. —Pardon my interruption, Diocesan Manipulator, but I fail
to recognise the ecclesiastical body of which you spoke—“ Reformed
Protestant Church?” I have not met with it, either in history or
experience. I thought that we were all baptised members of the
Church of England, a true and living branch of the one Holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church. Will you inform me when the Church of
England adopted a new nomenclature, and on what authority ? (Per-
ceptible searchings of heart.)
D.M. —Speaking with profoundest respect, I must, however painful
be the task, express my deep regret that your Grace should, in these
enlightened days, entertain such antiquated and effete notions. To us,
Catholic is simply the antithesis to Protestant, So doubtful a title as
“ Catholic ” we leave cheerfully to the monopoly of apostate Rome !
Taught by the memory and achievements of the immortal William , we
hold—(lmmense applause)


S.A.S. —Is that some new Saint? or perhaps it is one of Anti-
podean canonization, and therefore unfamiliar to me !
D.M. —I am referring to that memorable crisis in English history,
when the chains of spiritual bondage—
S.A.S. —Again pardon interruption. We are wandering widely
from our immediate purpose; viz., to advise and consult with me as to
certain obvious lines of duty in the present crisis.
D.M. —Precisely so, your Grace, as a band of loyal, God-fearing
Protestants, we desire to offer the advantage of our long, diversified and
wholly disinterested experience; that so forewarned, you might be fore-
armed in dealing with our deadly foes—even now rampant and
unabashed, who are seeking to unprotestanize our beloved Church !
(Assent —mingled with sobs).
S.A.S. —Do you not think a title less savouring of party spirit
would have been better ? Why not simply “ Catholics,” instead of
“ Protestants ?” It is surely a more comprehensive and more ancient
name. And pardon me, if I plead ignorance of that mysterious
disintegrating process to which you refer “ the unprotestanising , etc.”
How is the operation performed upon a branch of the Church-
Catholic ?
Justice Waterman (greatly agitated) —Your Grace, your Grace,
you do not, you cannot know in what “ parlous state ” we, as a denomi-
nation of Christians at this moment are ! At this very time our
esteemed and indefatigable Secretary, Mr. Guppy, on whose shoulders
rests the mighty burden, formed by the far-reaching and “ combined
exigencies of the Protestantism oj a continent ,” is laboring under our
direction “ with travail and tears, night and day,” to put down Popery
in our Churches, and banish from the teaching of our Clergy the
baleful heresies of the “Man of Sin,” and the soul destroying seduction
of the “ Scarlet AVoman.” And would your Grace weaken his hands
nd stultify his herculean efforts by sanctioning such a title ? s
S.A.S. —Really, Justice Waterman, we are still far from the main
object of our meeting, which was, I understood—
D.M. (interrupting eagerly) —Precisely so, your Grace. We are
not unmindful of our mission; and with the Laureate (slightly altered)
we crave permission to say :
“As counsellors at your command,
We come ! We know the Clergy perjectly.
And we can take occasion by the hand
(Our sun at least has not yet set).
By shaping some most absolute decree,
To keep them safe from Popish net,
And make the bounds of freedom narrower’ yet. ”
J.W. {aside) —Fine poetic ring in those stirring words! What a
tower of Protestantism we have in our good old Diocesan Manipulator !
Jones Dickson {indignantly) —Your Grace, as one always inclined
to deal fairly even with those who differ from me, may I say I have
listened to enough narrow-minded, bigoted, and unchristian rhodo-


montade to destroy my digestion for a week. Our religion is not empty
negation, nor wholesale denunciation of our Brethren. And our Clergy
are greater fools than I take them to be, if they submit to be treated
even by Diocesan Manipulator or Justice Waterman, as either machines
or slaves !
S.A.S. —I fully endorse your views, Mr. Dickson Jones. I
was about to say, in the plainest possible terms, that the policy sketched
out by the Diocesan Manipulator was inquisitorial, un-English, and there-
fore tyrannical in the highest degree. The sternest decree of Torque-
mada could hardly be more detestable and iniquitous in practical
operation !
Twineold, and Jones D. —Hear, hear ! bravo !
J. Waterman (rises, doubtfully stroking his chin, and balancing
himself on his toes) —The Diocesan Manipulator, your Grace, is after
all, I imagine, only speaking in metaphors. He knows the awful crisis
through which the Diocese has recently passed. How an absolutely Popish
representation of the Crucifixion was actually erected in the Cathedral;
how men and women came and bowed down in lowly adoration before
it! How, after superhuman efforts and gigantic petitions—compiled
with more design than accuracy or genuineness —on the part of the
Association, the Chapter at last, by a narrow majority, consented to its
demolition in order to meet and satisfy (?) the conscientious scruples of
thousands of faithful Protestants !
Hitts. —Besides, we had another difficulty, and another deliverance,
—in connection with Moore College. For, first on the plea of impecunios-
ity, then of failure, and finally of unpopularity, we, as Trustees, were
compelled to banish from the Colony the then Principal, whose students
had perfect confidence in him, but who, in our judgment, was ruining
the Protestantism of our candidates for the Ministry !
Twineold. —May Ibe permitted to say for myself with reference to
these vaunted achievements, that the one was an act of vandalism and
cowardly compromise ; the other, one of deliberate injustice.
S.A.S. (aside) to D.M. —You don’t seem quite a happy family after
all even in this council. (Diocesan Manipulator: Well, your Grace, it was
necessary to admit one High Churchman, if only to save appearances.)
(Aloud, continuing) : —But gentlemen, of the matters to which you
refer lam ignorant. Doubtless my trusty henchman, Diocesan Manipu-
lator, will in due course vouchsafe his interpretation,
Lang syne. —Your Grace, I sympathise to a very great extent with
what has fallen from Diocesan Manipulator and Justice Waterman. For
myself I must say, that even the prospect of a High Churchman for our
Primate—as Dr. Barry undoubtedly was—filled me with consternation.
I felt that the traditions of 25 years and the true welfare of our common
Protestantism were in awful peril, and I prayed unceasingly that the
Great Head of the Church would avert the impending blow !
Twineold. —You managed to survive it fairly well, however, when
the blow did fall ; and if appearances went for anything, you and others
made capital out of it!


J. IP.—I, too, ventured to predict that the arrival of Bishop Barry
would at once “ empty all our Churches, and crowd dissenting Chapels.”
S.A.S. —And were your sad prognostications realized 1
J. W. —No, but I perceived an immediate and lamentable increase
of formalism and ritualism ; in the shape of Surpliced Choirs, Musical
Services, decorations, and other Romish fads !
Grief. —x\fter patient waiting may I speak 1 It was my privilege
distinctly to announce to Synod, that if so great a calamity as the advent
of Bishop Barry befell the Diocese, I should be constrained to seek
“ fresh fields and pastures new,” I was then, your Grace, the Incumbent
of a small country parish, lam now Yicar of the richest parish in the
suburbs of Sydney. Maturer reflection convinced me I had spoken
rashly ; now I saw second thoughts, perhaps, were best; and that the
peril was less than my apprehension. Besides, circumstances alter
cases.
S.A.S. —No doubt it was a step demanding the gravest considera-
tion.
G . —But, your Grace, my zeal for pure Protestantism never waned !
The erection of the Reredos first opened my eyes to the spiritual dangers
lurking in such memorials. I determined not even to tolerate a cross
upon the spire of my Church. At great expense I took down the
Romish symbol, and now a goodly nondescript bulbous, terminal or
final, crowns that noble spire !
T. —l thought, Mr. Grief, you had a cross over the Holy Table ?
Archdeacon Royal. —So he has; but then, you know, that is a
painted cross, not one of metal or marble !
T. —l admire the ingenious distinction, but imagined that the
symbol, not your material, constituted the peril of idolatry !
S.A.S. —I thought I had read somewhere of the first Bishop of Aus-
tralia—how, at the consecration of a Church in the distant bush—he,
vested in his robes, climbed—lame as he was—to the ridge of the roof,
and there, at the east end, with his own hands, affixed a goodly wooden
cross (the sign of our Redemption), an act in strict accordance with
early Christian usage. Do you know, I have always admired that signi-
ficant incident, and certainly never identified it with any Popish
predilections.
Langsyne. —Your Grace, few in those early days realized how deep
and insidious were the attacks upon our Protestant faith, embodied in
those seemingly innocuous symbols. We have learned, to our cost,
what “ Nehustan,” “ the beggarly elements,” “ the yoke of superstition
and bondage ” signify.
S.A.S. —Now, gentlemen, leaving for the time these unprofitable
topics, may I remind you that I am yet anxiously awaiting some slight
sketch of the policy you are desirous of indicating for my guidance 1
J. W. —Prom a judicial point of view, I would suggest that passing
by for the moment those Church members, Clerical and Lay, whom we
know to be “sound in the faith,” we should call his Grace’s attention to


those of a contrary note, whose teaching and ritual are at this moment,
and have been for years a scandal to Protestants. (Applause).
D.M. —Why, your Grace, in two Churches here at least, the ritual
practised in the celebration of Holy Communion, includes almost every
identical act for the adoption of which the Bishop of Lincoln is at this
very time being prosecuted at Lambeth !
S.A.S. —lndeed ! and has no remonstrance been made by the
worshippers to the Ordinary ?
T. — No, your Grace, so far from such a representation being deemed
necessary, it is well known that the late Primate himself officiated more
than once, at one of the said Churches, according to the ritual spoken of;
including, the “ Eastward position,” all through the service; “ the
mixed chalice,” and “ the ablutions,” as a ceremonial after the service. On
the occasions referred to, the “ Benedictus,” and “ Agnus Dei,” and
several hymns were sung during the celebration.
b.A.S. —And without any protest or objection on the Primate’s
part?
T. —Nay, so far from objecting, his Lordship, to my knowledge,
thanked the good Vicar heartily, for allowing him to take part in a
service so orderly, reverent, and Catholic; adding the devout wish that
there might be many more services of a similar type in his Diocese.
S.A.S. —If the Ordinary found no reasonable ground of objection,
but rather cause for commendation, I do not see why outsiders, however
zealous, are justified in interfering. Are the Eucharistic “ vestments ”
worn, and are “lights” used in any of the churches here?
D.M. —Only in one, your Grace—a sort of “ Cave of Adullam ”
church, which has ever been “ a thorn in the flesh ” to all true
Protestants, and in which, of course, no “ faithful ” Protestants take
any interest.
T. —You are right, sir. But many Catholic-minded Churchmen
do, and many young men and women are consistent church-workers in
that parish, under the guidance of the earnest and energetic Vicar. It
would be well if other churches of a very different type could stimulate
such zeal and enlist such activity.
R. —There is a life-size image and tomb of the late Bishop
Patteson in that church.
S. —lndeed ! Why was it not placed in the Cathedral, its
proper destination, surely ?
T. —lt was offered to the Bishop, Dean and Chapter, but by them
indignantly refused on “ peril of idolatry.” What fearful danger must
worshippers incur in Westminster Abbey, and even in St. Paul’s, on
this showing!
R. —But we are at the Antipodes !
S. —Yes, I perceive the distinction, but fail to discover the
difference implied. I have often knelt in Westminster Abbey, but I
confess I never was conscious of the faintest wish to worship any of
the numberless images there ! But as we are dealing with the par-


ticular ritual of this church, is there or is there not, in your opinion,
anything illegal practised there 1
D.M. —Yes, your Grace; the choir and clergy make a low bow to
the altar, both on entering and when leaving ihe church !
S.A.S. —I fear you can hardly call such a simple and ancient act
of reverence “ illegal ” ! In one of the old canons it was enjoined on
all worshippers.
R. —But there is daily Communion celebrated in that church !
S. —So was the Eucharist observed by the primitive Christians.
J. W. —More than this, the Yicar does not preach the Gospel. He
tells his congregation that “ Church Doctrine is Bible Truth.” He also
follows the Romish iniquity of receiving auricular Confession !
S. —And does not the Church in one of her Articles declare
that no doctrine is to be received as “ necessary to salvation ” which
“ cannot be proved by most certain warrant of Holy Writ ”1 Do not,
then, such doctrines become “Bible Truth,” and so constitute the
“ Gospel ” 1 And as to “ Confession,” the Church permits, but does not
enjoin it.
T. —I was under the impression that in the Sentences, Confession,
Absolution, Litany, and indeed throughout the Prayer Book, the Gospel
was preached.
S.A.S. —I agree with you; but again I must remind the Council
that we are wandering into theologic discussion. What, may I ask, is
the other Church spoken of ?
D.M,, Langsyne, and Grief, {all rise). —Oh ! “ S. Poyntz,” in the
suburbs!
D.M. {continuing). —There, I grieve to say, all the objectionable
and to my mind illegal practices referred to, are in full swing—with the
exception of Vestments and Altar Lights—though I understand the
large candelabras are frequently used in broad daylight at Holy Com-
munion. But, there too, the Paten and Chalice are ‘ elevated ’ at
Consecration, the ‘ Benedictus ’ and ‘ Agnus ’ interpolated. A Proces-
sional Cross is used, and the Ablutions are made “ a ceremonial ” !
S.A.S. —And was it in this Church the late Primate celebrated
without protest or objection 1
T. —Yes, your Grace, on more than one occasion.
D.M. —But what can you expect save the practice of such super-
stitions and unlawful ceremonial in a Church where there is not a vestige
of spiritual life ; where Choral Services invariably prevail, and all the
Prayers, and Creeds, &c., are sung, not read !
S.A.S. —The Rubric permits it, and the rule obtains in all Cathe-
drals.
T. —The Te Deum is nearly all a prayer, and the Litany is one
continuous petition, and yet both are sung to music.
D.M. —lt may be so, yet I have ever held, and still hold, that in
Churches “ where the Service was Choral, there could be no spiritual
life in the worshippers,”


S. —That is rather a sweeping assertion, Diocesan Manipulator !
What of the thousands who habitually worship in Cathedrals, and no
where else. Are we right in concluding that such thousands are
“ destitute of spiritual life ?” Our Lord Himself was accustomed to
attend daily Choral worship in the Temple !
T. —I distinctly remember having heard, and indeed I know it to
be a fact, that two Church dignitaries in this Diocese went out of their
way seriously to warn certain attendants at S, Poyntz to desist from
going there to worship. Since, as they in so many words contended,
“ Choral Services would eat out the very heart of all Spirituality.”
As they valued their salvation, they bogged the worshippers in
question to go to some other Church. The said worshippers, however,
startled the dignitaries in each case by informing them they never
before had such clear views of Gospel truth, and of the need of a
personal Saviour, presented to them, as they had received from the
teaching of the priest of S. Poyntz. I wonder, your Grace, what such
objectors will do in Heaven, amid its ceaseless praise, and grand bursts
of choral adoration ?
(S.A.S., looking at his watch—evidently weary and disappointed).
Well, gentlemen, the time allotted for our consultation has come
to an end. It would be as unprofitable as it would be need-
less to prolong this discussion. You offered yourselves to me, unasked,
as a “Council of Advice.” What have you done? So far, I have not
received one single practical hint likely to be of the remotest utility to
me in the administration of my Diocese, You have certainly aired
your own views of existing grievances; you have contended for, with
pitiless repetition and endless platitudes, usque ad nauseam , your own
particular “ Shibboleths.” With one or two honorable exceptions—
notably Messrs. Twineold, Royal and Jones Dickson—you have said
many hard, bitter, and unbrotherly things. You have manifested
towards those who venture to differ from your Greed, much narrow
bigotry, and more uncharity. Instead of making the most of points of
union, and minimising differences, you have in actual fact, refused
the right hand of fellowship to men, quite as earnest as yourselves,
and quite as faithfully doing the Master’s work.
Suffer me to commend the following as a true motto for your future
action in Church life, and for the regulation of your conduct towards
your brethren in the faith :
“ In Necessariis— UNlTAS.
In Non-Necessariis —LIBERT AS.
In Omnibus— CAßlTAS."




