





•
. dfp




CONTENTS
* Variation of the Compass*
Terrestrial Magnetism*
• f
Photo gramme try •
Geodetioal Calculations.
Theodolites and Levels.
Plow of Water Formulae.
Catalogue of Stars*
School of Mines Syllabus.
A ’
.


r’-'
V
.. ■ ,
• #
♦






Variation of the Compass in South
Australia.
Charles Hope Harris.
[From the Transactions of the Royal Society of South Australia, 1884.]
[Read August 5, 1884.]
[abridged.]
The first information we have as to the variation (declina-
tion) of the compass in South Australia is that Flinders, in
1802, when off Eucla, crossed a line of no variation —the
needle, which had been pointing west of true north, showed no
variation for a short distance, and then pointed east of true
north, the declination increasing as his vessel advanced along
the coast. The first reliable magnetic bearing known to the
author is one given by Colonel Light in 1837. It is shown on
a plan of the city of Adelaide and surrounding sections, drawn
by Arrowsmith, in London. It shows one of the leading survey
lines N. 8° 47' W. The true bearing of this line, determined
astronomically by the author, is 3° 33', so that the variation in
1837 was 5° 14' E. In 1841 a Mr. Forrest (of the Royal
Sappers and Miners) officially recorded the variation as being
5° 9' E. at the north-west corner of the city. In 1850 Mr.
Painter, well-known as an efficient and painstaking surveyor
observed the variation at Cape Willoughby to be 5° 6' E. Ii
1857-9 Mr. G-oyder, Surveyor-General, found the variation tc
be at Mount Remarkable 5° 39' 13"; at Mount Serle, 5° 0' 6"
at Termination Hill, north of Lake Torrens, 5° 22' 40"; and
near Mount Margaret, about 4° 3'; so that we have the varia-
tion since 1837 fairly well recorded.
The next question of interest is whether the variation is at
present increasing or decreasing, and what the amount of
change known as the “annual variation” may be. Dealing
first with Arrowsmith’s plan, the magnetic bearing of the line
given in 1837 as 8° 47' W. is now 9° 15' W., showing an increase
of 28' in 45 years, or at the rate of 36" per annum.
Taking, next, the variation given by Forrest in 1841 of 5°
9', the mean variation read off by the author on the same spot
with three needles has varied from 5° 30' to 5° 43'. These
values indicate an increase at the rate of from 30" to 45" per
annum.
During the last six months the author has been systemati-
cally recording magnetic bearings in the city of Adelaide, with
the following somewhat remarkable result: —The mean aggre-


gate bearings o£ tbe streets parallel to North and South
terraces are found to be 80' higher than the mean aggregate
bearings of the streets parallel to West-terrace and King
William-street, even after all allowance has been made for
defect of alignment, and due precautions taken to secure their
intersections at right angles to one another. The average or
80 readings brings out a magnetic bearing of N. 81° 10' E. for
streets parallel to South-terrace, and of N. 9 20 W. for Ehng
William-street and the streets parallel to it. The true bear-
ings, determined astronomically, are 86 28 , and 3 32 res-
pectively ; so that one set of observations gives a magnetic
variation of 5° 18 f , and the other a variation of 5 48^. The
discrepancy is attributed by the author to local attraction -as,
for instance, by telegraphic wires, gas and water mains,
building stone # &c. The author is disposed to believe that the
latter more nearly represents the true magnetic bearing.
It is difficult, however, to assign a definite value to the mag-
netic declination at any epoch until the laws of the diurnal
and other oscillations are more completely known. The author
has made many observations on the diurnal oscillation. At
Adelaide the needle moves towards the east from about 8 a.m.
until after 1 p.m., and returns during the afternoon to the
position it occupied in the morning. This is, of course, the in-
verse of what is observed in the northern hemisphere. The
range at Adelaide was observed by the author to be 13 in
December, 1883 ; 4' in May, 1884; andf as much as 16' in
October, 1884.
* The author has found the stone walls of his house to be strongly
magnetic.
f Added since the paper was sent in.
Webb, Vardon, & Pritchard, Printers, Gresham-street, Adelaide.


meridian. This distance was carefully chained and an obelisk erected
to mark the accepted boundary.
Adopting the longitudes obtained from the recent measurements i.n
1883 which I have just described, the longitude of the transit instrument
near the boundary would be ph. 23m. 50’ 195., or only o - 85s. east of
the position assigned to it in 1886 ; this is equal to 16 chains, so that
the position of the obelisk may be regarded as practically correct. I
fear, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have too largely taxed your patience in
giving you these dry details on an occasion like the present. They
possess, however, an interest to professional Surveyors, and are of
considerable importance to the colony. This must be my excuse. In
conclusion permit me to thank you for the patient hearing you have
accorded me, and to express a hope that the Institute of Surveyors’ may
have in the future all the success it so richly deserves.
DEVELOPMENTS OF TERRESTRIAL MAGNETISM
AFFECTING THE COMPASS.
A Surveyors’ compass is in its essentials the same as the mariners’
compass, or an ordinary pocket compass. In appearance all such
instruments are of simple construction consisting mainly of a
magnetized needle balanced upon a pivot, sometimes bearing a circular
card, sometimes not, and many persons suppose there is not much to
learn with regard to them, but careful, long continued investigations by
practical and eminent mathematical men, have brought to light an
almost endless variety of facts concerning the behaviour of the
magnetized needle under general and special circumstances, which
facts, though of a highly complicated nature, have been so classified
and formulated, as to present a most interesting study to those who
care to pursue it.
Anyone, however, who tries to understand the why and wherefore of
these developments will be brought face to face with the fundamental
laws of gravitation, electricity, and terrestial magnetism, which, familiar
as they may sound to the ear are, as yet, but imperfectly understood by
the wisest of men.
My effort in this paper is to place in a concise form before “ The
Institute” certain facts and theories relating to the compass, and to
review them as developments of terrestial magnetism. ; : •
The movements of a free compass needle are perfectly synchronons,
that is, all the oscillations of any particular needle are performed in
uniform intervals of time. Like a pendulum, its vibrations are slow
or rapid in proportion to its length, and a swing of large or small
amplitude is performed in precisely the same space of time; but unlike
a pendulum the proximity of minerals or magnetic substances increase
the velocity of such oscillations whether they result from attraction or
repulsion.
Disturbing influences presented in addition to the normal effect of
the earth’s magnetism at any particular place, produce what is called
local attraction of which the needle gives two notable manifestations ;


one by its deflection from magnetic north, in which case the numerical
measure of the disturbing force is found to be in proportion to the
tangent of the angle of deflection ; the other by a noticeable increase
in the rate of its oscillations in which case the force of the disturbing
element is found to be in proportion to the squares of the number of
such oscillations counted (say for a minute) under normal and ab-
normal conditions which may be expressed by the following formula.
Relative Magnetic of Oscillations at A squared.
No. of Oscillations at B squared*
The effect of attraction or repulsion in this respect varies nearly with
the square of the distance. The pocket compass can, therefore, with a
little calculation, be used as a magnetometer to measure the relative
intensity of two or more magnetic forces.
All ordinary mineral substances are capable of magnetic saturation,
and will in an unmagnetized state attract either end of the compass
needle; but they possess the capability of acquiring magnetism
from the earth, in which state one part of the material will repel the
north end of the needle and the other will attract it. This aptitude for
acquiring magnetism from the earth is greatest in the plane of the mag-
netic meridan, and dipping at an angle in this part of the globe of about
sixty degrees towards the south. With regard to mineral substances
lying in an east and west direction this capacity no longer exists, except-
ing in the cases of those substances which are dia-magnetic, but in any
intermediate position between the meridian, and at right angles thereto;
the capability for acquiring magnetism by contact with the earth varies
with the azimuthal angle. A knowledge of these facts is advantageous
to a surveyor, since it is sometimes necessary for him to obtain as
correct a magnetic bearing as possible in proximity to railways, wire
fences, piping, curbing, walls, and ironstone lodes in which case he has
to contend against a vortex of errors streaming in upon him from all
sides.
A well-known, and interesting experiment shewing the tendency to
spontaneous magnetization, is to hold in the hand a bar of wrought
iron, or to rest it on the ground in a nearly upright position when it
will manifest polarity by repelling the north end of compass needle at
the upper end of the bar and attracting the same end of the needle at
the lower end of the bar. The operation may be reversed, and the
process repeated any number of times with an unvarying result in the
hands of anyone. By striking with a hammer about the middle, the
degree of magnetic saturation is increased and rendered more permanent
than otherwise. By holding the bar east and west and applying the
compass test it will be seen that the effect is of a transient nature, and
a blow with the hammer while thus held will dispel every vestige of
magnetic force from it. W ith iron bent double or twisted the ex-
periment is more complicated, and a fold or fork deranges the position
of the poles and wires bound together and twisted, some to the left, a.nd
some to the right, will often exhibit polarity of opposite characteristics.
Another experiment consists in placing a thin square plate of iron on


edge and either holding it in the hand in the plane of the magnetic
meridian or placing it upon the ground in that position when it will
acquire magnetic force of opposite qualities at each end, divided
towards the middle by a diagonal line at an angle corresponding to the
local dip of the needle.
In upright iron posts, railings, and iron girders of bridges, magnetic
poles of opposite qualities soon form, and gain more intensity year by
year. Wrought iron, cast iron, steel, stone, brick, concrete, exhibit
this tendency in greater or less degree, and as a rule the harder the
material, the slower will be the process of natural magnetization and
the more permanent its result.
Following this law the walls of a house built to the cardinal points
become strongly magnetic ; poles of opposite intensity always forming
near the corners of the meridional wall. Two, a little way from the
ground, and two near the top those of similar quality being connected
by a diagonal line. T. he material of which the wall is composed being
of small consequence, so long as it is of a mineral character. Several
years may elapse before the magnetic centres rise high enough from the
foundations to be detected; they continue rising for six or seven years
(so far at least as I am able to discover) then appear to remain in a
comparatively fixed position a few feet from the ground, and about as
many inches from the ends. Magnetic poles were detected forming in
the front wall of my house about five years ago ; they were then level
with the ground, and about four inches from the ends ; one repelling
the north end of the compass needle 35 0 the other attracting it through
about the same angle of deflection from magnetic north—two year’s
later the needle was deflected 70° at about two feet from the ground,
and now at the north-east corner of the house the N end of the needle
is repelled 90° and at the south-east corner it is attracted 90°.
Testing with a pocket compass performing 35 oscillations per minute
under normal conditions I obtained the following results :
Close to Wall. Oscillations Violent. Angle of Deflection. 90°
2 from “ 60 per minute “ 70°
“ 55 i “ 34*°
8 61 ,f i()6
16" “ 46 nio
32" “ 41 « 10
64 u 36 “ few minutes
These figures conform to well-known laws referred to early in this
paper, they also show that the attraction from such a source ceases to
have any effect upon the needle placed a few feet away.
7 o give another instance easily verified. A few weeks ago I tried the
western wall of the Observatory new transit room for magnetic satura-
tion with the following result:—General magnetic bearing of wall
35 2 /2°> about 7 *4° west of magnetic north. Four inches
in from the southein end at about four feet from the ground
the bearing was 40° whilst in a similar position at the northern
end the bearing read 310° *>., 50° west, a mean deflection of 45 0 total
difference 90°. These poles of maximum intensity are con-
fined in area to a circle of about a span in diameter. Everywhere else


upon the wall as high as could be reached, the extent of attraction and
repulsion was extremely limited; but at the distance of a few feet south
of the corner in line with the wall there exists in air, one of these
mysterious focii without visible means of support, a development of
terrestial magnetism likely to vitiate a compass bearing taken at that
spot to the extent of 30 or 40 degrees.
In the case of irregular outlines of masonry, and broken or stepped
fronts of houses the magnetic poles lie far in the walls, and do not
give so manifest an indication of their whereabouts.
Slaty and ironstone rocks are also subject to a high degree of
magnetization, and it may be inferred that wherever regular stratifica-
tions are crossed at right angles by mineral veins or dykes of harder
rock magnetic poles form. In several places I have ascertained this to
be the case, and only a fortnight ago was able to trace with a compass
the evidence of such poles in the rocks at Glen Osmond, where slaty
rocks abounding with quartz, ironstone and gossan are crossed at right
angles by bands of Diorite, interrupting magnetic saturation laterally,
and therefore causing the formation of poles. • Fragments of rock
separated from a magnetic reef usually manifest a pole at each
end.
The earth itself, is in a sense a large magnet possessing great intensity
of opposite qualities at its poles, with about midway between them a
line of low intensity. On this line, differing not greatly from the
equator, a magnetic needle balances exactly, and comes quickly to
rest, but when removed it dips, the North end when approaching the
North Pole, and the south end when approaching the South Pole,
and is proportionately longer coming to rest.
Nearing either pole the dip becomes greater, and the horizontal
oscillations more sluggish until the extreme case is reached when there
is no horizontal motion the dip becoming vertical or nearly so. In
this it may be seen that the power by which the horizontal compass
needle is urged into its position of rest has relation to two oblique
forces which are the result of terrestial attractions, for where there is no
dip, there is the greatest directive force, and where the dip is vertical
there is no influence sufficiently strong to direct it laterally into its
meridional position. These facts point to the material origin, and
testify to the correctness of the term terrestial magnetism.
If the intensity of this subtle force were uniformly diffused through-
out the earth s surface, it would be easy’ to define in mathematical
phrase, the law of its operation upon the needle, as being in proportion
to the cosine of the dip. But equal magnetic intensity has been
proved to be not the case, inasmuch as it is found to be weak near the
Equator, and strong near the polar regions; complemental in a certain
sense to the law of gravitation. Humboldt found a point of minimum
intensity on the magnetic Equator passing through Peru, and adopted
In connection with the above it is worthy of note that if small weights be affixed to the upper
end of a dipping needle it changes the direction in azimuth of the needle, until it becomes
horizontal, parallel to the Equator.


this as a unit to express the relative intensity of other parts of the world.
Upon this scale the total intensity at the south magnetic pole lying be-
low Tasmania is 2-05 ; at the north magnetic pole near Baffins Bay
north west of Lake Superior 1-62, at New York rBo, at London 1-37,
and at Paris I*4l.
These measures are of course relative only. Of late years an absolute
factor has been adopted as a unit of intensity, corresponding to a force
capable of translating one grain of matter ten feet at a certain velocity
in a second of time. According to General Sabine (see Admiralty
Manual of Scientific Enquiry) total magnetic force varies in different
parts of the world from 6‘4 feet per second to 15 '8 feet per second.
The dip is ascertained by a dipping needle constructed for the pur-
pose of recording the angle of depression. The vertical undulations of
such a needle are synchronous in the same manner as the horizontal
oscillations of a compass and the difference in the total magnetic inten-
sity existing at two or more places is found to be proportionate to the
difference of the squares of such undulations thus :
, . , .. A undulation squared
Rel intensity =■ ■■ a—„■■■-
B undulation squared
for instance a dipping needle that gave thirty undulations per minute in
London and dipped 67°, performed thirty-three per minute in Adelaide,
and dipped 63°, -30~7li =r2l > at * s to sa Y there is a difference of two
tenths in favor of Adelaide. With an azimuth compass as has already
been shewn the cosine of the dip must be taken in account, hence
the following formula.
Rel * : -- A oscillation squared x sec of dip.
B oscillation squared x sec of dip*
The following example will make this clear. A compass performing
39 oscillations per minute in London, gave 38 in Adelaide.
39 X 39 X cos 67 _
38 x 38 x cos 63
nearly the same as before.
Now the total intensity at Kew Observatory, London, is io'2g feet
per second, which, multiplied by the number first found, gives i2's,
that is twelve and a half feet per second as the total force at Adelaide.
Resolving total intensity into its components forces we have
Horizontal F= total intensity x cos dip = 5
Vertical >'= total intensity x sin dip
Though these figures may not be strictly accurate they are useful
as illustrations of the precise conditions of the problem dealt with.
It should be made clear that these component forces are themselves
subject to fluctuation as well as to gradual changes of a sub-permanent
character. The same may also be said of the difference between true
and magnetic north, known as variation of the compass viz ;—the
difference between a line determined by Astronomical observations and


that shewn by the compass under normal conditions. The needle
sometimes points too much to the left and sometimes too much to the
right of the true line. Rarely do Astronomical and magnetic Meridan
coincide, nor can their difference be said to be uniform either in respect
to latitude or longitude, but it varies in different places, by different
amounts at different times, and at first sight appears to be regular only
in the striking irregularity presented.
The normal variation at any place is continually undergoing slow
changes so that after a long period of years, it actually passes from the
easterly to westerly side of the true line and conversely from the west-
erly to the easterly side. This change is called the secular variation
and is considered to occupy about 340 years.
For example :—At the Cape of Good Hope in 1608 the needle
pointed true north, but in 1850 it pointed 29° 18' west of that line
whilst at Cape Horn it was about 22 0 east.
In London during 1657 the needle pointed true north, and in 1819
reached the limit of its greatest western excursion at an angle of 24 0
14', having passed from one extreme to the other through an arc of
about 50° during more than three centuries, accomplishing this
prodigious oscillation at an average, though not equal rate of 8' per
annum.
Here we see the swaying horizontal motion of the needle reproduced
in another form, in fact both oscillation and undulation are represented
on this larger scale, developments of terrestrial magnetism, connected
probably with movement of the magnetic poles, rotation of the earth
and attraction to its centre.
But it is not my intention to discuss this wider aspect of the subject
to-night, having prepared a separate paper on facts and theories with
regard to variation of the compass, which I shall be happy to place
before this Institute upon some other occasion.
Charles Hope Harris,
Ist November, 1888.
Shawyer & Co., Printers, Adelaide.


[Read at the Adelaide Meeting of the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science, held September, 1893,']
PHOTO GRAM METRY.
CEAS. HOPE HARRIS.
* Photogrammetry may be defined as the practice of plotting
the positions of various points in a landscape to scale upon a plan,
by intersection of angular lines taken from two or more stations
previously fixed with sufficient precision to serve as base lines for
the plan to be prepared, or which shall be fixed during progress of
the work by chainage of a single line.
The principles which form the basis of this science belong to
trigonometry and perspective, and their application is simple
to anyone accustomed to plotting with a protractor or scale
of chords. The angles contained between various points visible
in a landscape may be obtained from a photograph of them as
accurately as required for the purposes of mapping, provided the
lens used is of suitable construction, and attention is paid to the
general rules hereafter laid down for securing satisfactory results.
The photographic angles just referred to are always too large to
suit the spot at which the view is taken. There is a point for
which they are all true, though its situation is by no means evident
to the uninitiated, as it depends principally upon the focal length
of the lens employed. Out of doors it occurs between the camera
and the objects viewed, yet in the print lies from 4in. to lOin.
below the middle, upon a line dividing the picture equally left and
right. This state of things may be expressed by the following
formula : — r lhe tangent of the photographic angle, divided by the
focal distance between the lens and the plate, gives the tangent of
ji . i . tan. ct
the true angle ; or tan. A = —p — This ratio of the tangent ex-
plains how it is that the parts of a building near at hand seem to
be represented disproportionately larger by the lens than others
more remote.
are found from the photograph by the use of a
pair of dividers, a scale, and a table of natural tangents. This
may be done approximately with any photograph by ruling a
ihe term “ Photogrammetry ” was an outcome of a convention held on the Continent
<i >eai 01 tv o ago with reference to the subject. Effectual objections were made to every
name suggested for the practice excepting to this one, which was tacitly acknowledged.


line across the middle from left to right, and another at right
angles to it, from top to bottom, called the co-ordinating lines.
The intersection of these lines should correspond to the optical
axis of the lens ; and all angles derived from paper measurements
taken parallel to the horizontal line left to right of the vertical
one will, if the camera has been set up truly, be correct horizontal
angles; whilst those derived from measurements above or below
the horizontal line will be true angles of elevation or depression
from the centre of the lens.
Two factors, however, are required before these angles can be
worked out to correspond with what they would be if read with a
theodolite placed where the camera stood. They aref the offsets
from the co-ordinating lines, and the focal length of the lens.
Calling the offsets taken left or right of the middle P, P 1? P n , the
offsets taken above or below the horizon line (_/+) or (_/—)> the
focal length F, and the required angle A; the formula is
p
tan. A = p + y. ; P, F, & / being of course taken in the same
unit of measure; thus, let Pas measured upon the negative =
30
roiu., F = Bin., /= nil, then tan. A = = -0375 = tan. of
2° 9'. Again, if Pbe 4in., F = Sin. as before, and f lin. above
400 . ,
the line ; tan. A = = -4444, = tan. of 23° 58'. It may be
well at this point to remark upon the characteristics of various
lenses in order to avoid being misunderstood, and to prevent
disappointment to anyone who might attempt this kind of work
with a lens ill adapted to photogrammetrical purposes.
The so-called single lens (which is really compound, and gener-
ally of a meniscus or new moon form) is good for ordinary land-
scape work, but not for architectural subjects, as when used with a
stop in front of the lens the image of a square becomes barrel-
shaped, but with the stop placed behind, it gives a cushion or hour-
glass form.
Portrait lenses are constructed to give a brilliant image of
objects in one plane only, and should not on any account be used
for the purposes discussed in this paper, where the great desidera-
tum is a common focus for near and distant objects. These
conditions are fulfilled by the rectilinear or symmetrical lenses.
They are doublets, and consist of two single meniscus glasses
placed at a suitable distance apart, with their concave surfaces
inwards and the stop between. We thus have a combination with
the lens in front of the stop, giving cushion-shaped distortion, and
the second similar lens behind the stop, giving barrel-shaped
distortion to an equal extent. It follows that one distortion
neutralises the other, and the result is that even with a large
aperture there is practically no distortion of any kind, and the


Left hand offset 315 log
Angle 19° 45' log. tan
(F +/) = 877 log
Right hand offset 237 log
Angle 15° 37' log. tan
s
F = 848 log
%
alteration of focal length required to give sharpness of definition
to an image comprising near and distant objects is only about
a and may be restricted to narrower limits. If the middle
distance be sharply focussed the greatest error of focal length will
usually be about tVin.
In determining the focal length of a rectilinear lens by a method
published by Mr. Grubb, the writer recently adopted the following
course : Two points about half a mile away, subtending a suitable
angle for full width of a picture, were focussed, and their distance
apart, as seen on the ground glass screen, was measured and found
to be 6in., i.e., Sin. upon each side of the middle upright line. By
means of the theodolite, placed over the same spot, the true angle
was found to be 38° 56'. By solving the isosceles triangle thus
formed with a base of 6in., and with adjacent angles of 70° 32'
each, the distance from apex to base is found to be B£in., which is
technically called the equivalent focal length. This would answer
sufficiently well if one were sure that the negative occupied exactly
the same position as the screen, but as there was reason for doubt-
ing whether the above result really gave the correct factor required
for a constant divisor or not, the following test was resorted to ;
A. photograph of the landscape at hand was taken, and, with a
theodolite placed over the same spot, horizontal and vertical angles
were read to prominent hilltops, gables, and trees that could after-
wards be recognised upon the print for comparison with angles
scaled from the negative or proof. Two calculations were made,
as shown by Fig. I—one1 —one by reference to a chimney, which by
scale upon the picture was 3Tsin. to the left of the vertical line,
and o*3oin. above the horizontal line; the other by reference
to a post on the horizontal line, and 2*37in. to the right of the
vertical line. The angles taken with the theodolite Avere 19° 45'
and 15° 37' respectively. In the first place by trigonometry,
(F+/) = -£-
tan. A
Then subtracting /, = o*3oin, we have F = 8*47. In the
p
second case, by trigonometry, F =
tan. A


Thus the working focal length of the lens is 8’475in., or nearly
Several horizontal angles were determined from the photo,
with this factor, and they agreed within a few minutes, more or
less, with those taken with the theodolite. The angle of elevation
to a prominent hill was also found, as follows : —Height above
horizontal line = -63 in.; divided by focal length, 8-475 in., gives
tan. of 4° 15', only a minute different from the observed angle.
FIC. I
Illustrating determination or
Horizontal Ancles; F
BEING SCALED
FROM PHOTO.
True Ancle Point.
The simplest application of photogrammetry to vertical angles
is to determine the height of a telegraph post from a photograph,


concerning which the following particulars are obtained. Camera
upright; focal length, B£in.; and horizontal distance from middle
of lens to post, 68ft. 9in.*'
By reference to the accompanying wood-cut it will be seen that
the space between the horizontal line and the ground scales 78
units, and the space from the same line to the top of post 190
units. Thus there are two sides of two right-angled triangles
from which to find one angle of elevation, and one of depression.
♦ Measured with a tape, for calculating height of post after the angles have
been found.


P
The calculation is as follows:—Tan. angle A = zrr; tan. angle
p/ r
a ' = ¥
(P) scaled from photo = 78; log. = 1*89209
(F) focal length of lens = 850 ; log. = 2*92942
A = s'ls', log. tan. 8'96267
(P) scaled from photo, 190; log. 2*27875
(F) focal length 850 ; log. 2*92942
A' = log. tan. 9 - 34933
Having obtained both the angles, now substitute the measured
base 68*75ft. for the focal length F, and find the two perpendicu-
lars, as follows : h tan. A X D ; h! = tan. A' X D.
(D) measured distance, 68'75; log. 1'83727
O-
(A) calculated angle, 5-15'; log. tan. 8'96267
h in feet = 6-31 ; log. 0-79994
(D) measured distance, 68*75; log. 1*83727
(A') calculated angle, 12*36'; log. tan. 9*34933
h' in feet = 15-36; log. 1-18660
6*31 feet below axis of lens
15*36 feet above axis of lens
21*67 feet, total height of telegraph post
Or for brevity put h, and h' for heights of portions of post,
then h = X D 1
F k
p/ ( and h + h! height.
h! = ~x D
F
In order to try horizontal angles with a protractor upon the
print it is necessary to produce the vertical line to a point below
the horizontal line exactly equal to the focal length, which in this
case is 8*475in., where they will be found to agree perfectly. This
important position may be called the “ angle point.” It is also
the point of station with regard to true geometrical perspective
of the whole picture.
If the camera be moved about a quarter of a mile and the
distance measured, another photograph of the same view will
supply data for plotting with accuracy every object that can be


clearly seen in it; the liability of error, judged of by tests applied
to my experiments, being about 1 per cent., viz., one chain in one
and a quarter miles. It is evident, therefore, that the camera
might be made valuable to the surveyor in furnishing him with
reliable details where required for the compilation of topographical
maps, especially for parts difficult of access. Architects and
engineers might also find the application of photography upon
these lines convenient and safe in many cases where at present
they would not employ it, supposing that no reliance can be placed
upon the results.
The writer is indebted to notes in the “ Photographic Journal”
of June, July, and December, 1892, for suggestions upon the
subject; also to a paper in the Transactions of the American
Mining Engineers for 1890, by Messrs. Flipper and Noagles.
NOTES AND REMARKS UPON ESSENTIALS OF PHOTO-
GRAMMETRY.
1. Ihe focal length of lens used should be ascertained and
recorded on the back of every plate required for photogrammetrical
purposes. A permanent mark can be made on the camera at the
average, focus, and the small difference from the mark observed
each lime.
2. The camera should be placed level, that is, the sides should
be upright and the top horizontal.
3. One horizontal and one vertical line should be drawn upon
the screen, and the lens be adjusted so that its optical axis
coincides with their point of intersection; then the carriers should
have four studs corresponding precisely with the terminal points
of the lines on the screen, which studs might be so arranged as to
be photographed upon the margin of the negative, thereby in-
dicating the exact position of the co-ordinating lines.
4. When photographing a building measure the distance from
lens to a point on wall coinciding with the optical axis of the lens.
Ihe position of the point should be noted in a book, with the
distance.
5. Instead of tilting the camera it is best to fit the lens into a slot
so that it can be moved up or down an inch or two when required.
6. All offset distances should be scaled from prints that have
not been toned or fixed, as they then perfectly agree with the
negative, but shrink or expand unevenly after wetting.
7. The gelatine film of the negative, though it enlarges with
chemical treatment, affords when dry the same dimensions of the
luminous image it received when in the camera, the exact measure-
ment ot which, taken occasionally upon the ground glass, will be
a convincing test of this.
8. Celluloid films are manufactured in America for use instead
of glass, and afford a capital surface for working up field draughts
upon. °




QEODETICAL
CALCULATIONS.
TREATING OF
Radius of Curvature, Lengths of Degrees,
Differences of Latitude, Longitude and
Azimuth.
WITH
FORMUL/E, ORIGINAL EXAMPLES
METHODS OF WORKING,
TABLES AND EXPLANATORY
REMARKS.
Selected frem the uf an tuper'meed "Computer.
PRICE 10/-
ADELAIDE:
Brookman Sc Co., Printers, Corner Pirie & Freeman Streets.
1898.




THIS PROSPECTUS comprises the Title Page, Table of Con-
tents, and Three Pages of the Text of a Work proposed to
be published, if a sufficient number of copies are ordered to
meet the cost of printing.
The book is written simply, and proceeds by easy steps from
the solution of elementary problems in Geodesy to the elucidation
of others connected with a deeper study of the subject.
The examples are selected from the manuscript of an experienced
'Computer, accumulated during his occasional work of checking,
plotting, and projecting an extensive trigonometrical survey. For
facility in so doing under pressure of time, miles and decimals
were employed as units of calculation, and of the tabular factors
which enter into some of the formulae used.
The elements of the Spheriod adopted, are those recommended
by Col. A. R. Clarke, C. 8., in his work on Geodesy (page 319).
If you are willing to subscribe, please forward your name and
address to the undersigned.


CONTENTS.
i reduced to geodetic lines and triangles.
Astronomical positions reauoeu &
Angle of the Vertical, Formula and Calculation.
Arc and Distance, Mutual conversion of.
Arc and Chord, formula} and calculation of difference.
Azimuth differences, formula} and calculations.
Axes, equatorial and polar; dimensions, etc.
Back bearing, examples of calculation.
Convergence of meridians, formal* and examples of calculation.
Co-ordinates, formuhe for, and remarks upon.
Constants, logarithmic and tabular, Examples of calculation.
Degrees of Latitude and Longitude, Table and examples of calculation
Divergence of Parallels, formulae, calculations and explanation.
Elements of the Spheriod, Statement of.
Eccentricity of the Spheroid, Calculation of.
Latitude and Longitude, differences calculated geodetically.
Logarithms of sines and tangents of small arcs calculated.
Meridian Radius and factor M, Calculation of.
Normal Radius and factor N, Calculation of.
Projection of Parallels of latitude.
Quadrant of Meridian, Length of, etc.
Radii of Curvature, Tables, formuhe, and examples of calculation.
Spherical Excess, formula, remarks, and examples of calculation.
Solutions of Geodetic triangles by spherical excess formulae.
Tables, Constant logs, Convergence of Meridians, Convergence
Parallels, Lengths of Degrees, Meridian Arcs, Radius
Curvature, Vertical Angles.


QEODETICAL CALCULATIONS.
Given a Geodetic triangle formed by three trigonometrical stations,
ABC, the relative positions of which are as follows:
Distance from Ato B 102.7184 miles. True bearing 360° 00' 00"
Distance from Bto C 111.2915 miles. True bearing 270° 00' 00"
Distance from Ato C 151.4400 miles. True bearing 312° 41' 43"
FIND, Case (1). The latitude of B, that of A being 28° 29' 18"
south, and other data as stated above.
“ » Case (2). The latitude of C, that of B being 26° 59' 47"5,
and other data as stated.
“ Case (3). The longitude of C, that of B being 138° 35' 05",
and other data as stated.
Case (4). The convergence of the meridians of B and C for
mean latitude, 26° 59' 26"5, and other data
as stated.
Case (5). The latitude of C, the convergence of the meri-
dians B and C being 0° 49' 08", and other
data as stated.
Case (6). The differences of latitude and longitude between
A and C direct, and the back bearing of A
from C, given the True bearing and distance
from A to C.
CASE (1). The difference of latitude in seconds between A and B
(both being on the same meridian), equals the distance from A to B
divided by the meridian radius of curvature at a latitude approximately
midway between them, multiplied by the sine of one second. Substi-
tuting M for Merid. Radius x Sine 1" the FORM ULA becomes in
this Case ; Diff. of Lat = Dist. x M therefore
adding the log. of Distance 102.7184 2.0116478
to the Tabulated factor M for lat. 27° 45' 1.7183718
The diff. of Lat. is found to be 1° 29' 30" 55 = 5370"55 log. ..3.7300196
And this difference subtracted from the latitude of A gives 26° 59' 47"5
for the latitude of B.


CASE (3.) Since B C is a straight line at right angles to the meri-
dian of B, it cannot be at right angles to the meridian of 0; an since
points of equal latitude form a cnrce on the earth's surface, it follows
Lt 0 is nearer to the equator than B, causing a divergence ; which
may be found as follows :
Diff. of Lat. B C = dist 2 x tan. lat. B. (2 x 76 approx.)
where 76 represents the area in square miles on the earth’s surface at
the given latitude, causing one second of Spherical Excess ' nstea
of the expression 2 x 76, it is to use a tabular factor E,
calculated thus, E - e *P lamed 011 Pa « e
Distance BC - 111.2915 squared log. ... 4.09292
Lat. B = 26° 59' 47"5 tan. ... 9.70700
Factor E for Lat. of B 7 - 81908
I)iff, of Lat. between B and C = 41"58 log. 1.61895
This small difference subtracted from the latitude of B, gives
26° 69' 05"8 for the latitude of C.
For accuracy in long distances a small correction must be added to
this Diff. (See Page =.)
CASE (3.) The difference of longitude between B and C equals the
distance from B to C, multiplied by the secant of the latitude of B,
divided by (the Normal, i e. the radius of curvature perpendicular to
the meridian ; multiplied by the sine of one second).
Substituting N for Norma i \ sine the FORMULA becomes
Diff. of Lon. between B and C = dist. B C x sec. lat. B x N at lat. B.
Distance = 111.2915 log. ... 2.0464619
Lat, B = 26° 59' 47"5 sec. ... 10.0501057
Factor N at lat. of B 1.7160639
Diff. of Lon. BC= 1° 48' 15"78 = 6495"78 log. 3.8126315
Longitude of B ... ... =l3B 35 05
Diff. of lon. between B and C ... - 1 48 15.78
Longitude of C =136 46_4fh22
CASE (4.) The convergence of meridians of B and C at their mean
latitude, equals the distance B C x Secant latitude of B x N at
latitude of B, x sine of mean latitude.


This FORMULA being identical with (3) excepting the last term,
may be shortened to,
Convergene of merids. B and C = Dili', of lon. x sine of mean lat.
Diff. of lon. 1° 48' 15"78 = G495"78
Mean hit. = 26° 59' 26'5
log. 3.8126315
sin. 9.6569100
Conv. of merids. B and C = 49' 08" = 2948 log. 3.4695415
CASE (5.) The difference of latitude between B and C in seconds,
equals the distance B C x sine of half convergence x M.
Dist. BC = 111.2915 miles ... ... log. 2.04646
Half Convergence = 24' 34" ... s* ll - 7.85406
Tabular factor ... M 1.71841
Biff. of Lat. between B and C= 41 "58 ... log. 1.61893
which difference subtracted from the latitude of B gives 26 c 59' 05"8
for the Latitude of C.
This agrees with the lat. found by Case (2), which was calculated
before the convergence of meridians was known.
CASE (6.) To find the differences of latitude and longitude between
A and C direct and the back bearing from C to A ; given the True
bearing and distance from A to C.
Subtract the given true bearing from 360° or 180° to obtain an
Azimuthal Angle less than 90°. Find the Spherical Excess of the
triangle implied by the sine and cosine of this angle, thus, excess in
seconds = bqnaTe mile! ’ reduce the sine of the angle by one third of the
Spherical excess, and the cosine of the angle by two thirds of the
Spherical excess ; after which the following formula will afford results
sufficiently correct for distances up to about 100 miles. (For accurate
formulae see Pages = and =.)
dist. x cos (Az. Angle 3 excess) /-pj ug or m i nus a )
Diff. of lat. = ~ ~ | small arc (d). /
meridian radius x sine i
dist. x sine (Az. Angle \ excess)
Diff. of lon
normal radius X sine 1" X cos. lat.
Convergence = Diff. of lon. X sine middle lat.
To be added to a given true bearing when the latter exceeds 180 , and
to be subtracted from a given true bearing less than 180 .


Approx, diff. of lat. 1° 29 r 30"5 = 5370"5 log. 3.7300196
M for mid lat. = 27° 45' approx.
1.7183718
(Az. Angle — # excess) = 47° 17' 27"
cos. 9.8314072
Distance — 151.4400 miles
log. 2.1802406
(Az. Angle - J excess) = 47° 17' 52"
sin. 9.8662213
N for lat. C approx. = 27° 00'
1.7160638
„ „ /dist. x sine Az. angle\ 2 w Sine
SmaU are sine yT~) * mer id. rad. x sine 1" ’ ta
t
be added to the diff. of lat. previously obtained, when the bearing is
in any respect towards the equator, and to be subtracted when the
bearing is departing therefrom.
Now combining these THREE FORMULAE and using tabular
factors M and N as previously explained, the calculation may be so
arranged, that by adding up and down from the middle, the results
will be obtained with the fewest possible figures.
Arc in Seconds at right angles to merid. log. 3.7625257 3.7625
Lat. B = 26° 59' 47"5 sec. 10.0501057 2
Diff. of Lon. =l° 48' 15"7 = 6495 , 7 log. 3.8126314 7.5250
Middle latitude = 27° 44' 32-5 sin. 9.6679164 9.7070 tan. lat
Convergence =o° 50 r 23"7 = 3023 f, 7 log. 3.48054/8 4.3869 sin | *
””” 1.6189 =log. of 41"58‘-
Convergence ... 0-50-23-7
Bearing A to C ... 312-41-43
313-32-06-7
180-00-00
Back bearing from C to A= 133-32.06*7
1°29'30"5
41 58
Diff. of lat. AC =13012 08 /
l|if /
* Note.— This factor is strictly the sine of half a second multiplied
by Normal over Meridian radius.
For lat. 15° this logarithm is 4.3874 ; for lat. 30° 4.3868 ; for lat..
45° 4.3860 • and for lat. 75° 4.3840.


TESTING and RECTIEVING ERRORS.
-FOR-
i
i
i
Surveyors and Students,
BY
(L. 2Kope Harris,
Adelaide, 1895.
Published by the South Australian Institute of
Surveyors (Incorporated).
Kennedy, Printer, Adelaide.




of' xllicailalitcs ami Cmtb.
ADAPTABILITY OF THE THEODOLITE TO CERTAIN
KINDS OF WORK.
The theodolite is designed for the following purposes:
{a) For measuring angles in two planes at right angles to each other,
viz., in horizontal and vertical planes.
(b) For accurate alignment.
(c) For differential, and trigonometrical levelling.
(d) For astronomical determination of latitude, true meridian, time, and
declination of the needle.
(e) For setting out curves.
(f) For securing uniformity between surface and underground surveys
in tunnels and mines.
REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS OF EFFECTIVENESS.
(a) For Measuring Horizontal Angles the effectiveness of a theodolite
depends upon the refinement of its graduated limbs, its stability,
and the excellence of its telescope.
( b ) For Alignment Purposes the vertical motion of the telescope must
be true; errors of collimation must be eliminated; and the focus-
sing should be satisfactory.
(c) As a Level effectiveness depends upon sensitiveness of the spirit
bubble attached to the telescope ; correct collimation of the horizon-
tal hair; and good quality of the lenses.
(d) In Astronomical Work accuracy depends largely upon instrumental
effectiveness in all the foregoing particulars.
(e) For Setting out Curves it should be possible to lay off small angles
with precision and rapidity ; and to have good telescopic definition.
(/) For Connecting Surface and Underground Surveys it is some*
times necessary to re-produce at the bottom of a vertical shaft the
exact direction of a short horizontal line several hundred feet over
head. This involves the use of a transit theodolite of best workman-
ship, the Y or any modification of it being by construction, ill
adapted for the purpose.


DIRECTIONS FOR ADJUSTING TESTING AND CORRECTING
ERRORS OF THE “Y” THEODOLITE.
( For the use of Surveyors and Students.)
This explanation of theodolite adjustments is for convenience divided into
six parts.
Part I—The axis of Azimuth, or vertical axes.
n 2 —Parallax and collimation.
„ 3—The axis of altitude, or pivot axis.
„ 4—Misdirection of the wyes and arc ;or pointing error.
„ s—Angular measure, eccentricity and other errors.
„ 6—The compass.
Part I— AXIS OF AZIMUTH.
(a) —To adjust the telescope bubble.
( h ) —To test the vertical axis or axis of Azimuth.
(c) —To adjust the plate bubbles.
\d) —To test the index of the vertical arc,
(a) Set the instrument up firmly, and level it as in ordinary field work.
Place the telescope horizontally in the open wyes so that its level bubble
occupies the centre of its run, and lies fairly over a pair of levelling screws.
Lift out the telescope, turn it end for end ; correct any difference there may
be in position of the bubble half by the capstan screw at one end of the tube,
and half by the tangent screw of the vertical arc; then try the telescope back
again to be quite sure that the bubble behaves well when reversed, also when
partly upside down.
(6) With the collar under the plates still clamped, release the upper part
called the alidade, and reverse it by bringing the vernier 180 deg. round to
the other side. This will disturb the bubble, which must be again centred
half by the same pair of levelling screws and half by the tangent screw.
Next turn the alidade 90 degs., and if the bubble moves bring it right by the
levelling screws only that are under it, when after a slight touch more to the
tangent screw and levelling screws the bubble should remain steady during a
complete revolution of the alidade. If it does so, the spindle or internal
solid axis is truly upright, and the upper plate may be considered to be truly
horizontal. Now clamp the alidade, loosen the collar, and turn the whole
upper part of the instrument slowly round to test the external surface of the
hollow axis. If the bubble maintains its position during a complete revolution
the two axes are concentric and accurately fitted to each other and to the
sleeve of the ball and socket joint through which they pass ; but if not, there
exists a fault either of construction or caused by damage.
(c) Assuming the last testto be satisfactory, both plates are horizontal, and
the levels upon them may now be attended to. If there is difficulty in getting
them right, see that the glass tubes are properly placed in their metal cases,
and that the small screws in the ends of the latter catch the shoulders of the
adjusting screws. Further difficulty indicates the existence of a defect in
one or both plates.
(i d ) Index Error. —The position of the index of the vertical arc can be
noted at this stage, or corrected if preferred. The most satisfactory test for
index error is to read a small angle of elevation or of depression, then to take


a second reading with the telescope reversed end for end and upside down in
the wyes, and the alidade turned through 180 deg. Half the difference of
the angles will be the actual index error, which should agree with the nominal
error provided the horizontal plane of the intersection of the hairs, when made
parallel to the telescope bubble, is strictly at right angles to the vertical axis
of the instrument.
(<s) 1 art 2 : Parallax.— Parallax is an angular displacement of the cross-
hairs with reference to the mage of a point focussed against them. To avoid
parralax, the plane of common focus—of the eye-piece and object glass—must
be fixed exactly in the plane of the hairs. To accomplish this move the eye-
piece in or out until the hairs appear black and sharply defined when viewed
against the sky or any blank white surface. Then, sighting to two
ooints, one near, the other distant, lengthen and shorten the tube by means
)f the focussing screw, and note that the hairs are clear and the steady
in both instances when the eye is withdrawn a few inches. If not, the
lenses of the objective have probably been separated, and the optical axis,
which should bo co-incident with the line of collimation, or parallel thereto,
has become disarranged. Bad centreing of the objective and eye-piece makes
the field of view one-sided, and creates a halo which moves when the teles-
cope is rotated.
(/) Collimation is a straight line connecting a distant object with its
image formed within the telescope, at the intersection of the cross-hairs upon
what should be the geometrical axis. To perforin this adjustment direct the
telescope to some distant point. Clamp firmly, and bring the image of the
point nicely into the centre j turn the telescope slowly round upon its rings
in the wyes, and if the intersection of the hairs remains upon the point, there
is no error, but if otherwise, allow for half the difference by a slow motion
sciew and half by the capstan screws holding the diaphragm in its place, tak-
ing cate to move two screws simultaneously and noting that tightening a
sciew will not draw the diaphragm, unless all the other screws give it free-
dom. also that a short eye-piece magnifies the cross-hairs together with the
inv er ted image of the distant point thrown against them by the object glass \
and that the long erecting eye-piece in re-inverting the image reverses the
cioss hairs too, and thus gives a wrong impression as to which side—right or
left—the correction is required.
lari o lo test the horizontality of the pivot axis, or axis of altitude,
and to adjust it.
(g) With the instrument carefully levelled and firmly clamped, sight up
to some steady point about 30 deg. or 40 deg. high. Lower the telescope to
a horizontal position, also to an equal angle of depression and mark the bi-
section of the cross hairs at both places.* 7 ' Reverse the telescope in the wyes,
sight up again to the same object with the alidade turned through 180 deg!
to transpose the standards, then when the telescope is brought down the
second time the cross hairs should cut the previous marks. If not, half the
difference, unless the focussing extension is faulty, is due to super-elevation
of one end of the axis, which may be corrected by placing tinfoil or very thin
metal under the foot t* the lower standard. An error of this kind causes the


up and down motion of the telescope to be tilted out of the vertical plane;
nor will the mean of two settings be true unless the following adjustment is
correct.
*Note. To test the focussing extension gear, and as a check upon col"
limation.
TEST FOR DEFECTIVE POINTING.
(7t) Part 4— To see that the line of sight is at right angles, vertically to
the pivot axis.
From a peg (a) select a steady sharply defined mark (o) at an elevation
of a few degrees, six or eight chains away. "W ith the instrument carefully
levelled set a peg (c) in line with ( h )in the ground five or six yards from it.
Remove the instrument to (c), level it with special care, sight up to (b), (40
or 50 degs.), clamp collar and plate, lower the telescope, reverse it in the
wyes and sight back to (a), which should be found exactly in the line of sight.
If not, the circumstance indicates a pointing error in connection with the
telescope, the existence of which destroys every chance of doing good work in
hilly country, or of obtaining a satisfactory astronomical observation for true
meridian. The’ plumb line is the most satisfactory workshop test foi the
defect, but it is not adapted to field use. The above field test is based upon
the fact that when an error of this kind exists, it becomes manifested to a
four-fold extent by the operation just described.
There are three places where rectification may Vie attempted, viz., at the
heels of the wyes, at the telescope bar screwed upon the vertical arc, and at
the joining of the vertical arc with its axis, where, by slackening the flange
screws, a thin metal wedge may be inserted without much trouble. In a
workshop the arc could be flattened and re-set upon its axis in a manner that
renders packing unnecessary.
Packing the heels of the wyes (one back and one front on different sides)
is the simplest way, but may disarrange the zero point of the vertical arc, and
render some independent test for collimation necessary of a nature analagous
to that of the dumpy level and transit theodolite tests. It is desirable to
avoid disturbing any of the permanent adjustments unless compelled by stress
circumstances ; but it is of great importance for a surveyor to understand
what is the matter with his instrument wdien it is out of order.
Part S.—TESTS FOR RELIABILITY OF ANGULAR
MEASUREMENTS.
( i ) Adjustment of verniers,
(y) Test for eccentricity.
(k) Test for graduation.
ADJUSTMENT OF VERNIERS
( i ) To adjust the verniers is a delicate process; they are fastened by
small screws to the underside of the upper plate, allowing of a little play
when slackened. The alidade test is as follows :—Cause the minute verniers
to coincide respectively with 360 and 180 degs. on the degree circle ; then
turn the upper plate half round so that they have exchanged places. If the
co-incidence is satisfactory try the same process at 90 and 270 degs., then
adopt the mean position indicated by the two tests.


TEST FOR ECCENTRICITY.
(J) The verniers being in adjustment try half-a-dozen settings of both
around the circle without the telescope, and note whether the difference
between their records is uniform or not. In actual work it is of importance
to obtain the readings of both verniers, unless the instrument has just been
proved to be trustworthy in this respect.
TEST FOR GRADUATION.
(k) Select two clear marks ef equal elevation (viz., in the same plane)?
and subtending a small angle (say from 1 to 10 degs.,) read this angle most
care:ully by Meyer and Borda’s process of repetition, and regard the quotient
as the true angle, then by subtracting every reading in turn from the next
highest, errors of graduation, combined with those of sighting and manipula-
tion, will be disclosed.
Part 6—THE COMPASS.
(J) Besides the general magnetic bearing indicated by the needle upo 1 *
the compass box when swinging freely, separate settings should be made of
the north end, with the vernier at 90 deg., and of the south end with the
vernier at 270 deg., and the bearing from each of a line or object be read
upon the vernier plate and the mean adopted. This is necessary to detect
errors of centreing, unequal wear, or bending of the needle.
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE Y AND TRANSIT THEODOLITES-
The transit theodolite differs from the wye in several important
as follows :
(a) The telescope is so mounted that in addition to the rocking motion of
the \, it turns completely over, and instead of being lifted in and out, for
back and fore sights, it is made to revolve in the vertical plane.
yb) Ihe vertical arc of the Y instrument with its one vernier, is replaced
in the transit by a circle having two verniers, and its centre co-incident later-
ally with the axis of vertical motion passing through the line of sight, whereas
in the \ the centre of the telescope is set tangentially to the circumference
in such a manner that errors caused by misplacement or wear are difficult to
detect and impossible to remedy * thus an uncertainty of several minutes exists
in vertical angles observed with an untested Y theodolite.
(c) The ends of the pivot axis of the transit are cylindrical, and work
freely in V bearings permitting change of sides ; but the pivot of the wye
has two conical shoulders at each end which press against the standards in a
way that contributes to steadiness, but precludes reversal of the pivot ends.
(c?) Ihe compass needle of the transit can be read with greater facility and
accuracy than that of the Y.
(e) The constructional advantages of the transit theodolite are enhanced
for astronomical purposes by the possession of a pierced axis for illumination
of the cross hairs at night, and of a Newtonian or diagonal eye-piece for
observations near the zenith ; features which, for mining and engineering pur-
poses, render it superior to any other surveying instrument.


ADJUSTMENTS OF THE TRANSIT THEODOLITE.
This explanation of the adjustments of the transit theodolites is for con-
venience given in three parts as follows :
Part 1 : (a) —-Adjustment of the axis of azimuth, viz., vertical axes.
Part 2 : (6), (c), ( d ) —Adjustments connected with the telescope.
Part 3 : (e) —Adjustment of the axis of altitude or pivot axis.
Part 1 : (a)— TO ADJUST THE AXIS OF AZIMUTH OR VERTICAL
AXES.
With the instrument set firmly and moderately level, tighten the clamping
collar, unclamp the alidade or upper part, and bring it round until the telescope
is over two of the levelling screws (say pointing north), oring the bubble of the
telescope to the centre of its tube, by the tangent screw, turn the alidade half
round (say pointing south), and bring the bubble half-way to the centre by the
levelling screws directly under it, and half by the tangent screw; repeat this
operation until the bubble remains exactly in tlm centre, with the telescope
pointing either way ; then turn the vernier about DO deg. until the telescope
lies over the other pair of levelling screws, and points east or west, bring the
bubble to the centre this time by the levelling screws only, and it should now
remain still while the alidade is turned slowly round and round, showing that
the internal solid axis, called the spindle, is truly upright, and the plate
which it carries consequently horizontal. Now clamp the limbs, together
loosen the collar clamp, and move the whole upper part of the instrument
slowly round to test the external surface of the outer axis, and if the bubble
maintains its position during a complete revolution, the two axes are concen-
tric, and accurately fitted to each other, and to the sleeve connecting the
ball and socket in which they both move; if not there exists a fault in con-
struction, or the instrument has been damaged by a blow. Assuming that
the bubble behaves well, the horizontal limbs are both level, and the plate
bubbles upon them can be now adjusted.
Part 2—ADJUSTMENTS CONNECTED WITH THE TELESCOPE.
Parallax ( b ). —To avoid parallax, the plane of common focus of the eye-
piece and object glass must be fixed exactly in the plane of the cross-hairs. To
accomplish this move the eye-piece in or out until the hairs appear black and
sharply defined when viewed against the sky or any white surface ; then
sighting to two points, one near, the other distant, lengthen and shorten the
tube by means of the focussing screw, and note that the hairs are clear and
the image steady in both instances when the eye is withdrawn a few inches.
If not the lenses forming the objective have probably been separated, and the
optical axis—which should be co-incident with the line of collimation or
parallel thereto—has become disarranged.
Collimation in Azimuth, viz., Adjustment of the Vertical Hair
First Method as Practiced in FieldWork —Until the vertical hair is set right,
the line of sight will not strike out a plane but forms segments of two cones,
in its path between point of equal elevation and depression. Therefore with
the instrument properly levelled over a peg, set two other pegs straight
ahead, exactly in a line and in about the same, plane several chains
apart. Remove the instrument to the middle peg, level up, and sight


one of the others, clamp firmly, plunge the telescope and smht the
back peg; if the cross-hairs do not cut it, one-fourth of the difference
must be allowed for by the capstan-headed screws, holdin" the
diaphragm to which the cross-hairs are attached, and one-fourth by the tan-
gent screw.
Second ok Workshop Method— Bring the cross-hairs to any
well-defined mark, clamp the instrument at it; plunge the telescope and make
a mark behind exactly in a line, at an equal distance and in the same plane
as the former. Now unclamp the vernier, rotate the alidade through about
IHO deg,, and sight the first mark afresh; then, plungng the telescope a
second time, look at the mark behind, and if the cross-hairs do not coincide
with it, one-fourth of the difference must be allowed for as before.
Collimation in Altitude, viz., Adjustment of the Horizontal Hair
(d) This might, with propriety, follow rectification of the pivot, but such
a sequence is not essential, as both vertical and horizontal hairs may be per-
fectly adjusted without levelling the instrument. Level the instrument,
clamp the vertical circle at zero, turn the twin screws until the telescope
bubble occupies the centre of its tube, note the reading in altitude of some
well-defined mark ; rotate the upper part of the instrument through 180 deg.,
plunge the telescope and again observe the same point. Half the sum of the
readings will be the true altitude, to which the circle should be set, and the
cross-hair then be brought to the mark by the capstan-headed screws. If this
adjustment is required to extreme nicety, as for levelling purposes, the follow-
ing method should be adopted :—Set the instrument level, midway between
two stakes driven down to the head, upon each of which lei a levelling staff
be held in turn, then the difference of staff readings will give their true differ-
ence of level, no matter how much the cross-hair may be out of adjustment,
providing the telescope bubble occupies a central position at each sighting!
Now, setting the instrument up a few yards behind, or close to the staff, held
on one of the stakes, then sending the staff to the other stake, ascertain
their difference of level under new circumstances; if the result
is as before, both level and cross-hair are in adjustment; if not
read the height of the cross-hair upon the staff close by, apply to it by
addition or subtraction, the true difference of level first obtained, and this
will give a reading upon the staff held again at the further stake, which the
horizontal cioss-hair must be made to cut. This is effected by turning the
capstan-headed diapragm screws up or down as required, care being taken
that the bubble is central at the time.
(v j lo Test the Hokizontality of the Axis of Altitude for Rectifica-
ation OF THE Pivot Axis if Necessary. — Theoretically, rectification of
the pivot axis should precede adjustment of the horizontal hair, especially
when a striding level is supplied for the purpose ; but with five or six-inch
theodolite no error can be detected in the results obtained by following the
order here given. Sight up to some steady point, about thirty or forty
degrees high, then lower the telescope to about an equal aqgle of depression,
and mark upon the ground the bi-section of cross-hairs directly under it;
move the upper part of the instrument through 180 deg., turn the telescope
over, and again sight up to the same point; then, when the telescope is
depressed the second time, the intersection of the cross-hair should bi-sect


the previous mark ; if not, half the difference is due to error of the axis,
which may be corrected by the adjusting screw placed under one end of the
axis. The observation of stars at their greatest alongation, supplies a good
field test for horizontality of the pivot axis, but a plumb line is the best work-
shop test that can be devised for the purpose.
Sometimes a difficulty is experienced in collimating in azimuth, because
the telescope does not occupy a central position between the standards ; to
test this, lift the telescope out of its place, and reverse the ends of its axis in
their bearings. If the centreing is correct, and if pivot ends and Y bearings
match in figure and size, the cross-hairs will be in the same vertical plane,
and will record the same altitude as before ; if not, an error for which no
adjustment is provided, will become apparent. If, however, the instrument
be worked with the telescope clamped to the side for which it was collimated,
nor error will be caused by such a defect in ordinary surveying; but when
great precision is required as in long sights, and special astronomical obser-
vations, conformity to this rigorous test should be regarded as an essential
performance of a suitable instrument.
The vertical circle is subject to errors of eccentricity from two sources-
One arises from the fact that its centre of graduation is not always identical
with the implied centre of the pivot axis intersecting the line of collimation;
the other is that a straight line joining the zeros of its two verniers may
possibly not coincide with either of these ; but the principle of reversal
strictly adhered to, combined with careful attention to the level bubbles, will
do much towards elimination of such errors. Rigid support is invaluable
when extreme nicety is sought; this may be obtained by screwing the instru-
ment to a metal claw placed upon masonry, or upon a post let into the
ground, when the ordinary tripod is at fault.
TO ADJUST A DUMPY LEVEL WITH FIXED CROSS-HAIRS.
The adjustment of the dumpy level is based upon the proposition that
two lines which are parallel to a third line are parallel to each other, and is
carried out in accordance with the principles of the following method :—Upon
a horizontal surface such as a frozen lake, or the margin of still water, set
up the instrument, and measure the height of its optical axis, (of about 4.80)
against the stafl. Cause the same staff to be held upon the surface just des-
cribed at any convenient distance (not less than a hundred yards), then by
means of levelling screws or legs bring the horizontal hair to cut the same
figures (4.80,) upon the staff. The bubble should then occupy a central posi-
tion in its tube; but if it does not, it must be set right by its own adjusting
screws ; after which it may be regarded as parallel to the line of sight, and
will serve as an index to it.
If, when turning the telescope, the bubble is thrown off, a touch must be
given to the levelling screws to restore its position, and thus render collima-
tion true for any direction at time of sighting. If the bubble is non-adjust-
able a mark may be made upon the glass tube with pen and ink, to show the
working position of the bubble.


DUMPY LEVEL ORDINARY ADJUSTMENT OR PEG METHOD.
The adjustments of the level are
1st —Parallax.
2nd—The bubble.
3rd —The cross-hair.
4th—The telescope bar.
Having attended to the first adjustment for parallax as described for the
theodolite, select upon tolerably level ground two points, say a stump and a
stone, eight or ten chains apart. Plant the instrument mid-way between
them. Level it, and if necessary adjust the bubble by the capstan-headed
screws until it will maintain a central position, while the telescope is turned
slowly round; thus performing Adjustment No. 2. Now take readings of the
staff held upon the stump and stone in turn, being careful to have the bubble
exactly in the middle of its tube just at the moment of sighting each way,
the difference between the two readings so obtained will give the true differ-
ence of level of the two points where the staff has been held, no matter how
much the cross-hair may be out of adjustment.
Having now obtained data of a horizontal line joining the extreme points,
remove the instrument to the mark where the staff is, and set it up level close
to the face of the staff, and read the height of the cross-hair directly, and by
looking at it through the telescope from the wrong end. Next send the staff-
holder back to the stump sight to the staff, and note the figures cut by the
horizontal hair, take the difference between this reading and the height of
the instrument over the stone, and it should agree with the true difference of
level first obtained. If not the instrument is out of order in respect to ad-
justment No. 3, which must now be performed by moving the horizontal hair
up or down by means of the capstan-headed diaphragm screws until it cuts a
reading upon the further staff, denoting the true rise or fall between the
stump and stone the bubble being exactly at the centre of its run during the
final test.
If after careful levelling the bubble creeps away from the middle when
the telescope is turned about, it either requires setting upright in its tube
or the telescope bar is not at right angles to the vertical axis of the instru-
ment. Rectification of the telescope bar is a 4th adjustment, seldom attended
to and never absolutely necessary. It is effected by means of three split-
headed screws under each end of the bar, the middle one of which is a holding
screw affecting the horizontality of the bar, and those on each side are rock-
ings crews to tilt it slightly in a vertical direction. The quality of the object
glass may be tested by applying a large wafer temporarily to its centre
whilst collimating afresh for rays entering through the edges only of the
lenses. Imperfection of the focussing extension gear may be tested by
observing several staff readings upon stakes placed in line at intervals of
half-a-chain apart, then moving the instrument at right angles to the line
opposite the middle stake, and reading them all again from a distance suf-
ficient to afford a uniform focus Small discrepancies in heights will probably
be disclosed by the operation fairly attributable to such a cause.
The best test for either a dumpy or wye level, and the only one that is
independent of all instrumental defects, is the direct, or (A minus B) test


which may be performed in the following manner ;—At station A, level up
and read height of hair against face of staff, which write down as (a) Take
a long sight of eight or ten chains to staff at station B, and note the reading
as (b). Move instrument toB, level up, and again measure height of cross-hair
against face of staff, which enter as (j 3 Send staff-holder back to station
A and book the reading to it as (a), the bubble being of course brought
to the middle for both sights. If the instrument is in adjustment the dif-
ference between (a) and (b) should equal the difference between a and (3. If
otherwise, the difference between (a) and (6) and (a.) and (jj) equals twice
the instrumental error. The difference between <t -f- b and o. -f- ji
equals twice the difference of level.
Some levelling instruments are furnished with a second eye-piece for
special use where very long sights have to be taken. When long sights are
taKen in one direction without corresponding back sights, a correction must
be made for curvature of the Earth’s surface, thus : squared divided
by Earth’s diameter equals the correction for curvature, and one-seventh of
this amount is a second correction to be applied the contrary way to
counteract the effect of refraction.
.... . - - ,i,a
- . - - - ■■ * i.——
Kennedy, Printer, Grenfell-street, Opposite Arcade, Adelaide.


FLOW OF WATER IN RIVERS,
PIPES, AND DRAINS.
ELEMENTARY PAPER,
C. Hope Harris.
The Velocity of a stream is the rate per second at which its
waters move bodily, as shown by substances carried along by
them at different depths, and at various distances from the
margin.
The Discharge is calculated in cubic feet per minute (unless
otherwise stated), and is found by multiplying the area of a cross
section by the velocity of the water at the same point. When
the velocity cannot be obtained by experiment, it may be calcu-
lated with sufficient precision for ordinary purposes by means of
the following directions and formulae.
First measure with level, chain, tape, and staff several cross-
sections of the channel, also its slope or fall in feet per mile.
Divide the sectional area by its wet border (measured down the
sides and across the bottom) for the hydraulic mean depth,*
which, multiplied by twice the fall per mile, will give the square
of the hypothetical velocity. The root of this number, diminished
by one-tenth of itself, represents the actual velocity within an
inch or two per second. Then velocity by area gives discharge
in cubic feet, which, by 6| (or, more exactly, by 6*23210), gives
delivery in gallons.
Example.
Given a drain with a mean breadth of 10 feet, a depth of
feet, a wet border of 17 feet, and a fall of 2' 8" per mile. To
find its discharging capacity.
Formula —
Yel. =J( ~ x fall x 2) x-9
\border /
Therefore, * 5*4) - = 3-006 = velocity.
* Note.—Hydraulic depth is the depth the water would be if distributed
evenly upon a bed consisting of the friction surface measured as described,
or as scaled from plot of cross-section.


Then as area x velocity x time x gallons = delivery; it follows that
35 by 3by 60 equals 6-300 cubic feet; which by 6| gives the
discharge 39 J gallons per minute.
Again, a large river, about 30 feet deep and 759 feet broad,
has a sectional area of 23529 superficial feet, a wet border of
821 lineal feet, and a fall of 6 inches per mile.
Now, dividing 23-529 by 821, and multiplying by twice the
fall per mile, we obtain 28-655, the square root of which, multi-
plied by decimal 9, leaves 4-8177 for the velocity. Then area by
velocity, by time, 60 seconds, makes up 6,801,780 cubic feet as
the volume of water discharged in one minute.
Applying the same formula to pipes (from a few yards to a
mile in length) a good approximation both as to velocity and
discharge will be obtained.
Example.
How many gallons per minute will be delivered by a pipe 3
inches in diameter flowing full, having a length of half a mile
and a total fall of 100 feet ? Taking all terms in feet as before,
we find the sectional area divided by circumference (or wet
border) of pipe to be '.‘WsWt = ‘062 ; and
*7(4)62 x 400) x -9 = 4-491 = velocity.
Then area x velocity x 60 x 6| = 82|- gallons.
Let us now test this result by the following formula, which is
a very good one where long pipes only are concerned ; and con-
venient, as the terms consist of diameter in inches, fall in feet,
and length in yards.
t. i* ... (diam. x 3)' x fall
Delivery per minute in gallons 2 = j ~
That is to say the square root of the delivery in gallons per
minute is equal to the fifth power of three times the pipe’s
diameter in inches, multiplied by the total fall in feet, divided
by the total length in yards. Taking the same example as
before—
3" x3"= 9; 9 s = 59049 x 100 = 5904900 ;
= ; square root of which is 81-538 gallons.
Gauging.
Water flowing from a reservoir, or over a weir in a river
where the current is not perceptible, passes through an opening
one foot wide and one inch deep at the rate of 5-15 cubic feet
(equal to 32 gallons) per minute, being an average flow at the
surface of -430 of a cubic foot for every square inch of space;
but the velocity of water flowing through an aperture below the
surface varies as the square root of the pressure or head, i.e.,
depth measured to the centre of the aperture. In other words,
the velocity of a column extending vertically several or many
inches down varies as the square root of the cube of its depth.


In the following formulae the depth is always in inches
(1.) Discharge in cubic feet per minute =
depth 3 x *430 x breadth in inches.
2
(2.) Discharge in gallons per minute =
> / depth 3 x 2*68 x breadth in inches.
2
(3.) Discharge in cubic feet per minute =
depth 3 x 5*15 x breadth in feet.
2
(4.) Discharge in gallons per minute =
= sj depth 3 x 32 x breadth in feet.
2
Taking as an example a case where the flow over a weir is 3G
inches deep and 20 feet wide, we have—36 x36x 36 = 46656,
the square root being 216, which, multiplied by width of 20,
gives 22,100 cubic feet per minute, or nearly 200 million gallons
per day.
Example No. 2—The flow over a board in a creek was found
to be 1£ inches deep and 1| feet wide. Now, I*25 3 =1*90, the
square root of which is 1*414; then, 32 x 1*414 x I*sl =67*B
gallons per minute, or about 4,000 per hour.
lo find the flow through an opening one inch square at a
stated depth. Compute the square root of the cube of a depth
half an inch greater, and of a depth half an inch less than that
given ; multiply their difference by *43 for answer in cubic feet,
and by 2*68 for answer in gallons.
At a deptli of 12 feet an orifice one inch square would dis-
charge 48 gallons per minute, whilst an orifice double that area
would discharge nearly 100 gallons per minute.
Professor Thomson’s method of gauging small shallow streams
by causing the water to pass through a triangular notch in a
board or sheet of thin iron is a very good one. The notch must
be right-angled at the deepest point, thus \y , and the depth
be taken in inches and decimals, then the discharge in cubic feet
per minute
square root of fifth power of depth
3 X ’ 9
That is, one-third of the square root of the fifth power of the
depth gives gallons, nearly.
Example.
The depth from surface of still water to bottom of notch being 4
inches, find discharge of stream in cubic feet and gallons.
4x4x4x4x4 = 1024.
y/1024 32, which, divided by 3 and multiplied by decimal 9,
gi\ es 9*63 cubic feet, equivalent to 60 gallons per minute.
Miners’ Inch.
The Miners’ Inch is a somewhat uncertain measure. It repre-
sents the quantity of water that will flow through an opening


one inch square “ four inches or more ' below the surface of still
water. Originally 50 Californian inches were reckoned as equal
to a flow of one cubic foot per second. The Nevada inch was
differently expressed as being equivalent to a flow of ten gallons
per minute. The legal “ Miners’ inch ” now in use by various
companies in America can only be represented by figures ranging
from a flow of 14 cubic foot to T 8 cubic foot per minute, the
mean of which coincides with 10 gallons per minute ; an amount
corresponding to the calculated rate of discharge at a depth of
seven inches, and borne out by recent experiments by Messrs.
Engleb right and Pel ton, of Nevada City.
Torricelli Theorem.
A jet of water issues from an outlet at the bottom or side of a
vessel with a velocity equal to eight times the square root of the
height (in feet or decimals) of the water above the centre of the
opening ; but the quantity discharged depends so much upon the
form, bevel, and thickness of the outlet as to vary from a quarter
to one-half less than the theoretical discharge. Torricelli ob-
served that a thin stream or vein contracted to T 6 „%ths of its
bulk immediately after escaping through a round hole from a
vessel, and he gave the world the benefit of his experiments in
the following formula 1 , in which g represents the effective force
of gravity ; h, height in feet; a, the area of opening ; and t,
time in seconds :
Vel. = sj’2g h; or, Vel. = VA’BO2B.
Cubic feet discharged = 0’62 x vel. x ax
Weight discharged = 0’62 x vel. x«x<x ’036121b. (or 62 - 32101b5.)
to a gallon.
Example.
Find discharge through a round hole 2 inches in diameter
placed near the bottom of a tank a little more than 12 feet high
and full of water. 8-025 x 3464 = vel. 27*8, which by ’62 and
by area *2618 = 4’52 cubic feet. 4’52 x 6|- x6O = 169 gallons per
minute, about 30 gallons less than would pass out through a
short pipe or nozzle in the same time. An orifice of one inch
diameter would discharge 85 gallons under similar conditions.
Notes.
Through a 1-inch round pipe covered of an inch with
water about 3 gallons per minute will pass.
A l-inch flexible syphon will, according to circumstances, dis-
charge from 1 to 3 gallons per minute.
A body falling through space attains a velocity of 32’2 feet at
the end of the first second, and 64’, 96’, and 129* at the end of
the second, third, and fourth respectively, the distance passed
through being 16’08, 644, 144, and 256 feet respectively.
Gauge points.—Diagl. 3 = and gallons = diagl. 3 x ’002266.


CATALOGUE
SOUTH CIRCUMPOLAR
STARS.




k n & 11
V 2T2 .3
/3'
ft*
C33’y3‘* \
ott
<r
£.
.
1038
' 1070
1197
1215
V'7 I
1532
1587
0 .
/3
V&-/7- A
7 *
Octantis.
Tucanae
Hydri
Tucanae
Tucanae
Tucanae. .
Eridaiji .
Hydri . . .
Hydri
Hydri
Hydri
Mensae, B. A. C.
Hydri, B. A. C.
Reticuli, B.A.C.
Hydri, B. A. C.
Hydri
Reticuli
Reticuli
Mensae,, B. A. C.
Mensae, B. A. C.
Doradus
Doradus
Doradus
Canopus
Pictoris.
Volantis
Volantis
Volantis
Chamaeleontis.
Chamaeleontis.
I
i g Mean K. A. South'Polah
“ s Jan. 1, 1873. £ 1 Distance, ,®o£VT
J3 H IN K.A. j AN l) 1g73 INS.P.D. .
i
________________ •
" Tl mmm 1 ■* 1
h. m. s. s. ° * n s,
5 0 413 + 2-9 7 411 +2O 0 ✓
4-5 0.14 44 + 2-8 19 40 7 + 20-0 /
3 018 54 + 2-6 12 146 + 20*0 12.-4
4 025 42 + 2-7 26 20 28 + 19-9
4 025 43 + 2-7 26 20 3 +l9 9 *&&&
5 1 11 26 + 2*o 20 26 49 +l9 1 v'
1 132 58 + 2-2 32 7 4 +lB4 £2 3
3 1 54 45 + I*B 27 48 42 + 17*6
4 2 19 29 + I*o 20 45 42 + 16*4
5 237 38 + o*B 21 11 19 + 15*5
5 3 2 0 + o*o 17 35 49 +l4 0
5 3 11 59 2*3 10 32 12 + 13*3
5 3 .19 3 I*B 12 9 5 + 13 1
•4 342 36 + o*7 24 47 38 + 11-4
5 346 0 o*4 17 40 18 + 11 0
3. 3 49 14 I*o 15 22 19 + 10 9
3*5 4 12 47 + o*7 27 12 23 + 9*o
5 420 31 + o*6 26 16 52 + 8 4
5 448 32 2-3 13 27 46 + 5*9
4*5 4 58 51 I*B 14 51 54 + 5 2
-
5 513 52 —0- 22 40 17 + 4 0
4 532 31 + o*s' 27 25 36 + 2*4
4*5 544 33 + 0 1 24 12 49 1 + 1 0
I 621 8 + .I*3 37 22 33 I*B 37J?
’4 646 53 + 0-6 28 11 35 I 41
5 7 949 C 5 19 42 60
5 743 22 o*7 17 42 1 8 7
5 8 732 + 0-3 21 45 18 —lO 6
4*5 8 21 46 I*4 13 28 54 11*6
5*5 8 24 25 I*6 12 55 36 11*8




$ Mean R. A Sovth Polar L, Annuai '
I 4 an. 1. 1873. Distance, ?* E cf E £, SI ™
* INK. A. Jan. 1, 1873. IN & * P - D *
'
h. m c. s, o * // g
5 832 39 + 3*4 930 15 12*4
8 45 36 I*B 11 30 12 12*3
5 ,9 0 26 + o*9 24 6 37 — l4*3
3 9 11 48 + o*7 20 48 20 14*9 20'4-6 \
9 13 41 + I*6 31 15 28 15*1 J/ /J- 4
\ *
5 914 32 7*l 450 57 15*1
5 937 32 I*s 937 49 16*3
9 43 55 + I*s 25 31 0 16*6
10 10 42 + 1-4 20 35 33 17*8 ZO'jyj/
j 10 21 52 + I*2 16 37 4 —lB 2
,10 33 55 -f' o*7 f l 2 3 4 18*5 .
10 88 25 + 2 1 26 16 17 ! 18*8
10 44 34 + 0 6 10 7 46 I — l9*o
11 29 56 + 2*7 27 40 58 19*9
11 53 19 + 2*B 12 29 5 —2O 1
• I
>l2 0 16 + 3 0 26 5 89 20*2
12 10 56 + 3*3 HI 24 13 20*0
12 19 32 1 + 3*2 27 36 20 19*9 2^-t
12 24 55 + 3*4 18 34 7!—199 ' ?/
12 29 39 + 3-5 21 33 51 19*9 2/ vM'S
.*
12 38 31 I + 3*6 22 35 18 19*8
12 41 30 + 5*5 534 3 19*8
|l2 53 33, + 3*9 19 8 14 —l9-5
13 6 40 + 34) 22 46 54 — l9*2
13 20 49 + 8-3 402 1 —lB 8
13 53 1, + 5*6 13 48 55 17*7 f
:13 54 52 + 4*l j3O 14 30 —l7O J# */2* 2
14 22,5 , + 6*9 93526 17*1
114 650 j + B*s 655 3 17*2.
1 14 7 8 I 4 6*B 10 29 11 16*9
I !
!_ I \ [ _ p
f \
2928
A fn *
fi
2 i
£
£
f 0 /O S/ '$ u)
•■s
t z
Cliamseleont. B. A. C.
Chamaeleontis..
Volantis
Argus
Argus
Octantis
Chamaeleontis.,
Argus
Argus,..
Carina' . .
Chamaeleontis..
Argus
Chamaeleontis..
Centauri
Chamaeleontis..
Crucis..
Chamaeleontis. .
Crucis
Muscae . ...
Muscae
Muscae .
Octantis
Muscae .
Muscae .
Octantis
Apoclis .
Centauri
Apodis .
Octantis
Apodis .
M •
y< «
o
< g
a H
5*5
4-5
4-5
5
I
4
4




'7 f / .-X y
44-JS-4- J p
X 2
X
7
/3
u 2o /(}■/ 2
y
!24 22 - cr-
•J4--ys: /3
•/c a.
y x
7
Centauvi.... 4
Apodis
Trianguli Aust.
Octantis
Trianguli Aust.
Apodis
Apodis
Trianguli Aust.
Apodis . ......
Apodis
Trianguli Aust..
Apodis
Arae i
Pavonis.
Octantis
Pavonis.
Pavonis.
Pavonis.
Pavonis.
Pavonis,
Pavonis.
Octantis
Pavonis.
Octantis
Tucanse.'
Octantis .
Octantis .
Octantis .
Octantis .
S« Mean R. A. p An * ual South Polar Annual
Jan. I, 1873. P “T N Distance,
inR. A. Jan. 1, 1878. inS P I) -
h. m. s. a. ° 9 " s.
1 14 30 59 + 4-3 29 41 27 15-2 2V JS>-4
4- 14 32 10 + 7-0 11 29 54 15-9 // 2X-
-3 15 7 4 + 5 4 21 47 31 —l3 9
5*5 15 14 20 + 12-5 557 45 13-4
3 15 43 59 + 5*2 j 26 57 54 —ll 7 2G &G
5- 16 129 + 8-6 11137 47 —lO 0
5-5 16 1 33: + 8-6 11 39 29 —lO-0
4-5 16 3 54 + 5-3 26 38 31 9-8
5 16 13 59 + 8-8 11 22 55 —lO 3
5 16 25 0 + 8-3 12 45 21 8-3
%
,i \ }
2 16 35 14 + 6*2 21 12.34 7 3 2/' //- i
4 17 8 45 + 6-2 22 21*53 4 7
4 17 19 39 + 5-3 29 25 32 3 8 Z*
4- 17 33 16 + 5-8 25 20 22 2-4
5- 18 11 49 +lO9 0 043 14 I*o 6
4 18 28 10 . + 7-0 18 28 7- + 2-3
4 19 45 52 + 7-1 -16 45 39 + 8 6
4 19 56 12 + 5-7 23 30 12 + 9 6
2 20 15 35 + 4-8 32 51 40 +IM
3 20 33 29 + 5-5 23 20 37 +l2 3 22
\ I
4-5 20 37 141 + 5-8 20 45 49 + 12-6
4- 20 49 15 + 7*6 12 29 50 +134 /2 J/ 2
3 21 15 54 + 5-0 24 3 32 + 15-0
5- 21 31 10 + 10-1 642 3 + 15-8
3 22 9 47 + 4-2 29 6 33 +l7 7
4- 22 32 55 1 + 6 7 .757 16 +lB 6 7'
5- 23 753 + 13-4 149 18 + 19-5
6- 23 44 35 + 3-8 7 16 32 + 20-0
6 23 50 30 + 3-5 7 726 +2O 0
.
4*5
4-5
4-5
5-5
4-5
5-7
6-6


\ -
\
/
(cj Ay ~
Coe C&s/i A ~
Cc j Sc\, A ~
%
f S
S<t<L
.
p p ■— PPe-t faJ'
FD + UA-
p p) —p C
• \ 1
•v.
*.» f
\
•'• -.%.. .
,
* S»
' ,
t
%
1
\ »
/
♦
/
\
\
' X
# ' ..
4»
» ‘ / <
V- * ']
f
' h
>'
' # ' ‘
*
-
/
/
\
/
%
/ » ’ •




SCHOOL OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES,
SOTJTBE ATCrSX3R.itX.Iit.
Syllabus of Lectures and Demonstrations
on Surveying.
ISSUED AS A GUIDE TO TRE MEMBERS OF THE SURVEYING CLASS.
1. Lineal Measurements. —Use of chain, arrows, and plummet.
Units of measurement. Scales. The decimal system.
2. Angular Measurement. —Division of the circle into degrees.
The vernier. Protractor. Scale of chords and dividers.
3. The Compass. —Construction and use of. Practice with, in
reading bearings and courses.
4. The Theodolite. —Construction of instrument. Practice in
setting-up. Adjusting. Reading angles and aligning.
5. The Level. —Setting-up and adjusting. Practice in staff read-
ing and booking. Theory of curvature and refraction.
6. Field Book. —System of noting measurements, offsets, and
angles. Rodham’s method. Practice in booking a topographical survey,
and in preparing data for the reproduction of a survey represented by
a given plan.
7. Surveying with Chain only. —Diagonal line, and perpen-
180°
diculars. Laying out right angles. Application of ———R'= 3438.
8. Area. —Computation of squares, rectangles, triangles, rhomboids,
trapezoids, and regular polygons.
9. Area. —Computation of circles, ellipses, and segments.
10. Traversing with compass and chain from magnetic meridians.


11. Traversing* with theodolite and chain from a fixed meridian
by contained angles and reduced bearings.
12. Estate and Property Survey. Mapping an estate.
Fixing objects by cross bearings. Taking levels. Filling in details of
buildings, fences, wells, &c.
13. Mining Surveying —lllustration of, by traverse, adjacent
to the Exhibition Buildings. Partly above ground, partly below.
14. Plotting and Drawing. —Preparing finished plans of fore-
going surveys, also section showing levels.
15. Reduction of Traverse. —Reducing many lines, measure-
ments, and angles to one bearing and distance by sines and cosines or
traverse tables. Equalisation of boundaries. Treatment of obstructions.
Finding inaccessible distances and heights.
16. Co-ordination. System of rectilineal co-ordinates for
checking work, for plotting, and for calculating area with exactness.
Double latitude and longitude
17. Projection. —The representation of solids, and of plane and
spherical surfaces, on plan, by use of isometric, conical, and stereographic
projections.
18. Trigonometry —Plane and spherical, applied to surveying
and astronomical problems.
19. The Ephemeris or Nautical Almanac —Explanation
of. Definition of terms used.
20. True Meridian and Latitude —Determination of, by
observation of circumpolar stars at greatest elongation and by meridian
altitude of sun and stars. Compaxdson of true w r ith magnetic meridian.
21. Declination of Needle. —Ascertained in connection with
astronomical observations for azimuth and time.
22. Embankments —Measurement of, and cross-sections. The
prismoidal formula. Solid contents of spheres, wedges, pyramids, and
cones.
23. Excavations. —Reservoirs and tanks, capacity of.
24. Flow of Water —ln rivers, drains, and pipes. Velocity and
discharge of. Gauging.
25. Curves. —Railway and tramway curves. How to lay out.
26. Location Surveys —Problems and exercises in. Roads.
Grades and contour lines.
CHAS. HOPE HARRIS,
Member of the Institute of Surveyors, and
Member of the Board of Examiners for Surveyors.








3150802331






.• * . -&.S.-V .V •: v v f } V.. g
■ . » V . •• V‘; : : ! .r ‘ •" V > ?;•' ,i r
-
i.;-. v-..-. , -a.-: vv r*t ~ L : • ■ ■■ 7 • . ■■ v?,v -,r# *Ai- =f-H- -; *jrv r > : v;- v~-- |
'
vrVi : .• ■’■ . ' % . __ : t =., r , V f v. 5.-: * v . ,rr :>.•
,
•
:
.
• : •• :■ “ - &• * -. • • • • ■ , • • . *
:
■
' C^L : * i y t* 1 *** - • .5 5> • ,-■•-*• . .r.* . .* v• - ■■■• *yh$ • ••* •*- i .■ • : / .* t ■ •• . . . • • ’ . . * .;•• ;*
.
'
:
'/.VWi ?;*>. •>•;
r- t*’ •'■ .• -V; • :• v-‘;' ■ ■. ••• • ->•- ' ,• . : •- ■ >. ■•-, : i ; ■ ■ . . ;
* ■•■:.> *< ' • A : ;<*> -V- .■ '•!, TV : ?* ■ :$ , ■ ■.• ., .• - ■ : p ■: ' ; * ;.■
■
■
'
'• r : jL ' . *. .* • . ». — r : ' : "V ;■•> v-v ;
■
■
■
t.;:;' - ,f. v ; 4 . •. , % i. r L 4 ,* ; - / v '- :r.A t ■, '?<: - ‘ ; V- . r v •• ■ ■■ _ -, ••• .• <,
..Jk .. -.TlJi Ar. i- rf-rVr- .f r J '.r ■■*■: r>\* S. * r* '■ *i*g* * rh •. :,V;.V 4 ‘. -}*■. T-.T; • SW ? J. 7C;> •’ . '
• • • • ■* ,-■>-• ( ;
'A.-i* -,r/:V •.
’
