

The Tragedy of Julius Caefar.
Enter Cinna the Poet, and after him the Plebeians.
Cin. I dreamt to Night, that I did Feaft with Caefar,
And things unluckily charge my Fantafie :
I have no will to wander forth of Doors,
Yet fomething leads me forth.
1. What is your Name ?
2. Whither are you going ?
3. Where do you dwell ?
4- Are you a Married Man, or a Batchellor?
2. Anfwer every man direcftly.
1. I, and briefly.
4. I, and wifely.
3. 1, and truly, you were beft.
Cin. What is my Name ? Whither am I going ? Where
do I dwell ? Am I a Married Man, or a Batchellor ? Then
to Anfwer every Man diredly and briefly, wifely and
truly : wifely, I fay, I am a Batchellor.
2. That’s as much as to fay, they are Fools that Marry:
you’ll bear me a bang for that I fear : Proceed diredtly.
Cm. Dire<ftly, I am going toCajar's Funeral.
1. As a Friend, or an Enemy ?
Cin. As a Friend.
2. That matter is anfwered diredlly.
4. For your Dwelling: briefly.
Cin, Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
3. Your Name, Sir, truly.
Cin. Truly my Name is Cinna.
1. Tear him to pieces, he’s a Confpirator.
Cin. I am Cinna the Poet, 1 am Cinna the Poet.
4. Tear him for his bad Verfes, tear him for his bad
Verfes.
Cin. I am not Cinna the Confpirator.
4. It is no matter, his Name’s Cuma y pluck but his
name out of his heart, and turn him going.
3. Tear him, tear him •, Come Brands ho, Firebrands :
to Brutus, to Gafins, burn all. Some to Deciufs Houfes,
and fome to Caskas , fome to Liyarim : Away, go.
f Exeunt all the Plebeians,
Aslm Quartm.
%
Enter Antony, Odtavius, and Lepidus.
many then (hall die, their Names are
1 prickt.
OCI. Your Brother too muft die : confent you, Le-
pidus ?
Ley. Ido confent.
051. Prick him down, Antony,
Ley. Upon condition Publius lhall not live,
Who is your Sifters Son, Antony.
Am. He lhall not live ; look, with a fpot, I damn him.
But Leyidus , go you to Ctfar’s Houfe:
Fetch the Will hither, and we lhall determine
How to cut off fome charge in Legacies.
Ley. What? lhall I find you here ?
Ott. Or here, or at the Capitol. [Exit Lepidus,
Ant. This is a flight unmeritable man,
Meet to be fent on Errands: is it fit
The three-fold World divided, he Ihould ftand
One of the three to fhare it ?
051. So you thought him,
And took his Voice who fliould be prickt to die
In our black Sentence and Profcription.
Ant. 05lavtus , I have fecn more days than you y
And though we lay thefe honours on this man,
To eafe our felves of divers fland’rous loads,
He fhall but bear them, as the Afs bears Gold,
To groan and fweat under the Bulinefs,
Either led or driven, as we print the way:
And having brought our treafure, where we will.
Then take we down his load, and turn him off
(Like to the empty Afs) to lhake his Ears,
And graze in Commons.
051. You may do your will:
But he’s a tri’d and valiant Souldier.
Ant. So is my Horfc, 05lavius y and for that,
I do appoint him [lore of Provender.
It is a Creature that I teach to fight,
To wind, to flop, to run dircftly on :
His corporal Motion, govern’d by my Spirit,
And in Lome taft, is Leyidus but fo :
He muft be taught, and train’d, and bid go forth ;
A barren fpirited Fellow, one that feeds
On Objects, Arts, and Imitations.
Which out of ufe, and Hail’d by other men
Begin his fafhion. Do not talk ofhim,
But as a property : and now, Ottavius,
Liften great things. Brutus and (af ttts
Are levying Powers •, We muft ftraight make head:
Therefore let our Alliance be combin’d,
Our beft Friends made, and our belt means ftretcht out,
And let us prefently go fit in Council,
How covert matters may be beft difdos’d,
And open Perils fureft anfwered.
051. Let us do fo: for we are at the ftake.
And bayed about with many Enemies,
And fome that fmile have in their hearts, I fear.
Millions of Mifchiefs. [ 'Exeunt .
•«
Drum. Enter Brutus, Lucilius, and the Army, Titinius
and Pindarus meet them.
Bru. Stand, ho.
Luc. Give the word, ho, and Stand.
Bru. What now, Lucilius , is Cajjius near ?
Luc, He is at hand, and <r Pindarus is come
To do you falutation from hisMafter.
"Bru. He greets me well. Your Mafter Pindarus ,
In his own change, or by ill Olficers,
Hath given me fome worthy caufe to wilh
Things done, undone : But if he be at hand,
I fhall be fatisfied.
Pm. I do not doubt
But that my Noble Mafter will appear
Such as he is, full of regard, and Honour.
'Bru. He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius ,
How he receiv’d you: let me be refolv’d.
Luc. With curtcfie, and with refpeft enough.
But not with fuch familiar inftances.
Nor with fuch free and friendly Conference,
As he hath us’d of old.
Bru. Thou haft defcrib’d
A hot Friend, cooling : Ever note, Lucilius ,
When Love begins to ficken and decay,
It ufeth an enforced Ceremony.
There are no tricks in plain and fimple Faith :
But hollow men, like Florfts hot at hand,
Make gallant Ihew, and promife of their Mettle :
Low March within,
But when they Ihould endure the bloody Spur,
They fall their Creft, and like deceitful Jades,
Sink in the Trial. Comes his Army on ?
Luc. They mean this Night in Sardis to be quarter’d :
The greater part, the Horfe in general
Are come with Cajjius.
4
Enter Caflius and his Powers.
t
Bru. Hark, he is arriv’d :
March gently on to meet him.
Cajfi.
33


Cajfi. Stand, ho.
hru. Stand, ho, Apeak the word along.
S.and,
Stand.
Stand.
Caffi. Moll Noble Brother: you have done ms wrong.
Em Judge me, you Gods; wrong 1 mine Enemies?
And if not fo, how fhould 1 wrong a Brother ?
Caffi Brutus , this fober form ot yours, hides wrongs, !
And when you do them .
'Em Caffius y be content,
S,)cak your griefs foftly, I do know you well.
Before the Eyes of both our Armies here
(Which fliould perceive nothing but Love from us)
Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away :
Then in my Tent Caffius enlarge your Griefs,
And I will give you Audience.
Cajfi, PwdaruSy
Bid our Commanders lead their Charges off
A little from this ground.
Era. LuciliuSy do you the like, and let no man
Come to our Tent, till we have done our Conference.
Let Lucius and Titimus guard our Door. [ 'Exeunt,
Manent Brutus and Caffius.
Caffi. That you have wrong’d me, doth appear in this
You have condemn’d, and noted Lucius Pella
: or taking Bribes here of the Sardians ;
Wherein my Letter, praying on his fide,
Becaufe I knew the man, was flighted off
Bru. You wrong’d your felf to write in fuch a cafe.
Caffi. In Inch a time as this, it is not meet.
That every nice offence fhould bear his Comment.
Bru. Let me tell you, Caffius, you your felf,
Are much condemn’d to have an itching Palm,
To fell, and Mart your Offices for Gold
To Undefervers.
Caffi. I, an itching Palm ?
You know that you are Brutus that fpeaks this,
Or by the Gods, this fpeech were elfe your laft.
Bru. The name of Caffius honours this Corruption,
And Chaflifement doth therefore hide his head,
Caffi. Chaflifement?
Bru . Remember tJMarch, the Ides of March remember:
Did not great Julius bleed for Juftice fake ?
What Villain touch’d his Body, that did flab,
And not for Juftice ? What, ffiall one of Us,
That [truck the Formoft man of all this World,
uc for fupporting Robbers: ffiall we now
Contaminate our Fingers with bafe Bribes?
And fell the mighty fpace of our large Honours
For fo much traffi, as may be grafped thus ?
I had rather be a Dog, and bait the Moon,
Than fuch a Roman.
Caffi. Brutus , bait not me,
I’ll not endure it; you forget your felf,
To hedge me in, 1 am a Souldier, I,
Older in pradice, abler than your felf
To make Conditions.
Bru. Go to: you are not Caffius.
Caffi . I am.
Bru. I fay, you are not.
Caffi. Urge me no more, I ffiall forget my felf:
Have mind upon your health: Tempt me no farther.
Bru. Away, flight man.
Caffi. Is’t poffible ?
Bru. Hear me, for I will fpeak.
Muff I give way, and room to your raffi Choler ?
Shall I be frighted, when a mad man flares ?
Caffi. Oye Gods, ye Gods, mufl I endure all this?
Bru. All this ? I more. Fret till your proud heart break,
Go ffiew your Slaves howCholefick you are,
And make your Bondmen tremble. Muft I budge?
Mufl 1 obferve you ? Mufl I fland and crouch
| Under your tefly humour? By the Gods
You ffiall digeft the Venom of your fpleen
Though it do fplit you. For from this day forth,
I’il ufe you for my Mirth, yea for my Laughter,
When you are wafpilb.
Caffi. Is it come to this ?
' Bru . You fay, you are a better Souldier:
Let it appear fo , make your vaunting true,
And it ffiall pleafe me well. For mine own part,
I ffiall be glad to learn of Noble men.
Caffi. You wrong me every way :
You wrong me, Brutus:
I raid, an Elder Souldier, not a Better.
Did 1 fay Better ?
Bru If you did, I care not.
Caffi. When Cafar liv’d, he durft not thus have mov’d
me.
"Bru. Peace, peace, you durfl not fohave tempted him.
Caffi. I durft not.
Bru. No.
Caffi. What ? durft not tempt him ?
"Bru. For your life you durft not ?
Caffi. Do not prefume too much upon my love,
I may do that I [hall be forry for.
Bru . You have done that you ffiould be forry for.
There is no terror, Caffius , in your threats.
1 For I am arm’d fo ftrong in honefty,
That they pafs by me, as the idle wind,
Which I refpeCt not, I did fend to you
For certain fums of Gold, which you deny’d me,
For 1 can raife no money by vile means : *
By Heaven, I had rather coin my heart,
And drop my blood for Drachmaes, than to wring
From the hard hands of Peazants, their vile traffi
By any indirection. I did fend
To you for Gold to pay my Legions,
Which you deny’d me : was that done like Caffius ?
Should I haveanfwer’d Caws Caffius fo}
When Marcus Brutus grows fo covetous.
To lock fuch Rafcal Counters from his Friends,
Be ready gods with all your Thunder-bolts,
Daffi him to pieces.
Caffi. I deny’d you not.
Bru. You did.
Caffi. I did not. He was but a Fool
That brought my anfwcr back. Brutus hath riv’d my heart,
A Friend ffiould bear his Friends infirmities,
But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
Bru. Ido notjfrll ( you praCtife them on me.
Caffi. You love me not.
Bru, I do notiike your faults.
Caffi. A Friendly Eye could never fee fuch faults.
Bru. A Flatterers would not, though they do appear .
As huge as high Olympus.
Caffi. Come, aMntonyy and young Ociavius come,
Revenge your felves alone on Caffius ,
For Caffius is a weary of the World:
Hated by one he loves, brav’d by his Brother,
Check’d like a Bondman, all his faults obferv’d,
Set in a Note-Book, learn’d, and con’d by roat
To caft into my Teeth. O 1 could weep
My Spirit from mine Eyes; There is my Dagger,
And here my naked Breaft: Within a heart
Dearer than Pluto's Mine ; Richer than Gold ;
If that thou beeft a "Roman, take it forth.
I that deny’d thee Gold, will give my Heart:
Strike as thou didft at Cafar, for I know,
When thou didft hate him word, thou iovedft him better
Than ever thou lovedfl Caffius.
Bru. Sheath your Dagger :
, Be angry when you will, it fhall have fcope,
Do what you will, diffionour (hall be humour.
O, Caffius , you are yoaked with a Lamb
That carries anger, as the Flint bears fire,
Who much iiiforced, ffiews a hafly {park,
