

How rough and peevifh is the one, how
mild and good the other ? And fo the
Cafe will generally hold. Some Wines
four with Age, while others grow better
and richer. A Gravity with fome Severity
is to be allowed ; but by no means 111*
nature. What Covetoufnefs in Old Men
can mean, I muft own, I cannot compre*
hend ; for can any thing be more fenfe*
lefsly abfurd, than that the nearer we are
to our Journey’s End, we fhould ftill
lay in the more Provifion for it ?
CHAP. XIX.
'yy* E are now Come to the fourth and
laft Charge, which is thought moft
nearly to affedf Old Age, and to give
the greateft Anxiety of all others, viz,
dhe Aproach of Death, which ’tis certain
can be at no great Diftance. But mifer-
able is the Cafe of that Old Man, who in
fo long a Colirfe of Years, has not laid in
a fufficient Provifion againft thofe Fears,
and enabled himfelf to contemn Death•
man. 'Terence was contemporary with Cato , and his Co-
medy of the Adelphi was firft afted in the Year of Rome
594, by the Names of the Confuls in the Didafcalia pre-
fixed to it.


which is either to be flighted, as being in
Reality nothing in itfelf, in cafe it puts an
intire End to us, Soul as well as Body ; or
elfe, it is to be valued, and to be delired
and wifh’d for, if it leads us into another
State, in which we are to enjoy Eternity :
And between thefe there can be no
Medium. What then am Ito fear in
Death, if after it, I am to have no Senfe,
and therefore can feel no Pain ; or other-
wife am to become immortal in another
State by the Change ? But again, can
there be any one fo void of Senfe, as to
think himfelf fare of living even to the
next Evening ? Nay, Youth in its greatefl;
Vigour is fubje& to many more Cafualties,
and expofed to much greater and more fre-
quent Dangers that may fhorten Life, than
Old Age itfelf, which is allowed to be drawn
fo near its End. Their Heat of Blood,
and the frequent Changes of Heats and
Colds, which they undergo, render them
more liable to Fevers and other Fits of
Sicknefs, which, when they happen, bear
heavieft on the fbongeft Conftitutions;
nor have they generally, when hck, the
Patience to be fo carefully nurfed, as more
