

IRISH-AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC BENEFIT SOCIETY,
ST. MICHAEL’S LODGE, NO. 6, HOTHAM.
24-1 <2
A COMPLETE EEFUTATION
OF THE REV. DR. BROMBY’S THEORY:
BEYOND THE GRAVE.
BY THE
EEV. ¥M. KELLY, S.J.
TWO LECTURES
* DELIVERED IN THE TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE, ON DEO. 12 & 22,
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED AT
THE CATHOLIC BOOKSELLING DEPOT,
“Advocate Office,” 7 Post-Office Place.




3 iSS/F l/Ogf
DR. BROIBY REFUTED:
A LECTURE
DELIVERED at the TOWN HILL, MELBOURNE, on MONDAY, DEC. 12,1870
BY THE
REV. W. KELLY, S.J.
The Lecturer, who was introduced by the Chairman, the Hoh. M.
O’Gtbady, M.L.A., said :
The subject upon which I am about to address you is, as you are
aware, the theory, or series of theories, put forward by the reverend
gentleman to whom I am about to reply this evening. It appears to
me that a subject of this kind could be treated more suitably elsewhere.
A popular platform is not altogether the place for men to discuss the
tremendous questions involved in the issues between Dr. Bromby and
myself on this subject. Such questions as the exact and real nature of
the constitution of man in his creation on the one side, and on the other
in his resurrection at the last day, and the duration of the pains which
the reprobate must endure : these are questions of an import so high,
of an interest so solemn, that, perhaps, they would be better suited
for some other place and some other platform than that which I now
occupy. But we are now speaking in self-defence; and I come forward
in deference to, and in harmony with, the views of many of my respected
friends, who are of opinion that the views advocated by Dr. Bromby in
this hall ought to be confronted in this hall; and that from this plat-
form an authorised exponent of the ancient and unchanging Church
should step forward, and show that the views advocated by the reverend
lecturer, and the theories he has propounded, are in contradiction not
only to the teaching of that Church, but also most flatly and directly
opposed to Scripture, to reason, and to history.
Truths of so solemn a nature, and discussions touching points
of such extreme and everlasting moment to the human race, are, as I
have said, in my opinion, little suited to a place where a speaker is


naturally inclined, perhaps, to welcome, if not seek, applause and
laughter. Such things as the inspiration of the Scriptures, as the
creation and fall of man, as the secrets to be disclosed at the Last Day,
are, as it appears to me, more suited for a more solemn and more
sacred place, and are not of such a nature as to be welcomed with
man’s applause, and still less to be held up to man’s idle merriment
or laughter. My views on this point are in some degree strengthened
by the lecture to which I am about to reply. For instance, I shall
give one or two passages from the lecture of my reverend and respected
antagonist, in order that we may see whether such questions ought to
be treated or discussed on a public platform. According to the
printed account, the reverend lecturer stated that he once fell in
with a platform orator who declared that he believed in the inspiration
of the Bible to the very dots of the i’s and the crosses of the fs..
This was the utterance of a platform orator.
Now with regard to the inspiration of the Holy Scriptures, many
opinions have been held by grave and learned men.
A man may think that, as our Saviour has declared in the gospel
that not one jot or tittle of Holy Scripture shall pass away until all be
fulfilled, that every jot and tittle of Holy Scripture has been written
under the direction of the Holy Spirit--that not one jot or tittle of
what is extraneous, or of what is uninspired, has been admitted into
the sacred record —and that all must be fulfilled. On the other side,
a learned man, such as Dr. Bromby is, might go so far into the extreme
opposite view as to admit that Scripture contains things which are
actually untrue or “ inaccurate.” The word o€<Wewros used by St,
Paul is rendered in the Vulgate as God-inspired Scripture. It is
translated in the authorised version of the Church of England as
“ Scripture given by inspiration of God.” "With this translation Dr.
Bromby finds fault. I leave it to himself and the authorised version
to settle the quarrel. I shall only now say that in his view what he
admits to be God-inspired Scripture is this—l shall read his own
words :
“ That all Scripture is God-inspired no Christian doubts : for that
we have direct authority. But Ood-insj)ired does not mean exactly, as
our translators have it, given hi) inspiration. It is replete with spiritual
influence. Besides enlightening the understanding with revelations
which we could not otherwise obtain, its historic parts provide food for
our spiritual need here, quite irrespective of the accuracy of mere
historic detail.”
Therefore, what the learned doctor looks upon as “ God-inspired
Scripture,” may contain errors of “ historic detail,” or, in oilier
words, may contain statements which, historically taken, are not
precisely true, but which, nevertheless, come to us under the warrant
and guidance of the Spirit of Truth. This is one view of Scripture.
Such is the view of Holy Scripture propounded by the reverend
lecturer. These two vieivs to which I have referred are opposite in the
highest degree. I do not say which is correct, or whether a view


lying between these extremes may be tbe theory which we ought to
adopt. One man may think that every jot and tittle of Scripture is
true and inspired. Another man may think that some things contained
in the inspired Scriptures may not be precisely the accurate truth.
These questions may be worthy of profound investigation, and may call
for serious analysis and accurate inquiry on the part of learned and
reverential men; but this I say, that language such as that of the
platform orator referred to by the reverend lecturer, is not the way in
which subjects of this kind should be discussed. He tells us that —-
“ A platform orator once declared, that he believed in the inspiration
of the Bible to the very dots of the i’s and the crossing of the t's. He
might just as well have said he believed in the inspiration of St. Paul
to the very tip of his nose and the points of his toes.”
This seems to me not to be the way to treat questions of so much
moment; and in my opinion, it does not tend to increase the reverence
of hearers or of the laity in general, for Scripture or for its inspiration.
I would suggest that it would be something more to the point if
reference were made to the languages in which the Scripture was
originally written, the Hebrew and Greek, to see if the i’s were dotted,
or the t’s were crossed at all. IS either in the Greek nor Hebrew
Scriptures did the process with which we are familiar, when a
been written, of going back over our word, dotting our i’s and crossing
our t’s, exist at all.
The reverend lecturer takes another topic on which he makes
merry; but which, so far as I can perceive, is one that does not call
for mirth or laughter. He calls it the “ brimstone theory.” The word
“ brimstone” or sulphur is a word frequently used in Scripture. The
word Belov occurs often in the book of Eevelation as describing the
state of the condemned. I would ask the learned lecturer, does he
believe the book of Eevelation to be Scripture ? And if so, does he
believe that the word Belov in the Greek Scripture means “ brim-
stone ”or “ sulphur ” p He may think it is used here in a metaphoric
or figurative sense; others may think not. But this would be a
matter for argument, and not for mirth. To call the state of the
lost in the world beyond the grave a “ brimstone theory,” or “ the
immortality of brimstone,” when the word “ brimstone ” occurs in the
Greek Scriptures, in connection with this subject, is to search the
record of Holy Scripture for a jest, which appears to me to be
irreverent and unworthy. I mention this matter in order that you
may understand the position I have laid down from the beginning,
namely, that such subjects as these do not seem suitable to be
discussed by the platform orator. Beyond all question they are
more suitable for the pulpit, for the House of God, for the silent
chamber, where we read the Scriptures, where we ponder on their
meaning or receive their explanation. But I would only say, if
any person coming to this lecture expects to hear anything merry or
pleasant from me on such a topic, I fear he will be disappointed. I
trust I shall say nothing, I certainly mean nothing, in the slightest


degree discourteous to Dr. Bromby; but I must say that on reading
Dr. Bromby’s lecture and examining bis theories, some of them made
me laugh, and perhaps some of them will make you laugh also.
When I entered, in compliance with the wishes of some of my friends,
upon this subject, I made it a point to read nothing that had been
published in reference to it. I took the lecture “ Beyond the Grave ”
as it stands, and therefore if I should state anything that has been said
by others it will be purely a coincidence. What I am saying I am
saying perfectly of myself. I need hardly say that into the discus-
sions which have taken place between Dr. Bromby and other ministers
of the Church of England and other denominations, outside the Church
to which I have the honour to belong, I shall not enter. Whatever
battles or whatever feud they may have, they may settle those things
among themselves. It does not belong to me, to use the language of
an old Roman, to settle or bring to an end such strife or such disputes
as these. Perhaps it may be said in the language of an ancient poet
to whose works Dr. Bromby is strongly attached, that nothing hinders
a man from telling the truth when he is merry.
“Eidentem dicere verum quid vetat P”
That is very true of many truths; but I think with regard to the
truths of Eternity and the'judgment of the last day, it is my duty to
tell you of them, without any mirth, and to tell you of them seriously
and solemnly, as we shall all seriously and solemnly confront them on
the day of reckoning.
The reverend gentleman’s lecture may, so far as I can well analyse
it, be summed up under three heads. Eirst, as regards man’s creation.
The second treats of the question whether or not all men shall rise to
be judged at the last day. And the third discusses, or rather passes
over with very brief discussion, the duration of the penalties which
await the sinner after his final condemnation. To these three subjects
I shall address myself. In the first place to the consideration of man,
such as he is by his creation. In the second place to the question of
the rising of the entire human race, and especially of all who come to
the use of reason, before the Supreme Tribunal when the world shall
have reached its end. To the question which the learned doctor pro-
fesses to treat only slightly and incidentally, and which lies last in the
order of our discussion, I shall give as much time as our opportunity
will permit. But as on the first two points the reverend lecturer has
set forth his views at great length; and as some of those views are
strange and absurd, I shall enter upon the discussion by laying those
opinions before you in his own words, and then giving you what I
consider to be their complete answer and refutation.
In the first place I should observe that, unintentionally, I have no
doubt —but with intentions I do not deal —the reverend lecturer
■would lead his readers, or hearers, to believe that any person who is
acquainted thoroughly with Hebrew and Greek —of course, many of
his auditors were not —would suppose that the account given oi the
creation of man in the early chapters of Genesis, conducts us to the
opinion that man in his creation was not superior to the brutes of the


field, or the fishes of the sea. That is the impression which the
reverend doctor’s language would lead us to receive, namely, that
whoever is acquainted with Hebrew and Greek, and has the happiness
to be able to read the Holy Scriptures in those languages, would be
led to that conclusion. I shall read his words :
“We have two languages to deal with—Hebrew and Greek. In
the earliest chapters of the Bible, where creation is first described, the
phrase £ spirit of man’ does not occur. Of his two component parts,
body and soul, body is the mere framework of earthy material, which
became a living soul by God’s creative act of breathing into his
nostrils the breath of life. But it is just the same with every other
animal. No verbal distinction is made between the soul of a man and
the soul of a beast; the difference is only in our translation. In
Gen. i. 24, the words, literally translated, are —‘ Let the earth bring
forth the living soul after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing and beast
of the earth.’ The phrase translated ‘ living creature,’ in our version is
here exactly the same in the original as ‘ living soul,’ in ii 7, £ Man
became a living soul.’ In the language, therefore, of Genesis, man is
created a living soul, and so is an oyster, each after his kind. Our
translators being chary, as it would appear, of man’s dignity, call the
animal not a soul, but a creature.”
From this passage, it appears to me, but I may be mistaken, and I
have no desire whatsoever to thrust upon the reverend doctor anything
but what he meant —but it appears to me that a misconception might
arise; that there is nothing in the early chapters of Hebrew Scriptures
or in the Greek of the ancient Septuagint, to show that man at his
creation was anything superior to an oyster or to the beast of the
field. Well, is this so? Most decidedly not. The contrary is inferred
not only from our English translation, but also from the Greek and
Hebrew'. “ Let us make man in our own image or likeness.” Almighty
God had already created the fishes of the sea and the fowls of the air,
and then He said, “ Let us make man.” Many of the ancient fathers
have put upon the passage this interpretation that the Father
addresses the Son and Holy Spirit, and that they held a consultation,
saying, “Let us make man in our likeness.” I shall not on the present
occasion press that view. But this I shall say, that on the very lowest
explanation of these words they contain what Hebrew grammarians
call the language of exhortation. “ Let us make man.” Just as an
architect, or any other artist among us, having completed many works
which he had in hand, should say, “ Let us make something else.
Let us make a house, or let us make a palace, or a castle. Let us do
something in addition to what we have already done.” This w r ould
indicate that the work to be undertaken was more solemn and more
exalted than that which had already been completed. God said, “ Let
there be light,” and light was ; and He said, “ Let there be trees,” and
trees were ; but when He came to make man, He used this more
momentous language. Let us make man ; and how shall we make
him P Let us make him in our own shadow and likeness. The


Hebrew runs thus;—“ Let us make man in our shadow, in
(according to) our likeness.” Man thus hears in himself the shadow
of God—the likeness of the Most High. It was not said of the bird
in the air, or of Dr. Bromby’s friend, the oyster, that it was made in
the shadow of the living Giod. The truth is apparent, according to the
Hebrew Scriptures and the ancient Glreek translation, that man at his
creation, and according to the account of that creation given in the
early record, has a being immensely exalted over the brutes of the field
and over the fishes of the sea. So far, then, for the Hebrew Scriptures.
Let us now see precisely what is said concerning the soul of man.
Dr. Bromby says that the phrase, “ spirit of man,” does not occur in
the earliest chapters of the Bible; but certainly in the first and
second chapters of Genesis it is not said that God fashioned a brute
beast as he fashioned man, when man was made a living soul.
Dr. Bromby’s theory is this—and at this portion of the lecture, I must
beg you, my dear friends, to give me your most careful attention, as
it will be necessary for me to make use of language to which you are
more or less unaccustomed; but I trust that I shall make myself
intelligible and that the truth of Scripture shall flash out in full
untarnished lustre in the language which I shall endeavour to adopt.
There are three things, according to the reverend lecturer, in man —
and this seems to be a cardinal point in his theory, and one which is in
the highest degree extravagant and contrary to Scripture. The reverend
doctor distinguishes in man three things. The first is the bod}'’; the
second is the soul, and the third is the spirit as distinguished from the
soul. Perhaps I had better read his words lest there may be any
misconception on the subject. He says :
“ I think I am correct in the following statement of what would be
understood by body, soul, and spirit at the time St. Paul wrote” (that
St. Paul understood no such thing I hope to show you by and bye): —
“The body is that wonderful mechanism which we have in common with
the beasts that perish. Along with the material of which the body is
composed the definition includes the many instincts and propensities
whereby the bodily life is nourished and continued. Hunger and thirst,
which stimulate to search for food ; sudden wrath, which prompts to
self-defence; fear, which shuns a coming danger; drowsiness, which
seeks for rest; all the properties, in short, which Scripture calls carnal,
but which we usually denominate the animal instincts, constitute the
body.”
As far as I understand the reverend lecturer—though perhaps I do
not understand him fully —he means to say that it is the body and not
the soul —the mere material part of man, which feels hunger and
thirst; which shuns a coming danger, and prompts to self-defence, and
seeks for rest—that mere matter composed of the dust of the earth, a
mere thing which has no thoughts, no knowledge, is capable of wrath
and fear. He proceeds to say: —
“ The soul is that superadded and apparently immaterial organism
which distinguishes man from the lower animals. It is in a high


degree intelligent. It enables him to live in society, as a member of
a body politic, and under obedience to written laws. It is fitted when
incorrupt and in perfect health, to control the lower propensities and
to keep them in subjection. As the body is endowed with instincts,
•so is the soul with passions, which are of course instinctive. The
beasts of the field when their animal wants are satisfied, have no further
desire. They have no worldly ambition, no love of wealth, no love of
power, no love of praise ; or, if the rudiments of such passions should
■exist, they are too feeble to make it worth while to take them into
account. Man, on the contrary, is capable of ambition and of pride ;
is fond of admiration; eager in the pursuit of wealth.
“ The spirit, again, is something superadded to the soul. It is as
distinct from the soul as the soul is from the body. It is that faculty
by which we are capable of knowing and of loving God.”
Now, understand well, my dear friends, this theory of Dr. Bromby
concerning the body, soul and spirit. As far as I understand it, it
amounts to this : —The body consists of clay, or earth, of which it is
formed. He seems to think that the body itself is capable of wrath or
fear. In the second place, he seems to understand the soul as the
thing by which we are capable of understanding the world around us ;
and which he says is an organism apparently immaterial. And he adds
to this the spirit, which he says “is as distinct from the soul as the
soul is from the body.” Now, I say, that this assertion of Dr. Bromby
that “ the spirit is as distinct from the soul as the soul is from the
body,” and that the soul infused into man at his creation, as we read in
the early chapters of Genesis, is incapable of knowing and loving God,
is an assertion which appears to me to be contrary to all Scripture, to
our consciousness, and to reason itself. The soul was infused
into man at his creation, and, according to the learned doctor, is
to be carefully distinguished from the spirit which came afterwards,
and by which alone men can know God. I may observe that there is
no small confusion of language and possibly of ideas here. The body
is a certain thing, to which the soul is superadded, an apparently
immaterial organism. The spirit again is something superadded to the
soul, but as distinct from the soul as the soul is from the body. But
at the same time he declares it is a faculty by which we can know God.
A faculty, that is to say a power. To what does that power belong P
It is not a faculty of the body, because the body cannot know and love
God. It is not, according to Dr. Bromby, a faculty of the soul, for the
soul can know only the things of this world, it cannot know God. It is,
however, a faculty belonging to man, but to neither body nor soul. To
what it does belong he does not further explain, and I need not say
that I am incapable of giving any explanation.
We ordinarily understand by faculty or power some property in-
herent in or belonging to some existing thing. Dor instance, we say it
is the faculty or power of oxygen to support light or fire wuth great
vehemence; and we say it is the property of nitrogen to extinguish
that light or flame. But when we speak of a faculty we suppose it is


something which belongs to what it inheres in. But, according
to Dr. Brombj, the spirit is a kind of faculty wandering at
large, and belonging to neither body nor soul. But this is not a dis-
cussion of mere words : so far as I understand the idea which the
reverend lecturer means to convey, it is a contradiction of what is
clearly stated in the Hebrew, Greek, and English Scriptures. The
Hebrew words are tree Nephesh and tnnan Nishmath. These are the
words used in the second chapter of Genesis to describe the soul of
man, which he received at his creation, but by which, according to Dr.
Bromby, he cannot know or love God. Let us follow these words
through the Hebrew Scriptures. Nephesh, the soul, according
to Dr. Bromby, cannot know and cannot love God. We may there-
fore be surprised when we find the Psalmist in the 104th and the
57th Psalms calling upon his Nephesh (his soul) to praise the
Lord, and declare that his trm Nepliesh —this soul which he
received at his creation —hopes in God. According to Dr. Bromby
the soul of man cannot know God or hope in Him, but according to
the Psalmist he can, for he calls upon his soul to bless the Lord. Can
we suppose that the Psalmist’s soul hoped in the Lord without knowing
Him? If his soul did not know God it could not have faith in Him ;
and a man’s faith is the foundation of his hope. In Deuteronomy
iv. 29 Moses warns the children of Israel that they should find the
Lord their God if they sought Him with their whole heart and
with their Nephesh, or soul —that is to say the soul infused
into man at his creation, but which the lecturer says cannot know or
love God. Yet, what says Moses: Ye shall find the Lord your God
if ye seek Him with your whole heart and with your whole
Nephesh, or soul. Therefore this soul is capable of seeking and
finding the Lord God, and therefore capable of knowing Him, hoping
in Him, and loving Him. I shall follow the exact order and arrange-
ment of the Hebrew Scriptures, and thus prevent mistakes. In the
first chapter of the first Book of Samuel, after the mother of Samuel
is described, her own language is this: “ I was not drunk,” said she, “ I
did not take intoxicating liquor,” when she was seen moving her lips,
and they thought she was under the influence of liquor taken above
measure or proportion, “ but I was pouring forth my WSJ Nephesh
before the Lord.” If the soul given to man at his creation, if the
weu Nephesh alluded to and described in the Book of Genesis cannot
know God and cannot love Him, how could it be that this woman
could pour forth her soul in adoration and prayer for the opening of her
womb, for which her soul craved ; and which it pleased the Lord God
to grant P Isaiah in the 42nd chapter of his inspired book says that
the soul of God delights in Christ. Nephesh, my soul, said Isaiah,
delighteth in Him. There can be no doubt whatsoever that this pro-
phecy refers to Him in whom all prophecy was fulfilled, for it is
explained of Christ in the New Testament, Matt. xii. 18, My soul, my
Nephesh delighteth in Him. At the creation it was proclaimed
that man was made in the shadow and likeness of the Creator, not
surely so much in the body as in the Nephesh, as in that soul
or principle of life which was then infused into his nostrils. It was


said by Isaiah that the soul of God delighteth in Christ; and yet
we are told that our souls, made in the image of God, cannot know
Christ or delight in Him, or in His name, or glory in His Cross.
I have said that, besides the itqj Nephesh, or soul, there is also the
n»tw Nishmath, the breath of life infused into the nostrils of man at
his creation, and which, by the confession of all parties, means the
living principle by which Adam acted, and by which we know the things
in the midst of which we live. Can that nniw Nishmath love God ?
can it be, as the reverend lecturer says, distinguished from the spirit
by which he says we can know God and serve Him P The learned
Doctor declares that no man who has received only a soul, and who
has not received a spirit, to whom the word of faith has not come, can
know God; and that there are, at the present moment, 700 millions of
human beings, besides the countless myriads of the human race in ages
gone by, whose souls are in darkness, benighted, and who know not
God. To use his own language, their souls are “ utterly benighted..
There is no light in them, and no spiritual life.” What, however, says
the Holy Scripture F In the 20th chapter of Proverbs we read, “ The
lamp of the Lord is noiw Nishmath of man,” which, according to
Gesenius, enters into the depth of our hearts. The lamp of the Lord
is the notw Nishmath of man. That is the language of the Hebrew
Scriptures ; and yet the reverend lecturer tells you that the soul
(Nishmath ) is utter darkness. The Scripture tells us, it is the light
of the Lord; the reverend lecturer tells us it is utter and absolute
darkness.
Again, in Job xxxii., Elihu, one of the persons conversing with the
holy patriarch, declares that wisdom such as came from the mere mind
of man was insufficient—that the mere wisdom of the wise, in regard-
ing God and His ways, is empty and idle ; but he adds that there is a
spirit in man, and that the noiw Nishmath of God, gave him under-
standing ; that is to say, that the Nishmath of the Lord gives true
understanding of celestial things. How, then, can the Nishmath of
man be unable to understand the things of God ?
It may, perhaps, be said —and it would be well as I go along to parry
all the thrusts that may be made, and to receive upon my shield every
dart which may be directed against what I am now saying ; but what
I am saying is exactly the literal language of Holy Scripture, as found
in the Hebrew and the Greek, and which is in the hands of every
person acquainted with the one or the other. It may be said—These
words weie spoken not by Job himself, but by Elihu, one of those who
held convtrse with Job, and that therefore they may not be true and are
not to be nuch heeded by us. I may reply, in the first place, that Elihu
spoke, nc doubt, good Hebrew, and such as was understood by Job
and thosewhom he addressed. And I may reply, in the second place,,
that the apostle Paul, in his first epistle to the Corinthians, adduces
the testinony of Eliphas from the Book of Job to illustrate the truth
of what le was then laying down, and I in like manner quote the
words of Elihu, which were in conformity with the Hebrew as spoken
at the tine.
There is, my dear friends, a passage of Holy Scripture with which


we are all familiar, as it is recited in the sacred office of Vespers in the
Church every Sunday evening. It is in the opening of the canticle
which our Blessed Lady uttered, and which is recorded in the first
chapter of St. Luke’s Gospel. I ask you to give your attention to it
for a moment, because it tallies with the description which I have cited
from the Book of Job, and shows that the view propounded by the
learned lecturer is entirely contrary to Holy Scripture, and utterly
destitute of all foundation.
Hebrew poetry differs from ours. The Hebrew poets delighted not
in balancing words against words, or sound against sound, or even
lines against lines, like the poets of Greece, or Home, or England;
their poetry consisted mainly in this, that something was said twice
over in nearly the same words, and with nearly the same ideas. Eor
example —“Have mercy upon me, O God; have mercy upon me.”
Eor Thou knowest my iniquity, and my sins are always before Thee.”
u Eor, behold, I was conceived in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me.” You will find the same idea presented under two forms
of words, or ideas very nearly the same. Thus, in the commencement
of the Magnificat—“ My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit
has exulted in God my Saviour.” The soul, the i]/vxV °f fh© Greek
Scriptures, which, according to Dr. Bromby, cannot know God —
cannot magnify Him, or perceive His infinite perfections ; that i/a’xy
runs parallel to the second part of the sentence. And, according to
the theory of parallelism, as it is called —a theory brought into full
light by an illustrious bishop of the Church of England, by which we
can understand many passages of Holy writ- —we find that ifrvxV)
which, according to Dr. Bromby, cannot know God, is capable of both
knowing and magnifying Him, and is not really distinct from the
Trvev/ia ; her spirit, Trvavjj.a, as Our Lady said: Her spirit exulted
in God her Saviour.
This is confirmed by Job xxvii., where the holy patriarch declares
that he shall maintain his innocence, and sets forth the grand and
glorious truth that the innocent may suffer in this world, and that
it cannot be inferred from a man’s miseries and sufferings that he has
been a sinner or an enemy of God. Job remonstrates with his
friends, and says —As long as itfQJ (Nephesh) is in my mouth, and
as long as the spirit of God is in my nostrils, so long will I maintain
that I am innocent, and that it is not in consequence of any crime
that I have been chastised.” Here Nishmath and Ruach. are synonymous.
Erom every possible point of view ; from the oft-repeated testimony
and declarations of the Hebrew Scriptures ; from every species of
investigation that can be applied to the inspired books, it appears most
clear, most evident that the soul of man, not that imaginary spirit
spoken of by Dr. Bromby as being something entirely distinct from
his soul, but that the soul of man given to him at his creation, that
spirit of life which was then infused into his nostrils ; that Nephesh,
and riDiaj Nishmath , is capable of knowing and serving God ; and that
nothing more idle or more unfounded was ever brought forward by a
man of learning and ability than this attempt to make a distinction
between things respecting which the Scripture makes no distinction.


I shall forestall an objection which may be made, and the answer
to that objection will give us a still deeper insight into the truths
which lam now vindicating in your presence; and which appear to
me, independently of the authority of the Church, to have their root
and foundation in the inmost recesses of holy writ. Perhaps I may
say, before proceeding further, that the word nn Buach , and the word
nb Laib in the Hebrew Scriptures are used at one time to describe
the state of the affections with regard to this world, and at others with
regard to the things of Hod and those of the world to come. But the
word Laih means the same heart in every part of Scripture. There
is not in all the Scriptures anything to lead us to suppose that there
are two hearts, or two Laibs, by one of which we feel affection for
things of this world, and by the other for things relating to Clod and
the world to come. On the contrary, this one heart is capable of
receiving light from the world around us, is capable of receiving
light from the Gospel of God, and is capable of living rightly, and
by the higher power which it receives from the Almighty of
receiving and loving things that are celestial. But that there are
two A Laibs, or two hearts, one distinct from the other, as the soul is
from the body, is entirely alien to every passage of inspired Scripture.
I have not dwelt upon this point because, in the first place, in the
account of the creation the word A Laib, or heart, does not occur; and
in the second place because the word has not been used by the reverend
lecturer to whom I am now replying. But my object is to show
that as the Scripture says the heart of man can love the things of this
world and the next, can love God and the things of time, so the
soul of man can know the things of time, and can yearn for the things
of eternity ; but in all cases it is one heart and one soul of which it
is written : “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and
with all thy soul.”
I was saying, when this digression on the word A Laib, carried
me away for the moment, that the following objection may be urged
against what I have laid down: —The soul and spirit are so closely
connected, though really distinct from each other, that what the
Scripture says of the one may be applied to the other. To this I
answer, that if a clear, direct, and unimpeachable distinction be laid
down between two things, if it be clearly demonstrated that the two
things are distinct from each other, are as distinct —to use Dr.
Bromby’s own language —as the soul is from the body, and we find the
writers in Scripture apply to one what belongs to the other, we must
interpret their language otherwise than by its exact and literal
meaning. But, in the first place, it has to be proved that the two
things are distinct. But what proof is there that the spirit and the
soul of man are distinct P I say there is no proof in reason ; if we
reflect on ourselves, there is no proof from our own consciousness ; and,
in the third place there is not a shadow of proof from Scripture ; and
therefore the attempt to distinguish between things which neither
consciousness, reason, nor Scripture affirms to be distinct, and to twist
the plain meaning of words by figurative explanations, is utterly
uncalled for, and cannot be logically maintained.


Failing to find any proof without, I cast my eyes upon myself. The
reverend doctor admits that by consciousness we may come to some
knowledge of what is passing within. Have I any consciousness
whatever that I have two things within me ?—that I have two souls, or
one soul and one spirit entirely distinct —by one of which I know' the
world around me, and by the other I know Grod p So far as the appeal
lies to myself, I know that such a thing has no foundation. On the
contrary, it appears to me most evident to myself that I have one
principle within me, and that one principle animates my body, and
that same soul which feels pain—let me say —when my hand is hurt,
enables me to know not only the world around me, but to study
the motions of the stars, to read books of ancient authors; and
that same soul which enables me to read in the stars above, the grand
story they have to tell, namely, that the heavens declare the glory of
Gl od —that same soul animates this body, feels pain when the body is
hurt, and moves me in all matters that belong to this world —and that
same soul is lifted up above the stars, above created worlds, to contem-
plate, by the power of reason, the infinite perfections of Him by whom
all things were made—being still one and the same soul.
I have also various kinds of sensations such, for example, as hunger
and thirst, and various states of mind; and, as far as I can by any
possibility judge, these sensations and these states of mind, dwell not
in two or three different things within me, but in that one thing in
virtue of which I call myself I— a person —by which I feel that I myself
am the recipient of all these sensations, a being in whom all these
sensations have their place. I hunger after food: in other words,
my body stands in need of food by which its life may be maintained, and
the all-wise Creator has therefore implanted in us sensations of hunger
and thirst. I hunger and thirst after that food by which my bodily
life is to be supported ; and my mind hungers and thirsts after truth
and science, and I delight in giving up myself to the pursuit. In that
same soul, in my happier and better moments, I hunger and thirst after
justice, and heaven, and the possession of Glod. Therefore, when I
appeal to my own consciousness, I find no reason to think that there
are within me two things—two knowing things —two living things—
distinct from each other as the body is from the soul; but, on the
contrary, one thing which exercises various powers, which, at one time,
seeks food for the body; at another time seeks food for the mind; and
at another time seeks food for the soul and heart.
On what testimony of Scripture is this marvellous distinction of soul
and spirit built P It is built on the language of St. Paul in the
fifteenth chapter of his first epistle to the Corinthians, and, I must
say, it is a strange interpretation of divine writ. St. Paul tells us —
he is speaking in that passage of the resurrection of Christ —that as
Christ rose again, so we also shall rise again : and that after the
resurrection this body of ours, which is laid in the earth a mean
contemptible body, doomed to death and corruption, —that same body
shall rise again, grand, glorious, and immortal, at the final resurrection
when man shall be judged. St. Paul is speaking of a spiritual body.
The apostle tells us that there are two bodies, or rather two states of


the body ; the one is the body animated by the soul, and subject to
death and corruption ; the other is the body which shall be raised from
the dead, filled with eternal life at the resurrection of the final day.
St. Paul concludes that, as it was written in the Book of Genesis,
“ The first man, Adam, was made a living soul,” so the second
Adam, was made a life-giving spirit. The meaning of the passage,
read with the context, is so obvious, and the reasoning of the Apostle
so clear, that I must say I am astonished that any one could err in a
path so straight and plain—namely, that man received from Adam a
body which, from its own nature, was destined to death—although
supernaturally preserved from sorrow and death so long as Adam was
faithful to God. But so far as we have received our natural body
from Adam, that body is subject to misery, decay, and death; but
after the final resurrection, the body of man shall be so no longer; it
shall be raised a spiritual body, glorious and immortal. And as we
have received from Adam a body mortal and subject to death, so, at
the final resurrection, we shall receive, through Christ, a body full of
life and immortality. These are the two conditions of our human
frame. The first body, which we have from man, is of the earth earthy.
The second, which we shall have from Christ, will be heavenly and
glorious. Such is the direct, palpable, and unmistakable meaning of
St. Paul in this celebrated epistle. He is speaking of events to take
place after the resurrection. He is speaking of the body of the
glorified servant of God, who shall shine in all splendour and all
blessedness, and shall triumph over death. But as the glorified body
is not a thing really distinct from our mortal body, neither is the spirit
really distinct from the soul.
Before I pass to the second portion of my subject, I shall allude
briefly to Dr. Bromby’s theory concerning Adam’s fall, and the Garden
of Eden. He says;—
“ Having premised this much, I proceed to introduce that deeply
significant allegory, the temptation in the Garden of Eden. There can
be no question whatever about its being an allegory, for the terms
employed in it are unmistakably figurative. A tree of knowledge and
a tree of life never grew in garden mould.”
The opinion of Dr. Bromby is that there was no such thing growing
in garden mould as a tree of knowledge and a tree of life. There can,
he says, be no question whatever about it. I shall, however, be so
irreverent as to raise a question or two, which it will not be very easy
to answer. In the first place we may observe that according to the
testimony of Scripture, we must admit that man in some way or
another —unless we throw overboard the doctrine of St. Paul—by
some act, fell in Adam. That in Adam the entire human race died;
and that in Christ, the second Adam, the entire human race rises again.
Now when we ask ourselves, What was it that Adam did to cause
death to pass upon all men? —we have it declared that he ate of the fruit
of the forbidden tree, concerning which God distinctly told him that
on the day he ate thereof he should surely die; that is, he should lose


his immortality and should become subject to corruption and decay.
These trees, says Dr. Bromby, never grew in garden mould. He may
have one of two grounds for that assertion, Scripture or- reason. In
the first place the Scripture may teach that there was no such thing as
a tree of knowledge and a tree of life, and that no such fruit grew
in the Garden of Eden. Does the Scripture teach that ? It teaches
no such thing. The Scripture points to some remarkable transgression
committed by Adam, in consequence of which the human race lost
their primitive gifts which were only restored by Christ. But,
perhaps, reason tells us that there could be no such thing as a
tree of knowledge or a tree of life; and, we must, therefore, interpret
in a figurative sense the plain narrative of the Book of Genesis. Let
us see: Was it possible for God, in whose hands are the keys of life and
death, and who has power over the bodies and souls of men, was it
possible for Him when A dam was created, and when he obtained that
JSTephesh, or living soul, was it possible for God to grant him
immortality? Was it possible for God to declare, “So long as thou
shalt serve Me, and do My bidding, thou shalt not die ” p Was it
possible for God to hurl death to destruction at the commencement as
He shall at the end? (1 Cor. xv. 26.) Was it possible for Him to
say to Adam, “ As long as thou art My servant, thou shalt not die ” ?
And as long as it was possible for Him to say this, was it possible for-
Him to keep His word ? Most assuredly. And may not God have
added this declaration, “ Thou shalt not die so long as thou keepest
My commandments; and this commandment I give thee—l place
within thy reach in the midst of this garden a tree ; it stands there ;
and thou hast full power and liberty to eat of the fruit of every other-
tree that grows in this garden, except this one. I shall put thee to this
test. lam giving thee more than thy nature demands or requires. I
am giving thee immortality. I shall require obedience ; but some-
thing more than obedience to the mere law of nature. This further
compliance I require of thee. Erom that tree thou shalt abstain.
It is a small matter in itself; but I command thee to abstain from
this fruit. If thou keep that commandment, thou shalt have life
without end; but if thou break that commandment, and trample
under foot the ordinance which I have given thee, then I shall
withdraw from thee these precious gifts, and thou, refusing to be My
servant and obey My word, shalt surely die ” ? As far as I can judge,,
there is nothing in the slightest degree opposed to reason, but on
the contrary, everything most reasonable and most harmonious with
the attributes of God in what I have now laid before you.
This tree became the tree of knowledge. Adam already knew the
difference between good and evil._ He knew that he had received
the commandment from God. He knew that he ought to obey
that commandment; that he ought to serve his Master, and that it
was evil to spurn it or set ifc aside. So far he had a knowledge of good
and evil. But he was to have more bitter knowledge still; it was to
be brought home to his heart. In the same way as St. Paul, in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, describes the Saviour to have learned obedience
though he was the Son of God, and obedient in all things to the Father


In the opposite sense Adam learned the difference of good and evil,
by a life of bitter remorse, by a life of bitter regret for the tide of
sorrow which he had let loose upon the world. There was the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, and there was the tree of life. Was it
possible that there should be a tree of life, or that God should make
use of the fruit of that tree to give eternal life ? Was it possible for
God to make use of the water of Jordan to wash Haaman and to cleanse
him from his leprosy P When the Servant of God told Naaman that
if he would be cleansed of his leprosy he must go and wash himself in
the waters of Jordan, he made answer, ‘What are the waters of Jordan
that I should wash in them, are there not better rivers in Damascus P
If the waters of Jordan can cleanse me from my leprosy, I might
without undertaking this journey have bathed in the waters of
Damascus.” He was going away in anger when one of his servants
wiser than himself, said to him, “ If the man of God had commanded
thee to do something extremely hard, and had promised that thereby
thou shouldst recover thy health and cleanness of skin, thou wouldst
have obeyed his commandment; how much more then shouldst thou obey
him when he gives thee this slight commandment.” Naaman then
went down to the Jordan and bathed therein, and came forth from the
stream with his person pure and free from every spot and stain of
leprosy. If God could make use of the waters of Jordan, though there
were as good streams at Damascus, to give health to this leprous man,
what was there to prevent Him from using the tree of life to confer
upon man that immortality which He had promised, and which was to
be the reward of man’s obedience ?
When we look into the circumstances attending the fall of man and
regard them in all their significance, and bear in mind that Christ was
the second Adam, whom God promised when, foreseeing the fall of
man, He determined to repair it by the death and resurrection of His
divine Son, what could be grander or more in accord with the circum-
stances of the fall than that in the end the second Adam should, in the
language of Holy Scripture, pay upon the tree the penalty of Adam’s
transgression and obtain for man eternal life, which was forfeited by
the first Adam’s disobedience in eating of the fruit of that forbidden
tree; and that He should, by His obedience and by His death on the
“wood” at Calvary, have bestowed upon us that eternal existence
which the Tree of Life in the Garden of Eden had failed to bestow
upon the first Adam or upon his race.
Hence, my dear friends, so far from being opposed to reason, so far
from its being contrary to Scripture, so far from its being alien to the
purposes of God, it appears to me that this narrative in the Book of
Genesis is plain and clear, when it says that Adam did eat of the fruit of
the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; and that the tree did grow in
garden mould. This account is in the highest degree probable. It is, in
fact, just such an account that if it were possible for a man to be wise
enough, he might, from what he saw done by the Saviour, the second
Adam, imply to have been done by the first Adam; and thus con-
jecture the description given in the Book of Genesis of the fall.
So easy is it to put forward unfounded theories, and so long does it


take to refute them, that in reality it will be utterly impossible to do
justice to this subject in the time allotted for this lecture, even if I were
to take only the more prominent of the learned doctor’s theories and
coufine myself to refuting them.
A remarkable passage in the work of the great Roman satirist,
Juvenal, shows that there was a singular coincidence between the ideas
which he entertained concerning the creation of man and the account
given in the narrative of the ancient Scriptures. Man, according to
Juvenal, was either formed from the slime of the earth in the beginning,
or else he sprang from trees. It may at first sight seem to us strange
that Juvenal should have surmised that man sprang from earth or slime ;
but though a Pagan he was doubtless acquainted with the traditions
handed down through many generations, as we see that "Virgil, his great
predecessor, also was. The earth, dust, and trees have in many ancient
traditions been regarded as having some kind of connection with the
origin of the human race. Compare these traditions with Genesis ;
the first man is formed from the earth; the first man is born after the
tasting of the tree. We should not be surprised to find in the obscure
records of Pagan antiquity some account of these traditions. I
mention this as a matter which has no necessary connexion with the
theory which Dr. Bromby has advanced.
I find that, contrary to my expectation, I have trespassed already so
long upon your time that it is now past ten o’clock. I will, therefore,
if you will allow me, as briefly as possible, finish what I have to say.
I have dwelt upon the first part of the learned doctor’s theory—the
distinction between the soul and spirit, because it appears to me to
contain ideas which are not very usually put forward. That, I think,
required more express refutation than some of the things to which I
am now about to allude.
The reverend doctor thinks that the soul of man dies in a vast
majority of the human race —in the case of 700,000,000 of the
1.000. at present existing, and in the case of many billions in
time gone by; that all men will not rise up at the last day, and that
all men shall not then be judged. And his reason is, because these
700.000. are distinct from the 300,000,000 of Christians. The
difference between them is mainly this —the 300,000,000 of Christians
have a knowledge of the distinction between right and wrong. They,
therefore, are responsible for their own conduct, and may justly
be judged. The 700,000,000 of heathens cannot justly be judged,
and cannot be summoned before God’s tribunal, because they have
no knowledge of right and wrong, and are therefore irresponsible.
I shall read the words of the learned doctor, because they contain
statements so astounding, so utterly beyond anything you could expect
to emanate from him, that, unless they are given in his own words, I
should not ask you to believe them to be his. He says:—
“And now, what have we before us? Two distinct divisions of
mankind. The first is far the largest: pagans, who never came into
covenant with God—the 700,000,000 who live in heathen countries
now ; with countless multitudes more, who have been heathens for
untold centuries before the Blood.”


Then there is a second division of mankind, of an altogether different
character; and he winds up the description of the 300,000,000 who are
to appear before the Judgment Seat of God, in this way :
“ Who began to have knowledge of good and evil, who had rules
of conduct which their conscience approved, but which the lusts of
the flesh were ever prompting them to break. It is this class alone
with which Scripture is almost wholly occupied, and of this Our
Saviour is speaking when He says, ‘ They shall hear His voice and shall
come forth.’ Some to the resurrection of life, others to the resurrec-
tion of damnation.”
The reverend doctor felt himself a little hard pressed, however, by a
text of Scripture, and places upon it what may be not disrespectfully
termed the most grotesque explanation that I have heard in modern
times applied to any text of Holy Writ. Our Saviour says —“The
hour is coming in which all that are in the graves shall hear His voice,
and shall come forth.” The learned doctor says that the 700,000,000
in whom there was only (Nishmath), but not spiritual life, shall
not rise at the last day. Our Saviour says that “ all that are in the
graves shall hear His voice, and shall come forth.” The learned
doctor answers in this way : All that are in the graves shall rise ; but
the 700,000,000 will not be in their graves at all. The difference, then,
between an Athenian of the time of Socrates and Plato, and let us say,
a Jew of the time of Isaiah or the time of Our Saviour, and a
Christian who had listened to St. Paul, is this —that the Jew and the
Christian are in their graves ; but the Athenian is not. I will read
his own words :
“ Here we have the word all. But all who ? Whom does this all
include ? Our Saviour does not say all that ever lived shall hear His
voice, but all that are in the graves. But if the general tenor of
Scripture renders it probable that a large class have perished in utter
extinction, then such would not be in their graves at all.”
And, therefore, the conclusion is that the 700,000,000 who are now
alive, and the billions who have died in ages gone by, will not be in
their graves ; but that they have ceased to exist, and will not rise again
at the last day. What does the learned doctor mean by saying that
they shall cease to exist ? That they shall all be turned into dust and
shall not be in their graves ? Who are they who are thus to cease to
exist P Those who probably had nairj Nishmath, the breath of life,
but who had not rrn Ruach, the spirit. Their souls shall cease to
exist. They shall not, however, be annihilated. They shall not become
nothing. In reference to this Dr. Bromby says :
“You will observe that I have not employed the term annihilation.
Such a term involves a totally different question, about which
Scripture says nothing. A thing may cease to be without being
annihilated. Throw an old hat into the fire, it will not be anni-
hilated, but it will cease to be a hat. The materials of which it was


composed, after having first been aggregated in Nature’s laboratory,,
were then put together by the art of man; the fire resolved them into
different combinations. In a somewhat similar way, we observe a soul
growing from childhood to old age, gathering thoughts and remi-
niscences and peculiar partialities. How otherwise could we recog-
nise a disembodied spirit ? But love may he alienated and turned
to hatred ; memory may decay. And if a soul were to be deprived
of all its former memories and associations, it would he destroyed —-
that is, its identity would —and yet it would not be annihilated. I
need hardly say that we have no basis for any such speculation in
Scripture, and therefore the word annihilation ought never to be
used.”
The soul of man after death, of the man who has had a soul but
not a spirit, of the man who has not had the means of acquiring a
spirit, is not annihilated, but it ceases to exist. It has no existence.
He does not deny that it is immaterial. It does not consist of matter.
It has no parts. The hat is material; it has parts ; it has a brim and
a crown, and all these things may be destroyed, but they will not cease
to exist. The soul has no parts at all, and whatever destruction it
undergoes it is not by change among its parts. The only change it
undergoes is that it no longer likes in the next world what it had
liked in this ; that it has no longer memories and associations which it
had when in unison with the body ; but it is not annihilated —it exists
no longer. That old Athenian is not in his grave; but whatever.his
position may be, his soul has lost its likings and its dislikiugs, and has
no remembrance of what it used to be.
The learned doctor’s story about his old hat reminds me of a
story which I once heard of a blunt, bluff Englishman, a native of
Yorkshire, who was familiar with the city of York in England.
He went over to New York in America. Writing to his friends
at home from that city, he said that New York reminded him
every day of the dear old city of York, which he had left, especially
because they were most unlike in every particular. So I think that
the change which the learned doctor says the soul will undergo after
death is somewhat similar to the old hat, inasmuch as it is most unlike
it in every possible point of view. We have heard of a man being as
“ mad as a hatter,” but I never heard of a hatter being so mad as to
imagine that his old hat bore this kind of resemblance to the soul
of man.
The learned doctor tells us that we cannot understand many passages
in St. John’s Gospel and St. Paul’s Epistles, unless his view be taken,
and among others he refers to the case of Lazarus, and the daughter
of Jairus. Our Saviour said of the ruler’s daughter, “ She is not dead
but sleepeth,” and of Lazarus he said, “ Our friend Lazarus sleepeth,
and I go to awaken him,” and yet Jesus himself said plainly, “ Lazarus
is dead.” Their term of death was so short, and they were so
immediately raised to life, that it might be compared to a comfortable
and refreshing sleep, from which a man rises in all the vigour of life
and health—but the Scripture says distinctly that “ Lazarus was dead.”


The learned doctor seems to think that we must adopt his theory that
the souls of the girl and Lazarus were not dead. He says:—
“ When our Saviour was called in to see Jairus’s daughter, He came
apparently too late. The maiden was already dead, i. e., naturally
dead, and the hired minstrels were already in the house chanting the
funeral dirge. But Jesus declared that she only slept, being aware
by His divine knowledge that her soul was still alive ; we may well
conceive that He who on earth was the source of all spiritual life,
should recognise at once the germ of spiritual life, even in that pallid
corpse before Him.”
I may say, in the first place, that there is no reason in Scripture to
suppose that our Saviour saw in that dead body anything that was not
in every other dead body. It is said, in respect of Lazarus, that he
was already undergoing decomposition. When Dr. Bromby says that
our Saviour saw something in the dead body of Jairus’s daughter
which was not seen in other dead bodies, he makes an assertion for
which there is no authority in Scripture at all.
The difference, according to the reverend doctor’s theory, is this, that
our Saviour, looking at Lazarus, saw that his soul had not begun to lose
its liking and disliking for earthly things, or its reminiscences of earth ;
whereas the soul of Plato or Socrates, or the soul of any other man
whose body was dead, had already lost all these things. I will under-
take to say that a more ungrounded interpretation of Holy Scripture
has never been proposed.
In conclusion, I will refer to one other matter. I cannot under-
stand how so learned a scholar as Dr. Bromby could make such an
assertion as that 700,000,000 of human beings are not and ought not
to be judged, because they differ from Christians in this respect: that
the Christians have a knowledge of good and evil, and have a rule of
conduct for themselves. Now, nothing more monstrous and contrary
to history can be asserted than to say that the pagans of Greece and
Borne, and the Mahommedans (who also lie without the pale of the
300,000,000), the Brahmans of India, and the Buddhists, have had no
knowledge of the distinction between right and wrong. Such a state-
ment is most unfounded. That such a statement is contrary to all
history is proved by writers of every date, and by all the remains of
Greek and Latin antiquity, and by the experience of mankind over the
face of the whole earth.
Every man who is acquainted, as the learned lecturer well is, with,
the writings of classical antiquity will find, to use his own words, in
the “ glorious Greek ” of Pindar (who died before Plato was born)
announced in most glowing language that the just after death shall be
in possession of inconceivable happiness. There can be no doubt that
Pindar and the Greeks of that day were well aware of the distinction
between right and wrong; that Aristophanes and all the bards were
acquainted with laws of morality, though not so well as they are taught
in the gospel. Still they knew that some things were right and others
wrong; they knew that murder, robbery, perjury, and adultery were


wrong, base, and shameful. The Greeks and Romans knew the differ-
ence between right and wrong, or why did their lawgivers announce
that certain things were to be done, and certain things to be
omitted ; that a man if he committed a robbery should restore four-
fold, and that a man who murdered his father should be tied in a sack
and drowned in the depth of the sea P If the Greeks knew not the
distinction between right and wrong, why did they pursue Helen and
send their armies to punish the Trojans for the injury done to their
prince and nation ? If they thought it was as good for a woman to be
faithless to her husband as to be faithful, why did the Romans honour
Lucretia, and why was her name the passport among all the ancient
Romans for all that was virtuous and true and noble?
They knew that some things were right, that some things were
wrong, and that some things ought to be avoided. Nothing on the
face of the earth is clearer to any person who has even the most
superficial acquaintance with the records of Greece and Rome, with the
literature of the Buddhists and Brahmans, and the Koran of Mahomet,
than that they, as well as Christians, know the distinction between right
and wrong, and they shall be, therefore, justly summoned to judgment.
But now the reverend lecturer tells us that the pagan world had no such
knowledge; that they did not know the difference between right and
wrong; that they had no idea of guilt; that they had no sense of
responsibility, and they could not with propriety be brought to the bar
of justice, but must pass into oblivion—into what the learned doctor
calls non-existence.
The illustrious Theban General, Epaminondas, was so fond of truth
that he never told a lie even in jest; and yet we are to believe that
Epaminondas had no knowledge of the beauty of truth, though he felt
that he ought to avoid telling lies. We read too in ancient history of
Alexander the Great and the Roman Scipio, that when by the chances
of war beautiful young women fell prisoners into their power, they
treated them with the utmost consideration. Alexander would not
allow them to come into his presence lest their beauty might tempt
him into excesses which his conscience disapproved of. Are we to be
told that Alexander and Scipio did not know that chastity was a noble
thing ? But I will say this much, and I believe it cannot be called in
question —I believe that with the solitary exception of St. Paul, no two
men on the face of the earth whose writings have come down to us
and with which we are familiar, ever lashed vice with such an iron
scourge; no two men overlaid upon men of iniquity so heavy a rod;
no men ever made vice appear in more hideous proportions, or made it
more loathsome and hateful —than did the Athenian poet Aristophanes
and the Roman poet Juvenal. I could cite passages from the Koran
of Mahomet, from the writings of the Brahmans and the Buddhists, and
other authors beyond number of ancient and modern times, all of which
would demonstrate most distinctly that man has written on his heart the
distinction between right and wrong, and that Dr. Bromby in asserting
that the pagans do not know the difference between right and wrong,
and that they should not be judged, is in error. His view, moreover,
is contrary to the teaching of St. Paul, who tells us that the pagans


were without excuse, that the invisible things of God were clearly seen
from His works, bat they did not glorify Him as He ought to be
glorified, and did not give Him thanks ; hut they transferred the glory
of God to the work of their own hands, and, therefore, were without
excuse. Every man, therefore, was responsible for his acts. Instead
of 700,000,000, and billions more before their time, being utterly
destitute of any light, by which they could distinguish between right
and wrong, they are, as St. Paul himself shows, responsible for their
actions, because they have the law of nature written on their hearts,
and their consciences, approving when they did what was right, and
disapproving when they did what was wrong.
Therefore this theory of Dr. Bromby, namely, that the vast bulk of
the human race should not hear the trumpet voice, and should not rise
to be judged at the last day, because they have no knowledge of right
and wrong, and because having no rule of conduct they could not be
justly judged, is a theory directly contrary to the teaching of history,
to what we know of the human race in all ages and in all lands, and is
as utterly destitute of foundation as Dr. Bromby’s first theory —that
the spirit is as distinct from the soul as the soul is from the body.
Together let them stand, and together let them fall.
A vote of thanks to the lecturer terminated the proceedings.


SECOND LECTURE,
DELIVERED IN THE
TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE, ON THURSDAY, DECEMBER 22, 1870.
The Lecturer, who was introduced by the Chairman, Hon. M. O’Grady,
M.L.A., said :
Ladies and Gentlemen, —On the last occasion when I had the
honour of appearing before you, I refuted as much of the lecture of
the Eev. Dr. Bromby, as was possible, or nearly so, within the space of
two hours and a half, speaking at the rate, it appears, “of three
hundred words a minute and, therefore, if I could not get through
it all on that occasion, it must not be ascribed either to my not giving
the subject sufficient time, or to my not speaking sufficiently fast.
You are aware that on that occasion, in order to do justice to
Dr. Bromby, I divided the lecture into three parts. The first regarded
the creation of man ; the second weighed the question as to whether
the entire human race shall rise to be judged at the last day ; and
the third, which in itself is perhaps the most important, I, in accordance
with the arrangement of Dr. Bromby himself, left to the last place,
namely, what is the duration of the punishment which awaits the
wicked after death ? With regard to this third point, the reverend
doctor states that he did not raise the question; but the question
having been raised by some one (no matter by whom) and being under
discussion, he should say a few words on it. Following, therefore,
the order of the reverend lecturer, I, in the first place addressed myself
to the refutation of his opinions concerning the creation of man ; and
I showed, I think conclusively, that the reverend doctor’s theory, namely,
that the soul given to man at his creation cannot know and cannot love
God, is entirely contrary to the Scriptures, and has no solid foundation.
And in the second place that the narrative of sacred writ concerning
the fall of our first parents in the Garden of Eden is not, as the
reverend doctor alleges, a mere allegory, but according to Scripture,
and without any contradiction whatever from the light of reason, it
must be taken as a narrative of actual facts. We considered, further-
more, the reverend doctor’s theory of the future painless non-existence
of the soul—how it loses, according to him, its recollection of the things
of time and earth, and its likings and its dislikings for the things of this
world—and becomes destroyed in a manner somewhat similar to that in
which an old hat is destroyed when it is cast into the fire. We also


showed from history that not only the 300,000,000 now existing on
the earth who have heard* of Christ or professed the Christian faith,
but that of the 700,000,000 who are not Christians and the millions
and billions of their ancestors throughout all time, and in all lands,
there were vast numbers who did know the difterence between good and
evil, and were accordingly responsible beings, and should therefore be
raised from the dead and be judged at the last day.
Having answered so far those portions ot the reverend doctor s
lecture, I may be permitted before entering upon the consideration of
the remaining questions to observe that you must not be surprised
that a lecture in reply, even though it should occupy so long a time as
my lecture occupied, nevertheless cannot meet all the positions ad-
vanced by an opponent; because, though it is very easy to deny a thing,
it may take a long time to prove it. Any man could say in a very tew
seconds, one or two, perhaps, things which it would take a very long
time to refute ", as, for example, taking an illustration from the
scientific world, a man might say that the wave theory ot light has no
solid probability. undertook to refute that assertion would
have to occupy not merely seconds and minutes, but, perhaps, even
hours, in a full refutation. In like manner hundreds ot other questions
might be raised. To deny is easy, and takes little time ; but to refute
that denial and to make good your assertions by sound and unanswer-
able proof, may occupy a very considerable portion of time. Lest,
however, time should slip away from us to-night, and things should
remain unanswered that I am most desirous to refute, I shall begin
at once by taking up the question started by the reverend doctor con-
cerning the destiny of unbaptised infants.
It has been said that the current theory is that they are to be kept in a
state of conscious torture for ever. To use the words ot the reverend
lecturer, they “ according to the current theory, are to be kept in a
state of conscious torture to all eternity —‘ salted with tire ’ —for
faults which they did not commit, or, at all events, were helpless to
avoid.” Now it is well for us to inquire what is the teaching of
Scripture, and what is the “ current theory ” of the largest body of
Christians, the Catholic Church, on this subject ? I shall read in
order that I may not be accused of raising up giants ot straw for the
purpose of knocking them down again—the words ot the reverend
lecturer :
“ I reason thus : —lf every man is to be judged for the things done
in the body, and is to receive according to his deeds, what, I ask, has
the infant of a day old done in the body, that it should be condemned
to everlasting torment ? And yet, clearly, it has not complied with
the Scripture conditions for obtaining everlasting life. Let us, then,
look fairly at the phenomena which God’s world presents. Vast
numbers of human beings are born and die without ever having a
chance of obeying these conditions upon which an immortality of
happiness is promised. If then, the failure to obtain an immortality
of happiness means in all cases an immortality of misery, then do we
find ourselves involved in the necessary conclusion, that the great


mass of mankind who are born into the world, some living for a few
hours, some for only a few minutes, are doomed to an eternity
of woe.”
The reverend doctor repeats this doctrine in the course of his
observations under many points of view. But we may here observe
that he qualifies it with the word “if”—that word “ if,” as Shakespeare
says, “is a great pacificator.” I shall, therefore, in order to refute this
position of the reverend doctor, explain briefly and clearly what is the
doctrine, “the current theory” as laid down in the inspired Word, and
held by the Catholic Church concerning infants who die unbaptized.
I think it the more necessary to enter upon this point, because I am
informed by an anonymous friend that, on this question, the arguments
of the reverend doctor cannot be answered. I shall, therefore,
undertake to answer him.
The reverend lecturer maintains that, if the current theory be
admitted, not only are infants who die unbaptised excluded from
heaven, but they are also condemned to an eternity of woe and misery,
or. as he says elsewhere, to an eternity of “ conscious torture.”
Now, I maintain that no such thing is said in Scripture; it is entirely
contrary to the “ current theory ” of the Church. It is certain that
those infants cannot be admitted into heaven who are not baptised •
but are they doomed to an eternity of woe ? Will they have any misery
or sorrow, however slight, in' the Avorld to come? I say no. I shall
quote on this point the doctrine of the Church as held by the prince
of Catholic divines, St. Thomas Aquinas, in which he agrees with
others, such as Peter Lombard, Bonaventura, and the great Irish
theologian, Duns Scotus. The doctrine held by these masters of
theology is followed by other great and burning lights of the Church,
and may be looked upon as our “ current theory.” The question
raised by St. Thomas with respect to children who die unbaptised, and
who cannot enter heaven, is—Will they have suffering of any kind?
The answer is, No. They shall not feel the pains of fire, the pains of
sense, or any sorrow at all. The reason given by St. Thomas is,
because the penalties of sin are apportioned according to the real sin
and guilt incurred. Now r , infants are only guilty of original sin, but
are not guilty of actual sin. By original sin, says St. Thomas, man
lost in Adam original justice, immortality, and the grace of Grod; these
things were supernatural. They were lost in Adam, and they were all lost
by his posterity, until they were regained by Christ. But while, on the
one hand, man by original sin forfeited these gifts ; so, on the other
hand, those who have committed no actual sin have incurred none of
the penalties other than the loss of the supernatural gifts—no misery
or conscious torture —no actual misery and sorrow. Though children
who die unbaptised shall not enter into heaven, they shall have no
misery, no suffering, no sorrow, Such is the “ current theory ”of the
Catholic Church. Such is the teaching of St. Thomas and the other
great lights of the Catholic Church ; and such, too, is the doctrine
taught by the Holy Bather, Pope Innocent 111., when he declared that
pain and actual suffering, the fire and pains of hell, and what we call


the pains of sense, are the penalties of actual sin, so the loss of the
sight of Grod is the penalty of original sin.
But again it may be said of those children, that, although they have
no actual sorrow or suffering, perhaps they feel sorrow for the joys
they have lost. On this point St. Thomas again says: —“It isas im-
possible for an infant unbaptised to be sorrowful for not entering
heaven, as it is for a wise man to be sorry that he has not received as
much grace as has been given to others.” Such then is the “ current
theory ” of the Catholic Church and of its great lights concerning
the future state of children who die unbaptised. They will feel no
pain, no fire, no torture, no suffering no sorrow, while being shut
out of heaven. We may, therefore, be content with what 'we know,
without desiring to be wise above what is written, but to believe
what the Scripture tells us, and what the Church receives as truth
according to the teaching of ancient times, and the opinions of
the most illustrious doctors —that those children who die unbaptised,
so far as we can know, will in all probabilty in the future world
undergo no pain and no sorrow. What shall we infer from this
as to the duty of parents with respect to the baptism of their
children P If they are baptised and die in infancy they will go to
heaven. Therefore every parent should do all in his power to insure
the baptism of his children, and thus to procure for them the priceless
blessings of which the unbaptised can have no hope. But, on the other
hand, they may bear in mind with respect to those children who die
without baptism, that the Church does not believe and Scripture does
not teach that such children are subject in the future world to any
misery or sorrow.
A word has been used in reference to this matter which I think
requires some further explanation, namely—that this state of children
dying upbaptised is called by the Church a state of penalty, a state of
condemnation—in a certain sense a state of damnation —not so much
according to our way of speaking as according to theological lan-
guage —that is to say, these children are suffering penalties, are
under condemnation, but at the same time suffer no pain or sorrow.
What is this penalty ? It is this, that these children who would have
been raised up in Adam to a state of immortality and great glory, if
he had remained in his original state of innocence, have lost through
his fall all those gifts, and not being born again in Christ, have incurred
the penalty of Adam’s race. They are so far in a state of penalty that
they have lost in Adam what they cannot recover without being born
again. I consider this matter as of great importance, inasmuch as Dr.
Bromby’s crude assertion, that children are subject to eternal torture,
presents an idea of the Divine Being, which is revolting, and which we
regard as hostile to the infinite goodness of Grod.
I may illustrate this matter by supposing that a king -were of his
own free choice to raise a peasant to a high position of dignity and
nobility, and should announce to him at the same time that this dignity
should descend to his children —that it should be his, and should belong
to his heirs after him, provided he proved himself faithful and obedient
to his king; but if he were disobedient this dignity should be taken


from him and his descendants. This peasant rebels against his king;
he is deprived of his nobility, and his children after him remain
ignoble. If we compare them in their peasant condition with
the condition they were in before their father was raised to dignity,
they are no worse than they were originally ; but if we consider that in
their exalted state they had the title, the dignity and the wealth of
nobles, and that these had been lost for ev. r through their father’s
fault, we must consider them as being under a state of condemnation.
In that light they are under a penalty. They have lost by the rebellion
of their father that which they should have had a right to themselves,
had he continued obedient. This is the teaching of St. Thomas and of
the great Catholic doctors of the Church. If they are doomed to con-
tinue in the state of Adam at his fall; if they have lost the things
bestowed upon Adam before his fall, they are so far in the penalty of
condemnation; but suffering and sorrow does not approach them —
they are not “ damned ” as far as “ damnation ” means eternal torment.
Concerning the insane, I wish to say a few words. Dr. Bromby
says that, according to the “ current theory,” the insane in the lunatic
asylums are liable to eternal torture. Now, I say, that an insane
person in a lunatic asylum shall be regarded as a child. The unhappy
being over whose dawning intellect a father and mother watched, but
watched in vain, with heart sickness, and with hopes which were never
fulfilled—this hapless being whose intellect has never dawned, at its
death shall be, in all respects as regards the world to come, like a child.
If baptised, it will be like the baptised children. And it may have
good reason to bless God that it has been preserved from the suffer-
ings and sorrows, and temptations of this world. Again, if that poor
lunatic has not been baptised, then it shall be with the unbaptised
children, who cannot enter into heaven ; but there it shall have no
torture and no sorrow. And, therefore, the horror which Dr. Bromby
conjures up, that this mass of “ mere human pulp” is a being condemned
to eternal torture, has no foundation either in Scripture or the
“ cui’rent theory” of the Church, and may be discarded as a hideous
and most idle phantom.
I now proceed to the next question, which is also one of very deep
interest. We said on the last evening that the records of history
demonstrate the fact that the Pagans, or in other wmrds, the vast bulk
of the human race who lie outside the 300,000,000 of Christians and
Jews, have a knowledge of good and evil, and are responsible agents,
and that accordingly they shall be judged. But an interesting ques-
tion here arises : Can a man who never heard of Christ —to whom the
name of the Redeemer is not known —can he be preserved from hell,
and can he enter heaven at the last day ? Can he rise up to meet the
judge, and can he be admitted into the society of the blessed and be
saved P Can a man who never heard the name of Christ, who never
heard the distinction between Bather, Son, and Holy Ghost—can he
be saved P I say he can. I say that according to the “ current
theory” of the Church, a wild Indian of the woods, who never heard
of the name of Christ, and never had an opportunity of hearing that
sacred name, may nevertheless be saved and enter heaven. And this
I now undertake to prove.


In the 11th chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, St. Paul
announces what is absolutely necessary in the way of faith, in order
that a man may attain to God. And what he lays down is this: a
man must believe that there is a God, and that He is the rewarder of
those that seek Him. In other words, any man who believes that
there is a God, and that He is the rewarder of those that seek Him,
but who had no opportunity of hearing and consequently believing
anything else, provided that that man lead a life such as his conscience
called upon him to lead, may and shall be saved. This is the doc-
trine of the same great angel of the schools, St. Thomas, whom I have
already cited. And remember that lam not bringing forward theories
and opinions shaped and altered to meet the current opinions of the
time. These are the opinions of men who lived hundreds of years
before the Reformation ; these are the doctrines of St. Thomas: and I
may quote the doctrines and opinions of the most renowned theolo-
gians of the latest schools —of E. Suarez and Cardinal de Lugo. Their
doctrine is that if a man has no opportunity of hearing of Christ, and
he observes the law of Nature as known to him, he shall be saved.
Questions and difficulties of a most startling kind immediately rise
up. As, for example, can any man be saved who has never heard of or
invoked the Saviour’s name ? Those only who have relieved the
poor in the name of Christ can be saved; but, says Dr. Bromby,
those who have not heard of Christ cannot relieve in His name.
The question then arises, can such a man as I have spoken of
relieve the poor in the name of Christ, of whom he has never heard?
I say he can, sufficiently for salvation; and I undertake to show it.
You will observe, my dear friends, that in all this we proceed upon the
supposition that this man of whom we speak has not had an oppor-
tunity of learning anything concerning Christ. Now, to believe that
there is a God, and that He is the rewarder of those that seek Him, is
not by any means difficult; because, in the first place, it was handed
down by oral tradition from one generation to another from the earliest
ages. The Lord announced Himself to Adam, and the knowledge of
that fact has descended to all his posterity ; it has been endorsed by
the splendour of the starry sky, for the Psalmist says, “ The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth His handy work.”
And God has revealed Himself, says St. Paul, by His works, and has
not left Himself without witnesses ; seeing that He has given us rain
and harvest, the changing seasons, and food by which the body exists.
And along with that splendid testimony of the heavens above and of
the earth around us, there is the witness within man’s own heart, his
conscience approving what is right and disapproving what is wrong
and announcing the great Avenger by whom at last all things shall be
set right, and all that is wrong duly punished. The grace of God, and
His holy inspiration, in combination with the lessons we learn above,
and around us, and from within; and the early traditions handed down
from Adam are more than sufficient to warn the human race to believe
in one God, and to believe, at the same time, that He shall be the
rewarder of those that seek Him. Nothing else, I say, is required.
St. Thomas then discusses the question in language most clear and


sound. If a man, says St. Thomas, believes that God is tlie rewarder
of those that seek Him, he believes, at the same time, that God shall
reward man in the manner appointed by Himself. God has appointed
the manner in which He shall give those rewards. That manner is
through Christ. It is through Christ that these rewards are to be
given ; and thus, though the man has never heard of Christ, neverthe-
less, if he believes that God shall reward those who seek Him, he
believes implicitly in that Christ of whose name he never heard; and
if he lead a life such as his conscience commends, he shall not be
condemned, he shall be among those who seek the Lord according to
their light, and shall receive an eternal reward at His hands.
Again, it may be asked, can a man who never heard of Christ, and
who had no opportunity of hearing of Him, give a cup of cold water
in the Saviour’s name ? I say, he can. Because this man may
recognise in his fellow man one who has been created by God. Bor, as
St. Paul teaches us, the pagan poet announces that we are the offspring
of God, that we are from Him. (Acts xvii. 28.) This man believes
that man was created by God, however imperfectly he may understand
that creation. So, in the name of that God whom he adores, he shows
compassion to his fellow creature, and he does good works in the
name of God; and whatever is done in the name of God shall not
be repudiated by God at the last day. What is done in the name of
the Father shall not be rejected by the Divine Son. He shall, there-
fore, have his reward.
Such, my dear friends, are the doctrines taught by the most illus-
trious teachers in the Catholic Church. Such is the doctrine taught
by St. Paul in his second chapter of his epistle to the Homans. The
reverend doctor undertakes to vindicate the ways of God to man, and
to reconcile the justice with the mercy and other attributes of God,
by supposing that the great bulk of the human race shall not rise on
the last day. But we have these matters —this reconciliation between
the justice and mercy of God, clearly pointed out by the apostle, and
we need travel no further.
Perhaps I ought to observe for fear of being misunderstood, that if any
man~a wild Indian of the plains, let us say—were to keep the law of
God and overcome all temptations which his conscience may lead him
to resist, he does it by the grace of Christ. He had not heard of Christ
nor does he understand the influence of His grace, but he enjoys the
effect of it, otherwise he could not win the victory ; because the victory
can come to man only through Christ.
I may illustrate this matter in a way which will make it clear. A
traveller journeying through a desert expects every moment to be
attacked by robbers. But he finds in the first place that these attacks
are not so frequent as he expects. In the second place he finds lying
close to his hand, what he imagines to be the stump of a tree, with
which he defends himself and lays the robber low. Again he is parched
with thirst, and he observes a fountain before him, and drinks its refresh-
ing water. He believes that these things are the produce of the desert.
But in reality there is a powerful king within whose realm that desert
lies. And this king, watching over that man, has laid a strong restraint


upon the robbers, so that they cannot attack the traveller so fiercely as
they would have otherwise done. The knotted branch which appeared to
be a production of the earth, was placed there by the providence of this
king, so that the traveller might seize it with his hand and defend
•himself from the attacks of the robbers. And the well which the
traveller sees in the desert is a reservoir prepared by the care of this
good king, and the traveller finds its refreshing waters when otherwise
he might have died of thirst; but he does not know to whom he owes
these blessings. This man who has not heard of Christ is journeying
throught the desert of life. He has arms ready to repel temptation ;
be has a store of water of which he may drink ; but all these things
which he imagines to be mere products of the desert, are provided by
the good King. And thus those things which the wild Indian, or the
man who has not heard of Christ, imagines to spring from his own
heart, are in reality the gift of Christ coming to him from the
Eedeemer of mankind.
St. Paul (Eom. ii.), as I was saying before this digression, reconciles
the justice and mercy of God in this manner. The mercy of God
calls man to repentance. If a man listens to the voice of God then the
mercy of the Most High shall be glorified in him, no matter how
monstrous and manifold his transgressions, the mercy of that God
who sent His Divine Son into the world that sinners should be saved
by Him, will be extended to him. The mercy of God is shown to man
in every station of his mortal career, holding before him the promises
of peace and pardon ; but if a man refuse to obey the voice of God, if he
follow the dictates of his own hardened heart, and die in his sin, then
the justice of God begins to assert itself, and the treasures of divine
wrath, which the unhappy sinner has stored up for himself, shall be
made manifest in that day when the Son of Man shah appear. Thus
the mercy and justice of God are reconciled. St. Paul goes on to say,
both of the Gentile and of the Jew, that those who know not the law
.of Moses shall not be judged by that law. Those who know the law of
Moses and profess to obey it shall be judged by that law. On the
same ground, thosewho knowthe Gospel of Christ shall be judged by that
Gospel. For, says the apostle, it is not those who know the law, but
those who keep it that are justified. And with respect to those who
have not received the law of Moses and the written revelation from on
high, they still have the law of nature and the voice of their own
.consciences, blaming them when they do what is wrong, and approving
when they do what is right—and these are, as it were, a law to
themselves. And, consequently, in the magnificent and sublime mercy
and justice of God, did man know nothing but the law of nature —by
that law shall he be judged. Did man know nothing but the law of
Moses, by that law should his judgment be. Did man know the
Gospel, the words of truth and grace which fell from the lips of Christ,
by that law shall he be judged: and it shall be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for those who,
. having received the Gospel, have lived in determined disobedience to
its Divine declarations.
I may observe, although it is an incidental matter, that some faint


knowledge of Christ was more generally spread among the nations of the
world than is perhaps ordinarily imagined. The ancient Greeks and
Romans, the people of India and many other Pagan countries, had
some idea of a divine interposition in the affairs of this earth. They
had some notion of a golden age which had passed away, but which was
to return. It would be in vain, says Dr. Paley in one of his Commen-
taries on Euripides, to deny that the ancient Greeks displayed, in their
theology and plays, some notion of a divine personage that was to
appear on earth, and was to contribute in some way or another to the
resurrection from the dead. A being, as Euripides (Alcestis) goes on to
show, who should grapple with death, who should descend into the
regions of the dead and bring back one who had died to life. Yirgil,
also, sang of the coming of the Messiah in lofty strains, which might
almost have been looked upon as a translation of the prophet Isaiah.
He says that the time foretold by the ancient Sibyl had now arrived,,
when the course of ages was about to begin anew. That the golden
age was to be restored. That a child was to be born who was to give
happiness to man. All these things are described in glowing verse, in
the fourth eclogue of the great Roman bard. We find among certain
nations ideas extant respecting the incarnation of the Deity. Among
the Hindus, Druses, and other nations of the East, an idea prevailed
that something more than man was to appear on earth, and was to
confer great blessings on mankind. Nor is it unworthy of observation
that the two greatest nations of antiquity, the Greeks and Romans,
referred their origin each to a being who was the child of a woman,
but not the child of a man —to a person who was the offspring of a god
and a woman. Thus the Athenians looked upon lon as the head of
the lonic or Athenian family; and lon, according to their traditions,
was the son of Creusa and the god Apollo, not of the man Xuthus.
And in Roman history, every one knows that the Romans looked upon
Romulus as their founder and believed him to be the son of a woman
and the god Mars. So the idea of the founder of a great kingdom who
should be the child of a woman, but not the child of a man, who should
have a human mother but a divine father, seems to have been engrafted
on the history of nations—striking image, so to speak, of what was
promised in the beginning, that the seed of the woman should crush the
serpent’s head ; and, was afterwards foretold by Isaiah, that a Virgin
should conceive and bear a Son.
I shall now go on to the consideration of some other passages of
importance in the reverend doctor’s lecture. He considers that the
passages quoted by some of his critics from Daniel xii. 2, are strongly
favourable to his view, namely —that the entire human race shall not
rise at the last day. The passage as it stands in Hebrew and Greek
and as we read it in the English version, runs thus : —“ Many of them
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake.” The doctor infers
from these words that many shall awake, but not all. He says :
“ It seems to me that if a text can prove anything, stronger evidence
could not be adduced than this one to disprove a universal
resurrection.”


No doubt a text can prove anything, but only when it is rightly
understood. The learned doctor says that “ stronger evidence could
not be adduced to disprove a imiversal resurrection.” The language
of Daniel, however, is not entirely in accordance with the learned
doctor’s theory. According to Daniel, as explained by the reverend
doctor, some who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awaken, some
shall not: but according to the reverend lecturer himself, those who
awaken are in their graves, those who do not awaken are not, though
all are alike sleeping in the earth’s dust. What difference the learned
doctor finds between being in the grave and sleeping in the earth’s dust
I cannot imagine. Now let us see what is to be said about this text
of Daniel. In the first place, we may observe that the prophetic Scrip-
tures are obscure as compared with the Gospels, and the other portions
of the New Testament. And, therefore, I think that when anything is
dark in the Old Testament we are to seek for light and for a solution
of any difficulty connected with it in the clearer expressions of the
new law. This rule is especially to be observed in regard to God’s
dealing with the Jews and with those who were at that time outside
their pale. According to St. Paul (Eom. xvi.), the dealings of God
with the Gentiles, their vocation, and (Rom. ii.) their responsibility
were little known before the preaching of the Apostles. Mysteries of
this kind were hidden from the Jews. Therefore, if a Jew listened to
the prophecy of Daniel, “ Many of those that are in the dust of the
earth shall awake,” and he were to ask —What shall become of the rest,
shall they rise or not? The reply is this : —These things are dark at
present. They will be made known in the fulness of time. Let the
Gentiles take their course ; but be thou prepared for the resurrection
and the judgment. Hence, I say, nothing could be more illogical,
nothing more discordant with the spirit of the apostolic Scriptures, and
the new law, than to attempt to explain the bright, clear, perfect, and
unexceptionable testimony of the New Testament by any doubtful or
uncertain passage from the Old. It would be, in fact, attempting to
explain light by means of darkness. But, in truth, the words of Daniel
admit of an obvious and easy interpretation : “ Many shall arise,” i. e. }
all shall arise and they shall be many. There is no contradiction
whatever in such an interpretation. The reverend doctor says that
many is a very weak word to express the great bulk of mankind over
the whole earth. The ot ttoXXol of the ancient Greeks, signified the
multitude, yet it means all. (Rom. v. 15). If in the present day a
preacher were to say, many of those who now revel in intoxication, and
who now laugh to scorn those who live temperately and abstain from
such excesses, many of those who are leading sinful lives, and die in
their sins, shall lower their heads at the last day and shall be covered
with confusion: “many,” in the sense used by the preacher I speak of,
represents all; it does not mean that many shall be covered with con-
fusion and many shall not. They shall be all, and they shall be many.
We must now pass on to a subject of great interest, and which will
prepare us for the consideration of the important question of the
duration of the punishment of the wicked in the next world. I must,
however, in the first place, consider for a moment the learned doctor’s


manner of arguing from parables. He seems to tbink that be does
tbis well; and therefore bis argument from parables requires great
attention. I shall give one example, as it is of importance,
namely, that of the net let down into the sea. I shall read his own
words :
“ When the net was cast into the sea, it did not bring up all the
fishes of the sea, but it gathered of every kind, bad and good ; and at
the great Day of Judgment the angels are employed in separating
only what are in the net. Of those left behind in the sea no account
is taken.”
The meaning, then, which the reverend doctor, in his argument, infers
from this parable is this —That as the net is let down into the sea, it
takes up a certain number of fishes, and all these fishes are to be
separated, the good being distinguished from the bad; the rest of the
fishes in the sea are not brought up at all. So in the Last Day, those
who have heard the Gospel shall be brought up for judgment, but
those who have not heard the Gospel shall be like the fishes in the
depths of the ocean, they shall not appear before the Judgment-Seat
at all. That is arguing from parables. If we are to argue justly
from parables, we must consider what a parable is. A parable is a
resemblance. A parable is an image drawn from earthly things to
explain things that are celestial. A parable is drawn from the things
of this world, as compared with things which, in the language of
Milton, lie
“ Beyond the visible diurnal sphere.”
How it is evident that no such likeness can hold good on all points.
The doings of man towards man can never be in all points similar to
the doings of God towards the human race. The things of this world
cannot in many points of view be similar to those of the next. In
many points of view they must be most unlike. And, therefore, to
argue from parables, it is most necessary that we should thoroughly
sift the whole matter, to see in what points of view the resemblance
holds good ; on what points of view the resemblance entirely fails, and
was never intended to apply.
These rules are not laid down by me, or by any body of teachers merely
in the Catholic Church, but by all other persons who endeavoured to
explain the Scriptures by intelligible methods. If we press a parable
beyond its meaning, we shall be forced into the wildest and most
ludicrous conclusions. Dor example —the kingdom of heaven is often
compared to a man who placed his property in the hands of his ser-
vants and went into a far country, and he no longer saw those servants;
but when he came back he summoned them to an account, and dealt
with them according to their malversations, or according to the use
they had made of the property which had been placed in their hands.
If any one should argue that because this man went far away and was
absent for years without seeing what his servants did, until he returned
and called them to a strict account, so God is far away and does not
see what we are doing—everybody would admit that this is distorting


the parable into what it does not mean. We must take things that are
like and for which the parable was intended, and lay aside things that
are unlike, and which were never intended by the Divine Speaker
at all.
“It is,” says Dr. Bromby in his former lecture, “ a matter of deep
moment, that when the king invited all his guests to the marriage
banquet, and when he entered the banqueting chamber he saw there
one guest who was not clothed in a wedding garment, and he asked
him, ‘ Friend, how earnest thou in hither not having a wedding gar-
ment P ’ and he was speechless —this man was cast out into outer
darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” This
man represents those who are not clothed in the raiment of righteous-
ness. As long (we shall afterwards see), according to the testimony
of all Scripture, as there is light inside the banqueting chamber
shall there be darkness without. If there shall be light within
for all eternity, so shall there be likewise for equal duration weeping
and gnashing of teeth by those who have been rejected. But Dr.
Bromby observes that one man only was cast out; and, therefore,
he infers that the number cast out at the last day is as one to
one hundred, or as a unit compared with the number of those who
partake of the banquet. Our Saviour concluded the parable with
these remarkable words —“ Many are called but few are chosen.” That
does not harmonise with the view that a few only were cast out while a
vast number were admitted. I might as reasonably take up the parable of
the five wise and the five foolish virgins, and argue that because the
numbers mentioned in the parable are five on each side exactly, so that
the number shut out in the last day, shall be exactly equal to the num-
ber who shall be admitted. It is all absurd. And why absurd ?
Because this was not the purport of the parable. It was not a question
of numbers on one side or the other, but it was this : —The parable
enforces this truth, that this one man who was cast out of the wedding
banquet, may be the representative of me, of any one among us—though
I hope not —but he may be a representative of many millions of men
on the face of the earth. He may belong to a class ;he may be
the representative of thousands and millions without number, who
shall be found when the great King enters the banquet chamber with-
out a wedding garment, and being bereft of the grace of God, shall be
cast into outer darkness. Such, my friends, is the method of arguing
from parables, and all other methods are contrary to reason and op-
posed to the very nature of a parable itself. "What, therefore, shall we
say to our friends the fishes. The net is let down into the sea, and
gathers up a number of fishes, bad and good; but concerning those
who are not gathered the Scripture says nothing. The parable cannot
be stretched beyond what was intended, namely, that righteousness as
well as faith is required for salvation. For it is not every one who
says, “ Lord, Lord,” but he who obeys what the Lord commands who
shall be saved. Nothing is said concerning those who have not heard
the Gospel in this parable, but much is said of them in other passages
of holy writ. Now if we look at what is said, and the dealings of God
with the entire human race, i.e., His dealings with adults, for with


infants we make no further question, 1 1 say if we consider the deal-
ings of God through Christ with the entire human race adequately, we
shall find that the same net which is let down into the sea must catch
every child of Adam. A net let down into the wide waters of the
ocean cannot catch every fish ; there are places in the sea which it
cannot reach ; there are multitudes of the finny tribe which you cannot
enmesh; so that all fishes cannot be caught. But is it so with
regard to all men who have come to the use of reason, and know the
difference between right and wrong? I say No. The net gathers
them all in. Every man who has the ability to know the
difference between right and wrong is responsible; therefore,
if he rejects what is right, and chooses what is evil, he falls into the
meshes of the great net. Responsibility enters into his heart; and
he shall bo dragged from all the depths of the sea; of all tribes and
tongues; and the words of our Saviour in the Gospel, “all nations,”
shall be fulfilled. All tribes of the human race shall be thus caught
iu the great net; shall be drawn up before the great Judge, and shall
be separated, the good from the bad.
The parable of the tares is explained to the same purpose by the
reverend doctor. He says :
“ Again, in the parable of the tares of the field; the tares are not
what we call tares now, but a grass closely resembling wheat, and
which is, indeed, sometimes called bastard wheat. But what we have
particularly to observe is, that these tares are not the spontaneous
weeds of the soil. No account is taken of such. But the tares are
specially sown there by an enemy with malice prepense.”
Therefore, the tares are to be burned at the last day; but not the
weeds that spring up from the mere soil itself. Those only are to be
burned which spring up from the malice of the enemy ; and, therefore,
the learned doctor infers substantially that the entire human race is
not to be judged. That is the substantial inference. But, after
admitting that all the terms of a parable cannot be applied with logical
precision (unless under certain restrictions), he goes on to say :
“ Yet I maintain that when the main features of these figurative
representations of Our Saviour are looked at, a strong case is made
out for the resurrection of those only who had spiritual life of some
sort in them in this world.”
I reply : Man shall be judged for every act which he committed of
malice prepense, that is to say, with the knowledge that he was doing
wrong. Between man’s free acts and the spontaneous weeds there is
no resemblance, and the parable therefore does not hold under that
point of view.
I shall now proceed to the consideration of the last question, which
is, perhaps, the most interesting of all, although occurring last in the
series, and brought on only transiently by the learned doctor, and
consequently left last by me, namely, the duration of the punishment
of the wicked after death. The Scripture says these punishments are


eternal; the learned doctor, so far as he maintains anything on the
point, maintains that they are not eternal—that they shall have an
end. 1 shall read the words of the reverend doctor, in order that you
may not think lam doing him any injustice. He says ;-r-
“ As for the theoretical question, whether the punishments inflicted
on the wicked-at the day of judgment will be eternal or not, I beg
to say tnat that is not a question which I ever raised. The painless non-
existence of which I spoke, had obviously reference to other classes
than the wilfully wicked. As, however, the question is before us, I
will say a few words about it.”
The reverend doctor then looks upon it as a theoretical question. It
appears to me to be a practical question of the highest possible
importance, whether in the world to come the sufferings of the reprobate
shall be eternal, or whether they shall have an end. I think upon the
whole it is one of the most important and most practical questions to
which the human mind can direct all its powers, or apply its closest
investigation. The reverend doctor in the first place draws a distinction
between the two words for eternal in the Greek Scriptures, atStos and
diowLos. He observes that—
“ The proper Greek word for eternal , ulBlos occurs only twice—
once in Rom. i. 20, as an epithet of the power of the Supreme Being,
and again in Jude, eternal chains .”
JSTow, in the first place, if the word atStos were the strict Greek
for eternal , and the word cuoWjs were a word used only in a vague
sense and not as meaning eternal, then we have by the learned
doctor’s own confession the word which properly means eternal not
only applied to God Himself, but applied also to the punishment of
Satan. Hence I _ ask this question, does the word atStos as the
doctor asserts, strictly mean eternal ? Is it the proper Greek word
to express that idea ? If so, we have it applied to the sufferings
of rebel angels, and consequently, in the first place, a sin can deserve
eternal punishment.
In the secbnd place there is no foundation in Scripture for the
assertion that the punishment of Satan is longer than the punishment
of Judas; or that the punishment of man is less lasting than the
punishment of the rebel angels. Everything in Scripture leads to
the contrary conclusion. Therefore, if we accept the Greek exposition
of Dr. Bromby that it is the proper , word for eternal as applied to
the punishment of the rebel angels, then I maintain that the souls
nf wicked men deserve, and shall receive, eternal punishment.
In the next place, the learned doctor asserts that ollwvlos has a
lower meaning than atStos and says that it does not strictly mean
eternal. Now, the doctor knows Greek too well not to know that the
word atStos is used, not only to mean what is without end, but also
what is of long continuance. Thucydides wrote excellent Greek, and
so also did Xenophon ; and both of those writers used the word atStos
not only as a substitute for eternal, but of long duration. In the


History of the Peloponnesian War (iv. 20), we find this word used to
signify, not only what is eternal, but of long duration. Let us (said the
Spartan ambassadors) come to some arrangement, or otherwise there
will be eternal war between us. The word used here is atStos, eternal.
Of course, Thucydides meant no such thing as that there should be
eternal war, in the strict sense, between them, but long, prolonged
hostility. They did not think of carrying their hostilities into the
world to come. Again, the same author uses the word in a similar
sense in another passage : —“ Let us unite together, and let us make
a compact and league for ever.” The word here is cuSiov. But
Thucydides never meant to say that this league was to be made for all
eternity, but a league among men which they had no intention of
breaking, and which was to be of long duration. The learned
Schleusner, in his Lexicon, quotes a passage from Xenophon, which
shows most clearly that the difference which Dr. Bromby makes
between the words atSios and auovio s is contrary to the use of the
best Greek writers. Plato used the word aiwno? to signify eternal
fame, just as Thucydides and Xenophon used the word atStos. Hence
the learned doctor’s “ strict ” sense of odfiios is not in accordance with
the Greek authors.
We now come to the word atomos, the word used where our
Saviour describes the sentence which shall be passed on the wicked at
the last day. Before entering on the discussion of the critical meaning
of the word, the learned lecturer takes a hasty glance at the judgment
scene. I will read what he says in his own words :
“ And now let us take a hasty glance at the judgment scene in
Matthew xxv. The parable opens ”
There is no real parable in the matter at all. The slightest, faintest
trace of a parable may, perhaps, be found in one portion; but our
Saviour’s description of the judgment scene is no parable at all.
“ The parable opens with the statement that when the Son of Man
shall come in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, all nations
shall be gathered before Him, and He will divide them into two parts
only—those who have done kindness to the least of his brethren, and
those who, when they had the opportunity, did it not. But surely this
cannot include all the men and women, infants and sucklings, who ever
lived. There are palpably and unmistakably a vast mass of persons
who have been passed over sub silentio. Prom the very nature of the
case, the vast mass of mankind cannot be among the number of those
who have had the opportunity of showing Tdndness to Christ’s
followers, whether small or great. The parable is clearly a figurative
expansion of what our Saviour has elsewhere declared, ‘ Whosoever
shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold water
only, in the name of a disciple, shall in no wise lose his reward.’
The whole teaching of the parable, as the reverend lecturer terms it,
in this passage, is this : —Our Saviour declares that all nations shall
appear before Him, and that He shall address the just and the repro-


bate. To the just He stall say —You gave me meat when I was
a-hungered, and water when I was thirsty, and did other works of
charity. Some persons imagine that there is a parable in this —for
the just reply—“ When did we see Thee hungry and gave Thee to eat,
or thirsty and gave Thee to drink P ” But the matter is most obvious.
Our Saviour refers to the virtue of charity, which was His own com-
mandment. “ A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one another.” This second commandment pre-supposes the first. A
man who has true charity loves his neighbour as himself, and loves Grod
with his whole heart. Our Saviour says, “He who keeps my com-
mandment, he it is who loves me.” Therefore this one virtue of
charity supposes all the rest; and although it is especially marked out,
it is accompanied by all the other virtues. The just will be overwhelmed
with rapture when they have heard the words of the Saviour saying to
them—When you gave to the poorest, meanest, down-stricken beggar,
to the man covered with sores, to all kinds of suffering humanity, you
gave to me. They know this on earth by the dark light of faith ; but
when they behold the Saviour in all His Majesty coming in the clouds
of Heaven, the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth,
they will stand amazed, and will say, if not in words, at least by looks,
and in their swelling hearts, while standing before the Throne while the
full light of the Divine glory breaks upon them—“ Is it possible that
when we assisted the poor, the lame, the blind, in all their sorrows
and sufferings, it was to Thee, O Lord of glory, that I stretched out
my poor helping hand.” They shall be overwhelmed with amazement.
Some commentators think they shall actually say, —“ Lord, when did we
see Thee hunger and gave Thee to eat P Yet we now see that when we
helped that poor widow, that struggling child of sorrow, whose head
was bowed down with anguish, we were acknowledging Thy image, and
in helping them we showed our love for Thee.”
On the other hand, when the wicked shall see that every act of
cruelty, and fraud, and lasciviousness which they practised was an act
against Gfod, and would bring down eternal wrath upon their heads,
they shall stand cowering before the Judge in all His terrible Majesty.
Then the sentence shall be passed. The just shall be invited to eternal
glory and the wicked condemned to everlasting punishment.
The word used by our Saviour means eternal in both cases. The
word, as addressed to the just, means eternal happiness ; and the word,
as addressed to the wicked, means eternal punishment. The word
atwnos is derived from the word Jet always. JSTow such words, from
the nature of things, are sometimes used figuratively : thus we may
say that a man is always talking, although we do not mean to say that
a perpetual movment of his tongue is taking place. We say that we are
in endless trouble, although we know that it will end at some time
—at all events with our life. It is clear, however, that both these words
have, in certain cases, meanings which are strictly defined. I shall
borrow, for the purpose of illustrating this matter, a piece of reasoning
which appears to me so conclusive that nothing further can be desired.
It is the reasoning of Professor M. Stuart, as to the use of the word
auDVLos in Scripture. We are speaking of the punishment of the


wicked in the future state. What is the meaning of the word aiwios
as applied in Scripture to the future state ? It is used in the first
place with regard to God ; in the second place with regard to the
reward of the just; and in the third place with regard to the punish-
ment of the wicked. In the first place, as it regards God, it always
means eternal duration without end. In the second place, as regards
the just, it means, by the confession of all, happiness without end. In
the third place the meaning must be explained by the other two. If
in the case of God and the just it moans eternal it must also mean
eternal in the case of the reprobate. I have preferred to take the
reasoning of Professor Stuart in this case, because he is not a member
of the Catholic Church. To say that the word atconos with regard
to the third case means something which shall have an end is
contrary to all reason, to all Scripture, and to all the principles and
laws of language. And, therefore, these two things must stand or fall
together. If heaven is to have no end, if the eternity of heaven is
certain, no less certain is the eternity of hell, and the torments which
await the reprobate after death.
Another and supplementary method of explaining the text of
Scripture has been adopted by Protestant commentators on Holy
Writ; and I have no hesitation in appropriating their views. The
word atwvtos was held by those to whom our Saviour spoke as meaning
“ without end.” Wherever a word is used by a teacher in the presence
of a multitude of people, the meaning which they put upon his words
gives us what we must take to be the meaning which was
intended. If, for instance, I used a word to-night, and used it
knowing the sense in which you would take it, and I was certain that
that was the sense which you put upon it, I should be considered by
all men to have used the word in that sense and in no other. It would
be fraudulent and revolting on my part to endeavour to put any other
construction upon it. If my memory do not fail me, I have taken this
argument from Dean Alford. The Jews, to whom our Saviour addressed
those words, believed that the punishment of the wicked was eternal.
The testimony of Josephus, the Jewish historian, in the 18th book of
the Antiquities of the Jews, and elsewhere, shews us that the Pharisees
maintained the immortality of the soul and the eternal punishment of
the wicked. The Sadducees, on the other side, denied these two things.
But the Sadducees and their opinions were so hostile to the opinions
of the people, that the Jewish historian adds, that whenever a Sadducee
obtained a position of power, or Avas appointed to a magistracy, he was
obliged to make use of the language of the Pharisees in addressing the
people; because otherwise, the people would not endure him.
This shows that the Jewish people, in our Saviour’s time, were
entirely impressed with the belief that the punishment of the wicked
should be eternal. And when our Saviour applies the word cucortos
alike in both cases to the just and to the wicked, the word must, by every
possibility of reasoning, be taken in one case as well as in the other to
signify duration without end. Therefore the distinction drawn by
Dr. Bromby between atSios and atwvios is unfounded ; both words
must mean, according to Scripture, eternal.


I may add the testimony of St. Paul and of John the Baptist,
who declared that the fire which tormented the wicked should never
be extinguished. Josephus says that the opinion of the people of
his time was this, that a burning worm issued from the bodies of
the wicked after death, and that death should never release them
from their sufferings. Our Saviour says that their worm shall not die
and their fire shall never be quenched. And St. Paul in 2 Thessa-
lonians i. says they shall be punished with everlasting destruction from
the presence of the Lord. It is also said that the smoke of their
torments shall ascend for ever and ever. (Rev. xiv. 11.)
The reverend doctor lays much stress upon the fact that the word
perdition is constantly used in Scripture to denote the miserable fate
of the reprobate after death. And he puts the argument so often
before us, that he must have set great store by this imaginary meaning
which he attaches to the word. Now, nothing can be more contrary
to all the great authorities. The word 6'AA u/u or aTroXXvfju, to destroy ,
from which cra-wAeta is derived, is a word used to describe destruction of
every possible kind. For example, of a man who has lost his fortune and
all his hopes. Every kind of destruction is, according to the best
lexicons, to be inferred from this word. Therefore, to infer from it a
state of non-existence, that the body shall moulder away in the dust,
and that the soul shall lose its likings and its dislikings for the things of
this world, and all its old associations, is an inference without
foundation in the Greek language, as regards the use of the word
mroXXvfu and its kindred forms.
When the woman anointed the Saviour’s feet, there was a grumbling
because the money was wasted, instead of being given to the poor;
the word used to describe the waste of the money was airwXaa
(Matt. xxvi. 8). I might cite a hundred other instances, if time per-
mitted, to prove that the word has a meaning which applies to every
kind of destruction. It may be applied in the same way as our word
ruin. A man may be said to be destroyed, or ruined, in a hundred
ways. We must turn to other parls of the Scripture to see what the
kind of ruin is. When we are told by St. Paul that the wicked shall
suffer an eternal penalty, that is the nature of their ruin; and so,
likewise, when our Saviour tells us that they are to be cast forth into
eternal burnings, where their worm shall not die, and the fire shall not
be quenched. The inference drawn by Dr. Bromby from the word
aTToXXv/ju is, therefore, without foundation.
I shall conclude with one more passage. I hope I have omitted
nothing. I have endeavoured to put everything plainly and distinctly
before you, to the best of my power ; and in doing so, I trust that I
have not in any way distorted any theory or expression of my learned
opponent.
The reverend lecturer seems to think that the friars of the Middle
Ages preached too much about hell; that, in civilised times like ours,
brimstone theories, and eternal fire, and such things, are not to be
much talked about at all. Well, I can only say that if the friars went
astray in that direction, they went in good company. John the
Baptist, the inspired author of the Book of Revelations, St. Paul, the


illustrious fathers of the Church (reverence prevents me from men-
tioning the Son of God), all preached of these things. The reverend
doctor says :
“ There is no doubt about the efficacy of the style of the mediaeval
preaching among a rude and bucolic people.”
The people of Jerusalem were by no means a rude and bucolic
people in the time of our Saviour. Jerusalem had attained in the
time of Herod and in the time of St. Paul to a high degree of civilization..
That they had a most gorgeous temple, magnificent buildings, splendid
banquets, and that they were clothed in purple and fine linen, are facts
which stare us in the face in every page of the Gospel. Therefore we
have a right to infer that the people of Jerusalem were a highly
“polished people,” and by no means rude. And to them our Saviour,
as recorded in St. Mark’s Gospel, announced the terrors of hell. It
was among them that John the Baptist preached of the torments of
hell, and of the fire that could not be extinguished. The friars of the
middle ages spoke in their sermons the same language, and I have no
doubt that in the present day in the highly polished and civilized
cities of London, Berlin, Vienna, New York, or Melbourne, if even
John the Baptist were to rise from the dead, he might have very much
to say about hell and the fire that shall never be quenched. I think
that with such a tendency to vice, and such an inclination to throw
aside all the restraints of the moral law, it would be more expedient
if the ministers of religion upheld the Scripture view in all its integrity,
and announced to the people that while there are promises of eternal
glory for the good, there are threats of eternal misery for the wicked.
In conclusion, the reverend lecturer asserts :
“ It was not, then, the Scripture immediately to which my statements
were opposed, but to a certain clumsily-devised eternity of torment,
which might very fitly be denominated the immortality of brimstone.”
And, he adds, that what was “ thundered forth in glorious Greek by
John Chrysostom, beneath the domes of Byzantium,” was not the
brimstone theory at all. So far as I understand the learned doctor, he
says that St. Chrysostom did not speak of eternal suffering by fire. I
shall therefore quote St. Chrysostom, in his exposition of 2 Thessa-
lonians. Chrysostom says —“ It is a good thing to preach about
hell.” He proclaims in his glorious language, for which he was
called John of the golden utterance : “If we do not speak about
hell, will that extinguish hell ? If we speak of it, will that kindle it ?
Whether we speak of it or not, hell will still be burning.” That does
seem rather like brimstone. St. Chrysostom did think that there
was such a place as hell, and that silence respecting it would not
extinguish its fires. He further said—“ Some men lay up hope for
themselves, not because they are leading good lives, but because they
imagine either that hell is not so terrible as it is described, and that its
torments are milder than the threats which are held out respecting it,
or that it is not to last for ever. They think either that it is not sa


terrible as it is described, or that it only lasts for a time, and not for
eternity.” St. Chrysostom himself declares that it is fully as terrible
as it is described, and that for its eternity they have the words of Paul,
and what more do they desire ?
The reverend lecturer was not justified in asserting that John Chry-
sostom did not announce the doctrine of eternal punishment. That
same doctrine which was proclaimed in glorious Greek by John of the
golden utterance —that eternal punishment awaits the sinner after
death —that same doctrine do I, with such utterance as I can command,
also maintain —that same doctrine which the Great Father taught so
many centuries ago in that ancient city of the East, do I announce this
evening in this fair metropolis of the South.
A vote of thanks to the lecturer, carried by acclamation, terminated
the proceedings.


MELBOURNE:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED AT
THE CATHOLIC BOOKSELLING DEPOT,
“ ADVOCATE OFFICE,” 7, POST-OFFICE PLACE.


IRISH AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC BENEFIT SOCIETY.
The objects of tbis Society are to fill up the great want which exists
in this country of a Society composed of Catholics which can give the
same privileges and benefits as other benefit societies, and of binding its
members together in one common bond of brotherhood for their
temporal and spiritual welfare.
The Society has been started with the sanction and approval of his
Lordship the Bishop of the Diocese, the principles of which are, that
by payment of an entrance-fee and a small weekly contribution, the
members are entitled to a funeral allowance, sick-pay when unable to
follow their employment, medical attendance and medicines for them-
selves and families during sickness, and a benevolent fund for the relief
of distressed members, the widows and orphans of deceased members,
and under the spiritual care of the clergy. The laws for its government
have been compiled with great care and assiduity, everything has been
adopted which has proved practical in the working of other large
benefit societies. They have now been registered under the Friendly
Societies’ Act twelve months. There are nineteen branches throughout
the various parts of this colony, numbering 1,200 members, with near
2,000 pounds at present in the funds. Numbers of cases of sickness
and distress have already been relieved. Several of the branches,
have held spiritual retreats. Lectures and entertainments
have been got up under its auspices, where information and amusement
have been provided for the people ; hence, it is not too much to say
that it has proved itself a blessing to its members, and to the Catholic
community where its branches are established. There is, therefore,
no reason that all Catholics should not participate in the benefits of
this Society, as the rich and the poor, the high and the low, can
become members ; and a branch should be established in every town
or village where there is a Catholic school or chapel. The kind co-
operation of the Catholic clergy and people of these Australian
colonies is, therefore, respectfully solicited that branches and districts


may be established throughout the land—that, as we are one in Faith,
we may also be of one Society, having for its object the temporal and
spiritual welfare of our people.
The undersigned will feel honoured in supplying the necessary
information to persons wishing to become members of the Society, or
in founding’ branches through the colonies, or on any matter which
may be interesting to those who may desire information as to the
working of the Society.
JAMES KEAENEY,
5 Arden Street, Hotham,
Istf January , 1871.


■v. j. m:
THE CONVENT OF THE G-OOD SHEPHERD,
ABBOTSFOED,
THE MAGDALEN ASYLUM
For Penitent Women (98 Inmates),
AND THE
Jmlustuial ami SSctemls,
Affording an Orphanage for the Fatherless, and a Home for
Neglected and Criminal Girls under fifteen years
of age (130 Inmates).
The clergy, benevolent ladies and gentlemen, and the charitable public,
who have hitherto manifested so fervent a zeal in the support of our
institutions, are earnestly implored to continue their patronage in our behalf.
Without their assistance we are helpless. For them the grateful prayers of
the RELIGIOUS and the inmates are constantly offered to our Heavenly
Father, that His bounteous blessings may plentifully reward the friends of
the poor penitent Magdalen, and the others under the guardianship of His
Holy Name in the Convent of the Good Shepherd.
MARY J. CORBETT, Superioress.
Abbotsford.
*Collections are icing made for the erection of a Place of Worship, the first
instalment for which £3,600 falls due in February, 1871.


ct/Hy
muo
