

THE ABBE GAULTIER'S
COMPLETE COURSE OF
GEOGRAPHY,
BY MEANS OF
INSTRUCTIVE GAMES.
jPraiISHHD BY JOIIY
STEAUI/S CMFRCH YAffiD. iOWIMM*








A
COURSE OF GEOGRAPHY,
By Means of
INSTRUCTIVE GAMES,
INVENTED BY,
THE ABBE GAULTIER.
COLLATED WITH THE AUTHOR’S LAST PARIS EDITION, AND DIGESTED FOR EUROPE CONFORMABLY
TO THE TERRITORIAL ARRANGEMENTS AT THE PACIFICATION IN 1815.
J. ASPIN.
IN THREE PARTS.
THE FIRST PART,
i
CONTAINING
<®atne of pimple (Seogvcxpfip,
FOR TEACHING THE NAMES AND SITUATIONS OP THE DIFFERENT COUNTRIES AND PLACES OP THE EARTH.
THE SECOND PART,
CONTAINING
M eonctet €xtnmt on Hie imtftcwl
THE THIRD PART,
CONTAINING
A GEOGRAPHICAL GAME, ILLUSTRATIVE OF ANCIENT AND MODERN HISTORY.
A NEW EDITION WITH NUMEROUS IMPROVEMENTS.
As a necessary Appendage to the First Game, a Set of coloured Maps is subjoined. And another Set containing
LknX Mounts and ProvinceS > with the Course Rivers, Situation of Principal Towns.
ALSO,
A Set of Counters, having the Names of Kingdoms. Provinces, Islands, Seas. Rivers. &c. marked on them, by
which the Pupils may themselves explain and point out their Situation on the Map, may be had.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR JOHN HARRIS, CORNER OF ST. PAUL’S CHURCH-YARD
1820.


LONDON:
SHACKELL AND JOHNSONS-COURT, FLEET-STREET.


TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE
LADY AMELIA SPENCER,
YOUNGEST DAUGHTER
OF
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH.
PERMETTEZ-moi , My Lady, d’avoir Vhon-
neur de vous offrir le Cours Complet de Geographic,
quifaitpartie demon Cours d’Etude, Inattention soutenue ,
Vaimable et modeste enjouement que vous avez toujours
montres dans Vexercice de mes Jeux Instructfs, m’ont paru
faire sujfisamment la recommandation d’icne methode par
I
laquelle je me suis propose de rendre la Science agreable.
Veuillez bien, My Lady, recevoir cet hommage public de ma
satisfaction pour V inter et que vous a inspire ma methode.
Cet interet est pour moi un encouragement bien puissant d
concourir , avec un nouveau degre de plaisir et de zele , au
succds ulterieur de votre instruction .
Je suis , avec respect ,
<
MY LAD F,
Votre ires -humble,
Et trds-obeissant Serviteur,
L’ABBÉ GAULTIER.
PERMIT me the honour of presenting to your
Ladyship this Complete Course of Geography , which
forms a part of my Plan of Education. The con-
tinued attention, the amiable and engaging cheerfulness
you have always shown in the practice of my Games of
Instruction, appear to me a sufficient recommendation
of the method by which I propose to render the acqui-
sition of knowledge amusing. Deign, my Lady, to ac-
cept this public tribute of my satisfaction, as some
return for the interest you are pleased to take in my
method. That interest gives me very powerful encou-
ragement to promote, with increased zeal and pleasure,
the successful accomplishment of your education.
I am, with respect,
MY LADY,
Your very humble,
t
And very obedient Servant,
L’ABBÉ GAULTIER .


A LIST OF THE DESCRIPTIVE COUNTERS.
For the Game of the British Islands.
1 Division of the British
Islands.
2 Seas of the British Islands.
3 North Sea.
4 Atlantic Ocean.
5 Irish Sea.
6 Bristol Channel.
7 British Channel.
8 Division of England.
9 Northern Counties of England.
10 Newcastle.
11 Durham.
12 York.
13 Lancaster.
14 Appleby.
15 Carlisle.
16 Eastern Counties of England.
17 Lincoln.
18 Norwich.
19 Huntingdon.
20 Cambridge.
21 Ipswich.
22 Bedford.
23 Hertford.
24 Chelmsford.
25 London.
26 Southern Counties of England.
27 Maidstone.
28 Chichester.
29 Guildford.
30 Winchester.
31 Abingdon, Reading.
32 Dorchester.
33 Salisbury.
34 Wells.
35 Exeter.
36 Launcester, Bodmin.
37 Western Counties of England.
38 Beaumaris.
39 Caernarvon.
40 Denbigh.
41 Flint.
42 Harlech.
43 Montgomery.
44 Cardigan.
45 Radnor,
46 Pembroke.
47 Caermarthen.
48 Brecon.
49 Cardiff,
50 Midland Counties of England.
51 Stafford.
52 Wafwick.
53 Worcester.
54 Chester.
55 Derby.
56 Nottingham.
57 Leicester.
58 Okeham.
59 Northampton.
60 Buckingham.
61 Oxford.
62 Gloucester.
63 Monmouth.
64 Hereford.
65 Shrewsbury.
66 Division of Scotland.
67 Northern Division of Scotland.
68 Southern Division of Scotland.
69 Division of Ireland.
70 Counties of Leinster.
71 Counties of Ulster.
72 Counties of Connaught.
73 Counties of Munster. [[land.
74 Small Islands belonging to Eng-
-75 Small Islands belonging to Scot-
land.
76 Small Islands belonging to Ire-
land.
77 Counties of England watered by
the Sea,
78 Seaports of England.
79 Counties of Scotland watered by
the Sea.
80 Seaports of Scotland.
81 Counties of Ireland watered by
the Sea.
82 Seaports of Ireland.
83 Bays in the British Islands.
84 Bays in England.
85 Bays in Scotland.
86 Bays in Ireland.
87 Capes in the British Islands.
88 Capes in England.
89 Capes in Scotland.
90 Capes in Ireland. [^lslands.
91 Principal Rivers of the British
92 Principal Rivers of England.
93 Rivers of England falling into
the North Sea.
94 A River of England falling into
the Bristol Channel.
95 Rivers of England falling into
the Irish Sea.
96 Principal Rivers of Scotland,
97 Principal Rivers of Ireland.
98 Rivers that fall into other Rivers
of the British Islands.
99 Canals of England.
100 Lakes of the British Islands.
101 Mountains of the British Islands.
102 Forests of the British Islands.
103 Mineral Waters in the British
Islands.
104 Parliament of Great Britain.
105 House of Peers.
106 House of Commons.
107 Late Parliament of Ireland.
108 Orders of Knighthood in the
British Islands.
109 Naval Force of the British
Islands, [[lslands.
110 Military Force of the British
111 Revenue of the British Islands.
For the Game of Europe.
112 Division of Europe.
113 Northern Countries of Europe.
114 London.
115 Copenhagen.
116 Stockholm.
117 Petersburg!!.
118 Midland Countries of Europe.
119 Paris.
120 Vienna, Munich, Dresden, Ber-
lin, and Hamburgh.
121 Warsaw, Cracow, Grodno, and
Wilna.
122 Amsterdam, Rotterdam, the
Hague, and Brussels.
123 Berne, Lucerne, Zurich, So-
leure, Geneva, and Lausanne.
124 Koenigsberg.
125 Prague.
126 Presburgh.
127 Southern Countries of Europe.
128 Lisbon.
129 Madrid.
130 Turin, Milan, Venice, Florence,
Rome, Naples, &c.
131 Constantinople.
132 Seas of Europe.
133 Large Seas of Europe.
134 Small Seas of Europe.
135 The Frozen, or Arctic Ocean.
136 The Atlantic, or Western Ocean.
137 The Mediterranean.
138 The White Sea.
139 The Baltic.
140 North Sea, or German Ocean.
141 Irish Sea, or St. George's Chan-
nel.
142 The British Channel.
143 The lonian Sea.
144 The Archipelago.
145 The Sea of Marmora.
146 The Euxine, or Black Sea.
147 The Sea of Azof, or Sea of
Zabak.
148 Gulfs of Europe.
149 Large Gulfs of Europe.
150 Small Gulfs of Europe.
151 Straits of Europe.
152 Straits in the North of Europe.
153 Straits in the South of Europe.
154 Islands of Europe.
155 Islands in the Frozen, or Arctic
Ocean.
156 Large Isles of Europe in the
Atlantic-
157 Small Isles of Europe in the
Atlantic.
158 Large Isles in the Mediterra-
nean Sea.
159 Small Isles in the Mediterra-
nean Sea.
160 Islands in the Baltic Sea.
161 Islands in the North Sea.
162 Islands in the Irish Sea.
163 Islands in the British Channel.
164 Islands in the Ionian Sea.
165 Islands in the Archipelago.
166 Peninsulas of Europe.
167 Large Peninsulas of Europe.
168 Small Peninsulas of Europe.
169 Capes of Europe.
170 Isthmuses of Europe.
171 Lakes of Europe.
172 Lakes in the North of Europe.
173 Lakes in the Middle of Europe.
174 Lakes in the South of Europe.
175 Chains of Mountains in Europe.
176 Large Chains of Mountains in
Europe.
177 Small Chains of mountains in
Europe.
178 Principal Mountains of Europe.
179 Volcanoes of Europe.
180 Principal Rivers of Europe flow-
ing into the Sea.
181 A River falling into the White
Sea.
182 Rivers falling into the Baltic
Sea.
183 Rivers falling into the North
Sea.
184 Rivers falling into the British
Channel.
185 Rivers falling into the Atlantic
Ocean.
186 Rivers falling into the Mediter-
ranean Sea.
187 Rivers falling into the Adriatic
Sea, or Gulf of Venice.
188 Rivers falling into the Euxine,
or Black Sea.
189 A River falling into the Sea of
Azof.
190 Rivers falling into other Rivers
in Europe.
191 A River falling into the Vistula.
192 A River falling into the Oder.
193 Rivers falling into the Rhine.
194 A River falling into the Maese,
or Meuse.
195 Rivers falling into the Scheldt.
196 Rivers falling into the Seine.
197 Rivers falling into the Loire.
198 A River falling into the May-
enne.
199 A River falling into the Sarthe.
200 Rivers falling into the Garonne.
201 Rivers falling into the Rhone.
202 Rivers falling into the Po.
203 Rivers falling into the Danube.
204 Division of the Kingdom of
Great Britain.
205 Division of Denmark.
206 Division of Sweden.
207 Division of Russia.
208 Division of France.
209 Division of Germany.
210 Division of Poland.
211 Division of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
212 Division of Switzerland.
213 Division of the Kingdom of
Sardinia.
214 Division of the Prussian Do-
minions.
215 Division of Bohemia.
216 Division of Hungary.
217 Division of Portugal.
218 Division of Spain.
219 Division of Italy.
220 Sardinian Dominions in Italy.
221 Kingdom of Venetian Lom-
bardy.
222 Grand Duchy of Tuscany.
223 Principalities of the States of
the Pope.
224 Kingdom of Naples.
225 Duchy of Parma.
226 Duchy of Modena.
227 Duchy of Massa.
228 Duchy of Lucca.
229 Principality of Monaco, and
Republic of San Marino.
230 Division of Turkey.
231 Religions of Europe.
232 Languages of Europe.
233 Principal Sovereigns and Go-
vernments of Europe.
For the Game of Asia.
234 Boundaries of Asia.
235 Countries of Asia.
236 Seas of Asia.
237 Gulfs of Asia.
238 Straits of Asia.
239 Peninsulas of Asia.
240 Capes of Asia.
241 Lakes of Asia.
242 Mountains of Asia.
243 Principal Rivers of Asia.
244 Rivers flowing to the North
of Asia.
245 Rivers flowing to the east of
Asia.
246 Rivers flowing to the south of
Asia.
247 Rivers flowing to the west of
Asia.
248 Division of Great Tartary.
249 Division of the Chinese Empire.
250 Division of Hindoostan.
251 Division of Cabul.
252 Division of the Eastern Penin-
sula of India.
253 Division of Persia.
254 Division of Arabia.
255 Division of Turkey in Asia.
256 Islands of Asia.
257 Isles of Asia belonging to the
Chinese.
258 Isles of Asia belonging to the
Spaniards.
259 Isles of Asia open to the Dutch.
260 Isles of Asia belonging to Great
Britain.
261 Isles of Asia belonging to the
Turks.
262 An Isle of Asia common to the
British and Dutch.
263 Isles of Asia common to all
Nations.
264 Religions of Asia.
265 Languages of Asia.
266 Principal Sovereigns of Asia.
For the Game of Africa.
267 Boundaries of Africa.
268 Seas of Africa.
269 Division of Africa.
270 Countries of Africa on the Me-
diterranean.
271 Countries of Africa on the At-
lantic.
272 A Country of Africa on the
Southern Ocean.
273 Countries of Africa on the In-
dian Ocean.
274 Countries of Africa on the Red
Sea.


275 A Midland Country of Africa.
276 Gulfs of Africa.
277 Straits of Africa.
278 Capes of Africa.
279 Lakes of Africa.
280 Mountains of Africa. '
281 Rivers of Africa.
282 Islands of Africa.
283 Islands of Africa in the Atlantic.
284 Islands of Africa in the Indian
Ocean.
285 Religions of Africa.
286 Languages of Africa.
287 Sovereignties of Africa.
For the Game of America.
288 General Division of Ame-
rica.
289 Countries of North America.
290 Countries of South America.
291 Seas of America.
292 Gulfs of America.
293 Straits of America.
294 Capes of America.
295 Peninsulas of America.
296 Lakes of America.
297 Mountains of America.
298 Rivers of America.
299 Rivers of North America.
300 Rivers of South America.
301 Division of Canada.
302 Division of the United States.
303 Chief Towns of New Mexico.
304 Chief Towns of Old Mexico.
305 Chief Towns of Guatimala.
306 Division of the Colombian Re-
public.
307 Division of Peru.
308 Division of Chili.
309 Division of the Republic of the
United Provinces.
310 Division of Brazil.
311 Division of Guiana.
312 Islands of America.
313 Islands in Baffin’s Bay,Hudson’s
Bay, and the Arctic Ocean.
314 Islands in the Gulf of St. Law-
rence.
315 Islands of America in the At-
lantic Ocean.
316 Islands between the Atlantic
and Caribbean Sea.
317 Lucayos, or Bahama Islands.
318 Great Antilles.
319 Little Antilles. Qgellan.
320 Islands near the Straits of Ma-
-321 Islands of America in the South
Sea.
322 Religions, Governments, and
Languages, of America.
323 British Possessions in America.
324 Danish Possessions in America.
325 French Possessions in America.
326 Dutch Possessions in America.
327 Portuguese America.
328 Spanish American States.
For the Game of New Discoveries.
329 Newly-discovered Islands.
I 330 Northern Archipelago.
331 Sandwich Islands.
332 Marquesas.
333 Ingraham’s, or Washington Is-
lands.
334 Society Islands.
335 Navigators’ Islands.
336 Friendly Islands.
337 Feejee Islands.
338 New Hebrides.
339 Queen Charlotte’s Islands.
340 Solomon’s Islands.
341 Admiralty Islands.
342 Carolinas, or New Philippine
Islands.
343 Pellew Islands.
344 New Holland.
345 New Guinea, New Britain, and
New Ireland.
346 New Caledonia.
347 New Zealand.
348 Van Diemen’s Land.
RULES OF THE GAME
I. As the least indication of magisterial authority, menace, or repri-
mand, would be quite incompatible with every idea of this Game, the
Instructor will see the propriety of condescending to his Pupils, and
cheerfully associating with them, as their friend and companion.
11. Having seated himself at the head of the table, with his pupils on
either side, and in front of him, the Instructor will spread open the plain
map of that portion of the earth which is to be the subject of the Lesson,
with the north towards himself; observing, if possible, to dispose the car-
dinal points of the map according to the real situation of the horizon.
111. He must have near him a box of blank counters, from which, at
the commencement, he will furnish his pupils with eight or ten each,
reserving the rest to reward those who may give the proper answers. The
number of counters to be gained will generally correspond with the num-
ber of answers given by the pupils; but the intelligent Instructor will
better know how to reward his pupil according to their exertions, than
can be prescribed by positive rule.
IV. When the cardinal points, and the geographical terms of the
Introduction have been explained, the Instructor will read and explain
to his pupils, on the written map, the Lesson he means give them ;
and when he has reason to believe they sufficiently understand it, he will
proceed to exercise them on the plain map, by means of the Game, in the
following manner;
V. Let him put in a bag the descriptive counters belonging to the
Lesson, and cause the player at his right hand to draw one, and then point
out on the plain map the place named on the counter he has drawn. If
the pupil point to it aright, he will be rewarded with a counter ; but if
wrong, he must forfeit one to the Instructor, who will point out his error
by means of the written map. The Instructor is then to put the question
which in the Game corresponds with the number marked on the descrip-
tive counter: for example, should the descriptive counter be 'Newcastle,
No. 10, the Instructor, agreeably to the question No. 10, will ask. What
is Newcastle ? If the pupil answer, Newcastle is the capital of Northum-
berland, which is one of the ffty-two counties of England, and one of the
six to the north, he will be rewarded with a counter. Again, if the
descriptive counter have Northern Counties of England, No, 9, upon it,
the Instructor will ask his pupil, according to the question No. 9, to
Name the six Northern Counties of England : and if the pupil name them,
with their capitals, pointing out their situation on the plain map, he will
gain six counters for the six counties he has named.
VI. If the first player should not accurately explain the descriptive
counter according to the above method, he will be corrected by the second,
and pay him one counter for his assistance. If the second player make
any mistake, he will be corrected by the third; who will, in the same
manner, receive a counter from the first, and another from the second.
Should the third, fourth, or any succeeding player, fail in an adequate
explanation, the question is to be put round to the whole class, and he
who at length solves it will receive a counter from each of those who
have railed, besides the counters attached to the answer.
* he P’?y e r s err in the explanation of the descriptive counter .
they will forfeit to the Instructor one counter each.
VIII. When the first player has drawn and explained his descriptive
counter, the next to him will draw another, and explain it according to
the above method. The remaining players will proceed in the same man-
ner, until all the descriptive counters belonging to the lesson are drawn.
IX. At the end of the Game, the pupil who has won most counters will
have the title of President, and the one next to him in point of numbers
will receive the honour of Vice-President; in the succeeding Games, they
will be entitled to take their seats, one on the right, the other on the left
of the Master; and in case of his absence, they are to supply his place.
X. In the following rounds, the Master will leave in the bag the tickets
of the preceding Lessons, adding to them those relating to the new one.
XL If the number of tickets in the bag should be so considerable that
they cannot all be explained during one Lesson, they must be made the
subject of several exercises: for this purpose a second bag should be
provided for the reception of such tickets as may have been explained.
The reader will not perhaps be displeased to find here the description
of a geographical parterre, the idea of which the Author has communicated
to a few friends. It consists in tracing on a level piece of ground, of a
certain extent, the outlines of the globe, or of the hemisphere or of a
kingdom or a province, in which the towns and most remarkable places
are indicated by stakes, with tickets affixed to them.
The Pupils are directed to station themselves each on a different part
of this parterre. Accordingly, one sets out for China, another for Italy, a
third for the Strait of Magellan, a fourth for a city, a sea, a cape, a gulf
&c. The Pupil who stands in his right place, when his companions, or
the Instructor, make the round, gains one counter : but he who is not
at the post assigned him, must be subjected to a fine.
No method whereby study and occupation can be presented to children
under the most agreeable and entertaining forms, ought to be neglected •
for experience has proved that such methods afford the only certain means
of rousing theii zeal, exciting their resolution, and keeping up their
attention. As La Bruyere justly observes: “ Idleness, indolence, and
inactivity, vices so natural to youth, are never observable whilst they are
engaged at play. They are then lively, active, and persevering; fond of
rules and order; never overlooking each other’s faults; and trying, over
and over again, to surmount any difficulties they may encounter.”


INTRODUCTION.
GEOGRAPHY in general considers the Earth both as a Globe, on whose superficies are represented different Kingdoms, Provinces, Towns, Seas, &c.
and as a Planet performing; its revolutions around the Sun. The first forms the Science of Simple Geography, or the Doctrine of the Globe; the
second constitutes that part of Astronomy which is called the Doctrine of the The First Part of this Work explains the Simple Geography;
or that which teaches only the Names and Situations of the different Countries and Places of the Earth : the Second Part treats of the Doctrine
of the Sphere. This analytical method gradually leads the Pupil from the simple to the difficult and abstruse part of the Science. The advan-
tages accruing from it have now been proved by the experience of many years, in various parts of Europe.
EXPLANATION of the PRINCIPAL TERMS of GEOGRAPHY.
INTENDED FOR PRELIMINARY EXERCISES.
I. CARDINAL POINTS. —There are four Cardinal
Points, viz. North, South, East, and West. The North is con-
sidered as the upper part of the Map ; the South , as the lower,
opposite the North ; the East is on the right hand, the face being
turned towards the North ; and the West on the left hand, opposite
the East.
The Instructor will place the Cardinal Points of the Map according to
the natural situation of the horizon, with a counter on each, and direct his
Pupil to name in succession each Cardinal Point, and to take up the
counter placed upon it, as his reward. Or, the Instructor may himself
name the Cardinal Points, and desire his Pupil to take up the counter
placed on each, as he names them. If the Pupil do this correctly, he will
keep the counter ; but, if he make a mistake, he must forfeit one.
N.B. When several Pupils are engaged in the same exercise, they may
be permitted to challenge and correct each other; and in such cases the
forfeited counter (or counters, when more than one Pupil is in error),
as well as the counter on the Map, will belong to him who gives the
true answer. When all the Pupils are at fault, they must each pay a
counter to the Instructor for setting them right.
11. GENERAL DIVISION OF THE EARTH.—
The constituent parts of the Earth are Land and Water, which
form a spherical or globular body, the circumference of which is
computed to be about 25,000 English miles. The Earth is divided
into four principal parts, called Quarters , viz. Europe, Asia, Africa,
and America, The three first form the Eastern Hemisphere ; and
the last occupies the Western.
The Instructor will here place before his Pupil the plain Map of the
World, with a counter on each of the four quarters, differently coloured.
If the Pupil, in taking up these counters, one at a time, names rightly the
part of the world where they severally lie, he wins them ; but in case of
mistake, he forfeits a counter for each error, either to the Instructor, or to
the Pupil who may set him right.
111. THE PARTS OF LAND are Continents,
Islands, Peninsulas, Isthmuses, Promontories or Capes,
Coasts, Mountains, &c.
A Continent is a large tract, or portion of land, containing
several countries, or kingdoms, without any entire separation of its
parts by Water ; as Europe.
An Island is a less portion of land, entirely surrounded by
water ; as Great Britain.
A Peninsula is a tract of land every where surrounded by water
except at one narrow neck, which joins it to the neighbouring con-
tinent ; as Spain and Portugal, or the Morea in Greece.
An Isthmus is a neck of land, which joins the peninsula to the
continent; as the Isthmus of Suez, which joins Africa to Asia.
A Promontory is a hill, or point of land, stretching into the
sea, the end of which is called a Cape ; as the Cape of Good Hope.
A Coast, or Shore, is that part of a country which borders on
the sea ; as the Coast of Guinea.
Mountains, Valleys, Woods, Deserts, Plains, &c. are too obvious
to need description.
N. B. The above and following terms ought not to be explained all at
once to the Pupils ; but gradually, and as the respective lessons require it.
IV. THE PARTS OF WATER are Oceans, Seas,
Lakes, Straits, Gulfs, Bays, Rivers, &c.
An Ocean is a spacious collection of water, without anv entire
separation of its parts by land ; as the Atlantic Ocean.
A Sea is a smaller collection of water, communicating with the
ocean, but confined on each side by land ; as the Mediterranean Sea.
A Lake is a large collection of water, entirely surrounded by
land ; as the Lake of Geneva.
A Strait is a narrow part of the sea confined between two shores,
and opening a passage from one sea into another, or from a sea to
the ocean ; as the Strait of Gibraltar. This is also sometimes called
a Sound, as between Copenhagen and the Coast of Norway.
A Gulf is a part of the sea running up into the land, and sur-
rounded by it on all sides, except where it communicates with the
sea or ocean. If a Gulf be very large, it is called an Inland Sea,
as the Mediterranean : if it do not extend far into the land, it is
called a Bay, as the Bay of Biscay : and if it be very small, it is
called a Haven, Creek, or Road, as Milford Haven.
Rivers, Canals, &c. need no description.
The Source of a River is the place where the river first rises
or begins.
The Mouth, or Entrance, of a River, is the place where it dis-
charges or empties itself into another river, or into the sea.
The Right Bank of a River is that side which is to the right of
a person sailing from its source towards its mouth, or entrance ; the
Left Bank, of course, is on the opposite side. Thus, the Custom
House, at London, is on the left bank of the Thames, and Green-
wich Hospital on the right.
The Upper Part of a River is the part nearest its source ; the
Lower Part, that nearest its entrance. According to this rule,
Westminster Bridge is above London Bridge.
Note. —The description of a Continent answers to that of an
Ocean ; an Island, surrounded by water, to a Lake , encompassed
by land ; a Peninsula , to a Gulf, or Inland Sea ; a Promontory or
Cape , to a Bay or Creek ; and an Isthmus, connecting two por-
tions of land, to a Strait, which unites one sea to another.
After the Instructor has explained one of the above terms, and given
some examples on the written map, the Pupil should be desired to find out
some others on the plain map; and he should be rewarded with a
counter for every example he may discover.
CATECHETICAL EXERCISES
ON THE PRINCIPAL GEOGRAPHICAL TERMS AND DIVISIONS OF THE EARTH.
Q. What is Geography ?
A. A science which teaches the names and situations of the different parts
of the earth.
Q. What is the meaning of the word Geography f
A. It is derived from two Greek words, ge, “ the earth,’ 7 and grapho,
“to describe and signifies description of the earth.
Q. What are the most necessary and common geographical terms ?
A. Cardinal points, continents, countries, islands, oceans, seas, gulfs or
bays, straits, islands, capes, isthmuses, peninsulas, lakes, chains of
mountains, volcanos, and rivers.
Q. Name the four cardinal points.
A. The East, the West, the North, and the South.
Q. Which is the East ?
A. The part in which the sun rises.
Q. Which is the West ?
A. The part where the sun sets, opposite to the East.
Q. Which is the North ?
A. The part which lies before us when we have the East on our right
and the West on the left.
Q. Is not the South equally distant from the East and West ?
A. Yes ; and it is opposite to the North.
Q. In what part of a Geographical Map are the four Cardinal Points
usually marked ?
A. In a regular Map, the East is to the right of the person who looks
at it, the West is to his left, the North on the top of the Map, and
the South at the bottom.
[ln order to ascertain whether the Pupil thoroughly understands the
four Cardinal Points, it may be proper to ask him the following questions:
If you turn your face towards the South, what point is on your left ?
Answer, The East. Q. What point is on your right ? — A. The West.
Q. What is the point behind you ? — A. The North. The same exercise
may be repeated by making the scholar turn his face either East or West.
The four points which lie between, and are equally distant from the
four cardinal points, take names compounded from them ; namely—
North-east, North-west, South-east, and South-west: these are called
Collateral Points.^
Q. What is understood by the term Continent ?
A. A continent is the greatest extent of land that can be passed over
without crossing the sea.
Q. What are the four parts of the world, or of the earth ?
A. Europe, Asia, Africa, and America; situated thus :
NORTH.
EUROPE.
WEST
EAST.
AMERICA.
ASIA
AFRICA.
SOUTH.
Similar questions may be put upon all the other definitions.
In order more permanently to impress upon the recollection of children
the situation of the four Cardinal Points, and the relative position of the four
parts of the world, the Instructor is recommended to place a counter on
each of the Cardinal Points, or parts of the world, and then to agree with
ms Pupils, that if they unhesitatingly take up the counter laid on any car-
c inal point, or part of the world, which he may promiscuously name, they
shall win that counter; but if, on the contrary, they hesitate,and leave time
for the Instructor to take it up himself, or if they take up the wrong coun-
ter, they must be subjected to a forfeiture of one or more counters.


A COMPLETE COURSE OF GEOGRAPHY,
BY MEANS OF
INSTRUCTIVE GAMES.
PART I.
CONTAINING
The Game of Simple Geography;
OR, EXERCISES ON THE NOMENCLATURE OF THE DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE WORLD
SECTION I.
A GEOGRAPHICAL GAME
FOB THE
British Islands.
LESSON I.
DIVISION OF THE BRITISH ISLANDS, AND THE SEAS THAT WATER THEM.
Quest.
1. How are the British Islands divided? The British Islands are
divided into three Kingdoms and one Principality, besides a number
of small Islands; viz. the kingdom of England, capital London,
the kingdom of Scotland, capital Edinburgh j the kingdom of
Ireland, capital Dublin; and the principality of Wales, chief
towns Caernarvon and Caermarthen. England, Wales, and Scotland
foim one Island, called Great Britain ; Ireland is an island west
of Great Britain ; and the small adjacent islands are those of Wight,
Anglesea, Scilly, Man, the Hebrides, the Orkneys, and Shetland ,•
with those of Jersey, Guernsey, Alderney, and Sark, near the French
coast. ( Reward for answering, 7 counters.)
2. By what Seas are the British Islands watered ? The British
Islands are watered by the North Sea, or German Ocean, to the
east; the Atlantic Ocean, on the north and on the west; the Irish
Sea, and St. Georges Channel, between England and Ireland; the
Bristol Channel, to the west of England; and the British Channel,
to the south of the same kingdom. ( Reward, 5 coufiters.)
Exercise on the First Lessoti.
3. If hat is the North Sea, or German Ocean ? The North Sea, or
German Ocean, is one of the five seas that surround the British
Islands ; and waters them on the east. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
4. What is the Atlantic Ocean ? The Atlantic Ocean is one of the
five seas which encompass the British Islands; and waters them on
the west. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
5. What is the Irish Sea ? The Irish Sea, one part of which is called
St. Georges Channel, is one of the five seas which surround the
British Islands, and divides them into two large islands, viz. Great
Britain and Ireland. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
6. What is the Bristol Channel ? The Bristol Channel is one of the
five seas which water the British Islands, and lies to the south-west
of England. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
7. What is the British Channel ? The British Channel is one of the
five seas which water the British Islands, and lies on the south of
England. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON 11.
GENERAL DIVISION, AND NORTHERN COUNTIES, OF ENGLAND.
8. How is England divided ? England is divided into fifty-two
counties, or shires, viz. six to the north, nine to the east, ten to the
south, twelve to the west, and ffteen in the middle. ( Reward, 5
counters.)
9. Name the six Northern Counties of England. The Northern Coun-
ties are Northumberland, capital Newcastle; Durham, capital Dur-
ham ; Yorkshire, capital York; Lancashire, capital Lancaster •
Westmoreland, capital Appleby ; and Cumberland, capital Carlisle!
{Reward, 6 counters.)
Exercise on the Second Lesson.
10. What is Newcastle ? Newcastle is the capital of Northumberland;
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the
six to the north. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
11. What is Durham? Durham is the capital of the county of Dur-
ham, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of
the six to the north. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
12. What is York ? York is the capital of Yorkshire, which is one of
the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the six to the north.
{Reward, 1 counter).
Quest.
13. What is Lancaster ?■ Lancaster is the capital of Lancashire, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the six to the
norm. ( Reward , I counter .)
14. What is Appleby ? Appleby is the capital of Westmoreland, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the six to the
north. {Reward, I counter .)
15. What is Car tide ? Carlisle is the capital of Cumberland, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the six to the
north. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
LESSON 111.
EASTERN COUNTIES OF ENGLAND.
16. Name the nine Eastern Counties of England.- The Eastern Coun-
ties are, Lincoln, capital Lincoln; Norfolk, capital Norwich • Hun-
capital Huntingdon ; Cambridge, capital Cambridge • Suf-
folk, principal towns Bury and Ipswich ; Bedford, capital Bedford •
Hertford, capital Hertford ; Essex, capital Chelmsford ; Middlesex,
capital London. ( Reward , 9 counters.)
Exercise on the Third Lesson.
17- What is Lincoln ? Lincoln is the capital of Lincolnshire, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the nine to the
east. ( Bernard, 1 coimter.)
18. What is Norwich ? Norwich is the capital of Norfolk, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the nine to the
east. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
19. What is Huntingdon ? Huntingdon is the capital of Huntingdon-
shire, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of
the nine to the east. ( Reward , 1 counter).
20. What is Cambridge ? Cambridge is the capital of Cambridgeshire
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the
nine to the east. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
21. What are Bury and Ipswich ? Bury and Ipswich are principal
towns of Suffolk, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England
and one of the nine to the east. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
22. What is Bedford ? Bedford is the capital of Bedfordshire, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the nine to
the east. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
23. What is Hertford ? Hertford is the capital of Hertfordshire, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the nine to
the east, ( Reward , 1 counter.)
24. What is Chelmsford? Chelmsford is the capital of Essex, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the nine to
the east. ( Bernard, 1 counter.)
25. What is London ? London is the capital of Middlesex, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the nine to the
east. London is also the metropolis of the British empire. (Reward
1 counter.) v ’
LESSON IV.
SOUTHERN COUNTIES OF ENGLAND.
26. Name the ten Southern Counties of England. The Southern Counties
are, Kent, capital Maidstone; Sussex, capital Chichester; Surrey, capi-
tal Guildford; Hampshire, capital Winchester; Berks, principal'towns


Quest. . * .
Reading and Abingdon; Dorsetshire, capital Dorchester; Wilts,
capital Salisbury ; Somerset, capital Wells ; Devon, capital Exeter ;
and Cornwall, principal towns Launceston and Bodmin. ( Reward,
10 counters.)
Exercise on the Fourth Lesson.
27. What is Maidstone ? Maidstone is the capital of Kent, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the ten to the
south. ( Reward, 1 counter.')
28. What is Chichester? Chichester is the capital of Sussex, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the ten to the
south. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
29. What is Guildford ? Guildford is the capital of Surrey, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the ten to the
south. ( Reward, I counter.)
30. What is Winchester ? Winchester is the capital of Hampshire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the
ten to the south. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
31. What are Abingdon and Reading?- Abingdon and Reading are
principal towns of Berkshire, which is one of the fifty-two counties
of England, and one of the ten to the south. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
32. What is Dorchester ? Dorchester is the capital of Dorsetshire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the
ten to the south. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
33. What is Salisbury ? Salisbury is the capital of Wiltshire, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the ten to
the south. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
34. What is Wells ? Wells is the capital of Somersetshire, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the ten to the
south. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
35. What is Exeter ? Exeter is the capital of Devonshire, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the ten to the
south. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
36. What are Launceston and Bodmin ? Launceston and Bodmin are
principal towns of Cornwall, which is one of the fifty-two counties
of England, and one of the ten to the south. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON V.
WESTERN COUNTIES OF ENGLAND.
37- Name the twelve Western Counties of England. The Western Coun-
ties, which constitute the Principality of Wales, are, Anglesea,
capital Beaumaris; Caernarvonshire, capital Caernarvon; Denbigh-
shire, capital Denbigh; Flintshire, capital Flint; Merionethshire,
capital Harlech ; Montgomeryshire, capital Montgomery; Cardigan-
shire, capital Cardigan ; Radnorshire, capital New Radnor; Pem-
brokeshire, capital Pembroke; Caermarthenshire, capital Caermar-
then; Brecknockshire, capital Brecon; Glamorganshire, capital
Cardiff. ( Reward, 12 counters.)
Exercise on the Fifth Lesson.
38. What is Beaumaris? Beaumaris is the capital of the Isle of Angle-
sea, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of
the twelve to the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
39. What is Caernarvon ? Caernarvon is the capital of Caernarvon-
shire, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of
the twelve to the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
40. What is Denbigh ? Denbigh is the capital of Denbighshire, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the twelve to
the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
41. What is Flint ?——Flint is the capital of Flintshire, which is one of
the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the twelve to the
west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
42. What is Harlech ? Harlech is the capital of Merionethshire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the
twelve to the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
43. What is Montgomery ? Montgomery is the capital of Montgo-
meryshire, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and
one of the twelve to the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
44. What is Cardigan ? Cardigan is the capital of Cardiganshire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the
twelve to the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
45. What is New Radnor ? New Radnor is the capital of Radnor-
shire, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of
the twelve to the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
46. What is Pembroke ? Pembroke is the capital of Pembrokeshire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the
twelve to the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
47. What is Caermarthen ? Caermarthen is the capital of Caermar-
thenshire, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and
one of the twelve to the west. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
48. What is Brecon ? Brecon is the capital of Brecknockshire, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the twelve to
the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
49. What is Cardiff? Cardiff is the capital of Glamorganshire, which
is one of the fifty-two counties of England, and one of the twelve to
the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON VI.
MIDLAND COUNTIES OF ENGLAND.
50. Describe the Midland Counties of England. The Midland Counties
are fifteen; three of these form a triangle in the centre, and the remain-
ing twelve form a square about that triangle. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
Quest.
The three Midland Counties which form a triangle are, Staffordshire,
capital Stafford; Warwickshire, capital Warwick; Worcestershire;
capital Worcester. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
The three counties which form the North side of the square are
Cheshire, capital Chester; Derbyshire, capital Derby : Nottingham-
shire, capital Nottingham. (Reward , 3 counters.)
The three which form the East side are, Leicestershire, capital Leices-
ter; Rutland, capital Okeham; Northamptonshire, capital Northamp-
ton. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
The three which form the South side are, Buckinghamshire, capital
Buckingham ; Oxfordshire, capital Oxford ; Gloucestershire, capital
Gloucester. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
The three which form the West side are, Monmouthshire, capital Mon-
mouth ; Herefordshire, capital Hereford; and Shropshire, capital
Shrewsbury. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
Exercise on the Sixth Lesson.
51. What is Stafford? Stafford is the capital of Staffordshire, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen midland
counties, and one of the three that form the triangle. ( Reward,
1 counter.)
52. What is Warwick? Warwick is the capital of Warwickshire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen
midland counties, and one of the three that form the triangle.
( Reward, 1 counter.)
53. What is Worcester ? Worcester is the capital of Worcestershire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen
midland counties, and one of the three that form the triangle.
( Reward, 1 counter.)
54. What is Chester ? Chester is the capital of Cheshire, which is one
of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen midland
counties, and one of the three to the north of the triangle. ( Reward,
1 counter.)
55. What is Derby ? Derby is the capital of Derbyshire, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen midland
counties, and one of the three to the north of the triangle. ( Reward,
1 counter.)
56. What is Nottingham ? Nottingham is the capital of Nottingham-
shire, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the
fifteen midland counties, and one of the three to the north of the
triangle. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
57. What is Leicester? Leicester is the capital of Leicestershire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen
midland counties, and one of the three to the east of the triangle.
( Reward, \ counter.)
58. What is Okeham ? Okeham is the capital of Rutland, which is one of
the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen midland counties,
and one of the three to the east of the triangle. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
59. What is Northampton ? Northampton is the capital of Northamp-
tonshire, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of
the fifteen midland counties, and one of the three to the east of the
triangle. ( Reward, 1 counter)
60. What is Buckingham ? Buckingham is the capital of Bucking-
hamshire, which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of
the fifteen midland counties, and one of the three to the south of the
triangle. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
61. What is Oxford ? Oxford is the capital of Oxfordshire, which is
one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen midland
counties, and one of the three to the south of the triangle. ( Reward,
1 counter.)
62. What is Gloucester ? Gloucester is the capital of Gloucestershire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen
midland counties, and one of the three to the south of the triangle.
( Reward , 1 counter.)
63. What is Monmouth ? Monmouth is the capital of Monmouthshire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen
midland counties, and one of the three to the west of the triangle.
( Reward, 1 counter.)
64. What is Hereford ? Hereford is the capital of Herefordshire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen
midland counties, and one of the three to the west of the triangle.
(Reward, 1 counter.)
65. What is Shrewsbury ? Shrewsbury is the capital of Shropshire,
which is one of the fifty-two counties of England, one of the fifteen
midland counties, and one of the three to the west of the triangle.
(Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON VII.
DIVISION OF SCOTLAND.
66. How is Scotland divided ? Scotland is divided into thirty-three
counties, viz. sixteen north of the Firth of Forth, and seventeen
south of that river. (Reward, 1 counter.)
67- Name the Counties in the Northern Division of Scotland. The six-
teen counties in the Northern Division are, the Orkney and Shetland
Isles, principal towns Skalloway, Lerwick, and Kirkwall; Caithness,
principal towns Wick and Thurso; Sutherlamd, principal towns
Dornock and Strathey; Ross, principal towns Dingwall and Fortrose;
Cromartie, capital Cromartie ; Nairn, capital Nairn ; Inverness, capi-
tal Inverness; Murray, or Elgin, principal towns Elgin and Forres;
Bamff, principal towns Bamff and Cullen; Aberdeen, principal towns
Old and New Aberdeen; Kincardine, or Mearns, principal towns
Bervie, or Inverbervie, and Stonehaven ; Angus, or Forfar, principal
towns Forfar, Montrose, and Dundee ; Fife, principal towns Cupar
and St. Andrew’s ; Kinross, capital Kinross ; Clackmannan, capital
Clackmannan ; Perth, principal towns Perth, Scone, Dumblane, and
Culross. (Reward, 16 counters.)


Quest.
68. Name the Counties of the Southern Division of Scotland. The
seventeen counties of the Southern Division are, Edinburgh, or Mid
Lothian, capital Edinburgh; Haddington, or East Lothian, capital
Haddington; Berwick, or Merse, principal towns Dunse and
Lauder; Roxburgh, principal towns Jedburgh and Kelso; Selkirk,
capital Selkirk; Peebles, capital Peebles; Lanark, chief towns
Glasgow and Lanark ; Dumfries, capital Dumfries ; Kirkcudbright,
capital Kirkcudbright; Wigtown, capital Wigtown ; Ayr, principal
towns Ayr and Irvin; Dumbarton, capital Dumbarton; Bute,
capital Rothsay; Argyle, capital Inverary; Renfrew, capital Ren-
frew ; Stirling, principal towns Stirling and Falkirk; Linlithgow,
or West Lothian, capital Linlithgow. {Reward, 17 counters.)
LESSON VIII.
DIVISION OF IRELAND.
69. How is Ireland divided 9 The thirty-two counties of Ireland form
four Provinces, viz. Leinster, which contains twelve counties;
Ulster, which contains nine; Connaught , which contains five ; and
Munster, which contains six. {Reward, 4 counters.)
70. Name the Counties of Leinster. The twelve counties of Leinster
are, Dublin, capital Dublin, the metropolis of Ireland ; Louth, capital
Drogheda; Wicklow, capital Wicklow; Wexford, capital Wex-
ford ; Longford, capital Longford; East Meath, capital Trim ;
West Meath, capital Mullingar; King's County, capital Philipstown ;
Queens County, capital Maryborough ; Kilkenny, capital Kilkenny;
Kildare, capital Kildare, principal towns Naas and Athy; Carlow,
capital Carlow. {Reward, 12 counters.)
71. Name the Counties of Ulster. The nine counties of Ulster are, Down,
principal town Downpatrick ; Armagh, capital Armagh; Monaghan,
capital Monaghan; Cavan, capital Cavan ; Antrim, capital Antrim,
principal towns Belfast and Carrickfergus; Derry, or Londonderry,
capital Londonderry ; Tyrone, capital Omagh; Fermanagh, capital
Enniskillen; Donegal, capital Donegal. {Reward, 9 counters.)
72. Name the Counties of Connaught. The five counties of Connaught
are, Leitrim, capital Carrick-on-Shannon; Roscommon, capital Ros-
common ; Mayo, principal towns Ballinrobe and Castlebar; Sligo,
capital Sligo ; Galway, capital Galway. {Reward, 5 counters.)
73. Name the Counties of Munster. The six counties of Munster are,
Clare, capital Ennis ; Limerick, capital Limerick ; Kerry, capital
Tralee; Cork, capital Cork ; Waterford, capital Waterford; Tip-
perary, capital Clonmel. {Reward, 6 counters.)
LESSON IX.
SMALL ISLANDS BELONGING TO THE BRITISH ISLANDS.
74. Name the small Islands belonging to England. The small islands
belonging to England are, 1. The Isle of Wight, capital Newport;
Guernsey, capital St. Peter’s; Jersey, capital St. Helier’s; Alderney,
capital St. Ann’s; and Sark; all in the British Channel; 2. The
Scilly Isles, principal town St. Mary’s, between the British and
Bristol Channels; 3. The Isle of Man, capital Douglas, and Isle of
Anglesea, capital Beaumaris, both in the Irish Sea; and, 4. Holy
Island, on the coast of Northumberland. {Reward, 9 counters.)
75. Name the small Islands belonging to Scotland. The small islands
belonging to Scotland, are, 1. The Shetland Isles, 46 in number, of
which the chief is Mainland, principal towns Lerwick and Skalloway;
2. The Orkneys, 30 in number, of which the principal is Pomona,
or Mainland, capital Kirkwall; these two groups form a county of
Scotland ; 3. The Hebrides, or Western Isles, of which the chief are
Mull, capital Durant; Lewis, capital Stornaway; Sky, capital Uig ;
Bute, capital Rothsay; Arran, Ila, Jura, North Uist, and South
Uist. {Reward, 14 counters.)
76. Name the small islands belonging to Ireland. The small islands
belonging to Ireland are not very considerable; the principal are the
North Isles of Arran, Achilles Isles, South Isles of Arran, and
Blasques Islands, in the Atlantic Ocean. {Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON X.
COUNTIES WATERED BY THE SEA, AND SEAPORT TOWNS,
IN ENGLAND.
77- How many Counties of England are watered by the Sea 9 Twenty-
nine ; which may be divided into, 1. Those watered by the North
Sea; 2. Those by the British Channel; 3. Those by the Bristol
Channel; and, 4. Those watered by the Irish Sea. [Counties
watered by two seas, are repeated under each sea that belongs to
them.]] {Reward, 4 counters.)
Counties watered by the North Sea are, Northumberland, Durham,
York, Lincoln, Norfolk, Essex, and Kent. {Reward, 8 counters.)
Counties watered by the British Channel are, Kent, Sussex, Hamp-
shire, Dorset, Devon, and Cornwall. {Reward, 6 counters.)
Counties watered by the Bristol Channel are, Cornwall, Devon, So-
merset, Gloucester, Monmouth, Glamorgan, Caermarthen, and
Pembroke. {Reward, 8 counters.)
Counties watered by the Irish Sea are, Pembroke, Cardigan, Me-
rioneth, Caernarvon, Anglesea, Denbigh, Flint, Chester, Lancaster,
Westmoreland, and Cumberland. {Reward, 11 counters.)
78. Name the principal Seaports in England. The principal seaports
in England, are: In the North Sea: Berwick and Tynemouth, or
North Shields, in Northumberland ; Sunderland and Hartlepool, in
Durham; Whitby and Hull, otherwise Kingston-upon-Hull, in
Yorkshire; Lynn, or Lynn Regis, and Yarmouth, in Norfolk;
Harwich, in Essex; Chatham, Margate, and Ramsgate, in Kent.
( Reward, 6 counters.)
Quest.
In the British Channel: Dover, in Kent; New Shoreham, in Sussex;
Portsmouth, Gosport, and Southampton, in Hampshire; Cowes, in
the Isle of Wight; Poole and Weymouth, in Dorsetshire; Dart-
mouth and Plymouth, in Devonshire; Falmouth, in Cornwall.
( Reward, 7 counters.')
In the Bristol Channel: St. Ive's, in Cornwall; Bristol, in Glouces-
tershire: Cardiff and Swansea, in Glamorganshire; Caermarthen,
in Caermarthenshire; Milford Haven, in Pembrokeshire. (Be-
rnard, 5 counters.)
In the Irish Sea: Cardigan, in Cardiganshire; Liverpool and Lan-
caster, in Lancashire; and Whitehaven, in Cumberland. ( Reward,
3 counters.)
LESSON XI.
COUNTIES WATERED BY THE SEA, AND SEAPORT TOWNS,
IN SCOTLAND.
79. How many Counties of Scotland are watered by the Sea 9- Twenty-
eight; which may be divided into, 1. Those watered by the North
Sea; 2. Those by the Ocean; and, 3. Those watered by the Irish
Sea. ( Reward , 3 counters.)
The counties watered by the North Sea are, Berwick, Haddington,
Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Stirling, Clackmannan, Perth, Fife, For-
far, Kincardine, Aberdeen, Bamff, Elgin, Nairn, Inverness, Cro-
martie, Ross, Sutherland, and Caithness. ( Reward, 19 counters.)
The counties watered by the Ocean are, Shetland and the Orkneys,
Caithness, Sutherland, Ross, Inverness, Argyle, Bute, Dumbarton,
Renfrew, Ayr, and Wigtown. {Reward, 11 counters.)
The counties watered by the Irish Sea are, Wigtown, Kirkcudbright,
and Dumfries. {Reward, 3 counters.)
80. Name the principal Seaports of Scotland. The seaports of Scotland
are: In the North Sea: Dornock, in Sutherland; Cromartie, in
Cromartie; Bamff, in Bamff; Peterhead and New Aberdeen, in
Aberdeen; Dundee, in Forfar; and Leith, near Edinburgh. {Re-
ward, 6 counters.)
In the Atlantic Ocean : Stromness and Kirkwall, in the Orkneys ;
and Thurso, in Caithness. {Reward, 2 counters.)
In the Irish Sea: Wigtown and Portpatrick, in the county of
Wigtown. {Reward, 1 counter).
LESSON XII.
COUNTIES WATERED BY THE SEA, AND SEAPORTS, OF IRELAND.
81. How many Counties of Ireland are watered by the Sea 9 Seven-
teen ; which may be divided into those watered by the Irish Sea,
and those watered by the Ocean. {Reward, 2 counters.)
The counties watered by the Irish Sea are, Wexford, Wicklow,
Dublin, East Meath, Louth, and Down. {Reward, 6 counters.)
The counties watered by the Ocean are, Antrim, Londonderry, Done-
gal, Sligo, Mayo, Galway, Clare, Kerry, Cork, Waterford, and
Wexford. {Reward, 11 counters.)
82. Name the principal Seaports in Ireland The seaports of Ireland
consist of seven on the Ocean, and seven on the Irish Sea. (Re-
ward, 2 counters.)
The seven seaports on the Ocean are, Waterford, in Waterford; Cork
and Kinsale, in the county of Cork ; Galway, in the county of
Galway; Sligo, in the county of Sligo ; Donegal, in the county
of Donegal; and Londonderry, in the county of Londonderry.
{Reward, 6 counters.)
The seven seaports on the Irish Sea are, Carrickfergus and Belfast,
in the county of Antrim; Dundalk and Drogheda, in the county
of Louth ; Dublin, in the county of Dublin; Wicklow, in the
county of Wicklow ; and Wexford, in the county of Wexford.
{Reward, 5 counters.)
LESSON XIII.
BAYS.
83. How many remarkable Bays are there in the British Islands 9
The British Islands contain forty bays, viz. twenty-one in Eng-
land, seven in Scotland, and twelve in Ireland. {Reward, 3
counters.)
84. Name the Bays in England. The twenty-one remarkable bays
in England are, those of Robinhood and Bridlington, in Yorkshire;
Solebay, in Suffolk; Portsmouth, Southampton, and Spithead, in
Hampshire; St. Helen's, in the Isle of Wight; Portland and
Weymouth, in Dorsetshire; Torbay, in Devonshire; Mount’s Bay,
St ive’s, and Padstow, in Cornwall; Barnstaple, in Devonshire ;
Bridgewater, in Somersetshire; Caermarthen, in Carmarthenshire;
St. Bride’s, in Pembrokeshire ; Cardigan, in Cardiganshire; Caer-
narvon, in Caernarvonshire; Morecomb, in Lancashire; and the
Solway Firth, between England and Scotland. {Reward, 21
counters .)
85* Name the Bays m Scotland — The seven rem3,rk3,ble bciys in
Scotland are. Firth of Forth, between Fife and Haddington ; Firth
of Tay, between Fife and Forfar; Murray Firth, between' Nairn
and Cromartie ; Firth of Dornock, between Ross and Sutherland ;
Firth of Clyde, between Ayr and Argyle; and Luce Bay, in Wig-
townshire.—{Reward, 7 counters.)
86. Name the twelve Bays of Ireland The twelve remarkable bays of
Ireland are, 1. In the Ocean: Donegal, in the county of Donegal;
Sligo, in the county of Sligo ; Galway, in the county of Galway;
Dingle, in the county of Kerry; Bantry, Baltimore, and Cork, in
C


the county of Cork ; Waterford, in the county of Waterford; 2. In
the Irish Sea, Dublin, in the county of Dublin; Dundalk, in the
county of Louth; Strangford, in the county of Down ; and Carrick-
fergus, otherwise Belfast Lough, between Down and Antrim. (Re-
ward, 12 counters.)
LESSON XIV.
PRINCIPAL CAPES OF THE BRITISH ISLANDS.
87- Horn many remarkable Capes are there in the British Islands ?
There are fifty-two principal capes belonging to the British islands ;
of which, twenty-eight are in England, ten in Scotland, and four-
teen in Ireland. {Bernard, 3 counters.')
88. Describe the Capes in England. The twenty-eight principal capes
in England consist of eight in the North Sea, ten in tlm British
Channel, five in the Bristol Channel, and five in the Irish Sea.
(Reward, 4 counters.)
The eight capes in the North Sea are, Flamborough-head and Spurn-
head, in Yorkshire; Winterton-ness, in Norfolk; Orford-ness, in
Suffolk ; Walton-ness and the Naze, in Essex ; and the North and
South Forelands, in Kent. ( Reward, 8 counters.)
The ten capes in the British Chatmel are, Dungeness, in Kent;
Beachy-head, in Sussex; Needles’ Point, in the Isle of Wight;
Peverel Point, St. Aldham’s Head, and Portland Bill, in Dorset-
shire ; Berry Head and Start Point, in Devonshire ; and the Lizard
Point and Land’s End, in Cornwall. ( Reward , 10 counters.)
The five capes in the Bristol Channel are, Hartland Point and Baggy
Point, in Devonshire; Nash Point and Worm’s Head, in Glamor-
ganshire; and St. Gowen’s Head, in Pembrokeshire. ( Reward , 5
counters.)
The five capes in the Irish Sea are, St. David’s Head and Penkemis
Point, in Pembrokeshire; Braich-y-pull Point and Great Orme s
Head, in Caernarvonshire; and St. Bee’s Head, in Cumberland.
(Reward, 5 counters.)
89. Describe the capes in Scotland. The eleven capes of Scotland con-
sist of seven in the North Sea, and four in the Ocean. {Reward, 2
counters.)
The seven capes in the North Sea are, Fifeness, in the county of Fife;
Red Head, in Angus ; Kinnairds and Buchan-ness, in Aberdeen ;
Tarbat, in Ross; and Duncansby Head and Dunnet Head, in the
county of Caithness. {Reward, 7 counters.)
The four capes in the Ocean are. Wrath, in Sunderland; Mull, of
Can tire, in Argyle; Mull of Galloway, and F airland P oint, in
Wigtown. {Reward, 4 counters.)
90. Describe the Capes in Ireland. The sixteen capes of Ireland con-
sist of fourteen in the Ocean, and two in the Irish Sea. {Reward,
2 counters.)
The fourteen capes in the Ocean are, Fair Head, in Antrim ; Malin
Head, North Cape, and Telling, in Donegal; Mullet and Achilles’
Head, in the county of Mayo; Dog’s Head and Slyne Head, in
Galway; Loop Head, in Clare; Crow Head, Cape Clear, Galley
Head, and Seven Heads, in Cork; and Ram, or Ardmore Head, in
Waterford. {Reward, 14 counters.)
The two capes in the Irish Sea are, Carnsore Point, in Wexford coun-
ty ; and Howth Head, near Dublin. ( Reward , 2 counters.)
LESSON XV.
PRINCIPAL RIVERS IN THE BRITISH ISLANDS.
91. How many principal Rivers are there in the British Islands f——The
British Islands contain twenty-five principal rivers; of which,
eleven are in England, eight in Scotland, and six in Ireland. {Re-
ward, 3 counters.)
92. Name the principal Rivers in England. The eleven principal rivers
in England are, the Tyne, the Tees, the Humber, the Ouse, the
Thames, the Medway, the Severn, the Dee, the Mersey, the Der-
went, and the Eden. {Reward, 11 counters.)
93. Which of the Rivers of England fall into the North Sea ? These
are six in number, viz. the Tyne, the Tees, the Humber, the Ouse,
the Thames, and the Medway. {Reward, 6 counters.)
94. Which River of England falls into the Bristol Channel ? The river
that falls into the Bristol Channel is the Severn. {Reward, 1 counter.)
95. Which of the Rivers of England fall into the Irish Sea F These
are four in number, viz. the Dee, the Mersey, the Derwent, and
the Eden. {Reward, 4 counters.)
96. Name the principal Rivers of Scotland. The eight principal rivers
of Scotland are, the Tweed, the Forth, the Tay, the Dee, the Don,
the Spey, and the Shin, which fall into the North Sea; and the
Clyde, which falls into the Atlantic. {Reward, 8 counters.)
97- Name the principal Rivers of Ireland. The six principal rivers of
Ireland are, the Bann, the Shannon, the Blackwater, and the Bar-
row, which fall into the Atlantic ; and the Liffey and the Boyne,
which fall into the Irish Sea. {Reward, 6 counters.)
LESSON XVI.
RIVERS FALLING INTO OTHER RIVERS.
98. Name the Rivers that fall into other Rivers in the British Islands.
There are nine rivers which fall into other rivers belonging to the
British Islands, viz. The Ouse, the Derwent, the Air, and the Trent,
which fall into the Humber; the Wye, the Upper Avon, and the
Lower Avon, which fall into the Severn, in England ; and the Nore
and the Suir, which fall into the Barrow, in Ireland. {Reward, 9
counters.)
£For particulars of Rivers, vide Part 111. Sect. XXI.]
Quest.
LESSON XVII.
CANALS.
99. How many principal Canals are there in England F There are
twenty-eight principal canals in England, namely. The Andover, in
Hampshire ; the Basingstoke, in Hampshire and Surrey; the Bridge-
water, or Manchester, in Cheshire and Lancashire; the Birming-
ham, in Staffordshire and Warwickshire ; the Chest erf eld, in Der-
byshire, Yorkshire, and Nottinghamshire; the Cromford, in Derby-
shire ; the Coventry, in Warwickshire and Staffordshire ; the Chester,
in Cheshire; the Droitwich, in Worcestershire; the Dudley and
Stourbridge, in Staffordshire; the Grand Junction, in Northampton-
shire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, and Middlesex; the Great
Trunk, in Cheshire, Staffordshire, and Derbyshire ; the Leeds, in
Lancashire and Yorkshire; the Kennet and Avon, in Wilts and
Somerset; the Oxford, in Oxfordshire, Warwickshire, and North-
amptonshire ; the Paddington, and the Regent’s, in Middlesex ; the
Thames and Severn, in Gloucestershire and Wiltshire; the Sanky,
in Lancashire ; the Selby, in Yorkshire; the Grand Surrey, in Sur-
rey ; the Croydon and Rotherhithe, in Surrey and Kent, the Wor-
cester, in Worcestershire and Staffordshire ; the Wilts and Berks, in
Berkshire and Wiltshire; the Wolverhampton, in Worcestershire
and Staffordshire; the Worsley and Wigan, in Lancashire ; and the
Weighton, in Yorkshire. {Reward, 28 counters.)
LESSON XVIII.
LAKES AND MOUNTAINS OF THE BRITISH ISLANDS.
100. How many remarkable Lakes are there in the British Islands F
There are seventeen principal lakes in the British Islands, viz. five
in England, five in Scotland, and seven in Ireland. {Reward, 3
counters.)
The five principal lakes of England are, Ramsey Mere and Whittlesea
Mere, in Huntingdonshire; Winander Mere, in Westmoreland; Der-
went Water, or Keswick Lake, in Cumberland; and Ulles Water,
between Cumberland and Westmoreland. {Reward, 5 counters.)
The five principal lakes in Scotland are. Loch Tay, or Tumel, in the
county of Perth ; Loch Ness, in that of Inverness ; Loch Mari, in
the county of Ross ; Loch Shinn, in the county of Sutherland; and
Loch Lomond, va Dumbartonshire. {Reward, 5 counters.)
The seven principal lakes in Ireland are. Lough Neagh, between the
counties of Antrim, Londonderry, Tyrone, Armagh, and Down;
Lough Erne, in the county of Fermanagh ; Lough Rea, between the
counties of Roscommon, Longford, and West Meath; Lough Derg,
between the counties of Clare, Tipperary, and Galway ; Lough Conn
and Lough Mask, in the county of Mayo ; and Lough Corrib, in the
county of Galway. {Reward, I counters.)
101. How many principal Mountains are there in the British Islands F——
There are sixteen principal mountains in the British Islands, viz.
ten in England, four in Scotland, and two in Ireland. {Reward, 3
counters.)
The ten principal mountains of England are, the Cheviot Hills, be-
tween England and Scotland; the Wolds, in Yorkshire; Snowden
and Plinlimmon, in Wales ; Pendle Hills, in Lancashire ; Chiltern
Hills, in Berkshire and Buckinghamshire; Malvern Hills, in Wor-
cestershire ; Cotswold, in Gloucestershire ; the Peak, in Derbyshire;
and Wrekin, in Shropshire. {Retvard, 10 counters.)
The four principal mountains of Scotland are, the Grampian Hills,
which cross Scotland from west to east; th ePentland and Tweedesdale
Hills, in the southern part of Scotland ; and the Lammermuir Hills,
between Berwick and Haddington. {Reward, 4 counters.)
The two principal mountains of Ireland are, the Mourne and Iveagh
Hills, in the county of Down. {Reward, 2 counters.)
LESSON XIX.
FORESTS AND MINERAL WATERS OF THE BRITISH ISLANDS,
102. Which are the most remarkable Forests in the British Islands F——
The forests of England are Windsor Forest, in Berkshire ; New
Forest, in Hampshire; Forest of Dean, in Gloucestershire; and
Sherwood Forest, in Nottinghamshire. The principal forest of Scot-
land is the Caledonian, in the county of Dumfries. The forests of
Ireland are not considerable. {Reward, 6 counters.)
103. What Mineral Waters are found in the British Islands F --—The
mineral waters of England are, those of Bath, in Somersetshire;
Bristol, Gloucester, and Cheltenham, in Gloucestershire ; Tunbridge,
in Kent; Epsom, in Surrey ; Buxton and Matlock, in Derbyshire;
Harrow gate and Scarborough, in Yorkshire. The mineral waters of
Scotland are, those of New Aberdeen, in the county of Aberdeen.
{Reward, 11 counters.)
LESSON XX.
PARLIAMENT OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND,
ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD, NAVAL AND MILITARY FORCE,
AND REVENUE OF THE BRITISH ISLANDS.
104. Of what does the Parliament of Great Britain consist F——lt is com-
posed of two assemblies ; one called the House of Peers, the other
the House of Commons. {Reward, 12 counters.)
105. Of whom is the House of Peers composed ? The House of Peers
consists of the Princes of the royal blood, all the English Dukes,
Marquises, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, the Lord Chancellor, two
English Archbishops, and twenty-four Bishops, sixteen Scottish
Peers, four Irish Bishops, and twenty-eight Irish Peers. {Reward,
12 counters.)


Quest.
106. Of whom is the House of Commons composed ? The House of
Commons is composed of six hundred and fifty-eight members; five
hundred and thirteen of whom are sent by England, forty-five by
Scotland, and one hundred by Ireland. {Reward, 4 counters.)
107- How was the Irish Parliament constituted before the Union ? The
Irish Parliament, like the English, consisted of a House of Peers and
a House of Commons; but from the first day of the year 1801, it has
been united with that of Great Britain, under the title of “ The
Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.”
{Reward, 3 counters.)
108. What orders of Knighthood are there in the British Islands ?
There are two Orders of Knighthood in England, one in Scotland,
and one in Ireland. {Reward, 3 counters.)
The two in England are, the Order- of the Garter, instituted by Edward
111. in 1344; and the Order of the Bath, instituted by Henry IV.
Quest.
in 1339, revived by George I. in 1725, and enlarged by the Prince
Regent, in 1815, in the reign of George HI. In Scotland, the Order
of the Thistle was instituted in 1540, and revived in 1703, by
Queen Anne; and in Ireland, the Order of St. Patrick was insti-
tuted by George HI. in 1783. {Reward, 4 counters.)
109. What is the Naval Force of the British Islands ? The British
navy, for the year 1828, amounted to about four hundred vessels ;
and the number of men was 30,000, including 9,000 marines.
110. What is the Military Force of the British Islands ? The military
force of these kingdoms for 1828, was 89,287 men, officers included ;
besides 20,000 men in the East Indies, paid by the Company.
111. What is the Revenue of the British Islands ? The revenue of the
United Kingdom, or the produce of its permanent taxes, for the
year ending the sth January, 1829, was about forty-eight millions
and a quarter.
SECTION II
A GEOGRAPHICAL GAME
FOR
Europe.
LESSON I.
i , ft ■ . ' •
GENERAL DIVISION, AND NORTHERN COUNTRIES, OP EUROPE.
(The term Country signifies such an extent of land as forms the territory
of a whole nation.)
112. Into how many Countries is Europe divided? Europe is divided
into sixteen countries, viz . four to the North, eight in the Middle,
and four to the South. {Reward, 1 counter.)
113. Which are the four Northern Countries of Europe ? The four
countries to the North are, 1. The British Islands, capital London ;
2. Denmark, capital Copenhagen; 3. Sweden, capital Stockholm;
4. Russia, capital Petersburgh. {Reward, 4 counters.)
Exercise on the First Lesson.
114. What is London ? London is the capital of the British Islands,
which constitute one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of
the four to the North. {Reward, 1 counter.)
115. What is Copenhagen ? Copenhagen is the capital of Denmark,
which is one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the four
to the North. {Reward, 1 counter.)
116. What is Stockholm ?——Stockholm is the capital of Sweden, which
is one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the four to the
North. {Reward, 1 counter.)
117- What is Petersburgh ?■ Petersburgh is the capital of Russia,
which is one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the
four to the North. {Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON 11.
MIDLAND COUNTRIES OP EUROPE.
118. Which are the eight Midland Countries of Europe? The eight
midland countries of Europe are, 1. France, capital Paris ; 2. Ger-
many, principal cities Vienna, Munich, Dresden, Berlin, Hamburgh;
3. Poland, chief cities, Warsaw, Cracow, Grodno, Wilna; 4. Nether-
lands, chief cities Amsterdam, Rotterdam, the Hague, Brussels ;
5. Switzerland, chief cities Berne, Basle, Lucerne, Zurich, Soleure,
Geneva, Lausanne ; 6. Eastern or Ducal Prussia, capital Koenigs-
berg ; 7. Bohemia, capital Prague; and, 8. Hungary, capital Pres-
burgh. {Reward, 8 counters.)
Exercise on the Secotid Lesson.
119. What is Paris? Paris is the capital of France, which is one of
the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the eight in the middle.
{Reward, 1 counter.)
120. What are Vienna, Munich, Dresden, Berlin, and Hamburgh ?
Vienna, Munich, Dresden, Berlin, and Hamburgh, are principal
towns of Germany, which is one of the sixteen countries of Europe,
and one of the eight in the middle. {Reward, 1 counter.)
121. What are Warsaw, Cracow, Grodno, and Wilna ? Warsaw,
Cracow, Grodno, and Wilna, are principal cities of Poland, which is
one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the eight in the
middle. ( Reward , 1 counter.) *
122. M hat are Amsterdam, Rotterdam, the Hague, and Brussels ?
Amsterdem, Rotterdam, the Hague, and Brussels, are principal
towns of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which is one of the sixteen
countries of Europe, and one of the eight in the middle. {Reward
1 counter.)
123« What are Berne, Basle, Lucerne, Zurich, Soleure, Geneva, and Laii“
sanne ? Berne, Basle, Lucerne, Zurich, Soleure, Geneva, and
Lausanne, are principal towns of Switzerland, which is one of the
sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the eight in the middle. {Re-
ward, 1 counter.)
124. What is Kcenigsberg ? —— Koenigsberg is the capital of Ducal Prus-
sia, which is one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the
eight in the middle. {Reward, 1 counter.)
125. What is Prague ? Prague is the capital of Bohemia, which is
one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the eight in the
middle. {Reward, 1 counter .)
126. What is Presburgh?-. Presburgh is the capital of Hungary,
which is one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the eight
in the middle. {Reward, 1 counter.')
LESSON 111.
SOUTHERN COUNTRIES OF EUROPE.
127- Which are the four Southern Countries of Europe ? —The four
countries to the South of Europe are, 1. Portugal, capital Lisbon;
2. Spain, capital Madrid; 3. Italy, principal cities Turin, Milan"
Venice, Florence, Rome, Naples ; 4. Turkey, capital Constantinople.
{Reward, 4 counters.)
Exercise on the Third Lesson.
128. What is Lisbon ? Lisbon is the capital of Portugal, which is
one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the four to the
South. {Reward, 1 counter.)
129. What is Madrid ? Madrid is the capital of Spain, which is one
of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the four to the South.
{Reward, 1 counter.)
130. What are Turin, Milan, Venice, Florence, Rome, and Naples?
Turin, Milan, Venice, Florence, Rome, and Naples, are principal
cities of Italy, which is one of the sixteen countries of Europe, mid
one of the four to the South. {Reward, 1 counter.)
131. What is Constantinople ? Constantinople is the capital of Turkey,
which is one of the sixteen countries of Europe, and one of the four
to the South. {Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON IV.
SEAS OF EUROPE.
(A Sea is a large expanse of salt water, and the general receptacle of all
Rivers.)
132. How many Seas water Europe ?. Europe is watered by thirteen
, seas; viz. three large and ten small; the latter of which are
formed out of the three first. {Reward, 1 counter.)
133. Which are the three large Seas of Europe ? The three large seas
are, 1. The Arctic or Frozen Ocean, in the North; 2. The Atlantic
or Western Ocean, in the West; and, 3. The Mediterranean, in the
South. {Reward, 3 counters.)
134. Which are the ten small Seas? The ten small seas are, 1. The
White Sea, which is formed by the Frozen Ocean; 2. The Baltic, 3.
The North Sea, or German Ocean, 4. The Irish Sea, or St. Georges
Channel, and, 5. The British Channel, formed by the Atlantic Ocean;
6. The lonian Sea, 7* The Archipelago, 8. The Sea of Marmora, 9.
The Euxine, or Black Sea, and, 10. The Sea of Azof, or Sea of
Zabak, formed by the Mediterranean Sea. {Reward, 10 counters.)


Exercise on the Fourth Lesson.
135 What is the Arctic or Frozen Ocean ? One of the three great seas
of Europe, of which it forms the northern boimdary ; and it waters
Russia, Lapland, and the northern part of Norway. {Reward, 1
couutcv*!
136. What is the Atlantic or Western Ocean ? One of the three great
seas of Europe, which it bounds on the west; and it waters Norway
the British Islands, France, Spain, and Portugal. {Reward, 1
counter.) _ „ , , , r,
137 What is the Mediterranean ? — —One of the three great seas ot
Europe, which it bounds on the south; and it waters Spam, h ranee,
Italy, and Turkey in Europe. {Reward, 1 counter.)
138. What is the White Sea? One of the ten small seas of Europe ;
it is formed by the Frozen Ocean, and waters Russia in Europe.
{Reward, 1 counter.) .
139. What is the Baltic ? One of the ten small seas of Europe; it is
formed from the Atlantic, through the medium of the .North Sea,
and waters Russia, Poland, Prussia, part of Germany, Denmark,
and Sweden. {Reward, 1 counter.)
140. What is the North Sea, or German Ocean ?——One of the ten small
seas of Europe ; it is formed by the Atlantic, and waters Sweden,
Denmark, part of Germany, the Netherlands, and Great Britain.
{Reward, 1 counter.)
141. What is the Irish Sea, or St. George’s Channel ? One of the ten
small seas of Europe ; it is formed by the Atlantic, and divides the
British Islands. {Reward, 1 counter.)
142. What is the British Channel? One of the ten small seas ot
Europe; it is formed by the Atlantic, and waters France and Eng-
land. {Reward, 1 counter.)
143. What is the lonian Sea ? One of the ten small seas of Europe ;
it is formed by the Mediterranean, and waters the south of Italy and
European Turkey. {Reward, 1 counter.)
144. What is the Archipelago ? The Archipelago is one of the ten
small seas of Europe; it is formed by the Mediterranean, and waters
European Turkey, with a part of Asia, and contains seveial small
islands. {Reward, 1 counter.)
145. What is the Sea of Marmora ? One of the ten small seas ot
Europe ; it. is formed from the Mediterranean through the Archi-
pelago, waters European Turkey, and separates it from the Lesser
Asia. {Reward, 1 counter.)
146. What is the Euxine, or Black Sea ? The Euxine, or Black Sea,
is one of the ten small seas of Europe; it is formed from the Medi-
terranean through the Sea of Marmora, and waters European Tur-
key, Russia, and a part of Asia. {Reward, 1 counter.)
147 • What is the Sea of Azof, or the Sea of Zabak ? The Sea of Azof,
or Zabak, is one of the ten small seas of Europe; it is formed from
the Mediterranean, through the medium of the Black Sea, and
waters Russia and a part of Asia. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON Y.
GULFS OF EUROPE.
(A Gulf, or Bay, is a portion of the sea, which penetrates inland. A Bay
generally differs from a Gulf, in being less extensive, so as to afford
shelter to vessels from certain winds.)
148. How many principal Gulfs are there in Europe ? Europe contains
twelve principal gulfs; of which four are large, and eight small.
{Reward, 1 counter.)
149. Describe the large Gulfs of Europe. The four large gulfs of
Europe, are, 1. The Gulf of Bothnia, formed by the Baltic Sea,
between Sweden and Russia; 2. The Gulf of Finland, also formed
by the Baltic, between Finland and Russia ; 3. The Bay of Biscay,
or Gulf of Gascony, formed by the Atlantic, between France and
Spain; and, 4. The Gulf of Venice, or Adriatic Sea, formed by the
Mediterranean, between Italy and Turkey. {Reward, 4 counters.)
150. Describe the small Gulfs of Europe The eight small gulfs of
Europe are, 1. The Gulf of Livonia, or of Riga, formed by the Baltic,
between Poland and Russia; 2. The Zuyder Zee, in North Holland,
formed by the North Sea; 3. The Gulf of Valencia, on the east coast
of Spain; 4. The Gulf of Lyons, on the South of France ; 5. The
Gulf of Genoa, on the north-west of Italy ; 6. The Gulf of Taretito,
on the south-east of Italy; 7* The Gulf of Lepanto ; and, 8. The
Gulf of Salonichi, or of Thessalonica, on the south of Turkey,
formed by the Mediterranean. {Reward, 8 counters.)
LESSON VI.
STRAITS OF EUROPE.
(A Strait is a narrow portion of the sea, which separates two proximate
continents or countries.)
151. How many principal Straits are there in Europe? There are
twelve principal straits in Europe, of which six are in the north, and
six in the south. {Reward, 1 counter.)
152. Describe the Straits in the North of Europe. The six straits in the
north of Europe are, 1. The Cattegat, between Sweden and Jut-
land ; 2. The Sound, which separates Denmark from Sweden, at the
mouth of the Baltic Sea; 3. The Great Belt, between the Islands of
Zealand and Fuhnen ; 4. The Little Belt, between Fuhnen and Jut-
land ; 5. The Strait of Dover, which separates England from France ;
and, 6. St. Georges Channel, which separates England from Ireland.
{Reward, 6 counters.)
153. Describe the Straits in the South of Europe. The six straits in the
south of Europe are, 1. The Strait of Gibraltar, between Spain and
Africa, which forms the mouth of the Mediterranean; 2. The Strait
or Mouth of Bonifacio, between the islands of Corsica and Sardinia ;
3. The Pharos or Strait of Messina, between Sicily and Italy ; 4.
The Strait of Gallipoli, or Dardanelles, between the Archipelago and
the Sea of Marmora ; 5. The Strait of Constantinople, between the
Sea of Marmora and the Black Sea ; and, 6. The Strait of Caff a, or f
of Jenikal, between the Black Sea and the Sea of Azof. ( Reward ,
6 counters.')
LESSON VII.
ISLANDS OF EUROPE.
(An Island is a portion of land less than a continent, and entirely
surrounded by water.)
154. How many principal Islands, and groups of Islands, does Europe
contain ? Europe contains sixty-one islands, or groups of islands,
which may be classed as follows: Jive in the Frozen Ocean '.fourteen
in the Atlantic, of which three are large, and eleven small; ten in
the Mediterranean, of which three are large, and seven small; ten
in the Baltic ; four in the North Sea ; two in the Irish Sea ; five
in the British Channel; seven in the lonian Sea ; and four in the
Archipelago. ( Reward, 9 counters.)
155. Describe the Islands in the Frozen or'Arctic Ocean. The five
islands in the Frozen or Arctic Ocean are, 1. Spitzbergen, the most
northerly part of Europe; 2. Nova Zembla, 3. Vaigatch j and, 4.
Kalgouef all belonging to Russia ; 5. The group called Luffoden’s
Isles, of which Hindoen is the most considerable, on the north-west
_ coast of Norway, belonging to Sweden. ( [Reward, 5 counters.)
15(3. Describe the large Islands of Europe in the Atlantic.——' Pho three
large islands in the Atlantic are, 1. Great Britain, chief cities Lon-
don and Edinburgh, and, 2. Ireland, capital Dublin, which con-
stitute, with their dependencies, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain; 3. Iceland, chief places Reykeavik and Skaalholt, which
belongs to Denmark. {Reward, *3 counters .)
157- Describe the smaller Islands of Europe in the Atlantic. ■ The eleven
smaller European islands in the Atlantic are, 1. The Faro or Faroer
Isles, twenty-five in number, though seventeen only are inhabited,
which belong to Denmark ; 2. The Shetland Isles ; 3. -The Orkneys ;
4. The Hebrides, or Western Isles, which form part of the British
Empire; 5. The Isles cf Ushant, 6. Groays, 7• Belleisle, B. Noir-
moutier, 9. Isle-Dieu, 10. Rhe, and, 11, Oleron, on the west coast
of France, to which they belong. {Reward, 11 counters.)
158. Describe the large Islands of the Mediterranean. ——The three large
islands in the Mediterranean are, 1. Corsica, capital Bastia, which
belongs to France ; 2. Sardinia, capital Cagliari, belonging to the
King of Sardinia; and, 3. Sicily, capital Palermo, principal
Messina, which belongs to the King of Naples. {Reward, 3 counters .)
159. Describe the smaller Islands in the Mediterranean. ——The seven
small islands in the Mediterranean are, 1. Iviga, capital 2.
Majorca, capital Palma, and, 3. Minorca, capital Citadella, princi-
pal town Port-Mahon, which belong to Spain; 4. The group called
Hieres, lying to the south of France, to which they belong ; 5. Elba,
opposite to Piombino, capital Porto-Ferrago, principal town Porto-
Longone, which belongs to the Grand Duke of Tuscany ; 6. The
Lipari Isla?ids, the chief of which is Lipari, belonging to the King
of Naples ; and, 7- Malta, capital La Valette, which belongs to Great
Britain. {Reward, 7 counters.)
160. Describe the Islands of the Baltic Sea. The ten islands in the
Baltic Sea are, 1. Aland, 2. Dagho, and, 3. Oesel, which belong
to Russia; 4. Gothland, and, 5. Oeland, which belong to Sweden;
6. Rugen, which belongs to Prussia ; 7* Bornholm, 8. L’dland, 9.
Zealand, capital Copenhagen, and, 10. Fuhnen, capital Odensee,
which belong to Denmark. {Reward, 10 counters.)
161. Describe the Islands in the North Sea. The four islands in the
North Sea are, 1. Sylt, which belongs to Denmark ; 2. The Texel,
and, 3. The Islands of Zeeland, the chief of which is Walcheren,
belonging to the Netherlands ; 4. Heligoland, which belongs to
Great Britain. {Reward, 5 counters.)
162. Describe the Islands in the Irish Sea. The two islands in the
Irish Sea are, 1. The Isle of Man, capital Douglas, and, 2 . Anglesea,
capital Beaumaris, which form part of the British Empire. {Re-
ward, 2 counters.)
163. Describe the Islands in the British Channel. The five islands in
the British Channel are, 1. The Isle of Wight, capital Newport; 2.
Alderney, capital St. Anne’s; 3. Guernsey, capital St. Peter’s; 4.
Jersey, capital St. Helier’s ; and, 5. Sark; which all belong to
Great Britain. {Reward, 5 counters.)
164. Describe the Islands in the lonian Sea. The seven islands in the
lonian Sea are, 1. Corfu, capital Corfu ; 2. Paxo ; 3. St. Maura, or
Eeucadia, capital St. Maura; 4. Theaki (anciently Ithaca), chief
town Vathi; 5. Cephalonia, capital Argostoli; 6. Zante, chief town
Zante ; and, 7* Cerigo (anciently Cythera), capital Cerigo ; which
form an independent Republic, under the protection of Great Britain.
{Reward, 7 counters.)
165. Describe the Islands of the Archipelago. The four principal islands
of the Archipelago are, 1. Negropont, capital Negropont; 2. Candia,
capital Candia; 3. The Cyclades, the chief of which are Andros,
Tinos, Myconi, Naxos, Paros, and Milos; and, 4. The Sporades, the
chief of which are Lemnos, Mitylene, Scio, Samos, Patmos, and
Cos: they all belong to Turkey. {Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON VIII.
PENINSULAS, CAPES, AND ISTHMUSES OF EUROPE.
PENINSULAS.
(A Peninsula is a portion of land surrounded by water, except on one
part; which part is called an Isthmus.)
1661 How many Peninsulas are there in Europe ? Europe contains
eight principal peninsulas, of which four are large and four are small.
{Reward, 1 counter.)


Quest.
167* Which are the four large Peninsulas ? The four large European
peninsulas are, 1. Sweden and Norway, the ancient Scandinavia;
2. Spain and Portugal; 3. Italy; and, 4. Turkey in Europe.
{Reward, 4 counters.')
168. Which are the four small Peninsulas ? The four small Penin-
sulas are, 1. Jutland, in Denmark; 2. Britany, or Bretagne, in
France; 3. The Morea, or ancient Peloponnesus, in Turkey; and
4. The Crimea, in Russia. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
CAPES, OR PROMONTORIES, OP EUROPE.
(A Cape, or is an eminence of land projecting into
the sea.)
169. How many principal Capes are there in Europe ? There are six-
teen principal capes in Europe, of which ten belong to the conti-
nent, and six to the islands. ( Reward , 1 counter .)
Name the ten capes which belong to the continent. The ten principal
capes belonging to the continent are,' 1 . North Cape, in Lapland;
2. The Nase, or Eindsness, on the south of Norway; 3. La Hogue,
on the Normandy coast; 4. Ortegal, 5. Finistere, 6. St. Antonio,
and, 7* Trafalgar, in Spain; 8. St. Vincent, in Portugal; 9 . Spar-
tivento, the most southerly point of Italy; and, 10. Mutapan, in the
Morea. ( Reward, 10 counters.)
Name the six capes in the islands of Europe.— The six European capes,
which are in the islands, are, 1. Land's End, and, 2. Lizard Point,
in England; 3. Cape Clear, in Ireland; 4. Corse, in Corsica; 5.
Tavolaro, in Sardinia; and, 6. Passaro, in Sicily. ( Reward, 6
counters.)
ISTHMUSES OP EUROPE.
(An Isthmus is a portion of land which joins a Peninsula to a
Continent.)
170. How many principal Isthmuses are there in Europe? Two;
namely, 1. The Isthmus of Corinth, which joins the Morea to
Turkey; and, 2. The Isthmus of Perekop, which joins the Crimea to
Russia. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
LESSON IX.
LAKES OP EUROPE.
(A Lake is a great mass of dormant water, surrounded by land.)
17L How many principal Lakes are there in Europe? There are
twenty-three principal lakes in Europe ; namely, nine in the North,
six in the middle, and nine in the south. ( Reward , 3 counters.)
172. Describe the Lakes in the north of Europe. The nine lakes in the
north of Europe are those of, 1. Wenner, 2. Wetter, and, 3. Meier, in
Sweden; 4. Saima, 5. Onega, 6. Ladoga *, 7- Peipus, 8. Ilmen, and,
9. Bielo, or the White Lake, in Russia. ( Reward , 9 counters.)
173. Describe the Lakes in the middle of Eu rope. The six lakes in the
middle of Europe are those of, 1. Neufchdtel, 2. Geneva, 3. Lucerne,
and, 4. Zurich, in Switzerland ; 5. The Lake of Constance, between
Switzerland and Germany; and, 6. The Lake Balaton, or Platen See,
in Lower Hungary. ( Reward, 6 counters.)
174. Describe the Southern Lakes of Europe. The nine lakes in the
South of Europe are, 1. Maggiore, 2. Lugano, 3. Como, and, 4. Garda,
in the Lombardo-Venetian kingdom; 5. Comacchio, 6. Perugia,
(anciently Thr asy menus f) and, 7- Bolsena, in the States of the
Church; 8. Celano, in the kingdom of Naples, and, 9. Scutari, in
Turkey. ( Reward, 9 counters.)
LESSON X.
CHAINS OF MOUNTAINS, PRINCIPAL MOUNTAINS, AND VOLCANOS, IN
EUROPE.
CHAINS OF MOUNTAINS.
(A mountainous Chain consists of several mountains united in succes-
sion to a great distance.)
175. How many Chains of Mountains are there in Europe ? There are
thirteen remarkable chains of mountains in Europe, of which six
may be distinguished by the term large; the other seven are smaller.
{Reward, 1 counter.)
176. Which are the six larger chains of European Mountains? The
six larger chains of mountains in Europe are, 1. The Ophrine, or
Kolen Mountains, between Sweden and Norway; 2. The Pyrenees,
between France and Spain ; 3. The Alps, between France and Italy;
4. The Apennines, which run through the whole length of Italy ; 5.
The Krapak, or Carpathian Mountains, between Hungary and Po-
land ; and, 6. The Castagnat Mountains, or Chain of Hoemus, in
Turkey. {Reward, 6 counters.)
177. Describe the smaller Chains of European Mountains. The seven
smaller chains of mountains in Europe are, 1. The Cheviot Hills,
between England and Scotland; 2. The Vosges, on the north-east
of France ; 3. The Cevennes, in the south of France ; 4. Mount Jura,
between France and Switzerland ; and the mountains of, 5. Asturias,
6. Estramadura, and, 7- Sierra-Morena, in Spain. {Reward, 7
counters.)
PRINCIPAL MOUNTAINS.
178. Describe the principal Mountains of Europe. The principal moun-
tains of Europe are thirteen in number, as follow ; 1. Mont Perdu, in
the Pyrenees; 2. Mont Furca, 3. Mont St. Gothard, 4. Mont Simplon,
5. Mont Rosa, 6. Mont Blanc, I, Mont St. Bernard, 8. Mont Iserno,
9. Mont Cenis, and, 10. Mont Viso, in the Alps ; 11. Mont St. Angelo,
in Naples ; 12. Mont d’ Or, in Auvergne; and, 13. Mont Serrat, near
Barcelona, in Spain. {Reward, 13 counters.)
Quest.
VOLCANOS OF EUROPE.
(A Volcano is a mountain with a cavity, from which issue volumes of
smoke and flame, and igneous substances.)
179. How many Volcanos are there in Europe? There are three
remarkable volcanos in Europe; namely, 1. TEtna, or Gibel, in
Sicily; 2. Vesuvius, in Italy, near Naples; and, 3. Hecla, in Ice-
land. {Reward, 3 counters.)
LESSON XL
RIVERS OF EUROPE.
(Rivers, which consist of large inland currents of water, may be
divided into two classes, namely, those that flow into the sea, and
such as fall into other rivers.)
PRINCIPAL RIVERS OF EUROPE RUNNING INTO SEAS.
180. How many principal Rivers of Europe flow into Seas? Thirty-
six rivers of Europe empty themselves directly into seas; namely, one
into the White Sea; fve into the Baltic; seven into the North Sea;
two into the British Channel; eleven into the Atlantic; four into the
Mediterranean ; two into the Adriatic, or Gulf of Venice ; three into
the Euxine, or Black Sea; and one into the Sea of Azof, or Sea of
_ Zabak. {Reward, 9 counters.)
181. Describe the River of Europe that flows into the White Sea. The
Dwina is the principal river of Europe that flows into the White
Sea. {Reward, 1 counter.)
182. Describe the Rivers that flow into the Baltic. The five principal
rivers of Europe, which flow into the Baltic, are, 1. The Neva,
which has its origin in the Lake of Ladoga, in Russia, and falls into
the Gulf of Finland, opposite the Island of Cronstadt; 2. The Duna,
also called the Southern Dwina, which rises in Russia, and runs into
the Baltic, west of Riga; j 3. The Niemen, which rises in Poland,
and discharges itself into the Baltic by several outlets, below
Memel; 4. The Vistula, which rises among the Carpathian Moun-
tains, in Silesia, and falls into the Baltic between Elbing and Dant-
zick; and, 5. The Oder, which also rises among the Carpathian
Mountains, and flows into the Baltic by several outlets below Stet-
tin. {Reward, 5 counters.)
183. Describe the Rivers that flow into the North Sea. The seven
principal rivers of Europe, which flow into the North Sea, are, 1.
The Elbe, which has its source in the Giants' Mountains, on the
frontiers of Silesia, and runs into the North Sea, near Cuxhaven;
2. The Weser, which is formed by the confluence of the rivers Werra
and Fulda, in Hanover, and runs into the North Sea, south of Cux-
haven ; 3. The Rhine, which has its principal source in Mont St.
Gothard, in Switzerland, crosses the Lake of Constance, and, after
forming the Waal, the Yssel, and the Leek, loses itself among the
sands near Leyden, in the Netherlands; 4. The Maes, or Meuse,
which rises in France, and discharges itself into the North Sea
above Briel; 5. The Scheldt, which rises in France, and takes the
name of De Hondt, at its entrance into the North Sea, near Flush-
ing ; 6. The Thames, which rises near Cirencester, in England, and
falls into the sea below Sheerness; and, 7* The Tay, which rises
among the mountains in the county of Per Ji, in Scotland, and falls
into the North Sea above St. Andrew’s. {Reward, 7 counters.)
184. Describe the Rivers that flow into the British Channel. The two
principal rivers that flow into the British Channel are, 1. The Seine,
which rises in France, and falls into the British Channel between
Havre de Grace and Honfleur; and, 2. The Somme, which rises
near the source of the Scheldt, in France, and falls into the British
Channel between Crotoy and St. Valery. {Reward, 2 counters.)
185. Describe the Rivers which flow into the Atlantic Ocean. The eleven
principal rivers of Europe, which flow into the Atlantic, are, 1. The
Shannon, which rises in Ireland, and falls into the Atlantic, on the
west of that island; 2. The Severn, which rises among the moun-
tains of Montgomeryshire, in Wales, and runs into the Atlantic
below Bristol; 3. The Loire, which has its source in Mont Gerbier-
le-Joux, in France, and falls into the Atlantic at Paimbeuf; 4. The
Charente, -yvhich rises in Limousin, in France, and falls into the sea
opposite the Island of Oleron ; 5. The Garonne, which rises in the
Val d'Aran, in the Pyrenees, and after joining the Dordogne, takes the
name of Gironde to its confluence with the Atlantic ; 6. The Adour,
which has its source in the Pyrenees, and falls into the Atlantic at
Bayonne; 7- The Minho, which rises near Castro-del-Rey, in
Spain, and falls into the Atlantic below Guardia ; 8. The Douro,
which rises on the frontiers of Arragon, and falls into the Atlantic
near Oporto; 9. The Tagus, which rises on the confines of Arra-
gon, and discharges itself into the Atlantic below Lisbon; 10.
The Guadiana, which rises in La Mancha, and runs into the Atlantic
near Tavira; and, 11. The Guadalquiver, which rises on the con-
fines of Murcia, in Spain, and runs into the Atlantic at San Lucar.
{Reward, 11 counters.)
186. Describe the Rivers that flow into the Mediterranean. The four
principal European rivers which flow into the Mediterranean Sea,
are, 1. The Ebro, which rises in Asturias, in Spain, and falls into
the Mediterranean below Tortosa; 2. The Rhone, which has its
source in Mount Furca, crosses the Lake of Geneva, and falls into
the Mediterranean by several mouths; 3. The Arno, which rises in
the Apennines, to the East of Tuscany, and falls into the Mediter-
ranean north of Leghorn; and, 4. The Tiber, which rises in the
Apennines near Camaldoli, and falls into the Mediterranean at
Ostia. {Reward, 4 counters.)
187. Describe the Rivers that flow into the Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of
Venice. The two principal rivers which flow into the Adriatic,
or Gulf of Venice, are, 1. The Po, which rises near Mount Viso,


and falls into the Gulf of Venice, near the Lake of Comacchio;
and 2. The Adige, which has its source among the mountains ot
Tyrol, and falls into the Gulf of Venice near the outlet of the Po.
(Reward, 2 counters.) . _ . c; /
188. Describe the European Rivers that fiow into the Euxine, or Btack
Sea. The three principal rivers of Europe which flow into the
Euxine, or Black Sea, are, l.The Danube, which rises m the Black
Forest, in the Grand Duchy of Baden, and falls into the Black Sea
by several outlets; 2. The Dniester, which has its source among
the Krapak, or Carpathian Mountains, in Polish Gallicia, and falls
into the Black Sea below Akerman; and, 3. The Dnieper, or
ancient Borysthenes, which has its source in Russia, and falls into
the Black Sea at Otchakow. ( Reward , 3 counters.')
189. Describe the principal River that flows into the Sea of Azof. "“The
Don, or ancient Tana’is, which rises in the government of Toula, m
Russia, and falls into the Sea of Azof, at Azof. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON XII.
RIVERS OP EUROPE EMPTYING THEMSELVES INTO THE LARGER
RIVERS.
(See Note on Lesson XI.)
190. How many principal Rivers of Europe fall into other Rivers ?
There are thirty-two principal rivers of Europe which fall into
other rivers ; namely, one into the Vistula; one into the Oder ; four
into the Rhine; one into the Maees, or Meuse; two
Scheldt; three into the Seine ; four into the Loire ; one into the»
Mayenne ; one into the Sarthe ; three into the Garonne; three into
the Rhone; two into the P 6; and six into the Danube. ( Reward,
13 counters.)
191. Describe the River that falls into the Vistula ?■ The Bug, which
is the principal river that falls into the Vistula, has its source near
Beltz, in Poland, and falls into the Vistula above Warsaw. {Re-
ward, 1 counter.)
192. Describe the River that falls into the Oder. The Warta, which
is the principal river that falls into the Oder, rises near Mistow, in
Poland, and joins the Oder at Custrin. {Reward, 1 counter.)
193. Describe the Rivers which fall into the Rhine.- The four principal
rivers that fall into the Rhine are, 1. The Necfcer, whose source is
near that of the Danube, and falls into the Rhine at Manheim; 2.
The Aar, which rises near Mount Schreckhorn, in Switzerland,
and empties itself into the Rhine opposite to Waldshut; 3. The
Maine, which rises in Bavaria, and joins the Rhine near Mayence,
or Mentz; and, 4. The Moselle, which, rising in the Vosges moun-
tains, empties itself into the Rhine at Coblentz. {Reward, 4
counters.)
194. Describe the River which falls into the Maes, or Meuse. The
Sambre, which is the principal river that empties itself into the
Maes, or Meuse, rises near Capelle, and joins the Meuse at Namur.
{Reward, 1 counter.)
195. Describe the Rivers which fall into the Scheldt. —•—The two prin-
cipal rivers which fall into the Scheldt, are, 1. The Scarpe, which
rises in France, and joins the Scheldt below St. Amand; and, 2.
The Lys, which also rises in France, and falls into the Scheldt at
Ghent. {Reward, 2 counters.)
196. Describe the Rivers which empty themselves into the Seine. The
three principal rivers which fall into the Seine are, 1. The Yonne,
which unites with the Seine at Montereau-Faut-Yonne; 2. The
Marne, which joins with the Seine below Charenton; and, 3. The
Oise, which falls into the Seine below Pontoise. {Reward, 3
counters.)
197- Describe the Rivers falling into the Loire. The four principal
rivers which fall into the Loire are, 1. The Allier, which joins the
Loire below Nevers; 2. The Vienne, which unites with the Loire
at Cande; 3. The Cher, which falls into the Loire between Tours
and Saumur; and, 4. The Mayenne, which falls into the Loire
below Angers. {Reward, 4 counters.)
198. Describe the River which falls into the Mayenne. The river
which falls into the Mayenne is the Sarthe, which empties itself
into the Mayenne, opposite the Isle of St. Aubin, near Angers.
{Reward, 1 counter.)
199. Describe the River which falls into the Sarthe. The river which
falls into the Sarthe is the Loir, which unites with the Sarthe above
Angers. {Reward, 1 counter.)
200. Describe the Rivers which fall into the Garonne. The three
principal rivers which empty themselves into the Garonne are, 1.
The Tarn, which falls into the Garonne at Moissac; 2. The Lot,
which unites with the Garonne at Aiguillon; and, 3. The Dordogne,
which, empties itself into the Garonne below Bordeaux. {Reward,
3 counters.)
201. Describe the Rivers which empty themselves into the Rhone. The
three principal rivers which fall into the Rhone are, 1. The Sabne,
which rises in the Vosges mountains, and falls into the Rhone, at
Lyons ; 2. The Isere, which rises in Mont Iserno, in Savoy, and
unites with the Rhone between Tournon and Valence; and, 3. The
Durance, which rises in the Alps, and falls into the Rhone below
Avignon. {Reward, 3 counters.)
202. Describe the Rivers which fall into the P 6. The two principal
rivers which empty themselves into the P 6 are, 1. The Adda, which
rises in the Grisons, and falls into the P 6 between Cremona and
Piacenza; and, 2. The Tessino, which rises near Mont St. Gothard,
runs through Lake Maggiore, and falls into the Po near that city.
{Reward, 2 counters.)
203. Describe the Rivers which fall into the Danube. The seven prin-
cipal rivers which fall into the Danube are, 1. The Inn, which rises
in the Grisons country, and empties itself into the Danube at Pas-
*sau ; 2. The Lech, which rises in the mountains of Tyrol, and dis-
charges itself into the Danube near Donauwert; 3. The Iser, which
rises in the mountains of Tyrol, and falls into the Danube between
Strawbing and Passau; 4. The Drove, which rises in the moun-
tains of Tyrol, and joins the Danube near the latter place ; 5. The
Save, which rises in Carniola, and empties itself into the Danube be-
tween Semlin and Belgrade; fi. The Theiss, which rises in the eastern
part of the Carpathian Mountains, and enters the Danube above
Belgrade ; and, 7. The Truth, which rises in the Carpathian Moun-
tains, and discharges itself into the Danube, near Galatz. {Reward,
7 counters.)
LESSON XIII.
DIVISION OP COUNTRIES IN THE NORTH OF EUROPE.
204. How is the United Kingdom of Great Britain divided ? The
United Kingdom of Great Britain consists of four parts: 1. Eng-
land, capital London ; 2 Scotland, capital Edinburgh; 3. Ireland,
capital Dublin ; and, 4. Several small Islands, as more particularly
expressed in the First Section of the Geographical Game of the
British Islands. {Reward, 4 counters.)
205. How is Denmark divided ? Denmark consists of Continental
Territory and Islands. The continental part comprises, 1. Jutland,
capital Wiborg; 2. The Duchy of Holstein, chief cities Kiel and
Altona ; 3. The Duchy of Lauenburgh, capital Lauenburgh. The
Islands consist of, 1. Iceland, chief towns Reykeavik and Skaalholt;
2. The Islands of Faro, in the Atlantic, chief town Thorshaven ;
3. The Island of Sylt, in the North Sea; 4. The Islands of Born-
holm, Lciland, Zealand, capital Copenhagen, and Fuhnen, capital
Odensee, in the Baltic. {Reward, 7 counters.)
206. How is Sweden divided ? Sweden consists of three parts; namely,
1. Sweden Proper, capital Stockholm ; 2. Norway, capital Chris-
tiana; 3. The Islands, namely, Gothland, capital Wisby, and
Oeland, in the Baltic; and, 4. The Islands on the coast of Norway,
the principal of which are Luffbden and Hindoen. {Reward, 4
counters.)
207- Into how many principal parts may Russia, for the convenience of
description, be divided ? Russia consists of three principal parts,
besides the Islands ; namely, 1. The Northern Division, which con-
tains sixteen governments, or provinces ; chief cities, Petersburgh,
Wiborg, Abo, Archangel, Novgorod, Reval, Riga, &c.; 2. The
Central Division, which contains ten governments; chief cities
Moscow, Smolensk©, Nisnei-Novgorod, &c.; 3. The Southern Divi-
sion, which contains fifteen governments; chief cities, Kiev, Poltawa,
Bender, Ismael, Perekop, &c.; 4. The Islands of Adland, Dagho,
and Oesel, in the Baltic; and Kalgouef Nova Zembla, Vaigatch,
and Spitzbergen, in the Frozen Ocean; with some others of less note.
{Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON XIV.
DIVISION OP THE MIDLAND COUNTRIES OF EUROPE.
DIVISION OP FRANCE.
208. What have you to observe on the Division of France ? France was
formerly divided into thirty-two provinces; of which twenty were
on the frontiers, and twelve in the interior: it is now divided into
eighty-six departments, of which eighty-four have their; chief towns
in the old provinces, and two are recent additions to the French
territory. {Reward, 2 counters.)
PROVINCES.
Describe the relative position of the ancient French Provinces. The
twenty frontier provinces formed a kind of square, of which one side
was to the north, another to the east, a third to the south, and
another to the west; the twelve central provinces formed a triangle,
with its apex towards the south, and each side included four pro-
vinces. {Reward, 2 counters.)
Name the Provinces on the Northern Frontier. The four northern
frontier provinces of France were, 1. Normandy, capital Rouen; 2.
Picardy, capital Amiens ;3. Artois, capital Arras; and, 4. Flanders,
capital Lille. {Reward, 4 counters.)
Name the Provinces on the Eastern Frontier. The six eastern fron-
tier provinces of France were, 1. Lorraine, capital Nancy; 2. Alsace,
capital Strasburg; 3. Franche-Comte, capital Besan^on; 4. Bur-
gundy, capital Dijon; 5. Lyonnois, capital Lyons; and, 6. Dauphine,
capital Grenoble. {Reward, 6 counters.)
Name the Provinces on the Southern Frontier. The five southern
frontier provinces of France were, 1 .Provence, capital Aix; 2. Lan-
guedoc, capital Toulouse; 3. Roussillon, capital Perpignan; 4. The
Comte de Foix, principal towns Foix and Pamiers ; and, 5. Bearn,
capital Pau. {Reward, 5 counters.)
Name the Provinces on the Western Frontier. The five western
frontier provinces of France were, 1. Guienne, capital Bordeaux; 2.
Saintonge and Angoumois, principal towns Saintes and Angouleme;
3. Poitou, capital Poitiers; 4. Aunis, capital Rochelle; and, 5. Bre-
tagne, capital Rennes, principal town Nantes. {Reward, 5 counters.^
Name the Central Provinces towards the North. The four central
French provinces towards the north were, 1. Anjou, capital Angers ;
2. Maine, capital Le Mans ; 3. Orleannois, capital Orleans ; and, 4.
The Isle of France, capital Paris, the metropolis of the kingdom.
{Reward, 4 counters.)
Name the Central Provinces towards the East ? The four central
French provinces towards the east were, 1. Champagne, capital
Troyes; 2. Nivernois, capital Nevers; 3. Bourbonnois, capital Mou-
lins; and, 4. Auvergne, capital Clermont. {Reward, 4 counters.)


Quest.
Name the Central Provinces towards the West. The four central
French Provinces towards the west were, 1. Limosin, capital Limoges,
2. Marche, capital Gueret; 3. Berri, capital Bourges; and, 4. Tou-
raine, capital Tours. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
NORTHERN DEPARTMENTS.
How many Departments have their chief Towns situated in Normandy ?
Five departments have their capitals, or chief towns, in Nor-
mandy ; namely, 1. Lower Seine, capital Rouen, principal towns
Dieppe, Yvetot, and Havre de Grace ; 2. Eure, capital Evreux, chief
towns Pont-Andemer and Louviers; 3. Calvados, capital Caen,
chief towns Bayeux and Falaise; 4. La Manche, capital St. L 6, chief
towns Cherbourg, Valogne, Coutances, and Avranches; and, 5.
Orne, capital ( Reward, 5 counters.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in Picardy.— The de-
partment which has its capital in Picardy, is that of the Somme,
capital Amiens. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
Name the Department which has its capital in Artois. The depart-
ment which has its capital in Artois, is that of the Pas-de- Calais,
capital Arras, chief towns Calais, Boulogne, St. Omer, and Mon-
treuil. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in French Flanders.
The department which has its capital in French Flanders, is that of
the North, capital Lille, or Lisle, chief towns Dunkirk, Douay, and
Avesnes. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
EASTERN DEPARTMENTS.
How many Departments have their Capitals in Lorraine ? Four
departments have their capitals in Lorraine, namely, 1. La Meurthe,
capital Nancy, chief towns Sarrebourg and Luneville; 2. Vosges,
capital Epinal; 3. Meuse, capital Bar-le-duc; and, 4. Moselle,
capital Metz. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Alsace ? Two depart-
ments have their capitals in Alsace, namely, 1. Lower Rhine, capital
Strasburgh, chief towns Wissemburgh and Schelestadt; and, 2.
Upper Rhine, capital Colmar, chief towns Altkirch and Belfort.
( Reward, 2 counters.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Franche-Comte ?
Three departments have their capitals in Franche-Comte, namely,
1. Doubs, capital chief towns St. Hippolyte and Pont-
arlier; 2. Upper Sabne, capital Vesoul; and, 3. Mont Jura, capital
Lons-le-Saulnier, chief town Dole. ( Reward , 3 counters.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Burgundy ? Four
departments have their capitals in Burgundy, namely, L Cote d’Or,
capital Dijon, chief towns Beaune and Semur; 2. Yonne, capital
Auxerre, chief towns Tonnerre and Avallon; 3. Sabne-et-Loire,
capital Macon; and, 4. Ain, capital Bourg, chief town Nantua.
( Reward, 4 counters.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Lyonnois 9 Two
departments have their capitals in Lyonnois, namely, 1. Rhone,
capital Lyons; and, 2. Loire, capital Montbrison, chief town St.
Etienne. {Reward, 2 counters.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Dauphine ?■ Three
departments have their capitals in Dauphine, namely, 1. I sere,
capital Grenoble; 2. Drome, capital Valence; and, 3. Upper Alps,
capital Gap. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
SOUTHERN DEPARTMENTS.
How many Departments have their Capitals in Provence ? Three
departments have their capitals in Provence, namely, 1. Lower Alps,
capital Digne, chief towns Barcelonette and Forcalquier; 2. Var,
capital Draguignan, chief towns Toulon, Grasse, and Frejus ; and,
3. Mouths of the Rhone, capital Marseilles, chief town Aix. ( Reward,
3 counters.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Languedoc ? Nine
departments have their capitals in Languedoc, namely, 1. Upper
Garonne, capital Toulouse; 2. Tarn, capital Albi; 3. Tarn et
Garonne, capital Montauban; 4. Aude, capital Carcassone, chief
towns Castlenaudary and Narbonne ; 5. Herault, capital Mont-
pellier, chief towns Lodeve and Beziers ; 6. Gard, capital Nismes,
chief towns Alais and Uzes; 7- Lozere, capital Mende; 8. Upper
Loire, capital Le Puy; and, 9. Ardeche, capital Privas. ( Reward,
9 counters.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in Roussillon. The
department, which has its capital in Roussillon, is that of the Eastern
Pyrenees, capital Perpignan. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in the Comte de Foix.
The department which has its capital in the Comte de Foix, is that
of Arriege (which, being partly in Languedoc, is sometimes
reckoned among the departments of that province), capital Foix.
( Reward, 1 counter.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in Bearn. —.—The depart-
ment which has its capital in the province of Bearn, is that of the
Lower Pyrenees, capital Pau, chief towns Orthez and Oleron. (Re-
ward, 1 counter.)
WESTERN DEPARTMENTS.
How many Departments have their Capitals in Guyenne and Gascony ?
Eight departments have their capitals, or chief towns, in Guy-
enne and Gascony, namely, 1. Gironde, capital Bordeaux; 2. Dor-
dogne, capital Perigueux; 3. Lot et Garonne, capital Agen; 4. Lot,
capital Cahors, chief town Figeac ; 5. Aveyron, capital Rhodez ; 6.
Landez, capital Mont-de-Marsan; 7* Gers, capital Auch, chief
towns Condom and Lectoure; and, 8. Upper Pyrenees, capital
Tarbes. ( Reward, 8 counters.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in Saintonge.—- —The
department, which has its capital in Saintonge, is that of Lower
Quest.
Charente, capital Rochelle, chief towns Saintes and St.-Jean
d’Angely. ( Reward, 1 counter.')
Name the Department which has its Capital in Angoumois. —-—The
department which has its capital in the province of Angoumois, is
that of Charente, capital Angouleme. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
How many Departments have their Capitals inPoitou ? Three depart-
ments have their capitals in Poitou, namely, 1. Vienne, capital Poi-
tiers ; 2. Two Sevres, capital Niort, chief town Bressuire ; and, 3.
La Vendee, capital Fontenoy-le-Peuple. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Bretagne ? -Five de-
partments have their capitals in Bretagne, namely, 1. Ille et Vilaine,
capital Rennes, chief towns St. Malo and Vitre; 2. Lower Loire,
capital Nantes; 3. Morbihan, capital Vannes, chief towns Ploermel,
1/Orient, and Port Louis; 4. Finistere, capital Quimper, chief town
Brest; and, 5. Cotes-du-Nord, capital St. Brieux. (Reward, 5
counters.)
CENTRAL, DEPARTMENTS TOWARDS THE NORTH.
How many Departments have their Capitals in what was formerly called
the Isle of France ? Five departments have their capitals in the
Isle of France, namely, 1. Seine, capital Paris, sub-prefectures St.
Denis and Sceaux ; 2. Seine et Oise, capital Versailles ; 3. Seine et
Marne, capital Melun, chief towns Coulommiers, Provins, and Fon-
tainebleau; 4. Aisne, capital Laon, chief town Soissons; and, 5.
Oise, capital Beauvais. ( Reward, 5 counters.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Orleannois ? —-Three
m departments have their capitals in Orleannois, namely, 1. Loirei,
, Orleans, chief towns Pithiviers and Montargis ; 2. Loire et
Cher, capital Blois; and, 3. Eure et Loire, capital Chartres, chief
town Dreux. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Maine ? Two de-
partments' have their capitals in Maine, namely, 1. Sarthe, capital
Le Mans; and, 2. Mayenne, capital Laval. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in Anjou. The depart-
ment, which has its capital in Anjou, is that of the Mayenne et Loire,
capital Angers, chief towns Saumur, Bauge, and Beaupreau.
ward, I counter.)
CENTRAL DEPARTMENTS TOWARDS THE EAST.
How many Departments have their Capitals in Champagne ?——Four
departments have their capitals in Champagne, namely, 1. Aube,
capital Troyes; 2. Upper Marne, capital Chaumont; 3. Marne,
capital Chalons-sur-Marne, chief towns Rheims and St. Menehould;
and, 4. Ardennes, capital Sedan, chief town Mezieres. ( Reward, 4
counters.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in Nivernois. The de-
partment which has its capital in Nivernois, is that of the Nievre,
capital Nevers. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in Bourbonnois. The
department which has its capital in the province of Bourbonnois, is
that of the Allier, capital Moulins. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in Auvergne ? Two
departments have their capitals in Auvergne, namely, 1. Puy-de-
Dome, capital Clermont, chief town Riom; and, 2. Cantal, capital
Aurillac. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
CENTRAL DEPARTMENTS TOWARDS THE WEST.
How many Departments have their Capitals in Limosin f Two
departments have their capitals in Limosin, namely, 1. Correze,
capital Tulle, chief town Brives-la-Gaillarde; and, 2. Upper Vienne,
capital Limoges. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in Marche. The depart-
ment, which has its capital in the province of Marche, is that of the
Creuse, capital Gueret. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
How many Departments have their Capitals in the former Duchy of
Berri ?——Two departments have their capitals in Berri, namely,
1. Cher, capital Bourges, chief town Sancerre; and, 2. Indre,
capital Chateauroux. ( Reward, 2 coimters.)
Name the Department which has its Capital in Touraine. The de-
partment which has its capital in Touraine, is that of the Indre et
Loire, capital Tours, chief town Loches. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
DEPARTMENTS OF CORSICA AND IN THE COUNTY OF VENAISSIN.
Which are the two Departments not included in the ancient Provinces of
France ? The two departments not included in the ancient pro-
vinces are, 1. Corsica, in the island of the same name, capital Bastia,
chief town Ajaccio; and, 2. Vaucluse, in the ancient county of
Venaissin, or Avignon, capital Avignon, chief towns Orange and
Carpentras. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
LESSON XV.
DIVISION OP GERMANY.
209. How many States are comprised in Germany ? Germany com-
prises thirty-nine states; namely, one Empire; five Kingdoms;
six Principalities; six Grand-Duchies; ten Principalities, Grand-
Duchies, and Duchies of the House of Saxony; six Duchies ; one
County; and four Free Cities: these collectively form the Germanic
Confederacy. (Reward, 8 counters.)
Exercises on Lesson XV.
What Empire is that which constitutes one of the Germanic States ?
The Empire, which constitutes one of the Germanic states, is that
of Austria, capital Vienna. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
Which are the five Kingdoms of Germany ? The five Germanic
Kingdoms are, 1. Prussia, capital Berlin; 2. Bavaria, capital Munich ;


3. Wurtemberg, capital Stuttgardt; 4. Hanover, capital Hanovei ,
and, 5. Saxony, capital Dresden. ( Reward, s counters.)
Which are the six Principalities of Germany ? The six Prmcipa
of Germany are, 1. Hesse-Cassel, capital Cassel; 2. Hohenzollern-
Heckingen; 3. Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen ; 4. Hesse-Homberg , 5.
Schaumberg-Lippe; and, 6. Lippe-Detmold. (Reward, 6 punters j
Which are the six Grand-Duchies of Germany ?—-The six Grand-
Duchies of Germany are, 1. Mecklenburgh-Schwerm capital
Schwerin* 2. Mecklenburgh-Strehtz, capital Stiehtz, S. Ulden-
burgh, capital Oldenburgh ; 4. Luxemburgh, capital Luxemburgh ;
5. Hesse-Darmstadt, capital Darmstadt; and, 6, Baden, capital
Carlsruhe. ( Reward, 6 counters.) .
Which are the ten Principalities, Grand-Duchies, and Duchies, belong-
ing to the House of Saxe ? The ten Principalities Grand-
Duchies, and Duchies of the House of Saxe axe, I. Weimar 2. Gotha,
3. Cobourg, 4. Meinungen, 5. Ihldburghausen, 6.Schwartzberg-Son-
dershausen, 7- Schwartzberg-Rudolstadt, 8. Lichtenstein, 9. and 10.
Reuss, Elder and Younger Branches, capital Greitz. ( Reward. ,
10 counters.) _ , . .
Name the six Duchies in Germany. The six Duchies in Germany
are, 1. Brunswick, capital Brunswick; 2. Holstein and Lauenburgh,
chief towns Gluckstadt, Altona, Kiel, and Lauenburgh ; 3. Nassau,
chief town Nassau ; 4. Anhalt-Dessau, chief town Dessau; 5. Anhalt-
Bernberg, chief town Bernberg; and 6. Anhalt-Kothen, chief town
Kothen. ( Reward, 6 counters.) .
Name the County in Germany. The County in Germany is Waldeck,
capital Corbach. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
Which are the four Free Cities of Germany. The Four Free Cities of
Germany are, 1. Liibeck, 2. Hamburgh, 3. Bremen, and 4. Frank-
fort-on-the Maine. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON XVI.
DIVISION OF POLAND.
210. How is Poland divided?— lnto three parts; namely, 1. The
Kingdom of Poland, capital Warsaw, principal cities Polok, Duna-
bero-, Moghilef, Mittau, Wilna, Grodno, and Sandomir; 2. The
Grand-Duchy of Posen (which belongs to Prussia), principal cities
Posen, Thorn, and Dantzick; and, 3. Gallicia (which belongs to
Austria), principal towns Leopold, or Lemberg, and Zator. Besides
these, there is Cracow, a free city, under the protection of Russia,
Austria, and Prussia. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
DIVISION OF THE NETHERLANDS-
-211. How is the Kingdom of the Netherlands divided ? The Kingdom
of the Netherlands consists of two principal parts; namely, 1. Hol-
land, and, 2. Belgium. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
Exercise on the Netherlands.
How is Holland divided? Holland comprises eight provinces;
namely, 1. Holland, properly so called, principal cities Amsterdam,
Rotterdam, Leyden, and the Hague ; 2. Zeeland, capital Middle-
burgh; 3. Utrecht, capital Utrecht; 4. Guelderland, chief towns
Arnheim and Nimeguen; 5. Overyssel, chief towns Zwolle and
Deventer; 6. Groningen, capital Groningen; 7- Friesland, capital
Lieuarden; and, 8. Drenthe, chief town Meppel. ( Reward, 8
counters.)
How is Belgium divided ?■ Belgium is divided into eight districts;
namely, 1. Flanders, principal cities Ghent and Bruges; 2. Antwerp,
capital Antwerp; 3. Hainault, capital Mons; 4. Namur, capital
Namur; 5. Brabant, principal towns Bois-le-Duc, Brussels, Mech-
lin, or Malines, and Louvain; 6. Liege, capital Liege ; 7- Limburgh,
capital Maestricht; and, 8. The Grand Duchy of Luxemburgh, capi-
tal Luxemburgh, which forms a member of the Germanic confede-
racy. ( Reward, 8 counters.)
DIVISION OF SWITZERLAND.
212. How is Switzerland divided ?• Switzerland is divided into twenty-
two Cantons, of which nine are Catholic, eight Protestant, and fve
mixed, or in which both religions are exercised. ( Reward, 3 coun-
ters.)
Exercise on Switzerland.
Which are the Catholic Cantons of Switzerland ? The nine Catholic
Cantons of Switzerland are, 1 Friburgh, capital Friburgh; 2. Lu-
cerne, capital Lucerne; 3. Schweitz, capital Schweitz; 4. Soleure,
capital Soleure ; 5. Tesin, chief place Belinzona; 6. Underwalden,
chief place, Stantz ; 7. Uri, chief place Altorff; 8, The Valais, chief
place Sion; and, 9. Zug, capital Zug. ( Reward, 9 counters.)
Which are the Protestant Cantons ?■—■ —The eight Protestant cantons
of Switzerland are, 1. Argovia, chief town Aarau, or Argau; 2.
Basle, capital Basle; 3. Berne, capital Berne: 4. Geneva, capital
Geneva ; 5. Neufchdtel, capital Neufchatel, 6. Schaffhausen, capital
Schaffhausen; 7- Pays de Vaud, chief town Lausanne; and, 8.
Zurich, capital Zurich. ( Reward, 8 counters.) ♦
Which are the mixed Cantons ? The five Cantons, in which both the
Catholic and Protestant forms of religion are exercised, are, 1. Ap-
penzel, capital Appenzel; 2. Claris, capital Glaris; 3. Grisons, chief
town Coire, or Chur; 4. St. Gall, capital St. Gall; and, 5. Thurgau,
chief town Frauenfeld. ( Reward, 5 counters.)
KINGDOM OF SARDINIA.
213. Of whcvt does the Kingdom of Sardinia consist ? The Kingdom of
Sardinia comprises six principal divisions : 1. The Island of Sardinia,
capital Cagliari, in the Mediterranean; and, on the continent, 2.
Savoy, capital Chamberi; 3. Piedmont, with the county of Nice,
capital Turin, the metropolis of the kingdom; 4. The Duchy of
QaeS ‘'Montferrat, capital Casale ; 5. Par of the Duchy of Milan, capital
Alessandria; and, 6. The Genoese Territory, capital Genoa. (Re-
ward, 6 counters.)
DIVISION OF PRUSSIA.
214 Of how many parts do the Prussian dominions consist ?- The
Kingdom of Prussia comprehends seven provinces in Germany, and
three out of Germany. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
The seven provinces in Germany are, 1. The Duchy of Brandenhurgh,
capital Berlin, the metropolis of the kingdom; 2. The Duchy oj
Pomerania, capital Stettin; 3. Silesia, capital Breslau ; 4. The
Duchy of Saxony, capital Magdeburgh; 5. Westphalia, capital
Munster; 6. The Duchy of Juliers, Cleves, and Berg, capital Cleves,
chief towns Juliers and Dusseldorf; and, 7- The Grand Duchy of
the Lower Rhine, capital Cologne. ( Reward, 7 counters.)
r phe three provinces out of Germany are, 1. Eastern, ox Ducal Prussia,
capital Koenigsberg ; 2. TVestern Prussia, capital Dantzic ; and, 3.
The Grand Duchy of Posen, capital Posen. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
division of bohemia.
215. How is Bohemia divided ? Bohemia is divided into three parts;
namely, 1. Bohemia, properly so called, capital Prague; 2. The
Marggraviate of Moravia, principal towns Olmutz, Brunn, and
Austerlitz ; and, 3. Austrian Silesia, capital Troppau. ( Reward,
3 counters.')
DIVISION OF HUNGARY.
216. How is Hungary divided ? The Kingdom of Hungary consists
of four parts; namely, I. Upper Hungary, capital Presburgh; 2.
Lower Hungary, capital Buda ; 3. Sclavonia, capital Peterwaradin;
and, 4. Transylvania, capital Hermenstadt. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON XVII.
DIVISION OF COUNTRIES IN THE SOUTH OF EUROPE.
DIVISION OF PORTUGAL.
217. How is Portugal divided ? Portugal is divided into six parts; 1.
The Province of Entre-Douro-e-Minho, capital Braga, principal city
Oporto ; 2. The Province of Traz-os-Montes, principal towns. Bra-
ganza and Miranda; 3. The Province of Beira, capital Coimbra;
4. The Province of Estramadura, capital Lisbon, the metropolis of
the kingdom; 5. The Province of Alentejo, capital Lvora, and, 0.
The Kingdom of Algarve, capitalTavira. ( Reward, 6 counters.)
DIVISION OF SPAIN.
218. How is Spain divided ? Spain is divided into fourteen provinces;
namely, three to the North, six in the middle, two to the South, and
three to the East. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
Exercise on Spain.
Which are the Northern Provinces of Spain ? The three Provinces
of Spain situated in the North are, 1. The Kingdom of Galicia, capi-
tal St. Jago de Compostella, principal towns Corunna and Ferrol;
2. The Principality of Asturias, capital Oviedo; and, 3. The Pro-
vince of Biscay, capital Bilboa. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
Which are the Six Central Provinces of Spain ? -The six Central
Provinces of Spain are, 1. The Kingdom of Navarre, capital Pam-
peluna; 2. The Kingdom of Arragon, capital Saragossa; 3. The
Kingdom of Old Castile, capital Burgos, principal towns Valladolid
and Segovia; 4. The Kingdom of Leon, capital Leon, principal
town Salamanca; 5. The Province of New Castile, capital Madrid,
the metropolis of Spain; and, 6. The Province of Estramadura,
capital Badajoz, ( Reward, 6 counters.)
Which are the two Southern Provinces of Spain ?—■—The two Southern
Provinces of Spain are, 1. The Province of Andalusia, capital Seville,
principal town Cadiz; and, 2. The Kingdom of Granada, capital
Granada, principal town Malaga. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
Which are the Eastern Provinces of Spain ? The three Eastern
Provinces of Spain are, 1. The Kingdom of Murcia, capital Murcia,
principal town Carthagena; 2. The Kingdom of Valencia, capital
Valencia, principal town Alicant; and, 3. The Principality of
Catalonia, capital Barcelona, principal town Rosas. ( Reward, 3
counters.)
Note. —The Spanish Islands in the Mediterranean are usually deno-
minated The Kingdom of Majorca ; and consist of Majorca, capital
Palma; Minorca, capital Citadella, chief town Port Mahon; Ivitja,
capital Ivi<^a; and Formentera, a desert island, abounding in ser-
pents. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON XVIII.
DIVISION OF ITALY.
219. How is Italy divided ? Italy consists of eleven divisions; five of
which are large, and six small. The five larger are, 1. The States
of the King of Sardinia ; 2. The Kingdom of Venetian-Lombardy,
subject to Austria; 3. The Grand Duchy of Tuscany; 4. The
States of the Pope; and, 5. The Kingdom of Naples. The six
smaller divisions are, 1. The Duchy of Parma, Placentia, and
Guastella; 2. The Grand Duchy of Modena; 3. The Duchy of
Massa, with the Principality of Carrara ; 4. The Duchy of Lucca;
5. The Principality of Monaco ; and, 6. The Republic of San Ma-
rino. ( Reward, 11 counters.)
220. Describe the Dominions of the King of Sardinia in Italy,—* —The
dominions of the King of Sardinia in Italy are, 1. Piedmont, princi-


Quest.
pal towns Turin, Aosta, Asti, Saluzzo, and Nice; 2. The State of
Genoa, principal places Genoa,, Savona, and Chiavari; 3. The
Duchy of Montferrat, capital Casale ; and, 4. Part of the Duchy of
Milan, capital Alessandria. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
221. Describe the Kingdom of Venetian-Lombardy The Kingdom of
Venetian-Lombardy comprises, 1. The remainder of the Duchy of
Milan, principal cities Milan, Cremona, Mantua; and, 2. The State
of' Venice, principal cities Venice, Bergamo, Brescia, Verona,
Vicenza, Padua, Treviso, and Udina. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
222. What is the Grand Duchy of Tuscany ?■ The Grand Duchy of
Tuscany is one of the five larger divisions of Italy; its principal
cities are Florence, Leghorn, Pisa, Piombino, and Sienna. The
Grand Duke of Tuscany also possesses the Isle of Elba, chief towns
Porto Ferrajo and Porto Longone. ( Reward, 7 counters.)
223. What are the Principal Cities in the States of the Pope ? The
principal cities in the States of the Pope, which form one of the five
larger divisions of Italy, are Rome, Ferrara, Bologna, Urbino, Pe-
rugia, Orvieto, Ravenna, Ancona, Spoleto, CivitaVecchia, Magliano,
and Benevento, all which are capitals of provinces named after
them. ( Reward, 12 counters.)
224. What is the Kingdom of Naples? The Kingdom of Naples is
one of the five large divisions of Italy, and its principal cities are
Naples, Salerno, Manfredonia, Tarento, Cosenza, Capua, Conza,
Brindisi, and Reggio. [Reward, 9 counters.)
Note. Naples, with the Island of Sicily, capital Palermo, constitutes
the kingdom of the Two Sicilies. [Reward, 1 counter.)
225. What is the Duchy of Parma, S;c. ? The Duchy of Parma is one
of the six lesser divisions of Italy, principal cities Parma, Placentia,
and Guastella. [Reward, 3 conuters.)
226. What is the Grand Duchy of Modena ? The Grand Duchy of
Modena is one of the six lesser divisions of Italy ; and its principal
towns are Modena, Reggio, and Mirandola. [Reward, 3 counters.)
227* What is the Duchy of Massa ? The Duchy of Massa is one of
the six lesser states of Italy, capital Massa ; and it is united with the
principality of Carrara, capital Carrara. (Reward, 2 counters.)
Note. This Duchy, on the demise of the present Duchess, will merge
into that of Modena. { Reward, 1 counter .)
228. What is the Duchy of Lucca ? -The Duchy of Lucca is one of
the six lesser states of Italy ; the capital is also called Lucca. [Re-
ward, 1 counter.)
229. What are the Principality of Monaco and the Republic of San
Marino ? The Principality of Monaco and the Republic of San
Marino are the two smallest states of Italy. Monaco is under the
protection of the King of Sardinia; and San Marino, in the States
of the Church, is under the protection of the Pope. The latter is
the least state in Europe. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON XIX.
DIVISION OF TURKEY.
230. How is Turkey divided ? Turkey in Europe is divided into two
parts. Northern and Southern, which last comprehends Ancient
Greece. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
Exercise on the Nineteenth Lesson.
What are the Divisions of Northern Turkey? Northern Turkey
contains seven provinces; namely, 1. Moldavia, capital Jassy, or
Yassi; 2. Wallachia, principal towns Bucharest and Tergovista;
3. Turkish Croatia, chief town Bihatz ; 4. Herzegovina, or Dalma-
tia, chief town Mostar; 5. Bosnia, chief towns Bosna-Serajo and
Banialucka; 6. Servia, capital Belgrade; and, 7. Bulgaria, capital
• Sophia. [Reward, 7 counters.)
What are the Divisions of Southern Turkey ? Southern Turkey
contains seven provinces ; namely, 1. Romania, or Roumelia, capital
cities Constantinople (the metropolis of European Turkey) and
Adrianople; 2. Albania, capital Scutari ; 3. The Pashalic of Salo-
mchi, or Macedonia, capital Salonichi; 4. The Pashalic of Janina,
or Thessaly, principal towns Janina, Larissa, and Butrinto; 5. The
Pashalic of Negropont, principal town Negropont; 6. Livadia, chief
towns Setines (ancient Athens) and Lepanto; and, 7. The Pashalic
of Morea, principal towns Corinth, Argos, Tripolizza, Misitra, and
Patras. [Reward, 7 counters.)
LESSON XX.
RELIGIONS AND LANGUAGES OF EUROPE.
RELIGIONS OF EUROPE.
231. V hat are the different Religions of Europe ? The Religions of
Europe may be reduced to three principal; namely, Judaism, Chris-
tianity, and Mohammedism. [Reward, 3 counters.)
Exercise on the Religions of Europe.
Where is Judaism professed ? The professors of Judaism, that is,
the Jews, are nowhere an independent body of people, but dispersed
over all countries; they are most numerous in Holland, Germany,
and Poland. [Reward, 1 counter.)
Where is Christianity professed? Christianity is professed through-
out almost the whole of Europe, and includes, 1. The Roman Ca-
tholic Religion, which prevails in Italy, Spain, Portugal, France,
Belgium, Hungary, and in many parts of Germany, Switzerland*
and Ireland; 2. The Protestant Religion,, which includes Lutheran-
ism, professed in Sweden, Denmark, and some northern provinces
Quest.
of Germany; Calvinism, which prevails in Holland, Scotland, and
some of the cantons of Switzerland; and the Church of England,
from which there are several dissenting sects ; 3. The Greek Church,
which is professed in Greece, and established in Russia. ( Reward ,
6 counters .)
Where is Mohammedism professed ? The profession of Mohamme-
dism in Europe is confined to the Turks, who are of the sect of
Omar, the first of the Califs, or successors of Mohammed; in which
they are distinguished from the Persians, who are of the sect of Ali,
the son-in-law of Mohammed. { Reward, 2 counters.)
LANGUAGES OF EUROPE
232. From what ancient Languages do the Dialects now spoken in Europe
derive their origin ? The languages now used in Europe are
derived from the Latin, the Teutonic, the Sclavonic, the ancient
Greek, and the Arabic and Tartar. ( Reward, 5 counters.)
Exercise on the Languages of Europe.
What Languages are derived from the Latin ? From the Latin are
formed the Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, and French Languages;
the latter of which is the farthest removed from the original source.
( Reward, 4 counters.)
Which are the Languages derived from the Teutonic ? From the
Teutonic are formed the German, Dutch, Flemish, Danish, Swedish,
and English languages; the latter is also much indebted to the
Greek, Latin, and French. ( Reward, 6 counters.)
Which are the Languages derived from the Sclavonic ? From the
Sclavonic are formed the Russian, or Muscovite, Hungarian, Polish,
and Bohemian languages. (Reward, 4 counters.)
What Modern European Language is derived from the Ancient Greek ?
From the ancient Greek is formed the modern Greek. ( Reward ,
1 counter.)
What European Language is derived from the Arabic and Tartar?
Irom the Arabic and Tartar is formed the Turkish language. They
are all three written from right to left. { Reward , 1 counter.)
LESSON XXI.
SOVEREIGNS AND GOVERNMENTS OF EUROPE.
233. Of what Description are the principal Sovereigns and Governments
of Europe? -They consist of one Ecclesiastical Prince, three
Emperors, fourteen Kings, two Republics, two Italian Grand
Dukes, three Italian Dukes or Duchesses, and one Italian Prince ; *
besides the Sovereigns already named in the German Confederacy,
No. 209. ( Reward, 7 counters •)
Exercise on the Twenty-first Lesson.
Who is the Ecclesiastical Prince ? The Pope, who resides at Rome.
(Reward, 1 counter .)
Who are the three Emperors in Europe? The three European
Emperors are, 1. The Emperor of Austria, who is also the King of
Bohemia, Hungary, and Venetian-Lombardy, and resides at Vienna;
2. The Emperor of Russia, also King of Poland, who resides at
Petersburgh; and, 3. The Grand Signor, or Sultan of Turkey, who
resides at Constantinople. ( Reward, 3 counters .)
Who are the fourteen Kings of Europe ? The fourteen Kings of
Europe are as follow : in the north, 1. The King of Great Britain
and Ireland; 2. The King of Denmark; 3. The King of Sweden
and Norway ; 4. The King of Hanover (who is also Sovereign of
Great Britain) : in the middle, 5. The King of France and Navarre;
6. The King of the Netherlands ; 7- The King of Prussia; 8. The
King of Bavaria ; 9. The King of Wilrtemburgh ; 10. The King of
Saxony : in the south, 11. The King of Portugal; 12. The King of
Spain ; 13. The King of Sardinia ; and, 14. The King of Naples and
Sicily, or of the Two Sicilies. (Reward , 14 counters.')
Which are the Republics in Europe ? The European Republics are,
1. The Helvetic, or Switz Republic, which consists of twenty-two
Cantons, united in a federative government, as more particularly
stated in No. 212 ; and, 2. The lonian Republic, as particularized
in No. 164. ( Reward, 2 counters .)
Who are the Italian Grand Dukes ? The two Italian Grand Dukes
are, 1. The Grand Duke of Tuscany, who is also Prince of Piom-
bino; and, 2. The Grand Duke of Modena. (Reward, 2 coun~
ters.)
Who are the three Italian Dukes or Duchesses ? 1. The Duchess of
Lucca; 2. The Duchess of Parma and Placentia; and, 3. The
Duchess of Massa and Carrara. (Reward, 3 counters .)
Who is the Italian Prince? The Prince of Monaco. (Reward, I
counter .)
How many kinds of Governments are there in Europe ? There are five
sorts of government in Europe; namely, 1. The Despotic; 2. The
Monarchical; 3. The Aristocratic; 4. The Democratic; and, 5. The
Mixed. (Reward, 5 counters .)
Describe these more particularly 1. The Despotic, is where a sove-
reign has the power of life and death over his subjects, and is
governed by no law but his own will: such is the government of
Turkey. 2. The Monarchical, is where a sovereign rules alone, but
is governed by laws; as in Prussia, and in most other kingdoms of
Europe. The Aristocratic, is where the Lords, or principal men,
govern; as in several Cantons of Switzerland. 4. The Demo-
cratic, is where it depends on the People, or on those they have
chosen to act for them ; as in several others of the Cantons of Switzer-
land. 5. The Mixed Government is to be found in Great Britain,
France, and the Netherlands, where all the three forms are blended.
(Reward, 5 counters.)


SECTION III.
A GEOGRAPHICAL GAME
FOR
Asia
Quest.
LESSON I.
BOUNDARIES AND COUNTRIES OF ASIA.
234. Describe the Boundaries of Asia. Asia is bounded on the north
by the Frozen Ocean; on the east by the Pacific Ocean; on the
south by the Indian Ocean; on the west by Europe, the Mediter-
ranean, the Isthmus of Suez, and the Red Sea, which last nearly
separates it from Africa. ( Reward , 4 counters.)
235. Into how many Countries is Asia divided ? Asia consists of nine
principal countries; namely, one to the North; one on the East;
four to the South ; and three to the West. [Reward, 3 counters.)
Exercise on the First Lesson.
Which is the northern country of Asia ? The northern country of
Asia is Great Tartary, or Country of the Tartars ; principal towns
Astracan, Tobolsk, Sarmacand, Irkutsk. [Reward, 1 counter.)
Which is the eastern country of Asia ? The country to the east of
Asia is the Empire of Japan, consisting of the islands of Niphon,
Sikokf, Kiusiu, and Matsmai, or Jesso; chief town Jeddo. [Re-
ward, 1 counter.)
Na?ne the four southern countries of Asia. Tbe four southern coun-
tries of Asia are, 1. China, capital Pekin, chief towns Nankin and
Canton; 2. The Eastern Peninsula of India, or Birman Empire,
capital Ummerapoora, chief towns Ava, Pegu, Rangoon, Arracan,
and Siam; 3. Hindoostan, or the Western Peninsula of India, prin-
cipal towns Delhi, Agra, Calcutta, Madras, Pondicherry, Seringa-
patam, Goa, Cambay ; 4. Cahul and Beloochistan, capital Peshawer,
chief towns Cabul, Kelat, Candahar, Herat, Cashmere. [Reward,
4 counters.)
Name the three western countries of Asia. The three countries to
the west of Asia are, 1. Persia, capital Tehraun, chief towns Ispahan,
Shirauz, Bushire, and Gombroon ; 2. Arabia, principal towns Me-
dina, Mecca, and Mocha; and, 3. Turkey in Asia, principal towns
Bussora, Bagdad, Smyrna, Jerusalem. [Reward, 3 counters.)
What are Astracan, Tobolsk, Sarmacand, and Irkutsk ? Astracan,
Tobolsk, Sarmacand, and Irkustk, are the principal towns of Great
Tartary, which is one of the nine parts of Asia, and the only one to
the north. [Reward, 1 counter.)
What is Jeddo? Jeddo, in the island of Niphon, is the capital of
the Empire of Japan, which is one of the nine great divisions of
Asia, and consists of several islands in the Eastern Ocean. [Reward,
1 counter.)
What are Pekin, Nankin, and Canton ? ——Pekin is the capital, and
Nankin and Canton are chief towns, of China, which is one of the
nine parts of Asia, and one of the four to the south. [Reward, 1
counter.)
What are Ummerapoora, Ava, Pegu, Rangoon, Arracan, and Siam?
——Ummerapoora is the capital, and Ava, Pegu, Rangoon, Arra-
can, and Siam, are principal towns of the Eastern Peninsula of
India, which is one of the nine parts of Asia, and one of the four to
the south. [Reward, 1 counter.)
What are Delhi, Agra, Calcutta, Madras, fc. ? Delhi, Agra, Cal-
cutta, Madras, &c. are principal towns, of Hindoostan, or the Western
Peninsula of India, which is one of the nine parts of Asia, and one
of the four to the south. [Reward, 1 counter.)
What are Peshawer, Cabul, Kelat, Candahar, tyc. ? Peshawer is the
capital, and Cabul, Kelat, Candahar, &c. are chief towns, of Cabul
•and Beloochistan, which form one of the nine principal divisions of
Asia, and one of the four to the south. [Reward, 4 counters.)
What are Teheran, Ispahan, Shirauz, Sfc. ? Teheran is the capital,
and Ispahan, Shirauz, &c. are chief towns, of Persia, which is one of
the nine parts of Asia, and one of the three to the west. {Reward,
1 counter.)
What are Medina, Mecca, and Mocha ? Medina, Mecca, and Mocha,
are principal towns of Arabia, which is one of the nine parts of
Asia, and one of the three to the west. [Reward, 1 counter.)
What are Bussora, Bagdad, Smyrna, and Jerusalem ? Bussora,
Bagdad, Smyrna, and Jerusalem, are principal towns of Turkey in
Asia, which is one of the nine parts of Asia, and one of the three to
the west. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON 11.
SEAS OF ASIA.
236. How many Seas has Asia ? Asia has sixteen seas, four greater
and twelve less. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
Which are the four greater Seas of Asia ? ——The four greater seas of
Asia are, 1. The Frozen Ocean, to the north ; 2. The Indian Ocean,
to the south ; 3. The Pacifc Ocean, to the east; and, 4. The Medi-
terranean, to the west. [Reward, 4 counters.)
Which are the twelve lesser Seas of Asia ? The twelve lesser seas of
Asia are, 1. The Caspian, an inland sea between Tartary and Per-
Quest.
sia; 2. The Sea of Azof , or of Zabak, 3. The Black Sea, 4. The Sea
of Marmora, and, 5. The Archipelago, already mentioned among the
seas of Europe, as formed by the Mediterranean; 6. The Red Sea,
or Arabic Gulf; 7- The Arabian Sea ; and, 8. The Bengalese Sea,
or Bay of Bengal, formed by the Indian Ocean ; 9. The Chinese Sea,
10. The Yellow Sea, 11. The Sea of Japan, and, 12. The Sea of
Ochotsk, or Lama, formed by the Pacific Ocean. [Reward, 12
counters.)
Exercise on the Second Lesson.
What is the Frozen Ocean ? One of the four great seas of Asia, of
which it constitutes the northern boundary, as it also does of Europe;
and it waters Siberia, or the northern part of Great Tartary. [Re-
ward, 1 counter).
What is the Indian Ocean ? One of the four great seas of Asia,
which it bounds on the south, and which waters Arabia, Hin-
doostan, the Birman Empire, and the western side of New Holland,
or Australia. [Reward, 1 counter).
What is the Pacifc Ocean ? One of the four great seas of Asia, of
which it forms the eastern boundary; and it waters Eastern Tar-
tary, the Japan islands, China, and New South Wales, or the
eastern side of Australia, [Reward, 1 counter.)
What is the Mediterranean ? The Mediterranean is not only, one of
the seas of Europe, as before described, but also one of the «B*-great
seas of Asia, of which it forms part of the western boundary; and
it waters Asiatic Turkey.
What is the Caspian Sea ? The Caspian, a great inland sea, or salt
lake, is one of the twelve lesser seas of Asia, and waters Tartary
and Persia. [Reward, 1 counter ).
What are the Sea of Azof, or of Zabak, and the Black Sea ? Two
of the twelve lesser seas of Asia; they water Great Tartary and
Asiatic Turkey. [Reward, 2 counters).
What are the Sea of Marmora and the Archipelago ? Two of the
twelve lesser seas of Asia; they are connected with the Mediter-
ranean; and water Asiatic Turkey. [Reward, 2 counters.)
What is the Red Sea, or Arabic Gulf ? One of the twelve lesser
seas of Asia; it is formed by the Indian Ocean, and separates
Arabia from Africa. [Reward, 1 counter.)
What is the Arabian Sea ? One of the twelve lesser seas of Asia;
it is formed by the Indian Ocean, and waters Arabia, Persia, and
Hindoostan. [Reward, 1 counter.)
What is the Bengalese Sea, or Bay of Bengal ? One of the twelve
lesser seas of Asia; like the two former, it is formed by the Indian
Ocean, and waters Hindoostan and the Eastern Peninsula of India.
[Reward, 1 counter .)
What is the Chinese Sea ? One of the twelve lesser seas of Asia;
it is formed by the Pacific Ocean, and waters the south of China,
and the eastern side of the Birman empire. [Reward, 1 counter.)
What is the Yellow Sea ? One of the twelve lesser seas of Asia; it
is formed by the Pacific Ocean, and waters the north east of China.
[Reward, 1 counter.)
What is the Sea of Japan ? One of the twelve lesser seas of Asia ;
it also is formed by the Pacific Ocean, and waters Chinese Tartary
and the Japan islands. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
What is the Sea of Ochotsk, or Lama ? One of the twelve lesser
seas of Asia; it is formed by the Pacific Ocean, and waters Siberia
and Kamtschatka. [Reward, 1 counter.)
Which of the lesser Seas of Asia is inland ? The inland sea of Asia
is the Caspian,which has no apparent communication with any other.
[Reward, 1 counter.)
Which lesser Seas of Asia are connected with the Mediterranean ?
Four of the lesser seas of Asia are connected with the Mediterranean,
namely, 1. The Sea of Azof, or of Zabak; 2. The Black Sea; 3.
The Sea of Marmora; and, 4. The Archipelago. [Reward, 4
counters.)
How many of the lesser Seas of Asia are formed by the Indian Ocean ?
Three of the lesser seas of Asia are formed by the Indian
Ocean, namely, 1. The Red Sea, or Arabic Gulf; 2. The Arabian
Sea; and, 3. The Bengalese Sea, or Bay of Bengal. [Reward, 3
counters.)
How many of the lesser Seas of Asia are formed by the Pacifc Ocean ?
Four of the lesser seas of Asia are formed by the Pacific Ocean,
namely, 1. The Chinese Sea; 2. The Yellow Sea; 3. The Sea of
Japan; and, 4. The Sea of Ochotsk, or Lama. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
lesson in.
GULFS AND STRAITS OF ASIA.
237- How many Gulfs has Asia ? Asia has twelve remarkable gulfs,
of which six are large and six small [Reward, 1 counter.)
Which are the six large Gulfs of Asia ? The six large gulfs of


Quest.
Asia are, 1. The Gulf of Oby, in the country of the Samoieds, to
the north of Great Tartary; 2. The Gulf of Petchelee, between China
and the peninsula of Corea; 3. The Gulf of Siam, to the south of
the Birman Empire ; 4. The Bay of Bengal, (also reckoned among
the Asiatic Seas) between the empire of the Birmans and Hindoo-
stan; 5. The Persian Gulf, between Arabia and Persia; and, 6.
The Arabic Gulf, or Red Sea, (also numbered among the seas) be-
tween Arabia and Africa. ( Reward, 6 counters.)
Which are the six small Gulfs of Asia ? The six small gulfs of Asia
are, 1. The Gulf of Anadir, to the north-east of Kamtschatka; 2.
The Gulf of Tonquin, between China and Tonquin ; 3. The Gulf of
Martaban, to the west of the Birman Empire; 4. The Gulf of Cam-
bay, and, 5. The Gulf of Cutch, or Sinde, to the west of Hindoostan ;
and, 6. The Gulf of Ormus, at the mouth of the Persian Gulf.
( Reward, 6 counters.)
238. How many Straits does Asia contain ? The straits of Asia are
eleven in number; namely, 1. The Strait of Waigatz, between Nova
Zembla and Russian Tartary; 2. Behring’s Strait, between Asia and
America; 3. The Strait of Tchoka, or Channel of Tartary, between
Chinese Tartary and the island of Saghalien, or Tchoka; 4. Perous ’
Strait, between Tchoka and Jesso; 5. The Strait of Corea, between
Coiea and the Japanese Islands; 6. The Strait of Klacassar, between
Borneo and Celebes, or Macassar; 7- The Strait of Sunda, between
Sumatra and Java; 8. The Strait of Malacca, between Malacca and
Sumatra; 9.The Strait of Manar, between Hindoostan and Ceylon;
10. The Strait of Ormus, at the entrance of the Persian Gulf; and'
11. The Strait of Bab-el-mandeb, at the entrance of the Arabic
Gulf, or Red Sea. ( Reward, 11 counters.)
LESSON IV. /
PENINSULAS AND CAPES OF ASIA.
239. How many Peninsulas are there in Asia ?—■■■■ ■ There are eight penin-
sulas in Asia; of which, four are large and four small. ( Reward,
1 counter.)
Name the four large Peninsulas of Asia. The four large peninsulas
of Asia are, 1. The Eastern Peninsula of India, containing the Bir-
man Empire; 2. The Western Peninsula of India, south of Hin-
doostan ; 3. Arabia ; and, 4. Natalia, the ancient Asia Minor.
( Reward, 4 counters.)
Name the forir small Peninsulas of Asia. The four small peninsulas
of Asia are, 1. Kamtschatka; 2. Corea; 3. Malacca; and, 4. Cam-
bay, or Guzerat. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
240. How many Capes are there in Asia ? There are nine capes in
Asia; namely, I .East Cape, opposite Cape Prince of Wales, in
Ameiica ; 2. Point Romania, to the south of Malacca; 3. Cape
Negrais, to the west of the Eastern Peninsula of India; 4. Cape
Comorin, to the south of Hindoostan; 5. Point Diu, to the south of
Cambay ; 6. Cape Task, in Persia; f. Cape Rasalgate, and, 8. Cape
lartack, in Arabia; and, 9. Cape Smyrna, to the west of Asiatic
lurkey. ( Reward, 9 counters.)
■ ■
LESSON V.
LAKES AND MOUNTAINS OF ASIA.
241. How many principal Lakes does Asia contain ? There are nine
principal lakes in Asia; namely, 1. Lake Asphaltites, or the Dead
Sea, in Syria; 2. Lake Van, in Asiatic Turkey; 3. Lake Ormia, or
Urumea, in Persia; 4. Lake Zerrah, or Durr ah, in Cabul; 5. Lake
Arat, b. Lake Talkati, and, 7- Lake Nor-zaizan, in Great Tartary ;
<3. Lake Baikal, in Siberia; besides several in China, the largest of
O/io Tr ISj -F° n g~lin. [Reward, 9 counters.)
242. How many principal Mountains, or Chains of Mountains, are there
in Asia? -There are fourteen principal mountains, or chains of
mountains, in Asia, of which five belong to Great Tartary, two to
siatic Turkey, one to Persia, one to Hindoostan, three to Arabia,
and two are in islands. ( Reward , 6 counters.)
Which are thefve Mountains belonging to Great Tartary ? The five
principal mountains belonging to Great Tartary, are, 1. The Poyas
or (Jural Mountains, between Siberia and Russia in Europe; 2. The
Chain, which separates the Russian territories from the
Chinese; 3. The Yablonnoy Mountains, on the east of Great Tar-
tury; 4. Caucasus, between the Caspian and Black Seas; and 5.
Ihe Himmah-leh Chain, between Chinese Tartary and India
[Reward, 5 counters.)
Which are the two mountains belonging to Asiatic Turkey ? The two
principal mountains belonging to Asiatic Turkey/ are, 1. Ararat,
w ich separates the Turkish dominions from the Persian; and, 2.
i !?* 7° r Lebanon, in Syria. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
Which of the Asiatic Mountains belong to Persia ? The mountain
be ongmg to Persia is the chain of Mount Taurus, which stretches
* r .°f across Persia, as far as India. (Reward, 1 counter.)
Which of the Asiatic Mountains belongs to Hindoostan ? The moun-
tains belonging to Hindoostan are the chain of the Ghauts, which
run down the whole length of the west side of the Hindoo penin-
sula, to Cape Comorin. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
Which are the three principal Mountains of Arabia? The three
principal mountains of Arabia are, 1. Sinai, where the Almighty
gave laws to his people the Israelites; 2. Horeb, where Moses kept
the dock of Jethro, both in Arabia Petraea; and, 3. El Arad, in
Arabia Felix. ( Reward , 3 counters.)
Which are the Asiatic Mountains in islands ? The Asiatic moun-
tains in islands are, 1. Adam’s Peak, in Ceylon; and, 2. Ophir, in
Sumatra. [Reward, 2 counters.)
Quest.
LESSON VI.
DIVERS OF ASIA.
243. How many principal Rivers has Asia There are twenty prin-
cipal rivers in Asia, three of which flow to the north, three to the
east, eight to the south, and six to the west. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
244. Describe the Rivers that flow to the North of Asia. The three
rivers of Asia which flow towards the north are, 1. The Oby ; 2.
The I enissee, or Enisei; and, 3. The Lena; which all empty
themselves into the Frozen Ocean. [Reward, 3 counters.)
245. Describe the Rivers that flow to the East of Asia. The three
rivers of Asia which flow to the east are, 1. The Amur, or Saghalien,
which empties itself into the Sea of Ochotsk; 2. The Hoang-Ho, or
Yellow River, and, 3. The Yang-Tse-Kian, or Blue River, which
empty themselves into the Yellow Sea. [Reward, 3 counters.)
246. Describe the Rivers that flow to the South of Asia. The eight
rivers of Asia which flow to the south are,'l. The Maykaung, or
Cambodia, which falls into the Chinese Sea; 2. The Maygue, or
Siam, which empties itself into the Gulf of Siam ; 3. The Martaban,
or Thaluayn, 4. Phe Ava, or Irrawaddy, 5. The Burrampooter, or
Sanpoo, 6. The Ganges, and, 7* The Godavery, or Gunga, which
discharge their waters into the Bay of Bengal; and, 8. The Sinde,
or Indus, which empties itself into the Arabian Sea. [Reward, 8
counters .)
247. Describe the Rivers that flow on the West of Asia. The six rivers
of Asia which flow on the west are, 1. The Tigris, and 2. The Eu-
phrates, which discharge themselves into the Persian Gulf; 3. The
Kur, Cyrus, or Meknari, 4. The Volga, and 5. The Oural, or Jaik,
which fall into the Caspian Sea; and, 6. The Amu, Oxus, or Gihon,
which falls into the Lake of Aral. [Reward, 6 counters.)
LESSON VII.
DIVISION OF THE COUNTRIES OP ASIA.
248. How is Great Tartary divided?— Great Tartary is divided into
three principal parts; namely, 1. Russian Tartary, or Siberia, chief
Astrachan, Azof, Tobolsk, Irkutsk, Orenburgh, Uralesk,
I imis, Yeniseik, or Eniseik, and Kamtschatka; 2. Chinese Tartary,
principal towns Kashgar, Tcitcicar-Hotun, and Kirin-oulah; and,
o. Independent Tartary, principal towns Samarcand, Bochara, and
Badakshan. [Reward, 3 counters.)
249. How is the Chinese Empire divided? The Chinese empire is
divided into four parts; namely, 1. Chinese Tartary, as described in
the preceding number; 2. China Proper, including fifteen provinces
principal towns Pekin, Nankin, and Canton; 3. The Tributary
Countries to the South, comprising the Kingdom of Tonquin, capital
Keshao; Laos, capital Landjang; Cochin-China, capital Hue ; the
Kingdom of Cambodia, or Camboja, capital Cambodia; and, 4. The
Tributary Countries of the West, comprising Tibet, capital Lassa ;
Bhootan, capital Tas-sisudan; and Little Bukharia, chief towns
Kashgar and Yarkand. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
250. How is Hindoostan geographically divided? Hindoostan is geo-
graphically divided into four parts; 1. Northern Hindoostan, chief
towns Sennagur and Goorkhar; 2. Hindoostan Proper, chief towns
Helhi, Agra, Benares, Patna, Calcutta, Amedabad; 3. The Deccan
chief towns Cuttack, Nagpoor, Ellichpoor, Poonah, Bombay, Vizia-
poor, and Hyderabad; and, 4. Southern India, principal towns
Madras, Seringapatam, Cochin, and Travancore. [Reward, 4
counters.)
How is Hindoostan politically divided ?——ln a political sense, Hin-
doostan consists of three principal divisions: 1. British Possessions,
capital Calcutta, or Fort William; chief towns Delhi, Agra, Be-
nares, Patna, Madras, Arcot, Surat, Cambay, Bombay, Poonah, and
Calicut; 2. Tributary States and Allies of the British, chief towns
Hyderabad, Ellichpoor, Nagpoor, Lucknow, Baroda. Seringapatam,
Satarah, Bejapoor, or Viziapoor, Travancore, Cochin, Bhooi, and
Sikkim; and, 3. Independent States, chief towns Catmandoo, Gorkha
Lahore, Oujein, and Agimere. [Reward, 3 counters.)
Have you any thing further to say relative to Hindoostan ? The
south-east side of the Hindoo peninsula is called the Carnatic, and
the coast bears the name of Coromandel; and the south-west coast
is denominated Malabar. On the Coromandel coast are Pondicherry
which belongs to France; and Tranquebar, belonging to Denmark;
and on the Malabar coast is Goa, belonging to the Portuguese!
[Reward, 3 counters.) &
251. How is the Kingdom of Cabul divided ? The Kingdom of Cabul
consists of, 1. Cabul Proper, chief towns Peshawer, Cabul, Ghisni
Herat, and Balk (the ancient capital of Bactria); 2. Candahar, chief
town Candahar, 3. Cashmere, capital Cashmere, or Sirinagur * 4
Sinde, capital Tatta; 5. Moultan, capital Moultan; and/ 6.
Beloochistan, capital Kelat. [Reward, 6 counters.)
252. How is the Eastern Peninsula of India divided ? The eastern
peninsula of India, which includes the Birman Empire, is divided
into seven parts; namely, 1. The Province of Assam, capital Gher-
gong; 2. The Province of Ava, capital Ummerapoora; 3. The Pro-
vince of Arracan, capital Arracan; 4. Pegu, capital Pegu; 5. Mar-
taban, capital Martaban; 6. Siam, capital Judia, or Siam; and 7.
Malaya, capital Malacca. {Reward, 7 counters.)
253. How is Persia divided? Persia is divided into ten provinces, of
which the principal towns are Ispahan, Tehraun, Erivan, Tauris! or
Tabreez, Schiraus, Ormus, and Gombroon, or Bender-Abassi.
[Reward, 7 counters.)
254. How is Arabia divided? ——Arabia consists of three parts; namely,
1. Arabia Petreea, capital Suez; 2. Arabia Deserta, principal towns
Medina, Mecca, and Lachsa; and, 3. Arabia Felix, principal towns
Mocha, Muscat, and Aden. [Reward, 3 counters.)


255. What are the Divisions of Asiatic Turkey Turkey in Asia con-
sists of three principal parts; namely, 1. The Eastern Provinces
principal towns Bussora, Bagdad, Mosul, Diarbeck, Biths, and
Van; 2. Natalia, or Asia Minor, principal towns Trebisond, Amasia,
Bursa, Smyrna, and Ephesus; and, 3. Syria, remarkable towns
Alexandretta, or Scandaroon, Antioch, Aleppo, Sidon, Damascus,
Acre, Tyre, and Jerusalem. [Reward, 3 counters.)
LESSON VIII.
ISLANDS OP ASIA.
256. How may the Islands of Asia be classed? The Asiatic islands
consist of nine islands and eleven groups. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
Which are the nine Islands of Asia? The nine Asiatic islands are,
1. Formosa; 2. Macao; 3. Hainan; 4. Ceylon; o. Bombay; 6.
Kismish, 7. Bahrein (both in the Persian Gulf); 8. Cyprus, and, 9.
Rhodes (in the Mediterranean.) [Reward 1 counter.)
Which are the Eleven Groups of Islands belonging to Asia ?——The
eleven groups of Asiatic islands are, 1. The Islands of Japan ; 2. The
Marian, or Ladrones; 3. The Pelews; 4. The Philippines; 5.
The Moluccas; 6. The Sunda Islands, consisting of Borneo, Su-
matra, and Java; 7- The Andaman; 8. The Nicobar; 9. The
Laccadives; 10. The Maldives; and, 11. The Sporades; which
last are also reckoned among the islands of Europe, and noticed
under No. 165. [Reward, 12 counters.)
How may these Islands be classed ? These islands may be classed
according to the nations to which they belongs or with which they
trade, as the Chinese, the Spaniards, the Dutch, the British, the
Turks &c«
257. Which of the Islands of Asia belong to the Chinese ? The Asiatic
islands belonging to the Chinese are three in number; namely, 1.
Formosa, capital Taiouan-fou; 2. Macao j and, 3. Hainan, capital
Keuncheou. [Reward, 3 counters .)
258. Which of the Islands of Asia belong to the Spaniards ? The
Asiatic islands belonging to, or trading with Spain, are, 1. The
Marian, or Ladrone Islands, the principal of which is Guam;
2. The Philippines, to the number of about 1000, the principal of
which are capital Manilla; and Mindanao, capital Min-
danao. [Reward, 2 counters.)
259. Which of the Islands of Asia are open to the Dutch ? The islands
of Asia open to the Dutch are, 1. Phe Islands of Japan; namely,
Niphon, Sikokf, Kiusiu, and Matsmai, or Jesso, principal towns
Jeddo and Meaco; 2. The Moluccas, of which the seven most
remarkable are, Celebes, (chief town Macassar,) Ternate, Gilolo,
Ceram, Amboyna, Banda, and Timor; 3. The Island of Java, prin-
cipal towns Batavia and Bantam. [Reward, 10 counters.)^
260. Which of the Islands of Asia belong to Great Britain ? The
Asiatic islands belonging to Great Britain are, 1. Bombay, capital
Bombay; and, 2. Ceylon, capital Candi, principal towns Trincoma-
lee, Columbo, Pointe de Galle, and Jafna. [Reward, 2 counters .)
261. Which of the Islands of Asia belong to the Turks? The Asiatic
islands belonging to the Turks are, 1. Cyprus, capital Nicosia; and,
2. Rhodes, capital Rhodes. [Reward, 2 counters.)
262. Name the Island common to the British and the Dutch. The
Asiatic island common to the British and Dutch is that of Sumatra,
principal towns Achem and Bencoolen, or Fort Marlborough. (.Re-
W ard 9 1 cov/fitcT .)
263. Name the Islands of Asia open to all Nations. The Asiatic islands
open to all nations, are, 1. Borneo; 2. Andaman ;3. Nicobar, and,
4. The Maldives. [Reward, 4 counters.)
f
LESSON IX.
RELIGIONS, LANGUAGES, AND SOVEREIGNS OP ASIA.
264. What are the Religions professed in Asia? In Turkey, Arabia,
Persia, a part of Tartary, and a part of India, Mohammedism is pro-
fessed ; in the other parts of India and Partary, in China, Japan,
and the Asiatic Islands, the inhabitants are mostly Pagans and
Idolaters. In various parts of India, at Canton, in China, in the
Malay peninsula, and in the islands of Ceylon, Sumatra, Java,
Celebes, and Timor, are missionary stations for propagating Chris-
tianity. Jews are to be found in all parts of Asia. [Reward, 4
counters.)
265. What are the Languages spoken in Asia ? The languages chiefly
spoken in Asia are, the modern Greek, Turkish, Russian, Tartar,
Persian, Arabic, Hindoostanee, Chinese, Japanese, and Malay. On
the coasts of India and China, the various European languages are
used, particularly the Portuguese, Dutch, and English. ( Reward,
2 counters.)
266. Who are the principal Sovereigns of Asia ? The principal Asiatic
Sovereigns are, 1. The Emperors of Russia and Turkey, who reside
in Europe; 2. The Emperors of China, Japan, and Birmah; and,
3. The Kings of Persia and Cabul. There are, besides, many petty
sovereigns, called Khans, and a spiritual chief, called the Dalai-
Lama, who resides at Lassa, in Tibet, and is believed by his sub-
jects to be immortal. [Reward, 3 counters.)
SECTION IV.
A GEOGRAPHICAL GAME
FOR
Africa.
LESSON 1.
BOUNDARIES AND SEAS OF AFRICA.
267. What are the Boundaries of Africa ? Africa, being a peninsula,
is surrounded on every side by the sea, except where it is joined to
Asia by the Isthmus of Suez. [Reicard, 1 counter.)
268. What Seas water Africa? Africa is watered by five seas;
namely, 1. The Mediterranean, on the north; 2. The Red Sea, and,
3. The Indian Ocean, on the east; 4. The Southern Ocean, on the
south ; and, 5. The Atlantic, on the west. ( Reward, 5 counters.)
LESSON 11,
COUNTRIES OF AFRICA.
269. How is Africa divided ? Africa is divided into twelve countries,
namely, two, on the coast of the Mediterranean ; three on the coast
of the Atlantic; one on the coast of the Southern Ocean; three on
the coast of the Indian Sea ; two on the coast of the Red Sea; and
one in the interior. ( Reward, 6 counters.)
270. Name the Countries of Africa on the Coast of the Mediterranean.
The two countries of Africa on the coast of the Mediterranean are,
1. Egypt, capital Cairo ; 2. Barbary, principal towns, Morocco, Fez,
Tafilet, Algiers, Tunis, Tripoli, and Tolometa. ( Reward, 2 counters )
271- Name the Countries of Africa on the Coast of the Atlantic. The
three countries of Africa on the coast of the Atlantic are, 1, Zahara,
or the Great Desert; 2. Guinea, capital Benin; and, 3. Congo,
capital St. Salvador. ( Reward, 3 counters.')
272. Name the Country of Africa on the Southern Ocean. The
African country on the Southern Ocean is Caffraria, principal town
Cape Town, near the Cape of Good Hope. ( Reward , 1 counter .)
273. Name the Countries of Africa on the Coast of the Indian Sea.
The three countries of Africa on the Indian Sea are, 1. Monomotapa,
capital Zimboe; 2. Zanguehar, principal towns Melinda and Mosam-
bique; and, 3. Ajan, capital Brava. ( Reward , 3 counters.)
274. Name the Countries of Africa on the Coast of the Red Sea. The
two African countries on the Red Sea are, 1. Abyssinia, capital
Gondar; and, 2. Nubia, principal town Sennaar. ( Reward, 2
counters.)
275. Name the Midland Country of Africa. The inland country of
Africa is Negroland, chief towns, Bornou, Tombuctoo, and Man-
dingo, very little known. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON 111.
GULFS AND STRAITS OF AFRICA.
276. How many Gulfs belong to Africa ? There are seven principal
gulfs in Africa, namely ; 1. The Gulf of Sy dr a, and, 2. The Gulf of
Cubes, in Barbary; 3. The Gulf of Guinea, and, 4. The Bight of
Benin, on the coast of Guinea; 5. The Bay of St. Helena, and, 6.
The Bay of St. Laurence, in Caffraria ; and, 7- The Guf of Sofala,
in Monomotapa. ( Reward, 7 counters.)
277- How many Straits are there in Africa ? The straits of Africa
are three ; namely, 1. The Strait of Gibraltar, between Barbary and
Spain; 2. The Mozambique Channel, between Zanguebar and the
island of Madagascar ; and, 3. The Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb, which
separates Abyssinia from Arabia. (Reward, 3 counters.)
LESSON IV.
CAPES OF AFRICA.
278. How many Capes are there in Africa ? There are twenty-one
remarkable capes in Africa; of which four are in Barbary, two in
Zahara, six in Guinea, two in Congo, three in Caffraria, one in
Zanguebar, one in Ajan, and two in the island of Madagascar.
[Reward, 8 counters.)
Name the four Capes of Barbary. The four capes of Barbary are,
1. Razad; 2. Bon; 3. Ceuta ; and, 4. Cantin. ( Reward , 4 coun-
ters.)


Quest.
Name the two Capes of Zahara. The two principal capes of Zahara
are, 1. Bojador ; and, 2. Blanco. { Reward, 2 counters.)
Name the six Capes of Guinea. The six remarkable capes of Guinea
are, 1. Verd; 2. Roxo; 3. Palmas; 4. Three Points; 5. Formosa;
and, 6. Lopo Gonsalves. (Reward, 6 counters.)
Name the two principal Capes of Congo. The two principal capes
of Congo are, 1. Padron ; and, 2. Negro. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
Name the three most remarkable Capes of Caffraria. The three
remarkable capes of Caffraria are, 1, Volt as; 2. Good Hope; and,
3. Aiguillas, or Anguilhas. (Reward, 2 counters.)
Name the Cape in Zanguebar. The cape in Zanguebar is that of
Delgado. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
Name the Cape on the coast of Ajan. The cape on the coast of Ajan
is Guardafui, opposite Cape Fartach, in Arabia. [Reward, 1
counter.)
Name the two remarkable Capes in Madagascar. ■ ■ The two remark-
able capes in Madagascar are, 1. Natal, or Ambro, at the northern
extremity of the island; and, 2. St. Mary’s, at the southern point.
[Reward, 2 counters.)
LESSON V.
LAKES AND MOUNTAINS OF AFRICA.
279. How many principal Lakes are met with in Africa *? There are
nine principal lakes in Africa ; namely, 4. Menzala, and, 2. Berelos,
at the mouth of the Nile; 3. Kairoun, or Birket-el-Kerun, the
ancient Mceris of Strabo, in Egypt; 4. Dembea, or Tzana, and, 5.
Ashangee, in Abyssinia; 6. Farooun, or El-Low-deah, in Tunis ; 7*
Mabiera, 8. Dibbie, 9. Sea of Soudan, 10. Ghana, 11. Fittre, and 12.
Domboo, in Nigritia; and, 13. Zambre, or Maravi, in Caffraria.
{Reward, 13 counters.)
280. Which are the remarkable Mountains of Africa 9 The most re-
markable mountains of Africa are, 1. The Atlas Chain, which ex-
tends from Barca to the Atlantic Ocean ; 2. The Mountains of Ha-
kes h, along the coast of the Red Sea, in Egypt and Nubia; 3. Sierra
Leone, near the west coast ; 4. The Kong, or Komri Mountains, be-
tween Soudan and Upper Guinea; 5. The Mountains of the Moon,
to the south of Abyssinia ; 6. The Mountains of Lupata, sometimes
called die. Spine of the World, in Caffraria, and, 7* The Peak of
I eneriffe, in the island of that name. {Reward, 7 counters.)
LESSON VI.
PRINCIPAL RIVERS OF AFRICA.
881* How many principal Rivers are there in Africa 9 There are seven
principal rivers in Africa; of which one flows into the Mediterra-
nean ; one is in the interior; four discharge their waters into the
Atlantic; and one flows into the Indian Ocean. {Reward, 4
counters.)
Which of the African Rivers flows into the Mediterranean 9 The
Nile, which rises in the Mountains of the Moon, and, after runnino-
through Nubia and Egypt, empties itself into the Mediterranean
by several mouths between Damietta and Alexandria. {Reward, 1
counter.)
What River is that which you describe as in the Interior of Africa 9
The Niger, which rises in the Kong mountains, and flows through
Nigritia, but its ultimate progress is not yet discovered. {Reward,
1 counter.)
Which are the Four African Rivers that discharge their Waters into
the Atlantic. The four African rivers that empty themselves
into the Atlantic, are, 1. The Senegal, and, 2. The Gambia, in
Quest.
Guinea ; 3. The Zaire, in Congo ; and, 4. The Great, or Orange
River, in Caffraria. {Reward, 4 counters .)
Which of the African Rivers flows into the Indian Ocean ? The
river of Africa that flows into the Indian Ocean is the Zambere, or
Cuama, which flows between Monomotapa and Mozambique. {Re-
ward, 1 counter .)
LESSON VII.
ISLANDS OF AFRICA.
282. How many principal Islands belong to Africa ? The islands ot
Africa are seventeen in number ; nine of which are in the Atlantic,
and eight in the Indian Ocean. {Reward, 1 counter.)
283. Which are the Islands of Africa in the Atlantic 9 The nine African
islands in the Atlantic are, 1. The Azores, the principal of which is
Terceira, capital Angra; 2. Madeira, capital Funchal; 3. The Cape
Verd Islands, the largest of which is San Jago, capital Port Praya;
4. The Islands in the Gulf of Guinea, the principal of which are
Fernando-P6, Prince’s Island, St. Thomas, and Annabona; 5. The
Canaries, the principal of which are Grand Canary (capital Palmas),
Fortaventura, Teneriffe (chief towns Laguna and Santa Cruz), and
Ferro; 6. Goree, near Cape Verd; 7* Ascension Isle; 8. St. Mat-
. thew, both uninhabited; and 9. St. Helena, capital James Town.
{Reward, 9 counters.)
284. Which are the Islands in the Indian Ocean 9 The eight African
islands, situate in the Indian Ocean are, 1. Mauritius, capital Port
Louis; 2. Bourbon, capital St. Denis ; 3. Madagascar, capital Tana-
narive© ; 4. The Comoro Isles, the principal of which is Johanna,
capital Sultan Town; 5. The Amirantes; 6. The Seychelles, the
chief of which is Mahe ;7. Socotora ; and, 8. Bab-el-Mandib. {Re-
ward, 8 counters.')
LESSON VIII.
RELIGIONS, LANGUAGES, AND SOVEREIGNTIES OP AFRICA.
285. What are the Religions of Africa 9— —The religions of Africa may
be reduced to three principal kinds; namely, Christianity, Moham-
medism, and Paganism. The Christians of Abyssinia retain many
remains of Judaism and Paganism. Christian missions have also
been established in various parts of West and South Africa, and in
the islands of Madagascar, Mauritius, and Johanna, one of the
Comoro islands. The Mohammedans possess the Barbary Coast;
and the Pagans, who are most numerous, inhabit the interior!
There is also a great number of Jews in Africa, who are much en-
gaged in trade. {Reward, 3 counters.)
286. What are the different Languages of Africa ? The Arabic is the
common language in Egypt; but the Coptic and Modern Greek are
also spoken there. The ancient language of Africa is yet used in
all the interior parts of Barbary. In the seaports, a sort of corrupt
Arabic is spoken; and in the towns situated on the IVlediterranean
Coast the Lingua Franca is used, which is a mixture of French,
Italian, and Spanish. {Reward, 6 counters.)
287* What Sovereignties are there in Africa 9 The sovereignties of
Africa, according to the best authorities, are said to consist of one
Empire, Morocco ; five Kingdoms, Abyssinia, Monomotapa, Sennaar,
Congo, and Loango; and four Military Despotisms, Tripoli, Tunis,
Algiers, and Brava. Independent of these sovereignties, the French!
English, and Dutch have a great number of establishments on the
coasts of Africa ; and Ceuta and Oran, which are opposite to Spain,
belong to the Spanish monarchy. The interior of Africa is divided
into numerous petty despotisms. {Reward, 5 counters.)
SECTION V.
A GEOGRAPHICAL GAME
FOR
America.
LESSON I.
GENERAL DIVISION OF AMERICA.
288. How is America divided 9 America, which is also called the New
World, comprises two large Continents; namely. North America and
South America, united together by the Isthmus of Panama, which, in
its narrowest part, is about 60 miles wide. {Reward, 2 counters.)
LESSON 11.
COUNTRIES OF NORTH AMERICA.
289. How many Countries does North America contain 9 North Ame-
rica contains four countries; namely, 1. Greenland; 2. Canada
capital Quebec; 3. The United States, capital Washington, principal
cities. New Jork, Boston, Philadelphia, St. Augustin, and New
Means; and, 4. Mexico, capital Mexico, chief town Santa Fe.
. Exercise upon North America.
What Greenland P Greenland is one of the four countries of
North America; its southern coasts are visited by ships employed
in the whale fishery, but of its interior, scarcely any thing is known
•vwl° pe A nS ' . Xt 18 unc P rtain whether it is a Peninsula connected
with the American continent, or whether it is an island detached
from it. {Reward, 1 counter.)
What is Quebec?- Quebec is the capital of Canada, which is one of
the four countries of North America. {Reward, 1 counter.)
What are Washington, New York, Boston, and Philadelphia?
Washington is the metropolis, and New York, Boston, and Phila-
delphia, are the principal towns, of the United States, which con-
stitute one of the four countries of North America. {Reward, I
counter.) v *
What is St. Augustin 9- St. Augustin is the capital of Florida, which
belongs to the United States, one of the four countiers of North
America. {Reward, 1 counter.')
F


What is New Orleans ? New Orleans is the capital of Louisiana,
which belongs to the United States, one of the four countries of
North America. (Reward, 1 counter.) , e
What are Mexico and Santa Fe ?—-Mexico is the capital, and Santa
Fe a chief town, of Mexico, which is one of the four countries of
North America. (Reward, 1 counter.)
COUNTRIES OF SOUTH AMERICA.
290. How many Countries does South America contain ?- South Ame-
rica contains seven countries ; namely, 1. capital-Sante-
Fe-de-Bogota; chief towns Leon de Caraccas and Quito ;2. Guiana,
chief towns Stabroek, New Amsterdam, Paramaribo, and Cayenne ;
3. Brazil, chief cities Bahia, or St. Salvador, and St. Sebastian, or
Rio Janeiro; 4. The United Provinces, capital Buenos Ayres; o.
Peru, capital Lima; 6. Chili, capital Santiago; and, f. Patagonia,
thinly peopled by native Indians. (Reward, 7 counters.)
Exercise upon South America. _
What are Santa-Fe-de-Bogota, Leon de Caraccas, and Quito •— —
Santa- Fe-de-Bogota is the capital, and Leon de Caraccas and Quito
are chief towns, of the republic of Colombia, which is one ot the
seven countries of South America. (Reward, 3 counters.)
What are Stabroek, New Amsterdam, Paramaribo, and Cayenne .
Stabroek and New Amsterdam are chief towns of the British pos-
sessions, as are Paramaribo of the Dutch, and Cayenne of the French
dominions in Guiana, which is one of the seven countries of South
America. (Reward, 4 counters.) T • 9
What are Bahia, or St. Salvador, and St. Sebastian, or Rio Janeiro.
Bahia, or St. Salvador, and St. Sebastian, or Rio Janeiro, are
the chief cities of the empire of Brazil, which is one of the seven
countries of South America. (Reward, 1 counter.)
What is Buenos-Ayres ? Buenos- Ayres is the capital of the republic
of the United Provinces, which constitute one of the seven coun-
tries of South America ? (Reward, I counter.)
What is Lima ? Lima is the principal town of the republic of Peru,
which is one of the seven countries of South America. (Reward, i
count cv*} • •
What is Santiago ? Santiago is the capital of the republic of Chili,
which is one of the seven countries of South America. (Reward, 1
COUTItCT*) ,
What is Patagonia ? Patagonia is one of the seven countries of
South America, and is very thinly inhabited. (Reward, 1 counter.)
LESSON 111.
SEAS OP AMERICA.
291. By how many Seas is America watered? America is watered by
five Seas; namely, 1. The Frozen Ocean, on the north; 2. The
Atlantic, and 3. The Sea of the Antilles, or Caribbees, on the east;
4. The South Sea, on the south ; and, 5. The Pacific Ocean, on the
west. (Reward, 5 counters.)
LESSON IV.
GULFS AND STRAITS OF AMERICA.
292. How many Gulfs are there in America? There are nineteen
gulfs in America; of which four are large and fifteen small. (Re-
ward, 1 counter.)
Which are the four large American Gulfs ? The four large Gulfs of
America are, 1. Baffin’s Bay, and, 2. Hudsons Bay, in the North;
3. The Gulf of Mexico, in the Atlantic ; and, 4. The Gulf of
California, or Vermilion Sea, in the Pacific Ocean. (Reward, 4
counters.)
How are the ffteen smaller Gulfs of America situated? Of the fifteen
smaller American gulfs, twelve are in the Atlantic, and three in the
Pacific Occam (Reward, 2 counters.)
Which are the twelve in the Atlantic ? The twelve small American
Gulfs in the Atlantic are, 1. The Gulf of St. Lawrence, between Ca-
nada and Newfoundland; 2. The Bay of Fundy, between Nova
Scotia and the United States ; 3. Delaware, and, 4. Chesapeake Bays,
in the east of the United States; 5. The Bays of Campeachy, and,
6. Honduras, in Mexico; 7* The Gulfs of Darien, 8. Maracaibo,
and, 9. Paria, in Colombia; 10. All Saints * Bay, in Brazil; 11.
St. George’s Bay, and, 12. St. Matthias, in Patagonia. (Reward, 12
counters.)
Which are the three in the Pacifc ? The three small American
gulfs in the Pacific Ocean are. The Bays of, 1. Guyaquil, 2. Choco,
and, 3. Panama, in Colombia. (Reward, 3 counters.)
293. How many Straits belong to America ? There are nine straits
in America; namely, 1. Davis’s, 2. Cumberland, and, 3. Hudson’s,
in the North; 4. The Strait of Belleisle, between Labrador and
Newfoundland; 5. The Channel of Bahama, or Florida, between
Florida and the Bahama, or Lucayas Islands ; 6. The Strait of the
Passage, between the Islands of St. Domingo, Jamaica, and Cuba;
7- The Strait of Magellan, between Patagonia and Terra del Fuego;
8. The Strait of Le Maire, between Terra del Fuego and Staten
Land; and, 9. The North, or Behring’s Strait, between Asia and
America. (Reward, 9 counters.)
LESSON V.
CAPES AND PENINSULAS OF AMERICA.
294. How many principal Capes are there in America ? America has
twenty-three capes, of which seventeen are in the Atlantic, and six
in the Pacific Ocean. (Reward, 2 counters.)
Which are the American Canes in the Atlantic ? The seventeen
American capes in the Atlantic are, 1. Cape Farewell, to the south of
Greenland; 2. Cape Chidley, to the north of New Britain, or La-
brador ; 3. Cape Race, on the south-east of Newfoundland; 4. Cape
Breton, on the east of the island of the same name; 5. Cape Sable,
to the south of Nova Scotia; 6. Cape Cod, and 7- Cape Hatteras, on
the east coast of the United States; 8. Cape Florida, to the south of
Florida; 9. Cape Catoche, to the north of Yucatan; 10. Cape Si.
Antonio, on the west of the Island of Cuba ; 11. Cape Gracias-a-Dios,
on the coast of Honduras; 12. Cape North, at the mouth of the
River Amazon; 13. Cape St. Roque, and, 14. Cape St. Augustin,
on the east of Brazil; 15. Cape St. Maria, and, 16. Cape St. Anto-
nio, at the mouth of the Rio de la Plata; and, 17- Cape Horn, on
the south-west of Terra del Fuego. ( Reward, 17 counters .)
Which are the American Capes in the Pacific ?■ The six American
Capes in the Pacific are, 1. Cape Blanco, on the coast of Peru ; 2.
Cape Blanco, and, 3. Cape Corientes, on the coast of Mexico; 4. Cape
St. Lucas, to the south of California ; 5. Cape Blanco, or Cape Si.
Sebastian, on the coast of New Mexico; and, 6. Cape Prince of
Wales, opposite to East Cape, in Asia. ( Reward, 6 counters.)
295. Describe the principal Peninsulas of America ? -.The peninsulas
of most note in America are seven in number; namely,!. Greenland,
or Greenland, and, 2. Melville Peninsula, in the north; 3. Labrador;
4. Nova Scotia, or Arcadia, in Canada; 5. East Florida ; 6. Yuca-
tan, in Mexico; and, 7- California, in New Mexico. ( Reward, 7
counters.)
LESSON VI.
LAKES AND MOUNTAINS OF AMERICA.
296. How many principal Lakes are there in America ?• Fourteen
principal lakes are found in America; namely, 1. Bear Lake, 2.
Slave Lake, 3. Athapescow, or Lake of the Hills ; and, 4. Winnipeg,
north-west of Hudson’s Bay ; 5. Superior, 6. Michigan, 7- Huron,
8. Erie, and, 9. Ontario, in Canada; 10. Mexico, and, 11. Nicaragua,
in Mexico; 12. MLaracaybo, in Colombia; 13. Titicaca, in Peru,
and, 14. Xeray, between Brazil and the United Provinces. (Re-
TVClvd 14 COUTItCTS*')
297. Describe the Mountains of America. There are five great chains
of mountains in America; namely, 1. The Apallachian, or Allegany
Mountains, in the east of North America, and running through the
United States; 2. The Rocky or Stony, in the west of North America;
3. The Topian, and, 4. The Apecana Mountains, in Mexico; 5. The
Andes, which traverse the west part of South America parallel with
the Pacific Ocean, for above 4,000 miles. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON VII.
PRINCIPAL RIVERS OF AMERICA.
298. How many principal Rivers are there in America ?- —America con-
tains nine remarkable rivers, of which five are in the northern Con-
tinent, and four in the southern. ( Reward, 1 counter.')
299. Describe the Rivers of North America ? The five principal rivers
of North America are, 1. The St. Lawrence, which issues from Lake
Ontario, and discharges itself into the Atlantic, opposite the island
of Anticosti; 2. The Delaware, which rises in the State of New
York, and empties itself into the Atlantic by an estuary called De-
laware Bay; 3. The Potomack, which rises in the Allegany Moun-
tains, and falls into the Chesapeak Bay ; 4. The Mississippi, which
issues from the lakes of Canada, receives in its course the Missouri,
the Ohio, and the Arkansaw, and discharges itself into the Gulf of
Mexico; 5. The Bravo-del-Norte, which has its source in the
Topian Mountains, and empties itself into the Gulf of Mexico. [Re-
ward, 5 counters.)
300. Describe the principal Rivers in South America. The four most
remarkable rivers of South America are, 1. The Oronoko, which
rises to the north of Brazil, and enters the Atlantic by various
mouths, opposite the island of Trinidad; 2. The Orellana, or River
Amazon, also called Maranon, which rises in the Andes, and, after
a course of above four thousand miles, falls into the Atlantic at the
Equator; 3. The Tocantins, which rises in the mountains of Santa
Martha, and falls into the Atlantic at Villa Nova del Rey ; 4. The
Riodela Plata, which is formed by the three large rivers, Paraguay,
Parana, and Uruguay, and empties itself into the Atlantic below
Monte Video. ( Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON VIII.
DIVISION OF THE COUNTRIES OF NORTH AMERICA.
301. How are Canada and British America divided? Into five parts:
namely, 1. New Britain, or Labrador, inhabited by the Esquimaux
or Iskimos ; 2. Upper Canada, capital Montreal; 3. Lower Canada,
principal town Quebec; 4. New Brunswick, capital St. Anne’s;
and, 5. Nova Scotia, capital Halifax. ( Reward, 5 counters.)
302. How are the United States divided ? The United States consist
of twenty-seven provinces ; eight of which are to the north, seven in
the middle ; nine to the south, and three to the west. ( Reward, 4
counters.)
Which are the eight Northern Provinces ? The eight northern pro-
vinces of the United States are, 1. Maine, capital Portland; 2. New
Hampshire, capital Portsmouth; 3. Vermont, capital Windsor;
4. Massachusets, capital Boston; 5. Rhode Island, capital Newport;
6. Connecticut, capital Newhaven ; 7- New York, capital New York;
and, 8. Michigan, capital Detroit. ( Reward , 8 counters.)
Which are the seven Central Provinces ? The seven central pro-
vinces of the United States are, 1. New Jersey, capital Trenton; 2.


Quest.
Pennsylvania, capital Philadelphia; 3. Delaware, capital New Do-
ver ; 4. Maryland, capital Annapolis, principal town Baltimore; 5.
Indiana, capital Jeffersonville; 6. Ohio, capital Columbia, chief
town Chilocothe; and, 7- Illinois, capital Raskaskia. ( Reward, 7
counters.)
Which are the nine Southern Provinces ? The nine Southern Pro-
vinces of the United States are, I. Virginia, capital Richmond,
principal towns Norfolk and Williamsburgh ; 2. Kentucky, capital
rankfort; 3. Tennesee, capital Knoxville; 4. North Carolina, ca-
pita Raleigh; 5. South Carolina, capital Charleston, principal
town Columbia ; 6. Georgia, capital Augusta, principal town
Savanna; 7. Mississippi, capital Natches; 8. Alabama, capital St.
Stephen’s; and, 9. Florida, chief towns St. Augustin, Mobile, and
Pensacola. ( Reward, 9 counters.)
Which are the three Western Provinces ? The three Western Pro-
vinces of the United States are, 1. Louisiana, capital New Orleans;
, Arkansas, capital Arkopolis ; 3. Missouri, capital St. Louis. Be-
sides these, there is an extensive tract of country between the
Topian mountains and the sea, belonging to the United States, but
as yet uncivilized. ( Reward, 3 counters.)
303. Name the chief towns of New Mexico. The principal towns of
Mexico, which now forms one of the three provinces of the
Mexican Republic, are, 1. Santa Fe, 2. Durango, and, 3. San Louis
del Potosi. {Reward, 3 counters.)
304. Name the chief Towns of Old Mexico. The principal towns of
Old Mexico, which forms another province of the Mexican republic,
are, 1. Guadalaxara, 2. Valladolid, 3. Mexico, 4. Vera Cruz, 5. Aca-
pulco, and, 6. Campeachy. {Reward, 6 counters.)
305. Name the chief Towns of the Province of Guatimala The prin-
cipal towns of Guatimala, which constitutes a third province of the
republic of Mexico, are, 1. Guatimala, 2. Vera-Paz, 3. Truxillo, and,
4. Umoa. {Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON IX.
DIVISION OF THE COUNTRIES OF SOUTH AMERICA.
306. How is the Republic of Colombia divided ? The Republic of
Colombia has ten departments; principal towns Santa-Fe de-Bogota,
Panama, Porto-Bello, Darien, Carthagena, Maracaibo, Leon de
Caraccas, Cumana, Santa Martha, Popayan, and Quito. ( Reward,
JL X COIFivTjCi <3 • 1
307. How is Peru divided ? Peru is divided into seventeen inten-
dancies; principal towns Lima, Cusco, Guamanga, Tarma, and
1 ruxillo. {Reward, 7 counters.)
308. Horn ts Chili divided ? Chili is divided into two parts; namely,
1. Chili Proper, which contains eleven districts, principal towns
bantiago, Valparaiso, and Conception; and, 2. Araucana, capital
Valdivia. ( Reward, 2 counters.)
309. How is the Republic of the United Provinces divided ? The Re-
public of the United Provinces is divided into eight intendancies ;
namely, 1. Buenos Ayres, capital Buenos Ayres, the metropolis of the
whole country; chief towns Montevideo, Santa Fe, Maldonado, and
Corrientes; 2 . Paraguay, capital Assumption; 3. Tucuman, capital
Cordova, chief town Mendoza; 4. Salta, capital Salta; 5. Potosi,
chief towns Potosi and Clncas; 6. Charcas, chief towns La Plata and
Ururo; 7, Cochabamba, chief town Cochabamba; and, 8. La Paz
chief town La Paz. ( Reward, 8 counters.)
310. Horn ts Brazil divided ? The empire of Brazil consists of twenty-
two provinces, of which fifteen are maritime, and seven inland The
maritime provinces contain the city of Rio Janeiro, or St. Sebas-
tian, the capital of the empire; Bahia, or St. Salvador, the second
city; Pernambuco, consisting of the town of Recife, and the city of
Ohnda; and the ports of Natal, Parahiba, or Paraiba, Seguro,
Villa da Vittona, Santos, and St. Vincent. In the inland prol
yinces are the towns of San Paulo and Villa Rica, celebrated for
the gold mines in their vicinity; Tejuco, the capital of the diamond
district, and Villa Boa. ( Reward, 12 counters.')
311. Horn is Guiana divided ?—Guiana consists of five political divi-
sums: 1. Spanish Guiana, included in the republic of Colombia-
. / ortuguese Guiana, a province of the empire of Brazil • 3 Bri-
tishGuianaconsistingof the colonies of Demerara, Essequibo, and
Berbice ; chief towns Stabroek, Cummingsburgh, and New Amster-
dam, 4. Dutch Guiana, or Surinam, chief town Paramaribo; and, 5
French Guiana, chief town Cayenne. {Reward, 5 counters.)
LESSON X.
PRINCIPAL ISLANDS OF AMERICA.
312. How ( may the Islands of America be classed ? The islands of
America may be classed under seven heads; namely, 1. The islands
in Baffin s Bay, and in the Arctic Ocean; 2. Those in Hudson’s Strait
; * ho mi! n th f ° ulf ° f St Lawre nce; 4. The islands of
the Atlantic; 5. Those between the Atlantic and the Caribbean
Sea; 6. Ihe islands near the Strait of Magellan; and, f The
islands m the South Sea. {Reward, 7 counters )
313. AW the Islands in Baffin’s Bay, and the Arctic Ocean. In
Baffin s Bay are the islands Disco, Waygat, and the group called
Boffin s Islands; m the Arctic Ocean is the group called North
Georgia, principal islands Cornwallis, Bathurst, Sabine,and Melville
recently discovered. {Reward, 3 counters.) ’
Name the principal Islands in Hudson’s Strait and Bay. —--The prin-
cipal islands in Hudson’s Strait are. Resolution and Charles Isles,
Quest.
Savage. Islands, divided into the north, middle, and south groups.
Mill Islands, Salisbury and Nottingham Isles. In Hudson’s Bay are,
Southampton and Mansel Islands, with some collections of small
Islets. {Reward, 8 counters.)
314. Name the Islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. The islands in the
trull ot St. Lawrence are four in number; namely, 1. Newfound-
lands, principal towns Placentia and St. John’s; 2. Cape Breton,
capital Lomsburgh; 3. St. John’s; and, 4. Anticosti, or Assumption.
{Reward, 4 counters.) 1
315. Name the Islands of America in the Atlantic. The American
islands in the Atlantic are, 1. The Bermudas, or Somer’s Isles, oppo-
site the States of the Carolinas, but at a great distance out at sea,
principal town St. George; and, 2. Long Island, on the coast of
# New York. {Reward, 2 counters.)
316. Name the Islands between the Atlantic and the Caribbean Sea.
Ihe islands between the Atlantic and the Caribbean Sea are, 1. The
Bahama, ox Lucayas Islands; and, 2. The Caribbees, otherwise called
cm „ x? hrea I ter and Less Antilles. {Reward, 2 counters.)
317- Name the principal of the Bahama, or Lucayas Islands. The prin-
cipal of the Bahama, or Lucayas Isles, are, 1. Bahama, 2. Lucaya,
. ew rovicence, and, 4. Guanahani, otherwise San Salvador, or
Lot Island which was the first land discovered in the New World.
{Reward, 4 counters.)
318. Name the principal Islands of the Group called the Greater Antilles.
—-1 he principal islands of the Greater Antilles are, 1. Cuba, capital
Havannah; 2. Hayti, or St. Domingo, principal towns Cape Town,
or -au- rmce, Aux Cayes, and St. Domingo; 3. Jamaica, principal
towns Kingston, Port Royal, Savannah La Mar, and Spanish Town;
oin a rr/f * * orl capital St. John’s. {Reward, 4 counters.)
319. What are the Lesser Antilles? The Lesser Antilles may be
classed in four groups. 1. The Virgin Isles, more than twenty in
number,; the chief of which are, Tortola, St. Thomas, Santa Cruz
l St : C r X ; A £^ ada ; a s d St Eustatia; 2. The Leeward Islands,
the chief of which are St Kitt’s or Christopher, Antigua, Mont-
serrat Guadaloupe, and Domimca; 3. The Windward Isles, the
chief of which are Martmico, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Barbadoes,
Grenada, and Tolmgo. 4. Some islands near South America, the
clnef of which are Trinidad, Margaritta, and Cura ? oa. {Reward,
CC/ UjILLCI o • 1
320. Name the Islands situate near the Straits of Magellan. The
islands near the Straits of Magellan are, 1. The Falkland, or Ma-
loume Islands ; 2 Terra del Fuego; 3. Staten Island ; and, 4. The
group called South Shetland. {Reward, 4 counters.)
321. Fame the American Islands in the South Sea The American
islands in the South Sea are, 1 . Chiloe ; 2. Juan de Fernandez, the
scene of Robinson Crusoe’s exile; 3. St. Felix; and, 4. The Galli-
pago Islands. {Reward, 4 counters.)
LESSON XI.
RELIGIONS, GOVERNMENTS, AND LANGUAGES OF AMERICA.
322. What are the Religions, Forms of Government, and Languages of
America . The Religions, Forms of Government, and Languages
of America are mostly those of the different European powers who
have settled on that continent. The native Indians speak a great
variety of dialects, and are in general Pagans. In North America
there are two republics, viz. The United States, where all sects of
Christians are tolerated, and the language is English; and the
republic of Mexico, in which the Roman Catholic religion is esta-
is ed. In South America, the Spanish population have erected
t “f., fbur republics of Colombia, the United Provinces, Peru, and
Unit; and the former Kingdom of Brazil has become an indepen-
dent empire; in all these the religion is the Roman Catholic.
{Reward, 8 counters.)
323. Which are the British Possessions in America 9 The British Pos
sessions in America are. Nova Scotia, Canada, New Britain, Labrador'
the Islands of Newfoundland, Anticosti, St. John’s, Cape Breton, or
the Royal Island, the Magdalen Islands, the Bermuda or Somer’s
Isles, the Bahama or Lucayas Islands, Jamaica, Tortola, Barbuda
Antigua, Nevis, Montserrat, St. Christopher’s, or St. Kitt’s, Domi-
nica, St. Lucia, St. Vincent’s, Barbadoes, Tobago, Grenada, Trinidad
a^and V,° r a .l oldne I^ an ds; and, in Guiana, the settlements
QO . °rrP Essequibo, and Berbice. {Reward, 24 counters.)
324. Which are the Danish Possessions in America 9 The Danes pos
sess the Islands of St. John, St. Thomas, and St. Croix, or Santa
Cruz, with a small establishment in Greenland. ( Reward, 4 coun-
ters.)
325. Which are the French Possessions in America ? The French Pos-
sessions in America are the Islands of Martinico, Guadaloupe'
Deseada, or Desirade, and Mariegalante; and, on the continent the
eastern part of Guiana. {Reward, 7 counters.)
326. Which are the Dutch Possessions in America ?- The Dutch Pos-
sessions in America are the Islands of St. Eustatia, St. Martin, and
Curacjoa; and on the continent the colony of Surinam, in Guiana.
{Reward, 4 counters.)
327. What iS' Portuguese America ? Portuguese America consists of
the empire of Brazil, which was formerly a colony of Portugal but
is now independent. {Reivard, 1 counter.)
328. Which are the Spanish Possessions in America ? The Spanish
Possessions in America are, the Islands of Cuba, Porto Rico, St
Felix, Juan de Fernandez, the Gallipago Islands, &c. {Reward, 7
counters.)


SECTION VI.
A GEOGRAPHICAL GAME
FOR
New Discoveries.
NEWLY DISCOVERED ISLANDS.
329. How may the newly discovered Islands be classed ?• The new ly
discovered Islands may be classed under two general heads; namely,
1. Groups of small Islands ; and, 2. Single or large Islands. {Re-
ward, 1 counter.)
Name the Groups of small Islands. The most remarkable groups of
newly discovered Islands are, 1. Those constituting the A orthern
Archipelago, near the entrance of Behring’s Straits, between the north-
west coast of America and the north-east coast of Asia, 2. The
Sandwich Isles; 3. The Marquesas ; 4. Ingraham’s or Washington
Isles, 5. The Society Isles, 6. Navigators’ Isles, 7- The Friendly
Isles; 8. The Fejee Isles; 9. The New Hebrides; 10. Queen
Charlotte’s Isles; 11. Solomons Isles; 12. Admiralty Isles; 13.
The Carolinas, or New Philippines; 14. Pelew Isles; 15. Kings-
mill’s Group, and, 16. Lord Mulgraves Range, all in the Pacific
Ocean; 17- North Georgia, in the Arctic Ocean; and 18. New
Shetland, in the Southern Ocean. {Reward, 18 counters.)
Name the single or large Islands. The principal single, or large,
newly discovered Islands are, 1. New Holland, 2. Aew Guinea, 3.
New Britain, 4. New Ireland, 5. New Caledonia, 6. New Zealand,
and, 7. Van Diemen’s Land. {Reward, 7 counters.)
Exercise.
330 Describe the Islands of the Northern Archipelago. The Islands of
the Northern Archipelago consist of four groups; namely, 1. The
Fox Islands, sixteen in number, of which the principal are Oona-
lashka, Umnak, and Atcha; 2. The Negho Isles, sixteen in number, of
which the principal are Kanaga and Tananga; 3. The Andrean, or
Andreanovskie Isles, eight in number, of which Amtatka and Kiska
are the chief; and, 4. The Aleutian, or Aleoutskiyan Isles, five in
number, of which the principal are Behring and Atton. The term
Aleoutskiy a is sometimes applied to all the four groups, which were
discovered by the Russians in the reign of Peter I. {Reward, 13
counters.)
331. What have you to observe respecting the Sandwich Isles? The
Sandwich Isles, eleven in number, were discovered in 1777; hy
Captain Cook, who was killed by the natives in 1779, at Hawaii,
misspelt Owyhee, the principal of them. {Reward, 1 counter.)
332. What have you to observe relative to the Marquesas ? The Mar-
quesas consist of five islands ; namely, St. Christiana, Magdalena, St.
Dominica, St. Pedro, and Hood. They were discovered by Quiros,
the Spanish navigator, in 1595 ; but their situation was better ascer-
tained by Captain Cook, in 1774- {Reward, 1 counter.)
333. What have you to observe concerning Ingraham’s or Washington
Islands? -These islands were discovered by Captain Joseph
Ingraham, of Boston, in the United States of America, in 1791, and
are seven in number, of which Washington is the chief. The people
much resemble those of the Marquesas. {Reward, 1 counter.)
334. Have you any observation relative to the Society Islatids ? The
Society Isles were discovered by Captain Wallace, in 1767, and
more fully explored by Captain Cook, in 1769. They are eight in
number; namely, Huaheine, Ulietea, o’Tahaa, o’Taheite, Borabora,
o’Hetevoa, Tubai, and Maurua. {Reward, 1 counter.)
335 What have you to remark on the Navigators’ Islands ? The
Navigators’ Islands, which were discovered by Monsieur De Bou-
gainville, and explored by La Perouse in 1787, are ten in number,
of which Ohoun is the chief. {Reward, 1 counter.)
336. What have you to observe relative to the Friendly Islands ? The
Friendly Islands were first discovered by Tasman, the Dutch navi-
gator, in 1643; but they were scarcely known till Captain Cook
visited them 1773 ; they are numerous, and the chief of them are
Tonga-taboo, or Amsterdam; Eaoowe, or Middleburgh; Annamooka,
or Rotterdam ; Hapaee, and Lefooga. {Reward, 4 counters.)
337. What have you to say respecting the Fejee Islands ? The Feejee
Islands are but little known, and are sometimes reckoned among the
Friendly Islands : they were discovered by Captain Cook, in 1773,
{Reward, 1 counter.)
338. By whom ryere the New Hebrides discovered? The principal
island of the New Hebrides, called Terra del Espiritu Santo, was
discovered by Quiros, the Spanish navigator, in 1606; and, in 1774,
Quest.
Captain Cook discovered the whole group, which now bears the
name of New Hebrides. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
339. Who discovered the group called Queen Charlotte’s Islands ?—-—The
group called Queen Charlotte’s Islands, the chief of which are
Egmont, or Santa Cruz, otherwise New Guernsey, and Lord Howe’s
Island, or New Jersey, were discovered by Captain Carteret, in 1767;
but Santa Cruz had before been seen and named by Torres, the
Spanish navigator, in 1606. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
340. By whom were Solomons Islands discovered? The Solomon
Isles were discovered by the Spaniards towards the close of the
sixteenth century, and have since been visited by various navigators
who each claim the merit of discovery. The largest two were called
Arsacides, till Lieut. Shortland, supposing he had made a new dis-
covery, called them New Georgia , the most northerly of which is
also called Bougainville’s Island. The names of the other principal
islands are Guadalcanal St. Christoval, and St. Isabel. ( Reward ,
4 counters.)
341. By whom were the Admiralty Isles discovered? The Admiralty
Isles were discovered by Captain Carteret, in 1767, and are between
twenty and thirty in number. New Hanover is the largest. {Re-
ward, 1 counter.)
342. What have you to observe respecting the Carolinas, or New Philippine
Isles 9 The Carolinas, or New Philippine Islands, are said to be
upwards of eighty in number; but some accounts reduce them to
about thirty. They are very little known. The largest is called
Yap. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
343. By whom were the Pelew Islands discovered ? The Pelew, or
Palaos Islands were probably first noticed by some Spaniards of the
Philippines, who called them Palaos , from the tall palm-trees with
which they abound. Nothing, however, was known of these islands
beyond the name, till Captain Wilson, in 1783, was wrecked on one
of them, and was treated in a very hospitable manner by the natives.
They are about eighteen in number, the chief of which are Oroolong,
Emungs, Emillegue, Artingal, Corooraa, and Pelelew. ( Reward,
counters.)
By whom was the group called North Georgia discovered ? The
islands, called North Georgia, to which the access is through Lan-
caster’s Sound, in Baffin’s Bay, were discovered in 1819, by Captain
Parry, in his search for a north-west passage. The largest of them
he named Cornwallis, Bathurst, Sabine, and Melville. ( Reward , 4
counters.)
By whom was South Shetland discovered ? The group named South
Shetland was discovered in 1819, by Mr. Smith, master of an Eng-
lish vessel, trading between Chili and La Plata. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
344. What have you to observe respecting New Holland ?—New Holland
first discovered by the Dutch in 1616, and since explored by British
navigators, is the largest island in the known world. The eastern
part, called New South Wales , extends nearly two thousand miles in
length, and was taken possession of by Captain Cook, in 1770, in
the name of his Britannic Majesty, and it now forms a part of the
British Empire. ( Reward , 1 counter.)
345. By whom were New Guinea , New Britain , and New Ireland dis-
covered ? New Guinea was discovered by the Dutch in 1529, and
is separated from New Holland by a channel, called Endeavour
Strait, discovered by Captain Cook in 1770. New Britain was dis-
covered by Captain Dampier, an English navigator; and New Ire-
land by Captain Carteret. ( Reward , 3 counters.)
346. By whom was New Caledonia discovered ? New Caledonia, a
very large island to the south of the New Hebrides, in which group
it is sometimes reckoned, was discovered by Captain Cook in
1774. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
347. By whom was New Zealand discovered ? New Zealand was first
discovered in 1642, by Tasman, the Dutch navigator, who gave it
the name of Staten Land. Captain Cook sailed round it in 1779,
and found it to consist of two large islands, separated from each
other by a strait four or five leagues across. ( Reward, 1 counter.)
348. By whom was Van Diemen’s Land discovered? Tasman, the
Dutch navigator, observed the south point of Van Diemen’s Land
in 1642 ; but Captain Cook, in 1777; discovered it to be an island,
The British have now a colony upon it. ( Reward , 3 counters.)
END OF THE SIMPLE GEOGRAPHY.


A COMPLETE COURSE OF GEOGRAPHY,
BY MEANS OF
INSTRUCTIVE GAMES.
PART II.
CONTAINING
A Concise Creative on the Artificial Sphere.
Section I.— General Definitions necessary for understanding the Doctrine of the Sphere.
I. A RIGHT Line , or straight Line, is the shortest that can be drawn
between two given points. Figure 1.
11. A curved Line is longer than a straight line, when both are drawn
between the same points. Figure 2.
111. Two lines, either straight or curved, are called Parallels, when
equally distant from each other throughout their extent. Figures 3 and 4.
IV. When two lines meet together, they form an angle, either right or
oblique. Figures 5 and 6.
V. A right Angle is formed by a line falling on another perpendicularly,
or so as to make equal angles on each side. Figure 5.
VI. An oblique Angle is either less or greater than a right angle.
Figure 6.
VII. An oblique Angle, if less than the right angle, is called Acute ; if
greater, it is called Obtuse. Figure 6.
VIII. A Circle, in general, is a curved line, called the circumference,
returning upon itself, with a point in the middle, called the Centre. All
lines drawn through this centre to the circumference are equal. Figure 7-
IX. The right line passing through the centre of a circle, and terminating
on each side by the circumference, is called the Diameter, or Axis; the
half of which is called the Radius . Figure 7-
X. The Diameter of a Circle divides the circumference into two equal
parts, called Semicircles. Figures 11 and 12.
XI. The Arc of a Circle is a portion of its circumference, less than a
semicircle ; and a line drawn between its two extremities is denominated
a Chord.
XII. A plane, passing through the centre of a globe, or sphere, divides
it into two equal parts, called Hemispheres. Figure 8.
XIII. Circles, equally distant from each other in every point of their
circumferences, or described from the same centre, are called Parallel or
Concentric Circles. Figure 9.
XIV. The Circumference of every circle, large or small, is supposed to
be divided into 360 equal parts, which are called Degrees ; every degree
is subdivided into 60 lesser parts, called Minutes; the minutes into 60
others, called Seconds ; the seconds into 60 thirds, Sec. It therefore fol-
lows, that the degrees, minutes, &c. of large circles are greater than those
of small circles. Figure 10.
XV. An Angle is said to be of as many degrees as would correspond
with the degrees of the arc of a circle drawn between its open extremi-
ties from its point as a centre: thus, the right angle is an angle of 90
degrees, as in Figure 11, wherein the two angles at the centre are right
angles. Other angles, which are of fewer or more degrees than 90, are
either oblique or obtuse, as in Figure 12, wherein the acute angle is found
to be of 45 degrees, and the obtuse of 135, which sum makes twice the
sum of 90 degrees, equal to the same circumference.
XVI. The Pole, in general, is a point equally distant from every part
of the plane circumference of the hemisphere ; or the pole is a point 90
degrees distant from the plane of a circle. Thus, in Figure 8, A and B
are the poles of the Globe.
Note. Instead of confining the Pupil to a view of the Figures on Paper, it will be preferable to exemplify the Definitions by means of Wooden
Globes, Pasteboard Planes, Circles, &c.
Section ll. —Doctrine of the Sphere , or an Explanation of the several imaginary Points, Circles , fyc. of the Earth.
Quest.
What is an Artificial Globe. —-—An artificial globe is a round and solid
body, on which are described all the parts of the earth and sea, ac-
cording to their natural form, distance, and situation, with the seve-
ral lines, points, and circles, invented for ascertaining their true
position.
Describe the Lines, Points, and Circles upon an Artificial Globe. The
lines, points, and circles upon an artificial globe are, 1. The Axis,
2. The Poles, 3. The Equator, 4. The Meridians, 5. The Tropics, 6.
The Polar Circles, 7* The Zodiac, 8. The Ecliptic, 9. The Equi-
noctial Points, 10. The Solstitial Points, 11. The Colures, 12. The
Horizon, 13. The Cardinal Points, or points of the Compass, 14. The
Points of the Zenith and Nadir, and, 15. The Azimuth Circles.
What is the Axis of the Earth ? It is an imaginary line, passing
through its centre, and upon which the globe is supposed to turn once
in twenty-four hours j this axis is, by calculation, seven thousand
nine hundred and ten miles and a quarter in extent.
Quest.
What are the Poles ? The poles of the earth are the two extremities of
the axis, and are consequently opposite to each other ; one is called
the Arctic or North Pole ; the other, the Antarctic or South Pole.
What is the Equator f The equator is an imaginary circle, passing
round the middle of the globe at an equal distance from each of the
two poles, so as to divide it into two equal parts, called Hemispheres ;
which, according to their relative situation, are denominated northern
or southern. This circle is divided into twenty-four equal parts called
hours; each hour is subdivided into sixty minutes; and each minute
into sixty seconds ; so that an hour upon the equator answers to fif-
teen degrees, and each minute of time to fifteen minutes of a degree.
What are the Meridians ? —The meridians are circles conceived to pass
through the poles, crossing the equator at right angles. They are
generally drawn, upon the artificial globe, at the distance of fifteen
degrees from each other, which makes the difference of one hour of
time between the different places through which they respectively pass.
G


Q ues t. i
What are the Tropics ?— — The Tropics are two circles parallel to the
Equator ; that on the north is called the Tropic of Cancer, and that
on the south the Tropic of Capricorn. Each of these circles is placed
at the distance of twenty-three degrees and a half from the Equator.
What are the Polar Circles? The Polar Circles are two circles, each
twenty-three degrees and a half distant from the Poles : they are pa-
rallel to the Equator, from which they are each sixty-six degrees and
a half distant. The Northern Polar Circle is denominated the Arctic
Circle, and the Southern is called the Antarctic, in reference to the
Poles they belong to.
What is the Zodiac ? The Zodiac is a great circle, which divides the
globe into two equal parts, and crossing the Equator in opposite
points, makes an angle of twenty-three degrees and a half with it.
The Zodiac is divided into twelve equal parts, called signs, each con-
sisting of thirty degrees.
What is the Ecliptic ? ——The Ecliptic is a circle supposed to lie in the
middle of the Zodiac, and to represent the course of the sun in its
annual motion, through the twelve signs just alluded to, as more
fully explained in the following catalogue:
NAMES AND MARKS OF THE TWELVE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC, WITH
THE MONTHS IN WHICH THE SUN PASSES THROUGH THEM.
1. Aries, the Ram, in March and April nr
2. Taurus, the Bull, in April and May 8
3. Gemini, the Twins, in May and June................ n
4. Cancer, the Crab, in J une and J uly 2B
5. Leo, the Lion, in July and August <9,
6. Virgo, the Virgin, in August and September.......... nji
7* Libra, the Balance, in September and October
8. Scorpio, the Scorpion, in October and November iq
9. Sagittarius, the Archer, in November and December .. £
10. Capricornus, the Goat, in December and January y?
11. Aquarius, the Waterman, in January and February .... m
12. Pisces, the Fishes, in February and March X
The first six are called 7iorthern signs, and are contained in that half
of the Ecliptic which is north of the Equator; the other six are called
southern signs, because they occupy the south part of the Ecliptic.
The sun passes through the first three signs during spring, through
the three next during summer ; it passes through the next three dur-
ing autumn, and finally through the last three during winter; enter-
ing each sign within about nine days from the end of the months first
named in the foregoing list. Thus, the Spring Quarter commences
with the Vernal Equinox, or the sun’s ingress into the sign Aries,
about the 20th of March; the Summer Quarter begins with the
Summer Solstice, or the sun’s entrance into Cancer, about the 21st of
June; the Autumnal Quarter commences with the Autumnal Equi-
nox, or the sun’s entrance into the sign Libra, about the 23d of
September; and the Winter Quarter begins with the Winter Sol-
stice, or ingress of the sun into Capricorn, about the 21st of December.
What are the Equinoctial and Solstitial Points ? The two opposite
points at which the Ecliptic intersects the Equator are the Equinoc-
tial Points; and the two points in the Ecliptic opposite to each
other, which are at the greatest equal distance from the Equinoctial
Points, making with the tropics an angle of twenty-three degrees and
a half, are called the Solstitial Points. The former two mark the
commencement of spring and autumn, the latter two the beginning
of summer and winter.
Quest.
What are the Colures ? The Colures are two Meridians which pass
through the equinoctial and solstitial points, and are called Colures
from a Greek word which signifies to divide, because they divide
the earth into four equal parts. The Colure which passes through
the equinoctial points is called the Equinoctial Colure; and that which
passes through the solstitial points is termed the Solstitial Colure.
What is the Horizon ? The sensible or visible Horizon is that circular
line which is seen on a clear day, and in which the sky and water,
or the sky and the earth, appear to meet; but the real or rational
horizon is that which is bounded by a plane passing through the centre
of the earth, and dividing it into two hemispheres. {See Figure 8.)
The Horizon marks the rising and setting of the sun, moon, and
stars, which are said to rise when they begin to appear above the
horizon, and to set when they descend below it.
How does the Horizon give a knowledge of the points of the Compass, and the
Cardinal points ? The Horizon is divided into thirty-two equal
parts, by lines conceived to be drawn from the place where the ob-
server stands, and which form with each other an angle equal to the
thirty-second part of three hundred and sixty degrees, that is, an
angle of eleven degrees and a quarter. The points of these divisions
are called Points of the Compass. The points which divide the
Horizon into four parts are, the North, the South, the East, and the
West; and these are called the Cardinal Points. In any part of the
globe these points may be easily ascertained: for, as the sun at
twelve o’clock is always at its greatest height, if the observer turn
his back upon it, he will have his face towards the North ; the East
will be on his right, and the West on his left.
What are the Zenith and Nadir ? The Zenith and Nadir are two imagi-
nary points in the heavens ; the Zenith is directly over our heads,
and the Nadir is exactly under our feet: they are also called the
Poles of the Horizon.
What are the Azimuth Circles ? The Azimuth Circles are described
round the globe, crossing the Horizon at right angles, and meeting
together at the Zenith and Nadir, as the meridional lines meet at
the poles of the earth.
Note. —ln recapitulating the elementary principles of the foregoing
theory of the sphere, it is necessary to observe that there are,
1. The Axis, or Diameter of the Earth , the extent of which, ac-
cording to the best calculations, is seven thousand nine hun-
dred and ten and a quarter English miles.
2. Four Poles, namely, the two poles of the earth, called the North
and South Poles, and the two poles of the horizon, called the
Zenith and Nadir.
3. Four Cardinal Points, called North, South, East, and West,
and twenty-eight secondary points, the names of which are
composed of those of the first.
4. Six Great Circles, the planes of which pass through the centre
of the earth, and divide it into equal parts or hemispheres ;
these are the Horizon, the Equator, the Meridian , the Zodiac,
and the two Colures.
5. The Azimuth Circles correspond with the meridian, and the
Ecliptic with the Zodiac.
6. The Circumference of the Earth, or of the great circles which
are conceived to be drawn upon its surface, is twenty-four
thousand eight hundred and ninety-one English miles.
7. Two lesser circles, called Tropics.
8. Two smaller circles, called Polar Circles.
Section 111. — Application of the Doctrine of the Sphere to the Use of the Artificial Globe,
As an Artificial Globe bears a near resemblance to the figure of
our Earth, it is the most proper instrument on which to delineate the
external appearance of the earth. Before we begin to practise on it, its
various appurtenances should be well understood.
The Horizon of an Artificial Globe is the broad wooden frame which
surrounds it, and coincides with the rational Horizon already defined. In
this frame the Globe is suspended by means of two notches, one on each
at the distance of half the interior circumference, for the Brazen
Meridian to stand in. This circle is of great use in determining the
times of the rising and setting of the Sun or Stars, and their continuance
above the Horizon; as well as in showing the reason of the increase and
decrease in the length of the day or night, in all parts of the Earth.
The Brazen Meridian is a large circle of brass surrounding the Globe,
in which it turns on two axes, representing the Poles of the Earth. This
circle divides the Globe into two equal parts, called the Eastern and
Western Hemispheres ; and by sliding it up or down in the two notches
of the Horizon, it may be placed in any position, so as to elevate or de-
press the Poles at pleasure, to represent the true position of the Globe in
any latitude; and it may also be made to represent the Meridian of any
place.
The Quadrant of Altitude is a narrow slip of brass, answering to
the fourth part of a Meridian, and divided into ninety degrees: it has a
notch, nut, and screw, at one end, to fasten it to the Zenith in the Meri-
dian ; and being thus fixed, and turned on a small pivot, it supplies the
place of an infinite number of vertical circles, and is very useful in deter-
mining the Altitudes and Azimuths of the heavenly bodies on the Celestial
Globe, and in measuring the distances between places on the Terrestrial.
The Hour Circle is a flat ring of brass, >so contrived that it may be
taken off, and fixed about either Pole of the Globe. When fastened to
the Brazen Meridian, the Pole becomes its centre ; and an Index, fixed
to the end of the axis, turns round with the Globe itself, and points out
the Hour on the small ring.
A Right Sphere is that in which the Horizon passes through the
North and South Poles, and the Equator through the Zenith and Nadir.
The inhabitants at the Equator have this position of the Sphere.
An Oblique Sphere is that in which one of the Poles is elevated
above the Horizon, and the other depressed below it; the Zenith and
Nadir falling between the Equator and the Poles, and the Equator making
an oblique angle with the Horizon. The inhabitants between the Equator
and the Polar Circles have this position of the Sphere.
A Parallel Sphere is that in which the Equator coincides with the
Horizon, with the Poles in the Zenith and Nadir. The people who live
under either of the Poles have this position of the Sphere.
Having described the several Parts of the Globe, and its three positions,
the following Problems will show their use.
PROBLEM I.
To find the Latitude and Longitude of any Place on the Globe.
Turn the Globe till the given place be brought to the east edge of the
brass Meridian; then the degree of the Meridian over the place will show
the latitude; and the degree of the Equator cut by the brass Meridian
will show the longitude.
PROBLEM 11.
To find the Situation of any Place on the Globe, from having its Latitude
and Longitude given.
Bring the given longitude to the brass Meridian, and look for the given
latitude on the same, under which will be the place required.


PROBLEM HI.
To find the Relative Distance of any two Places on the Globe.
Lay the Quadrant of Altitude on both places; or take the distance of
the two places between the points of a pair of compasses, and apply them
to the Equator ; and the degrees between them on the Quadrant in the
former case, and those of the Equator between the points of the compasses
in the latter, will give the number of degrees the two places are apart.
PROBLEM IV.
7b Rectify the Globe.
The Globe being set upon a true plane, raise the Pole above the
Horizon as many degrees as are equal to the latitude of the place : then
fix the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith; and if there be a Mariner’s
compass upon the pedestal, let the Globe be so placed, that the Brazen
Meridian may stand due North and South, according to the two ex-.
tremities of the needle, allowing for their variation.
PROBLEM V.
The Hour being given at one Place, to find what Hour it is at any other
Place.
Bring the place where the time is given under the brass Meridian, and
set the Hour-Index to the given time ; then turn the Globe till the other
place is brought under the brass Meridian, and the Index will point to
the Hour required.
PROBLEM VI.
To find the Sun's Decimation, that is, its Distance from the Equator, and the
Parallel of Latitude corresponding thereto.
Find the Sun’s place for the given day in the broad painted circle, and
seek that place in the Ecliptic Line upon the Globe; this will show the
parallel of the Sun’s Declination, which is also the corresponding parallel
of Latitude.
PROBLEM VII.
The Day of the Month and the Hour at any Place being given, to find the Place,
in the Torrid Zone, where the Sun is in the Zenith, or vertical, at that time.
The Sun’s place must be brought to the brass Meridian; and the de-
gree on the Meridian directly over it, is the Sun’s present declination:
then the given place being brought to the Meridian, and the Index
placed to XII. the Globe must be turned till the Index points to the
given hour; which, being done, the place on the Globe, lying under
that degree of the Meridian which had been the Sun’s declination, has the
Sun at that time in the Zenith.
PROBLEM VIII.
If any Place, whose Latitude is less than degrees, and the Day of the
Month, be proposed, to find the Hour at which the Sun rises and sets,
with the Length of Day and Night.
Rectify the Globe by (Problem IV.) ; bring the Sun’s place under the
brass Meridian, and set the Index to XII. then turn the Globe from West
to East, till the Sun’s place coincide with the broad painted circle, when
the Index will show the hour of the Sun’s rising; then turn the Globe
from East to West, and the Index will show the time of the Sun’s setting.
It will be easy, therefore, to reckon the length of the day, which, taken
from 24 hours, will also give the length of the night.
PROBLEM IX.
The Day and Hour being given, to find all those Places of the Earth where
the Sun is rising, setting, or culminating ; and also where it is Daylight,
Twilight, or Dark Night.
Find, by Problem VII. the place where the Sun is vertical at the given
hour; and after rectifying the latitude for that place, bring it to the
brass Meridian; then all those places that are in the Western simicircle
of the horizon, have the Sun rising; those in the Eastern semicircle have
it setting; those in the Meridian have it culminating, or on the Meri-
dian ; those below the Horizon, but within 18 degrees, have twilight;
and those lower than 18 degrees, have dark night.
Section IV. The Inhabitants of the Earth compared with each other , with respect to their Zones and Shadows.
The Terrestrial Globe is divided by the Tropics and Polar Circles into
five parts, called Zones; of which there are two Temperate, one Torrid,
and two Frigid; and the inhabitants, according to the various directions
of their meridional shadows, receive different names.
The Torrid Zone lies between the two Tropics, or the Sun’s northern
and southern boundaries; so that the sun’s beams are nearly perpendicular
during the whole year; and for this reason, the ancients were persuaded,
that this division of the Globe was so very hot, as to be uninhabitable;
but experience has since shewn that they were mistaken. Its breadth is
47 degrees; and the Equator, which runs through the middle of it,
divides it into two equal parts, each containing 23° 30'. The inhabitants
of this zone are called Amphiscii, that is, two shadows (from the Greek
a,[xq>u both, and crxioc, shadow,') because the Sun, being at different times of
the year both to the northward and southward of the zenith, cast their
shadows both ways at noon; that is, when the sun is to the south of their
zenith, their shadows at noon point to the north; and when it is to the
north, they point to the south: but twice a year the Sun is directly in
their zenith, when they have no shadow at all at noon, and then they are
called Ascii, that is, without shadow, (from ot, without, and uxia, shadow.)
The Two Temperate Zones lie between the Tropics and Polar Circles,
where the sun-beams are more oblique, in a degree between the extremes
of heat and cold. The breadth of each is 43 degrees. The inhabitants of
these zones are called Heteroscii, (from hepog, different, and <nu a, shadow,)
because their shadows are always opposite to each other ; the meridional
shadows of those who inhabit the Northern Temperate Zone being always
projected towards the North, and those of the Southern Temperate Zone
towards the South.
The Two Frigid Zones lie between the Polar Circles and the Poles.
They were supposed by the ancients to be uninhabited ; but this also is a
mistake. The breadth of each is 23° 30'. The inhabitants of both these
zones are called Periscii, (from 7np, round, and axm, shadow,) because, at
one particular time of the year, the Sun never sets for some days to-
gether, according as they are farther from, or nearer to, the Poles; and
consequently their shadows move round them.
INHABITANTS OP THE SEVERAL ZONES.
I. The Amphiscii, and Ascii, or Inhabitants of the Torrid Zqne, are
those who inhabit, 1. The Continent of Africa, viz. from the southern
part of Monomotapa, to the northern parts of Nubia and Nigritia. 2. Part
of Asia, viz. from its southernmost parts to the southern extremity of
Arabia Deserta; the ancient Mogul Empire, and China. 3. Great part
of America, viz. from Cape St. Lucas, in California, to Rio Janeiro, in
Brazil; the southern parts of Peru, and the several intermediate islands.
11. The Northern Heteroscii, or Inhabitants of the North Temperate Zone
are those who inhabit, 1. Almost all Europe, viz. from Cape Matapan, in
the Morea, to Tornea, and the North of Bothnia. 2. Great part of Asia,
viz. from the middle of the Isle of Formosa, Canton, in China, Dacca, in
Bengal, and Mascate, in Arabia Felix, to the mouth of the River Oby,
and the northern part of Great Tartary. 3. Great part of America, viz.
from Cape St. Lucas, in California; and Havannah, capital of the Island
of Cuba, to Cape Prince of Wales, and the North of Hudson’s Bay.
111. The Southern Heteroscii, or Inhabitants of the South Temperate
Zone, are those who inhabit, 1. The southernmost parts of Africa, viz. from
Cape Corientes, in Caffraria, St. Augustine, in the Isle of Madagascar,
and Cape Capricorn, in New Holland, to the South Sea. 2. Great part
of South America, viz. from Rio Janeiro, in Brazil, to Cape Horn.
IV. The Northern Periscii, or Inhabitants of the North Frigid Zone, are
those who inhabit, 1. The northern parts of America, viz. Greenland, and
that extent of country which is from Cape Prince of Wales, and the
northern part of Hudson’s Bay, to the North Pole. 2. A small part of
Europe, viz. Nova Zembla, the north point of Norway, Swedish Lap-
land, and Spitzbergen. 3. A great part of Tartary, viz. from the mouth
of the River Oby, to the Pole.
V. The Southern Periscii, or South Frigid Zone, remains unexplored,
by reason of the remote distance, the boisterous winds, rough seas, and
barriers of ice in those parts, which have hitherto prevented adventurers
from making any material discoveries in them.
Section V. The Inhabitants of the Earth compared with each other, with respect to their Climates,
A Climate is a Tract on the surface of the Earth, included between
two parallels of latitude, so that its longest day shall exceed or fall short
of that in the next Climate by half an hour.
The whole surface of the Earth is considered as divided into sixty Cli-
mates, viz. twenty-four from the Equator to each of the Polar Circles,
which differ from each other half an hour in the length of their longest
days; and six from each of the Polar Circles to the Poles themselves.
which differ from each other an entire month in the length of their days,
the Sun being seen in the first of these a whole month without setting \
in the second, two months; in the third, three, and so on to the Pofes
themselves, where the whole year consists but of one day and one night,
of six months each. These Climates decrease in breadth, as they recede
from the Equator, and increase again as they approach the Poles.


Climates.
Latitude.
Longest Days.
deg. min.
hours, min.
CLIMATES IN HALF HOURS.
and part of Tartary; New York, and
Boston, in New England, North America,
VIII.
49. 10.
16.
Paris, Vienna, capital of Germany ; Nova
Scotia, Newfoundland, and Canada, in
North America.
IX.
52.'
16. 30.
London,Flanders,Prague,Dresden; Cracow,
inPoland; Southern provinces ofRussia; part
of Tartary, North part of Newfoundland,
X.
54. 27.
17.
York, Holland, Hanover, and Tartary;
Warsaw, in Poland ; Labrador and New
South Wales, in North America.
XI.
56. 37.
17. 30.
Edinburgh, Copenhagen, Moscow.
XII.
58. 29.
18.
South part of Sweden; Tobolsk, capital of
Tobolsk in Asiatic Russia.
XIIL
59. 58.
18. 30.
Orkney Isles; Stockholm, capital of Sweden.
XIV.
61. 18.
19.
Bergen, in Norway; Petersburgh, in Russia.
XV.
62. 25.
19. 30.
Abo, and Wiborg, in Finland; Hudson’s
Straits, North America.
XVI.
63. 20.
20.
Siberia, and the South part of Greenland.
XVII.
64. 6.
20. 30.
Drontheim, in Norway.
XVIII.
64. 49.
21.
Part of Finland.
XIX.
65. 21.
21. 30.
Pitea, in Sweden; Archangel, on the White
Sea, in Russia.
XX.
65. 45.
22.
Mount Hecla, in Iceland.
XXL
66. 6.
22, 30.
Northern Parts of Siberia.
XXII.
66. 20.
23.
New North Wales, in North America.
XXIII.
66. 28.
23. 30.
Davis’s Straits, in North America.
XXIV.
66. 31.
24.
MONTHS.
Samoieda, in the North of Siberia; Southern
part of Baffin’s Bay.
CLIMATES OF MONTHS.
XXV.
67. 21.
1 month.
South part of Lapland.
XXVI.
69. 48.
2 months.
Greenland.
XXVII.
73. 37.
3 months.
Zembla Australis.
XXVIII.
78. 30.
4 months.
Zembla Borealis.
XXIX.
84. 5.
5 months.
Spitzbergen.
XXX.
90.
6 months.
Unknown Regions, at the Pole.
Climates.
Latitude.
Longest Days.
deg. min.
hours, min.
CLIMATES OF HALF HOURS.
I.
8. 25.
12. 30.
Within the first Climate lie the Gold, Ivory,
and Grain Coasts of Africa; Malacca, in
the East Indies ; Cayenne and Surinam,
in Guiana, South America.
II.
16. 25,
13.
Abyssinia, in Africa; Siam, Madras, and
Pondicherry, in the East Indies; Isthmus
of Panama, or Darien, between North
and South America; Tobago, the Gre-
nadas, St. Vincent’s, and Barbadoes, in
the West Indies.
III.
23. 50.
13. 30.
Mecca, in Arabia; Bombay; part of Bengal,
in the East Indies; Canton, in China;
Mexico, and Bay of Campeachy, in
North America; Jamaica, Hispaniola, St.
Chistopher’s, Antigua, Martinico, and
Guadaloupe, in the West Indies.
IV.
30. 25.
14.
Egypt, and the Canary Islands, in Africa;
Delhi, capital of the ancient Mogul Em-
pire, in Asia ; Gulf of Mexico and East
Florida, in North America; Havannah,
in the West Indies.
V.
36. 28.
14. 30.
Gibraltar, in Spain; part of the Mediterra-
nean Sea, the Barbary Coast, in Africa ;
Jerusalem; Ispahan, capital of Persia;
Nankin, in China ; California, New
Mexico, West Florida, Georgia, and the
Carolinas, in North America.
VI.
41. 22.
15.
Lisbon, in Portugal; Madrid, in Spain ;
Minorca, Sardinia, and part of Greece, in
the Mediterranean ; Asia Minor, part of
the Caspian Sea, Samarkand, in Great
Tartary ; Pekin in China; Corea and
Japan; Williamsburg, in Virginia, Mary-
land and Philadelphia, in North America.
VII.
45. 29.
15. 30.
Northern Provinces of Spain; Southern
Districts of France ; Turin, Genoa, and
Rome, in Italy ; Constantinople, and the
Black Sea, in Turkey; the Caspian Sea,
TABLE of the Names of Countries , and remarkable Places , situated in every Climate North of the Equator.
Section Vl. —The Inhabitants of the Earth compared with each other, as to their Meridians , and Parallels of Latitude,
The inhabitants of the Earth are, with respect to their Meridians and
Parallels of Latitude, either Antceci, Perioeci, or Antipodes.
I. The Antceci (drived from avn, against , and oiksu, to dwell,') are
people whose situation lies under the same Meridian, but opposite Paral-
lels, that is, if one have 40° North Latitude, the other will have 40°
South Latitude; consequently,
1. They have the same elevation of their Poles, but not of the same Pole;
those in the North Latitude having the North Pole elevated, and those in
the South Latitude having the South Pole elevated, in the same degree.
2. They are equally distant from the Equator, but on different sides,
because one is in North Latitude, and the other in South Latitude.
3. Their Noon and Midnight, and consequently all the Hours of the
Day and Night, are alike, because they are under the same Meridian; but,
4. The days of the one are equal to the Nights of the other, throughout
the year, because of their opposite Latitudes; the Sun rising and setting
sooner and later relatively with the one than with the other, except at the
time of the Equinoxes, when it rises and sets to both alike.
5. The longest Day with the one, is the shortest Day with the other ;
and, consequently, the longest Night with the one, is the shortest Night
with the other; because their Meridian is the same, but their Parallel,
or Latitude, is opposite.
6. They have opposite Seasons of the Year; it being Winter in one
Latitude, when it is Summer in the other; but within the Torrid Zone,
this difference is little felt.
7- Those who live under the Equator have no Antceci.
11. The Periceci (derived from mpi, about, and oikm, to dwell,) are
two classes of people, living under the same parallel of latitude, whether
North or South, but on opposite Meridians ; i. e. if one live in 51° North
latitude, the other lives in the same latitude also, but one is in the
Eastern hemisphere, the other in the Western; consequently,
1. They have the same Pole, which, whether they dwell in North or
South latitude, is elevated to both alike, because they live in the same
hemisphere.
2. They are equally distant from the Equator, because they are on the
same side of it, in the same degree of latitude.
ANTCECI IN THE EASTERN HEMISPHERE.
Towards the Northern, or Arctic Pole. Towards the Southern, or Antarctic Pole.
Sierra Leone to the Isle of St. Helena.
The Lake Dembea to the Lake Zembre.
Egypt % to Monomotapa.
fto the Northern part of the Isle of
Arabia Felix | Madagascar.
. , . „ fto the Southern part of the Isle of
Arabia Deserta | Madagascar.
The Isle of Guam, one of the La- C the Northern part ofXew Holland.
drones . j A
A part of the Mediterranean, be-1 the c of Good H
tween Cape Matapan and Sicily J
TT , i tt 11 * fto Nuitz Land, on the West of New
Hoan-ho, or the Yellow River .. < Holland
The Isle of Yesso to Van Dieman’s Land, New Holland.
The Isle of Candia to the Gulf of St. Lawrence, in Africa.
Tripoli to the Hottentots.
Nubia to the Northern part of Monomotapa.
ANTCECI IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE.
*
New Britain, or Labrador to Terra del Fuego Islands.
_ T TT , . fto the separation of Chili and Pata-
New Hampshire | gon ia. r
The Lake Ontario to the Isle of Chiloe.
Philadelphia to the Western Coast of Chili.
Charlestown to the Isle of Juan Fernandez.
Cape Florida , to the Isle of St. Felix.
mi t t /• ta fto the province of Los Char cos, in
The Isle of St. Domingo < Peru
The Northern part of Terra Firma to Cusco, in Peru.
PERIOECI IN THE NORTHERN HEMISPHERE.
In the East. In the West.
The Mouth of the River Lena ... .to Disco Isle, Greenland.
The Icy Cape to the North-west of Baffin’s Bay.
~ „ , , fto the unknown Regions North of
NovaZembla •■ •• • \ Canada.
The North-eastern part of Siberia, .to Greenland.
The River Lena to Davis’s Straits.
The Mount of Yablonskoi to the Southern part of Greenland,
Tl Tartery hern f. } to the head ° f Hudson ’ s Ba J''
Iceland to the North of Kamtschatka.
mu oi, ui jr i Ito the Isle of Goree, in the Northern
The Shetland Isles | Archipelago.
Amsterdam to the Fox Isles.


PERICECI CONTINUED.
3. When it is Noon with one, it is Midnight with the other; when it
is Ten o’clock in the Morning with one, it is Ten at Night with the
other, because of their being under opposite Meridians ; yet,
4. Their Length of Days, and their Length of Nights, are the same;
because they are equally distant from the Equator.
5. They agree exactly in the Four Seasons of the Year, because their
Latitude (as was observed before) is the same.
6. Those who live under the Poles have no Periceci.
111. The Antipodes (a term derived from avrt, against, and mhq,
feet,) are two people, under opposite Meridians, and opposite Parallels;
i. e. if one live in 40° North Latitude, the other lives in 40° South
Latitude, but on the direct contrary side of the Globe ; they are there-
fore diametrically opposite to each other; consequently,
1. They have both the same elevation of their Poles, because they live
in the same degree of Latitude; though one is in the North, and the
other in the South.
2. They are both equally distant from the Equator, though they live
on contrary sides of the Globe, and in opposite Hemispheres.
3. When it is Noon with one, it is Midnight with the other ; when it
is Seven o’clock in the Morning with the one, it is Seven at Night with
the other; because their Meridians are opposite.
4. The Longest Day with the one, is the Shortest with the other;
and, consequently, the Longest Night with the one,, is the Shortest
Night with the other ; because they live on opposite sides of the Equator,
and on opposite Meridians.
5. When it is Midsummer with the one, it is Midwinter with the
other; because of their opposite Latitudes and Meridians.
6. The feet of the one are opposite to the feet of the other; because
they are in positions diametrically opposite.
In the East. In the West.
The River Yenisee , to Hudson’s Bay.
The Lake Baikal .to the Western Part of Labrador
The River Amur to the Strait of Belleisle.
Independent Tartary to the Northern Part of Louisiana
Part of Tartary, near the Lake Aral to Cape Blanco, in New Mexico.
The Great Desert, in Chinese Tartary,to the Province of Quebec.
Tcitcicar, in Chinese Tartary to Newfoundland.
Part ofZahara, near Nubia to the Sandwich Isles.
The Mountains of Himma-Leh ... .to Santa Fe, North America.
The Mouth of the Indus to the Southern Part of California.
The Kingdom of Tonquin to the Isle of Cuba.
The Northern Part of the Bay of \to the Peninsula of Yucatan, in
Bengal j Mexico.
The Philippines to the Little Antilles, West Indies.
The Isle of Hainan to St. Domingo.
The Kingdom of Cambodia to Jamaica.
The Isthmus of Malacca to the Province of Darien.
The Northern Part of Borneo to the Northern Part of Terra Firma.
perkeci in the southern hemisphere.
The Isles of Sunda and the Moluccas,to Amazonia.
Papua, or New Guinea to the Northern Part of Brazil.
The Northern Part of New Holland,to the Middle of Brazil.
The Northern Part of Monomotapa,to the Society Islands.
The Western Coast of New Holland A t^le Andes Mountains, South
I America.
ANTIPODES
In the Eastern Hemisphere. In the Western Hemisphere.
The Lake Baikal to the Southern Part of Patagonia.
Madrid ...../ to t^le Entrance of Cook’s Straits,
j n N ew Zealand.
Chinese Tartary to Patagonia.
The Northern Part of Morocco to the North Cape, in New Zealand.
.The Head of the River Hoan-ho . .to the Isle of Juan Fernandez.
Pekin .to the Northern Part of Patagonia.
The Northern Part of the Yellow Sea,to the Mouth of Rio de la Plata.
Jhe Southern Part of Corea to Cape St. Mary, in Paraguay.
Cape Blanco, in Africa to New Caledonia.
Mount Caphas to the Friendly Islands.
Nubia to the Society Isles.
The South-west of China to the Isle of St. Felix.
The Isle of Hainan to La Plata.
The Northern Part of Formosa ... .to Assumption, in Paraguay.
Northern Part of Guinea to the New Hebrides.
The Eastern Part of the Siam Gulf to the City of Lima, Peru.
The Philippine Islands to Amazonia.
The Straits of Malacca to the Gulf of Guayaquil.
The Peninsula of Malacca to the Province of Quito.
The Isle of Borneo to the Northern Part of Amazonia.
The Isle of Gilolo to the Mouth of the Amazon River.
The Southern Part of the Isle of I . 0 . _
Sumatra > to the Southern Part of Terra Firma.
The Head of the River Zambeze . .to the Island of Owhyhee.
Lion s Land, in New Holland ... .to the Bermuda Islands.
Van Diemen’s Land, in New Holland,to the Azores in the Atlantic.
PROBLEM.
To fnd the Antceci, the Periceci, and the Antipodes, of any given Place.
Bring the given place to the Brass IVleridian, and note its latitude;
which being done, the same latitude counted towards the contrary Pole"
under the Brass Meridian, will shew the place of the Antoeci. Keep the
given place still under the Meridian, and set the Hour Index to twelve at
noon ; if the Globe be then turned till the Index point to twelve at night.
the place which comes under the same degree of the Meridian that the
first given place was, will be that of the Perioeci; and the Antipodes of
the first place will now be under the same degree of the Meridian, that
the Antoeci were before.


A COMPLETE COURSE OF GEOGRAPHY,
BY MEANS OF
INSTRUCTIVE GAMES.
PART III.
CONTAINING
Geographical Questions,
IN THE MANNER OF
A GAME
For enabling the Pupil to find out a place by means of its characteristic or distinguishing Marks ; designed to
excite a Recollection of what he has learned of Geography and History , by making him reason , combine , and reflect on
it; and by thus enlarging his Mind, to accustom him early to the ready application and exercise of his Judgment.
MANNER OF PLAYING.
In this Game, the Instructor proposes one of the Geo-
graphical Questions (of which a very numerous List is
hereafter annexed); and if the Pupil, who is supposed to
have prepared himself for the Exercise, answer right, he
is to be rewarded with a counter ; but should he give a
wrong answer, he must forfeit one. Where several Pupils
are engaged in this Exercise, they will correct each
other, and receive a counter from each of those who are
unable to give the proper answer. Let us suppose here,
that the Instructor plays alone with his Pupil.
Example.
Instructor. — Name the Country , which , being surrounded
on all sides by the Sea , composes three Kingdoms, (Sec-
tion I. No. 1.)
Pupil. — The British Islands.
(Here the Instructor acknowledges the justness of the
Answer, and gives his Pupil a Counter.)
All the Questions which the Instructor, according to
the following List, may ask his Pupil, relate,
I. To the Boundaries of different Places ;
11. To the Use and Knowledge of the Sphere ;
111. To Facts of Sacred, Ancient, Modern, or Fabulous
History.
The Instructor is advised to vary his Questions : so
that, after having proposed any Question relative to the
Boundaries , as in the Example above, he may propose
some others relative to the use or knowledge of the Globe,
or deduced from the Tables of the Antoeci, Perioeci, and
Antipodes.
Example relative to the Antoeci.
(See the Table of Antoeci, page 28.)
Instructor. — What place is that , whose Inhabitants are
the Antoeci to those of the Isle of St. Domingo f
Pupil. — Los Charcos, in Peru.
Example relative to the Perioeci.
(See the Table of Perioeci, page 28.)
Instructor. — What place is that , whose Inhabitants are
the Perioeci to those of the Fox Isles ?
Pupil . — Amsterdam .
Example relative to the Antipodes.
(See the Table of Antipodes, page 29.)
Instructor.— What place is that , whose Inhabitants are
the Antipodes to those of the Peninsula of Malacca f
Pupil.™ The Province of Quito , in South America,
Lastly, he may propose some other Questions, relative
to HISTORY, SACRED, ANCIENT, MODERN, Or FABULOUS, as
in the following Examples.
Example in Sacred History.
Instructor. — Name a mountain , which is in Arabia
Petrcea , in a Peninsula formed by the arms of the Red Sea ,
and on which God delivered his Law to the Israelites,
(Section XIII. No. 32.)
Pupil . — Mount Sinai,
Example in Ancient History.
Instructor.— Name the part of Asia, in which is Nicopolis,
a town of Armenia , built by Pompey in commemoration of
a victory which he gained over the forces of Mithridates,
(Section 11. No. 7^.)
Pupil.— The East Part of Turkey in Asia,
Example in Modern History.
Instructor.— Name the Town where King Canute gave a
striking reproof to his flattering courtiers : —At which the
Emperor Charles F, embarked on his return from England
to Spain : —And at which Philip 11, disembarked when he
came to England to marry Queen Mary I, (Section IV.
Numbers 118, 119, 120.)
Pupil.— Southampton,
Example in Fabulous History.
Instructor.— Name the part of Asia which contains
Turkish Georgia , or Mingrelia , formerly called Colchis ,
rendered famous by the Expedition of the Argonauts , and
the birth of Medea. (Section 11. No. 74.)
Pupil . The East part of Turkey in Asia.
The Pupils, according to their Answers, will gain or
lose Counters, as above.


GEOGRAPHICAL QUESTIONS
FOR DISCOVERING
The Most Remarkable Places in the World.
BY MEANS OF THEIR CHARACTERISTIC OR DISTINGUISHING MARKS;
IN THE MANNER OF
A GAME.
Note,— ln putting these Questions, every point of interrogation should be followed by a pause, to give the Pupil time to reply; and the words here
expressed only once at the commencement of a series of questions, as Name the Country of Europe, Name the Country of Africa, &c. must be
repeated with each question, before the word which, of which, where, &c.—The answers are printed in Italics, at the end of each paragraph.
SECTION I.
COUNTRIES.
4£tanu tljc ©ountrg of iSuvopo,
1. Which is surrounded by the sea
on every side, and contains three
kingdoms. 2. Which comprises two
great, and many small islands, in the
Atlantic. (The British Islands,)
3. Which is bounded on the north,
east, and west by the sea; and on
the south by Germany. (Denmark.)
4. Which is bounded on the north
by the Frozen Ocean; on the south
by the Baltic; on the west by the
Atlantic, the Cattegat, and the
Sound. 5. From which issued the
Cimbri and Teutones, who, having
invaded the Roman Empire with a
great army, were defeated by the
Consul Marius. (The Scandinavian
Peninsula, or Sweden and Norway.)
6. Which is bounded by the Frozen
Ocean on the north; by Asia on the
east, by the Sea of Zabak, or Azof,
and the Black Sea, on the south;
and by Sweden and Poland on the
west. (Russia.)
7- Which is bounded by the Bri-
tish Channel and the Netherlands on
the north; by Germany, Switzer-
land, and Italy, on the east; and by
the Mediterranean and Spain on the
south. 8. Which was called by the
ancient Romans Gallia Transalpina.
9. Which was divided by the Romans
into four different parts, called Gallia
Belgica or Comata, Gallia Narbonen-
sis or Braccata, Aquitania, and Gal-
lia Celtica or Lugdunensis. (France.)
10. Which is bounded on the east
by Poland, Bohemia, and Hungary ;
on the north by the Baltic Sea and
Jutland; on the west by France and
the Netherlands; on the south-west
by Switzerland and Italy ; and on
the south-east by Turkey. 11. Which
was lately divided into nine Circles,
namely. Upper Saxony, Lower Saxo-
ny, and Westphalia, on the north;
the Upper Rhine, the Lower Rhine,
and Franconia, in the middle; Sua-
bia, Bavaria, and Austria, on the
south. ( Germamy.)
12. Which is bounded on the west
by Silesia; on the south by Hungary
and Moldavia; on the north by
Prussia and a part of Russia; and
on the east by southern Russia.
(Poland.)
13. Which is bounded on the north
and west by the German or North
Sea; and on the south by France.
14. Which was formerly called Bel-
gium Proper, and was inhabited by
the ancient Batavians. (The Nether-
lands.)
15. Which is bounded on the east
by Tyrol; on the west by France; on
the north by the Black Forest and
part of Germany; and on the south
by Italy. 16. Which contains in one
of its Cantons, called Glaris, quarries
of marble and slate, bearing impres-
sions of different kinds of fish, even
those of the Indian Seas, and which
quarries are regarded as testimonials
of the Deluge. {Switzerland.)
17- Which lies between France,
Italy, and Switzerland, and was for-
merly inhabited by people called Al-
lohroges, whose city was destroyed
by the Romans because they had as-
sisted Hannibal. 18. Of ?vhich, in
the days of Cicero and Caesar, its
ambassadors refused to join in Cati-
line’s conspiracy, and made a disco-
very of his treason. {Savoy.)
19. Which is bounded on the north
by the Baltic ; on the east and south
by Poland, and on the west by the
Grand Duchy of Posen. {Ducal
Prussia.)
20. Which is bounded on the north,
south, and west, by Germany; and
on the east by Poland and Hungary.
{Bohemia.)
21. Which is bounded on the north
by Galicia and Bohemia ; on the west
by Germany; and on the south and
east by Turkey. {Hungary.)
22. Which is bounded on the west
and south by the Atlantic; on the
north and east by Spain. 23. Which
was anciently called Lusitania. {Por-
tugal.)
24. Which is bounded on the north
by the Bay of Biscay and the Pyre-
nees ; on the east and south by the
Mediterranean; on the south by the
Straits of Gibraltar; and on the
west by Portugal and the Atlantic.
25. Which was formerly called Ibe-
ria and Hesperia. {Spain.)
26. Which is bounded on the north
by Switzerland and Germany; on
the east and north-east by the Gulf
of Venice; on the south-east and
south-west by the Mediterranean;
and on the north-west by France.
27- Which was called by the ancients,
at different periods, Saturnia, JEno-
tria, Hesperia, Ausonia, and Tyrrhe-
nia. 28. Of which the northern part
comprised Gallia Transpadana and
Gallia Cispadana. 29. Of which the
southern part contained Etruria, La-
tiura, and Magna Graecia. {ltaly.)
30. Which is bounded on the north
by Russia, Poland, Hungary, and
Germany; on the east by the Black
Sea and Sea of Marmora; on the
west by the lonian Sea and the Gulf
of Venice. 31. Of which the north-
ern part formerly contained Illyria
and Dacia. 32. Of which the south-
ern part formerly contained Thrace
and Greece. 33. I?i which is Al-
bania, which formerly contained
Epirus and part of Macedonia. 34.
In ivhieh is Livadia, which formerly
contained, under the name of Achaia,
iEtolia, Phocis, Boeotia, and Attica.
[lt was in iEtolia that Meleager
killed the Caledonian boar, and pre-
sented its head to Atalanta.] 35.
In which is the Morea, formerly the
Peloponnesus, which contained six
provinces ; namely, Achaia Proper,
Argolis, Elis, Arcadia, Laconia, and
Messenia. ( Turkey in Europe.)
Kamc tl)c ©ouutrg of
36. Which is bounded by the Frozen
Ocean on the north; by the Pacific
Ocean on the east; by China, India,
Persia, and the Caspian Sea, on the
south; and by European Russia on
the west. ( Great Tartary.)
37- Which is surrounded on the
north by a great wall, upwards of a
thousand miles in length. 38. Where
the women wear exceedingly narrow
shoes, and suppose their beauty to
consist in having their feet as small
as those of children of six years old.
(China.)
39. Which is bounded by Tibet
and China on the north; by China
and the Chinese Sea on the east; by
the Chinese Sea and Straits of Ma-
lacca on the south; by the Bay of
Bengal and the River Ganges on the
west. 40. Which contains the Bir-
man Empire. (The Eastern Penin-
sula of India.)
41. Which is bounded on the north
by the ancient Mogul Empire; on
the south-east by the Bay of Bengal;
and on the west by the Arabian Sea.
42. Where widows burn themselves
to death on the funeral pile of their
deceased husbands. 43. Where de-
votees sacrifice themselves beneath
the car of their idol Juggernaut. 44.
Where the British possess an empire
equal to the whole of Europe in ex-
tent. ( The Western Peninsula oflndia.)
45. Which is a Kingdom, bounded
on the north by Georgia, the Caspian
Sea, and Usbeck Tartary; on the
west by Turkey; on the south by
the Gulfs of Persia and Ormus, and
the Arabian Sea; and on the east
by Hindoostan Proper. 46. Which
was the country of the great Cyrus,
the liberator of the Jews from their
Babylonish captivity ; and also of the
unfortunate Darius Codomanus, who
was murdered by traitors, as he fled
from the victorious Alexander of
Macedon. (Persia.)
47- Which is bounded on the west
by the Red Sea and the Isthmus of
Suez ; on the north-east by the Ri-
ver Euphrates, which divides it from
Diarbeck, the ancient Mesopotamia;
on the east by Persia and the Gulfs
of Persia and Ormus; and on the
south by the Indian Ocean. 48. Which
has a celebrated breed of horses, said
to be derived from King Solomon’s
stud. 49. Which is famous for its
spices and perfumes. 50. Which is
the residence of the Bedouins, or
descendants of Ishmael, who have
never ackowledged a king, but still
live in a state of nature. ( Arabia .)
51. Which is bounded on the north
by the Black Sea and Circassia; on
the east by Persia; on the south by
Arabia and the Mediterranean; and
on the West by the Archipelago, the
Sea of Marmora, and the Straits of
Constantinople. 52. Which contains
the ancient Asia Minor, Armenia,
Syria, and Judea. (Turkey in Asia.)
Kame ti)c ©ountrg of Africa,
53. Which is bounded on the north
by the Mediterranean ; on the south
by Nubia; on the east by the Red
Sea and the Isthmus of Suez; and
on the west by Deserts. 54. Which
was once the seat of a mighty empire
of learning and science, though now
poor and degraded. 55. Which is
remarkable in Sacred History for
ten plagues inflicted on it by God,
on account of the cruelties exercised
towards the Israelites, who then so-
journed there, and for the destruction
of its king, with his attendant armies,
in the Red Sea. 56. Which possesses
the most ancient and stupendous mo-
numents ever discovered. (Egypt.)
57- Which has the Mediterranean
on the north, and the Atlantic on the
west, and was known to the ancients
by the names of Mauritania, Numidia,
Africa Propria, and Libya. ( Barbary.
58. Which is bounded on the north
by Barbary; on the east by Nubia
and Egypt; on the south by Nigri-
tia; and on the west by the Atlantic
Ocean. ( Sahara, or the Great Desert.)
59. Which is the only country of
Africa that the sea does not reach.
(■ Nigritia, or Soudan.)
60. Which is bounded on the north
by Nigritia; on the south by Congo
and the Atlantic Ocean ; on the east
by Ethiopia; and on the west by
the Atlantic Ocean. 61. Which was
till lately infamous for the slave-trade
carried on upon its coasts by Euro-
peans. ( Guinea.)
62. Which is a kingdom, bounded
on the north by Benin; on the east
and south by inland parts of Africa;
and on the west by the Atlantic
Ocean. ( Lower Guinea.)
63. Which comprehends a large
extent of country little known to Eu-
ropeans, bounded on the east by
Zanguebar and Monomotapa; on the
west by Congo and the Atlantic
Ocean; and on the south by the
Southern Ocean. 64. Which is the
residence of the Hottentots, and now
the scene of pious missionary labours
for converting the idolatrous natives
to Christianity. ( Caffraria .)
65. Which is bounded on the north
by Mono-Emugi; on the west by
the Gulf of Sofala and the Mozam-
bique Channel; on the south by the
country of the Hottentots; and on


the East by unexplored regions. 66.
Which contains an Empire and se-
veral dependent Kingdoms. 67* In
which are the Lupata Mountains, po-
pularly called “ the Spine, or Back-
bone of the World.” {Monomotapa.)
68. Which includes several King-
doms, and is bounded on the east by
the Indian Ocean ; on the south by
Monomotapa; and on the west by
Mono-Emugi. 69. In which the
Portuguese have settlements. (Zan-
guebar.)
70. Which is bounded on the north
by the Red Sea and the Straits of
Bab-el-mandeb; on the south by
Zanguebar; on the east by the In-
dian Ocean; and on the west by
Abyssinia. 71* Which is divided into
several States, or Kingdoms, of which
Adel, or Zeila, and Magadoxa, are
the principal. 72- Which has an ex-
cellent breed of horses, in great request
among foreign merchants. {Ajan.)
73. Which is bounded on the north
by Nubia; on the east partly by the
Red Sea, and partly by Ajan; on
the west by Nigritia; and on the
south by the Mountains of the
Moon. 74. In which the children of
the King are at a certain age sent
into confinement on a certain moun-
tain, to prevent them from aspiring to
the crown, 15. Of which the esta-
blished religion is Christianity, mix-
ed with many Jewish and Pagan rites.
76. Which contains the Lake Dembea,
one of the sources of the Nile. 77-
In which the capital punishments are
crucifixion, flaying alive, stoning, and
plucking out the eyes. {Abyssinia.)
78. Which is bounded on the north
by Egypt; on the east by the Red
Sea; on the south by Abyssinia;
and on the west by Nigritia. 79.
Which contains the Kingdoms of Sen-
naar and Dongola. 80. Of which
the inhabitants are said to be ac-
quainted with a poison of so subtle
a nature, that a single grain will
destroy ten persons. {Nubia.)
iHUmc ©ountrg of America,
81. Which is bounded on the north
and west by unexplored regions; on
the east by the Atlantic; and on the
south by the United States. 82.
Which, two hundred years ago, had
an exceedingly cold climate, but
which has grown gradually milder
since the French and English began
to clear the forests. {Canada.)
83. Which is bounded on the north
by the Lakes of Canada; on the east
by the Atlantic Ocean ; on the south
by the Gulf of Mexico ; and on the
west by New Mexico and the Pacific
Ocean. 84. Which was colonized by
Europeans, and now forms a power-
ful independent federal Republic.
{United States.)
85. Which is bounded on the west
by the Pacific Ocean; on the south
by New Spain ; on the east by Loui-
siana ; and on the north by an unex-
plored country. 86. Which abounds
in precious stones, gold, and silver,
and is accounted the most pleasant,
rich, and plentiful country of Ame-
rica, if not of the whole world. {New
Mexico.)
87- Which is bounded on the north
by New Mexico; on the east by the
Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean
Sea; on the south-east by the Isth-
mus of Darien; and on the south
and west by the Pacific Ocean. 88.
Which was the seat of an ancient
empire, called Anabac, when disco-
vered by Fernando Cortez, the Spa-
niard, in 1520, who gave it the name
of New Spain. (Old Mexico.)
89. Which is bounded on the north
by the Caribbean Sea; on the east
by the Atlantic and Guiana; on the
south by Amazonia and Peru; and
on the west by the Pacific Ocean.
{Terra Firma.) •
90. Which is bounded on the north
by Terra Firma ; on the west by the
Pacific Ocean; on the south by
Chili; and on the east by a ridge of
prodigious mountains called the An-
des. 91. Which was the seat of a
rich monarchy dedicated to the Sun,
under the government of sovereigns,
called Yncas, when invaded and con-
quered by the Spaniards, under Fran-
cis Pizarro, and Diego Almagro,
about the year 1530. {Peru.)
92. Which lies between the Pacific
Ocean on the west; and the Andes
on the east. 93. Which was re-
duced by Diego Almagro, in 1535.
{Chili.)
94. Which is bounded on the north
by Paraguay and Chili; on the w T est
by Chili and the Pacific Ocean; on
the south by the Straits of Magellan;
and on the east by the Atlantic. 95.
Of which the inhabitants are reported
to be of gigantic size, and savage
manners. {Patagonia.)
96. Which is bounded on the north
by Amazonia; on the east by Bra-
zil ; on the south by Patagonia; and
on the west by Chili and Peru. 97-
Which is watered by the Rio de la
Plata, or Plate River, so called from
the quantity of silver found on its
banks by those Europeans who first
visited the country in 1515 and 1526.
98. In which the cotton-tree flourishes
in a remarkable manner. {Paraguay.)
99. Which lies between the rivers
Oronoco and Amazon, and to the
east of Terra Firma. 100. In which
was supposed to be situate the ideal
country of El Dorado, said to sur-
pass Mexico and Peru in riches, but
which has never yet been discovered.
101. To which Sir Walter Raleigh
made a voyage in search of wealth, in
1595, but returned disappointed. 102.
Which is divided into three parts, be-
longing respectively to the French,
Dutch, and Portuguese. {Guiana.)
103. Which is bounded on the
north by Terra Firma and Guiana;
on the east by the Atlantic Ocean
and Brazil; on the south by Para-
guay ; and on the west by Peru. 104.
Which was discovered in 1580, by
Francisco Orellana, who observing
companies of women in arms, gave it
the name it now bears. {Amazonia.)
105. Which is bounded on the
north by the River of the Amazons
and the Atlantic; on the east by the
Atlantic; on the south by Paraguay;
and on the west by Amazonia. 106.
Which was a colony of Portugal, and
for a time the seat of the Portuguese
court, but is now an independent
empire. {Brazil.)
SECTION 11.
DIVISION OF COUNTRIES.
Name 0k Hart of IHuropc,
1. Which was anciently called Cale-
donia, is subdivided into thirty-three
; counties, and contains the Universi-
ties of Aberdeen, St. Andrew’s, Edin-
, burgh, and Glasgow. {Scotland.)
2. In which are the remains of a
> great wall, built by the Emperor
Adrian, to serve as a rampart against
i the incursions of the Piets, whom
; the Romans were not able to subdue.
l 3. Which, under the Saxons, con-
- tained seven kingdoms, and is now
i subdivided into forty counties. 4.
. Which contains the Universities of
t Oxford and Cambridge. 5. Which,
- since the year 956, in consequence of
- the measures taken by King Edgar,
e has ceased to be infested by wolves
and other wild beasts. {England.)
i 6. Which is a principality, and
t part of the British Empire. 7- Which
e consists of two principal divisions,
1 north and south, each subdivided
into six counties. 8. Which served i
as a retreat to the ancient Britons, J
when they refused to submit to the
Saxon yoke, and where their descen- (
dants still reside. 9. Which gives a <
title to the eldest son of the King of ]
England, {Wales.) t
10. Which contains four extensive ]
provinces; namely, Ulster to the i
north, subdivided into nine coun- ]
ties; Leinster to the east, subdi- (
vided into twelve counties ; Munster i
to the south, subdivided into six i
counties; and Connaught to the 1
west, containing five counties. 11.
In which no serpents, or other veno-
mous reptiles can exist. {lreland.) 1
12. Which is bounded on the ]
south by the Duchy of Holstein, :
and was formerly called the Cher- 1
sonesus Cimbrica. {Jutland.) <
13. Of which the name, in the lan- 1
guage of the country, signifies the 1
North Road. {Norway.) <
14. In which is found the rein-deer,
an animal less than a horse and
longer than a stag, and used by the
inhabitants for travelling, for food,
and for clothing. {Lapland.)
15. Which is a part of the king-
dom of Sweden, and inhabited by
the descendants of a nation, cele-
brated for its excursions and inva-
sions of other countries, particularly
in the decline of the Roman Empire;
and which had its origin from the
ancient Getae, or Tartars of the
Crimea. ( Gothland.)
16. Which is divided into two parts
by a gulf, bearing the same name as
the place itself. {Bothnia.)
17* Which is bounded on the west
by Switzerland and Bavaria ; on the
north by Bohemia; on the east by
Hungary; and on the south by Lom-
bardy and Croatia. 18. Which was
formerly an Archduchy, but is now
an Empire. 19. Which excels all
other provinces of Germany in the
fertility of its soil, the excellence of
its pastures, the salubrity of the air,
and beauty of the country. 20. In
which wine and fruit every where
abound, and which produces saffron
superior to that of India. {Austria.)
21. Which is bounded on the west
by Suabia; on the north-west by
Franconia; on the north-east by
Bohemia ; and on the east and south
by Austria. 22. Which was formerly
an Electorate, but is now a Kingdom.
{Bavaria.)
23. From which issued the Franks,
who conquered the country of the
Gauls, and gave their name to it,
{Franconia.)
24. 171 which are Dresden, and
Leipsic, where Buonaparte was de-
feated by the Allies in 1813. 25.
Which was formerly an Electorate,
but is now a Kingdom. 26. Of which
the King was deprived of a consider-
able part of his dominions in 1814,
for his adherence to Buonaparte.
{Saxony.)
27- Which is bounded on the north
by the North Sea, Holstein, and
Hamburgh; on the east by Meck-
lenburgh and Brandenburgh ; on the
south by Westphalia and Hesse;
and on the west by the Kingdom of
the Netherlands. 28. Which was for-
merly an Electorate, but is now a
Kingdom, belonging to the King of
Great Britain. {Hanover.)
29. Which is a Grand Duchy,
bounded on the north by the Prin-
? cipality of Hesse; on the east by
, Wiirtemburgh; on the south by S wit-
? zerland; and on the west by France.
, 30. In ivhich the Duke D’Enghien
5 was seized by order of Buonaparte,
and put to death in 1804. {Baden.)
I 31. Which is surrounded by Ba-
i den and Bavaria on all sides, ex-
, cept a part of the south, where it is
I bounded by Austria. 32. Which was
formerly a Duchy, but is now a
Kingdom. ( W'urtemburgh.)
33. Which is a Federal Republic,
consisting of States denominated
Cantons, bounded on the north by
Baden ; on the east by Austria and
the Tyrol ; on the south by the
Kingdom of Lombardy, Piedmont,
and Savoy; and on the west by
France. 34. Which was the country
of the ancient Helvetii, 35. Which
is remarkable for its high mountains
and romantic scenery. 36. Which
was the country of the brave patriot
William Tell. ( Switzerland.)
37- Which, with the territories of
the ancient Republic of Genoa, form
part of the King of Sardinia’s conti-
nental dominions. 38. Which lie at
the foot of the Alps, and are bound-
ed on the north by Switzerland; on
the east by the Kingdom of Lom-
bardy and the Duchy of Modena;
on the south by the Gulf of Genoa;
and on the west by France. 39.
Which was part of the ancient Gallia
Cisalpina. {Piedmont and Savoy.')
40. Which formed a principal part
of the ancient Gallia Cisalpina, and
has its present name from a northern
tribe, who settled in it under Alboi-
nus, in the year 568. 41. Which
now includes the territories of the old
Venetian Republic, the Duchies of
Milan and Mantua, and the pro-
vinces of Istria and Dalmatia. 42.
Which is bounded on the north by
Switzerland and Austria; on the
east by Austria and Turkey; on
the south by the Gulf of Venice, the
States of the Church, and the Duchies
of Modena and Parma; and on the
west by Piedmont and Switzerland.
{Lombardo-Venetian Kingdom.)
43. Which is a Duchy, bounded on
the north by the P 6, which sepa-
rates it from Lombardy; on the east
by Modena; on the south by the
former territory of Genoa; and on
the west by Piedmont. {Parma.)
44. Which is a Grand Duchy,
bounded on the north by the territory
of Mantua; on the east by the Ec-
clesiastical State; on the south by
the Apennines, which divide it from
Tuscany; and on the west by Parma.
{Modena.)
45. Which was formerly a Repub-
lic, but is now a Duchy ; bounded
on the north by Modena ; on the
north-east and south by Tuscany;
and on the west by the Mediterra-
nean Sea. {Lucca.)
46. Which is a Grand Duchy,
bounded on the north by Modena
and Parma ; on the east by the States
of the Church; and on the south
and west by the Mediterranean. 47-
Which was formerly called Etruria.
48. In which was Veii, a powerful
city, taken and destroyed by Ca-
millus, after a siege of ten years.
49. In which dwelt the Falisci, ori-
ginally a Macedonian Colony, who
surrendered to Camillus, after being
besieged by him. {Tuscany.)
50. Which is bounded on the North
by the Kingdom of Lombardy and
the Duchy of Modena ; on the East
by the Gulf of Venice; on the South
by the Kingdom of Naples ; and on
the West by the Mediterranean and
Tuscany. 51. In which is the an-
cient city of Rome. 52. Which con-
tains the Campagna di Roma, St. Pe-
ter’s Patrimony, Umbria, or Spoleto,
Ancona, Urbino, Romagna, the Bo-
lognese, and the Ferrarese. {Ecclesi-
astical States, or States of the Church.)
53. Which is bounded on the South-
west by the States of the Church; on
the North-east by the Gulf of Venice;
and on the South and West by the
Mediterranean. 54. Which contains
the provinces of Terra di Lavora,
> Abruzzo, Apulia, Salerno, and Ca-
; labria. {Naples.) ■*'


Name tljc Hart of
55. Which is bounded on the north
by the Frozen Ocean; on the east
by the Eastern Ocean ; on the south
by Chinese and Independent Tartary,
and the Caspian Sea; and on the
west by Russia. {Russian Tartary.)
56. Which is bounded on the north
by Russian Tartary; on the east by
the Eastern Ocean and the Korean
Sea ; on the south by the Yellow Sea,
the Gulf of Pekeli, and China ; and
on the west by Independent Tartary.
{Chinese Tartary.)
57. Which is bounded on the north
by Russian Tartary; on the east by
Chinese Tartary ; on the west by
the Caspian Sea; and on the south
by the Western Peninsula of India
and Persia. {lndependent Tartary.)
58. In which are the Kingdoms of
Tonquin and Laos. {North-east Divi-
sion of the Eastern Peninsula of India.)
59. In which are the Kingdoms of
Cambodia and Cochinchina. {South-
east Division of the Eastern Penin-
sula of India.)
60. In which are the Kingdoms of
Burmah and Aracan. {North-wsst
Division of the Eastern Peninsula
of India.)
61. In which are the Kingdoms of
Pegu, Siam, and Malacca. {South-
west Division of the Eastern Penin-
sula of India.)
62. In which are the towns of Cal-
cutta, Dacca, and Hoogley. {North-
east Division of British India, or
Bengal.)
63. In which are the towns of
Balk, Cabul, and Cashmere. {King-
dom of Cabul.)
64. In which are the cities of Agra,
Delhi, and Sirinagur. {Northern
Division of British India.)
65. Which contains Madura and
Tanjour,with the Presidency of Ma-
dras, the east side of the Carnatic,
Golconda, and Orissa. {Coast of
Coromandel.)
66. Which contains the west side
of the Peninsula and Deccan, or Visia-
pour, with Mysore, Cochin, and Tra-
vancore. {Coast of Malabar.)
67- Which is bounded on the north
by Turkey in Asia; on the south-
east by Arabia Deserta; on the south
by the Red Sea ; and on the west by
Egypt. 68. In which the Israelites so-
journed, during forty years, under
the direction of Moses. {Arabia
Petrcea.)
69. Which is bounded on the north
by Turkey in Asia ; on the east by
the Persian Gulf; on the south by
Arabia Felix; and on the west by
the Red Sea and Arabia Petrsea.
{Arabia Deserta.)
70. Which is bounded on the north
by Arabia Deserta ; on the east by
the Gulf of Ormus and the Arabian
Sea ; on the south by the Arabian
Sea and the Strait of Bab-el-Man-
deb ; and on the west by the Red
Sea. 71* Which is called Yemen by
the present inhabitants, and contains
the towns or cities of Mecca, Medina,
Mocha, Loheia, &c. {Arabia Felix.)
72. In which is Nicopoli, a town
of Armenia, built by Pompey, in
commemoration of a victory which
he gained over the forces of Mithri-
dates. 73. In which are the cities of
Bussorah and Bagdad, and the ruins
of Babylon and Nineveh. 74. Which
contains Turkish Georgia, or Min-
grelia, formerly called Colchis, ren-
dered famous by the expedition of
the Argonauts, and the birth of Me-
dea. {East Part of Turkey in Asia.)
75. Which is bounded on the north
by the Black Sea; on the east by
the Eastern Provinces of Turkey in
Asia ; on the south by the Mediter-
ranean ; and on the west by the Sea
of Marmora and the Archipelago.
76. Which was formerly called Asia
Minor. 77- Which contained, on the
coasts of the Black Sea, from east
to west, the Provinces of Pontus,
Paphlagonia, and Bithynia. 79.
Which contained, on the Mediterra-
nean coast, from west to east, the
provinces of Caria, Lycia, Pamphylia,
and Cilicia. 79. Which contained,
on t e Archipelago, f ’om north to
south, Troas, Mysia, and lonia. 80.
Which contained, in the interior, the
provinces of Cappadocia, Galatia,
Phrygia, and Lydia. 81. In which
the Amazons founded a powerful
empire, near the River Thermodon,
in Cilicia. 82. In which Mithridates,
King of Pontus, maintained a great
and dangerous war against the Ro-
mans, during nearly forty years.
{Natolia.)
83. Which is bounded on the
north by Natolia; on the east by
the Eastern Provinces of Turkey,
and the Deserts of Arabia; on the
south by Arabia Petrsea; and on
the west by the Mediterranean Sea.
84. In which are the remains of the
ancient cities of Tyre, Sidon, Da-
mascus, Samaria, and Jerusalem,
with the Mountains and Forest of
Lebanon. {Syria.)
iSame tf)e ;p>art of Africa,
85. Which was formerly called
Libya, and contained the celebrated
Temple of Jupiter Ammon, the ap-
proach to which was extremely dan-
gerous, on account of the burning
sands wherewith it was surrounded.
{Kingdom of Barca.)
86. Which was formerly called
Africa Tripolitana, on account of
three considerable towns which it
contained. {Republic of Tripoli.)
87. Which was called Africa Pro-
pria, and had Carthage for its capital.
{Republic of Tunis.)
88. Which was formerly called
Numidia, over which Masinissa, Ju-
gurtha, Syphax, and Juba reigned
successively. {Republic of Algiers.)
89. Which was formerly called
Mauritania Tingitania. {Empire of
Morocco.)
ifiame tbc of America,
90. Which is situated to the north
of Canada, in the district usually
called the Country of the Esquimaux,
and contains the territory called New
Wales. {New Britain.)
91. Which is bounded on the east
by New Mexico Proper; by Sonora
on the south ; and the Gulf of Cali-
fornia on the west. {New Navarre.)
92. Which is bounded by New
Navarre, and New Mexico Proper,
on the north ; by the Gulf of Cali-
fornia on the south. 93. Of which
the capital is Tuape. {Sonora.)
94. Which is a large peninsula,
bounded on the north by New Na-
varre ; on the east by a Gulf of the
same name; and on the south and
west by the Pacific Ocean. {Cali-
fornia.)
95. Which is bounded on the
north by New Mexico; on the east
by the Gulf of Mexico ; on the south
by Mexico; and on the west by the
Pacific Ocean. {New Galicia, or
Guadalaxara.)
96. Which is bounded on the
north by Guadalaxara; on the north
and east by the Gulf of Mexico and
Guatimala; and on the south and
west by the Pacific Ocean. {Mexico
Proper.)
97. Which lies between New Na-
varre and Louisiana, 98. Of which
the capital is Santa Fe. {New Mex-
ico Proper.)
99. Which is bounded on the north
by the Province of Mexico and the
Gulf of Honduras; on the east by
the Caribbean Sea; and on the south
and west by the Pacific Ocean.
{Guatimala.)
100. Which is bounded on the north
by the Caribbean Sea; on the east
by Guiana; on the south by the
South Division of Terra Firma ; and
on the west by the Pacific Ocean
and the Isthmus of Panama. {North
Division of Terra Firma.)
101. Which is bounded on the
north by the north division of Terra
Firma; on the south by Amazonia
and Peru; and on the west by the
Pacific Ocean. {South Division of
Terra Firma.)
102. Which is bounded on the
north by Terra Firma; on the eastby
Amazonia; on the south by Lima, or
Los Reyos; and on the west by the
Pacific Ocean. 103. Which lies be-
tween two chains of the high moun-
tains called Andes. {Quito.)
104. Which is bounded on the
north by the Audience of Quito; on
the east by the Andes ; on the south
by the Audience of Los Charcos;
and on the west by the South Sea.
{Lima.)
105. Which is bounded on the
north by Lima; on the east by the
Andes; on the south by Chili; and
on the west by the South Sea. {Los
Charcos.)
106. Which is bounded on the
north by the Audience of Los Char-
cos ; on the east by Paraguay and
Cuyo ; and on the west by the Pa-
cific Ocean. {Chili Proper.)
107- Which is bounded on the
north by part of Paraguay ; on the
south and east by Patagonia; and is
separated from Chili, on the west, by
the Andes. {Cuyo, or Cutio.)
108. Which is bounded by the At-
lantic on the north; on the north-
west by the river of the Amazons at
its mouth, and is very little known
in the middle. 109. Which contains
the Captainries of Para, Maran-
ham, and Seara. {North Brazil.)
110. Which is bounded on the
north-east by the Atlantic Ocean;
on the north by North Brazil; but
on the west is very little known.
{South Brazil.)
SECTION 111.
PROVINCES, COUNTIES, sc.
“Name 6k ©ountg of lEnglantt,
1. Which is bounded on the east
by the German Ocean ; on the south
by the Bishopric of Durham ; on
the west and south-west by Cum-
berland ; and on the north-west and
north by Scotland. 2. In which is
Alnwick, where Malcolm, King of
Scotland, was killed by the Earl of
Northumberland, in 1092. 3. In
which is Flodden, on the river Till,
near which the famous victory was
gained, on the 9th September, 1513,
by the English over the Scots, whose
king, James IV., fell in the contest.
4. Which is crossed from east to west
by the Piets’ Wall,builtby theßomans
as a defence against the northern bar-
barians. {Northumberland.)
5. Which is bounded on the north-
west by Scotland; on the east by
Northumberland and Durham; on
the south-east by Westmoreland ; on
the south by Lancashire; and on the
west by the Irish Sea* and Solway
Frith. 6. Across which the Piets’
Wall is continued from the border of
Northumberlandtothe Solway Frith.
{Cumberland.)
7. Which is bounded on the north
by Northumberland, from which it
is separated on the north-east by the
River Tyne; on the east by the
German Ocean; on the south and
south-west by Yorkshire and the
River Tees; and on the west by
Westmoreland and Cumberland. 8.
Which is a county palatine, vested in
the bishop of the diocese, who has the
richest see in England. {Durham.)
9. Which is bounded on the west
by the Irish Sea; on the north and
north-west by Cumberland ; on the
east by Durham and Yorkshire;
and on the south and south-west by
Lancashire. ( Westmoreland.)
10. Which is bounded on the north
by the bishopric of Durham; on
the east by the German Ocean ; on
the south by Lincolnshire, Notting-
hamshire, and Derbyshire; on the
south-west by a small part of
Cheshire; on the west by Lan-
cashire ; and on the north-west by
Westmoreland. 11. Which is the
largest county in England, and is
divided into North, East, and West
Ridings. 12. In which is a district,
called the Wolds, particularly adapt-
ed to feeding sheep. 13. Which, at
the original division of England into
counties, by King Alfred, included
those of Durham and Lancashire.
( Yorkshire.)
14. Which is bounded on the west
by the Irish Sea; on the north by
Cumberland and Westmoreland; on
the east by Yorkshire, from which it
is separated by a ridge of mountains,
called The Apennines of England;
and on the south by Cheshire. 15.
Which is a county-palatine, and con-
tains the manufacturing town of
Manchester, and the sea-port of
Liverpool. ( Lancashire .)
16. Which is watered on the north-
west by the Irish Sea, and is sepa-
rated on the north from Lancashire
by the River Mersey, but just at the
north-east point borders on York-
shire. 17- Which is bounded on the
east by Derbyshire; on the south-
east by Staffordshire; on the south
by Shropshire; and on the west by
Denbighshire and Flintshire, from
which latter it is separated by the
Dee. 18. Which is a county-palatine,
and gives the title of Earl to the
Kings eldest son. 19. Which is
famous for its cheese. {Cheshire.)
20. Which is bounded on the north
by Yorkshire; on the east by Not-
tinghamshire ; on the south-east by
Leicestershire; on the south by a
point of Warwickshire; on the west
by Staffordshire; and on the north-
west by Cheshire. 21. Which con-
tains some singular caverns and hot
baths, and the mountainous district
called The Peak. {Derbyshire.)
22. Which is bounded on the north
by Yorkshire; on the east by Lin-
colnshire; on the south by Leicester-
shire ; and on the west by Derby-
shire. 23. In which is the extensive
Forest of Sherwood, which has a
government peculiar to itself, and
was the residence of the celebrated
brigand, Robin Hood, and his com-
panions, in the reign of Richard I.
{Nottinghamshire.)
24. Which is bounded on the north
by the Humber, which divides it from
Yorkshire; on the east by the Ger-
man Ocean; on the south-east by the
Wash, and part of Norfolk ; on the
south by Cambridgeshire and North-
amptonshire ; on the south-west by
Rutland; and on the west by the
counties of Leicester and Nottingham.
25. In whichisW oolsthorp, thebirth-
place of the great geometrician. Sir
Isaac Newton, who first discovered
the principle of gravitation by ob-
serving an apple fall from a tree.
26. Which once had numerous sea-
ports, though most of them are now
nearly choked up with sand, or de-
serted by the sea. {Lincolnshire.)
27. Which is bounded on the north
by Nottinghamshire ; on the east by
Lincolnshire and Rutland; on the
south by Northamptonshire; on the
south-west by Warwickshire; and on
the north-west by Derbyshire. 28.
In which is Bosworth Field, where
Richard HI. was slain in battle by


the Earl of Richmond, afterwards
Henry VII. (Leicestershire.)
29. Which is the smallest county
of England ; and is surrounded by
Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, and
Leicestershire. (Rutland.)
30. Which is bounded on the north
and east by the German Ocean ; on
the west by Cambridgeshire, Lin-
colnshire, and the Wash, and on the
south and south-east by Suffolk. 31.
Which gives the title of Duke, Earl,
and Baron to the noble family of
Howard, the first peer of the realm,
next to the royal family, and Here-
ditary Earl-Marshal of England. 32.
Which has a peculiar breed of sheep,
distinguished by their black noses
and feet. (Norfolk.)
33. Which is bounded on the west
by Cambridgeshire; on the north by
Norfolk; on the south by Essex; and
on the east by the German Ocean.
34. Which gives the title of Earl to
the Howard family. 35. Which is
remarkable for the goodness of its
butter, and the badness of its cheese.
(Suffolk.)
36. Which is bounded on the north-
west by Lincolnshire; on the north-
east by Norfolk ; on the east by Suf-
folk ; on the south by Essex and
Herts ; and on the west by the coun-
ties of Huntingdon, Bedford, and
Northampton. 37- In which is one
of the two English universities, said
to have been founded by Sigebert,
King of the East Angles, about the
year 630. (Cambridgeshire.)
38. Which is bounded on the north-
east, the east, and south-east by Cam-
bridgeshire ; on the north-west and
west by Northamptonshire ; and on
the south-west by Bedfordshire. 39.
Of which the county-town was the
birth-place of Oliver Cromwell, Lord
Protector of England in the time of
the Commonwealth. 40. Which had
its name from its conveniency for
h unting. (Hu nti ngdonshire.)
41. Which is bounded on the north-
east by Huntingdonshire and Cam-
bridgeshire ; on the south-east by
Herts ; on the south-west by Bucks;
and on the north-west by Northamp-
tonshire. 42. Which gives the title
of Duke to the Russell family. 43.
Of which the staple manufactory is
lace. (Bedfordshire.)
44. Which is bounded on the north-
west by Leicestershire and Rutland;
on the north by Lincolnshire; on the
east by the counties of Cambridge,
Huntingdon, and Bedford; on the
south by Buckinghamshire and Ox-
fordshire ; and on the west by Ox-
fordshire and Warwickshire. 45. In
which is Naseby, said to be the very
centre, and highest ground of Eng-
land, where Charles I. was defeated
by the Parliamentary army in 1645.
46. In which is Holmby House, where
Charles I. was for some time in con-
finement. 47- In which is Fotherin-
gay Castle, where Richard 111. was
born, and Mary Queen of Scots be-
headed. (Northamptonshire.)
48. Which is bounded at its north-
ern extremity by a point of Derby-
shire ; on the north-west by Staf-
fordshire ; on the north-east by
Leicestershire; on the west by Wor-
cestershire ; on the east by Nor-
thamptonshire ; on the south-west
by Gloucestershire; and on the
south-east by Oxfordshire. 49. In
which is Stratford-upon-Avon, the
birth-place of the poet Shakspeare,
and where he was also buried. 50.
In which is the city of Coventry, ce-
lebrated for the legend of Peeping
Tom. 51. In which is Edge-hill,
remarkable for the first battle between
Charles I. and the Parliamentary
forces, in 1642. (Warwickshire.)
52. Which is bounded on the west
by Shropshire; on the north-west by
Cheshire ; on the north-east and east
by Derbyshire ; on the south east by
Warwickshire ; and on the south by
Worcestershire. 53. Which is re-
markable for its extensive potteries.
(Staffordshire.)
54. Which is bounded on the north
by Cheshire, and a detached part of
Flintshire; on the east by Stafford-
shire ; on the south-east by Worces-
tershire ; on the south by Hereford-
shire ; on the south-west by Radnor-
shire ; and on the west by Montgo-
mery and Denbighshires. 55. Which
is reckoned the largest inland county
in England. 56. In ivhich is Ludlow
Castle, an ancient seat of the Princes
of Wales, to whom it formerly be-
longed. (Shropshire, or Salop.)
57. Which is bounded on the south-
east by Gloucestershire ; on the east
by Worcestershire ; on the west by
Radnorshire and Brecknockshire; on
the north by Shropshire ; and on the
south by Monmouthshire. 58. Which
is the most pleasant and healthy
county of England, and remarkable
for its fine cider. 59. Which, prior
to the Conquest, was reckoned a part
of Wales. (Herefordshire.)
60. Which is bounded on the north
by Herefordshire; on the east by
Gloucestershire; on the south-east
by the mouth of the Severn ; and on
the west by the counties of Breck-
nock and Glamorgan. 61. Which,
till the time of Charles 11., was reck-
oned among the Welsh counties.
62. Which was the native county of
Geoffrey, the British historian, and
of King Henry V. (Monmouthshire.)
63. Which is bounded on the north
by Shropshire and Staffordshire ; on
the east by Warwickshire; on the
w est by Herefordshire ; and on the
south by Gloucestershire. 64. In
which are the Malvern Hills and
Chase, and the Vale of Evesham; in
the last of which Simon de Montford
was defeated and slain by Prince
Edward, son of Henry HI., in the
Barons’ w ars against the king. 65.
In which the Scottish army, under
Charles 11., was defeated and put to
flight by Oliver Cromwell, in the
year 1651. 66. 1 n ivhich is Kidder-
minster, celebrated for its carnet
’ X
manufacture. ( Worcestershire.)
67- Which is bounded on the north
by Worcestershire; on the north-
east by Warwickshire ; on the east
by Oxfordshire ; on the south by
Wiltshire and Somersetshire; on the
north-west by Herefordshire; and
on the west by Monmouthshire. 68.
Where E dmund Iron side, king of the
Saxons, and the Danish king, Canute
the Great, agreed to decide their
claims to the kingdom of England
by single combat; but, laying aside
their swords, consented to divide it
between them. 69. In which is the
Forest of Dean, valuable for its tim-
ber and coal-works. (Gloucester-
shire.)
70. Which is bounded on the east
by Buckinghamshire; on the west
by Gloucestershire ; on the south by
Berkshire; and on the north by War-
wickshire and Northamptonshire.
71. Which contains the principal of
the two English universities. In
whichis Blenheim House, near Woo-
dstock, the grateful monument of the
British nation to the Churchill fa-
mily, in acknowledgment of the ser-
vices of the great John, Duke of
Marlborough, in the reign of Queen
Anne. 73- In which is the town of
Witney, celebrated for its blanket
manufacture. 74* In which the river
Thames, from the junction of the
Thame and Isis, becomes navigable.
( Oxfordshire.)
75. Which is bounded on the
south-east by Surrey; on the south
by Hants ; on the west by Wilts ; on
the north by Gloucestershire, Ox-
fordshire, and Buckinghamshire;
and is divided from Oxfordshire and
Buckinghamshire by the Thames.
76. In which are the Castle, Park,
and Forest of Windsor. (Berkshire.)
77- Which is bounded on the
north by Northamptonshire ; on the
east by Bedfordshire, Herts, and
Middlesex; on the west by Ox-
fordshire; and on the south by Berks
and Surrey. 78- In which is Eton
College. (Buckinghamshire.)
79. Which is bounded on the north
by Cambridgeshire ; on the east by
Essex; on the west by Bucking-
hamshire ; and on the south by Mid-
dlesex. 80. Which derives its name
from the harts with which it for-
merly abounded. 81. In which the
New River, for supplying London
with water, has its source. 82. In
which is Welwyn, where a general
massacre of Danes was began by or-
der of Ethelred 11. in the night of
the festival of St. Britius, in the year
1002. (Hertfordshire.)
83. Which is bounded on the north
by part of Cambridgeshire, and by
the River Stour, which separates it
from Suffolk; on the east by the
German Ocean; on the south by the
Thames, which divides it from Kent;
and on the west by Herts and Mid-
dlesex ; being divided from the for-
mer, in one part by the Stort, and
then by the Lea, which separates it
likewise from Middlesex. 84. Which
is celebrated for its breed of calves.
85. In which is Dunmow, remark-
able for an ancient custom of giving
a flitch of bacon to any married
man, who would swear, on two hard-
pointed stones in the priory Church-
yard, that, for a year and a day,
he had not repented of his mar-
riage, nor quarrelled w T ith his wife.
(Essex.)
86. Which is bounded on the north
by Hertfordshire, on the east by
Essex; on the south by Surrey and
a corner of Kent; and on the west
by Buckinghamshire. 87- Which
contains the metropolis of the British
empire. (Middlesex.)
88. Which is bounded on the north
by Middlesex, and a point of Buck-
inghamshire ; on the east by Kent;
on the south by Sussex; on the
west by Hampshire; and on the
north-w r est by Berkshire. 89. In
which is Runnymead, where the spi-
rited opposition of the Barons to the
oppressive government of King John,
obtained the glorious privileges of
Magna Charta, in 1215. 90. Which
contains the southern suburb of the
British metropolis. 91. Which is re-
markable for the fine quality of its
hops. 92. In which are the palace
and gardens of Richmond. (Surrey.)
93. Which is divided from Essex,
on the north, by the Thames; is
bounded by the German Ocean on
the north-east; by the Straits of
Dover on the south-east; by Sussex
and the British Channel on the south;
and by Surrey on the west. 94.
Which under the Saxons was an en-
tire kingdom. 95. Which contains
Canterbury, the seat of an archbi-
shopric, and the primacy of all Eng-
land. 96. In which is the Royal
Hospital of Greenwich, for wounded
and disabled seamen. (Kent.)
97- Which is bounded on the north
by Surrey and Kent; on the south
by the British Channel; and on the
west by Hampshire. 98. In which
is Pevensey, where some say Wil-
liam the Conqueror landed with sixty
thousand men, from a fleet of three
hundred sail. 99. In which is Has-
tings, where William mustered his
army, after he had burnt the ships
which brought him over, in 1066.
(Sussex.)
100. Which is bounded on the north
by Berkshire; on the east by Sus-
sex ; on the south by the British
Channel; and on the west by Dor-
setshire and Wiltshire. 101. Of which
William the Conqueror, to indulge
himself in the pleasure of hunting,
depopulated a great part, in order to
make the New Forest. ( Hampshire.)
102. Which is bounded on the east
by Berkshire and Hampshire; on the
south by Dorsetshire and a part of
Hampshire ; on the west by Somer-
setshire ; and on the north-west and
north by Gloucestershire. 103. In
which is that remarkable ancient
monument, called Stonehenge, on a
part of Salisbury Plain. ( Wiltshire.')
104. Which is bounded on the
north-west by the Bristol Channel;
on the north by Gloucestershire, from
which it is divided by the Avon; on
the east by Wiltshire; on the south
east by Dorsetshire; and on the
south-west by Devonshire. 105. In
which is Glastonbury, remarkable in
the monkish legends for its miracu-
lous walnut-tree and holy thorn. 106.
In which are the Men dip Hills,
with the cavern, called Okey’s Hole,
and the Cheddar Cliffs. 107- In
which are the cities of Bath and Wells,
with part of Bristol. 108. In which
is the birth-place of the great philo-
sopher, John Locke. ( Somersetshire.)
109. Which is bounded on the
north by Somersetshire and Wilt-
shire; on the east by Hampshire;
on the south by the British Channel;
and on the west by Devonshire. 110.
In which the Saxons made their first
settlement. 111. In which is Char-
mouth, where the Danes were totally
defeated by Egbert. 112. In which
are Portland and Purbeck, both cele-
brated for their valuable stone quar-
ries. ( Dorsetshire.)
113. Which is bounded on the
north and north-west by the Bristol
Channel; on the east by Somerset-
shire and Dorsetshire; on the south
and south-east by the British Chan-
nel ; and on the west by the county
of Cornwall. 114. Which is equally
celebrated with Herefordshire for its
cider. 115. In which is Torbay, one
of the finest roads for shipping in
England. 116. In which is Plymouth,
the great naval arsenal of England.
(Devonshire.)
117- Which is bounded on the
south by the British Channel; on
the north-west by St. George’s Chan-
nel ; and on the east by the river
Tamar, which parts it from Devon-
shire. 118. Where are rich mines of
tin, copper, and lead. 119. In which
several Druidical monuments, called
Rocking-stones and Logan-stones, are
met with. (Cornwall.)
Kamc lljc ©ountg of Kortfj Scales,
120. Which is entirely surrounded
by the sea, and lies on the north-west
of Caernarvonshire. 121. In which
is Holyhead, from which the Irish
packets usually depart. (Anglesea.)
122. Which is bounded on the
north and west by the Irish Sea; on
the south by Merionethshire; and on
the east by Denbighshire. 123. In
which is a celebrated castle, where
Edward 11. was born. (Caernarvon-
shire.)
124. Which is bounded on the
north and north-east by an arm of
the Irish Sea, which forms a large
bay at the mouth of the river Dee,
which divides it from Cheshire; and
on the north-west is watered by the
Irish Sea. 125. In which is a castle
where Richard 11. was deposed by
the Duke of Lancaster, afterwards
Henry IV. (Flintshire.)
126. Which is bounded on the
north by the Irish Sea; on the north-
east by a part of Flintshire; on the


east by Flintshire, Cheshire, and
Shropshire; on the south by Merio-
nethshire and Montgomeryshire; and
on the west by Caernarvonshire, from
which it is separated by the river
Conway. (Denbighshire.)
127. Which is bounded on the
west by Cardigan Bay; on the north
by Caernarvonshire and Denbigh-
shire ; on the east by Denbighshire
and Montgomeryshire ; and on the
south by a small part of Cardigan-
shire. (Merionethshire.)
128. Which is an inland county,
bounded on the north-west by Me-
rionethshire ; on the north by Den-
bighshire ; on the east by Shrop-
shire ; on the south by Radnorshire;
on the south-west by Cardiganshire;
and on the west by part of Merio-
nethshire. ( Montgomeryshire.)
JJamc tijc ©ountg of J&ouli) S2£aicg,
129. Which is bounded on the
north by a small part of Merioneth-
shire and Montgomeryshire; on the
east by Radnorshire and Brecknock-
shire ; on the south by Caermar-
thenshire and a small part of Pem-
brokeshire ; and on the west by a
bay, to which it gives name, in St.
George’s Channel. (Cardiganshire.)
130. Which is an inland county,
bounded on the east by Hereford-
shire ; on the south and south-west
by Brecknockshire ; on the west by
Cardiganshire; and on the north by
Montgomeryshire and Shropshire.
(Radnorshire.)
131. Which is an inland county,
bounded on the east by the counties
of Hereford and Monmouth ; on the
south by Glamorganshire; on the
west by Caermarthen shire and Car-
diganshire; and on the north and
north-east by Radnorshire. (Breck-
nockshire.)
132. Which is bounded on the
north by Caermarthenshire and
Brecknockshire; on the east by
Monmouthshire; and on the south
and west by the British Channel.
133. Which contains the seaports of
Cardiff and Swansea. (Glamorgan-
shire.)
134. Which is bounded by Car-
diganshire on the north; by the
Bristol Channel on the south; by
Brecknockshire on the east; Gla-
morganshire on the south-east; and
Pembrokeshire on the west. (Caer-
marthenshire.)
135. Which is surrounded on all
sides by the sea, except on the east,
where it is bounded by Caermar-
thenshire and Cardiganshire. (Pem-
brokeshire.
tNamc tijc :Probtncc of Itclanh,
136. Which is bounded on the
east by the Irish Sea; on the north
by the Northern Ocean; on the west
by the Western Ocean; on the south
by the Province of Leinster; and on
the south-west by that of Connaught.
137- Which contains the northern
counties of Donegal, Londonderry,
Antrim, Tyrone, Fermanagh, Mo-
naghan, Armagh, Down, and Cavan.
( Ulster.)
138. Which is bounded on the east
by Leinster ; on the north and west
by the Atlantic; on the north-east
by Ulster; and on the south and
south-east by Munster. 139. Which
contains the western counties of
Galway, Leitrim, Mayo, Roscom-
mon, and Sligo. (Connaught.)
140. Which is bounded on the east
and south by St. George’s Channel;
on the west by Connaught and Mun-
ster; and on the north by Ulster.
141. Which contains the eastern
counties of Louth, Meath, Dublin,
Wicklow, Wexford, Kilkenny, Car-
low, Kildare, Queen’s County, King’s
County, West Meath, and Longford,
with the metropolis of Ireland.
(Leinster.)
142. Which is bounded on the
North by Leinster and Connaught,
and on the south-east and west by
the Atlantic. 143. Which contains
the southern counties of Clare, Ker-
ry, Limerick, Cork, Tipperary, and
Waterford. (Munster.)
Jiam? tijc of
144. Which is bounded on the
north by the Frozen Ocean; on the
east by the White Sea; on the south
by Finland; and on the west by the
Gulf of Bothnia and Swedish Lap-
land. (Russian Lapland.)
145. Which is bounded on the
north by Lapland; on the east by
the governments of Archangel and
Olonetz and the Lake Ladoga; on
the south by the Gulf of Finland;
and on the west by the Gulf of
Bothnia. 146. Of which Abo is the
capital. (Finland.)
147. Which is bounded on the
north by the Gulf of Livonia; on
the east by the government of Po-
lotsk ; on the south by Lithuania;
and on the west by the Baltic Sea.
148. Of which Mittau is the capital.
(Courland.)
149. Which is bounded on the
north by Courland; on the east by
the government of Moghilev; on the
south by Volhynia; and on the west
by Prussia. 150. Of which the ca-
pital is Wilna. (Lithuania.)
Kamc tl)« CScbetnmcnt of Muggta,
151. Which is bounded by the
White Sea and the Frozen Ocean on
the north; by Asia on the east; by
Vologda and Novgorod on the south;
and by Sweden and Lapland on the
west. (Archangel.)
152. Which is bounded on the
north by Sweden and Archangel; on
the east by Novgorod and the Lake
Ladoga; on the west by Sweden;
and on the south by Petersburg!!
and the Gulf of Finland. ( Wyborg.)
153. Which is bounded on the
north by Vyborg, the Lake La-
doga and the Gulf of Finland; on
the south and east by Novgorod;
and on the west by Revel. (Pe-
tershurgh.)
154. Which is bounded on the
north by the Gulf of Finland; on
the east by Petersburg!!; on the
south by Riga; and on the west by
the Baltic Sea. (Revel.)
155. Which is bounded on the
north by the government of Revel,
or Esthonia; on the east by that of
Novgorod ; on the south by the go-
vernment of Polotsh and part of
Poland; and on the west by the
Gulf of Livonia. (Riga.)
156. Which is bounded on the
north and east by Archangel; on
the south by Moscow, Smolensko,
and Russian Poland; and on the
west by Vyborg, Petersburg!!, and
Riga. (Novgorod.)
157* Which is bounded on the
north by Novgorod and Archangel;
on the east by Asia andNisnei-Nov-
gorod; on the south by Voronesk;
and on the west by Smolensko.
(Moscow.)
158. Which is bounded on the
north by Novgorod; on the east by
Moscow; on the south by Voronesk,
Bielgorod, and Kiov; and on the
west by Poland. (Smolensko.)
159. Which is bounded on the
north by Smolensko; on the east
by Bielgorod; on the south by Lit-
tle Tartary; and on the west by
Poland and Lithuania. (Kiov.)
160. Which is bounded on the
north by Smolensko; on the east
by Voronesk ; on the south by Little
Tartary; and on the west by Kiov.
(Bielgorod.)
161. Which is bounded on the
north by Moscow ; on the east by
Asia; on the south by the Sea of
Azof and Little Tartary; on the west
by Bielgorod; and on the north-
west by Smolensko. (Voronezh.)
162. Which is bounded by Asia
on the east; and on the north-west
and south by Moscow. ( Nisnei-
Novgorod.)
Kamc tDc of
163. Which is bounded on the
north and east by the kingdom of
the Netherlands; on the south and
west by Picardy, and is included in
the department of the Straits of Ca-
lais. (Artois.)
164. Which is bounded on the
north by Artois, and the Straits of
Dover ; on the east by Champagne;
on the south by the Isle of France;
and on the west by Normandy and
the British Channel. 165. Which
forms the department of the Somme,
of which Amiens is the capital, and
includes part of the departments of
Aisne and of the Straits of Calais, or
La Manche. (Picardy.)
166. Which is bounded on the
north by the British Channel; on
the east by Picardy and the Isle of
France; and the south by Maine
and Bretagne; and on the west by
the Ocean. 167* Which was part of
Gallia Celtica, or Lugdunensis Ar-
morica, and now forms the depart-
ments of Calvados, Eure, La Manche,
Orne, and Lower Seine. ( Normandy.)
168. Which is bounded on the
north by Picardy ; on the east by
Champagne; on the south by Or-
leannois ; on the south-west by
Maine ; and on the west by Nor-
mandy. 169. Which was part of
Gallia Lugdunensis, or Celtica Ori-
entalis, and now includes the de-
partments of Oise, Seine and Oise,
Seine and Marne, Paris, and Aisne.
170. In which is the French metro-
polis. (Isle of France.)
17L Which is bounded on the
north by the Netherlands; on the
east by Lorraine ; on the south by
Burgundy and Franche-Comte ; on
the south-west by Orleannois ; and
on the west by the Isle of France
and Picardy. 172. Which was part
of Gallia Lugdunensis, or Celtica
Orientalis, and now forms the depart-
ments of Ardennes, Aube, Marne,
and Upper Marne. (Champagne.)
173. Which is bounded on the
north by the Netherlands ; on the
east by Alsace; on the north-east
by the Duchy of Deux Fonts; on
the south by Franche-Comte; and
on the west by Champagne. 174.
Which includes the departments of
Muerthe, Moselle, Vosges, and
Meuse. (Lorraine.)
175. Which is bounded on the
north by the Netherlands; on the
east by the Rhine; on the south by
Switzerland and Franche-Comte;
and on the west by Lorraine. 176.
Of which the capital, formerly called
Argentoratum, was in Gallia Belgica
on the east, called also Cis-Rhenana
Germania. 177* Which now includes
the departments of Upper and Lower
Rhine. (Alsace.)
178. Which is bounded on the
north by Lorraine; on the north-
west by Champagne; on the east by
Alsace and Switzerland ; and on the
south and west by Burgundy. 179.
Which was part of Gallia Belgica on
the east, and inhabited by the peo-
ple called Sequani. 180. Which in-
cludes the departments of Doubs,
Jura, and Upper Saone. (Tranche
Comte.)
181. Which is bounded on the
north by Champagne; on the east
by Franche-Comte, Savoy, and Swit-
zerland ; on the south by Lyonnois
and Dauphiny ; and on the west by
Bourbonnois, Orleannois, and Niver-
nois. 182. Of which part was in-
cluded in Gallia Lugdunensis, or Cel-
tica Orientalis, and contains now the
departments of Cote d’Or, Saone and
Loire, Ain, and Yonne. (Burgundy.)
183. Which lies between Bur-
gundy, Bourbonnois, Berri, and Or-
leannois ; and forms the departments
of Nievre. (Nivernois.)
184. Which is bounded on the
north by Nivernois and Berri; on
the west by Berri; on the south by
Auvergne ; and on the east by Bur-
gundy and a part of Lyonnois. 185.
Which forms the department of the
Allier. (Bourbonnois).
186. Which is bounded on the
north by the Isle of France ; on the
east by Champagne and Burgundy ;
on the south by Nivernois, Berri,
and Touraine ; and on the west by
Maine. 187- Which was part of
Gallia Lugdunensis, or Celtica Me-
dia, and now forms the departments
of Loiret, Loir and Cher, and Eure
and Loir. (Orleannois.)
188. Which is bounded on the
north by Orleannois ; on the east by
Nivernois and Bourbonnois ; on the
south by Auvergne and Marche;
and on the west by Touraine and
Poitou. 189. Which was part of
Aquitania Novem, and now forms
the two departments of Cher and
Indre. (Berri.)
190. Which is bounded on the
north by Normandy ; on the east
by the Isle of France and Orlean-
nois ; on the south by Touraine and
Anjou; and on the west by Bre-
tagne. 191. Which forms the de-
partments of Mayenne and Sarte.
(Maine.)
192. Which is bounded on the
north by Maine; on the west by
Bretagne ; on the south by Poitou ;
and on the east by Touraine. 193.
Which was part of Gallia Lugdunen-
sis, or Celtica Media, and now in-
cludes the department of the Maine
and Loire. (Anjou.)
194. Which is bounded on the
north by Maine and Orleannois; on
the east by Berri; on the south by
Poitou; and on the west by Anjou.
195. Which was part of Gallia
Lugdunensis, or Celtica Media, and
now forms the department of the
Indre and Loire. (Touraine.)
196. Which is bounded on the
east by Normandy, Maine, and An-
jou ; on the south by a part of Poi-
tou ; and is on all other sides washed
by the Ocean. 197- Which was part
of Gallia Celtica, or Lugdunensis
Armorica, and now forms the five
departments of Finisterre, the North
Coast, Morbihan, Ille and Vilaine,
and Lower Loire. (Bretagne.)
198. Which is bounded on the
north by Bretagne, Anjou, and part
of Touraine; on the east by Tou-
raine, Berri, and La Marche ; on the
south by Angoumois, Saintonge, and
Aunis; and on the west by the Ocean.
199. Which was part of Aquitania
Novem, and now forms the depart-
ments of La Vendee, Vienne, and
the Two Sevres. (Poitou.)
200. Which is bounded on the
north by Poitou; on the east and
south by Saintonge; and on the
west by the Ocean. 201. Which
forms, with the western part of
Saintonge, the department of Lower
Charente. (Aunis.)
202. Which is bounded on the
north by Poitou and Aunis ; on the
east by Limosin and La Marche; on
the south and south-east by Guienne ;
and on the west by the Ocean. 203.
Of which the western part was for-
merly included in Aquitania No-
vem ; and whose eastern part forms


the department of the Charente.
(Saintonge and Angoumois.)
204. Which is bounded on the
north by Berri; on the east by Au-
vergne ; on the west by Angoumois
and Poitou; and on the south by
Limosin. 205. Which forms the de-
partment of La Creuse. ( La Marche.)
206. Which is bounded on the
north by La Marche; on the east
by Auvergne ; and on the south and
west by Guienne and Angoumois.
207- Which forms the departments
of Upper Vienne and Correze. (Li-
mosin.)
208. Which is bounded on the
north by Bourbonnois; on the north-
west by Berri; on the east by Lyon-
nois and part of Languedoc ; on the
west by Limosin and La Marche;
and on the south by Guienne and
the Cevennes. 209. Which was part
of Aquitania Novem, and now forms
the departments of Cantal and Puy
de Dome. (Auvergne.)
210. Which is bounded on the
north by Bourbonnois and Burgun-
dy ; on the east by parts of Bur-
gundy and Dauphiny; on the south
by Languedoc ; and on the west by
Auvergne. 211. Of which part was
included in Gallia Lugdunensis, or
Celtica Orientalis, and now forms
the departments of the Rhone and
the Loire. ( Lyonnois.)
212. Which is bounded on the
west by the Rhone; on the north
by the Rhone and Savoy; on the
south by Provence; and on the east
by the Alps. 213. Which was part
of Gallia Narbonensis on the east of
the Rhone, and now forms the de-
partments of Drome, Isere, and Up-
per Alps. (Dauphiny.)
214. Which is bounded on the
north by Dauphiny ; on the south
by the Mediterranean ; on the west
by Languedoc ; and on the east by
the Alps and the river Var. 215.
Which was part of Gallia Narbonen-
sis, on the east of the Rhine; and
now forms the departments of the
Var, the Lower Alps, and the mouths
of the Rhone. (Provence.)
216. Which is bounded on the
north by Auvergne and Lyonnois;
on the east by Dauphiny and Pro-
vence ; on the west by Guienne;
and on the south by the Pyrenees,
Roussillon, and the Mediterranean.
217- Which was part of Gallia Nar-
bonensis, on the west of the Rhone,
and now includes the departments
of Aude, Gard, Upper Garonne,
Herault, Upper Loire, Ardeche,
Tarn, and Lozere. (Languedoc.)
218. Which is bounded on the
north by Languedoc; on the east
by the Mediterranean; on the south
by Catalonia, from which it is sepa-
rated by the Pyrenees ; and on the
west by the Comte de Foix. 219.
Which forms the department of the
Eastern Pyrenees. (Roussillon.)
220. Which is bounded on the
north and east by Languedoc; on
the south by part of Roussillon and
Spain ; and on the west by Guienne.
221, Which forms the department of
Arriege. (Comte de Foix.)
222. Which is bounded on the
north by Saintonge and Angoumois,
Limosin, and Auvergne ; on the east
by Languedoc and the Comte de
Foix; on the south by Spain and
Bearn; and on the west by the Bay
of Biscay and a part of Spain. 223.
Which was part of Aquitania Vetus,
conquered by Julius Caesar, and now
comprises the departments of Gi-
ronde, Dordogne, Landes, Lot and
Garonne, Lot, Aveiron, Gers, and
Upper Pyrenees. (Guienne.)
224. Which is bounded on the
north and east by Guienne ; on the
south by the Pyrenees and Navarre;
and on the by part of Navarre;
and forms the department of the
Lower Pyrenees. (Bearn.)
Name tfic of t|)o
of tl)o Nctbcrlanlig,
*
225. Which is bounded on the
east by Germany; on the south by
Overyssel; on the west by Fries-
land ; and on the north by the Ger-
man Ocean. (Groningen.)
226. Which is bounded on the
north by the Northern Sea ; on the
west by the Zuyder Zee; on the
south by the Zuyder Zee and Over-
yssel, which last also, with Gronin-
gen, bounds it on the east. 227.
Where an inundation of the north-
ern Sea, in the year 1225, formed
the Zuyder Zee. (Friesland.)
228. Which is bounded on the
east by Germany ; on the north by
Friesland and Groningen; on the
west by the river Yssel and the
Zuyder Zee ; and on the south by
Guelderland. (Overyssel.)
229. Which is bounded on the
north-west by the Zuyder Zee ; on
the north by Overyssel; on the
east by Germany ; on the south by
Cleves and Brabant; and on the
west by Utrecht and the Zuyder
Zee. ( Guelderland.)
230. Which is bounded on the
north by the Zuyder Zee and part
of Holland; on the east by Guelder-
land ; on the south by Guelderland
and Holland; and on the west by
Holland. (Utrecht.)
231. Which is bounded on the
west and north by the North Sea; on
the east by the Zuyder Zee, Utrecht,
and Guelderland ; and on the south
by Brabant and Zeeland. (Holland.)
232. Which is bounded on the
north by Holland; on the east by
Brabant; on the south by Flanders;
and on the west by the North Sea.
(Zeeland.)
233. Which is bounded on the
north by Holland and Guelderland ;
on the east by Liege; on the south
by Namur and Hainault; and on the
west by Hainault and Flanders. 234.
In which is Ramillies, remarkable
for the great victory obtained by the
Duke of Marlborough over the French
on Whitsunday, 1706. 225. In which
is the village of Waterloo, where the
Duke of Wellington finally over-
threw Buonaparte, in 1815. (Bra-
bant.)
236. Which is entirely surrounded
by Brabant, and is celebrated for its
lace manufacture. (Malines.)
237- Which is bounded on the
west by the Scheldt, and on all the
other sides by Brabant. (Antwerp.)
238. Which is bounded on the
north, east, and west by Brabant ;
and on the south by Hainault and
France. (Flanders.)
239. Which is bounded on the
north by Brabant; on the north-
west by Flanders; on the west by
Artois; on the south by France;
and on the east by Namur.
240. In which is Malplaquet, a vil-
lage famous for a battle gained over
the French by the Duke of Marl-
borough and Prince Eugene, ini 709.
(Hainault.)
241. Which lies between the rivers
Sambre and Maese ; and is bounded
on the north by Brabant; on the east
and south by Liege; and on the
west by Hainault. (Namur.)
242. Which is bounded on the
north by Brabant; on the cast by
the Maese, Limburgh, and Luxem-
burgh; on the south by Luxemburgh
and France; and on the west by
Hainault and Brabant. (Liege.)
243. Which is bounded on the
north and east by Germany ; and
on the south and west by Liege,
from which it is separated by the
river Maese. (Limburgh.)
-244. Which is bounded on the
north by Limburgh and Liege ; on
the east by Germany; on the south
by France ; on the west partly by
France and partly by Liege. 245.
Which formerly was part of France.
(Luxemburgh.)
Name tlje of
246. Which is bounded on the
north by the Baltic Sea and Russia;
on the east and south by Poland;
and on the west by Pomerelia and
the Baltic. 247- Of which Konigs-
berg is the capital. (Eastern Prus-
sia, or Prussia Proper.)
248. Which is bounded on the
north by the Baltic ; on the east by
Prussia Proper; on the west by
Pomerania; and on the south by
Silesia. 249. Of which the chief
cities are Dantzic, Marienwerder,
Culm, Bromberg, and Thorn. ( West
Prussia, or Pomerelia.)
250. Which is bounded on the
north by the Baltic ; on the east by
Pomerelia; on the south by Bran-
denburgh; and on the west by Ha-
nover and Mecklenburgh. 251. Of
which the chief cities are Stralsund,
Stettin, Rugenwalde, and Lauen-
berg. (Pomerania.)
252. Which is bounded on the
north by Pomerania; on the east
by South Prussia; on the south by
Silesia and Saxony; and on the west
by Hesse and Hanover. 253. Of
which Berlin is the capital. (Bran-
denburg h.)
254. Which is bounded on the
north by Pomerelia; on the east by
Poland; on the south by Silesia;
and on the west by Brandenburgh.
255. Of which Posen and Gnesen are
the chief cities. (South Prussia.)
256. Which is bounded on the
north by South Prussia; on the
east by Poland; on the south by
Bohemia and Moravia; and on the
west by Lusatia. 257- Of which the
capital is Breslau. (Silesia.)
Name tfie ©anton of Jfcfedt^rlant),
258. Which is bounded on the
north and east by Germany; on the
east by Argovia; on the south by
Soleure; and on the west by Soleure
and France. (Basle.)
259. Which is bounded on the
north by the Rhine, which separates
it from Germany; on the east by
Zurich; on the south by Lucerne ;
and on the west by Soleure and
Basle. (Argovia.)
260. Which is bounded on the
north by the Rhine, which separates
it from the Canton of Schaffhausen;
on the south by that of Schweitz; on
the east by Thurgau and St. Gall;
and on the west by Argovia and Zug.
(Zurich.)
261. Which is surrounded by Ger-
many on all sides, except the south-
east, where it is bounded by Thurgo-
via and Zurich. (*S chaffhausen.)
262. Which is bounded on the
north and east by the Lake of Con-
stance ; on the south by St. Gall;
and on the west by Zurich. (Thur-
govia.)
263. Which is bounded on the
north by Thurgovia, and the Lake
of Constance; on the east by Austria;
on the south and south-east by the
Grisons; and on the west by Glarus,
Schweitz, and Zurich. (St. Gall.)
264. Which is surrounded on all
sides by the Canton of St. Gall.
(Appenzel.)
265. Which is bounded on the
north and east by St, Gall; on the
south by the Grisons ; and on the
west by the Cantons of Uri and
Schweitz. 266. In the high moun-
tains of which are found many quar-
ries of marble and slate, on which are
seen curious impressions of fish, some
even of Indian production, which are
supposed to be vestiges of the Flood.
(Glaris.)
267- Which is bounded on the
west by the Lake of Lucerne, or of
the Four Cantons; on the south by
the Canton of Uri; on the east by the
Canton of Glaris ; and on the north
by those of Zurich and Zug. 268.
Which gives its name to the whole
Confederacy. (Schweitz, or Swiss.)
269. Which is bounded on the
north by Zurich; on the west by
Lucerne and Argovia; and on the
east and south by Schweitz. 270.
Which is the smallest of all the Swiss
Cantons. (Zug.)
271. Which is the most considera-
ble Canton of Switzerland, next to
Zurich and Berne. 272. Which is
bounded on the north by Argovia ;
on the east by the Cantons of Zug,
Schweitz, and Underwald; and on
the south and west by that of Berne.
(Lucerne.)
273. Which is bounded on the
north by the Lake of Lucerne ; on
the east by high mountains, which
separate it from Uri; on the south
by mountains which part it from
Berne; and on the west by Lucerne.
(Underwald.)
274. Which is bounded on the
north by Schweitz and the Lake of
Lucerne; on the east by the Alps,
which separate it from the Grisons
and Glaris; on the south by the
Cantons of Tesin and Valais; and
on the west by those of Underwald
and Berne. • 275. In which is the
town of Altorf, the birth-place of
William Tell, revered by the Swiss
as the hero of their liberty. 276.
Where William Tell shot an arrow
through the apple which the inhuman
Austrian Governor (whom he after-
wards killed) had caused to be placed
on his son's head. (Uri.)
277* Which is the largest of the
twenty-two Cantons, and is bounded
on the north by Soleure, and part of
France; on the east by Lucerne,
Underwald, and Uri; on the south
by the country of the Valais; and on
the west by the Cantons of Vaud,
Friburgh, and Neufchatel. (Berne.)
278. Which is bounded on the
north by Basle; on the west by
part of France; and on the south
and east by Berne. (Soleure.)
279. Which is bounded on the
west, north, and north-east by
France; on the south-east by a
lake, to which it gives name; and
on the south by the Canton of
Vaud. 280. Which was formerly a
principality, and belonged to the
King of Prussia. (Neufchatel.)
281. Which is bounded on the
north by Neufchatel and the lake
of that name; on the east by Fri-
burgh and Berne ; on the south by
the Lake of Geneva; and on the
west by France. ( Vaud.)
282. Which is bounded on the
north-west by the Lake of Neufcha-
tel ; on the north-east and east by
Berne; and on the south and west
by the Canton of Vaud. (Friburgh,
or Thurgau.)
283. Of which the . capital is situ-
ated on the most narrow part of a
lake of the same name, and is di-
vided by the river Rhone into two
unequal parts. 284. Which was a
Republic, allied with the Swiss Can-
tons, where the Reformation, first
preached by William Farel and Peter
Viret, owed its final reception and
establishment to the celebrated John
Calvin. ( Geneva.)
285. Which is bounded on the east
by Mount Furca, and on all the other
sides by the Alps, which separate it
on the south from Piedmont and
Savoy; and on the north trom the
Canton of Berne. 286. Which has
its name from its situation in a nar


row valley. 287- In which, at one
extremity, is the source of the Rhone,
which runs through it. ( Valais.)
288. Which is bounded on the
North by tlri, and the canton of the
Orisons, from which it is separated
by Mont St. Gothard; on the East
by the Orisons, and the Lake of
Como; on the South by the kingdom
of Venetian-Lombardy ; and on the
West by Piedmont and the Valais.
289. Which is traversed from North
to South by the river Tesino, which
rises in Mont St. Gothard. ( Tesin.)
290. Which is bounded on the
North by Glarus, St. Gall, and part
of Austria; on the East and South by
the kingdom of Venetian-Lombardy;
and on the West by Tesin and Uri.
291. Which formerly consisted of
the Grey League, the Cadee, or
House of God, and the League of
Ten Jurisdictions. ( Orisons.)
Name tije of Jibpam,
292. Which is bounded on the
North and West by the Ocean; on
the South by Portugal; and on the
East by Asturias and Leon. 293. In
which is Corunna, where Sir John
Moore lost his life in an engagement
with the French, in 1809. ( Gallicia.)
294. Which is bounded on the
East by Biscay; on the South by
Old Castile and Leon; on the West
by Gallicia; and on the North by the
Ocean. ( Asturias.)
295. Which is bounded on the
North by Asturias ; on the West by
Gallicia and Portugal; on the South
by Estramadura; and on the East by
Old Castille. 296. In which are Cui-
dad Rodrigo and Salamanca, where
Lord Wellington twice defeated the
French, in 1812. {Leon.)
297- Which is bounded on the
North by the Ocean; on the East by
Navarre and a part of France; on
the South by Old Castille ; and on
the West by Asturias. 298. Which
gives name to a celebrated Bay of
the Atlantic, between France and
Spain. 299. In which is Vittoria,
where Lord Wellington defeated tile
French in 1813. {Biscay.)
300. Which is bounded on the
North-east by the Pyrenees, which
separate it from France ; on the East
by Arragon ; on the South by part
of Arragon and Old Castille; and on
the West by part of Old Castille and
Biscay. 301. Which has given a title
to the Kings of France, from the time
of Henry IV. who was Sovereign of
both. {Navarre.)
302. Which is bounded on the
North by the Pyrenean Mountains;
on the West by Navarre and the two
Castilles; on the South by Valencia;
and on the East by part of Valencia
and Catalonia. 303. Of which the
inhabitants were formerly called Celt-
iberi. {Arragon.)
304. Which is bounded on the
North by the Pyrenees; on the East
and South by the Mediterranean; on
the West by Arragon; and on the
South West by a part of Valencia.
{Catalonia.)
305. Which is bounded on the
North by Catalonia and Arragon;
on the East and South by the Medi-
terranean ; and on the West by New
Castille and Murcia. {Valencia.)
306. Which is bounded on the
North by Biscay and Asturias; on
the East by Arragon and Navarre;
on the South by New Castille; and
on the West by Leon. {Old Castille.)
307- Which is bounded on the
North by Old Castille ; on the East
by Arragon and Valencia; on the
South by Murcia and Andalusia; and
on the West by part of Leon and Es-
tramadura. 308. Which contains Ma-
drid, the metropolis of Spain. {New
Castille.)
-309. Which is bounded on the
North by Leon; on the East by New
Castille; on the South by Andalusia;
and on the West by Portugal. 310.
In which is Badajos, stormed, and
taken from the French, by Lord Wel-
lington, in 1812. {Spanish Estrama-
dura.)
311. Which is bounded on the
North by Estramadura and New Cas-
tille ; on the East by Murcia; on the
South-east by Granada; on the South
by the Straits of Gibraltar ; and on
the West by Algarva, and the Gulf
of Cadiz. 312. In which is Cape Tra-
falgar, celebrated for the victory and
death of Lord Nelson, in a naval bat-
tle near it, in 1805, when he destroy-
ed the combined Spanish and French
fleets. 313. In which are Seville, said
to have been founded by Hercules;
Cordova, the ancient capital of the
Saracen Kings, and celebrated for its
University; the important sea-port
of Cadiz ; and the fortress of Gib-
raltar, belonging to Great Britain.
{Andalusia.)
314. Which is bounded on the
South by the Mediterranean; on the
North and West by Andalusia; and
on the East by Murcia. {Granada.)
315. Which is bounded on the
North-west by New Castille ; on the
East partly by Valencia, and partly
by the Mediterranean Sea; on the
West by Andalusia and Granada;
and on the South by the Mediterra-
nean. 316. In which is Carthagena,
founded by Asdrubal, the Carthagi-
nian general. {Murcia.)
Name tlk of
317- Which is bounded on the
North by Gallicia, and on the West
by Entre-Douro-e-Minho; on the
South by Beira and part of Leon ;
and on the East by Leon. ( Tra-los-
Montes.)
SlS.JWhich is bounded on the
North by Gallicia, on the East by
Tra-los-Montes; on the South by
Beira; and on the West by the
Ocean. 319. Which lies between
the rivers Douro and Minho. {Entre-
Doure-e-Minho.)
320. Which is bounded on the
North by Tra-los-Montes and En-
tre-Douro-e-Minho; on the South
by Portuguese Estramadura, and
Alentejo; on the East by Leon;
and on the West by the Atlantic.
321. Which lies between the Douro
and the Tagus. {Beira.)
322. Which lies about the mouth
of the Tagus, and is bounded on the
North by Beira; on the East and
South by Alentejo ; and on the West
by the Atlantic Ocean. 323. In
which is Alpibarata, near which John
I. King of Portugal, in 1358, ob-
tained a decisive victory, which se-
cured him the crown, 324. In which
is Vimiera, where Lord Wellington
gained his first victory over the
French in the Peninsula, in 1808.
[Portuguese Estramadura.)
325. Which lies between the rivers
Tagus and Guadiana; and is bounded
on the East by Spanish Estramadura,
on the South by Algarva, and on the
West by a part of Portuguese Estra-
madura and the Atlantic. {Alentejo.)
326. Whichis bounded on the West
and South by the Atlantic; on the
East by the Guadiana, which parts it
from Andalusia; and on the North by
Alentejo. 327- In which is Cape St.
Vincent, where Sir John Jervis (af-
terwards Earl St. Vincent) defeated
the Spanish fleet, in 1797- {Algarva.)
Name tl)e of tEurfceg tit
(Europe,
328. Which is bounded on the
North-east and East by Russian Mol-
davia and Bessarabia, from which it is
divided by the river Pruth; on the
South by Wallachia and part of Bul-
garia, from which last it is parted by
the Danube; and on the West by
Transylvania and Hungary. 329.
Which was a part of ancient Dacia.
{Turkish Moldavia.)
330. Which is bounded on the
North by Moldavia and Transylva-
nia ; on the East, South, and South-
west, by the river Danube, which se-
parates it from Bulgaria; and on the
North-west by Hungary. 331. Which
is part of ancient Dacia, and was the
residence of the Daci, or Getae. {Wal-
lachia.)
332. Which is bounded on the
North by Wallachia, Moldavia, and
Bessarabia; on the East by the Black
Sea ; on the South by Romania and
Macedonia, from which it is sepa-
rated by Mount Haemus; and on the
West by Servia. 333. Which was the
ancient Moesia. {Bidgaria.)
334. Which is bounded on the
North by the rivers Danube and Save,
which separate it from Hungary; on
the East by Wallachia and Bulgaria;
on the West by Bosnia and Dalma-
tia ; and on the South by Albania
and Macedonia. 335. Which includes
part of ancient Pannonia and Illyri-
cum. {Servia.)
336. Which is bounded on the
North by Sclavonia, from which it is
separated by the Save ; on the East
by Servia ; on the South by Servia
and Dalmatia; and on the West by
Croatia and Dalmatia. 337- Which
was part of ancient Illyricum. {Bos-
nia.)
338. Which is bounded on the
North by Austrian Croatia, and Scla-
vonia; on the South and West by
Dalmatia; and on the East by Ser-
via. ( Turkish Croatia.)
339. Which is bounded on the
North by Croatia, and Bosnia; on the
East by Servia; on the South by Al-
bania ; and on the West by Morla-
chia. 340 Which is part of ancient
Liburnia and Dalmatia. {Herzego-
vina, or Turkish Dalmatia.)
341. Which is bounded on the
North by Bosnia; on the East by
Roumelia; on the South by Livadia;
and on the West by the Adriatic and
Dalmatia. 342. Of which the south-
ern part was formerly called Epirus,
now Larta, and the northern part be-
longed to ancient Macedonia. 343.
In which is Capo Figalo, formerly Ac-
tium, an ancient town and promon-
tory of Epirus, famous for the naval
victory which Augustus obtained
over Marc Antony and Cleopatra.
[Albania.)
344. Which is bounded on the
North by Servia and Bulgaria; on
the East by the Black Sea; on the
South by the Sea of Marmora, the
Archipelago, and Thessaly ; and on
the West by Aljbania. 345. Which
includes the ancient Macedonia and
Thrace, and is now divided into Ma-
cedonia and Romania. [Roumelia,
or Romania.)
346. Which is bounded on the
North by Macedonia and Albania;
on the East by the Archipelago; on
the South by the Gulf of Lepanto;
and on the West by the lonian Sea
and Livadia. 347- Which includes
the ancient Thessaly, part of Epirus,
Acarnania, vEtolia, Locris, Doris,
Phocis, Boeotia, Megaris, and Attica.
348. In which are the celebrated
mountains Olympus, Parnassus, He-
licon, Pelion, Oita, and Cythaeron.
[Livadia.)
349. Which is joined to Livadia at
the North-east corner by the Isthmus
of Corinth, and is surrounded on all
other sides by the Mediterranean.
350. Which was formerly called Pe-
loponnesus, and includes the ancient
countries of Achaia Proper, Sicyonia,
Corinth, Argolis, Arcadia, Elis, Mes-
senia, and Laconia, or Lacedaemon.
351. In which the Olympic games
were formerly celebrated. {Morea.)
of^Turkep
352. Which is bounded on the
North by the Black Sea and the Sea
of Marmora; on the East by Amasia
and Karaman; on the South by the
Mediterranean; and on the West by
the Archipelago. 353. Which com-
prehends the ancient Bithynia, Pa-
phlagonia, Galatia, Phrygia, Lycia,
Caria, Lydia, lonia, iEolia, Troas, and
Mysia. 354. Which constituted the
greater part of the kingdom of Crce-
sus. 355. Ifi which were the seven
churches of Asia, mentioned in the
Apocalypse. 356. Which is subdi-
vided into the districts of Bursa, Si-
nope, and Smyrna. {Natalia.)
357- Which is bounded on the
North by the Black Sea; on the East
by Turcomania; on the South by
Algezira and Karaman; and on the
West by Karaman and Natolia. 358.
Which comprehends the ancient Pon-
tus, the Lesser Armenia, and the
North part of Cappadocia. 359.
Which is subdivided into the districts
of Trebizond, Siwas, and Marash.
{Amasia.)
360. Which is bounded on the
North by Mount Caucasus; on the
East by Georgia; on the South by
Turcomania and Amasia; and on the
West by the Black Sea. 361. TVhick
comprehends the ancient Colchis, the
country of Media, whence Jason and
the Argonauts are fabled to have
fetched the golden fleece. 362. Which
is divided by the river Rioui into
the districts of Mingrelia andGuriel.
{lmiretta.)
363. Which is bounded on the
North by Imiretta; on the East by
Persia; on the South by Kurdistan
and Algezira ; and on the West and
North-west by Amasia. 364. Which
includes the ancient Armenia, where
the ark rested after the Deluge, on
Mount Ararat, and which was the
primitive habitation of the second
race of men. 365. Which is subdi-
vided into the three districts of Kars,
Erzerum, and Wan. {Turcomania.)
366. Which is bounded on the
North by Turcomania, from which it
is separated by the ancient mountain
Niphates; on the East by the Gor-
dian chain of mountains, which parts
it from Persia; on the South by Irak;
and on the West by the river Tigris,
which separates it from Algezira.
367- Which comprehends the greater
part of ancient Assyria. 368. In
which are the ruins of Nineveh. 369.
Which now comprises the two dis-
tricts of Betlis and Sharzul. {Kur-
distan.)
370. Which is bounded on the
North by Kurdistan; on the East by
Persia; on the South-east by the
Persian Gulf; on the South-west and
West by Arabia Deserta; and on the
North-west by Algezira. 171. Which
includes the ancient Babylonia and
Chaldea. 372. Through which the
celebrated rivers Euphrates and Ti-
gris run into the Persian Gulf. 373.
In which are the ruins of the Tower
of Babel and City of Babylon. 374.
Which was the seat of the Saracen
empire. 375. Which is subdivided
into the districts of Bagdad and Bas-
ra, or Bussora. {lrak.)
376. Which is bounded on the
North-west and North by Amasia;
on the North-east by Turcomania;
on the East by Kurdistan; on the
South-east by Irak; on the South by
the Arabian Desert; and on the West
by Syria and Karaman. 377- Which
i s nearly surrounded by the Euphrates
and the Tigris. 378. Which consti-
tuted the ancient Mesopotamia. 379.
Which includes the three subdivisions


of Diarbekir, Mosul, and Racca.
{Algezira.)
380. Which is bounded on the
north by Karaman and Algezira; on
the east by Algezira and the Ara-
bian Desert; on the south by Arabia
Petraea; and on the west by the
Mediterranean. 381- Which includes
the ancient Aram, Damascus, Phoe-
nice, Judaea, and Palestine, or coun-
try of the Philistines. 382. Which is
subdivided into the cantons or pacha-
lics of Aleppo, Tripoli, Acre, and
Damascus. {Syria.)
383. Which is bounded on the
north by Natolia and Amasia; on
the east by Amasia, Algezira, and
Syria; on the south by the Medi-
terranean ; and on the west by Na-
tolia. 384. Which comprehends the
ancient Pisidia, Pamphylia, part of
Phrygia, Lycaonia, Isauria, and Ci-
licia. 385. Which is subdivided in ; to
the districts of Konia and Adania.
{Karaman.)
Name the Probince ofKorth America,
386. Which is bounded on the
north and west by New Britain, and
on the east and south by the River
St. Lawrence, which divides it from
Nova Scotia and New England. 387-
In which General Wolfe was killed,
in beating the French, in 1759.
{Quebec.)
388. Which is bounded by the Gulf
of St. Lawrence on the north; by the
Atlantic on the east; by the Bay of
Fundi on the south; and by New
England on the west. {Nova Scotia.)
389. Which is bounded on the
north, and partly on the east, by
Nova Scotia; on the south-east by
the Bay of Fundi; and by New Eng-
land on the west. {New Brunswick.)
390. Which is part of New Eng-
land, and is bounded on the north
by Canada and New Brunswick ; on
the north-east by the Bay of Fundi;
on the east and south-east by Mas-
sachusetts Bay ; and on the west by
New Hampshire. {Maine.)
391. Which is bounded on the
north and north-west by Canada ;
on the south-east by the Atlantic;
on the south by Massachusetts; and
on the west by Vermont. [New
Hampshire .)
392. Which is bounded on the
north by Canada; on the east by
New Hampshire; on the south by
Massachusetts; and on the west by
New York. {Vermont.)
393. Which is bounded on the
north by New Hampshire and Ver-
mont ;on the west by new York ;
on the south by Connecticut, Rhode
Island, and the Atlantic ; and on the
east by a bay named after itself.
{Massachusetts.)
394. Which is bounded on the
north and east by Massachusetts ;
on the south by the Atlantic; and
on the west by Connecticut. {Rhode
Island.)
395. Which is bounded on the
north by Massachusetts; on the
east by Rhode Island ; on the west
by New York; and on the south by
The Sound, which divides it from
Long Island. ( Connecticut .)
396. Which is bounded on the
south-east by the Atlantic; on the
east by Connecticut, Massachusetts,
and New Hampshire ; on the north
by Canada; on the north-west by
the river St. Lawrence, and Lake
Ontario; on the south-west and
south by Pennsylvania and New
Jersey. {New York.)
397. Which is bounded on the
north by New York ; on the east
by New Jersey ; on the south by
Delaware and Maryland; and on the
west by Ohio. {Pennsylvania.)
398. Which is bounded on the
north and north-east by New York;
on the east by the Atlantic ; on the
south and south-east by Delaware
Bay ; and on the west by Pennsyl-
vania. {New Jersey.)
399. Which is bounded on the
north by Pennsylvania ; on the east
by a river and bay to which it gives
name; and on the south and west
by Maryland. {Delaware.)
400. Which is bounded on the
north by Pennsylvania; on the east
by the state of Delaware; on the
south-east by the Atlantic Ocean;
on the south and west by Virginia.
401. Which is intersected by Chesa-
peak Bay. 402. In which are the
district of Columbia, and the city of
Washington, the metropolis of the
United States. {Maryland.)
403. Which is bounded on the
north by Maryland and Pennsyl-
vania ; on the east by Chesapeak
Bay, and the Atlantic ; on the south
by North Carolina; and on the
west by Kentucky and Ohio. (Vir-
ginia.)
404. Which is bounded on the
north by Lake Michigan; on the
east by Ohio; on the south by Ken-
tucky ; and on the west by the
Illinois territory. {lndiana.)
405. Which is bounded on the
north by Ohio and Indiana ; on the
east by Virginia; on the south by
Tennasse; and on the west by the
Ohio river. {Kentucky.)
406. Which is bounded on the
north by Kentucky and part of
Virginia; on the east by north Ca-
rolina ; on the south by Georgia;
and on the west by Tennasse.
{Franklinia.)
407- Which is bounded on the
north by Kentucky; on the east
by Franklinia ; on the south by the
Mississippi territory; and on the
west by the river Mississippi. [Ten-
nasse.)
408. Which is bounded on the
north by Virginia; on the east by
the Atlantic; on the south by south
Carolina; and on the west by the Al-
legany mountains. {North Carolina.)
409. Which is bounded on the
north by North Carolina; on the
south-east by the Atlantic ; and on
the south-west by Georgia. [South
Carolina.)
410. Which is bounded on the
north by Tennasse ; on the north-
east by the river Savannah, which
parts it from South Carolina ; on the
east by the Atlantic; on the south
by Florida; and on the west by
the Alabama territory. {Georgia.)
411. Which is bounded on the
north by Tennasse; on the east
by the Alabama territory ; on the
south by Louisiana; and on the
west by the river from which it has
received its name. {Mississippi.)
412. Which is bounded on the
north by the Arkansa Territory; on
the east by Mississippi and the Gulf
of Mexico; on the south by the
Gulf of Mexico; and on the west
by New Mexico. 413. Which be-
longed alternately to France and
Spain, till, in 1803, it was ceded to
the United States. {Louisiana.)
414. Which is bounded on the
north by Lake Superior; on the
east by Lake Michigan ; on the
south by Indiana and the Illinois
Territory; and on the west by the
Mississippi, which divides it from
the Missouri Territory. [North-west
Territory.)
415. Which is bounded on the
north by Lake Huron ; on the east
by Lakes Huron and Erie; on the
south by Ohio and Indiana ; and on
the by a lake from which it
receives its name. {Michigan Ter-
ritory.)
416. Which is bounded on the
north by Georgia; on the east by
the Atlantic; and on the south and
west by the Gulf of Mexico. {East
Florida.)
417. Which is bounded on the j
north and west by the Alabama
Territory ; on the east by East Flo-
rida ; and on the south by the Gulf |
of Mexico. ( West Florida.)
Kanu the of America,
418. Which is bounded on the
north by the Caribbean Sea; on the
east by Cumana; and on the west
and south by New Granada. 419.
Of which the capital is Leon de
Caraccas. {Venezuela.)
420. In which are the European
settlements of Essequibo, Demerara,
Berbice, Surinam, and Cayenne.
[Guiana.)
421. Which is at the north-east
extremity of Brazil, having the At-
lantic on the north and east; Bahia
on the south ; and Maranham on the
west. {Pernambuco.)
422. Which is named from a river
which unites first with the Paraguay,
and afterwards with the Urugay.
{Parana.)
423. Which is bounded on the
north by Parana; on the east by
the sea; and on the south and west
by Rio de la Plata. {Urugay.)
424. Which is bounded on the
north by Peru and Chaco; on the
east by Rio de la Plata; on the
south by Patagonia and Chili; and
on the west by Chili. {Tucuman.)
425. Which is bounded on the
north by Peru; on the east by Pa-
raguay ; on the south by Rio de la
Plata; and on the west by Tucu-
man. {Chaco.)
426. Which is bounded on the
north by Paraguay and Parana ; on
the east by Paraguay ; on the south
by Patagonia; and on the west by
Tucuman. 427- Which receives its
name from a great river that crosses
Paraguay from north to south.
{Rio de la Plata.)
SECTION IV.
PRINCIPAL CITIES AND
TOWNS. OF EUROPE.
N. B. The alphabetical order is observed in
this Section.
Name ti)c 2Tohm m ti>e Ddttei)
Hslaißs,
1. Which is about one mile from
Old Aberdeen, on an eminence on
the River Dee, over which, about
two miles from the town, is an ele-
gant bridge of seven arches. {New
Aberdeen.)
2. Which was formerly the capital
of the British kings. 3. Which has
a name, signifying, in the language
of the country. Abbey Town, given
it in consequence of the Saxon Kings
having founded a rich abbey there.
{Abingdon.)
4. Which is seated on the river
Eden, by which it is almost sur-
rounded. 5. Which is the county
town of Westmoreland. {Appleby.)
6. Which is famous for its medici-
nal springs, and the resort of much
company from all parts. 7- Near
which was fought the battle of Lans-
down, between the king’s troops and
the parliamentary forces, in the year
1643. {Bath.)
8. Which is seated on an island in
North Wales, and stands on the
Strait of Menai. 9. Which is the
county town of Anglesea. [Beau-
maris.)
10. Which is seated on the river
Ouse, which divides it into two
parts, united by a fine stone bridge.
{Bedford.)
11. Which is on the borders of
England and Scotland, and properly
belongs to neither. 12. Which is a
town and county of itself, seated on
the River Tweed. {Berwick.)
13. Which contains above 60,000
inhabitants, is famous for its manu-
factures of steel, gold, silver, &c., and
has been emphatically called the toy-
shop of Europe. 14. Which is situate
seventeen miles north-west of Co-
ventry. {Birmingham.')
15. Which is the second city in
England. 16. Which gives its name
to the Channel between England and
Wales. 17* Near which was the birth-
place of John Locke, an illustrious
philosopher, and the friend of youth,
who advised that children should be
reconciled to study, by making it ap-
pear to them an agreeable, honorable,
and amusing occupation. {Bristol.)
18. Which is seated on the conflu-
ence of the rivers Honthey and Usk,
in South Wales. {Brecon.)
19. Which is almost surrounded
by the river Ouse, over which it has
three handsome bridges. {Bucking-
ham.)
20. Which took its name from St.
Edmund the King, who was buried
there, after being murdered in a
wood. 21. Which is the county town
of Suffolk. {Bury St. Edmund.)
22. Which is seated on the river
Towy,and isusualltyreckonedthefirst
town in South Wales, f Caermarthen.)
23. Which has a castle of remark-
able grandeur, built by Edward 1.,
the conqueror of Wales, and in which
was born his unfortunate son, Ed-
ward 11., the first English Prince of
Wales. ( Caernarvon .)
24. Which is seated on the river
Cam, and has a celebrated University,
consisting of twelve Colleges and
four Halls. 25. Which is famous for
one of the finest pieces of Gothic
architecture now remaining in the
world. {Cambridge.)
26. In which, during the reign of
Henry 11. the celebrated Archbishop,
Thomas a Becket, was assassinated
before the altar of the Cathedral.
{Canterbury.)
27. Which is seated on the river
Tave, in South Wales, and is the
place where died Robert, the deposed
Duke of Normandy, eldest son of
William the Conqueror. 28. Which
is the county town of Glamorgan-
shire. {Cardiff.)
29. Which is a sea-port town in
South Wales, seated on the river
Tivy, {Cardigan.)
30. Which has manufactures of
printed linens and checks, whips,
and fish-hooks. 31. Which has three
gates, called the English, Irish, and
Scottish. 32. Which is the county
town of Cumberland. {Carlisle.)
33. Which is situated between two
rivers, the Chelmer and the Cam,
and takes its name from the first.
34. Which is the county town of
Essex. {Chelmsford.)
35. Which has an almost constant
communication with Ireland, being,
with Holyhead, the principal place
for taking shipping for Dublin. 36.
Which is the capital of Cheshire.
{Chester.)
37. W hich is a bishop’s see, and
seated on the river Lavant. 38.
Which was formerly the chief city
of the South Saxons’ kingdom, and
is the county town of Sussex. {Chi-
chester.)
39. Which is seated on an island
in the river Lee, in an Irish county
of the same name, in the province of
Munster, and surpasses all the towns
in Ireland, except Dublin. {Cork.)
40. Which is situated on a rocky
declivity, that surrounds the vale of
Clwyd, in North Wales, on a branch
of the river Clwyd, and has a consL


derable manufacture of gloves and
shoes. [Denbigh.)
41. At which are carried on ex-
tensive manufactures of silk* cotton*
and fine worsted stockings* andporce-
lain. 42. To which the rebels ad-
vanced in 1745, and then returned
to Scotland. [Derbiy.)
43. Which is seated on the river
Frome* on a Roman road* about two
miles distant from Maiden Castle, an
extensive entrenchment* reputed to
have been thrown up in the time of
the Romans. [Dorchester.)
44. In ivhich is a brass cannon*
twenty-two feet long* presented by
the States of Utrecht to Queen
Elizabeth* and called her pocket-
pistol. [Dover.)
45. Which is the metropolis of
Ireland* seated on the river Liffey*
sixty miles west of Holyhead in
North Wales* and three hundred and
thirty miles north-west of London.
[Dublin.)
46. Which is seated in the county
of Angus* in Scotland* on the north
of the Frith of Tay* and north-west
of St. Andrew’s. [Dundee.)
47. Which is almost surrounded
by the river Wear. 48. Near which
is Nevil’s Cross* erected in memory
of the great victory obtained by
Queen Philippa* consort of Edward
Hl.* in 1340* over David Bruce*
King of Scotland* who was taken
prisoner. [Durham.)
49. Which is the capital of Scot-
land. [Edinburgh.)
50, Which is the chief town of
Devonshire* and although formerly
watered by the sea* is now about ten
miles distant from it. 51. Which
stands on a river from which it de-
rives its name. {Exeter.)
52. Which is* in Cornwall, the sta-
tion of the packet-boats to Portugal,
Spain* and America; and where
the river Fale runs into the British
Channel. [Falmouth.)
53. Which is on the river Dee, in
North Wales. 54. Where are the
remains of a castle* in which King
Richard 11. was delivered into the
hands of his rival, the Duke of Lan-
caster* afterwards Henry IV. [Flint.)
55. Which is in the county of
Lanark* in Scotland* on the north
bank of the Clyde* and has a sea-port
twenty-one miles from the sea* on the
south side of the same river. 56.
Which is the seat of an University.
[Glasgow.)
57- In which Edmund ll.* King
of the Saxons* and Canute the Great*
King of the Danes, engaged in sin-
gle combat* but afterwards* laying
down their swords* made an ami-
cable division of the kingdom of
England. ( Gloucester.)
58. Which is in the county of
Renfrew* at the mouth of the Clyde*
in Scotland. {Greenock!)
59. Which is the chief town of the
county of Surrey. 60. Which is
seated on the river Wey. 61. Near
which are the ruins of an ancient
Saxon castle* said to have been taken
by the Dauphin of France in 1216*
when he was invited into England by
the Barons, to assist them against the
tyranny of King John. [Guildford.)
62. Which is in North Wales* seated
on a rock on the sea-shore. 63. Which
had formerly a strong* handsome
castle* garrisoned for King Charles I.
during the Civil War* and for that
reason demolished by the Parlia-
ment. 64. Which is the county town
of Merionethshire. [Harlech.)
65. Which is almost encompassed
by the Wye and two other rivers;
and of which the chief manufacture
is gloves. [Hereford.)
66. Which is the chief town of
the county of Herts. 67- At which
the Danes had two strong forts
to protect their vessels on the river
Lea, which suddenly became dry*
through a stratagem of King Alfred*
who* being master of the upper part of
the river* turned its course. 68. Which
is near a small town called Welwyn*
where the English commenced the
general massacre of the Danes on the
night of St. Britius (13th November),
in 1002. [Hertford!)
69. Which is seated on the river
Ouse* and was the birth-place of
Oliver Cromwell. [Huntingdon.)
70. Which is near the place in
Scotland* where the English* in 1746*
defeated the Pretender* Edward
Stuart* who* after being exposed to
the greatest dangers* escaped to
France in the disguise of a female.
[lnverness!)
71 • Which is on the river Orwell*
and was the birth-place of Cardinal
Wolsey. [lpswich.)
72. Which is the capital of a coun-
ty of the same name* in the province
of Leinster* and one of the most
flourishing towns in Ireland; twenty-
six miles north of Waterford* and
fifty-four south-west of Dublin.
[Kilkenny.)
73. Which is in the county of
Kerry* in the province of Munster*
on the side of a lake of the same
name* one of the most beautiful in
the world* 143 miles south-west of
Dublin. ( Killarney.)
74. Which is seated on the river
Loyne* and is noted for its manu-
facture of mahogany cabinet ware.
[Lancaster.)
75. Which is seated on the river
Tamar* and is the county town of
Cornwall. [Launceston!)
76. Which was stormed by the
Royalists under Charles I. 77- Near
which are the ruins of an abbey*
where Cardinal Wolsey ended his
days. [Leicester.)
78. Tlliich is seated on the Frith
of Forth* two miles north of Edin-
burgh. of which city it is the port.
[Leith.)
79. Which is in Ireland, and con-
sists of the Irish and English town*
the latter situated on an island form-
ed by the River Shannon* and called
King’s Island. [Limerick.)
80. Which was the birth-place of
Sir Isaac Newton* an illustrious phi-
losopher* who discovered the prin-
ciple of gravitation* from seeing an
apple fall in his garden. ( Woolsthorp .)
81. In which is the celebrated cathe-
dral bell, called Tom, which weighs
five tons* is twenty-three feet in cir-
cumference* and is said to be capa-
ble of containing seventeen hundred
quarts of beer. ( Lincoln .)
82. Which is a place of great trade
to all parts of the world* situated on
the river Mersey* in Lancashire,
83. Which was besieged and taken
by Prince Rupert. [Liverpool.)
84. Which has the most beautiful
metropolitan church in the world*
after St. Peter’s at Rome. 85. In
which is a column of stone* two hun-
dred and two feet in height, and fif-
teen in diameter* built in commemo-
ration of a fire* which* in 1666* al-
most ertfirely destroyed the city. 86.
Which contains about a million of
inhabitants* and has in each of its
streets fine pavements for the conve-
nience and safety of foot-passengers.
87- Which is the metropolis of the
British empire. [London.)
88. Which is one of the principal
towns of Ireland* and was besieged*
in 1689* by James ll.* the exiled
King of England* in person; on
which occasion an Irish Protestant
clergyman performed prodigies of
valour* and obliged the King to re-
tire* after he had blockaded the place
for six weeks. [Londonderry.)
89. Which is famous for its fustian
manufacture* and is reckoned tlie
largest market-town in England.
90. Which stands near the conflux
of the Irk and Irwell, three miles
from the Mersey. ( Manchester .)
91. W hich is seated at the con-
fluence of the rivers Wye and Mun-
now. 92. TV hie h was the birth-place of
the warlike Henry V. ( Monmouth. )
93. Which is pleasantly situated
on the ascent of a hill in North
Wales. 94. Near which the royal
forces* in 1644* were defeated with
great slaughter by the Parliamentary
army. 95. Which is sixty-five miles
north by west of Hereford* and 161
north-west of London. [Montgo-
mery.)
96. Which is seated on the river
Tyne* and is the county town of
Northumberland. 97- Which stands
at the extremity of the Piets’ Wall*
and is famous for its trade in coals
and grindstones. ( Newcastle .)
98. Which is seated almost in the
middle of the Isle of Wight* of which
it is the capital. ( Newport, Isle of
Wight.)
99. Which is twelve miles distant
from Naseby* where the Parliamen-
tary army* in 1645* gained a decisive
victory over King Charles I. (North-
ampton.)
100. Which is on the river Y are*
and is the county town of Norfolk.
[Norwich.)
101. Which is the capital of an
inland county* where Charles I. set
aphis standard at the commencement
of the civil wars. [Nottingham.)
102. Which is the capital of a
country supposed to have received its
name from the red colour of the soil;
namely* Rutland. [Okeham.)
103. In which is a celebrated
University* near the junction of the
rivers Thame and Isis* which con-
jointly form the Thames. [Oxford.)
104. Which iscommodiously seated
on the innermost creek of Milford
Haven* in South Wales* 237 miles
west by north of London. [Pem-
broke.)
105. Which is in Aberdeenshire*
near the mouth of the river Ugie,
a little to the north of Buchan
Ness* the most eastern promontory
of Scotland. [Peterhead.)
106. Which, next to Portsmouth*
is the most considerable harbour in
England for men-of-war* and is si-
tuated between the mouths of the
rivers Plynn and Tamar, in Devon-
shire. [Plymouth.)
107. Which is in Hampshire* seven-
ty-four miles from London, is esteem-
ed the key of England* and has a most
regular fortification. 108. Which has
one of the finest harbours in the
world* wherein the whole English
navy may ride in safety* and at the
mouth of which lies the Isle of Wight*
six miles distant. [Portsmouth.)
109. Which is seated near the head
spring of the river Somergil, in
South Wales. [Radnor.)
110. Which i s pleasantly situated on
the Kennet* near its confluence with
the Thames* and is the largest and
best town in Berkshire. [Reading.)
111. Of which the cathedral has
the highest spire in England* and
also twelve doors and three hundred
and sixty-five windows, in allusion
to the number of months and days
in the year. ( Salisbury .)
112. Which has a good stone
bridge over the Don* and another
over the Sheaf* in Yorkshire* and has
been noted several hundred years for
cutlers’ and smiths’ manufactures.
113. Which had a castle* wherein
Mary Queen of Scots was detained a
prisoner between sixteen and seven-
teen years. [Sheffield )
114. In which, in 1283,Edward I.
holding a Parliament* the Lords sat
in a castle* and the Commons in a
barn. 115. Where Richard 11. hold-
ing a Parliament in 1397, sat with
the crown on his head* created several
Peers, and made Chester a princi-
pality. 116. Near which the bloody
battle* in 1400* was fought* between
Henry IV. and the malcontents
under Henry Percy, surnamed Hot-
spur* in which the latter was de-
feated and slain. 11 7. Which is the
capital of Shropshire, [Shrewsbury.)
118. Where King Canute gave a
striking reproof to his flattering
courtiers. 119. At which the Em-
peror Charles V. embarked on his
return from England to Spain. 120.
At ivhich Philip 11. disembarked
when he came to England* to marry
Queen Mary I. [Southampton.)
121. Which stands on the river
Sow* and* by the late inland naviga-
tion* has a communication with the
rivers Mersey* Dee* Ribble* Ouse*
Trent* Derwent* Severn* Humber,
Thames* and Avon; and is 135
miles from London. [Stafford.)
122. Which is seated on a rocky
eminence above the river Avon* and
which is said to have its name from
Warremund, an ancestor of the Mer-
cian Kings. [Warwick.)
123. Which is the scond place in
Ireland* standing on the river Suire,
eight miles north of St. George’s
Channel, in the province of Mun-
ster. ( Waterford. )
124. W hich, seated at the foot of
a hill in Somersetshire* has its name
from the wells and springs about it*
and is the centre of a manufacture of
knit worsted stockings. 125. Which
is the county town of Somersetshire,
[Wells.)
126. Which is commodiously seated
at the mouth of the river Esk* in
Yorkshire* and was the birth-place
of the great circumnavigator* Cap-
tain James Cook. [Whitby.)
127. At which the brave Guy Earl
of Warwick overcame and killed,
in single combat* the celebrated
Danish champion* Colebrand. (Win-
chester.)
128. Which, though considered as
a village* has long been the country
residence of the kings of England.
129. At which Edward HI. instituted*
the Order of the Garter. ( Windsor .)
130. At which Cromwell* in 1651
defeated the Scots, who wished to
place Charles 11. on the throne.
131. At which Cromwell defeated
Charles 11., who, in order to avoid
the pursuit of his conqueror* con-
cealed himself for many hours in the
branches of a large oak. ( Worcester.)
Name iijc ®ofon of Denmark.
132. Which is the capital of the
kingdom. ( Copenhagen. )
133. Which is in the Island of
Zealand* north of Copenhagen, and
opposite Helsinborg* and at which
all vessels passing the Sound pay
a duty to the King of Denmark.
[Elsinore, or Helsingoer.)
134. Which is the capital of the
Isle of Fuhnen* and is seated on a
small river* not navigable. ( Oldensee.)
135. Which is seated on the lake
Asmild* in a peninsula, and is the
capital of Jutland. [Wyborg.)
Name 2Toton belonging to
J&lueEcn*
136. Which is in Norway* and lias*
as a sea-port* the exclusive privilege
of importing all foreign corn into
that country. [Bergen.)
137. Which is celebrated for the
Act of Union* signed there in the
reign of Queen Margaret* in 1395*
on the part of the three crowns of
Sweden* Denmark* and Norway.
138. Which is separated from the
Island of Oeland by a strait* in the


midst of which is a spring of soft
water. (Colmar.)
139. Which is in South Gothland,
and derives its origin and name from
Charles XI. who laid there the foun-
dation of a new town, and removed
the fleet from Stockholm to this
place. (Carlscroon or Carlscrona.)
140. Which has two names, one
of which it received from Christian
IV. King of Denmark, who built it,
and the other from the bay upon
which it stands. 141. Which is the
modern capital of Norway. ( Christi-
ana, or Anslow, otherwise Opslow.)
142. Which is the capital of Ble-
kingen, on the Baltic, and has its
name from Christian IV. King of
Denmark, who gave it the privileges
of a town. (Christianstadt.)
143. In which the smoke arising
from the forges is so considerable,
that when the West wind blows it
upon the houses, the inhabitants are
obliged to light candles in the middle
of the day. (Fahlun, or Copersberg.)
144. In which the Kings of Nor-
way formerly resided, and which
now carries on a considerable trade
in wood, fish, and copper. 145.
Which was the ancient capital of
Norway. (Drontheim.)
146. Which is in Norway, where
Charles XII. King of Sweden, was
killed when besieging it. (Frede-
rickshall.)
147. Which is in the Province of
Aggerhuys, on the river Glommen,
and contains an arsenal amply sup-
plied. (Frederickstadt.)
148. In which Gustavus Adolphus,
King of Sweden, and Christian IV.
King of Denmark, had an amicable
interview in 1619. 149. Which is
the capital of a division of South
Gothland. ( Helmstadt.)
150. Which is at the mouth of a
river of the same name, on the West
side of the Gulf of Bothnia. (Lulea.)
151. Which is in Swedish Lapland,
on a river of the same name, which
runs through it. (Pitea.)
152. Which is seated in the terri-
tory of Stavanger, in Norway, and
is a peninsula, on the sea-coast, near
the fortress of Doswick, South of
Bergen. (Stavanger.)
153. Of which the name, in the
language of the country, signifies
built on piles, the houses being almost
all of wood, and the town standing,
on two peninsulas and seven rocks,
in lake Melar. (Stockholm.)
154. Which is on a river of the same
name, at its confluence with the Gulf
of Bothnia, and is the residence of the
Governor of West Bothnia. (Umea.)
Name tbc GTotmt Mongtng to Muggta,
155. Which is the capital of Fin-
land, and seated on the point where
the Gulfs of Bothnia and Finland
unite. [Abo.)
156. Which is situated on the
Dwina, and had formerly an exten-
sive maritime commerce, but since
the foundation of St. Petersburg!!,
has become very inconsiderable.
[Archangel.)
157- Which is seated in an ancient
palatinate of Poland, near the source
of the river Donetz. (Bielgorod.)
158. Which is seated on the West
side of the Dnieper, and- was for-
merly the capital of a palatinate of
Poland. 159. Which was built by
the early Russian Princes, and was
long the seat of their government.
[Kief, Kiev, or Kiow.)
160. Which was formerly the ca-
pital of the Russian empire, and con-
tains, in the church of the Assump-
tion, the largest bell in the world;
being in external circumference sixty-
four feet, two feet in thickness, and
of the reputed weight of three hun-
dred and twenty thousand pounds.
161. From which proceeds a road
two hundred leagues in length, lead-
ing in a straight line to St. Peters-
burgh. (Moscow.)
162. At which Charles XII. King
of Sweden, in 1700, being then only
nineteen years of age, gained a com-
plete victory over the Czar Peter the
Great, who said on that occasion:
“ I was afraid the Swedes would beat
us; but I am now sure they will
teach us to beat them.” [Narva.)
163. Which is seated on a moun-
tain at the confluence of the Volga
and the Oka. (Nisnei Novgorod.)
164. Which is situated near the
Lake Ilmen, and stretches on both
sides of the river Wolkoft, or Vol-
kova, which separates it into two
divisions. 165. Which was formerly
so powerful as to give rise to a Rus-
sian proverb, “ That it would be
equal folly to resist the gods, or that
great town.” [Novgorod.)
166. Which stands near the junc-
tion of the rivers Sukona and Youg,
by which union the river Dwina is
formed. 167- Which is the capital
of the province of Veliki Ustiug.
( Ustiug.)
168. Which was built on the Neva,
in 1703, by Peter the Great, in ho-
nour of St. Peter the Apostle, and
of which the name signifies “ the
city of Peter.” (Petersburgh, or St.
Peter sburgh.)
169. Which is situated to the
South-east of Kief, and is celebrated
for two great battles fought there ;
one, in 1389, between Tamerlane,
Emperor of the Moguls, and Vitold,
Grand Duke of Lithuania, who was
defeated; the other, in 1709,between
Peter the Great and Charles XII.
King of Sweden, who was conquered,
and found there a termination to his
career of success. ( Pultowa.)
170. Which was formerly one of
the Hanse towns, and sustained a
remarkable siege in 1570, by Mag-
nus, Duke of Holstein; and another,
in 1577; hy the Muscovites. [Revel.)
171- Which stands on the Duna,
five miles from its mouth, and, next
to Petersburg!!, is the most com-
mercial town in the whole Russian
Empire. (Riga.)
172. Which is seated on the banks
of the Dnieper, and extends over
two mountains, including the valley
between them, to the North of Kiov,
and to the North-east of Novgorod-
Sieverskoe. 173. Which is surrounded
by walls thirty feet high and fifteen
feet thick, enclosing an area of about
five miles, with a town at each angle.
174. Near which was a severe battle
between the French and Russians,
on the 16th and 17th of August,
1812. (Smoletisko.)
175. Which is seated on the North-
ern part of a large gulf, at the mouth
of a river of the same name, and is
the capital of Bothnia. (Tornea.)
176. Which was built by Peter the
Great, and is seated on a river of
the same name, a little above its
junction wfith the Don. (Voronetz.)
177' Which is the capital of Po-
land, and is seated on the Vistula.
(Warsaw.)
178. Which is a rich trading sea-
port of Russia, seated on the North
side of the Gulf of Finland, 250
miles North-east of Riga. ( Wyborg.)
Kame Mjt GTofon of df ranee,
179. Which is in the Department of
the Somme, and has a manufacture of
woollen cloth. 180. Which is seated
on the river Somme, by which it car-
ries on a great trade, twenty miles
North-west of Amiens, and fifty-two
South of Calais. (Abbeville.)
181. Which is seated on the banks
of the Garonne, in the department
of Lot and Garonne, in Guienne,
and was the birth-place of Joseph
Scaliger. ( Agen.)
182. Which is seated in a plain,
where are hot baths, near the little
river Air, in Provence. 183. Which
is the capital of the department of
the Mouths of the Rhone. (Aix.)
184. Which is in the department of
the Somme, and was taken by the
Spaniards, in 1597, by means of the
following stratagem: disguised as
peasants, some Spaniards presented
themselves before the town, with a
waggon-load of nuts ; the gates
being opened to admit them, they
untied one of the sacks, which the
soldiers of the guard began to pil-
lage, when the pretended peasants
fell upon them, and, during the affray,
the Spanish army came up, forced an
entrance, and made themselves mas-
ters of the town. 185. In which a
treaty of peace was negotiated and
signed between Great Britain and
Buonaparte, in 1802. ( Amiens.)
186. Which is between Nimes and
Montpellier, and was,in the thirteenth
century, a good sea-port, but is now
two leagues distant from the sea.
187* At which St. Louis twice em-
barked, namely, in 1248 and 1269,
to proceed to the Holy wars. 188.
In which Francis I. and Charles V.
had an interview in 1538. ( Aigues-
Mortes.)
189. Which is the capital of the
department of Mayenne and Loire,
and contains in its botanical garden
an urn of porphyry, said to have
been used at the marriage-feast of
Cana. 190. Which is famous for the
blocks of beautiful slate found in its
environs. (Angers.)
191. Which is seated on the South
bank of the Charente, in the pro-
vince of Angoumois, where Francis
I. was born. 192. Which is the capi-
tal of the department of Charente.
(Angouleme.)
193. Which is in the department
of Var, nine miles West of Nice, on
the Mediterranean Sea. 194. Which
was built by the people of Mar-
seilles, and was formerly called An-
tipolis. (Antibes.)
195. At which Henry IV. in 1589,
gained a great victory over the Duke
de Mayenne, chief of the League.
(Arques.)
196. Which is seatedonthe Scarpe,
and was captured by Louis XIII. in
1640. 197- Which was the capital of
Artois, and is now in the department
of the Straits of Calais. (Arras.)
198. In the middle of which two
rivers, the Nive and the Adour, unite
their streams, and proceed to the sea
at the distance of a quarter of a league.
199. W hich is in the department of
the Lower Pyrenees, and is the place
where was invented the military wea-
pon that bears its name. (Bayonne.)
200. Which is in the department
of Loiret, and province of Orleans,
six miles West of Orleans. 201.
Which is seated on a hill, at the
foot of which runs the Loire, and is
famous for its wines. (Beaugenci.)
202. Which is in the department
of the Oise, and in which the women
formerly enjoyed the prerogative of
marching first in a procession, a cus-
tom said to have been preserved in
commemoration of the intrepidity
with which the females repulsed the
troops of Charles the Bold, Duke
of Burgundy, in 1472, after their
husbands had begun to give way.
(Beauvais.)
203. Which has a good citadel, on
a high rock, the base of which touches
both sides of the river Doubs, which
forms here a peninsula. 204. Which
was the capital of Ffanche Comte,
and is now in the department of
Doubs. (Besangon.)
205. In which Henry 111. in 1588, I
caused the Duke of Guise and his
brother, the Cardinal, to be assassi-
nated, in an assembly of the States
General, and is in Bie department of
the Loir and Cher. (Blois.)
206. Which is in the department
of the Straits of Calais, seated at
the mouth of the river Siam. (Bou-
logne.)
207- Which is the place where Ed-
ward the Black Prince resided several
years, and where his son, afterwards
Richard 11. King of England, was
born. 208. Which was the capital of
Guienne, and is now the capital of the
department of Gironde. (Bordeaux.)
209. In which the Pragmatic Sanc-
tion was given, in 1438. 210. In
which Louis XI. and the celebrated
Fathers Bourdaloue, Orleans, and
Labbe were born. Which is the ca-
pital of the department of the Cher.
(Bourges.)
211. W hich is the finest port in the
kingdom for its magazines, arsenals,
and quays, having accommodation in
its roads for five hundred ships of the
line to lie in safety, and is in the de-
partment of Finisterre. (Brest.)
212. Which is in the department of
Upper Loire, and has a bridge of one
arch over the Allier, built by the
Romans. (Brioude.)
213. At which William the Con-
queror was buried, in an abbey that
he had founded and dedicated to St.
Stephen, and is the capital of the de-
partment of Calvados. {Caen.)
214. Which Henry IV. took by
assault, in 1580, when petards were
used for the first time. (Cahors.)
215. W hich, when besieged in
by Edward HI. King of England,
was defended by the inhabitants with
incredible valour, till they were re-
duced to the last extremity by famine,
when King Edward, provoked by
their long resistance, would grant
them a capitulation only on condition
that six of the principal citizens should
be sent, with the keys, to the camp,
in their shirts,- with ropes about their
necks, to submit themselves to the
punishment of death. Eustace de
St. Pierre and five others generously
resolved to sacrifice themselves for
the safety of their fellow citizens
but Edward, softened by the prayers
ofhis Queen, pardoned them. [Calais.)
216. Which is seated on a branch
of the river Scheldt, in the department
of the North, and was formerly ca-
pital of Cambresis, with a citadel and
fort. 217- Which has a considerable
manufacture of linen, especially cam-
brics, which took their name from it.
(Camhray.)
218. At which three battles were
fought against three Philips of
France. The first, in 1071, against
Philip I. who was defeated by
Robert the Grison; the second, in
1328, against Philip the Fair, who
gained a complete victory, and pil-
laged the town; the third, in 1677,
against Philip, Duke of Orleans,
who defeated the Prince of Orange,
and took the town. (Cassel.)
219. Which is in the department
of the Channel (Normandy,) and
remarkable for the sea-fight between
the English and French fleets in 1692,
when the latter were beaten, and
twenty of their men-of-war burnt,
near Cape La Hogue. ( Cherbourg .)
220. Which has manufactures of
ratteens, druggets, serges, and lea-
ther, and was the birth place of the
celebrated Pascal. 221. Which was
the capital of Auvergne, and is now
in the department of Puy de Dome.
[Clermont.)
222. At which Philip of Valois
was defeated, in 1346, by Edward
HI. King of England, when the
English, for the first time, riiade
use of artillery. ( Crecy.)


223. Which is in the department
of Isere, and near the grotto of Notre
Dame de Balme, a celebrated cavern
with a lake, on which Francis I. ad-
vanced two leagues. {Cremieu.)
224. Of which the inhabitants, hav-
ing discovered Guinea, brought hom e
some elephants’ tusks, and established
an extensive commerce in all articles
made of ivory. {Dieppe.)
225. Which, in the fifteenth cen-
tury, was the capital of the kingdom
of Burgundy, and the environs of
which produced the wines of Beaune
and Vollenay. {Dijon.')
226. Which is in the department
of the Maine and Loire, and contains
in its neighbourhood an extensive
Roman amphitheatre, cut in the rock,
around the arena of which may still
be seen the stalls where the different
animals intended for the combats
were kept. {Doe, or Done.)
227. Which is in the department
of the North, twenty-two miles
south-west of Ostend, and was sold
to the French by Charles 11. in
1662. [Dunkirk.)
228. Which is in the department
of Eure, on the Iton, and has a
manufacture of cotton velvets, and
another of ticken. [Evreux.)
229. Which is seated on the river
Loire, in the department of the Rhone
and Loire, and is the birth-place of the
famous anatomistDuvernay.(Fo?Mr^.)
230. Which was the capital of a
country of the same name, in the de-
partment of Arriege, and is seated on
the river Arriege, at the foot of the
Pyrenees, eight miles south of Pa-
lmers. {Foix.)
231. In which are the ruins of the
ancient Tour-sans-venin, so called
because no venomous insects have
ever been found in it, and those car-
ried thither have immediately with-
drawn from it. 232. Which is three
leagues distant from Fontaine-ar-
dente,apiece of ground eight feet long
and four broad, from which issue red
and white flames, rising to the height
of half a foot, capable of burning
paper, straw, and wood, but not of
igniting gunpowder. {Grenoble.)
233. Which is seated on the river
Gartampe, was the capital of La
Marche, and is now in the depart-
ment of Creuse. {Gueret.)
234. Which is in the department
of Aisne, on the Oise. 235. Which
was formerly the capital of a Duchy,
and is famous for the princes of Lor-
raine, who have borne its name.
(Guise.)
236. Which is in the department of
Lower Seine, and is seated at the
mouth of the river Seine. 237-
Which has a harbour affording pecu-
liar advantages, from its retention
of the water in it for threehours after
full tide, occasioned by the strong
current of the Seine running into it.
238. Which was bombarded, in 1694,
by the celebrated Englishcommander
Benbow, and again, in 1759, by Ad-
miral Rodney. [Havre-de- Grace.)
239. Which is in the department
of Indre and Loire, on the river
Creuse, and is the birth-place of
Des Cartes. {Haye.)
240. Which is near St. Gobin, ce-
lebrated for the beautiful glass cast
there, and sent to Paris to be po-
lished. [La Fere.)
241. Which is in the department
of the North, on the Sambre, and
was besieged, in vain, by Prince Eu-
gene, in 1712. [Landrecy.)
242. Which has famous wax and
stuffs, and excellent poultry ; is
seated on a high hill, at the foot of
which runs the Sarte. 243. Which
was the capital of Maine, and is now
in the department of La Sarte. ( Le
Mans.)
244. Which is situated on a moun-
tain near the river Loire, in the de-
partment of the Upper Loire, and
was the capital of the canton of Ve-
lay, in Languedoc. [Le Puy.)
245. Which is in the department
of the Upper Saone, where is a ca-
vern which serves as a barometer to
all the country people : a fog at the
entrance being an infallible sign of
rain on the next day. [Leugne.)
246. In which were lately two
magnificent hospitals, in one of
which, called the Countess’s Hospi-
tal, the inmates were served off sil-
ver plate. [Lille.)
247- Which is seated on the river
Vienne, was the capital of Limosin,
and is now in the department of
Upper Vienne. [Limoges.)
248. Which was built in 1720, by
the French East-India Company,
who made it the exclusive mart of
their commerce, and is seated in the
department of Morbihan, five miles
from Hennebon. (L’ Orient.)
249. Which is seated at the con-
fluence of the Rhone and Saone, and
is celebrated for its silk manufac-
tures. 250. Which was called Lug-
dunum by the Romans, and was
built by Plancus Munatius, when he
was governor of this province, a few
years after the death of Julius Caesar.
251. Which was the capital of the
late province of the same name, as
it now is of the department of the
Rhone and Loire. {Lyons.)
252. Which was founded five hun-
dred and thirty-nine years before
Christ by the Phocenses, who fled
from Asia Minor, to escape from the
tyranny of the Persians. 253. Which
obtained from Asia Minor, about the
same time, the first vine planted in
France. 254. Which was called by
Cicero the Athens of Gaul, and by
Pliny the Mistress of education.
{Marseilles.)
255. Which is the capital of the
department of the Seine and Marne,
on the Seine, ten miles from Fon-
tainbleau, and twenty-five south-
east of Paris. 256. Which, in 1419,
was besieged and taken by the Eng-
lish, and held by them for ten years,
when the inhabitants drove them
out, and submitted to Charles VII.
{Melun.)
257- Which, next to Toulouse, is
the most considerable and finest town
in Languedoc, and is now in the
department of Herault. 258. In which
is a celebrated school of medicine,
and a botanic garden, the first esta-
blished in Europe. {Montpelier.)
259. Which is seated on the Allier,
and takes its name from the great
number of mills that were formerly
in its neighbourhood. 260. Which
was the capital of Bourbonnis, as it
now is of the department of the Al-
lier, {Moulins.)
261. Which is built on the river
Ille, in the ancient Alsace, and was
formerly a free town, in alliance with
the Swiss Republic. 262. Which
received from the Germans a name
signifying Mill-houses, on account
of the great number of mills it con-
tained. {Muhlhausen.)
263. Which contains the palace of
the ancient Dukes of Lorraine, and
was ceded to France in 1756. 264.
Which was the capital of Lorraine,
and is now in the department of La
Meurthe. {Nancy.)
265. Which was the residence of
the ancient Dukes of Britany, and is
the place where Henry IV., in 1598,
published the celebrated Edict of To-
leration, afterwards revoked by Louis
XIV. in 1685. {Nantez, or Nantz.)
266. Which was the birth-place of
the Emperor Aurelius, and is cele-
brated for the excellent quality of
its honey. {Narbonne.)
267- In which is a ducal palace,
where John Casimir, King of Poland,
died in 1672. 268. Which is seated
on the river Loire, and was the capi-
tal of Nivernois, but is now in the
department of La Nievre. [Nevers.)
269. Which was formerly supplied
with water by the magnificent aque-
duct of the Pont du Gard, built, it is
said, during the reign of the Empe-
ror Antoninus, which forms a junction
between two mountains, by means of
three stages of arches one above the
other. (N ismes.)
270. Which owes its name and
importance to a rich abbey, in the
neighbourhood of which are floating
islands, or small portions of earth,
with trees growing upon them,
which float upon the water, and can
easily be moved from one place to
another. [St. Omer.)
271. Which sustained two memo-
rable sieges, one, in 451, by the
Huns, under the formidable Attila,
surnamed “ the Scourge of God
the other, in 1428, by the English,
who were defeated by the celebrated
Joan of Arc. 272. Which, under
the four sons of Clovis, was the capi-
tal of the kingdom inherited by Gon-
tran. 273. Of which the name is
derived from the Latin Aurelianum.
[Orleans.)
274. In which is a spring, remark-
able for overflowing in time of rain,
and throwing up a great number of
fish called Graylings. ( Ornans .)
275. Which lies at the mouth of
the river Loire, and is the sea-port of
Nantes. [Painboeuf.)
276. Which is in the department
of Arriege, on the river Arriege,
eight miles north of Foix. 277*
Near which is a celebrated mineral
spring. (Pamiers.)
278. Of which the Latin name is
Lutetia, from Luteus, signifying clay
or mud. 279. Which Clovis, the
Frank, made the capital of his king-
dom, after he had defeated and slain
Alaric, the Visigoth, in battle. 280.
Which Hugh Capet made the metro-
polis of France, as it still continues
to be. 281. Which possesses one of
the most celebrated Museums of
painting and sculpture in the world.
(Paris.)
282. Which has a castle, where
Henry IV. was born, to the south
of Bourdeaux. 283. Which was the
capital of the province of Bearn, and
is now in the department of the
Lower Pyrenees. ( Pau.)
284. Which is seated on the river
Tet, where Philip the Hardy, King
of France, died. 285. Which was
the capital of Roussillon, as it now is
of the department of the Eastern
Pyrenees. (Perpignan.)
286. Which is celebrated for a
battle between the French and Eng-
lish, in 1356, when Edward the Black
Prince made prisoner John King
of France and his son Philip, whom
he afterwards carried to England.
[Poitiers.)
287* Which derives its name from
its bridge over the Oise. 288. Which
the English took in 1435, by the sin-
gular stratagem of approaching the
town during a shower of snow in
white clothing, carrying white lad-
ders, by means of which they scaled
the walls unperceived. [Pontoise.)
289. Which is situated in the de-
partment of the Morbihan, one league
south of L'Orient, and was fortified
by Louis XIII. from whom it had its
name, and was a station for part of
the Royal Navy, as well as for that
of the French East India Company.
( Pnr/- 1 nm f i
290. At which Philip 11. King of
Spain, in 1577, gained that great vic-
tory over the French, in commemora-
tion of which he built the palace of the
Escurial, near Madrid. (St. Quentin.)
291. Which is divided into two
parts by the Vilaine, on which it is
seated. 292. Which was the capital
of Bretagne or Britanny, as it now is
of the department of the Ille and
Vilaine. [Rennes.)
293. In which the Kings of France
are usually crowned. 294. In
which Clovis the Frank received
baptism, after he had embraced
Christianity. ( Rheims.)
295. Which is the capital of the
department of Aveiron, and is seated
on a hill, at the foot of which flows
the rapid Aveiron ; thirty miles west
by south of Mende. (Rhodez, or
Rodez.)
296. Which is in the department
of the Loire, and is seated on the
river Loire, where it begins to be
navigable. ( Roanne .)
297* Which was built by Louis,
XIV. in 1664, six leagues from the
mouth of the river Charente, and
eight leagues south-east of Rochelle,
in the department of Lower Cha-
rente. 298. Whi ch has a noble arse-
nal, a rope-yard, a foundery for can-
non, and all other magazines neces-
sary for the construction and equip-
ment of ships of war. 299. Which
was taken by the British captain
Howe, in the Magnanime, in 1757,
after half an hour’s resistance.
[Rochefort.)
300. Of which the port is defended
by two towers, about seven hundred
toises distant from each other, and
by a chain which closes its entrance
during the night. 301. Which is re-
markable for the long resistance
made by the inhabitants, who had em-
braced the reformed religion, against
Louis XIII. 302. Which is situated
in the department of the Lower
Charente, eight leagues north-west
of Rochefort. {Rochelle.)
303. In which Joan of Arc, the
maid of Orleans, was burnt for a
sorceress. 304. In which the two
Corneilles and Fontenelle were born.
305. In which is a floating bridge,
built upon rafts, and paved, which
rises and falls with the flux and re-
flux of the Seine. 306. Which was
the capital of Normandy, as it now
is of the department of the Lower
Seine. [Rouen.)
307* Which is seated on an island
united to the main land by a cause-
way, near the Bay of Cancale, in the
department of the Ille and Vilaine.
308. Which, in time of war, is a
favourite port for privateers, who
thence molest the British traders.
309. W hich, in the year 1623, was
bombarded by the English, under the
celebrated Capt. Benbow. (aSV. Malo.)
310. In which is a grand amphi-
theatre, some aqueducts, and also a
triumphal arch on the bridge over the
Charente. 311. Which was the ca-
pital of Saintonge, and is now in the
department of the Lower Charente.
[Saintes.)
312. Which is in the department
of the Cher, near the river Allier,
in which the Calvinists, in 1573,
sustained a memorable siege by the
troops of Charles IX. and were re-
duced to the necessity of eating skins,
parchment, and all kinds of loath-
some food, before they would sur-
render. (Sancerre.)
313. Which is in the department
of the Mayenne and Loire, and has a
bridge over the Loire, consisting of
twelve elliptical arches, each sixty
feet in diameter. 314. Which was the
birth-place of the celebrated Madame
Dacier. ( Saumur .)
315. Which is seated on the Meuse,
in the department of the Ardennes,
and is one of the most important keys
of France. 316. Which was the
birth-blace of the famous Marshal
Turenne. ( Sedan.)


317. Which is in the department
of Yonne, at the confluence of the
Vanne and the Yonne. [Sens-sur
Yonne.)
318. Which was formerly an im-
perial town, but was taken by Louis
XIV. in 1697. 319. Of which the
name signifies “ the town of the
street,” because it is situated on the
highroad from France to Germany.
320. In which is a beautiful Gothic
cathedral, with a steeple in the form
of a pyramid 115 feet in height, and
a clock that shews the motions of the
constellations, the revolutions of the
sun and moon, the days of the week,
the hours, &c. 321. Which is seated
on the river 111, about a mile from
the Rhine. 322. Which was the ca-
pital of Alsace, as it now is of the
department of the Lower Rhine.
[Strasburgh.)
323. Which is a celebrated sea-
port in the Mediterranean, in the
department of the Mar, and has two
commodious harbours, defended by
several forts. 324. Which was sur-
rendered by the inhabitants to the
British, in September, 1793, who eva-
cuated it in the month of December
following, after setting fire to the
town and shipping. [Toulon.)
325. Which was the capital of the
Tectosages, then a Roman colony,
and successively the capital of the
Visigoths and of the Kings of Aqui-
taine. 326. Which communicates
with the ocean on one side by the
river Garonne, and with the Medi-
terranean on the other, by the canal
of Languedoc. 327- Which was the
capital of Languedoc, and is now the
capital of the department of Upper
Garonne. (Tou louse.)
328. Which has, over the Loire,
one of the most beautiful bridges in
Europe, composed of fifteen elliptical
arches, each of which is seventy-five
feet in diameter. 329. Which was
the capital of Touraine, as it now is
of the department of the Indre and
Loire. [Tours.)
330. Which has a castle, in which
the ancient Counts of Champagne
resided, and is seated on the river
Seine. 331. Which was the capital
of Champagne, as it now is of the
department of the Aube. [Troyes.)
332. Which was taken from the
Spaniards by Louis XIV. in 1677*
and is situated in the department of
the North, on the Scheldt, which
runs through it in several branches,
and there becomes navigable. 333.
Which was taken, after a siege of
two months, by the Austrians and
British, commanded by the Duke of
York, on the 26th July, 1793, but
given up again thirteen months after,
334. Which is celebrated for its ma-
nufacture of beautiful lace. (Valen-
ciennes.)
335. Which is seated on the Meuse,
which runs through it, in the depart-
ment of the Meuse; and was the
birth-place of the famous engineer
Marshal de Vauban. [Verdun.)
336. Which is the chief town of a
department where the cavern of
Leuge is situated, which contains a
natural and inexhaustible ice-house
with a small stream running through
it, which is frozen in summer, but
thaws in winter. When a mist appears
in this cavern, it is a certain presage
of rain for the next day, and the
country people are accustomed to
consult this natural barometer. [Ve-
soul.)
337- In which, in 1311, was held
a celebrated council, in presence of
Pope Clement V. Philip the Fair,
King of France, Edward 11. King of
England, and James 11. King of
Arragon, for the purpose of abolish-
ing the order of the Knights Tem-
plars. 338. Which was built by a
Roman colony, and was taken by the
Burgundians in the fifth century,
when it became the residence of their
kings. 339. Which, in the ninth cen-
tury, was the capital of the kingdom
of Provence, was afterwards the chief
place of a province named after it,
and is now in the department of the
Isere. [Vienne.)
340. Which is situated in the
country formerly called Roussillon,
near a mountain with a singular ca-
vern, ascended by five hundred steps,
with icicles at certain intervals hang-
ing from the roof. [Ville-Franche.)
Kame tl)c in (Sermang,
341. Which Charlemagne selected
for the seat of his government, and
was the place of his interment. 342.
In which were formerly kept Charle-
magne’s sword and belt, and a copy of
the New Testament used at the coro-
nation of the Western Emperors.
[Aix-la-Chapelle.)
343. Which was burnt by the
Swedes in 1712, but has been beau-
tifully rebuilt, and is situated on the
Elbe, in the vicinity of Hamburgh,
being the staple of the Danish East-
India Company. [Altona.)
344. Which is in the ancient circle
of Franconia, and was the birth-place
of John Philip Baratier, an extraor-
dinary child, who at six years of age,
is said to have been master of Greek,
Latin, Hebrew, German, and French,
was an author at eleven, and died in
the nineteenth year of his age, in
1740, with the reputation of an ac-
complished scholar. [Anspach.)
345. In which the Lutherans, in
1530, published their new articles
of faith, and where, in 1555, the re-
ligious pacification took place, by
which toleration was established in
the Empire. [Augsburgh.)
346. Which stands at the confluence
of the Maine and Rednitz, in the
kingdom of Bavaria, north of Nu-
remberg. [Bamberg.)
347- Which is the capital of Bran-
denburgh, seated on the Spree, and
the usual residence of the King of
Prussia. [Berlin.)
348. Which gives its name to a
Duchy belonging to the King of
Prussia, and is divided into the New
and Old Town by the river Havel,
which separates the fort from both ;
twenty-six miles West of Berlin.
[Brandenburgh.)
349. Which is the capital of a
Duchy of the same name, seated
on the Weser, in the kingdom of
Hanover. [Bremen.)
350. Which is the capital of Sile-
sia, at the confluence of the Oder and
Ohlau, and subject to the King of
Prussia. [Breslau.)
351. Which is the capital of Lower
Hesse, and is divided by the river
Fulda into the Old and New Towns,
which are united by means of a
bridge. [Casset.)
352. Which is situated on the de-
clivity of a hill, and derives its name
from the Latin wordclivus, which sig-
nifies the declivity of a hill. ( Cleves.)
353. Which was formerly called
Colonia Agrippa, the metropolis of
Germania Secunda, and is on the
west bank of the Rhine, [Cologne.)
354. In which, in a celebrated
council, held from 1414 to 1418, the
doctrines of Wickliffe, the first re-
former in religion, were condemned
as heretical, and his disciples, John
Huss and Jerome of Prague, were
condemned tobe burned alive. (Con-
stance.)
355. Which was the birth-place of
Gaspard Barthius, who, in 1559,
translated the Psalms of David into
every kind of Latin verse, and pub-
lished some other poems in his own
language. {Custrin.)
356. Which is seated on the west-
;m bank of the river Vistula, near
:he Gulf of Rugil, in Western Prus-
sia, and was formerly a free Han-
seatic town, under the protection of
Poland, but is now subject to Prus-
sia. ( Dantzick.)
357- Which is the capital of a
Duchy, to which it gives name, and
is seated on the river Erbach. [Deux
Fonts.)
358. Which is seated on the north
side of the Danube, in Bavaria, on
the frontiers of Suabia ; near which
the Duke of Marlborough forced a
strong post in the French and Bava-
rian entrenchments. {Donauwert.)
359. Which is the capital of the
county of East Friesland, at the
mouth of the River Ems, in the king-
dom of Hanover, ( Emden .)
360. In which two great fairs are
annually held. 361. In which the
Western Emperors were elected and
crowned. {Francfort-on-the-Maine.)
362. Which is on the Oder, in the
middle marche of Brandenburgh,
and has a communication with the
Spree and Havel by canals. 363.
Which was formerly Imperial, but is
now subject to the King of Prussia.
[Francfort-on-the- Oder.)
364. Which is in the vicinity of Al-
ton a, seated on the river Elbe, which
runs through its streets in various ca-
nals. 365. Which was a free, and
Imperial city , the great emporium for
German commerce, and is now under
the protection of the kingdom of Ha-
nover. [Hamburgh.)
366. Which is seated on the river
Leina, which divides it into two parts,
and is the capital of the King of
Great Britain’s German dominions.
[Hanover.)
367- Which stands on the river
Neckar, in the grand duchy of Baden,
twelve miles north-east of Spire, and
is equally celebrated for its university
as for a cask or tun of extraordinary
dimensions. [Heidelburg.)
368. Which is seated on the Neckar,
in the kingdom of Wiirtemburg, and
yields great profits to its inhabitants
from its baths, whence the town has
its name, which signifies the foun-
tain of health. [Heilbron.)
369. Which is seated on the Da-
nube, and is the strongest town in
Bavaria, though it surrendered to the
Duke of Marlborough, after the bat-
tle of Hocksted, or Blenheim, in 1704,
and was taken by the Austrians in
1743, who held it till 1745. [ln-
goldstadt.)
370. Which is seated on the river
Roer, and is the capital of a duchy
of the same name. {Juliers.)
371- In which are held two cele-
brated annual fairs, principally for
books. 372. In which the illustrious
Leibnitz was born. [Leipsick.)
373. Which is the capital of a
bishopric of the same name, in West-
phalia, and is seated on the river
Meuse, which is navigable up to it.
[Liege.)
374. Which is situated on a moun-
tain, near the river Weze, to the south
of Aix-la-Chapelle, and to the south-
east of Liege, and is the capital of an
ancient Duchy of the same name.
375. Of which the air is so wholesome,
that the inhabitants scarcely know any
disease besides old age. {Limburgh.)
376. Which is the capital of Upper
Austria, and is seated at the con-
fluence of the Danube and Traen.
{Lintz.)
377- Which was formerly the head
of the Hanse Towns, and is situate
on the river Trave, forty miles north
east from Hamburgh. 378. Which
was the birth-place of Henry Hei-
necken, a child celebrated for his
extraordinary mental endowments,
who began to speak, it is said, at ten
months old; knew Geography, and
ancient and modern History, spoke
Latin and French with facility, and
possessed an excellent judgment, at
two years and a half; and died on
the 27th of June, 1725, aged four
years and some months. ( Liibeck .)
379. Which is the capital of a Mar-
quisate, situated to the north of Bo-
hemia Proper, on the river Spree, to
the south-west of Berlin. 380 . Which
is the capital of Lusatia. ( [Liiben .)
381. In which Luther pursued his
studies, and the Burgomaster Otho
de Guerick invented the pneumatick
machine, in 1654. 302. Which con-
tains, in the church of St. Maurice,
an organ ornamented with little
wooden figures, which move and
touch the keys like living organists.
( Mag deb urgh .)
383. Which is one of the most
beautiful cities in the ancient pala-
tinate of the Rhine, on the borders of
the grand duchy of Baden, and al-
most surrounded by the Neckar
and the Rhine. ( Manheim )
384. In which, in 975, Archbishop
Wiligisius, the son of a wheelwright,
took a wheel for the arms of the Prin-
cipality, in order to remind him of
his birth. 385. Of which the inha-
bitants maintain that John Guttem-
berg, a German by birth, and soldier
by profession, invented the art of
printing there, in 1440. 386. In
which Constantine Angli sen, a Fran-
ciscan monk and German chemist,
is said to have invented gunpowder.
( Mayence, or Mentz.)
387* Which is seated on the Weser,
in Westphalia, near which Prince
Ferdinand of Brunswick totally de-
feated the French Marshal Contades,
in 1759. ( Minden.)
388. In which resides a king, who
has the largest and most magnificent
palace in all Germany, containing
eleven towers, twenty grand saloons,
nineteen galleries, two thousand six
hundred and sixty large windows, six
chapels, sixteen large kitchens,twelve
large cellars, forty vast apartments
splendidly ornamented and furnished,
and galleries which, by means of
arcades across the streets and houses,
form a communication between the
palace and the principal churches.
389. Which is the capital of Bavaria,
situate on the river Iser. ( Munich .)
390. Which is the capital of a
bishopric of the same name, and of
all Westphalia, and is seated on the
river Aa. 391. In which the famous
treaty of Westphalia was concluded,
in 1648, which put an end to the
religious wars of thirty years’ conti-
nuance. {Mimster.)
392. In which were kept the im-
perial ornaments of Charlemagne,
namely, the crown, the globe, the
sceptre, the dalmatick vest, the sur-
plice of gold, and the mantle used at
the coronation of the Western Em-
perors. 393. Which has a consider-
able manufacture of toys, in ivory,
wood, and metal. 394. Which has
six stone bridges, besides many others
of wood, over the Pegnitz, on which
it stands. {Nuremberg.)
395. Which is in Silesia, at the
source of a river of the same name,
sixteen miles south-west of Troppau,
on the border of Moravia. ( Oderberg.)
396. Which is seated on the river
Hunta, in a Duchy of the same name
in Westphalia, and from the ancient
Counts of which are descended the
families of the King of Denmark
and Duke of Holstein. {Oldenburgh.)
397. Which is the capital of a
bishopric of the same name, on the
Danube, at the confluence of the
rivers Inn and Iltz, in Bavaria; and
has a cathedral, which is thought tobe
the finest in all Germany. ( Passau. )
398. Which is situated in a little


island formed by the rivers Spree and
Havel, and contains a country seat
of the King of Prussia. {Potsdam.)
399. Which has a most beautiful
stone bridge over the Danube. 400.
In which the General Diets of the Em-
pire were formerly held. {Ratisbon.)
401. Of which the Metropolitan
Church is one of the most beautiful
edifices in Germany, being built upon
the model of St. Peter’s at Rome,
with the same proportions observed
throughout it. {Saltzburgh.)
402. Which is situated in the
country formerly called Upper Saxo-
ny, and contains mines so rich, that,
in 1477, under the reign of the Em-
peror Frederick HI. ablock of silver,
of extraordinary size, was found in
them. (The Duke Albert wished
to see this remarkable block, and
descending into the mine for that
purpose, caused some food to be
placed upon it, observing to those
about him :—■“ The Emperor Frede-
rick is a powerful Prince, but you
must confess that my table is far
richer than his.”) {Shenesberg.)
403. Which is the capital of a
bishoprick of the same name, seated
on the Rhine, seven miles north of
Philipsburgh, and twelve south-west
of Heidelberg. 404. Which was
founded before the Christian aera,
and receives its name from the small
river Spirbach, which runs into the
Rhine, about 500 paces below it.
{Spire.)
405. To which in Pomerania,
Charles XII. retired when he left
Turkey. {Stralsund.)
406. Which is the capital of a ter-
ritory of the same name in Lower
Bavaria, seated on the Danube,
south-east of Ratisbon, and north-
east of Munich. {Straubing.)
407- Which is seated near the
river Neckar, in Suabia, and is the
capital of the kingdom of Wiirtem-
burg. {Stuttgard.)
408. In which was held the last
General Council, formed in 1543,
and dissolved in 1563, against the
Lutherans. {Trente.)
409- Which is seated on the Mo-
selle, and is the capital of an arch-
bishopric of the same name, whose
Archbishop was an Elector, with the
title of Arch-chancellor of the Em-
pire of the Gauls, and gave the first
vote at the election of the Emperor.
{Treves.)
410. W hich is the second town in
the kingdom of Wiirtemburg, and is
seated on the river Nekar, south-
west of Stuttgard: [Tubingen.)
411. Which is seated on the Da-
nube, and is the capital of Austria.
( Vienna.)
412. Which is in the kingdom of
Wiirtemburgh, on a branch of the
Danube, where it receives the river
Iller. ( Ulm.)
413. Which is in the north part of
the duchy of Mecklenburgh, on a
bay of the Baltic, with a good har-
bour, thirty-six miles East of Lubec.
414. Which was formerly a Hanse
Town, and possessed the privilege
of coining. {Wismar.)
415. In which Luther 4 began to
preach his reformation in 1517; and
where he was buried in the chapel
of the castle. 416. W hich is situate
on the right bank of the Elbe, and
has a celebrated university. 417-
Which formerly belonged to Saxony,
but is now subject to Prussia. ( Wit-
temberg.)
418. Which is seated on the west
bank of the Rhine, north-west of
Manheim, and is the capital of a
bishopric of the same name. 419.
Where, in the campaign of 1743,
King George 11. took up his quar-
ters after the battle of Dettingen.
420. Which is famous for a Diet held
there in 1521, at which Luther as-
sisted in person. ( Worms.)
421. Which is the capital of a
county of the same name, and is
seated at the confluence of the rivers
Turbur and Maine. { Wurtheim .)
422. In which the canons oblige
a noviciate to submit to the humi-
liating ceremony of running the
gantelope, by passing between them
in ranks, while each gives him a
stripe on the shoulder with a cane;
a ceremony intended to deter Princes
from becoming candidates. ([Wurtz-
burgh.)
Name B)e ®obm tn
423. Which was the capital of the
country before Warsaw, and in which
its ancient Dukes and Kings were
elected and crowed. ( Cracow.)
424. Which is the most ancient
town of Poland, and received its
name, which signifies “ a nest,” about
550, in consequence of DukeLesko I.
finding a nest of eagles on the spot
where he proposed laying the foun-
dations of the city. ( Gnesen , or
Gnesna,)
425. Which is seated on the Nie-
men, and is the principal town,though
not the capital, of Lithuania, where
every third General Diet was held.
[Grodno.')
426. Which stands on the Warta,
and was the capital of a palatinate of
the same name. 427- Which w r as
taken by Charles XII. King of
Sweden, in 1703; and in 1773 be-
came subject to the King of Prussia.
[Posen.)
428. Which stands on the river
Warta, and is the capital of a pala-
tinate of the same name, 105 miles
north of Cracow. [Siradia.)
429. Which is the most ancient
town of Poland, the depository of the
archives of the country, and the birth-
place of Copernicus. [Thorn.)
430. W hich is the capital of Po-
land, and stands on the Vistula.
[Warsaw.)
431. Which contains in the cathe-
dral church of St. Stanislaus, the
tomb of St. Casimir, Prince of Poland;
in which church also King Sigismund
111. placed a silver tomb, weighing
three thousand pounds, a silver altar,
and a bell so heavy, that the force of
twenty-four men is required to ring
it. (Wilna.)
Name ll)e tHofcm in tije i&tngtiem
of tije Netherlands,
432. Which derives its name from
the river Amstel and the word dam or
dyke. [Amsterdam.)
433. Which was taken by the Prince
of Parma in 1585, retaken by the
French in 1700, and ceded to the
Duke of Marlborough in 1706, after
the battle of Ramillies. [Antwerp.)
434. Which derives its name from
its situation on the river Zoom, which
communicates with the Scheldt by
a canal. 435. Which sustained a
memorable siege of two months, in
1746, by the French, under Count
Lowendahl, who took it by storm on
the 16th of September, although it
had been deemed impregnable. {Ber-
gen-op-zoom.)
436. Which is a fortified place,
seated on the river Merk, where King
Charles 11. was resident when invited
to return to England. {Breda.)
437- Which has canals to Ghent,
Ostend, Sluys, Nieuport, Fumes,
Ypres, and Dunkirk, and where the
Order of the Golden Fleece was in-
stituted, in 1430, by Philip the Good,
Duke of Burgundy; {Bruges.)
438. Which is the most beautiful
in the Netherlands, and possesses,
among other things, a magnificent
promenade called “ the Park.” [Brus-
sels.)
439. Which was fortified andraised
to the rank of a city by the Spaniards,
in 1666, and is seated on the Sambre,
eighteen miles west of Namur.
[Charleroy.)
440. Which is seated on the river
Yssel, and is the capital of the
Province of Overyssel. 441. Which
is supposed to have had its name
from Davon, a rich man, the friend
of St. Livin, the apostle of the
country, who first converted the
people to Christianity. [Deventer.)
442. Which is seated near the river
Maese, twelve miles south of Namur,
in the bishopric of Liege, with quar-
ries of marble and other stone, and
some mines of iron ore in its neigh-
bourhood. [Dinant.)
443. Which was the birth-place of
the Emperor Charles V. and contains
twenty-six islands and many canals,
over which about three hundred
bridges are constructed. [Ghent.)
444. W hich is situated upon the
river Dunged, and near lake Bies-
bosch, formed in 1421, by an inun-
dation of the sea, by which seventy-
two villages were overwhelmed.
( Gertruydenherg.)
445. Which is seated on the rivers
Hunes and Aa, and is the capital of
a province situated between the two
Frieslands, with a commodious har-
bour lined with large stones, three
leagues from the sea, entered by
means of a canal. [Groningen.)
446. W hich, though one of the
handsomest cities of Europe, is called
a village. 447- In which the King
of the Netherlands and many
persons of rank reside. ( The
Hague.)
448. Which is the capital of Fries-
land, and was the usual residence of
the Stadtholder, before his removal
to the Hague. [Lewarden.)
449. Which, next to Amsterdam,
is the largest city in the province
of Holland, and is seated near the
ancient bed of the Rhine, which now
looks like a canal. 450. Which sus-
tained a memorable siege by the
Spaniards in 1574, during which the
inhabitants experienced most horrible
miseries from famine and pestilence.
451. Which was the birth-place of
John Bucold, a tailor, the chief of
the sect of Anabaptists. [Leyden.)
452. Which is seated on the river
Dyle, twelve miles north-east of
Brussels. 453. Which has a cele-
brated university, and was long the
residence of the Dukes of Brabant.
454. Which was once inhabited by
vast numbers of clothiers and wea-
vers, who being banished for rebel-
lion in 1382, came over to England,
where they were well received, and
were the founders of the English
clothing trade. [Louvain.)
455. Which is situated to the south-
west of Treves, and west of Mentz,
and is one of the strongest places in
Europe. 456. Which was taken by
the French in 1684, ceded to the
House of Austria by the treaty of
Utrecht, re-taken by the French in
1795, and finally ceded to the Ne-
therlands in 1815. [Luxemburgh.)
457* Of which the name is formed
from the Flemish tricht, “ a passage
or crossing,” and Maes, the Dutch
name for the Meuse; that is to say,
“ the passage of the Meuse.” [Maas-
tricht.)
458. Which is seated on the Der-
mer, twelve miles north of Brussels,
and is celebrated for, its lace. 459.
Which was nearly destroyed, in 1546,
by the explosion of a powder maga-
zine, struck by lightning. [Malines,
or Mechlin.)
460. Which is seated on the island
of Walcheren, and has a communi-
cation with the German Sea, by a
canal, capable of receiving the largest
vessels; seventy-two miles south-
west of Amsterdam. 461. Which is
the capital of the province of Zee-
land. { Middlehourg .)
462. Which is seven miles north
by west of the village of Malpla-
quet, famous for a battle gained over
the French by the Duke of Marlbo-
rough, in 1709. 463. Which is three
miles from Jammapes, where the
French obtained a celebrated victory
over the Austrians, in November,
1792. 464. Which is the capital of
Hainault. [Mons.)
465. Which was taken, in 1692,
by Louis XIV. in person, after a
siege of six and was recovered
by King William 111. in 1695.
[Namur.)
466. At which the Spanish army,
commanded by the Archduke Albert,
was defeated, in 1600, by the army
of the States-General of Holland,
under Prince Maurice. {Nieuport.)
467- Which is noted for the peace
concluded there in 1679. 468.
Which is seated on the river Waal,
between the Rhine and the Maese,
and is the capital of the province of
Guelderland. [Nimeguen.)
469. Which sustained a siege of
more than three years by the Spa-
niards, and only yielded to the Mar-
quis of Spinosa, in 1634, on very
honourable terms. 470. At which
the Mareschal d’Aumont, in 1650,
attempting to take the place by
stratagem, was himself made a pri-
soner. [Ostend.)
471. Which stands on the Scheldt,
twelve miles south of Ghent, with a
considerable fort. 472. Which was
besieged, inl7oß, by the French, un-
der the Due de Vendome, who was
obliged to raise the siege by the Duke
of Marlborough. [Oudenarde.)
473. Which takes its name from
a little stream, called Rotter, and was
the birth-place of the celebrated
Erasmus, whose statue in bronze is
placed in the middle of the town.
[Rotterdam.)
474. Which was founded six hun-
dred years before the Christian sera,
and was the capital of the ancient
Nervii. 475. Which is divided into
two parts by the Scheldt, and has
alternately belonged to Spain, France,
Austria, and the States-General of
the United Netherlands, and was
confirmed to the kingdom of the
latter by the peace of Paris, 1815.
(Tour nay.)
476. Which is celebrated for the
treaty of union signed there in 1579,
between the Seven United Provinces,
and by a treaty of peace in 1713,
between France and the Grand Allies
of Europe. 477- Which has a beau-
tiful mall without the town, respected
by Louis XIV. when he conquered
the place in 1672, on which occasion
he would not suffer his troops to
destroy or damage a single tree.
[Utrecht.)
Name the in JS&ntierlatih,
478. Which was the birth-place
of William Tell, the asserter and
founder of Swiss liberty, who, with
an arrow dexterously struck an apple
from his son’s head, where ithadbeen
placed for that purpose by Gessler,
the Austrian Governor, because he
had refused to bow to the tyrant’s
hat, and who afterwards slew the
Governor himself. [Altorff.]
479. Which derives its name from
the Latin ahhatis cella, or “ residence
of the Abbot,” because the Abbot,
who was the proprietor, lived there.
[Appenzel.)
480. Which is divided into two
parts by the Rhine, and is said to be
the place where the art of making
paper was invented. [Basle.)
481. Of which the name signifies
Bear, in the language of the country.


which it received in consequence of
its founder having killed one of those
animals when he began the founda-
tions. {Bemie.)
482. Which is seated on a lake
of the same name, at the foot of
Mount Jura. {Bienne.)
483. Which is the capital of the
canton of the Grisons, and is seated
at the foot of the Alps, half a mile
from the Rhine, and to the South of
Constance. {Coire, or Chur.)
484. Which is a league distant
from a very elevated hermitage, hewn
in a rock, by one man and his ser-
vant, in the space of five-and-twenty
years. 485. Which contains a beau-
tiful convent, a church, and two
legislative chambers. {Friburgh.)
486. In which William Farel and
Peter Viret first preached the re-
formed religion, afterwards establish-
ed by John Calvin. {Geneva.)
487- Which is the capital of a
canton of the same name, seated on
the river Linth. 488. In which the
popular assemblies are held in the
open air, in imitation of the ancient
Gauls and Germans. {Claris.)
489. In which are preserved, in
the Town House, the bones of a
pretended giant, said to have been
nineteen feet high. 490. Which
takes its name from a tower, situated
at the place where the Reuss issues
from a lake, and which anciently
served for a watch-tower. {Lucerne.)
491. Which is a handsome town,
the capital of a canton, formerly a
principality, of the same name, seated
on a lake also of the same name,
and partly on the declivity of Mount
Jura. {Neufchdtel.)
492. Which is a considerable town,
to the north-east of Zurich, and ca-
pital of a canton of the same name;
with a rich and celebrated abbey,
whose Abbot was a titular Prince of
the German Empire. {St. Gall.)
493. Which is half a league dis-
tant from the spot where the Rhine,
falling over soine rocks, forms a
tremendous cataract, the sound of
which may be heard at the distance
of many leagues. {Schaffhausen.)
494. Which is the capital of a can-
ton that gives name to the whole
republic, andis seated on the east side
of the Lake of Lucerne. [Schweitz.)
495. In which exist a species of
singular men called Cretins, deaf,
dumb, silly, and almost insensible to
blows, and having goitres, or swell-
ings of the throat, which hang down
upon their breast. {Sion, or Sotten,
in the country of the Valais.)
496. Which is seated on the Aar,
which there expands into a noble
river, and is the capital of a canton
of the same name. 497- Which was
one of the Helvetian towns, burned
in the time of Julius Caesar, and was
afterwards frequently the residence
of the Burgundian Kings. 498.
Of which the inhabitants displayed
a noble instance of generosity in the
year 1318, when they were besieged
by the Duke of Austria, by hastening
to the assistance of the hostile troops,
who had been precipitated from the
bridge into the river by a sudden
swell of the flood. {Soleure, or
Solothurne.)
499. Which is the capital of the
canton of Underwalden, and stands
near the lake of Lucerne, to the
south of Zurich. {Stantz.)
500. Which is the capital of a
canton of the same name, and is
seated at the northern extremity of
a lake to which it gives name, to the
north-east of Lucerne, and south-
east of Basle. {Zug.)
501. Which was the first to sepa-
rate itself from the Roman Church,
in 1524, under the direction of Zuin-
glius, and was the birth-place of
Gesner. 502. In which is a foun-
tain, in a large square, that throws
its waters to the height of about a
hundred and fifteen feet. ( Zurich.)
iHams tt)c ®ofon of 13ucal :|9rugSta,
503. Which contains a palace, with
a saloon, 274 feet long and fifty-four
broad, said to be unsupported by
pillars. ( Kcenigsberg.),
“Name lljc BTobm’of Dol)cm(a,
504. Which was taken, in 1741; by
the King of Prussia, who besieged
it again in 1758, and is seated on the
river Morava, to the north by east
of Vienna. 505. Which is the ca-
pital of the marquisate of Moravia.
( Olmutz.)
506. Which is the capital of the
country, and contains, in the church
of St. James, a grand altar to the
Virgin, ornamented with two beau-
tiful columns and a frame of rock
crystal. {Prague.)
507- Qf which the German name
signifies “ Capuchin Mountain,” from
the following circumstance: —A cer-
tain monk, in 1237; having discover-
ed a vein of silver on the spot where
the town now stands, left his gown
there, in order that he might recog-
nize the place when he returned.
{Kuttenberg, or Kutna Hora.)
Kame tl)c tEofon of i^ungarg,
508. Which was formerly the ca-
pital of that country, and contains
baths, of which the waters are so hot
that an egg may be cooked in them
in a short time. ( Buda , or Offen.)
509. Which is seated on the river
Caben, and is the capital of Transyl-
vania. {Hermanstadt.)
510. Which is one of the strongest
frontier places the House of Austria
has against the Turks, and is seated
on the river Danube, between the
Drave and the Save. 511. Which is
the capital of Sclavonia, and is re-
markable for the great victory ob-
tained near it by Prince Eugene, over
the Turks, in 1716. {Peterwardein.)
512. Which is the capital of the
country north of the Danube. 513.
At which there is a very strong cas-
tle, approached by an ascent of one
hundred and fifty steps, each step
being a foot in height; and in the
middle of which castle is a very
deep well, sunk in the rock, and
supplied with water from the Danube.
[Presburgh, or Posen.)
Kairu tig of Portugal,
514. Which is seated on the river
Cavedo, and is the capital of the
province of Entre-Minho-e-Douro.
{Braga.)
515. Which is seated on the river
Fervantja, and the capital of a duchy
of the same name, in the province of
Tra-los-Montes. [Braganza.)
516. Which was built by the
Romans, about 300 years before the
Christian eera; stands on a mountain
by the side of the river Mondego,and
is the capital of Beira. [Coimbra.)
517- Which possesses a reservoir
capable of containing water sufficient
to supply all the town for the space
of six months, which water is con-
veyed to the cistern by a magnificent
aqueduct a league in length, sup-
ported in some places by four or five
rows of arches constructed one above
the other. ( Elvas.)
518. Which is said to have been
built by the Phoenicians, and walled
round by Sertorius, who supplied
the town with water by means of a
beautiful aqueduct. 519. Which is
the capital of Alentejo. [Evora, or
Elvora.)
520. Which is built on seven large
hills, two leagues in length, at the
mouth of the Tagus. 521. Which
was almost totally destroyed by an
earthquake on the Ist of November,
-1755, and is the capital of Portugal.
{Lisbon.)
522. Which is seated on the decli-
vity of a mountain near the mouth of
the river Douro, in the province of
Entre-Douro-e-Minho, and is noted
for its strong wines, great quantities
of which are annually exported to
England. 523. Which, next to Lis-
bon, is the richest, most populous,
and most commercial town in Portu-
gal, and has a harbour capable of
containing a large fleet. {Ojjorto.)
524. In which Alfonso I. was de-
clared King by his troops, after a vic-
tory he had gained over five Moorish
Kings, in 1130; in consequence of
which victory five blue escutcheons
in the form of a cross were added to
the arms of Portugal. {Ourique.)
525. From which the Moors were
driven, in 1447; by Alfonso Hen-
riques of Portugal. 526. Of which
the soil is so fertile, that the harvest
commences two months after the
seed is sown. {Santaren.)
527- Which is situated at the
mouth of the river Gilaon, between
Cape St. Vincent and the Straits of
Gibraltar, and is the capital of the
kingdom of Algarve. {Tavira.)
Name tljc ®ofon of J&patn,
528. Which contains a beautiful
bridge over the Tagus, built by the
Emperor Trajan. 529. Which was
the chief residence of an order of
Knights. {Alcantara.)
530. At which, in Estramadura,
John I. King of Portugal, in 1358,
gained a victory, which secured the
possession of his throne. {Alpi-
borata.)
531. Which contains a superb
bridge over the Guadiana, built by
the Romans; and near which the Por-
tuguese were defeated in 1661, by
Don John of Austria. 532. Which
was taken by storm by the British,
under Lord Wellington, from the
French, in 1812. {Badajos.)
533. Which is a seaport on the
Mediterranean, the capital of Cata-
lonia, and noted for its works in
glass, knives, and blankets. 534.
Which was taken by the Earl of
Peterborough, in 1705, and re-taken
by the French and Spaniards, in
1714. {Barcelona.)
535. Which is a much frequented
seaport, near the mouth of the river
Ybai9abal, and is the capital of Bis-
cay. 536. Which has a peculiar law
againstingratitude.(.B«76flo or Vilvao.)
537- Which is seated partly on a
mountain and partly on the river
Aranzon, and is the capital of Old
Castille. {Burgos.)
538. Which is seated on a little
island, and communicates with An-
dalusia by a bridge. 539. Which
was founded by the Phoenicians, and
was called Gades by the Romans.
{Cadiz.)
540. Which is in New Castille,
near the Guadiana, and the chief
place of a military order of Knights,
instituted by Sancho 11. King of
Castille, in 1158. {Calatrava.)
541. Which was built by the Car-
thaginian general Asdrubal, and has
the best port in Spain. {Carthagena.)
542. Which is the capital of Gali-
cia, where it is pretended the body of
St. James was buried. 543. From
which the Order of St. James, or St.
Yago, had its origin. {Compostella.)
544. Which is seated on the Gua-
dalquivir, in Andalusia, and was the
birth-place of three great men, the
two Senecas and Lucan. 545. In
which the Moors, in the twelfth cen-
tury, had an University, rendered il-
lustrious by Averroes and other
learned Arabs having studied in it.
{Cordova.)
546. Which was anciently called
Brigantium, and is situate to the West
of Gallicia, at the bottom of a bay, in
the form of a crescent, whence its mo-
dern name. 547. In the citadel of which
is the tomb of Sir John Moore, who
was slain in battle by the French on
the 15th January, 1809. [Corunna.)
548. In which, though considered
as a village, Philip 11. in 1563, in
commemoration of the victory he had
gained over the French at St. Quen-
tin, built a convent, in the form of a
gridiron, containing eleven hundred
and forty windows, seventeen clois-
ters, twenty two courts, upwards of
eight hundred pillars, a prodigious
number of halls and cabinets, and
fourteen hundred doors, and which
occupied twenty-two years in its
construction, at an expense of six
millions of ducats. {Escurial.)
549. At which the Moors, in 1134,
gained a memorable victory over
Alfonso VII. King of Arragon, who
lost his life in the conflict. {Fraga.)
550. At which the ancients placed
the European column of Hercules,
called Calpe, opposite to that of Abyla,
in Africa. 551. Which was taken
by the English in 1704, and is still
retained by them. 552. Which sus-
tained a memorable siege by the Spa-
niards in 1782, when it was bravely
defended by General Eliot, who de-
stroyed the enemy’s floating batteries
with red-hot shot. ( Gibraltar.)
553. Which is the capital of a pro-
vince of the same name, built on
four hills, and divided into four parts,
in one of which is the large church,
containing the tombs of Ferdinand
and Isabella, who took this place
from the Moors in 1492. {Granada.)
554. Which was the birth-place of
the celebrated navigator Sebastian
Cano, who embarked with Magellan
to sail round the world, returned
during the reign of Charles V. and
died in 1528. [Guipuscoa.)
555. Which was built by the Ro-
mans under the Emperor Galba, and
was the residence of the first Christian
King, who reigned in Spain. {Leon.)
556. Which is seated on the river
Manzanares, in New Castille, and
has been the capital of Spain from
the time of the Emperor Charles V.
{Madrid.)
557- Which is a sea-port of Gra-
nada, and much frequented by the
English and Dutch for the fruit and
o '
wine which bears its name. [Malaga.)
558. Which stands on the Guadi-
ana, east of Badajos, in Spanish Es-
tramadura, and was known to the
Romans and Goths, before the Chris-
tian aera, by the name of Augusta
Eremita. [Merida.)
559. Which stands on a river of
the same name, in Valencia, on the
site of the ancient Saguntum, cele-
brated for its attachment to the Ro-
mans, and for having been the cause
of the second Punic War. 560.
Which was taken by Hannibal after
eight months’ siege, when the inha-
bitants, rather than fall into the
hands of the enemy, set fire to their
houses, and perished in the flames.
{Morviedro.)
561. Which contains a cathedral,
the spire of which has a staircase so
constructed that beasts of burden
may proceed to the top of it. {Mur-
cia.)
562. Which is seated at the con-
fluence of the Ove and Deva, which
united formed the Asta, and is the
capital of Asturias. [Oviedo.)
563. Which derives its name from
Pompey, the Roman general, who is
supposed to have built it while he
was in Navarre. [Pampeluna.)
564. Which is between Avila and
Segovia, and has a fortress, in which
Francis, Dauphin of France, and
Henry, his brother, children of Fran


cis I. were detained as hostages for
four years. (Pcdraga de la Sierra.)
sbo. Which is seated in the island
Z Mmorc f> f? d es lts nai T frora
Mago a Carthagmmn general, who
bU ™ ?* ( PortMahm .)
obb. Which is built on the Ebro,
and derives its name from the Latin
C cesarea Augusta. (Saragossa.)
ooj. OJ which the inhabitants
have the privilege of not uncovering
till after the King, when they have
business to transact with him in
person 568. Which was taken by
storm by the British, under the Mar-
quis o e mgton, in 1813. (St.
r?o a/ / • 7 • ,
ob J. Near which is a superb aque-
duct, built by the Emperor Trajan,
extending from mountain to moun-
tanv a> length of three thousand feet
and composed of one hundred and
seventy-seven arches, in two stories,
one above the other (Segovia.)
,)70. OJ which _ the cathedral is
the largest church m Spam. (Seville.)
a7l. Which is built on the rums of
the ancient Numantia, destroyed by
Scipio Africanus, 130 years B. C.
' Tm • t i , ,
°7?' has a royal castie, and
«a cathedral one of the largest and
considerable in Spam. 573.
Which is seated on the river Tajo in
New Castille, of which it was for-
mer y t e capita . ( o edo.)
. Which is in Catalonia, on the
river Ebro, about fifteen miles from
its mouth. (Tortosa.)
075. Which, being seated on the
Guadalquivir has five bridges over
that river. o7b. Which was taken
iLr 6 ii ° f . Peterborou g h , in
ITOo, and lost again two years after,
(y atentia.)
KTamr tlir S’ohm tit Tffaln
p mh jj r j * 7 n .
Which, from its great extent,
was called the second Rome, and in
whmh often re-
sided 578. Which was pillaged and
almost destroyed by Attala, King of
the Huns, m 432. (Aqmleia.)
079. In which the Latin poet Pa-
?» V 1 b £ rib nd - Virgd died *
(Brindui or Brundiismiti.)
580. Which is near the rums of
ancient Cannae, where Hannibal de-
feated the Roman Consuls, Paulus
, mill us and Perentius Varro, with
the slaughter of forty thousand Ro-
\Oamsa.)
•11* In which the soldiers of Han-
mbal, after the victory of Cannae,
gave themselves up to voluptuous
pleasures, and thereby enervating
themselves, lost the fruits of then*
victories. (Capua.)
082. Which is the capital of Mont-
ferrat, and is seated on the river Po.
[Casal.)
583. Which is the capital of Savoy,
[Chambery.)
584. Which is a free port, in the
patrimony of St. Peter, and where
the Pope s galleys are stationed. ( Ci-
rVdaWecchia.) >
Which, was the principal town
of Gallia Cenomani, in Gallia Trans-
padana, is seated on the P 6, and is
the capital of the Cremonese. (Cre-
mo7 ff) <
585. Which is the capital of a
duchy of the same name, on the river
P 6, in the dominions of the Pope;
and was the birth-place of Ariosto.
. t
587- Which, in the fifteenth cen-
tury, was kept in a state of agitation
by a violent faction, the members of
■ which were distinguished by the de-
nominations of n Jutes and Blacks.
[Florence.) >
Which derives its name from
-Eneas s nurse, who was buried there,
( corf ’l/77. . .
». 80. Which is built like an amphi-
theatre, on a gulf of the same name,
and was the capital of a republic of
the same name, now included in the
States of the King of Sardinia. 590.
Which was anciently the capital of
Liguria. [Genoa.)
591. Which is a free port in the
Mediterranean, in the Grand Duchy
of Tuscany, and where the great
wealth of the Jews has given rise to
a proverb, “ That a man may as well
beat the Grand Duke as a Jew/’
[Leghorn.)
592. Which contains the Santa
Casa, or Holy house of Nazareth, in
which, it is pretended, our Saviour
was brought up. [Loretto )
593. Which is the capital of a
small duchy of the same name,
between Florence, Modena, and Ge-
noa. [Lucca.)
594. Which forms one of the larg-
est fortresses in Europe, and is near
the birth-place of Virgil. {Mantua.)
595. Which the Emperor
rick Barbarossa rased to its founda-
tions and sowed with salt, in conse-
quence of the insult the inhabitants
had offered to his wife, by parading
her through the streets seated upon
an ass. [Milan.)
596. Which was a Roman Colony
of Cisalpine Gaul, where Marc An-
tony besieged Brutus, whom the Con-
suls Pansa and Hirtius delivered.
[Modena.)
597• Which is seated at the bot-
tom of a bay of the same name, in
the neighbourhood of Mount Vesu-
vius, and is the capital of the king-
dom of the two Sicilies. [Naples.)
598. Which was the birth-place of
Andrew Doria, the Genoese patriot,
and in which he died, in 1660, in
the ninety-fourth year of his age.
[Oneille, or Oneglia.)
599. Which contains a very deep
well, into which mules descend to
drink by one staircase, and ascend by
another. {Orvieto.)
600. Of which the Latin name sig-
nifies mouth, or entrance, because it
is situated at the mouth of the Tiber.
{Ostia.)
601. Which was the birth-place of
Livy, a celebrated Latin historian,
and contains a magnificent church
dedicated to St. Anthony. [Padua.)
602. Which was formerly called
Colonia Julia Augusta, and is now
the capital of a Duchy of the same
name. 603. Which has a theatre that
is considered as the most beautiful
in the world. [Parma.)
604. Which was formerly called
Ticinum, and is the town in which
Francis I. king of France was made
prisoner, in 1525, by the Emperor
Charles'V. [Pavia.)
605. Which is one of the twelve
ancient cities of Etruria, and is said
to have been founded by Arcadians,
260 years after the deluge. 606. In
which Lucius Antonius was besieged
by Augustus, and compelled to sur-
render. [Perugia.)
607- Which, like the former, was
founded by Arcadians, and contains
a famous cathedral and cemetery, of
which the three bronze doors of the
former, and the earth of the latter,
are said to have been brought from
Jerusalem. 608. Which has a remark-
able leaning tower, 15 feet out of the
perpendicular, built in 1174. ( Pisa.)
609. Which is the capital of a
duchy of the same name, seated at
the confluence of the rivers Trebia
and Po, and was the birth-place of
Pope Gregory X. and Cardinal Al-
beroni. [Piacenza.)
610. Which, in the time of the Ro-
mans, was seated on the Adriatic Sea,
although it is now more than a league
distant from it. 611. In which The-
odoric. King of the Goths, resided ;
and in which is his tomb, covered
with a single block of fine marble,
twenty-five feet in diameter and fif-
teen in thickness. {Ravenna.)
. 612. 1 71 which may still be seen a
pedestal of marble, forming part of
the tribune, from which Julius Caesar
harangued his soldiers, after having
passed the Rubicon on his way to
Rome. {Rimini.)
613. Which is washed by the Tiber,
and was built on seven hills, 752
years before Christ. 614. Which
was once the seat of the most exten-
sive empire ever known, and is now
the residence of the Pope. {Rome.)
615. In which flourished, a few
centuries ago, a school of medicine,
celebrated for its precepts regarding
health. {Salerno.)
616. Which is at the bottom of a
gulf of the same name, with Porto
Venere at its entrance, south-east of
Genoa. {Spezzia.)
617* Which contains the famous
fountain of Arethusa, the waters of
which flow into the river Alpheus.
618. Which was the birth-place of
the great Archimedes, who, by
means of machines unknown until he
invented them, and never discovered
afterwards, defended the town for
a long time against the Romans.
{Syracuse, in Sicily.)
619. Which has given its name to
the tarantula, a sort of spider, the
bite of which, it is said, can only be
cur edbymusicanddancing. [Ta rento.)
620. In which Julius Caesar, Caius
Cassius, Augustus, Maecenas, Catul-
lus, and Propertius, had their country
houses, and in Which Horace com-
posed a great part of his works. 621.
In which are a superb cascade, a
temple of the Sibyls, the house of
Este, and the Lake of Solfatara.
{Tivoli, the ancient Tibur.)
622. Which is remarkable for the
beauty of its edifices and the regu-
larity of its streets, and is provided
with a sluice, which distributes water
into all its quarters, for the purpose
of cleansing the streets. ( Turin.)
623. Which stands on seventy-
two little islands in a large gulf, and
was long the capital of a powerful
republic of the same name, but is
now included in the Austrian king-
dom of Lombardy. { Venice.)
' 624. lit which is an ancient am-
phitheatre, very large, and well .pre-
served, containing forty-four rows of
benches of white marble, and capable
of accommodating upwards of twen-
ty-five thousand spectators. 625. In
which were born, among the an-
cients, Catullus, Cornelius Nepos,
Vitruvius, and Pliny, the naturalist;
and among the moderns, Fracastorio,
Paul Veronese, Scipio Maffei, &c.
( Veronal)
■Name tlje ®ofon of lEuroptan
tEutkcg,
626. Of which the first eight kings
were called Inachidae, in honour of
Inachus, who founded the city 1856
years before the Christian era, and
where Agamemnon reigned at the
time of the Trojan war. {Argos.)
627- Which produced the greatest
number of learned men and artists
among the Greeks, and was consi-
dered by the Romans as the school
of the whole world. {Athens.)
628. Which is a strong and famous
town of Turkey in Europe, and the
capital of Servia. 629. Which is
seated on a low hill, that reaches the
Danube a little above its confluence
with the Save. {Belgrade.)
630. Which is situated to the
south-west of Belgrade, and is the
capital of Bosnia. {Bosna Serajo.)
631. Which is in Walachia, and
was the residence of a Sclavonic
prince, tributary to the Turks, called
Hospodar. {Bucharest.)
632. Which was called Byzantium
by the Romans, and now Starnboul,
by the Turks. 633. Which was built
A. D. 329, by. Constantine the Great,
on the model of Rome. 634. Which
has two extensive suburbs, one called
Per a, and the other Gdlata, inhabit-
ed by Europeans and foreign minis-
ters, who are not allowed to live in
the city. ( Constantinople .)
635. Which, next to Athens, pro-
duced the greatest number of Greek
architects, painters, and sculptors.
{Corinth.)
636. Which served as a retreat to
Pompey, when ..pursued by Caesar ;
and was tire residence of Cicero dur-
ing his exile. 637- Which was called
Epidamnus by the Greeks, and Dyr-
rachium by the Romans. ( Durazzo.)
638. Which is in Moldavia, andin
which, till lately, resided a Hospo-
dar, or Greek Prince, tributary to
Russia. [Jassy, or Yassi.)
639. Which is situated in Lower
Albania, and was the residence of
King Pyrrhus. 640. Which was near
the Acheron, a river of hell, accord-
ing to the fabulists. 641. Which was
called Ambracia, till Augustus gave
it the name of Nicopolis, after the
battle of Actium. ( Arta .)
,642. Which gives its name to the
gulf in which Don John of Austria
gained a celebrated, victory over the
Turkish fleet, in 1571. ( Lepanto .)
643. Which is in. the Morea, and
where TEsculapius, the god of medi-
cine, was formerly worshipped. 644.
Which once bore the name of Epi-
daurus, the son of Argus, and is now
celebrated for its good wines. (Na-
poli di Malvasia.)
645. Which is situated at an almost
equal distance between Athens and
Corinth, and received its name from
a son of Neptune. 646. Which was
originally governed by twelve Kings,
but became afterwards a republic,
and fell under the power of the
Athenians, from whom it was res-
cued by the Heraclidae. ( Megara .)
647- Which is the capital of Turk-
ish Dalmatia, on the river Narent,
and has a harbour made by the Ro-
mans. ( Mostar.)
648. Which is celebrated for two
victories gained in its neighbourhood
by Octavius, and Antony over Bru-
tus and Cassius, forty-two years be-
fore Christ. {Philippi.)
649. Which was formerly called
Thessahnica, and is situated at a
short distance from Pella, where
Philip, King of Macedon, was
brought up, and his son, Alexander
the Great, was born. {Salonichi.)
650. Which is seated on the lake
Zanta, near the mouth of the river
Bpcana, and is the capital of Alba-
nia. [Scutari.')
651. Which is seated on the. river
Ezker, near the ruins of ancient
Sardica. 652. Which was built by
the Emperor Justinian, and is the
capital of Bulgaria. [Sophia.)
653. Which is seated on the river
Jalowitz, and is the capital of Wala-
chia. [Tergovist.)
654. Which was formerly the ca-
pital of Boetia, and was the birth-
place of Epaminondas. 655. Which
was destroyed by Alexander the
Great, who only left standing the
house in which Pindar, the poet, was
born. [Thiva, or Thebes, in Livadia.)
SECTION V.
PRINCIPAL TOWNS OUT OF
EUROPE.
JSamr tljc 'S’oton of &sia,
T. Which is the capital of a pro-
vince of the same name, in the mid-
dle division of the late Mogul Empire.
2. Which was, till the beginning of


the last century, the most splendid
of all Indian cities, and is seated on
the south bank of the river Jumna.
(Agra.)
3. Which, next, to Constantinople
and Cairo, was the most considerable
of the Turkish Empire, till destroyed
by an earthquake in August, 1822.
[Aleppo.)
4. Which has two names, and from
whence pigeons were daily dispatched
with information and news to Aleppo.
5. Which was the port of Aleppo, al-
though at the distance of eight leagues
from that city. [Alexandretta, or
Scandaroon.)
6. Which is in Natolia, and was
the capital of Pontus, under Mithri-
dates. [Amasia.)
7. Which was called the Great City
by the Greeks, and bore the name of
Epidaphne, in consequence of there
being a temple and a grove dedicated
to Apollo, at Daphne, a little town
in its neighbourhood. 8. Which was
called the Queen of the East, in con-
sequence of the Kings of Syria, and
afterwards the Roman Governors,
having made it their place of resi-
dence. [Antioch.)
9. Which is the capital of a king-
dom of the same name, in Russian
Tartary, and has a good harbour,
where the Europeans embark for
Persia. 10. TVhich is seated on an
island formed by the river Volga,
which overflows like the Nile, and
is fifty miles north-west of the Cas-
pian Sea. [Astrachan.)
11. Which was the capital of the
empire of Burmah, in the east
Peninsula of India, and is seated on
a river, which falls into the Bay of
Bengal. [Ava.)
12. Which gives its name to the
sea into which the Don falls. 13.
Which is between the rivers Cuban
and Don, and the ancient capital of a
district of the Russian empire, bor-
dering on the Sea of Azof. (Azof.)
14. Which was the capital of Ne-
buchadnezzar’s empire, and had five
hundred brazen gates. 15. Which
Cyrus, the Persian, took, 538 years
before Christ, by turning the course
of the Euphrates which ran through
the city, and leading his soldiers up
the dry channel during the night.
(Babylon, near the modxrn Hillah.)
16. Which was the capital of the
Saracen empire, as it now is of Irak-
Arabi, the ancient Chaldea, and is
seated on the Tigris. (Bagdad.)
17. Which stands on the river
Euphrates, forty miles north-west of
the Gulf of Persia, and has a canal
from the Euphrates, which, running
from one end of the city to the other,
divides it into two parts. (Bussora.)
18. Which is the capital of Kur-
distan, the ancient Assyria, and is
seated on a steep rock on the frontiers
of Persia and Turkey 19. Which
is subject to its own Bey, and is a
sanctuary for the subjects of neigh-
bouring powers. [Betlis.)
20. Which is situated on the river
Hydaspes, in India, and was built by
Alexander the Great, in commemo-
ration of his victory over Porus. 21.
Which received its name from Alex-
ander’s favourite horse. ( Bucephala. )
22. Which was formerly the capital
of the kingdom of Bithynia, and
afterwards of the Turkish empire,
before the capture of Constantinople
by Mohammed 11. in 1453. (Bursa,
or Prusa.)
23. Which lies on the west side ol
the river Hoti, and is the capital ol
the north-eastern division of the
eastern Peninsula of India. [Kesho.)
24. Which is seated on the river
Hoogly, or western arm of the
Ganges, and is the seat of the British
Governor-General and council ol
Bengal, who have a control over the
Presidencies of Madras and Bom-
bay. ( Calcutta.)
25. Which is the first sea-port
vdsited by Europeans in the Penin-
sula of Hindostan, on the Malabar
coast. [Calicut.)
26. Which is seated on the river
Meinam, and is the capital of the
south-east division of the eastern
Peninsula of India. [Cambodia.)
27- Which was the capital of a
kingdom of the same name, in the
island of Ceylon, and the metropolis
of the whole island ; and which was
taken by the British, in 1815. [Candy.)
28. In which the barriers erected
at the end of each street are closed
every evening to oblige the in-
habitants to return to their homes at
an early hour. [Canton.)
29. Which is the capital of a pro-
vince of the same name, near the
sources of the Indus, in the kingdom
of Cabul, and through which runs
the river Jhelum. [Cachemire, or
Cashmere.)
30. Which is in the western pe-
ninsula of India, 120 miles south by
east of Calicut, and is in alliance
with the British. [Cochin.)
31. Which stands about two miles
from the head of the river Barrady,
which waters it. 32. Which existed
so early as the time of Abraham; was
conquered by David; is now subject
to the Turks, who took it from the
Saracens ; and is called by the Arabs
Scham. [Damascus.)
33. Which is the capital of a pro-
vince of the same name, and was for-
merly the capital of all Hindoostan,
but is now subject to the British. 34.
Which was plundered when Nadir
Shah invaded Hindoostan, to the
amount of 62,000,000/. sterling ;
and is seated on the west bank of
the river Jumna. [Delhi.)
35. Which is the capital of a coun-
try of the same name, formerly called
Mesopotamia, and is situated on the
river Tigris. [Diarbekir.)
36. Which contained the celebrated
Temple of Diana, deemed one of the
seven wonders of the world, that was
burned by Eratostratus in the same
night that Alexander the Great was
born. [Ephesus.)
37. TVhich is the capital of Persian
Armenia,but i n whi ch the Armenians,
who have shops in it, must not re-
main during the night. 38. Which
is seated on the river Zuengui,
near a lake, north-west of Astrabad.
[Erivan, or Irvan.)
39. Which stands near the head
of the Euphrates, five days' journey
from the Black Sea, and ten from
the frontiers of Persia, and is the
emporinm for the merchandize of
India. [Erzerum.)
40. Which was the capital of an
ancient kingdom of the same name,
now subject to the Soubah of the
Deccan, about six miles west-north-
west of Hydrabad, and joined to that
city by a wall of communication.
( Golconda.)
41. Which formerly contained the
mausoleum, or tomb, of Mausolus,
King of Caria, one of the seven
wonders of the world. 42. In which
the historian Herodotus, the learned
Dionysius, and the philosopher He-
raclitus were born. [Helicarnassus,
or Bodroun.)
43. Which is in Siberia, in the
government of Tobolsk, seated on a
river of the same name. [Jeneseik.)
44. Which became the capital of
Judea after David had taken it from
the Jebusites. 45. Which contains
Mount Calvary, Mount Olivet, and
the Brook Kedron, running through
the valley of Jehoshaphat. 46. Which
was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar,
who carried the inhabitants captives
to Babylon. 47- Which after it had
been rebuilt, and stood above 600 i
years, was finally destroyed by Titus, .
in the 70th year of Christ, after a
memorable siege. (Jerusalem )
" 48. Which is the principal factory of
the English East-India Company on
the coast of Coromandel. (Madras.)
49. Which is the capital of a king-
dom, in a Peninsula of India, to
which it gives its name, as well as
to a strait of Asia. [Malacca.)
50. Which is the capital of a pro-
vince now subject to the King of
Burmah (who, in 1754, subdued the
kingdom of Pegu,) and gives its
name to a small gulf, seated near
that of Bengal. [Martaban.)
51. Which was the birth-place and
residence of Mohammed, and in
which he pretended to have received
the Koran from the hands of the Angel
Gabriel. 52. To which the Moham-
medans go in pilgrimage, at least once
in their lives, to visit the Caaba, or
House of God, the Chamber of Abra-
ham, and the retreat of Agar. [Mecca.)
53. Which is called by the Turks
the City of the Prophet, because,
when Mohammed fled from Mecca,
he was received in it and protected by
the inhabitants. 54. Which contains
the tombs of Mohammed and Omar,
and is often visited by the Turks.
[Medina.)
55. Which is in Arabia Felix,
south of Mecca, near the Strait of
Bab-el-mandeb, and is famous for its
coffee. [Mocha.)
56. Which is the largest in China,
and contains a porcelain tower, two
hundred feet in height. [Nankin.)
57. Which was formerly the me-
tropolis of Bithynia, and is situated
on the Lake Ascanius. 58. Which
was founded by Antigonus, the son
of Philip, and thence called Antigo-
nia, till Lysimachus, who completed
it, gave it the name it now bears.
[Niccea.)
59. Which is seated in an island at
the bottom of a gulf of the same name,
at the entrance of the Persian Gulf,
of which it is the key, and was built
by a King of Persia, from whom it
received its name. [Ormus.)
60. Which was the capital of a con-
siderable kingdom of the same name
in the East Peninsula of India, and is
seated on the small river Pegu. [Pegu.)
61. Which, after having been the
capital of the Persian Empire, was
burned by Alexander the Great, in a
drunken frolic, at the instigation of
the courtezan Thais. ( Persepolis.)
62. TVhich was formerly the prin-
cipal factory of the French East-
India Company. [Pondicherry.)
63. Which is on the coast of Ca-
ramania, in Natolia, south by east
of Constantinople, and has risen from
the ruins of Attalia, some remains of
the ancient splendour of which are
still to be seen. [Satalia.)
64. Which was formerly the capital
of Phoenice, where the art of making
mirrors and linen cloth is supposed
to have been invented. (Sidon.)
65. Which was the capital of
Pontus, under Mithridates ; and the
birth-place of Diogenes, the Cynic
philosopher. (Sinope.)
66. Which, being one of the largest
and richest cities in the Levant, is the
rendezvous of merchants from all
parts of the world, and is seated near
a cape of the same name, at the bottom
of a large bay in Natolia. [Smyrna.)
67. Which is seated at the north
of the western branch of the Red
Sea, and gives its name to an isthmus
which joins Asia to Africa. [Suez.)
68. Which was called Palmyra by
the Greeks, and is supposed to have
been built by Solomon. 69. Which
acquired celebrity from the splendid
i reign of Odenatus and the courage of
l Zenobia his wife. 70. Which was
lamed Adrianopolis by the Emperor
Adrian. ( Tadmor. )
71. Which is seated on the river
Sinde, or Indus, is the capital of the
province of Sinde, and is supposed
to occupy the site of the ancient Pa-
tula. ( Tatta.)
72. Which is the capital of Chinese
Tartary, and was built to guard the
frontiers oftheChinese empire against
the Russians. (Tcitcicar Hotun.)
73. Which is the capital of a coun-
try of the same name, in Georgia, on
the river Kur, at the foot of a moun-
tain, and is called by the inhabitants
Thilis Caahar (warm town) from the
warm baths in its neighbourhood.
( Teflis .)
74. Which is in Circassia, in the
district of Daghistan, on a river of
the same name, one mile from the
Caspian Sea, and the residence of a
Prince, subject to the Russians.
[Ter hi.)
75. Which is the capital of Siberia
in Russian Tartary. 76. Which has
its name from the river Tobol, which
joins here the Irtish ; and whither
the Russians commonly send their
state prisoners. {Tobolsk.)
77. Which stands on the Black
Sea, in the province of Tenieh, in
Natolia, and was formerly called
Trapesus. ( Trebisond.)
78. Which is in Phoenice, waslho
birth-place of Dido, and reckoned
among its sovereigns, Belus, Hiram,
and Pygmalion. 79. Near which was
caught a kind of marine Shell-fish,
from which was extracted a beautiful
purple dye, held in high estimation
by the ancients. {Tyre.)
80. Which is in Turcomania, on
the northern extremity of the lake
Van, and on the confines of Persia.
[Van.)
Kamc tbc ®ofon of Africa,
81. Which was founded by Alex-
ander the Great, and was the birth-
place of the learned Euclid. 82.
Opposite to which was the celebrated
Pharos, or fire tower, one of the seven
wonders of the world. 83. In which
was the celebrated library of the Pto-
lemies, burnt in the seventh century
by the Calif Omar. [Alexandria.)
84. Which is the capital of a King-
dom of the same name, situated op-
posite to Minorca, and of which the
inhabitants derive their chief sub-
sistence from piracies. 85. Which
Lord Exmouth bombarded, in 1816,
and obliged the Dey to release all
Christian slaves without ransom.
[Algiers.)
86. Which is situated on the river
Benin, or Formosa, and is the capital
of Guinea. [Benin.)
87* Which is governed by an inde-
pendent little aristocracy, but pays to
the Portuguese an annual tribute of
400 pounds of gold, and is considered
as the capital of Ajan, (Brava.)
88. Wh ch is situated at the distance
of a hundred miles from the mouth
of the Nile, opposite the Pyramids
and ruins of Memphis. [Cairo.)
89. Which is at the southern ex-
tremity of Africa, at the bottom of
Table Bay, and was taken by the
British from the Dutch in 1806. 90.
In which the British keep a store of
refreshments for their East-India
ships. [Cape Town.)
91. Which was anciently called
Abyla, and formed one of the two
columns of Hercules. (Ceuta.)
92. Which was taken from the
Turks by St. Louis, King of France,
and afterwards restored for his ran-
som. ( Damietta .)
93. Which was once the capital of
an extensive independent kingdom,
and the seat of Saracenic academies
for philosophy, medicine, and astro-
nomy. 94. Which now belongs to


the Emperor of Morocco, and has
always been considered by the Moors
as a sacred asylum, and an object of
devotion, on account of its mosques.
/ tt \ *
(Fez.)
95. Which is the capital of Abys-
sinia. (Gondar.)
96. Which is the capital of a king-
dom of the same name, on the coast
of Zanguebar, and is seated near the
mouth of the river Quilmancy. [Me-
linda.)
97* Which is the capital of the
whole empire of Morocco, and is
seated in a delightful plain, having
a very serene and clear air, for which
reason the Emperor prefers it to Fez.
( Mequinez .)
98. Which is one of the three ca-
pitals of the empire of Morocco, of
which the two others are Mequinez
and Fez. (Morocco.)
99. Which is the chief town of a
kingdom of the same name, lying
south of Quiloa, in an island at the
mouth of a river, also of the same
name, and is to the Portuguese
what the Cape of Good Hope is to
other European nations, where they
stop and take in provisions. (Mo-
sarnbique.)
100. Which is thirty miles north
of Tunis, is subject to the Dey of that
place, and was formerly called Utica,
whither Cato retired, and there killed
himself, rather than yield to Caesar.
{Porto Farino.)
101. Which is situated at the foot
of a craggy mountain, in the kingdom
of Congo, near the river Lelunda, and
is the capital of thepro vince of Pemba.
(St. Salvador,or Banza St. Salvador.)
102. Which is seated on the At-
lantic Ocean, one hundred miles west
of Fez, and one hundred and fifty
south of Gibraltar, and has long been
famous for its pirates, who seize all
Christian ships that sail in their way.
( Salee .)
103. Which is seated on an emi-
nence near the Nile, and is the capi-
tal of a kingdom of the same name,
in the country of Nubia. 104. Which
is surrounded by a district of fat
earth, some miles in extent, which,
though it produces grain in abun-
dance, is so noxious to animals, that
no horse, mule, ass, ox, sheep, dog,
or cat, can live upon it for the space
of half a year, but dies if not re-
moved to a sandy country. (Se-
naar.)
105. Which was the capital of
Mauritania Tingitana, and was taken
from the Moors by the Portuguese,
in 1471, and given as a dower to the
Princess Catherine, who married
Charles 11., King of England. 106.
Which was abandoned by the Eng-
lish in 1684, and is now a harbour
for Moorish pirates. {Tangier.)
107. Which was the capital of
Upper Egypt, and called Hecatom-
pylos by the Greeks, because it had a
hundred gates, or palaces, from each
of which, in time of war, issued
twenty thousand men, and two hun-
dred chariots. ( Thebes , or Luxor.)
108. Which was formerly called
Ptolemais, and is the only town in
the kingdom of Barca, near the Gulf
of Sydra, in Barbary. ( Tolemeta .)
109. Which wastaken by the Count
of Navarre, and given by the Empe-
ror Charles V. to the Knights of
Rhodes, or Malta, from whom it was
afterwards taken by the Turks, who
now possess it. [Tripoli.)
110. Which stands on a point of
the Gulf of Goletta, about ten miles
to the south of ancient Carthage,
and is the capital of a kingdom of ;
the same name, opposite the island
of Sardinia. (Tunis.) 1
111. Which is the residence of the '
Emperor of the country of the same ]
name, and is situated near the river 1
1 Zambeze, in the country of Mono-
-1 motapa. (Zimbaoe.)
Name tfce UTofon of America,
112. Which is one of the principal
towns of Mexico Proper: and from
whence, while under the Spaniards, a
ship annually sailed to Manilla, while
another returned thence with the trea-
sures of the East Indies. (Acapulco.)
113. Which is situated at the
mouth of the river Severn, in the
United States, and is the capital of
Maryland. (Annapolis.)
114. Which is seated on the river
Paraguay, in a fertile country, where
the trees are always green, and is the
capital of the province of Paraguay.
(Assumption.)
115. Which is seated on the river
Savannah, and is the capital of Geor-
gia, in the United States. (Augusta.)
116. Which is in Maryland, at
the bottom of Chesapeak Bay, and
has risen, in a very short time, to a
state of great prosperity. (Balti-
more.)
117- Which is the capital of the
province of Massachusetts, in the
United States, and remarkable for
being the place where the North
American colonists made their first
stand against the oppressive measures
of the British Ministry ; an opposi-
tion that led to the independence of
the United States. (Boston.)
118. Which is seated on the Rio
de la Plata, and is the capital of the
province so called. (Buenos Ayres.)
119. Which is seated on the river
Delaware, under the shelter of Mil-
lincunck and Burlington Islands, and
is the capital of New Jersey, in the
United States. (Burlington.)
120. Which is seated on a penin-
sula formed by the rivers Ashley
and Cooper, and is the capital of
South Carolina. (Charlestown.)
121. Fromwhich w r as formerly ship-
ped every year for Europe, the im-
mense revenue which the King of
Spain derived from New Granada
and Terra Firma. (Carthagena.)
122. Which was formerly the ca-
pital of Peru, and the residence of
the Incas. (Cusco.)
123. Which is situated on the
north side of Albemarle Sound, and
is in the state of North Carolina, in
the United States. (Edenton.)
124. Which is the capital of a
rich and fertile part of Mexico, with
a Bishop’s see, and is 217 miles
west of the city of Mexico. (Gua-
dalajara, or Guadalaxara.)
125. Which is built near a town
of the same name that was swallow-
ed up by an earthquake in 1773, on
which occasion about eight thousand
families perished. ( Guatimala .)
126. Which is situated on Chebuc-
to Bay, and is the capital of Nova
Scotia, in British America, (Hali-
fax.)
127. Of which the port, though
capable of containing more than a
thousand vessels, is so narrow at the
mouth, that only one ship can enter
at a time. Which is the capital of
Cuba. { Havannah.)
128. Which is seated on a pleasant
fertile plain, on a small river near the
sea, and is the capital of the Peru-
vian Republic. (Lima.)
129. Which is situated on a lake
named after it, and is the capital of
the richest province of the Mexican
Republic. 130. Which was the seat
of the Indian King Montezuma, and ]
was taken by Fernando Cortez, after j
a siege of three months. (Mexico.)
131. Which stands on St. John’s
Creek, a few miles from the river !
Delaware, and is the capital of the i
province of Delaware, in the United 1
States. (New Dover.)
132. Which is seated on the west
side of the river Thames, in the
United States, and is in the state of
Connecticut. (New London.)
133. Which was built in the time
■ of the regency of the duke of Or-
-1 leans, 105 miles from the mouth of
L the Mississippi, being the only town
1 in Louisiana seated on the east side
of that river. {New Orleans.)
134. Which has one of the finest
harbours in the world, and is one of
' the principal towns in the state of
Rhode Island, about thirty miles
south-east of Providence in the
United States. (Newport, Rhode
Island.)
135. W hick is situated at the
south-west point of an Island, at the
confluence of Hudson's and East Ri-
vers. 136. Which is separated from
Long Island by a very narrow chan-
nel, and has the best harbour in the
United States. ( New York.)
137. Which stands on a bay of the
same name, in the South Sea, and
is the capital of the northern part
of Terra Fiona. 138. Which gives
name to the Isthmus which joins
North and South America. (Pa-
nama.)
139. Which is in the audience of
Quito, and has been frequently plun-
dered by the Buccaneers. ( Payta .)
140. Which is seated on a bay of
the Gulf of Mexico, and s the ca- I
pital of West Florida. ( Pensacola.)
141. Which is seated on the west
bank of the river Delaware, and is
the capital of Pennsylvania. (Phi-
ladelphia.)
142. Which is the capital of the
province of Popayan, in Terra Fir-
ma, and the residence of the gover-
nor. (Popayan.)
143. Which is in Peru, in the pro-
vince of Los Charcos, not far from
Potosi and the mountain of Porco,
and from the mines of which the In-
cas extracted all the silver for their
expenses and ornaments. * (Porco.)
144. Which is seatedon the north-
ern coast of the Isthmus of Panama,
to the north of Terra Firma, and
was taken by Admiral Vernon, in
1742, but abandoned by him after
he had demolished the fortification.
(Porto Bello.)
145. Which stands on the south-
east side of the river Piscataqua,
about two miles from the Atlantic
Ocean, and is the capital of New
Hampshire, in the United States.
( Portsmouth , New Hampshire.)
146. Which is in Peru, and in the
province of Los Charcos, at the foot
of a celebrated mountain of the same
name, containing the best silver
mine in all America. (Potosi.)
147. Which is seated on both sides
of the river Providence, and is the
most flourishing town in the state of
Rhode Island, in the United States.
(Providence , Rhode Island.)
148. Which was founded by the
French, in 1608, and is situated at
the confluence of the rivers St. Law-
rence and Charles, and is the capital
of Lower Canada, in British Ame-
rica. 149. Of which the siege by
the British, in 1759, when it fell
into their hands, was rendered me-
morable by the death of General
Wolfe. (Quebec.)
150. Which is above a fine valley,
between two chains of high moun- .
tains called Andes, and is the capital j
of the province of Quito. (Quito.) 1
151. Which is seated among the 1
mountains near the Rio del Norte, ;
and is the capital of New Mexico <
Proper. (Santa Fe.) ]
152. Which is situated on the river t
Bogota, in a country abounding (
in mines of silver, and is the capi-
tal of the republic of the United t
Provinces, (Santa Fe de Bogota.) c
t 153. Which lies on the frontiers
J °f Georgia, and is the capital of East
r Florida. ( St. Augustin.)
154. Which is the oldest Euro-
i! pean town in*America, having been
■ founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
f brother to the Admiral of that name,
i (St Domingo.)
155. Which is seated at the foot of
the Andes, on the river Mopocho,
- and is the capital of Chilese Re-
public. [St. Jago.)
156. Which is seated on a large
i river of the same name, is the usual
j residence of the governor of the pro-
! vince, and the capital of Tucuman.
( St. Jago del Estero.)
■ 157. Which is seated at the foot
of the Andes, near the lake of Guana-
cho, and is the capital of Cujo, or
Cutio. 158. Of which the territory
is inhabited by 20,000 native Ame-
rican Indians. (St. Jean de Fron-
tier a.)
159. Which is seated on an emi-
nence on the Bay of All Saints, with
a harbour just below it. 160. Which
is the capital of Eastern Brazil. (St.
Salvador , or Bahia.)
161. JFhich is the capital of the
Empire of Brazil, at the mouth of
the river St. Sebastian. (St. Se-
bastian, or Rio Janeiro.)
162. Which stands between the
rivers Calacalles and Portero, in
Chili, where they fall into the sea,
and was founded by a Spanish gene-
ral, whose name it still bears. (Val-
divia, or Baldivia.)
163. Which is in the Gulf of
Mexico, and where Fernando Cortez
first disembarked with five hundred
Spaniards, when he undertook the
conquest of Mexico. (Fein Cruz.)
164. Which is situated between
Virginia and Maryland ; and, lying
at an equal distance from the north-
ern and southern extremities of the
United States, was chosen by Con-
gress for the seat of Government.
(Washington.)
165. JFhich is situated between two
creeks, one falling into James River,
and the other into York River, and
is in the state 01 Virginia, in the
United States. ( Williomsburgh .)
SECTION VI. , /
GROUPS OF ISLANDS.
Name ll)c <*sroup of Itelantts,
1. Which are on the East side of
the entrance into the bay of Bengal,
on the north of the Nicobar Isles,
and are common to all nations. ( A n-
daman Islands )
2. Which lie at the entrance of the
Gulf of Mexico, and the principal of
which are Cuba, Jamaica, St. Do-
mingo, or Hayti, and Porto Rico.
(The Great Antilles.)
3. Which lie in the Caribbean Sea,
near the north coast of South Ame-
rica, and the principal of which are
Margaretta, Tortuga, Orchilla, Bo-
naire, and Cura9oa. (The Little An-
tilles.)
4. Which Gonsalvo-Velio, in the
middle of the fifteenth century, called
by a Portuguese word, which signifies
sparrow hawks, because he perceived
a great number of birds of that kind
upon them. 5. Which were discovered
by John Vanderberg, a merchant of
Bruges, who by imprudently boasting
of his discovery on his return to Lis-
bon, gave occasion to the Portuguese
to go and take possession of them.
(The Azores.)
6. Which lie in the Atlantic near the
east coast of North America, and one
of which was the first land discovered


by Christopher Columb us, in the year
1492. 7- Which are said to amount
to about five hundred in number, and
of which the principal are, Bahama,
Lucayonequa, or Lucaya, Eleuthera,
Providence, Yuma, or Long Island,
Exuma, and Guanahani, or St. Sal-
vador, the island on which Columbus
landed. ( Bahamas, or Lucayas.)
8. Which lie in the Atlantic Ocean,
about five hundred miles East of
Carolina; and were discovered by
John Burmudez, a Spaniard. 9. On
which Sir George Somers was cast
away ; they have since belonged to
Great Britain. ( Bermuda, or Somers'
Islands.)
10. Which lie ort fhe west coast of
Africa, below Cape Verde, and were
•known to the ancients by the names
of Hesperides, Gorgades, and Gor-
gons. ( Bistagos Isles.)
11. Which lie in the Atlantic, are
thirteen in number, among which are
Ferro and Teneriffe, and belong to
Spain. 12. Which were anciently call-
ed the Fortunate Islands ; and from
whence originally came an excellent
singing-bird. ( The Canaries.)
13. Which are in the Atlantic
Ocean, about four hundred miles
w r est of a cape of the same name, are
twenty in number, lying in a semi-
circle, and belong to the Portuguese.
( Cope Vei'de Islands.)
14. Which comprehend what are
otherwise called the Windward and
Leeward Islands, in the West Indies,
and receive their name from the na-
tive inhabitants. ( Caribbee Islands.)
15. Which are in the Indian Ocean,
opposite to the coast of Zanguebar,
in Africa, North of the Channel of
Mozambique, and the Island of Ma-
dagascar. {Comoro, or Gomaro Islands.)
16. Which derive their name from
a Greek word, signifying a circle,
because they lie in that form round
the Isle of Delos, in the Archipelago,
and are about fifty'•three in number,
including Patmos, where St. John
wrote his Revelation, and Delos, the
reputed birth-place of Diana and
Apollo, who were worshipped there.
{The Cyclades.)
17- Which are near the straits of
Magellan, in the South Atlantic
Ocean, and were discovered by Capt.
John Davis, in 1592, but were
ceded to the Spaniards in 1774.
( Falkland Islands.)
18. Which are in the Northern
Ocean, and subject Jto Denmark,
being about twenty-five in number,
though only -seventeen are inhabited,
each consisting of a lofty mountain,
rising out of the waves, and divided
from the others by deep and rapid
currents. {Faro, or Faroer Islands.)
19. Which are in the South Sea,
under the Equator, and were disco-
vered by the Spaniards, to whom
they belong, and who only, call here
lor fresh water and provisions, when
they sail from America to Asia.
{Galapago Islands.)
20. Which are in the Atlantic
Ocean, on the west coast of Scot-
land, and are about thirty in number,
the principal of which are Lewis,
Skye, St. Kilda, Harris, North and
South Uist, Benbecula, Cannay,
Staffa, Mull, Jura, and Isla. 21.
Which were known to the ancients
under the name of Ebudes. (He-
brides, or Western Isles.)
22. Which consist of the islands of
Niphon, Sikokf,andXimo, or Kiusiu,
with some small isles, and are situate
in the Northern Pacific Ocean, near
the most eastern part of Asia, have
the title of an Empire, and form the
richest country in the world for gold.
23. Which the ancients supposed to
be inhabited by Satyrs, and thence
called them Satyridae and Satadubae.
(Japan Islands.)
24. Which are about tourteen or f
sixteen in number, in the north Pa- f
cific Ocean, and were discovered in r
1521 by Magellan, who, in conse-
quence of the natives stealing from I
him every thing made of iron that t
fell within their reach, called them 1
The Islands of Thieves. 25. Which i
subsequently obtained another name (
from the Queen of Spain, Mary Ann r
of Austria, mother of Charles 11., at
whose expense Christian missionaries i
were sent to these islands. 26. In ]
which that extraordinary and useful ;
plant, the bread-fruit tree, was first
discovered. (The Ladrones, or Ma- i
rianne Islands.)
27. Which lie between the Atlan-
tic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea,
forming the North branch of the
Caribbean group, the principal of
which are, Anguilla, St. Martin's,
Saba, St. Eustatia, St. Bartholomew,
Barbaba, St. Christopher's, or St.
Kitt’s, Antigua, Montserrat, Nevis,
Deseada, or Desirade, Guadaloupe,
Mariegalante, and Dominica. [Lee-
ward Isles.)
28. Which are in the Mediterra-
nean, twelve in number, to the North
of Sicily : and in which the ancient
• *
poets placed the court of iEolus, God
of the Winds. ( The Lipari, or Aeo-
lian Islands.)
29. Which sere in the Indian Ocean,
about ninety leagues south-west of
Cape Comorin, and are said to be up-
wards of one thousand in number,
and the sovereign of which resides
in the principal Island, called Male.
{Maidive Islands.)
30. Which are in the Indian Ocean,
and the principal of which are, Gilolo,
Banda, Ternate, Amboyna, Tidore,
Machian, Motir, and Bachian, all
remarkable for spices, especially
cloves. [Molucca Islands.)
31. Which are at the entrance of
the Gulf of Bengal, to the south of
Andaman, extend northward from
the north of Sumatra, and are com-
mon to all nations. [Nicobar Islands))
32. Which are in the Atlantic Ocean,
on the north of Scotland, about thirty
in number, though only twenty-six
are inhabited, of which one greatly
exceeds the other in extent, and is
called Mainland, or Pomona. [Ork-
ney Islands, or Orcades.)
33. Which were discovered by
Magellan, in 1521, in the East-Indian
Ocean, and the principal of which are
Luzon, containing the town of Ma-
nilla, and Mindanao. ‘34. Which
received their name in honour of
that King of Spain, who sent out the
Armada against England. [The Phi-
lippines, or Manillas.)
35. Which are at the entrance of
the British Channel, almost ten
leagues west of the Land’s End, in
Cornwall, from whence they are easily
discerned, and of which only five or
six are inhabited, [Scilly Islands.)
36. Which are in the Atlantic
Ocean, and, with the Orkneys, form
one of the counties of Scotland, and
are reckoned forty-six in number,
besides forty smaller called Holmes,
which produce pasture, and as many
barren. 37. Of which only one,
which gives its name to the whole
group, is of any considerable size.
[Shetland Islands.)
38. Which is in the Frozen Ocean,
the most northern of Europe, being
to the north of Norway, between
Greenland to the west, and Nova
Zembla to the east, and was first
discovered by Sir Hugh Willoughby,
in 1553. 39. In which the sun never
sets during the months of June, July,
and August; but is hardly seen for
the rest of the year. [Spitzbergen.)
40. Which are in the Indian Ocean,
and form a strait of Asia, the princi-
pal of which are, Borneo, Java, and
Sumatra. 41. Which were imper- 1
fectly known to the ancients, by the ;
name of Sindae. [Suhda. I si >nds.) i
42. Which form the southern
branch of the Caribbean Isles, be-
tween the Atlantic Ocean and the Ca-
ribbean Sea,and of which the pr in cipal
are, Martinico, St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Grenada, Barbadoes, Tobago, and
Trinidad. [The Windward Islands.)
43. Which derive their name from
a Greek word signifying scattered ,
because in fact they are scattered
about in the Archipelago, and of
which the principal were formerly
called Chios, Samos, Cos, and
Rhodes. [The Sporades.)
44. Which are divided into four
groups, namely, the Fox Islands, the
Negho Islands, the Andrean, or An-
dreanovske Islands, and the Aleu-
tian, or Aleoutskiyan Islands. 45.
Which are situated at the entrance of
the North straits, and were discover-
ed by the Russians in the reign of
Peter I. [The Islands of the Northern
Archipelago.)
46. Which were discovered by
Captain Cook, who was killed in an
affray with the natives at Hawaii,
or Owhyee, the principal of them.
[The Sandwich Islands.)
47. Which were discovered by
Captain Wallis in 1767, and visited
by Captain Cook in 1769. 48. Of
which the principal are named O’ta-
heite, or Taheite, Ulietea, Bolabola,
and Oheteroa. [The Society Islands.)
49. Which were discovered by
Tasman, the Dutch navigator, in
1643, but were little known till
Captain Cook visited them in 1773;
and the principal of which are,
Tongataboo, or Amsterdam, Anna-
mooka, or Rotterdam, and Eaoowe,
or Middleburgh. [The Friendly Is-
lands. )
50. Which were discovered 'by
Don Quiros, a Spaniard, in 1606,
who supposed he had found a new
continent, but which Captain Cook,
who more fully explored them in
1769 and 1774, proved to be a cluster
of Islands, the principal of which is
Terra del Espiritu Santo. [The
New Hebrides.)
51. Which are in the American
hemisphere, in the Northern Arctic
Ocean, and were discovered 'by
Lieutenant Parry, in 1819. 52. Of
which the principal is called Mel-
ville Island. [North Georgia.)
53. Which are in the Southern
Ocean, in the Western Hemisphere,
and were discovered by Mr. Smith
and Captain Sherriff, in 1819. [New
South Shetland.)
SECTION VII.
PRINCIPAL ISLANDS.
i&anu t|)r Islanfc,
1. Which is at the entrance of the
Gulf of Bothnia, in the Baltic Sea,
and was, with part of Swedish Fin-
land, ceded to Russiain 1808. [Aland.)
2. Which is one of the Molucca
Islands, in the Indian Ocean, and
remarkable for the quantity of nut-
megs and cloves it produces, and
where the Dutch, to whom it belongs,
most cruelly tortured and put to
death some Englishmen in 1623.
[Amboyna.)
3. Which forms the most northern
county of North Wales, and stands
in the Irish Sea, separated from
Caernarvonshire by a long and
narrow strait, called the Menai.
[Anglesea.)
4. Which is the most northerly
of the Caribbee Islands, in the West
Indies, sixty miles north of St.
Christopher’s. [Anguilla.)
5. Which lies in the Grecian Archi-
pelago, and in ancient times contained
a temple dedicated to Bacchus, and
a sacred fountain, whose waters were
reputed to have the flavour of wine
during the Ides of January. [An-
dros.)
6. Which is off the coast of Guinea,
in the Atlantic Ocean, and received
its name, which signifies “ happy
year,” from the Portuguese, because
they discovered it on the New-Year’s
day. ( Annahona .)
7* Which is one of the Caribbee
Islands, sixty miles east of St. Chris-
topher’s, is remarkable for its nume-
rous excellent harbours, and belongs
to Great Britain. [Antigua.)
8. Which is in the South Atlantic
Ocean, six hundred miles north-west
of St. Helena, and, though uninha-
bited, is valuable to homeward bound
shipping on account of its excellent
harbour. 9. Which had its name
from the circumstance of its being
discovered on Holy Thursday, 1506.
[Ascension.)
10. Which is at the entrance of
the Red Bea; and gives its name to
the strait which unites the Red Sea
with the Ocean. [Bah-el-mandeb.)
11. Which is.in.the Atlantic Ocean,
the easternmost of the Windward
Islands, whose capital is Bridgetown,
and which belongs to Great Britain.
( Barbadoes.)
12. Which is in the Arabian Sea,
on the west coast of Hindoostan, is
one of the three presidencies of the
British East-India Company, and
came to the English by the marriage
of Charles 11. with Catherine of
Portugal. [Bombay.)
13. Which is in the Indian Ocean,
East of Malacca and Sumatra, and
was discovered by the Portuguese in
1521. 14. Which, till the late new
discoveries, was thought to be the
largest Island in the world, and of
which the capital, of the same name,
, consisting of about three thousand
' houses, is built on rafts and floats
, near the shore, to which it is. moored,
i [Borneo.)
15. Which is in the Indian Ocean,
i East of Madagascar, produces excel-
i lent coffee and tobacco, and bears the
name of the family which has long
l reigned in France. [Bourbon.)
; 16. Which is situated in the Frozen
r Ocean, near the entrance of the White
c Sea, and is separated from the Go-
. vernment of Archangel by the narro w
channel of Titza. ( Candenos .)
i 17. Which lies in the Mediterra-
, nean, south of the Archipelago, was
l celebratedfor its Mount Ida, on which
> the ancients pretended Jupiter was
brought up by the Corybantes; the
laws of Minos; its hundred cities,
and its> labyrinth. 18. In which The-
seus slew the fabulous monster Mi-
notaur. 19. Of which the capital, of
the same name, in more recent times,
was taken from the Venetians by the
; Turks, after a siege of twenty-five
, years, in 1670. {Candia, or Crete.)
20. Which is in the Atlantic Ocean,
1 separated from Nova Scotia by a
1 narrow strait, called Causo, and
I whose capital is Louisbourg. [Cape
. Breton.)
I 21. TVhich is in the Atlantic Ocean,
, and, by a particular formation, un-
► common in islands, the land is
, highest near the water side, and
lowest in the middle. 22. Which is
l called by the French, the Equinoctial
i France, from its situation nearly
1 under the line. [Cayenne.)
I 23. Which is in the Indian Ocean,
, between Borneo, the Philippines, and
the Moluccas, and belongs to the
Dutch. 24. Which exceeds all the
: Asiatic Isles in sublime and beautiful
, scenery, but contains a number of
poisonous trees and plants, among
■ which is the deadly upas, that kills
I birds accidentally alighting on its


branches, and is fatal to men passing
under it without due precaution.
[Celebes, or Macassar.)
25. Which was part of the king-
dom of Ulysses, is the largest in the
lonian Sea, south of Albania, and
north-east of the Morea, and was
known to the ancients by the names
of Same, Epirus, Melaena, and that
which it still bears. {Cep ha lonia.')
26. Which is in the Indian Ocean,
and one of the Spice Islands, to the
west of New Guinea, and north of
Amboyna and Banda. {Ceram.)
27. Which lies to the south of the
Morea, at the entrance to the Archi-
pelago, and was formerly called Cy-
thera, the reputed abode of the god-
dess Venus, and the birth-place of
the celebrated Helen, who was the
occasion of the Trojan War. [Ce-
rigo.)
28. JI hich is in the Indian Ocean,
near the south-east point of Hindoos-
tan, and is supposed to have been
the Taprobana of the ancients. 29.
Which contains vast forests of aroma-
tic trees and plants, and is remark-
able for its abundant produce of cin-
namon. 30. In which is found the
tallipot tree, rising like the mast of a
ship, with leaves at the top, each
large enough to cover fifteen men.
31. Which was seized by the Portu-
guese in 1506, who were expelled
by the Dutch about 1660, and taken
by the British in 1795. [Ceylon.)
32. Which is in the South Sea,
near the coast of Chili, of which the
principal town is Castro, and belongs
to Spain. [Chiloe.)
83. Which is opposite Eleusis, and
was anciently called Salamis, or Sa-
lamina, and is celebrated for the naval
combat fought near its shores, be-
tween the Greeks and Persians, when
Xerxes invaded Attica. 34. TWhich was
the birth-place of Teucer and Ajax,
surnamed of Salamina. [Colour i.)
35. Whichis in the lonian Sea, near
the coast of Albania, and commands
the Gulf of Venice. 36. Which was
formerly called Corcyra, and was
noted for the shipwreck of Ulysses
and the gardens of Alcinoiis. [Corfu.)
37. Which is seated in the Medi-
terranean Sea, was called Cyrnos by
the ancients, and belonged formerly
to the Genoese, but now belongs to the
French. 38. Which contains the towns
of Bastia, Calvi, and Ajaccio, the last
of which was the birth-place of Na-
poleon Buonaparte, late Emperor of
the French. [Corsica.)
39. Which, lying at the entrance of
the Gulf of Mexico, was discovered
by Columbus in 1494, and belongs to
the Spaniards. 40. Of which the ca-
pital is Havannah, the rendezvous of
the galleons that return annually to
Spain. [Cuba.)
41. Whichis in the Mediterranean,
near the coast of Syria, and was the
reputed birth-place of Venus, who
had temples dedicated to her at Pa-
phos and Amathus. [Cyprus.)
42. Which is between ithe Gulfs of
Finland and Riga, on the coast of
Livonia, and belongs to Russia.
[Daghohe.)
43. Which arose in the Archipe-
lago, as it is said, from the bottom of
the sea, and contains abundance of
fine ruins, supposed to be those of
the temples of Apollo and Diana,
whose birth-place it is reputed to
have been. 44. In which one of the
altars of Apollo was reckoned among
the seven wonders of the world. (De-
los,or Sailles.)
45. Which is one of the Caribbees,
in the Atlantic Ocean, the first land
that is made in sailing to the West
Indies, and belongs to France. {De-
seada, or Desirade.)
46. Which lies in the Caribbean
Sea, half way between Guadaloupe
and Martinico, is subject to Great
Britain, and has its name from being
discovered by Columbus on a Sunday.
[Dominica.)
47. Which is in the Pacific Ocean,
about one hundred miles east of
Canton in China, to which it be-
longs. 48. Of which the waters of
every kind prove deadly poison to
strangers. [Formosa.)
49. Which is separated from Jut-
land by a strait called the Little Belt,
and from Zealand by another called
the Great Belt. 50. Of which the
capital town is Oldenesse, and which
belongs to Denmark. [Funen.)
51. Which is in the Atlantic Ocean,
near Cape Verde, and subject to the
French. [Goree.)
52. Which is in the Baltic, on the
east coast of Sweden, to which it
belongs, and where the only town is
Wisby. [Gothland.)
53. Which is in the Atlantic Ocean,
and the most considerable of all the
European islands. 54. Which con-
tains the kingdoms of England and
Scotland, and the principality of
Wales, and was known to the an-
cients by the name of Albion. [Great
Britain.)
55. Which is one of the Wind-
ward Caribbees, thirty leagues to the
North-west of Tobago, and subject
to Great Britain. [Grenada.]
56. Which is one of the Leeward
Islands, belonging to France, lies be-
tween Antigua and Dominica, and
is said to be the best of all the Ca-
ribbees. 57. In which is a remarkable
volcano, called the Souffrier, or Sul-
phur Mountain, continually emitting
sulphureous steams; and where, at a
little distance from the shore, the sea
is hot enough to boil an egg. [Gua-
daloupe.)
58. Which is in the British Chan-
nel, on the north-west of Jersey, and
is subject to the King of Great Bri-
tain . ( Guernsey.)
59. Which is in the Eastern Ocean,
North of Cochinchina, and South of
the province of Canton, from which
it is twelve miles distant, and belongs
to China. 60. Which abounds in va-
rious kinds of curious and valuable
woods, particularly rose or violet
wood, so called from its odour. [Hai-
nan.)
61. W hich lies between Jamaica to
the west, and Porto Rico to the east,
in the Caribbean Sea, and is now the
seat of a Negro empire, or republic,
called Hayti. 62. Of which the west
part formerly belonged to the French,
and the east to the Spaniards. [His-
paniola, or St. Domingo.)
63. Which lies in the Northern
Ocean, near the coast of Greenland,
is a hundred and sixty leagues long,
sixty broad. 64. Which was
not inhabited till about nine hundred
years ago, and is now subject to Den-
mark. 65. Of which the natives are
very small, but strong and robust,
great lovers of fishing and hunting,
and live upon dry fish, which they
eat raw after having made it soft by
beating it; are passionately fond of
dancing and playing at chess, dwell
mostly under ground, and live to a
very advanced age. 66. In which is
a terrible volcano, called Hecla.
[lceland.)
67. Which lies in the lonian Sea,
between the coast of Albania and the
islands of St. Maura and Cephalonia,
and was the seat of the ancient king-
dom of Ulysses. [lthaca, or Teaki.)
68. Which is in the Mediterranean,
fifty-six miles south-west of Major-
ca, about sixty miles in circum-
ference, and belongs to Spain. 69.
Which was known to the ancients
by the name of Ebusus. ( Iviga .)
70. Which is in the Caribbean Sea,
was discovered by Columbus in 1494,
and is now the most considerable of
the British West India colonies, the
principal towns being Kingston, Port
Royal, and St. Jago, or Spanish
Town. [Jamaica.)
71. Whichlies in the Indian Ocean,
to the south of the island of Su-
matra, from which it is separated by
the Straits of Sunda. 72. Of which
the capital, Batavia, is the metro-
polis of the Oriental Archipelago,
but remarkable for its fatality to
Europeans. [Java.)
73. Which is in the British Chan-
nel, to the south-east of Guernsey,
eighteen miles from the western
coast of Normandy, in France, and is
subject to the English crown. [Jersey.)
74. Which lies in the South Pacific
Ocean, three hundred miles West of
Chili, and was the solitary residence
°f Alexander Selkirk, till he was dis-
covered and taken off by an English
Captain in 1709, and whose narrative
furnished the subject of the romance
called Robinson Crusoe. [Juan Fer-
nandez.)
75. Which is supposed to be the
°f the ancients, where Ca-
lypso reigned, and entertained first
Ulysses, and afterwards his son Tele-
machus. 70. Which is situated be-
tween Tunis and Malta, and is now
uninhabited, and overrun with wild
olives. 77. In which is a magazine,
well supplied by the Sicilian monks,
where ships may find necessaries,
for which they deposit the value in
a chest left for that purpose. [Lam-
pedosa.)
78. Which is one of the Sporades,
in the Archipelago, and had a cele-
brated labyrinth, surpassing, accord-
ing to some traditions, those of Crete
and Egypt. 79. In which the poets
feigned that Vulcanfell when Jupiter
kicked him down from heaven, and
in which they fixed his forges, con-
secrating the whole country to his
divinity. 80. Which is remarkable
in ancient history for two horrible
massacres; that of the women mur-
dering their husbands, in order to es-
tablish a female government; and
that of the Pelasgi, their successors,
killing all the children they had had
by some Athenian women. 81. In
which Philoctetes was left by the
Greeks, on their way to the Trojan
war. ( Lemnos , or Stalimene.)
82. Which is in the Atlantic, in the
state of New York, and extends from
the city of New York east to 140
miles, but is not more than ten broad
on a medium. 83. In which , at the
east end of the island, is Montank
Point, where no flies are found.
[Long Island.)
84. Which lies off the eastern
coast of Africa, in the Indian Ocean,
is about 2000 miles in circumference,
and was discovered by the Portu-
guese in 1492. ( Madagascar .)
85. Which lies in the Atlantic
Ocean, and was discovered by the
Portuguese in 1407, who colonized it
in 1431, and cleared away its exten-
sive forests by setting them on fire,
and thereby caused a conflagration of
many years’ continuance, to which
circumstance the present great ferti-
lity of the soil has been attributed.
86. Which is celebrated for its ex-
cellent wines, which keep best in the
hottest climate, and are usually sent
a voyage to the East or West Indies
before they are drank in England.
[Madeira.)
87- Which belongs to Spain, and
is in the Mediterranean, between
and Minorca, about eighty
miles west from the Spanish coast,
and is the most considerable of the
ancient Baleares. [Majorca.)
88. Which is in the Mediterranean,
between Africa and Sicily, and was
the scene of St. Paul’s shipwreck.
89. Which belonged, till lately, to the
Knights of a religious Military Or-
der, but now belongs to Great
Britain. {Malta.)
90. Which is in the Irish Sea,
twelve miles south of Scotland, thir-
ty north of Anglesea, forty east of
the coast of Ireland. 91. Which was
the seat of the ancient kings of the
Western Isles, but now belongs to
England. [Man.)
92. Which is one of the Leeward
Islands, in the Caribbean Sea, and
subject to France; thirty miles north
of Dominica, and forty east of Gua-
daloupe. {Mariegalante.)
93. Which is one of the Windward
Islands, in the Caribbean Sea, and
is the residence of the Governor of
the French Caribbee Islands. {Mar-
tinique.)
94. Which is in the Indian Ocean,
and to which the Dutch gave the
name it bears now, in honour of their
Stadtholder; but which, on their
acquisition of the Cape of Good
Hope, they abandoned to the French,
who called it the Isle of France, and
from whom it was taken by the Bri-
tish, in 1810. [Mauritius.)
95. Which is in the Mediterranean,
fifty miles to the east of Majorca,
and belongs to Spain. [Minorca.)
96. Which is oneof the British Lee-
ward Islands, in the Caribbean Sea,
and was discovered in 1493 by Colum-
bus, who named it after a mountain
of Catalonia, in Spain to which it bears
some resemblance. {Montserrat.)
97. Which is the largest and most
fertile of the Cyclades, and in which
Bacchus was held in particular vene-
ration. {Naxos.)
98. Which is the largest of the
Grecian Archipelago ; is separated
from Livadia by a bridge, and was
formerly called Euboea. {Negropont,
or, more properly, Egripo.)
99. Which is one of the Leeward
Islands, in the Caribbean Sea, about
seven leagues north of Montserrat,
twenty-one miles in circumference ;
divided from the east end of St.
Christopher's by a narrow channel,
and subject to the British. {Nevis.)
100. Which is separated from New
Guinea by a strait, first navigated by
the English Captain Dampier. [New
Britain.)
101. Which is the largest of all the
islands discovered by Captain Cook
in 1774, and is situated near the
New Hebrides. {New Caledonia.)
102. Which was discovered by Se-
bastian Cabot, an Englishman, in
1497, and lies in the Atlantic Ocean
on the eastern coast of North Ame-
rica. 103. Which, in the fishing
season, is resorted to by at least
10,000 people, on account of its
fishing banks. {Newfoundland.)
104. Which was discovered by
Saavedra, a Spaniard, in 1528, and is
separated from New Holland by En-
deavour Strait. 105. Which is the
chosen residence of the splendid
bird of Paradise. 106. Of which
the natives are remarkable for their
ugliness, and among whom is a
race that always resides in trees.
{Papua, or New Guinea.)
107. Which was partially disco-
vered by the Dutch, in 1616, and
more minutely explored by Captain
Cook, who took possession of it
in the name of the King of Great
Britain, in 1770. 108. In which
the British have a colony, called
New South Wales, on the eastern
coast. 109. Which is the largest
island in the world. {New Holland.)
110. Which is situated to the
north of New Britain, and was first
discovered by the British Captain
Carteret, in 1767- {New. Ireland.)
111. Which was discovered, in
1642, by Tasman, the Dutch naviga-


tor, who supposed it to be part of a
great continent; but Captain Cook
discovered, in 1776, that it consisted
of two large islands, separated by a
channel, to which the name of
Cook’s Strait has been given.
(New Zealand.)
112. Which is the chief of a group
named after it among the Spice
Islands, in which the nutmeg-tree is
the principal object of cultivation.
(Banda, or Lantor.)
113. Which is in the Baltic, and
belongs to Sweden, from which it is
divided by a narrow strait called
Calmar Sound, and the capital of
which is Borckholm. (Oeland.)
114. Which is on the coast of Livo-
nia, at the entrance of the Gulf of
Riga, three miles south of the Isle
of Daghoe, and belongs to Russia.
(Oesel.)
115. Which is in the South Pacific
Ocean, and one of the Society Islands,
thirteen miles in circuit, with neither
harbour nor anchorage. (Oheteroa.)
116. Which is in the South Pacific
Ocean, and was discovered by Cap-
tain Wallis, in 1767- 117- To which
Captain Cook went to observe the
transit of Venus, in 1769. 118. Of
which the inhabitants are remarkable
for their ingenuity and benevolence.
(O’taheite, or Taheite.)
119. Which is one of the Sandwich
Islands, and where Captain Cook
was killed by the natives, in 1779.
(Hawaii, or O’wyhee.)
120. Which is in the Mediterra-
nean, in the bay of Alexandria, about
seven furlongs distant from the con-
tinent with which it once communi-
cated by means of a bridge, and was
famed for its magnificent tower and
' lighthouse, built of white marble
by the architect Sostratus, at the sole
expence of Ptolemy Philadelphus,
and which passed for one of the
seven wonders of the world. (Pharos.)
121. Which is one of the Great
Antilles, between the Atlantic Ocean
and the Caribbean Sea; fifty miles
east of St. Domingo, being one hun-
dred and twenty miles in length, and
forty in breadth, fertile and beautiful,
and belongingto Spain. (Portoßico.)
122. Which rose, as it is said, from
the bottom of the sea in ancient times,
and the climate of which, though for-
merly very temperate, is now cold
and humid, in consequence of the
great quantity of wood that grows
upon it, and in which a considerable
traffic is carried on with Egypt. 123.
In which was a colossal statue of
Apollo, one of the seven won-
ders of the world, seventy cubits
high, and placed in such an attitude
across the harbour, that ships could
pass in full sail between its legs. 124.
In which the Knights of St. John re-
sided until the year 1523, when the
Turks expelled them, and took pos-
session of the island. [Rhodes.)
125. Which is in the Baltic, off
the coast of Pomerania, over against
Stralsund; the capital of which is
Bergen, and belongs to Prussia.
( Rugen.)
126. Which is one of the Leeward
Islands, in the Caribbean Sea, thirty
miles north of St. Christopher’s, and
was ceded by the French to the
Swedes, in 1785. (St. Bartholomew.)
127. Which is one of the Leeward
Islands, in the Caribbean Sea, sixty
miles west of Antigua, and was for-
merly inhabited by the French and
English, but in 1713 was ceded to
the latter. (St. Christopher’s, or St.
Kitt’s.)
128. Which is one of the Virgin
Islands, belonging to Denmark, in
the Caribbean Sea, is of a triangular
form, and of which the capital town
is called Christianstadt. (Santa Cruz,
or St. Croix.)
129. Which, with regard to situa-
tion, is the strongest of all the Ca-
ribbee Islands, lies to the north-
west of St. Christopher’s, and belongs
to the Dutch. (St, Eusiatia.)
130. Which is in the Atlantic
Ocean, between the continents of
Africa and South America, about
1200 miles west of the former, and
1800 east of the latter. 131. Which
belongs to the British, and was the
place of exile of Napoleon Buona-
parte, the deposed Emperor of the
French, and where he died and was
buried. (St. Helena.)
132. Which is in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, having Nova Scotia on the
south and west, and Cape Breton
on the east, and belongs to Great
Britain. (St. John’s.)
133. Which is situated atthe mouth
of the Senegal, in the Atlantic Ocean,
and where the French have a fort
and a factory. (St. Louis.)
134. Which is one of the Wind-
ward Caribbee Islands, about seventy
miles north-west of Barbadoes, and
twenty-one south of Martinico; and
is subject to Great Britain. (St. Lucia.)
135. Which is in the Atlantic
Ocean, and was formerly planted by
the Portuguese, who gave it the
name of one of the four Evangelists,
but is now deserted. (St. Matthew.)
136. Which is in the lonian Sea,
near the coast of Albania, and was an-
ciently called Leucas, Leucadia, and
Neritus. 137- In which was the ce-
' ebrated promontory, called the Lo-
ver’ s Leap, from which Sappho threw
herself into the sea. (St. Maura.)
138. Whie lilies in the Gulf of Gui-
nea, under the Equator, and was dis-
covered, in 1429, by the Portuguese,
who have there a fort called Pavoas-
san. (St. Thomas.)
139. Which is one of the Virgin
Islands in the Caribbean Sea, to the
east of Porto Rico, and belongs to
the Danes. 140. Which, after the
capture of St. Eustatia, in 1781, be-
came the mart of that part of the
West Indies. (St. Thomas.)
141. Which is one of the Wind-
ward Islands in the Caribbean Sea,
fifty-five miles west of Barbadoes,
thirty south of St. Lucia, and be-
longs to Great Britain. [St. Vincent .)
142. Which is in the Mediter-
ranean Sea, and was known to the
ancients by the names of Ichnusa and
Sandaliotis. 143. Which, in 1720,
was erected into a kingdom, and
ceded to the Duke of Savoy, as an
equivalent for Sicily. [Sardinia.)
144. Which is in the Mediterra-
nean, near the south-west point of
Italy, from which it is separated by
the Faro di Messina. 145. Which is al-
most of a triangular form, and was in
ancient times called Trinacria. 146.
In which is the remarkable volcano
iEtna, near which the Cyclops were
reputed to have their residence. 147.
In which Peter 111. King of Arragon,
caused all the French to be massacred
during the time of vespers, on Easter
Sunday, 1282. 148. Which now be-
longs to the crown of Naples. (Sicily.)
149. Which is in the Indian Ocean,
between Arabia, Felix, and Africa,
thirty leagues east of Guardafui,
and was known to the ancients by
the name of Dioscorides. [Socotora,
or Socotra.)
150. Which is in the Indian Ocean,
and chief of the Sunda Islands,
where the British and Dutch have
factories; the principal one of the
former being fort Marlborough, on
the south-west coast. [Sumatra.)
151. Which is one of the British
Windward Islands in the Caribbean
Sea, the most southward of the
islands in the West Indies, and the
most eastward, except Barbadoes,
120 miles south of it. [Tobago.)
152. Which is one of the Wind- )
ward Islands, and the largest of all 1
the Caribbean group. 153. Which
wasdiscoveredby Colombus, in 1498,
is separated from New Andalusia, in
Terra Firma, by a strait three miles
over, was long subject to Spain, and
now belongs to Great Britain. [Tri-
nidad.)
154. Which lies off the south
coast of Hampshire, in the British
Channel, and was called Vectis by the
ancients. 155. Which has, besides
Newport, the smallboroughs of New-
ton, Cowes, and Yarmouth. 156. In
which is Carisbrook castle, where
Charles I. was imprisoned for thir-
teen months. [Wight.)
157. Which is in the lonian Sea,
off the coast of the Morea, seventeen
miles south-east of the Island of Ce-
phalonia, and was formerly called
Zacynthus. [Zanta, or Zante.)
158. Which is almost of a round
form, at the entrance of the Baltic;
is the largest of the isles belonging to
the King of Denmark, and of which
the capital is Copenhagen. [Zealand.)
SECTION VIII.
REMARKABLE TOWNS SI-
TUATED IN ISLANDS.
Name tl)c 'STofon in an Fjdantf,
1. Which is on the west coast of
Java, and the capital of a kingdom
of the same name. [Bantam.)
2. Which has a good harbour and
a strong castle, and is the capital of
Corsica. (Bastia.)
3. Which is the capital of all the
Dutch settlements in the East Indies,
and situated on the north-west part
of the Island of Java. (Batavia.)
4. Which is on the south-west
coast of the Island of Sumatra,
whence large quantities of pepper are
exported to Europe. (Bencoolen.)
5- Which stands on a high rock at
the most southern verge of the Island
of Corsica, near the chanel which
divides that Island from Sardinia.
[Bonafacio.)
6. Which has a castle and a good
harbour, and is the capital of Sardi-
nia. [Cagliari.)
7. Which is the capital of an is-
land, formerly called Crete, in the
middle of which stands the celebrat-
ed Mount Ida. ( Candia.)
8. Which was the capital of that
part of St. Domingo, which formerly
belonged to France. (Cape Francois,
or Le Cap.)
9. Which is the capital of an island
on the coasts of Guiana, and the
chief settlement of the French in
South America. [Cayenne.)
10. Which is seated on the west
side of the island of Minorca, of
which it is the capital. (Cittadella.)
11. Which is seated on the north
of the Isle of Wight, and in time of
war is a place of general rendezvous
for merchant-ships waiting for con-
voys. (Cowes.)
12. Which is nearly at the same
distance from the English, Scottish,
and Irish shores, and is the capital of
the Isle of Man. [Douglas.)
13. Which is situated round a bay,
on the gentle ascent of a hill, in form
of an amphitheatre, and is the capital
of the Island of Madeira. [Funchal.)
14. Which is in Sicily, about a
mile from the sea, and was formerly
called Agrigentum. [Gergenti.)
15. Which stands on the north
side of an island on the Malabar
coast, is the capital of the Portu-
guese settlements in India, and the
seat of a Viceroy. (Goa.)
16. Which is in the Island of Cuba,
: and famous for its harbour, so large
that it can hold 1000 vessels, and yet
the mouth so narrow, that only one
ship can enter at a time ; is the re-
sidence of the Governor and Captain-
General of the Spanish West Indies,
and the rendezvous for all the trea-
sure ships on their return to Spain.
[Havannah.)
17- Which has a good harbour,
and is the capital of the Island of
Ivi9a, in the Mediterranean; is re-
nowned for its pasturage and figs,
and was formerly called Ebusus.
( Iviga .)
18. Which is seated on the north
side of the bay of Port Royal, in the
Island of Jamaica, and is much re-
sorted to by merchants and seamen.
(Kingston.)
19. Which is on the north coast
of the Island of St. Domingo, and
was formerly the seat of the French ,
Government in that island. (Leo-
gana.)
20. Which is the capital of a group
of islands of the same name, in the
Mediterranean, belonging to Naples,
and in ancient times was the seat of
the kingdom of iEolus. 21. Which
was ruined by Barbarossa, in 1544,
who carried away all the inhabitants
into slavery, and demolished the
place, which was rebuilt by the Em-
peror Charles V. ( Lipari.)
22. Which is the capital of the Isle
of Cape Breton. ( Louisbourg .)
23. Which is seated on the south-
west side of the largest of the an-
cient Balearic Isles, in the Mediter-
ranean, of which it is the capital.
(Majorca.)
24. Which is the capital of the
chief of the Philippine Isles, and the
residence of the Viceroy. [Manilla.)
25. Which is a settlement of the
English East India Company in Su-~
matra, between two and three miles
to the south of York Fort, and five
east of Bencoolen. [Marlborough
Fort.)
26. Which was originally called
Zancle, and is seated in the valley of
Demona, in Sicily, and has one of
the safest harbours in the Mediter-
ranean in the form of a half moon.
(Messina.)
27. Which is the capital of one of
the Philippine Islands of the same
name, and is seated in between five
and ten degrees North latitude..
[Mindanao.)
28. Which, seated on the north
side of Sicily, is a rich, ancient, and
beautiful city, once the metropolis of
the island, and was formerly called
Panormus. (Palermo.)
29. Which is seated on a bay in
the south-west part of the island of
Newfoundland, forty miles west of
St. John’s, and 200 east of Cape
Breton. ( Placentia .)
30. Which is on the north coast
of the Island of Cuba, with a good
harbour. [Porto del Principe.)
31. Which was formerly the ca-
pital of Jamaica, but was destroyed,
at different times, by an earthquake,
a great fire, a hurricane the most ter-
rible on record, and a great inunda-
tion of the sea. [Port Royal.)
32. Which is one of the principal
' places of Martinico, and is the seat
of government in the island. [Port
Royal.)
33. Which formerly belonged to
the Spaniards, and was the capital of
an island called by the same name,
as well as by the name of Hispa-
niola, half of which belonged to the
Spaniards, and the rest to the
French, till both were expelled by
the Negroes, who have now esta-
blished a government of their own,
; and call the island by its ancient
name, Hayti. 34. Which is the most
, ancient European town of all the
; New World, and was founded by
; Bartholomew Columbus, brother to
? the Admiral. (St. Domingo.)


35. Which is seated at the bottom
of a haven, in St. George’s Island,
one of the Bermudas or Somers’
Islands, in the Atlantic Ocean. [St.
George.)
36. Which is seated on the Bay of
St. Aubin, has a church where the
prayers are read alternately in Eng-
lish and French, and is the capital of
the island of Jersey. [St. Hellier.)
37. Which was once the capital,
though not the most considerable
town, in the Isle of Cuba, about two
leagues from the sea. [St. Jago de
Cuba.)
38. Which is the ordinary seat of
the Governor of the Leeward Islands,
and the capital of Antigua. [St. John
of Antigua.)
39. Which is guarded by two forts,
one called the Old Castle, and the
other Castle Cornet, and is the
capital of the island of Guernsey.
(St. Peter.)
40. Which is among mountains in
Iceland, and the principal place of
the whole Island. ( SJcaalholt .)
41. Which was once the capital of
the Island of Jamaica, where the
assembly and the grand courts of
justice are held, and is seated on the
south-east part of the Island. [Spa-
nish Town.)
42. Which is the capital of the
Island of Formosa, in the Chinese
Sea. [Taiouan-fou.)
43. Which is the capital of Malta,
and, though exceedingly strong and
well fortified, was taken by the Bri-
tish, in 1800, after a siege of eleven
months. {Valetta.)
44. Which is the only town in the
Island of Gothland, and is seated
on the side of a rock in the Baltic.
[Wisby.)
SECTION IX.
PRINCIPAL PENINSULAS.
Name tlje
1. Which is in the province of Gu-
zerat, between the Gulf of Cambay,
and twenty degrees of N. latitude.
{Cambay.)
2. Which lies on the north-east
of China, to which it is tributary,
and the King of which resides at
Hanching. [Corea.)
3. Which was formerly called Tau-
rica Chersonesus, the inhabitants of
which sacrificed all strangers to Dia-
na, but now belongs to Russia, and
is united to the province of Cathari-
noslaff by the isthmus of Perekop,
between the Black Sea and the Sea
of Azof. 4. Which, previous to its
falling into the power of the Russians,
was the residence of a Tartar Khan,
whom the Turks considered as enti-
tled to succeed to the throne of their
Sultan, should the Ottoman race
become extinct. [Crimea.)
5. Which is bounded on the west
by Baffin’s Bay, on the south by
Davis’s Strait, and on the east * by
the northern part of the Atlantic
Ocean. {South Greenland.)
6. Which is situated on the east-
ern coast of Asia, and is bounded
by the country of the Koriaks on
the north, by the Pacific Ocean to
the south and east, and by the Sea
of Okhotsk to the west. [Kamts-
chatka.)
7. Which contains a kingdom of
the same name, bounded by Siam on
the north, by the Indian Ocean on
the east, and by a strait which sepa-
rates it from Sumatra on the south-
west. {Malaya, or Malacca.)
8. Which is the country whence
came the Goths, who, under Alaric,
plundered Rome, and spread them-
selves over a large part of Europe.
9. Which now includes the greater
portion of two kingdoms, united
under one sovereign, having the
Gulf of Bothnia and the Baltic on
the east, and the North Sea and the
Atlantic Ocean on the west. [The
ancient Scandinavia , containing
Sweden and Norway.)
10. Which is surrounded, on the
North by the Atlantic Ocean, the Bay
of Biscay, and France; on the east
by the Mediterranean; on the south
by the Mediterranean and the Strait
of Gibraltar; and on the west by the
Atlantic Ocean. 11. Which contains
two kingdoms, wherein the British,
under Lord Wellington, acquired
great renown during the war with
Buonaparte. ( Spain and Portugal .)
12. Which is in New Spain, oppo-
site the Island of Cuba, and between
the Bays of Campeachy and Hon-
duras. {Yucatan.)
SECTION X.
PRINCIPAL CAPES.
tljc ©ape,
1. Which is the highest on all the
South coast of England, between
Hastings and Shoreham, in the
county of Sussex, and near which
the French, in 1690, defeated the
combined English and Dutch fleets.
{Peachy Head.)
2. Which is on the west coast of
Zaara, in the Atlantic Ocean, and of
which the inhabitants are Antipodes
to those of New Caledonia. [Cage
Blanco, in Africa.
3. Which is in the government of
Costa Rica, in Guatimala, on the
coast of the Pacific Ocean, twenty
leagues south of Lake Nicaragua.
{Cape Blanco, in Mexico.)
4. Which is the most western
known point of California, and was
visited by Captain Cook, in 1778, to
whom the inhabitants expressed a
desire for iron in preference to any
thing else. {Cape Blanco, in New
Mexico.)
5. Which is on the coast of Peru,
in the South Sea, 120 miles south-
west of Guayaquil. ( Cape Blanco, in
Peru.)
6. W hich is on the west coast of
Africa, in Zaara, south of the Canary
Islands. {Cape Bojador.)
7- Which is on the east of an
island of the same name in North
America, about four leagues east of
Louisbourg. { Cape Breton.)
8. Whick is the most eastern part
of all Scotland, situated in the dis-
trict of Buchan, Aberdeenshire, be-
tween which and the town of Peter-
head, are the Bullers, or Boilers of
Buchan, a very remarkable cavity in
the rocks, worn by the sea, and one
of the greatest curiosities in North
Britain. {Buchanness.)
9. Which is at the entrance of Tor-
bay, in Devonshire. {Bury Head.)
-10. Which is in the Atlantic Ocean,
on the coast of Morocco, in Africa.
[Cape Cantin.)
11. Which is seated on the north-
east of Yucatan, in South America,
opposite to Cape Antonio, in the
Isle of Cuba. {Cape Catoche.)
12. Which is the most northerly
point of Labrador, at the entrance of
Hudson’s Strait. {Cape Chidley.)
13 Which is in a little island on
the south of Ireland. [Cape Clear.)
14. Which is on the south side of
Boston harbour, at the north end of
Barnstaple Bay. 15. Which is the
highest and longest cape on the
coast of Massachusetts, in North
America. {Cape Cod.)
16. Which is the most southern of
the West Peninsula of India, and
situated north-west of Ceylon. [Cape
Comorin.)
17- Which is on the coast of Mex-
ico, or New Spain, in the province
of Guadalajara, in the Pacific Ocean.
{Cape Corientes.)
18. Which is at the northern ex-
tremity of Corsica, about twenty
miles north of Bastia. {Cape Corso.)
19. Which is commonly called the
Old Head of Kinsale, in the county
of Cork, Ireland. {Cape Coursey.)
20. Which is seated on the south
of the peninsula of Cambay, oppo-
site a small island of the same name,
in the country of Guzerat. {Point
Hiu.)
21. Which is a point of land on
the coast of Kent, six miles south
of Romney, in the British Channel.
{Dungeness.)
22. Which is the north-eastern
point of Great Britain, in Caithness,
near which are the remains of John
o’Groat’s House, the most northerly
dwelling in the kingdom. (Dun-
cansby Head.)
23. Which is on the south-west
extremity of Ireland, on an island of
the same name, between Kenmare
Bay andßantryßay. {CapeDursey.)
24. Which is on the most easterly
point of Asia, opposite Cape Prince
of Wales, in North America. {East
Cape.)
25. Which is in the north-eastern
extremity of Ireland, forming one
side of Bally castle Bay. {Fair Head.)
26. Which is the most southerly
point of Greenland, at the entrance
of Davis’s Straits. {Cape Farewell.)
27- Which was anciently called
Actium, near which Augustus de-
feated Antony and Cleopatra in a
sea-fight. {Cape Azio, or Figalo.)
28. Which is the most western
part of Europe, and was believed by
the ancients to be the termination of
the world. 29. Of which the name
still signifies “ the end of the earth.”
{Cape Finisterre.)
30. Which is in the North Sea,
on the east coast of Yorkshire, five
miles north-east of Burlington.
{Flamborough Head.)
31. Which is the southern point of
Florida, in North America, near the
Strait of Bahama. {CapeFlorida.)
32. Which is the north-east point
of the Isle of Thanet, north-east of
Margate, in Kent. {North Fore-
land.)
33. Which is a head-land, form-
ing the east point of the Kentish
shore, six miles to the south of the
North Foreland. {South Foreland.)
34. Which is the most southern
part of Africa, at which all European
vessels touch on their way to the
East Indies. 35. Which belonged to
the Dutch till 1806, but is now the
seat of an important British colony.
{Cape of Good Hope.)
36. Which lies on the eastern part
of Guatimala, in Mexico, and to which
Columbus, by way of thanksgiving
to the Almighty, upon a favourable
wind springing up, gave the name it
bears now. {Cape Gr alias a Dios.)
37. Which is at the easternmost
point of Africa, on the coast of Ajan,
and opposite to the Isle of Socotra.
{Cape Guardafui.)
38. Which is the most southern
part of Terra del Fuego, in South
America, and round which all ships
now pass that sail to the South Sea.
{Cape Horn.)
39. Which forms the north side of
Dublin harbour. {Howth Head.)
40. Which is near the Gulf of
Ormus, on the south of Persia, in the
province of Kerman. {Cape Jask.)
41. Which is on the north-west
point of Normandy, in France, and
near which, in 1692, the English
fleet, under Admiral Russell, obtain-
ed a decided and memorable victory
over that of France. [Cape La Hogue.)
42. Which forms a point of land,
so surrounded by the sea at high
water, that it looks like a little island,
at least one mile from the shore, and
is seated on the south of Suffolk,
over against Harwich. {Landguard
Point.)
43. Which is in Cornwall, and, as
it forms the most western point of
Great Britain, is distinguished by a
name signifying the extremity of the
country. {The Land’s End.)
44. Which is the most southern
point of England, and from whence
vessels bound to the West Indies
take their departure. {Lizard Point.)
45. Which is in the kingdom of
Benin, in Guinea, and almost op-
posite to the Isle of St. Thomas.
{Cape Lopo, or Lopez Gonsalvo.)
46. Which is in Valencia, in Spain,
and separates the Gulf of Valencia
from that of Alicant. [Cape Martin.)
47. Which is the most southern
of the Morea, between the Gulf
of Coron and that of Colokythia.
[Cape Matapan, or Caglia.)
48. Which is in the county of Wig-
town, and the most southerly point
in Scotland. {Mull of Galloway.)
49. Which is at the northern ex-
tremity of the island of Madagascar.
{Cape Natal, or Ambra.)
50. Which is at the western extre-
mity of the Isle of Wight, andreceives
its name from two sharp-pointed
narrow rocks which stand opposite
to it. ( The Needles’ Point.)
51. Which is seated on the coast
of Ava, on the east side of the Bay
of Bengal, about one hundred miles
to the north of the Isles of Andaman.
{Cape Negrais.)
52. Which is in the most southern
part of the coast of Angola, and used
to be frequented by European slave
traders. {Cape Negro.)
53. Which lies on the north part
of the entrance of the river of Ama-
zons, in French Guiana. {Cape
North, in Guiana.)
54. Which is the most northern
point of Europe and of Norway.
[Cape North, in the Island of Mag-
geroe.)
55. Which is on the Windward or
Grain Coast of Malaguette, in Guinea;
latitude 4. 15. N. {Cape Palmas.)
56. Which is in Val de Noto, on
the south-east coast of Sicily, near
which the English and Spanish fleets
had an engagement in the year 1735,
when the latter were beaten. {Cape
Passaro.)
57. Which is on the Dorsetshire
coast, by Swanage Bay, in the Bri-
tish Channel, with a battery upon it.
{P ever el Point.)
58. Which is also on the Dorset-
shire coast, and forms the southern
point of an island, or rather pro-
montory, united to the main land by
an isthmus of pebbles, called the
Chesil Bank. 59. On which are two
light-houses, in the British Channel.
[Portland Bill.)
60. Which is on the north-west
extremity of North America, oppo-
site to East Cape, in Asia. [Cape
Prince of Wales.)
61. Which is the most eastern
point of Arabia, at the entrance of
the Gulf of Ormus. {Cape Razalgat.)
62. Which is on the south-east
coast of the Island of Newfoundland,
opposite to the great fishing-bank.
{Cape Race.)
63. Which is the most southern
point of the peninsula of Malacca,
opposite the Island of Sincapora.
{Cape Romania.)
64. Which is the most southerly
point of Nova Scotia, in North
America, and near which is a fine
cod fishery. [Cape Sable.)
65. Which is in Dorsetshire, south
of Swanage Bay, in the British Chan


nel, and forms a noted sea-mark. 1
{St. Alban’s, or St. Aldham’s Head.) 1
66. Which is in the province of (
Buenos Ayres, in South America, at
the mouth of Rio de la Plata, and op- <
posite to Cape St. Maria. ( Cape St. 1
Antonio.)
67- Which is the most western
point of the Island of Cuba. {Cape
St. Antonio.)
68. Which is in Brazil, in South
America, between the Bay of All
Saints and Cape St. Roque. {Cape
St. Augustine.)
69. Which is at the southern ex-
tremity of California, south of the
Tropic of Cancer, in North America.
{Cape St. Lucas.)
70. Which is the most southern
point of the Captainry del Rey, in
South Brazil, at the mouth of the Rio
de la Plata, {Cape Santa Maria.)
71. Which is the most eastern
point of the Captainry of Rio Grande,
in the northern division of Brazil.
{Cape St. Roque.)
72. Which forms the south-west
point of the kingdom of Algarve, in
Portugal, in the Atlantic, and is re-
markable for a great naval victory,
obtained, in 1795, by the British ad-
miral, Sir John Jervis, over the Spa-
nish fleet, 73. Which gives the title
of earl to the Jervis family, in conse-
quence of that victory. (St. Vincent.)
74. Which is the utmost point of
Hdlderness, at the mouth of the
Humber, in Yorkshire, and has a
lighthouse upon it. ( Spurn Head:)
75. Which is in the British Chan-
nel, nine miles south of Dartmouth,
in Devonshire. {Start Point.)
76. Which is at the southern ex-
tremity of Sardinia, abouttwenty-five
miles south-west of Cagliari. {Cape
Tavolaro.)
77* Which is the most southern
point of the Gold Coast, in Guinea.
{Cape Three Points.)
78. Which is on the coast of An-
dalusia, in Spain, south-east of Cadiz,
and memorable for the death of Lord
Nelson, who was shot on the 21st
October, 1805, at the moment when
he had obtained a great naval victory
over the combined fleets of France
and Spain off this place. 79* Which
gives the title of earl to the Nelson
family. {Trafalgar.)
80. Which is on the west coast of
Africa, opposite the islands of the
same name, forty-five miles north-
west of the mouth of the river Gam-
bia. {Cape Verde.)
81. Which is in Sutherland, and
forms the north-west point of Great
Britain. 82. Which receives its name
from the sea being always tempes-
tuous in its vicinity, so that it has
become the dread of mariners. ( Cane
Wrath.)
SECTION XI.
ISTHMUSES.
Name tfjc IglJjmus,
1. Which joins the Morea to
Greece, and reaches from the Gulf
of Lepanto to that of Egina. (Isth-
mus of Corinth.)
2. Which unites North and South
America, having the Caribbean Sea
on the east side, and the Pacific
Ocean on the west. {lsthmus of
Darien, or Panama.)
3. Which joins Crim Tartary to the
Continent. {lsthmus of Perekop.)
4. Which unites Asia to Africa.
{lsthmus of Suez.)
SECTION XII.
CHAINS OF MOUNTAINS.
Name tl)e ©lain oi JHountams,
1. Which, dividing Italy from
France and Germany, bears a Celtic
name, signifying High Mountains,
and of which many rise to the perpen-
dicular height of two miles. 2. Which
Hannibal, the Carthaginian comman-
der, crossed with vast labour, when
he invaded Italy. ( The Alps.')
3. Which is in North America,
between the Atlantic, the Mississippi,
and the lakes of Canada. 4. Which
has been called “ the back-bone of
the United States/' because it sepa-
rates the old provinces from Louisi-
ana, following the course of the Mis-
sissippi. { The Allegany , or Apa-
lachian Mountains .)
5. Which, beginning at Savona,
extends as far as the southern extre-
mity of the kingdom of Naples, and
divides Italy throughout its whole
length. .{The Apennines.)
6. Which derives its name from a
province of Spain, that gives a title
to the eldest son of the King of that
country. J. Which separates the
province of the same name in Spain,
from the kingdom of Leon, and is a
continuation of the Pyrenean Moun-
tains. ( The Mountains of Asturias .)
8. Which separates Barbary from
Biledulgerid and the Deserts to the
south of Barbary Proper, running
from Egypt to the coasts of a large
sea, to which it gives name. 9. Which
is said to derive its own name from
an ancient King of Mauritania, who,
being a great astronomer, was fabled
to have supported the heavens on his
shoulders, and to have been metamor-
phosed into this mountain. {Atlas.)
10. Which, extending from the
Black Sea to the Adriatic, divides
Turkey in Europe into north and
south. 11. Which was known to the
ancients by the name of Pangaeus.
{Mount Castagnat.)
12. Which, being a continuation
of Mount Taurus, extends from the
Black Sea to the Caspian, and is one of
the highest in Asia. 13. On which,
according to the ancient poets, Pro-
metheus was chained by Jupiter, to
endure the punishment of having
his heart continually devoured by
vultures. 14. Which was long consi-
dered by the Orientals as the boun-
dary of the world. ( Mount Cauca-
sus..)
15. Which is in Albania, and ex-
tends far into the sea, forming a pro-
montory, that divides the lonian Sea
from the Adriatic Gulf. 16. Which
is a continuation of Mount Castag-
nat, in Turkey, and was known to
the ancients under the title of Acro-
ceranus. ( The Ceraunian Chain,
also called Linguetta and Glossa.
17* Which is in Languedoc, in
France, and, in the reign of Louis
XJV. afforded a secure asylum to the
persecuted Protestants. 18. Which
consists of three principal divisions,
the northern, called Puy-de-Dome;
the central, called Mont d’Or ; and
the southern, called Cantal. {The
Cevennes.)
19. Which runs from north to
south, through Cumberland and
. Northumberland, and separates
Scotland from England. 20. Which
is memorable for a sanguinary battle,
called by the Scots the battle of Ot-
terburn, fought at its foot, between
Earl Douglas on the Scottish side,
- and Percy, Earl of Northumberland,
on that of the English, in which both
were killed. ( The Cheviot Hills.)
21, Which runs a course of up-
wards of four thousand miles from
north to south, along the coast of
the Pacific Ocean, in South America,
extending from the Isthmus of Darien
to the Straits of Magellan. 22. To
which Don George Juan, Mr. Good-
win, Mons. De la Condamine, and
many other mathematicians, were
sent by the Kings of France and
Spain to make observations by which
to determine the figure of the earth.
{The Cordilleras, or Great Chain of
the Andes.)
23. Which is in European Turkey,
and separates the country of Servia,
with Bulgaria, from Roumelia, the
ancient Macedon and Thrace, send-
ing many branches into the latter
countries. 24. Of which some parts
are so lofty, that both the Adriatic
and the Black Sea may be seen from
them. 25. Which is celebrated in
fabulous history for being the scene
of Orpheus’s death. {Emineh, or
Hcemus.)
26. Which crosses Portuguese and
Spanish Estramadura, to the north
of the Tagus, dividing New Castille
from the Old, and joining the Astu-
rian and Pyrenean Mountains, of
which it is a continuation. ( The
Guadarama Chain.)
27- Which is the largest chain of
mountains in Arabia, crossing Arabia
Felix, from the coast of the Red Sea
to that of the Arabian Sea. {Gibel-
el-Ared.)
28. Which runs almost the whole
length of the Western Peninsula of
India, extending from Surat to Cape
Comorin, and is a continuation of the
mountains of Naugracut. {The Chain
of the Ghauts, divided into the Balla-
ghauts, or Upper Ghauts, and the
Payenghauts, or Loiver Ghauts.)
29. Which is a branch of Taurus,
separates Hindoostan from Tibet,
and was known to the ancients by
the names of Imaiis and Emodus,
30. Which is now called by a name
signifying, in the country dialect, a
mountain of snow," with which it is
constantly covered. {Mount Him-
maleh.)
31. Which, beginning in the Canton
of Zurich, in Swisserland, extends
along the Rhine to the cantons of
Soleure and Neufchatel, separates
the Pays de Vaud from Burgundy
and Franche Comte, and gives name
to one of the departments of France.
{Mount Jura.)
32. Which divides Hungary from
Austrian Poland, and is so high that
in a clear day its peaks may be seen
at Erlau, in Hungary, and at War-
saw. {Mount Krapak, or the Carpa-
thian Chain.)
33. Which intersects Syria and
Palestine, reaching from Sidon, on
the Mediterranean, eastward beyond
Damascus. 34. Which is celebrated
in sacred history for its lofty cedars,
which furnished King Solomon with
timber for the temple at Jerusalem,
and for his palaces. {Mount Lebanon,
or Libanus.)
35. Which is on the west coast of
Africa, and, running eastward into
the country, separates Guinea from
Nigritia. 36. To which the Portu-
guese gave a name, which it still bears,
in consequence of its being much in-
fested by lions. 37- Near which the
British had a colony, called after it,
for the purpose of civilizing the na-
tives. ( Sierra Leone.)
38. Which runs from Cape Guar-
dafui down to the country of the Hot-
tentots, separating the countries on
the Eastern coast of Africa from the
interior. 39. Which, from its great
length and singular appearance, has
been called the “ back-bone of the
world.” {Mount Lupata.)
40. Which is a continuation of the
Sierra Leone, and is situated in the
centre of Africa, extending from
Nigritia to the Indian Sea. 41. In
which Ptolemy and the ancient Geo-
graphers place the source of the
Nile. {Mountains of the Moon.)
42. Whichisin Andalusia,in Spain,
and divides that province from Estra-
madura, New Castille, and Murcia,
being a continuation of the mountains
in Estramadura. 43. Which were
called Montes Marinse by the Ro-
mans. 44. In which the Spanish
minister Olivarez settled a number
of French and Germans, in order to
augment the population of the coun-
try. {Sierra Morena.)
45. Which is a continuation of
Mount Taurus, and runs from the
Caspian Sea to the kingdom of Bur-
mah, in the eastern peninsula of In-
dia, dividing the late Mogul Empire
from Usbeek Tartary and Tibet.
{Naugracaut.)
46. Which runs from the north to
the south of the Scandinavian penin-
sula, and separates the governments
of Drontheim and Agerhus, in Nor-
way, from Sweden Proper and Swe-
dish Lapland. {The Dqfrine Chain.)
47- Which divides France from
Spain, commencing near the har-
bour of Vendres, in Roussillon, and
running as far as Fontarabia. in
Biscay, a course of about two
hundred miles. {The Pyrennees.)
48. Which consists of a prodigious
ridge of mountains, extending over
the south of Tartary, and running
as far as Cape East and Bhering’s
Straits. {The Altar Chain.)
49. Which divides Asia into two
parts, and extends from the sea-coast
opposite Rhodes, across Turkey in.
Asia and Persia, and reaching to the
extremities of Tartary and China,
under different names. {Mount Tau-
rus.)
50. Which, in France, separates
the department of the same name
from the departments of Upper
Saone and Upper Rhine; or Lor-
raine from Franche Comte and
Alsace. {The Vosges.)
»
SECTION xm.
PRINCIPAL MOUNTAINS.
Name tlje iHountain,
1. Which is in Caernarvonshire,
four miles south-westof Aberconway,.
and was formerly a tremendous pre-
cipice, 1400 feet high, overhanging
the sea, but is now securely crossed
by a good road. {Penmaenmawr.)
2. Which is also in Caenarvon-
shire, and the highest in Wales, rising
to the height of 3,555 feet above the
level of the sea. 3. Which was as
much revered by the ancient Britons,
as Parnassus was by the Greeks, or
Mount Ida by the Cretans. {Snow-
don.)
4. Which, next to Snowdon, is
the highest mountain in North
Wales, and is situated in Merioneth-
shire. ( Cader Idris.)
5. Which is among the Alps, in
Savoy, and rises to the height of
15,662 feet above the level of the
sea, that is to say, is 5000 feet higher
than the Peak of Teneriffe. {Mont
Blanc.)
6. Which is between the country
of the Valais, and the valley of Aost,
and on which are hospitable Monks,
who afford assistance to distressed
travellers. ( Great St. Bernard.)
7* Which is in the Canton of Uri,
in Switzerland, eight miles South
from Altorf, and in which the river
Rhine has its source. {St. Gothard.)
8. Which is in France, in the de-
partment of Puy de Dome, and in
the neighbourhood of a deep lake,
covered with a thick vapour, which
resolves itself into rain as soon
as a stone is thrown into it. {Mont
d’Or.)
9. Which forms a peninsula in the
Grecian Archipelago, and at sunset
extends its shadow to the. island of


Stalimene, or Lemnos, a distance of
about eight leagues. 10. Near which
Xerxes dug a canal about a mile
and a half long, by means of which
he conducted his fleet to the foot of
the mountain. 11. Which the sculp-
tor Dinocrates proposed to Alex-
ander the Great to form into a co-
lossal statue, representing that mo-
narch, with the town in one hand,
and in the other a bason large enough
to contain all the waters of the moun-
tain. [Mount Athos.)
12. Which is between Thessalia
and Macedonia, and upon the top of
which Hercules is said to have burnt
himself. 13. Between which and the
sea is a narrow pass, about twenty-
five feet wide, called Thermopylae, on
account of the hot baths and mineral
waters in its neighbourhood; a pass
celebrated in history for the success-
ful opposition made there by Leoni-
das and three hundred Spartans
against three hundred thousand Per-
sians. [Mount (Eta.)
14. Which lies between Thessaly,
Macedonia, and Epirus, was conse-
crated to the Muses and Apollo, and
has been rendered by the poets as
celebrated as Parnassus. ( Pindus.)
15. Which is in Thessaly, and has
been rendered famous by the fable
of the giants; and the summit of
which, according to the ancients,
touched the heavens. 16. Which
was the reputed abode of the gods,
and upon which Jupiter was sup-
posed to hold his court. [Olympus.)
17. Which formed part of Mount
Olympus, in Thessaly, and was sup-
posed to have been separated by Her-
cules into two parts in order to form
the Vale of Tempe. [Mount Ossa.)
18. Upon which the giants, in their
war against the gods, in Thessaly,
are fabled to have placed Mount
Ossa, in order to scale the heavens.
19. On which the Centaurs fixed their
residence, and from a grove on which
Chiron, the preceptor of Achilles, cut
the lance which none but that hero
could wield. [Mount Pelion.)
20. Which is in Boeotia, now part
of Livadia, and was anciently called
Helicon. 21. Which was consecrated
to the Muses, and from which flowed
the fountain of Hippocrene. ( Mount
Zagara.)
22. Which is in Achaia, very near
Mount Helicon, and was consecrated
by the poets to the Muses and Apollo.
23. From which flowed a fountain
that became very celebrated, because
the Pythian prophetess, and the
poets who wished to be inspired,
plunged themselves into it, and drank
the waters. 24. Which is one of the
highest in Greece, and may be per-
ceived from the citadel of Corinth, a
distance of about twenty-six leagues.
25. Which has two points, upon one
of which stood the city of Delphi.
(Mount Parnasus.)
26. Which lies in Attica, now part
of Livadia, about two miles from
Athens, and is still famous for its
bees and excellent honey. (Hy-
mettus.)
27. Which is in Arcadia, forming
now part of the Morea, and near
which Hercules killed an enormous
wild boar, and carried it on his shoul-
ders to Eurystheus, who was so ter-
rified at the sight of it that he hid
himself in a brazen vessel. [Ery-
manthus.)
28. Which is the highest in the
island of Candia, and upon which
Jupiter was reputed to have been
brought up by the Corybantes.
[Mount Ida, in Crete.)
29. Which is in the environs of
Troy, in Phrygia, and on which the
shepherd Paris adjudged the prize
of beauty to Venus. [Mount Ida, in
Phrygic. .)
30. Which is between Syria and
Judea, on the Mediterranean, four
leagues from Nazareth, and is cele-
brated on account of the prophet
Elijah. [Mount Carmel .)
31. Which is near Jerusalem, to
the north of Sion, in the Holy Land,
where our Saviour suffered, and
where is now the holy sepulchre.
[Mount Calvary.)
32. Which is in Arabia Petrgea, in
a peninsula formed by the Red Sea,
and on which God delivered His law
to the Israelites. ( Mount Sinai.)
33. Which is in Arabia Petrsea, to
the east of the Red Sea, and on
which Moses, while keeping the
flock of his father-in-law, Jethro, saw
the burning bush. [Mount Horeh.)
34. Which stands in Armenia, and
is held in great veneration by the in-
habitants, as being the place where
Noah’s Ark rested after the Deluge.
[Mount Ararat.)
35. Which is in the island of Su-
matra, and is 357 feet higher than the
Peak of Teneriffe. ( Mount Ophir.)
36. Which is in one of the Canary
Islands, is shaped like a sugar-loaf,
and rises to the height of about 1742
toises above the level of the sea. 37.
Through which the Dutch draw their
first meridian. [Peak of Teneriffe .)
SECTION XIV.
PRINCIPAL VOLCANOS.
Name ti)e Volcano,
I. Of which the first eruption on
record was in the year of our Lord
79, in the reign of the Emperor
Titus, and was accompanied by a
destructive earthquake. 2. Which
overwhelmed the cities of Pompeii
and Herculaneum, in the neigh-
bourhood of Naples, with its lava
and ashes. 3. On which Pliny, the
naturalist was destroyed by the
lava, whilst endeavouring to discover
the causes of an eruption. [Vesu-
vius.)
4. Which is in the valley Demona,
in Sicily, and under which, according
to the poets, Jupiter confined the
rebellious giants. 5. Which was sup-
posed by the ancients to contain the
forges of Vulcan and of the Cyclops,
the reputed fabricators of Jove’s
thunderbolts. [JEtna, or Gihel.)
6. Which is in Iceland, covered
with perpetual snow, even when it
sends forth flames, and near which
are two springs, one extremely cold,
the other boiling hot. [Hecla.)
7. Which is near Mount Taurus,
and the most celebrated in Asia,
having its summit always covered
with flames. [Volcano of Albour.)
8. Which is in the principal of the
Molucca Islands, properly so called,
and rages most furiously at the time
of the equinoxes. [The Volcano of
Ternate.)
9. Which gives name to one of the
Cape de Verde Islands, and con-
tinually sends out flames. ( The Vol-
cano of Fuego.)
10. Which is in the most consider-
able of the Canary Islands, and very
seldom ceases to emit flames. [The
Volcano of Teneriffe.)
11. Which is near Quito, is up-
wards of three miles in perpendicular
height, and has eruptions more dread-
ful than those of any other volcanos.
( The Volcano of Cotopaxi.)
12. Which derives its name from
a large town between Lima and Po-
tosi, in Peru, and throws out consi-
derable flames. [The Volcano of
Arequipa.)
13. Which takes its name from a
group of islands separated from
South America by the Strait of Ma-
gellan. [The Volcano of Terra del
Fuego.)
SECTION XV.
PRINCIPAL FORESTS.
Name tljc J?orest,
I. Which takes its name from a
village in which is the most splendid
of the country-seats of the kings of
England. 2. In which is a little vil-
lage, called Binfield, in Berkshire, the
birth-place of the celebrated poet
Pope. ( Windsor Forest.)
3. Which is in Gloucestershire,
and has for a long time supplied the
English navy with the best wood for
ship-building. ( Dean Forest.)
4 Which is the only royal forest
in England, is situated to the north
of the river Trent, and extends over
all the western part of Nottingham-
shire. 5. Which, in ancient times,
was the head-quarters of the celebra-
ted Robin Hood and little John, with
their horde of freebooters. ( Sherwood
Forest.)
6. Which was planted by William
the Conqueror, in Hampshire, and in
which his son, William Rufus, w r as
shot by an arrow, whilst hunting, by
Sir Walter Tyrrel. ( The New Forest.)
7. Which is situated to the north
of Norway and Sweden, and contains
a great number of foxes. {The Forest
of Lapland.')
8. Which is in a kingdom belong-
ing to the King of Sweden, and sup-
plies almost all Europe with masts,
beams, planks, and boards. [The
Forest of Norway.)
9. Which lies in Russia, in the go-
vernment of Archangel, and is bound-
ed on the west by the river Youg,
which falls into the Dwina, and is di-
vided on the east from Asia by a
long chain of mountains. ( Zibanian
Forest.)
40. Which is in France, between
a city of the same name, and the
town of Montargis, in the depart-
ment of the Loire. {Orleans Forest.)
11. Which is in France, in the de-
partment of the Oise, and derives its
name from the town in which the
maid of Orleans was made prisoner
by the English, in 1430. { The Forest
of Compeigne.)
12. Which, in the time of Caesar,
overspread a great part of Germany,
and lies between the Meuse, Thion-
ville, and Liege. [The Forest of Ar-
dennes.)
13. Which is in the department of
the Seine and Marne, and in which
the Kings of France, from the time
of Louis VII., have had a celebrated
hunting-seat or palace. ( The Forest
of Fontainbleau.)
14. Which was called by the Ro-
mans Marciana Sylva, and in one part
Hyrcinia Sylva, and spread itself over
almost all Germany, as far as Bohe-
mia, being nine days’ journey in j
length and six in breadth. 15. (
Which stretches now over a part of
the kingdom of Wiirtemberg to the
Brisgau in the south, including a
portion of the principality of Furs-
temberg, and from near the sources
of the Danube, as far as the Rhine,
above Basle. [The Black Forest.)
SECTION XVI.
HEATHS AND DESERTS.
Name ll)e i^eat^,
1. Which extends along the Bay
of Biscay, from the mouth of the Ga-
ronne to Bayonne. 2. Which forms
part of Gascony, and presents to the
eye a vast plain covered with sand,
heath, small holm-oaks, from the bark
of which cork is made, and pine trees,
which furnish turpentine and masts
for ships. {The Landes of Bordeaux.)
Name tj)e Uesert,
3. Which is in Arabia, and is di-
vided into two parts by a celebrated
mount, from which it has derived its
name. 4. In which the Israelites
sojourned, under the direction of
Moses, during a period of forty years,
{Desert of Sinai.)
5. Which is in a peninsula of Asia,
formed by theßedSea and the Persian
gulf, and is the abode of freebooters,
called Bedouins, who ride on very fleet
horses, and are a terror to the mer-
chants and pilgrims, whom they fre-
quently plunder, on their way to and
from Mecca. ( The Desert of Arabia.)
6. Which is in Nubia to the west
of the Nile, across which is a journey
of five days from Egypt to Abyssinia.
{Desert of Bahouda.)
7- Which is between Prussian Po-
merania and Prussia Proper, in the
district of Dantzic. {The Desert
of Waldon.)
8. Which is on the side of the great
wall between China and Chinese Tar-
tary, and extends into independent
Tartary. {The Desert of Gobi, or
Charm.)
9. Which is between Egypt and
Tripoli, and inhabited only by wan-
dering Arabs. 10. In which stood
the temple of Jupiter Ammon, the
access to which was very difficult, in
consequence of the burning sands
which surrounded it. ( The Desert
of' Barca.)
SECTION XVII.
PRINCIPAL SEAS AND
OCEANS.
Name tljc J£ea,
I. Which derives its modern names
from the ice with which it is conti-
nually covered, and from its northern
situation, on which last account it
was called Hyperborean by the an-
cients. 2. Which lies towards the
North Pole, between Europe, Asia,
and America; and to which the Eng-
lish, Dutch, and Danes go annually
to fish for whales. {The Frozen, or
Arctic Ocean.)
3. Which separates Europe and
Africa from America, and derives
its name from the fabulous daughters
of Atlas, who were supposed to have
their residence in it. ( The Atlantic.)
4. Of which the name signifies
Midland,” and by which three con-
tinents are washed. {The Mediter-
ranean.)
5. Which lies between the Eastern
coast of Africa and the south of
Asia, and takes its name from its be-
ing near India. ( The Indian Ocean.)
6. Which is the largest of all the
seas, and washes the ancient conti-
nent on the east, and the new one
on the west. {The Pacifc Ocean.)
7. Which is in the north-west
part of Russia in Europe, and is
formed by the Frozen Ocean. 8.
Which was known to the ancients by
the name of Pigrum, on account of
its being frequently frozen over.
{The White Sea.)
9. Which lies between Denmark,
Sweden, Russia, Courland, Prussia,
and Germany, and was called Sinus
Codanus by the ancients. 10. Which
has neither flux nor reflux of tide, is
often frozen during the winter, and
may be considered as a gulf of the
North Sea. [The Baltic.)
11. Which is formed by the Atlan-
tic Ocean, and lies between Norway,
Denmark, and Great Britain, having
Germany and part of the Low Coun-
tries on the south. ( The North Sea,
or German Ocean.)
12. Which is formed by the Atlan-
tic Ocean, and divides Great Britain
from Ireland. ( The Irish Sea, or St.
George’s Channel.)


13. Which is formedby the Atlan-
tic Ocean, and divides France from (
England, extending from Dover to ]
the Scilly Islands, and from Calais to j
Ushant, and joins the German Ocean ]
between Dover and Calais. ( The
British Channel.)
14. Which separates the west of
England from South Wales, and
bears the name of the second city in
England. [The Bristol Channel.)
15. Which takes its name from 16,
the daughter of Inachus and Melissa,
who being, as the fabulists relate,
changed into a heifer by Jupiter,
swam across it. 16. Which is part
of the Mediterranean, and lies be-
tween the south-east part of Italy
and the west coast of Turkey in
Europe. [The lonian Sea.)
17. Which divides Turkey in
Europe from Asia Minor, or Natolia,
and is bounded on the North by Ro-
mania, on the East by Natolia, on the
west by Livadia and the Morea, and
on the south by the island of Candia.
18. Which , in ancient times, was
called the iEgean Sea, from iEgeus,
the father of Theseus, and king of
Athens, who is said to have drowned
himself in it. {The Archipelago.)
19. Which, in consequence of its
vicinity to the kingdom of Pontus,
was called Propontis by the ancients,
and which communicates with the
Archipelago by the Strait of the
Dardanelles. [The Sea of Marmora.)
20. Which has Russia on the north,
Circassia on the east, Anatolia on
the south, and Turkey, in Europe on
the west, and communicates with the
Sea of Marmora by the Strait of
Constantinople. 21. Which origi-
nally was called Axenus, either from
Ashkenaz, the son of Gomer, and
great grandson of Noah, who settled
on its borders, or from a Greek word
signifying inhospitable, on account of
the savage manners of the inhabitants
of the coast; but when commerce
with foreign nations and the planta-
tion pf colonies in their neighbour-
hood, had brought them to a state of
civilization, they became remarkable
for their urbanity, and the sea then
obtained the name of Euxinus, or
hospitable. 22. Which has its mo-
dern name from the thick and dark
fogs that always lie upon its surface.
[The Black Sea.)
23. Which lies between Europe
and Asia to the north of the Black
Sea, with which it communicates by
the Strait of Kaffa. 24. Which was
anciently called Palus Maeotis, and
was worshipped as a divinity by the
Maeotee, a people of Scythia, who
lived on its borders. [The Sea of
Azof, or Sea of Zabach .)
25. Which, having no known com-
munication with any other sea, al-
though it is supposed to communicate
under ground with the Persian Gulf,
may be considered as an immense
lake. 26. Which is bounded on the
north by the country of the Calmucs,
on the east by that of a tribe of Tur-
kumans, on the south-east, south
and south-west by Persia, and on the
west by Georgia and Circassia. 27-
Which has neither flux nor reflux of
its waters, which are salter towards
the middle than on the coasts, by
reason of the great number of rivers
that empty themselves into it. 28.
Which was partially known to the
ancients by the name of Hyrcanum.
[The Caspian Sea, or Sea of Sala,
or of Baku.)
29. W hich is formed by the Indian
Ocean, with which it communicates
by the Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb, and
divides Arabia from Egypt. 30.
Which is celebrated in holy writ for
the miraculous passage of the Is-
raelites at the time of their Exodus.
(The Bed Sea, or Arabic Gulf.)
31. Which is formed by the Indian 9
Ocean, and lies between the western ai
peninsula of India, or Hindoostan, w
and Arabia, having Persia on the ii
north. 32. Which, in ancient times, tl
bore the name of Erythreeum, which c
signifies red, and is synonymous with tl
the name of the Edomites, who J
dwelt on its borders in Arabia. ( The r
Arabian Sea.) p
33. Which is formed by the Indian t
Ocean, and divides Hindoostan from J
the Birman empire. 34. Which was
known to the ancients by the name of \
Gangeticus, because it receives the £
waters of the Ganges, and is now (
called after an Indian province be-
longing to the British. [Sea, or Bay (
of Bengal.) <
35. Which is formed by the Pacific i
Ocean, on the south-east of China, t
having China on the north-west, Co-
chinchina, Cambodia, and the Malay <
peninsula on the west, the Philip- '
pine Islands on the east, and the i
islands of Borneo, Java, and Sumatra, 1
on the south. [The Chinese Sea.) (
36. Which is formed by the Pacific
Ocean, on the north-east of China, 1
which it separates from Corea, and I
is frequently called the Gulf of
Pekeli. [The Yellow Sea.)
37. Which is formed by the Pacific
Ocean, and is included between Chi-
nese Tartary and the island of Jesso
on the north, with the empire of
Japan on the east and south-east,
and Corea on the west. {The Sea
of Japan.)
38. Which is formed by the Pacific
Ocean, and lies between Great Tar-
tary and the easternmost peninsula
of Asia. [Sea of Ochotsk.)
39. Which is formed by the At-
lantic Ocean, and is bounded by the
Great Antilles on the north, the
Caribbean Islands on the east, and
by South America, with part of
Mexico on the west, south-west, and
south. [Caribbean Sea.)
SECTION XVIII.
PRINCIPAL STRAITS.
iHanu tlje Jetratt,
1. Which ships usually sail through
from the North Sea, into the Baltic,
and where the Danes take toll of all
merchants-ships that pass into the
latter sea. [The Sound.)
2. Which lies between England
and France, and is twenty-one miles
broad, where it separates Picardy
from Kent. [Strait of Dover, or of
Calais.)
3. Which is situated between the
two largest islands in Europe, and
divides England from Ireland. [St.
George's Channel.)
4. Which lies between Spain and
Morocco, is twenty-four miles in
length, and fifteen in breadth, and
through which a strong current al-
ways runs from the Ocean to the Me-
diterranean. 5. Which, in ancient
times, bore the names of Fretum
Herculeum, and Fretum Gaditanum ;
the former from Hercules, who is
fabled to have opened it; the latter
* from Gades, the ancient name of the
1 island on which the city of Cadiz
stands. [Strait of Gibraltar.)
1 6. Which divides Corsica from
, Sardinia, and takes its name from a
! town of Corsica. [Strait of Boni-
, facio.)
, 7* Which separates Sicily from the
southernmost point of the kingdom of
1 Naples, and in which were the cele-
! brated rocks of Scylla and whirlpool
[ of Charybdis. [Strait of Messina.)
8. Which unites the Archipelago
* to the sea of Marmora, and was
* anciently called Hellespontus, from
, Helle, the sister of Phry xus, who was
supposed to have been drowmed in it.
9. Which is remarkable in Grecian I
and Persian history for the bridge (
which Xerxes built over it when he .
invaded Greece, and for the folly of i
that monarch in endeavouring to
chastise and fetter its waves because
they had overthrown his work. 10.
Which now bears two names, one de-
rived from the Turkish towers which
guard its entrance, the other from a
town on its coast. ( The Strait of the
Dardanelles, or of Gallipoli.)
11, Which was formerly called the
Thracian Bosphorus, and unites the
Sea of Marmora to the Black Sea.
[Strait of Constantinople.)
12. Which the ancients called the
Cimmerian Bosphorus, and in which
Ovid places the palace of Sleep. 13.
Which affords a communication be-
tween the Black Sea and the Sea of
Azof. [Strait of Kaffa, or of Jeni-
cale.)
' 14. Which is situated between the
island of Tchoka and Chinese Tar-
tary. [Strait of Tchoka, or Channel
of Tartary.)
15. Which forms the communica-
tion between the Yellow Sea and the
Sea of Japan. ( The Strait of Corea .)
16. Which is between the islands
of Borneo and Celebes, and has its
name from a kingdom situated in the
latter island. [Strait of Macassar.)
17. Which is in the Indian Ocean,
between the isles of Java and Suma-
tra. [Strait of Sun da.')
18. Which separates the island of
Sumatra from the most southern
part of the eastern peninsula of
India, and is a difficult and trouble-
some passage. [Strait of Malacca.)
19. Which lies between the wes-
tern peninsula of India and the
island of Ceylon, and in the middle
of which is a sand-bank called Adam’s
Bridge. [Strait of Manar.)
20. Which is at the entrance of the
Red Sea from the Indian Ocean, be-
tween the coast of Arabia Felix and
that of Ajan, in Africa. [Strait of
Bab-el-Mandeb, or Strait of Mocha.)
21. Which is between Nova Zem-
bla and Russia, and is so called from
an island of the same name standing
in it. ( Strait of Waigatz.)
22. Which lies between Zanguebar
and the isle of Madagascar, and is
named after a province on the African
coast. [The Mozambique Channel.)
23. Which opens a communication
through Lancaster Sound, between
i Baffin’s Bay and the Arctic Ocean.
24. Which was discovered by Cap-
tain Parry,in 1819. [Barrow'sStrait.)
25. Which separates Greenland
; from North America, and has its
. name from an Englishman, who
, first passed it in quest of a North-
west passage. ( Davis’s Strait.)
[ 26. Which forms a passage from
i the Atlantic Ocean into a bay of the
[ same name, and in which are Charles,
Salisbury, and Nottingham Islands.
■ 27. Which, like the former, is named
; after an English navigator. [Hud-
son's Strait.)
28. Which lies between Cumber-
-1 land Isle and Terra Nieva. (Cum-
berland Strait.)
29. Which lies between the main
land of New Britain, in North Ame-
rica, and Newfoundland. [Strait of
Belleisle.)
30. Which lies between the coast
of Florida and the Bahama Isles,
and is also called the Gulf of Flo-
-1 rida. [Strait of Bahama.)
31. Which is between the Atlantic
■ and the Pacific Ocean, dividing
Patagonia from Terra del Fuego.
(Strait of Magellan.)
> 32. Which lies between Terra del
! Fuego, and the island of Staten, going
1 round Staten, as well as Cape Horn,
i and has its name from its first disco-
. verer. [Strait of Le Maire.)
33. Which separates the east coast
of Asia from the west of North
America, and forms a communi-
cation between the Pacific and
Frozen Ocean. 34. Which was first
visited by the navigator whose name
it bears, afterwards explored by Cap-
tain Cook, and is frozen over during
the winter. [Behring’s Strait.)
SECTION XIX.
PRINCIPAL GULFS.
Name t!)c ©ulf,
1. Which is formed by the Baltic
Sea, and takes its name from a pro-
vince of Sweden, which is divided
by it into East and West. [Gulf of
Bothnia.)
2. Which is formed by the Baltic
Sea, and lies between Revel and the
country from which it derives its
name. [Gulf of Finland.)
3. Which is separated from the
Baltic Sea by the islands of Dagho
and Oesel, and is surrounded by the
governments of Revel and Riga on
the north and east, and Courland on
the south. [Gulf of Livonia, or of
Riga.)
4. Which is in Holland, and was
formed by an inundation about the
year 1225, and is separated from
the German Ocean by a crescent of
small islands. ( The Zuyder Zee.)
5. Which is formed by the Medi-
terranean Sea, and was called by the
Romans Mare Superum, because it
was situated above Italy. [Gulf of
Venice.)
6. Which is formed by the Medi-
terranean Sea to the south-east of
the kingdom of Naples, and waters
Calabria, Basilicate, and the territory
of Otranto. ( Gulf of Tarento.)
7. Which, in ancient times, bore
the name of Sinus Corinthiacus, from
’ the city and isthmus of Corinth,
which parts it from the Archipelago.
8. Which runs between the Turkish
province of Livadia and the Morea,
forming the latter into a peninsula.
9. Which derives its modern name
from a town of Livadia, near which
Don John of Austria, in the year
1572, obtained a complete victory
over the Turkish fleet. [Gulf of
Lepanto.)
10. Which is formed by the Ar-
chipelago, and waters Macedonia.
11. Which was formerly called Sinus
Thermaicus, from the town of
Therma, on its north-eastern coast,
i and whose modern name it now
• bears. [Gulf of Salonichi.)
12. Which was the ancient Sinus
Strymonicus, on the coast of Mace-
l don, and now bears the name of a
i town on its coast, at the mouth of the
, river Strymon. [Gulf of Contessa.)
13. Which was the ancient Sinus
Melas, or Melanis, so named after
one of the Argonauts, who was
drowned in it on the coast of
Thrace. [Gulf of Saros.)
14. W r hich was the ancient Sinus
Saronicus, forming the eastern boun-
dary of the isthmus of Corinth, and
has its modern name from a cele-
brated island situated in it. [Gulf
of JEgina, or Engia.)
15. Which was the ancient Sinus
Argolicus, and with the last-named
gulf forms the north-east part of the
Morea into a peninsula. 16. Which
; has its present name from a town,
■ formerly called Nauplia, seated on
a cape tow r ards its head. [Gulf of
Napoli.)
16. Which was the ancient Sinus
Laconicus, so called from the country
of Laconia, which it washed, and now
receives its name from a town at its
head. [Gulf of Coloki/ia.)


17. Which was the ancient Sinus,
Messeniacus, which separated Laco-
nia from Messenia, and is now called
after a town on its western shore, in
the Morea. [Gulf of Coron.)
18. Which is situated at the south-
east end of the Italian peninsula, and
bears the name of an ancient town,
founded by Phalanthus, a leader of
the Parthenae, when they were ex-
pelled Sparta. {Gulf of Tarentum.)
19. Which is situated between
Italy and France, and was called by
the Romans Sinus Ligusticus, but
has its modern name from a city, once
the seat of a powerful republic, but
now included in the states of the
King of Sardinia. [Gulf of Genoa.)
20. Which is on the south of
France, formed by the Mediterra-
nean Sea, between the port of Toulon
and Port Vendre. 21. Which was the
Sinus Gallicus of the Romans. ( Gulf
of Lyons.)
22. Which is formed by the Medi-
terranean Sea, between Catalonia,
Valencia, and the Balearic Isles, and
which extends from Cape Martin, in
Valencia, to Barcelona, in Catalonia.
[Gulf of Valencia.)
23. Which is formed by the Frozen
Ocean, and lies between Nova Zem-
bla and the country of the Samoides,
in the north of Great Tartary. [lcy
Gulf or Gulf of Oby.)
24. Whick is formed by the north-
ern Pacific Ocean, and lies at the
easternmost part of Asia, between
the country of the Koriaks, and a
large peninsula, inhabited by the
Tchouktchi. [Gulf of Anadir.)
25. Which is formed by the Yel-
low Sea, between China and Corea,
and derives its name from a province
of China, [Gulf of Pekeli.)
26. Which is formed by the Pacific
Ocean, from which it is separated by
the island of Hainan. 27- Which
waters China, a kingdom of the same
name with itself, and Cochinchina.
[Gulf of Tonquin.)
28. Which was known to the an-
cients by the name of Sinus Magnus,
and is formed by the Indian Ocean,
on the south of the eastern penin-
sula of India, and waters the king-
doms of Cambodia, Siam, and Ma-
lacca. [Gulf of Siam.)
29. Which lies on the north coast
of New Holland, between Arnheim’s
Land and a peninsula bearing the
same name with itself, which it
received from Peter Carpenter, a
Dutchman, who discovered it in 1628.
{Gulf of Carpentaria.)
30. Which is formed by the Bay of
Bengal, to the west of the Eastern
peninsula of India, and waters the
kingdom of P egu. { Gulf of Martaban.)
31. Which is formed by the Arabian «
Sea, between the peninsula of Guze-
rat, or Cambay, and the Western
peninsula of India, and waters a part 1
of Hindoostan. 32. Which was the
Sinus Barygazenus of the ancients.
{Gulf of Cambay.)
33. Which is formed by the Ara- ]
bian Sea, and lies under the Tropic
of Cancer, between the mouth of 1
the Indus and the peninsula of t
Cambay. 34. Which was known to s
the ancients by the various names of t
Sinus Patalene, Sinus Canthi, and (
Sinus Baraces. {Gulf of Cut Ji.)
35. Which was the Sinus Terabdon 1
of the ancients, and lies at the mouth 1
of the Indus. [Gulf of Sinda.) [
36. Which receives its name from
a small island at the entrance of the a
Persian Gulf, and is formed by the ]
Arabian Sea, between Persia and a
Arabia. [Gulf of Ormus.) j
37- Which is formed by the Ara-
bian Sea, between Persia and Arabia r
Felix, and receives the waters of the t
Euphrates and Tigris. ( Persian Gulf.) f
38. Which separates Arabia from I
s > is usually called a sea.
3- 39. Which is memorable in sacred
; d history for the miraculous passage of
n the Israelites. {The Arabic Gulf or
Red Sea.)
i- 40. Which is formed by the Indian
d Ocean, and lies off Monomotapa, op-
1, posite to the island of Madagascar.
)f ( Gulf of Sqfala.)
41. Which waters the kingdom of
.) Benin, the Grain Coast, the Ivory
n Coast, and Gold Coast, and is formed
y by the Atlantic Ocean, between Cape
it Palmas and Cape Lopo. ( Gulf of
:e Guinea.)
it 42. Which is formed by the Medi-
e terranean Sea, between the kingdoms
of Tunis and Tripoli, and was called
>f Syrtis Minor by the ancients. (Gulf
l- of Gabes.)
n 43. Which was the Syrtis Major of
e ancient times, and is formed by the
f Mediterranean, between Tripoli and
Barca. 44. Which takes its present
- name from a small island at the bot-
i, tom of the same gulf. ( Gulf of
d Sydra.)
n 45. Which is formed by the Atlan-
i. tic Ocean, on the east side of North
America, between Labrador, New-
i foundland, Canada, and Nova Scotia,
- and receives its name from a large
i, river that empties itself into it.
y {Gulf of St. Lawrence.)
46. Which is formed by the At-
- lantic Ocean, between East Florida
e and the peninsula of Yucatan. ( Gulf
i of Mexico.)
a 47- Which is formed by the Paci-
e fic Ocean on the west side of North
America,, between the peninsula of
- California and New Mexico, and is
l, sometimes called the Vermilion Sea.
e ( Gulf of California .)
I SECTION XX.
'* PRINCIPAL BAYS.
~ Name ll)e 33ag,
1. On which is situated the trading
- town of Thurso, in Caithness-shire,
, in Scotland. (Dunnet, or Thurso Bay.)
, 2. Which is the largest frith in
■ Scotland, forming nearly an equila-
teral triangle, between Kinnaird’s
- Head, Duncansby Head, and Fort
George, in Inverness-shire. (Mur-
t ray Frith.)
5 3. Which is between Fifeshire, on
; the north, and the counties of Had-
t dington,Edinburgh,Linlithgow, and
1 Stirling, onthesouth. [Frithof Forth.)
• 4. Wlnch at low water is passable
by carriages, and waters Cumberland
in England, and Dumfries in Scot-
■ land. { Solway Frith.)
■ 5. Which is a great inlet of the sea,
between Burrow Head and the Mull
1 °f Galloway, in Wigtownshire. (Luce
Bay.
1 6. Which contains the ports of
: Glasgow and Greenock, in Scotland.
' {Frith of Clyde.)
7- Which is on the east side of
England, between the counties of
Lincoln and Norfolk. (The Wash.)
8. Which divides itself into several
branches between Hampshire and t
Sussex, and is named after a town *
situated on an island within it, con- i
taming a celebrated naval arsenal.
{Portsmouth Harbour.) (
9. Which is an arm of the sea, run- ;
ning up into Hampshire for some (
miles, opposite to the Isle of Wight.
{Southampton Water.) <
10. Which runs a considerable way i
within land on the north side of the <
Isle of Wight, with a cluster of rocks }
at its mouth called the Mixen. [St. <
Helen’s.) j
11. Which is in the British Chan- c
nel on the coast of Devonshire, a lit- s
tie to the east of Dartmouth, and is i
formed by two capes, called Bury 1
Head and Hope’s Nose. [Torbay.) c
12. Which, extending from St.
David’s Head, in Pembrokeshire, to
Bardsey Island, in Caernarvonshire,
waters Caernarvonshire, Merioneth-
shire, Cardiganshire, and Pembroke-
shire. {Cardigan Bay.)
13. Which is between the counties
of Antrim and Down, in Ireland, and
is remarkable for the landing of King
William, in 1690. 14. On which is
the town of Belfast, the chief place
of the Irish linen trade. {Carrickfer-
gus Bay, or Belfast Lough.)
15. Which is on the east of Ire-
land, and separates the counties of
Down and Lowth. [Carlingford Bay .)
16. Which is in the county of
Louth, between Carlingford Head
and Dummy Point. [Dundalk Bay.)
% 17- Which is between Howth Head
and a place called Black Rock, into
which the river Liffey empties itself,
after passing through the metropolis
of Ireland. {Dublin Bay, or Har-
bour.)
18. Which is formed by the south-
ern extremity of the county of Wex-
ford. [Ballyteig Bay.)
19. Which runs between the pro-
vinces of Leinster and Munster, and
is defended at its entrance by Dun-
cannon Fort. {Waterford Haven.)
20. Which is the chief place of
victualling,in Ireland,for ships bound
to the West Indies. ( Cork Harbour .)
21. Which is in the county of Cork,
on the south-west coast of Ireland,
and is remarkable for two attempts
at invasion by the French: one in
1689, to assist King James’s party in
opposition to William HI., the other
in 1796, to assist the rebels. [Bantry
Bay.)
22. Which is in the county of Ker-
ry, on the south-west coast of Ire-
land, is the largest bay of the pro-
vince of Munster, and named after a
town, on its north coast, that was
once a place of great importance and
commerce. {Dingle Bay.)
23. Which, with the last-named
bay, forms a peninsula on the east side
of the county of Kerry. ( Tralee Bay.)
24. Which is on the west coast of
Ireland, about twenty miles long and
seven broad, and sheltered at its en-
trance by the South Arran Islands.
{Galway Bay.)
25. Which is also on the west of
Ireland, is defended at its entrance
by Clare Island, and contains towards
its head a number of small isles.
[Clew Bay, or Newport Bay.)
26. Which is on the north coast
of the province of Connaught, in Ire-
land, separating the counties of Sligo
and Mayo. 27. In which, in 1798,
the French made a descent, under
General Humbert, to assist the re-
bels, and were defeated. {Killala
Bay.)
28. Which is on the north-west
coast of Ireland, between the pro-
vinces of Ulster and Connaught, and
receives its name from a town and
county on its northern coast. [Do-
negal Bay.)
29. Which lies between the pro-
jecting coasts of France and Spain,
extending from Ushant to Cape Fi-
nisterre. 30. Which derives its name
from a province of Spain, and is pe-
culiarly dangerous to seamen by rea-
son of the heavy swell of the sea. <
{Bay of Biscay.)
31. Which, being the largest gulf
of Asia, is also denominated a sea,
and was called by the ancients Sinus 1
Gangeticus, on account of the Gan-
ges flowing into it by many mouths.
32. Which lies between the two pe- i
ninsulas of India, and derives its mo- ;
dern name from a province, formerly
subject to the Grand Mogul, but now i
under the domination of the British, j
whose chief settlement in it is Cal- s
cutta. {Bay of Bengal.)
33. Which is formed by the Indian
• Ocean, between Monomotapa and
, Caffraria. {Bay of St. Laurence, or
He la Goa Bay.)
34. Which is in the Gulf of Guinea,
between the Gold Coast and a king-
-1 dom from which it derives its name.
{Bight of Benin.)
35. Which was discovered by an
Englishman, whose name it bears,
in attempting to find a North-west
passage to the North Pacific Ocean.
{Baffin’s Bay.)
36. Which divides Labrador from
New North and South Wales, in
North America. [Hudson’s Bay.)
37. Which is formed by the At-
lantic Ocean, on the east coast of
Labrador, and extends far into the
country of the people after whom it
is named. {Esquimaux Inlet.)
38. Which lies between New Eng-
land, New Brunswick, and Nova
Scotia in North America, running
up from Cape Sable, the most south-
ern point of Nova Scotia, to the isth-
mus which joins that peninsula to
the continent. {Fundy Bay.)
39. Which is on the coast of New
England, between Capes Sable and
Cod, and gives name to one of the
American United Provinces, of which
Boston is the capital. (Massachu-
sett’s Bay.)
40. Which runs between Virginia
and Maryland, in North Ameria,
having its entrance between Capes
Charles and Henry, and extending
270 miles to the northward, and
from seven to eighteen miles across.
41. Which receives the waters of the
Susquehannah, Potomak, Rappaha-
nock, York, and James Rivers, all
of which are large and navigable.
[Chesapeak Bay.)
42. Which is formed by the Gulf
of Mexico, between the west coast of
Yucatan, and the audience of Mexico.
[Campechy Bay.)
43. Which is formed by the Carib-
bean Sea, between the eastern point
of Yucatan, and a cape from which
it receives its name. 44. Which is
remarkable for the quantity of log-
wood cut on its coasts, chiefly by
Englishmen. [Honduras Bay.)
45. Which is formed by the Carib-
bean Sea, in the isthmus of Darien,
and forms a fine harbour, from which
it has derived its name. (Porto-
bello Bay.)
46. Which is formed by the Carib-
bean Sea, between the isthmus of Pa-
nama and the province of Cartha-
gena. [Bay, or Gulf of Darien.)
47. Which is formed by the Carib-
bean Sea, on the north-west coast
of New Granada, and was the place
where the Spanish galeons waited for
the arrival of the Peru plate fleet.
[Carihagena Bay.)
48. Which is formed by the Atlan-
tic Ocean, in the captainry of Bahia,
in Brazil, and in which St. Salvador
is situated. {All Saints’ Bay.)
49. Which is formed by the Atlan-
tic Ocean, on the coast of Patagonia,
in South America, and where ships
bound to the Pacific Ocean usually
put in for refreshments. [St. Julian’s
Bay, or Port St. Julian.)
50. Which is formed by the Pa-
cific Ocean, in Peru, in the audience
of Quito, and at the entrance of
which is Cape Blanco, {Bay, or
Gulf of Guayaquil.)
51. Which is formed by the Pa-
cific Ocean, in Terra Firma, and in
which is a mart for the cities of Cali,
Popayan, Santa Fe, and for all the
south part of Terra Firma. [Bue-
naventura Bay.)
52. Which, formed by the Pacific
Ocean, waters the isthmus of Darien,
and takes its name from a large town
standing on it. [Bay of Panama.)
53. Which lies on the west coast


of North America, and was disco-
vered by Captain Cook, in 1778. 54.
Of which the seizure by the Spa-
niards, in 1789, had nearly involved
them in a war with Great Britain,
but, after great altercation, the ques-
tion of right between the two coun-
tries being amicably settled in 1790,
the British are now allowed free
commerce and navigation to it.
[Nootha Sound.)
SECTION XXI.
PRINCIPAL RIVERS.
Name t|)c r,
1. Which rises in a lake of the same
name, in the county of Perth, in Scot-
land, waters Perth and Dundee, and
falls into the German Sea between the
counties of Fife and Angus. {Tay.)
2. Which runs between the bor-
ders of Scotland and England, and
falls into the German Sea at Ber-
wick. {Tweed.)
3. Which runs through Northum-
berland, dividing it from Durham,
and falls into the German Sea at a
town, which has a name from being at
its mouth, below Newcastle. ( Tyne.)
4. Which divides Durham from
Yorkshire, and falls into the German
Sea below Stockton. [Tees.)
5. Which formed by the junction
of several rivers in Yorkshire, and
after separating that county from
Lincolnshire, falls into the German
Sea at Spurn Head, below Hull.
{Humber.)
6. Which rises near Newcastle-
under-Line, in the north of Stafford-
shire, and forms the Humber, a
large estuary. 7* Which crosses
Staffordshire, Derbyshire, and Not-
tinghamshire, dividing the latter
county from Lincolnshire. ( Trent.)
8. Which rises in Northampton-
shire, and, after crossing the counties
of Buckingham, Bedford, Hunting-
don, Cambridge, and Norfolk, falls
into a part of the German Sea called
the Wash. 9. Which waters Bedford,
Huntingdon, Ely, Downham, and
Lynn Regis. {Great Ouse.)
10. Which rises in Gloucestershire,
and derives its name from two small
rivers, the Thame and the Isis, by
which it is formed. 11. Which di-
vides Oxfordshire,Buckinghamshire,
Middlesex, and Essex, from Berk-
shire, Surrey, and Kent, passes
through London, and falls into the
German Sea at Sheerness. ( Thames.)
12. Which was in ancient times
called Sabrina, and, rising near Plin-
limmon Hill, in Montgomeryshire,
crosses Shropshire, Worcestershire,
and Gloucestershire, and falls into
the Bristol Channel, between Mon-
mouthshire and Somersetshire. {Se-
vern.)
13. Which, rising in Wiltshire, se-
parates the counties of Somerset and
Gloucester, waters Bath and Bristol,
and falls into the Severn at King’s
Road, about six miles below the last-
named city. {Lower Avon.)
14. Which, rising in Warwick-
shire, crosses that county, as well as
Worcestershire, waters Stratford and
Evesham, and falls into the Severn
at Tewkesbury. {Upper Avon.)
15. Which, rising in Wales, divides
Flintshire from Cheshire, and falls in-
to the Irish Seabelow Chester. {Dee.)
16. Which runs through Cheshire,
and then, dividing that county from
Lancashire, passes by Liverpool, and
falls into the Irish Sea. {Mersey.)
17. Which runs through Lanca-
shire, and falls into the Irish Sea, a
little below Preston. {Ribble.)
18. Which runs through Cumber-
land, and falls into the Irish Sea be-
low Cockermouth. {Derwent.)
19. Which runs through West-
moreland and Cumberland, and falls
into the Solway Frith, below Car-
lisle. {Eden.)
20. Which, rising in the north
part of the county of Kildare, in Ire-
land, crosses the county of Meath,
and runs into the Irish Sea, four
miles below Drogheda. 21. Which
is celebrated for a battle fought on its
banks, in 1690, between William 111.
and James 11. the result of which
was a decided victory to William.
[Boyne.')
22. Which rises in the Wicklow
mountains, and, after taking a cir-
cuitous course through the county of
Kildare, waters the metropolis of Ire-
land, and falls into Dublin Harbour.
{Lifey.)
23. Which, rising in the county of
Leitrim, divides Connaught from
Leinster, and, after crossing the lakes
of Ree and Derg, falls into the At-
lantic Ocean at Loop Head, below
Limerick. {Shannon.)
24. Which is formed by the junc-
tion of the rivers Sukona and Youg,
at Oustioug, runs to the north-west
of Russia, and falls into the White
Sea, below Archangel. [Dwina.)
25. Which rises in Russia, between
the governments of Novgorod and
Smolensko, crosses Russian Poland
from east t o west, divides Russia
from Courland, and falls into the
Gulf of Livonia. 26. Which receives
the Witzha near the town of Witepsk,
and the Polesa near Polock. 27-
Which waters the town of Duna-
bourg, in Russian Poland, and the
towns of Riga and Dunemonde, in
Livonia, [Buna.)
28. Which rises in the palatinate
of Minsk, in Lithuania, crosses the
great duchy of Lithuania, Russian
Lithuania, Samogitia, and the north-
ern part of Prussia, and falls into a
gulf of the Baltic Sea, called Curich-
Haff. 29. Which waters Grodno
and Kowno, in Lithuania, and Tilsit,
in Prussia. [Niemen.)
30. Which, rising in the south-east
of Silesia, crosses Poland, and, after
watering Cracow, Sandomir, War-
saw, Thorn, Culm, Marienberg, and
Dantzic, falls into the Baltic bv two
* •>
large openings. 31. Which receives
the waters of the Bug between War-
saw and Thorn, and in ancient times
separated Sarmatia from Germany.
{ Vistula.)
32. Which rises in Austrian Po-
land, in the district of Leopol, near
the town of Beltz, crosses Lesser and
Great Poland, and falls into the Vis-
tula, below Warsaw. {Bug.)
33. Which, rising in the Carpa-
thian Mountains, runs through Silesia
and Brandenburgh, separates Eastern
from Western Pomerania, and, after
forming the islands of Usedom and
Wollen, falls into the Baltic. 34.
Which waters Oppeln, Breslau, Glo-
gau, and Crossen, in Silesia, and
Frankfort and Stettin, in Upper
Saxony, and receives the Varta be-
low Frankfort. {Oder.)
35. Which rising in Lesser Po-
land, waters Great Poland and Bran-
denburgh, with Siradia and Posen,
in Poland, and Lansberg, in Ger-
many, and falls into the Oder at
Kustrin. {Varta.)
36. Which, rising in the Black
Forest, crosses Suabia, Bavaria, and
Austria, divides Upper from Lower
Hungary, and Wallachia from Bul-
garia, and, after watering Vienna,
Presburgh, Belgrade, and other im-
portant places, falls into the Black
Sea. 37. Which, in ancient times,
bore the name of Ister towards its
mouth, and is so deep between Buda
and Belgrade, that the Turks and
Christians have had men-of-war upon
it, though it is not navigable to the sea,
on account of its cataracts. {Danube.)
38. Which, rising in Bavaria, crosses
Carinthia and Stiria, divides Hun-
gary from Sclavonia, and falls into
the Danube below Essek. {Drave.)
39. Which, rising in the mountains
of Upper Carniola, divides that pro-
vince from Stiria, bounds Sclavonia
on the south, and falls into the Da-
nube, near Belgrade. {Save.)
40. Which, rising in the mountains
of Tyrol, divides Suabia from Bava-
ria, waters Landsperg and Ausburgh,
and falls into the Danube below Do-
navert. [Lech.)
41. Which, rising among the Alps,
in the country of the Grisons, crosses
Tyrol and Bavaria, waters Inspruck,
Kustrine, Oetingen, Braunau, and
falls into the Danube near Passau.
[lnn.)
42. Which, issuing from a lake in the
Carpathian Mountains, runs between
Poland and Moldavia, and empties
itself into the Black Sea. {Dniester.)
43. Which was the Borysthenes
of the ancients, and, rising in R ussia,
between the governments of Novgo-
rod and Smolensko, runs between
Russia, Lithuania, and Poland, and
falls into the Black Sea, near Otch-
akov. {Dnieper.)
44. Which rises in the lake Iwan,
in Russia, runs through the govern-
ment of Woronesk, and falls into the
Sea of Azof. 45. Which was known
to the ancients under the name of
Tanais, as the boundary between
Europe and Asia. [Don.)
46. Which rises on the confines of
Bohemia and Silesia, in what are
called the Giants’ Mountains, and
after crossing Bohemia Proper and
Upper and Lower Saxony, watering
in its course the towns of Konings-
gratz, Malnick, Dresden, Witten-
berg, Magdeburgh, Hamburgh, and
the fortress of Gluckstadt, falls into
the German Sea. {Elbe.)
47. Which, rising in the northern
part of Franconia, runs northwards
between Westphalia and Lower Sax-
ony, and, after watering Minden,
Bremen, Carlsbourg, and Cassel,emp-
ties itself into the German Sea. 48.
Which crosses Franconia under the
name of the Verre, but changes its title
at its union with the Fulda. ( Weser.)
49. Which, rising in Mount St.
Gothard, in Switzerland, traverses the
lake of Constance, divides the king-
dom of Wiirtemberg from France,
and on its arrival in the Netherlands,
forms the four great branches of the
Waal, the Yssel, the Leek, and the
Waert, losing itself among the sands
near Leyden. 50. Which waters the
towns of Constance, Basle, Manheim,
Mentz, Coblentz, Cologne, Cleves,
Utrecht, Nimeguen, and Leyden,
receiving the Neckar at Manheim,
the Maine at Mentz, the Moselle at
Coblentz, and the Lippe at Wesel.
{Rhine.)
51. Which has its source not far
from that of the Danube, in the prin-
cipality of Furstemberg, crosses the
kingdom of Wiirtemberg, and falls
into the Rhine at Manheim. 52.
Which waters Tubingen, Stuttgardt,
Heilbron, Morbasch, and Heidel-
berg. [Neckar.)
53. Which rises in the Marquisate
of Culmback, east of Franconia,
crosses the bishopricks of Bamberg
and Wurtzberg, and after watering
the towns of Bamberg, Wurtzberg,
Wertheim, and Frankfort, falls into
the Rhiue, near Mentz. ’ [Maine.)
54. Which, rising in France, in
the mountains of the Vosges, waters
Epinal, Metz, Thionville, and
Treves, and falls into the Rhine at
Coblentz. {Moselle.)
55. Which, rising in France, near
the villages of Meuse and Montigny,
in the department of Upper Marne,
crosses the departments of the
Meuse and Ardennes, with the
county of Namur, the bishopric of
Liege, and the duchies of Limbourg
and Guelders, and, after dividing
Brabant from Cleves and Guelder-
land, joins the Waal. 56. Which,
after forming with the Waal, the
island of Bommel, divides itself into
several branches, and empties itself
into the German Sea, below Rotter-
dam. {Maese, or Meuse.)
57- Which rises near La Capelle,
in France, and, after watering Lan-
dreci, Maubeuge,and Charleroi, falls
into the Meuse, at Namur. {Sambre.)
58. Which rises near St. Quentin,
in the department of Aisne, and, after
crossing the department of the North,
passes by Cambray, Bouchain, and
Valenciennes, where it becomes na-
vigable, and waters Tournay/Oude-
narde, Ghent, and Antwerp, receiv-
ing the Scarpe below Conde, and the
Lys at Ghent. 59. Which, a few
miles below Antwerp, divides into
two streams, the East and the West,
the former passing by Bergen-op-
Zoom, the latter, under the name of
De Hondt, by Flushing, and both
running into the German Sea, west
of the island of Zeeland. [Scheldt.)
60. Which, rising in France, in the
department of the Straits of Calais,
passes by Aire, St. Venant, Menin,
and Courtray, and runs into the
Scheldt, at Ghent. 61. Which exhi-
bits a singular phenomenon near its
source, by becoming turbid, on the
approach of rain, and recovering its
clearness on the return of fair wea-
ther, thereby forming a natural baro-
meter to the country people. {Lys.)
62. Which, rising in the depart-
ment of the Cote d’Or, and crossing
those of Aube, Seine, and Marne,
Seine and Oise, Eure, and
Lower Seine, falls into the British
Channel near Havre de Grace. 63.
Which waters Chatillon, Troyse, No-
gent, Melun, Paris, Rouen, and Cau-
debec, receiving in its course the
waters of the Yonne at Montereau,
of the Marne at Charenton, and of
the Oise near Pontoise. [Seine.)
64. Which, rising in the depart-
ment of Ardeche, waters Foeurs, Ro-
anne, Nevers, Orleans, Beaugency,
Blois, Amboise, Tours, Saumur,
Nantes, and Paimboeuf, near which
last it falls into the Atlantic Ocean.
65. Which, in its extensive course,
traverses ten departments, and re-
ceives the waters of the Allier below
Nevers, those of the Cher and Indre
near Chinon, those of the Vienne
between Chinon and Saumur, and
those of the Loire, Sarthe, and May-
enne, below Angers. [Loire.)
66. Which, rising in the Pyrenees,
on the borders of Arragon, in Spain,
traverses the departments of Upper
Garonne, Lot, and Garonne, and
Gironde, watering the towns of
Toulouse, Agen, and Bordeaux, and
receiving the waters of the Tarn,
near Moissac, of the Lot, near Aiguil-
lon, and of the Dordogne between
Blaye and Bordeaux. 67- Which,
after its junction with the Dordogne,
changes its name to Gironde, and
empties itself by a large estuary into
the Atlantic. 68. Which has at its
mouth the celebrated tower or light-
house of Corduan, built by Henry
IV. one hundred and sixty feet in
height. [Garonne.)
69. Which, rising in Spain, near
Castro del Rey to the north of
Galicia, crosses that province, and
falls into the Atlantic Ocean at Tuy,
on the frontiers of Portugal. 70.
Which takes its name from the Latin
word Minius, (Vermilion), of which
great quantities are found in its
neighbourhood. {Minho.)
71. Which, rising near Soria, crosses
Old Castille, as well as the province


of Leon and the kingdom of Portugal
and falls into the Atlantic Ocean
near Oporto. ( Douro.)
72. Which, rising in the mountains
on the borders of Arragon and Ne\i
Castille, traverses Estramadura anc
Portugal, watering Toledo and Al-
cantara, in Spain, and Santaren and
Lisbon, in Portugal, below which
last it falls into the Atlantic Ocean.
{Tagus, or Tajo.)
73. Which rises in La Mancha, a
province of New Castille, in a field
called Campo del Monteil, crosses
New Castille, Estramadura, and Por-
tugal, and, after watering Calatrava,
Merida, and Badajos, falls into the
Atlantic Ocean, between Andalusia
and Portugal, 74. Of which the
name in ancient times was Anas,
whence its modern Spanish name,
which signifies the river Anas.
( Guadiana.)
75. Which rises on the confines of
Murcia, at the foot of a mountain
called Sierra Segura, and, after wa-
tering Cordova and Seville, falls into
the Atlantic Ocean, at St.Lucar. 70.
Of which the name, in the Spanish
language, implies a great river, but
in ancient times it was called Baetis.
( Guadalquivir.')
77* Which has two springs, the
principal of which is near Fontebro,
in Old Castille, on the confines of
Asturias, and which, crossing Na-
varre, Arragon, and Catalonia, wa-
ters Saragossa and Tortosa, and falls
into the Mediterranean below the
latter city, forming at its mouth the
island of Alfachs. 73. Which was
formerly called Iberus, whence a
Celtic colony, settled on its banks,
bore the name of Celtiberians. 79.
Which formerly separated the Roman
possessions in Spain from those of
the Carthaginians. {Ebro.)
80. Which, rising in the eastern
extremity of Valais, in Switzerland,
near mount St. Gothard, crosses the
Lake of Geneva, and separates Savoy
and the departments of Isere, Drome,
Vaucleuse, and of the mouths of the
Rhone, from those of Rhone and
Loire, Ardeche, and Garde. 81.
Which, after watering Sion, in Valais,
Geneva, Lyons, Vienne, Valence,
Pont St. Esprit, and Avignon, falls
into the Mediterranean by several
mouths, ten leagues to the south of
Arles. 82. Which was formerly
called Rhodanus, and was in Gallia-
Narbonensis. {Rhone.)
83. Which, rising among the
Apennines, runs through the Grand
Duchy of Tuscany, waters Florence,
and falls into the Mediterranean,
below Pisa. {Arno.)
84. Which, rising in Tuscany,
crosses the Pope’s dominions from
north to south, waters Borgo in
Tuscany, Citta di Castelli, Perugia,
Orvieto, and Rome; and falls into the
Mediterranean, fifteen miles below
the last named city. 85. Which, at
various times, has borne the names
of Lydius, Tyrrhenus, and Albula ;
the first from a colony on its banks,
supposed to be of Lydian origin ;
the second from the Tyrrhenians, or
ancient inhabitants of Etruria; and
the last from the whiteness of its
waters. 86. Which has its present
name from Tiberinus, an ancient
king of Alba, who is said to have
been drowned in it. ( Tiber.)
87- Which rises in Mount Viso,
among the highest peaks of the
Alps,and after running through Pie-
dmont, Montferrat, Milan, Parma,
Mantua, and Ferrara, and watering
Turin, Casal, Plazenza,and Cremona,
empties itself, by seven mouths, into
the Adriatic Sea. 88. Which for-
merly bore the names of Padus, Pa-
danus, and Eridanus, and is cele-
brated in fabulous history for theme-
tamorphosis of the Heliades, sister
of Phaeton, into poplars on its hanks
89. Which receives the waters o
numerous rivers, as the Doria, th<
Tesino, the Adda, the Mincio. (Po.
90. Which , rising in the Alps, runi
through the country of the Grisom
and the Lago Maggiore, and, aftei
watering Pavia, falls into the P 6
( Tesino.)
91. Which , issuing from the lake
of Como, runs through the Milanese,
and falls into the Po, near Cremona.
{Adda.)
92. Which , rising in the Tyrolese,
near Surentz, crosses the territories
of Trent and Venice, and after water-
ing Trent and Verona, falls into the
Adriatic. 93. Which was formerly
called Athesis, and is the only con-
siderable stream of Lombardy that
does not fall into the P 6. {Adige.)
94. Which, issuing from the lake
Altin, in Calmuck Tartary, unites
with the Irish, and falls into a bay
of the Frozen Ocean. {Oby.)
95. Which , rising in several lakes
on the borders of Chinese Tartary,
takes a northern course, and, after
watering a town to which it gives
name, runs into the Frozen Ocean,
forming a bay, with its mouth full
of rocky islands. {Enisei, or Yenisei.)
96. Which, rising near the lake
Baikal, in the south of Siberia, tra-
verses a large tract of country, and
empties itself by several mouths into
the Frozen Ocean. {Lena.)
97- Which rises in the country of
the Mogul Tartars, and falls into the
sea of Kamtschatka, opposite to the
island of Saghalien. {Amur.)
98. Which, rising in the Desert of
Cobi, to the west of China, crosses
that empire from west to east, wa-
ters Caifong, and falls into the Gulf
of Corea. 99. Which derives its
name from the colour of its sands.
{Hoang-ho, or Yellow River.)
100. Which, rising in Independent
Tartary, crosses Tibet and China,
waters Voutchang and Nankin, and
falls into the Eastern Sea. {Kiang,
or Blue River.)
101. Which, rising in the kingdom
of Tibet, crosses a part of China,
and the kingdom of Laos, waters the
town of Cambodia, and falls into the
Chinese Sea by several mouths.
{Meikong.)
102. Which, rising near the fron-
tiers of China, takes a southerly
course through the Birman empire,
and falls into the Gulf of Siam,
below the town of Judia, or Siam.
{Meinam.)
103. Which, rising in the moun-
tains of Tibet, crosses the kingdoms
of Ava and Pegu, and falls by nume-
rous mouths into the Bay of Bengal,
near the Gulf of Martaban. {Ava.)
104. Which, rising by two branches
in Mount Kintaisse, in the kingdom
of Tibet, and afterwards uniting its
streams, runs through the late Mogul
empire, and falls into the Bay of
Bengal, by a multitude of branches,
between Dacca and Calcutta. 105.
In which are found gold-dust and
precious stones, and to which the
Hindoos, who consider it as a kind
of deity, annually resort in prodi-
gious numbers to perform their de-
votions. ( Ganges.)
100. Which, rising in the moun-
tains of the Lesser Tibet, divides
Persia from India, and falls into the
Gulf of Sinde, below Tatta, by many
channels. 107- Which gives its name
to all the country situated on the
southern part of Asia, and was nearly
the limits of Alexander’s conquests
in the East. {lndus.)
108. Which has two sources north-
ward of Erzerum, in Turcomania,
which unite their streams three
lays’ journey below that town. 109.
s Which runs through the easter
1. provinces of Turkey in Asia, anc
f after having joined the Tigris, wa
3 ters Bussora, and falls into the Per
) sian Gulf. 110. On which th
5 ancient city of Babylon was seated
3 (Euphrates.)
M HI- Which, rising in the mountain
. of Armenia, and running south, di
vides Diarbeck from Curdistan. 112
3 Which, after visiting Bagdad, unitei
, with the Euphrates, and runs intc
. the Persian Gulf, below Bussora
113. On which the ancient Ninevel
, was seated. (Tigris.)
s 114. Which, rising in Mount Al-
■ bos, in Turcomania, passes throng!
: Armenia and Persia, and, uniting
with the Kur, falls with it into the
Caspian sea. 115. Which is a
rapid river, as its ancient name in-
dicates, and is supposed, by some
writers, to be the Gihon of Moses,
(Araxes, or Aras.)
116. Which rises in Russia, in the
government of Novgorod, in Europe,
and after watering Casan, Simbersk,
and Saratov, divides the continents
of Europe and Asia in the govern-
ment of Caucasus, and falls into the
Caspian Sea, below Astrachan. 11 7.
Which was called Rha, and sometimes
Araxes, by the ancients. ( Volga.)
118. Which, rising in the south-
west of Siberia, crosses the kingdom
of Casan, in Calmuck Tartary, and
falls into the northern part of the
Caspian Sea. 119. Which was known
to the ancients by the names of Daix
and Yaik, or Jaik, and is now called
after the mountains in which it has
its source. (Oural.)
120. Which, rising in Abyssinia,
runs through that country,Nubia,and
Egypt, divides itself into two large
branches in Lower Egypt, and falls
into the Mediterranean by several
mouths, between Damietta and Ro-
setta. 121. Which, in May and June,
inundates a great part of Egypt, in
consequence of the periodical rains
annually falling within the Tropics,
where lies its source, and is remark-
able for the crocodiles and other
amphibious voracious creatures,
which infest its waters and banks.
122. Which originally bore the name
of iEgyptus, but received its present
title from a king of Thebes, and was
worshipped by the Egyptians, as the
god of rivers. (Nile.)
123. Which is said to have its
source in Lake Maberia, in Nigritia,
crosses the northern part of Guinea,
and at its entrance into the Atlantic
Ocean forms many islands, the prin-
cipal of which is St. Lo\As.(Senegal.)
124. Which rises in Nigritia, in the
kingdom of Mandingo, runs to the
west in the same direction as the Se-
negal, and falls into the Atlantic
Ocean, below CapeVerd. (Gambia.)
125. Which, rising in the kingdom
of Matamba, separates the kingdoms
of Loango and Congo, and falls into
the Atlantic Ocean. (Zaire.)
126. Which, rising in the lake
Shangra, almost surrounds Monomo-
tapa, and falls into the Gulf of So-
fala, by several openings. (Zambese.)
127. Which has its source near
that of the Senegal, crosses Nigritia
from west to east, passes near Tom-
buctoo, and of which the exit is un-
known. (Niger.)
128. Which is one of the largest
rivers of North America, proceeding
from Lake Ontario, and running a
course of 700 miles to the Atlantic
Ocean. 129. Which is navigable as
far as Quebec, above 400 miles from
its mouth ; but, beyond Montreal, is
so full of shoals and rocks, as not to
admit of large vessels without danger.
(St. Lawrence.)
130. Which rises in Lake Erie,
and runs into Lake Ontario, near a
11
•n I fort bearing its own name. 131. In
1, which are those celebrated cataracts
i- reckoned among the greatest natural
% curiosities in the world, in each of
e which the river rushes down a pre-
1. cipice upwards of 400 feet in per-
pendicular height, with a noise that
s may be heard at the distance of 45
- miles. ( Niagara.)
}. 132. Which is the receptacle of the
s waters of the Ohio, the Illinois, the
0 Missouri, and other large rivers, se-r
l. parates Louisiana from the other
1 United States of America, and falls
into the Gulf of Mexico, near New
- Orleans. 133. In which are the falls
i of St. Anthony, where the whole
y river, which is more than 250 yards
5 wide, falls perpendicularly about 30
J feet. ( Mississippi .)
134. Which, rising in the Rocky
3 Mountains, has a direction from
. north-west to south-east in Louisi-
ana, and, after a course of more than
? 3000 miles, falls into the Mississippi,
, of which it is the principal supply.
, (Missouri.)
3 135. Which, rising in the Allegany
• Mountains, north of Pennsylvania,
3 runs from north-east to south-west,
crosses the western part of Virginia,
5 and, after receiving numerous rivers
in its way, falls into the Mississippi.
■ 136. Near which, at a salt spring,
i very large bones are found, far sur-
[ passing the size of any species of
- animals at present known. (Ohio.)
l 137- Which rises in Popayan, in
: Terra Firma, among the mountains
L south of Santa Fe de Bogota, and,
1 after a course of 1300 miles, during
which it waters St. Juan de Los La-
nos, and unites with the river San
Pedro, falls into the Atlantic by
many mouths, opposite the island of
: Trinidad. (Oronoko.)
138. Which, rising in Peru, at no
great distance from the PacificOccan,
crosses the continent in an easterly
direction, and after receiving nearly
200 streams of other rivers, falls into
the Atlantic, by several outlets, im-
mediately under the equinoctial line,
being the largest and longest river in
the world. (Maranon, or Amazon.)
139. Which is formed by the junc-
tion of those two considerable rivers,
the Parana and the Paraguay, in the
province of Buenos-Ayres, and falls
into the Atlantic Ocean between
Maldonado and Cape St. Antonio,
with so wide and rapid a stream,
that the sea is rendered fresh for
some leagues from its mouth. (Rio
de la Plata.)
SECTION XXII.
PRINCIPAL LAKES.
Jlame tljc Hake,
1. Which is in the County of Kerry,
in Ireland. [Lake of Killarney.)
2. W Inch is in the government of
Novgorod, in Russia, with a town of
the same name on its southern border.
(Lakeßielozersk, or White Lake.)
3. Which lies between the Ladoga
Lake and the White Sea, with the
former of which it communicates by
means of the River Svir. ( Lake
Onega.)
4. Which is the largest in Russia,
lies between the Gulf of Finland and
the lake Onega, and is formed by
four rivers, which continually pour
in their streams. (Lake Ladoga.)
< 5. Which, situated between Livo-
nia and Petersburgh, communicates
with the Gulf of Finland by the river
Narva, its outlet. (Lake Peipus.)
6. Which is in the government of
Novgorod, and the source of the
river Volchova, by means of which
it has a communication with lake
Ladoga. (Lake Ilmen.)


7. Which is in the government of
Moscow, and the source of the river
Don. [Lake Ivan.) f
8. Which lies in West Gothland, '
and is the largest in Sweden. [Lake
Wenner.)
9. Which lies in East Gothland, j
and is the source of the river Mota-
la, which runs through Nordkioping,
and has a fall of about thirty feet.
10. Which is 300 fathoms in depth,
and sends forth, on the eve of a tem-
pest, a dreadful and continued roar-
ing like thunder. [Lake Wetter.)
11. Which lies between Stock-
holm and Arozen, in Sweden Pro-
per, is full of rocky islands, and has
a communication with the Baltic
Sea. [Lake Meier.)
12. Which is in what is called the
country w ithin the Danube, in Lower
Hungary, near Stuhl-W eissenburgh,
or Albe-Royal, and is about forty-
six miles long and eight broad,
abounding in fish. [The Flatten
Sea, or Lake Balaton.)
13. Which lies between Germany
and Switzerland, and through which
the Rhine runs with remarkable ra-
pidity. [The Boden Sea, or Lake(f
Constance.)
14. Which is one of the largest
lakes in Switzerland, with the river
Limmat running through its length,
and uniting it with the Lake of
Wallenstadt. [Lake of Zurich.)
15. Which, from its situation be-
tween the cantons of Lucerne, Uri,
Schweitz, and Underwald, is fre-
quently called the Lake of the Four
Cantons. [Lake of Lucerne.)
16. Which separates the canton of
the same name from the cantons of
Berne and Fribourg, is seven leagues
in length and one and a half in
breadth, and well furnished with fish
in great variety. [Lake of Neuf-
chdtel.)
17. Which is partly formed by the
river Rhone, on the confines of France
and Switzerland, and was in ancient
times called Lacus Lemanus. 18.
Which decreases in winter, but, in
consequence of the melting of the
snows on the neighbouring moun-
tains, increases in summer. 19.
Hear which stands the Chateau de
Ripaille, the favourite retreat of
Amadaeus, the first Duke of Savoy,
which, from the voluptuous style of
living pursued by its inmates, gave
rise to the proverb Faire la Ripaille,
when speaking of good cheer. [Lake
of Geneva.)
20. Which lies between the Mila-
nese and the Grisons’ country, among
the Alps, in Upper Italy, and was
anciently called Lacus Verbanus. 21.
In which are two considerable islands,
called Isola Bella and Isola Madre.
22. From which issues the river Te-
sino, which, by means of the canal of
Ticinello, or of Navilio, made by the
Emperor Francis I. has a communi-
cation with the city of Milan. [Lake
Maggiore, or Lake of Lucarno.)
23. Which is on the frontiers of
Italy, at the foot of the Alps, between
the lakes of Lucarno and of Como,
and on which stands the town of
Lugano. [Lake of Lugano.)
24. Which is in the Milanese, with
the river Adda running through it,
and was called by the Latin poets
Larius Lacus. [Lake of Como.)
25. Which is formed by the river
Oglio, and separates the Bergamasco
from the Bressan. [Lake of Iseo.)
26. Which is in the Venetian ter-
ritory, of a pyramidal form, and se-
parates the Bressan from the Vero-
nese. [Lake Garda.)
27. Which is in the Ferrarese, and
is rather a marsh than a lake, with a
town, from which it has its name,
standing in it, on an island. ( Lake
of Comachio.)
-28. Which was formerly called w
Thrasymenus, near which the Roman A
forces, under the Consul Flaminius
were routed by Hannibal. [The B
Lake of Perugia.) k
29. Which is in the patrimony of
St. Peter, and was called Volsinium o
by the ancients. {Lake of Bolsena.) c
30. Which is in Abruzzo Ultra, in C
the kingdom of Naples, and was o
called Fucinus by the ancients. 31. I
Which is surrounded by high moun- fi
tains, and, though supposed to be
forty-seven miles in circumference, is r
not more than twelve feet deep on an t
average. 32. Which Julius Caesar, I
and afterwards the Emperor Claudius c
endeavoured in vain to drain of its t
waters, the last of whom employed t
30,000 men for eleven years in fruit- a
less attempts to cut a tunnel through c
a mountain, in order to convey the c
water into the river Liris. [Lake (
of Celano.)
33. Which is in Carniola, in Aus- 1
tria, and furnishes in succession, fish, 1
corn, and game, every year: for when 1
part of its waters has run off into the
neighbouring ditches and marshes,
and the remainder has sunk into the
ground, the fishes are easily caught, <
and what had formed the bed of the J
lake is ploughed and sown with corn, 1
which soon comes up, and as rapidly (
ripens ; it is then reaped, and during
the autumn, and part of the winter, j
the same spot furnishes a vast quan- \
tity of game, which flocks thither J
from all the neighbouring forests. J
[Lake of Czernitz.) 1
34. Which is in Upper Albania, I
in European Turkey, and was called
by the ancients Labealis. 35. Which f
receives the river Bocana, and on ’
which is seated Scutari, the capital J
of Albania. [Lake Zanta.)
36. Which lies in the province of
Segestan, about the middle of Persia, -
and w r as called Aria Palus by the
ancients. [Lake Zare, or Durrah.) 1
37. Which is in Armenio, in the j
province of Turcomania, on the con- ;
fines of Persia, and w r as called by i
the ancients Palus Argissa, of which 1
the fish were all of one sort. ( Lake 1
Van.)
38. Which is in Siberia, on the
road from Muscovy to China, and in
which are a great many seals of a j
blackish colour, and sturgeons of a
monstrous size. [Lake Baikal.)
39. Which lies among the moun-
tains of Kalmuck Tartary, and in
which rises the river Irtish. {Lake
Tschane.)
40. Which is to the east of the
Caspian Sea, in the country of the
Independent Tartars. [Lake Aral.)
41. Which lies in the province of
Kiang-si, in China, near the town of
Nant-chang, and communicates with
the Kiang, or Blue river. { Lake
Poyang.)
42. Which lies in the deserts of
Biledulgerid, near Mount Atlas, on
the south of the kingdom of Tunis,
and w r as called by the ancients Palus
Tritonis and Palus Libyee. [Lake
Faroan, or Farooun.)
43. Which is in the kingdom of
Dembea, in Abyssinia, about 100
miles from the source of the Nile,
which falls into it on the w r est side,
and comes out of it on the south-
east. {Lake of Dembea.)
44. Which is in Caffraria, near the
Lupata mountains, extending from
Monomotapa to the kingdom of
Mono-Emugi, but whose northern
extremity is unknown. [Lake Zam~
bre, or Maravi.)
45. Which lies in Caffraria, to the
L w r est of Monomotapa, and out of
1 which rises the riverZambese. [Lake
, Shangra.)
; 46. Which is on the confines of
Guinea and Nigritia, and empties its
waters into the Senegal river. [Lake s<
Maberia.) c
47. Which is in the kingdom of (
Bornou, and receives the river Niger
into its bosom. [Lake of Bornou.) \
48. Which, being the largest lake 1
of the western hemisphere, has been 1
called, not inaptly, the American C
Caspian. 49. Which lies to the west J
of Canada, and communicates w ith
Lake Huron by means of St. Mary’s f
falls. {Lake Superior.) '
50. Which is in Canada, and com- <
municates w r ith Lake Michigan by
the Straits of Michilimakinak ; with <
Lake Superior by the Straits or Falls «
of St. Mary ; and with Lake Erie by
the Strait of Detroit. 51. Of which
the shape is nearly triangular, with ;
a bay at the north-west corner,
called Thunder Bay, from the fre-
quent occurrence of thunder there.
[Lake Huron.)
52. Which is towards the west of
Lake Huron, w ith which it commu-
nicates by the Strait of Michilima-
kinak. [Lake Michigan.)
53. Which lying to the w'est of
New York and Pennsylvania, in the
United States of America, communi-
cates with Lake Ontario by the river
Niagara, remarkable for having the
most wonderful cataract in the world,
[Lake Erie.)
54. Which, lying between Upper
Canada and New York, receives on
its south side the w r aters of Lake
Erie, through the rivers and falls of
Niagara, and on the north commu-
nicates with the river St. Lawrence.
[Lake Ontario.)
55. Which is in New Spain, with
the magnificent capital of that pro-
vince built on several islands within
it. [Lake of Mexico, or Lake of
Tetzcuco.)
56. Which is in the province of
Mexico, only a few leagues from the
Pacific, and about three hundred
miles in circumference, ebbing and
flowdng like the sea. 57* Which is
interspersed w r ith several islands,
and full of fish, but infested by cro-
codiles, and communicates wdth the
Gulf of Mexico by the river St. J uan.
[Lake Nicaragua.)
58. Which is formed by the river
Paraguay in the kingdom of Brazil,
and is about thirty-six leagues in
length, and seven in breadth. [Lake
Xeray.)
SECTION XXIII.
PRINCIPAL CANALS.
Ham* tf)c ©anal,
1. Which forms a communication
between the North Sea and the Irish
Sea by means of the Frith of Forth
and the river Clyde. [The Canal of
the Clyde and the Forth.)
2. Which, passing from Andover
to the Southampton Water, crosses
Hampshire, from north to south, and
waters Stockbridge and Romsey.
[Andover Canal.)
3. Which, beginning in the Grand
Trunk, at Middlewich, in Cheshire,
runs to Nantwich and Chester, and
1 unites the river Dee with the sea.
[Chester Canal.)
4. Which runs through Westmore-
land and Lancaster, uniting the river
Ken to the Leeds canal, and is
seventy-tw r o miles in length, from
Kendal to Eccleston. {Lancaster
Canal.)
5. Which lies in the East Riding
. of Yorkshire, and forms a communi-
cation between the Humber and
Market-Weighton. {Wigton Canal.)
; 6. Which, beginning near Man-
s’ Chester, joins the Grand Trunk near
» Preston-on-the-Hill. [The Duke of
Bridgewater’s Canal.)
f 7- Which passing from Liverpool
3 to Leeds, in Yorkshire, joins the Mer-
sey to the river Air, and communi-
cates with the Humber. ( Liverpool
Canal.)
8. Which branches from the War-
wick and Birmingham Canal, near
Birmingham, is almost twenty-four
miles in length, to its union with the
Coventry Canal. [Birmingham and
Fazeley Canal.)
9. Which , commencing near Lich-
field, joins the Trent, and ends at Co-
ventry, near which it unites with the
Oxford Canal. ( Coventry Canal.)
10. Which branches off from the
Coventry Canal, and j oins the Thames
above Oxford. ( Oxford Canal.)
11. Which branches off from the
Worcester Canal at Droitwich, and
joins the Severn. ( Droitwich Canal.)
12. Which is in Staffordshire, and
forms a communication between the
Birmingham Canal and those of
Worcester and Wolverhampton.
(Dudley and Stourbridge Canal.)
13. Which forms a communication
between the Mersey and Trent,
and lies in Cheshire, Staffordshire,
Derbyshire, and Nottinghamshire.
[Grand Trunk.)
14. Which begins in the Trent,
above Rudgely, waters Wolverhamp-
ton, in Staffordshire, communicates
with the Dudley and Worcester
Canals, and ends in the Severn, near
Kidderminster. ( Wolverhampton
Canal.)
15. Which is in Yorkshire, and
unites the Leeds Canal to the Hum-
ber, near the town from which it has
its name. ( Selby Canal.)
16. Which is in Lancashire, and
communicates with the Mersey below
Warrington. ( Sanky Canal.)
17. Which, being in Lancashire,
runs from the town of Wigan, and
forms the Leeds Canal, between Ec-
clestonandOrmskirk. ( WiganCanal.)
18. W,lnch unites the Thames with
the Severn, beginning at Lechlade,
running through Gloucestershire and
a part of Wiltshire, and joining the
Severn near Saul, between Berkeley
and Gloucester. ( Thames and Severn
Canal.)
19. Which, commencing at Bath,
passes by Bradford and Devizes, and,
ending at Hungerford, unites the
tw r o rivers after which it is named,
and opens a communication between
London and Bristol. ( Kennett and
Avon Canal.)
20. Which joins the Thames near
Chertsey, in Surrey, and runs as far
as Basingstoke, in Hampshire. {Ba~
smgstoke Canal.)
21. Which, commencing at Braun-
ston, in Northamptonshire, w’here it
joins the Oxford Canal, and passing
throughNorthamptonshire,Bucking-
harashire, Hertfordshire, and part of
Middlesex, joins the Thames at
Brentford. [Grand Junction Canal.)
22. Which is in Middlesex, and
branching from the Grand J unction
near Cranford, takes a circuit be-
tween Greenford and Harrow to
Paddington. [Paddington Canal.)
23. Which, branching off from the
last-named Canal, at Paddington,
passes round the north and east of
London, and joins the Thames at
Limehouse. 24. Which passes through
1 tw r o stupendous tunnels, cut under
i roads, rivers, houses, and fields, one
l at Maida Hill, near Paddington, the
• other, which is the longest, at Isling-
ton. ( Regent’s Canal.)
I 25. Which is formed from the
• Scheldt, and establishes a communi-
l cation between Ghent, Bruges, and
) Ostend. [Canal of Bruges.)
26. Which furnishes an interior
r navigation between Calais, Grave-
f lines, Dunkirk, Fumes, Nieuport,
and Ostend. [Canal of Dunkirk.)
1 27. Which leads from St. Peters-
- burgh to the Caspian Sea, but tra


vellers who follow its course occupy
two years in completing their journey.
[The Great Russian Canal.)
28. Which joins the Loire near
Briare, and the Loing at Montargis.
( Canal of Briare.)
29. Which is a continuation of
the Canal of Briare, and proceeds
from Montargis to the Seine. (Ca-
nal of Montargis.)
30. Which is formed from the
Loire, above Orleans, communicates
with the Loing above Montargis, and
unites with the Seine above Moret.
(Canal of Orleans.)
31. Which, formed by rendering
the little river Lay on navigable, com-
mences near Doue, on the confines of
ancient Poitou, passes Touane and
Rabli, and empties itself into the
Loire, at Chalonne. [Canal of Mon-
sieur.)
32. Which passes under a moun-
tain through the arch of Malpas,
720 feet in length. 33. Which, com-
mencing at Cette, terminates in the
Garonne, and forms a communica-
tion between the Mediterranean and
the Atlantic. ( Canal of Languedoc.)
SECTION XXIV.
MINERAL WATERS.
Name tl)e J&tnml S&atttf!,
!• Which are found in England,
twelve miles from Bristol, and were
called by the Romans Aquae So-
lis, or waters of the sun. ( Bath
Waters.)
2. Which issue from a rock, named
after St. Vincent, near the second
city of England. [Bristol Waters.)
3. Which are in the county of
Kent, at a town built on three hills,
called Mounts Sion, Ephraim, and
Pleasant. [Tunbridge Waters.)
4. Which are in the county of
Surrey, and from which is extracted
a cathartic salt, well known through-
out Europe. [Epsom Waters.)
5. Which are found in the county
of York, and produce the same ef-
fects as those of Pyrmont in Ger-
many. ( Scarborough Waters.)
6. Which are obtained from nine
springs, that rise near the source of
the river Wye, and are named after
a town of Derbyshire. [Buxton Wa-
ters.)
7. Which consist of two baths,
whose waters are warm, and are
near Wirksworth, in Derbyshire.
[Matlock Baths.)
8. Which are in a village in the
West Riding of Yorkshire, in the
parish of Knaresborough, one of
which is the strongest sulphuric
water in Great Britain. {Harrow -
gate Waters.)
9. Which bear the name of the
Scottish Spa, and possess the same
qualities as those of the Spa in Ger-
many. ( New Aberdeen Waters.')
10. Which are found in a town
of Switzerland, where the assembly
of the States are held. ( Waters of
Baden, in Switzerland.)
11. Which are found in a town of
Germany, that gives name to a
Grand Duchy. 12. Which are eight
leagues from Strasburgh, beyond the
Rhine, and near which Turenne was
killed in 1675. ( Baden Waters.)
13. Which are in the Archduchy
of Austria, and are much frequent-
ed, especially by the inhabitants of
Vienna. [Waters of Baden, in Aus-
tria.)
14. Which are in the northern
part of Bavaria, ten miles north-
west of Amberg, and thirty-two
north of Ratisbon. { Saltzbach Wa-
ters.)
15. Which are in the kingdom of
the Netherlands, in the province of
Liege, and have five principal springs.
[Spa Waters.)
16. Which bear the name of a
town rendered memorable by the
treaty, signed there in 1748, which
terminated the war of the succession
against the House of Austria. [Wa-
ters of Aix-la-Chapelle.)
17. Which are at the foot of the
Upper Pyrenees, in a valley lined
with seventeen villages, besides the
little town of Luc. [Waters of Bar-
rege.)
18. Which are in the department
of the Lower Seine, nine leagues from
Rouen, and three from Neufchatel.
(Waters of Forges.)
19. Which arefound in the moun-
tains of the department of Vosges.
[Waters of Piombieres.)
20. Which are in the department
of the Upper Marne, seven leagues
from Langres, and ten from Chau-
mont. [Waters of Bourbonne-les-
bains.)
21. Which are in the department
of the Allier, six leagues from Mou-
lins and ten from Nevers, and are so
hot that a person cannot hold his
hand in them longer than a moment
without experiencing pain ; yet they
can neither cook an egg nor destroy
the life of plants; neither does the
water, when taken from the springs
and placed upon the fire, boil sooner
than perfectly cold water. [Waters
(f Bourbon-V Archamb and.)
22. Which are in the department
of the Allier, six leagues from Gan-
nat, and eighteen from Moulins.
[Waters of Vichy.)
23. Which are in the department
of the Herault, at the distance of one
league from Frontignan. ( Waters of
Balaruc.)
END OF THE GEOGRAPHICAL QUESTIONS.
LIST OF SECTIONS
INTO WHICH THE FOREGOING GEOGRAPHICAL QUESTIONS ARE DIVIDED.
Page
Section I. Countries 31
European 31
Asiatic 31
African 31
American 32
Section 11. Division of Countries 32
In Europe 32
In Asia 33
In Africa 33
In America 33
Section 111. Provinces, Counties, &c 33
Counties of England 33
North Wales .... 34
South Wales 35
Provinces of Ireland 35
Russia 35
Governments of Russia 35
Provinces of France 35
—— the Netherlands 36
Prussia 36
Cantons of Switzerland 36
Provinces of Spain 37
Portugal 37
Page
Section 111. (continued)
Provinces of Turkey in Europe 37
Turkey in Asia . 37
1 North America .38
• South America . 38
Section IV. Principal Cities and Towns of
Europe 38
In Great Britain 38
Denmark 39
Sweden and Norway 39
Russia 40
France 40
Germany 42
Poland 43
The Netherlands 43
Switzerland 43
Ducal Prussia 44
Bohemia 44
Hungary 44
Portugal 44
Spain 44
Italy 45
Turkey in Europe 45
Page
Section V. Principal Towns out of Europe 45
—— In Asia 45
ln Africa 46
ln America... 47
Section VI. Groups of Islands 47
Section VII. Principal Islands 48
Section VIII. Remarkable Towns in Islands 50
Section IX. Principal Peninsulas 51
Section X. Principal Capes 51
Section XI. Isthmuses 52
Section XII. Chains of Mountains 52
Section XIII. Principal Mountains 52
Section XIV. Principal Volcanos 53
Section XV. Principal Forests 53
Section XVI. Heaths and Deserts 53
Section XVII. Principal Seas 53
Section XVIII. Principal Straits 54
Section XIX. Principal Gulfs 54
Section XX. Principal Bays 55
Section XXI. Principal Rivers 56
Section XXII. Principal Lakes 57
Section XXIII. Principal Canals ..... 58
Section XXIV. Mineral Waters 59


APPENDIX.
GENERAL QUESTIONS ON GEOGRAPHY:
OR,
A GAME
Whereby a Person, by asking some General Questions, is to find out what is the Nature of a Place which has been
thought of by another Person, viz. whether it be a or an Inland County.
Designed for the Exercise of young People on the pvincipcd Terms of Geography , and on the general Denominations of
the several Parts of the Earth.
MANNER OF PLAYING THIS GAME.
We suppose A. and B. to be two Players; A. who thinks of a place, and B. who is to find out what is the Nature of
that place. The last is always to follow the Circle at his right, if he is answered negatively ; and that at his left, if
he is answered affirmatively.
Example I.
(A. is supposed to have thought of
an Island in a large Sea.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Land.
B. Is it a Maritime Land? A. Yes.
B. A Cluster of Islands ? A. No.
B. An Island in a large Sea ?
A. Yes, it is— '{naming the Island.)
Example 11.
(A. is supposed to have thought of a
Small Peninsula.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Land.
B. Is it a Maritime Land ? A. Yes.
B. Entirely surrounded by Water ?
A. No.
B. A Land whose form implies a con-
nexion with the Sea, as a Penin-
sula, Isthmus, or Cape? A. Yes.
B. A Peninsula? A. Yes.
B. A great: Peninsula. A. No.
B. A small Peninsula. A. Yes, it is
-—[naming the Peninsula.)
Example 111.
[A. is supposed to have thought of
an Isthmus.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Land.
B. Is it a Maritime Land? A. Yes.
B. Entirely surrounded by Water ?
A. No.
B. A Land whose form implies a con-
nexion with the sea ? A. Yes.
B. A peninsula ? A. No.
B. An Isthmus? A. Yes, it is—
[naming the Isthmus.)
Example IV.
{A. is supposed to have thought of the
Capital of a Maritime Country.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Land.
B. Is it a Maritime Land ? A. Yes.
B. Entirely surrounded with Water?
A. No.
B. A Land whose form implies a con-
nexion with the Sea ? A. No.
B. A City? A. Yes.
R.TheGapital of a Maritime Country ?
A. Yes, it is— [naming the City and
Country.)
Example V.
(. A . is supposed to have thought of a
Maritime Town seated on a conspi-
cuous River.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have. .
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Land.
B. Is it a Maritime Land? A. Yes.
B. Entirely surrounded by Water ?
A. No.
B. A Land whose form implies a
connexion with the Sea ? A. No.
B. City, or town? A, Yes.
B. Capital of a Country ? A. No.
B. Capital of a Division ? A. No.
B. Capital of a Province ? A. No.
B. A Maritime Town seated on an
Island ?
A. No.
B. A Maritime Town seated on a
conspicuous River ? A. Yes, it is
—(naming the Town and River.)
Example VI.
(A. is supposed to have thought of
a Maritime Division, as Natolia.)
*
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Land.
B. Is it a Maritime Land? A. Yes.
B. Entirely surrounded by the Sea?
A. No.
B. A Land whose form implies a con-
nexion with the Sea ? A. No.
B. City, &c. or extent of Land ?
A. Extent of Land.
B. Entire Country ? A. No.
B. Division of a country ? A. Yes,
it is— [naming the Division.)
Example VII.
{A. is supposed to have thought of a
Province not Maritime, as Oxford-
shire.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Land.
B. Is it a Maritime Land ? A. No.
B. Divisible into Provinces? A. No.
B. A Province not Maritime ?
A. Yes, it is— [naming the Province.)
Example VIII.
[A. is supposed to have thought of a
Town seatedon a co?ispicuous River,
as Landrecy.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water? A. Land.
B. Is it a Maritime Land ? A. No.
B. Divisible into Provinces ? A. No.
B. A Province ? A. No.
B. A City, or Town? A. Yes.
B. Capital of a Country ? A. No.
B. Capital of a Division ? A. No.
B. Capital of a Province ? A. No.
B. A Town situated on a River which
falls into the Sea ? A. No.
B. Seated on a conspicuous River ?
A. Yes, it is -—[naming the Town.')
Example IX.
CA. is supposed to have thought of a
Forest, as that of Windsor.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Land.
B. Is it a Maritime Land? A. No.
B. Divisible into Provinces ? A. No.
B. Is it a Province ? A. No.
B. A city or town ? A. No.
B. A steep Ground ? A. No.
B. A Forest? A. Yes, it is—
(naming the Forest.)
Example X,
[A. is supposed to have thought of a
Large Sea, as the Atlantic Ocean.
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water? A. Water.
B. Sea Water? A, Yes,
B. An entire Sea? A, Yes.
B. A large Sea? A. Yes, it is—
(naming the Sea.)
Example XI.
fA.As supposed to have thought of a
Strait, as that of Gibraltar.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Water.
B. Sea Water? A. Yes.
B. An entire Sea ? A. No.
B. A Strait ? A. Yes, it is— [naming
the Strait.)
Example XII.
( A. is supposed to have thought of a
Small Gulf, as that of Salonichi.)
B. Have you thought of a Place?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Water,
j B. Sea Water ? A. Yes.
B. An entire Sea? A. No.
B. A Strait ? A. No.
B. A Gulf? A. Yes.
B. A large Gulf. A. No.
B. Then is it a small Gulf?
A. Yes, it is— (naming the Gulf.)
Example XIII.
[A. is supposed to have thought of a
Mineral Water, as that of Bath.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Water.
B. Sea Water ? A. No.
B. Running Water ? A. Yes.
B. Is it a natural Bed? A. Yes.
B. Mineral Water? A. Yes, it is—
[naming the Water.)
Example XIV.
[A. is supposed to have thought of a
River which falls into another Ri-
ver, as the Neckar.)
B. Have you thought of a Place?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water? A. Water.
B. Sea Water ? A. No.
B. Running Water? A. Yes.
B. In a natural Bed ? A. Yes.
B. Mineral Water ? A. No.
B. A River which falls into the Sea?
A. No.
B. A River which falls into another
River? A. Yes, it is— [naming
the River.)
Example XV.
[A. is supposed to have thought of a
Lake which hears the name of a
Town, as that of Geneva.)
B. Have you thought of a Place ?
A. I have.
B. Is it Land or Water ? A. Water.
B Sea Water? A. No.
B. Running Water? A. No.
B. A Lake which bears the name of
a Town ? A. Yes, it is— [naming
the Lake.)
THE END.
LONDON:
SHACK ELL AND BAYLIS,
johnson’s-court, FLEET-STREET.


Fage, 23.
. / Tib/, e ojf Gjewemwl (Dues nows
* * * * *£ * * * *






I I I
' , THE
JIWjB *i> M *il >3 jc& JJ i5 2p5 oS 9
f ///fYs/ss/sf'S/ J
(is the (Bait Uteri; ) }
&Z 0 @apjg[ f .
/r/s,j/<///Arf A /.j/t/s/ : m
' 1 822{^7j


Hetritt. .rculp.
Lo/Arn . thr Act thrcct.r, hr Jlhirri.r k Son, St Pauls Ch. !■' h't'iJAftirAi .7/ 'f






FoirLjp
■I _
— - r // /;
, -(< 3 tbcJUibc (5atilticvs_ >X^
Mamies. 1
> / .**&
I Jfc/tv.j/u/Z/AtiX, (.o/u/t’.
j c/ Wwi.C v j


// •// iff. .»■< •. tiirfj/irf) •// . r/r
l.on,h’/i. ht/riitlhi !<f ,/V/v //•■/ U,i /•//■* X.><>// ,XfJim/.<r fir A// /f. /if VS Afrtri'/i 3J






'@}Svp#irsi 9
///<' (o/t/w/tr/uvs r/ >
(> the Jlbbe faultier*
&JLO&Ii&IL'IS&L
/r// aj/t srA/s a /V /y /
1822/3 /) ♦
Fuhlutherl no- the Act direct.r , by,T.Jht\


n, T:' •// 3J *






A' /Ar A AA/r/sAs/V/s//
0 tl) i v( 3ll> lu : QJiiultm's c\)'')
'< / ■
7/7/ //rr // //ru - fJy/777^.
Imdw.M-*** hy. ■


Jim Jit. sc. thrburtonJtr.
rj.uns Y ’ l ' { W? 3 &,•»*. 31'/






4 #4) Cpm central Past of v \ I
% /(>) //< f /scsr/s/sc/t f/)
( ( ' tlu 0 )
\( *)f
honJo/i±l*uh’/nje Ih&Aef t/irtftf, by J


Hewitt, sculp.
'7/iirri.r AzSon„S , J\i///f l7t.Y'//<‘73.A€t/.r>'fi ol •






/ yoJi r^
x ‘ 'Aim®
/X / f
/n& (l cf
0 tin' Owultiers. 0 )
. ——<
/" / i / J :
/f //r. J//S/////S// * I.)///// ;' y
/ , jUise. y// / /
J.< ‘n./, ’//. />,,/■ '/,u-/h, •./-/ ,hr.‘. /•['•/■


P/ajr.
-'.'rank far?M26..M,trr/t ‘il*t






4 rr-AXK < iuitr OJ ,.
* *T -TV
v ii c/ jxjjiy
r// C //r/ v /f//"/'J. j/isyry/yr/s'
Wt//> f//t‘ 7/ r/rAv Ji'JJ/.vro v«v of?//r
Jj'f/frr/*//ff/frf?/to.s77\*f rr///. \7n f//ff fa?W;
PfjjT'riiK rrifAY of
CThtAbbtliVaultifrs o>ft'i\EiphualCf>aiiire.
-—' ( r, ~.
yc/oj/ry/f/y// «• (.j/ty/i;
ys 182 G,
FuA’f'j* th<- Aftdiwt*. h’^-


// ■// in. .1, •. ////, •kiitii'iJ7.t. •,
W;-, \ , S'r.„,U r/t.rf 1/-f






-EondcruPuh^aslhe^lctdirects fy J-B<u
W
/v zZ/zZ.)//,
V Sitin' (I)


•< r/utrch T!J626.Mat'tiv 31'?
/ V .V"
ills!©;
v/(W /'/
/
" /, /,






JiUCJnY'J' AJIACO YKRXES
( ( ( iiMln-;-) )
nx'Qx.pm.
c DRAWN by)) T
/(//r,>//r/////r/ /* //
f O)
1826.
Zontto/i* Jiibtaslhe Art directs byJ.h


Hwitt.ScuJp. S?John's Wood.
eh. 7*Jan?i.ifiz 7 .






(v till: central part of \ /
p 7 » v
\ /r > /dr fs/sssys/sz/sr// */>
' C tl)c .Abbe Omwtlttcre r?T) ?
/r///■.// // a/ /? /* f.)///// , /
I | >r^\
' h I II 's y' \
lovdt>t>,Puh'/,i.f thePirf diwtf. hvJ.


Henri/I iv '.Bju-A’/'/h/V .
£.Cw. sfßtuLr rh.r! J.rju.AErv/i 31






( 0 A sis: ai v )
A ////• f ■// '
ty tbc l> b c (/van Ui crs )
bmlss,
— '
/// Vsr /4 /' •
/'/' <PJ f /ssyt//<'/C - r-
< 18'’Q, '/ \
/., •/?//{»//. fi/l> '///.*• /hr. ir/ ////*yv*Ar, hv / /


.tv •////>.
A hfnf.fr/,.}"//W.M,,,-. /, .I/*






C v JP jp >) 1
//// r •////■/!■/■//// ■// sS
, (. tljcvUUjcfomiUicvs 'c^T)
{A.822 .ijy
.Lui'ioi/. v/ ’/nvt-f, byJ-


Ht , n '/'//>■<\JSut fruit/ ’!‘P/t/,f.
Turrit K- Son. SfFnii /.c / 7i , T: 1 IF PS. Mat v // .7/






C't' A wW T ;P» A
fr ’r //// f /s/fys/rs/vs y/ ;
(. tbc-MU'coWUtims >) >
GiEO c>- f- f •u; a>v r fvS,
Y’ / 7 T / v~xX / •
/r// (ij/zr///// s/ A Ay//// > ? .
3822. C^O
■■■■
LtUyloiiiPub J ,i* tjh&.lct Jin rtf. by


li. Ui-lliit.-e.'U Ip.
,h Y:> .7 1'?






( r A w* XZ A M
V «i£t Js&& A
v /dt a /s/ru/s//sf>//
(r tljl' OMUItUT* ( 0
(Sak>s^geaj^Sftsqaj,
/, // ■ )~ /
yr //r j// s/V/ // /// , f //i /?/ j
- 7 t«22.
London. Fld‘?n.r the Act directs, Sir.


f/< ti-iil.. iv• (!//•/•///•/, 7/ S/r.
■ A Son, S' i/r.YmvL /.f "J.J f,irch SI "'






/(> / /A/r (s>A/f V/Ar/ ///// f/
(, the 3U«bc ■)
&Si O .
,/ 7 /
A Ass\jA> (/A A/ r/ /' Ay// /// ; 7
, / 4 822 y / ) /
A . iLy v . v , y /
Loii‘h‘ll.Tu!• :'</■<■ th> .Irt <///>'<'A >•, by


XJi.Jlfiriti M-ulf
floorLr Si Son.. SlF.uiL tl, T.' ISt’-i. Mur. /, o/ ri










