



















A Lerspective Vierv of the Grand Saloon & Gallery at the Museum,
late Sir Ashton Lever's Sunny and Black fryer's Bridge.


A
COMPA NION
TO THE
MUSEUM,
(Late Sir Ashton Lever’s)
Removed to
Albion Street, the Surry End of Black Friars Bridge.
Whilft Time is unveiling, Science is exploring Nature.
LONDON:
PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DCC.XC.




PREFACE.
I r is unnecejfary to make any other Apology for the Publication of this Work , than
to mention , that many Perfons of the moji dijlinguijhed Learning and Abilities?
Admirers of the Works of Nature , in its almoji infinite Variety of Forms and Properties?
and thofe curious Works of Art y which difplay the inventive Genius as well of the un-
tutored Indian , as of the more polijhed European or Afeatic , have repeatedly intimated
i
their Wijhes to fee a concife Defcription of the numerous and curious Contents of the
L/EVERian Museum. —ln Compliance therewith , the prefent Proprietor has
thought it incumbent on him to proceed in the forming a Catalogue of it \ in which
he had made confiderable Progrefs , and , when compleated , intended to have publijhecl
the whole together. But repeated and daily Applications made by Perfons who vifit
the Mufeum for a Catalogue , have induced him to publijh the Firji Part feparately ,
k
as a confiderable Time muji neceffarily elapfe before the whole can be compleated . —-
The Explanations of the various Articles of Natural Hijiory have been given as
fully as a Work of this Kind will ad?nit of y and particular Attention has been paid
to render it as generally ufeful as pojfible , by giving an Expofition of the Scientific
Names and Terms .
Perfons vifiting the Mufeum will be accommodated with the life of this Catalogue
whilft they are infpeffing the various Articles that may attraff their Notice ; and the
fubfequent Parts thereof.\ which will unavoidably exceed in Fpiiantity what is con-
tained in this j will he compleated with all pojfible Speed,




A
COMPA NION
TO THE
MUSEUM.
APARTMENT THE FIRST.
The HALL.
WK ibi&xx firft talvC notice of two columns or pillars of Hone, of an Kexangular
e as you enter the Hall, on which are thefe v/ords :
GIANTS CAUSEY, Ireland .
They are part of a moff wonderful production near Coleraine, in the county of Antrim,
in the norJi of Ireland, where there are many thoufands of Inch pillars, or columns, an-
gular and contiguous, but not united, fome of the columns having more, and Others
fewer Tides or angles than thefe fpecimens. The common people of the country fup-
pofe tnem to be a work of art, and have a tradition, that they were placed in the order
they are now feen, by the antient inhabitants of Ireland, who were of a gigantic fize ;
but fome of the learned conjecture them to be of volcanic origin, whilff others fuppofc them
to be a regular operation of nature, and the effeCt of chryftallization.
There are many other fimilar productions in different parts of Europe and elfewhere,
but none that can vie with this for valt extent, aftonilhing magnificence, and beautifully
romantic appearance. *
This Caufeway is fituated (as the late Mr. Whitehurff mentions) “ at the foot of a
llupendous cliff, the elevation of which is not apparently Ids than five or fix hundred
ce feet perpendicular above the Atlantic Ocean; and yet the Vhole cliff confifts of one
“ entire r mafs > compofed (as he apprehends) of different ffrata of lava, in cbnfequence
cc not of one but many facceffive eruptions.’’
B The


The Hall contains four Glafs Cafes .
GLASS CASE. I.
No. I. A Gun, which burfl in the hand of Lord Grey’s game-keeper, without his re-
ceiving any hurt, A remarkable circumflance, confidering how greatly the gun
was lhattered.
2. Brace of Highland Piflols, iron flocks. N. B. All the others in the cafe , not markers
are Britifh, and ‘very antient .
3. Five Guns, flocks curioufly inlaid. Perfan , &c.
4. Singular Gun, Chinsfe, ornamented with filver ferrils ; three others, ditto.
5. Air Gun.
6. Two Guns, which belonged to the late Edward Wortley Montague, Efq;
7. Brace of Piflols, which belonged to ditto.
S. Rifle-barrelled Gun, from North America . —> The drefs of a "Rife-man is to he feen
in the Wardrobe Room.
9. Two Guns, antient, fuppofed to be Old Englijh v
1 ■ _ . ....
On the Sides of this Cafe ,
1 A long Gun, and Red for ditto, by which General Wedderburns, (brother to Lord
Loughborough) was killed when reconnoitring a fort in the Bail Indies, The fhot
he received could not be accounted for until the fort was taken, and this long gun
difcovered, the diftance being fo great.
2. Magazine Gun. A great curiofity, which being charged at the butt end, by mo*
ving a fmall regulator, may be fired four times facceflively in a few feconds.
3. Short Match-lock Gun.
4. Ditto.
Over this Cafe.
1. Remarkable large Brafs-barelled Blunderbufs.
2. Brace of Piflols, flocks finely inlaid, of great antiquity. Perfan .
3. Powder Horns. African and Perfan.
4. Eleven Gun Locks, of different forts, being fuch as were invented foon after th
difeovery of gunpowder.
GLASS CASE 11.
Remarkable Horse Shoes, fever al of which exhibit great Ingenuity in the
Contrivance.
1. Was taken from the old caflle of Oakingham, Berks, where it is the cuflom for
every nobleman who pafles that way the firll time after fucceding to his title, to
prefent one to the lord of the manor.
2. A


z. Large Shoe, which belonged to a Dutch dray horfe.
3. Shoe with rings, ufed for horfes accuflomed to trip, to make them lift up their feet,
and are put on when they are turned to grafs.
4. Two Shoes for coking, or to put on and take off, for frofting a horfe, without
his being new ihod.
5. Pair of Moorifh Horfe-fhoes, from Tangiers in Africa,
6. Shoe with a Screw, to put on and take off occasionally when a horfe has caft his flioe.
Ditto.
7. Shoes made for a bad footed coach horfe, by means of which it travelled with eafe
from London to Edinburgh and back again.
8. Hoof and Shoe of a beautiful Sumpter mule, that belonged to the late Duke
of Cumberland, which, being fhod by a fmith in Germany, was lamed by his
driving a nail into the frog of its foot, and which he was fuppofed to have done wil-
fully, in order to deprive the Duke of the polfelTion of fo beautiful an animal ; the
Duke being at that time in an enemy’s country.
9. Shoe of a Tufcan mule.
10. Two antient Shoes, dug out of the earth ten feet deep, fuppofed to have lain ther
for ages, they being encruited with a very thick ochry fubftance.
11. Shoe for a horfe that has had his foie drawn.
12. Pair of Shoes to prevent a horfe cutting.
13. Shoes for race horfes.
Bottom Shelf,
*4* Eight pieces of Iron from Talk on the Hill, Stafford shire, being part of the tire and
other iron work of a waggon with gunpowder in it, which took lire, and blew up there.
15. A piece of ditto, cut fide the cafe .
j 6. On the fide of this cafe is a curious German Sword, upon the blade of which is en-
graved, in very dilUnd characters, an intire calendar, or almanack, in the German
language,
GLASS CASE 111.
1. Remarkable Arrows. •—• Bengal,
2. Quiver of Barbed Arrows. Africa.
3. Bird Arrow.
4. Elegant French modern Bow,
5. African Bow.
6. Quiver for Arrows. JV. America •
Thofe unlabeled , are Bows and Arrows of various kinds and countries,
GLASSCASEIV.
I. Quiver of Arrows. Per fan.
The Ivory Knife on the outfidc is ufed for feaing the animal that has been fliot,
B 2 2. Whift-


2. Whiftlingf Arrows from China , the heads of which are made of horn perforated with
holes, which, by cutting the air in their iitghv, c.jmis ■?. loud Whirling found, whence
their name. The fame kind were formerly ulccl in England, and ihot from one friendly
camp to another, by way of fignal.
3. Quiver, Sling, and Cap. Africa.
4. Iron Arrow, which was found about 14. years ago in the field in which the
caftle of Harwood in Yorkfhire hands. Thole- unlabeled are Africa, China, North -
America, &c.
On the Walnfcot to the left , as you enter the Hall , out of Cafes•
1. Singular Three-bladed Weapon, unknown, fuppofed to be African*
2. True Toledo.
3. Daggers of different kinds, chiefly P erf an.
4. Moorifii Cried, with ornamented handle.
3. Two others.
6. Three Powder Horns. American , finely carved by the Indians, with maps and other
devices.
7. Two Ivory Indruments, or Beaters, which are druck againft a kind of drum. They
are ufed in China in proclaiming or giving notice to the public, and anfwer the fame
purpofe as a bell with our bellman or common cryer.
8. Italian Stilletto.
9. Highland Bafket-hilted Sword.
10. Belt. African.
11. Fair of Spurs, and three Bridles. Barbary.
12. Barbary or Morocco llirrups.
13. Italian Spurs for Race-horfes, in order to make them run without riders. Thefe
fpurs are fixed to the fides of the horfes by fome glutinous fubdance. Thofe un-
labeled are different curious weapons, as tolsdos, hangers, feimetars, daggers, antient
and modern.
14. Lady’s Riding Stirrup for a fide-faddle.
15. Two Scotch Dirks.
16. Flaming Sword.
On the JVainfcot near the Fire-place*
1. Real Tomohawk and Tobacco-pipe in one.
2. Truncheon or Sceptre, of great antiquity. It was taken up from the bottom of
the Thames. The Filhmongers company in London are faid to have one of the fame
kind, which they ufe as a mace,
3. Two Old Engliih Battle-axes,
4. Three Moorilh Criefts.
5. Two


5. Two American war weapons.
6. Two-handed Sword, which belonged to an antient corporation.
6. A. Sword and Piftolm one.
7. Scimetar, I 'Turkijh , with real Damafcus blade.
7. A. Tomohawk with a Saw, of the latell conflru&ion made in England Thofc
unlabeled are curious weapons of different denominations, and various countries.
8. Gilt Spurs, refembling thofe worn by the Knights of the Bath.
9. Gambado Spurs.
ic. Pair of Sir Afhton Lever’s own Hunting Spurs. all the other fpurs are antient;
fome of which were worn in Charles the Firfl’s time.
11. Part of an antient Shield.
1 2. Sword. Ferfian .
13. Skeleton Head of Hippopotamus, or River Horfe, fuppofed by the learned to be the
Behemoth mentioned in the Book of Job.
14. Skeleton Head of an Elephant, which, when living, belonged to her prefent Majefly.
Specimens of the abovementioned Animals may be feen in the Quadruped Room.
15. Spontoon. Ferfian .
16. Pike, which belonged to the Great Mogul’s guards.
17. Stake, which was driven down in the Thames fifty-five years before Chrift, by the
Britons, to obflrud the progrefs of Julius Caefar upon his invafion of Britain.
18. Cubic Chriftallization of Salt, from the fait works, Chsjhire .
19. Specimen of Penmanfhip, by Mr. Tomkins.
20. Skeleton Turtle.
21. Favourite Dog, of a particular friend of Sir Afhton Lever’s.
APARTMENT 11.
Being the Arched Baffage leading from the Hall to the Sandwich Room*
The Sides of this paffage are covered with fpecimens of painted or chequered cloth,
all from the Sandwich If ands.
Under which are placed five Flaxen Mantles, from Ncotha , or King George'Sound \
(marked A.) ornamented with a deep fringe< This kind of garment paffes under the left
arm, and ties over the right fhoulder, by which means both arms are left at freedom.
Ditto from New Zealand , (marked B.) in an unfinifhed fate.
Thefe different Mantles are made by people to whom the ufe of a loom is totally un-
known, and who live at a Vaft diftance from each other ; nothwithftanding which, there is
fo great a fimliitude in the workmanfhip, that, on comparing them together, and confider-
ing, how improbable it is that the latter fhould, ever have beep peopled by the former, it
naturally excides the idea, that invention is not peculiar to any nation or climate.
Over thefe Garments are hung the following curious articles from New Caledonia,
New Zealand, the Friendly Ifands, Otaheite, Sandwich Iflands, Is c, &c,
1. War


1. War Clubs. New Caledonia .
»
2. Short Bludgeons, called Patapattoos, of bone, (lone, and wood, which are worn by
the New Zealanders, in like manner as daggers are worn by fome Afiatics and Euro-
peans in their Girdles. Otaheite and New Zealand.
Paddles. New Zealand'. Two of thefe are ornamented with carving, and circular
pieces of the beautiful pearly fhell called the Iris Ear.
3. Long War Clubs, and other war weapons. Friendly Iflands . The greater part of thefe
are made of a wood aimed equal in hardnefs to the Brazilian, and fuperior in beauty
to mahogany; and when it is remembred iron and fleel were wholly unknown to thefe
people, few fpecimens for laborious and fkilful workmanfhip can vie with them. —-
The carving, though with no better inftrument than a fhell, a fhark’s tooth, or a Bint,
by dint of induftry and ingenuity is perfectly uniform in pattern, and highly ornamental. ♦
4. Paddles and Spear-headed Battle Axes. Nootka, or King George’s Sound.
Small ditto for Boys.
5. Adzes, and fhort Clubs. Otaheite and Friendly Iflands.
6. Pagees; fhort flaves, in the form of fmall paddles, ufed In warlike exercifcs or dan-
ces. Friendly Iflands,
7. Two Heads of Spears, made of bone ; for the manner in which they are fixed, fee No. 13,
on the arch entering the Saloon. Nootka.
APARTMENT 111,
Sandwich Room.
Thus called from containing principally the admirable and curious articles colle&ed by
Captain Cook, in his third and unhappily laft voyage ; for at Owhyhee, one of the Sand-
wich Ifiands, f he was cut off by thofe perfons who had before treated him with
a rTpedl approaching to adoration.
On entering this Apartment, the firfi thing that meets the eye is the following Infcription.
“To the Immortal Memory of Captain Cook.”
Being the fame Infcription that the public have Teen at Leicefter-houfe.
This Room contains ten mahogany Glafs-cafes, fix of which, marked with the Num-
bers, 1,2, 3,4, 5, and 6, are furnifhed with mifcellaneous articles ; in the other four, mar-
ked
* To give an idea of the fmall eftimation in which the people of the Friendly Iflands held thefe
weapons , when compared with infir uments made of iron, a fubfiance which they admired no lefs
for its novelty than its utility ; it may be obferved , that the Club marked (f) one of the ntofi cu-
rious form, and highly finijhed , was purchafed by Mr. Samwell, late furgeon of the Difcovery,
for two hatchets from one of the chiefs of Tongataboo, one of the Friendly Iflands.
f The ifiands thus called were fo tiamed in honour of Lord Sandwich, who, at the time of their
being difcovered, was firfi Lord of the Admiralty , and the particular patron of Captain Cook,


ked A, B, C, and D, are arranged the beautiful Feathered Cloaks, and various other pro-
du&tons, chiefly c-f the fame Angular and elegant materials. *
GLASS CASE I.
Top Shelf,
Wooden Can (marked No. I.) fattened in a Angular manner with thongs of the fmews
of fome animal, and wooden pegs round the bottom. Two other Cans, or Veflels, (mar-
ked 2. and 3.) of wood alfo, fattened with fome vegetable fubttance, inttead of the fmews
ofbeafts, and without wooden pegs.
4. Houfehold Utenfils,made of a horny or bone-like fubttance, all from King George's Sound,
and along the Coaft.
4. A. Model of a Sledge, in bone.
4. B. Models in bone, or ivory, unknown, from 7 "JhukutJki,
5. Quiver for Arrows, and Bone Bracer to ditto, from TJhukutfii Nofs , on the North-eatt
part of AAa ; a work of great curiofity, ornamented with porcupine quills, fquirrel flan,
ermine, &c. We are informed this is the only fpecimen of the kind brought to Europe.
5. A. Curious Cap, from the fame place.
6. The Skin of a Sea Otter, from the South , Seas , being one of thofe collected by
Capt. Cooky on his laft voyage. This is one of the ttaple commodities of King George's
Sound. The fur is remarkable for its delicate foftnefs, and the fkins are in fuch high
efteem in China, that the prime ones have produced there at the rate of twenty pounds
tterling each, and upwards. —> This Ani?nal may he feen in the Quadruped Room.
Shelf 11.
6. A. Pouch, from Prince William's Sound. The ornamental part of fome of thefe, Capt,
Cook affirms, may be put in competition with the moft delicate manufactures found in
any part of the known world. This curious work is performed by means of exceeding
fine needles, made of fifh bones. ,
y. Gloves and Glove Bands, from the fame place, and of curious workmanfhip.
8. Two Bracelets, ornamented on the outfide with the pipes or tubular Ihells of Den-
talia, a fpecies of Tea worms, and refembling bugles. The inttde is of a horny fub-
ftance, but of what animal not known.
8. A. A Angle ditto, which, befides the above ornaments, is interfperfed with copper.
8. B. An ornament of copper. From whence procured by the natives of Pritice William's
Sound , is unknown.
9; Necklace,
* It mu[i undoubtedly afford fatisfaftion to the public , to fee federal of the identical articles
which were once the property of the celebrated Captain Cook, and two of which he wore on
cne particular public occafion at 0 why bee, as dejeribed in Page of this Catalogue ; the
viewing offuch ohjefts cannot fail to excite a melancholy pleafure , while we refeSi on his emi-
nent abilities, and his unhahhy fate .


9. Necklace, made of the fame bugle-like fubftance as that above mentioned.
10. Spoons of horn, or bone, one of which is ornamented with carving of birds on the
handle ; all from Prince William's Sound.
11. Figure made of bone, or ivory, (from fame Place,) with Nofe and Lip Ornamenfs,
to fhew the manner in which the natives of that place decorate, or rather deform, the
human countenance. The under lip and noftrils are cut to hang ihefe ornaments
through ; and fo extraordinary was the appearance of thefe people, that one of Capt.
Cook's feamen, on the firft view of them, cried out they had two mouths, The drefs
of this figure refembles one of the common frocks, and is ufually the fkin of the fea ot-
tci, and worn with the hairy fide outwards, ■with a hole juft fufficient to admit the
head. See Cook's Lajl Voyage vol. 2, p. 367.
12. Various fpecimens of the Lip Ornaments, to fome of which beads are ufually hung.
13. Head Ornament of Feathers and Beads, from the fame place.
14. Two inftruments in wood, ufe unknown.
15. Hoods, made of a very fine fquirrel fkin. Cook's River.
16. Pair of Gloves, ornamented with porcupine quills. Prince William's Sound.
Shelf 111.
37. Girdles, or Waift Ornaments, made of curious fquirrel fkin. Cook's River .
iB. Boots.
39. A Pouch.
20. Cuffs.
21. Snares for Catching Birds. y Kamtfchatka .
22. Garters, curioufly ornamented.
23. Ditto, to one of which the jaw and
teeth of fome quadruped appends.
Bottom Shelf,
24. One of the common clofe Frocks or Dreftes, made of leather, ornamented with taffcls,
or fringe, and narrow thongs, worn by the inhabitants of Cook's River.
25. Another Frock, or Jacket, made of the inteftines of a whale, prepared fo fkilfully as
almoft to referable our goldbeater’s fkin. It is to be worn when it rains, and is made
to draw tight round the neck. Its fleeves reach as low as the wrifts, round which they
are tied with a firing; and its fkirts, when they are in their canoes, are drawn over the
rim of the hole in which they fit, fo that no water can enter the canoe. At the fame
time it keeps the men entirely dry upward ; for no water can penetrate through it, any
more than thro’ a bladder. It muft be kept continually moift, or wet, otherwife it is apt
to crack or break. This may properly be called a Foul-weather Frock. The
feams of thefe frocks are fo contrived as to exclude the paflage of water. Our fea-
men made feveral attempts to imitate them, but without effeft.
GLASS-


GLASS CASE 11.
fop Shelf,
I* High Truncated Conic Caps, or Hats, worn by the natives of Nootka, or King George’s
Sound; on fome of which the procefs of their whale fiffiery is wrought, This, fays
Capt. Cook, though rudely executed, ferves to ihevv, that tho’ there be no appearance
of the knowledge of letters amongft them, they have fome notion of reprefenting
actions in a lading way, independent of what may be recorded in their fongs and tra-
ditions. They are worn by both fexes, without diffindion. Others, of a different
form but painted.
2. War Bludgeons, of bone, fomewhat like the Patapattoos of New Zealand, which arc
feen in the Arched Paffage .
Shelf 11.
Mafks of different kinds, fome of them refembling the human face ; others the heads of
birds, fea and land animals, &c. Thofe marked No. 1, and 2, are faid to be hung up in
houfes, in memory of a dead friend*
3. The others are worn by dancers, and bn various occaffons. #
C
4. The
* Thefe Majks , or Vizors, called hy Capt. Cook, W. 2, 306 and 3c 7of his haft Voyage,
t( Monjirous Decorations . Some oj' thefe refemble human faces, furnijhed with hair , beards ,
* c eye-brows ; others , heads of birds , many the heads of land and fea aniinals . In gene~
ral they much exceed the natural fze, and are painted, and often f reused with pieces of thi
Kt Foliaceous Mica, which makes them glitter, and ferves to augment the enormous deformity.
** Whether they ufe thefe extravagant mafquerade ornaments on any particular religious occafon
** o** diver fan, or whether they are put on to intimidate their enemies when they go to battle, or
S( as decoys when they go to hunt animals, is uncertain . ’’ ——• [ However, in a fubfequent part of
the work he fays, ] —— “ They fometimes decoy animals by covering themfelves with a Jkin, and
f< running about upon all-fours, which they do very nimbly, as appeared from the fpecimens of
i( jkill exhibited hy tnsm, making a kind of noife or howl at the fame time ; and on thefe occaflons
** the mafs or carved heads, as well as the real heads of the different animals, are put on .
M It may be concluded, fays he, that if travellers or voyagers, in an ignorant and credulous age,
when many unnatural or marvellous things were fuppofed to exif, had feen a number of people
decorated in this manner, without being able to approach fo near as to be undeceived, they would
** readily have believed, and in their relations would have attempted to make others believe
that there exif ed a race of beings partaking of the nature of man and beaf 1 9 A reflection
that prefenfs the admirers of Herodotus in particular with an excellent apology for fome of his
wonderful tales of this fort*


4. The figure of a White Bear, rudely carved by the natives of Nootka in ivory or bone.
5. Four figures, one of which, is a Boar’s Head, carved in horn or bone, fuppofed to be
ornaments.
6. Other Ornaments of bone.
*j. Two fmall Bags, one containing foliaceous mica, and the other a Toft green hone or earth,
which are ufed for painting the face of the wooden malks, or vizors; and the hick for
laying it on, ufed by the inhabitants of Nootka , or King George's Sound,
Shelf 111,
1. Dancing Rattles, made of wood, horn, &c.
1. A, Small Whihle, or Call, ufed by the inhabitants of Nootka *
2. An Eel Spear,
3. Tools, or inhruments, to be ufed like chihels or planes ; two of them have iron fixed
to them, but whether obtained by immediate traffic themfelves, [meaning the inhabi-
tants of King George's Sound ] or thro* their connexion with other tribes on the continent,
is, as Capt, Cook obferves, unknown.
4. Models of Birds.
5. Model of a fmall Canoe, with two oars. This is the more remarkable for its being
made on the fame plan as thofc of the Efquimaux Indians. This model was made by
one of our officers.
Bottom Shelf,
I* Models of Canoes of various kinds.
3. Harpoon Line and Barb, ufed in catching fifli, and which Capt. Cook admired for the
ingenuity of the contrivance in feveral refpe&s, and particularly for its being {Length-
ened by finews within the line.
3* Bowl*
* t( The only inftruments of mufic (iffuch they may he called') fays Capt, Cook, vol. 2, page.
** 3 11 °f his laft voyage, which I faw amongji them were a Rattle , and a fmall Whijile, about
* r an inch long , incapable of any variation from having hut one hole* They ufe the Rattle, when
** they fng ; hut upon what occafons they ufe the whijile I know not, unlefs it he when they drefs
x< themfelves like particular animals, and endeavour to imitate their howl or cry, 1 once faw one
u of them dreffed in a wolf s Jkitfa with the head f over his own, and imitating that animal hy
“ making a f making noife with one of thefe whifiles, which he had in his mouth, The Rattles
4( are for the moji part made in the Jhape of a bird, with a few pebbles in the belly , and the
4i tail is the handle,” He fays elfewhere, that rattles are ufed in their mufcal entertainments ,
and when they addrefs Jirangers, &c. ” Capt . Cook was fo much annoyed hy the rattle ,
No, 6, made of horn, and carved, that he pur chafed it of the owner in order to get rid of its
sxcejjive noife,
f The wolfs head in this cafe is that which Capt . Cook deferihes in ths above Note,


3. Bowl, or Dilh, ornamented with the teeth of feals.
4. Box fattened with thongs.
5. Another Bowl. - , c ,
The whole contents of this Cafe were brought from King Gsorge s Sounds
GLASS CASE 111.
• ' Top Shelf.
Several beautiful fpeciraens of Matting, from Sandwich Thefe are made of the
leaves' of the Pandanus. by the inhabitants of thofe in which at tide of
manufafture, Capt. King affirms, whether we regard ftrength, finenefs, or beauty, they
certainly excel the whole world. , 0 ,n «
I. Large Gourd, made ufe of to put provifions, or filhmg tackle. See. m. Gourd Ihells
conilitute a large part of the houlhold utenfils among the Sandwich iflanders; tome ot
them grow to fo enormous a fize, that they are capable of containing from ten to twelve
2 Vegetable Bottle* This is another fpecies of Gourd. The defcription of thefe vege-
■ table productions given by Capt. King, is as follows : “ The gourd is applied to all man-
« ner of domcftic ufes, and the Sandwich iflanders, in order the better to fit tnem to
“ their refpedive ufes, have the ingenuity to give them different forms, by tying them
« with bandages during their early growth.” Thus feme are of a longitudinal form, to
hold filhing tackle; fome round, to hold provifions; and others are in the fliape of a
bottle, to hold water. Sec. They have alfo a method of footing them with a heated m-
ftrument, fo as to give them the appearance of being painted in a variety of neat and
elegant deligns. Vol. 3, p. 15*»
Shelf 11.
1. Fans of Wicker-work; they are neatly formed with fmall cords of hair and fibres of the
cocoa-nut.
±, Two gourds, ufed to put fmall repafts in.
2. A. Cocoa-nut, containing bird-lime made ufe of to catch particular birds. After
they are caught, the natives pluck out their moil beautiful feathers,* and then give
them their liberty again, making ufe of thefe feathers in their various ornaments and
dreffes, fuch as cloaks, helmets, necklaces, wreaths, &c. elegant fpecimens of which
may be feen in the cafes A. B. C. and D; in this room.
3. Houlhold Utenfils ; among which is a remarkable cup with fupporters, and a ladle orna-
mented at the handle with a human figure in a fupplicating pofture. The above are all
formed out of folid pieces of wood.
4. Beautiful Box, or Balket. \
Q z
Shelf lilt
* Specimens of thefe birds may he feen in the Gallery .


Shelf 111.
1. Vegetable bottles. See defeription, Top Shelf.
Friendly Bowl, drinking the liquor called Ava , * made from the root of an in-
toxicating kind of pepper, by mafticating or chewing,
3. Singular War Weapon.
4. Two cups, made of the cocoa-nut.
5. Double Cup, life unknown. All the above articles in this cafe. Sandwich I funds,
* Bottom Shelf \
j. Singular and formidable War Weapons, made ufe of by the inhabitants of Nootka, or
King George’s Sound. This is the tomohawk of thefe people, and is called by them Taa-
•weejh. This formidable weapon confifts of done. 6 or 8 inches long, pointed at one
end*
Capi. King, vol. 3./. 161, fays, “ Among ft their religious ceremonies may be reckoned the
‘ P ra f * rs and offing* rnade by the priefts before their meals, Whilft the Ansa is chewing, of
“ which they always drink before they begin their repaft, the perfon of the higheft rank takes
“ the lead in a fort of hymn, in which he is prefently joined by one t two , or more of the company ;
“ the reft moving their bodies, and ftriking their hands gently together in concert with the finders.
“ When the Ava ts ready, cups of it are handed about to thofe who do not join in the fong,
which they keep in their hands till it is ended; when , uniting in one loud refponfe , they drink
“ ff'beir cup, The performers of the hymn are then Jerved with Ava, who drink it after a
“ repetition of the fame ceremony \ and if there be prejent one of a very fuperior rank, * cup is
“ left of all prefented to him ; which, after chanting fome time alone, and being anjwered by
“ ioe re ft\ and pouring a little out on the ground, he drinks oft', A piece of the fle/h that is
** dre ff ed ** mxt cut c ff> without any feleSllon of the part of the animal, which, together with
" J° me °f ihe wgctablesy being depofited at the foot of the image of the Eatooa, and a hymn
chanted, their meal commences, A ceremony of much the fame kind is aljo performed by the
t( chiefs whenever they drink Ava between their meals,”
Capt • z Dixon > bis Voyage, lately publijhed, p . 102, fays, “ The Ava is a root fomewhat
ref emb ling our liquorice in ft ape and colour, but totally different in tafle. None but the
•?* Arees > or Chiefs, are permitted to uje it; and they never prepare it themfelves, but always
** keep a/ervant , whofe foie bufinefs is to prepare and adminifler this delicious potation ts
“ mafter. He frft begins by chewing a fufficient quantity till it is well mafticated; this
" is fP lt into a neat ™ooden howl made for the purpoje, and a fmall quantity of water being
“ poured over it, it is well /queened, and the liquor afterwards ft rained through a piece of
“ cloth, r l he delicious beverage is now compleai, and is drank with the hi gheft relift. This
“ root is of an intoxicating nature, but feems to ftupify rather than exhilerate the/pint's,”
Jt Otaheite the Ava is chiefly ufed by perfons of fuperior rank, and is prepared by a more
dedicateprocefs than the above . It is the cuftom there to roaft , bake, or bruife the root, pro,
minus to its infujion in muter, i


end, fixed into a handle of wood : this handle refembles the head and face of the human
figure, but with a diftorted and terrible afped; and the done is fixed in the mouth, fo as
to reprefent an enormoufly large tongue. Some of thefe weapons are however formed
differently from thofe lad mentioned, as will appear by infpeclion ; one of which in par-
ticular is made entirely of done, ornamented with hair and beautiful green feathers, and
carved. ... .
2. Difh or Bowl, ornamented in like manner as that in Cafe 2, with duds made of teals teeth.
3. Three other Bowls, all formed out of folid wood. King George's Sound .
GLASS CASE IV.
Top Shelf.
1. Daggers, made of a clofe grained wood, feme of which are pointed at both ends, and
are called Pahooas. They are fecured to the hand and wrift by a ftring, and are ufed
to ftab in clofe fight, for which purpofe they feem well adapted. Capt. Cook was par-
ticularly importuned by one of the chiefs to permit him to have an Iron Dagger made
after the model of one of the largeft of thefe wooden daggers. The chief s requeft was
complied with, and we are informed this was the inllrument that afterwards put a
period to Capt. Cook's exiftence ; a clrcumftance beyond the reach of human forefight.
One of them is ornamented with red and yellow feathers, and rendered more terrible
by rows of lharks teeth fixed in the wood. This is fuppofed to have belonged to
one of the chiefs. The firing of this dagger is made ot the fibres of the cocoa nut,
and very curioufly plaited.
2. Bracelets made of large boars tufks, which Capt. Cook thought elegant; they are faid
to be worn by women of fuperior rank.
jV Curious feathered necklaces, * with bamboo cafes to preferve them.
4. Two ornaments of feathers to go round the head.
Shelf 11.
Bracelets of various materials and conftrudion ; fome of which, as No. 1. are made of
extremely thin plates of tortoife-fhell, and ivory or bone interfperfed, well poliihed, and
* fixed together by means of a ftring clofely drawn through them.
2. Bracelets of Hogs Tufks, laid parallel to each other with the concave part outwards,
* and points cut off, faftened together in the fame manner as the above.
3. Arm
• Capt. Dixon, in his Voyage lately publijhed, fays, “ Bat the moft beautiful ornament worn
.< by the women, is a necklace, or Araia,made from the -variegated feathers of the humming
“ bird -f, -which are fixed on firings fo regular and e-ven, as to ha ve a furface equally fmootb
“as velvet ; and the rich colours of the feathers give it an appearance uncommonly elegant.”
f Of the Humming Bird here mentioned he alfofays, “ There are t-wofpecies, viz. The red
« bird ; and another, the breafi apale green i


3* Arm Bracelets of Shells, for men. Sandwich Ifands .
4. Bread Gorgets. This is an ornament in the form of the handle of a cup, made of
wood, bone, ivory, or fhsll, polilhed, which is hung about the neck by fine threads of
twilled hair, fometimes doubled an hundred fold. Sandwich IJlands.
4. A. Small Human Figure, made of bone, worn by fome on the bread, fufpended in
the fame manner as the above ornament.
(j. Several aiticles, which occaiionally depend or hang from the gorgets.
5. A. An aiticde, neatly carved in ivory, or bone, intended to hang ornaments ofdrefs upon*
6. "Tops of Boxes, made 01 Gourds fcored with a heated inftrument, in fuch a manner as
to reprefent painting.
7. Two pieces of die jaw ofafifh, unknown.
8. I allrumen ts made 01 various kinds of wood, bone, Sec. fet with (harks teeth, and made
ule of by the Sandwich idanders as weapons of offence and defence; and alfo to cut up
their pnfoners; two of which weapons are pointed at the handle, and intended to be
ufe of occaiionally as a pahooa, or wooden dagger ; and fome of the fmallerkind
are laid to be ufed for domeftic purpofes. See the explanatio7i of plate 67. in uol. 1, of
Cook s Laji Voyage to the Southern Hemifphere.
9. Bracelet of dogs teeth.
10. Weight for a filhing line.
1 1. Fifh Hook of curious conllruaion, from the Friendly IJlands .
12. bracelets for the wrills, armed with ihark’s teeth, to prevent an enemy’s nranolinp-
when in an engagement. *
Shelf 111 .
li Tattowing inllruments. Sandwich IJlands. Capt. King , in his Continuation of Capt
Cook’s Third Voyage, vol. 3, p. 135, obferves, that the Sandwich iflanders have the
cuftom of I attowing the body in common with the reft of the natives of the South Sea
iflands , but it is only at New Zealand and the Sandwich Ifands that they tattow the face
There is alfo this difference between the two laft, that in the former it is done in els*
gant fpiral volutes; and, in the latter, in ftraight lines, croffing each other at right
angles. The hands and arms of the women are alfo very neatly marked; and they
have a fmgular cullom among them, the meaning of which, Capt. King favs, wc
could never learn, that of tattowing the tips of the tongues of the females. From
fome information we received relative to the cullom of tattowing, we were inclined to
think it is frequently intended as a fign of mourning on the death of a chief, or any
other calamitous event; for we were often told, that fuch a particular mark was* in me-
mory of fuch a chief, and fo of the reft. It may be here too obferved, that the loweft
ckfs are often tattowed with a mark that diftinguilhes them as the property of the feveral
chiefs to whom they belonged. For the manner in which Tattowing is performed , fee t
ef this Catalogue. J Jr*
2. Necklaces of ftiells, berries, beads, chiefly from the Friendly Ifands,
3i Neck*


, Necklace made of final! limpets. South Sea IJlands.
I Mutal Mrument, or Dancing Shield. - This does not produce a melody
4 ’ exceeding that of a child’s rattle. The head or upper part of it, which re (enables a
fhieh'l is g ornamented with beautiful feathers of various colours; and to the point, or
lower’oart, is fixed a gourd fhell, into which fmall pebbles are put to make a rattling
noife v Ivch is done by the performer, or perfon who dances, ftiaking it bn k y wit one
hand’ whiledwith the other he ftrikes his breaft, and is continually varying his attitude
and geftures. - Sandwich IJlands. See Caft. Cook’s Laft Voyage, vol. 2, f. 236, pi. 62.
6. Smalf figuisTrTwtlt?&c. in ivory or bone, from the Sandwich and worn by
women tied on their wrifts.
Bottom Shelf*
~ Fine Cordage, made of the bark of the Touta or Cloth-tree, for fifhing nets, lines, &c.
2 of bafaltes; they are wetted to render them refleftors; from
one of the Sandwich Iflands, where they are worn by the women on their necks. ,
3. Fifh Hooks, from Otaheite, the Friendly and Sandwich ; and feme marke
New Zealand. „
Weight for Fidling Line, of done.
GLASS CASE. V\
• ‘ * - , 1 \
Top Shelf
1. Adzes and Chiflels. Otaheite and Sandwich IJlands. Thefe are chiefly made of a
black ftone, nearly refembling the bafaltes. , *
2. Dagger, made of bone,
' - Shelf 11.
. rinth beaters. The two finaller Otaheite ; the largeft. Sandwich IJlands.
: Snecimen cf tie Bread Fruit, the only one brought by Captain Cook from the •. South
sL It is the produce of Otaheite and the neighbouring iflands, and is med by the
n Xes of thofe places as their principal vegetable food; to procure which, colls tne
neople no trouble or labour but that of climbing the trees that produce it. It is not
L feafon all the year; but when the feafon is over, there are other vegetables to fupply
‘ Us tfidency One mode of preparing bread fruit for food is to bake it in an oven.
w’Tch renders it foft, and fomething like a boiled potatoe, not maeed quite fo me, y
r s a Vood one, but more fo than thofe of the inferior klnf Another mode of pre-
' paring it for food, is to pound the Bread fruit upon a block of wood with a hone
Jellle! and, while pounding, to fprinkle either water or the milk of tne cocoa-nut


upomt, winch operation reduces it to a parte. It is then put into a veffel refemblinfr
a butcher s tray, and either made up alone, or mixed with ripe plantains, bananas, or the
four parte which they call mahie. See Haw Vyages, vol, 2. p, iq 7 . _ Fox
a very curious account of this tree and the fruit, and the different modes of preparing
and dreffing it for ufe, fee Sydney Parkings Journal of a Voyage ,0 the South J.
He fpeaks of it as a moll excellent and palatable food.
3. Stone Peftles for pounding the bread fruit into parte. Ditto.
4. Small Idols. Otaheite, Safer, and Sandwich Ifands.
5 ‘ ~K f "e ' S ° f / he ° Uy nUt ’ * r wh l ch> when ftuck u P° n a ftewer or pointed flick, and
h r ’ *Z er e pur ? e talloW ’ and are in this forra ufed M a flambeau, or
canibe. The uppermoft being lighted, burns down to the fecond, at the fame time
confummg that part of the fkewer which goes through it; the fecond burns down to
tne third, and fo of the reft. Some of thefe flambeaux, or candles, will burn a con-
iderable time, and give a good light. They are ufed at the Ifands, Otaheite,
6. Small wooaen utenfils, made of the bread fruit tree. Ditto .
7. Cap, formed of the flan of fome animal, from which treffes of human hair mixed with
wine hang down ; it is worn by way of ornament. Nootka, or King George’s Sound.
8. Cup, made out of a cocoa-nut. *
Shelf IH. ■ .
I. Pair of Sandals, made of the fibres of the cocoa-nut. Sandwich Ifands.
2- teing ° rnamentS f ° r dancers < of dogs teeth, berries,
5. Bread Plate, made of Dogs teeth. Ditto .
4. Small Diflies for fait. Sc c. made of the cocoa-nut; Ditto
5 ‘ pkt the fibres ° f tbe cocoa ' nut; ' anj a rmau ba& « of ditto.
Bottom Shelf.
1. Leg Ornaments, as on Shelf 3.
2. Falfe Hair, worn about the neck by way of ornament
3 ' for i' ayil V g Wkb; thofe marked A - are formed of date; thofe marked B. of/par-
and the others of marble. _ All from Sandw Ifands. P ’
GLASS-
\m f !Z!% P L OdUCe ° ftbl Dm Dm tm ’ ,h jUi “ ° f M " ?*** Hf'for dying


GLASS CASE VI.
lop Shelf,
1. Hand Weapons, of done.- King George’s Sound.
2. Piffling Implements, ingeniouffy contrived, and well made, pointed with ffiells, ffones,
and bones. Ditto. —■- Moll of thefe are heads of harpoons, and are thrown with a
fhaft. See page 22. No. 23.
3. Fox Trap. Ditto,
• -
Shelf 11.
1. Heads of Harpoons, pointed with mufcle Ihells, and Angular Fifh-hooks, &c. King
George’s Sound,
2. Puff, refembling a powder puff, but filled with delicate white down, which is puffed
upon the hair by way of ornament, in the fame manner that powder is ufed by the Eu-
ropeans. Ditto.
3. Necklace of bone or ivory*
4. Combs of different patterns*
5. Whiffle.
6. Inftrument made of wood, and ufed as i whiffle.
7. Ear Jewels.
8. Hemp beater, wood.
9. Several others, bone.
10. Hand weapon of ffone. All from Nootka, or King George’s Sound ;
M. Very ffrong and curious Piffling Line, made of plaited hair.
Shelf 111,
I. Caps made of very curious materials, which difplay in their form both novelty and tie-
gance; one of them is ornamented with final! cryffals. Seven fmail figures in bone or
ivory, worn by way of ornament to caps . The above, together with the pair of cuff*,
are all from the If and of Onalafa , and Cook’s River,
z. Girdle.
3. Two elegant Knife-cafes.
4. Necklace, with fmail pearls, beads, Sec. All from Cook’s River.
5. Part of a Drefs, very curiouffy made of a bird’s Ikin, prepared with the feathers on,
—•* Prince William’s Sound. —At Onalafa , where this kind of drefs is alfo ufed, they
wear the plumage inward ; at Prince William’s Sound , they wear it outward,
6.. Four Pouches, two of them extremely curious, and made fine grafs: the other two
are made of fine fquirrel Ikin.
7, Two ornamental articles, their particular ufe unknown*
Bottom


Bottom Shelf. )
!• Girdle. ■— Cooks River •
2. Boots, and a pair of gloves. Ditto.
3« Part of a Waift ornament, —— K.ing George's Sound,
GLASS CASES, A, B, C, and D,
In thefe feveral glafs cafes are depollted the Feathered Cloaks, and a variety of other
articles of the fame beautiful materials and curious manufacture, all from the Sandwich
Ifands.
Pne fupcrb cloak in cafe B, was taken by the king of Owhyhce from his own Ihoulders,
o.s mentioned in the label annexed to the cloak, and by him placed on the fhoulders of Capt.
Cook. He then put the helmet (marked No. i) *on the Captain’s head, and a curious
'“ n kts hand; after which he Ipread feveral cloaks at his feet, all exceedingly beautiful,
and of great value, f
Thefe
ex ad refernblance between this helmet and cloak and the cloak and helmet formerly voorh
ly the Span tat ds, as Capt. King ohferves, was too friking not to excite our curiojity to enquire
whether there were any probable grounds for fuppojing it to have been borrowed from them,
.y' ter exerting every mea?is in our power of obtaining information on this fubjed , we found that
d.cy had no immediate knowledge of any other nation whatever, nor any tradition remaining
among them of thefe Iflands having been ever vifeted before by fuch /hips as ours. But, notwiths-
tanding the refult of thefe inquiries, the uncommon form of this habit appears to me a fufficient
p? oof of its European oiigin, efpecially when added to another circumfance, that it is a fngtdar
deviation from the general refernblance in drefs which prevails amongft all the branches of this
tr.be difperfed through the South Seas. We were driven indeed by this conclufi on to a fuppoftion
if the Jhipwi eck of fame buccaneer, or Spani/h Jhip, in the neighbourhood of thefe Ifands. But
when it is recolleded, that the courfe of the Spani/h trade from Acapulco to the Manillas is but
& fevo degi ees to i.ve fouthward of the Sandwich Ifands in their pafage out, and to the north-
ward on their return, this fuppoftion will not appear in the leaf improbable. Cook*s Laf
Voyage, v. 3. /. 137.
t beautiful green feather* d cloak in Cafe A, was not found an eafy pur chafe, as Capt,
V illiamfon affured Mr. II arfng, Secretary to the late Sir A/hton Lever. "The Captain, who
was toen a Lieutenant, of'ered the owner of it a very valuable double barrelled gun in exchange
jor it, which was refufed; then w he of'ered him his regimental coat, which was al/'o refufed;
when the owner of the cloak happening to obferve a bottle and bafon of what is called the
‘queen s voare, vjas fo fruck with the beauty and novelty of it, that he threw down the cloak,
andfnatched up the ware, and , without waiting to make any regular exchange, with no lefs dex-
terity than velocity, let himfelf down the fde of the /hip, and bore it of with fngular good for-
tune unbroken.”


- Thefe feathered cloaks which are very fcarce, are appropriated folely to the men, and worn
by them on very particular occafions only ; as they never were obferved to appear in them
more than three times, namely, in the proceffion * of the King of Owhyhee and his people
to the ftiips on their firffc arrival; next in the tumult, when Capt.. Cook fell a victim to
their miftaken refentment; and the third time, when two of the principal chiefs brought
this unfortunate commander's bones to Capt. Clark.
The ground of thefe elegant and Angularly beautiful cloaks, is a net work all
wrought by the hand, upon which the feathers are fo clofely fixed, that the furface
is compared by Capt. King to the thickefl and richell velvets, which they much referable
both as to their delicate foftnefs and gloffy appearance.
In Cafe D. is a fpecimen of the netting only, with the feathers tied in little bunches as
prepared for ufs ; and from the delicacy of the cordage, the fmallnefs of the meflies, and
the great nicety in putting the feathers on, it would no doubt be found a work of confide-
rable time and expence in the hands of the moil ingenious European artiil.
The other articles in thefe cafes are helmets and bands for ditto, fans, ladles ilomachers,
curious feathered necklaces, large feathered idols, fly-flaps, daggers, &c.
The Helmets have a ilrong lining of wickerwork, capable of reflflingin a great degree
the blow of any warlike inftrument, and feem evidently deflgned, as Capt. King fuppofed,
for that purpofe. Other articles to be particularly noticed are,
A Model of a Temple, (Cafe B.) in which is fufpended a fmall idol, carved in ivory or
bone, in the form of a human figure.
Two Tabooing Rods, or Wands, ( Cafe D. ) of a very beautiful clofe grained
red wood ; one of them is tipt or tufted with dog’s hair, the other pointed. They
are carried by the priefls, and fometimes by another perfon, particularly appointed
to that office, who is called Tonaia , (or the taboo man). They are made ufe of on
various occafions, both public and private ; and any thing touched by them is confidered
as prohibited or forbidden. The word Taboo is ufed emphatically to denote any thing
facred, eminent, or devoted. When a particular fpot or fpace of ground is Tabooed,
feveral of thefe rods or wands, tufted with dogs hair, are fixed up, and until they are
removed, no perfon will prefume to tread on that ground.
D 2
The
* The proccflflion alluded to , we are told by Capt . King, was a mofl magnificent one . It
conflfled of three canoes ,in the firji of '-which were the king and his chiefs , dt efifed in their rich
feathered cloaks and helmets , and armed with long /pears and doggers ; in the fecond canoe came
the ‘venerable Kaoo, the chief of the priefls, and his brethren, with the feathered idols, fuch as are
in Cafes B, and C, difplayedon red cloth , andflinging their hymns with great folemnity ;in the
third and lafl canoe were hogs and ‘various forts of ‘vegetables , intended as a prcfent for Capt .
Cook , &c A


The Fans and Fly .flaps are ufed by both Texes. - The handles of the fly-flaps are or.
namented with rings of tortoife-Ihell, ivory, Sec. but thofe moft efteemed are made of the
arm bone of an enemy flam in battle, which are preferved with abundant care from father
to lon, as trophies of ineflimable value.
The beautiful Fly-flap in cafe D, No. ~ is a fpecimen of this kind. *
The Stomachers and Necklaces for ladies are made with lingular tafte.
The Idols are made of wicker-work, and curioufly covered with fmall feathers of va-
-110113 colours, wrought in the fame manner with their cloaks.
Their eyes are made of large pearly-flieUs, with a nut of black wood in the centre;
then- mouths are fet with a double row of fangs of dogs, and, together with the reft of their
features, are, as moft evidently appears by thefe fpecimens, ilrangely diftorted.
Over the Cafes,beginning at the right-hand, as you enter the Sandwich Room.
I. Hemp, or Flax. Otaheite.
z. An Eyelet-hole Mat, of a very curious conftrudion, the holes not being cut out, but
formed when making. Friendly IJlands .
3* Bows. Nootka, or King George's Sound
4. Ditto.
We are informed by Mr Samwell, late furgeon of the Jhip Difcovery,
• Narrative of the Death of Captain Cook, that he brought the Fly-flap Jrked
No I. homewith him and he has given us the following account it. The natives of the
.. 7", * fays endeavour to catry off the dead bodies of their friends fain in
„ h J' e T n ° fthe ‘ r orwn lives - Tbis cu fi om probably ovsing to the harbaritf
„ h the f treat the dead bcd y °f an and the trophies they make of his bones ; a
„ remarkable ,njlance of which I met with at Atowai . Tomataherei, queen of that
I m \'fd P T d T “ ho “rd the Difcovery, accompanied by herhufhand, Taeoh,
and one of her daughters by a former hufiand, whofe name was Oteeha. The youno prin-
cefsy who was called Ore, reerao, horanee, carried in her hand a very elegant fly-flap, of a
curious conftruaton. The upper part of it was variegated with alternate rings of tortoife-
fell and human bone, and the handle, which was confsfted of the greater part
of the os humeri (bone of the upper arm) of a chief,called Mahowra ;he had belonged to
the neighbouring if and of Oahoo, and in a hoflile defeent he made upon thiscoafi, had been
“ k ‘i ed 7 teeha ’ ’ mho ™ as then King of Atowai. His bones were in this manner carried
‘ “ b ° ° re > r , eemo > horane£ -> « trophies of her father's The mother and daughter
\vf a value upon it, and were not willing to part with it for any of our iron ; but
“ Famataherei happening to caft her eye upon a wajh-hand bafon of mine, which was of queen’s
“ ware, it ft ruck her fancy, and Jke offered to exchange . I accepted of her propofal, and the
* banes of the unfortmiate Mahowra came at laj} into my Pojfejfion."


Ditto. N. W. Coafl of America.
5. Painted or Stained Cloth, the whole of which is from the Sandwich Ifands.
This is the principal manufacture of the natives, and is made from the bark oi
the Aouta , or Morns Papyrifera . The manner in which it is made will be noticed when
we give an account of the art of making cloth at Otaheite .
6. Model of a Canoe. Cook's River, or Prince William's Sound.
y. Arrows. Nootha Sound.
£. Furbelowed matted Petticoat, the furbelows curioufly formed in the making. Friendly
Ifands.
9. Fifh Darts, barbed with hate and bone. Nootka.
10. Barbed Spears, or Lances, made of a beautiful redwood, refembling mahogany. —■*
Sandwich I funds.
11. Fifh Darts. Onalafa, or Cooks River.
12. Petticoat of curious manufacture, one fide of which is matting, the other wrought fo
as to have fome refemblance to fhag. Friendly Ifands.
13. Mantle. Nootka , or King George's Sound , made of the fkin of fome animal, orna-
mented with rows of dried hoofs of deer, fufpended by leather thongs run through
quills. Thefe hoofs, when in motion, make a loud rattling noife, almoft equal to that
offmall bells. “ It feems doubtful, (fays Capt. Cook) whether this part of their
“ garb is intended to flrike terror in war, or only to be confidered as belonging to
“ their excentric ornaments on ceremonious occafions, one of their mufical enter-
tainments being conducted by a man dreflcd in this fort of mantled*
14. Drum. Sandwich Ifands.
15. Bows. Nootka , lame as No. 3.
16. Helmet. —— Sandwich Ifands.
ty. Ditto, in an unfinilhed hate. Ditto.
18. Coat of Mail. Nootka or King George's Sound. This conhhs of about 60 narrow
but ftrong and thick flips of wood, of proper lengths, placed together fide by fide ; each
flip is firmly united to the adjoining one by numerous threads of fine catgut, fo
as to render fhe whole compaCt, and yet afford fuch parts of the body proper motion,
which it is intended to defend. The outffde is ornamented with a number of heads or
faces rudely carved, which have a grim appearance, and are luppofed to be intended to
flrike terror into an enemy.
19. Mantle, or Cloak. * Nootka , or King George's Sound.
v 20. Filh
* Capt. Cook, in vol. 2, p, 325, lafl voyage, /peaking of the manufactures and ;mechanic arts of
the people of Nootka, Jays, “ The Flaxen and woollen garments with which they cover them-
u /elves , mufl neajfarily engage their firfl care , and are the mofl Material of thofe that can he
%t ranked under the head of manuj'afiures, > The former of thefe are made of the hark of a yine
i( tree y


20. Fifh Spear [Onalajka) , which is darted by the aid of a very hngular and ingenious
indrument made for that purpofe See fpecimen. No. 4, the fide of the arch entering
the Sandwich Room.
21. Arrows and a Lance. Friendly Ifands .
22. Sledge and Hamels or Furniture complete for the dogs that draw it, (prefented by Capt.
as he himfelf mentions in vol. 3. p. 202 of Capt. Cook's Lad Voyage, to Sir AJhton
Lever), and which he therein particularly defcribes; and adds, as follows ; “ They
" are reldom ufedto carry more than one perfon at a time, who fits afide, reding his feet
(( on the lowei part of the fledge, and carryinghis provilions and other neceflaries wrapped
up m a bundle behind him. The dogs are ufually five in number, yoked two and
tvvo with a leader. The reins not being fadened to the head of the dogs, but to the
CoI ! ar ’ have Me power over them, and are therefore generally hung upon the fledge,
“ vvhild the driver depends entirely on their obedience to his voice for the direction of
tnem. With tnis view the leader is always trained up with a particular degree of care
" and attention, fome of them rifmg to a mod extraordinary value, on account of their
docillt 7 and deadinefs; infomuch, that for one of thefe I am well allured forty
" roubles (or ten pounds) was no unufual price. The dogs are fed, during the winter,
“ on the ofFais of dried and linking fifh, but are always deprived of this miferable food a
day before they fet out on a journey, and never differed to eat before they reach the end
of it. We wei e alio told, that it was not unufual for them to continue thus fading two
entire days, in which time they would perform a journey of 120 miles. Thefe dogs are
<f in fhape fomewhat like the Pomeranian breed, but confiderably larger.
23. Fild Gig, or fmall Flarpoon, of curious invention, and meriting the attention of thofe
concerned in dlheries, and which we will describe on account of its particular cu-
rio lity.
It confifts of a fliaft, or lance, about 4. feet in length, and of a taper form, made of wood
• and bone joined or fpheed together. The wooden part is about 3 feet 5 inches in
length, and the bone about 7 inches. At the end of this bone there is a fmall Iheath
or focket, made for the reception of a barbed point, refembling the head of an arrow!
and which is made of bone, and is about an inch in length. To this barbed point one
<*»
“ iree > heaten into a hm P en fi ats ' h « not fpuh, but , after being properly prepared, is fpread
‘‘ upon a flick, which is faftened acrcfs to two others that ft and upright. It is difpofed in
“ f uch a that the inanufatturer, who fas on her hams at this ftmple machine , knots it
acrofs with fmall plaited threads, at the diflance of half an inch from each other. Tho' by
“ t! 15 met od if he vot f° clo f e or firm as cloth that is woven, the hunches between the knots make
“ lt fnf fitly impervious to the air, by filling the interfiices ; and it has the additional advan-
“ tage f being ffter and more pliable. The woollen garments, tho’ probably manufactured in
Sf thejame manner , have the firongefi refetnhlance to woven cloth .


end of a ftrong line, made of plaited hair, is fixed. The other end of the line is Mened
to the-lhaft, or lance. When the harpoon is to be thrown, the barbed point is fixed in
the Iheath or focket, and a bladder of fome animal blown up is fattened to the fma.ler end
of the inftrument. As foon as a fife is ftruck, the barbed point flies off from the fliaft,
which by its bluntnefs is prevented from entering the fiih, and, by the force of the blow,
accelerates the motion of the barbed point, which enters deep into the fifli, by whole
ftruggling the point is drawn by the cord lengthwife acrofs the mciflon made by its
breadth only; by which means it cannot be fo eafily drawn out, the tvyo encis being
oppofed to the middle, where the line is affixed, r l he fliaft then floats iry a perpendi-
cular direction upon the furface of the water, by means of tue bladder, which refills Lie
efforts of the fifli to draw it under water, and by which its punuer is enabled to find it.
Thefe* Fifli Gigs are fometimes thrown by the hand, fometimes by the Angular inftru-
ment, p. 24, No, 4, and fometimes fhot by means of a bow : in the latter cafe the end
of the fliaft is feathered like an arrow.
24. Cloak. New Zealand .
25. Two barbed Spears. Sandwich IJlands. _
26. Long Drum, made of a hollow block ot wood, of a cylindrical form, folio, at one end,
and covered at the other with fhaik’s fkln, braced with ftrong twine. Thefe tne inha-
bitants of Otaheite beat not with flicks, but their hands, and they know how to tune
two drums of different notes into concord. Otaheite.
26. A. Three Drums. Sandwich IJlands. Thefe differ from thofe of Otaheite in being
broader, and more neatly made, have carved bafes, and are covered witn a kind of fha-
green, braced on with ftrong plaited cords, made of the fibres of plants,
27. Spears. Sandwich IJlands , fame as No. 10.
28. Cloak. Nootka.
'29. Short Cloak, worn over the mantles by the women only, made of the fame mate-
rials and fringed in like manner as thole in the arched panage. King George s Sound .
30. Fifli Gig. Onalajka, fame as No. 23. *
31. Fifli Spears. Onalajka , fame as No. 20.
32. Cloak. Nootka.
33. Arrows, fame as No. 7. Nootka.
34. Fifli Darts, Friendly IJlands.
35. Mantle. Nootka, ox King George's Sound, deferibed at No. 13.
36. Fifli Darts Nootka
37. Furbelowed Mat, made of plantain leaves. - Friendly IJlands *
38. Bows. Nootka, fame as No. 3.
38. A. Rude Bow, from the Marque/as, >
39. Drum. Sandwich IJlands, fame as No, 14.
40. Barbed Spears or Lances. Ditto } fame as No. io*
41. Arrows. Nootka . \
* - *
rv 42. Short.
is . t *


42. Short Cloak. King George’s Sound, fame as No. 29.
43. Model of a Canoe with oars, made of birch bark fewed together, - Canada,
44* Balket. —— Onalajka,
45. Tabooing Rods, or Wands, fame as In Cafe D, and defcribed page 19.
4 . Painted or Stained Cloth. Sandwich IJlands, fame as No. c.
47. Cloak. Nootka. ~ 5
48. Filh Darts with the inftruments ufed in throwing them. _ Onalajka,
49- Quiver for Arrows. Jf. W. Coafi of America.
50. Arrows. Nootka.
51. Foul-weather Mantle, made of flags. Friendly IJlands.
S2 -,r-> _ a of great ingenuity, the texture of which being fo exceeding
bttr ; WIU hold wa f nearl y £( * ual to a bucket ' ™ d « fometimes ufed as !
bucket, and fometimes as a bafket. Onalajka.
53. Bows. Otaheite
54. Spear of bone. New Zealand .
55. Two Aprons of dancing girls, made of the fibres of a plant Otaheite.
Near the Arch entering the Sandwich Room.
'■SS S s - re ““ s Mr «a uu
2 ’ feak 26 S w ai / S i ° r L -f Ce r’ carved and ornamented with the teeth of
arm 'that tW^them/ " fp6arS neceffaril y rcn >re vaft ftrength in the
2 ' inftrument fuidtobe ufed as a quarter Half in athletic exercifes. - Friendly
1’ S°pT° W °- a l eS ’ r arV t d and ornamented - - Neetia. or King George's Sound.
4- lh Gigs, with a Angular inftrument for throwing them. Onalajka.
• UriOUS -fed as ftamps or prints by
dots, t - •*» “ “ ,M *• «*•*«
6. Quiver and arrows, with barbs of bone. - CWb-
-7' vl7rh^ anCe % or^nm\ I 2 / ee l long ’ madeof hard clofe g rained wood, the points of
which are rendered lbll harder by fire : one of them has many barbs and the other a
• Ranis’. Whkh m “ ft b£ dr£adfUl WeaP ° M take ~
5 Zealand.’ remarkable hard black and wood, curioufly carved. New
9. Two Lances, or ipears, made of ditto. Ditto .
9. A, Slender bow, made of fine wood,- Sandwich IJlands
Oa


On the Arch entering the Saloon*
10. Idol, * carved out of a folid piece of wood nearly refembling our alder. King
George's Sound .
11. Another, made of the wood of the bread fruit tree. Otaheite .■ ***** *
12. Another, flamed black. Eafler IJland .
12. (A) Another, of a coarfe grained wood, with a very lofty thorny tiara.
Sandwich IJlands . f
13. Two Spears, ornamented with the teeth of feals, Sec, Ncotka ,
14. Bow. Fjhukutfki .
15. Ditto, made and ufed by the EJkimaux Indians.
16. Spontoons, or fpears, carried by the chiefs of New Zealand , mofl; curioufly carved,
and ornamented with eyes, formed of the beautiful pearl of the iris ear (hell.
17. Spears of a hard and folid wood, from 12 to 15 feet long, pointed but not barbed,
with which the warriors of Owhyhee and Atowai chiefly arm themfelves.
18. Two Bows with a groove on the back of each, to contain an arrow, which
is ufually made of a {lender reed. Friendly IJlands .
APARTMENT IV.
THE SALOON
This apartment contains four elegant deep mahogany glafs cafes, in which are the fol-
lowing articles.
E
GLASS
* Thefe Idols are called Klumma, by the people of Nootka, who place them in their houfes .
[S#? Cook's Laf Voyage, vol . 2. p. 317*] Mr, Webber has given a very perfe£l view of
the inflde of a Nootka houfe, in which two of thefe images are reprejenied . But whilfl he was
delineating them, he was interrupted by a man, and under the necejfty of bribing him with
a tnetal button from his coat, before he could obtain leave to proceed . This bribe he was
obliged to repeat occafionally, on account of frequent interruptions, until he had parted with every
button, a?id he was then permitted to compleat his drawing .
fAn ingenious perfon, who prefented the public with a curfory view of this Mufeum in the
European Magazine, vol. I. fp caking of thefe idols, fays, “ He (the fpeSiator) fighs to recol-
“ left: the prevalent power of fear and fuperflition over the human mind, when he views the
“ rude deformity of an idol, carved with a flint by a hand incapable of imitating the outline of
6( nature, and that works only that it may worjhipd 9


GLASS CASE I.
Top Shelf,
1. Vegetable or Scythian Lambs,
hey refemble in form a quadruped, and are covered with a
mofs, which has the appearance of fine wool or fur.
2. Head of a Palm Tree, a very fine fpecimen. Africa,
3. Faddy, or Eaft India Rice, in the hufk, the principal food of the Bramins and Gen-
toos in India, who abilain from animal food of every kind.
4. Large Bean. Eafi Indies .
5 Curious Root, with many branches.
6. Singular Plants of the reed kind.
7. Curious Thorn.
<
8. Branch of a Palm Tree. Guinea .
9. Other curious exotic plants.
Shelf 11.
1. The Steeple Fungus, very curious and rare, found at Woolwich, in Ketit..
2. Another curious Fungus.
3. Flower of a curious Tin file.
4. Specimens of different rare kinds of Tea, as prepared for fale by the Chinefe.
3. Two curious pieces of Camphor Wood (inclofed in a glafs). Every part of the fub-
fiance of thefe fpecimens appears to be impregnated with camphor.
6. Specimens of the wood of the Lagetto Tree, with feveral plaits or folds of the interior
part of the bark turned down to fhew its fine and curious texture, refembling lace. King
Charles the 2d. had a pair of ruiHes and frill made of this bark, which was prefented to
him by a Jamaica merchant, and which he wore feveral times. The paper mul-
berry, or cloth tree of the South Sea iflands, of which the inhabitants make their
cloth, isfimilar to this.
7. Specimen in a box of the mofs called Filigree Mofs, on which the rein deer feed in
Lapland. They dig it up very dexteroufiy with their horns and feet from beneath the
fnow, under which it is buried during the winter feafon.
8. Winter Bark, from Terra del Fuego, prefented by Dr. Percival to Sir Afhton Lever,
with a deferiptive label, pointing out in what refpecls it differs from the bark fold under
that name in the fhops.
9. Cluilers of pods of the black and red Tropical Pea.
10. Specimens of the great black and red Oriental Pea.
n. Specimens of the bark or cork of a Cork Tree, which grew at Mount Edgcumhe, the
feat of Vifcount Mount Edgcumbe.
32. German Tinder. It is afoft vegetable fubflance, in appearance refembling tanned
leather..
13. Ever-


13. Everlafling Flowers, from the Cape of Good Hope, which flill retain their fine colour,
although they have been many years in the Mufeum.
14. Two Winter Cherries, one of them curioufly differed, to fhew its fibres.
15. Grafs from St. Vincent's. Another fpecimen of ditto, fpun into thread, prefented
to Sir Aihton Lever by Lady Marchmont.
16. A curious Seed Veffel, from the Bland of Ceylon, Eafi Indies, commonly known by
the name of the Ceylon Rofe; which, although.it has been many years gathered,
when put in water it gradually expands, and, on opening, difeovers a curious
flower; as foon as the water evaporates, it again clofes ; and is a fpecimen of
great curiofity.
17. Rofe of Jericho. This, like No. 16, expands or blooms when put into water,
18 Bark of the Camphor Tree, very curious.
19. Specimen of wood, which grew in the form of a ring.
2:. Cone of the red Pins.
21. Varieties of curious Agarics, ufed as ftyptics, to flop bleeding.
22. Fox Tail Mofs. —■ Lancajhire.
23. Specimens of the Silk Cotton. Weft Indies,
24. Singular clufiers of the Hazel Nut.
25. An uncommon draped Walnut.
26. Brown Tamarinds in the pod. • Weft-Indies.
27. Specimens made from Flax by the Countefs of Moira, fo much refembling cotton and
filk as not to be diftinguifhed therefrom by the nicefl eye.
28. Betel f Nut, which is chewed by mofi of the natives of the Eabi Indies .
29. Galls, from Aleppo.
30. Nutmeg,
E 2
(e broader
f Betel Nut and Tree, is defcrihed by D ampler, vol. r, p. 318. as follows :
“ The Betel Nut is much efteemed here \at Mindanao] as it is in moft places of the Eaf In*
<c dies. The Betel Tree grows like the cabbage tree, but is not fo big, nor fo high, - The
“ body grows fraight, about 12 or \\ feet high, without leaf or branch, except at the head .
“ There it fpreads forth long branches, like other trees of the like nature, as the cabbage tree,
“ the cocoa-nut tree, and the Palm, Ihefe branches are about 10 or \z feet long, and their
<c ferns, 'near the head of the tree, as big as a man's arm. On the top cf the tree, among the
“ branches, the Betel Nut grows, on a tough fiem as big as a man's finger, in clufiers, much as
the cocoa nuts do, and they grow 40 or 30 in a clufter. This fruit is bigger than a nutmeg,
<e and is much like it, but rounder. It is much ufed all over the Eafi Indies. Their way
“ is to cut it in four pieces, and wrap one of them up in a.n Arek leaf, which they fprsad with
“ a Joft pafte made cf lime or plafter, and then chew it all together, —• Every man in thsfe
“ parts carries his lime box by his fide, and dipping his finger into it, fpreads his betel and arek
€ ‘ leaf with it. The Arek is a fmall tree, or Jhrub, of a green hark, and the leaf is long and


30. Nutmeg, with the mace on. Molucca IJlands^
31. Curious excrefcence from an elm tree.
32. Curious ftellated everlafting flowers.
33. Singular horned feeds. Baft I tidies.
34. Uncommon {pined feeds growing in pairs in the branch in a dichotomous form. EaU
Indies.
35. Singular branches of the afli tree, a kind of lufus nature.
36. Curious Nut with a fibrous coat, fomewhat refembling the cocoa-nut. Baft Indies .
37. Locuft Pod. Ditto
38. Curious Caltrop-like Thorn.
39. Sea-onion. Guernfey.
40. Singular kind of Nut. Baft Indies.
A. 1. Box-like Bean. Weft Indies.
42. Young Nuts, fimilar in form to the cocoa-nuts. Baft Indies.
43. Hickorey Nuts.
44* Sundry curious Pods and Seeds, unknown.
45. A leaf of the tree
46. A curious (lender long Pod, unknown.
47. Singular Plant, unknown.
48. Fibrous coat, fuppofed of a fruit.
49. Curious boat-lhaped Pods.
sc. Nicker-nut. Weft Indies.
Shelf 111.
1. Two different kinds of Cotton Pods, gathered when the cotton had arrived at its full
flate of maturity, from the Weft-Indies , with fome of the cotton feeds.
2. Pod of the White Tamarind, peculiar to the coaft of Guinea. It grows on an im-
menfe high tree, not unlike our walnut-tree. This was gathered up the river Gambia.
30, Guinea Corn, which the natives of that country pound on the flump of a tree, and af-
terwards mix and boil withpot Liquor, made with fowls, mutton, &c. and compofe a mefs
they call Conns Conns. The whole ear is of a very large fize. This and the pre-
ceding article, prefented to Mr. Parkinfon by Lieut. Robert Hefketh, of the Navy.
broader than a willow. They are packed up to fell into parts that have them not, to chew
“ with the betel. The Betel-nut is moft efteemed when it is young, and before it trows hard
“ and then they cut it only in two pieces, with the green hufk or Jhell on it. It is then exceeding
“ juicy, aud therefore snakes them fpit much. It tafies rough in the mouth, and dyes the lips
“ red, and makes the teeth black, but it preferves them, and cleanfeth the gums. It is alfo
“ accounted very wholefoms for the Jiomach, but fometimes it will caufe great giddinefs in the
“ head of thofe that are not ufed to chew it. But this is the ejfeft only of the old nut, for the
“ young nuts, will not do it. I fpeak of my own experienced *
* - * they


4, Sundry Seeds, Leaves, and other parts of curious unknown plants, lately brought
from Botany Bay , New South Wales.
4. A. Part of the extremity of the branch of a new fpecies of the pine kind, with its cu-
rious cone. This fpecimen is alfo remarkable for a curious fmall bird’s neft affixed to it.
Ditto.
4. B. A red Gum of a kind fimilar to that called dragon’s blood, with a bottle of a
the fame in its original fluid date , from ditto,
c,.. Seed veflels of a umous plant from Italy. The flalks are ufed for tooth-picks.
6. Prickly pods of the Nicker-nut, with varieties of the nuts. Wefi Indies.
7. CafliaFiflula piped locuft-pod. Ditto.
8. Brown Locufl-pod. - Baft Indies.
9. Seed Veflels with feeds of the Sand Box Tree. *— Wefi Indies
10. Marking Nut. Baft Indies.
11. Singular acorn. —— America.
12. Fibrous part of a pulpy Fruit (the Guava). Wefi Indies.
13. Curious horned feeds of a Water Lilly.— China .
14. Gum Myrrh. The largefl; fpecimen ever brought, from the Bafi Indies.
13. Gum Senega, a large and fine fpecimen from the coaft of Guinea.
16. Gum Copal. - Baft Indies.
17. Gum or Refm, horn Botany Bay, New South Wales. This fpecimen was lately
fhewn to the Royal Society.
18. 1
19. i Different kinds of Gum..
20. 3
21. Various fpecimens of the Termites, or White Ants, and their buildings, chiefly
from Africa , prefented to Sir Afliton Lever by Mr. Henry Smeathman, and defcribed*
in the Philofophical Tranfa&ions, vol. 71.
TERMES BELLI.COSUS.
No. 1, A King.
2. A Queen.
3. Soldiers.
4. Labourers.
TERMES FAT AXIS..
5. A Queen.
6. Soldiers.
7. Labourers.
TERMES ARBORUM..
8. Winged or perfeft Infe&s* -
9. Soldiers.
10. Labourers.
Com-


Compactions made by the Termites Bellicofi , or Fighting White Ants .
11. A fmall part of the interior building, with an arch in it.— N.B. Thefe little
infers turn as good arches, above a foot in diameter.
12. A fmall piece of the fame.
13. A royal chamber, fmall.
14. The arched deling of a pretty large royal chamber.
15. A fpecimen which appears nearly as ftrong as done.
16. I his fpecimen has feveral paffages, which had been flopped up by the labour-
ing infedls while the hill was attacked.
17. Another fpecimen of the fame.
18. A fpecimen of the outer part of one of the hills, rough as it appears after being
recently built
19. A large fpecimen of fome of the interior building, containing cells, galleries, &c.
20. A nurfery.
21. A piece of the ned of the Termes Arborum.
22. Part of a roofed turret, built by the Termes Mordax,
23. A piece of the fame, reduced to brick by fire.
24. Piece of a roofed turret, fuppofsd of the Termes Atrox.
25. A turret raifed above one third of its height, feveral of the cells laid open, to
fhew the dicks, weeds, &c. worked in with the building.
Clement's Inn, Dec. 1, i 7 Bj.
HENRY SMEATHMAN.
22. A kind of Caul, faid to be fabricated in a box by filk worms.
23. *1 be nefl 01 cell or a large Spider, from Jamaica, —— This nell is furnilhed with a
door, or valve, which the infed within fhuts too in order to hide its tremendous form
when watching for its prey, which approaching near the cell, it rufhes out and feizes.
Bottom Shelf,
I'* Thin cakes of Bread, made of the Calfada root, which * though of a poi/bnous
quality, ferves moll of the inhabitants of the Well Indies, the Mufquito Ihore, See.
for bread. It is prepared by grinding upon a fmooth hone with a Hone roller*
till it is reduced to a rough faw-dull-like powder or meal. It is then put into d
prefs, to fqueeze out the poifonous juice; and being fufficiently prelfed and fifted, is
made into bread, by fpreading it upon an iron plate heated over a fire, and thus the
parts incorporate, and become cake bread, which is accounted very nourifhing. The
flone and roller for grinding this root may be feen in the Mu/eum.
2, Balket, from Finland , made of the bark of a tree.
3. Curious Bafkets, made of the bark of the American Birch tree, from Hudfon's Bay.
4* Carved Calabaih, made of the fhell of a gourd. When emptied and dried, it
ferves as a cafe to put divers kinds of goods in, fuch as pitch, refill, and the like.
The


The Indians of the North and South Seas put the pearls they have fifhed for into their
calabalhes, and the negroes on the the coaft of Africa do tne fame with their gold
duft. The fmaller calabafhes are alfo ufed by them as a meafure by which they fell
thefe precious commodities to the Europeans. 1 hey likewife ferve to hold liquors, and
are ufed for cups as well as bottles, &c.
5. Cocoa Nut.
6. Bark of the Cocoa-nut Tree.
7. American Wheat, of various colours, in two fmall glafs cafes.
B. Horfe Shoe, partly incloied by the fpur ot an afh tree, which grew round it.
9. Bark of the Cabbage Tree Weft Indies.
10. Specimen of American Wheat, on its Item or dalk.
11. Two large pieces of Camphor Wood. —• Eafi Indies.
12. A curious Agaric.
Gn the outfuls of this Cafe •
1. Camphor wood. Eafi Indies.
2. Briar from the Straits of Malacca ; a curious fpecimen, about 21 inenes in circumference.
3. Specimen of the Cork Tree, upwards of 4 feet in circumference. Gibraltar.
4. Specimen of the Plank T ree. Eafi Indies. This is a lingular pioduftion, it being
quite flat, near 2 feet broad, and but 2 inches thick, the bark on both Tides included.
3. Fart of the Thigh Bone of a large quadruped inclofed in the folid body of an oak, and
which was difeovered in the centre of the tree upon fplitting it.
6. Specimen of Bamboo Cane, 17 inches in circumference.
GLASS CASE 11.
Top Shelf.
1. Large fpecimens of the Gorgonia Setofa Linnaei, or Sea Feather Gorgon. They
were found growing upon a rock at Bahama, two fathoms below the furface of the Sea.
2. A very large mafs of Cubic Salt (57 indies in circumference) which the intenfe heat
of the fun cryllailized, in its prefent form, round a balket that had been left in a pond, in,
Salt IJland, near Tortola .
Shelf 11.
Native Fossils or Sul fiances, found in the Earth , in their native State •
or Plaster Stones.
' > 1
Is, Group of clear white Rhomboidal Selemtse, unknown whence
2. Arrow-head Selenites, from the Gypfum Pits at Monte Marte, near Paris.
3. Rhomboidal Selemtse, from Oxfordjhire, many varieties.
4., Long Rhomboidal Selenitse, from Sbeepy IJland, Kent, 3 fpecimens.
5. Part:


5. Part of a large clear white Selenites, from Hungary .
6. Lamina of a clear white Selenites, of extraordinary fize, Scotland .
6. A. Gypfum Striatum. Notttnghamjhire.
T A L C S.
7. Venetian Talc, ufed in cofmetics.
Clays.
8. Steatites, or Soap Rock. Cornwall.
8. A. Another fpecies of Soap Stone, unknown whence.
9. Steatites, from China. This is an ingredient in the china ware. The figures
monly fuppofed to be made of rice, are formed cf this kind of ftone.
10. Red and yellow Clay, unknown whence.
11. Green Steatites, with cubic marcafites imbedded in it.
12. Steatites.
13. Variegated Clay, from Nanking in China . The clay images which come from thence
are formed of this fofiil fubfiance.
14. Steatites.
15. Yellow and violet-coloured Clay.
/
Mici, or Mica, of different Kinds.
.16. Different varieties of Micas, the larger plates from Mufcovy, Clear white plates of
this fubfiance are ufed for glazing lanterns, particularly thofe of fhips, as fire has little
efFctfi on it. The micas are alfo ufed by the microfcope-makers to preferve fmall objects
for viewing them by glalfes, and by painters to cover miniature pidures. The undents
ufed this fubfiance inftead of glafs in their windows.
Amianthi. *
17. White Afbeftos, from Scotland.
18. Green Afbeftos, from Aberdeenjhire.
19. Brown Afbeftos, from the fame country.
20. Red Afbeftos, unknown whence.
2i. Afbe-
* Aftony or fojfilfubfiance, cf a fiorous nature, the longer filaments are capable of being fpun
into thread, and aft erwards 'wove into cloth. This moft extraordinary fubfiance being of an in-
combufiible nature, refifis the action of fire. Of the Jhorter filaments paper may he made, after
the ufual manner.
Pliny mentions his havingfeen napkins of this cloth , which, being taken from the table after
a feaft, were thrown into the fire , and by that means better fcoured than if they had been wafhed
in water. Put its principal ufe (according to that author) was for making fhrouds for royal
funerals, to wrap up the corpfe, fo that the ajhes might be preferred diftindl from the wood.
According to Dr • Lifter, the wicks for perpetual lamps were made of it ; and fame to this
day ufe it for the wicks fiffuch lamps as they would not have any trouble with*


Hi. Afbellos, fornied on a coarfe reck Hone.
22. White Amianthus.
23. Ditto, from Piedmont .
24. Green Silky Amianthus, forming veins in a Terpentine Hone, from the Ife ofAnglcfey.
25. Amianthus with Quartz.
26. Afbellos.
Appendix to the Fofftls .
27. Various fpecimens of Lava, Pumices, and other fubftances, from Mount Vefuvius.
28. Garnets of 20 Tides, in their matrix, from the fame Volcano; but having palled through
its interne heat, are divefted of their colour.
29. Curious vitrification, of a ftaladitical form, fuppofed from fome great Iron Foundry,
Inflammables.
30. Afphaltum.
31. Elaftic Bitumen, from Derhyjhire *
32. Coal, whence unknown.
33. Canal Coal, from Haigh, in Lancajhire *
Shelf IT!.
Sparry Formations.
j . Orbicular Sparry Bodies, commonly called Fairies Money, from the banks of the Tyne s
Northumberland.
2. Mamillated Sparry Bodies, commonly called Maiden Paps, from ditto.
3. Large Orbicular Sparry Formations, fome of them double, from Finland.
4. Sparry Formation, found in a laminated calcareous Hone, from Stonesfteld , Oxfordjhire
5. Sparry Formation, of a red hue, from whence unknown.
£. (A) Bird’s Nell and Eggs, incrufted with fpar, from a petrifying fpring in Derhyjhire .
Flints.
6. A very large Nodule of Agate, fplit in two, and difeovering a hollow lined with co«
loured chalcedony, or bubbled agate, from France.
Iron Ores.
7. Variety of lingularly lhaped Bodies, called by authors Geodee , * from Lancaffire, and
Other parts of England. See Woodward's Catalogue of Englijh Fcffls .
8. AniEtites,or Eagle Stone, formerly worn by pregnant ladies, from a prevailing opinion
that it would procure an eafy delivery, and then greatly valued. ’Tis of the fame kind
as the Geodas, is hollow, and has a loofe piece within it, which rattles. See Woodward.
F
Saxa,
* Stones of a cruft ated or Jhelly ftrudure, the chief conftituent part of which is iron , and fre-
quently containing in the infde earthy matter of a different nature from the coat or cruft.


SAXA, or COMPOUND STONES.
■ * •
9. Coarfe Stones, compounded of micae, fand and iron [“a kind of grind-ftones] worn into
their prefent fhape by the adion of water, from the Englijh Coaji .
ic. Bowlder Stone, of a fmgular lhape.
11. Smooth Stone, a kind of whetftone.
appendix to the FoJJils.
12. Coarfe Laminated Sand Stones, with beautiful arbufcular or tree-like delineations be-
tween the laminae, effeded by the adion of mineral falts, from Lancajhire. Thefe ap-
pearances are called by authors Dendritae.
13. The like delineations on yellow laminated marbles, from Sulenhofgn , near Papenheim,
Germany .
14. Similar Tree-like Figures on a common flint, from Kent,
15. Very curious pyritical arbufcular figures between the laminae of a purple flate, from
Scotland.
16. The like Pyritical Dendritae on a greenilh flate, from Ingleton , in Torkjhire .
w
Bottom Shelf,
j. Sundry curious fports of nature, in flints, and other ftones, refcmbling different parts of
the human ftrudure, &c.
2. Singularly fliaped ftones, refembling mouldings in architedure, foun 4 d in the river Dove,
Staff or djhire.
P Y R I T J£. *■
3. Smooth Pyritae, from Heap , in Lancajhire .
4. Smooth Pyrites, from whence unknown.
5. Smooth Pyritae, from Scarborough .
6. Botryoid, or Grape-like Pyrites.
7. Smooth Pyrites, containing much vitriol, which is ftiooting through its furface,
from Germany .
8. Another, in a decompofing ftate.
9. Another different, in a like ftate.
jo. Pyritae, with the furface formed into cubes, from Saxony .
11. Pyritae, with a fmooth rufty coat, from Sujfex.
j 2, Pyritae, of various forms, with an echinated rufty furface, from the chalkpits in Sujex.
SAXA,
* Subfances found in the earth, in detached mafes, in nodules, greatly refembling rich and
productive ores in their external and metallic appearance, and fame other properties, but feldom
worth /melting, on account of their containing fo fmall a portion of metal, and fo great a quantity
cf the mineral ifng fubfances and unmetallic earth with which they are combined .


SAXA, or COMPOUND STONES.
Di v Isl 0 N SepT A & i -AC* called by Tome Ludus Hclmontiij and by
others, Waxen Veins.
13. Parts of various Septariae, compofed of a hard cinereous clay, with yellow
fepta or veins, from Sheepy If and , Kent . See a long account of this fthfance in Wood-
ward's Catalogue of Enghjh FoJJlls .
14. Five Septariae, fimilar to No. 13, from Weymouth .
13. Part of another, of fimilar component parts, from F arnworth, near Prefect , va Lancashire .
16. Parts of another, fimilar, from i?ary, polilhed.
17, Polifhed Sedbion of a very large and beautiful Septarium, compofed of a dark pyntical
clay, with yellow and brown fparry fepta, from Dorfetfoire , where they aie called X uitle
Stones.
jB. Fragment of another, of the fame kind.
19. Polifhed Slab, cut from a feptarium formed of a black iron ftonc, wiih neat angulated
white cryftal fepta, from Were-Dale , in Durham .
20. Septarium, which has been compofed of a rotten Hone and cryftal fepta, but the flone
being walked out, has left the fepta in the form of a honey comb, from the fame Dale.'
21. Septarium, formed of a ftony clay with pyritical fepta, from Sheepy Ifland, Kent .
22. Four feptariae, compofed of an irony clay, with fepta of iron ore, from Heywood,Lancafiire.
23. An Iron Septarium, from Rinser Rock , in Lancajhire .
24. Iron Septariae.
25. Septariae, compofed of a black iron ftone with pyritical fepta, from Were-Dale , Durham .
25. (A) Slates with veined furfaces, which referable thofe of the feptariae, from the fea
coaft of Lancafhire,
33 ar y t or Ponderous Earths*
26. Stellated Barytae on the yellow fpars of a feptarium, from Sheepy If and, Kent .
Outfide the Cafe .
27. One valve of the great Clamp Shell, Chama Gigas , or Gigantic Cockle of Linmeus,
from the Iftand Borneo . Its length 42 inches, breadth 24, and weight 236 pounds. A
view of this fpecimen will eafily reconcile us to the feemingly extravagant alfertion of
Voyagers, who mention their having dined on a Cockle fufficiently large to feaft a whole
boats crew. This is the largeft known fpecies of the teftaceous animals.
GLASS CASE 111.
fop Shelf,
Fabrications of Insects.
1. Four Wafps Nells, opened in different ways to ftiew their curious internal conftruftion,
from Cayenne, in South America . ___ . ,
y F z 2. Walp s


2. Wafp’s Ned, formed on a fprig of yew.
3. Another, fimilar, opened to ihew its cells, fome of which have the lids on,
4. Two others, fimilar, formed on fprigs of the oak.
5. Seftions of two others, fimilar, one of them very large.
5. (A) Curious neds of the tree ant, Guinea.
6, Cafe of the Cryfalis of a large Moth, N. America.
6. (A) Part of a fprig furrounded with a kind of Galls, the fabrications of infefts.
7. Cafes of the Cryfali of fmall infedls, much like cotton.
8. Delicate fmall Combs, of a fpecies of the Bee or Wafp kind.
Shelf 11.
8. (A) Calls of Medals, llruck on particular occafions or remarkable events in Rufia,
commencing with Peter the fird Czar, done at Rotheram, in a kind of bafaltine-ware,
by Mr. Samuel Walker.
Shelf 111.
V EGETABLES.
0. Upwards of 160 fpecimens of Woods, from various countries, labeled; among which
are the Ailigazant, Cam, Iron, King, Manchineel, Nutmeg, Orange, Purple, Sandal,
Sattin, Sumac, Tulip, Veretta, Zebra, and other curious and beautiful kinds, uied
for vaneering the mod excpiifite kinds of line cabinet work.
Nests and Eggs of Birds.
10. Three Eggs of the Ollrich, from the Cape of Good Hope ,
il. Neils and Eggs of various fpecies of Humming Birds, fome of them very curious.
12. Ned of a fpecies of the Swallow kind, ufodby the Chinefe in their foups, from Sumatra.
13. Ned of the Banana Bird. Jamaica .
14. A curious hanging ned, being formed by the bird on the extremity of a branch of a
tree, to fecure its young from the monkies, from the Haft Indies. See various others in
the Quadruped Room as originally formed by the birds upon the tree.,
15. Double Eggs, very curious.
16. Eggs and Neds of different birds, fome of them labeled.
Bottom Shelf.
Parts of uncommon Birds.
1. Beak of the Rhinoceros Hornbill Bird, remarkable for the curious appendage on it $
upper mandible. Eaft Indies. Latham's Synopfs , W. i.p. 342.
2. Skulls and Beaks of an unknown fpecies of bird, having fimilar appendages to the
upper mandible as is in the beak of the rhinoceros bird, from the Eaft Indies .
3. Beak of the Helmet Hornbill Bird, with a like appendage, from the Eafi Indies This
is figured by Edwards, tab, 281, fig. C.
4. Skull and beak of an unknown bird, differing from the above mentioned* with a fimilar
appendage. * 5* Skull


5* Skull and Beak of the Albatros. Eaf Indies .
6. Skull and Beak of the Ibis a fpecies of llork, from the Nile.
7. Skull and Beak of an unknown bird.
8. Serrated Beak of a fpecies of the Toucan, or Bill bird kind.
9. Beak of a bird of the Falcon genus.
10. Different parts of birds..
Parts of Quadrupeds. &c.
10. (A) Skull of the Babyrouffa, a curious fpecies of wild,hog, having a pair of large
curved tufks in each jaw, from Borneo .
11. Horn of a Rhinoceros, from the Cape of Good Hope, polifhed.
12. Parts of the Hide of the Rhinoceros, remarkable for its thicknefs, being piftol-proof.
This thicknefs of fkin is neceffary for an animal who, in his paffage in the woods,
makes his way through any part, turning afide for nothing but large trees. See Kol~
bin's Natural Hifory of the Cape cf Good Hope .
13. Jaws of the Beaver, remarkable for its fore teeth or cutters, which are fo deeply and
Brongly fixed in the jaws, that they gnaw afunder branches of trees of the thicknefs of
a man’s wrifl, when forming their habitations, from North America,
14. Foot of a Beaver.
15. Grinder Teeth of the Elephant, from Bojnbay.
16. Tufks and Teeth of the Hippopotamus. Goaf of Guinea*
17. Canine Tooth of a Lion, from Africa .
18. Teeth of the Horfe, one polifhed.
jB. (A) Singular Horn, in fhape of a human bud.
18. (B) Horns, fuppofed to be excrefcences formed on the human head.
19. Horns and feet of the fmall African Deer.
20. Singular curvated internal bone of the horn of fome cornuted animal,
21. An Armadillo as rolled up to fecure itfelf from danger. S. America
22. Vertebrae of
23. Tufks of the Hog, from Otaheite.
24. Under Jaw with the teeth of
25. Bones with preternatural offeous appendages, very curious.
36. Hoof of a young Zebra,
27, Vertebras of a Snake.
Parts of Fishes*
3. Teeth of the Sperma Ceti Whale.
z> Tufks and teeth of the Walrufs.
3. Teeth of the Sea Lion, from Falkland's If and s*.
4. Teeth of uncornmon hikes.
5* Faw of a large Seal.
6. Jaws


6. Jaws with the bony palate and tongue of the Sting Ray, from Jamaica.
7* unous Palate of a iilh of the Ray kind, from Japan, figured and deferibed by D’Avi-
( la * See bis Catalogue, Tom . I, pi. 22.
8. Palate of another kind of Ray-filh,
9. Jaws and Teeth of Skate.
ic. Curious Palates and Teeth of the Wolf Fifh.
■ll. Curious Palate of a fifh, from Otaheite .
12. Bony 1 ongue of an uncommon fifh. *•
13. Curious ftudded palate of a fifh, from the Friendly IJlands . Fifhes that are furnifhed
\\ ith thefe bony palates and tongue feed on teflaceous animals, and their ufe is to crack
the fhells of their prey.
J 4. Part of the Beak of a Parrot Fifh.
15. Singular Bone of the Cat Fifh, remarkable for having two fmall pointed bones affixed
to it, which move on fwivels; three fpecimens, from Jamaica ,
16. Sirgular curvated bones of a fifh.
17. Bone of a'Fifh, having a large preternatural offeous appendage to it.
18. Jaws of uncommon fifhes.
19. Under Jaw of a Frog Filh.
20. Parts of Jaws, Vertebrae, and other bones of curious fifhes.
21. Skeleton of an Old Wife Fifh.
22. Curious inner Teeth, with which the roof of the mouth and gullets of fome fifhes are
furnifhed, to prevent the efcape of their prey.
23. Part of the Jaw of a Shark.
24. Head of a Gurnard.
Quadrangular Eggs, of a fpecies of Ray Fifh.
26. Bladders of the Dolphin.
27. Beak and bones of the Cuttle Fifh.
28. Vertebrae, or joints of the back bone, of the Whale.
29. Patella, a bone which is placed between the vertebrae of the whale.
29. (A) Socket of a Whale’s Eye.
30. Blade Bone of a Porpoife.
31. Stings of the Sting Ray, naturally barbed, very curious, from Jamaica,
32. Stings of another curious kind of fifh.
33. Triangular fifh, opened to fhew the vertebrae. Sc c.
34. Shark’s Tooth, of an uncommon fize.
35. Parts of a fmgular Palate of a fifh.
36. Part of the curious granulated Skin of an uncommon fifh.
37. Saw of a fmall Saw-fifh.
38. Part of the finevv of a Whale.
39. Curious Gills of a fmall fpecies of the whale kind.
40. Parts of others, different.
Crabs,


Crabs, &c.
•*«
41. Backs, Claws, and Legs of uncommon fpecies of Crabs and Lobrter*.
42. Four varieties of the Syngnathus Hippocampus of Linnaeus, or little Sea Horfe.
43. Young Prickly Globe-fifh. Weft Indies,
Outfide the Cafe.
44. Hornet’s Nell. Eaft Indies, Prefented to Mr, Parkinfon,
GLASS CASE IV.
/ -■ \
Top Shelf,
1. Purple and white varieties of the Gorgonia Setofa of Linnaeus, or Sea Feather, from the
Gulph of Florida,
2. Ditto, diverted of the flertiy part, or coat.
3. Large fpecimen of Antipathes Spiralis, Spiral Antipathes, or black Spiral Animal
Plant, from the Eaji Indies. Ellis Zooph. Fab. 19, Fig . I— 6.
4. Very large fpecimen of the Millepora Alcicornis of Linnaeus, or Harts Horn Coral, with
curious adhefions of ferpulae, gryphi, and other Ihells, which are partly over-run by
the millepora, from the Weft Indies, Ellis Zooph, p. 141, n. 19.
5. Another fpecimen, equally large and fine, from the fame country.
6. Two fpecimens of the Madrepora Muricata of Linnaeus, or Branched Muricated Coral
of the Weft Indies, naturally united together. Ellis Zooph. p. 171, n. 76.
7. Madrepora Ramea of Linnaeus, Cinnamon Coral, alfo called May Blofibm Coral, on
account of the agreeable fmell it has when frelh from the fea, exa&ly like that of
the May bloffom. Sicily. Ellis Zooph. Fab. 38.
8. Madrepora Labyrinthica Solanderii. Sharp ridged Brainrtone, Weft Indies . This
being fplit in two, fhews the interior rtruflure. Ellis Zooph, p, 160, n. 34.
9. Curious and rare Star Stone, with a Gorgonia Flabellum of Linnaeus, or Sea Fan, a
large purple ridged Serpula fhell, and other adhefions, from the Weft Indie;,
10. The broad flat variety, with flender fhort branches, of the Madrepora Muricata
of Linnaeus, from the Eaft Indies , in its native ftate. Prefented to Mr, Parkinfon,
11. The fame cleaned.
12. Large and fine fpecimen of the Piped Wire Sponge, from the Weft Indies,
13. Large and Angular tuberculated variety of Madrepora Labyrinthica Solanderii, or
fharp ridged Brainrtone, from Martinique,
14. The Stag’s Horn Coral, a variety of the Madrepora Muricata of Linnaeus, from
the Weft Indies,
15. Another fpecimen of extraordinary Aze, from ditto
16. The Naked Branched Prickly Coral, a fcarce variety of the Madrepora Muricat%
of Linnaeus, from St. ChriftopheP s Iftand , Weft Indies,
Sin*


ij, Singular variety of the Muricated Coral of the Weft Indies,
18. Large and fine fpecimen of Miilepora Alcicornis, with a curious liar Hone, gryphi,
and other curious adhelions. Weft Indies,
19. Madrepora Galaxea, the Milky Way Star Stone, of an extraordinary fize.— Weft
Indies, —Ellis Zooph, 'Tab. 47, Fig. 7.
20. Specimen of Madrepora Sinuofa, or broad-ridged Brainftone, of the firll magnitude,
weighing ico pounds, from the Weji Indies. Ellis Zooph. p. 160, n. 33.
21. Uncommon large fpecimen of Madrepora Labyrinthica, or fharp ridged Brain(lone>
weighing near 200 pounds, from the Weft Indies.
22. The long branched warted Gorgon, on its native rock, from the Mediterranean Sea.
23. Part of a large branch of a tree perforated by fea worms, ( Teredo Navalis of Linnaus)
fome of which are very large.
Outfide the Caje .
24. A large Chama Gigas of Linnaeus, or Clamp, a kind of cockle-fliell, from Borneo,
25. Large fpecimen of Madrepora Raraea, or May Blofibm Coral, from the MeditUr-
ranean Sea. Prefented to Mr. Parkinfon,
In the Centre of the Saloon •
23. (A). A magnificent Laver, of the curious old Raphael's ware; the form an elegant
oval, with a recurved edge, and pointed bottom, both, as well as a raifed zone or belt,
which encircles the middle of the outfide, wrought in fluted or gadrooned work. Each
fide is ornamented with a laughing cornuted fatyr’s head. Two grotefque fphinx-
like figures, half fatyr, half dragon, with each a double tail, ferve as fupporters ;
their arms are extended to the edge, and their hind parts, with wings ex-
panded, underneath, refting on an oval bafe, which has a hollow gadrooned edge.
The whole is painted in the moft lively colours, and glazed. On the infide, within a
broad grotefque border, is reprefented a Roman naval engagement; the boarding
of two fliips by a number of foldiers in boats, fvvord and fhield in hand ; failors
fixing their grappling hooks to facilitate the entrance of the aflailants, who are op-
pofed by foldiers on board the fliips armed in like manner. The outfide is enriched
with grotefque figures, fupporting fefioons of flowers, interfperfed among which are
birds, military atchievements, foliage. See. This capital and mafterly performance befpeaks
it the work of firll rate genius, and renders it the deferved objeft of general admiration.
It was originally in the Medicean Collection, and, at the time of the Duke of Tufcany’s
taking poflefiion of that valuable repofitory, was by miflake put out with other articles
for fale, and w r as purchafed by the late Admiral Broderick, for a coniiderable Sum,
On whofe demife it came into the pofleifion of the late Sir Afliton Lever.
On


Within this Saloon are four Infcriptions , intended to imprefs the Spectator zvith an
Idea of the combined Beauty and wonderful Variety of the t Vo>ks of Cr cation y
and the fupreme Wifdom and Goodnefs oj that Beingy wkofe Fiat fpake
them into Exifience .
On the EafL
O JEHOVAH!
ffpuarn magnifca funt tua Opera!
Vir injipiens non cogncfcit ea !
Siulius non animadvertit ea !
See Psalm xcii. ver. 5* 6,
*
On the Weft,
O JEHOVAH!
fpuam ampla funt tua Opera !
dfuam fapienter ea fecifti !
ffuam plena eft Terra Pojfefftone Tua !
See Psalm dv. ver. 23.
On the North.
See thro 9 this Air , this Ocean , and this Earthy
All Matter quick y and bur fling into Birth 3
Above how high progrejfwe, Life may go.
Around how wide y hoiv deep extend below !
Vaft Chain of Beings zvhich from GOD began ,
Natures ethereal 9 human ; Angely Man r
Beafiy Birdy Fijhy Infediy what no Eye can fee 9
No Glafs can from infinite to Thee t
From Thee to nothing . —■ !
Pope.
On the South.
Thefe are ihy glorious Works , Parent of Good .
I ! !
Thou fed ft above thefe Heavens
To us invifiblcy or dimly feen
In thefe thy loweft Works \ yet thefe declare
Thy Goodnefs beyond Thought , and Power diving.
Milton.
G Ou


On the Sides of the Arch entering Apartment V.
1. A moft beautiful Gorgonia, having an Afterias Caput Medufse, and another curious
Star-filh entangled in its branches. .
2. Drawing in Water Colours of a curious Jafper, two Agates, and an Egyptian Pebble,
by Mils Stone.
3* Ditto of the Opaline Shell Marble, two Agates, and an Egyptian Pebble, by ditto.
4. Difteftions of 3 leaves of plants, exhibiting the moll curious and minute ramifications
of their fibres, by Mr. Dobfon , of the Cuftom-houfe, London.
5. Ditto of 9 ditto, by ditto.
6. Imitations of Dendritical Mocho Stones, and neat fmall Landfcapes, done on glafies
with fea weeds [a fpecies of marine fuci] the performance of Mr. Leake , furgeon, of
London,
APARTMENT V.
ZOOPHYTES,
Or Animal Plants ; hut better known by the more comtnon Names of
Corals, Corallines, &c.
The Zoophytes were formerly ranked among the number of lub-marine plants, and
their figure and ftrudure feems to warrant the propriety of this arrangement; but they
now are indifputably afcertained to be of an animal nature, replete with life, growing in
the form of plants. Many of the Corallines exhibit a great variety of the molt elegant
forms, reprefenting trees and Ihrubs, each of which, both ftem and branches, contains an
infinite number of very minute cells, or fockets, with their feveral inhabitants exifting
therein.
It is affirmed by fome naturalifts, that thefe animal plants are not only the habitation,
but even the ftrufture or workmanihip of their inhabitants, who are of the Polype * kind.
—However, M.Donati, of Turin, thinks it more juft to fay, “ That Coral and other Coral*
“ line bodies have the fame relation to the polypes united to them, that there is betweea
“ the Iheli of a fnail and the fnail itfelf, or the bones of an animal and the animal itfelf,’ >
GLASS
* They are called Polypes from their being united in the form of a clujier . They are of a
gelatinous nature , and fix tkemfie loses by their bafie. Their 'mouth is at one er.d , furrounded with
hair-like feelers , or arms ; and they produce their young, either Hosing or in eggs, from the fide.
]f the frejh-water Polypes are cut into two or more pieces, each piece will haoje the wonderful
property of becoming a compleat animal of itfielf, — See Baker s and Trembley's Htfiory of the
Polype , and the annexed Plate , from which the reader will eafily know what is intended when
the Marine Polype is mentioned. .


Fig. 1. Is the Common Fresh-water Polype, at its full growth, hut before hawing produced its
young . Hydra Vulgaris. Ellis Zooph, p . 9, n. 2. Hydra Grifea of Linnæus.
Fig. 2. Is the fame magnified .
Fig. 3. Is the Long-armed Fresh-water Polype, shewn as it appears with its numerous progeny
issuing from its fides . Hydra Fufca of Linnæus. Ellis Zooph . p. 9, n , 1.




GLASS CASE I.
j, Goro-onia * Setofa of Linnaeus, Sea Feather, from the Bahamas.
2. Madrepora f Muricata of Linnaeus, Prickly White Coral, from th e Weft Indies.
3. Piped Wirey Sponge. Wefl Indies.
4. Millepora J Calcarea, Chalky Millepore, from th q Weft-Indies. Ellis Zooph. dab,
23, fig* 1 3*
t, Madrepora Interftinfla of Linnaeus and Solander. Ellis Zooph. p. 167, Tab. 56. and
Millepora Ccerulea. of Ellis, Blue Coral, from the Eaf Indies. —■ Ellis Zooph. p. 142,
Tab, \2,fg. 4.
6. Madrepora Fafcicularis of Linnaeus, Fafciculated or Swathed Coral, from the Mau-
ritius Ifand. Ellis Zooph. Tab. 30, fig. I.
7. Sertularia § Thuja of Linnaeus, Bottle-brulh Coralline, from the Englijh Coafi. Ellis Co-
Tallin, p. 10. Tab. 3, n, q. fig* b. B. and in the Frontifpiece. Ellis Zooph. p. 41, n. 9.
8. Madrepora Failigiata of Linnaeus, Branched Fungus Coral. — Weft Indies, variety of
Ellis Zooph. Tab. 33.
9. Spongia Oculata of Linnaeus, Branched Sponge, from the Englijh Coafi. — Ellis Corallin.
pi. 32, fig. f. F. Ellis Zooph. p. 184.
10. Madrepora Meandrites of Linnaeus, the Butter Print Coral, from the Weft Indies. Ellis
Zooph. Tab. 48 ,fig. I.
n. A moil beautiful fcarlet Gorgonia, on its native rock, from whence unknown.
12. Madrepora Damicornis of Pallas and Solander, or Deer’s-horn Coral, from the Eaft
Indies. Ellis Zooph, p, 170, n. 73.
13. Madrepora Failigiata of Linnaeus, var. a curious variety of Branched Fungus-like Co-
ral. Weft Indies. Variety of Ellis Zooph. Tab. 33.
14. Madrepora Radiata of Solander, Sedlion of an Allroites, with round Ears, from the
Eaft Indies, Ellis Zooph, Tab. 47, n, 8.
15. Foliated variety of the Millepora Alcicornis of Linnaeus, or ElkVhorn Coral. —-
Weft Indies.
16. Fucus, or Sea Weed, on its native rock, Englijh Coafi.
17. Millepora Truncata of Linnaeus, Blunt-pointed Millepore, on its native rock. Medi-
terranean Sea. Ellis Zooph. Tab. 23, fig. I 8.
G 2
18.. Sin-
* A plant-like animal, or clujler of polypes, whofe hafe is either horny, Jhelly, or fony, coated
with afoftijh fiejh or cruf, in which the cells, containing the heads of the polypes, are placed,
■j' Madrepora implies a fony or hard coral, whofe pores are large, and of a fellatedfgure .
X Midepora denotes a fony coral, whofe pores are either imperceptible to the naked eye, or
*very fmall, and of a cylindrical form .
§ A clufer of polypes, inclofed in horny cup-Jh aped denticles , or cells , inferted into a piped horny
Hem, through which the bafe of tpe polypes is continued , the whole refembling a plant.


18. Singular fcalloped variety of Madrepora Fungites of Linnaeus, or Sea Mufliroom.
Eaft indies. - Ellis Zooph. Tab. 28. fig. 5. 6.
19. Tubipora Mudca of Linnaeus, or Purple. Tubular Coral. Eaft Indies Ellis Zooph.
Tab. 27. See a curious account' of this fpecies in the Janie 'work. p\ 14-4*
20. Stellated Fungus-like Coral, 1
21. A pale red Gorgonia. 3 w^ence unknown.
22. Cat’s Tail Sponge. Gulph of Florida.
23. Madrepora Seriata of Pallas, delicate White Branched Coral, with the cells of the ani-
mals placed in ftrait rows, from the Eaft Indies. Ellis Zooph. Tab. 31,9%. It
24. Stony White Millepore.— Englifh Coaft , variety of Millepora Polymorpha of Linmeus.
25. Corallina # Opuntia of Linnaeus, Articulated Coralline. Weft Indies. Ellis Zooph .
Tab. 20, fig. 6.
26. Curious Muricated or prickly Sponge, on its native rock; to which alfo adheres an
orange-coloured Spondylus fhell, from th e Weft Indies.
27. Fine fpecimen of the broad flat variety of Madrepora Muricata of Linnams, with flender
fliort branches. Eaft Indies.
28. The Stem of a Gorgonia Ceratophyta of Linnaeus Weft Indies. This has
feveral Ihells of a fpecies of the odrea genus, called Tree Cyders, adhering to it,
over which the animals of the Gorgonia have run their fabrication, on which,
account his a curious and intending fpecimen.— Compare Ellis Zooph. Tab . 2 x fig. 1, A.
GLASS CASE If.
29. Gorgonia verrucofa of Linnaeus, Warted Gorgon. Mediterranean Sea. - ’Tis alf©
found, but rarely, on the Englijh Coaft . Ellis Zooph.p. 89, n. 14.
30. Yellow Gorgon, naturally adhering to a fliell, from the Goad of :SUtly.
31. Another of the fame kind, founded on a done, from ditto.
32. Curious Orbicular Sponge.
33. Ids f Hippuris of Linnaeus, Pyed Jointed Coral, from the Eaft Indies. Ellis Zooph *
Tab. 3 y ftg. I, Tab. 9 ,ftg. 3, 4.
34. Madrepora Carduus, the Thidle Coral, Ellis Zooph. Tab. 35, of which it is a young variety.
3s. Corallina Flabellum, Fan Coralline. Ellis Zooph. Tab. 24.
36. Millepora Foraminofa, Lace Coral, two fpecimens, one affixed to a done, the other
to a pullet’s egg, a fhell of the Anomia genus [Anomia Terebratula of Linnaeus,] to
which alfo adhere two diells of a dngular triangular fpecies of the Serpula or worm
fhell kind. Mediterranean Sea. Ellis Zooph. Tab. 26, fig. 2. This Coral is
the Millepora Cellulofa of Linnasus.
37. Ano~
* Corallina implies an animal growing in the form oft a plant , whofe ftem is fixed to other bodies,
and is compofted of capillary or hair-like tubes, whofe extremities pafts through a calcareous or
chalky cruft , and open into pores on the fturftace , through which the polypes extend their feelers ,
4 The Ifis is a plant-like animal , nearly allied to the Gorgonias, having a hard part within >■
mid . a mealy coat or flejh , but whofe ftem is jointed .


'37* Another fpecimen, with adhefions of ferpulae (hells, from the fame fea.
38. Millepora Reticulata of Linnaeus, Netted Coral, from the coaft of Sicily. Ellis Zooph.
Tab. 26, fig. 5. This fpecimen, together with fome ferpulae ihells, adheres to a (hell
of the Tray genus, Ma&ra Lu.raria of Linnaeus.
3,9. Millepora Foliacea, Foliaceous Miilepore.— Ellis Zooph. p. 133. Millepora Fafcialis
of Linnaeus.
40. Bone of a Gorgonia Flabellum of Linnaeus, or Sea Fan, partly over-run ; and
40. (A) Ditto, quite over-run by a Millepora Alcicornis, or ElkVhorn Coral. —Weft Indies,
41. Small kind of Madrepora Digitata, or Finger Coral, from the Baft Indies,
42. CoraPina Cylindrica, Cylindrical Jointed Coralline, from the Weft Indies, — Ellis
Zooph. Tab. 22, fig, 4.
Sertularia Tamatifca of Linnaeus, Sea T amarifk, C oraliine.. Ellis Ltorallin . Tab * i } n»
1 .Jig, a. A. This adheres to an old fucus, and is young.
Madrepora Damicornis of Pall is and Solander, Deer s-horn Coral (the fame as
No. « 2.) on its native rock, a.kind of granite, which is alio incrufted with ferpulae, over-
run by a miilepore. Baft Indies.
45. Spongia Digitata, curious branched piped Sponge, called the Fingered or Glove
Sponge, from Florida ,
46. Gorgonia Verrucofa of Linnaeus, Warted Gorgon (fame as No. 29.) on its native rock,
on which is alfo a large Serpula (hell.
47. Another, affixed to an oyfter fhell.
48. Madrepora Ramea of Linnaeus, May Bloffom Coral. Ellis Zooph, Tab, 38. For a
moil beautiful fpecimen of this, lee No. 48. in Glafs Cafe 7.
49. Madrepora Flexuofa and Caefpitofa of Linnaeus, Bending Coral. Ellis Zooph, Tab *
• 3n M- S> 61
50. Another, formed on a done.
51. Waned Gordon (fame as No. 29.) on its native rock, with a group of thread worms,
fome balani, or acorn (hells, and other adhehons. This and the hve preceding aitiCiv^s
' are from the Mediterranean Sea .
32- Stem of an old Gorg n, on a decayed coral, (hewing the manner in which the animals
of this genus fprcad their bale to fecure their fabric.
GLASS-CASE TIL
53. Bone of a Gorgonia Flabellum of Linnaeus, or Fan Gorgon, from .the Weft Indies *
54. Red variety of a Sicilian Gorgon.
55. Curious Lobated Sponge.
56. Ids Ochracea of Linnaeus, Pipy Knobbed Red Coral, from the Molucca y or Spice Iftands,
in the Baft Indies. • See a description of this curious fpecies by Mr. Ellis in the Phi-
lofophical Tranfa&ions, vol. 40, p. 189. See alfo Ellis Zooph. p. 105,, n. 1.
36. (A) Millepora Violacea, Violet-coloured Miilepore. Elhs Zooph, lav, 2(3, Jig. 3> 4*
- S everal fpecimens of this rare fpecies are formed on No, s6*
57. Madre-


57- Madrepora Areolata of Linnams, Cockfcomb Coral. Ellis Zooph. Tab . 47. 4,
var. having a Gorgonia Flabellum of Linnaeus, or Fan Gorgon, naturally affixed to it.
Weft Indies,
58. Bone or Stem of a Gorgon, divefted of the fleffi.
59. Millepora Alcicornis of Linnaeus, ElkVhorn CoraL Weft Indies, Ellis Zooph,
p. 141, n . 19.
60. Ditto, formed on the hem of an old Gorgon. Ditto,
61. Singular Cavernous Sponge.
62. Curious Netted Sponge, variety of Spongia Cancellata of Linmeus ?
63. Madrepora Foliofa of Pallas, Foliated Coral, from the Baft Indies. Ellis
Zooph. pi, 32.
64. Millepora Decu/Tata, Interfered Millepore, from the Portugal Coaft, £///j Zooph,
pi, 23.9%. 9.
65. Part of a large fpecimen of the Naked Branched Prickly Coral, variety of Madrepora
Muricata of Linnaeus Saint Chiftopher*s Iftand , Weft Indies,
66. Curious Brown Piped Sponge.
67. Gorgonia Pretiofa, True Red Coral, from the Coaft of Sicily. Ellis Zooph. Tab. ij,
ftg, 3. Ills Nobilis of Linnaeus.
68. Madrepora Crater of Ellis, the Cu P Madrepore. Eaft Indies, Madrepora Cine-
-1 afcens of Solander. Ellis Zooph . lab. 43.
69. Long Branched Warted Gorgon, adhering to a hone.
70. Ditto, adhering to a fhell, I
7 1 • Ditto, naturally affixed to part of an iron hoop, f mediterranean Sea,
72. Ditto, formed on part of a fmall Anchor, j
73. Gorgonia Aculeata, Spined or Prickly Gorgon, with adhefions of oyfters, from the Weft
Indies. J
74. Alcyonium, * formed on an old ftar ftone, from the Eaft Indies. Alcyoniura
Pulmonana, Sea Lungs ? Ellis Zooph. p. 175.
7;. Cavernous Wirey Sponge. _ Weft Indies.
GLA S S CAS E. IV.
76. Wirey Sponge. Weft Indies.
77. Spongia Cellulofa, Cellular Sponge. Wejt Indies.
78. Curious Branched Sponge, from the Gulph of Florida.
79. Madrepora Agaricites of Linnaeus, Agaric Coral. Weft Indies. Madrepora Undata.
Ellis Zooph. Tab. up, Madrepora Agaricites. ibid, p. 159, h. 32.
8o A rare
■ * The Alcyonium is an animal growing in the form of a plant. The ftem is fixed, and is
either flejhy, gelatinous , fpongy, or a leather-like fubftance ; having an outward Jkin full of
cells, with ft ar-like openings, or little mouths, which fend forth polype fuckers, through which
the eggs are produced.


go. A rare Perforated Sponge, adhering to a Pe&en-lhell, from the TLaft Indies •
81. Madrepora Flexuofa of Linnaeus, Bending Coral, formed on a fragment of an earthen
veflel, from Sicily.
82. Singular Cavernous Sponge.
83. Stony White Millepore, from the Mediterranean Sea. A variety of Millepora Poly-
morpha of Linnaeus.
84. Corallina Opuntia of Linnaeus, Articulated Coralline. Wed Indies. Ellis Zooph.
Tab. 20, Jig. 6.
85. Curious Sponge ? with hollow fibres.
86. Madrepora Bulliens of Solander, Bubbled Coral, from the Eajl Indies. Ellis Zooph.
p. 167, n . 63.
87. Singular Sponge.
88. Another different, a variety of Spongia Officinalis, of Linnaeus, Common Sponge.
89. Another ftill different, a large and fine fpecimen.
90. The Stem or Bone of an old Gorgonia, diveffed of the Bark or Flefh, with a large
purple ferpula fliell adhering, both over-run by a Millepora Alcicornis, from the Wf
Indies,
91. Madrepora Annularis. Ellis Zooph. Tab . 53, Jig. 1, 2. Star Stone Coral.
Wejt Indies •
92. Madrepora Porites of Linnaeus, Club-branched Coral. Wejl Indies , Ellis Zooph.
'Tab. 47, Jig* I, 2.
93. Brown Coral, with adhefions of Serpula fhells, from the Mediterranean Sea. Madre-
pora Tibicina. Ellis Zooph. p. 152. n. 7.
94. Singular Sponge.
95. Curious Gorgon.
96. The Stem of another, diveffed of the flefh or bark.
97. Long Branched Warted Gorgon, on a ftone, with Milleporae and other adhefions,
from the Mediterranean Sea,
98. Bottle, which having lain fome time in the fea, is over-run with Serpula fhells of the
Triquetra fpecies. This article belongs to the Teffacea, or Shells, but is put here for
want of room in its proper place.
GLASS CASE. V.
99. Purple variety of Gorgonia Flabellum of Linnaeus, the Fan Gorgon, from the Weft
Indies. — Ellis Zooph. p. 92, n. 18.
100. Ramofe ditto, from ditto. N.B. Two very large fpecimens are on the top of this and
the next Cafe.
101. Millepora Rubra, Red Millepore, formed on a Shell. Weji Indies. Ellis Zooph.
p. 137, 12.
sc z. The fame kind on a Madrepora Labyrinthica, or fliarp-ridged Brainftone, from ditto.
103. Ma-


103. Madrepora Porites of Linnaeus, a fine fpecimen of die Club-branched Coral in it?
native State. Weft Indies, — See No. 92.
104. Yellow variety of Gorgonia Flabellum of Linnaeus, the Fan Gorgpn,,from the. Weft
Indies.
1 °s* Gorgpnia Pretiofa, Red Coral* in fmallbranches, formed on a decayed fhell.— Sicily „
206. Madrepora Galaxea. The Milky-Way Star Stone, adhering to a purple Gryphus-
fliell, from the W eft Indies. Ellis Zooph. Tab. 47, fig 7. This fpecimen is per-
forated by a Mytilus Lithophagus of Linnasus, or hone piercing Mufcle, which maybe
feen in its cell.
107. Corallina Monile, Necklace Coralline, from c Jamm€a..—M.llis Zooph. Tab. 20, Jig. C,
108. An Ailroites, or Star Stone Coral, with large liars, from Martinique, Madrepora
Dasdalea ? Ellis Zooph. Tab. l, 2.
109. Group ofßalaoi, over-run by the Elk’s-horn Coral, Millepora Alcicornis of,Linnaeus,
from the d eft Indies.
1 10. Carious Yellow Gorgon, from the Gulph of Florida.
HI. Red Gorgon on a fhell. Mediterranean Sea.
112. Another, with a Margaratifera, or Pearl-fhell, adhering to it, from ditto.
113. Madrepora AntliophyHites, Flower-like Coral. Eaft In dies.. Ellis Zooph . Tab. 29.
114. Millepora Lichenoides, Liverwort Millepore, from the Coalt of Sicily. Ellis Zooph.
Tab. 23. fig. 10 12.
11$. Madrepora Crihata, Crelled Madrepore, from the Eaft Indies. Ellis Zooph. Tab.
. fig- 3* 4,»«
116. Corallina Palmata, Palmated Coralline, from the Weft Indies. Ellis Zooph . Tab. 21,
fig. a. A.
117. Scarce variety of Madrepora Fungites of Linnaeus, the Little Sea Mulhroom.
Eaft Indies.
118. Millepora Truncata of Linnaeus, Blunt- pointed Millepore, two fpecimens, with their
branches united, formed on a fiat hone, to which alfo a variety of the Millepora Liche-
noides and other marine bodies have affixed themfelves, from the Mediterranean Sea.
119. Gorgonia Verrucola of Linnaeus, Wanted Gorgon* adhering to Pinna-fhells* from
the Irift? Coaft. Ellis Zooph p. 89, n. 14.
120. Ditto, adhering to an old brick, from the Mediterranean Sea. This has two of a
fmall kind of Alferias Caput Medufe, or Medufa’s-head Star-fiih, intangledin its branches,
121. Ditto, with a fmgular coralline adhering to a hone, from ditto.
GLASS CASE VI.
122. Mod elegant Tree of the red variety .of Ifis Ochracea of Linnaeus, or Jointed Red
Coral, from the haft Indies. See No. 56. On its bafe are feveral of the Sertularia Pen-
natula, or Sea Pen Coralline..— Ellis Zooph. lab. I, fig. »■, 2, with other adhefions»
This beautiful fpecimen was brought from the Eaft Indies, by Sir Elijah Impey.
123. Curious Yellow Gorgon.
124. Madre-


*l4. Madrepora Hirtella of Pallas. Rofy Stellated Coral, “
a fine rofe colour when firft taken out of the fea, but the colour fades as it dries. Ellis
of Linmeus. Bending Coral, formed on a fragment of an earthen
veflfel, on which are alfo curious MiUeporz, Serpuhe- Set Vo. 49-
126. Corallina Tribulus, Caltrop Coralline, from the Weft Inches. - Elis Zooph. T. .
I2 ; l, 4; e | pedmen of that moll elegant and curious coral Madrepora Phrygia, or Lace-
work Brainllone, from the Eaft Indies, Ellis Z oof •" • 4 2 ‘ p rvo l, U s .(hell.
, 2 8. Gorgonia Setofa of Linmeus, Sea Feather Gorgon, naturally affixed to
_ Weft Indies. - N.B. A fmall Margaratifera Ihell is adhering to pne °f its brancne
U 9. Scarce deep variety of Madrepora Fungites of Linnaeus, or Sea Mulhroom, from ..
130. Papillofa, Branched Nipple Coral. Baft Indies. Ellis Zoopb. p.
l3 !? 9 Coramna Fragiliffima of Linnxus, Brittle Coralline, from the Weft Indies. - Ellis
, 3 SctrJvariety ff Madrepora Fungites of Linnaeus, or Sea Mulhroom, naturally affixed
to a large fpondylus (hell, from Martinique,
,33. Millepora Truncata of Linmeus, Blunt-pointed Millepora with another kind of
Millepora and curious Serpuke-lhells adhering to it, from the Mediterranean Sea. -
See No. 17.
GLASS CASE VII.
It a. Bone of a fmgular fpedes of Gorgonia. , ,
133 Red and Yellow Gorgonia on their native rocks, from Sicily ; one of them haa -
veral fragments of the rays of a Medufa’s-head Star-filh attached to it. ,
136. Madrepora Agaricites of Linnaeus, Agaric Coral, and a curious Star-Hone Coral, the
firll beginnings of each formed on a decayed Madrepore, from Martinique. See No. 79.
137. Curious fmall Madrepore, with fmooth cylindrical branches ftellated at their ends,
from the Mediterranean Sea, . _ . n fm a. ijr„a
138. Scarce variety of Madrepora Gyrofa, or the Swimming Brainllone, from the
Indies, Ellis Zocph, p, n, 44**
tig. Beautiful Purple Gorgon, whence unknown. ~ c
140. Madrepora Fungites ofLimueus, the Mulhroom Coral, from the Raft bee
No. 18. .
141. Madrepora Reticulata, Netted Madrepore Coral, rare, from the Eafi Indies,
142. Madrepora Verrucofa of Solander, Wanted Coral, from the Eaft Indies. Madrepora
Damicornis of Linmeus. —Ellis Zooph. f. 17z, *■ 7^'
H 1 43* Aa


143. An Ifls Hippuris of Linnaeus, or Pyed Jointed Coral, with a Millepora Cosrulea of
Fahas and Ellis, or Flue Coral, adhering to it. See No. 5 and 33.
glass CASE VIII.
144. Antipathes * Ulex, Furze-like Antipathes, from Batavia, Ellis Zooph, ‘Tab, 19,
fig- 7> 8.
1 45* Antipathes Myriophylla, Yarrow-like Antipathes, from the Molucca IJl ands, Ellis
Zooph, Tab, <cy, fig, 11, 12.
146. Flute Sponge, from the Gulph of Florida,
147. Carious Sponge, whence unknown
148. Another, different
149. Madrepora Sinuofa, Broad-ridged Brainflone. JVefi Indies ,
350. Another larger and very fine.
151. Curious Sponge furrounding a number of the Sole Oyfler, [Mya Vulfella of
Linnaeus] from the Eafi Indies.
152. Spongia Infundibuliformis of Linnaeus, Funnel-fhaped Sponge, whence unknown.
153. Two others different, one of them formed on a fpondylus fhell.
154. Curious Lobated Sponge.
154. Two uncommon Sponges.
356. Madrepora Virginea of Linnaeus, Stellated Branched Coral, naturally affixed to a
Noah’s Ark-lhell, from the Weft Indies,
157. Fine Orbicular fpecimen of Madrepora Verrucofa of Solander. See No. 142.
158. Singular fpecimen of the Bafis of a red Coral, Gorgonia Pretiofa of Ellis, from the
Coaft of Sicily, See No. 67,
159. Gorgonia Verrucofa of Linnaeus, or Warted Gorgon, remarkable for having feveral
Swallow Margaratiferae naturally affixed to it, from the Mediterranean Sea .
160. Red and Yellow Gorgon, on its native rock, from Sicily,
GLASS CASE IX.
*
l6r. Curious Gorgon, from the Bay of Honduras,
362. Curious Muricated Sponge, formed on a coral, whence unknown.
163. Singular Lobated or flapped Sponge, founded on the fame rock.
164. Curious Star Stone Coral, whence unknown.
165, Gor>
*I he Antipathes is an animal growing in the Jhape of a plant, The ft em is horny in the
infide, befet with fmall /pines, and fpread out at the bafe ; the out/ide covered with a gelatinous
flejh, full of warts , from whence the polypes extend themfeTues, For a curious account of the
Antipathes, fee Humph, Herb . Ambom, Book XII. chap . 2, and Ellis Zooph, p, 97.


265. Gorgonia Crafla, Flefliy Gorgon. Ellis Zooph. p. 9 1, n. 17, Tab. 1 3. with
a Miilepora Aicicornis, or EikViiorn Coral, formed on the Stem of an old Gorgon,
from the h eji indies.
166. The Screen-like Gorgon, formed on a Hone, from the Eafi Indies , variety of Gor-
gonia Umbraculum. Ellis Zooph. lab . 10.
167. Singular Ipecimen of the common Well India variety of Madrepora Muricata of
Linnaeus, Branched Prickly Coral. See No. 2.
168. Miilepora Aicicornis of Linnaeus, EikViiorn Coral, and a curious Aftroites, or Star-
Hone Coral, Ellis Zooph. ‘Tab. 41 -Jig. 4. both, formed on the knobs of an Alatus
Gigas [Strombus Gigas of Linnaeus.] or large Conch, from the Wed Indies, a molt
curious and uncommon ipecimen.
169. Curious red Gorgon, on its native rock.
17c. Gorgonia Pinnata. Weji India Feather-like Gorgon.— Ellis Zooph. Tab. 3,
171. Madrepora Alveolata, Honey Comb Aftroites, or Star-ftone Coral, with hexagonal
cells, very rare, from the Eaji Indies. This was formed on a large mother of pearl
fhell, but has been feparated from it,
172. Madrepora Gyrofa, The fwimming Brainftone, fo called from its floating on water,
from the Weft Indies , rare. Ellis Zooph. Tab. 31.
173. Madrepora Papiilofa of Solander, Branched Nipple Coral, formed on a Clamp-lhell.
Eaji Indies. See No. 130.
174. Several fpecimens of a Dwarf Stellated Branched Coral, a variety of Madrepora
Hirtella of Pallas. Ellis Zooph. p. 155, n. 16 ? formed .on a large piece of black Gra-
nite, from the Coaft of Guinea.
175. Madrepora Talpa, the Mole-like Coral, from the Coaft of New South Wales.
Madrepora Pileus. Ellis Zooph. Tab. 43.
176. Two of the Gorgonia Flabellum of Linnasus, the Sea-fan, and a Gorgonia Fufca*
or Brown Gorgon, naturally affixed to an old coral, from the Wefi Indies.
177. Curious Lobated Sponge, with a Star-ftone Coral formed, within its flaps*.
GLASS CASE X.
178. Two fpecimens of Gorgonia Peflinata of Linnaeus, the Comb-like Gorgon; one o f
them with a curious fpecies of the Afterias Caput Medufae entangled in its branches,,
from the Eaji Indies , Ellis Zooph. p. 83, n. 9.
179. Branched Yellow variety of the Gorgonia Flabellum of Linnaeus, or Sea Fan, from
the Weft Indies.
180. Gorgonia Pretiofa, the true Red Coral, on its native rock, from the Coaft of Sardt~
nia. See No. 67.
381. Large and fine fpecimen of the fame kind of Gorgon, with its branches much com-
plicated. See No. 67.
183. Curious Reticulated or net-like Sponge*.
8 3 M&-


183* Madrepora Favofa of Linnaeus, Large-ftarred Aftroites or Star-Hone Coral. —« Welt
Indies,
184. Millepora Tubipora, Tubulous Millepore, on its native rock. Mediterranean Sea .
Bill* Zooph . p, 139, n. 16. Tab. 26. n . 1. Millepora Lichenoides of Linnseus.
285. Gorgonia Fiammea, the Fiery Red Gorgon, from the Cape of Good Hope, Ellis
Looph, Tab, 11» /
186. Madrepora Galaxea, The Milky-Way Aflroites Coral, formed on an old Murex-ftielL
VZeft Indies, See No. 106.
187. Very carious variety of Madrepora Fungites of Linnaeus, or Sea Mulhroom, remark-
able for having 20 young ones of the lame kind formed on its under part, from the
Taft Indies, Such fpecimens are very uncommon. See No. 140.
188. Scarce fpecies of Sea Mulhroom, remarkable for its thicknefs.
289. Curious variety of Madrepora Virginea of Linns us, or Stellated Branched Coral,
from the Baha?nas,
190. Madrepora Rofea of Pallas, Rofe-coloured Madrepore, from St, Domingo, Ellis
'Looph, p, 135. n , 18.
191 • Millepora Calcarea, Chalky Millepore, formed on a Buccinum-lhell, from the Weft
Indies,
192. Corallina Penicillus of Linnaeus, Pencil or Plain Stemmed Mop Coralline, from the
Weft Indies, Ellis Looph. Tab, 23. fig. 4. 6.
193. r I übularia Acetabulum of Linnseus, Saucer-like Coralline, from Gibraltar,
194. The Scarlet variety of Tubipora Mulica of Linnaeus or Organ-pipe Coral, from the
Eaft Indies,
295. Madrepora Limax, the Slug-like Coral, from the Coaft of Neva South Walet,
196. Madrepora Bulliens, Bubbled Coral. Eaft Indies, Curious and beautiful Ipecimenj
formed on an old one of the fame kind. - B6.
197. Curious fpecies of Muricated Madrepore Coral, from the Eaft Indies , very rare.
198. Delicate Species of Aftroites, with hexagonal cells, from the Weft Indies,
199. Dwarf kind of Madrepora Virginea of Linnaeus, or Stellated Branched Coral, from
the Weft Indies.
200. Double Sea Mulhroom, very curious. See No. 18.
201. Curious Aftroites, with large round cells. Eaft Indies,
202. Sertularia Antennina of Linnaeus, Lobfter’s Horn Coralline, from the Englijh Coaft,
Ellis Zooph, p, 43. n. 14.
203 Pennatula # Phofphorea of Linnaeus, the Shining Sea Pen, from the Bay of Naples,
204 FluG
* The Pennatula, or Sea Pen, is an animal that fwims freely about in the fea , of many Jhapes ,
having a hone in the inftde to fupport it. It fends forth from the upper part of its dem polype-
like mouths, fwjrrounded by claws ; through thefe it produces its eggs. The lovoer part of the ftem
is bare. All of this genus have the remarkable property of fending forth a drong phofphoreal
light in the fea ,


204 Fluftra* Foliacea of Linnaeus, Broad-leaved Sea Matt, from Weymouth. Ellis
Zooph. Tab . z, fig, 8. y
205. Fluftra Truncata of Linnaeus, Square-topped Sea Matt, from - Ellis
Zooph. p. 11, n. 1. y
205 (A) The fame, bleached by lying on the Tea fhore.
306 Ceilaria f Farciminoides, Bugle Celleferous Coralline, from Weymouth. Ellis Zooth
p. 26, n. 13. Tubulana Fiftulofa of Linnseus.
207 Part of the branch of a Tree perforated by pholades, and its furface incrufted with
groups of the ferpula fdofa, or thread-worm Ihells, from the Mediterranean Sea This
‘Jlace 6 appertains to the Teiiacea or Shells, but was put here for want of room
END of PjjRT I.
Part 11. will be publifhet! with at! convenient Speed-
■ F Infra, or Sea Matt, is an animal that grows on other bodies, andfomstimes,but rat eh
adheres by lithe radical tubes to them. The ftem is a membranaceous leaf-like Jubilance con-
fftmg of many rows of cells united together, which fpread out as thy grow, and divide into ’mam
parts-, the whole furface having the appearance of being wove like a matt. It ,ends forth
through the mouth-hke openings of its cells, fuckers or feelers, Jhaped like the frejh-water pipe -
. .eftarefixed at the bottom of each cell. The ovaries appear to be the pearl-like ftuds, which■
Kve find at the top of the cells, J
f The Cellar ta, or Celleferous Coralline, is an animal growing in the form of a plant. The-
ftem is crufaceous, inclining to feme, compofed of rows of cells, for the part jointed and
’“ e tUbeS ' U /‘“ds forth from the little openings of
















A
COMPA NION
TO THE
MUSEUM.
PART II.




A
COMPA NION
TO THE
MUSEUM.
PART II.
MINERALS.
INTRODUCTION.
MINERALOGY being a Rudy of the firft importance to mankind, it is no
wonder that when the European world emerged from Gothic darknefs, this fcience
fhould, among others, begin to attraft the attention of men of genius, defirous of attaining
and diifuling a fpecies of knowledge that had fo eminently for its object the utility of the
human race; and that from the faid period to the prefent time it fliould be continually improv-
ing under the intenfe labours and curious refearches of fuccellive mineralogies. But altho’
fo confiderable a progrefs has been made herein, particularly of late years, much remains
Rill to be done; as it is confeifed on all hands, that there are many fubftances in the foffil
kingdom with which we are totally unacquainted, and others that have been only partiallv
examined. Experiments are, however, continued by the learned with affiduity, and new
difcoveries are daily making ; but it is to be lamented, that in refpeft to the cultivation
of this moll ufeful Rudy, England fliould be fo very far behind other European nations,
efpecially as it is a country which abounds with fubterranean treafures; and as Mr!
Kirovan jußly obferves, in the Preface to his Elements of Mineralogy, “ when we confider the
“ degree of excellence which many of the praftical arts, bufied in the treatment of mine-
rals, have reached in England , and alfo that in the merely fpeculative fciences we are at
** leak on a level with our neighbours on the Continent, it cannot but be matter of furprize,
“ that . with refpea to Mineralogy, the parent of thefe arts, they Ihould Rand confeffedjy
8< fuperior to us. That this inferiority on our fide does not originate in any want of iu-
genuity in our artifts, evidently appears by the mafterly produftions of a Parker and a
“ We^erwood - The true caufe lies deeper : Mineralogy is an art, whole cultivation and
4t improvement requires both fpeculation and pra&ice: the mere theorift will never
Part IL B « defeend


€e defcend into the laborious details of the practical part without das encoUrageitlSM*
Sc or a degree of enthufiafm, in a country devoted to politics rarely to be met with |
i( and the practical artift feldom poffeffes thofe general principles of fcience, and ex*
*< tenfive acquaintance with the difcoveries of his cotemporaries, that are indifpenfable
requifites to eltabliffi him on a footing of equality with them. On the Continent Mine*
t( ralogy is on a very different footing. In Sweden and Germany it is confidered as a
branch of fcience worthy of the attention of government. There are colleges in which
“ it is regularly taught; it forms a diltinCt and honourable profeffion, like that of the
« foldier, the merchant, or the barrifter : its fuperior officers form a part of the admmi*
“ llration of the hate. Young hudents, fraught with the knowledge to be acquired in their
et own country, are fent abroad to glean all that can be collected from a more diversified
view of nature, or a more improved practice of the arts* This example has been lately
e ‘ followed by the French , the Ruffians , and even the Spaniards .
(t The French have ereCted a mineralogical fchool at Paris, to which a confideruble
<( penhon is annexed* Subterraneous maps of the whole kingdom are now tracing, and
i( mineralogical voyages are from time to time undertaken at the public expence. # Che-
t{ mihry, the parent of Mineralogy, is cultivated by the moh enlightened nations in Europe ,
“ and particularly in France* with a degree of ardour that approaches to enthufiafm $
« it forms the favourite occupation, and even the moft fafhionable objedl of attention not
only of the middling, but even of fome in the higheft ranks of fociety.
“ In England, on the contrary, (a country far richer than France in mineral produce
lt tions) it receives no encouragement from the public, and few apply to it except Gentle*
t( men in the medical line, whofe tranfient attention is foon diverted by their more direfl oc-
<c cupations. The confequences are obvious : the groffeft blunders are daily committed
<{ in working our mines, and extracting our ores; infomuch that learned foreigners have re-
tc marked, that were it not for their fuperior excellence, and the cheapnefs of fuel, their
te extraction would infallibly be attended with lofs, q and many ufeful fubltances are daily
<e rejected as ufelefs.’ ,
The Reverend and ingenious Dr. Watfon obferves alfo, in the Preface to his Chemical
Fjjays y that “ Chemiftry ” (which includes the ftudy of Mineralogy) “ is cultivated abroad
“ by perfons of the firlt rank, fortune, and abilities. They find in it a never failing fource
of honourable amufement for their private hours; and, as public men, they confider
fC its cultivation as one of the molt certain means of bringing to their utmoil perfection the
* c manufactures of their country. ”
The Leverian Mufeum being deficient in feveral parts of this particular branch of
natural hiltory, when it came into the hands of the prefent poffeffor, he has, at a very
confiderable expence, greatly enriched this part of the collection with many cnoice, rare,
and interefting fpecimens, to which he is daily making additions, thereby contributing
23
* As that of Mr, Jars,
f FerheV) Rei/s Derhyjhire .


as much as falls within his province to facilitate the iludy of Mineralogy in this country.
The advantages refulting from which are, that the Undent will here fee, at one view,
moil of the bodies which are already noted by authors, thereby avoiding the expence of
collecting, and having an opportunity of infpeCting many of the fubjeCls on a much
larger fcale than it is poifible to have them in any private mufeum. They are faithfully
defcribed according to the bell information that could be procured, though it muft be
confeifed, that it is next to impoffible to convey a requifite idea of feveral of the articles
by the moil exaCt and minute account of them, many of which, however accurately de-
fcribed, ihould be feen, in order to render the defcriptions perfectly intelligible.
The whole are arranged, fo far as their refpeClive fituations in the Mufeum would
admit, according to the moil approved modern authors.
The mineral kingdom is divided by Kirwan, Cronjiedt , &c. nearly as follows :
1. EARTHS and STONES.
2. SALT S.
3 . INFLAMMABLES.
4. METALS.
Each of thefe is again fubdivided in the manner following:
1. EARTH S.
1. The Calcareous. • 5. The Siliceous.
2. The Ponderous, called Barytes. To which Bergman adds,
3. The Magnesian, or Muriatic. 6. The Adamantine, or Earth of the
4. The Argillaceous. Diamond.
2. SALTS.
They are divided by Mr. Kirovan as follows :
CID n r Thefe are fubdivided into a variety of dif-
Alcaline > Salts. s ferent fpecies. See Kirwan and Cron-
Neutral V v Jiedt .
3. INFLAMMABLES.
J ... '
The principal kinds are.
1. Inflammable Air.
2. Hepatic Air.
3. Plumbago, or Black Lead.
4. Mineral Tallow.
5. Ambergris.*
6. Amber.f
B z
7. Rock
* ’This i r fuppofed by fome to belong to the 'vegetable kingdom . See Mhgellan s note in
Crondedt, page 457* Others haue conceited it to be the freces of the fpermaceti whale*
T This is fuppofed , and 'with great appearance of probability , to appertain to the 'vegetable
kingdom ♦ Ibid* /. 461, note [«]. See the remark, /. of this Catalogue .


7. Rock Oft, or Naphtha.
8. Petrgl *
9. Maltha, or Barbadoes Tar.
10. Elastic Petrol. %
11. Fossil Pitch, or Hardened Rock
Oil,
12. Jet.
13. Mineral Phlogiston, united with
different Earths, as Liver-Hone, Coal*
Sec.
14. Sulphur, or Brimstone.
15 Sulphur, united with Metals, &c*
4. M E T A h S.
NOBLE or PERFECT METALS,
1. Gold,
2, Platina.
3. Silver,
4. Mercury, or Quicksilver*
IMPERFECT METALS.
5. Lead.
6. Copper.
7. Iron.
8. Tin..
SEMI-M E T A L S.
9. Bismuth,
to. Nlckel.
11. Arsenic.
12. Cobalt,
13. Zing.
14. Antimony,
15. Manganese,
To which late Difcoveries have added,,
16. Molybdena.
17. Wolfram, or Tongstein,
18. Siderite.
19. Uranite.-
With two or three others, yet but imperfeftly afcertained.
Sax a, or compound Hones, volcanic produ&ions. Sec. are not included by Mr. Cronjiedt
under any of the foregoing heads; he treats of them feparately> by way of appendix.
NATIVE
I This, with other oily comhujiihles , are fuppofed to derive their origin from the vegetable
kingdom . See CronHedt’s Mineralogy, by Magellan, p . 470.


NATIVE FOSSILS, or MINERALS.
Between GLASS CASE X and XI, Apartment V.
t, A Natural Magnet, or Loadftone, *of extraordinary fize, weighing 184 lb. from
Jt JL the Brazils.
1. A. A large Horfe-fhoe artificial Magnet.
2. A capital fpecimenof the Rainbow Feld {path, f rich, in piifmatic colours, from the coafi:
of Labradore. —This is fixed in a moveable mahogany frame, for more readily turning
it to the light, to view its beautiful and diverfified appearances. %
3. A very large and fine flab of the white variety of the flexible micaceous § Sand
Stone, from the Brazils.—This is in a mahogany glafs-cafe, but fo contrived by pro-
jecting part of it thro* the top of the cafe, as that its curious property of bending like a
thin board may be eafily fhown, which, in a fione fufiiciently hard to flrike fire with fteel,
appears very furprizing. |j
4. A capital group of white Quartz Cryftals, (a fpecies of filiceous earth) fpnnkled with
violet cubic fluors, from a lead mine in Were Dale, Durham. This group is remark-
able for being cracked acrofs by fome natural commotion, whilfl in its primitive fituation
in
* The Magnet is cl a fed by authors among the martial ores , as it contains much iron , but
is fuppofed to include other metallic fubftances. Its confiitution has not yet been properly exa-
mined; and the caufe of its wonderful property of atraliingiron, &c. is intirely unknown*
Kirwan, p. 271, fpec. 3, and Cronfledc’s Mineralogy, p, 737.
4 This is catted by authors Rhombic Quartz, and by fome is placed among the filiceous earths ;
others clafs it as a Barytes, It has the firft name from its figure when found cryftallized ,
which is that of a rhomb. The term Feld-fpath is adopted from the Germans, with whom
the word Feld fignifies a Field, and likewife a compartment , or regular furface. Thus Feld-
fpath means a fpar compofed of little compartments of rhombic or other figures. J. R. Forder.
Some tranfiate it Wild or Mountain Spar.
J It is but a few years ago (12 or 15) that this beautiful fione began to be known in
Fur ope. It is brought from the coafi of Labradore , where the Moravians, who have a colony
among the Ffquitnaux, firfi difcovered it. See a farther defcription of it in Cronfledt s Mi-
neralogy, by Magellan, p. 199, where it is placed among the filiceous earths.
§ Having in its compartments many particles of mica , or fp angle fione. See p. 66.
jj This fione has not as yet been deferibed by any author , Magellan excepted , It is men-
tioned in his C err ell ions and Additions > folio 54, of the Preface, &c.


in the earth, and the parts afterwards connected by the formation of the cubic fluors and
-cryftals of galena, or folid lead ore. The bafe is a pale amethyftine fluor, in which is a*
globular piece of iron ore.
5. A very large fpecimen of glolfy black cryftallized Blend, or Speltre ore, fprinkled with
pearly rhombic barytes, and here and there a cryftal of lead ore, fome fpar, &c. from a
lead mine at Kefwick in Cumberland. *
6. A capital fpecimen of Galena, formed in very large truncated f cubes, with cryftallized
blend and final! quartz cryftals intermixed, the whole partly over-run by a dalagmitical or
drop-done fpar ; from a lead mine on Alllon Moor, Cumberland.
7. A fpecimen of Galena, of extraordinary fize, weighing 263 pounds, from Derbyfhire.
8. A large polilhed flab, formed of a group of white and ferrugineous, or rufty, cubic fluors,
exhibiting curious triangular fhaped figures, owing to particular feCtions of the cubes,
from Derbyfhire.
GLASS CASE XL
MARCASITES. J
1. Cubic Marcafites, from Saxony and other countries
2. Small cubic Marcafites, from Cornwall.
3. Large and fine cubic Marcafites, with columnar rock cryftal, from ditto.
4. A botryoid or grape-like aflemblage of cubic Marcafites, on the fide of a columnar
rock cryftal, from ditto.
5 . Cubic Marcafites with fpars on lime-ftone, in whichagryphites or beaked oyfter is imbed-
ded, from the Blue Lodge Quarry, near Bath.
6. Cubic Marcafites on cauk, from EClon copper mine. In Staffordfhire.
7. Ditto, much interfered, with blend and fpar, on § cauk, from Derbyfhire.
8. Small cubic Marcafites in black date, from the vicinity of Dublin, commonly called Irifh
Diamonds. Thefe are manufactured into buttons and other ornaments, &c. yet pre-
ferving the natural form of the marcafites, which are very brilliant, particularly by
candle-light.
9. Smaß
* The Blend is an ore of zinc.
A dice-like figure, having the corners as it were cut off.
I Thefie are hy Cronfledt placed among the infiamjnahle fubfiances, they being a compound of
fulphur, which is the mofi prevailing part, with metals of various kinds, principally iron.
The finer kinds are often cut andpolijhed as the gems are, and, like them, worn by way of ornament.
§ A term ufed by the miners in Derbyjhlre for a fpecies of barytes , perhaps corrupted from
cork, which it fometimes refembksi.


9, Small cubic Marcafites in little round groups, on a feptarium, from Sheepy Ifiand, Kent.
so. A very large and fine cubic Marcafite, with a ferrugineous coat, faid to come from
China. - The fame kind is brought from Peru, and called by the Spaniards Piedra
del Ynca, or the Royal Stone.*
11. Marcafite polifhed.
12. Marcafites of an irregular figure on cauk and fpar> from E£lon Mine, Staffordfiiire.
13. Ditto, beautifully coloured, from ditto.
14. Marcafites in large cryfials of an irregular figure, on a group of rock cryfials, from
Cornwall.
15. Marcafites in minute angulated cryfials, on a group of quartz cryfials, from the HartZb
16. Ditto on brown rhombic barytes, and quartz cryfials, from ditto.
17. Coloured Marcafites, with a fcabrous or rough furface, feeming to be a congeries or
duller of fmall truncated cubes, greatly interfered, or running one into another, from
Cornwall.
sB. Plated and Cockfcomb yellow Marcafites with fpars, on a group of cubic fiuors, from
Derbylhire.
19. Small tefiellated, or dice-like, Marcafites on the furface of a group of cubic fiuors,
from Derbylhire.
20. Small Marcafites in truncated cubes on a group of cauk> fpar, &c. from E<Slon Mine*
Staftbrdlhire.
21. Marcafites Of 14 fides, each being a truncated cube, on a Calcareous or lime fione,
from Sheepy Ifland, Kent.
22. Polilhed cubic Fiuors, with internal marcafites, forming veins on the furface, from
Derby fibre.
23. Group of large cubic Fiuors, having marcafites within them, from ditto.
24. Cockfcomb Marcafites, feveral fpeeimens varioufiy combined with cubic fiuors, fpars.j
blend, &c. from ditto.
35. Marcafites in double quadrilateral pyramids, joined bale to bafs, with the points trun~
cated, or feemingly cut off, making cryfials of 14 fides, v/ith fpars, &c. on lime-fione,
from the vicinity of Bath.
26. Minute oftoedml or eight-fided Marcafites* in a ftaladitical, or icicle-like, group on
quartz, from Cornwall.
27. Bright tefiellated Marcafites with white nummular, or money-like, twelve-fided fpars,
and lead ore, from Were Dale in the bilhoprick of Durham.
28. Caft of a bivalve fliell in lime-fione frofted with fmall Marcafites of like figure with
N° 25, from a quarry near Bath.
29. A very bright exoddoedral or fourteen-fided Marcafite, from Cornwall.
30. A large fpecimen of folid Marcafite, with a Aiming furface, formed by multitudinous
congeries of minute cubes, greatly interfered, from ditto.
3 1* A
* See Cronfiedt’s Mineralogy, by Magellan, /. 497, fett. 254, ii


31. A group of large twenty-four-fided fpars, having internal {pars coated with marcafites
of an irregular figure, from Eflonmine, Staffordftiire.
32. The like kind of Marcafites, forming a coat on the furface of an hexagonal pyramid of a
{par, which is faturated or filled with marcafites in fmall {piculs, or needle-like figures#
from ditto.
33. A large cubic Marcafite {lightly truncated, with feveral lefier ones of the like figure,
* having quartz intermixed, from a copper mine in Cornwall.
34. A group of Marcafites of like figure, from Derbyfhire.
33. Another from Cornwall.
36. A group of cubic Marcafites, from ditto.
37. A duller of tefiellated Marcafites, the corners of fome of which arc {lightly trun-
cated, from ditto.
38. Ditto, finely coloured, with peacock copper ore, quartz and white day, from ditto.
39. Marcafites in truncated cubes, greatly interfered, with double-pointed {pars on a rude
mafs of plated cauk, which with the fpars are tinged of a rufiy colour ; from a lead mine
in Derby {hire.
40. Groups of exoftoedral Marcafites, with quartz, from Cornwall.
41. Ditto, in a ftala&itical form, from ditto.
42. The like figured Marcafites, in abotryoid form, from ditto.
43. Ditto, finely coloured, from ditto.
44. Marcafite in a brecciated* afh-coloured and purple flone, from Edon mine, Stafford-
{hire. This has been polifhed.
43. Specimen of fpar with intejnal Marcafites, from ditto, and alfo polilhed.
46. Dodecaedral or twelve-fided Marcafites, from Germany.
47. Exodoedral Marcafites, from Cornwall,
48. A group of cubic Fluors, interiorly and exteriorly fprinkled with marcafites of an in-
determinate figure, and partly coated with minute cubic marcafites. There is alfo fome
cryftallized galena combined with the fluors, from Derbyfliire.
49. A Group of dark purple cubic Fluors, coated with very fmall cubic marcafites, from ditto.
50. A group of white cubic Fluors, fprinkled with fmall marcafites of an indeterminate
figure, and combined with cryftallized galena, from ditto.
31. A polilhed Fluor, which being clear, internal cubes fprinkled with marcafites may be
plainly feen, from ditto.
32. Small dark coloured Marcafites, of an exodoedral figure, on a group of white quartz
cryflals, from the Earl of Hopetoun’s mines at the Lead Hills, Scotland; found after an
explofion by the miners, 120 fathoms deep.
53* Bright
* This term is adopted from the Italians , who mean by it any kind offt one , the ground of
which is of an uniform colour, and whofe fpots are as it were pieces of other fanes inlaid or ft
into it .


0
53’ Bright yellow Marcafites in final! irregular figures on a group of white cubic fluors,
from Leicefterftiire.
r 4. Plated Marcafites in a ftalaaidcal form, from Cornwall.^
55. Rofes, or finall groups of minute cubic Pyrits, on part of an ammonites, or make none,
from Gloucefterlhire.
56. Marcafite in coal, from Northumberland. , _
57 Very bright exoaoedral Marcafites, combined with violet cubic fluors, from Cornwall,
SS. Brilliant exodoedral Marcafites much mterfeding each other, on a micaceous fiate,
from ditto. # -
59. Cubic Marcafites combined with aqua marine and violet cubic fiaors and rock cry it a is,
60. Minute cubic Marcafites, partly covering the furface of a group of violet cubic fluors,
combined with white quartz cryftals, from Were Dale, Durham.
61. Marcafites in fmall cubes, fome of them very minute, intermixed with brilliant white
quartz cryftals, on the furface of a group of cubic fluors, of a gray colour, tinted with
aquamarine; the bafe of which Is fprinkled with white nummular twelve-fided fpars,
from Durham. _ .
62. Solid Marcafite, the furface formed into a multitudinous botryoid congeries of minute
cubes, on copper ore and quartz, from Cornwall.
GLASS CASE XII.
FLUOR S. *
1. White cubic Fluors, various fpecimens, either in feparate groups or combined with lead
ore, fpar, blend, &c. from Derbylhire.
1 A. Ditto, polifiied.
2. Violet cubic Fluors on a group of fpars, from ditto.
3. Ditto, fprinkled with marcafites on cauk and fpar, from ditto.
4. Pale amethylline cubic Fluors with cry ftallizea lead ore, from auto.
5 . Amethyftine cubic Fluors of all gradations of colour from pale to almoft black, out of a
*pit on the fide of a hill near Caftleton in Derbylhire. This is the principal fione made
ufe of in the vafes, obelifks, ,&c. the manufacture of that county.
■56, Varieties of ditto polifhed.
- . Violet Fluors in diftina cubes on a group of quartz cryftals, whofe bafe is a group of
greenifti fluors in large cubes, from the Biftioprick of Durham. [This article is placed
in Cafe XIII, for want of room here ]
Part 11.
c
8- Yel!ow
* Theft bodies, which are phofphorefcent, or in the dark when heated, have their
name from their being ufeful in promoting the fufion of lead ores, veins they generally
accompany, for which it is a fluor, or fiux, and therefore as much valued by as
berax is by the ajayers. They are placed among the calcareous earths, do not ferment
with acids like fpars ; however, they are not hard enough to frir.e f e with feeh See
Cronflsdt’s Mineralogy, 40 —45*


8. Yellow cubic Fluors, from Derbyfhire.
9. Ditto, with a ferrugineous coat, from ditto.
10. Yellow cubic Fluors, having the edges bevelled, or as it were Hoped off, from ditto.
11. Topazine cubic Fluors, from Wales.
12. Ditto, with cryftallized blend, from Derby (hi re.
13. Small groups of clear violet cubic Fluors, from Durham, f
14. Another, having a topazine tint, from ditto.
15. Amethyftine Fluor, in large cubes, from ditto.
16. Ditto, combined with white quartz cryftals, from ditto.
17. Ditto, of a darker complexion and fmooth furface, ftudded with fmall brilliant
double-pointed cryftals, from ditto.
iS. A capital group of amethyftine Fluors in very large cubes, whofe furfaces are entirely
coated with white quartz cryftals, from ditto.
19. Gray cubic Fluors, much intorfe&ing each other, from Derbyfhire.
20. Gray cubic Fluors, combined with lead ore, blend, andfpars, from ditto.
21. Pale violet and yellowilh cubic Fluors intermixed, combined with cryftallized galena,
from ditto.
22- Dark coloured amethyftine cubic Fluors, from the neighbourhood of Matlock Bath,
Derbyfhire.
23. Purple cubic Fluors, partly coated with brown rhombic barytes, from Durham.
24. Greenifti cubic F'luors, highly faturated with marcafttes, and combined with cryftal-
lized blend, from Derbyfhire.
25. Groups of greenifh cubic Fluors, with the edges bevelled, one of them froftcd with
fpars, and combined with lead ore, from ditto.
26. Group of white cubic Fluors, having internal cubes, fprinkled with marcafttes, from
ditto.
27. Poliihed flab, formed of a group of brown cubic. Fluors, combined with a flefh-colour’d
cauk, from ditto.
28. Green Fluor, from Cornwall.
29. Aqua marine cubic Fluors, ftudded and combined with brilliant quartz cryftals, from
Durham.
30. Cubic Fluors of a greenifti tint, formed on cockfcomb marcafttes, which are viftble
through the cubes, and partly over-run with white fpars ; from Derbyfhire.
31. Gray cubic Fluors, combined with fpars of a like colour, and both interiorly and
exteriorly fprinkled with marcafttes ; from Leicefterfhire.
32. Violet cubic Fluors, partly coated with minute marcafttes, from ditto.
33 A group of cubic Fluors, of a pale violet colour, on a thin black mine ftone, the other
ftde of which is covered with fpars ; from Eyam, in Derbyfhire,
34, Pale
f The Durham Jiucrs are as capable of being formed into ornamental and ufeful articles as
the Derbyjhire ones } but have been little attended to%


34* violet cubic Fluors, with lead ore and fpars, from ditto.
3) • Cubic Fluors of a dark a (hen colour, with fpars, &c. from ditto.
36. Large amethyfline cubic Fluors, with white quartz cryflals, (mailer amethyfline
cubic fluors, and cryflallized galena on the furface ; from Durham.
37. Cubic Fluors of a deep amethyfline colour, from ditto.
38. Ditto, having their edges (lightly bevelled, from ditto.
39. White cubic Fluors, with a fcabrous furface, combined with galena and cryftallized
blend ; from Derbyshire.
40. Pale amethyfline cubic Fluors with cryflallized galena, from Durham.
41. Daik violet cubic Fluors, clouded with white, and (lightly fprinkled with marcafltes,
formed on a group of aqua marine cubic fluors, having fome galena in it; from ditto.
42. A large group of dark violet Cubic Fluors, partly fprinkled with minute exodoedral
cryflals of galena, on an aqua marine fluor; from ditto.
43. A green Fluor, formed in well denned cubes, coated with a green argillaceous or
clay-like matter, and prettily grouped on the furface of fmall white quartz cry flab,
the bafe of which is a mine (lone, containing fome filvery micte ; from ditto,
GLASS CASE XIIL
BARYTES, or PONDEROUS EARTH.*
m
1. White pearly rhombic Barytes, varioufly combined with lead ore, blend, cryflals, &c.
from lead mines on Alflon Moor, Cumberland.
2. Brown rhombic Barytes, with cryflals, lead ore, blend, &c, from ditto.
3. Ditto, fmall and much interfered; forming globofe figures on a group of laroe
amethyfline cubic fluors, from a lead mine in Were Dale, Durham.
4. Blue Feldfpath, combined with a white opaque quartz, or rough cryflal, and filvery
micas, from the Electorate of Triers.
5. Prifmatic or Rainbow Feldfpath, of feveral moft vivid and beautiful colours, from
the coaft of Labradore, pcliflied. 4
5 A. An onachme or flraight-veined Feldfpath, of a brilliant yellow colour, edged with
blue and green, from ditto, and alfo polilhed.
6. White plated cauk, of a globofe (hape, and varioufly combined with pellucid or
dear white and other cubic fluors, lead ore, blend, marcafite, &C. from lead mines in
Derbyflure.
7. Ditto, fpnnklea with irregularly figured grains of mundic or marcafite, from Eton
copper mine, Staffordfliire.
2
8% Yellow
* For an account of this newly-difcovered earth, fir ft noticed by Dr . William Withering,
vf Birmingham, fee Cronftedt’s Mineralogy, by Magellan,B4.
4 See the note at p, 59, No, 2.


8. Yellow plated Cauk, on purple cubic fluors, from Derbylhire.
g . Globofe plated Cauk, of a ferrugineoua colour, with yellow cubic fluors, lead ore, &c.
from a lead mine near Caftleton, in Derbylhire. _ - . f
10. Gray plated Cauk, fprinkled and combined with minute cubic fluors, fpars, &c. „om
a lead mine at Alhover, near Matlock, Derbylhire,
11. White Cauk, combined with quartz crystals* from Derbylhire.
12. Flefli-colcured plated cauk, fprinkled with mundic, from tne Haitz Foie., in
l Barytes, on a group of quartz Cryftals, fprinkled with minute balls of fome
mineral, probably iron ; from ditto. Uu fmm dii-to
14 placed Barytes, coated with minute marcautes, on a Drown rhomb • y > ‘ *
!A curiot/Barytes, of a pale brown colour, in final! rhombic cryftals, combined in a
ramofe or branched form ; from a lead mine in Lancafture.
36. Brown wood-like Cauk, from Derbythir...
■j *7 "Oitro noliihed, from citto. r r *
iB. White Barytes, in fiat rhombic cry dais, with iron ore, on. a group Ox errugmeou
quartz cryftals, from Hungary* . . ir-flmrtrplinil
tO. A capital fpecimen of white clear tabular Barytes from a lead mine in W e-tmore.a . .
~ Another larger with brown fpars on its farface, from ditto.
t. Whim tabular Barytes, combined with galena m large oftoedral cryftals, whofe points
in which the cryftals are laid very flat, and much blended'
Creintcobmed tabular Barytes, in final! cryftals, formed in rofes or rounded.
-, U K a Sh^^2:;4pearin g as if partly decompofed, from ditto.
C- Stellated or ftar-like Cauk, from the neighbourhood ofMatlock Bath, Derbylhire.
p o lilh e d fpecimens of Cauk of various colours, fome of them combined with fluors and.
other minerals, from Derbylhire. _
I*’ with white quartz and black miew, from Cathannenberg,
*-bk Barytes, iron *» b, .1. Germans, combined mi.h
ofao indeterminate Bgure,
the Hartz. „ „ , >
2 5.. A curious tabular opaque Barytes, of a yellow colour, from
MIC;®,


MIC JE, or SPANGLE STONES.
19. Mies, in Sat or tabular hexagonal cryftals, combined with purple cub.c fluors, fithn
Zinwald, in Bohemia.
»r cIoMy »«
<t7 *“ or b, “ “
' ftone, polifhed ; from the fide of Mount .Etna, m SicJy.
3 3. Green Mies, mixed with white quartz, from the Englifh coaft.
*4. Greenilh brown Mica;, from *
3;. A curious undulated micaceous ftone _£ f In LancaMre.
36. Mica Argentea, Silvery Mica, in white quartz , fromiWigan. in ft , ata
37. Black cryftallized Mies, combined with quartz and feldfpa.h, .
or layers ; from
GYPSiE, or PLASTER STONES.*
•38. An undulated ftriated Gypfum, from Skertonbeck Cliff, near York..
39 A poll (bed Selenite's, from Germany.
- - Uie fait works at Whitchurch, in
42 C Atngeries of clear white Selenit* in long prlfms, on a gypfeous ftone, from Mat-
Gypfum, on a yellow flatter ftone„from the fame place.,
where it is called Snow Foflil.
44. A capital fpeclmen of ditto, very fine, from ditto.
43. White capillary or hair-like Gypfum, from ditto. 1 ~,(, ades 3 th
IA. Variegated § Alabafter, from Chelafton m Derbyftnre. - The baluftrades
Rotunda of the Lhverian Museum, are formed of this kind ot uon
45 B-
* r »r.m i<a calcareous earth, combined -with vitriolic acid. It is not affeSled by acids,.
ttLS£X. tX. «■ r“-s ***■ *
&c. Floors are frequently made of the fame fubjiance. ,
§ The Italians call the various kinds of factual /pars by f tas,
~ } .A.,.. f L pv ferment with acids, and burn to tune , the error >
which are no ways gypjeous, as they jermem
however,, been adopted from them by feme modern waters .


45 B. Akbafter of the fame kind, from Belleton Hills, five miles from Derby. ’
45 C. Ditto, from Red Hill, Leicefterlhire. }
45 D. Ditto, (on the outfide of the cafe) from Red Hills, Nottinghamlhire. This is the
2mS£“ Thecl the - Upe ;: b ? lumns are made thst Lord Scarfdale’s Hal
at Kedlefton. The columns in the L E v E ri AN Museum are from the fame quarries.
s P A R s. t
46 dots S tood,°rS rg 'V wh!t 7 nd >' dlow hexagonal pyramids, commonly called
Ah™ I f n f ° me °J J hen * Icoated 1 coated Wlth a ferrugineous mineral; from Derbylhire.
cetrihfre Free " ft ° ne ’ lined with hexa S onal Spars, from Glou-
-43. A Stalagmites, from the great natural cave called the Devil’s Peak, near Caftleton,
in Derbylhire. *
CRYSTALS. J
49. A large group of fmall opaque white Quartz Cryftals, combined with blend and ga-i
lena, both of them cryftallized ; from Allton Moor, Cumberland.
GLASS CASE XIV. and XV.
ZEOLITES.*
i» Lapis Lazuli, from the Buchanan Calmucks.
1 A. from Gambaroon, in Perfia, laft from Italy, where it is called Antique Ori-
ental Lapis Lazuli, and is found among the ancient ruins.
2. Ditto, from the Ihores of the lake Bakal, in Siberia.
3 . Glafs made in imitation of Lapis Lazuli, from Italy, found among the ancient ruins.
4. White cryftallized Zeolites, fpars, marcafite, and red filver ore, from the Sampfon
mine, near Andrealberg, in the Hartz. r
5. White and red cryftallized Zeolites, with white and topazine fpars, coloured by yei-
low and red arfenic ; from ditto. / / •
SILICES,
hy calcareous earths > and burn i 0 lime - Cronftcdt’s Mineralogy,
J ‘ ! \ aoUl ° rfiinty earth ’ ™ hich readi b ftrike fire with fieel.
Cronftedt s Mineralogy, by Magellan, f. 120.
,hSarSiUa:mS ° r claj ‘ j Cronlledt’s Mineralogy,


SILICES. f Most of them polished.
i. FLINTS.
6. A common Flint broke in two, the black and white parts of which not unaptly re-
ferable a bird in the aftion of flying ; from a chalk pit in Kent.
7. Common Flint, of a light colour, the veins of which referable a human figure ; from
Kent.
8. An Aitites, or Eagle Stone, a hollow Flint, with chalk or fome other fubfiance within
it, which rattles ; from ditto.
2. JASPERS.
9. Purple and white veined Jafper, from the Marquifate of Baden-Durlach, in the circle
of Swabia, in Germany.
10. Black and white veined Jafper, from the Englifh coafi.
11. Pyed Jafper, from Baden-Durlach.
12. Striped and veined Jafper, from ditto.
13. Green and black brecciated Jafper, from ditto.
13 A. Brindled red and white Jafper, from ditto.
13 B. Brecciated dark red and yellow Jafper, from ditto.
14. Red Jafper, intermixed with cryflials, from ditto.
15. Variety of Jafpers, of different colours.
15 A. Green Jafper, from
16. Green Jafper with red fpots, commonly called Blood-flone, the Heliotropium of the
ancients, from the Eafi Indies.
17. Striped red and green, or ribband Jafper, from Catharinenberg, in Siberia.
18. Red firiped Jafper, from the Eafl Indies.
19. Beautiful red and yellow firiped Jafper, from Saxony.
20. Red firiped Jafper, very fine, from ditto.
21. Green and black firiped Jafper, from
22. Clouded red and yellow Jafper, from Sicily.
23. Yellow Jafper, veined with clear agate, from ditto-
-24. Red Jafper, with white veins, from ditto.
25. Striped green and brown Jafper, a kind of blood-fione, from Catharinenberg, in
Siberia.
26. Sinople, or variegated red and white Jafper, from ditto,
26 A. Brecciated black and white Jafper, from Italy,
2* FEB*
f Called hy authors Siliceous or Flinty Earths , They do not ferment with acids , and rea*
dily fir ike fire with JteeU


3- PEBBLES.
27. Varieties of the Egyptian Pebble.
28. An Egyptian Pebble of extraordinary fize, curloufly variegated.
29. Another, whofe veins and fpots refemble a man with a fool’s cap on.
30. Another with a curious lufus naturae in It, reprefenting a head of a P.oman emperorV
30 A. An Englifh Pebble, the fpots in which refemble a man’s head,
3i. Variety of Pebbles found in places near London.
32 , Ditto, whofe veins and flripes refemble thofe of Wood.
33 A. Ditto, from Adkrington, the feat of the late Sir Afliton Lever, near Manchefter.
33. Pebbles from Hampftead Heath.
34. Ditto, from Hertfordlhire.
35. A beautiful variegated Pebble, from Oberflein, in the Palatinate.
36. Another, very large.
37. Varieties of plumb-pudding flones, from Hertfotdfhire. Thefe are congeries of peb-
bles, naturally cemented in one mafs by a filiceous matter, and are peculiar to England,
but rarely met with out of Hertfordlhire. They are diftinguilhed by the colour of the
ground or cement, as white, yellow, red, Sec. the red is fcarce.
38. A curioully veined Pebble, from Staffordlhire.
4. CHALCEDONIES.
39. Varieties of beautifully veined and clouded Chalcedonies of the mod lively colours,
fome of them with the outer furface covered with quartz crydals, which in their origi-
nal date condituted the lining of a cave at Oberdein in the Palatinate, from whence
they were broken, and afterwards ground down and polilhed by water mills at that
place.
40. Chalcedony of a blueifh colour, with feldfpath, quartz and micae, from the Johannes
mine, near Schneeberg in Saxony.
41. Brown Chalcedony, or bubbled flint, found near London.
42. Stala&itical ditto in a hollow pebble, ditto.
43. Chalcedony with cryftals, from Oberflein.
44. White Chalcedony in fmall globules, which are entirely covered with minute quartz
cryflals, formed on a group of coloured cryftallized blend, among which is a little
galena ; from Alflton Moor, Cumberland.
45. Part of a nodule of faphirine Chalcedony, with a cryflal centre, from Catharinenberg,
in Siberia. '
5. A GATE S.
‘ 46. Varieties of Agates of different colours, many of them beautifully veined and clouded,
fome refembling fOrdflcatidns ; from Scotland. —They are got out of tne rocks in Abei-
deenlhire, in which they are naturally imbedded in fmall nodules, or bails.
46 A. 1


46 A. Very (mall nodules of Agate, in their native bed, a kind of rock-jfione, from ditto.
47. Onyx, or ftraight-veined Agates, from ditto.
48. Specimens of Agates in great variety, as well in refpeft to colours as veins, fpots,
&c. from Saxony, and the Palatinate, principally from the rocks near Oberrtein in the
latter country. Many of thefe have their native coat or cruft with which all agates are
naturally inverted.
48 A. Agate with a ramified fubrtance within, refembling mofs, from Germany.
49. Cryftal and Agate within a red chalcedonic coat, from Oberrtein.
50. A large and beautiful Agate with fpar and cryftal in its centre, from Saxony.
51. Part of an Agate nodule ot extraordinary fize, with a cryftalline centre, from Ober*.
rtein.
52. A plate cut from a beautiful nodule, the middle of which is a blue veined Agate,
between which and the cruft is white cryftal, from Oberrtein.
53* Agates with fortification-like veins, from ditto.
54. Eyed Agates, from ditto.— Their refemblance to eyes is owing to the manner of
cutting them.
55* Jafpachates, or Agate combined with jafper, from ditto.
56. Broken Agate, from Saxony. ■— This is very curious; it feems to be a number of
fragments of an Agate that has been fhattered, and the parts feparated by fome natural
convulfion, * and which were afterwards cemented together, while in the earth, (in
like manner with the iinghlh plumb-pudding ftone) by the intervention of filiceous
matter.
57. Jad Stone, from China.
58. Varieties of oriental Agates, fome of them with fortification-like veins.
59. Specimens of a fine kind of Agate, from Arabia Felix, commonly called Mocho-ftone.
A very large ditto, moll beautifully clouded and veined, and enriched with dark
brown dendritae, or trees.
61. Carnellons, varloufly clouded, veined and driped, from Falkland’s Wands.
62. White Carnelion, from the Eaft Indies.
62 A. White Carnelion, clouded with yellow and red, from ditto.
6 3. Red Carnelion, from ditto.
64 ’ewellerT CarUelion ’ from ditto ’ ~ This is alfo called the Eeryll by
65. Red Carnelion, from Catharinenberg, in Siberia.
66. Sardonyx Agate, from the Eaft Indies.
67. Ditto, with a cryftalline centre, from ditto.
Part 11,
D
68. A
• That fuch revolutions happen under-ground is certain from the account given of a curious
mineral, called Shckeiifides, hereafter mentioned in this Catalogue. 1


68i A fcarce whitifh yellow Pitch-Hone, which breaks with a ihining furface, from Altay
in Siberia.
69. Bright fpotted red Pitch-Hone, from ditto.
70* Red and yellow Pitch-Hone, which breaks with a dull furface, and adheres to the
tongue, from ditto.
71. Lapis Nephriticus, the Nephritic Stone, fo called from its being formerly worn as an
antidote in nephritic complaints, and for which purpofe it is now much eHeemed in
China ; from
72. Nephritic Stone, from Pruffia.
73. Nephritic Stone, from Tovy Poenammoo, the fouthern divilion of New Zealand,
which country takes its name from this Hone, which is there called Poenammoo, or
the ear-drop Hone* See Parkinfons Voyage round the World, page 93, 120, and 127 ;
and Hawkef-worth’s Voyages , nsol, 2, page 400* A ‘variety of chijjels and other tools ,
made of this kind of fone, may he feen in Glafs-cafe 2, in the South Sea room .
DENDRITjE, or Tree-like Delineations in Stones, the Effect of
Mineral Salts •
74. Varieties of Tree-like appearances of feveral colours in agate, from different parts
of Germany. Thefe are named by the lapidaries German Mochos.
75. A great variety of Dendritas of yellow, red, brown, and black colours, in agate, from
the Eaft They are called by the jewellers, &c. Oriental Mochos.
6. CRYSTALS.
76. A group of white quartz Cry Hals (by which is meant fuch cry Hals as have little or no
column) from a lead mine on AlHon Moor, Cumberiand.
77. Ditto, formed on a group of cubic fluors with lead ore, from Were Dale, Durham.
78. A group of white quarts Cry Hals, with cryHallized blend, from Cumbeiland.
79. Another, very large.
So. A mafs of gray quartz Cry Hals, from ditto.
So A - Another, with copper ore and marcafites, from Anglefey. This is curious from the
manner of its formation.
Bf, White quartz Cry Hals, from Wales.
82. Ditto, from
83. Ditto, on iron Hone and fpar, from the lime-Hone quarries near BiiHol.
84. Gray quartz Cry Hals, from ditto.
84. A hollow Hint lined with fmall white quartz Cry Hals, from a chalk pit in Kent.
86. Yellow quartz Cry Hals, from Were Dale, Durham.
87. Ditto on amethyHine cubic Huors, from ditto.
88. White and gray quartz Cry Hals on flint, from a chalk pit in Surry.
89- Brown quartz Cry Hals on iron ore, from St, Vincent’s Rock, BriHol. .


£D. Red quartz Cryftals on iron ore, from ditto. — The colour in thefe is owing to are
or yellow iron ochre within the body of the cryftal.
gi. Yellow quartz Cryftals on iron ore, from ditto.
g i A. Red quartz Cryftals, from Devonftiire.
92. A group of white Cryftals, formed on a group of cubic floors, which have been decom*
pofed, leaving their impreflions in the quartz, from Durham.
93 A hollow ball with a red flinty coat, lined with gray quartz Cryftals and yellow fpar,
from King’s Wefton, Gloucefterfliire. ~ „ r , ... .. * , .
94. Orbicular groups of quartz cryftals, found loofe within balls Ox the like kind, or bu
llightly attached to their fides. rll . . ...
93. A group of white quartz Cryftals, with minute particles of b*ack iron ore within
them, found between Buxton and Caftleton, in Derbylhiie.
96. A pale red quartz Cryftal, of a large ftze, from
07. A hollow Agate, lined with gray cryftals, from Oberftem, in the Palatinate.
98. White opaque Agate, or chalcedony, lined with yellow and red jafper, the inner fur ace
of which is fet with gray quartz cryftals, from ditto. ,
no. White columnar or rock Cryftals, and groups of ditto, from Cornwall, of which there
are various fpecimens, from very clear ones to quite opaque, and of different flzes ; fome
of them combined with cubic marcafttes, copper ore, and other minerals j from the copper
and tin mines in Cornwall.
100. White columnar Cryftals, and groups of ditto, feme of them very clear, and of various
fees, from the Glacieres, or Icey Mountains, in Switzerland.
1 01. A fine group of clear white rock Cryftals, varioufty interfefting each other, from
Dauphiny in France,
icz. Brown rock Cryftals, from Bohemia.
103. Ditto, cut and poliftied.
104. A Snuff-box, formed of clear white rock cryftal.
103. A rude group of rock Cryftals, very much debafed by its combination with an ochreous
matter and green fnirl, from Breitenbrunn in Saxony.^
106. A group of rock Cryftals on lead and copper ore, from
107. A white pebble Cryftal, originally a rock or columnar cryftal, but worn into its
prefent ftiape by the addon of the water in its paffage from the mountains to the bed of
the river ; from the Brazils.
108. Another, with beautiful prifmatic colours within it, from ditto.
100. Another, with curious internal appearances, fuppofed to be owing to fldh-coloured
micae, from ditto.
nc. A red quartz or cryftal Pebble, much refembling the avanturine ftone, from
111. A rock Cryftal, highly impregnated with tin ore, from a tin mine in Cornwall.
112*. A capital and extremely valuable fpecimen (by much the largeft in Europe) of the
true Avanturine Stone, being a red quartz, highly impregnated with brilliant golden micas.
D 2 This


This curious article was found in the ruins of the triumphal arch of Julius Ctefar in the
valley of Safe in Piedmont, in 1788, by the Sieur Francis Ludwig, of Maye'nce, in
Germany. It a very high polifh, and is much harder and infinitely more beauti-
ful than the Itone commonly known by the fame name. *
■ n . . ~ - - 113 Spe-
SIR,
“ The Quartz Avanturine that you have been fo obliging as to let me fee, merits,
by its beauty , the utmoft attention of the amateurs, 1 have never feen one yet which refembles
more the artificialglafs , known by the na?ne of Avanturine,
I am, SIR,
I iennt, lifh May, 1790. Tour very obedient Servant,
J. BORNE.”
<r I perfectly coincide with thefentiments of my friend Mr, le Chevalier Borne,
that it is a laminatedfer rug i neons quartz, of the colour of the came lion, abundantly impreg-
nated with copper-coloured tnica.which , by the intimate mixture and the different pofition *of
the particles, appears to have produced the natural Avant urine •
Freyberg, \th June, 1790. DE CHARPENTIER ”
“ 1 have feen with the great eft pleafure the large fpeci7nen of red-coloured quartz,
mixed with micas, belonging to Mr, le Counfellor Ludwig, and which throws great light on the
true origin of the Avant urine. It is an unique piece, both on account of its fize and beauty,
Cologne on the Rhine, B th Aug, 1790. BARON DE HUPSCH.”
" un der-figned at t efts never to have feen a quartz mixed with mica, offuch
fize and beauty. It is ufually called Avanturine,
Dr. CHARLES HENRI TITIUS,
Drefaen, yh July, 1790. Infpeftor of his S, H, the E led or of Saxony's
Cabinet of Natural Hiftory
“ As
The artificial Avanturine has been known for ages, fpecimem of it being frequently found
among the antiem rums at Rome, Some eminent miner alogifts have doubted the ex'fence of fuch
a beautifulftone as the natural Avanturine ; but the following refpeaable authorities put the
matter beyond a doubt. They are tranftatedfrom the originals, and addrefed to Monf, Ludwig,
of May ence, to whom the ftone originally belonged.


113. Specimens of the antlent artificial Avanturine Stone. This is a combination of golden
micac with glafs, from Rome. 6
113 A. Specimen of the modern ditto, from Venice.
114. A large brown rock Cryltal, probably impregnated with tin ore, from Bohemia.
115. Rofe-coloured Quartz, or rough Cryltal, very fcarce, from Altay in Siberia.
116. A large broad columnar Cryltal, found in marie, near Lyme in Chelhire, anno 1760.
1 17. Group of white and yellow quartz Cryltals, from North America.
118. A group of three rock Cryltals, from South Carolina.
119. Various fpecimens of cut Cryltals.
120. White columnar rock Cryltals, with dark-coloured rock cryltals (probably owing their
co our to an admixture of iron ore) fome of them double-pointed ; from Mount Caucafus
in Ferfia.
12 1. Complete or double-pointed Cryltals, from Lancalhire.
122. Ditto, from Carthagena.
123. White and red complete Cryftals, from Buxton in Derby (hire, commonly called Bu*.
ton diamonds. ?
, , AS .‘ l *f ahuS amateur °f I‘thology, and pofefor of a fufciently compleat col-
leJton, I think it incumbent upon me to declare, that I never have feen an of a
beauty fo perfect, andfize fo uncommon, as that belonging to Mr. Ludwig, o/Mayence.
Drefden, nth July, 179 c,. JOSEPH FREDERIC, Baron of Racknitz.”
‘‘The underftgned acknowledges never to have feen fo large and clear quartz
mixed with glimmer, and which fo compleatly reprefents the compofition known by the name of
the jA. c vcintuTiTi6n
t, c, „ VOSMAER,
Hague, 13 Sept. 1790. Director of the Cabinet of Nat. Hift. of the Prince Stadtholder.
„ r r “ In ad , d “ lon t 0 the filing teftirnonies of the great judges in natural hifiorv, 1
muft confefs never to have feen a produAion in the mineral kingdom which has fo much excited
my admiration, as this wonderful fpecimen, which 1 had the pleafure to fee through mi!
frQtr ‘ e> ° r ’ "*'* ' which bl of great ufe, as adding to the difcov cries in
■ . FRANCIS WILLIAM,
Cologne, yh Aug. 179 o. Count of Otting, Baldern, and Portern.
“ et Otfupeo. F. WALLRAB, Profelfor at Cologne."
123 A.


123 A. Complete red Cryftals, imbedded in yellow cauk, from StafFordlhirc.
124. Brown double-pointed Cryftals, from Falkland’s Ifland.
123. Yellow or topazine Cryftal, from the Brazils*
) 26. Ditto, cut for a feal.
127. Pale Amethyft, from Cornwall. •
128. Hollow Agate balls, lined with amethyfts, from the rocks near Obeiftein in the ia-
iatinate ; one of them formed into a box.
129. Another, in which the amethyfts are combined with white cryftals, from ditto.
13c. A polilhed fedion of an Agate nodule, that was once hollow, but whofe cavity has been
filled up with amethyfts, from ditto,
j 3 1. A beautiful fmall polilhed flab, in which agate, cryftals, jafper, and amethyfts are
united, from Saxony.
132. An oval fpecimen of amethyft, polilhed, from Oberftein.
132 A. Square fpecimens of Amethyft polilhed, from Italy, where they are called Oriental.
133 Avery fine columnar Amethyft, from Siberia.
134. One of the fame kind, cut and polilhed.
133. Oriental Amethyfts, one cut and polilhed.
136. An Amethyft, from Carthegena, cut and polilhed.
137. A large oriental Amethyft, polilhed, but uncut.
7. GEMS.
138. Small Garnets in their native bed of micse, from Scotland.
139. Large Garnets, from Aberdeenlhire, Scotland.
140. Very large Garnet, from Bohemia, polilhed.
141. Garnets in tnicse, from ditto.
! |2. Oriental Garnets, in their native Hate, from the Eaft Inuies.
14.2 A. Oriental Garnet polilhed.
543. Pebble Garnets, found in the rivers in the Eaft Indies, polilhed.
1a a, Syrian Garnets. „ „ , , .
145. Dodecaedral Garnets, imbedded in a green micaceous ftone, called by tue Germans,
Schneidften, from Mount Caucafus. .
Vermilion of the jewellers, a fine kind of Garnet, from Bohemia.
Garnets of 26 fides, imbedded in ftone, from Mount Vefuvius. Thefe are change
hrom their natural colour, having palled through the fire of that volcano. _
118 A Snuff-box formed of a large Bohemian garnet,
U 9; Snuff-box formed of a mafs of garnets in the matrix, from the Convent of Gotwmd
,vo.°A formed of a ma& of garnets in their native bed of grgen micas, from
* o
Saxony.
131. Opals, from Caflia in Hungary.


152. Oriental Gat’s-eyes, green.
133. Ditto, brown.
154.. Turcois or Turquoife Stone, of the Old Rock, from
355, Ditto, of the New Rock, from Perfta. The Turcois Stone is acknowledged by
authors to be a foflil bone, impregnated with blue particles of copper ore. * Pieces of
the Malachites copper ore are often fubftituted for it by the jewellers.
156. A curious Gem of a light colour, whofe figure confifts of two quadrangular pyramids,
with biangular points, joined by their bafes, from Mount Caueafus in Perlia, veiy
rare. Some call this the white Topaz.
157. Saxon Topaz, in its native cryftallized form, from Schneckenftein.
158. Ditto, imbedded in a group of quartz cryftals, from ditto.
158 A. A capital group of Topazes, in their native or cryftallized ftate, combined with,
copper and iron ore, quartz cryftals, &c. from Saxony.
159. A group of cryftallized Topazes, from Siberia,
160. A rare Brazilian Topaz, in its native cryftallized ftiape, with a quadrangular pyramid.
161. Ditto, cut and polilhed*
162. Topaz, from Spain*
163. Hyacinths or Jacinths, from Gompbftella in Spain;
164. A molt curiondy formed and greatly admired group of the Aqua Marine, in its na-
tive ftate, (being an hexagonal column or cryftal with flat ends) coated with a ferru-
gineous ore, from Neftchinlky in Siberia.
165 A fine clear Aqua Marine, from ditto.
166. Ditto, from ditto, cut and polifhed.
167. A flender prifmatic cryftal of Aqua with the pyramid, very rare, from ditto,
3 68. A moft uncommon and beautiful Angle natural column of the Aqua of a
large fize, of the fame figure as thofe at No. 164, from ditto.
169. Large Aqua Marine, formed on a group of prifmatic cryftals, from the Cape 0/
Good Hope,
170. Oriental Ghryfolite*
171. Brazilian Chryfolite, both in the native ftate and cut.
172. Ghryfoprafe, from Kofeinitz, in Silefia,
J 73. Emerald, from Peru.
174. Oriental Saphires. t ,
375. Brazilian Ruby, in the native ftate, being afour-flded prlfm, with a quadrilateral end,
176. Ditto, cut and poliftied.
377. Spin ell Ruby
178. O riehtal Rubies.
17 9*
*lt is placed by Cronftedt among the copper ores ; and it might with propriety be arranged
with the foffil bones. Cronftedt’s Mineralogy by Magellan, page, 684,


379. A Brilliant Diamond.
179 A. A model in glafs of the great Diamond, the largeft known, in the Royal Cabinet
at Lifhon, which weighs 1680 carats, and is valued at 224 millions ftirling. Cronftedds
Mineralogy by Magellan, page 130.
8. SHIRLS.*
180, Violet Shirl, with green and white fhirl intermixed, from Dauphiny in France.
180 A. Red hair-like Shirl in brown cryftals, from Siberia,
180 B. Fine brown hair-like Shirl, in a topazine rock cryftal, from the Brazils.
181, Hair-like Shirl, in white columnar cryllals, from Cornwall.
182, Green needle-like Shirl, with a black metallic fubftance in a large columnar cryftal,
from Switzerland.
1 S 3. Partot a rock cryftal, replete with green needle-like Shirl, from ditto.
183 A. Fibrofe green Shirl, in a red and white quartz, from Cornwall.
184. Black ele&rical Shirl, a kind of tourmaline, imbedded in green filvery and yellow
micac, from Mount Caucafus.
185. White Shirl, combined with white quartz and gray micae, from Altenberg in Saxony,
the only place where this kind of Ihirl, has been found.
186. White Shirl, from
187. Yellow Shirl, from
187 A. Black Shirl, from Saxony,
In thefe Cafes are alfa y
188. Poliihed Ipecimens of the black glafs of Mount Hecla, commonly called Iceland
Agate, f
iBg< An elegant and moil highly finifhed Trinket, reprefenting a Lizard, formed of folid
gold, enamelled and ornamented with precious ftones; the eyes are two rubles.
GLASS-
* The Shirls are inferior kinds of gems. The name is adopted fro?n the Germans . They
are. known in Cornwall by the appellation of Cockles. CronftedFs Mineralogy by Magellan*
p, 208. /indfome mineralogifts are of opinion, that feveral of the gems, as the aqua marine ,
Brazilian topaz and emerald, the tourmalin , &e. are fpecies of fnrl.
f This appertains to the volcano products , which are placed by authors in an appendix to
the minerals , See Cronftedt’s Mineralogy by Magellan, p. 909.


GLASS CASES XVI. and XVIL
SALTS.
1. White Rock Salt, of a botryoid form, from the fait mines near Barcelona in Spain.
2. Tranfparent white Rock Salt, from ditto.
3. Red Rock Salt, from ditto.
4. Cubic white Rock Salt, from the fait mines at Namptwich in Chefhlre.— A large
and fine fpecimen of this Salt formed on wood, from the fame place, is in the Hall, on
the right of the ftove.
4A. A group of white Cubic Salt, formed within the bafket mentioned Part I. of this
Catalogue, page 3 1, Glafs-cafe 11. top fhelf, No. 2, from Salt Hand, near Tortola.—
7 his Specimen is, for nvant of room , placed in Glafs-cafe XII,
Native green Vitriol, front
6. Blue Vitriol.
y. Native Sal Ammoniac, combined with a laminated fleih-coloUred Hate, very fcarce,
from Tibet.
B‘, Black flate, from which allum is made, in Sweden.
SPARS, &c.
8. Group of large white flalaftitical Spars, or drop-flones, froni a natural cavern * In a
lead mine near Caflleton, Derbyfhire.
5. Cauliflower-like fparry incrufiation, from Matlock Bath, Derbyfhire.
10. Group of yellow Spars, each having 24 Tides, of a fingufar form, from Derbyfhire-
-11. Very large orbicular group of hexagonal pointed Spars, from Derbyfhire.
12. Exo&oedral Marcafites, grouped in a botryoid form, from Cornwall.
13. Large fpecimen of green Slate, with a number of bright cubic marcafites imbedded
in it, from Cumberland.
14. A capital group of large 14-fided cryflals of Galena, with cryflallized blend, white
cubic fluors interiorly fprinkled with marcafites, andwhofe edges are bevelled, &c.
from a lead mine in Derbyfhire,
i£. A large group of opaque white quartz cryflals, with a vein of blend croffing it, from.
Alflon Moor, Cumberland.
Part JI.
B
I*, Large
♦ V his Cavern, which is but little known , was frft difco<vered in the year 1 769, by fome
miners who were fear chingfor a loft win of lead ore . It is of the ftze of a large chapel , and the
roof andfides are lined with this kind of beautiful white fpar, with which alfo the floor is orna-
mented and paved in a variety of glob ofe and other figures, fome rijing up into fmall columns, the
whole forming one of the moft curious grottos in the World . It is about 30 fathoms under
the furface of the earth .


16. Large white and red quartz cryftals, with fpiculse or fmall points of iron ore in them,
in the hollow of a large piece of Hone, compounded of fpar, cryftal, and iron ore, from
the neighbourhood of Briftol. . . a..
17. Gray and white quartz Cryftals, having fpiculas of iron ore m them, in the cavity
of a large piece of lime-ftone, combined wijh fpar and cryftal, from ditto.
Ig. A group of rotk Cryftals, from Piedmont. r
iq. A capital group of yellow double-pointed eighteen-ftded Spars, formed on the far ace
of a large flat piece of lime-ftone, from a lead mine near Alhover, Derbylhire.
20. A very large and fine group of opaque white quartz Cryftals, fprinkled with plated
niarcafites, from a copper mine in Cornwall.
On or about the Chimney-piece . . .
2 1. A curious Lufus Nature, reprefenting a man’s head, in an Egyptian pebble, m a
bjft of g E. d George 111. when Prince of Wales, in white porcelain, or bifcuit, the
4j m itS ftatue of Queen Ann, in the chat-after of Fortitude treading on Envy, finely
«* - nte ingenious Mr. Chambers.
has face been removed to the Arch at the entrance into tins room.] . bribed
2? . A large white ftalaftitical fpar, from the roof of the curious natural grotto defenbed
in the note, page 79.
26. A very large columnar white ftalagmitical fpar, from the fame grotto.
GLASS CASES XVIII. to XXII.
SPARS,* continued .
1. Large white ftalaftitical Spars, from the fides and roofs of caverns and mines in Der-
by (hire.
2. Large white ftalagmitical Spars, from the bottoms of the fame
3. Yellow ftalaftitical Spars, of various fizes, from the free-ftone quarries in Oxfordihire.
4. Stalagmitical Spars oflike colour, from ditto.
r Hollow white ftalaftitical, or tobacco-pipe Spars, from the natural grotto de-
feribed p. 79. Moll of the icicle-like Spars are thus hollow at the beginning of their
formation. .. . r .
6. Brown fparry incruftations, of various fizes, on mofs, from the petrifying pnngs a
Knarelborough in Yorkfhire, Matlock Bath, &c.
7. Sparry
* See the remark at Spars , p» 68, note -f*


j t Sparry incruftation, that was originally formed on leaves, which having hnce periihed,
have left their impreflions in the fpar, from Germany,
g. Sparry incruftation, that was formed within a fqqare pipe ufed for conducing water,
replete with particles of fpar, from
9, Polifhed feftions of a piece of Spar, formed within a large fquare pipe, and ufed for a
like purpofe at The cavity of the pipe, as appears by this fpecimen,
was almoft filled up.
ic. Brown fparry incruftation, formed on coarfe twine, from a natural cavern, called
Pool’s Hole, near Buxton, Derbyfhire.
11, White fparry incruftation on mofs and fmall flicks, from Cumberland.
12. Coarfe brown ftalagmitical Spars, with a rough or cauliflower-like furface, from Matlock
Bath, Derbyfhire.
13. A large and fins group of brown ftalaftitical Spars, with a like furface, from ditto.
14. Brown fparry incruftation on a bird’s nefl and eggs, from Derbyfnire.
15. Coral-like fparry incruftation, from
16. Yellow Stalagmites on lime-flene, from a natural cave near Caflleton, in Derbyfhire.
jy. Brown fparry incruftation, from a petrifying fpring near Carlfbad, in Bohemia.
18. Brown ftalagmitical Spars, from Derbyfhire.
19. Botryoid ditto, from ditto.
20. Pifolithus, or peafe-ftone, from Carllbad in Bohemia. This is a congeries of fmall
orbicular fparry bodies, formed by a fucceflion of laminae, in like manner as the animal
calculi.
21. Ditto cut and poliihed, to fliew the laminated ftrufture of the balls.
22. A lingular Stalagmites with the top indented, from the great cave called the DeviFs
Peak, near Caflleton, Derbyfhire.
23. A brown flaladitical Spar, from the great cave called Pool’s Hole, near Buxton in
Derbyfhire.
24. Several varieties in veins and colours of ftala&itical Spars, from natural caverns in Italy,
'poliihed. Thefe are deferibed by the Italians as alabafters, but have no affinity to the
gypfas. See the remark at note §, p. 67.
24 A. Polifhed brown and white Spars, from the Marquifate of Baden Durlach, in the
circle of Swabia, Germany.
23. Poliihed Stalaftitse, differently veined and coloured, from Derbyfhire.
26. A Staladlites of a flefti-colour, from ditto, poliihed.
27 A curious white ftalagmitical Spar, from the neighbourhood of Matlock Bath, Derby-
fhire.
28. Green flaladlitical Spar, from ditto.
29. A brown ftriated fparry incruftation, from
30. Another, from Caernarvonfhire.
3 1. White fparry incruftation on twigs, from Berkfhire. This is the Ofteocolia of authors,
and was formerly ufed in medicine to facilitate the uniting of fradured bones.
E 2 32. Brown


32. Brown fparry incruftation on wood, from
33. White fmall pointed or heath-like Spar, from a free-ftone quarry in Oxfordlhire,
34. A hollow white calcareous or fparry incruftation, which Teems to have been formed on
wood, lince perilhed and mouldered away, from
34 A. Yellow heath-like Spar, from Allen’s free-done quarry, near Bath, Somerfetlhire.
33. Brown heath-like Spar, from Derbylhire.
36. Clear white double refradling Spar, from Iceland. This has the lingular property
of Ihewing obje&s double that are viewed through it, as may be Teen by looking at
the two black lines on the paper placed behind it, which appear as four. This double
refradling property is not peculiar to the Icelandic, but is common to all clear fpars that
fcreak into rhombs,
37. Double refrafting Spars, from Wales.
38. Bacon Spar, from Staffordlhire,.
39. Spar tinted red by iron, of an hexagonal rhomboidal lhape, from an iron mine in the
Foreft of Dean, Gloucefterlhire.
40. Hollow free-ftones lined with brown hexagonal pointed Spars, differently grouped in a
variety of grotefque forms, from quarries in Gioucefterlhire. Larger fpecimens may be
feen in Cafe XIII.
41. Hollow lime-dones lined with like Spars, from Derbyshire.
42. Curious dark-Coloiired Spars of 6 Tides, formed by the union of two trigonal fharp-
pointed pyramids, rare, from Derbylhire.
42 A. Opaque white fpars, of like lhape, curioufly grouped, from Monte Marte near Paris.
43. Delicate white 6-fided pointed fpars in the cavity of an ochrcous iron ore, from Cum-
berland,
44. Very fmgular dark-coloured rhomboidal Spars, very rare, from Derbylhire.
45 . Curious light brown Spars of ah irregular figure, from Alfton Moor, Cumberland.
46. A fquare polilhed brown Spar, with curious undulated veins of a light colour, from
Derbylhire; *
47. BroWn Spar, from the Rock of Gibraltar, polilhed.
ay A. Gray and brown Spar, from ditto, polilhed.
48. Odloedral white Spars, con filling of an hexagonal column with two flat ends, from the
filver mines, in the Hartz Foreft, Hanover.
; I- , »
49. A group of nummular Spars of 1 z-lidps, con filling of two trigonal flat pyramids united
by an hexagonal edge, or very Ihort column, from Alfton Moor, Cumberland.
49 A. Another, in which the Spars are fmaller, on a group of quartz cryflals, from ditto.
50. Another, having their furfaces glazed with a gray ftalaclitical fpar, from ditto.
31, Broad white fpars of 12 fides, having a Ihort hexagonal column, on lead ore and
cryftals, from Alfton Moor, Cumberland.
52. Nummular 1 2 -Tided Spars, from the lead mines, in Derbylhire.
33, A ftaladlitical group of fmall brown nummular 12-fided Spars, combined with iron Ore
and a little plated barytes, from Weftmoreland.
34. Yellow


54. Yellow Spars of 12 Tides, viz, a column of 6 Tides of different breadths, with two
blunt trigonal ends; they are of various fizes, and nearly cover the furface of a group of
plated cubic fluors, Tprinkled with minute cubic pyritae, from ditto.
55. Curious opaque columnar 12-fided Spars, on a group of white quartz cryftals, from
Alfton Moor, Cumberland.
56. Brown Tugar-candy-like Spar, partly cryflallized, in hexagonal figures, Timilar to thofe of
No. 42, from Ireland.
57* Red Spar, from ditto.
57 A. White 12-fided Spars, having a long column, on a blend, from Eyam, in Derbyfliire.
58. White columnar 12-fided Spars, each having 3 Tides of the column rounded off into
the pyramid, on quartz cryftals, from Alfton Moor, Cumberland.
59. White Spars in hexagonal fliarp pointed pyramids, from Derbyfliire.
60. Ditto, on lime-ftone, from Lincolnfliire.
6.1, Ditto, combined with cubic fluors and fmall marcafites, from Derbyfliire.
t 2. Ditto on coal, from SomerTetfliire.
63. A group of afli-coloured Spars of like figure, from Derbyfliire.
64. A large ftraw-coloured Spar, formed into an hexagonal pointed pyramid, from a lead
mine Eyam in Derbyfliire.
65. Clear white 12-fidcd Spars, on a group of cryflallized blend, cubic fluors, and galena
from ditto. v ‘ 6 *
66. A group of yellow Spars, of like figure with No. 59, from ditto.
67. A capital ditto, coated with a yellow ferrugineous matter, from v
68. Red hexagonal Spars on lime-done, from Staffprdfliire. This ;s the cryflallization
of the bacon Tpar, No. 38.
69. Larger red hexagonal Spars, from the lime-ftone pits near Bath.
70. Groups of white Tpars of 18 Tides, formed by the uniting of two hexagonal pointed
pyramids at their baTes, by the intervention of an hexagonal column, from Derbyfliire.
71. Brownifli, yellow, and ftraw-coloured Spars, of like figure, from ditto.
72. White Spars of like figure, with cryflallized blend and yellow cauk, from ditto.
73. White twenty-four Tided Spars, each confiding of two fliarp pointed hexagonal pyl
ramids, having trigonal ends, united by an hexagonal column, from the lead mines near
Eyam in Derbyfliire. Some of thefe having three edges of each of the pyramids cut-
off, the number of the planes are thereby increafed, and confequently form Tpars of
30 Tides.
74. Brilliant ditto, on the Turface of cryflallized blend, from ditto.
73. Yellow ditto, from ditto.
76. Large amber-coloured Spars of 24 Tides, confiding of two hexagonal pyramids with
trigonal ends, united by a fliort fix-fided column, from Ecloa copper mine in Staf-
fordfliirc. *
7;* White


77. White and yellow 30-fided Spars, confining of two pyramids, each having 13 Tides,
viz. 3 principal ones, 6 leffer, and an hexagonal point or end, joined by their bafes,
without the intervention of a column, from Derbyfhire.
78. Whiie 24-fided Spars, confiding of two hexagonal pyramids, with blunt trigonal
ends, united by a fhort column, on a group of white and pale violet cubic fluors, from
Derbyfhire.
79. White Spars of like figure, but having a long column, from the lead mines near Eyam
in Derbyfhire. Several groups, varioufly combined with lead ore, cubic fluors, cry-
llallized blend, lime-done, &c. Many of thefe having 3 edges of each pyramid cut off,
adds 6 more to the number of planes, and confequsntly makes them fpars of 30 Tides.
So. White 30-fided Spars, compofed of a long hexagonal column, with two pyramidal ends
of fix fides, terminated by a fmall hexagonal apex, or point, lying in all directions on
the furface of a group of quartz crydals, from Alllon Moor, Cumberland.
81. Yellow Spars of 24 Tides, confiding of two fharp pointed pyramids of fix Tides each,
3 of the edges of which are cut off, united by a long hexagonal column, from Derbyfhire.
82. A group of fmall 24-fided Spars, the furfaces highly tinged of a ruft-colour by iron,
on a pyrites, from Derbyfhire.
83. A group of nummular or flat oftosdral Spars, each having a pale brown centre, with
galena in the bafe, from Cumberland.
SEPTARIUM. *
S 3. A curious Septarium, compofed of a brown iron done, divided by thin lines of white
fpar into quadrangular departments, from Lancafhire.
INFLAM MA B L E S, marked on the Specimens B.
I* Various fpecimens of coal, fome of them beautifully coloured by fulphureous deams, com-
monly called Peacock Coal, from Lancafhire.
2. Canal or Candle-coal, fo called from the great light it gives, from Haigh In Lancafhire.
3. A medallion of his prefentMajefty, neatly executed in canal coal by a weaver atMancheder.
4. Two falt-cellers formed of ditto, made for Sir Afhton Lever, and ornamented with his
cred, which is engraved on each, by ditto.
£. Peat, from the bogs in the fame county.
6. Balls of mountain pitch, on a group of cubic fluors, from a lead mine in Derby fhire.
7. Coal very much refembling wood, from the Cliffs near Weymouth, Dorfetfhire.
8. Native yellow fulphur, from Mount Vefuvius.
9. Native yellow fulphur in iron ore, from Sweden.
10. Bovey Coal.
11. Amber,
* This, being a compound ft one, is placed'with the Saxa, in the Appendix to the Minerals,
Crondedt’s Mineralogy hj Magellan, page 888*


11. Amber, * from the cliffs near Dantzic.
1 2. Fat Amber, from ditto.
13. Amber with fmgular appearances in it, from ditto.
14. Amber with infects inclofed, from ditto.
ic. Amber with air-bubbles and infedts within it, from ditto. 1 , • \
,6. Gum Copal, with fimilar appearances to thofe in the amber. No. 13, and therefore
introduced here, from the Eaft Indies.
17. Gum Copal, with infers inclofed, introduced here to compare with the ambers. No.
14, from ditto. ~
18. Gum Copal with a blatta and other infeds, and two leaves inclofed, from ditto.
19. A fine kind of jet, or bitumen, found in the infide of a piece of peacock coal, from
Lancafhire.
20. Elaftk bitumen, from a lead mine near Caftleton in Derbylhire.
PLUMBAGO, f marked on the Specimens by this Charaßer ,
1. Plumbago, or black lead, from the great black lead mine, near Kefwick in Borrowdale,
Cumberland.
2. Ditto, of a dark hue, from ditto.
3. Plumbago, from Betfoerg Kluck, in Sweden.
SEMI METALS.
Wolfram or Tungstki N» t marked
1. Tungftein, by fome called white ore of tin, very rare, from Cornwall.
2. Wolfram, from Cornwall.
M O-
* y Tis hardly to he doubted, that Amber is a fpecies of gum copal, and appertains to the foffil
vegetables . The infers fometimes found inclofed in it, in like manner as we fee in the recent gum
copal, feems to confirm this opinion: However, in compliance with the general praSiice of mi-
ner alo gifts, it is here placed with the inflammable native fojfils . See Magellan’s Cronftedt,
page 460.
4 'll his fub (lance is variouly placed by authors* Kirwan, in his Mineralogy, is of opinion
that, like the diamond, it ought to be treated feparately from any other clafs of fojfilfuhftance .
Bergman, in his Sciagraphia, daffies it, as well as the diamond, among the inflammables , on ac-
count of their burning in a vehement fire without leaving any refiduum . See Magellan’s
Cronftedt, p. 451 —454.
X Cronftedt places this among the calcareous earths, but fays it is a calcareous earth faturatea
with a particular acid, perhaps of the metallic kind, Magellan’s Cronftedt, p, 46, andS66»


MOLYBDENA, marked
I. Molybdena with quartz, from Penfylvania'.
MANGANESE, marked
1. Manganefe, in flat b&oedral cryftals, from
2. Manganefe, in fmall needle-like cryftals, arranged in a ftellated form in the cavities of st
qiiartzdfe ftone, rich in iron pre, with rock Cryftals, &c. from
3- Solid Manganefe, which in its cavities has aftumcd a cryftaliized form in fliort prifms,
or needles, from Thuringia.
4. Needle-like Manganefe, from
5. Manganefe, in prifmatic cryftals, combined with a white plated barytes and fpar, from
Ilfeld, near the Hartz, in Lower SaXorty.
6. Stellated Manganefe, from
7. Needle Manganefe, from
8. A capital fpecimen of Manganefe cryftaliized in minute needles on the furface of a
black haematites iron ore, from the Electorate of Triers, in Germany.
9. Manganefe, in rofes qr clufters of curious tabular and needle-like cryftals, on a black
ftaladtitical haematites iron ore, from ditto.
10. Manganefe, in bright fteel-coloured needles, placed in a ftelldlar fohn in the cavities
of a black ftaladtitical haematites iron ore, from ditto.
11. Manganefe, in a globofe form, with a fmooth furface, in the cavites of a like iron ore,
from ditto.
12. Tranfparent fpliaceous or micaceous Manganefe, in the hollows of a large cavernous
fpecimen of black ftalaClitical haematites iron ore, from ditto.
13. Dark coloured Manganefe in flat pointed cryftals, on a like iron ore, from ditto.
14. Manganefe, in hexagonal tabular or flat cryftals, with the furface finely coloured, in
the cavities of a red ochreous iron ore, from ditto.
15. StalaCUtical Manganefe on a black haematites iron ore, from ditto.
jb. White native Calx of Manganefe, very rare> on a coloured ftalaClitical hxmatites iron
ore, from ditto.
NICKEL, marked
1. Solid ore of Nickel, with green nickel ore> intermixed with white fpar, from Saxony.
2. Native Calx of Nickel, with ore of nickel, from the Palatinate.
C O B A L T, marked £>
j. Cobalt in fpar and hardened clay, having black flate intermixed, with red efflorefccnce
of cobalt on the furface, from a mine called Jeremiah, near Saalfeld, in Thuringia.
2. Cobalt with red flowers or bloflbms, from ditto.
3. Green and liver Cobalt, with blue and red bloflbms, and white barytes, from ditto.
4. Gray Cobalt, with copper ore, from Cornwall. This is faid to contain filver,
B I S-


BIS.MUT H, marked
ti Coloured or Pigeon-neck Bifmuth, from a mine near Johan Georgen Stadt, in Saxony,
2 Regulus, or metal of Bifmuth.
ARSENIC, marked OO
1. Native Crpiment, from Hungary.
2. Native Orpiment, with cryftallized realgar, or red arfenic, from
3. Arfenical ore, from
4. Arfenical Mundic, with quartz, from
5* Mifpickel (a kind of arfenical marcafite) with quartz, from
'’' . *
ANTIMONY, marked +
1. Antimony, with a ferrugineous coat* from an antimony mine in Cornwall*
2. Needle-like Antimony in quartz, from Cremnitz in Hungary.
3. Peacock needle Antiinony* from Felfobonia, in Upper Hungary.
4. Antimony cryftallized in large prifms, and coated with native red calx, or ruft of Anti-
, mony, from Tufcany.
5. Regulus of Antimony.
6. Grey ore of Antimony, of a prifmatical figure, from Cornwall.
7. A rare fpecies of cryftallized Antimony, with tranfparent cryftallized refin-like blend,
and white rock cryftals, from a mine belonging to Mr. Fox, at Wadebridge. Cornwall!
round nowhere elfe.
2 I N C, or SPELT RE, * marked
1. GALA M I NE.
I. Grey bubbled Calamine, from Derby (hire,
i. Brown Calamine, from Wales.
3. Ditto, from Derbyfhire.
4. Bliftered and fpar-like ditto, from Wales.
5. Laminated brown Calamine, from Derbyftiire,
6. Ditto, from Wales.
7. Brown Calamine, from
Pa *? IL
F
Brown
* It is not a great many years Jince this femi-metal was found in the blends and other fuh -
Jiances in this kingdom, and moji of the Spelt re ufed in England was imported from abroad .
is, however, now procured in fitch quantities from the ores abovementioned , that it is become an
article of exportation : fo much is it therefore necef'ary in this country, which abounds with
metallic treafure , that every gentleman who has mines on his ejlate, Jhould endeavour to become
acquainted with the appearance and contents of their fevered productions,
'


8. Brown Calamine, from Mendip Hills, Somerfetfhire.
9. Yellow or waxen Calamine, from Wales. .
jb. Green bliftered Calamine, from ditto,
11. Pea-green Calamine, from .
12. Cryftallized green and yellow Calamine, with antimony-like galena, from Scotland.
33. Very rare and curious Calamine in clear prifmatic cryftals, with a ferrugineous coat*
from Siberia.
14. Gray cryftallized Calamine, alfo curious and rare, from ditto#
2. BLEND.
13; Solid brown Blend, with yellow cubic fluors, from Derbyfhire*
16. Ditto, combined with lead ore, from ditto,
16 A. Solid Blend, with galena, marcafttes, &c. from
17. Black glofty Blend, mixed with marcafite, from
38. Black Blend, combined with black micse, from #
19. Curious Blend, of a tetraedal or three-fided figure, with a jet black glofty furfacc;
intermixed with yellow quartz cryftals, from a tin mine in Cornwall.
19 A. A fpecimen of the like kind of Blend, in which the cryftals are much interfeaed*
and intermixed with marcafttes and yellow quartz cryftals, from ditto.
20. The like kind of Blend, combined with copper ore and quartz, from ditto.
21. Tetraedral Blend, interfperfed among a group of columnar or rock cryftals, from ditto,
•22 . A large group of tetraedral black Blend, with exoaoedral cryftals of galena and fpars*
on a group 6f yellow cubic fluors, from Deibyfbiie.
23. A capital group of black blend, in diftina tetraedral cryftals, on a group of yellow cu-
bic fluors, from ditto. . . ,
24. Tetraedral black and glofty. Blend,. whofe cryftals much intoned each other# nearly
covering a group of white cubic fluors, from Eyam, in Deibyihirc.
23. The like kind of Blend, combined with cubic fluors, fpars, galena, and marcafttes,-
from ditto. ~ * , , , • ■
26. Tetraedral Blend, on the furface of a group of yellow cubic fluors, from a lead mine
near Matlock Bath, Derbyfhire. r - , . ~ ..
27. Black glofty blend, of like figure, combined with brilliant 2 4-fided fpars, white cubic
fluors, marcafttes, &c. from Eyam in Derbyfhire. , .. * ,*
28. Black tetraedral Blend, intermixed with double pointed fpars, cuolc fluors, &C. front
Derbyfhire. .
iq. The like kind ofßleitd, combined with fpars and ferrugineous cask, from ditto;
Tranfparent brown polyedral Blend, with fome cryftallized galena an aso moun
; tain pitch, from Eyam in Derbyfhire. ■ -
at, Black polyedral Blend, from Derbyfliire. # »
32. Polyedral Blend, fprinkled on a group of white fpars and cubic fluors, among whicll
is a.large double pointed fpar, from Eyam in Derbylhiie.


33. Polyedral Blend, on a group of white fpars, fprinkled with cockfcomb marcadtes,
and having feme galena in the bafe, from ditto,
34. Very dark garnet-coloured gloffy femi-tranfparent polyedral Blend, with galena, in
large truncated cubes, intermixed, from ditto.
35- The. like kind of Blend, combined with galena and minute cubic marcafites, from
ditto.
36 Polyedral Blend, having a beautifully coloured furface, combined with violet cubic
fluors, white plated cauk, and minute marcafites, from ditto.
37. Very dark garnet-coloured glolfy polyedral Blend, from Aldon Moor, Cumberland.
38. Black glolfy polyedral Blend, interfperfed on white quartz crydals, from ditto,
39. The like kind of Blend, intermixed with double pointed white quartz cryilals, form-
ing together a moil beautiful group, from ditto.
40. Jet black polyedral cryilals of Blend, fprinkled on the furface of a group of opaque
white quartz cryilals, with which they make a Unking contrail, from ditto,
41. Polyedral black Blend, combined with galena and barytes, from ditto.
42. The like kind of Blend, fprinkled with pearly and yellow rhombic barytes, and
combined with quartz cryilals, from ditto.
43. Black glolfy polyedral Blend, combined with teliellated galena, qnartz cryilals, white
rhombic barytes, marcafites, &c. from ditto.
44. The like kind of blend, part of whofe furface is prifmatic, and nearly covered with
yellow rhombic barytes, and white chalcedony, coated with minute quartz cryilals, from
ditto.
45. Polyedral cryilals of tranfparent Blend, of a hyacinthine colour, interfperfed with
fmali but diilind exoclpedrai cryilals of galena, on a group of white quartz cryilals,
from ditto.
46. Crydallized Blend, with cockfcomb marcafites, 24-fided fpars, white fiuor, and
lena, from a lead mine near Eyam, Derbylhire.
47. Speltre, or metal of zinc.
48. Ditto, with the furface crydallized.
IMPERFECT METALS*
LEAD, marked
1. Galena, or folid lead ore, from Aldon Moor, Cumberland.
2. Galena, with a dalagmitical fpar run over it, from Cumberland#
3. Galena, combined with fpar and white micse, from
4 A large ponderous piece of Galena,* very rich in lead, combined with barytes, from
Cumberland.
5. Crofs-grained Lead ore, containing diver, intermixed with fpar, from Salbergt Gru-
fen, in Sweden#
F Z 6. Ga*


6. Galena in white plated barytes, from
7. Galena with a coloured furface, in white fluor, from Derbyfhire.
8. Solid Lead ore, combined with whits pearly rhombic barytes, on a martial limc-ftonej
from Alfton Moor, Cumberland.
9. Galena, forming cpnfufed veins in a broken white cauk, whofe fragments are united
by a white fluor, from Derbyfhire.
10. Solid Lead ore in a white cubic fluor, poliflied, from ditto.
ji. The fame, with the addition of a vein of marcafite, from ditto.
12. Galena, containing fdver, interfperfed in a white and ferrugineous quartz, in which
is alfo a little marcaiite, from Schlangenberg, in Siberia.
13. Striated crofs-grained folid Lead ore, combined with marcafitical copper ore, from
13 A. Galena, containing fdver, combined with a little purple and yellow copper ore, and
- fome white quartz, from Helftone, in Cornwall. »
14. Galena, with green efflorefcence of copper ore, from
15. Looking-glafs Lead ore, called by the miners Slickenjtdes, or Smooth-Jldes , being a
thin coat of galena on the fmooth furface of a fluor, termed by the workmen Kibble,
combined with flriated lead ore, in which is a fmall portion of marcafite ; from Oden
lead mine, near Caftleton, in Derby (hire.
The following account of this curious mineral is extracted from Jo?ieds Phyfiological
Di/quifitionSy London , 1781, page 511 and 5 1 2.
“To what has been faid of earthquakes, I fhall here add an account of a fubterra-
“ neous exploflon, which happens from a very obfcure caufe,. in a fort of foflil called
«* the Slickenjides> This ftone has the appearance of black marble, and breaks, when
“ the exploflon happens, with a poliflied furface, not truly plane, but lying in waves.
<< It is found in fiflures of lime-ftone, in Hay cliff and Ladywafli mines at Eyam, and
“ in Oden, at Caftleton in Derbylhirc; It is divided into two equal parts, or flabs, by
“ a line parallel to the Tides of the flffare, and thefe flabs are joined by two poliflied
ft faces, which feem to be in perfeft contad without any coheflon. The furfaces are
“ coloured with lead ore, but as thin as a covering from a black lead pencil. If a
“ fharp-pointed tpol, which the workmen call a pick, is drawn over the vein with
“ fome force, the minerals begin to crackle, like fulpflur excited to eleftricity ; in a
<c few minutes after which they explode with violence and fly out, as if they had been
“ blafted with gunpowder, infomuch that the weight of forty tons have been blown’
“ out together. Thefe dangerous eftefts deterred the workmen from proceeding for
“ feveral years ; but at length it occurred to them, that this power might be med for
<< the carrying on of their work with better advantage than by the common method of.
** blafting with gunpowder. Accordingly, a workman makes a feratch with his pier:
<< upon the joint of the llickenfides, and runs away as fail as he can, to efcape the
exploflon, which perhaps looflens as much of the rock as ten men would have
“ brought


•'**' brought away in three months by the ordinary methods. I borrow thefe particulars
** from fome late Oh/erwaticns , by Mr. Whitehurft , on the Strata in Derbylhire, page
“ 185, &c. who adds, that in the mines where this phenomenon occurs, the workmen
<f were much alarmed on the ill of November, 1755, about ten o’clock in the morn-
“ ing, the time of the earthquake fo fatal at Lifbon. The rocks which furrounded
cf them were fo much difiurbed, that foil, &c. fell from their joints or Mures, and
they heard violent explofions as of cannon, for fear of which they fled to the furface ;
<f and when all was quiet, were furprized to find that nothing material had happened
“ under ground. It is probable, that the fhock of the earthquake had difturbed fome
i( of the flickenfide mineral far under ground, and occafioned it to part and explode, **
16. Sttel-grained Lead ore, containing filver, from Derbylhire.
17. Spar and lime-done, with veins of lead ore, from Derbylhire, where this kind is
termed Thread-veined ore.
1?. The like kind of Lead ore, with fpar and cauk, from ditto. This is formed into a
flab, and polifhed.
19. A large piece of Galena, with a curious botryoid furface, from
\o. Tefiellated or dice-lhaped Lead ore, from Derbylhire,
21. Rich brilliant Galena, in fmall fharp diftind cubes, with white cubic fluors, on a
white lime-flone, from the Hermitage lead mine near Wirkfworth, Derbylhire.
22. A capital group of the like kind of Galena, but formed in larger difiind cubes, com-
bined with cubic fluors and white cauk, from ditto.
23. Tefiellated Lead ore, with a decompofed furface, forming a kind of native cerus>
from Derby (hire.
24. A fpecimen of Galena, formed in cubes, wdiich much lnterfed each other, with a
little cubic fluor in the interfaces or crevices, from ditto,
25. Galena of a tefiellated form, having fome of the cubes fllghtly truncated at the cor-
ners, and a little marcafite in the bale, from ditto.
26. Detached cryfials of Galena, in an exodoedral form, found loofe in clay, in a lead
mine on Alfton Moor, Cumberland.
27. An union of two like-fhaped cryfials of galena, from ditto.
28. A group ofjike cryfials of Galena, much interfeding each other, with a decompofed
furface, exhibiting a kind of native cerus, or white lead, from Derbylhire.
29. Galena adhering to a ferrugineous ftone, from
30. Exodoedral Galena, whofe cryfials are hollow, and lined with fpars, from Alfton Moor,
Cumberland.
31. Rich Galena, in large well defined 14-fided cryfials, with fome blend, on a group of
white cubic fiuors, fprinkled with marcafites, from a lead mine near Eyam in Derbylhire.
32. Exodoedral Galena, with white fpars on the furface, from Eyam in Derbylhire.
32 A. The like kind of Lead ore, combined with cubic fluors, fprinkled with marcafites,
£ryfiallized blend, &c. from Matlock Bath, Derbylhire.
* . . a • 1


33. The like kindcf Galena, with its furface beautifully coloured, from the fame place,,
and from Alfton Moor, Cumberland. Thofe with the largeft cry Hals are from the
latter place.
34, Galena of like figure and coloured furface, whofebafe is porous and alfo coloured, from
Eyam in Derbyfhire.
3 V Galena in 14-fided cry Hals, the furface curioully bronzed, combined with blend, red
and white cauk, double pointed fpars, cryftallized horn lead ore, &c» from a lead mine
in Leicefterfhire.
36. Solid Lead ore in 14-flded cryftals, formed of two quadrangular pyramids joined bafe
to bafe, and having their points cut off, combined with purple and dark-coloured cubic
fluors, fpars, marcafites &c. from Derbyfhire.
37. A hollow ftaladhtical fpecimen of Galena, whofe furface is formed into fmall ex-
cftocdral cryftals, coated with yellow ochreous iron ore, from Somerfetfhire.
38. Galena of a blue colour, rich in filver, from Mr, Gullet’s mine, at Bear Ferries, in
Devonfhire.
39. White fpathofe or fpar-like ore of Lead, from Ireland.
40. Striated ditto, from
41. Teffellated Lead ore, with the corners truncated, on a group of pale amethyftine cubio
fluors, frqm Durham.
42. Fibrous Alining white fpathofe Lead ore, from
43. Fibrous white fpathofe Lead ore, from Scotland.
44. Ditto, ilained and intermixed with iron ore, from ditto,
43. Rich white fpathofe Lead ore in prifmatic cryftals, from Wales.
46. Pebble Lead ore, rounded by the action of water, from a mine in Wales.
47. White and ferrugineous fpathofe Lead ore, containing filver, with blend, from Weld-*
berg, in the province of Bertrues.
48. White fpathofe Lead ore, combined with galena and iron ore, from Lancaftiire.
49. Foliated white fpathofe ore of Lead, with ochreous and cryftallized iron ore, from
30. Brown fpathofe ore of Lead, with yellow ochre of iron andiron ore, from Altay in
Siberia.
31. Foliated yellow fpathofe Lead ore, from Bleybcrg, in Carinthia.
32. Mofs-like green fpathofe ore of Lead, upon a cavernous quartz, mixed with a yellow
ochreous iron ore, from Schopau, in Saxony.
53. Plorn Lead ore, from Leiccfterfhirc.
54. A fmall group of prifmatic cryftals of horn Lead ore, with a little galena and rank*
from ditto.
C c. A fpecimen of Galena, which feems to have been cracked when in the mine, and dis-
parts afterwards united by the formation of cryftallized horn lead ore and cauk in
the cavities, from a lead mine in Leicefterfhire.
36. Cryftallized green and brown horn ore of Lead, with galena, ochre of lead, iron ore,
green efforefcence of copper and quartz, from Schlangenberg in Siberia.
37. Cry*


jy, Cryftallized brown horn Lead ore, with yellow ochre of lead and green cfilorcfcencc
of copper, from Fertfchinfky, in Siberia.
$B. Brown fpathofe ore of Lead intimately mixed with clay, from Altay, in Siberia.
59. Superficial red and black fpathofe ore of Lead, upon a micaceous fand-ftone, fpotted
with iron ere and cubical pyrites, from the mines ol Bercfowiky, in Siberia. This kind
of land -hone is called by the Germans Stellften.
to. Red fpathofe ore of Lead in prifmatic crystals, on a group of quartz cryftals, coated
with iron oie, whofe bafe is the fame kind of fand-ftone as the preceding article, and. is
from the fame place. This fpecies of lead Ore is extremely rare, and this fpecimen un-
commonly fine.
61. Native Minium, or red lead, on white and red fpathofe lead oie, galena, and quartz,
from Siberia.
62. Green fpathofe Lead ore in oflocdral cryftals, from Wales.
63 Ditto, combined with a yellow hardened clay, from ditto.
64. Ditto, formed on quartz and iron ore, from Schopau, in Saxony.
63. Ditto, on a martial micaceous ftone, called by the Germans Gneis, from Schlangenberg,
in Siberia.
63 A. Greert and white fpathofe Lead ore, from Wales.
66. Lead as it dropped from the furnace, in form of a bird’s wing.
67. Lead, which after melting aftumed a lingular form, fomewhat like a groupof final! columns*
68. Litharge of Lead.
6g. Solid fpathofe white ore of Lead, from —— The miners call it Cows Udder ore.
70. Crofs-grained Lead ore, with a little yellow copper ore intermixed, from Helftone, in
Cornwall.
COPPER, marked fjh
1 Solid native or virgin Copper, malleable from the mine without previous fmelting, frois
Godolphin mine in Cornwall.
2. Solid native Copper, from
3 . Solid native Copper, with green eiftorefcence of copper, from
4. Granulated native copper, from Cornwall.
5. Ditto, intermixed with quartz from ditto.
6. Ditto, iprinkled with minute cryftals of red copper ore, from dittos
7. Rich. cryftallized native Copper, from ditto.
S. Granulated native Copper, from Turkey.
9. Various fpecimens ot arborefeent or branched native Copper, iome of them combined
with quartz, from Cornwall.
9 A. A curious fpecimen of native Copper, finely cryftallized in a ramofe form, from
10. Fibrous native Copper, with blue and green effloreicence of copper, on quartz, from ditto.
it. Wire-like native Copper, from ' -
12. Na-


12. Native Copper, combined with vitreous copper ore, quartz, &c. from the copper mma§
of Count Pokadefchky, near Uralgeburge, in Siberia.
13. Foliated native Copper, on a brown pyriteous copper ore, in a coarfe mine-ftone, in
which is alfo a little pitch copper ore, (copper mixed with a black pitchey rock-oil) from
Wafilewlky, near Uralgeburge* in Siberia.
14 Ramofe and cryftallized native Copper, with a varioufly coloured furface, combined
with fpar, from the fame mines as No. 12.
13# Bright native copper, cryftallized in a decaedrical form in a white fpar, from ditto.
j 6. The like kind of native Copper, in a dendritical form, in the fame kind of fpar, in
which is alfo fome cryftallized gray copper ore, from Pokadefchky.
17. Native Copper, intermixed with green copper ochre, ftellated green elftorefcence of
copper, and a little vitreous copper ore, in white fpar, from ditto. •
18. Mofs-like native Copper, in a dirty quartz, from an old exhaufted mine near Uralge-
burge, in Siberia.
19. The fame kind of native Copper without the quartz, and interlperfed with vitreous
copper ore, from ditto.
20. Native Copper, in a white gritty clay, from Wofelkrantzkyftien Geburge, in Siberia,
21. Red Copper ore with native copper, in quartz, from Cornwall,
22. Cryftallized ditto, with a bubbled furface, in quartz, from ditto.
23. Tranfparent ruby Copper ore, refembling the red ore of filver, in o&oedral cryftals,
with white quartz intermixed, from ditto.
24. Tranfparent ruby Copper ore, in oftoedral and polyedral cryftals, in live cavity of a
red vitreous copper ore, with fome green malachites copper ore, from Tourtfcheninow,
in Siberia,
25 Tranfparent ruby copper ore, in cubical cryftals, with fome native copper and pitch
copper ore in quartz, froni Gumitfchowfky, in Siberia.
26. Cryftallized ruby Copper ore, with native copper and liver copper ore in cryftallized
- quartz, from Count Pokadefchky’s mines, near Uralgeburge, in Siberia,
27. Aggregated finall oftoedral cryftallized red copper ore, with a little iron ore inter-
mixed, from Tourtfcheninow, in Siberia.
28. Ruby copper ore in eight-lided cryftals, combined with green ftelkted copper ore,
from Siberia.
29. Plumofe red Copper ore, with minute cryftals of ruby copper ore, in a ferrugineous
copper ore, from Count Pokadefchky’s mines in Siberia,
30. Green and blue efftorefcence of Copper in a calcareous ftone, from E&on mine*
Staffbrdfhire.
31. Cryftallized green Copper ore, in a ferrugineous lime-ftone, fr©m
32. Greeu
• ‘The account received with this fpecimenfays, that it is native copper in a Jiate of tranf
formation into copper glafs (or vitreous copper) ere .


Green malachites Copper ore, from Cornwall. ' .
33. The like kind of Copper ore in a brown calamine, from Wales,
3p. Blue and green malachites Copper ore, from
35. Green malachites and pitch Copper ore* with green waxen calamifte and a little iron^
’ ore intermixed, from Wales.
A, Globular malachites Copper ore upon quartz, with fome martial ochre, from
Nertfehinlky, in Siberia.
Sotryoid green malachites Copper orfe, from Pokadefchky, in Siberia.
37. Ditto, with dendritical manganefe on the fiirface, from ditto.
38. Another fpecimen in a ere fled form, from ditto.
39 Staladitical green malachites Copper ore, part of its furface tinged with blue, from
ditto.
40. A beautifully figured green malachites Copper ore, from ditto, polifhed.
4, . Stellated green fattin Copper ore, upon a fed vitreous copper Ore, from ditto.
42. Ditto, but differing in having a yellow ochreous iron ore intermixed with the vitreous
copper, and in the fize of the green cryflals, which are fmaller, from ditto.
43. Fine green fatiin. copper ore, nearly fibrous, intermixed with a yellow ochreous iron
ore,, from ditto.
44. A large and fine fpecimen of fattin-like green copper ore, formed of capillary fila-
ments of a clofe texture, reflecting beautiful appearances, with a little ochreous iron
ore intermixed, from Tourtfchininow, near Uralgeburge, in Siberia.
45. Blue Copper ore, partly cryflallized . in polyedral figures, and fibrous plufli-like green
cryflallized copper ore, with fome white native calx of manganefe in the cavities of a
red ochreous copper ore, from Altayfehen Geburg, in Siberia.
46. Green Copper ore, of a clofe fibrous texture, with fome fmall white quartz cryflals,
in the cavity of a ferrugineous quartz, from Cornwall.
47. Stellated fibrous green cryflallized Copper ore, with fome plated eauk, in the hollow
of a red and yellow copper ore, from
48. Fine flellated fibrous green cryflals of Copper, In a red copper ore, from a mine in
the ifland of Jamaica;
49. Cryflallized green malachites Copper Ore, extremely fcarce, with blue cryflals of
copper in the hollows of a white and yellow quartz, from Schlangenberg, in Siberia.
50i Green malachites Copper ore, mixed with brown iron ore, from Sophienberg, in
Nafiau Siegen
51. Malachites Copper ore, from China;
52. Fibrous green cryflals of Copper ore, with fome fine yellow ochre of iron, on the fur*
face of a group of white quartz cryflals, from Cornwall.
53. Blue and green efflorefcence of Copper, in fmall globules, on a coarfe ferrugineous
fand-ftone, with mieje intermixed, from Eftdn mine, Staffordfhire.
54. Another fpecimen, in which the green colour is more predominant, from ditto.
Blue and green Copper ore in foar, from ditto.
Part 11, O 5 6, £! ue


56. Blue and green Copper ore, combined with quartz, from Cornwall.
56 A. Yellow Copper ore, in large Angularly figured cryftals, combined with columns
quartz cryftals, coated with a ferrugineous matter, final! marcafites, &c. from ditto.
57. Blueandgreen cryftallizations ofCopper, on a white barytes andironore, from Thuringia.
58. Small blue cryftallizations of Copper, in the cavities of a quartzofe ftone combined with
iron ore, from the Ele&orate of Triers.
59. Copper and iron ore combined, having a polifhed furface, called by the miners Looking-
glafs ore, with blue and green efflorefcence of copper, from ditto.
60. Blue Copper ore, from
61. Blue and green Copper ore, combined with quartz cryftals, and tabular barytes, from
62. Blue and green cryftallizations of Copper, with gray copper ore, in a white barytes,
from Arthree in Scotland.
63. Foflll Wood impregnated with blue and green copper ore, on a coarfe fand-ftone, com-
bined with copper ore, from Uralgeburge, in Siberia.
64. Blue cryftallizations of Copper, with fome ftellated green cryftals ofcopper, on a gray
vitreous copper ore, combined with iron ore, from Pokadelky in Siberia.
65. Polyedral blue cryftals of Copper, with fome white fpathofe lead ore, on a quartzofe
ftone, from Nertfchinfky in Siberia.
66. Small tabular blue cryftallizations of Copper in a botryoid form, combined with a
brown globularly accumulated iron ore, from Altayefchen Geburge, in Siberia.
67. Solid azure Copper ore, with fome plumofe green cryftallizations of copper in the
middle of it, and alfo fprinkled with brick-coloured copper ore, in a white clay, from
Nertfchinfky, in Siberia.
68. Brilliant blue and curious green cryftallizations of Copper, in the cavities of a yellow
marcafitical copper ore, with which a little iron ore is combined, from Gumitfchewlky,
v in Siberia,
69. Large and varioufly figured blue cryftals of Copper, with white fpathofe lead ore,
on a partly cavernous and ferrugineous quartz, from Schlangenberg, in Siberia.
70. Pitch-like Copper ore, with fome malachites copper ore, partly covered with a beauti-
ful cinnabar-like matter, upon light brown liver copper ore, from Gumitfchewlky, in
Siberia. •
7 1. Green efflorefcence of Copper, with fpar, from ECton mine, Staftbrdfhire.
71 A. Ochreous and ftellated green and azure blue cryftallizations of Copper, intermixed
with gray copper ore rich in filver, and a little iron ore, from Langen Hecke, in the
Electorate of Triers.
72. Stellated green efflorefcence of Copper, with yellow copper ore, in an iron ore, from
73. Green Copper ore, combined with lead ore and calamine, from Scotland.
74. Brown Copper ore, almoft pure copper, with green efflorefcence of copper, fpar, .and
ochreous iron ore, from Thuringia.
7r, Purple Copper ore, from Devonfhire. r .
76* Purple


76. Purple Copper ore, with white barytes, from Arthree in Scotland.
77. Gray Copper ore, from
Gray Copper ore, with green efflorefcence, from
79. Gray Copper ore, with plated barytes, from Arthree in Scotland.
80. Gray and green Copper ore, with calamine, white fpathofe lead ore, and ochreous
iron ore, from ditto.
81. Gray Copper ore, in oftoedral cryftals, on the furface of a coloured bliftercd copper
ore, from Cook’s Kitchen mine, near Redruth, Cornwall.
82. Coloured bliftered Copper ore, from Cornwall.
83. Solid yellow 7 Copper ore, from E&onmine, Staftordfhire.
84. Yellow Copper ore, combined with malachites copper ore and pyrites, from ditto.
85. Marcafitical Copper ore, with white cauk, from ditto.
86. A hollow fpecimen of white Cauk, the infide lined and the outftde fprinkled with green
and yellow copper ore, from ditto.
87. Yellow Copper ore, in a white barytes, from the Palatinate.
88. Yellow Copper ores, combined with iron ore, &c. from
88 A. Marcafitical Copper ore, between two bands of iron ore, from
89. Peacock and yellow Copper ores, fome combined with quartz, &c. from Cornwall.
90. Cryftallizcd Copper ore, with quartz cryftals, from Stolzemberg, in Germany.
91. Yellow Copper ore, with fmall quartz cryftals, from
92. Yellow and peacock Copper ore, combined with white and brown chalcedony, from
Cornwall.
93. Yellow Copper ore, combined with purple fiuor, from ditto.
93 A. Yellow Copper ore, combined with brown quartz and purple fluor, from ditto.
94. Yellow Copper ore, combined with lead ore, from ditto.
95. Yellow and green Ccpper ore, intermixed with quartz cryftals, and alight brown
micaceous ftone, from
96. Yellow Copper ore, combined with black fhirl, from Sweden.
97. Yellow Copper ore, in a greenifti afbeftos, from ditto.
98. Yellow Copper ore, combined with black fhirl, and greenifti afbeftos, from ditto.
99. Looking-glafs Copper ore, from ditto.
I co. Copper ore combined with foffil wood, very fcarce.
id. Copper ore intermixed with a foflil honeycomb coral, from StafFordfture.
102. Yellow Copper ore, with tin ore and fpar, from
103. Yellow Copper ore, combined with brown feldfpath and blend, from
104. Yellow Copper ore, mixed with lead ore, and marcafite, from Cornwall.
105. Copper ore, combined with quartz and green cryftallizations of copper, from
106. Ccpper and iron ore intermixed, with blue and green efftorefcence of copper, from
Thuringia. "
107. Copper ore, from
6 z soB. A flag


108. A flag from a fmelting of Copper, with curious teflellated crydals in its cavities, front
109. Smelted Copper, as it comes from the furnace.
110. Sundry fpecimens, exhibiting varieties of the folid yellow Copper ores of
differently combined with other minerals.
in. Yellow Copper ore, interfperfed with black micas, from Sweden,
112. Red Copper ore, very fcarce, from ditto.
113. Blue Copper ore, with albedos, from ditto.
114. Yellow Copper ore, combined with iron ore, from ditto,
115. Yellow Copper ore, with cobalt, from ditto.
IRON, ?narked
1. Native Iron, from Siberia.
2. Red haematites or blood-done Iron ore, from Lancafliire,
3. Ditto, very dne,from Cumberland, 1770.
4. Ditto, with a crydallized furface, from Lancafliire.
3. Red haematites Iron ore, on black haematites iron ore, having a glofly furface, and yellow
ochre in the bale, from a mine near Catharinenburg, in Siberia,
6. Black haematites Iron ore, from Saxony.
7. Ditto, with fpar on its furface, on a red ochreous iron ore, from
8. Stalaftiticalred haematites Iron ore, with complete or double-pointed crydals, impregnated
with iron ore, intermixed, from St. Vincent’s Rock, near Bridol.
g. Several capital fpecimens of black ftaladlitical Iron ore, fome of them with the furface
finely coloured, from the Electorate of Triers.
30. The like kind of Iron ore, on a bed of chopped or hacked quartz, from ditto.
11. Black haematites Iron ore, formed in hollow ftalaCtitae, filled with yellow ochreous iron
ore, from the county of Sayn.
12. Black haematites Iron ore, with a beautiful gilded furface, from ditto.
13. Stalaclitical Iron pre, with yellow ochre of iron on the furface, from the Fored of
Dean, where it is called Brufh ore.
14. Pyritical Iron ore, from the chalk pits, in Suflex*
15. Yellow ochreous Iron ore, fprinkled with fmall complete crydals, which are faturated
with the iron ore, from St. Vincent’s Rock, near Bridol.
16. Solid Iron ore, combined with quartz, the hollows of which are lined with double-point-
ed crydals, faturated with yellow ochre of iron, from ditto.
17. Brown fpathofe Iron ore, the Stahldein of the Germans, from
18. Rhomboidal ditto, grouped in a daladlitical form, from the Fored of Dean, Gloceder-
mire, and is another variety of what the miners there call Brufli ores.
19. Brown rhomboidal fpathofe Iron ore, partly in a daladlidcal form, in the cavities of a
brown iron ore, with yellow ochre, &c. front ’ ' ‘ •
20. Dark


so. Dark brown rhomboidal fpathofe Iron ore, on white cauk, with tabular barytes, frottt
Germany. -
21. Foliaceous brown fpathofe Iron ore, from ditto.
22. Ditto, in a hard flaty Hone, from ditto.
23. Brown fpathofe Iron ore, with quartz cryftals and gray fdver ore, from Saxony.
24. Iron done, from Lancaftiire.
25. Ditto, of a Angular form, one of them, from Shotover Hill, near Oxford.
26. Iron ore, with fllvery micae intermixed, from . # .....
2**. Hollow honey bodies, rich in iron, one of them with a curious ramified part within it,
1 f r om Northamptonihire. Thele are called Geodae, by Wood-ward and other writers on,
minerals.
28. Magnetical Iron ore, commonly called the loadftone, from Norway.
28 A. A fmall Loadftone, from ditto. This is armed, and mounted in filven
29. A Loadftone cut in a cubical form, from Magnetberg, near Jemfa in Siberia, remark-
able for its ftrong attractive power.
30. An artificial Magnet,
31. Iron fand, which is attracted by the magnet, from North America.
32. A feptarium or divided Iron ore, from the Electorate of Triers.
33. Iron ore, in flat tabular cryftals, from the Ifland of Elba, near the coaft of Tufcany.
34. Cryftallized Iron ore, having a fine poliftied furface, refembling a clufter of precious
ft ones, the beauty and brilliancy of its colours aremoft remarkable, with ferrugmeous rock
Cryftals in the cavities. Originally the hollows were filled up with a fine red ochre, part
of which was removed in order to difeover the beautiful cryftallizations conc#aled under
it, from ditto, .
35. Rhomboidal fpathofe Iron ore, in the cavities of a coloured ftalaftitical haematites iron
ore, from the Electorate of Triers.
35 A. Rhombic fpathofe Iron ore, combined with galena, white nummular fpars, &c. from
Alfton Moor, Cumberland.
36. Cubical pyrites, containing iron, from Germany.
“37. Magnetical oftoedral cryftals of Iron ore, or pyrites having on their furface fome golden
micre, in which kind of body they were likely found imbedded, from
38. Gray laminated Iron ore, the Eifenram of the Germans, with fome quartz and ye ow
iron ochre, from Olomiz, in Siberia. „
39. The like kind of Iron ore, with quartz and red ochre, found in a perpendicular fiflure,
or as the miners call it, pipe-vein, in a rock of granite, in Efkdale, near Ravenglafs in
Cumberland. ,
40. Cryftallized Iron ore, with black haematites iron ore, fmall quartz cryftals, and red
and yellow ochre of iron, from the Electorate of Triers.
41. Cockfcomb pyritical Iron ore, from a lead mine near Moneyafti in Derbyftiire.
42. Various fpecimens of the folid Iron ores, from the different provinces of Sweden.
43. Ditto,
i - ■ •


43. Ditto combined with green albeftos, from ditto.
44. Gray Iron ore, of a granulated texture, from ditto.
45. Ditto, with folid Iron ore interfperfed in it, from ditto.
46. Granulated Iron ore, with a little albeftos, from ditto.
47. Red folid Iron ore, from Sweden.
48. Looking-glafs Iron ore with green Ihirl, from ditto.
49. Steel-grained Iron ore, from ditto.
50. Solid Iron ore, from Lapland.
51. Brown Iron ore, from a mine which runs under the fea, in the province of Smalandia
in Sweden. ■ ' 1
52. The metal of Iron, exhibited in two manufactured fpecimens of Mr. Con’s Patent iron,
rendered malleable from caft iron.
53. Cauliflower-like fpecimens of pyrites, in the bafe of which is a Angle exoftoedral cry-
Hal of galena, from
54* Veins of magnetical Iron ore, in a red jafper, from Siberia.
55. A capital and beautifully formed fpecimen of Flos Ferri, or the flower of Iron, a curious
kind of ftala&itical fpar, containing about one fourth part of iron, from an iron mine near
Steurmarck, in Germany.
TIN, marked
1. Tin ore, rounded by the adlion of water, called by the miners Stream tin, from Cornwall.
2. Solid Tin ore, from ditto.
3. Ditto, intermixed with a brown mine Hone, from ditto,
4. Cryftallized Tin ore, but of no determinate figure, from ditto.
5. Tin ore, of a red hue, from ditto.
6. Tin ore, combined with cockle or ihirl, from ditto.
7. Cryftallized Tin ore, with green mics, ihirl, &c. from Saxony.
8. Tin ore, combined with ihirl and a red ochreous fubftance, from Cornwall.
9. Black cryftallized Tin ore, with quartz, in a ilaty ftone, from ditto.
10. Cryftallized Tin ore, combined with yellow copper ore, marcafite, quartz, blend, and
cryftallized feldfpath, from ditto.
Ir. Haematitical or wood-like Tin ore, being a combination of tin and iron ore, from ditto.
12. Detached cryftals of Tin ore, each confiding of a quadrangular column, with an odtoe-
dral pyramidal end, from ditto.
13. Tin ore, in brown tranfparent cryftals of like figure, combined with quartz and greei|
fteatites or fope-ftone, micas, &c. from ditto.
14. Black Tin ore of like figure, mixed with white barytes, from ditto.
13. Gray cryftallized Tin ore, from ditto.
16. Ditto, combined with ablueilh mine ftone, among which is a fmall cryftal oflike figure
with No. 12, from ditto.
17. Gar*


1 7. Garnet-like Tin 01 e, from ditto, where it is called Variegated tin.
18. Brown tranfparent cryftallized Tin ore, with a little marcafite, in green micae, from ditto.
ig. Brown tranfparent cryftallized Tin ore, with fmall columnar cryftals and marcafite, in.
a hollow afti-coloured mine-ftone, from ditto.
20. Black cryftals of Tin, of an oaoedral figure, from ditto, where they are called Tin
grains.
21. Larger ditto, in which the form is more diftinft, from ditto.
22. Black Tin ore, in oftoedral grains or cryftals, from ditto.
2 3. Tin ore, in fmall black oftoedral cryftals, from ditto.
24. Brown Tin ore, in like fhaped cryftals, combined with a white clay, or decayed feldf*
path, and quartz, from ditto.
Brown oCloedral Tin grains, in white quartz, from ditto.
26. Tin ore of like figure, with yellow columnar cryftals, from dittto.
27. Black oftoedralTin grains, with white and ferrugineous quartz, on a gray ftone, rich
in tin, from Cornwall.
25. Black Tin ore, of like figure, in the interlaces of a group of rock cryftals, interiorly
fprinkled with green micae, and combined with brown plated barytes, cubic fluors, minute
brown quartz cryftals, &c. the whole forming a moil interefting fpecimen to a mine-
ralogift, from ditto.
29. Brown oftoedral cryftals of Tin ore, in a red argillaceous fubftance, from ditto.
30. Refm-likeTin cryftals, of like figure, fome of them with a ftiort quadrangular
intervening between the two pyramids, from ditto.
31. Ditto, with fmall quartz cryftals, from ditto.
32. Small glofty black odoedral cryftals of Tin ore, with a like intervening column, com-
bined with quartz on a gray ftone, from ditto,
33. Ditto, with green micse, &c. from ditto.
34. An union of two black cryftals of Tin ore, confifting of two quadrangular pyramids,
joined by a Ihort column, containing a like number offides. The French call fuch
combinations Macles, or a reverfed cryftal, making them but one, which they explain by
an artificial cryftal cut obliquely in two, and the parts inverted. From Bohemia,
3s. Pure metal of Tin, from Cornwall.
36. Tin ore, in minute brown cryftals, mixed with ftiirl and green cryftallized from
37. Black Tin ore, in o&oedral cryftals* whofe edges and corners are truncated, from
tornwall.
38. Black cryftallized Tin ore, combined with mundic, on a white gritty ftone, from
Brofc mine, in Cornwall.
39. Tin ore, in a .red fteatites, from Cornwall.
J^pBLE


NOBLE or PERFECT METALS,
MERCURY, marked
1. Native or virgin Quickfilver, with horn mercury, in the cavities of a laro- e fjjecimeii of
native cinnabar, from Mufchel Landiberg, in the Duchy of Zweybruck or Deuxponts, in
Germany.
2. Native Cinnabar, mixed with iron and copper ore, in the cavities, of which are various
fmall globules of virgin quickfilver, from ditto.
3- Tranfparent red cryttallized native Cinnabar, rich in quickfilver, from Hungary.
4* Dendiitical or branched native Cinnabar, in a light coloured hardened clay, from Muf*
chel Landlbergi
SILVER, marked
I. Dendritical, Ihiub, or lacc-like native Silver, in quartz, from the diver mines at
Potod, in Peru.
i. Arborefcent, or branched native Silver, with crydallized quartz, from ditto.
3* Ramcfe or branched native Silver, in white fpar and black lime-done, from the King
of Denmark’s filver mines at Eongihergy in Norway.
3 A. Laminated native Silver, in a quartzofe done, with purple fluor interlperfed, from ditto.
4. Cn flallized arborefcent native Silver, inlpar, black lime-done, and purple fluor, from
ditto.
51 Dendritical native Silver, with a gilded furface, in a flelh-coloufed barytes, from
ITcmcls Furlten near Freyberg, in Saxony.
6. Superficial native Silver, with fuperficial brittle vitreous filver ore, of variegated
colours, on a gray quartzofe done, in which is alfo a little galena, phofphorefcent blend,
and marcafite, from Schlangenberg, in Siberia.
7' er y blight fuperficial native Silver, upon a mixture of diver with fulphiirated copper
and antimony, phofphorefcent blend, galena, and fpar, from ditto.
5. Snow-like native Silver, upon a friable yellow ochreous iron ore, containing diver, inter-*
mixed with fome white fpathofe lead ore, from Nertfchinfky, in Siberia.’
9* Native Silver and gray diver ore, combined with white fpar and green fj|;om
10. Tranfparent red or ruby Silver ore, (diver mineralized with arfenic) in fmall odoedral
cry dais, with a little native green vitriol intermixed, from the Eledor of Hanover’s diver
mines in the Hartz Fored, Germany.
11. Another fpecimen, in which the cryfials are larger and polyedral, from ditto.
12. Light brown horn Silver ore, (diver mineralized with the acids of vitriol and common
fait) very fcarce and curious, upon a gray quartzofe done, from Schlangenberg, in Siberia,
This kind of diver ore is fofter than lead.
13. Silver


i|; Silver mirieralizcd with' fulphurated copper and antimony, of a fetid fmell, upon a
gray fpar, interfperied with marcafite arid line grained galena. This mineral is only
tound in Siberia; it Was difCoveredby Mf. Reno-vanz, and is from NertfchinzfkoL
14. White Silver ore, from Larigenhecke, in the Electorate of Triers.
15. Gray Silver ore, nearly approaching to native filver, in a jafpachates, from Saxony.
This is cut and polilhed*.
i'6. White Silver ore, combined with galena, in a quartzofe ftone, from Rattvik, ill the
province of Dalecarlia, iri Sweden.
17. White Silver ore, combined with lead ore and quartz, from Lofafen, iii the fame pro-
vince.
18. Teffellatcd galena rich in filver, intermixed with fpar, from Chriftieribe’rg, in the pro*
Vince of Nerike in Sweden.
19. White Silver ore, intermixed with lead ore and marcafite, from Bfunfvik, in the pro*
vmce of Dalecarlia in Sweden*
White Silver ore, combined with galena, and intermixed with a green mine-done, from
Salberg, in the province of Wedmannia iu Sweden.
21. White Silver ore, combined with lead and copper ore, in a quartzofe mine-done,
from
22. White Silver ore, with galena, one fide banded with quartz and black date, from
2 3* White Silver ore, with lead ore, marcafite and quartz, from
24. Lead ore, rich in filver, in crydailized horn-done, from Anhalt Schaumberg.
35. Steel-grained lead ore* rich in filver, combined with yellow copper ere, from Qornart
mine in Hede*
P LATIN Ay marked
I; Platina, or white Gold, from Peru.
GOLD, marked (J)
1 ’ * ich . and bri S ht ndtive Gold > pervading all parts of a dark-coloiired quartz, iriterfperfed
witli iron ore, and a little yellow micte, both rich in gold. —. The whole fpecimen
11 oz; and is part of a large lump, the whole of which was nearly as rich as this piece
It came from the Brazils, in South America. ' y
it. Native Gold, in a partly crydailized quartz, from Sumatra,
3. Very bright crydailized foliated native Gold, with a little marcafite, iri the crydailized
cavity of a white quartz, in which is fome tranfparent crydals of zinc, from the fold
mines at Chemnitz in Hungary. - h
4. Cryftallized native Gold,_ in the crydailized cavity of a quattzofe mihe-Hottc, rich ia
gold, mteriperfed with mica:, gold marcafite, &c. from Boitfca, in Tranfylvania
5 ‘ , Upon a f di y ed S ra y nickel, refembling gray filver ore, (nickel mineral^!
1 h ariliucal iron and cobalt) in an opaque white quartz, from the gold mines at Here-
fowfky, near Cathannenburg in Siberia
?ART H 6 . Su .


6. Superficial native Gold, on a cubic iron pyrites, containing gold, in a yellow micaceous
ftone, from ditto.— See Cronftedt's Mineralogy improved by Magellan , p, 521 and 525.
7. A large teffellated pyrites, internally of a loofe ochreous texture, interfered by letter
ones, all containing gold, intermixed with quartz, from ditto.
8. Marcafites containing Gold, intermixed with quartz, from Adelsfors, in the province of
Smalandiairi Sweden.
9. Earth and clay, containing particles of native Gold, taken up in the gullies formed by
the running off of the waters out of the levels in the Bacher mine, fituate on a ridge of
mountains near Chemnitz.
10. Garnets, containing Gold, with part of the yellow micaceous bed in which they were
found, from Fichtelberg, in the Marquifate of Bayreith, in Germany.
11. Copper ore, containing Gold, combined with lead ore rich in filver, feme blend, quartz*’
&c. from Sweden.
On the Outfide the Cafes .
9. Scum of Lead, the furface enriched with the moil beautiful colours, from the furnaces
at Alflon Moor, Cumberland.
10. A very large group of Quartz Cryflals, from the lead mines on the fame Moor.
11. Coarfe flalagmitical Spars, from Derbyfhire.
12. Coarfe ftalaaitical Spars, from Pool’s Hole, in the fame county.
13. A group of very large yellow double-pointed Spars, with hexagonal pyramidal enas,
formed on a flat group of fmallcf fpars of like figure, the bafe of which is a ferrugineous
tauk, from ditto.
14. A very large and fine Rock Cryflal, weighing 98 poundsj from Switzerland.
15. A moll capital mafs of the amber-coloured onachine Chalcedony, partly formed in
cavities, which have a fine poliihed mammillated or bubbled furface, from the Eafl Indies.
-—This fpecimen, which appertains to the filiceous earths, is fuppofed to be the largefl
of the kind in Europe, weighing nearly 224 pounds, and is eileemed of very great value.
16. Avery large piece of rich native Copper, combined with a little quartz and fpar*
weighing 49 pounds, from the cliffs on the fliores of the lake Ontario, in North America.
17. A very large block of the Prifmatic Feldfpath of Labradore, in which a combination
of different tints of gold, crimfon, blue, &c. varioufly blended in fine gradations, edged
with a lively green, conflitute one of the mofi beautiful and vivid affemblages of coloui
that can be imagined, partly flriped like:an onyx: Ihe colours pervade tne whole r^ a^s >
being as vifible on all parts of the outer furface, as well as in that part which has been
cut and polifhed ; * and is prefumed to be the mofi capital fpecimen of the kind ever
brought from that country. #
jS. Another, alfo partly onachine, whole colours are principally gieen, ye owan ue,
in various gradations from light to dark, happily blended togethei, <m making amp
vivid and beautiful appearance, exhibiting different changes Oi co.oui as vlewe mti
ferent lights : Thefe colours alfo pervade the whole fpecimen.
>9. A


10 A bull of Oliver Cromwell. ;
20. Another, of Lord Chefterfield, elleemed an excellent likenefs.
APARTMENT VL South Room,
On the Sides of the Arch at the Entrance.
1. Four curious plftures, done in a compofition to reprefent marble.
2. Two Frames, containing various imitations of butterflies and moths with mens, pre-
fented to Sir AJbton Lever by a Lady, . _ ,
3. Two Pi&ures, of a gentleman playing on a flute and a huflar, the drapery cunoufly done
with the wings of beautiful moths and butterflies,
GLASS CASES. VIII. and XL.
Nat 1 v e Fossils, continued •
POLISHED SPAR S,
1. White ftaladitical Spars, from Italy.
2. Gray ftaladitical Spars, with brown agate-like veins, from ditto.
3. Green ftaladitical Spar, rare, from ditto.
4. White ftaladitical Spars, with yellow clouds and fpots, from ditto,
5. Ditto, from the Grotto Feratto, Italy.
6. Clear yellow and white Spar, from the Ponte Mode, Italy.
7. Yellow and white ftaladitical Spars, veined like agate, from Italy.
S. Opaque yellow and white flaladitical Spars, finely veined, from ditto,
9. Ditto, from Caferta, near Naples.
10. Variety of flaladitical Spars, with white, yellow, and brown veins, from Italy.
Ij, Variegated Spars, of white, brown, andyellow colours, from ditto. —Thefe are called by
the Italians, Flowered Alabaflers.
12. Staladitical Spars, beautifully veined with white, yellow, and brown, many of them re-
fembling agates, from ditto. Moft of thefe are called Antique flowered and veined
alabaflers, by the Italians, being formed put of fragments of fmall columns and other works
of the ancients, found among the 'ruins in that country. Some are termed
probably being the produce of Egypt and other eaftern countries,
13. Red and white veined Spars, from Italy.
14. White Spar, with dark red undulated veins, from ditto,
15. Spar with yellow and red undulated veins, from ditto.
16. Singularly veined and flowered Spars, of white, yellow, brown, and red colours, thelafl:
moll predominant, from ditto, where they are called Alabaftro Fioritto,
H 2
jy. Dark
* See the remark in 67 , ncie, § andp, 68 , note , -J*


17* Dark red Spar, from ditto.
18. Brownilh red llrait-veined Spar, from ditto. *
19. Veined brown Spar, from ditto.
20. Ditto, from Ponte Mole, in ditto.
21. Ditto, from Monte Avuto, in ditto,
22. Dark brown Spar, from Italy. .
23. Ditto ? with undulatory veins, from ditto.
POLISHED MARBLES, * b.
1. Parian Marble, from Italy.— See Da Cofta's Nat. Eift. of Fcjfils , p. 1 88, No. 4,
2. Manner Greco Saligno, Salt-like marble, from ditto Ibid, p. 189. No. 3.
3. Statuary white Marble, from Carrara, in Italy, Ibid, p, 190. n . 6.
4. Ivory-like Marble, from Italy, where it is called Palombino Antico,— lbid, p. 191. «. 9,
5. Afh-coloured Marble, from the Marquifate of Baden Durlach, in the circle of Swabia,
Germany.
6. Afh-coloured Marble, from Derbyfhire,
7. Gray Marble, from Carrara, in Italy, a variety of the ftatuary marble. See Da Codas
Nat. Hiji. ofFeJJils , p. 190. n. 6.
8. Friar’s gray Marble, called by the mafons Dove marble, from Italy,
9. Clouded ditto, from ditto.
10. Ancient veined gray Marble, found among the ruins in Italy,
11. White and gray veined Marble, from Italy.
12. Brindled gray and white Marble, frpm ditto,
13. Dark gray Marble, from ditto.
14. Ditto, with red veins, from ditto.
14 A. Gray Marble, with red and white variegations, from
14 B. Gray Marble, with purple veins, from Derbyfhire,
15. Dark gray veined Marble, from Baden Durlach,
j 6. Striped gray Marble, from Italy.
17. Gray Marble, with undulated veins, from ditto.
18. Brecciated X gray Marble, from Derbyfhire.
19. Brec^
* I’hefc appertain to the lime-fanes , or fuch fones as burn to time , and are placed among the
calcareous earths . Magellan’s Cronftedt, p. 65 .-~The coarfer lime fones are much ufed in
England as a Jlux to promote the fujion of iron ores ,
x This term , which, as ohf rased in the note y p . 62, n. 44, is adopted from the Italians , is ap*
plied 10 fuch marbles whofe frudlure is not homogeneous , or forming one folid mafs, but has part
or pieces of a different nature in it , which are not blended with the fubfance of the fone , hut as if
inlaid or fuck in it . Vide Da Cofas Nat. Hif, of Foflls,p, 200. n. 19.


xq. Brecciated gray Marble, from
20. Pale yellow Marble, from the Marquifate of Baden Durladi.
21. Ditto, clouded with brown, from ditto.
a?. Pale yellow Marble, with brown dendrite, or tree-like fpots, from ditto,
aj. Variegated yellow Marble, from ditto.
24. Veliow Marble, with brown dendrite, from ditto,
2 S* Yellow Marble, clouded with red, from ditto,
26. Ancient pale yellow Marble, from the ruins in Italy.
27. Modern pale yellow Marble, from Verona.
28. and mottled yellow Marble, from the vicinity of Maples*
29. Ancient yellow Marble, from the ruins in Italy.
£,o. Modern yellow Marble, from Italy,
31. Ditto, from Sicily.
32. Ancient yellow Marble, clouded and veined with red, from the ruins in Italy,
33. Ancient brecciated yellow and red Marble, from Italy.
34. Yellow Marble, with purple veins, from Sienna in T ufcany. —Da Cofta's Nat . Hi ft,
o/FcJJils, p. ig6. n. 16.
35. Ancient variegated yellow Marble, from Italy. _ According to Da Cofta this is one
of the kinds the Italians call Brocatello, or brocaded marble. See his Hiji. o/FoJfiis, p.
217. n. q 3.
36. Yellow Marble variegated with purple, from Spain. —This is the true or fined Bro-
catello marble of the Eiiglilh mafons. Its price is about f. 20 the cubic foot.
CoJla' > f Nat. Hi ft. of F oftlls , p. 225. n. 65.
37. Ancient mottled yellow Marble, from Italy,
38. A lingular fpotted yellow Marble, from
39. Ancient variegated yellow Marble, from the ruins in Italy This is called bv the
Italians Caftraccane Antico, 7
40. Another, different, called Caffraccane Fiorrito Orientale, from ditto,
41. Gray and yellow Marble, from ditto.
41 A. Variegated yellow and green Marble, from ditto,
41 B. Clouded red and yellow Marble, from ditto.
42. Yellow and red Marble, from Baden Durlach,
43. Ancient ditto, from the ruins in Italy.
44. Spotted ditto, from Italy.
45. Brindled ancient yellow and red Marble, from ditto,
46. Pale red and yellow Marble, from Thuringia.
47. Pale red White and gray veined Marble, from a quarry near Plymouth. —Da Cojla's
Mat. Hiji.of FoJJils, p. 206. «. 33.
48. Ditto, from in Germany.
49. Ancient ditto, from the rums in Italy,
50, An-


50. Ancient flefh-coloured Marble, from ditto, —Da Ccjfa’s Nat . Hiji, of Fojils ,
195. n. 14.
51. Red and white veined Marble, from Sardinia, called by the Italians Sardinian Jafper.
52. Clouded red Marble, from Baden Durladi.
53. White Marble, veined and clouded with red, from Italy.
53 A. White Marble, veined and clouded with red and yellow, from ditto.
53 B. Another variety of the like coloured Marble,'from
54. Ancient variegated red and white Marble, from the ruins in Italy This is called by
the Italians, Flower of Perfxa.
55. Dark flefh-coloured and white Marble, from Sabina, in Italy.
56. Ancient pale red and white brccciatcd Marble, from the ruins in Italy.
57. Ditto, different, from ditto.
s§. Ancient red and white brecciated Marble, from ditto. —This is called oy the Italians
Breccia Corallina Antica.
59. Pale brecciated afh-coloured Marble, with a call of red, from Sicily.
59 A. Flefh-coloured Marble with black and white or inlaid fpots,Trom Italy.
60. Ancient pale red and white brecciated Marble, from the ruins in Italy.
60 A. Variegated Marble, the ground yellow, brecciated or inlaid with aflr-coloured and red
fpots, from
61. Ancient red and white brecciated Marble, from ditto.
62. Ancient brecciated Marble, having a dark flefh-coloured ground with brown and black
fpots,.and fomewhat refembling the plum-pudding flone. -r p. 70. No. 37. from ditto.
63. Ancient brecciated Marble, the ground dark red, with pale yellow fpots, from ditto.
64. Beautiful ancient brecciated Marble, having a red ground with gray and bright yellow
fpots, from ditto. .
65. Ancient dark red and white brecciated Marble, from ditto.-r- ihe Italians name this
Antique Porta Santa marble.
66. Dark red and white brecciated Marble, from
67. Veined red and white Marble, from i n Germany.
68. Variegated red and white Marble, from Sicily. The Italians, as well as our flatu-r
aries, call this Sicilian Jafper. _ , .
68 A. Striped and fpotted dark flefh-coloured Marble, with fmall black dendntas, from
Gibraltar.
68 B. Ditto, with gray Marble and white fpar intermixed, from ditto.
68 C. Flefh-coloured Marble, clouded with red and fpotted with black and greenhorn-
blend, from the ifland of Tide in Scotland. It began to be worked anno 1790.
69. Variegatedred and white Marble, from Sardinia. —This kind is termed by the Italians
Sardinian Jafper.
70. Ancient red and pale green brecciated Marble, from the ruins in Italy.
- 1 Veined red and pale green Marble, from Italy*
' 72. Pale


12. Paie red and gray Marble, from ditto:
73. Mottled red and white Marble, from ditto, . . 1
74 Ancient r ed arid white veined Marble, from tnc mins in Italy*
IS . Clouded red and white Marble, from France. This is called by the ftatuanes French
Jafper.
76. Clouded red and white Marble, from Italy.
77. Ancient ditto, from the ruins in Italy, called by the Italians Antique Porto Santo.
78. Dark red fpotted and veined Marble, from Italy.
79. Ancient red coral-like Marble, from the luins in Italy,
80. Dark red and white Marble, from Italy.
81. Ancient dark red and gray Marble, from the ruins in Italy. A variety of the antique
porto fanto marble, as it is called by the Italians.
82. Clouded Marble, of white, yellow, red and brown colours, from Italy.
83. Dark red and white veined Marble, from Pirna, in Saxony. Da Cojla's Nat, Htft. of
FoJJUs , p. 196.
84. Ancient pale purple and white veined Marble, from the ruins inlta y.
83. Brecciated pale purple and white Marble, from Italy.
86. Ancient dark purple and white veined Marble, from the ruins in Italy.
87. Clouded purple and white Marble, from Italy.
88; Variegated purple, brown and white Marble, from ditto.
89. Ancient ditto, from ditto. This is alfo called by the Italians Flower of Perfia. _
See b. 34. *
90. Singular fpotted purple and white Marble, very beautiful, from Scotland, received from
thence anno 1772.
91. Beautifully variegated purple and white Marble, from Italy.
92. A purple and white Marble, with lingular markings, from ditto.
93. Dark purple and white veined jafper-like Marble, from Saravegga, in Italy.
94. Ancient dark purple Marble, with fmgular dark veins, from the ruins in Italy. —*
This kind is named by the Italians, Ancient Coral-coloured African Marble.
95. Pale brown and white brecciated Marble, tinged with purple, from Italy.
96. Ancient dark purple and white brecciated Marble, from the ruins in Italy,
97. Ditto, with fmall brecciae or fpots, from ditto. This Is called by the Italians Ancient
Violet Marble.
98. Dark reddilh-purple and white brecciated Marble, from Italy.
99. Beautiful brecciated Marble, having a dark purple ground, with white and red fpots,
from ditto.
99 A. Purple and white brecciated Marble, from
10c. A beautiful ancient Marble, the ground of which is dark purple, variegated with
fmall brecciae, or fpots, of white and yellow, from the ruins in Italy, This is named by
the Italians Antique Semi-Santo Marble,
Tor. An-


101. Ancient coral-coloured and white brecciated Marble, from the ruins in Italy. This
is termed by the Italians Breccia Corallina Antica.
102. Clouded purple, brown, and white Marble, from Baden Baden, in Germany.
103. Ditto, from Italy.
104. A brecciated Marble, of white, yellow, red, brown, and black colours, from France*
105. A variegated Marble, its ground very dark brown approaching to black, veined with
dark purple and white, from Italy*
106. Clouded Marbles, of different degrees of colour, from light brown to almoft black;
iome of them with fpots and veins of yellow fpar, from the Marquifate of Baden Dur-
lach.
107. Dark brown Marble, fpotted with yellow fpar, from the Marquifate of Baden Baden,
108. Marbles of various colours, as gray, light brown, fed, veined, and clouded with
black; one of them fpotted with marcafite, from a quarry in Thuringia.
icq. Striped brown and white Marble, much like foflil wood, from Baden Baden*
lio Striped gray and white Marble, fpotted with red, from ditto.
111. Striped brown and red Marble, from ditto*
112. Light green Marble, from Italy*
II 3. Ancient veined green Marble, from the ruins in Italy.
114. Ancient veined green Marble, with flefh-coloured, red, and black fpots, from ditto*
The Italians name this Antique African Marble.
* 15* Green Marble, clouded with red and black, from in Germany*
116. Light green Marble, fpotted with white and dark green. This is the true Verde
Antico of the Italians, and is found among the ruins in Italy. Da Cofta fays, there
are quarries of it in the Genoefe territories. See his Nat. Hi ft, of Fcfils, p. 218, n. 35,
the 2nd variety. The Englifti ftatuaries efteem this marble, which is very fcarCe, equal
in value to the Brocatello marble, b. 36.
116 A. Green Marble, brecciated, of inlaid with white, yellow, and purple, from
a 17. Beautiful green, white, and Hefti-coloured Marble, from Italy.
118* Veined white Marble, fpotted with green, from Tirie in Scotland, firft difcoveml
hy Mr* Ralpe, anno 1789. The green fpots are a kind of Serpentine.
119. Dark greeh and yellow Marble, from
12c. Dark green Marble, from Italy.
121. Ancient Veined ditto, from the ruins in Italy,
122. brecciated light green Marble, with white veins and dark green fpots, from Italy,
This is called by our ftatuaries Egyptian Verde. —Ha Co/a's Nat. Hi/. ofFofls>p*
218, n, $3, var, 1.
123. Brecciated light and dark green Mafble, from Italy. This is named by the Englilli
ftatuaries Grecian Verde.— -Da Co/a' s Nat. H/. of Fo/ilt , p. 218, n. var. 3. whu
fays it is dug in Piedmont, and that the quarries are about three miles from Sufa, and 21
miles W. N, W. from Turin. * *
412. Varkgated black and white Marble, from
j 25. An-


£25. Ancient brecclated black and white Marble, from the ruins in Italy.
126. Pyed Marble, from Baden Durlach.
127. Ditto, from Italy.
128. Ditto, from Germany.
129. Black Marble, with yellow and white veins, from Italy. This is named by our
ftatuaries the black and gold marble. —Da Cofa's Nat, Hif . of FoJJils, p . 203, n, 27.
13c. Black Marble, from a quarry near Aftiford, in Derbylhire. —Da Cofa’s Nat . Hif . of
FoJJils, p . 185, n. 1.
131. Black Marble, from Carrara, in Italy.
132. Black Marble, from Baden Durlach.
133. Landfcape Marble, from Cottam, near Briftol. — Da Cofa's Nat . Hif . of FoJJils, p*
241, ». 2, where it is deferibed by the name of Marmoroides * Dendropotamites, and is
there faid to be alfo got on Mendip Hills, and near Bath.
133, A. A large round- flab of a Angular dendritical variety of ditto. —This, from its
ftze, is obliged to be placed outfide the Cafes.
MARBLES, containing Shells, Corals, and other extraneous Bodies, f
134. Afh-Coloured Marble, with fragments of fhells and other marine bodies in it, from
1*35. Gray and yellow Marble, filled with fhells, chiefly of the bivalve kind, fuch as
cockles, &c. from Italy. —Da Cofa's Nat, Hif, of FoJJils, p, 237. n. 81. The Italians
call thefe fhelly marbles Lumachella.
136. Ditto, from Whichwood Foreft, Oxfordftiire. —One fide of this fpecimen, being the
upper part of the ftratum, has the fhells in relievo, or only partly lodged in its furface. ibid,
137. Brownilh yellow Marble, with fhells, &c. in it, from Baden Durlach.
E3B. Brown Marble, replete with fragments of fhells, and minute yellow bodies, refembling
the eggs of fifh, from ditto.
139. Brown fhelly Marble, from ditto.
140. Brown Marble, having belemnitse and other foftil fhells'lodged in it, from Germany.
141. Brown Marble, replete with fhells of various kinds, chiefly univalves, among which
are fragments of pearly fhells of the ammonia genus, which being of the moft beautiful
colours, chiefly a bright crimfon, has obtained it the name of the Flame or Fire Marble.
’Tis got in the neighbourhood of Vienna' but not in any great quantity.
Part 11.
I
142. Browna
* By this, term Da Cofa means allfuch marbles as are not found in large continuedJlrata , hut
are only met ’with in loofe independant maffes on the furface of the earth , or lodged in frata of
other fubftances .
f Cronftedt places thefe among his conglutinated faxa, as he does the Verde Antique , and
feme other marbles, particularly the Magellan’s Cronftedt, p. 889.


Brown Marble, with Ihells in it, and containing alio feme bituminOns matter, from
Sweden. This is the Lapis Suillus, fetid or fwine ftone, of authors, and is fo named
on account of the difagreeable fmell it emits on being fcratched with a pin. Da Cofta's
Nat. Hift. of Fojfils, p. 172. n. 9. Cronftedt's Mineralogy by Magellan , p. 49. fed. 29,
and p. 475. fed, 241.
143. Brown Marble, with bivalve fhells lodged in it, from Derbylhire. Marmoroides ni-
gro fufeus conchyliis refertus. — Da Coftai s Nat. Hift. of Foftils, p. 248. n. 14.
144. Black Marble, with white bivalve Ihells of the anomia genus lodged in it, from the
quarries near Kilkenny, in Ireland. —Da Cofta's Nat . Hift. of Foftils, p. 2 32. n . 73.
145. Gray Marble, with corals and Ihells imbedded in it, from Gothland, in Sweden.
146. Yellow Marble, with ftellated corals lodged in it, from Sardinia.— lbid,p. 249, n. 15.
where it is called Marmoroides Fufco-ftavus Stellatus, live Aftroites Fufco-fiavus.
147. Purple Marble, with large fungus-like corals and other marine bodies in it, from
Blankenburgh, in the Duchy of Brunfwick, Lower Saxony. • Da Cofta's Nat. Hid. of
Foftils, p. 228. n. 69.
148. Reddilh brown Marble, in which are imbedded fome red and white ftellated branched
corals, fomewhat like that deferibed in Part 1. p. 45. n. 49. of this Catalogue, from
Dunbar, in Scotland.
149. Black and white Marble, with corals and fragments of encrini (afpecies of ftar-lilh*
having a long Hem) imbedded in it, from
150. An Aftroites, or Star-ftone, compofed of black Marble, with white ftellated cylindri-
cal corals in it, from Derbylhire, This kind is alfo found on the fea Ihores of many
parts of this ifland* Marmaroides niger coralliis refertus; —Da Cofta's Nat. Hift. of
Foftils, p. 244. n. y-.
151. Black Marble, with white branched corals imbedded in it, from Derbylhire. Thefe
corals are alfo like that deferibed in Part 1. p. 43. m 49. of this Catalogue.
152. Gray Marble, with fragments of the Items and branches of encrini, commonly called
entrochi, faturated with white fpar, lodged in it, from Derbylhire.— This is the Marmor
fufco-cinereum entrochis refertum of Da Cofta. See his Nat. Hift. of Foftils, p. 235. n .
who fays, that the whole metallic trad of the county of Derby is as it were one con-s
tinual quarry of this kind of marble ; and varieties of it are alfo in Yorklhire, Walesj
and other parts of the kingdom, which abound with it.
153. A reddilh Marble, with fragments of encrini imbedded in it, from
154. Brown Marble, with yellow fparry veins, in which are imbedded fome fragments of
entrochi and Ihells, faturated with fpar, from the Marquifate of Baden Durlach.
LAMINATED MARBLES.
"155. White Marble, with black dendritae, or Ihrub-like appearances in it, from Florence*
■Da Cofta's Nat t Hift . of Foftils, 169. n» 5.
156. Ditto*


156. Ditto, from Baden Durlach.
157. Yellow Marble, \vith black dendritae, from Sulenhofen, near Papenheim, Germany.
—Da Cofta* s Nat, Hiji. of FoJJils,p . 177. n. 15.
157 A. Ditto, from Baden Durlach.
158. Yellow veined Marble, with fmall black dendrita? in it, from the vicinity of Naples.
159. White and yellow veined Marble, from ditto.
160. Ditto, with a tinge of purple, from ditto.
r6i. White and yellow veined Marble, from Baden Durlach. —This, with the three next
preceding, are varieties of the kind deferibed in the next article.
162. Yellow and brown variegated Marble, commonly called the ruin marble, from its co-
lours, which not unaptly refemble the ruins of a town, from a quarry, near Florence.
Da Cojia's Nat . Hf. of Foffils, p . 183. n. iB.
SERPENTINE STONES, *
j, Serpentine Stone, varioufly coloured, fpotted, and veined, chiefly green. — Da Cofa's
Nat . Hiji . of FoJJjk , p, 266. n. 9. who fays, that the quarries of this ftone are at Zoeblitz,
a fmall city in Mifnia, which lies between Marienberg and Olberhayn, on the confines
of Bohemia. He alfo fuppofes it to be the Ophites Candidas of Pliny,
This Stone, on account of its variety of colours and foftnels, is turned and worked
into cups, plates, vafes, mortars, and various other utenflls, and even houlhold furniture,,
which are in common ufe all over Germany, and are greatly efteemed.
The name of Serpentine Stone has been given it on account of its being fpotted, va-
riegated, &c. like the (kin of a ferpent; as alfo becaufe it is greatly celebrated as an ex-
cellent antidote againft all poifons. This virtue is founded on an obfervation, that no
toad, ferpent, infeft, or any venomous animals whatever, have been found in its quarries,,
or even in the neighbourhood of them.
It is alfo fuperftitioufly cut into heart-like fhapes, and is ufed as amulets for Children.
Thefe amulets in Germany are vulgarly called Schreck-ftein . i. e. ftones to prefers one from
terrors ; however, its name and virtues feem more probably to be remains of the tradition
of the ferpentine ftones, or Ophite, of the ancients, which had the fame name and vir-
tues attributed to them ; and more fo, as this ftone feems to be their white Ophites.
In medicine its ufe has alfo been applauded by many, Tin&ures, pills, and plaifters
have been prepared from it, and ufed with fuccefs in the gout, ftone, cholic, and other
diftempers ; but by the more judicious its medicinal virtues are much diferedited.
Pliny fays the Ophites Candidas was foft, and that it was worked into mortars, vafes.
Sec. Ibid. p. 268, 269,
For an account of the component parts of this ftone, fee CronfiedFs Mineralogy, by Ma-
gellan, p. 99, 103, 105*
I 2--
2. Serpentine?
? Fhefe are doffed by Cronftedt among the magnefian earths, Magellan’s Cronftedt, p. 1o 1.


2. Serpentine Stone, clouded with red, from ditto.
3. Serpentine Stone, from Italy, where it is alfo turned into cups, vafes, Sc c, but is erro-
neouily called Lava.
4. Another variety of Serpentine Stone, from Italy,
3. Serpentine Stone, from the ifland of Anglefey.
6. Serpentine Stone, clouded and fpotted with red, from Scotland.
7. Variegated Serpentine-Hone, with veins of Heatites, from the Land’s End, Cornwall.—
This is part of the bed or flratum in which the fopey rock clay is found, between which
and the clay is a thin layer of talc, which protects the clay from the water.
GRANITES.* d.
1. Varieties of Gray Granite, from the Marquifate of Baden Durlach.
2. Gray Granite, from Italy, where it is called Oriental.
3. Pyed jafper-like Granites, from Baden Durlach.
4. Varieties of red Granite, from Baden Durlach.
5. Red Granite, from Italy, where it is called Oriental, —Da Cojla's Nat, Hifi% ofFoJJtls,
p. 276. n. 6,
6. Purplifh red Granite, from Baden Durlach,
7. B rowniih red Granite, from ditto,
8. Green and white Granite, from Catharinenberg, in Siberia. See No. 25 of Glafs-cafs
XIII. Apartment V. where this fpecimen is placed on account of its screen feldfpatk ,
9. Black and white Granite, from
PORPHYRIES, f
1. Gray Porphyry, from the ancient ruins in Italy.— It is called by the Italians Hard,
Black, Antique, or Oriental Serpentine.
2. Green Porphyry, from ditto. —This is alfo named by the Italians Hard, Green, Antique
or Oriental Serpentine, Da Cofa’s Nat. Hiji. of Fojjils, p. 287* 2.
3. Red Porphyry, from ditto. —This is the true porphyry of the ancients.— Plinii HiJl .
Nat. /. 36. c. 7. Da Cofta's Nat. Hiji . of Fojjils,p. 283. n. 1. J
4 Red
* The Granites are in general a combination of quartz., mica, and feldfpath : fometimes, but
rarely, Jhirl and garnets are imbedded in them. They are placed by Cronjiedt among the com-
pound fax a, in his Appendix to the Minerals. See Magellan’s Cronftedt, p. 885.
f Thefe are alfo ranged by Cronftedt among the compound fax a, in the Appendix to his Mine-
ralogy.— See Magellan’s Cronftedt, p. 879.
I According to Mr. Bruce, the Porphyries found among the ancient ruins in Italy , were got
from a ridge of mountains extending the length offour days journey, in his paj]agefrom the Nile
t» the Red Sea ; and where alfo he met with the Verde Antique, and other curious marbles ufed
by the ancients in their public buildings ; as alfo Serpentine-f one, Blood-fone, Granites, lAc.
£ es hii Travels to difcover the fource of the Nile, vol. 1 chap. B» p# 174 ——— 192.


4. Red Porphyry, with large {pots of feldfpath, part of a bowlder or pebbk found in En-
gland, but fuppofed to come from the Eaft Indies.
5. Brown Porphyry, from Italy, perhaps a variety of No. 3.
6. Black and white Porphyry, part of a bowlder found in England,
,7. Black and white Porphyry, from Italy, where it called Hard Oriental Black Porphyry,
and is probably originally from the fame country as No. 3. See the note there .
8- Brown and red Porphyry, from Sweden.
9, Green and black Porphyry, from Italy, where it is named Hard Green Oriental Por-
phyry. —Da Cojia's Nat, Hiji . of Foffls t p . 288, n, 3. This is alfo fuppofed to come
originally from the fame country as No. 3.
SA X A VAR I A, Compound Stones of different Kinds . f.
1. Pyed Whyn Stone, from Italy.
2. Ditto, from
•3. A curious green barytical Stone, from Corfica.— This is called in Italy Hard Oriental
Emerald.
4. A dark green barytical Stone, from Italy. —lt is called by the Italians Hard Oriental
Egyptian Bafaltes.
A compound Stone, of white marble and black fhirl, or balfates, from Italy.- I his is the
Bianco e Nero Moderno of the Italians. — Da Ccfd’s Nat, Hifi, of FoJJils,p. 20 2. n . 25.
6. A Saxum, compounded of a white filiceous done, wi'h black fhirl, or bafaltes, from
Italy. This is the Nero e Bianco Antico of the Italians, who alfo call it hard oriental
Egyptian black and white Granite.
7. A compound Stone, feeming to be a kind of Granite, with black fhirl, or bafaltes, in it,
from Baden Durlach, where it is called Ofen-dein, or Oven-done.
5. A compound Stone, confiding of crydallized bafaltes, in a white filiceous matter, from
L A V A. * g.
1, Gray Lava, with black fpecks, probably of bafaltes, in it, from Mount Vefuvius.
POLISHED FLUOR S. f h.
1. White and yellow cubic Fluors, from Derbyfhire.
2. Ditto, from ditto.— Particular fe&ions of the cubes form fmgular triangular figures in
thefe fpecimens.
3. Yellow cubic Fluors, from'ditto. This is cut the longitudinal way of the mafs, or
with the grain, as it breaks.
4. A
* Thefe appertain to the Appendix cf Crondedt See his Mineralogy, by Magellan,
p. 909.
f See the note on Fitters, at page 63.


4* A ipecimen, formed of a group of gray cubic Fluors, from DerbyiHre*
5. Gray and yellow cubic Fluors, from ditto.
6. Gray and red cubic Fluors, from ditto.
7. White, yellow, and amethyiline cubic Fluors, from ditto.
8. Varieties of the amethyiline cubic Fluors of Derbyihire; one with triangular figures hv
it. This kind is moil commonly ufed in making the obelilks, vales. &c. manufactured
in that county, where it is called Blue John. —lt is got on a fide of the high hill near
Callleton, in the Peak.
9. Ditto, from ditto. This fpecimen has undergone a certain degree of heat by fire,
which makes it of a redder hue than the natural appearance, and affords a pleafmg variety
in fuch pieces as are manufactured.
10. Honeycomb fpecimens of the white, yellow, and amethyiline cubic fluors of Derbyihire,
varieties of No. 7. from the fame place.— They have this appearance from being cut
the tranfverfe way of the mafs.
it. Veined fpecimens of the yellow and amethyiline cubic fluors of Derbyihire, another
variety of No. 7, and from the fame place.— Their veined appearance is owing to their
being cut longitudinally, or with the grain.
f 2. Dark purple and yellow cubic fluors, with Angular appearances in them, from Derby Ihire-
-13. Ditto, having curious triangular figures in them, owing to particular feClions of the
cubes, from ditto.
14. Purple and yellow cubic fluors, with yellow cauk intermixed, from ditto.-
15. White cubic fluors, mixed with lead ore, from ditto.
GLASS CASES IX. and X.
Columns, Obelisks, Vases, and various other ornamental and ufeful Articles :
made in Derbyjhire , from beautiful and curious Stones found in the Quarries-
and Mines of that County , and which , on account of the Articles they are for~
7ned of are placed in this Museum.
1. A cylinder made of white veined llalaClitical Ipar.
2. A fmall vafemade of a rare green and white llalaClitlcal fpar.
3. A vafe formed of a yellow llaladlitical fpar.
4. A cylinder made of red and gray veined marble.
5. A vafe made of the encrinus or entrochi marble, deferibed p. 112 of this Catalogue,
b, 132.
6. A cylinder, a vafe, and 2 eggs, formed of a gray cubic fluor.
7. A vafe made of a pale amethyiline fluor with Angular clear triangular appearances in it,
8. A pair of large columns, the principal parts of which are formed of gray cubic fluors,,
having internal cubes and cockfcomb marcafites.
9. Three


9* Three cylinders, 2 (mall vafes, and feveral eggs, formed of gray fluors, having marcailtesji
&c. within them.
10. A pair of large obelifks, the principal parts of which are formed of gray cubic fluors,
fprinkled with cockfcomb marcafites, the cubes being interfered in ths'catting in various
directions form curious triangular and other figures on the furface.
11. A vafe, the body of which is formed' of a gray and green cubic fluor, having curious
triangular appearances in it,
12. A pair of obelifks and an egg, formed of a gray cubic fluor, having lead ore in it.
13. Three fmall vafes and two eggs, made of a yellow fluor.
14. A pair of columns, the principal parts of which are formed of a pale variety of the ame-
thyfline fluor, defcribed p. 116 of this Catalogue, h, if.
15. A pair of large vafes, formed of a beautiful honeycomb and veined variety of the fame
kind of ffone.
16. Varieties of vafes, cups, eggs, and other articles, formed of different famples of the like
kind of ffone.
17. A pair of large vafes, and various other articles, made of the like kind of ffone, but
whofe colour has been changed to a lighter and more beautiful purple by means of lire.
18. A vafe and a cup, formed of a beautiful variety of the amethyftine and yellow
cubic fluor, having curious triangular appearances in it, owing to particular feftions ot
the cubes.
19. A large vafe, formed of a rich greeniffi brown cubic fluor, having red cauk and m-ir
cafites mixed with it.
20. A vafe, formed of the rich brown caukj a fpecies of barytes; defcribed in p 8 of this
Catalogue, No. 17.
Ovifide the Cafes,
41. A large and fine vafe. Made of a gray fluor, mixed with marcafites and blend the
former of which affords ctirious internal appearances in the clearer parts of the ffone.
On or about the Chimney Piece .
1. A Copy in Terra Cotta of the famous Mofes of Michael Angelo, the original of which ic
' at Rome, the gift of John Wilmot, Efq. S ch xs
2. A Venus, after bathing, a fine bronze.
3. A Dog, finely executed in the blue veined white Italian marble.
4. A large Mortar, formed of a red marble with fragments of encrini in it, from
"*■ i lus 1S retained on account of the ffone of which it is formed.
APPENDIX,


APPENDIX, marked ip
ConftjUng offuch Articles among the Minerals as have been added to the Museum;
fince the aforegoing Sheets’ were printed off. <
In the S A L O O N, No. 11.
Mountain Leather, a fpecies ofamianthi, from, the Wolkreffenlfchen Ertzgeburg, in
2 A Dolllhed fpecimen of greenilh Albedos, from Scotland^
CrVftaUized dark brown fhining Mica: (vitreum Rufficum) combined with opaque feld-
r mt . and coarfe quartz, from Altay in Siberia. . ...
.. White and variegated Clay, from Braffington in Derbyflure. - This is a principal in-
gredient in the porcellain manufactured in that county. _ _
c A hardkind of Steatites, or fope-ftone, from Googreale mmein
S \ his kind of done enters into the compofitloa of Mr. Turner’s Salopian China, and his
(, P ri “Upally ml., from A 11,.«...
7 '. Q A fmo-ularitv attending this earth is, that being ground fine- with water, in
which a little of any glutinous fubftanceis diffolved, and rubbed over a caft in plafter of
Paris, it gives it a fhining or pearly appearance : A plafter medalion, done in this man-
ner, is fhewn near the fpecimen.
9 S ; yellowed Steatites, from Planitz, in Saxony, called by the Germans Terra
’Miraculofa.
io. Laminated black Chalk, from France .
In the North-Room, or Apartment V.
',. Marcafite of a curious dendritical figure, formed between the lamina: of a purple Hate,.
r (Germany 'This is in the Glafs-Cafe , ho. XI.
I 2 cC“ selenitm,.ia long rhomboidal prifms. on white quartz, from Tyrol. -/«
Gl fC C vt “lenit. on a group of opaque white minute fpars, in the bafe of.
1 veins of violet fluor, partly cryttallized in very fmall cubes, from Der y-
-14f^SeotiTnbtmlful fmall needle-like prifms ™ *'
black rock-ftone, from the ifland Ferro, in the Baltic. In a/s /


i;. A group of rare cryftalhzed bodies of the filiceous genus, by fome termed Chryfolites,
by others Hyacinths, and by others fuppofed to appertain to the Shiris, in a decahedrical,
or ten-fidcd form, confifttngof a column of 8 Tides with flat ends, a!fo termed a truncated
octoedral pnfm combined with green and brown micae, and rhombic barytes, from the ori-
ginal ftrata in the fides of Mount JEtim, in Sicily. — 1„ the fat,is Cafe.
16 A group of filiceous Cryftals, of a laminated ftrufture, and curious fliape,byfome
thougnt to be garnets, from Siberia. —ln the fame Cafe. ' J
,7 ;," I n k f^r> Pr ‘ fa,S ’ 7 bedded in white quartz, from the Logan rock, near
toe Lcviid s End, Cornwall. In the fame Cafe.
.B_Gray Antimony ore, cryftallized in needle-like prifms, with white barytes, from Pel-
lobania, in Lpper Hungary In Glafs-Cafe No. XVIII.
19. Gray Silver ore, with fome galena, from Cornwall ■
p “ c “ k “ pp " "*• '" fci “ l wa '
1 finr* ° fM "‘ *** im - **• * * »*■
22. Red arfenical native Sulphur, with hardened black clay, and calcareous ftone, from a
“ Mar Sauerb «£> in Carniola Superior. —/»
23. Spar, from the original ftrata of Mount Vefuvius. —ln Glafs-Cafs No. XXII
2 4 . Half of a very large nodule of Agate, (part of that deferibed p. 33, No. 6.) havine a
hollow in it, lined with onachtne chalcedony, of white, yellow, purple and brown colours,
runumg one into the other, tn beautiful gradations, feveral parts of which, particularly the
mutabili °T S r "t en wetted with water > are ofcourfe the lapis
mutab. is, or changeable ftone, called • alfo oculus mundi, or eye of the world, and
STcJt aCCOUnt extremel y curious andrare > from France. This is placed outfide
2l '\ oapttal fpecimen of rich Galena, in large exofloedral cryftals, whofe furfaces exhibit
moft beautiful opaline colours, which are reflefted from one cryftal to another fo as a!
moft to dazzle die eyes of the beholder, combined with jetty black cryfta b,! '
&c from a lead mine on Alfton Moor, Cumberland. -In Glafs-Cafs No. XVJF
26. A large and fine fpecimen of clear white tabular Barytes; in well defined cryftals of
17 flZeS ’ eacb ° f 28 P| anes or faces > ounoufly grouped in all direftions. Some of
tlw laiger ones have fmaller cryftals vifible within them. The whole mafs has a flight
Glaflfe No. xflL Ce t 0 Calamine - Fr ° m “ kad mine ia Wcftmoreland.-/,
Part 11.
K
EX-


EXPLANATION of the PLATE.
AS many of the geometric terms made ufc of in the afcregomg defcription of tile
minerals, however familiar to the fcientific dudent, are not generally known to the
bulk of our readers, we have given the annexed plate, together with the following account
of the figures reprefented therein, which, we trull, will fufficiently explain the faid terms, as
well as others that may occur in the courfe of this work.
i. A Circle. Being a line continued in a regular curve till it ends where it began, each part
of which is at an equal dillance from the included centre.
2. A Triangle . A figure of three angles or corners; that figured is called a regular
triangle, the fides being equal.
3. A Square. A figure with right or flrait angles, and equal fides.
4. A Rhomb, or Lozenge. A parallelogram, or quadrangular figure, having its four fides*
equal, and confiding of parallel lines, with two oppofite angles acute, and two obtufe.
5. A Hexagon. A figure of fix fides, or angles, the mod capacious of all the figures that
can be added to each other without any interdice ; and therefore the cells in honeycombs
are of this form.
6. An Oflagon. A figure confiding of 8 angles or fides.
A Decagon. Is a figure confiding of 10 angles or fides.
A Dodecagon. Is a figure of 12 angles or fides.
7. A Cone. A folid body, of which the bale is a circle, from which it tapers to a point,
8. A Cylinder. A body having two flat furfaces, and one circular.
i), A Tetraedron . A body having four fides, each cf which is triangular. .This is to be
feen in the zinc,mercurial, and copper ores, and in the fpinel ruby.
10. A Prifm. A long body angulated lengthwife. That figured is of thofe which are
generally made of glafs or crydal, bounded with two equal and parallel triangular ends*
and three plain and well polifhed fides, which meet in three parallel lines, running from
the three angles of one end, to the other three angles of the other end ; they are ufed
to fhevv the colours exiding in light; oneway to obferve which is to hold one edge of the
fides to the forehead, and look into that plain or dat which is next the eye ; in doing
which the bodies that are reflected in the prifm appear beautifully tinted with colours,
fuch as are obferved in the rainbow. Several of the mineral bodies, from the condruc-
tion of their component parts, naturally exhibit thefe beautiful colours, as the Labradore
feldfpath, the felenites. See. and whenever there is a daw in clear quartz cry dais, the
fraflured part frequently exhibits like beautiful colours, called prifmatic from the priim.
Thofe crydallizations found in a prifmatic drape, have frequently diflimilar fides, they
occur in the fnirls, lead ores, &c. '
11. A Quadrangular Pyramid. A folid body, having a four-fided ba*e, and lour triangulai
fides, which meet in a point. Found among tin ores.
iz. A


32. A Cube, or Hexahedron. A regular folid body, confiding of fix fquare and equal faces,
or Tides, and the angles all right, confequently equal. Cryftals of this figure may be been
among the marcafites, fluors, lead ores, falls, pyrites, &c.
13. A Parallelopipedon, A folid figure, contained under fix parallelograms, or quadrilateral
figures, the oppoiites of which are equal and parallel; or it is a priifn, whofe bafe is a
parallelogram. It is always triple to a pyramid of the fame bale and height. The prifm
No. 10, is half of this, cut obliquely in two lengthwife, or from one edge to that mod
diftant from it.
14. Rhomhoidal Parallelopipedon. A figure of fix planes cr Tides, each of which is a rhomb.
The fix-fided Fontainbleau fpars, p. 82, No. 43. (by mifiake there faid to be from Monte
Marte) are exactly of this fhape ; as is No. 42, in the fame page, and it alfo occurs in
fragments of the pifolithi, fparry incruilations, Sec.
13. Another variety of the Rhomhoidal Parallelopipedon. Having alfo fix rhomboidal fides.
The double refracting fpars break into this figure, as the Iceland fpar, p, 82, No. 36•
The rhombic barytes is alfo nearly of this fhape.
16. An Hexagonal Pyramid , A folid body with an hexagonal bafe, and fix planes or fides
each of which is an ifofceles triangle (i. e. a triangle having only two fides equal) which
meet in a point. This is feenin the fpars, and in the oriental ruby.
37. An Odiaedron. A folid body of eight fides, which, in a regular figure of this kind, are
equal and triangular, reprefenting two quadrilateral pyramids joined at their bafes.
This is feen in the pyritical iron ores, the diamond, the fpinel ruby, tin ores, zinc ores,
allum, filver ores, lead ores, copper ores, the falfe emerald, &c.
18. Prifmatic Odiaedron . A folid body of eight fides, but which are difiimilar, four of them
being each a trapezium, or quadrilateral figure, whole four fides are not equal, and none
of its fides parallel. Calamine is fometimes found in a modification of this figure, as is
the Saxon topaz,
19. Rhomhoidal Odiaedron. A figure of eight fides, confiding of two quadrangular pyramids,
joined bafe to bafe, each plane of which is an ifofceles triangle, and the bafe a rhomb. The
Brazilian topaz is a modification of this.
20. Truncated Pri/matic Hexaedron. A body having a draft, or column, of fix fides, and
two flat ends. It is a modification of the rhomboidal parallelopipedon. This figure is in
the lead and copper ores, the fpars, (fee No. 48, in p. 82.) Aqua marine, (p. 77,
No. 164.) the columns of the Giants Caufey (fee p. 1.) Sec. — N. 8.. The loft mentioned
articles are removed from the Hall to the North Roo?n } or Apartment V. on account of their
immediate connection voith the minerals.
21. Flat or tabular ditto. This is a fegment or part of No. 20. cut tranfverfely, and is
found in fpars, mica;, copper ores, talc. Sc c.
22. A Tetraedron with the points truncated, making a figure of eight fides, three of which
are hexagonal, and five trigonal, obferveable in the fpinel ruby.
23. Rhomboidal Decahedron. A ten-fided lozenge-flraped figure, a modification of the rhom-
boidal odaedron, No. 19. This is to befeea in the felenites, p. 31, No. 3.
24. A


-A Regular Dodecahedron , A figure of twelve equal planes or fides, each of them equila-
teral}/ quingangular, or five-fided, a modification of the cube. It may be feen in the
marcafite, the lead ores, the garnet, the-diamond, &c.
25. Pyramidal Dodecaedron . A twelve-fided body, compounded of two hexagonal pyra-
mids, joined bafeto Dafe. This may be feen in the cryilalsof quartz.
Another Dodecaedr on, diiferently figured, may be feen in the fpars, confining of an
hexagonal column with two trigonal ends. See p. 82 and 83, No. 49 55.
26. An OSiaedron with the edges truncated, making a figure of twelve fides. This may
be feen among the tin ores.
27 \ An Exodioedron, or truncated cube, having fourteen fides, fix of which are oftagon, and
eight triangular ; obfervabie among the marcafites and lead ores.
28. Another variety of the Exofioedron, or truncated cube, fix of whofe fides are quadran-
gular and eight triangular, alfo to be feen among the marcafites and lead ores.
29. An Ofiaedron, with the points truncated, making another variety of the exo&oedron,
01 14-fided figure ; eight of vyhofe planes are of the form of a trapezium, and fix qua-
drangular. This may be feen in the lead ores, the fpinel ruby, marcafites, &c.
Z °' r ll ramida [ with the edges truncated, making a figure of eighteen fides.
his is in the columnar quartz cryftals.
31. A Regular Ico/aedron. A polygonal figure, having twenty faces or fides, each of which
o an equilateral triangle, and is a modification of the cube.
32. Another Icofaedren, being an oftasdron with biangular points. The pale topaz from
Mount Caucaius, p. 77, No. i;6, is of this figure.
33. A Polyedron, containing 24 quadrangular faces, another modification of the cube,
pus is thefigure of the Vefuvian garnet, p. 33, No. 28, and p. 76, No. 147, but which
is tnere faid, by mifiake, to have 26 fides.
34* Another modification of the cube, having 26 fides, obfervabie in the fluors.
35. A Cube , with the edges bevelled, making a Triacontraedron, or figure of 20 fides
This is among the fluors. ' . 6 3
A regular triacontraedron , is a figure with 30 rhombic faces, and is alfo a modifica-
tion of the cube.
36. Another variety of the triacontraedron, being a modification of the rhomboidal pa-
rahelopipedon, having alfo 30 planes. This figure is met with among the fpars. See
p. 84, No. 79.
1 wl/h to have farther infght into this matter, may confult De Lille’s Cryflallogra-
piue, fro?n which curious work moji of the fgures in our plate were taken .
End op the Second Part,








































