

\VAYC I
A COMMUNITY OF CLUBS
•7#r#


THE V.A.Y.C.
The Victorian Association of Youth Clubs (formerly the Victorian Associa-
tion of Boys’ Clubs) derives its strength from the vitality of its constituent
members.
It is a voluntary association of independent Boys’, Girls’ and Youth Clubs
in the State of Victoria, which seeks to encourage, by the co-operation of its
members, the advancement of the moral, mental and physical well-being of
Australian Youth.
It has no power, legal or otherwise, nor any desire, to interfere in any way
with the policy or management of any member Club.
★ WE BELIEVE
For the complete and balanced education of our future citizens, some form
of Club life is necessary, and is best achieved by working in partnership with
home, school, church and other agencies.
★ THE WORTH OF CLUBS
Youth Clubs provide for the proper development of their members by—
Giving opportunities for the profitable use of leisure time in the pursuit of
their natural aptitudes;
Affording them the chance to develop independence, responsibility and
leadership by taking active part in organisation and management of their own
Club;
Encouraging Club spirit and thereby laying foundations for social unity.
THE KEYSTONE EMBLEM
The Keystone Emblem of the V.A.Y.C. is the internationally recognised emblem
in this field of Boys’ and Youth Club work—linking the Victorian Association with
the N.A.B.C. of Great Britain, The Boys’ Clubs of America, and other kindred
overseas organisations.


AS AN ASSOCIATION . . .
The V.A.Y.C. is recognised monetarily by the Government; acts as a channel
for grant aid; and actively campaigns for increased recognition for the work and
worth of Youth Clubs.
The V.A.Y.C. exchanges and disseminates the latest and best ideas in Youth
Club work from local and overseas experience; and, with the consent of its
members, determines policy and seeks to raise the standard and standing of
Youth Club work in the State.
The V.A.Y.C. can, by providing opportunities for members to meet together,
speak with a common voice, and therefore with added strength and force.
★ SERVICES FOR YOUTH CLUBS . . .
The V.A.Y.C. helps Clubs in the following ways: —
It provides the services of experienced Field Staff to advise on all aspects
of Club work;
It advises on finance and buildings—bringing to bear the combined value
of widely-shared experiences;
It advises on equipment for Clubs and undertakes a measure of central
purchasing;
It provides personal accident insurance for Club members and instructors,
and public liability protection for Club committees;
It fosters regional organisation for Country Clubs and promotes inter-Club
and other competitions to bring Clubs together and raise the standard of work;
It makes an annual leadership award to a member of each Club—the coveted
“Keystone Award”;
It publishes a monthly news-sheet of topical and useful information;
It co-operates with other voluntary Youth organisations through the
Associated Youth Committee of the National Fitness Council.


FURTHER SERVICES
The V.A.Y.C. further assists member and non-member
Clubs in the following ways—including some of special
value to new Clubs:
It issues special publications dealing with Youth Club
activities and management, and others of more general
nature for enlistment of public support;
It plans leadership training and co-operates with
other agencies in this field to provide specialised instruc-
tion for the voluntary leader;
It provides special speakers, films and general aid for
public meetings to establish new Clubs or revitalise local
interest;
It advises new Clubs on equipment, premises and
general Club organisation and makes available the
accumulated experience of all Clubs;
It acts on behalf of all Clubs in approaches to
statutory authorities.
THE KEYSTONE BADGE
Members of affiliated Clubs are entitled to wear the Key-
stone Badge with the addition, if they desire, of the name
of their own Club.
AFFILIATION
To be granted affiliation or associate membership a
Club must exist for the moral, mental and physical well-
being of its members, and be conducted to comply with
the minimum conditions laid down by the Association: —
To qualify for affiliation) a Club must —
Be operating on an acceptable constitution;
Have a committee of management, comprising
majority of adults; and responsible leadership;
Conduct Club meetings at least once a week.
Have as members at least 15 boys and/or girls be-
tween the ages of 14 and 18 years;
Charge a regular membership subscription;
Be prepared to provide a well-balanced programme,
and encourage some form of participation by the mem-
bers in the management of their Club.
Associate membership may be granted to any Club
that does not fulfil all the above requirements.
AFFILIATION FEE
The annual affiliation fee is £1 per annum, to be paid
when membership is granted, and renewed thereafter on Ist
July each year.
All enquiries should be addressed to
THE EXECUTIVE OFFICER, VICTORIAN ASSOCIATION OF YOUTH CLUBS
62 Wellington-Parade, East Melbourne, C.2. Telephone JA2019
Sr Kelt
Registered as a Company, for charitable purposes, under the Companies Act 1938.
Donations to the Association are allowable as an Income Tax deduction.
