

j». S&
W-
x
»
V; : ; X W‘
£# v * $/&&*'
P* *sWi& ■


pln<nfc


A COMPLETE REPORT
OF TUE EX AMI NATION IN THE ALLEGED
MVR DE R GASE
OF THE LATE
KINDER,
ALL Ti IE C OB K ESPONDENCE,
THE DIAEY,
POTJR PHOTOGRAPHS,
BY MILIJGAN BROTHERS, 84, KING STREET,
MR, & MRS. KINDER and MR. & MRS. BERTRAND.
PRIPF | WITH photogeaphs ls. 6d.
r nVITHOUT PHOTOGHUPHfi ... ... ls, Op,
Is, Od,
SYDNEY:
PiUNTSD POE THE PüBIJSHEE 4.T THE OiXTOV StKAM MaCHUTE P«INTI!TQ OPPIOB,
Uß t PITI-STREET, NKXX MfirilOPOHTi-'f HOTBUi


.
*


f'Wlb
INTEODUCTION.
In this book is contained the whole of the evidence taken at the Water Police
Court at the prelitninary examination of the prisoners, Mr. and Mrs. Bertrand
and Mrs. Kinder, charged with the murder of Henry Kinder. The intelli-
gent reader will, of course, form his own conclusions of the weight tobe
attaohed to the evidähce —will judge for himself the value of the admissions
made by Bertrand to several witnesses, and will also be able to decide whet
the Crown made out a prima fade case to warrant the committal ol Mrs
Bertrand. Before the final committal of the prisoners, we had an mdication
that the populär feeling was strongly excited against Bertrand and Mrs
Kinder, evidenced by the assault committed on Mrs. Kinder when leavrag
Darlinghurst Gaol for the Court, and by the hooting, hisses, and exeevations'
which greeted the appearance of Bertrand when about tobe dnven to pnson'
These were unmistakeable manifestations, and however we may censure those
people who indulged in them, we are bound to respect the fine natural and
honest instinct out of which they Sprung. But if the public have
already displayed their abhorrence of the conduct of Bert and and Mrs*
Kinder; we are bound to confess that much sympathy has been shewn to-
wards Mrs. Bertrand. And we think that sympathy is not xnisplaced. The
case of this unhappy young woman is a peculiar one. We, in common with
nearly the whole public, have woudered how it was that Mrs. Bertrand displayed
such a long-suffering patience uuder the abominable and eruel conduct of her
husband. Why did she submit to blows, to threats, to murderous attacks, and
to indignities which canuot be named without the hot blood mantling up into
one’s face ? One would have thought that the natural spirit of the woman
would have rebelled at such disdainful and contumelious treatment from the
man who had sworn to love and cherish her. We can understand a fond»
loving, simple, trusting woman enduring even blows from her husband, with-
out blazoning her wrongs to her parents, or the world. But it is
exceedingly difficult to comprehend how any woman could bear to se@
a rival in her husband’s arms, and still be silent. Mrs. Bertrand was, nu
doubt, crushed in soul and body, and her spirit was subdued to her husband’s
will. But there must have been some other reason why she held her peace
during the long course of ill-treatment she sufiered from. We are in a posi-
tion to explain the reason why she did not complain to her mother or father-
in-law tili Bertrand endeavoureü to force her to take poison. And the reason
was this 'When Bertrand sought his wife in marriage, the eourtship was
approved by her mother; but her step-father (Mr. Palmer) was oppgsed /to
the match. A sister of Mrs. Bertrand’s was engaged tobe married at the
same time, and the Rev. Heorge King was asked to marry both sisters on the


I ,
same day at Newtown. The matter was kept secrot from Mr. Palmer tili the
very day of the marriage, when, accideatally Hearing of it, he hurried off from
Ins shop in Sydney to protest against it. He arrived at his house before the
ceremony had begun, and at once made known to Mr. King his objections to
the marriage taking place. Mrs. Palmer, pointing to the b.ethrothed of her
younger daughter, said, “ What is your objection to him P” haming him.
Mr. Palmer replied, “He is a man—l freely consent to his marrying my daugh-
ter.” Then she said, “What is your objection to Bertrand ?” “He is a wretch,’,
replied Mr. Palmer, I will not allow him to marry my daughter.” Thereupou
Mr. Kmg reasoned with Mr. Palmer, and poiuted out that he really could not
prevent his daughter’s marriage, for she might goto the Presbyterian clergy.
man and ükrry despite him. And he adduced some other reasons, which,
though they failed to reconcile Mr. Palmer to the marriage, induced him t 0
withdraw or modify his protest. And Bertrand married. And so it feil out,
when Mrs. Bertrand was ill-used by her husband, she naturally shrank from
eomplaining tohei parents,because she was afraidher father might either quarre!
• with her mother, or tnumph over her, seeing that his objections to Bertrand
turned out so well founded. The reason is not a strong or well founded oue,
but we understand how ifr would affect the conduct of a woman of Mrs.
Bertrand’s temperament. Easy going and submissive, she loved much, and
suüered much. We cannot defend her weakness, but we appreciate the
motivea which induced her to hide her husband’s villanies from the world.
Having said thus much in explanation of her conduct, we conclude by hoping
that justice may be done in the case, the guilty punished and the innocent set
free.


SHOCKING- SUICIDE.
A most deplorable instance of self-destructiou formed the subject of
Investigation befor tbe City Coroner, at Dind's Hotel, North Shore, on
Saturday. Henry Kinder, late principal teller in the City Bank, shot
bims elf in the head with a pistol on last Monday evening; and he died
athis residence, North Shore, on Friday night. The following are
the depositions taken in regard to this painful incident.
I Maria Helen Kinder deposed: Deceased, aged thirty-five years,
was my husband. He was a native of London, and has been in the
colony over two years. We have been five years married, and have
two children. Since the City Bank opened he has been principal teller
there; andwhen in New Zealand he was in the Union Bank and the
New Zealand Bank. He was in difficulties in New Zealand, and that
was the cause of his leaviug there. Of late I observed bis health
becoming impaired, and he was more irritable than formerly. He was
generally seized with fits after being excited, but he was not under
medical treatment. He had leavo of absence from the bank on account
of ill health, and has not been there for nine days past. He kept the
pistol produced locked up in a ehest of drawers. About a week before
.the occurrence he threatened to take his life; he has so frequently
threatened to take his life that I did not think he would do so. Within
two or three days before the occurrence he was drinking freely. He
generally came home in driuk; and I attribute the state of mind he
was in to his drinking habits. I tried to check his drinking pro-
pensities. Lately some demand for money was made to him from New
Zealand. He took that very quietly. On Monday last deceased and I
had a disagreemeut; he was then very violent, and threatened to leave
me. I was doing some needle-work when I heard the report of fire-
arms ) and on looking up I saw deceased had shot himself. Imme*
diately before I heard the report of firearms deceased came into the
room; he made no remark. Nothing was done to excite him. The
persons in the room did not attempt to prevent deceased from shooting
himself. After he fired the shot deceased inclined to the left side. I
ran and caught hold of him. The lady and gentlemen were not in the
room when deceased was quarrelling with me Deceased had been to
Sydney on that day, and when he came home I observed that he had
been indulging very much in drink. Lately he was careless in his
dress and person, and only had a regard for one of his children. He
was restless at night, and was a heavy smoker. The occurrence
happened betweeu 5 and 6 o’clock p.m. on last Monday, and deceased
died last night, at about half-past 9 o’clock.
Henry L. Bertrand, dentist, deposed: I have known deceased
and Mrs. Kinder for the last ten months, and have been on visiting
terms with them. I usually saw deceased once or twice a day. I
thought him the strängest man in the world; he wandered a great
deal, and spoke of religious matters in a very peculiar manner. He
indulged freely in drink, and I often tried to dissuade him from it. On
last Sunday moming deceased and his wife were at my house. Mrs.
Kinder told me that her husband had threatened to shoot himself on
the night previous, but that he could not find powder and ball. Deceased
adfOitted it; and he said that it was not right of his wife to speak to
me of his domestic affairs. Wo passed the day together at the So uth
Head, and he was drinking rather freely with me. When we got
deceased to my house, he kept arguing with his wife. He became
very violent, and he pushed his wife out of the room and shut the door,
saying he would “ tarne her or kill her in six months," X told him


thero was no occasion to go on in that way; and he said he would like
to have a duel with me, as he was a good shot. I remarked that I
wished to drop hia acquaintance; and he then became calm, saying
that he was in great difficulties in money matters, and wishing me to
excuse bim. On thc next day he came over to me, and was very
friendly; he asked me to forget what had happened, and he invited me
over to bis housc that evening. My wife went over in the moruing;
and at about 5 o’clock I reached deceased’s house where I found de-
ceased, Mrs. Kinder, and my wife in the room. Deceased, who was
seated at the fable, and was in a morose humour, seemed glad to see
me, and he said, “ I bäte tobe shut up in the room; I bäte tobe with
lwomen; come out and have some beer/' Although I saw lae had been
drinking, in order to pacify him I went with deceased to Dind’s public-
house where we had one glass of beer ouly. We left the public-house
immediately. Deceased kept talking of bis wife, saying that he would
wear her out and kill her in six months, We got back to deceased’s
house at twenty-five minutes to 6 o’clock. He sat down on a room chair.
My wife and Mrs, Kinder were standing in the room near the window.
My wife remarked, “ Have you given the letters to Mr. Kinder ?” I had
three letters for deceased, and I handed them to him. He opened
the letters; they contained accounts, one from Giles’s and the other
from Chisholm’s, amounting altogetherto £l9. Deceased said, “more
accounts.” He commenced to read the other letter, which was from
-New Zealand. When he had partly read it, Mrs. Kinder turned round
to deceased and said, “What is that, my dear?” He said “something
very pleasant indeed,” handing the letter to bis wife. He commenced
Smoking very rapidly. After Mrs. Kinder had read the letter, and was
handing it to me, shesaid toher husband, “will you allow Mr. Bertrand
to read the letter? ” It annoyed him, as he wished to hand me the
letter himself. I read all bis letters, and knew all bis business. The
letter was a demand from the New Zealand Bank for £l2O. Hc said,
“don’t you think the property would fetch more ? ” and I said, “it
appears they have a claim upon you.” He said “it is that wretch
Monkton that bas done this.” Deceased then got up and left the room.
After having been absent about five minutes, he returned to the room
as I was folding up the letter. I saw a change in him; bis face was
of a bluish color. and he was smoking. I handed him the letter, and
he put it into bis pocket carefully with the other two letters. My
attention was taken from him for a few moments, and when I looked
at him again, I saw the pistol produced in bis right hand, the muzzle
of it being against the right side of bis head near bis ear. I heard a
loud report; the two ladies feil, and I thought they were shot. The
pistol feil from bis hand, but the pipe remained in his mouth. The
■ladies jumped up, and, screaming, rushed outof the room. I followed
them, bnt returned shortly afterwards and found deceased still sitting
up with blood flowing from the right side of his head. Before I left
for a doctor, deceased feil from the chair, and Mrs. Kinder was Holding
up bis head. I went to several doctors but could find none of them at
home, and I left word for Dr. Eichler, who came in the evening.
When I returned to the house deceased seemed conscious; he was
calling “Bertrand, Bertrand; he will be as good as any doctor to me. ’,
I bathed his head, and applied some cloths. I saw he had lost a great
deal of blood, although everything was done to try and stop the
bleeding. There was a wound on the right side of his head, and hia
right eye was swollen and very black. Although deceased called for
me he did not know me. In my opinion the excitement he sufiered
from was caused by drink j tue difficulties be was in also annoyed him


very much. He was jealons of bis wife with every person; and was a
monomaniac on that point. Deceased’s wife vvould answer bim wben
a buscd her. To my knowledge for the last six months lam cerfcain
Mrs, Kinder never gave deceased cause for the unkind manner that ho
had towards her. I kept the occurrence quiet from the police, thinking
that deceased would recover. The pistol produced was mine. He
asked for a pistol on Friday to have practice firing at sorae bottles,
and I gave it to him ; I also gave hira some caps, but no powder or
shot. I was not aware that he had threatened to take his life or his
wife’s. I believe his mind was not impaired wben I gave him the
pistol. I never saw deceased firing at bottles.
William Cooper, acting teller in the City Bank, deposed; I have
known deceased since the bank was opened. I have always foundhim
a very clever man of business, _ and an exceediugly good teller. 11
observed that bis health was failing for the last six or seven nionths*
but lam not aware that he made any mistakes. The manager gave
him leave of absence which commenced on the 23rd September on
acqount of ill-health. _ When he gave up his books and money every-
thing was correct. His salary was £3oo per annum, payable monthly,
I saw him twice and he told me on those occasions, that his health was
very much improved; he appeared in better spirits. He seenied tobe
an excltable nervous man; and he has stated to me that he was subjeefc
to fits and had heart disease. He was very much liked by all in the
bank. The only occasion that he was ever found fault with by the
manager of the bank was once when he spoke rather sharply to oue of
his juniors. Deceased was not a fast man ; he was fond of his beer,
and could stand a good deal of liquor. I was greatly astonished when
I heard of this occurrence. I was very intimate with deceased; he
told me of his difficulties which I think were such as a man in his
Position could surmount. I know his wife. He never complained of
her; and I should say she w r as not extravagent in running him into
debt. A trifle w r ould at times excite him. The receipt of a letter from
New Zealand as mentioned would upset a man like deceased. He
would brood over anything very much; he was very impulsive; he
suifered from indigestion; he smoked a great deal ofa morning; he'
was careless of his person; and would go all day without food, drmking
beer freely of a morning.
, Dr * , Elcbler deposed that he was called to see deceased at about
II o clock on Monday night. He found him lying on a sofa, with a
large lacerated wound, reaching from the maxillary angle up to the
temples, and measuring about four inches ; the right ear was hangiim-
back from its proper place about two inches; the wound was
ai *d partly filled with clotted blood. Deceased was partially conscious,!
and his pulse waa weak and slow. Witnessed cleansed the wound and*
exammed it. The temporal artery and part of the maxillary artery
were tom, and the temporal bone was fraetured. The wound had a
tendency upwards. There were no indications that any sub-
stance had entered the bone into the brain. The injury doscribed*
caused death. Witnessed believed the wound was made by the dis-
of a pistol, like the one produced, loaded with powder and
wadding. He had no hope of deceased’s recovery when he first saw
him, and he believed deceased inflicted the injuries himself. Deceased
was a stranger to him, but judging from the evidence he had heard, it
was his opmion that deceased was an imbecile.
f°ll°wing is a copy qf the jury’s verdict: « Deceased died from
i j ec ! iS a wound inflicted by himself by discharging a pistol
loaded with powder. whilst labouring under a fitof temporary insanity,”


BATHURST POLICE COURT.
Monday, 27x11 Nov., 1865.
(Beforc Br. Palmer P.M. and J. B. Richards, Esq., J.P.)
Maria Helen Kinder, apprehended on a warrant, chargecl with bemg
accessory to the murder of Henry Kinder, m ot
thc Detective Office, was remanded to Sydney tobe < dealt Mit .
[Mr. Wäger and Mrs. Kinder arnved m Sydney on Tuesday
evening.]
WATER POLICE COURT.
VIOLENT DEATH OF HENRY KINDER.
CHARGE OF MURDER.
Henry Louis Bertrand, (25), dentist/lately carrying ou busmess m
Sydney, and Jane Bertrand, (21), bis wife, were on Wednesday, tke
29th ultimo, brought before the Water Pohce Magistmte and Mr. G.
R Elliott, J.P., on a Charge that they did at St. Leonards, m ™ J s
trfct of Sydney, on or about the 2nd October last, wihully,
and with malice aforethought, kill and murder Henry Km f d
Helen Kinder (apparently about thirty years qf age), the wüe ot
ceased, was at the same time charged with bemg an accessory to the
Butler appeared as counsel for the Crown; Mr. W. Roberts was
for^dMr P s P Bertrand; and Mr R. W. to of
Gumer and Robberds), with Mr. P. Macpherson, for Mis. Kmdei.
Detective Elliott apprehended Jane Bertrand on the 28th ultim
her residence in Wynyard-square; she was conveyed to the lem«le
watchhouse, where he read to her the warrant by virtue of which she
was arrested, and to the Charge therein contained she ’
he received from her a gold watcb, cham, locket, and two nngs, anü a
Portemonnaie containinf £6 18s. 6d.; in the portemommie there were
twn rards bearins the name of Kinder. ,
Henry Wäger, resident clerk in the Detective Department, proye
the arrest of Maria Helen Kinder, at Bathurst, on Monday, the 25th
ultimo • she was, by warrant under the hand ol the Police Magistrate,
remanded to Sydney; witness escorted her from Bathurst; she mado no
who had been removed under writ * Mtm
corvus from Darlinghurst gaol, (where he was undergomg asentence
in default of sureties to keep the peace—for usmg threaffinmg -
guage to a Mrs. Robertson), was, on the mormng of the 29 “’ te( J
at the Darlinghurst police Station, by detective Eihott, on the P*
Charge. When the warrant was read to him, he said Itsiat ea
heavy Charge.” Elliott asked “Am I take that as your answei to the
Charge ?” Bertrand rejoined, “Amlon my tnal now Eihott said,
“No, lam only stating to you the Charge. Bertrand added, My
reply to it is—Not guilty.”
Prisoners were remanded until
Monday, December 4th.
Mr. Butler, in opening the case for the Crown, referved. to the
nature of the evidence intended tobe adduced, in order that their M or-
shins might understand the relation of its parts, and judge of their
St Ä evidence was in course of hearing. The
as to Bertrand and his wife would be admissions made by them, taken
in connection with othor testimony; and, as far as Mrs. ■ W . l ‘
concerned, it would be for their Worships to take into account the cn-


cumstances tending to prove the probability of her being concemed
with the alleged crime; if the other two prisoncr were tobe com-
mitted outhese admissions it would be a question fortheir Worshipsto
consider whether the circumstances did not also iuvolve her committal,
Indeed, the state of circumstances he shonld lay befqre the Court would,
he believed, render it morally impossihle to commit the other prisoners
without committing Mrs. Kinder. The motive for the crime would be
found in the writings both of Bertrand and Mrs. Kinder, as there would
be sufficient to satisfy their Worships that even during the lifetime of
the husband alleged to have been murdered, there was a personal inti-
macy, and, perhaps, an illicit intercpurse between Bertrand and Mrs.
Kinder; at all events such an intimacy as could not without fur-
nishing a eine to the imputed crime. On the occasion when Bertrand
prosecuted a man uamed Jackson for seuding him a threatening lettor,
what he said in reference to that showed that there was the strengest
possible intimacy; and on the same occasion Mrs. Kinder, under
cross-examination, being asked if her husband was not jealous of her,
said “ Yes, but he never had any occasion.” It would be proved that
he had only too much occasion, and that this was a falsehood upon oath.
After the death of Kinder, and when Mrs. Kinder had gone to resido
at Bathurst, what was called a Journal or diary was kept by Bertrand,
it being an understanding between them that he shonld Jot down his
thoughts, feelings, and the events of the day for her perasal when they
shonld meet again, From entries in this diary it would be clearly seen
that it was his intention to proenre a divorce from his present wife, and
to marry Mrs. Kinder : the very first entry was in a most impassioned
strain. He talked of her as his wife, and of “ sweeping away, as with
a scimitar, his enemies,” or those who shonld “ step between her lovo
and him.” “ Think kiudly ofme —ofmy great failings,” it proceeded—
“see what I have done for thee—for my, for our love;—-think of that,
and doubt me if you can.” In reference to the prosecution of Jackson,
and his committal to prison for sending a threatening letter, there was
an entry to this effect: —“It pleased me—l am satisfied—thus once
more perish my enemies. He is disposed of for the present —are you
sorry ? Came home. The first tliing Jane did was to teil me that
after all our quarrel with regard to your laughing at Jackson, you,
while I -was in Court, laughed openly at him, Did you do so ?—if so,
you will be his ruin, for I have not done with him yet. Why will you
enrage me? I called on Cooper, at the City Bank. It might be neoes-
sary to explainthat grounds would be found for imputing to Jackson
an intimacy with Mrs. Kinder, and that Bertrand, having an affeqtion
for the womän, became jealous of this man on acconnt of his antece-
dent relations with Mrs. Kinder whilst they were living in New Zea-
land. In another entry he said, “I am now by my own agonies
paying a debt to retributive justice; how or what I have made others
suffer, God only knows; but if I have I ricbly deserve all 1 feel, and
you my love, have you not done the same.” What this related to was
a matter of inference taken in connection with other facts and circum-
stances that would be offered in evidence. In reference to the inten-
tion of getting a divorce, he said, “ Dream of the future, for wo
both look forward to repeut our sins and make peace with our God; I
am sure He will help us tobe good if we try with all our heart and
strength,” &c. Then he said, “ Thinking of the time when we shall
meet to part only in death-—when will that time arrive? It approaches
surely, but with slow steps ; but it will come, believe me, as surely us
you believe there is a God—l have said it.” He said further, “ what
would life be without thee, or even the hope of posses,sing thee, ’ In


■anöty er passage this occurred“ I look back at tbe past, and lam al-
mosfe astonisbed at wbat I have dared and successfully executed. Can
you., fafter that, say you have not faith in me—that I am changed, and
tha't I could care for others beside thee ?” Then, in reference to her
fut »re conduct, he advised her tobe good, as it was nottoo lateto pray
to Qod with a true repentant heart, adding, “ I dare not yet lift up my
v< jj.ce to Hirn—l feel I dare not yet ask bis forgiveness—my dear wife,
p ray for thy husband.” The following would be incredible, except on
t i?e supposition that Mrs. Bertrand was perfectly cognisant of his inti-
macy with Mrs. Kinder:—“ I speak a great deal of my affairs to my
dear sister, she loves me, and is much concerned about our future; sho
l; is favourable to our divorce, and this, under the circumstances, is the
most kind thing I can do for Jane and for all concerned.’' Again he
said, “ What is our love if the mere calamity of casual affairs upsets
us thus—l should be ashamed of ray love, of what I have done for it,
if I knew not different from that—that is our only excuse on earth or
in heaven for what we have accomplished.” Then with reference to
the supposition of anteeedent intimacy, he said, “ Do you, my Helen,
ever dream that we are locked in each other’s arms once moro ?"
In another part he said, in reference to a person named Bellhouse haviug
to stop at his house. “After that, Mrs. Bobertson was taken very ill
and is sleeping with my sister. Jane is obliged to sleep with me; it
feels so stränge as I have not slept with her for a long time—it seems
like sleeping with some one else’s wife.” Writing in reference to his
worldly prospects, he said, “My heart gets sick and faint when I look
into the future. God. is this thy retribution for my sins ? Did I flatter
rayself that God would let a wretch like me go unpunished ? But I
teil thee, fate, I defy thee.*’ Speaking of the objcct of the diary, ho
wrote, “This diary is for thee, my Helen.” Then he had a memoran-
dum in which he informed the father of Mrs. Kinder of this feelinghe
had about his daughter, and it seemed incredible that his sister and
her father should, without any expression of dissent, be aware of this
attachment. There was, however, it appeared, disapprobation on the
mother’s part. In another entry, he spoke of being in a boat in the
harbour, standing on the deck his “face turned towards the little house
with two chimneys, and thinking of the time when on the wings of
love he flew to the arms of ray beloved, oh, my heart sinks when I
recall those happy meetings now gone by.” [This referred to the
time when Mrs. Kinder was living with her husband.] “When none
were by to interrupt us. Those were happy moments alloyed with
bitter thoughts. How horribly jealous I was; how could I bear to
know that Helen my love belonged to some one who had a legal right
to do and say anything he liked with her. It drove me raving mad
and lam what I am. I looked around me and saw the people coming
and going as they used to do, and racked by my thoughts, surely there
can be no worso hell than our own conscience.” Adverting to the
time when Mr. Kinder was living he spoke of a Mr. Deffries, saying,
“Deffries, when I was out with him, spoke about an affair, and said
he know more of it than I imagined; that he had watched us, and that
he thought it his duty to speak to me on the subject.” In another
entry he said:—“The more they oppose us, the more will bemypower
of resistance. Poor fools, to try and thwart my will—l who value
human life so little, and value weapons tobe used when required, and
then thrown away or destroyed, some of course being kept for future
use, if necessary.” There were a great many Statements in this diary
connected with his desire for Mrs. Kinder to return to Sydney, and it
intimated that Mr, Layard had been asked to get an hotel in which to


set up in business, so that tlioy might have an oppF rtunity of being
near each otber. Then letters were found in bis posf .ession, and would
be proved tobe in tbe handwriting of Mrs. Kinder«, sent to bim from
Bathurst. By tbis diary it appeared tbat he was in tbe babit of corres-
ponding witb her, but only one of bis letters was tfound in ber possess-
ion 5 and it would seexn tbat in tbe case of tbe fir st be wrote to ber,
part of it was intended only for tbe inspection of. ber motber, tbe rest
intended only for ber own eye, tbe portion iutended for tbe motber
being separate, but enclosed. Sbe admitted tbe receipt of otber
letters, but said they were destroyed. Her »correspondence witb
Bertrand would be pioduced, disclosing an attachsment quite as ardeut
on her part as tbat entertained on bis part toward’s her. Tbis was one
of tbe main facts corroborative of tbe admissions tbat would be giveu
in cvidence. Part of Bertrand’s evidence at tlhe inquest would be
proved by tbis correspondence tobe utterly false. Wben asked if
Kinder was jealous of bis wife, Bertrand said, “He was jealous of bis
wife witb evei'y person, be was a monomaniac oml that point 5 sbe would
answer wben be abused ber, but to my knowfbdge for tbe last six
months I am certain Mrs. Kinder never gave dooieased occasion for tbe
unkind manner he sbowed towards ber.” Lettens would be produced
to sbow tbat tbis was absolutely false. Some of tbese letters begau in
October and came down to tbe 23rd of Noveavber. Tbe Statement
given of wbat occurred wben deceased was sbot was, that wben
Bertrand, Mrs. Bertrand, and Mrs. Kinder were present, Mr. Kinder
cameinto tbe roora, baving been drinking, and, baving some time
before been talking about bis affairs, got excited, fired a pistol at bis
head, and feil down. The curious fact connercted witb tbis was tbat
neither Mrs. Kinder nor Mrs. Bertrand gave information to tbe police
on tbe matter. It was stated tbat Kinder died oftbe injury whicb be
then.inflicted on bimself. But subsequently Bertrand stated to bis
own sister, wbo bad come up from Melbourne (referred to in tbe diary
as tbe person for wbom be bad a great affection, and wbo bad a great
affection for bim), tbat tbe mode ot Kinder’s deatb was not as mentioned
in tbe newspapers or at tbe inquest—that be (Bertrand) bad sbot bim,
and tbat as be lingered, and appeared likely to get somewbat better,
Mrs. Bertrand and Mrs. Kinder concurred in poisoning bim, to put an
end to bis life. Sometbing similar to tbis would be deposed by a young
man wbo bad been in Bertrand’s employment, and wbose Statement if
uncorroborated, would certainly be most incredible. Tbis assistant
would prove tbat Bertrand admitted substantially tbe samc tbing to
bim ; tbat be (tbe assistant) was for weeks before privy to a design to
commit tbe alleged murder, and to repeated attempts to murder
Kinder; tbat be sent bis assistant to buy pistols, Bertrand accompany-
ing bim in woman’s attire; and it would be proved tbat witb one of
tbese pistols Kinder came by bis deatb. A person wbo, being cogni-
sant of such a proceeding, did not deuounce it to tbe autborities would
scarcely be admitted as a very credible witness, and bis Statement
would seem improbable if not confirmed by otber testimony. It would
be proved tbat Bertrand, witb tbe aid of bis assistant, procured a
sbeep’s bead, and in bis own bouse fired at it for practice witb tbe
pistols tbat be bad obtained. As to Mrs. Bertrandit would be sbown
tbat sbe wben asked about tbe circumstance by a person wbose cvidence
would be fortbcoming, said sometbing to tbe eftect tbat Kinder was
sbot—that Kinder sbowed Bertrand a card and some letters, and tbat
Bertrand tben sbot bim, placing tbe pistol as if it bad been fired from
Kinder’s band, and putting a pipe in bis moutb. Mrs. Bertrand also
spoke of Kinder getting better, and of poisoning bim. Sbe said sbe


did it being afraid of her life being taken by her husband. Mrs.
Kinder was present, and if her husband was shot and poisoued she
mnst have been privy to it, On one occasion a card was produced and
shown to the wife, and "when asked if she remembered it she cried out
to the husband, “Don't, don’t,” and got quite affected by the product-
ion. He admitted that this was the card put into Kinder’s hand at the
time he was shot. On another occasion he threatened in Mrs. Kinder’s
presence to disclose that he had committed the murder, and she said,
“Hon t, don’t,” in an apparent state of alarm. “Don’t do anything of
the kind.” If that occurred it showed a bygone complicity in Avhat
took place, but there would be circumstances und correspondence that
would render it impossible for them tobe guilty without her being
privy to the crime.
Mr. Roberts inquired of the counsel for the Crown whether he
intended to proceed on all the informations at once, and applied to the
Bench that they should be taken separately.
Mr. Macpheesou made a similar application for a severance of
the charges.
Mr. Butler said there was no ground for the application. There
was no necessity for any informations, the prisoners being brought
before the Court under warrant, the evidence could be proceeded with
without information. The Charge of murder would include the whole
Investigation applying to accessories, as well as to principals.
The evidence for the crown was then proceeded with.
Detectrse Richard Elliott produced a packet of letters which, on
the 24th of last month whilst Bertrand was in Darlinghurst Gaol, he
fouud in a secretary in prisoner’s house, "Wynyard-square. One of
them, at the time not open, was opened by Mrs. Bertrand after bis
arrest. One of the letters höre the name of Mrs. Kinder; the others
appeared tobe without signature, but they appeared tobe in the same
handwriting as that bearing the name of Mrs. Kinder. He produced
another packet of letters fouud in the same secretary at Bertrand’s
house. They seemed to contain poetry, and did not appear tobe in
the same handwriting as those in the package first produced. He
p.xoduccd a diary found at the same time in one of the drawers in
Bertrand’s bedroom; this drawer was not locked when found. He
also produced a small bottle labelled tincture of belladonna, a large
phial containing a white powder, and two pieces of dry substances
which wore now folded up and sealed. The assistant (Alfred Burne)
on the same day handed to witness a phial labelled “Chloride of Zinc.”
The secretary was not locked. He also produced a pistol, powder
flask, and a box containing caps, all which he found in the same
secretary. The tomahawk he produced he received from the assistant
the same day. He also produced a diary, which was found in a drawer
in Bertrand’s bedroom by the assistant, and handed to inspector Read
in witness’s presence. He also produced a screw which was found in
the secretary, which could be used for the nipple of a pistol or for
the barrel. He also produced a bottle he had received from the clerk
of inspector Read. It had the word “poison” writtcu on what ap-
peared tobe the label of Wilkiuson, chemist, Hunter-street. He also
produced two other books which he received from the assistant on
the 30th Kovembcr ; one of them bore tho name of “Henry L. Ber-
trand,” and the handwriting appeared tobe the same as that in the
book previously produced.
Oross-examined by Mr. Roberts : Mrs. Bertrand was in the house
when these things were found in the drawers, but was not present;
Burne had possession of the keys and unlocked the drawers for usj


we looked upon hhn as the person managing tlie Business in tho
absence of bis employer ; the ehest of drawers was in Bertrand’s
bedroom up stairs, the secretary was in the surgery on the ground-
lloor ; .1 believe that Mrs, Bertrand offered to unlock her drawers that
were locked ; I believe the occupation of Bertrand tobe that of a
dentist.
By Me. Macpherson; I was acting under the instruotions of
Inspector Read.
By Mr. Robberds: Mrs. Kinder was not present at this time.
Henry Wäger re-called : I arrested Mrs. Kinder in Bathurst, and
the place where she was staying I understood tobe her inother’s ; I
said to her I have here a number of your letters* addressed to Mr.
Bertrand, at Wynyard-square, and I will thank you to let me have any
letters you have received from Mr. Bertrand; she replied, I have nono
of Mr. Bertrand’s letters ; I never kept them, I always burned them
after I had read them ; I said it would then be my duty search for
them; Mrs. Kinder said, very well, lam sure you will not find any; I
then made a search and found a letter dated, 7, Wynyard-square,
October 28th, 1865, and signed, “Louis Bertrand;” I understood Mrs.
Kinder to say this was her desk; I also found an envelope, addressed
“ H. L. Bertrand, 7, Wynyard-square” it appeared to have been used
and then broken open; there was no post mark or stamp upon it; I also
found a note addressed to the manager of the City Bank, which purpor-
ted tobe an acknowledgrnont for the receipt of a draft for £2O ; I found
the envelope, this note, and a small quantity of stationery in a small
bag that Mrs. Kinder handed to me ; the note is signed Maria Helen
Kin— the name not being completed; I found in the bedroom another
note, in an envelope addressed “ Henry Bertrand, Esq.,” and she told
rae it was in the handwriting of Mr. Bertrand’s sister; I produce a gun
nipple wrench, and a box of pistol caps, which I found in a small box,
containing china and glass articles in the bedroom; Mrs. Kinder stated
that these two articles were the property of her father; I theii pointed
to an open box in the bedroom, and asked her what that contained ;
she replied it contains nothing but my children’s clothing, and the
pistol with which my husband shot himself; I searched the box and
found the pistol which I now produce. (This was a common pistol
with a trigger guard, the other pistol produced by Elliott having a
secret trigger). The letters I referred to when I said I had a bündle
of her letters, were seven or eight I had given to me by Inspector Read
prior to my going to Bathurst; those produced and marked are the
letters referred to; she did not say they were or were not her letters.
Cross-examined by Mr. Roberts: I do not recollect that Mrs.
Kinder said how she became possessed of the pistol; I have never had
any conversation with Mrs. Bertrand
By Mr. Macpherson : I do not think she said she had asked Mr.
Bertrand for this pistol after the inquest; the search lasted_ about
threo-quarters of an hour, or, it may be, an hour; ono desk, which she
said was her husband’s, I broke open according to her wish.
Mary A. Robinson deposed: lam a married woman ; I had a letter
from Mrs. Kinder from Bathurst; I have spoken to her about it; the
eight letters produced are in the handwriting of Mrs. Kinder, and that
enclosed seemed tobe her handwriting, although she usually did not
write so large.
Alfred Bnrne deposed : I was assistant to the prisoner Bertrand, at
Wynyard-square, where he carried on Business as a dentist. The
books produced, marked “ 0. J. K.” respectively, are in his hand-
writing, as is also that marked A.
* The letters will he fouad after the eyidence.


George M‘Kay cleposed: I am deposition clerk to the Coroner of
this city, and took down the depositions at an inquest held on tne
body of Henry Kinder at the North Shore, St. Leonards ; t e is
deposition I saw signed by Mrs. Kinder, the next was signed y r *
Bertrand ; Mrs. Bertrand was not examined.
Mr. Butler tendered theso depositions as evidence in the case.
Mr. Macpherson objected to their reception as making evidence
against his dient from the statoments of othcrs. _
The depositions of Mrs. Kinder and Mr. Bertrand put in and reau.
The diary* was then put in and a copy of it read. .
Alfred Burne recalled. I have been nearly four years in Ler-
trand’s Service, and I was usually employed Irom 9 o clock in the
morning tili 6 o’clock in the evening ; I have known Mrs. Kinder
stop at Bertrand’s house at night; sometimes I have stopped late at
night to work ; at other times when I have come to work on a mor-
ning I have seen her coming down stairs ; she stayed in the house
for about a week on one occasion, after Chloroform was administered ;
about three or four days after he first new her Bertrand sent me
with a message to her, giving me a note and saying that I was to
deliver it to Mrs. Kinder and get an answer yes or no ; I took tue
note to Kinder’s house at the North Shore a little after 8 in the
morning, and delivered it to a young lady who came to the door, and
who said she would perhaps be there in the afternoon ; it was Mrs.
Kinder’s sister, I believe ; when I got back, I told Bertrand, as an
answer, “ She would be down in the afternoon.
Mr. Roberts objected to the reception as evidence of a commum-
cation not shown to have been authorised by the person assumed to
have given the the answer stated by the witness.
Mr, Macpherson contended- that, before this evidence was ad-
missible, the party who spoke must be shown to have been the agent
of Mrs, Kinder; and, until that was shown, it was merely hearsay
evidence. . .
Mr. Butler said he was not putting it as evidence against Mrs.
Kinder, but as evidence of what the witness said to Bertrand.
Mr. Roberts objected to it as evidence against Bertrand.
"Witness continued: I said to Bertrand, she will be here this
afternoon ; I saw her at Bertrand’s house that afternoon, when he
was out; he was out nearly an hour, and she went away without see-
ing him ; about a couple of months after that he told me to go to the
post office at St. Leonards, and ask for a letter addressed to a Miss
Somebody, as he thought Mrs. Kinder was not going to receivo it
herseif, as she had been seen or observed at the post-office by Major
Christie ; I went to the post-office at St. Leonards and got a letter ;
it was addressed to Miss Somebody, tobe left tili called for ; I gave
it to Bertrand ; about a fortnight or three weeks before Kinder s
death Mrs. Bertrand gave me a letter, saying it was written by Mr.
Bertrand, and that I was to take it to the North Shore and. see if
there was any answer ; it was in Mr. Bertrand’s handwriting ; I
took it over, handed it to Mrs. Kinder and she took out a diamond
ring ; it was Mr. Bertrand’s ring ; besides Mrs, Kinder, I only saw
a little boy ; Mr. Jackson, whom I know, was not there on that day ;
she said perhaps she would come in the afternoon ; Bertrand was ill
at this time ; these were the only occasions on which I took letters ;
Bertrand told me that on the first occasion of his knowing Mrs.
Kinder she was accompanied by her mother and sister, and that after
the acquaintance, when her mother and sister accompanied her he
*Tho Diary at end of book.


exchänged lettefswith her'when they'shook hands at parting ; h©
told me tliat Mrs. Kinder had taken a violent fancy to hnn ; this was
about tbe time lie reccived tbe first letter, or after tue first letter ,
he told me tliat ho was in the habit of having connexion with her ;
sorae time after this he told me tliat Kinder would very hkely be
found dead in bis bed one morning ; on tbe occasion of her visits i
saw them together in the room , apart from whcre I was, and when
no one eise was in the room ; he said that Kinder would very bke y
commit suicide. Ido not recollect the tune when he said thisi, °n
subsequent occasion he told me in the work-shop that he wouid put
Kinder against Jackson and so get Jackson out of the road, by ma -
ing Kinder jealous of him ; about a fortmght afterwards he told me
he had succeeded, and that Kinder had got Jackson to leave the
house at the North Shore ; a short time afterwards he told me he had
made friends with Jackson, and that Jackson was coming to stopt at
his place for a time ; Jackson did stay there and had raeais there,
after he had been there three or four days Bertrand told me thati he
hadtried to drug Jackson for the purpose of gettmg papers and
letters written to him by Mrs. Kinder ; he told me the day after that
it had failed ; he subsequently told me that he had tried to get Jack-
son to leave the house, and Jackson left; the next thmghe told me
was that Mr. Kinder would be found dead in bis bed ; this was su -
sequent to the other conversations ; about six weeks previous to
Kinder’s death he asked me where I could get a boat to hire ; i told
him several planes, and mentioned Buckley’s amongst others ; he
said he required a boat for a little exercise, and asked me if I couid
accoropany him ; we went the follownig night about 12 o clock, 1
hired a boat from Buckley between 5 and 6 o clock, and about
we went in it over to North Shore, as far as Kinder s house, which
was about five minutes walk from the wharf; the boat was tied up
at the wharf, and we went to the sidc of Kinder s house, opposite
to the bedroom window upon which the moon was shmmg ; he said
“ That is his bedroom ; he did not then say what was the purpose ot
his visit, but afterwards ho said he wished to get to Mr. Kinder 3
drawers ; I think be said for the purpose of gettmg papers from bis
ehest of drawers, but I am not quite certam ; he did not go in, lie
said the moon was too streng, he had come too early, and that he
would have to go some other night; we returned to Sydney; we
went again about three nights after, taking a boat from the sarae
place, and went up to the house ; as we were gomg over he said it
was very likely that next morning Kinder would be found dead in bis
bed, having committed suicide, and letters from Jackson be found in
this hand ; we were there about 1 o’clock in the morning ; this night
he went into the house, whilst I was standing about a dozen yards
from it; he took off his boots, giving them to me to hold ; 1 cannot
say how long he reraahicd there as I feil asleep ; he got in by one ot
the front Windows—the dining room window, I think alter his re-
turn he said Kinder’s beer was untouched; he said, We had
drugged itthat Kinder was very restless, startmg up in his sleep
every moment, and that Mrs. Kinder kept him from sleeping ; e
said he would punish her for it in the morning ; wo then returned
home; nearly a week after he came and told me he required a boat
again, and asked me if I would get it for him ; I got it for bim.
Captain Cloete: Was it from the same man ? Yes, from Buckley,
but not the same boat, a lighter one. I think that night he went to
the theatre and met Mr. and Mrs. Kinder there. ......
By Mr, Butler; At tea time that evemng he produced a hatchet hq


Lad bougbt, and asked me to bore a hole in tbe bandle so that be could
tie it up by a string and carry it concealed under bis coat; and I did so.
He bad in tbe bouse at fcbe time ayoung man wbose name I believe was
Eanclaud, wbo came from tbe tbeatre witb tbem and left tbe bouse tbe
samc time that we did—about 1 o’clock in tbe morning; be asked
Bertrand wbere be was going witb tbe batebet, and Bertrand told bim
something about fishing; I asked Bertrand wbat be told Eanclaud, and
ho said be told bim that bo intended to knock a hole in tbe bottom of
tbe boat, because some one bad iusulted bim ; about 1 o’clock we went
across in tbe boat; on going to tbe boat be told me that Kinder bad
insulted bim at tbe tbeatre, and that it was bis Intention to knock bis
brains out; he also said be intended to get a divorce from bis present
wife andto marry Mrs. Kinder ; I asked wbat was bis cause against Mrs
Bertrand, that be wisbed tobe divorced ;be said no cause ; I told bim
I tbought it was impossible to get a divorce from her unless be could i
get something against her, and be said be would get some one and pay
tbem until be got something agäinst her; wben be was about going out of
bis bouse be would wisb me good night, teil me tobe back early in tbe
moming, slam tbe door, and tben be would come out at tbe back door; j
witb regard to wbat be said as to tbe divorce, I remarked wbat object 1
could be bave in putting Mr. Kinder out of tbe way wben Mrs. Kinderj
was just as good as a wife to bim ; be said Mr. Kinder bad insulted;
bim, and besides be wisbed to bave Mrs. Kinder all tohimself; be said
bo told Mrs Kinder that be bad been over tbere, and sbe would not
believe it; wben we got to tbe bouse, be went in tbe same way tbrough
tbe same window, by takingolf bisboots; he told me that be bad taken
tbe screws out of tbe lock, and put tbe lock in again witb putty. so thatj
it would readily fall out into bis band; we returned in about an hour, ■
or a little more, and on our way back be said Jackson and Llewollyn.
(Mrs. Kinder’s brother) were tbere again, asleep in tbe bouse, and
that he did not tbink it safe, especially as tbe boards creaked.'^j.
Mr. Roberts ; Safe to do wbat ?Jf To murder Mr. Kinder/as I
understood. *:
By Mr. Butler : We tben returned to Sydney"; tbe tomabawk was"
a small one; it was that produced, but part of tbe bandle bas been
broken off; about a week aftcr be told me be was going over again, and
asked me in tbe afternoon if I would buy bim a red crimean sbirt, \
because it would not sbow tbe colour of blood; I got one from Giles’;
be tben asked me if I understood making up, and if I would make bim!
up so that be would not be recognised; I said “ Don’t you wisb you !
may get it.” Between 12 and Ibe shut tbe door again, after callingi
out to bis wife, tben wentupstairs and sbaved bimself; be woke me up ;
bis face was tben blackened ; be bad on a shell bat belonging to me, 1
wore tbe Crimean sbirt, and on bis face be bad a kind of mask that
concealed half bis face ;be told me to take of my boots; I did so, and
be did tbe same ; tbis was at bis own bouse, in Wynyard-square ; we (
put on our boots outside in tbe lane, and went across witb a boat again
at half-past one o’clock; be took some brandy in a ginger-beer bottle,
and drank tbe brandy before going up to Kinder’s bouse; be got inside
tbe bouse, and remained tbere about three quarters of an bour; wben
we got back to tbe wbarf, be said he did not like to go bome witbout
finisbing wbat be bad come to do, and asked me if I would accompany,
bim to tbe bouse, go in witb bim, and if anytbing bappened, to take
bis part and knock anybody’s brains out wbo interfered; I said it was
too romantic forme, or I don’t see any tbing romantic in it, —that I bad
no sbare in Mrs. Kinder, and would not run any risk; he went backby
bimself, and returning in about half-an-hour, hg woke me up, as I was


fesleep on tlie wharf; on all these'occasioris I al#äys carried thö hatchot
xnyself (except when he wag in the house) for my own safety ; I gavo
it to him when wo got up to the house; I also used to get him to sit in
front of me in the boat for fear of accidents ; I made him pull the stroko
oar whilst I pulled the bow oar, fearing lest taking me by surpriso
whilst my back was towards him he might throw me into the water;
this ended the boat excursions; in stating theso particulars of them
some circnmstances might have occurred on different nights to those I
have mentioned, but if they did not occur on one of the nights I havo
mentioned, they occured on one or other of the occasions ; two or threo
weeks after Bertrand asked me if I had any pistols ; I said that I had
one, but that I used it for conjuring—for wizarding ; he then asked mo
if I knew where any could be got, and where any one might buy them
without being rccognised; I told him I did not know, but that I would
try to obtain them for him ;he said he would get some himself; that
night he asked mo if I would accompany him, and meet him at 8 o clock
opposite Betty’s Hotel, and he would dress as a woman; I waited until
a quarter-past 8, and he did not come ; I went to the house, and then
saw Bertrand ; I asked him for some money as a pretext not to let those
in the house know what I had come for; I went out, and met him
nearly opposite Cohen’s Hotel, about twenty minutes afterwards; we
werit down Lower George-street, and I cnquired at several places ; at
last 1 sPc'ceedcd in getting a pistol at Levey’s, nearly opposite the
Orooked Bildet Inn, in Lower George-street; whilst I was in the shop
Bertrand came in and examined the pistols ; he being then dressed as a
woman; he expressed his approval of them, and paid for them with
money he gäve me | he had shaved off a moustache he wore previously!
we retumed home, and I left him at the corner of Margaret-streot;
ncxt morning he told me to go and get a sheep’s head, and I got one
from Sharp’s the butcher’s in Hunter-street; he said he wanted it to
practice with, and told me not to have it cut in two; I think young Mp.
Sharp helped me ; I took it up to Bertrand's workshop, at his place irr
jWynyard-square; he then made some bullets; I saw him make a model
of one in wax to fit the pistol, and then pour plaster of paris upon it; in
the mould he pourod lead; he loadedthe pistol, and fired several times
at the sheep's head; after firing about four times Mrs. Palmer and Mrs.
Bertrand came into the shop, and Mrs. Palmer asked him what he was
doing: he immediately ordered them both out and shut the door; he
said he wished to know which part of the skull the bullet would enter
into the soonest; and he pointed to the side of the temple between the
eye’and the car as the best place ; ’ nothing more occurred until Monday
morning, this being on the Satufday; on the Monday he told me to
burn the skvtll in the furnace, and I did so; the next thing I heard was
that Mr. Kinder had shot himself; he came in between 11 and 12 on
the morning of. the day when I heard of Kinder shooting himself; a
week previous he had shown me a pistol he said he intended to give to
Kinder, not one ofthose produced, but one of a b etter maker; in the
cvening he told me that Kinder had shot himself; that he had gone
out with him tp have a drink; and that befbre going back to the house
he had shown him a pistol, telling him that it was perfectly empty,
although at the same time it was loaded; that he (Bertrand) placed a
cap upon the nipple and told Kinder to go into the room and frighten
the ladics by pretending to shoot himself; that he did so, and of course
shot himself; Bertrand said they were two or three hours looking for
doctors, and that none of them thought the wound was inflicted by a
bullet; that no bullet could be found; the day previous to Kinder’a
death, Bertrand took out ofhis pocket a sznjll bqtjdQ contajning a white


liquid, without any labe!; tliis was in tbe worksfiößl tbe liquid was like
water; he tookitoutofhistrouser’specket, saying itwas poison, which
ho intendcd to give to Kinder; that he had often befere given bim
poison, and that it had never taken eflect; he said Kinder stuck out to
thc last that he did not shoot himself; he also said Kinder would have
no one with him but himself (Bertrand); 011 the morning of tbe
conversation about Kinder having shot himself, Bertrand said one
of the ladies had picked up a bullet on the floor, and which
he showcd me; it was flat; he merely laughed, and put it
in bis pocket; in the surgery I have seen Mrs. Kinder with her
arms round Bertrand’s neck ; I was not at work there at that time,
but happened tobe going in quickly ; the pistol produced (the one
with concealcd trigger) is one of those bought at Levy’s ; I objected
to it, and Lcvy pretending to change it, took a good one back and
put this one up again ; the one with the trigger guard, I think, was
the one Bertrand showed me, and told me he was going to give it to
Kinder ; 1 think one of the bullets that were cast in the mould, and
which I.gavo to Elliott, fits one of the pistols bought at Levy’s ; I
kept that one (bullet.)
Captain Cloete: The first night of your boat excursions, you say
he spoke of too much moonlight;—were the others by moonlight?
The others were still moonlight, but not so much. The moon was
generally down beforc we gob there. We timed it so that the moon
might be going down.
By Mr. Butler: I think Bertrand said he applied some poison to
the wound, and that it was acid ; that was about the time he showed
me the small phial; he also said ho must not leave Kinder too long
for anybody eise to speak to ; beforc Kindcr’s death Bertrand came
up with a handful of letters to burn ; I asked him what they were,
and he handed me one as he was burning the others ; he did not say
whose letters they were ; the purporb of the one he showed me, as
far as I could gather it, was this, “Bear Kinder, or dear Harry, I
know you are jealous of me, because that d Bertrand has told
lies of me ;” we made some remarks at the same time about thc way
he could disguise his handwriting; he took it out of my hand, and
pkiced it among the others he was burning; I believe Kinder’s narae
was Henry; either the third or the last time we went over to the
North Shore—it was on Friday night—he said Kinder might be killed
that night, and as Jackson was leaving thc colony the next day,
suspicion would fall upon him ; since Kinder’s death, I have had no
conversation with Jackson ; I do not think I have spokeu to him at
all; I have had no conversation with him either before or siuco
Kinder’s death.
( v( "■ *
’ * . TUESDAY, THE 5tH.
Alfred Borne, cross-examined by Mr. Boberts; lam twenty
years of age ; I did not give any evidence at the inquest on the body
of Kinder, although I was aware that an inquest was tobe held,
Bertrand having told me that hc was going there; I did not go,
because I was not subpoenaed I suppose; I have been subpoenaod
here ; I have been at the Detective Office since the inquest; I Went
there, being in dangcr of my life if Bertrand got at libcrty; it
Was slightly for thc sake of the public justice, and by way of
protecting my lifo that I went there—thc object being seif-
preservation in particular, and the other in a slight degree; I did not
go there for fear I might be implicated in the Charge against Bertrand;
X went voluntarily; I voluntarily stated what I knew; before I went


to Captain M'Lerie 1 told Mr. Layard, of Jamison-street, all that I
knew about the affair; it took me about an hour to give my statement
at the Detective Office; I took three letters to Mrs. Kinder; two I
receivod from Mr. Bertrand, and ono fron Mrs. Bortrand; tbere was
tobe secrecy; Bertrand told me that if Mr. Kinder bad not gone to the
Office and I saw him I was not to give him the letter; ho told me to
look out for him on the way and gave me a descriptiou of him ; Ber-
trand told me this about 9 o’clock; I stated yesterday it was between
8 and 9 o’clock; to the best of my recollection it was about half an hour
after when I got there, because I missed the house; when I reached
the house it was about 9; he gave me directions as to the house, but
they had moved; I found that out by going there that morning ; yester-
day I forgot to state many important facts in connexion with my
evidence until Mr. Butler reminded me of them; I did not say from
whom the letter came; no one but myself and Bertrand was present at
any of the conversations I have related with regard to the delivery of
letters, buying pistol, and the changes of apparel, except one, I think
that was the conversation about the hatchet, when the teller of the City
Bank was present; that was one night just previous to our going over
to the North Shore; I have no idea of the time; it was about three
months ago as far as I cau recollect; I think it was, but will not swear
it was in August; I cannot say when Mrs. Kinder first visited Ber-
trand’s establishmeut, but it was before the month of August last; I
took no notice of it, it did not interest me ; I did not know the contents
of the first letter Bertrand gave mc, but from what ho said to me I
pretty well guessed; I was not told thatit was on Professional business ,
to the best’ of my belief it was sent before Mrs. Kinder became
acquainted with Mrs. Bertrand, and I think two or
elapsed between the time of her first visit and the sending of
the letter; she atteuded shortly after to have her teeth attended to ;
I saw her come when Bertrand was out, and she left whilst I was
there; I had to make a model of her mouth; I think she said
something about an appouitment' on one occasion only did I see Mis.
Kinder with her arms round Bertrand; it was about three or fur
months a°'o, and occurred in the surgery; lam an amateur theatiical,
and used to do juvenile business at the Victoria Theatre before it
closed.
Mr. Butler: Did you act for pay or pleasuro ? For pleasure.
Cross-examination continued: It was usual forme to go out of
the surgery when patieuts came in; I had seen her in the surgery
before this act of intimacy many times._
Captain Cloete: In the surgery or in the house?—ln the house.
Cross-examination continued: I guessed they had a liking for
each other, and that this letter was an appointment; it was about a
week after that he told me Mrs. Kinder had taken a violent fancy to
him; but the day previous to giving me letter he said Mrs. Kinder was
a remarkably fine womau, at the same time winking; I never saw
them exchaxxgo letters on shaking hands with each other; Bertrand,
about three weeks after he became acquinted with her, told me he was
in the habit of having improper intercourse with her; it was about
three months ago that Bei’trand told me in the workshop that Kindei’
was likely to commit suicide; he said Kinder was in great money
difficulties, that he was very hard up, and would most likely be found
dead in bis bed; I asked why, and he said because he is in great money
difficulties and did not know what to do for money ; this might have
taken place six or seven months ago ; lam not certain as to dates ;
now lam reminded of it I think BertyMid in talking of the probabi-


Hty oi‘ Kinder committing suicide, coupled with it some allusion to
bis leading a dissipated hfe and addiction to intoxicating driuks ; he
‘ sometimes mentioned that and sometimes liis pecnniary embarrass-
ments as the cause ; on one of the boat excnrsions Bertrand told me
Kinder bad insulted bim, and for that reason be was going to knock
his brains out, and I believe the same night be said be bad drugged
bim ; in fact I understood bim to say he bad drugged bim every
night be went over tbere ; except the first; he said he bad drugged
the beer ; the conversation with reference to Jackson and Kinder
took place in the worksbop ; I saw Jackson at Bertrand’s two er tbree
days apparently stopping tbere, but I never spoke to bim; in not
telling Jackson what Bertrand bad said of bim, I bad no more reason
tban not wishing to break the confideuce reposed in me by Bertrand ;
I bave broken confideuce now or eise some one eise would; I was
told that Bertrand bad spoken of the circumstance that he attempted
to drug Jackson and failed/ in fact that he bad spoken of the wbole
affair, and threatened to blow my brains out as soon as he came out of
gaol; it was because I was afraid of being implicated in the death of
Kinder ; previous to getting into difficulties be stated bis intention
to put me out of the way ; and bis sister, Mrs. Kerr, and Mr. Deffries
told me that I bad better give evidence ; I read about a page of the
diary before the detectives came—the first page—wbilst Bertrand was
in gaol; it was no part of my business to open the books in tbo
drawers, and I received no directibns to do so ; I received the keys
from Mrs. Bertrand wben Mr. Bertrand went to gaol; my reason for
opening the diary was to see if tbere was anything in it against Mr.
Bertrand ; be bas some years previously dressed bimself in the
character of a woman ; be did so about tbree years back as a joke ; I 1
once remonstrated with bim about talking of knocking Kinder’s
brains out—that was the night wben be told me be was going to kill
Kinder—to knock bis brains out with the hatchet ; I said how would
it benefit you, because Mrs. Kinder can be no more to you tban sbe is
already ; I said that in the boat; be placed great confideuce in me,
but I tbougbt it best tobe on the safe side, altbough I did not fear
bim ; I tbougbt he might take my lifo ; be offen joked with me upon'
the subject of Kinder’s death ; belladonna, cblorodyne of zinc, and
arsenic are used in the business of a dentist for killing the nerves of
decayed teeth before stopping tbem ; I am not certain about bella-
donna.
By Mr. Butler: Wben be sbowed me tbo bottle of poison I
referred to yesterday be did not say wbere or how he got it ; upon
anotber occasion ho said that be was in tbo babit of going into a
cbemist’s sbop, and amongst otbers ho mentioned the name of
Wilkinson—that he took a small pbial and filled it with what poison
bß required wbilst the chemist’s back was turned ; I supposed the
person wbo sold me thepistols was Mr. Levy. [Joseph Myers brougbt
before witness.] The gentleman now before me is the one wbo sold
me the pistols ; I got the keys to attend to Bertrand’s business in bis
absence.
Captain Cloete : I got tbo keys from Mrs. Bertrand in Order to at-
tend to the surgery: I am not certain about the datcs of the circum-
stances I bave mentioned.
By Mr. Eobcrts, at the instance of the prisoner Bertrand: Do you
not know it tobe a fact that Bertrand could get poisons of any de-
scription from cbemists on application ? I believe be could.
Police Sergeant Harris was called to give evidence as to what was
stated by Bertrand at the Court of Quarter Sessions on tbo prosecution


of Jackson relative to the ssnding of a letter by Bertrand to Mrs.
Kinder, bnt all that he recollected of what were stated tobe the con-
tents, was that she was asked to come over as he was very iil, and
wanted her to wait upon him; he did not remember anything being
said as to what was enclosed in the letter as a special sign for her to
come; he said that Mrs. Bertrand was in the house whon ho had Mrs.
Kinder thcre.
Mr. Roberts: He said he would not take the medicine out of any
one’s hands bnt Mrs. Kinder ; I give my own Interpretation of the
answers ; I did not take notes.
Joseph Myers, carrying on business with Levy and Co., 197, Lower
George-street, deposed that about 8 o’clock on the evening of Thurs-
day, 28th September, a young man, with a person—apparently a
young woman, the latter remaining at the door—came to the shop to
get some pistols ; he identified the witness Burne as the young man
who came to the shop ; the person dressed as a woman only came iu-
side the shop door ; this was after the application of the young man
who bought the pistols for the money which he got from the person
outside ; the young man said they were purchasing them for amateur
theatrical performances ; they were 10s. 6d., and I think he gave me
a £1 note ; when the pistols were paidfor I did not see themgo away
together ; one of the two pröduced (that with the secret trigger) was
one of those sold on that occasion ; they were sold as damaged pis-
tols ; the trigger of this one will not cock, and in one of those I sold
the trigger was a perfect fixture.
By Mr. Roberts : I did not see any whiskers on the person dressed
as a woman ; it would not answer the description of Bertrand in his
Eresent condition with whiskers and moustache ; to the best of my
elief the young man fetched money from the young woman ; the
pistol Avith the trigger-guard I did not see before to-day ; in my cx-
perience of these articles, such a pistol as this could not shoot a man,
but it might have shot a man and afterwards have become disordered ;
one of the two I sold would not act at all, and the other would not
act Avith the ordinary pressure ; the only person I suav in possessiou
of the pistols was the young man to Avhoui they Avere handed.
John Sharp, butcher, assistant to his brother, carrying on business
in Hunter-street, deposed: Mithin the last three months I sold a
sheep’s head to a young man very much like the Avitness Burne ; a
sheep’s head ; I asked him if he Avould have it chopped and skinned,
and he said no, he Avanted it for an experiment, and took it aAvay Avith
him.
By Mr. Roberts : I sold it in the forenoon, to the best of my re-
collection ; he did not say Avho he was, nor inform mc of the nature
of the experiment ; I could not SAvear Burne is the same person, but
I believe he is the same young man.
Mary Palmer deposed : lam Mrs. Bertrand’s mother ; I remember
being in Bertrand's house Avith my daughter one day upstairs, and
hearing Avhat appeared tobe the report of pistols ; they Avere suc-
cessive reports, within intervals of not a minute, I suppose ; I heard
tAVO reports, and in about ten minutes afterwards I came doAvn stairs
from the next floor to Bertrand's Avorshop and looked in ; there I suav
a sheep’s head on a side fable, and observed smoke in the room ; I
observed to Bertrand, •• Goodness, Henry, what a smoke in the
room he ordered me out and I left the house ; my daughter
knocked at the door ; on one occasion, it might be tAA r o months or
more since, and I believe before I heard of Kinder’ s death, I had a
with Bertrand in the front room of his house, when my


daughter, Mrs. Bertrand, was present, when Bertrand said to me,
“ Mother, I am going to get a divoroe. dear
divorcement, and been mamed hu VO nld not allow my own
rather to the contrary of hdp]sy ter ’ eight or nine months that
ffßtSiÄi Seither Befand no r tny
daughter ever mentioned to me tbe industrious,
By Mr. Roberts : I always found her sober, ste laints
and having a great regard for hei . - ' observe a pistol
against Hm ; she was very £ nd I
in Bertrand’s band ; the assista o , w p en j beard the
did not know which of them hrcd th 1 ■ . my dau Ater knocked,
report, I fancied it was the head on tho
and immediately the dooi was op . " ‘ dauo bter for two years ;
table ; he was very good and km J mithin the last nine
he was not a man of stränge time I have
months he has been very different to me, not known
noticed an alteration in Hs mau , ~ | have had noreason
Hm to carry on practxcal jokes durmg that time ,
stränge to my danghter, and, not hkmg t i P
you -»HÄr#.,“ of gun-
powder in the room after you eat J? harbour. deposed that ho
»ÄgÄU S:Without Mt (witness's) Unowledge.
S ‘ WEDBESDAY, 6IH. fuineter
Charles Lett deposed; Xn wLtroteouteTfor sending a
Sessions when a man named . a "k crossmxamination of Bertrand
threatening letter to Bertrand , Bertrand to Mrs. Kinder,
by Jackson, in reference to a lett ® " , mentioned that he enclosed
at tho North Shore, the witness ‘ ag ki n o- if it was usual for
a ring in the letter and on Dowlmg ast h | d he did
geritlemen in addressmg lac o ° . habit of seiidin (T rings or
not kuow that, tat he ms %, wStted
something when he wrote to Mis. ? • . Be g;dd hc was Ul
her for a particular pnrpose he enciosed Hs n g , h im,
at the time, and wanted her to come, and to
as he wonld not take Hs mccicino • ’ . tho habit of
take thom from Mrs Kmder; he s*d
lendmg Jackson small sums oi_ m J , acquaiutod with
he laut Hm was £2; by Mr. B3nd«r,
Jackson a short tune, and Hd H _ j believo was sfcatod in the
who had known Hm in New f ’ ho Bald tho money
cxanunation in cluef, and in ine * - 'Kinder to Jackson ; I
- to bo d«laotcd tom a aum Z, oulled 'by,
•asästä-ä hc ™


of everybody he osked her if there was any ground for the jealousy,
and sho said “ Decidodly not. . , ~ i
Charles Edward Rand and deposed: lam a clerk in tho City Rank,
and am slightly acquainted with Bertrand ; I remcmber bemg at Ins
bouse one night after we had been to the theatro ; I shonld say it was
about a month before Mr. Kindor's death ; I proceeded from the
theatro to tho houso with Bertrand ; I remained there not more than
a cmarter of an hour ; I went out with Bertrand and bis assistant,
Bnrne ; this was a little after 12; I asked him wnere he was gomg,
and he stated that he was gomg out hshmg ; I asked him what he
was going to do with the hatchet ho had with lura ; it was what is
called a tomahawk ; I believe what he said in reply was to the chect
that he had had a quarrcl with, or had been ms ult cd by somo one, and
that he intended to knock a hole in the bottom of the boat.
Cross-examined by Mr. Roberts ; I have had a conversatiou with
Mr Elliott as to tho reply Bertrand made to my qnestion ; it took
place in the bank, and I read to him almost exactly what I have just
sworu ; before I went into the witness-box I told a person in Court i
eould not recollect the exact words of the answer, but I conld state
j>y Mr. Butler: I wrote down for Mr. Elliott my recollection of
the answer ; that was about a fortnight ago. . ,
Alexander Bellhonsc deposed: lam omployed in tue Telegraph
denartment, and have known Bertrand three or four years, but uncii.
three or four weeks ago I had not seen him for two years; Ithea
met him on board the Manly Beach steamer, and he myited me to Ins
housc I went there the following ovening, remained there two or
three hours, he introduced me to bis wife and his-sister, Mrs. Korr,
and wo played at cards ; when I was going away he said he wanted
to tdl nie something, and ivalked out of the house with me ; he then
volunteered a Statement about the death of Kinder ; he said ho went
in tho garb of a woman and purchascd a pistol; tuat he shayed oft
bis moustache entirely; he said he was sorry _ for Kinder, but ho
wanted him out of the way; he said he was going to get a divorce,
from bis wife in less than twelvc months; he said he was a powerfuj
mesmerist, arid had great power over people that way; that he had
i'Tent influence over bis wife, and conld do what he liked with her,
he said that bis wife knew about bis attachment Mrs. Kinder—
that she was very fond of him and would do anything he wished;
then ho went on to say he was a powerful mesmerist; I thmk he send
he put the pistols in Kinder’s way, but I would not swear to it; he
ebd not say rmytliing particular as to bis iiillucncG over Mis. ivmdcr j
he said they were apair of common pistols. .
Cross examined by Mr. Roberts: He went ont to a calo
o’clock and I suppose I was with him for an hour; we separated
abont 2 o’clock that morning; Bertrand volunteered the Statement
without any introduction or any questions on my part; I cha not com-
mcnce the conversatiou by saymg, «What sort of a woman is Mit.
Kinder, I should like tobe introduced to herthe thmg had been
out of my mxnd siuce I glauccd at the account of tho inquost beforo I
came down to Sydney; no one was present at the conversatiou
between him and me; hie etatement was so singulär that 1 conld not,
rdeep mnch that night for thinking of it; ho diel not say that he couM
by mesmerism do anything ho liked with hie wife; ho sind he hau n
S reat amount of power over her; ho stated that Mr. Kinder sheti
Eixnself; I thought it was clcarly undoretood that Kinder ehot. tarn-
seif,"und I not, tUerefor© question him about it {hs said he was sorry


for Kinder, but I do not ätvear it was immediately after that he Said
lie was in his way; he told me that in the garb of a woman he pur-
chased the pistols himself; lam not positive whether he said he pnt
them in Kinder’s way; he did not say that so long as Kinder was in
his way he could not get married to Mrs. Kinder; I had somethingto
drink with Bertrand outside the house, oue drink I thiuk.
By Mr. Butler: The conversation with Bertrand was after leav-
ing the house and before going into one of the cafcs; he did not say
that the pistols he referred to had anything to do with Kinder’s death.
Mr. Roberts: I had a littlc brandy and water in Bertrand’s
house, and I thiuk Bertrand took some gin in and out of the house.
Harriet Kerr deposed: I am a married woman, and sister to
Bertrand, the prisoner ; I arrived from Melbourne ab out six weeks
ago, and wentto live at his house in Wynyard-square ; shortly after
I arrived he spokc of Mrs. Kinder, and said he wished to make her
his wife—that he wished a divorce from his present wife ; he said he
was very much in love with this person, Mrs. Kinder ; I said I was
very much surprised, as in his letters to me he said hc was living
happily with his wife ; I argued with him, and said that after heilig
married for three years he should think of better things ; I only had
one conversation with him on the subject of the divorce ; about a
week afterwards, or tivc or six days, early in themorning, just before
breakfast and before leaving my bedroom ; Bertrand came into my
room whilst I was washing the baby ; he said, “ Stay a minute, I havc
something to say to you he told me to sit down on the side of the
bed, and asked me if I had read about the death of Kinder ; I said I
had ; he paused a little and then said, “ Kinder did not shoot him-
self—he said I shot him I replied, “ You must be mad to say such
a thing he said, “ Ko, lam not mad—l teil you I did shoot him !”
I said, “ But how cruel of you to do so," and I put up my hands to
my face ; he pulled them down again ; I was crying, and he said,
“ Don’t cry, I don’t rcgret what I have done he said Kinder was
in his way ; he said he would do the same thing to any man who
stood in his way ; he warned me not to teil his wife what he had told
me ; I remember nothing eise that occurred at that time ; he said he
was jealous of Kinder, and that he loved Mrs. Kinder very dearly ;
when he said he shot him, he said he put the pistol in his handa pipe
in his mouth, and that afterwards he threw the pistol that he shot him
with into the harbour ; he did not say to me that he put a card into
Kinder’s hand before he shot him ; I was told so, but not by Mr.
Bertrand ; when I remonstrated with him. he said, “you need notbc
so hard upon me—Kinder was going to shoot me, and had bought a
gun to do so hc did not say from whom he had heard that ;ho
said that it was well planned, and if it ever came before the public
they would not beliove it ; he said, “we planned it ” : he said that
moro than himself planned it; we did not mention Mrs. Kinder’s
narac in that conversation ; about three weeks after I had another
conversation with him in the dining-room ; his wife was present, but
shc was asleep on the sofa ; she usea to sleep a great deal ; I thought
it was not natural sometimes ; it was more iike stupor; hc then
entcred into conversation about the divorce from his wife ; he used
to bcat his wife most brutally ; this I observed whilst staying in the
house : speaking of the divorce, I told him how wrong his conduct
was ; his treatment of his wife was everything that was had, wicked,
and cruel ; he attempted her life two or three timcs whilst I was in
the house ; he said he must marry Mrs. Kinder ; hc said, “ I don’t
waut to kill Jane,” mcaning his wife, but if I cannot get a divorce I


skall gct up an adult 017 case with some i'Cspectable mamed womau,
and tlien Jane can sue me for a divorce I asked liim why he did
not givc up bis thought of marrying that woman : he said ho could
not give her up ; I said “ She must bo a bad woman, tobe cognisaut
of the death of her husband ; she could not make you a good wife ;”
I said she must be a bad woman ; he answcred “ Yes, I know she is
a bad woman ; ho said that was why he must marry her—because she
was a wicked woman ; he said he would make a second Lucretia of
her ;he then paused, and, leaning over me whispered, “ Kinder did
not die by the shot, we poisonod him ; he said she (pointing to his
wife 011 tho sofa) gave him the poison ; he said the poison would
never be discovered, and that he had enough poison in the houso
to kill half tho people in Sydney ; ho said it was very
likcly that before I went to Brisbane I should see bis wifes funeral;
several times ho has spoken about Kinder, about secing bis ghost, and
when he saw tho colour of liquors 011 the tablc, rofcrred to it as blood ;
at one time he said he loved Mrs. Kinder dearly, and at other times
said she kncw every wicked deed that could be committed, and that she
was ade vif s imp; he also said she was a clever woman ; one night he
attempted to murder bis wife, about a month ago; I was in the honse
at the time; he had beeil out, and cainc home at about 1 o clock in the
morning; ho would never allow Mrs. Bertrand a will of her own in tim
house; she was very frightenedof him: speakingof some subject, I don t
remember what —Bertrand and his wife wcrc talking and she dared to
argue with him, when he got up iu a very excited state and said her
time had come —that she must die : he took up a stick with a sling at
the end, called a lifo-preserver, and said ho wanted to measure the
cxact spot Avhere her brain was, so that he could kill her with one blow;
she said, Doht kill me, you promised me on your word of honour
that you would not kill mehe then raised the stick to striko, and I
interfered, pleadcd that for his mother’s, for the children’s sake, for all
their sakes, he would forbear; he told me not to look athimorto speak
to him, and said “go out of the room or I will brain you; I went out
of tho room with fear and trembling, my tongue cleaving to the roof of
my raouth; I tried to call out, but could not; I thought he would
murder her; alter I left the room he shut the door; I managed to
crawl to the top of the kitchen stairs, I ivas so faint I could not walk
then; I called for Bridget, the servant, and when she came up I said,
Bridget, there is something dreadful happening in the parlour; whilst
I was speaking to her the handle of the door was turned, and I got up
to the first landing of the stairs; whilst sitting there I hcard them
saying something; my brother said, “Now, Jane, I want you to go
into the surgery, and she asked Avhat for ? he said I want you to write
on this picce of paper that you are tired of your lifo and that you
poisoncd yourself by your oaa’u hand ;” she said, “ Ko,I shall not Avritc
it;” he said, “ I will make you;” she said, “ You may pour the poison
down my throat, but I will not write anything before the conversatiou
began my brother had poured me out a little weak brandy and water,
and whilst I Avas on the stairs I hcard him say to Jane “ Drink that,’
meaning the brandv and water that he had poured out forme; he said
drink it up; she drank it; Mrs. Bertrand then came out, and avc
retired to our rcom for the night; Mrs. Bertrand and I slept togethcr;
she slept Avith me the Avhole time I Avas there cxcepb one night; there
was-then a strangcr, a lady visitor, in the house; Mrs. Bertrand, Avhcn
she got into tho room, sat down on a chair quitc exhausted, and to my
astonishment feil fast asleep; I thought it Avas stränge she should fall
asloep so soon after so exciting a scene j it was about ton minutos alter


drinking the brandy and water; on two otber occasions ho attemptcd
her life; alter the first conversation with my brother relative to the
death of Kinder, Mrs. Bertrand asked me why I was looking so pale—
what was the matter with me; I said I had heard told something hy
Henry that I could scarcely beliove tobe true ; she said, what did he
say to you? I said he told' me that he shot Mr. Kinder, I asked hei,
Is that true ? she said Yes; this was in the dining room; on the after-
noon of the same day that my brother told me he had shot Kinder, she
said, You know Henry and Mrs. Kinder and I are constantly visiting at
the North Shore, and that, on one particular morning, Henry said, “You
must go over to the North Shore;” she said Henry had often threatened to
kill Mr. Kinder ; in reference to shooting bim, she one day, in the
parlour, warned Mrs. Kinder about this, that Bertrand was gomg, or
had thrcatenod, to kill him i Mrs. Kinder said, Tellhim youiself ,
Mrs. Bertrand said, —it it was my husband that was tobe shot
I should teil him myself, and think I had a right to do itthe reply
was something to that eflect ; she said that Henry was in loa c witb
Mrs. Kinder, and that she (Mrs. Bcrtrand)_ and her husband were to
be divorced in consequence ol this ; she said they were Irving a com-
fortablc life together, and were quite reconciled to the fact of a divorce ;
she being tired of the ill-treatment she had been receivmg ; she then
told me that, on one particular morning, Bertrand told her she was to
go over to the North Shore, and take the baby and Sophy (the nurse
girl) ; she did not wish to go that morning, because it was raming,
and the baby would get wet ; he said she must go, and they did go ;
she said she noticed that when Bertrand came to the house (Kinder s)
ho seemed more serious than he had been for some time, and seenied
kinder to Mr. Kinder ; Mr. Bertrand was walking up and down the
room very fast ; and she noticed that he kept his gloves on and one
hand in his pocket ; she said, I think, shortly after, Bertrand and
Kinder were talking about the business aflairs of Kinder, speakmg oi
New Zcaland, and reading letters from New Zealand ; sho lurther
said that Mrs. Kinder and herseif were Standing at the window look-
in" out when they heard the report ol a pistol, and on turning louud
she saw Mr. Kinder sittingin a chair and a pistol clrop from bis hand,
and saw Bertrand place a pipe in Kinder s mouth, taking the pipo
from the table ; Mrs. Kinder ran out of the room ; Bertrand iollowed
her with a loaded pistol, put it to her head, and said if she did not
"o into the room he would blow her brains out ; Mrs. Kindei came
{ n to the room ; Bertrand then took hold ol Mrs. Bertrand s arm and
made her face Mr. Kinder ; she told me the blood was then flowmg
from the wound, and that Bertrand’s fingers ncarly met in the flesh,
and he pinched her arm so hard that the marks were lelt for threo
weeks afterwards ;he said, “ Now look at him—look at him well
makin" her look. ‘' I wish you always to sec him befoie jou ;
said tliat after Kinder was shot they made her (Mrs. Bertrand) nurse
and attend upon him ; she said she was domg all she could ior the
sick man to remedy the evil her husband had done ; Mrs. Kinder and
Bertrand during ncarly the whole time were acting in an improper
manncr, such as walking up and down the verandah with their arms
around cacli other’s waists ; some time after the shot was fired sho
was looking round the room and said she saw something lymg against
the wainscot, and found it tobe a bullet Hatten ed ; she said, “ Mr.
Bertrand ran to me and took it fromme, and put it in his waistcoat
pocket, eaying * This is just what I wantod ” she said she had been
attending upon Mr. Kinder two or three davs, when ho was iraproving ;
Bhö sbcftuid Bertraiui had decided that he could wot lofc Kuidcy


live—that be must be pmsoned; ie ld weiTup to bim and
so delirious and more sßnsible , tbat M lfr ] ie said, “ I did
said, Mp. Bertraudafter-
not sboot myself; she said s_ \\ r m a + Mrs. Kinder gave it to
wards forced her to mix tbe poison, t . j said i must
bim : tbat was all tbat sbe saui t . be be gged of me not to
leavo tho house after wtattould be.murdered, as he would
do so, and said if I left tbe ° a nd teil of these tbmgs, and so I
thinksbebad advised me togoand . t • but my brotber
remained ; I sbould bave JJ^ oul d’ no t be such a fool; wben
wouldnotallowmeto go , besaid markg on M rs. Bertrand s
I first came there I noticed D aR the appe arance oi
back wbilst she was dressmg , üey gaid? Did you see
burns or scalds, and speakmg ot <<mn> }l e tbrasbed
tbese marks? I said je . and took pieces of flesh out,
mc witb her (Mrs. Kin( J eT ] \] ie bad said something about
and she said tbis was because ghould thero were
letting tbe murder out. On h an(J ~l ic also bad a black eye ,
marks as if tbe flesh ba e Kinder’s presence, tbat be bad
sbe told me afterwards, m Mrs. . f * h icb ponetrated to the
stabbed her (Mrs a pair of stays tba.were
depth of tbe olade , and ‘ made the confession about tbe ül-
saturated witb blood; su bad to ] d ber tobe very kmd to Mr.
treatment, sbe said tbat 1» , Per if necessary ; tbis be told her
Bellbouse, and to allow biin io k ’. , d ber very mucb to go to
at night, after Bellbouse Md leit . 1 sa id, “If you
somemagistrateandcoiifesswbatsb tbis woman wbo
do not, you will bear tbe Warne, an |)e f iaTlgcd s be said,
deserved it would get cl^ a r, wbüst >o » lf „ ghe re fused to
« Ko, I would never be I would go, and
go to a magistrate jtwooilbre < • ld no t allow me to go,
would bring tbe police to tbe bouse , . memad ; mdeed,
and said tbat if I told it to o^e frÄat I was mad : I told it to
I believe tbat Bertrand bad told Delr M<Lerie about tbe case ; I
Defries, and after tbat went t 4 ‘ , pe wa „ be went on ; Mrs.
often thougbt my brotber was mal * Kinder was staying in tbe
Bertrand on one occasion sUted tbat * did uot say h ow long «Be
house before I came from MelbourJ _» Mrs. Kinder was there,
was staying tbere, but sbe said tb t b , that wben Mrs.
Bertrand always ill-treated be M s lifo ! s be also said that
Kinder was away, be never ad“ d) to sleep in the samo room
Bertrand bad forced her (Mrs. B Mrs. Kinder mto Mrs.
witb Mrs. Kinder and bnnoelf , s be said tbat Bertrand
Bertrand’ s bed, and lay down witb tbem ]jed . one da y wben wo
and Mrs. Kinder bad bee:n freqi was kneeling down tying tbe
were alone after dmner, Mi.. { . You see me in very disadvan-
dress of a litfle boy, when sbe said yo u dare to look at
tageous circumstances ; i « * .» tbis was all tbat was said,
fc SoT4amined hy Mr! Ä «ot°a
friondly terms at all txmos wboi ' residmg witb bim, refused to
facfc tbat be, at soao never quairolled witb hm m
asaiat mo m pocunrnry »ftters , 1 of AVcarin g appai-el from
oonsoquonco of bis velasai to i i a rcfusc t 0 purchase tbmgs
mo j Ido not yeoolloot uuu )


forme, but you spend money on Mrs. Kinder;» I did not teil my
brother before I knew anything of the death of Kinder, that I liad
areamed oi bis death. or of the way in which it was brought about;
no aüusion of the fand was made ; after prisoner told me that he had
~i ndc 1 mi S bt have related to him that my sister (Mrs. Bright,
o i o bourne), on reading the report in the Herald, had said howsilly
it was to lend pistols to a man who had threatened to shoot himself;
Bertrand never told me that he had lent Kinder the pistol ; the re-
mark arose out of the report in the paper ; I said that I often thought
my brother was mad from the way in which he went on ; I did not say
that Befnes said so; I have said to Mr. Defries that I thought
my brother must bo a lunatic, or he could not have done and
said what he had; when my brother mentioned the circumstance
rst he said that he had shot him; my brother was calm at
the time he said so; he did not say that Kinder died; he merely
said that he_ had shot him; my brother might have used
the Word die in many conversations, but he did not use it in the
hr&t; he ölten stated that people believed that Kinder had died
y ns own band; in one conversation he (Bertrand) leaued over
to me, and said that he did not die by the shot; that conversation
took place about three or four weeks ago; at the time that Bertrand
stated that to me I thought that Mrs. Bertrand was asleep ; she was
in a kmd ol a stupor; she used to go off into those sleeps that would
last some hours ; Bertrand asked me not to mention to his wife that
he had shot Kinder; I mentioned to his wife that he said to me that
belore 1 leit for Brisbane, which I was then shortly about to do, that
should see Mrs. Bertrand's funeral; that was three weeks after Mrs.
Bertrand told me that prisoner had shot Kinder; in conversation he
told me that deceased did not die by the shot, but that “we poisoned
him ; all that conversation took place on the same night; I did not
speak to Mrs. Bertrand about it the same night, as the conversation
took place at about half-past 12 o’clock, and Mrs. Bertrand was so
rowsy that I could not talk to her; I cannot swear that it was the
next morning that I spoke to Mrs. Bertrand about what her husband
had said; I always told her what Bertrand said; I wished to protect
Mrs. Bertrand ; in fact, that was what I stayed in the house for, and
I must also say that I stayed partly for fear of my lifo ; whenever I
tned to shelter Mrs. Bertrand in any way, her husband always seemed
to have some revenge against me ; evon if Mrs. Bertrand only took a
lork up at the table, and he told her not to do so, it would givo
oüence, and il I said anything in Mrs. Bertrand’s favour he would
show bis spite atme ; we were always in dread of our lives ; in fact
1 had not a moment’s peace in thehouse since I heard of the murder ;
my brother did not appear anxious to get me out of the house, but
quito the contrary, and when I wanted to go he always hindered me :
he always professed tobe very fond of me, and said 1 was his favorito
sister ; although he professed fondness forme he did not show it by
his mariner ; he was often very eccentric ; even in gaping ho would
Imitate the roar of a tiger, and had done it in the Street ; he always
prolessed to have an idea that he could mesmerise people ; on one
occasion, when we were spending the evening at Defries’, Bertrand
acted m a very eccentric manner all the night; he put his fingers up
to bis head to make horns, and he said he was the devil; ho said he
could call up Kinder s ghost in the room ; of course I did not expect
that he could do such a thing, but the horror of knowing what I did
atlected me, and I went into hystcrics ; Bertrand voluntarily and un-
©xpectedly made the statement that deceased did not die by the shot,


but tliat “wc poisoned hhn I believo Boi fr an tT was a tt-jr.pc; ato
man; from all that I have observcd, he was; wlien ho s-.id “Wo
poisoned him,” I did not ’question hirn about it ; ho said he gavo
Kinder the poison, or that he had a poison that could not be detectcd ;
subsequently, Bertrand said, that thc poison ho gave Kinder, or that
he (Bertrand) had, could not bo detected ; I nnderstood him at first,
when he said .“we,” that it was not Bertrand alonc who had poisoned
bim ; from bis langnage afterwards, I inferred that Bertrand himself
had poisoned deceased; Bertrand did not say that ho had poisoned
Kinder, but that Kinder had poison ; I will swear that he did not say
that he gave Kinder the poison himself, he said “ we ” gavo it to him,
and he said whilst Mrs. Bertrand was asleop on the sofa, and, pointing
to her, “and she mixed itho did not teil me that bis wife kuew
wliether it was poison or not; I have no doubfc that Mrs. Bertrand was
asleep when he pointed to her: from what he said, Mrs. Bertrand,
I shotild conclude, might be wholly innocent, and not have
known what it was she mixed; he did not say that he
compelled bis, wife to mix the poison; I have generally a
good recollection, but I have gone through a great deal lately; I
remember all that was said by Mr. and Mrs. Bertrand about Kinder
because it was of a natnro that I could not easily forget it; all Mrs.
Bertrand said to me abont my brother I oon remember; I did not say
to Mrs. Bertrand, “Mr, Kinder did not die by the shot—he was
poisoned;” when I spoko to Mrs. Bertrand, and mentioned that her
nusband had pointed to her and said “ >She mixed ifc,” Mrs. Bertrand
got up and stamped on the fleor, and said ho’s a liar;” that was the
same morning, or the morning alter that Mr. Bertrand had spoken
about her mixing thc poison ; I have not stated this before to-day ; it
oscapod my recollection ; previously to this Mr.?. Bertrand had told me
that she had mixed the poison ; I did not know what to bolieve ; I could
not undorstand it; lam not mixing up what Bertrand said with what
Mrs. Bertrand said; she had previously told me she had mixed the
poison because her husband compelled her; I did not say anything
when Mrs. Bertrand stamped her foot and said “He’s a har;’’ I was
astounded, and I did not like to spoak to hex*, —I did not know what to
say ; I will swear that I did not say “‘Well, rill teil’Henry what you
say;” I won't swear that she said, “ He’s a liar, and I’ll teil him so;”
the words “ 81l teil him so,” might have been said, and have escaped
my recollection ; I ppsitively swear that I did not say to Mrs. Bertrand,
“ For Gochs sake don’t, for he told me not to teil you ” when she said
“ He’s a liar; my brother did not “ implore ” me, lie only “ asked ” me
not to teil bis wife that he had told me that he had shot Kinder; I did
teil her what hc said ; tlxere was an interval of three weeks between the
two conversations in which Bertrand told me that he had shot Kinder
and when he told me that he had poisoned him; I could not have
mentioned both conversations to Mrs. Bertrand at the same time; I
never heard Mrs Bertrand speak ixx nnkind terms of Kinder, but quito
the other way; she always spoke in very kind terms of Kinder; sho,
never said “ I was present at thopoisoning of Kinder;” Mrs.
said that she turned round when she saw the pisbol falling frory the
hands of Kinder; she might have said that she fainted afterwards ; she
repeated things that oeenrred shoi’tly affcer Kinder was sliot, and sho
thereforo could not have been long unconscious, supposino- she haa
fainted; Mrs. Bertrand mentioned to mo, by way of complaint, that on
one occasion Mrs. Kinder slept in the [same bed with Bertrand and
herseif; she said that Bertrand made her lie in bed; that Mrs. Kinder
tben camo in and that they had improper intereourse j on another


Öccasion slie said timt sbe would not stay in ued, and timt rather tbaii
do so sbe took a mattress and slept on tbefloor; I beard that Bertrand
wanted bis wife to write down on a piece of paper that sbe was tired of
her life, and that sbe bad taken poison; sbe refused to do so; at
anotber time, Mrs. Bertrand told me that her busband wisbed hei to
o*o and buy strychnine, and that she refused to go ; Mrs. Bertrand said
sbe would not be such a fool, and that if he wanted it, be could write ib
down and send for it; tbis was after Kinder’s death, and
wbile I was staying in tbe house; Bertrand often told me,
at that time, that be bad a great mind to murder Mrs.
Bertrand and say I bad done it ; I know that Mrs. Bertrand bas
bcen to tbe Inspector-General's officc, and given Information res-
pccting this matter \ I never saw Mrs. Bertrand. intexfeio in hei
limband’s business as to tbe poisons nsed, and as far as I am aware
sbe bad no knowledge of poisons ; after I told her wbat my brotber
bad said, I told her "that sbe ought to teil wbat sbe knew to a magis-
tratc—that if sbe did not confess, very likcly tbe woman who ougbt
to bear it would escape, and she (Mrs. Bertrand) would be hangedj
she said, she could not be hanged—she had nothing to fear—she had
done no wrong ; Mrs. Bertrand as well as my brotber told me that
Kinder was poisoned ; she said Henry forced her to mix tbe poison,
and Mrs. Kinder gave it bim ; sbe never told me for wbat pnrpose it
was mixed, and that sbe knew for wbat pnrpose it was intended.
By Mr. Robcrds: In tbe conversations I bave spoken about in
cvidence to day, Mrs Kinder was not present.
By Mr. Butler: Wben I spoke of not being on fnendly terms
witb my brotber, I mean to say I differed with bim as to tbe courso
be took witb regard to Mrs. Kinder, and wbat be wanted me to do in
Mary Agnes Robertson was recalled and examined; after wbich,
tbe furtber bearing was adjourned tili tbis morning.
Mr. Roberts again applied that Mrs. Bertrand migbt be allowed
bail, but it was refused.
, Thursdav, Becembee 7th.
Mary Agnes Robertson (wbose examination in ebief was concluded
on Wednesday) deposed: I bave known Mrs. Kinder for about
embteen montbs, having first become acquainted witb her at tbo
North Shore, wbere my sister resides ; I was introduced to Mr.
Bertrand before Kinder's deatb, but alter bis dcatb I became moic
intimately acquainted witb Mr. and Mrs. Bertrand ; after Kinder s
deatb I went to see Mrs. Kinder at Bertrand’s bouse, wbere sbe was
staying; tbey visited at my bouse some time after that; Bertrand
came first witb Mrs. Kinder, and twice Bertrand came alone in tbe
afternoon 5 I have scen the youiig mau (Jackson) who was prosecutcd
some time ago by Bertrand ; about a fortnight after Kindei s death,
Bertrand, in conversation, Mrs. Kinder was present, spoke
about a divorce from bis wife and about marrying Mrs. Kinder ;bc
spoke of tbis on one if not two occasions ; 1 said “I tbink it
wrong, I do not see wby you sbould bave a divorce Irom your wife ;
Mrs.°kinder was present on one occasion wben I said it was very
Wrong, and sbe made no remark ; but I do not tbink sbe was present
on any occasion wben tbere was a conversation witb me about
Kinder’s deatb ; I callcd at Bertrand’s bouse to inquire if it was truo
that Kinder bad shot bimself; Mrs. Bertrand was not at bome, and
Bertrand told me that Kinder was sitting on a ebair near tbe piano,
and that the two ladies were at tbe window arranging flowers m a
bonnet wben Uc sbot bimself 5 be also tele! me that bc bougbt a pair


tF pistols for Kinder to figbt a duel witb Jackson, and tbat it was
witb one rf tbese pistols that he shot himself; I said it was very silly
of bim to buy pistols for tbat purpose; Bertrand said he had gone
over, or had been over, to practise witb Kinder in bring at bottles ;
in the next conversation he was talking abont tbe divorce, and said
tbat Kinder did not sboot himself; tbis was in my bouse ; 1 had been
at bis place, and be accompanied me bome ; be would not allow me to
leave at all until a late hour, and tben insisted upon accompanymg
me bome ; I told bim I did not wisb to bear anythmg more about the
sbooting of Kinder ; be said “It is true, I did sboot bim Kinder did
not sboot himself.’' He said be could not give up Mrs, Kinder, as he
was in her power ; be said be tbrew tbe pistol mto the sea, and that
it was Mrs. Kinder’s wisb that Kinder was shot wbilst Jackson was m
the bouse, so tbat be migbt be blamed for it; on one occasion, when
Bertrand, Mrs. Bertrand, and Mrs. Kerr were at my bouse, after the
conversation I have spoken of tbey remained for tbe night ; Mrs. Kerr
retired to bed before supper, and Mr, and Mrs. Bertrand had supper ;
wbilst at supper Bertrand took out of bis portemonaie a small card
witbsome figures in lead pencil written on it; tbrew it on tbe table
and wished bis wife to take it up ; I tbink tbe word gaslight was
printed on, witb some figures in pencil; he desired her to look at it
well; he said “Jane, do you bear?” she said, “Henry, dont, dont;
be told her to take the card in her band, and askcd her d she recol-
lected it; she turned very pale, and commenced crymg ; she took up
tbe card after being told to do so several times ; he tben told me to
take the card and look at it; I asked bim wby I was to look at it; he
said because it was the card tbat Kinder had in bis band wben be was
shot: we tben went into tbe drawing-room, when he commenced
raving, and, falling on the floor, called out “ Helen, Helen, come and
dress be also said, “Jane, are you asleep? T and called for bis
assistant to fetcb Helen from Mrs. Macintosh’s ; I do not tbmk be was
in a fit; be called out, “ Bring tbe milk and mix the poison—i say,
Helen, you gave it bim—l say you are to give it to bim. He said,
“ Dont wring your bands, he feels notbing now ; Bertrand tben com-
plained that be was not well, baving a pain in bis bead ; I heard ot
Kinder living some days, and tben dying on the Fnday, I tbmk ; that
day I saw Bertrand and Mrs. Kinder dnvmg in a patent satety towards
tbe Haymarket; tbis was tbe Friday after I beard of Kinder sbooting
himself, between 2 and 3 o’clock ; I observed them laugbmg as tbey
drove in tbe cab ; I was at tbe bouse at tbe North Shore on tbe alter-
noon of tbe day tbat Kinder died, and was gomg to Kinder s when i
saw tbem driving along tbe Street; she came in wbilst I was at the
bouse ; Mrs. Bowden and Mrs. Johnson were at the bouse; betöre she
came, tbey asked tobe allowed to see Mr. Kinder, but tbe answer was
that tbe doctors would not allow bim tobe seen; I recollect Mrs.
Kinder leaving tbe room, saying she was unwell and must go to bed ;
afterwards she came in, wben Mrs. Bowden and Mrs. Johnson had
gone, and said sbe did not want to sit witb them; Bertrand and Mrs.
Bertrand were atmy bouse tbe night before ; wben I beard bmi say
he would go next day and say he shot Kinder; I saw tbat Mrs. Kinder
looked unwell and pale, and asked her wby, or wby Bertrand spoke in
tbat manner; she told me that Bertrand would go and say so: she
said he sbould not say so, or sometbing to tbat eflect; 1 sai n? Ido
not tbink be would do such a thing,” or, “ wby sbould be say
so” : she said sbe tbought be would do so; next day, 1 saw them at
Darlinghurst Court-bouse ; Bertrand was sbaking Mrs. Kindei by e
wi’ist in the court-yard, and I heard bim say tbat sbe annoyed mm by


lau ginng at Jackson, and that ehe wlsbed to go to Jackson in the dock,
I remember Bertrand saying that the pistol produced on tho mquost
was not the one that shot Mr. Kinder.
Francis Arthur Jackson deposed: I Hvod in New Zealandior
fourtecn years, and was a squatter there ; I knew Mrs. Kinder in hew
Zealand subsequent to her maxriage, and also knewMr. Kinder;: there
was au intimacy between myself and Mrs. Kinder in New Zealand, and
I had correspondence with har there; the letters produced are in my
handwriting. and wera semt fromme to her; I never gave thom to
Bertrand myself. and if they were iound in bis possession Ido nos
know how they came there : I saw thera in Mrs. Kinder s possession
after I had written them to her ; I had lettors of hers writtan to m o
ahout the same time ; 1 did not know her bcfore she was married to
Kinder; abont half a year ago I came to Sydney, and then I went to
reside with Mr. aud Mrs. Kinder at the North Shore; after three
weeks this intimacy was renewed; I first met Bertrand at Kinder s
house, and had been there about a week or eight days ; he frequently
visited the house whilst I was there ; after I had left I called one day
and recollect that a letter came enclosing a diamond ring, brooght by
Bertrand's assistant; this is the letter with regard to which 1 put sorno
questions when upon my trial; I am not certain that sne showad mo
wie letter, but 1 read it; it was signod Louis, or, “ lonr owu
Louis." I cannot remember distinctly; she went to Sydney that day
immediately afterwards ; I wanted to ascertain whether she really cared
for Bertrand : I was not living in the house at the time, nor was I living
at Bertrand’s ; I asked her if she really cared for Bertrand and sho
answered in a joking Idnd of mauner, giving no positive answer atthat
time; I resided at Kinder s about two mouths ; once on my trial, and
once somewhero eise, I heard Bertrand say I was removed by Kindei——
that it was Kinder’s wish that I should be removed that that was the
reason for Kinder's family coming to live over at Sydney at Bertrand s,
so as to cause me to leave the place; during a conversation With Mrs.
Kinder, as she saw Bertrand coming in, she said I nad botter go, I
said no, I thonght not, and Bertrand came into the room; I asked her
when he was there which of tho two men she preferred; Bertrand
would not speak to me at first; he said she ought to undeceive me at
once; he said it was not right forme to go on supposiug that Mis,
Ehnder did care forme; he asked Mrs, Kinder it she cared for him,
and sliö bowed her herbei i after w , he tolcl me Mis. Kindei hau
cared for him for a long time, and had ceased to care forme ,he then
went on to say he wished to remove from my mind any idea that Mrs.
Kinder had cared forme from the momeut she saw him, seeming to ac-
knowledge that Mrs. Kinder had liked him from the very first time sho
saw him; he afterwards told me there was an intimacy existing between
them of tho same sort that existed between her and me—an illicit in-
timacy; ho told me that he liked her much better than I did, and that
his intimacy had reached its climax —not speaking more uirectly than
that; I told him at this time what the nature ofmy intimacy with Mrs.
Kinder was —that it was of a similar kind to that ho had; when tho
conversation took place between the three of ns Mrs. Kinder informed
me in fact that there was an illicit intimacy between herseif and Ber-
trand; I saw the report of the inquest when I was at West Maitland,
and the conversation I spoko of took place about three days before
that; it was long before this conversation that I had gone to live at
Kinder’s house ; at Bertrand’s house, to which he invited me about a
fortnight befo.-o tho death of Kinder, Bertrand, his wife, and myself
wors iu the dining-room, and the conversation turued upon Mrs.


Kinder, when Bertrand said in the pressnce of bis wife, that heloved
Mrs. Kinder; he was then walking up and down the room very fast,'
and appeared tobe much excited: he said he would do anything for
her—that no woman had acquired such a power overhimbefora; Mrs.
| Bertrand appeared tobe depressed and unhappy; he said he looked
upon Helen as bis wife; I remcmber Bertrand saying it was a bad
thing for him that bis wife was virtuous, because it gave bim no way
of getting rid of her : I do not remember whether Mrs. Bertrand was
present when he said this or not; at another conversation, which took
place in the bodroom whilst I was lying in bed and he Standing at the
foot, he reiterated how very foild be was of Mrs. Kinder; said he
could do anything for her, and told me that after I went —I was going
away, as he thought to leave the colony—l must not be surprised at
anything I niight hcar; he had given me some money to go away, and
he said, “You would not like to bo implicated in a charge for tha
inurder of Kinder;” I said, “ Mo, I think not, 1 should think it im*
possible;” he said if I stayed in Sydney I might bo charged with be-
ing implicated in Kinder’ s murder or something of that kind; this he
said in a joking kind of in armer; this was the last night I was there,
'and about a fortnight before Kinder’s death; I said it was impossible,
and be said tbere were mauy stranger things in the country than that,
and then again alluded to my former intimacy with Mrs. Kinder ; ha
told me that in a year or two he would marry her; I said it was im-
possible that be could bemarried, her busband being aliye ; he replied,
“ all things are possible, and time will show it; he said Kinder was
' “rapidly killing himself with drink. and that if drinking did not kill
him other raeans (or things) would;” Kinder often used to go to
Dind’s to drink ; I do not know any instance of Bertrand preventing
him from drinking, nor have I seeu him encouraging it farther than
going with him; he said the best thing I could do was to go away
from Sydney; and he offered to pay my passage to Melbourne; he
once held the threat over me that if I did not gö I might be implicated
in Kinder’s death, and remarked something abont the Devil havmg a
strong will. Mrs, Kinder appeared to treat it as out of the qnestion
that she should be bis wife; 1 heard her say that Bertrand was very
fond of her and wanted to marry her, bub that it was out ox the ques-
tion ; I did not goto Melbourne, but np the country to West Maitland,
and whilst there I saw an acconnt of the inquest; I had been away
from Sydney a few days or a week; I then wrote the letter produccd ;
on my trial I heard Bertrand say he had recoived this letter, and that
was the letter I was prosecuted for sending ; and for which I am now
undergoing sentencc. [The letter was read. It was dated M ögt
Maitland, lOth October, 1865, and commenced; “ I am shookecl, hor-
rlfied, astounded at this denonement of your plans.” It continued:
“1 little thought when you told me not tobe snrprised at anything
after my departure, that it would ond in this.” He farther
have read the evidence, and noticed the discrepancies in it. '*■ _ *
Had the Jury known one-half that I could teil them, this would rmg
through the whole of the civilised world.” He also says :“I would
not stand in your shoes at this moment for all the wealtb, rank, nches,
and beauty it is in the power of the world to bestow. As for the ac-
complice and accessory, I pity as much as blame her.” He goes on:
You ai’e aware that twice in the course of your evidence you were
guilty of wilful and corrupt perjury, and a few words of mine to a
mao’istrate or the police would be sufficiont to bring abont a search
into the affair, and cause you more troublo than you can conoeive.
The letter proceeds i >; I seem tobe a sort oi aceesstü’y by the uiexe


" -Zi
facfc of concealing wliat I know, and still more wliat I snspect. That
feeling is growing strenger every hour, and will burst forth unlcss you
give me the means to get to some other land, where I may forget the
horrors of this. I could not remain in a country where_ such a fearful
tragedy was enacted.” The writer says : “On the receipt of this send
me°£2o, and I will get away by the Tararua, and will never return.’
He says, £e You think I can prove nothing, but you are mistaken.’’ He
concludes by saying, “ I consider you two are now one in everything,”
and signs “F. A. J.”] I was prosecuted upon that as for sending a
threatening letter, and am now undergoing sentence; one of the pas-
sages in the evidence that I state in that letter tobe perjury was that in
whichhe said Kinder had no cause for jealousy against Bei’trand, and
next, in reference to his holding irreligious opinions, and that he drank
very hard; Ido not believe Bertrand dissuaded him from drinking, but I
cannot swear that he encouraged him; when I left Sydney Bertrand
did not know whether I was leaving the colony or not; when I left him
I did not think of going to Melbourne, on my way to New Zealand, and
I did not infoi’m him of my change of pui’pose ; this letter was the
tirst intimation he had of my not having goxxe to Melbourne.
Cross-examined by Mr. Eoberts : I was convicted upon that letter,
which is called a threatening letter ; I wanted to go away from the
country, and wrote that on the spur of the moment when I read the
evidence on the inquest; I was not defended by counscl ; Kinder
drank freely in New Zealand ; I spoke to Bertrand about Mrs. Kinder
before his admissions to me ; and after he mentioned his intimacy
with hex% I might have told him that Mrs. Kinder was in my power ;
I do not remember saying that Mrs. Kinder, was in my power because
of some defalcations in New Zealand; to my knowledge he was
not guilty of any defalcations; I mentioned about Kinder qwing
me a sum of money befoi’e he mentioned to me his intimacy
Avith Mrs. Kinder, and I darc say I told him that Kinder used tobe
dreadfully jealous of me ; I think I told him that Kinder had threat-
ened to shöot nie (or rather I think Kinder told him so in my preseuce)
on account of a private quarrel I had in New Zealand ; but I stayed
at his house in Ncav Zealand after this quarrel; I do not remember
saying I had him in my power with regard to money affairs with me ;
I the habit of drinking with Kinder in New Zealand; I used
to drink hard ; we used to drink to see Avhich could stand the most
liquor, and sometimes he used to see me under the table ; I used to
drink with him before I knew Mrs. Kinder, and afterwards ; I had a
strong regard for Mrs. Kinder soon after my acquaintance Avith her ;
when I drank excessively with Kinder first my object was not
to impair his health, or to get rid of him by his death, or by Separation
from his wife ; after my intimacy Avith Mrs. Kinder coramenced I had
an object in getting him to drink to excess —that Avas to get him
stupid so as to afford me opportunities for Interviews or intimacy
with Mrs. Kinder ; the human mind is very base ; I was base enough
for that; by constant drinking with him I thought it Avould shorten
his days ; it Avould shorten anybody’s days.
Captain Cloete : I did not drink with him for the express purpose
of shortening his days.
By Mr. Eoberts: I will not swear that I did not mention the
circumstances and my objects to Bertrand ; but I am aware he must
have known them all; Bertrand did say on one occasion that I had
better go out of the colony or I might be implicated in Kinder’»
murder ; I was out of employment for most of the time I was here,
and Bertrand assisted me a little in a pecuaiary way; J will not


fcwear that on one öccasion I did not teil Bertrand that It was my
Intention some day to marry Mrs. Kinder ; I was constantly with her
in the dav time ; it was in New Zealand that he wanted to fight me
with pistols : he was jealous of me ; he was drinking at the time, and
I was partially drunk ; this happened m the bank; whenlwrote
this letter I knew that Bertrand had stated to me bis mtimacy with
Mrs. Kinder, and I had heard him speak of bis wife asia virtnons
woman ; I do not believe I was thinkmg of Mrs. Kinder when in that
letter I spoke of “ beauty,” but I thought she was an accessory and
accomplice when I spoke of her ; I do not in that letter refer to Mrs.
Bertrand in any way ; I wrote nothing to the effect that she w.s
participator in bringing about the deatb ol Kinder, and never did
believe it; I thought Bertrand was an eccentric sort of Person from
his manner and conversations ; I never heard him say he would be
divorced or get a divorce, nor did I hear bim say he would leave bis
wife and go and live with Mrs. Kinder ; 1 told Bertrand that Kinder
owed me £4O ; I will not swear I did not teil him it was £132.
By Mr. Kobberds • I know nothing about Mrs. Kmdei bein g an
accessory ; she was present at one of the conversations I had with
Bertrand—the one in the house; she was not present at any ol those
when Bertrand told me that Kinder might die ; I remember her say-
ing that she would rather have nothing at all to do with either ol us ,
that she intended to do her duty as a wife, or somethmg of that kind ;
at that time she requested me to leave her, and not to corae near her
acrain, and any Interviews I had with her were of my own seeking, not
hers ; she told me that she feared Bertrand ; said *• He seeras tobe a
perfect devil;” and spoke of him as being able to compel her to do
things against her will, having a sort of clairvoyance oyer her, or
mesmeric influence; Bertrand often threatened to poison himself; hc
did not believe in a hereafter, and Mrs. Kinder was ternhed when she
asked me to go ; in New Zealand Mrs. Kinder tned hard to prevent
her husband from drinking, and also whilst she was here she per-
suaded him not to drink ; his drinking and his unkmd conduct towards
her made her unhappy ; Bertrand’s letter, in which the diamond ring
was sent, requested Mrs. Kinder to go over and see him as he ivas
unwell, and she asked me whether she should go or not; she said she
would send the ring back to him; she was excited and might have
said she would go and speak of it to Mr. Kinder ; there is nothing that
I know of to criminate her in this Charge beyond the mtimacy with
nftrti'flind» •
Captairi Cloete : I never spoke of any of his affairs as defalcations;
she seemed tobe very undecided about commg to Sydney to see her
husband about the ring; Ido not know that I used any influence to
iuduce her to do so.
By Mrs. Kobberds: She went. .. .. , t x .
' Captain Cloete: When I wrote that letter 1 knew all that I havö
stated in evidence. . , , oi
Marr Agnes Eobertson recalled, and cross-exammed by Mr. Kob City.
1 appeared against Bertrand for threatening languagc hc made usc ot,
he threatened to kill me with a steel at my own house; it was on the
occasion of a visit with his wife and Mrs. Kerr (his sistcr) ; thcy were
not present, and Mr. Deffries came in to see what he wasdomg ; hc
appeared to speak seriously; I went mto the dming-room to fetch an
urabrella of my own, but which Bertrand had been usmg, and whilst i
was stooping I saw the shadow of some one standmg near me, and on
turning round saw Bertrand standing over me with a steel in Ins band,
j had giyea him uo provocation that X am awavc ol \ thovc hau oeou


ho cause of quarrel betwecn us up to that moment; there was" nofching
but feelmgs of friendsbip 011 eacb siele ; I cannot say that I was as-
touished at bis threat; he afterwarda said he woald kill me; he had
thieatened me be/oro with a knife in bis own lionsc,' in the dining-
room, in the presence ol Mrs. Kerr; I had given him no reason then ;
at the Police Office he was directed to lind sureties to keep the peace
towards me, in defanlt to go to gaol for fourteen days: he has ölten
said to me “ I will kill you ; I "was on visiting terms with his family ;
I did not consider he was joking; I asked him what I had done that
he shonld taxie my hie, that was whon he took the Steel, and he did
not auswer me that I remember; it was alter the death of Kinder that
he feil on tite floor, raving and calling Ihr Helen ; when he called for
Mrs. Kinder (Helen) she was not in the houae ; 1 knew that she was
then at Bathurst; when he asked Jane if she Was asleep she was at-
tending to him; Borne, his as istaut, was not there: he cried out
“ s ™hg the milk—mix the poison—Helen you give it him ;he did not
say Jane was to mix the poison ; I never told Bertrand that I was very
fond ol him, he tried to mosmerise me in my own roorn ono night 5
and I fancied I leih the effects—a kind of galvanic shock; Mrs.
Kinder was present, but no one olso ; when I feit a dizziness in my oyes,
I ran out of the room ; I know ho has tnod to mesmerise me by follow-
ing me about the place and looking atme; he compelled me that
night to lass him in the presence of Mrs. Kinder, who said that Captain
Eobortson wonld not como home, and made me feel very unwell: I left
Mrs. Kinder and Bertrand in the dining room, and told him I did not
wish to see him there again ; Mrs. Kinder made him speck to me. and
wo became friends ; I did it through fear; since that on one occasion I
have kissed him to save his wife from violence ; he said “do von intend
to do as I bid you F in the presence of his wife and Mrs. Kerr, in his
bedroom ; I said no; then he called his wife so that he might flog her
with a whip. nnless I kissed him, and to save her from v iolence ? did
so ; on another occasion I saw him beat her with an ümbrella without
any apparent cause; I had no consultation with Deflries about placing
Bertrand in a Innatic asyhnn in conseqnence of these : I
have heard Dell ries say he must be insane to go on as he did; ho said
it in a jocular manner; I thought his eccentricity was to a great
extent pretended; snbseqnently, when I got home one night I'told
Mrs. Kerr that I woald not walk home with Bertrand again, as he told
me such horrible things aboyit a mnrder; Mrs. Bertrand, tome, always
appeared tobe a well condncted woman in all respects, and affectionatc
and attentive to her children; I have noticed a great ohange in her
since I first saw her at Kinder’s house at the North Shore; she always
appeared lately tobe very much ander the coramand of her husband,
and very much in fear of him ; when he took out the card at Slipper he
fhi ew it upon the table and addressed his wife in a psremptory tone ;
he said, “Jane, take that card up; I think Mrs. Bertrand heard him,
but she did not wish to take the card up; ho then said, “Jane, do voa
hear take that card np ;' befere she took it up she said, “Don’t,
Henry, den t;' I wanted to know the meaning of the card; shö took
it ap and began to cry; he asked her if she remembered the card; I
cannot say whether it was owing to his peremptory manner that she wept i
she appeared tobe powerless, completely under his control, and in
fear oi him; he desired me, but not in eoharsh amanner, to look at the
card, and I took it either from the table er from Mrs. Bertrand’s
band; _he said he desired me to look at it, böfeftuso it was the card
that Kinder had in bis hand when ho was shot; he had previously told
me that Kinder had shot bims elf; he never told me that his wife was
f • - ■ ■' -S
F m • - y


a party to tho shooting of Kinder; he never, in any of his conversa-
tions, that I am aware of, implicated his wife either with reguard to
the shooting or the poisoning, if Kinder was poisoned or shot; nor
any one eise with reguard tothe shooting; I always observed that his
wife was a woman of quiet mild disposition; I never heard her speak
against Kinder or in anger against any one; I recollect saying to him,
“ I will not allow yon to look at your wife in that way,” and I kuow
he rose and went towards his wife with a knife in his hand.
By Mr. Eobberds : I saw Mrs. Kinder and Bertrand in the cab; I
was perfectly certain it was her ; I believe Mrs. Kinder told me she
had been to an hotel abont a bailiff who was in her houso ; she said
she went concerning the bailiff to see the master of the hotel, who I
beleive she said, held a bill of sale over the furnitnre ; I do not re-
member her saying she went to the hotel to get the bailiff removed ;
when I went over to Kinder’s honse she told me this ; she appeared
dejected and sorrowful for a short time ; she left the room, but soon
after came in again; Mr. Kinder was not dead then; she said she only
wished to get rid of Mrs. Bowden and Mrs. Johnson, and that that
was the reason she said she was unwell and obliged to go to her room;
this was the day on which Mr. Kinder died ; when Bertrand spoke of
the divorce, Mrs. Kinder was playing the piano, but not looking at it,
and she could hear what he said; it was qnite loud enough for her to
hear; she was not present at any of the other conversations I have
related in my evidence, with Bertrand or any one eise.
Fbiday, Dec. 8.
Sophia Taylor deposed: I was nursegirl in the employ of Mr. and
Mrs. Bertrand, and nsed sometimes to go with them to the North
Shore, to Kinder’s place ; on the Monday that I heard of Kinder
shooting himself I went to the North Shore with Mrs. Bertrand and
the baby ; I think it was about 4 o’clock when I got there, and I re-
turned about half-past 5 o’clock ; on other occasions I usually came
back with them, but on this occasion, when it was raining, I did not;
it was said that baby had a cold, and Mrs. Bertrand sent me home
early; I did not hear any directions given to Mrs. Bertrand tosend
me home ; Bertrand said, “Is Sophy going to take baby home ?” and
Mrs. Bertrand said yes; that was the only time on which I returned
by myself; before I heard of Kinder’s death I saw Mrs. Kinder and
Bertrand in the dining-room, she was lying on the sofa, and he was
sitting on the chair beside her; that was in his honse at Wynyard-
square ; on the Satnrday of Kinder’s death I saw them together in the
dining-room, and as it was dark I asked if they would have a light,
and Mrs. Kinder said she liked tobe in the dark; on the day that
Mrs. Bertrand's baby was christened, Bertrand asked Mrs. Kinder to
lass him ; I laughed; Mrs. Kinder asked me why I laughed, and Mrs.
Bertrand said I might well laugh ; I have seen him kiss her ; I have
seen Bertrand and Mrs. Kinder np-stairs in Mrs. Bertrand’s bedroom
when no one eise was there ; Bertrand was in the arm-chair and Mrs.
Kinder was before the glass; at the North Shore I saw Mrs. Kinder
and Bertrand in Mrs. Kinder’s bedroom; I saw her come out, and
Bertrand came out about a minute aftervvards ; there was no one eise
there ; I saw them kissing before Kinder’s death, more thau two
months ; it was before Kinder’s death that I saw them coming out of
his room, at the North Shore; Kinder was then away at his office;
when I saw them in Bertrand’s bedroom it was after Kiuder’s death.
Thomas Buchanan deposed: I am accountant in the Bank of
Australasia, and knew the late Mr. {Kinder; I recollect the day on
which he was reported to have shot himself; I crossed with him to the


North Shore on that day; it was by the steamer leaving the Circular
Quay at a quarter before 1 o’clock; the latest time at which I saw him
was a few minutes past 1 o’clock; it was on Monday, the 2nd October ;
when I parted with him he appeared by no means under the influence
of drink ; I believe he was perfectly sober; there was no appearance
whatever of drinking,
Cross-examined by Mr. Eoberts: I havemet him several times, in
business and on other occasions, but wag not an intimate friend of bis;
that day he asked me to go his house and take a glass of wine, but being
engaged I cpuld not go,
By Mr.' Macphersou: I never saw him at any time the worse for
drink ; it never occurred to rao that there was anything peculiar about
Kinder’s ordinary manner.
By Mr. Butler: I have known him since the City Bank opened—
nearly twelve months
Sophia Taylor, recalled: On the last day that I wasat Kinder’s,
whilst I w r as there with the baby, I didnothear of his shooting himself;
between 4 and half-past 5 I saw Mr. Kinder at his house; he was
playing with his little boy in front of the house below the verandah ;
that was about half-an-hour before I returned with the baby; I never
could teil when he was drunk; he seemed that day in better spirits than
ever I saw him ; he did not seem to me like a man Avho was drunk.
Cross-examined by Mr. Eoberts : As far as I know he might have
been drunk, but I could not say; whilst I was on the verendah I looked
at him as he was throwing money to the child; I am fifteen years old
on the 18th January next; I was in the Service of Mrs. Bertrand from
the llth of March last, and I left last Saturday; she was a very kind
mistress, and very fond and affectionate to her children.
By Mr. Macpherson: On the evening that I saw him playing with
the baby I saw Kinder and Bertrand going out of the house together ;
I heard Kinder or Bertrand say they were going to Dind’s public-house;
Ido not know r how long they w'ere away ; I saw him playing with the
baby before they went there; I did not take particular notice ot him
when he returned
William Fester Dind deposed: I am a publican residing at the
North Shore, my place being about fifty yards from Kinder’s house; I
believe the shooting took place on the Monday, but the first I heard of
it was on the Wednesday evening; I was at home all the time, and
people were coming in and out as usnal; I had not been to Kinder s
house until the Wednesday; on the Monday evening I saw Kinder and
Bertrand at my house; I think it was about sor G o’clock: Ido not
think they stayed more than ten minutes ; I had frequently seen them
atmy place before having something to drink; there is no public-house
between my house and Kinder’s ; I do not think Kinder was drunk when
he left my place; I did not see any difference in him then from what
he was when there on any former occasion; I heard them talking while
they were there; he nearly always drank beer; he had only one glass
of ale at my house then ;it w r as colonial ale; he did not appear tobe
under the influence of drink w r hen he left; he was a man that nevrr
would appear tobe under the influence of drink; after he drank the
glass of ale I think Bertrand asked him how many he had had to-day,
and I think Kinder made the remark “ It’s only the second ;” Bertrand
then said “ That won’t hurt you; I never that I recollect heard
Bertrand dissuade him from drinking.
Cross-examined by Mr. Eoberts: I have not heard Bertrand
persuade him to drink; I have heard him ask him to drink; I hey
appeared tobe upon friendly terms Avhilc they were at my place ; Kin-


der must bave been living tlicre some time before I knew bim, but 1
have known bim about six or eigbt montbs; I have seen bim 011
occasions when I believed be was drunk ; ou these occasions he used
to look a little sleepy, foolisb, or drowsy; I never mixed in bis society,
and cannot say wbe'tber be was an excitable or irritable man or not, or
whetber be acted upon impulse ; almost every evening we used to bave
a talk togetber; I never got into conversation witb bim about bis
affairs ;be bas mentioned to me bis pecuniary embarrasments I tbink
only once ;be appeared tobe sober on tbat occasion; tbig Avas a good
Avbile before I beard that he bad sbot bimself; it did not appear to me
that bis manners were stränge in any Avay, upon any occasion, either
in reference to bis pecuniary embarrassments or otbenvise ; be never
told me that be used to drink bard; I bave never seen bim drink to
intoxication in my liouse, nor bave I at any time anywhere seen bim
drink to intoxication; but I have seen bim on occasions Avben I believed
be Avas drunk; I bave never seen bim, nnder any circumstances,
wben he bad cause for quarrel; I bave seen bim under circumstances
Avben be believed be bad cause for suspicion of some person or tbing;
upon one occasion Jackson Avas tbere witb Kinder, about a month or
fortnigbt before bis death—or four or five Aveeks before; tbey Avere in
my place togetber; Jackson bad been to my house Avith Kinder drink«
ing togetber frequently. One evening, Avben tbey came tbe back Avay
througb the liouse to tbe bar, about nine orten o’clock, tbey bad a
couple of giasses of ale, and Avent into the 'parlour; I was standing at
tbe bar, no one eise being tbere, and I overheard a little of tbeir con«
versation; Jackson was talking to Kinder about Bertrand, I tbink;
Kinder seemed annoyed upon tbat occasion. I beard Jackson say
sometbing about Mr. and Mrs. Bertrand, and I beard bim remark tbat
Bertrand, in tbe presence of bis Avife (Mrs. Bertrand), bad said tbat
be Avas very fond of Mrs. Kinder, and tbat if Kinder was dead be
Avould marry ber to-morroAV; be said be would get a divorce from
Mrs. Bertrand, and marry Mrs. Kinder to-morroAV; I could not teil
wbetber tbat was tbe begümmg or part of tbe conversation; it was
Avben tbey spoke in ratber a bigb tone ; I did not listen, it Avas so far
forced upon me by the position I Avas in; I Avas in tbe bar, and tbey
AVere in the parlour next to tbe bar.
Mr. Butler: Tbey could not see me at tbe time.
Mr. Roberts : Jackson said Bertrand bad, in tbe presence of bis
Avife, said tbat if Kinder were dead he would get a divorce and marry
Mrs. Kinder to-morroAv; upon this Jackson added, that if Mrs»
Bertrand Avas bis sister be Avould take ber to Bertrand face to face and
teil bim to take bis last look of ber, and screAV bis (Bertrand’s) neck
oft'; be seemed to hold Mrs. Bertrand in bigb estimation. I did not
see Bertrand anywhere about at that time ; Jackson always spoke in
ratber a bigb t:ne, ratber cnergetically and empbatically, and then be
Avas ratber tbe Avorso for liquor; Kinder Avas a mau tbat you could not
teil Avbetber he Avas drunk or not, be Avas very drowsy ; tbey talked
for some time afterwards, and I beard Kinder say be Avould get a
Separation ; Jackson advised bim not on account of bis little boy “Bob**
saying Avbat a fine man he Avould make ; Jackson beggcd of bim not to
do Büch a tbing; tbey stayed some time afterwards, and I went ont of
the bar ; Kinder bad a very soft voice ; he appeared by tbe rnanuer of
bis expression tobe annoyed; it did not appear to me tbat tbe otber
Avas working upon bis feelings or patience; tbey must bave been tbere
tbree-quarters of au bour; Avbat I beard raust bave been about tbe
middle of tbe conversation; on tbe "Wcdnesday, Avben 1 beard tbat
Kinder bad sbot bimself, my fatber Avben be came from Sydney askcd


me if I had heard of it; I said no, and he then asked me to go round
and see if it was true ; I did not like to do so, but I went: I never saw
Kinder after it was reported that he had shot himself; I went for that
pnrposeon Wednesday and saw Bertrand; it was between 4 and 5
o’clock I think; I went round tho back way and came up to the front
door; I did not see Mrs. Bertrand then to my knowledge ; the dogs
bogan to bark, and Bertrand came to the edge of the step of the
verandah, and I stood on the edge of the second step ; I
asked him if it was true that Kinder had shot himself; he said it
was ; I cannot be quito certaiu whether he told me the reason Avhy
he shot himself—whether he said it was owing tosoine aflairs in New
Zealand or not; Kinder that month, when he had a holiday, said,
“ I owe you something, Bind; I will pay sonie of it this month”;
I said to Bertrand I was very glad I did not ask Kinder for it; I did
not say I observed that he was in a desponding state, and I did not
therefore, ask him for it; I said he owed me £4, and I made the
remark that I was very glad I did not ask him for the money ; Kinder
had not previously spoken of his pecuniary embarrassment or bis
difficulty in Unding money ; the only thing that he spoke to me about
was some money transaction he had with Jackson in New Zealand ;
this was a long time before his death ; .1 used only to see him in tho
morniug and evening, and when he made that reference to Jackson I
cannot say whether he was drunk or sober ; he seemed to say Jack-
son was very good to him in the way he behaved as to this £4O bill;
this was before I knew Jackson ; he said that Jackson had lent him
£4O whilst he was in New Zealand, and by some mistake or other he
had forgotten the time the bill feil due, and that Jackson having no
cash sold some of his cattle to meet the bill himself; I think he told
me he had paid Jackson, I am not snre ; that he had made it all right
afterwards ; I was not sure that Bertrand assigned to me any reason
for Kinder having shot himself; while I was talking to Bertrand at
Kinder's house on the Wednesday, Kinder seemed as if he wished to
know who was talking, and sang ont loud enough for us to hear him :
in fact, whilst I was talking to Bertrand a little above a whisper, Kin-
der sang out “ Bertrand,” and when he said that Bertrand said no one
was allowed to see him : I think he said, “the doctors will not allow
anyone to see himl think Bertrand said something to the effect
that he was attendinghim as well, and therefore I did not ask to see
him ; I do not recollect Bertrand stating as a cause for Kinder shooting
himself, that he brought a letter from the Bank of New Zealand ap-
plying for payment of an amount something like £250 advanced to him
on some property, and that Kinder never for a moment thought he
owed the bank any-thing ; it might have been said ; I think there
was something said about leaving a man named Monkton to pay this
mortgage ; I am not sure whether this conversation took place on the
Wednesday evening or afterwards—that he rented the house for 255.
a week, and this 255. was tobe paid to the bank in liquidation of the
mortgage, and this man never paid it; Mrs. Kinder had a womau
servant, but at the time of my visit I did not see her; I saw her
afterwards ; I believe there was a servant living with him at tho
time ; shortly after the conversation between Jackson and Kinder I
saw Bertrand comc over about 11 o’clock ; I cannot say as a fact—
whether Bertrand did or did not attend to bis business as usual from
the Monday afternoon; I did not see Kinder from the time he left our
place ; Bertrand said it was not above ten minutes after he left that
Kinder had shot himself; he told me that after being at my place to
drink he gave the letter to Kinder, and that immediately after Kinder


shot himself; I cannot say that this conversation was 011 the Wed-
nesday afternoon, or when Bertrand was at my liouse
By Mr. Macplierson: When I say I could never teil wbethor
Kinder was drunk or not, I meau lie always appeared in a constant
state of mnddle ; during the eiglit or nine months I knew him, I can-
not say he was a good customer to me ; Kinder did not driuk inuch ;
the most at a time was three glasses of ale—colonial ale—pint
glasses; or abont six ordinary glasses; he nsed to smoke,
and generally came in Smoking ; I did not take particular notice
whether he usually went out smoking ; I act as barman to my public
house, and am pretty well always there ; I was very seldom out ol the
bar ; I always knew what Kinder got, because I was told, as he never
paid for it; he had a score or running account; Mrs. Kinder was not
present at this conversation with Bertrand.
Mr. Butler: It was in consequence of hearing somothing about
pecuniary embarrassments that I said I was glad I did not ask him for
the money.
Charles F. Eichler deposed ; I am a duly qualified medical prac-
titiouer; I was called in professionally to see the late Mr. Kinder, and
saw him ou the 2nd October; I think it would be on a Monday; I
reached the house in the eveniug about 11 o clock: wheu I arrived I
found him lying on a sofa, and I believe in the parlour : he was then
in a half-conscious state ; I saw that he had lost a great deal ol blood;
the clothes that wer© on him were bespattered with it, as was also the
Moor; on examining his head I found a large torn wound from the
maxillary angle reaching up to the right side of the head in the direc-
tion of the temple, about lour inches in length; the ear was forced
away from its natural position; the wound had the appearance ol
being di’essed with perchloride ofiron; there was very little hemo-
rrhage at that time; the pulse was about 100, very small and leeble,
although regulär; his hands were cold ; on examining the wound I found
the parotid gland was gone, some of the branches ol the maxillary and
temporal artery was uninjured, with the exception ol the processus
xygomaticus; the smaller bone of the two produced was then loose
from its position between the ear and the eye; I could not detect any
other injury to the skull bones; the ear was so far displaced that I could
see into the cavity; I have not had experience as a military surgeon, but
have seen many gunshot wounds; I have attended soldiers in hospital;
it was such an injury as a pistol might have inllicted, and had the ap-
pearance of being produced by a pistol shot; my opinion is that he
placed the muzzle of the pistol himself to the ear, and drawing the
trigger pulled the stock of the pistol downwards ; it must have been
directed upwards, and almost perpendicular to the head ; it was my
opinion that the pistol was held very dose to his face, but I could not
distinguish marks of powder ; if a man lired a pistol at his own head
there would be marks of powder, but I did not see the wolmd until
some time alter it was inllicted, and the perchrolide of iron would
cover it; it was in the wound and dose around it ; if the muzzle of a
pistol were held dose to a mau’s face, it was frequently the case that
the powder would show itself; but if the powder is fine it may not; I
did not notice traces of the powder, but they might have been coyered
by this perchloride of iron; it was possible that a bullet was in the
pistol, but I saw no entrance or exit of the ball ; the fracture ol thi
bone would probably be different to what it is now; it would have cut
sharp ; it is not likely that it passed under the bone, but it might have
done so ; the bone was only loose, not knocked out ; I think powder
and wadding or paper, if lired from a pistol dose to the faoe } would


produce the wound ; If a bullet had touched the bonc 1 tlilnk it Avould
liave cut it out altogether; tlie eftect of powder and wadding would be
shown best by experience, or it may be a matter for medical skill to
judge ; such a wound was sufficient to account for death ; it was such
a wound that a man might recover from, or from which also he might
die. The body having been exhumed, I recently made a post mortem
examination ; I have discovered nothing to induce me to vary my for-
men opiniou. In addition to what I perceived then, I discovered a
crack in the maxillary hone; it was in the line of the wound and occa-
sioued by the same cause ; that would not lead me to suppose that a
bulled was used; the body was very much decomposed, and in examin-
ing it I discovered nothing to alter my formen Impression ; I had no
couversation Avith Bertrand before I saw Kinder; he came over with
me when I came back alter my first visit, and then I had some conversa-
tion with him as to this matter, as far as I recollect his expressions
were that he or some one eise handed to Kinder some letters by which
he appeared tobe in money difficulties—that the sight of these
depressed him very much; Bertrand spoke to me of a certain Mr.
Jackson, of whom he said Kinder had been rather jealous, and that he
(Bertrand) had advanced 'him (Jackson) some money to get him
out of the colony; Ido not think he connected this jealousy with the
suicide ; 1 only say him once alter the first visit, and that mono by
accident than Intention ; I did not consider Mr. Kinder as a patient of
mine ; Mr. Wright was sent for, and after the first visit I thougbt I
should have nothing more to do with him ; I dressed the wound and
cleaned it nicely ; on Thursday, the sth of the same mouth, I had to
see a patient at the North Shore, and about 2 o’clock on that day I took
luncheon at Mr. Black’s, when a person was sent down to Kinder*s to
know how he was ; Bertrand then came down and asked me if I would
go up and see Kinder again ; he was then in the bed room in his bed ;
he was better; he commencod to talk to me ; he was considerably
better ; his intellect was Iree, his pulse about eighty, quite full,
and the wound Avas dischargiug; but did not show any signs of heal-
ing ; there Avas no indication of sudden dangen to his life at that
momont; he Avas in full possession of his faculties so as to linder«
stand what was going on; I believe I heard at the iuquest held on
Saturday that he died on the previous Friday; I examined tbe wound
on the day of the iuquest, and then saw nothing in the Avound to show
that it was in a less favourable state ; it Avas more open than it was
on Thursday; that Avould be otherwise than favourable to life, and
the stitches seemed to have sloughed away; the 3 was no sign of
henruorrage in the meantime : I did not think th n tl it there was
anything remarJ ;ablc in his dying on the Friday; , the ight he had
taken a sn Iden change as is frequent with men idici ed to exces«
sive drinki. g ; on the first occasion I erplained to h m tl e danger he
Avas in; tcld him the wound from which he sul ared was a very
dangerous ne, md that, if ho Avished, he had better settle his worldly
alfairs, as he might soon have to appear before bis Cheator; he did
not ans AVer and feil almost back in a stupor: Avhat I had said seemed to
have had an eftect upon his mind; I tried to rouse him ; he feit the
pain in dressing the wound, and I believe Bertrand said, “ Look,
hore's the doctor ;” it Afas evident he ünderstood the eftect of Avhat I
said, but ho said nothing to me ; on the second occasion he commenced
to speak to me in the German language ; he told me
he had been been educated in Germany I believe he said at
Neuid, on the Rinne ; I asked if ho knew Mr. Palmer
(Mr. Aldia’s sou-iu-law), and ho said no, but that ho did hear of


Ixim—tliftt ho was educated at the same place, that was the reason I
asked him : that was all the conversation in German that took place;
I expressed a hope that he would recover ; pointing to the wound, I
asked him how it happoned, and he said “ I don’t know,” or “ I don’t
recollect having expressed the hope for his recovery 1 Mt him;
belladonna is a particularly strong poison ; alkaloids and all
poisons are very difficult totraco : belladonna is remarkably difhcult—
I think it is almost untraceable by science : after the lapse of two
months lam certain it is impossible to trace it; the bottle produced
has the appearance of being a strong tincture of belladonna ; acomte, i
think, is untraceable, especially after the lapse of two months ; most
of the poisons cannot be traced ; belladonna does not remam
perceptible for any time ; the question as to the time it would remam
[s raore a Chemical than a medical question; the other small bottle
produced soems to contain lunar caustic, and the other sulphate ot
copper; the other bottle contains Chloride of zinc, which is a very
powerful mineral poison. ,
Cross-examined by Mr. Roberts; I gave eyidence at the mquest
on the death of Kinder, and I think I then described the mjunes m the
same manner as I have done to-day, and that they, as I then described
them, had caused death ; it is my opinion still; I stated atthe mquest,
and still hold the opinion, that the wound was produced by the dis-
charge of a pistol loaded with powder and wadding or paper; it was ot
a very dangerous character; and I had no hopes of the reco\ oi> ot do-
ceased when I first saw him; it was my opinion that deceased mfheted
the wound himself. , _ „
On the question—“ You were present at the finding of the Coroner s
iury”—Mr. Butler objected to the opinion of that Jury being taken, as
they had not there the evidence now before the Court, and theiofoxe
their opinion conld not have anything to do with the present case.
Mr, Roberts urged that the object of the Crown ought tobe to elicxt
ti’uth, whether it be on one side or the other.
Captain Cloete did not see the relevancy of the question, but saw
no barm in answering it. ,
Cross-examination continued: I was present in the rooxn at tue
finding of the juiy, but I did not pay any attention to il ; th y reairned
a verdict that deceased iuflicted tho injnrics whh las own nand; hav-
in" reference to tho direction of the wound I think thia probable ; alter
the recent exhumation I took out the stomach and handed the contents
to Mr. Watt, for analysation; it appeared to me so far as opportuinty
foi’ iudmii" preaented itself, that the deceased had been a man of xn-
ternperate'habits, and such a wound npon such a nxan would be xnore
likely to hasten death than upon a man whose Constitution was different;
the part of the temple that was injnred isnot thick; the whole of the
muscles and blood vessels appear to have been torn and blown away by
tho shot; the shock would be likely to produce coneussionot the bram;
in the first conversation with Bertrand I think Bertrand expressed a
doubt as to Kinder’s recovery; Bertrand triod to rouse him up, saymg
a Tliis is the doctor I heard from Bertrand, as I found tioni rny
sei’vant, that some one from him calledin the afternoon Mrs. Kinder s
brother, I believe, and a girl (the nursegirl); Ido not recollect Ber-
trand say in ghe hoped for Kinder’s recovery, and that il you attended
upon him as Kinder was not in good circumstances ho (Bertrand) would
pay tho expenses ; I think I saw Bertrand on the Thnrsday again : 1
told him he would have to pay Br. AVright for my first visit, and he
replied that he would pay him forme; I looked at the wound on the
Thnrsday : I was told on the Monday that Kinder had sho^hnnselt,


bnt I did not then ask bim how he carae to shoot himself; on the
Thursday I did; he said something to the effect that he did not know
how it happened; I do not recollect whether Mrs. Kinder was present
at the conversation with Mr. Kinder; I never said to Kinder “Why
did you shoot yourself,” or “ How did you come to shoot yourself,” or
anything of the kind; I pointed to the wound and asked how it hap-
pened ; he replied “ I don’t know,” or “ I don’t recollectl put the
question in English; I cannot say whether the bottle I supposed to
contain sulphate of copper is not arsenic and charcoal mixed for the
nse of dentists; there is about half a drachm of the belladonna out of
this bottle; less than the contents of this bottle would be sufficient to
kill a inan ; half of it would be sufficient; the extract of belladonna is
nsefnl in midwifery; Ido not know what dentists nse ; medical men
general ly nse belladonna for dilating the pupils of the eyes ; I do not
think there is sufficient taken out of that bottle to poison a man; in
Bertrand’s explanations about Kinder’s affairs I think he said he had
taken some letters to him that afternoon, which had come from New
Zealand.
By Mr. Robberds : The brauch of the temporary artery was blown
away, and this of itself would be a dangerous wound; part of the
temporal muscle was also gone ; I observed that Mrs. Kinder was
there, attending npon her husband ; Bertrand assisted mostly, I do
not know that she did anything in particular ; Bertrand told nie he
had done all he could to stop the hemorrhage ; I lielieve he applied to
it Chloride of iron, that with lint is a proper application for stopping
hemorrhage ; I did not hear that Mrs. Kinder had washed his hands
and face.
By Mr. Butler : It is consistent afber concussion of the brain for
a man to recover ; when the concussion is very slight it will pass off
speedily after a minnte or two perhaps ; another jierhaps will last
forty-eight hours ; whilst another will kill on the spot; I believe
there was a slight concussion of the brain ; the bone that is broken is
thin ; one part of the temporal bone, which lies inside, is the hardest
bone in the skull, bnt I do not think this is a very hard one ; some
part of this bone is very hard and part of it is not ; it is hard, bnt
other bones are harder ; at the inquest I spoke with Dr. Alloway and
Dr. Alleyne as to the direction of the wound, whether upward or
downward ; I do not mean to say that no one eise bnt himself could
have inflicted the wound, bnt it is my impression that he did it ; seeing
the improvement from the Monday to the Thursday, and there being
no hemorrhage, I cannot mention any visible cause or matter of fact
to which I can attribute his death on the Friday; the exhaustion I
perceived on the Monday might have been prodnced by the hemorrhage
and the first shook combined.
Mr. Elliott: Supposing you had not heard anything at all about
Kinder having shot himself, would you, on seeing the wound, have at
once arrived at the conclusion that he shot himself? I would.
By Mr. Roberts : Would not the shock to his System, imder the
circumstances of intemperate habits and abstinence from food, be suf-
ficient to account for his death ?
Mr. Butler: Did you prescribe any food ? Ido not recollect whe-
ther 1 prescribed any food; I dare say I did.
By Mr. Roberts : I did not hear that he could not keep any food
on his stomach.
Senior-constahle Emerton deposed : I am stationed at the North
Shore ; about II o’clock on the 4th October I first heard of Kinder
shooting himself; I went to the house and saw him ; I spoke to him
about the injury he was suffering from.


Mr. Roberts objected to tbe question as to tbe presence of Bertrand,
as tbe evidence in tbat respect Avas intended to apply to tbe wbole of
tbe prisoners.
Tbeir Worsbips mied it admissible.
Mr. Macpberson contended tbat it could not be received as against
Mrs. Kinder.
Mr. Butler said a dying declaratiou bad notbing to do witb tbe
fact wbetber tbe prisoner was present or not; sometimes tbey are
taken before tbe culprit is apprebended.
Witness continued: Bertrand alone was present wben I spoke to
Kinder; it was about balf-past 11 wben I arrived at tbe bouse; wben
I went into tbe room I asked Kinder if be knew me; be said no;
afterwards he said, “are you tbe Sergeant?” I said, “I am;” tbey
calledme tbe Sergeant over tbere; Kinder said, “ AVhat lies are tbese
tbe people bere are saying about me shooting myself, as I did not do
it; ” be commenced tben to pull tbe bandage of tbe face; I saw no
one present but Bertrand ; he did, in fact, pull tbe bandage off; I
assisted Bertrand to put it on again ; I tben left tbe room Avitb bim,
as be said be instructed by tbe doctors to let no one taik to bim;
after tbe bandage was put on I asked bim if be did it; be made no
answer; Bertrand, as I went in, told me tbat I was not to talk to bim;
after I left tbe room I asked Bertrand wbat cause Kinder bad for
shooting bimself; he said all along be accused bis wife (Mrs Kinder)
of doing it; I asked bim if tbey bad bad any dispute or quarrel previous
to tbe occurrence, and be said no ; be said tbat bimself, bis wife, and
Mrs. Kinder were all present in tbe same room wben Kinder shot
bimself; I asked for tbe pistol witb wbicb Kinder bad sbot bimself;
Bertrand said Mrs. Kinder bad got it, but tbat sbe was too ill in bed to
be disturbed; I told bim tobe sure and take care of it, as it migbt be
required at tbe inquest in case be died; Bertrand requested me not to
report tbe affair; after some conversation in tbe verandab be said, “ I
suppose you won’t say anytbing about tbis until Ave see bow it gets
on.” I said, “ Certainly I sball, I sball report it to-morrow.” As far
as I recollect I tbmk be said be did not want tbe people at tbe Bank
to know it.
Cross-examined by Mr. Roberts: Ido not tbink be said be did not
want tbe people at tbe Bank to know of it as, in case of bis recovery, it
migbt do bim injury. He said, “ Don't you report it, because I don’t
want tbe people at tbe Bank to know it;” he did not mention anytbing
about recovery ; I do not tbink I bave said all tbat occurred between
me and Bertrand; as I approacbed tue bouse, be met me in tbe
verandab ;be did not invite me into tbe bouse at all; I asked bim if I
could see Mr. Kinder; Is it true tbat Mr. Kinder bas sbot bimself;”
be replied, “ Yes, it is;” be said “ Boes be knoAv you :” I said “ Yes,
be does ;” be tben told me to folloA\ T bim, and asked me to go into tbe
room; previous to my going into tbe room he told me not to talk to
bim; be invited me in, but said “ Don’t talk to bim, tbe doctors bave
ordered tbat no person sbould do so;” Ido not knoAv tbat be could stop
me from speaking to bim ; he told me be was mstructed by tbe doctor;
be said tbis before we went in and after Ave got in ; Jackson’s name was
mentioned before I Avent in ; I do not recollect tbat Kinder thougbt I
was Jackson by tbe noise I made witb my boots; I bad no boots on, I
bad sboes; be did not say tbat Kinder bad tbreatened to sboot Jack-
son, orteil me tbat Kinder bad been raA'ing a great deal about Jackson;
after tbe bandage was put ou I asked Kinder wbo did it; I would not
SAvear tbat be Avas conscious at tbat time, but I belicAm be was; be
seemed in a very excited state Avben be commenced to pull tbe bandage


off; I do not think I caused the excitement by the questions I put to
him; I cannot say tbat I saw any other cause ; he was smoking cosily
in bed when I first went in; I could not swear that he was smoking
when I left; I believe I told Bertrand’s wife two days afterwards that
he would be prosecuted for attempting to commit suicide ; it was some
lady (not Mrs. Kinder) that I saw in the verandah of Kinder’s house;
she was a stranger to me ; I asked Bei trand if I could give him any
assistance ; he said he could do better himself; I came out of my own
accord, because I considered it would be au injury to Kinder to talk to
him.
Satukdav, Decembee 9.
Alfred Burne re-called and examined by Oaptain Cloete: I have
seen Bertrand have the pistol he used to practice with, but I cannot
say I ever saw him put wads in ; I never saw him cut wads, or saw
paper or any other substance from which wads had been cut; I
think the balls he fired at the sheep’s head glanced off; only one
penetrated the head.
Charles Watt deposed : 1 am au analytical chemist residing in this
city, and have had a great deal of experience ; I attended a post
mortem examination upon the remains of the late Henry Kinder, and
took away the stomach in Order to analyse the contents ; I have made
an extremely careful analysis with a view to ascertaiu if it coutained
poison ; either mineral or vegetable ; the result of my analysis is that
I have not discovered any poison ; supposing the death of Kinder to
have occurred on the 6th October last, it is not inconsistent with the
result of the analysis I have made, that he died by poison of au organic
nature ; some of the vegetable poisons are rapidly decomposed in the
stomach ; I speak of active and very deadly poisons ; for instance, a
person has taken two grains of aconite, and died from the effects next
day, yet when analysis was made, no poison was found ; it is con-
sidered that one-fiftieth part of a grain of that powder is sufficient to
kill; the lOOth part of that taken in the instance referred to, therefbre,
would have been sufficient to have destroyed life ; I do not mean to
say that chemists have failed to detect it, but it is decomposed, as
sugar would be in the stomach ; if it exist in the stomach, chemists
can discover it, but it is veiy probable that it will quickly be decom-
posed by the gastric Juices ; it decomposes like other organic sub-
stances; there are other vegetable poisons of this dass, as belladonna
and atropine, the active pnnciple of belladonna ; these would also be
liable tobe decomposed in the stomach, and I believe atropine has
never been separated perfectly afterwards, so as tobe thoroughly
identified ; in all cases hitherto reported it is stated to have rapidly
decomposed ; there might be some circumstances under which it could
be detected ; there are other substances that come under the same
category ; strychnine does not come quite within the list, that is much
easier to trace ; these remarks do not apply to every imaginable case ;
there are cases in which the poisons I have said tobe untraceable are
detected ; the remarks, however, will apply to the generality of cases;
after the lapse of time from the 6th October until I made the analysis
it was very hopeles s to attempt to trace any of the poisons I have
referred to —there being au interval of two months ; there are several
other poisons coming within the category of those difficult to trace; I
do not say that in all cases it would be impossible to trace them, but
it would be so in the generality of cases ; it- would always be a hope-
less case to attempt to find them after the lapse of two months ; I was
present at the post mortem examination, saw the wound on the head,
and took possession of the stomach, which was then distended by


gases ; if the stomach is ompty poison decomposes sooner than if the
stomach were full, because when food existed the poison might get
entangled with it; it would be more easy, however, to detect poison
in the stomach if there was no food there, provided the poison re-
mained ; I could discover nothing in the stomach of deceased but a
small quantity of fluid.
Cross-examinedby Mr. Roberts : The body was not so much de-
composed as I expected: but still it was bad ; the parts were very
soft: referring to the poisoning by aconite, I do not say it is not
possible that a sufficient quantity to cause death may leave traces
behind; a less quantity than two grains and a sufficient quantity to
cause death is not likely to leave traces, but I do not say it is impos~
sible ; there is a case ofthat kind causing some discussion in England
at the present time ; after the lapse of so loug a period as two months
Ido not believe it tobe possible to trace it; I might be mistaken in
my opinion; butthat ismyopinion; I would not expect eventhe
next morning to find any traces of it j I have never made an examina-
tion upon a stomach where death was said to have arisen from the ad-
ministration of aconite; what I know of it is a matter of scientific
knowledge: I am not practically acquainted with aconite ; I have
soarched for aconite but never dotected it, where it has not been
known whether poison was given or not, and my investigation was
wanted to ascertain it; I believe belladonna is not used by the gene-
rality of dentists; the contents of the bottle produced are
stated tobe a tincture of belladonna 5 on the there
is the name of Wilkinson, dispensing chemist, t , Hunter-
street, Sydney 5 that would poison a human being: whether
sufficient is taken from that bottle to poison a person rather a
medical question, and not being a medical mau, I do not wish to an-
swer it; I know a raedicinal dose of this tinctiu-c would be from fiveto
fifteen minims to the extreme of a quarter of a drachm ; I think this
rather more than a half-ounce bottle ; I think it would contain two-
thirds of an ounce ; these tinctures vary very much in strength, and
I could not teil whether it was filled up with water or not after some
of the tincture being taken out; I could teil you how much atropine
there was in it oniy by analysis ; I believe colonial ale contams no
poisonous ingredients ; I might consider colonial ale itself poisonous
on the ground that it is injurious 5 I think that is in consequence of
its undergoing fermentation when sour 5 I should be sorry to indulge
in it, not because I think active poison is added to it, but because 1
think it injurious ; I do not believe any known poison is added to it;
the body did not present any unnatural appearance, or rather I should
say I saw no such appearance : after that length of timo I could not
expect anything in the shape of organic poison tobe discemible ex-
cept in extreme cases, especially in this climate.
By Mr. Macpherson: I know these poisous have a poisonous
effect locally and that they are dangerous to meddle with. _
George Holmes Alloway deposed : I am a licentiate of medicine
and surgery 5 I attended with Dr. Eichler and Dr. Alleyne a post
mortem examination on the body of the late Mr. Kinder, and found the
traces of an injury on the right side of the head ; the wound extended
from the top of the ear to the lower angle of the jaw; there was
nothino- in the nature or direction of the wound to enable me to say
that it°was actually inflicted by deceased, or by some one eise ; it is
possible that it might have been inflicted by himself oranother; I
have had a large experience in the treatment of gunshot wounds in
India, Burraab, and lastly in the Crimea, as an army surgeon—(two


bones banded to witness) —the smaller bone, the zygoma, I fouud
hanging loose from the head, but the larger bone, which is very dense
and strong, could be seen from the external wound; it is one of the
hardest bones in the head —not the hardest; Ido not think the frac-
ture of it was caused by the explosion of gunpowder with wadding
from apistol; Ido not think either of the pistols produced, if loaded
only with powder and wadding, and fired close to tho head, could have
caused the fracture of this bone ; it would require a ball or some hard
snbstance; I believe the mark on the bone was produced by some
hard substance having baoken it, and not merelythe force of gun-
pqwder ; in the wound there is an indication of the way in which tho
pistol was held ; it was from behind forwards and from below upwards,
and the wound was on the right side ; if the wound was inflicted face
to face the probabilities are that as most persons are right-handed
the wound wonld have been on the left rather than the right side of
the head ; a man might in a stränge position have inflicted this
wound upon himself, and he would have to avert his head at the time
of pulling the trigger ; again, it would be necessary for the man who
was shot tobe stooping for another person to inflict the injury ;if
the head was very much inclined, as in the act of reading, it would
account for the direction of the wound ; this bone would not have
been injured as it is if the injury had been inflicted in front and up-
wards ; in case of the ball striking the jaw, first the ball wonld have
passed up by the temple instead of striking the jaw bone; the bone
could be broken, I think, by firing from behind what is popularly
called the butt of the ear—a position generally ascribed to a suicide
shooting himself, but there is greater difflculty in placing a pistol at
tim ear than in placing it at the temple ; I attribute the driving of the
ear.from its natural position to the force of the powder ; from my exam-
ination of the wound I do not think it was one that must result in
death, though very likely death would be the result ; there was suffi-
cient injury to cause death, but there was the possibility of a man
recovering from the wound ; the conseqnences of the wound were
greater than the wound itself; considering the wound and all its
consequences, it was still possible for him to recover ; there would be
a temporary confusion, but I do not think what we call concussion would
be produced by injury to the jaws ; there would most likely be a slight
shock of the brain; the shock and the hemorrhage arising from the wound
would be likely to produce prostration on the day of the occurrence, or
what we call collapse ; I do not think there would be comple prostra-
tion ; the particular injury was to the lower jaw, and not connected
with the brain; supposing Kinder to have been in a state of prostration
and partially unconscious on the evening of the occurrence—that he
was conscious on the Wednesday and his intellect clear on the Thurs-
day, and there being no hemorrhage, I should not be surprised at hear-
ing of his death on the Friday if there was an evident change in the
Symptoms ; if such a thing occurred in a case I was attending myself,
the cause I should look for would be exhaustion ; I should expect to
hear what the cause was from those about him—some change in the
Symptoms—some constitutional or external cause: I would not expect
it to occur in the Order of progression in his condition if he was getting
better; sloughing of the wound and loosening of the stitches would be
an untoward symptom, which would make itself evident to the surgeon,
and an increase of the sloughing would be a bad Symptom ;it would
produce great constitutional exhaustion that would be evident; some
amount of sloughing from the wound would be certain to take place ;
supposing that on the Monday after the injury the pulse was 100 and


small, that on the afternoon of Thursday it was 80 and full, that would
indicato an improvement; taken by itself it would indicate much im-
provement, as it would sliow that the shock and the exhaustion were
passing away; I should not have expocted death on the Friday after
that change in the state of the patient; I should look either for Symp-
toms of lockjaw setting in, or great exhaustion from different causes—
constitutional causes, if the Constitution was weak or impaired; taking
the indications of improvement mentioned and the counter indication
as to sloughing, death on the Friday would to me appear an unexpected
result; the sloughing of the wound would be expected, but it might
extend to söund uninjured tissues; after a certain nnmber of days the
breaking away of the stitches would be an ordinary occurrence; the
large bone I have described as hard and dense is fractured, and it
must have been struck by some hard substance; the smaller bone is
not a very hard one ; the larger bone was struck first, the smaller one
after; the large bone is the descending portion of the lower jawbone;
the external condyle of the lower jawbone was struck by some hard
substance; the smaller bone is the zygoma.
Cross-examination by Mr. Roberts : A pulse of 80 and full would
not, under the circumstances described, be an indication of inflamma-
tion ; I can only give general answers to general questions, not having
seen the case; in my answers I have made allowances for persons being
to some extent of debilitated constitutions ; from my examination I
cannot undertake to swear that deceased did not die from disease of
theheart; if deceased had suffered from disease of the haart, the
effect of this shock from a gunshot wound would have been a very
serious one; if there had been pre-existing disease of the heart, the
combined causes might produce death; the wound must certainly
have producod a shock to the System; I should say the shock to the
System, the hemorrhage from the wound, intemperate habits, and ab-
stinence from food, all ccmbined, would be sutficient to account for
death; if he tore away the bandages, and smoked bis pipe wildly, I
should consider that he was delirious; the tearing away of the ban-
dages would cause irritation of the wound; Ido not think it would
produce inflammation; he might be conscious under these circum-
stances ; on one of these bones I find a fracture, a piece of the corner
is knocked off; I should say it was impossible that powder alone would
do it; if powder and paper alone had fractured it the soft parts inside
and underneath would have been lacerated, but they were intact; the
bone, which is the harder and stronger of the two, seems to have the
mark of a bullet or of some hard substance upon it; the upper bone
has a mark upon it; the attachment of the small bone being weak, it
is blown out first, and might be blown out by the powder; the bone
more remote from the pistol might have been reraoved by the powder ;
and the one nearest the pistol struck by a bullet; if Dr. Sichler, sup-
posing ho had heard nothing of the cause of the wound, came to the
conclusion, from the nature of the wound, that the man shot himself,
I should not come to that conclusion, but I should say it was possible;
I cannot say what cause or causes produced the death of Mr. Kinder,
as there was no evidence before me to enable me to come to a conclu-
sion on that point.
By Mr. Macpherson: I was requested to make a post mortem
examination for the purpose of giving my opinion on the cause of the
wound; I did not open the head.
By Mr. Butler: If the intemperate habits, want of food, hem-
orrhage, and the shock from the wound. existed at the same time, I
should say that would be sufficient to cause death.


By Mr. Roberts: Not, If they bad existefl at different times,
By Mr. Butler: My answer refers to the concurrence of all tbese
things. , ...
By Mr, Roberts: I tbink tbe doctor who was in Charge o: tue
patient would be more likely to understand bis general condition after
the wound, but not the mode in which it was inflicted.
Haynes Gibbes Alleyne deposed: lam a surgeon and pbysician ;
took part in a post mortem examination npon the remains of the late
Kinder, and examined the wound; there was nothing in the nature
of the wound to enable anyone to form an opinion whether it was
inflicted by deceascd himself or by anyone eise ; the mark on the
larger of the two bones produced gives more indication of its being
done by a bullet or some other hard substance than by powder and
wadding only : the wound could be accounted for by the explosionof
gunpowder and wadding ; I do not see anything particularly to in-
dicate that the iujury was caused by a round substance such as a
bullet; I have heard Dr. Alloway’s evidence, and substantially I agree
with it; although he seeraed more decided than lamas to its being
done hy a bullet; substantially, however, I agree with all he said,
Cross examined by Mr. Roberts: lam not so decided as to the
use of a bullet; I believe a pistol well loaded with powder and wad-
ding and fired dose to the head might produce a greater injury, but
it appears much more likely that this iujury to the bone was done by
a hard substance ; the pisto Imust have been very near to the head,
as I see the muscles were blown away ; the ear was in its natural
position, but I could see that it was torn from the soalp ; it might
evidently have been done by deceascd firing himself, or by some one
eise firing at him; the force of the powder tore the ear back.
Arthur George ’Wxlkiuson deposed : I am achemist and druggist,
carrying on business in Hunter-street; for the last two or three years
Bertrand has been in the habit of dealing at ray place ; I believe he
has been behind the counter of the dispensary frequently ; it is quite
possible that he has got poisons from my shop without my know-
ledge ; I had some aconite, but the bottle was broken three or four
months ago, and I have not had any since; I found tho bottle broken
one morning as it had fallen from the shelf; I have frequently con-
versed with him about poisons in connection with his business ; he
spoke of the properties and qualities of seyeral poisons generally
used in cases of toothache, tic-doloreux, or in the practice of den-
tistry ; he merely referred to their power and their uses in relievmg
these ailments; he said nothing in reference to their cflect on the
nervous System that I recollect.
Cross-examined by Mr. Roberts : I believe he has bought at ray
place such things as tincture of belladonna, and morphia ; I know
raorphia is used by dentists, but' I do not know anything about the
practice of dentistry ; I have no recollection of Bertrand purchasing
aconite fromme; the bottle of tincture of belladonna produced is pro-
bably in the same state as when it came from my shop ; there is not
sufficient taken out of it yet to do any injury to anybody; it is of the
usual strength as stated in the British Pharmacopoeia.
This closed case for the Crown.
Mr. Roberts here called npon their worships for a dnmissal of
Mrs. Bertrand, and Mr. Robberds made a similar application on behalf
of Mrs. Kinder.
The counsel for the Crown opposed the application.
All the prisoners were committed for trial at the uext sitting of
the Central Criminal Court.


> ; THE LETTERS. ..
?*■ .. . Bathurst, 23rd October.
Mv dear friend —You will he pleased to hear that we reached our joumey’s end in
safetv last evening. I assure you I was not sorry, for it was indeed a weaiy, weary time
after saying good-bye to you. We drove on and on all day long through dust and beafc
until we reached Hartley—fiancy thirteeu homs of it. I really thought tho day would
nerer end To mend mattere, the poor little chddren suffered dreadfully while we stopped
at Hartlcy, until 5 next momhig. I was so tired I could not sleep. We again startod,
and drove on and on again until we reached Bathurst, about 3 o clock. Ido not think I;
was ever so tired in ray lifo ; thc very thought of the last two days makes me sick ; I
trust I mav never again experience such utter prostration. You will wonder bow X üke
the place. As far as I have seon, lam not in raptures; it appears dreadfully dull, but X
must not judge hastily; I think I shall like it well enough. Dear Mamma and Sarah
vcre looking out airxiously for us, Ido not think I ever before feit how mnch I have to
be thaakful for having a quiet home and dear friends to welcome me to. When we are
wcaxied out in mind and body, bow kindness and love comes home to us. I was much
disappointed in not haring a line from oithor Llev/ellyn or yourself this aftemoon. X trust
you will writ© vory often, and toll us all about everything and everybody, and y ourseli in
particular. Mamma was in a great way about the telegram ; she could not make it out.
Ohank you very mucb for scnding it so speedily. The sentence was much more severe
than I expected. Plcase giva my kind love to Jane, and kiss the dear chi.aren; also kmd
rosrards to your sister. I trust you are all well at home. Teil Jane tobe sure and not to
forget tosend me her portrait as soon as possible. Mamma does not think yours a good
one a* all. Your sistor also promised me hers ; I hope she will not forget. I havo been
tclling mamma about her, and 1 should liko mamma to see her likeness so very much. I
think her so nice looking in every way. lam so tired to night. I cannot wntc at any
length. You must plcase excuso all inistakes. I will write a long letter the next time.
lam going to church in the morning to have a look at the natives. Will you kmdly giye
our best wished love to Lloweiiyn, and teil bim be must not neglect us. You must make
Phn write and teil us all the nows. I must conclude now, or eise I shall be lato lor tho
post. They are quite well; in kindest regards to yourself and all the fanuly, and beheva
mc ever to’remain truly yourb,—EuLKN Kixdkb. •
- Bathurst, 31st October.
My Dearest Darling Love,—l have just received your dear, kind, and xnost welcome
letter. Oh, darling, if you could but know how my heart was aching for a word of love
from you. Dear, dear love, your kind loving words seemed to have filled a void m my
heart. I cannot, convey to you in words the intense comfort your letter is to me. It has
infused now life into my veins. I was tormenting myself with all sorts of naughty
thoughts, darling. Writo very often—every day if you can—and I will be here to answer.
There is no fear of our correspondence being seen, as Ido not read my letters out; the ono
to day 1 did, aa it did not matter, and it was such a nice, good letter. I wished mamma
tu liava a favourable opinion of you. Of course I mean the one you intended her to see;
the other is by far too precious for anyone hnt my own eyes or thoughts to dwell on. Oh,
darling. you arc all I care for and comfort you. Do hear up, my own love, and hope for,
Letter days. I teil you this when my own heart is sinking with fears for the future, Lovey,,
Lovey, if wo could hnt see each other occasionally it would he some comfort; bat that!
'vre&ry waitiiig waiting is terrible. Do you know I seem tobe able to bear it less and less
with'patience; the hours and days drag ou; my only comfort is at the end of a day, and
to thiuV of your words. Every day brings the end nearer, and yet how do we know what
the end may be. You may not be ablo to accomplish your purpose on account of tho.
expense -oveu it will be granted you; but I must not give way to thoughts of this kind, (
or l shall both unnervc myself and you; but surely surely things will tum out right’
eome way or the other. lam truly grieved to hear about your difficnlties, dear one, 1,
ftear you will be hard pusbed; you bare such an expansive honsebold; you must be as,
carefnl as possible on our account. Mamma feels very much yonr being burthened with i
Llewcllyn, but my parents are in such a position at present they have no ehoice but to
cxcept your kind * * * . And indeed, dear, there seems little or no prospects that I
can see here for the future. I would tiy and get a Situation in some honae in Sydney;.
here there is no such thing to bc had. However, we must hope for tbe best. I suppose
you would not be asb amedof our poor home when you come up, darling; but I know
that will make no difference to you. If I lived in a shanty it would be all the same, would
it not ? Now, about yonr coming np, dear darling; bow I should like to see your dear
face, and to have a long, long talk with you about affairs in general. Bnt, my own love,
I fear if you were to come just now you would not find it pay yon. Everything is so dull,
and what I fear more is that people to whom you owe money would be down on you
directly, tbinking you were going to ran away. Dear darling, all this advice goes sadly
the dictates of my own heart, for my spirit is fairly dying for you. A glimpse
of you, oh! dearest, dearest, what would I not give tobe taken to your heart, if only for
a moment, I think it would content me. It is no use, dear. Your love is food and
nourishment to me. I cannot do without it. I tried to advise for the best, but I cannot,
I cry out in very bittemess. If I can only be near you—only see you at a distance onca
again, I think I could hear myself. I behexe, darling, if our Separation is for long I
shall go out of my mind. I cannot live without seeing you sometimes, but if we lived.
anywhere near Sydney we could have this occasionally wbicb would have kept us up ;
so all this long time of waiting here I might as well be at the end of the wbrld. If you
can manage to do so without risk, darling, come up at Christmas. I must try and live at,
least.—must until your own judgement teils you we can meet without injury to yourself.
How is Jane P—what is the matter. It is of no use to say I am grieved at her being laid
pjjj'ftiat’would beawere farce bstweeu you and I, May I then not maks a prctonca,


As for her asserlions with regard to Mr. Jackson, I shall not * * * them; forifXsu»?
tobe taken to task abont all she may choose to say about me I shall have enough to do.,
I am not aware that she ia so very particular with regard to her Statements generally a•
to think it worth while giving second thoughts as to what she may say about me. I
know her, and you ought by this time. If you allow everything she may say to influence
you against me, I have done, but darling lam yours, I leave my conduct tobe judged
by you as you think fit; there let the matter rest. It ought never to have been broached.
Oh dear “Lovey,” I feel heartily you know whenever you approach me, though some
may say I get angry at anything you may say yourself. lam always ready and willing
to listen to you, my dear one, for bojng settled. You will be glad to hear that the bank
have sent me £2O; it will be a little assistance. I intend keeping it, if possible; it is
handy in case of wishing to get away from here at any time. Mamma wishos very much
we could have got into any sort of business near Sydney, very much. When you come up
you will bc botter ablo to judge of affairs. “Papa” talks of going to New ZealandJ
almost directly, for he is very unsettled, a d what he had better do, there is nothing to,
bo done here ; he quite expects me to make a good match one of these days. I teil him
I would not give him thanks for the best man living, if I could only make my own liv- 1
ing. Bess is quite well, and Polly has not been very well and is very cross; I hope her 1
temper will improve as it is rather trying. I think the weatber is much hotter here than j
in Sydney. Teil Llewellyn he must be sure to write very often, and, dear love, will you j
send us the paper every day; you know the post leaves Sydney at 4 p.m., and it reachesi
here the following aftemoon at 3, so we can almost hear daily. What a long, long letterl
I have written. Ido not seem to have much left. I wrote to Mr. Paterson last evening.:
I trust your dear children are well, also your sister and family; give her my kindest re-i
gards. Do not let anyone see my letters or diary, as they are for your eyes alone, andl
oh, dear one of all things do not neglect writing, it is the only comfort I have during i
our Separation. Teil me all about yourself—your goings, sayings, and doings. I reallyj
must flnish now. My own love, better, fondest love, ever yours. Good bye, lovey, plea- i
Bant dreams — Nells'. I kiss you every night, and P. dear one before sleeping, and cry i
God bless you and let me dream of you. I cry oh, oh, off my heart, and to ache withi
longing to see you. I told you in my past letters the sort of place this is. I don’t see!
the least likelihood of ever making a living out of the business ; everything is dreadfullyl
dull, it is a horrid place, I dislike it infinitely; I would not name this if I could see any j
prospect. Ido so wish wc could have found something to do nearer, ifnot in Sydney-
somewhere not so utterly isolated as this is. I feel my position very much, as I know]
how little able we are to afiford the extra expense we must be at. If there was anything i
1 could do to make it up there I should not mind, but there is absolutely nothing. What!
goods we have are very little, and the few wc have there is no sale for. I do not know
how things are to go on if it were not for the children. - 5
Bathurst, November 6th. j
My own Dearest Love.—l received your two dear kind letters, enclosed with one foi*,
Sarah, yesterday. I thank you again and again, darling for them. I thank you still!
more för your kind consideration of my dear father. It is too bad of me to worry yo«. : !
with my troubles when you are too straitened with your own; but no, I will not say so, 3
as I know you prefer me to consult you on all things. I have a strong faith, dear one, in?
your judgment, that I feel 1 can do nothing without your approval, and then again !•)
have been so accustomed lately to look to you for advice and direction in.all my worriesj
incapable to act independently of you. I have too much to say to you. I scarcely knowl
where to begin. I think I will begin about myself and doings, likes and dislikesJ
I have not been very well the last day or so. I have been suffering from my old pain ia j
myside; also headache, particularly to day. I fancy it is-working harder than usualj
that brings it on. Hester is getting better, and easy to nurse. She secms easierto nursei
when lam by. All the rost, lam happy to say, are pretty well. Poor papa is not very]
well, for he is unsettled. I think I shall begin to teil you what occurs each day, then you j
will know, which is not much. With regard to my eye, I have not been out more than ]
two or three times during the week of an evening, to post my letters, and twico to churcll j
last evening, and twice to-day. This is the result of my stay in Bathurst. Ido not care,
how little I see of the place or people, for the whole set of it is a bad and disgusting place,'
darling, you have no idea. I have had some people call on me. I have been introduceoH
to one or two gentlemen, and a young fellow studying for the law appears rather a mean !
fellow. They teil me his family are considered some of the great folks here; he is rather
tall, and talks like a book; but the people here, on the whole, appear perfect snobs. Th«,
less I see of them the better. I shall be pleasant. Do not be angry with me, and thinÜri
me very discontented. Dear one, there is one thing tobe said in my present frame oft
mind. If they were angels they would not be likely to please me. It is wonderfnl with!
what different ideas we look at the same thing one time and another, “is it not.” Our-i
own kindred feehngs are the rule by which we judge everything. When they are out ofi
tune, all things jar. To end up this account of to-day, lovey, I will teil you. lam in th«,
nursery all the aftemoon, the children are both asleep near me, as I write, and all tho’
rest are gone to church. _ I intend going to post this when they come home. I will now,’
dearest one, tum to affairs in general, mine in particular. lam most grateful, dear one,"!
for your thought forme. I have been considering your advice, and have arrived at aj
sort of conclusion; but to mature matters, dearest, Ithink I had better explain cxactly«
how we are situated. Oh! darling, darling, if I could only but see the old surgery there,?
and learung my head against yours, as I have so often done, and teil you all and every-1
thing; what a comfort it would be to me; but no, that can never be, perhaps never ]
again. You teil me to have faith, and so I will dear, dear one, if you teil me to; but it is ;
very difflcult. lam not penitent, I fear. Patience, you know, is not a virtue that I am!
gifted with; and, after all, darling, Ido not think you would see of nie more. I could bo
constaut to you for years perhaps, with only the hoped-for change— that is not me, lot*.


1 love you, you know full well, and I clo not think you w ou’d like it tobe such; at least-,
if you would, one’s feelings are tobe studiert. Hut, dear cne, I have wandored from my
subjoct, I hart better done with that first. Dr. H., however, you must know that we are
imder a reut of fivo and twenty Shillings a week for this shop, which must be paid
xnontbly. The only dependence we have to mect this Claim, and living cxpenses, are tho
profits arising from tho sale of goods in tho shop. There are about £2OO or £3OO worth,
but of course they have been obtained on credit of four and six months’ billa, X believe.
These bills, of course, will have tobe met, or partly so, as they fall due. If there was
any sale for goods wo nvght do, but up to the present it has not half paid the rent, and
,we must live besides. The only other dependency marna has is about £5O a year which
; she gets from a. little property in New Zealand. So you see al things considered, it
would be much better forme, do you not think so, to leave here; mama wbuld take care
’of the childron forme, and if I got ever such a little it would be a help, and there would
ihe one less in family to keep. I intend to get into a business bouse here, even it Ido not
get mucb. I sball be leaming a business which may bo useful to me. My dressmaking
I arrd millinery, thougb it would suit myself, w'ould not suit other people; so you see, dear
ilove, after you have considered the case, I think you will agree with me in thinkiug my
; plan a good one. Ido not wish, in fact, tobe dependent. I feel it will not do to dopend
ion papa’s exertions. He may succeed in getting into a business, either in Sydney or
: New Zealand, but I want to feel independent if wo can, in case of failure. I forgot to teil
; you that mama’s little income goes principally to keep up the payment of papa’s life
policy, which it would be a great pity after so many years to allow to fall to the gronnd,
ixt being the only provision for us all in case of anything happening to papa. Now,
i dearest one, I want you to he on the look ont forme, abont a Situation in somo bouse of
i business, in case I fall in getting employment here. You must not be too particular,
darling. The more moncy you can get the better it will be. Do you think there is any
■ Chance in your succeeding ? Oh, love, the thought that I might be a rather easier dis-
;tance off you makes me wild with pleasnre. Dear, dear one, I can place everything to
iyour own judgment; I know you will do everything for the best forme. I may not want
to get into a place here; I need not teil you what I should prefer; your own beart will
1 teil you that. It will be better not to say anything to papa about it; if he can he inl onds
■to get into business in Sydney—if possible an hotel —if possible, of course ; I should like
• that best, if it could he managed ; but I much fear the want of means will prevent bim.
Ilf he does not succeed in that venture, he will go to New Zealand hy the mail onthe 15tb,
We were ahnest decided to take an hotel here, and continue the other business, but on
j second thought I do not care mucb for it, as I do not tbink it would answer, besides,!
j bäte tbe place; it would tie us too much, for anything that is done would have tobe done .
iin my name. I should not mind it in a respectable bouse in Sydney, but tbis is such a ,
[hart place. This is, oh, dreadfully matter of fact, dear, dear love, but it is necessaiy.
[ Therefore I know you will not mind it. Do, dear love, write as soon as you can, and teil
ime what you think. You see how we are situated. ff papa goes away we have nothing
j but our own exertions to depend upon. Oh, dear, dear love, what can you mean about
I mama’s secret. I know of none. Do, do teil me. I have tortured myself dreadfully since
jyour letter came. Darling, that must be some mistake; what secret can she have? Oh,
!my love, have pity and teil me. She has said nothing further about our letters ; but Ido ,
; not think sbe likes our writing mucb. Oh, darling, you preach patience, taut how can I;
ibe patient ? I cannot be- I won’t be. I bave no fear about your getting on, lovey. It ia i
, tbe uncertainty of our meeting is to me terrible. I have every faitb in you as iar as you
| are concemed : but others, that is tbe thing. lam always well wiaen I get a letter to ,
i strengtben me. You are right in saying I want you. Try to belp me, oh, dear, dear Ute,
1 now. I look forward for you. My heart fairly jumps at the thought. I must flnish
■ now, love, in a hurry, as I hear mamma coming. God bless you. Good night, darling
■ love, and plenty kisses from your own darling Child. ■
1 '■ Bathurst, November 9th.
r ' My own dearest,—l received your dear kind letters this afteruoon. Oh, darling,
why have you not written before this week ? I bave been so wearying to bear from you 5
1 thought you hart forgotten me, or that something dreadful bad happened. But I must
1 not be too exacting, must I dearest love, and you bave so many Claims on your time; 1
lit is very, very good of you to think of and write to me as you do; but lovey, mako
excuses, and forgive me for complaining. You can bave no idea, in the midst ot agree-
able society and pleasant surroundings, what the disappointment is to me when I am
denied the one and only pleasure of my life—the getting a letter from you, dear one. It is
! five long days since I last heard from you. I thank you very mach) or your kind and loving
[words, they always strengtben me. lam so thankful you have been doing a little 1
1 business again; it only wants a start; you will get on nicely now, I trust. lam sorry
fto say matters do not at all improve with us. I have been trying to get in several of the
Ihouses of business here, but find there is no opening; they are all shortening their
j hands, the times are so had. I have also tried for a governess’Situation; it is partly
j vacant, as the lady has gone to Sydney who has beon holding it, and it is uncertain
i whether she will retum. lam to know more about it on Monday. If I get ever so littia
•it will be a help. Poor, dear papa is, I trust, safe in Sydney by this time. Poor old man, ;
: I never saw bim so low spirited before leaving us ; be bas ixever before beert so poor in bis
life, and left us so uncertainly provided for. Ido hope and pray he may succeed. Oh,
Louis, flarling ! I do not know how to thank you snfficiently for your great kmdness to my
hrother. Ido not know what he should do were it not for your kindness in gmng him
shelter just now. You will feel willing in your own mind without words fromme how
grateful wo are to you. I have nonews to toll you about myself except ibat my
• whole thoughts are given to you. Oh! Ido feel so very desolate and have such «.
craving to see you at times, and then, again, I bow my head in utter humiliation of
spirita when I think of my uttsr unworthiaess, and to bring a hlight ca »11 that l Ist*


find care forme. Öh! if 1 could only be a true Christian, but my thoughts and desires
are so terribly wicked. I am myself terrifled at them. God forgive me and strengthen
me in the right way, and teach me to bear with patience whatever the future may have
in störe forme. My sister-in-law and brother have writteu very kmdly to me, askhig
me my plans. I intend writing bv return mail, and telling them how lam situated. I
do not expect anything from them. I am glad you have been enjoyingyourself, darling ;
I picture you all to myself very offen. Poor Mrs. Robertson, lam sorry she is so
delicate; she has not answered my letter yet. lam gettüig so subdued by trouble, that
I do not feel so severely as I did, I think, or I should feel it unkind in her not writing,
but I suppose she has no time. The clergyman of the parish and bis wifo wore here to
see me; he is a very young man, a curate. I have been to church this evening; I heard
him preach; I liked him much, his words came home to me. I have not been out before,
since I last wrote to you. lam happy to say the three dear little children are well; I
am also better myself to-day—it is peace of mind I want. Nelly is getting such a plump
little thing, she will soon walk, I think. Give our kindest love to dear Lewellyu and
papa ; teil Lewellyn mamma likes him to write in the way that it amuses ns. Also,
please to give our kind regards to Jane and your sister, at least mine —mamma does
not know her —and kiss your dear children forme. I think, dear one, I would rather
you should bring your diary with you, as I should like to read it together, it would
be such a pleasure. I do not know how I shall feel when I see your dear face agaiu.
The thought sets my breast beating and my blood gurgling in my veins. Do, darling,
not fail to write as offen as you can. Spare me a little moment." I must not forget
to thank you for your kindness in seeing about my business. It would perhaps be
better not to go to Sydney exactly, but somewhere on the line. I should like to get
into a first-rate establishment for n few weeks to leam dressmaking, as a really good
one would do very well here. In that case, theu, there is no place like Sydney; but,
darling, I leave myself entirely in your hands —feeliug, love, you will do everything for
me best. lam not at all certaiu of obtaining what I want here, so you will continue to
look out forme. Dearest, will you not ? I am, I fear, a great sore to you. I must now
conclude, or I shall be too late for the post-offlee. Good-bye, dear, dear, precious love.
God for ever bless you and preserve you from harm, and preserve your dear children.
My own darling, what a treat it is to me to get your dear letters. The one enclosed in
Llewellyn’s letter I thought was bearing the best of news—news that has distressed me.
Your loving words are the only comfort I have around me surromiding darkness. Indeed,
dearest one, everything looks very dull indeed; but with regard to youraffairs and ours.
Ido trust, dear lovey, your business may improve ; it will be dreadful if it does not. I
am very glad to hear that your sister, dearest, has some prospect before her. I think you
were most sensible in your advice to her, for every one appears tobe in a bad state, and
not much likelihood of improvemgnt, so that a certainty, be it ever so little, is not tobe
despised. Matters here are nearly as bad as it is possible tobe. I really do not know
what we are to do; there is no sale for anything ; we do not take live Shillings a day, and
yesterday and to-day we have not taken sixpence—a nice prospect, is it not ? My own
dear love, you said you would advise me; I do sadly want it; Ido not see that there is
anything forme to do. You think of my trying for a Situation in some establishment
here or elsewhere. The children are my great ties ; were it not for them 1 think I might
do something. If I could get £4O a y'ear even, I could even then take mamma and give
her all I could. It would not cost much for my clothes. You see I could not leave mine
to her without compensation. Darling, do not think me a bother to you, but which
shall 1 do. Do you think there would be even a chauce if by obtaining a Situation of any
sort under consideration, I should feel more independent? I knew how it would be.
Mama has already commented on my getting letters from you, and says the injury I am
doing you and Jane by encouraging your love. She also advises me tobe careful what
we write, as she says there are mauy reports with regard to us in Sydney, and that the
detectives have power, and might nse it if they thought to find anything out by opening
our letters. I was not aware they had that power; it is only in case of there being any-
thing suspicious with regard to people. But to come back to the subject. Dear one, Ido
not ask advice so much with regard to ourselves, but mine is real necessity for something
tobe done. Mama gave me a regulär lecture to-day. I knew she would see through us, and
as good as told me she would not countenance anything wrong. I, darling, know what 1
shall have to bear. I told mama plain out I cared for you and you forme ; I also said I
should not think of marrying. All this makes me more anxious tobe to a certain extent
independent of them, if 1 could in any W’ay manage it; but, independently of that, they
camiot keep themselves, much more me and the two children. I am telling you really
how matters stand. Dear one, as far as anything in the shape of love and affectionate
welcome goes, to the last crust they have I can depend; but I w'ould rather be a common
servant than a dependent on them under the circumstances. Ido think of trying to get
into one of the shops here, but will do nothing nntil hearing from you. Oh, love, love,
consider forme, and advise me; I know I should have great Opposition tomy living there
first, but I should not mind, that would force off. Fancy, mama said she would rather
Llewellyn was begging in the streets than that it should be only on my account you kept
him, but still she is kind in her actions, I know she feels very grateful to you—at the
same time she is right-minded, and looks at things as they are in the eyes of the world ;
you must not be angry with her for my sake love; she is a mother, and advises as she
thinks for the best. I fear, dear, dear love, you have every reason to complain of this
letter not been loving, but, my own dear dear love, I have only you to depend on for ad-
vice ; with regard to my own heart’s feelings there is no one eise in this wide world to
which I can talk as to you. Love, love, you ask me to say I love you, dear darling, it is
Lome in sorrow and trouble, therefore all the strenger my heart and mind aches with the
strength of my love, as it is one ahnest without hope,—love you, oh, yes, better than
anything in this wide wide world, not only love but respQct, I look up to you as throu^U


hature, do not ask if 1 love yon, you must feel it in tlie bottom of your beart how 1 do
love you, and I shall continue to love you always. Oh, dear, darling, it is a week this
evening since I left, what an age, it keeps three hundred and sixty days, love. Sweet
love, papa and mama are gone to church, so I got this Chance of writing, I shall enclose
it in Llewellyn’s letter; I also enclose Annie’s character, will you be kind enough to read
it to her, and also put her surname, as Ido not know it. Oh. deary, I must flnish now
trust you will be in better spirits, and that you will clear up all my difficulties in your
next. Dear, dear love, good bye.
Bathurst, November llth.
My own dearest one,—Oh, is it, can it be true —yes, that there is a possibility of
our being ever in the same city P Oh, dear, dear love, the thought is too great a happi-
ness —even am I not dreaming—but darling, is there even a remote Chance of such a
thing coming to pass P You cannot imagine my feelings when I read your dear, dear
letters ; what thought and trouble you do take, dearest, on my account. I can never
repay you sufflciently. Yes, words are weak to all that I feel, and yet, I cannot help
saying, again and again, how grateful I am to you for all your care and anxiety on my
aceount. Now, to come to bnsiness, dear love do you think' there is a likelihood of papa
being able to take a house and stock it, you know'he hasno money. I think your plan an
excellent one, if it is practicable. Papa and I spoke about it before his leaving. I think
we should do well. I told him the very last thing to try and manage to get into some-
thing of the kind, as I never can make up my mind to live in this place, so far away from
all I love. You know he had serious thoughts of taking an hotel here, but I set my face
against it, it would tie us to the place ; but oh, darling, tobe near you I could live cm dry
bread and water, anything in the World but Separation—let hardship and adversity come,
1 can bear anything if I can only see your dear face, if only at a distance, sometimes.
Only let me be able to obtain a living for the children and myself, though ever so poor a
one, it is all I ask so long as I can be near you, love. I told you in my last about the Situ-
ation I was inquiring about. lam to hear more about it on Monday. Even if I take it I
shall not bind myself in case of anything tuming up. How I do trust everything may
tum out as we wish, but I fear it is too good tobe reality; but I have faith in your good
luck, “ Loo,” and such dependence on your judgment, darling, that I seem to fancy
nothing can go wn-ong if you wish otherwise. I am rather sorry you told papa the exact
state with regard to ourselves. Dear, you know he is changeable, andl don’t want mama
to have any idea just yet. I am sure nothing would delight him more himself, he is
so fond of you ; but you know he is easily led. I shall be glad if you can manage this
bnsiness somehow. As far as being jealous gocs, you have no business to speak of
such a thing, you ought to know me by this time. I have told you lam completely
altered, myfuture life is laid out as a map before ne—nothing will change it; good
fortune or il, I intend to do my duty to the best of my ability wherever I may be. As
far as my heart goes it has found its rest; not all the world will alter me in thought
or deed. lam glad to hear that your brother-in-law is gotting on. I hope your sister
will like her new house; give her my kindest regards. I think had she known me ander
more favourable circumstances she would have liked me; but that cannot be helped,
the good or ill opinion of others after all does not alter one for better or worse —does it,
deary ? lam what I am. I trust dear you will write again very soon, as I shall be
anxious to know how things are going. Mamma, I think, would very soon be brought
over, as we are not making our salt in the business. lam going to write to New Zea-
land to-morrow. Mr, Cooper sent me a very kind little note with the letters which I
answered. I must now conclude, dear love, trusting you will have good news forme
next time you write; and oh, darling, fancy, fancy, each other tobe always near each
other. Dear love, I shall die with pleasure if it comes about. Good bye, and good night,
dear. dear, kind love. God for ever bless you. Ever yours, most affectionately.
Bathurst, November 14th.
My own dearest Love, —I received your kind and loving letter of Monday. I thank
you very mach for it, darling; but how am Ito answer it ? I have nothing cheering to
say. With regard to our coming to Sydney to live, I sounded mamma about it; but as
she says very truly, it would be a great risk removing. She would like, of all things,
tobe in Sydney, if she could see her way clear before her. What she thinks is, that
the goods, of which we have very few, by the time they were taken down again, their
value would be so decreased, that we should scarcely be able to make enough out of
them to pay the carriage. She also says, that house-rent would be so high and com-
Petition so great, that she does not see how it could pay us to remove. Another thing,
we could not leave here without giving a month’s notice. It is a sort of place that you
cannot stir without all the world knowing your doings. So you see, love, that if I could
even persuade her, which 1 do not think I could do if I were to try, if things failed
afterwards, I should get all the blame. Do not, pray, say I do not want tobe near you,
dear, dear one, you know so very different. What 1 want you to do is to get me some
employment in or near Sydney. Mamma, when I was telling her that I could not and
would not make up my mind to remain here, said it was a pity I came up; but she says
she will take Charge of the children, that they shall be no hindrance to me if I wish to
leave home. So, darling dear one, ifyou want me tobe near you, it is our only chance
you getting me something. I have made up my mind not to try further in Bathurst.
Mamma dkl not get a letter from papa ; you know how undecided ho always is. As we
are situated here at present, we can live for some months at all events; but what mamma
thinks is, that we run great risk of not being able to even do that if we go to the expense
of moving, unless we see our way clearly to make a living in Sydney. I was much dis-
appointed about the hotel affair, for mamma would have gone into one without a murmur.
However, it cannot be helped, can it dear one ? How black everything looks, lovey, does
it not ? Our good fortune seems tobe deserting us. You say you heard a great deal
lately. Ido not wish tobe uncharitable, but it appears to me there can be only one


Person to attribnte talking to, considering you appear to spend the greater pari of your
time in tbeir society; I am, pei’haps, unjust, but I should like to know of what lam
accused, and who my aoeusers are. I will say no more. I leave it to your own heart to
judge me, and to your own discretion to teil me what you mean. Ido not cboose tobe
mangned by anyone without cause, eitlier to gain their own ends or for any other pur-
pose. It is surprising liow delicate people grow now-a-days. Louis, lamin a rage with
tbat interesting little friend of yours. Slie is double-dealing. You may find her out yet,
I had better not say any more," for I find my temper is getting the better of me. Bear,
dear love, how Idb long to see you. You would soon put me all right—do try and get
me something near you. I shall always be tormenting myself with all sorts of jealous
fears ; if I am away, be sure and write me again soon, lovey, what you think I raust say.
Goodbye most dear precious one, with endless love. Eorgive me, for you know my dis-
position too well tobe angry with me, particularly as it arises from caring too much for
you. Good night, and goodbye. God bless you. Ever yours.—E. E.
Give my kindest love to Llewellin and papa, ask papa to write his plans. Also teil him
a young'man from Weeke’s was here to-day, and said that if the »ffair was not settled
Mr. Weeke would take proceedings immediatoly. Give my kind regards to your sister
and Jane, and kiss your dear children forme ?
Teil Llewellyn mama was much pleased with his Journal, and hopes he will continue it.
We are all well. I have been suffering the last day or two with violent headache, but I
feel better to-day.
Bathurst, November 18th.
My own. dear Louis, —I received your dear, kind little note about an hour since. I
have very little time to answer it, but I must teil you, lovey, it has put new life into me,
the hope that you may be successful in your endeavour to'get something forme to do
that will bring me near your dear seif. Oh, my darling love, Ido long for that time to
come about. Ido not care how hard I may have to work, or how much anxiety I may
have if I can only be where I shall be able to have a cheering smile rom you dear. Bear
love, do help me in it, it is absence from you that hurts me so. Oh, I know I could bear
anything but dishonour, and love, that I could bear, if it were only myself that was the
sufierer; this, dear one, I know you will imderstand. My feelings for my parents and
young sister, besides, I know, for your own and my sake you would always shield me, you
dear generous one. How can I repay you for all thoughts for my happinoss, for I know
well you feel that it is my happiness tobe near you; but darling, not for my sake_ must
you involve yourself in difficulties dear ; dear, that must not be; I must have patience,
and he content to wait and hope, if that is the only means of sparing you, for you must
not worry yourself so much on my account, darling, I am not worth the labour you take
about me. I had a letter from papa. He writes for us to come down, at last. Ho says he
thinks it would he best, but mama thinks differently. I told you the reasons in my last
letter, also, what I want you to do forme in case all doos fall. I have quite made
np my mind not to try for anything höre until you give me no more hope. This I trust
you will succeed in, some way or the other, in fact, I am sure you will if you make up
your mind to. How Ido hate this place, too. Hate! hate! hato it! There, it does me
good to even write my mind freely. Ido not like to say too much to poor mama, for she
does her best to make me happy, and really is striving' hard to make a living. I know I
worry her often, for my disgust will break out sometimes, in spite of myself. It is very
ungrateful of me, I know, for what should I do had I not such a kind homo to come to,
poor as it, and my loving relatives to welcome me. Oh, I fear, dear one, lam very
wretchcd. I know it is being away from you. If you were only here,"and I could be even
in the same town, I should be all right. Bon’t think me a little goose, but I do long to
think of the time when I shall see your dear face ; very, very often that is what makes
mo want to come to Sydney, or somewhere near, or eise I would make np my mind to stay
here and be content, for if it were not for you all places would he alike to me. Oh, I do
hope you will succeed, darling. I pray you may, for I quite expect it. Papa goes toNew
Zeala’nd, the best thing will be our leaving tobe off there. I quite expect to find myself
in Canterbury one of tbese days, and fancy dear dear, lovey lovey, all those miles apart.
Oh, how would we bearit? 'But we must hope fur good for tune will favour ns in tbis.
I cannot say any more, dearest love, as I have no time, I have tobe very busy to-night
making ajacket for some girl or other. You must remember I am a seamstress, now,
not a lady with my time at my own disposal. So good-bye, my own dear one. Be sure to
write as soon as possible, and let mo know the result. Adieu. God bless you, love. Ever
your own, affectionately.—l have enclosed a few lines for papa. Bear Louis please give
them to him. Ever yours.
November 21st.
Oh, darling Louis, —Your letter has quite bewildered me. Oh, lovey, what shall I
say and what shall I do. You must not be angry. But Ido not quite understand about
this husiness. You say something ahont papa’s going to New Zealand. If lam goingto
Sydney to go into the house, he must not go; he must stay in some capacity or other, as
it would never do forme to enter into it without his countenance, darling. Barling, hoth
yours and my repntation would be gone at once, you see. If he could stay I will come at
bnce. Oh, dear darling, he must stay, or I cannot come. lam too young, in reality,
after all the talk there has been about me. Bear, dear love, for myself I would risk all;
but supposing it should not answer. My having lived as it were, in, and keeping your
house, without either of my parents to come and see mo ; it would preclnde all Chance of
my getting my living in any other way. Llewellin is no use in that respect; as my
Menäs are here, he would cry out directly, and we neither of us aro rieh enough exactly
to run counter to its prejudice. Mama would not, at least could not come Just now—in
fact, I would rather she did not until we could see our way dear, I am talking reason
now, lovey ; but oh, do, do get papa to stay, if only for a time, just to see how things will
go; so that I may come, only do so at once; I wülbe with you if you do so, gooely; I


will fly direct, and only ba too glad, as it is just wbat I should like to bare, plenty to da.
Deary, you must, you will, see that I could not come to tbe above; the onlj- liability papa
bas immediately is lor a bill about £7O to meet; you see if ba could arrange that week I
would teil mama of it at once, as be grows impatient; if tbat could only be managed
thore is notbing to prevent papa stopping bero at least tbree moutbs, and by that time I
should havo got settled, or some other arrangement migbt be made ; besides, darling, I
knowing nothing really about the business, 1 could not get on witbout papa; mamma
would go ou witb her business here independently of me. Oh, I do hope you will
get bim to stay; you can if you only make up your inind _ to;
I have told mamma- ’ about it; sbe says if papa is _ asked for It migbt
answer best; she rauch donbts my being able to manage such a thing, but tbe idca of my
going alone is, I fear, altogether wrong. I feel it myself, too, dear; in fact, my dear, you
raust, if papa does not remain, got me a Situation. You see, deary, in an botel is such a
public atfair, that my position wou'd be uoticeable directly ; and, deary, you know tbat
must have a little eoxisidoration. I should not like tobe in public, and I know you would
not like forme tobe a disgrace to everyone connected witb me. You soo if my parents
bad not becn in the colony tbat would be something different, but as it is, I have no
voice for ontering into such a thing without their comitenance. _ I will write a few lines to
papa, whicli I will enclose, and you can give it to bim,—tbat is as you like, lovey--as
far as Llewellyn is concemed —ifl can, I should prefer bis not. And now, darling, witb
regard to yourself. Wbat can 1 say to tbank you for your care and anxiety forme ?
Are you not, dear one, rmmüig great risks about tbese promissory notes. Ob, do, dear
one, be careful not to involve yourself in difficulty. This, porhaps, is good advice, bat
consider tbe cost, love; but no, I will not despair ; things will tum all for tbe best lam
pure, only patience, patienco, tbat is (be natura} cry; do not borget what I have saiil
about tbe Situation, lovey. If you fail —but you will not fall if you cbnoso otherwise. You
must write by rcturn of joost, dear love, as I sball be tormented tili I hear frora my
beavt’s tbrobs. Wbeu I tbink I sball be witb you in less tha.n a week, but I tbink it will
be notl dng like a week bcfore I see you, if all goos right. Telegram to me, love, tbat wi! I
be best, it will so relievo my anxiety; I could then answer, and teil you whcn to mect me
ftt Penrith. Ob, tbis mocting, love ; ob, I sball go mad ; it is too delicious to droam of;
oh, let it be in reality. darling, do, do. For you my feolings will burst out, but still,
dear one, 1 trust you will do xvhat is best for us both in tbe oud, I would say—
[remainder illegible.]
THE DIARY.
“Sydney, October 26, 18G5,
“Thnrsday, 26th.—Lonely! Lonely! Lonely! She is gone—l am
alone. omy God, did 1 er er think or dream of such agony. I am
bound to appoar oalm: so rauch the worse. I do so hatc all mankiud.
I fecl as if overy kindly feeling has gone with her. Ellen, dearest
Ellen, I thank, I dare to thank," God for the happinoss of our last few
raoments. Surely He could not forsake us, and yet favour ns as he
has done. Tears stream irom my eyes ; they rolieve the burning an-
guish of my breaking heart. Öh, how shall 1 outlive twelve long
xnonths ? Child—l lovo thee passionately—aye madly. I knew not
how much nntil thon wert gone. And yet lam calm. Tis as the
dead silenee that preludes the tompest. What fierce passions are con-
tending in my breast! Love, jealousy, revonge, bäte, and unappeased
rage! Can 1 ever be good ? I will try, since my love wishes it.
Dearest child, what would I not do for you, my wife in heart, soul, and
spirit! Angel of love, star that hath illumined my dark existence, 1
am grateful, ever grateful, for the intense happiness you have caused
me. Oh, darling love, give me by thy future lifo faith, new, sterling
faith in thee. Thon art all I possess both in this life and in the next.
Do not rouse thedemon that I know lies dormant within me. Beware
how you triflo with my love. lam no base slave tobe played with or
cast off as a toy. lam terrible in my vengeance; tenible, for I call
on the powers of hell to aid their master in bis dire vengeance. God,
what am I saying. Do not fear me darling love ; I would not barm
thee—not thy dear seif, but only sweep away, as with a scimitar, my
enemies or thoso who would step between thy lovo and me. Think
kindly of me—of my great failings. See what I have done. for thee,
for my, for our love. Think of that and then donbt me if you can.
Oh, Ellen, 1 swear that since the creation of the universe no woman
was ever loved as thon art. Dear lovo, are you not proud of that ? and
I feel that lam loved equally weih I am so ill, Ellen ; 1 want a smiJe


from those dear eyes to giye me hope, renewed energy. My llfe seems
ebbing away. I want to live now, since thou art the prize tobe won.
I have thee I knoAV, but I crave, my own darling, to call thee wife be-
loie God and man. Will that ever be? If I thongbt not I would not
wni l '^' e "'vifcbout thee ? One burning kiss, love. Adieu.
\v nl you think of our last parting ? you did not leave me or I you, avc
loic eacli other ofour own free will that we shonld sooner meet again.
How stränge it seemed von going one way and I another, and yet I
seemed to carry you back Avith me, thy darling spirit is ever by me.
Courage, dearest, courage, and all will yet be well. The journey will
fatigue you greatly, and I not there to help thee my love ; that hap-
piness will fall to the lot of some one who knoAA’s not the pleasure he
is robbmg me of., Dear one I pray that you may not be ill. That my
WÜI strengthen instead of exhausting you my own child. I feel
h u Y6 Uas mo^er > sister, brother, husband, all, all combined.
\V hat work I have before me God only knows, but I will call His love
to help me and strive to do right, i feel I shall: thy dear devoted
love shall save me. I know it will, and Ave may yet be good and
happy together. In the train I borroAved half the Empire, which
contamed this paragraph‘Francis Arthur Jackson, convicted of
sending a threatening letter to Henry L, Bertrand with the intent to
extort money, sentenced to tAA'elve months hard labour in Parramatta
gaol. It pleased me. lam satified. Thus once more perish my
enormes. He is disposed of for the present ; are you sorry ? Came
liome, the first thing that Jane did was to teil me, that after all our
quarrel Avith regard to your laughing at Jackson, you, while I Avas in
Court, laughed oponly at him. Did you do so ? If so, you Avill be his
rum, for I have not done with him yet. Why will you ertrage me ? I
called on Cooper, at the City Bank, and gai - o him your letter. The
Board meets to-morrow, at 12 a.m. I trust to God that thev Avill do
Bomething for you ; afterAvards telegraphed to you Jackson’s sentence;
am domg no business Avhatever; Alfred not here to-day ; obtained
hvo copies of your darling likeness ; kept two for myself, gave one to
Jane, and one euch to my sister and Mrs, Robertson; I had also three
of mmo at the same time. I have been very ill all to-day, and very
sad. rhat is not tobe wondered at; how could I be
otherwise? I could eat no dinner, had nothing whatever
t° eat since breakfast with your darling »elf until half-past 7
to-night. Great pain in my stomach ; I fear that I shall be ill; Mrs.
Robertson Avas very ill Avhen they retumed from the railway, and was
obhged to go home directly in a cab alone. My sister promised to go
and see her this evening ; and accordingly, Harriette, Jane, and my-
self, went to see her at 9 o’clock ; AA r e could not go sooner, because of
rhe children. I was taken A T ery ill at her house, and was obliged to
take one of my powders. I gave her your portrait; she liked it very
w U iT' * Mr f: Robertson gave me two pearl shells had to look at, to see
it they could be mounted into sugar- spoons, and asked me if it Avonld
he very expensive to get thein done, Al ben I told her that it would be.
Bhe asked me to accept them, and that she would try and get others
from the Islands for herseif. Ido not knoAV what to do, whether to
accept them or not ; howeyer, I will consider what to do. It is nowa
feAv to 2 o clock, high time to retire, particularly as I am very’
waary and ftired. 1 placed one of yonr dear darling portraits this
mornmg in your locket; so I carry you. my love, about with me, and
lass your dear eyes again and again. Love, dear dear Kelly, hoiv do
you bear, bear our Separation. Oh, darling, you must be tired and
worn out. God bless and guard thee, Ellen. (One day nearer to
thee.) —Louis. J


IViday, 27tb.
Am very unwell to-day ; not busy. Oh, Ellen, I hope tbat I
sball not be obliged to keep my bod; you know, love, wbat 1 bave to
do; I sufFer so very mach, dearest, bodily pains. and you not by to
cbeer me witb a smile. lam in agony, and yet I can write tbis and
feel intense pleasure in so doing. lam doing no business, earning no
money, and yet I require so mucb. By tbis you, my love, will bave
seen and embraced your mamma. Will you, my love, in tbe kindness
and afFection of a motber and sister, forget me ? No, you can never,
never forget, even witbout speaking of love, my kindness, or wbat I
bave done for you, for I bave done a great deal. I bave not been able
to eat any diuner to-day ; I am afraid I sball die of lowness ot spirits.
How can Ibe gay?—notbing seems to possess any interest forme ;nu
kind of amusement; my cbief bappiness consists in luoking at your
dear face. Ob, dearest, wbat sbould Ido witbout you ? Do you feel
tbus ?I am now, by my agonies, paying a debt to retributive justice;
bow and wbat I rnade otbers suffer, God only knows ; but if 1 bave, I
richly deserve all I now feel; and you, my love, bave you not done tbe
same ? ’Tis stränge, our two natures are so mucb alike; tbey say tbat
tbose wbose cbaracters resemble one anotber never agree; but it is not
so, my love. I love a companion wbo can understand my sentiments,
respond to tbe very beating of my beart, belp me to think, to plan, and
by clear judgment advise witb me on worldly affairs. A woman is not
a toy. God did not create tbem for tbat, but as a belp; for, dearest,
is not a good, loving wife a great boon ; ber price is above rubies.
Women are as men make tbem ; tbeir natures are naturally soft and
yielding, and easily moulded to any form. I bave found, from expe-
rience, tbat balf tbe trouble women give tbeir busbands is caused by
tbe busbands tbemselves —sometimes directly, but mostly from some
indirect cause., tbat migbt bave been avoided if tbe man bad used even
moderate care in tbe guidance of tbe being sacredly intrusted to bis
charge. It is man’s prerogative, bis duty, to advise—and see tbat bis
advice is acted upon —tbose be loves, wbetber cbildren or women, and
a lord of tbe creation deserves to lose bis estate, and mqrally become
a beggar if be is too idle, or worse, too wicked, to guard innocence and
virtue from tbe evils tbat surround tbem. Dearest Ellen, I bave been
sometimes cruel, very cruel apparontly, but my own love, it was requi-
site ; you, of course, could not see tbat you were spoilt —spoilt by a
beartless world —wbat, wbat did tbey care for your bappiness, for your
future; all tbey did w r as to amuse tbemselves for tbe time being; and
so tbey fiattered and pampered you, and gave you your own way, until
you scomed and despised, instead of respectmg tbose wbo ougbt to
bave been a guidance to you. It was tbus 1 found you, and my own
love discovered at a glance wbat was wauting ; I, under tbe circum-
stances of tbe case, considered it my duty, as I loved you, to do all in
my power to destroy tbo infiuence and evil accumulated by yoars of
neglect. Tbe task was not easy, as you know it was painful to me in
tbe extreme, as every unkind Word I gave you caused me more pain
tban it could possibly cause you my love. At 9 tbis eveuing, Mrs.
Robertson called ; sbc brougbt Jobn witb ber ; sbe said sbe came in
to see Miss Willington. I being a little better, we bad one game of
wbist; I and Jane were partners. I lost my temper, for a Jwonder,
and disgusted Harriette and good Mrs. Robertson exceediugly. Sbe
only staid until 10 o’clock. I am mucb better, and am now bound for
bed. You, my love, are, no doubt, after your arduous journey, fast
asleep. Pl.easant dreams to thee, my own dear love; drearn of tbo
future, for in tbat do wo botb look forward to rcpeut our sins and


niake peace with our God. ]am sure Pie will help us tobe good, if
we try Avith all our heart, with all our streugth.—Good bye, sweet
Ellen. I kiss thy dear semblance. God guardthee.—Louis.
One more day stolcn from fate.
Saturday, 28th,-—Slept late. A great deal better. Harrietto
brought me my breakfast in bed. Jane was taken very ill with grea*
pain in her sido. Harriet is now putting turpentine to her sidc" and
stomach. I am taking the opportunity of writing my busiue.se letters,
as not very busy, but did a littlo. Yv rote to von my own darling,
two letters, they occupied me all the afternoon, I knew von wouldbe
anxious to hear fromme, and also that von would not be contented
with a cold every-day letter, such as you could shoAV your mamma ;
so, my love, I sent you the half-sheet for your oavu dear oyes alono to
peruse. Will you be able to make it out? I wrote so small and,
crossed it so much that I think, dcarest, you will have some trouble
at least to read it, I know you will not mind that, as you know the
reason for my doing so. Dear Ellen, lam alone now with thy Spirit.
'Tis 12 o’clock. Thou art perhaps asleep, or thinking of your dear
loving Louis—think of the time when wo shall meet to part only in
death. When will that time arrive ? It approaches surely, but waht
sloav steps — but it will come — believe me, it will corae, as you belie\ r e
there is a God. I have said it. I forgot Jane was better ; so about
halt-past 4, Harriette, J ane, and I went out for a walk, shewing her
the new buildiugs in Ncav Pitt-street. I spent the evening indesign-
iug sih'er work. lam too ill to Avrite you any more to-night. Good
byo, darling. Dear love, God love andkeep thee.—Three days nearer
to thee dear Ellen.—Louis.”
Sunday, 29.—Last night 1 read in bed uutil past 2 o’clock, woke
lato this mprning, do not feel very well, I am afraid my old illness
will come,no matter how I strive to ward it off; lam not happy, how
can I be, I Avant affection, 1 cannot live Avithout it. Oh dear Ellen,
Avhat would life be without thee, or even the hope of possessing thee ;
that alone is food for the heart and mind. My own dear love, I talk
incessantly of thee, I speak of thy gentle Avays, of thy abilities, Avhat
thou canst do, Avhat thy favourite airs, and all that recalls thy dear
name has a charm forme. Harriette, my dear sister Harriette, is a
comfort, for dear girl, she knoAvs I love to talk of thee, my own darl-
and so listens attentiA T oly to the enumeration of thy excellent
qualities. I forget at times she is a Avoman, for I am sure she must
be jealous of the immense love I bear thee ; she often says she wants
her husband to caress her. I awoke this morning when the church
bells Avere ringing, so of courso Avas too late for church, feeling rather
tired, 1 did not dress or shave. I fear, my dear Nelly, that not having
you to fascinate, I shall become quite slovoiily and untidy, for if I con-
sulted my own feelings I should not dress at all. I dare say also that
I shall become ugly again, for you know how ugly I was before I kneAV
you. I may l»e so now, only you do not see it, or rather pretend not
to. Never mind, my loA’e, if I am good enough for you you are my
Avorld, That is all I desire; no, that is not all, for lam ambitious—
veiy, A’ery ambitious. I Avant fame as Avell as Avealth and power, and,
as usual, littlo Bortrand must have his Avay. You know he is a spoilt
child—spoilt in more Avays than one. So, as I Avas saymg, I must
have fame, fortune, and powor, as well as the most ardent, pure, pas-
sionate, and devoted love of the most fascinating, amiable, and liest of
women that the world at present contains. There, if this is not
ilattery, _ 1 dou’t know Avhat is; but it is not—it is the truth ?at least
X think it is the truth to the best of my belief us we say in ooiu’t, Olq


1 must not speak of courts ; we liave had enougli of them, at least for
the present. But you know, dearest love, without my saying, what
is the next court that I should like to extend to me its Jurisdiction.
I long for the time when I shall be able to commence to see about it;
but patience, patience. Louis, restrain thyself— not too fast. I shall
oxcite myself unduly. Dearest Nelly, if I continue this topic any longer,
so, no matter how pleasant, I had better desist, particularly
as it is getting into the small hour of the night, and I have t’o
toll you how I spent the rest of the day. After breakfast I
wcnt to the workshop, having one or two little things to put to rights.
When there I commenced to model in wax, and not having anything
better to do I stayed there, designing a figure of a’native of Fiji, to form
with the pearl shell given me by Mrs. Robertson, a pair of salt-
cellars, which if I cah carry out according to my desire, I intend to
send to the forthcoming Exhibition tobe held in Melbourne next year.
I also intend to finish the centre-piece that you saw—l mean the one
with the palmtree. I will try and give you some idea of my design for
the salt-cellars. There willbe for one—a nakcd figure of a Fijian kneel-
ing in a graceful attitude, _ holding the pearl shell, which is shaped
like a fiat basket, above his head, from which will droop bunches of
seaweed. The figure will rest on an appropriate stand, emblematical
of the seashore, and the spoon will consist of a paddle formed of some
other kind of shell, small of course. I purpose making the other
exactly the same, ouly that the figure will be that of a female of the
samc Island. They both will be cast in solid silver, frosted, and will
be about 3| iuchcs high. They, with my other affair, will take up a
good deal of my time, so I shall pass many, many hours alone, think-
mg of thee, my own darling love—for, dearest, it is for thee now that
I toil—all that Ido will be thine, and all praise I obtain will be that
thou, my owii love, shall delight in it. At 9 o’clock we went out for
a quiet walk, as I feit the want of it after working all day, and came
honie at 11; it is now, my darling, past 12, and I must to 'bed. You
see, my love, nothing whatever passes but that I carefully narrate, as
1 promised thee. lam suro you would not believe what comfort it
giyes me to talk to you, my love, thus. I know you will see and read
this; and, hcsid.es, it is a mirror in which I will see the reflection of
my miud. and it is thus of great use to me in puttiug me ou my guard
as regards my conduct every day. I know my own dear, darling love,
cvery night before I lay me down to sleep, that my love for thee bums
as dear ly and as brightly as eyer. Oh, I thauk God, dear Ellen, that
it is so for thy dear sake, for if I had ceased to love thee, what wouldst
thou have done l I sincerely thank Hirn that I not only love thee with-
out ah efibrt, but that it would be impossiblc forme to do otherwise.
I have no control over myself on this point; theu, darling, think of me
as I deserve ; there has not beeu one second since thou hast left but
that my every thought has beeu of thee—thine image has filled my
heart, and thy sweet dear name gently murmured in my ear. Good-
bye, loved darling child, I bum to embrace thee, Ellen, once again
adieu.—Four days out of the 365.—Louis.
" Monday, 30th. Was wanted early, having a good chalico of
takmg £2O ; will know to-morrow. Did no other business. About
10 o clock received letter from my dear love ; was very inuch grieved
that Ellen was so tired by the journey. I cannot boar such cold Com-
munications, they seem to me but a mockery * however, I must fee*
content that I have any at all. I kissed thy darling letter, my Ellen
ft has soothed me greatly. Dear love, I’ am almost despcmdent. Mv
aister s husband has boou oflorcd an appoiutment in the Work’s Dy »


partment in Melbourne, and I think will soon retnrn there, so we shall
lose her society sooner tlian wc expected. lam sorry for that, but it
cannot be helped. lam occupied all day in working and modellmg
my Fijian. I have bim nearly ready for casting. In doing this i
neglected my own work, so I shall have tobe up before six to-morrow
morning to complete a set that has tobe finished by three in the aitei -
noon. Mrs. Morris called to-day about her —, and will have to come
again Monday next. I am, as is usual, at present much pushed lor
money, and do not Icuoav what to do to obtain some. At 8 o clock v o
went out to see Mrs. Robertson, and, as usual, had to walkhome which
tired us all very much. Lewellyn wrote to Ellen, and I am gomg to
write in his letter before going to bed; so as it is hall-past one, 1 shai
conclude this day’s entry. Dearest’ sweet one, I. look on thy darling
face, and my heart feels as if it would break with love, mteuse loac,
for thee, Ellen ; that you are well and peaceful is my last prayer to-
night, dearest. Adieu, adieu, once again. Five days passed away
never to retum. —Louis."
“ Tuesday, 31st. —Arose at 6 o’clock; did not stay to dress ; AAent
to work at once ; got my part finished before breakfast; at 9 went out
on some business; saw Cooper, and he gladdened my heart by telhrig
me that Mr. Ford had written to you, my darling, enclosmg L2O. Uh .
my love, what a blessing ! I could hug the direetors with very jo}.
lam sorry io say that lam not doing any business at all. I have not
taken a Shilling as yet. I dont know really what lam to do ;it is
dreadful, is it not, dearest? but in all my trouble I think of thee, my
darling, think of thy dear sAveet face, of thy boundless love, and surely
that is better than wealth. I knoAV that I Avant money, and money i
must have. I have nothing, my love, but bad news to Amte, and ido
not like to AVrite then, for it depresses my spirits. I have not thee to
comfort me. Oh! Ellen, how thou dwellest in my soul, night oi da}
thou art constantly Avith me; loved dearest, what, AA T hat am Ito do
without thee ? lam so very weary, my own darling. I seem to stille
in this place ;itis no longer what it used tobe to me, but I live on in
hope, glorious hope in the future. You have many times doubted my
love, have thought that I Avas like other men, deceitful; and, love, you
have had occasion to doubt others for I could not blame thee, child.
But as years roll ou thou wilt see, for there is a veil before thine eyes
—thou wilt see thou Avhat steadfast, true love I have for thee, my
life: when I have accomplished all I promised, then, and
onlv then, you, my darling Ellen will understand what I
have done for thee, for our loves. I look back at the past and am
myself astonished at what I have dared and successfully exccuted.
Gau and will von say after that, tliat you have not faith in ine ; that
I am changeable and could care for others besides thee, dailing.
do not doubt thee dearest Ellen. I am not even jea.ous ol thee, be-
cause I have faith, true faith, in thy holy, good love lor me. Oh, my
own one, my love, do try and be good, very good to atone tor thy
past follies, for they were nought eise. I know thy heart, and if thou
hadst had me for thy husbaud how different my Ellen would have
been. But it is not too lato ; now if you pray Ood with a true re-
»entant heart to help you love, lam sure He will. Oh, I daic nOu
litt up my voice yet. i feel that I dare net as yet ask His forgiveness,
so Ellen, my oavh dear ivife. pray also for thy husbaud. feuppheate
our Saviour that ho may soften my heart, and that ho will sutter me
approach the throne of grace. I »sha.ll striv’o hard tobe a good man.
lAvant tobe good. for I feel that if Ido not I shall becomo entirely
cuslaved to the Pevilthat soon there would be no hope lor mo


either now or hereafter. But enough of myself. I speak a great deal
of my affairs to my dear sister. She loves me very much, and is very
much concerned about my future happiness. She is favourable to our
divorce, and thinks that under the circumstances it is the most kind I
can do for Jane, and in fact for all concerned. ¥e speak constantly of
yon my own love. Jane, as usual, goes to sleep, which gives ns some
time to onrselves. I worked hard all day, but took no money. At
half-past 6 we three went out for a walk in the Domain, I sat a
moment on the seat we sat on that night. Do you, my Ellen, ever
think of those delightfnl times ? When, when will they come again ?
perhaps never. Oh! my Ood, I trust so, or I should die! Sweet
darling, sweet love, I kiss thy loved and loving name. My Ellen, my
world, my God, adieu ! Six days gone—how slow the time. —Louis.
“Wednesday, November Ist. —A nice time this to commence to
write—half-past one in the morning. Well, better late than never;
and now all are gone to bed I feel free to breathe ; I feel as if I were
again a single man; but it is nothing new ; since my love has
gone I seem to delight in staying up tili 1 or 2 o’clock. I have not
been to bed once since Ellen left before half-past 1 or 2 ; it seems to
me the only time when not harrassed by business of any description, I
can devote all my heart and thoughts to thee my loved one. Oh,
darling, how shall we both drag throngh the weary time ? When will
itend ? Yousee, my angel, I can do nothing active at present. My
own love, I have had hardly time to do anything to-day, I have been
so very busy—plenty to do and to occupy me. All promises, and yet
nothing definite or tangible. I look at my book and see no Orders
entered ; all to come, perhaps. But now, then, oh, my dearest
my Ellen, I wish to get on for thy dear sake. What, what can Ido
without money ? Nothing at all. But to resume; As I was saying,
I have a great chance of doing some business. I trust I may. At 6
o'clock Harriett, Jane, and I went out for a walk—that means, shop-
ping—which, of course, disgusted me, and put rae in a bad temper,
which, by-the-bye, has become of late my chronic state; we came
home, and while the children were being put to bed, I sat down and
made out several accounts, and some business letters, in the hope of
being able to get in some money. I trust I may succeed. We had
tea about a quarter to 9, and while we were at the table Mrs. Eobert-
son came alone ; she didnot intend to stop, but Jane made her tako
off her bonnet, and we sat down to a game of whist, Harriette being
my partner. We lost. Llewollyn very kindly tried to get some ices,
but did not succeed. Ho also went to the Flore Australienne, to get
some tarts, as we, as usual, had nothing in the house. At 11 she
went. I accompanied her home. I went in, as she promised to lend
me a book on the Fijis, as I could not finish my figure without
some guide, not having ever seen a native of those islands.
She told me then that she had a letter from darling Ellen.
I feit quite jealous. I envied her, and more so when I saw that
it was a much longer letter than mine. I could not resist
the impulse, and when she had her back turned I kissed the letter. How
weak lam even to admit this much, but I must write the truth. Oh,
my love, do not forget your fond Louis. See, dearest, how he thinks
constantly of thee ; how every moment of his life he ever has thee in
his heart Thon, my Ellen, art enshrined there for ever. Mrs. Eob-
ertson fancied that I had seen your letter, or that I had opened it
before she had it. She asked me how long was Harriette going to
stay in Sydney ; and when I told her not very long, she said that I
ought to take her out more than I do, and let |her see some places of


amusement. She and the Defries’ are going to the Prince of Wales
Theatre on Friday, and she asked us to join them andmake-one party.
So, as Harriette would liko to sec tkc theatre, I am going to take
them. I can ill afford to do so, but my sister will think lam very
niggardly if I do not let her try and enjoy herself a little while she
can. Oh, my Ellen, dear love, you know and appreciate me as I
deserve, and, darling girl, you know I am not mean. I had to walk
home, and am very tired ; so will now leave off also for want of ma-
terial, haviug nothing more to write. G-ood night, my öwn precious,
darling love. Sweet dear, am I always in thy thoughts and next thy
heart, as thou art to mine. Adieu! One week, love, since we parted—
onel ong, weary week!—Louis.”
“ Thursday, 2nd.—Harriette awoko me this morning by placing
a letter before my eyes. Dull as lam usually, I sprang up wide awake.
I knew—l feit by instinct, even before I saw the writing, that it was
from my love. Oh ! what a delicious half-hour I passed in bed ! Yes !
the dear epistle was so long, that it took me a whole half-hour to read
it through. My loved darling, what a dear good girl she is to com-
fort me so greatly. Such sweet, kind words of hope and love.
What—what could Ido without her ? She is my life—the very air I
breathe. I shall go out of my mind with excess of love. The letter
was a compound of joy and sorrow. Yes. My dear Ellen commences
to feel how hard poverty is to bear—to feel how different it is to work
for pleasure or for existence, but I believe itchastensus to go through
trouble; it takes from our hearts that false pride which is below the
dignity of a noble mind to experience. I have my difflculties, and I
feel them the more that I require so much. I have a great deal to
do, Courage, both ofus, What is our love, ifthe mere calamities
of casual affairs upset us thus. I should feel ashamed of my love,
of what I have done for it, if it were no different from that of others ;
that is our only excuse either on earth or Heaven for what we have
accomplished. Oh! my Ellen, my wife, dear wife, do try and be
strong to fight our battle with me side by side, in spirit let us face
as sturdy warriors the shock of warfare, of deadly strife against men
or things that oppose us; let us not bo cowed or terrified at aught
that besets us. I warned you what to expect, and, dcarest, for the
greatness of our love for one another, surely we can bear aye fiffcy
tim es more than what we have to bear. As long as thou, my Ellen,
art true, so long will I fight and gain the victory. I do not fear the
result, the end to me is dear and palpable, I am sure of it; I never
failed yet in my life. Thus I feel better. I have been in such a good
temper all day, I am sure my sister will bless Ellen, as she knows
that my darling is the cause of my happiness. I am so pleased that
I can write openly to my own love, it will be such a source of comfort
to me to do so, and to receive letters in return. How Ido treasure
them ; they are to me meat and drink. Oh, to know that her heart
beats as warmly as mine does—that her love is as firm, strong, and
much purer than my own, is in itself enough to turn my brain, My
own pet, and she longs to see me, the dear child. Poor Ellen ! I pity
thee—patience—patience —my darling love, and all will soon be well
with both of us. Oh, how my heart beats when the very idea of being
in the same town, of being able to see cach other occasionally, the
very thought that that could be possible or likely quite took away my
breath. Dear one, how glad I am that you suffer as Ido from our
Separation ; am I not cruel, dearest, selfish, but I cannot help it; my
intense love makes me so. Lewellyn was much annoyed at having no
letter; I think Sarah might write to him ; I forgot to teil him tosend


tho paper to Bathurst; lam doing no business ; I did not sec a soul
all day; I was all day in tlie workshop, occupied in casting my figure.
Alfred stayed to dinner and tea to belp me ; and after all my work at
half-past 11 at night, it is all spoilt. I have to commence all over
a a-ain. It is very vexing, as I set my hcart on it being right the first
time. Calder came up to see me this afternoon; I went out witli
him for ten minutes, and had a glass of ale —the second I have had
since you, my Ellen left. It is now past 12, and I am going to write
to Ellen; I raust write her a very nice letter in return for her dear
one this morning. Adieu, my love, my darling love, adieu, Eight
days gone. —Louis. , „ n
“Friday, November 3rd.—Received a nice letter from my dear
Ellen ; she complains of business being very bad at Bathurst and sees
no prospect of making a living. The dear girl almost asks me to
look after some sort of a Situation near or in Sydney. Oh I do hope
and pray that she may come that we may be near one another ; Tis
great happiness forme to know that my darling child fcels the Sepa-
ration as much as I do ; I will try hard, very hard,_to get something
for her to do ; I trust I may succeed. Oh, is it not hard that,
through me, my sweet Ellen is thus placed. lam sure I feel it moro
than she does, to see the woman I adore seeking a Situation to work
for her daily bread, it is so very hard forme to bear. Oh why can I
not share all, all I possess with her, take her to ray heart and home.
No! tho worid would not allow such a breach of etiquette, so wo
must, I suppose, abide by its decrees. I hate tho vile hypocrisy that
is inborn in man's very nature. I despise all, cverything worldly
except pure unadulterated love. This, oh worid, is thy only redeem-
ing feature ; but for love, what should webe, worse, far worse than
the lowest brutes in the scale of creation, I have done ; it inakos me
sick when I think of these things. I am doing no business ; one
solitary half-crown this day ; but it rained hard all day so I could not
expect people to come out in such weather. I was at work all day
and night at my Figian. I cast him this time in six pieces, and fivo
of them are sufficiently correct tomako do, but I shall have to make a
new body. that being the imperfect face ; it was twenty minutes to 2
before we left the workshop, so lam too fatigued to write. I wrote
Ellen a long letter to-day, it seems to me the only comfort I have
left, to receive and write letters to my darling love. Oh Ido long to
see her once again. My soul yearns for thee, oh my loved dearest
one. I shall pray to God that we may be near eaeh other ; that I may
be able to counsel and advise thee love, that I may watch over thee
and guard thee from all ill. Oh, my sweet loving child, will that be
possible ? I hardly dare to realise tho hope ever of such taking place,
for fear that I shall raise in my hcart expectations that may not come
to pass. I have no news. Of course, we did not go to the theatre, as
it was wet. I was so very glad, as I could ill afford a pound at such a
time, to throw away on such amusements. Alfred sleöps on tho sofa
to-night, it is pouring with rain and rather cold. Adieu, my Ellen,
dream my own love that we are locked in each others arms once more.
God bless thee, my love, good-night. The ninth day passed away.—
Louis. Annie called, and I gave her Ellen s letter, which I read to
her, and she cried, poor girl.”
“Saturday, 4th November,—Did no business to-day again, al-
though the day was fine ; occupied myself all day in casting my silver
work ; took longer, as Alfred goes early on Saturday ; I am happy to
state, that after all my trouble with it, the figure is at last correct, and
almost ready tobe soldered together, although there is an immensity of


work tobe gone througb before it is fit tobe seen. After tea agreed
to go to Mrs, Robertsons, and while we were dressing to go, she came
berself with John; so, as we were ready, we all went back with
her to her home, and played cards nntil 12 o’clock. She very
kindly gave me a pair of all the Shells she possessed, as lam
going to make a good collection of natural curiosities. She also
gave Harriette a great number of shells and a native comb. I have
one too, We came home at half-past 1, qnite tired out. I feel that
late hours begin to teil npon my Constitution. Mrs. Robertson very
kindly invited ns to dinner to-morrow, and as we did not accept the
invitation, she is coming to our house early, and we are going at half-
past 2to Manly Beach. Oh, my Ellen, I feel so stränge not having
one of yonr dear letters to comfort me, so I console myself, before going
to bed, by reading yonr last letter, and looking ou thy dear, dear face.
I got Mrs. Robertson’s portraits for her, as I was qnite ashamed at her
asking me for them so often, Llewellyn went to the theatre to-night
as we were going out. Good bye my'loved one, my giorious darling
Ellen, adieu.—Louis. Ten days gone.
“Sunday, sth.—Slept as usual late. Jane is very good, and tries
to make me as happy and comfortable as she can. I went into the
workshop and tried to cut out the pieces of pearl from the shell Mrs.
Robertson gave me, but unfortunately it broke all to pieces, and is of
course spoiled. I also worked at my Fijian. At about 1 o’clock went
np to dress. Had to hurry, Dear Harriette made me such a nico
stow of the breast of veal; it was delicions, only wo were so very lato
that I could not enjoy it as I might have done Mrs. Robertson did not
come nntil about a quarter after 2, so that by the time Harriette and Jane
were ready wo were too late for that boat, but luckily there was
another at 3 o’clock, so we went by that one. It was a boautiful day,
clondy and not too hot. I have not been down to Manly for a very long
time, so it was qnite a treat. Oh, my Ellen, my lovely dearest, how I
thought of thee, how I longed for thee my own love ; that, that alone
was wanting to make the day delightful. I do so feel the want of
some one to love ; I mean for the one I love. I want to embraco her,
tobe able to pay attention to my love and tobe a very slave to her slight-
est will. We took Harriette, it being her first trip to Manly Beach, to
the Fairy Bower. We went npon the verandah, then, which would
have been very pleasant had it not been ihr the parcel of rüde
men and women ; but we must expcct that on Sunday—it is the same
all over the world. We went back to the steamer througb the bush,
and almost lost our way. We gathered some wild flowers, and, after
all our trouble in getting them they threw them away. We retu ued
to Sydney at half-past 5, and it was nearly 7 when we got home. As
there was nothing for tea I went to Myer’s and got some presorved
fish. I met on board the steamer Mr. Bellhouse, an old acquaint-
ance of mine before marriage ; I asked him to come to tea to-morrow
and spend the evening with us. After tea Mrs. Robertson was taken
very ill, so that she could not go home, and so is sleeping with my
sister. Jane is obliged througb that to sleep with me. It feels so
stränge, as I have not slept with her for a long time, it sccm’s like
sleeping with some else’s wife. Llewellyn spent the day with John at
Mrs. Robertson’s and came back after tea, but both went home, as he
is to sleep there to-night. Oh, my Ellen—l know, my love, you would
be jealous, my own dear, and you haveno reason tobe so, as I love
you so very fondly. It is now a quarter to 1, and I must now to bed,
as I have to commence to-morrow in earnest. I must decide upon
some course of raaking money. This will never do. lam almost


helpless on thispoxnt. What am Ito do? Never mind—sxx days aro
sufficient to think ox 1 write of business matters, so for this day I have
doxxe. I shall awake, I trust, to receivo a letter froxn my darling
Ellen. Ido hope and pray that therc is one on tho road forme. It is
my only comfoi’t. Good bye, my own darling, dearest lo\e. God
bless and presei’ve thee. Ido hope and pray that things xnay look
better at Bathurst, for it troubles me. God knows how anxxous I am
about my dear, dear wife. Adieu, —Louis. Eleven days gouo.
Monday, 6th.—'Wo got up early, on accouxxt of Mrs. Robertson.
It was raining fast, and continued to do so all day. I was kept pretty
busy Avith patients, but did no business at all as regax’ds moncj. 1
have werk to do. Jane made Mrs. Robertson stayed to dinner, but sue
Avould not stay after dark, axxd went home at half-past 5 hx a hansom
alone. She would not stay on account of Agnes bexng ratner imwell.
I was working at my figure a good deal all day. I told Lewellyn to
send the paper regulaxiy to Bathurst, but I sec he dxd not do so. i
don't know what my darling Ellen will think ot such Mi.
Bellhouse came after tea, as he thought we would not expect hxm oxx
account of the weather. As wo had not had tea he joxxxed ns, and
after tea we played whist—Jane and Mi 1 . Bellhouse, and Haxxxette and
myself. We won, and Mr. Bellhouse lost 3s. 6d., for whxch he mteuds
to buy Harriette a pair of gloves, as he does not like playmg fox
money. At half-past 11 he went out, and I went wxth hxm. I took
three glasses of brandy, which made me feel very sleepy and stupid.
I stayed out with hhn until 1 o’clock. I took Spry wxth xne, he beguxs
to like xne vexy much. lam glad ol that for my daximg Ellexx s sake.
Mrs. Monns came accompanied by Mrs. Douglass, her mamma. 1 took
the model of her mouth, and she is to have the tooth oxx Wedxiesday at
12, She asked after Mrs. Kinder, and also what Mrs. Kinder xnteuded
dohm. Jane did not see her. Mrs. Douglass is going tobe marrxed.
I feel vexy depx’ossed to day, I think it is xxot haviug x'ecexvcd a lettei
from my dai'ling Ellen, I want a letter evexy day, I caxxxxot get on
at all without it." Oh, xny dear love, Ido hope that you, xny love, are
not il. Oh, dearest oxxe, I long, long to see, to embrace thy dear seil,
what shall I do without thee xny dear child ? I love thee passxonately,
nay, more fondly than ever. Oh, my beauty, do not grow cold and
foxraal ; I shall die outright. lam half dead already. Oh, my Ellexi,
we ought to correspond evexy day ot our lives, until \ve can see one
another. My life seems, nay is a complete blank, sxnce thou, my
sweet one, art gone. I Ixad no idea, and as I kncw I loved tnee, tnat
thou Avert so wrapt up in my vexy sonl, until my dear Ellen, thon loit
me of myself alone, oh, Lovey, my own txme love. Say, 01113 7 say, thou
'vilt be his m spitc of all and eA*exythmg, say that, AATitcitto meocuexi,
and I will bless thee md God that it is so. Oh, my own doax dear
Elle., Adieu.—Lou-s. m welve days gone. _
“r.’uesdav. 7 bl: -Ja eAVok x'me his mornmg by tellxng me phat
Mrs. Robertson wa. tak. 1 A r exy ill, md she would like to see. aue.
The. ; Avas also a letter f an my darli.xg Eller, God bless her ; d. I no
busiruss at all Avorth xpeaking abcut to-day. Ml*. Belhoi.se cvlled
with Harriettc’s gloves. I Avas in tho Avork-shop tho best part 01 tho
dav. I paid Hafer £3 as I promised. Jane and Karrxette AVent in tho
afternooxx to see how Mrs. Robertson Avas getting on, and took both
babies Avith them. At 6 o’clock I Avexxt out to fetch them, but to my
surpiise Mrs. Robertson Avas up, and nxade us stay to tea. While at
tea Mrs. Defries came in and avc did not _ leave then Untxl 11. Ihe
ladies have airanged to spuid the day (Friday) witli Mi*s. Deflies, at
Shore. The Defries are going home to England at the ctxd ot


tliis montli. lam sorry to say that Ellen is not well. I am not well
myself. I fear that late hours are not goocf forme, and I shall have
to go to bed at a reasonable time. It is now past two o’clock, and I
aan very tired, I have plenty to occupy my mind and thoughts, both
nnth my own business and those of whom I am so very anxious. 1
viote a letter just now to my jewel, Ellen. I shall try hard and get
hei in some house of business here if I can. Good-night, my own
lo\ e. Sleep soundly, and may you wake refreshed, and the thirteenth
day gone.—Louis.”
“ Wednesday, Bth.—Thank God, another day gone; whataweary,
weary, weary time. However will a twelvemonth pass ? God only
kuows. My heart grows sich and faint when I look iuto the futurc.
Oh, God, is this Thy retribution for our sins ! Did I flatter myself that
the Almighty would let me—a wretch like me—go unpunished; but I
teil thee, fate, I defy thee. What do I care for aught, only that lam
with my Ellen. Oh, sweet dear angel, whyart thou not uear to soothe
iny anguish ? I do feel as il my heart was rent in pieces, crushed; and
then dark thoughts obtrude themselves before me; fiends rise and
mock me; they point to a gatc, a portal through which I feel half in-
clmcd to go; but not yet. What would my love do without me ?
Perhaps soon forget me, and may be to love another. That last
thought is horrible, Ellen, I half hate thee at the very idea of such a
thmg. Oh, could Ibe certain she loves me as I love her, what a
comfort it would be. I possess no means of keeping her love. I know
I can lascinate when she is with me, but away there are so mauy fine
handsome men that I dwindle down to insignificance in comparison.
Oh Louis, for shamo, is this right to think in this manner ? No Ellen,
T will not, my love, do thee the unkindness of those ideas. My own dar-
lin o love. I will no longer torturo myself thus. I have faith, and
agamst the whole world. No matter what thou hast been, my child,
1 hold thee up as a true virtuous wife to me, for you have been truo
to me, oh my dearest love. When can I call thee miue ? when shall I
have the right to love thee opeuly ? That it may not be long, I pray
for both our sakcs, as I fear all this tends to undermine my healtli.
Bye the bye, I ought not to stay upthe way I do. I am sure I mustbe
very strong to stand it every night until 3 or 4 o’clock, and working
hard all day. I must take care of myself for thy sake, my dcar onc.
I Want to give thee, my love, not a worn out husband, but a mau in all
the vigour and energy of the prime of life, that I may live long to
make the rest of thy existence happy. What a comfort tobe alone. It
is now nearly 3 o’clock, and I have not yet noted the events of the day.
I was rather busy, although not making much money; I was engaged
1 Illing teeth, and went without my breakfast until half-past 11 ;
Jane weut to Newtown to see her sister who is confined ; at 11 Mrs.
Morris came for her teeth. and as I had not breakfasted., I made her
wait in the parlour until I did so. She asked me and Jane to call on
her, and also invited my sister to come with us. She did not see Har-
riette to-day ; she was busy all day in the bedroom with the childreu,
1 hardly saw her at all. I went out and saw Oooper ; hc told me that
he had letters for Ellen from New Zealand from John Kinder; also,
he informed me that John Kinder desired him to have a wooden cross
put upon the grave temporarily. They think down in New Zealand
that Harry did not intend to kill himself, but only to frighten his wife,
and they seem kindly disposed towards Ellen. I am glad, for I like
her to have friends. I spoke to Mr. Douglass about getting Ellen
something to do, but he thinks it would bo better to let the old affaira


blow over first for a time, if possible. I was introduced to a gentleman
to-day at the Cafe, I and a friend are to meet bim to-morrow
at 1 o’clock, to lunch. I sball go a little more iuto society—l meau of men
—than I have beeu in the habit of doing of late. I wrote another
page of my letter to my dear Ellen, but could not say all I intended to
say on account of being too late for the post. I worked all the.rest of
tho day and night, until half-past 1, at my silver Fijian. I have put
all the pieces together to-night, and he is all ready for the firm work.
shall have it soon* ffnished. I must be up early to-morrow, as I ex-
pect peoplo before breakfast. It is a holiday to-morrow, but I, for
one, will not keep it as such. My love, I must have doue corresponding
with your dear darling seif, for this diary is for thee, my Ellen, You,
my love, know my every thought; and in the future, when you read
this, you will see my inmost soul. Love, good night. I pray that
God will give thee health and patience to bear thy heavy bürden.
Once more, good night.—Louis. [Fourteen days, my love, since thou
art gone.’’
“ Thursday, 9th November.—Do not feel able to write. lam do-
ing no business. To my surprise, after I had been out, I heard that
Mr. Wood had been. I flew to see him. Ido not know what possessed
me, but I feit almost as if it were *part of my own dear Ellen. I feit
so very, very glad to see him. It being a holiday, spent nearly all the
day with him, talking of affairs in general that coucerns us both. Ho
told me exactly how they are all situated, and we thought of takiug an
hotel between us, in Mrs. Kinder s name. I hope we may be able to
do something for my dear Ellen, for Ido not like to work. The dear,
dear girl did not forget me, and sent me her little Bell. I seem tobe
quite out of my senses with joy at the thought that I may soon see her.
Papa came to tea with us, and after tea we went out for a short walk,
and came home and played whist. About half-past 11 he went. I
accompauied him and our conversation was so interesting that I stayed
out tili nearly 2 o’clock. 1 also am ashamed to say too much to drink,
I was not iutoxicated, but rather excited. I told papa all about our
afiair. I could not bear to hear him planuing a marriage for my own
darling, so thought it best to teil him all. He plainly said that if Ellen
loved me sincerely, and that it was for both our happiness he would
not object. So that is settled. I commenced to write to my dear
love tbe moment I returncd, but was so excited at the event of the day
that I could not manage it, and got only to the end of four pages.
Oh, my dear, dear oue, what can I say to show w T hat great joy fills my
heart when I think of thee. Adieu, my Ellen, adieu. Fifteen days gone.
—Louis.
“ Friday, lOth November.—l got up rather late ;do feel rather
unwell. I went to finish my letter to dear Ellen, but to my surprise I
found that—what with the excitement combined with brandy and
water—l had writteu on two separate sheets of paper, and the writing
so terribly bad, that I was not inclined tosend it, but on second
thoughts I deoided on finishing the same letter, as I do not intend to
hide anything, even the most trivial from my sweetheart. However,
1 wrote her a nice long letter, telling her all that papa wished me to.
1 hope she will be able to make it out. I was rather busy with peoplc
calling, but not making money at all. About half-past 10, Mrs. Robert -
son came to the house to fetch my sister and Jane to spend the day
with Mrs. Defries. They were ready for her, and started directly. I
went out to dino with a friend, and afterwards went to look for Mr.
Wood. I could not see him anywhere. I was annoyed, as I did not like
to cloic my letter without hearing if there was any more news to write


about. However, I was obliged, at 4, to post it, and tben went up-
stairs to dress to go to North Shore to fetch the ladies. While dress-
ing, Mr. Wood came, the time being rather short so 1 asked him to
come up and stay with me until I was ready to go. He had had a
short letter from John Kinder, which I read. He had no further news
to teil me. He walked down with me to the North Shore Ferry. I
feit very stränge. I went over in the Kiribili. It brought a crowd of
ideas that I thought were buried for cver back to my memory. This is the
first time I have been to the shore since poor Harry - s funeral. lam
standing on the deck, my face turned towards the little honse with the
two chimneys, as I used to do when on wings of love I flew to the
arms of my beloved. Oh, my heart sinks within me when I recall our
happy, happy meetings alone, and none by to interrupt us. Those
were happy moments, bnt, iudeed alloyed with bitter thoughts. How
horribly jealous I was. I was mad. How conld I bear to know that
my Ellen, my own dear love, belonged to some one who had the legal
right to do or say anything ho liked to her. It drove me raviug mad,
and lam what I am. I looked around me, and saw people coming
and going as they used to do, and I, racked by those thoughts: surely
there can be no worse hell than our own conscience. I rode up to
Defriess, and got a scolding for being so late. It was past 6 o’clock.
We stayed until half-past 10, and a carriage came for ns which cost
6s. I can-ied the babies home when we reached Sydney. Mrs.
Eobertsou ate no tea, so I went out and got some oysters and a cray-
fish. However, Mrs. Eobertsou was afraid of it. I ate too much and
made myself very ill. About half-past one I saw Mrs. Eobertsou
home. We walked all the way, and I rested about a quarter of an
hour at her house. Of course I had to walk back, and was quite
knocked up. It was past 3 o’clock before I got home. When I re-
turned I awoke Llewellyn in unlocking the back door, and he told me
that Jane thought while lying on the sofa that something jumped
upon her, and she fainted. Harriette also went into hysterics, aud
Llewellyn, in one of his usual fits, knocking his head. Luckily I
was out of all this, and I slept lik& a top. I have tobe up eorly
to-morrow moming, so I will not write more at present, or I shall not
get to bed at all. I long to have a letter from my dear Ellen. I
trnst I may have one to-morrow. Adieu, my love, adieu.—Sixteeu
days gone.—Louis.
“ Saturday, November llth.—Could hardly wake this moming,
feeling as if I had not been in bed at all. Was very busy with
patients until 1 o’clock. Mr. Loady called forme to go and lunch.
1 detained him more than half an hour. While he was waiting, Mr.
Dofries called, dressed in his Voluntoer uniform; he was going to
receive his prizc, £2, from Lady Young. There isto be a review this
afternoon in the Domain. Jane is very ill, indeed so ill that she
could not finish dressing, and I am afraid she will not be able to come
down stairs to-day. I asked Mr. Deines to come out and lunch with us
as he was here; so we went to Stilbs and had a very nicc dinner at my ex-
pense. After dinner I went with Defries to the barracks, and waited tili
fbrmed, aud saw them march into the Domain. This was about half-
past 3. I then came home, and had not been in two minutes when
Mrs. Eobertsou came, expecting that my sister and Jane would go with
her to the review, as Mr. Defries intended, after the review, to go out
to her house. I went back to the Domain and tried to let him know
that she was at our house. I was tired looking for him ; however, I
managed to find him and we came back together. We made him stop
to tea, as Mrs. Eobertson was here, and as the downstairs room was


ratber dose and full of flies. Jane and I went out to Zuccani’s and
bought a very handsome lamp for the drawing-room. Mr. Defries went
bome about half-past 9 o’clock, and we played whist. Mrs. Robertson
was my partner, and we lost frigbtfully. However, Mrs. Robertson
during tbe game, said something to me whicb ofiended me, and be-
cause I Avas annoyed sbe became quite ill and fainted; after lying down
a little while sbe became better, and Avben alone witb me sbe told me
sbe could not bear me to Im cross Avith her; sbe also told me tbat it
was tbrougb me sbe was ill previously; sbe is very nervous and lam
grieved tbat I sbould indirectly be the cause of making her unhappy.
I received tbis morning a long letter from my darling Ellen. My own
darling is still very loav spirited, and sbe upbraids me greatly for not
writing more freely tban I do. lam sure I occupy every spare mo-
ment in Avriting eitber in my diary or to her. Poor dear cbild Ido so
pity her. Sbe says I must be happy witb all my pleasant surround-
iugs. Dear girl, could you only read my heart and soul you would see
nothing but blank despair. I don’t know how it is, but I seem to get
more despondent every day. Ob, my Ellen, I call on thee and tbou
answered not, Mr. Defries, Avben I was out Avith bim, spoke to me
about our afiair. He said tbat be knew more about us tban Ave
imagined—tbat be had Avatcbed us all along, and tbat be thougbt it bis
duty to speak to me on tbe subject. What l imagine is tbis—tbat eitber
Mrs. Robertson or Jane bave biuted something to bim of what they
knoAV. I thougbt it best to bear Avbat be had to say so tbat I migbt
be on my guard. Ile knows tbe trutb of my love for Ellen, and also
tbat sbe loves me ; he almost knoAvs tbat I intended getting a divorce.
He begged of me almost on bis knees to try and love my wife. He
said tbat Ellen did only care forme for what use sbe could put me to,
and tbat sbe had said so openly; tbat he could teil me tbings tbat
would astound me—sufflcient to make me give up Ellen altogetber,
andnever see her again. I listened attentively to all he bad to say;
and Avben be bad fmished, he said tbat be feit forme as if be Avas my
brotber : he exborted me if I cared for my happiness in tbis world
and my eternal Avelfare in the next not tobe tempted by tbe Devil.
Mrs. Robertson is always talking in tbe sarae manner, so I tbink sbe
bas been speaking to bim about us. I intend to Avrite to my darling
JoA r e to-morrow. I broke Jane s fan in a passion. Mrs. Robertson
said sbe Avould Avrite to Ellen soon, in answer to my question wbether
sbe had Avritten. About a quarter-past 1 sbe Avas well enougb to go
bome, so, as it Avas so very late, although J ohn was Avith her, I could
not let her go home alone under bis protection. I accordingly took her
bome, and Avben we got there I AA r as so tired and Avorn out myself tbat
I was obliged to lie doAvn, late as it Avas, on the sofa. I remained
until a quarter past 2, and then had a glass of gin and water to revive
me for my homeward journey. I can assure you it was no joke at first,
tbis walking such a long distance, tired as I was. I Avas too tired to
write in my diary, so Avrote tbis Sunday aflernoon. Oh, my Ellen, my
dear love do, do come to me ! what am I fit for witbout thee ? Har-
riette beard from her husband, and he wants her to go to bim at once.
lam going to keep her until the end of next week, as I bave her
mouth to put to rights. He seems tobe getting on better, and bas
already something to do —some sbops to put up. Ido bope tbey may
get on. As for my aftairs, I do not know in tbe least bow I am to
get on. I bave tbat bill of £25 12s, Bd. to meet on tbe 30th of tbis
montb, and it is now the lltb, and I bave not a penny towards it as
yct. I sball try and get my creditors to let all tbe old accounts stand
over and pay for everything as we get it in tbe future, Tbat is the


only way. I suppose I must go insolvent. 1 trust that I may not
have occasion to do so. Defrics asked me before he left to go over
and breakfast with him to-morroAv, and afterwards go to church at St.
Leonard's, which I intend doing. I guess that he wants to talk with
me about Ellen, Well, Ido not remember anything now worthy of
notice during this day, so will draw to an end. Adieu/ my
love; adieu my own one; bless thoe, and guard thoe from ail
ill.—Louis.
The seventeenth day passed away. Sunday, November 12th.
Harriet awoke me at a quarter-past 8 o’clock, instead of 7 as I de-
sired, so I had to shave and dress in ahurry, a performance that I
object to infinitely. However, I got away from the house at near 9
and took a waterman’s boat over to North Shore. It was cloudy, and
looks for also very windy, the tide and wind were against ns, so
that it took tlve and twenty minutes to go acmss. There were no
busses running at that hour, so I made for Defrie’s house on foot. It
was then nearly half-past 9, and the appointed time for breakfast was
that at the very latest. To make matters worse, instead of going by
the road, I went the road through the bush that I went through on
one occasion with my darling dear Ellen. I sauntered leisurely along,
and a vision bright along with me. I recalled that happy walk. I
ouce more fancied she, the loved darling of my heart, was by my sido.
Oh God, what I suffer. Oh, this love is terrible, it will kill me, I
know it will. What excruciating agony, intense bitterness of the
past, all that I possess of brain, nerve, and sonl is devoted to this one
object of my life. When shall the endarrive. If need be, I will
willingly seil my sonl to Satan for thee, oh, my dear one. What is
the future to me or my salvation. Ido not Avant it unless my Ellen
share it with me. No, where she goes there I shall be found, no
matter what penalty I have to pay. I glory in ruining both body and
soul for the idol I Avorship and adore. Be she as wicked as Satan,
or as vile and Avily as the serpent, I, even I, Avill save her; avül raise
from the depth of hell. I feel this is in my power to do, or I
perish in the attempt. I, Ellen, e\ T en I, thy lover, Avicked as I am,
will be a Saviour to thee. Thon shalt bless and almost revere me for
what I shall do for thee. I shall be a beacon in this vacillating Avorld
of ours, to show Avhat the human will is capable of, and Avhat the
power of love can perform. Dear, sweet, loved Ellen, the more they
oppose us the greater will be my power of resistance. Poor fools, to
try and thAvart my will. I teil thee, all thou hast need of, God's help.
Indeed, if thou hast me for an enemy—l, Avho value human life as I
value weapons, tobe used Avhen required, and then thrown a\vay or
destroyed; some, of conrse, kept for future use, if necessary. Be-
ware! If I have my Avay in this, if I obtain this sole object of my
being, I feel that I shall be reclaimed; but if not, no matter from
what cause, Heaven help the worid, oh! I shall indeed be revenged,
What my brain conceives my hands can execute; but enough of this
for the present. I am furious on this one subject. Now to my ac-
count. In wandering, I strolled along until I got to Neutral Bay, for-
getting all about breakfast, and was only recalled to myself by it
coxnmenciug to rain rather heavily, I then found how far I Avas out of
my way, and had a run for it. I mauaged to get to Defrie’s before I
got very Avet, and I found him, poor fellow, Avaiting breakfast, and
wondering what the deuce had kept me so late. lam sorry to say
that Mrs. Defries was taken very ill last night with an attack of slight
cholera ; in fact, she Avas in bed, and so I did not see her at all. After
breakfaat—-in fact, the moment we had finished—we went to church, as


tbe bells had commenced sometime, and we had a Httlo walk ; it was
raining slightly, bnt as we botb had umbrellas, it did not matter; it is
a pretty little church. 1 did not pay much attention to the sermou, beiug
occupied with my own thonghts. The very fact that Ellen, dear Ellen”
had been within thoso walls was sufficient food for
rny mind to ruminate on for hours. Defries rode down with
mo to the ferry and came over with me, and wcnt back by the
same boat, as I used to do with Kinder. It does seem so stränge—
not two months ago, and all this to have happened; I almost fancy it
is a dream, I had promiscd tobe home to dinner by 2 o’clock, as I
did not like leaving my sister all day. I forgot to mention that Mrs.
Eobertson had promxsed to come and dine with ns if she was well
enough. Of course, as it rained all day, she did not come, so am
nuable to state whether she is iil or not. I directly aftor dinner com-
menced to write, and continued to do so all the rest of the afternoon
and evening. Mr. Bellhouse called ou ns after dinner, and is going
to return this evening. Ido not feel at all inclined for society, and
in fact I have of late become indifferent to all and everything bnt the
one absorbing snbject that engrosses all my faculties. My own dear,
dear Ellen, my dearest love, what a great deal you will have to answer
for. I hope your dear back is broad tobe able to bear all this. It is
now past 8, and wo are about having tea. So I will not wind up this
day as yet until all are gone to bed as usual. I told Lewellyn to teil
Mr. Wood, if he saw him, to come up to-night, as ho called twice this
morning when I was out, and no one saw him. I hope he will come,
as I want to see him, By and by lam also going to write to answer
my lovey’s dear letter. God send I may comfort her. lam wretched,
lam so morose. lam perfectly disgusted with myself and everyone
eise around me. lam sorry for that, as I know it makes dear Harri-
ette very unhappy to see me thus. But what am Itodo ? I oannot
help myself. I did not make my own nature ; and if I suffer, I can’t
help showing it. Mr. Wood came in while we were at tea. He
charmed me a little. He has decided |on going to New Zealand, but
before he goes he would like Ellen and Mrs. Wood to come and open
business in Sydney, to take a small shop as a beginning. I should like
that greatly, as I am sure they would do well, at any rate better than
they do at Bathurst. He just told me as I was going to write to mention
this in my letter to Ellen, He is going to write to Mrs. Wood to-mor-
row himself to hear what she thinks of this plan. Now, lam going to
begin my letters. So good-bye my faithful diary, my mirror, in which
I see the reflection of every thought. Adieu !—Louis.—Eighteen
days gone.”
“Monday, November 13th.—Eose in good time, took out two or
three teeth, did no further business to-day. About half-past 1
Deffries called as he had promised, and said that he was going to see
Mrs. Eobertson. We made him stay to dinner until about 3 o’clock.
I recived a letter from my darling love. She is well, she wrote in
answer to my letter telling her of the hotel business. I also wrote to
Ellen to-day a long letter, telling her that we could not as yet take
an hotel, but that papa proposed for them to come to Sydney. I
do hope and pray that that may come to pass, as I really do not know
what I shall do if my darling is away much longer. At about 4
o’clock Mrs. Eobertson came ; of course we did not expect her, as
Deffries said she expocted him. So we missed her. Harriette, Jane,
and Mrs. Eobertson went for a walk in the gardens, and as I was
waiting at home for a patient, I decided to remain at home for Deffries,
as he said ho would call on his way home. He came and took Agnes


nway with him. Afterwards I went to meet tlae ladies, and we then
went and had ices in Pitt-street before coming home. After tea we
played whist—Mrs. Robertson was my partner, as there was a debt
that had tobe worked off, for we played for money. At half-past II
she left. I accompanied her home, and as it was a fine night we
walked the whole distance. I stayed nearly an hour with her in con-
versation about my Ellen. She advised me, if I cared for myself and
my friends, to havo nothing at all to do with Ellen, and she said,
moreover, that she never could admit Mrs. Kinder into her house or
friendship after what she knew of her. She also told me that she
heard something said between ns that was disgraceful, and that she
staid np three hours, telling Ellen abont it. öf conrse I must make
her revoke those ideas, as I intend to make use of Mrs. Robertson.
Deffries has also been trying all ho can to set me against Ellen. Poor
denn one, it only shows me all the more how necessary is my love to
her. Dear, dear child, Ido trust that she is früh' penitent for what
she has done, and that with me she will be in future a truly good and
virtuous woman. lam sure of her, fornuich as I love her, she should
die the morn ent she did wrong ; even a thonght or look, with what I
know, would be sufficient to make me do it. Why do people try and
torture me thus, God knows I havo misery and wretchedness enough
without this. Oh, Ellen ! it is indeed a lottery, whether wewill draw
happiness or blank despair. lam prepared for the very worst, and
God help the world if this my forlorn hope fails. I feel depressed,
terribly depressed in spirit, to hear these accusations against my
own darling love. To hear her spoken of as being bad, almost as bad
as it is possible tobe, is sufficient to upset my intellect. They teil me
that she went into Deffries’ bedroom, and sat ön his bed for three
hours until Mrs. Deffries had to turn her out. Oh, my God ! I must
bo mad to listen to or repeat such things, but I seemed spell-bound at
the time, and seemed to take a morbid delight in being miserable. I
cannot account for it in any other way. Ellen, my dear, own dear
love, I must be near you. I want to look in those dear wicked eyes—
and I know they cannot, will not, deceive me ; and yet I am, to a
certain extent, blinded by passion, and she knows it. But lam unlike
other men, and she knows what to expect, if I have, like others, cause
to repent what I have done—l must drop this painful subject or I shall
be ill—it will unman me —unfit me for the battle I am fighting,
Enough excitement of mind for onc day. Adieu, my thoughts.
Adieu, my own Ellen, —Louis. Nineteenth day since I commenced
this.”
“ Tuesday, November 14th, 1865, —I forgot to mention yesterday
that Defries came to Say that they would come and spend the day
with us to day. 1 was not busy, so went to see Layard at 1 o'clock.
Luckily, he was at home. We arranged about Palmer’s money. He
has paid altogether about £35 : and the balance of my share as yet is
tobe £l2 10s., which lam to have to-morrow. I spoke to Layard
about taking an hotel for Ellen—in fact, for myself—so that if my
business is injured by the Kinder afiair I shall have something to fall
back upon. I have the offer of two very nice ones, and am undecided
which of the two would suit me. In fact, my plan is this—to take
the place for myself and put my darling in it, forme in her name.
Mr. Wood will manage the afiair, and if we so erränge that if any-
thing happened to Mr. Wood, it would not affect us. Also, as it will
be mine, 1 shall have everything in my power, and both Ellen and I
will be independent of every one. I stayed and dined with Layard,
and as 1 had ordered our dinner by half-past 2 I appointed to meet


him at 4 o’clock. Wben I returned from bis bouse, I found Mrs.
Eobertson waiting, but tlie Deffrie’s bad not tben come; tbey soon
came, and we bad a very agreeable dinner. Directly alter dinner,
Layard called in tbe dogcart forme; went and saw botb tbe botels—
tbey are very nice ones ; I came home alone, and wbile wo were at
tea, Mr. Wood came. I told him bow tbings were going on, and he
seemed deligbted at tbe prospect of such luck. He sbowed me a
letter be bad written to Ellen, telling her ol bis going to New Zealand
and of tbeir coming to Sydney, of course, tben, be was not aware of
wbat I bad been doing. I intend to write to my love to-morrow,
tbat is if I come to any decision about tbis hotel busmess. Afterwards
we play vingt-un until late. I saw Mrs. Eobertson bome, and was in
bed uy 2 o’clock —tbat was early forme. Now I am sure, tired as I
am, I shall not sleep, as I bave so mucb to tbink about. Adieu, my
Ellen, my tbougbts are constantly directed to tbee.—Louis. Twenty
days gone.” , ,
“ Wednesday, November 15tb, 1865.—Busy m tbe worksbop
finisbing tbe set of teeth for Miss Horneybrook, as I want tbe money
for it. Went to Layard about tbe botel, I do not know wbat to tbink
of it, or wbat to decide upon. I sbould like to haye tbe Eailway botel,
as it is nearer town. Mr. Wood seems so undecided about tbe afiau
tbat lam afraid I sball bave to act independently of bim. Ho docs
not seem tobe at all grateful for wbat I bave done, or tbe tfouble
and anxiety tbe business causes me. At 3 o’clock tbe ladies iveut
witb tbeir babies to spend tbe afternoon _at Mrs. Eobertson s. I
went out there at 6to tea. We played wbist and lost. I and Mis.
Eobertson lost 3s. eacb, Jane and Harriette being Partners. lam
to see Layard at 10 to-morrow. It being late, and me bavmg a
bad foot, Mrs. Eobertson kindly pressed us to stay all night, wbicb
we did. I was very unwell, and botb Jane and Mrs. E. were kept
up until past 4. However, we slept late, and bad a nice cold batb
whicli put nie all to rigbts. I leffc tbere at 11 o clock, Icaving
Harriette and Jane to come bome later. Tweuty-first day.
(( Thursday, November 16tb, 1865.—AVhen I came to town 1
found two letters for me—one from Mr. Tidemanu, saying tbat be
was insolvent, so tbat is a loss ol £9 tbat I depended on; tbc otbei
from my darling Ellen. It is a ratber peculiar one. I called alter
I cbanged my sbirt, on Layard. It appears tbat Mr. v» ood, con-
trary to my instructions, bad humbugged witb tbe peoplo at tbc
botel, and spoilt all. The womau wanted _ nearly £2OO more to-day
wben sbe tbougbt so many people were after it; and lam sure Ido not
know bow to manage it at all, as 1 bave no money wbatevor, I bow-
ovor, will not give up tbe idea, an I am sure, dear Eilen would do
well witb me. After I came frcm Layard, Mr. Wood called and
said if he could not bave tbe botel altogether, be wo Ad go
down at once to New Zealand, and write for all tbe family to come
afterwards to bim; be bas acted m a sbameful manncr to
me, after wbat I bave done. I see tbrougb it all; be wunts to
trade witb my love for bis daugbter, and so make me do all 1 can
for bim. On tbat account, God bclp tbat old man if be flies in my
face lam bis matcb, and I tbink be knows it. Well, be said tbat
be would not let Ellen come to. Sydney, and tbat be would write to
her forbidding her to come. Let bim do so, I tio not care; sbe is bei
own mistress, und <is forme Ido not care a damn for any one in tlie
world. lamin a wretched temper all to-day. At dinner time Mr.
Defries called, and said tbat be was going to tbe Glebe. At 5 Jane
pnd my sister returned, bringing Mrs, Eobertson witb tbem ; ehe


stayed tili 11 o’clock. I saw lier bome, as it is very late I must weary
oftliisday. lam ratber annoyed at tlie liotcl. I might not liavc
such a chauce over agaiu.—Twenty-two days gone.’’
“Friday, November 17th.—Went to Layard’s at 10, to hear what
was decided about tbe hotel, and found tbat I could not have it at all,
as the woman had been tampered with by Mr. Wood. Tbat is unfor-
tnnate, as I would bave preferred tbat one. However, it is gone and
cannot be helped. I did no business at all to-day. In tbe evening
alter tea we went out to tbe Glebe, and stayed tili past 1 o’clock. Mr.
Deffries camc late and slept there all night. In coming bomo Harri-
ette’s boot hurt her so mncb tbat we could not proceed at all, and as it
was too late for any sort of conveyance, I tbongbt of tbe expedient of
taking off my own boot and lettiug her wear it, so I walked from
Christ Churcb to Wynyard-square barefoot. I can bardly put my
foot to tbe ground, it is so paiuful, lam anxious to hear from Ellen
in auswcr to my last note, I cannot call it a letter. Adieu, my loved
one, adieu.—Louis. Twenty-third day gone.”
“ Saturday, November 18th, 1865.—Had an appointmcnt at 10,
and as we werc up late did not get any breakfast until 12 o’clock. I
bad to meet Layard to decide what was best tobe done, and alter con-
sidering all tbings, I bave taken tbe Univcrsity Hotel, and intern! to-
morrow to wiite Ellen tbe wbolo trutb of tbe matter, and if sbe de-
cides on coming down at once, I am sure we shall botb of ns make
money, besides being able to see eacb otber so often; I will keep Mrs.
King as barmaid, as sbe understauds tbe wbole business of tbe place,
and besidcs, my dear love will be saved not only work and troubly, but
also a great deal of unpleusantness. Layard will join me in tbe busi-
ness, and of course, alter a time, if we get on, we can take a better
bouse nearer town. I went to all tbe rest of my creditors to-day, and
tbey all acted very kindly to me, and none of tbera will trouble me at
all for tbis money. I am sure it is very good of tbem, as it relieves me
from a great anuoyauce at present, as all I bave to obtain for immedi-
ate nse at once is £ll reut and tbe bill of £25 12s. Bd. Abuot tbe bill, I
du not know wbere I can find money for it, as I bave none. However,
I never stuck yet for an idea, and am not likely to do so at present. At
balf-past 3 Mrs. Eobertson came to go with Jane and my sister to tbe
Gardens; as tbey werc not ready to go until 4, I dressed myself and
accompanied tbem : tbere w r ere a wretebed lot of people tbcre, wbicb
quite disgusted me. We came bome at about 7 o’clock to tea, aud
tben went up stairs, with the Intention of playing cards, but Mrs.
Eobertson w r as taken very ill indeed, aud so we did notbmg. At 11
sbe went bome; I rode with her, and wandered back—tbat is tbe
events of to-day. I am awfully tired out. Adieu, I am sure Ido
not know what to say to Ellen, or 1 whetber had better go to Bathiust
to fetcb her. Louis.—Twenty-four days gone.’b:
Caxt-n Stcaui Machiue l’iijitiiig Olive, H 6, Pitt-atrect, Sydney


BERTRAND’S TRIAL, at the CRIMINÄL COURT.
BEFOEE HIS HONOE THE CHIEF JUSTICE.
The prisoner being asked if he had anything to say why sentence
should not be passed upon him, made the following statement; his
voice betraying no trepidation, and perhaps only a natura,! weakness.
Although ably defended by Mr. Dalley and others acting in my behalf,
I still have to call your honoris attention to the fact that throughout
the defence no evidence had been taken to prove that Kinder had inti-
mated his intention or threatened in any way to take ms own hie.
This was an oversight by Mr. Dalley. Witnesses might have been
brought to prove that Kinder, shortly before his death, threatened to
shoot or drown himself, and stated that he had firearms, powder, and
shotiu the house with which he intended to do it. He was in such a
state of mind from nervous depression that he had to leave the bank.
I have lent him money until I told him I could do no more for him. He
was in siich difficulty that nothing in his house belonged to him. This
letter iromNew Zealand pressed heavily upon him, and I have witnesses
who could prove not only that the letter was given into my hands, but
that it came from New Zealand; and it was quite sufficient tq upset the
mind of a man labouring under his embarrassments. Neither Mrs.
Kinder nor my wife were called, although they conld prove my inno-
cence. A certain amount of intelligence and ability is imputed to me,
and yet it is assumed that I would entrüst such a terrible secret to
women, who are known not tobe in the habit of keeping secrets. If I
could have poisoned him why should I have shot him. Then as to
the statements I made. I was in the habit of hearing jokes and jommg
in them very freely, with a great deal of nonsense, about the time of
prosecuting Jackson, as to shooting men and runningaway with their
wives, and itwas in jest that I told my sister what she has stated.
But by a kind of fatality, circumstances have been brought together
that make it almost evident that lam guilty. If I made confessions,
and my conscience pricked me, yet I denied them directly afterwards.
I have been fairly and impartially tried; but I do complain that the
Crown seemed seemed more intent upon taking my life than was war-
ranted to satisfy the ends of justice. If I die lam murdered, and in
spite of the decision of the twelve men who who have given this verdict,
I defy the world to say that there has been a murder. I dq not care for
life; all lam now interested in being to vindicate myself in justice to
my family. I have been unkind to my wife, maddened as I was by
love for this woman, and she never seemed satisfied with the mention
of my passion. I wrote that diary not intending it for the eyes of any-
body but herseif, and to gratify that romantic feeling which seemed to
be part of her very nature. The facts I mention can be proved. It is j
not the end of justice to take the lifeof an innocent man; its object must
be to satisfy society by acting upon the established truth of facts
either of innocence or guilt. I was in the habit of leading a loqse wild
life, and now, because of it, there is imputed to me a crime which was
never thought of before Jackosn alluded to it in his letter. We two
have discussed a marriage with Mrs. Kinder—two men of like charac-
ter. He said it was not impossible for him to marry her, but that
itwas forme. Mrs. Kinder attributed herhusband’s suidide to jealousy
of me, so that although I am not actually his murderer, I was the instru-
ment of his death. This pricked my conscience. Then I strove night
and day to tear myself from the fascination which seemed to beset me—
to repent of what I had done—and endeavoured tobe a better man.
This may he ridiculed after what has transpired. It seems tobe my
fate, and I am content to die. It is not death I'fear,‘but I desire justice.
The evidence on the inquest was given truthfully, on my honor as I
stand here. I did not wish to expose Mrs. Kinder —it was not required
that I should expose her character or my own, so as unnecessarily to
injoro either of us, I said, VTg tliö best </f try belief Kinder hau n& j
cause for the unkind way in which he treated her.” I was striving to ’
teach her to make herseif a good home. There is evidence of all that. \
It may be said that Mr. Woods was not called because he was interest-
ed, but I complain of the most unfair and most unjust manner in which 1
my case has been treated from the beginning to the end —the empörte i
statements at the Police Office having, in contravention of justice, been (
published and the whole case put before the public to make a Sensation, .
to this I attribute all the prejudice against me. Your honor is not an
interested party, and may have the means of ascertaining the truth of
what I have said, no evidence has been taken as to whether Kinder put "
himself out of the way ; but evidence is adduced to show that I had a
motive in getting rid of him, and therefore it is assumed I put him out
of the way.
His Honor said : It is no infrequent thing forme to hear protesta-
tions of innocence after conviction ; but I have never found it consis-
tent with duty, truth, or the interests of society to accord them any
serious consideration. Even under the gallows I have known their
innoc ence protested by men of whose guüt I have feit as certain as of
anything I have known personally myself, and whose guilt was demon-
strated by evidence so clear that no human being possessed of the
power of reason could doubt for an instant that the result arrived at
had been right. Of course these protestations with many persons go
for much, but by those with more experience, equal feeling, more
responsibility, who desire to see justice and nothing more, they really
pass unheeded. You are evidently a person of great ability, acute-
ness, and considerable cunning, with sufficient cleverness to seize upon
weak points and make them appear an excuse, which to reflecting
persons could be no palliation whatever, You say you are not afraid
to die, and I trust you are not, but believe me, that in the opinion of
a great majority of thinking men, wherever this evidence will go, you
ought not tobe allowed to hope forgiveness here. You say you desire
only to clear your character. For whose sake ? For the sake of your
wife and children ? Can it be possible that any human being that has
heard what has passed at this trial, who has read the diary, who knows
your intercourso with that abandoned woman, supposes that you
attempt to clear your character for the sake of your wife and children.
How can you, who hi the same breath, utter a falsehood, be believed
in this ? The jury having now pronounced their verdict, lam now at
liberty to look at other matters I did not think proper to refer to before.
I did not read one line of that to which lam now going to allude. I
was informed that Mrs. Kinder might possibly have been tried upon
evidence tobe given by your wife. Upon inquiry I then made, I
found that she had indeed given some infbrmation that she was stated
to have given to your own sister in a confession, but having been per-
mitted to see you, I believe she has receded from it. [Prisoner: I have
never seen my wife since I have been in gaol.] Then it may be possi-
ble she has not receded from it. I shall feel myself called upon after
your address, to lay before the sublic that statement. If she was not
called as a witness, you must with the intelligence you possess, have
known that she could not be called. She has made a statement which
unless your sister is peijured, positively confirms the verdict of the
jury. [Prisoner: My sister is peijured.] Then the case displays
unparalleled wickedness, but this, the deepest in dye—that a sister, for
no object of her own, should falsely state that your own wife admitted
to her that you had shot Kinder. She may have some remains of affec-
tion for your children, and even for the character of their father, but
can I doubt that your sister spoke the truth when she said she heard
this extraordinary statement from you. I do not believe you are an
insane man, but a perfectly sane man would never have made the deola-
rations you have made; and I thoroughly believe your sister when she
related this: “I said to his wife, good God, has Henry really shot
him; ” and she answered, “Yes, he has.” Her details, too, are quite
consistent with my idea of the mode in which the deed was done. Can
any one doubt the guilt when a man is accused by wife and
sister, and their statement sustains and accords with all the probabili-
ties of the case? I hear your declaration with soitow and with
pain, but I place not the slightest dependence upon it. I
hrve a greater responsibility than the jury, and I declare to you
now, before God, I believe you thoroughly guilty, and I have uo more
doubt of it than that you are before me at this moment. When I first
heard the case I did entertain doubts, and I have lain awake hours
thinking over the various points involved, and determined if those
doubts were not removed not to try you again. But now I have not
the slightest doubt of your guilt, and I believe I can demonstrate to
any man that you are guilty. I think it utterly impossible for a
rational person to believe that that man shot himself. You say he had
intentions. I have had great experience in criminal trials, extending
over thirty-two years, and have tried perhaps more cases than any
Judge in any country, and I have never known a case clearer than
your own; nore have I known a single case in which a man who was
really determined to kill himself talked about it to his friends. If a
man talks ofcommitting suicide, it is almost a proof that he never in-
tends to take his life. Is there the slightest probability that without
any temptation and with his pipe in his mouth—having only half an
hour before been playing with his child, and just bought oysters for
his wife and given them to the servant to prepare for supper—this un-
fortunate man should, no pistol having been seen in his possession
about that time, go into the drawing-room in your presence, in the
presence of your wife and his own, and commit a bungling attempt at
suicide like that described by you. No person ever heard of such a
thing in the annals of crime. He might have been embarrassed and
addicted to drinking. Had he not been a drunkard, his wife probably
would not have been seduced by Jackson, and you would not have de-
bauched her. If drink did not give the temptation to crime by him, it
afforded opportunities for crime in others. All the records of Criminal
Courts show repeated instances of crime being committed through the
agency of drimkenness—the victim being a drunkard, and affording
opportunities for crime against himself. Ido not think Kinder was
drunk on that day, but whether drunk or sober it is inconceivable that
he could have intended to take his life in the bungling, stupid, incred-
ible mauner. Then I find you had every temptation, every
motive, for destroying him. You where madly in love with this
woman, with a passion eating into your vitals, and you would
have committed any crime to have her as your own.
Half mad I believe you tobe, for you never could have
talked as you did, unless there was a partial disturbance of
your mind—wild, eccentric, stränge, to an utterly unprecedented
degree, your mind was overshadowed by the influence this unhappy
woman had acquired over you. I hear you say that at the time of
writing to her the impassioned sentences, burning with love, you had
no other intent than to satisfy the cravings of her romantic feelings.
Why, you admit that you wrote them as a deep and abandoned hypo-
crite. Ido not believe it. I believe that maddened by the passion
of your attachment to her you did this terrible deed, and your State-
ments previous were tobe accounied for by the idea that in saying
his death was likely to occur, when it eventually took place, yet as
his friend would not be looked upon with suspicion. Ido not make
any excuses for Jackson: his conduct was extremely bad. But I feel
some sympathy for him, believing that hc spoke the truth. I think
he deserves punishment, but the law was never meant for a case like
his, but for persons who wrote threatening to accuse persons of crimes
they never committed, I am satisfied he believed what he said that
vOü did to kirn utter dark, mysterioas, dangerqus hints, and uaed
expressions justifying him in the belief that you intended to commit
the murder; and therefore I think the man should be pardoned.
He has had sufficient punishment for writing that imprudent letter.
A prudent man would say, “ I cannot prove the case against this
cunning person, and it will only involve me in ruin; but I know what
has taken place, it is horrible, and I will go to the police and let them
take what steps they choose.” Yet being in distress and trouble, he
said he would be silent if you gave him £2O, with which, probably, he
would have gone to New Zealand at once, and nothing would have been
heard of him. It was grossly wrong to harter away the interests of
justice in that manner. But he did not demand money by threatening
to accuse you of crime without having grounds for believing you com-
mitted it. You allude to what you call a prejudice against you, yet
you must see that it arises in an abhorrence of your proved crimes,
and which is the almost universal feeling of the country, and this
verdict will, I believe, be received with perfect approval. On this
trial there have been adduced two points making the case stronger than
before; and I am not surprised the previous jury should entertain
doubts. Now, I think there would be scarcely a dissentient voice
against a verdict of guilty. Nothing can pain a Judge so much as the
assumption that a verdict is unjust. I believe you tobe guilty, and I
shall feel deeper pain than I express if I thought there were anythmg
wron°- in the verdict, because lam satisfied you will suffci death I
am sure you deserve the verdict, and I am certain in my mind that it is
true. And when you talk about idle words, and complain of being
spoken of as a fiend, surely when one reads your journal, hears what is
said by your sister, by Mrs. Eobertson, by Burne, byßellhouse, andknows
why you invited this man to your house, all their testimony, uniting and
tending the same way, you cannot but be regarded as a fiend. You are
not a human being in feeling. I can speak of you with compassion,
because I do not think you are fully possessed of the mind that God
has been pleased to give to almost all of us. On that account alone
I feel some sympathy. It is distressing and sad that any father of a
family, a man that might be useful in his generation, should die on a
scaffold for a crime that makes human nature shudder. The sentence
is that you be taken hence to the place whence you came, and thence,
on a day tobe named by the Governor in Council, to the place of execu-
tion, and at that place tobe hanged tili your body be dead. If you
are to find mercy, as I hope you will, seek it elsewhere, but from no
human tribunal.
The prisoner asked if he might be permitted to see his wife. llis
Honor directed him to make any application of that kind to the feheriffj
but he hoped that that officer would be very cautious before complying
with the request.
MAEIA HELEN KINDEE.
With reference to the case of Maria Helen Kinder, his Honor said it
must either be discharged or proeeeded with, and unless Mrs. Bertrand
could give evidence it was plain that prisoner must be discharged. It
was impossible that her husband could have been poisoned. In a
newspaper article it was asked why Mrs. Kinder was not put upon her
trial; but he could not see any possibility of making out a case against
her. The counsel for the prisoner called his attention to this article,
with the intention on that ground to move for a postponement qf hei*
trial. Bertrand was convicted upon statements and confessions of his own
in connexion with certain circumstances, and these did not touch the case
of Mrs. Kinder. There was no hope of a conviction against her; and
she must be discharged.
After the usual proclamation of the Court.
His Honor said the only observation I have to make to you, Mrs»
Kinder, is that I hope you will quit this colony as soon as you can.
You are discharged.


MR. BERTRAN3X
MRS. - BERTRAND.
MR. N MRS. KINDER.


3 1508 00226279
f C Co fr\A


