

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
'■ U’ - vTT
Miscellaneous Pub’
Miscellaneous Publication, No. 241.
,
I '4
A CONTRIBUTION
TOWARDS A
OF MOUNT KOSCIUSKO
FLORA
J. H. MAIDEN,
Government Botanist and Dim tor of the Botanic
Garden *, Sydney.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, <
OVKRNMENT PRINTER,
1898.
. 15 1 «... * I .l' I■ H I I ':.,i. t .A I ** r..*JLI H I I ri‘ I H I
for Railway Construction .




PARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Miscellaneous Publication, No. 241.
A CONTRIBUTION
TOWARDS A
RA OF MOUNT KOSCIUSKO:
J. H. MAIDEN,
Government Botanist and Director of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
IYDNEY : WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1898.




FfAU S
From Agricultural Gazette of N. S. Wales.
July , 1898.
A Contribution towards a Flora of Mount
Kosciusko.
By J. H. MAIDEN,
Government Botanist and Director of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
Introductory.
Mount Kosciusko is tire highest mountain in Australia, being 7,328*
feet above the level of the sea. It is reached by train to Cooma (265
miles), thence by coach to Jindabyne, on the Snowy River (34 miles),
which is the starting-point whence ascents are made to the summit,
nearly 30 miles further on.
The coach drive from Cooma to Jindabyne was rather dusty, which
detracted somewhat from the pleasing scenery, but we had two
glorious experiences by way of compensation—one, the magnificent
view of the valley of the Snowy, with ranges in the distance, as we
descend into Jindabyne (the view reminding one at once of Piguenit’s
beautiful canvases); the other, a dip in the Snowy, cold even at mid-
summer, and the means of promptly transforming us from tired,
travel-stained wayfarers into vigorous athletes, ready to ascend
Kosciusko at a moment’s notice.
A good deal has been written in regard to “ How to get to Mount
Kosciusko.” I may remind inquirers of the admirable articles in the
Daily Telegraph of 18th December, 1897, entitled “ Kosciusko and
the Caves; how to go and what to take,” and also one on Christmas
Day last, by the Rev. J. Milne Curran, entitled “The Roof of
Australia,” written, of course, mainly from the geological point of
view. Then we have an article, full of information, in the Sydney
Morning Herald of 15th January last, entitled “ Christmas on
Kosciusko,” over initials thinly veiling the identity of “ R.R.Gr.,”
and the pamphlet published by the Railway Commissioners, entitled
“ The Snowy Mountains, and Mount Kosciusko.”
There is consequently no necessity for me to add to the literature
in this direction. The traveller cannot do better than put himself
in the hands of the Tourist Agency, Sydney. In the unlikely contin-
gency of additional information being required, I will supply it if
I can.
I intend to touch very lightly upon topographical detail; I would
advise my readers to peruse Mr. Helms’ account of the ascent ( see
* Mr. Ingleby informed me that he believed that this will be found to be below the
real height. In the Lands Department “ Map of the South-eastern portion of New
South Wales, showing the position of Kiandra” (1860, reproduced by photo-lithography
in 1881), we have the following spellings of places referred to by me in this paper :
Mount Kosciuszko, 7,300 ft. ; Cracembac River ; Jinderboine (a mountain after which
the present township is named). In the sketch map of the county of Wallace (Lands
Department), 1888, the height of Mount Kosciusko is given at 7,260 ft.


page 6). I have given a few notes on important places by the
way, and would suggest that it would be desirable to have (< height-
posts ” along the track for the information of tourists. If mile-posts
be erected at any future date, perhaps the approximate height above
sea-level could be stated on each post.
Distances from Jindabyne.
Some of these distances are liable to revision, as the guides differed
in regard to them :
Miles.
Crackenback 5
Sawpit Creek ... ... ... 9
Quartz Ridge ... ... ... ... ... 11£
Bee-tree Flat (so named after a bees’ nest in a snow-gum (Eucalyptus coriacea)
which was here for many years) ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Wilson’s Valley (after a man who camped here for many years) 12£
The Toll-bar (a facetious name for a bog in the scrub) ... ... ... ... 13
Boggy Plain (here we saw brombees or wild horses) ... ... ... ... 14
Harvey’s Yard (an old sheep-yard) ... ... ... ... 14£
Pretty Point (so called because of the glorious view from here) 15|
Thompson’s Flat or Plain (the first big plain after passing Pretty Point, from
which it is distant about 2 miles) ... ... ... ... 17|
Mouche’s Camp (after a nickname of Harry Wheatley, well-known on the
mountain) (lately christened Wragge’s Camp) ... ... ... ... 18
A scrubby sidling, then Prussian Flat ... ... 19
Taylor’s Swamp ... ... ... 20
Porcupine Mountain (a rugged ridge which forms a very prominent feature in
the landscape ; there is a trigonometrical station here) ... .. ... 2(H
Betts’ Camp (so called after Mr. Betts, who surveyed the mountain about
fifteen years ago) ... ... .. ... 22
Spencer’s Camp (a camp formed by Spencer Brothers for conveniently working
the tourist traffic and looking after the snow leases. We were informed
that it had been re-christened Duff’s Camp, in honor of Admiral Bridge’s
Flag-Lieutenant, who visited Mount Kosciusko last Christmas.) Our
party camped here ... ... ... ... 23
Burnt Yard Camp (there are no trees past this) ... ... ... 2.3 J
Rose’s Camp and Kangaroo Ridge (so called from a rock which presents a
startling resemblance to a kangaroo in the act of looking over his left
shoulder) ... ... ... ... ... ... 23^
Head of Snowy River ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
The Echo Rock (400 feet high). I believe the proper vernacular name is
“ Dead-horse Ridge” ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Cootapatamba Gap—Ascent to the highest peak of Mount Kosciusko (most
authorities to whom I have spoken believe this distance is understated)... 28
The grass land on the mountain approaching the summit is leased
annually to graziers, to whom are granted what are called “ snow-
leases/’ Above the tree-line one observes in conspicuous positions
vertical white posts 4or 5 feet high. These indicate the leases, which
extend so many miles or chains from the posts. Fences are unknown.
The grasses are nutritious, and are chiefly used for sheep and for the
mountain horses, without which man would be unable to tend sheep
or pursue any occupation in these lonely regions. Sheep cannot
usually be brought up the mountain much before Christmas, and the
weather generally becomes too severe for them before the end of
March, so that the lessees have, as a rule, only about three months’
grazing. Even during this short period the weather is frequently
severe, and sometimes dangerously so. For example, on the 27th
January, 1897 (in midsummer, be it remarked), at nearly 2,000 feet
below the summit, a blizzard destroyed every animal out of a flock of


600 sheep, and the shepherds had a narrow escape. The air is as
exhilarating as champagne, but that ic can be cold’in midsummer our
party had abundant testimony. The day I left camp (5,500 feet) for
the summit I had on the following garments : —Two suits of Jaeger
combinations, two pairs of woollen socks, two suits of clothes (one
suit very thick), a macintosh, and leggings. We arrived on the
summit about noon, and could not keep warm. The thermometer was
only 1| degree above freezing, and the searching south-westerly wind
seemed to blow through everything. Of course it has been far colder
since my visit, and the pluck of the meteorological observers, Messrs.
Bernard Ingleby and De Burgh Newth, cannot readily be realised.
To stay through the winter in the observatory on the summit must
necessitate much suffering, and I only trust that the scientific results
of their undertaking may be a sufficient set-off to so perilous an
enterprise.
Mount Kosciusko has been talked of as a sanatorium. At present I
very much doubt whether this will ever be realised. It cannot be
safely, or at all events, comfortably, dwelt upon (as a rule), for periods
sufficiently long to remunerate any hotel-keeper, and men who can
stand the climate require no sanatorium, for they are specimens of
healthy manhood. But to dash up and down again in a few days, as
we did, is a delicious experience. Of course there is no “ Hotel
Australia” near the summit, neither can the ascent be made in saloon
carriages, but there is everything else. It is impossible to view the
scenery without emotion. On the summit itself one sees-as far as the
eye can reach ranges of mountains succeeding each other until they
fade away in a distant horizon, and presenting the appearance of a
billowy ocean. Nearer to us are huge mountain masses, contemplation
of which irresistibly suggests to man his own insignificance. We
note the solitary grandeur of these peaks, the awfulness of the
abysmal valleys surrounding them, the placid lakes and tarns (some
of them of unknown depth), and view the stern, hard faces of the
rocks, which show scars and solid angles, the result of their contests
during the ages with the savage elements. We further observe that
these mountain tops and sides are not relieved with vegetation larger
and higher than dwarf, woody, clinging shrubs. The tout ensemble
affords a scene of an awe-inspiring character peculiarly its own. The
immensity of the views oppresses one. As one turns round, with but
little to obstruct the view at this height, the practically illimitable
panorama of mountain and valley is perplexing. It is grand, sublime,
ennobling ! It gives one a broader view of men and things. In
short, it is an education.
I have alluded to the lowness of the temperature, but besides this
one has to guard against the fogs to which the mountain is liable.
These fogs come on very suddenly, and frequently are so dense that
men who know the mountain well are unable to continue their journey.
In consequence they are much feared, and so the approach of a fog
is examined with eagerness, and “Push On !” is the watchword. Of
snowstorms on the mountain I know nothing; but newspaper accounts
show that they have recently been very severe. At the time of my


visit (January) there were immense snowdrifts remaining from the
falls of the preceding winter. I know it can rain there—stinging
rain, which peppered my face as if small pebbles were thrown at it;
cold rain, propelled by wind of high velocity, which made my face
glow again, and caused my horse to turn tail and prop his legs so as
to feel it as little as possible. In giving this account of the severities
of Mount Kosciusko weather, partly from experience and partly from
hearsay, I desire to hold the balance as evenly as possible—to exag-
gerate nothing. I desire to encourage people to ascend the mountain,
but they must go well prepared against the possible severities of the
weather. It is an ideal place for a concentrated holiday. Three days
on Mount Kosciusko is as much a change as a week spent in most
places.
In the clear, pure air one can see long distances, and its accoustio
properties are wonderful. So you must talk no secrets unless you are
(say) a couple of miles away from any person other than the one
whom you are addressing.
Although I have referred my readers who desire a description of
the mountain to the works mentioned in the Bibliography, I cannot
abstain from an allusion to Pretty Point. The height is about 5,500
feet, and here the view so opens out that we have a superb panorama
of the valley of the Snowy, and a clear view of Jindabyne—more
than 15 miles away, and (say) 2,500 feet below. There are views here
to satisfy for a long period the painter of pictures, whether he uses
words or the brush ; and on this little table-land, it seems to me,
should be the site of a mountain chalet, should it ever be considered
desirable to erect one. It is sufficiently below the summit to be
spared the severest rigours of the climate; there is plenty of com-
paratively flat ground for promenades, and it is not too far for a dash
to the summit. If the weather be unfavourable for upward travel,
visitors can obtain views here if they can obtain them anywhere. If
the weather be even too unfavourable for short walks, visitors to the
chalet could revel in the scenery —could bathe in it, and I imagine
that most people would not readily tire of it. The air here is delicious,
and pestilent microbes are dead as Julius Cassar, so that it is an ideal
place for people in search of rest and change of scene.
We observed several smouldering fires which had been started
either by shepherds burning off the grasses for feed, or by people
making camp-fires. I trust that increased care will be exercised in
keeping fires within limits, and in carefully extinguishing them when
done with, or else great and regrettable changes will ere long take
place in the charming and scientifically-interesting vegetation of the
mountain.
The lists which follow do not purport to be a flora of the Australian
Alps, which have now quite an extensive literature of their own, but
the beginning of a record of plants actually found on Mount Kosciusko
itself. Much more collecting requires to be done, for botanists have
mostly kept to the beaten tracks from causes beyond their control,
but I trust that each succeeding season will enable us to make large
additions to the list of plants.


It is difficult to state where Mount Kosciusko begins and ends, from
a botanical standpoint—to define it, in fact; and this definition must be
reserved until our knowledge of its vegetation becomes far more
extensive than it is at present.
As one ascends, the same species may change in appearance in
various ways :
1. It may become more stunted and appressed.
2. It may become more woolly.
3. The leaves and flowers may become smaller.
The effect of the elevation is noticed in the comparative lateness of
the flowering of many of the plants. Plants which are in full fruit,
say on the Crackenback River, for example, may only be in early
flower higher up.
A thing that the visitor cannot fail to notice is the profusion of
individuals of many species. Some of the shrubs, e.g., Phehalium
ovalifolium, Orites -lanceolata, and Prostanthera cuneata were in acre
patches. Then others, e.g., Oxylobium ellipticum, var. : Stackhousia
pulvinaris, Nertera depressa, Raoulia catipes, Pentachondra pumila,
Grevillea australis, Helichrysun rosmarinifolium, Kunzea Muelleri,
form dense mats sometimes several feet in diameter, some of them
clasping the rocks and boulders, following their outlines in a remarkable
manner.
Conspicuous in the swamps may be noticed Ranunculus, Richea
Gunnii, Stylidium graminifolium, Callistemon pityoides, Microseris
Forsteri, Aster Celmisia, Euphrasia, Epacris, whilem any of them are
cushioned in Sphagnum Moss.
The most obvious evidence of the paucity of traffic up the mountain
is that there appear to be no weeds (except Acsena sanguisorbse) after
the first thousand feet of ascent from Jindabyne. This plant is a
native of Australia, but it is introduced in many of its localities, being
diffused by means of the barbed fruiting-calyx which readily attaches
itself to passing objects.
We may expect other weeds to be conveyed in the tails of horses,
in human clothing, in the packing-cases for the Meteorological
Observatory, &c., but most of them will not readily take a hold unless
the ground is broken up for cultivation. Of course the tramp of the
hoofs of horses and road-making are setting up new conditions, and
weeds may take the place of some of the indigenous plants thus
disturbed, but I trust that this process will be very slow, and hence
Mount Kosciusko may be expected to be a paradise of the student of
Australian plants for many years to come. I also trust that there will
be as little artificial planting on the mountain as possible. It is
wicked to interfere with the most interesting vegetation which at
present clothes its sides.
My travelling companions were Mr. Herbert Carter, of the Sydney
Grammar School; Mr. Percy Shaw, of the Public Works Department;
and Mr. Quin, and a happy family we made. I cannot be too grateful
to these gentlemen for many kindnesses they showed me which
facilitated my work of collecting specimens and making observations.


Bibliography.
The following is a selection from the literature of Mount Kosciusko,
or the Australian Alps. It includes only references to botanical papers,
and to those which give an account of the topography of the country
in question.
Carter, H. J.
“On the Roof of Australia,” The Sydneian, Nos. cxli & cxlii. February and April,
1898. Anonymous, but I hope lam not betraying a confidence in announcing
the name of the author of these humorous articles.
Clarke, W. B.
“ Researches in the Southern Gold-fields of New South Wales”, Sydney, Reading
and Wellbank, 1860.
P. 231. Vegetation. Consists mainly of Mueller’s lists of plants collected by him on
the Muniong Ranges. The lists are :
1. Alpine plants common to Australia and Tasmania.
2. Exclusively Australian Alpine plants.
3. Alpine plants identical with European species.
4. A New Zealand species ( Veronica tetragona).
5. Plants founds on the Alps, chiefly on the Victorian side of the border.
At p. 234, there is a woodcut, entitled “ Western View of Kosciusko from Welaragang,
Hume River, in June, 1839, from a sketch by P. G. King, Esq.”
Curran, J. M.
“The Roof of Australia,” accompanied by a good map, Sydney Daily Telegraph,
25th December, 1897.
Curran, J. M.
On the evidence (so-called) of Glacier Action on Mount Kosciusko Plateau. Proc.
Linn. Soc., N.S. W. [2] xn, 796,
[This paper is, of course, a geological one. It is to be read in conjunction with those
of Dr. Lendenfeld and Mr. Helms. Attached to it are four excellent photographs of
Mount Kosciusko scenery].
Helms, R.
On the recently observed evidences of an extensive glacier action at Mount
Kosciusko Plateau. Proc. Linn. Soc., N.S. W. [2], vm, 349 (1893).
[This paper contains an excellent account of the country passed over during an ascent
from the Snowy River to Mount Kosciusko].
Helms, R.
“The Australian Alps, or Snowy Mountains.” Journ. Royal Geog. Soc., N.S. W.,
Vol. vi. No. 4 (October —December, 1896) and No. 5 (January—March, 1897). Contains
a list of plants found by Mr. Helms on the Mountain.
Lendenfeld, R. von.
“The Meteorology of Mount Kosciusko,” Proc. Linn. Soc., N.S. W., x, 39.
Lendenfeld, R. von.
“ The Glacial Period in Australia,” Proc. Linn. Soc., N.S. W., x, 44.
[The latter is accompanied by a drawing of the Mountain peaks in the vicinity of
Mount Kosciusko].
Maiden, J. H.
A list of plants collected by Mr. Richard Helms in the Australian Alps, February,
1893. Agric. Gaz. of N.S. W., v (December, 1894), 836.
[This is the list on which Mr. Helms’ list of the Flora in Proc. Geog. Soc., N.S. W. t
Vol. vi, pt, 5, is based].


Mueller, F.
Second General Report of the Government Botanist of the Vegetation of the Colony,
dated sth October, 1854 (ordered by the Council to be printed, 24th October,
1854).
[Contains references to an exploration in the Australian Alps. ]
Mueller, F.
Annual Report from the Government Botanist for the year 1854 (ordered by the
Council to be printed, 28th November, 1855).
[Contains an account of “ A Non-extensive Phytologic Exploration of the Australian
Alps].
Although Mount Kosciusko is not specially mentioned in these reports, Mueller was
probably on the mountain, and it is very probable that the plants noted in the Flora
Awitraliensis as having been collected on Mount Kosciusko, giving Mueller as the
authority, were collected on the second trip.
Stirling, J.
“Notes on the Rutacese of the Australian Alps.” Proc. Linn. Soc., N.S. W. [2], i,
1052.
[This paper contains references to some plants which will probably be found to occur
on Mount Kosciusko].
Stirling, J.
“Notes on the Physiography of the Western portion of the County of Croajin-
galong.” Proc. Roy. Soc., Viet. 1888.
[This paper incidentally includes some plants found on the Snowy River].
Stirling, J.
“Remarks on the Flora of the Australian Alps.” Southern Science vol. i
(Nos. 1-3), new series. Jan.-March, 1885.
[March No. “to be continued.” I have not seen a later number.]
Mr. Stirling’s observations usually refer to the ranges on the Victorian side of Mount
Kosciusko. He only refers twice to Mount Kosciusko by name. Many of the plants in
Mr. Stirling’s lists are, however, found on Mount Kosciusko, and doubtless some of the
others will be, but I have not recorded them on my list, as I deside to make no assump-
tions. The same remarks apply to Rev. W. B. Clarke’s list of Baron von Mueller’s
plants.
Jindabyne (Snowy River).
I do not claim first record of these plants, as most of them will be
found noted in the Flora Australiensis as having been collected on
some part of the course of the Snowy River. But, imperfect as my
list is, it will be found of interest to Kosciusko travellers as a record of
plants collected near that part of the Snowy River at Jindabyne, where
one begins the ascent of the mountain. They were all collected (unless
otherwise indicated) between the Public School and the Old Mill, and
on the left bank of the Snowy. The height above sea-level is about
3,000 feet, and probably some of the plants in Helms’ list recorded as
“ 3,000 feet ” were collected in the same place.
The plants in the neighbourhood of Jindabyne have been so eaten
down by sheep and cattle that it is difficult to get specimens, except
under shelter of granite boulders or on the banks of the river. There
are impenetrable thickets of briar {Rosa rubiginosa, L.) on the banks
of the Snowy, which are lined for a considerable distance with this
plant and tea-trees ( Leptospermum lanigerum and stellatum and
Bto chi a virgata, var.)


RANUNCULACE^E.
Clematis microphylla, DC. var. leptophylla , F. v. M.
RHAMNEiE.
Discaria australis, Hook.—A spiny, uncomfortable shrub.
LEGUMINOSiE.
Oxylohium ellipticum , R. Br. var. alpinum , Maiden and Betche.
Mirbelia oxylobioides, F.v.M.
Daviesia corymbosa, Sm. “ Hop-bush.” Glaucous and non-glaucous forms
commingle here. I had difficulty in collecting it on horseback, as my horse
ate it as fast as I pulled a twig towards me.
Psoralea adscendens , F.v.M. (a small purple-blossomed plant in the grass).
Acacia sicidiformis, A. Gunn. A prickly wattle, erect, and usually 3or 4
feet high. Mostly so gall-infested that it was difficult to bring away good
specimens.
Acacia penninervis , Sieb. (probably, as it was in leaf only). The narrow-
leaved form of the species. Bushy shrub of 10-15 feet.
Acacia pravissima, F.v.M. Amongst granite boulders on the banks of the
river. A handsome, bushy shrub of 10 feet, reminding one of A. armata, but
more graceful.
Acacia dealbata, Link. “ Silver Wattle.”
MYRTACE^E.
Bceckia virgata, Andr. var. polyandra. Distinguished from the normal
species chiefly by the numerous stamens (about twenty-five to above thirty) in
a continuous series as in Leptospermum, and by the flowers always occurring
singly in the axils, and not umbellate. Described by Maiden and Betche
before the Linnean Society of New South Wales, in March last.
Letospermum lanigerum, Sm.
Leptospermum stellatum, Cav.
(According to the Flora Australiensis , L. attenuatum, Sm., would be expected
in the district, but the characters are those of L. stellatum ). These three
plants (tea-trees) form dense scrubs on the banks of the river.
Eucalyptus stelhdata, Sieb. “ Green Gum,” owing to the appearance of the
bark, which contains much chlorophyll.
E. coriacea, A. Cunn. (White or Cabbage gum; Snow gum). This
eucalypt has the highest vertical range of any in the district. It will be
found to form the limit of tree vegetation on Mount Kosciusko.
E. amygdalina, Labill., Peppermint. The broad-suckered form (the var.
latifolia of Deane and Maiden). There have been big trees of this; I saw
stumps 4 feet in diameter. This tree also occurs at Crackenback, and for a few
miles up the mountain. Eucalypts (20-50 feet) form the prevailing arboreal
vegetation.
E. viminalis, Labill, “ White or Ribbony Gum.” A broad-suckered form
of the species, but otherwise with the habit and botanical characteristics of
the normal species. The fohage is very glaucous. The flowers are in threes,
and the foliage is drooping. The bark is smooth and falling off in ribbons.
There is no E. Stuartiana in the district, a species of course allied to the
present one. This tree also occurs at Crackenback, and further up the
mountain.


COMPOSITE.
Calotis glandulosa , F. v. M.
Cassinia aculeata, R. Br.
Helichrysum rosmarinifolium, Less. var. thyrsoideum. (Syn. Ozothamnus
thyrsoideus, DC.)
Helichrysum semipapposum , DC.—A pretty little yellow, spherical-headed
“ everlasting,” widely diffused in the Colony.
Erechtites arguta, DC.
EPACRIDEiE.
Epacris heteronema, Labill
SCROPHULARINE^E.
Gratiola peruviana , Linn.
POLYGONACEiE.
Polygonum prostratum, R. Br, (Forms mats in grass-land).
Rumex Brownii, Campd. (A Dock).
LABIATE.
Prostanthera linearis , R. Br. (A shrub, 3 feet high, near the Crackenback
River).
SANTALAOE^E.
Exocarpus stricta, R. Br. (White-fruited cherry-tree).
PROTEACE^E.
Lomatia longifolia, R. Br. With leaves entire, or only occasionally
slightly denticulate.
Hakea pugioni/ormis, Cav.
Grevillea lanigera, A. Cunn.
THYMELACE^E,
Pimelea glauca, R. Br.
Pimelea paucijiora, R. Br,
The latter species forms large bushes 6 feet high, most frequently occurring
singly.
NAIADES.
Potamogeton crispus, Linn. ; Potamogeton natans , Linn.—Water-plants,
with floating leaves, and found in many parts of the world in cool climates.
Found in the Snowy River.
GRAMINEiE.
Ilemarthia compressa, R. Br.
Pappophorum commune, F. v. M.
These were the only two grasses actually collected in flower, but of course
there are many others.


Sawpit Creek.
[So called because mountain ash was cut in the upper course of
the creek, several miles away.]
Sawpit Creek (or rather our crossing-place) is 9 miles on the track
up Mount Kosciusko. It is about 1,000 feet higher than Jindabyne.
We stayed there for lunch, and to spell the horses, remaining perhaps
two hours. It is quite a small creek, but has much vegetation along
its banks, and the scenery in the neighbourhood is very pretty.
Following are the plants I collected near the crossing-place, either
along the creek, or only a few yards distant from its banks. It is
difficult to give precise localities for most of the plants collected on
Kosciusko, and since the place is likely to be visited by most persons
who ascend the mountain, my list, imperfect as it is, will have some
educational value for tourists.
DILLENIACEiE.
llibhertia linearis , R. Br. var. obtusifolia.
RHAMNE^E.
Discaria australis, Hook. Usually the branches are reduced to mere
spines, and the leaves are sparse. In my specimens the leaves are plentiful
and broad, giving the plant an unusual appearance.
LEGUMIN OSHS.
Mirbelia oxylobioides, E.v.M.
Daviesia corymhosa, Sm. (the glaucous and non-glaucous forms referred to
on page 8).
Bossicea foliosa, A. Cunn (often commingled with the Mirbelia. We shall
see much of it as we further ascend).
Lotus corniculatus, Linn.
Acacia siculiformis , A. Cunn. Very common here.
Acacia vomeriformis, A. Cunn. Not common ; here are small plants a foot
high. The seeds are not mottled as figured in Hooker’s Flora of Tasmania.
ROSACEA.
Rubus parvifolius, Linn. The small native raspberry, which is not bad
eating. It scrambles along the ground or in the crevices of rocks.
MYRTAOEiE.
Leptospermum stellatum, Cav.
Leptospermum lanigerum, Sm.
Bceckia virgata, Audi 1 ., var. latifolia.
Bceckia Gunniana, Schau. var. latifolia.
Gallistemon pityoides, Miq. (Yellow flowering small bottle-brush.) —These
five plants foxun dense scrubs, making it difficult to approach the water of the
creek in most parts of its course.
Eucalyptus coriacea, A. Cunn.—At no great distaxxce from the creek we see
tx’ees occasionally 6 feet in diameter.
Eucalyptus viminalis , Labill.—The form already observed at Jindabyne.


RUBIACKffI.
Goprosma hirtella, Labill.
STYLIDE^E.
StyUdium graminifolium , Sw.—The well-known pink flowering “ Trigger-
plant.”
COMPOSITE.
Olearia alpicola, F.v.M. var.—An interesting form at present under con-
sideration.
Olearia Jloribunda, Benth.—A larger form than is observed higher up.
Ccdotis scabiosifolia, Sond. and F.v.M. var. integrifolia, F.v.M.
Brachycome ciliaris, Less.—One of the “ purple daisies,” of which there
are many on the mountain.
Podolepis longipedata, A. Gunn.
Helichrysum scorpioides, Labill.
ARALIACEiE.
Panax sambuci/olms, Sieb.
CAMP AX PLACED.
Wahlenbergia gracilis, DC.—The widely-diffused, variable Australian
Blue-bell.
EPACRIDEiE.
Brachylovna daphnoides, Benth.
Lissanthc montana, R. Br. (in fruit; new for N.S.W. See p. 19.)
Epacris heteronema, Labill.
SCROPHULARINEiE.
Veronica perfoliata, R. Br.
PROTEACEiE.
Grevillea lanigera, A. Cunn.
Lomatia longifolia, R. Br.
Persoonia chamcepeuce, Lhot. “ Groundberry,” forming carpets ; bears
profusion of small yellow flowers.
Hakea pugioniformis, Cav. One of the so-called pin or needle-bushes.
THYMELACEJE.
Pimelea ligustrina, Labill.
Pimelea curviflora (1) (in early fruit).
SANTALACEiE.
Exocarpus stricla, R. Br.—“ Dwarf or white-fruited cherry.”
LILIACEiE.
Arlhropodium paniculatura, R. Br.
GRAMINEiE.
Poa cmpitosa, Forst.—“ Tussock Grass.”
Anthistiria ciliata, L.—“ Kangaroo Grass.”
Dichelachne crinata, Hk.—“ Long-hair Plume Grass.”
Echinopagon ovatus, Palis.—“ Beard Grass.”
Deyeuxia quadriseta, Kunth.
Hemarthria compressa, R. Br.—“ Mat Grass.”


From 4,000 to 5,500 feet (from Sawpit Creek upwards).
The 5,500 feet altitude will be found convenient in practice for years
to come as a record, as it is an important halting-place.
Henceforward the letters B, H, or M (one or more of them) will be
found after the name of each plant. B indicates Mr. Bauerlen’s
collection; H, Mr, Helms’; and M, my own. I cannot state the
height to affix to Mr. Bauerlen’s plants; but I believe them to be
5,500 feet to summit, and have placed them accordingly.
RANUNCULACEiE.
Clematis aristata, R. Br., H.
DILLENIACEAS.
Hibhertia linearis , R. Br., var. obtusi/olia, M.
M AGN OLIACEAS.
Drimys aromatica, F.v.M., —“Pepper-bush,” owing to the pungency of
its seeds, bark, &c., M.
CARY OPH YLLACE A 5.
Stellaria pungens, Brong., H.M.
HYPERICINEAE.
Hypericum japonicum, Thunb., H.
RUTACEAS.
Correa Lawrenciana , Hk., H.—One of the so-called “Native Fuchsias.”
LEGUMIN OSAE.
Oxylobium ellipticum, R. Br., var. alpinum (see p. 17.), M
Mirbelia oxylobioides, F.v.M., M.
Daviesia corymbosa, Sm., M.—“ Hop-bush.” Glaucous form.
Pultencea palacea, Willd., M.—A prickly shrub of about 4 feet.
Pultencea fasciculata, Benth. M.—A pretty little yellow or orange flowering
plant found under shelter of larger shrubs in swampy grass-land.
Bossicea foliosa, A. Cunn., M,—2 or 3 feet high.
Hovea longifolia, R. Br., M.
Lotus corniculatus , Linn., M.
Lotus australis , Andr., H.
The following are all wattles :
Acacia penninervis , Sieb., H.M.—“ Narrow-leaved Hickory.”
Acacia falcata, Willd, M.
Acacia siculi/ormis, A. Cunn., H.M.
Acacia oxycedrus , Sieb., H.
Acacia dealbata, Link., M.—Silver Wattle.
droseraoea:.
Drosera Arcturi, Hk., H.


MYRTACEiE.
Bceckia gunniana, Schauer, M.
Leptospermum stellatum, Cav., M.
Leptospermum lanigerum, Sm., H.
Kunzea Muelleri, Eenth., M.—A plant forming dense mats or masses,
sometimes several feet in diameter, and usually only a few inches high.
Flowers dull yellow,
Kunzea peduncular is, F. v. M., H.
Callistemon pity aides, Miq. M, •
Eucalyptus coriacea, A. Cunn., M., “ Snow Gum.”—The prevailing eucalypt
on the mountain.
Eucalyptus amygdalina, Labill., M., “Peppermint.”
Eucalyptus Sieheriana, F.v.M., M., “ Mountain Ash.”
Eucalyptus viminalis, Labill., M., “White Ribbony Gum.”
LYTHRARIE^E.
Lythrum salicaria, Linn., H,, “ Purple Loose-strife ”; in the bogs.
UMBELLIFER^E.
Oreomyrrhis andicola, Endl., M.
ARALIACEHC.
Panax sambucifolius, Sieb., M., with leaflets nearly linear, length about
1 inch and breadth inch.
RUBIACEiE.
Asperula oligantha, F.v.M.
Coprosma nitida, Hook, f., H.
COMPOSITE.
Olearia megalophylla, F.v.M., M.
Olearia myrsinoides, Labill., M.
Olearia stellulata, Labill., H.
Olearia iodochroa, F.v.M., H.M.
Calotis glandulosa, F.v.M., H.
Brachycome cardiocarpa , F.v.M., M., var. alpina.
Brachycome scapi/ormis, DC., M. ; up to 15 inches in height, and purple
flowers 1 £ inches across.
Brachycome stricta, D. C., M.
Brachycome ciliaris, Less., H.
Brachycome calocarpa, F.v.M., H,
Brachycomes are often called “ Daisies,” and the colour of their flowers is
usually purple.
Craspedia Kichea, Cass., M.
Cassinia longi/olia, R. Br., H.
Cassinia aculeata, R. Br., H. M.
Podolepis longipedata, A. Cunn., H., var. rohusta , Maiden and Betche, M
(See page 18).
Helichrysum apiculatum, DC., H.
Helichrysum semipapposum, DC., H. M.
Helichrysum rosmarini folium, Less., var. ericifolium, and var.
thyrsoideum , M.


Helichrysum baccharoides, F. v. M., H. M
Helipterum anthemoides, DC., H. M.
Erechtites arguta, DC., M.
Senecio australis, A. Rich., H.
Microseris Forsteri, Hk., H.
Picris hieracioides, Linn., H. M.
GOODENIAOEHk
Velleia paradoxa, E. Bp., H,
CAMPANULACE^E.
Lobelia purpurascens, R. Br., H.
EPACRIDE^E.
Brachyloma daphnoides, Benth., M.
Leucopogon juniperinus, R. Br., M.
Leucopogon Hookeri, Send., M. (See p. 19.)
Acrotriche serrulata, R. Br., M., “ Ground-berry.”
Epacris paludosa, R. Br., H.M.
Epacris serpillifolia, R. Br., M.
Epacris heteronema, Labill., M.
Richea Gunnii, Hook, f., M. About 1 foot high ; abundant in swamps.
CON YOL Y ULACEiE.
Convolvulus sepium, Linn,, H.
SCROPH CLARINET.
Veronica Derwentia, Andr., H.M. Amongst the granite boulders.
LABIATE.
Prostanthera cuneata , Benth., M.
PROTEACEJE.
Grevillea australis, R. Br., var., M.
Grevillea aquifolium, Meissn, H.
Lomatia longifolia, R. Br., H. M.
Hakea microcarpa , R. Br., M.
THYMELACEHS.
Pimelea glauca, R. Br., M.
Pimelea cdpina, F. v. M., M.
Pimelea axijiora, F. v. M., var. alpina, 5,000 feet (recorded as new for New
South Wales, Linnean Society of N.S.W., March, 1898. Previously recorded
from Victoria), M.
EUPHORBIACEHS.
Poranthera microphylla, Brong. H. M. (recorded under the name P. Drum-
mondii in Helms’ list).
santalaceh:.
Exocarpus stricta, R. Br., M.
Omphacomeria acerba , DO., M.


LILI ACE^E.
Dianella Tasmanica, Hk., H. M.
Bulbine bulbosa , Haw., H.
Arthropodium paniculatum, R. Br., H.
JUNCE^E.
Juncus planifolius, R. Br., M.
Juncus prismatocarpus, R. Br., H.
OYPERACEHC.
Carpha alpina, R. Br., M.
GRAMINEHS (Grasses).
Anthistiria ciliata, Linn., H. M.—“ Kangaroo Grass.”
Dichelachne crinita Hk., H. M.—“ Long Hair Plume Grass.
Deyeuxia Billardieri, Kunth., H.
Deschampsia cmspitosa, Beauv., El.
Trisetum subspicatum, Palis., M.
Danthonia penicillata , F. v. M., H.
Agropyrum scabrum , Palisot., M.
Agropyrum pectinatum, Palis., H.
FILICES (Ferns)
Gleichenia circinata, Sw., H.—“ Bead Fern.”
Lindsaya ? trichomanoides, Dryand, H.
Adiantum cethiopicum , Linn., H.— “Maiden-hair Fern.”
Cheilanthes tenuifolia , Sw., H.M.
Pteris aquilina, Linn., var. esculenla, H.—“ Bracken,”
Lomaria capensis, Willd., H.
Asplenium trichomanes, Linn., H.
Grammitis rutaifolia, R. Br,, H. M.
From 5,600 Feet to the Summit.
In Helms’ list all plants “ 5,500 feet ” have been placed in my
“ up to 5,500 feet ” list, and all plants recorded by him “ 5,500 feet ”
have been placed in my “ 5,500 feet to summit ” list.
Those marked * occur on the summit, or within a very few feet of it.
Where a plant is stated in the Flora Australiensis to have been
found on Mt. Kosciusko, with Mueller’s authority, I have put the
word “Mueller” before the letters B, H or M.
R ANUN CULACEiE.
Ranunculus Millani , F. v. M., H, M.
Ranunculus anemoneus, F. v. M., B. H. M
Ranunculus Gunnianus, Hook. B. H. M.
Ranunculus lappaceus, Sm., M.
Ranunculus Muelleri, Benth., H.
Ranunculus plebeius, R. Br., M.
Caltha introloba , F. v. M., B.
All these plants are found in bogs, or on the banks of creeks, or in the
watercourses themselves.


MAGNOLIACE^E.
Drimys aromatica, F. v. M., H.
CRUCIFERS.
Barbarea vulgaris , R. Br., B.
Cardamine parvijiora , Linn., B.
Gardamine dictyosperma, Hk., H.
YIOLACEHS.
Viola betoniccefolia, Sm., H.
POLYGALE^E.
Gomesperma retusum, Labill., B. H,
CARY OPHYLLEiE.
* Sclera I ithus mniaroides, F. v, M., M.
*Colobanthus subulatus, Hk., H, M.
Sagina procumbens , Linn., B.
Stellaria pungens, Brong., H. M.
Stellariajiaccida, Hk,, H. M.
PORT ULAC ACEHS.
*Claytonia australasica, Hk., B. H. M.
LINE^E.
Linum marginals , Cunn., H. “ Native Flax.”
GERANIACEHC
Geranium dissectum, Linn., H.
Pelargonium australe, Willd., H.
RUTACEiE.
Boronia algida , F. v. M., Mueller.
Phebalium squamulosum , var. alpinus. Syn. Eriostemon alpinus, F. v. M
“On Some of the Higher Peaks of the Australian Alps.” Stirling, op. cit.,
p. 1056.
Phebalium ovati/olium, F. v. M., M. (Probably the Eriostemon obovahs ?,
in leaf only, of Helms’ list.) Recorded also by Stirling, “ Rutacea? Aust.
Alps,” page 1056. Has dark-green foliage; is a flat-topped shrub of 3 feet
high, and forms enormous patches. I noticed some quite an acre in extent.
This, Prostanthera and Orites are of about the same height, in the greatest
profusion, and they often commingle.
Asterolasia trymalioides, F. v. M. (Syn. Eriostemon trymalioides, F. v. M).
“On the Granite of Mount Kosciusko, not below 5,000 feet.” Stirling,
“ Rutacea? Aust. Alps,” p. 1057 ; also Mueller.
STACKHOUSIEHC.
*Stackhousia pulvinaris, F. v. M. Forms carpets. B. H. M.


LEGIT MIN OS^E.
Oxylohium ellipticum, R. Br., var. alpinum, Maiden and Betche, described
before the Linneau Society of New Soutli Wales, March, 1898, M. Probably
the 0. alpestre of Helms’ list.
Pultencva fasciculata , Benth., B. H. M.
Bossicea foliosa, A. Cunn., H. M.
Hovea longifolia , R. Br., var. lanceolata, H. M.
ROSACEA.
Rubus parvifolius, Linn., H.
Alchemilla vulgaris , Bauh., H.
Accena sanguisorbce , Yahl., H. M. (a weed, although indigenous to the
Colony).
CRASSULACE^E,
Tillcea vulgaris , Heyne, H.
DROSERACEHS (Sun-dews).
Drosera peltata, Sm., B.
Dr user a Arcturi, Hk., Mueller, B. H.
HALORAGEiE.
Haloragis depressa, Walp., (a minute plant common in some bogs), M.
Haloragis micrantha, B.
MYRTACE^E.
Bceckia Gunniana, Schau., B. M.
Leptospermum lanigerum, Sm., H.
Kunzea Muelleri, Benth. {See p. 13), B. H. M.
Gallistemon pithyoides, Miq. M. ; the G. salignus, DC., var. Sieberi of
Helms’ list.
Gallistemon salignus , DC., H.
Eucalyptus coriacea, A. Cunn., B. H. M. The Snow Gum is a small-leaved
form of E. coriacea , resembling E. stellulata a good deal in leaf outline, and
might be mistaken for it. At low elevations it is a large tree ;as the moun-
tain is ascended it becomes smaller and smaller, till at length it becomes a dense
whip-stick scrub, and finally (at 6,000 feet, about) disappears altogether. It
forms the limit of tree vegetation. It is usually as glaucous as if it had been
sprinkled with flour, but not invariably so, and at the Jindabyne level it is
frequently scarcely glaucous.
Eucalyptus Gunnii, Hk., H.—“ Cider gum.”
ONAGRARIE^E.
Epilobium glabellum, R. Br., H.
UMBELLIFERyE.
Hydrocotyle hirta, R. Br., var. pusilla. Agrees well with the var. figured
in Hook., FI. Tas. , xxxiii (A), as H. vagans, Hook, f., H. M.
Azorella cunei/olia, F. v. M., B. H. M.
Azorella dichopetala, Benth., B. H. M.
Diplaspis ( Huanaca) hydrocotylea, Hook, f., B. H.
Oreomyrrhis andicola, Endl., var., B.


Oreomyrrhis pulvinifica, F. v. M., H.
Seseli algens, F. v. M., H.
Aciphylla simplicifolia, F. v. M., B. H.
*Aciphylla glacialis, F. v. M. The so-called “Celery plant,” conspicuous
with its spreading leaves in the grass-land. H. M.
RUBIACE^E.
Asperula oligantha , F. v. M. (with at least two forms, A. conferta, Hook, f.,
and A. Gunnii, Hook, f.) B. H. M.
*Nertera depressa, Banks. (Syn. Coprosma Nertera , F. v. M.) A dainty
little plant, forming carpet-like patches, with small spherical red fruits.
B. H. M.
Coprosma pumila, Hook, f., B. H.
COMPOSITE.
Olearia megalojihylla, F. v. M., B. H. M.
Olearia stellulata, Labill., H. M.
Olearia Jlorihunda, Benth., M.
Olearia iodochroa, F. v. M., H.
*Celmisia longifolia, Cass. A beautiful silvery-leaved plant. H. M.
Erigeron pappochroma, Labill., B. M.
Brachycome radicans, Steetz, H.
Brachycome scapigera, DC., H.
Brachycome decipiens, Hook., H.
* Brachycome nivalis, F. v. M., H. M. (Another plant, the ripe achenes not
seen, the young ones slightly winged.) M.
Brachycome scapiformis, DC. (Small form.) H. M.
Brachycome stricta, DC., H.
*Craspedia Richea, Cass. With orange-coloured flowers. B. H. M.
Cassinia aculeata, R. Br. Leaves longer and broader than those from
lower elevations. M.
*Podolepis longipedata, A. Cunn., var. robusta (Maiden and Betche). A
new variety described before the Linnean Society of N.S.W., March, 1898.
A handsome, stout, woolly form of this well-known yellow composite. M.
Perhaps the P. acuminata of Helms’ list, which is probably wrong.
Podolepis rugata , Labill., H.
Leptorrhynchus squamatus, Less. (The leaves woolly underneath.) H. M.
Helichrysum scorpioides, Labill. A woolly form. H. M.
Helichrysum rutidolepis, DC., H.
Helichrysum hracteatum, Willd. The ordinary yellow everlasting. H.
Helichrysum rosmarinifolium, Less., var. ericifolium (dense masses), M.
Mr. Bauerlen simply records 11. rosmarinifolium var.
Helichrysum rosmarinifolium, Less., var. thyrsoidem. There are three
forms (the intermediate one of which is dissimilar to the others at first sight).
At Jindabyne the leaves usually not exceeding | in., woolly underneath.
Absolutely matching specimens from Mount St. Bernard, Victoria.
Up to 5,500 feet, a looser form and larger plant, leaves exceptionally to
nearly 2 inches long, under surface not so woolly, upper surface more or less
glutinous. Matching New Norfolk (Tas.) specimens.
5,500 feet to summit not greatly dissimilar to Jindabyne specimens, perhaps
more woolly, even thickish, the stems being quite woolly and the inflorescence
more compact.
Helichrysum haccharoides, F. v. M., H. M.


*Helipterum incanum, DC., B. H. M.—One of the most beautiful of plants,
silvery white.
Helipterum anthemoides, DC., H.
*Raoulia Catipes , Hook., B. H. M.—Forms a dainty white or greyish
carpet, about an inch thick. A charming little plant.
Erechtites arguta, DC., M.
* Senecio pectinatus, DC., B. M.
*Senecio pectinatus , DC., H. M., var. pleiocephalus.
Senecio lautus , Forst., H,
Senecio Georgianus, DC., H.
STYLIDEiE.
Stylidium graminifolium , Sw., B. H. M., var. minor.
GOODEN lACEHC
Goodenia hederacea , Sm., H.
Sccevola Hookeri, F, v, M., B. H. M.
CAMPANULACEiE.
Wahlenbergia gracilis , DC., H.
EPACRIDEiE.
*Pentachondra ( Trochocarpa ) pumila, R. Br., B. H. M.
*Lissanthe montana , R. Br., M.—New for New South Wales. Proc.
Linnean Society of N.S.W., March, 1898. Previously recorded from Tas-
mania and Victoria. Found by me in flower near the summit, and in fruit
at Sawpit Creek. Mueller unites this species with Leucopogon Hookeri under
the name of Styphelia montana; but Mr. Betche and I have shown that this
is an erroneous view to take. It is perhaps the Lissanthe Hookeri of Helms’
list.
Leucopogon glacialis, Lindl,, H.
Monotoca elliptica, R. Br., H.
Epacris petrophila, Hk., H.
* Epacris mucronulata, R. Br., M.—New for New South Wales; previously
recorded from Tasmania. See Proc. Linnean Society of N.S.W., March, 1898.
It forms a scrubby growth of 1 to 2 feet up to nearly as high as the summit.
It is probably the E. paludosa of Helms’ list.
Epacris serpillifolia , R. Br., B. H.
*Richea Gunnii, Hook, f., B. H. M.
GENTIANEiE.
*Gentiana saxosa, F. v. M., H. M.—The flowers are white, with a tinge of
lavender, and delicately striped. Dries yellow.
SCROPHULARINEHi:.
* Euphrasia speciosa, R. Br., H.
* Euphrasia collina, R. Br., H. M.
* Euphrasia antarctica, Benth., B. H. M.
Veronica densifolia, F. v. M., Mueller.
Veronica Derwentia, Andr., H.
* Veronica nivea, Lindl., B. H. M.
LENTIBULARINE^E.
Utricularia dichotoma, Labill., H.


LABIATE.
Prostanthera cuneata, Benth., Mueller, B. H. M.—This forms dense scrubs
3 feet high. It is a very handsome plant, the dark-green foliage admirably
setting off the profusion of large, pale lavender flowers.
PLANTAGINE^E.
Plantago varia, R. Br., H.
Plantago Brownii , Rafin. (Syn. P. stellar is, F. v. M.), H.
Plantago Gunnii , H. K., B.
PARON CH YEiE.
Scleranthus biflorus, H. K., H.
POLYGONACE.E.
Rumex Brownii, Campd., H.
PROTEACEiE,
Grevillea australis, R. Br., var., apparently nearest to Hooker’s var. mon-
tana, FI. Tas., i. 322, B. H. M.
Grevillea Miqueliana, F.v.M., “ Above the Snow-line.” Received from
Rev. J. M. Curran. This plant is new to Hew South Wales, having hitherto
been recorded only from the Victorian side of the Alps.
Orites lancifolia, F. v. M.—A hard shrub of 3 feet high and spreading. It
forms large masses, B.H.M.
THYMELACEiE.
Pimelea ligustrina, Labill, var. hypericina, B. H. M,
Pimelea alpina, F. v. M., B. 11. M.
Pimelea axiflora, F. v. M., var. alpina, M.—New for New South Wales.
Recorded at meeting of Linnean Society N.S.W., March, 1898.
EUPHORBIACE^E
Poranthera microphylla, Brong., B. H. M.
SANTALACE^E.
Exocarpus humifusa, R. Br., B.
CONIFERS.
Podocarpus alpina, R. Br., B.
ORCHIDE^E.
* Prasophyllum ? fuscum, R. Br., M.
Prasophyllum patens, R, Br., H.
Thelymitra sp., B.
LILIACEiE.
Astelia alpina, R. Br., B, H. M.
JUNCEiE.
Juncus stipulaceus, Nees., B.
Juncus falcatus, E. Mey., H.
Luzula campestris, DC., B. H. M.


RESTIACEiE.
Restio australis, R. Br., H. M.—Two forms, one a very robust one.
Galnstrophus lateriflorus, Benth., H.
CYPERACEiE.
Scirpus crassiusculus, Hk., H.
Scirpus riparius, Spr,, B.
Scirpus cartilagineus, Spr., B,
Lipocarpa microcephala, R. Br., H.
Carpha alpina, R. Br., B. H. M.
Carex cephalotes, F. v. M., H.
Car ex echinata, Murr., H.
Carex? declinata, Boott, H.
Carex vulgaris, Fries., var. Gaudichaudiana, H.
Carex Buxbaumii, Vahl., H.
GRAMINEHS (Grasses).
Stipa pubescens, R. Br., H. —One of the “Spear Grasses.’
Agrostis scabra, Willd., H.
Agrostis venusta, Trin., H.
Deyeuxia quadriseta, Benth., H.
Deyeuxia minor, Benth., H.
Deyeuxia nivalis, Benth., H. M.
Deschampsia (Aira ) caespitosa, Beauv., B. H.
Trisetum subspicatum, Palis., H. M.
*Danthonia paucijiora, R. Br., M.
* Dantho nia robusta, F. v. M., Mueller, H. M.—This grows on the plains close
to the summit and for a thousand or two feet below. It is a coarse grass and
is known as Ribbony Grass. It reminds one strongly of “ Blady Grass ”
(Imperata arundinacea, Cyr.). Horses are very fond of it.
Poa ccespitosa, Forst., var. latifolia H.—“ Broad Tussock Grass.”
Schedonorus Hookerianus, Benth., B. H.
Agropyrum pectinatum, Palis., H.
Agropyrum scabrum, Pali sot., H.
LYCOPODIACE^E.
Lycopodium varium, R. Br., B.
Lycopodium clavatum, R. Br., H.
FILICES (Ferns).
Hymenophyllum Tunbridgense, Sm., B.
Lomaria alpina, Spreng., H. M.
Aspidium aculeatum, Sw., H. M.—Small form
Polypodium australe, Mett., var. alpicola, B. H
Woocfaia Icetovirens, Prent., B.
Sydney: William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—lBoB.




BOTANIC GARDENS,
SYDNEY, 189 ...r
$ wwA.
