

TASMANIA.
(VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.)
RETURN to an Address of The Honourable the House of Commons,
dated 28 April 1864 y—for.
A “ COPY of the Report of Mr. Gould, the Government Geologist, upon the
subject of Gold in the Colony of Van Diemen's Land , referred, to in the
last Report of the Governor of Tasmania , 1862.”
Colonial Office, "1
May 1864. J
C. FORTESCUE.
COPY of the Report of Mr. Gould , the Government Geologist, upon the
subject of Gold in the Colony of Van Diemen's Land, referred to in the last
Report of the Governor of Tasmania, 1862.
In enclosing the accompanying Map of Macquarie Harbour, and the country
round it, I must explain that it does not purpose to represent in detail their
geological structure, but only to express broadly the area which is occupied by
the various formations ; and that the remarks which follow are of a general cha-
racter, and not intended to enter into minutiae, which could only be supplied by a
much longer and more detailed survey than I have been able to'effect.
My conception of the general structure of that country is derived from an
examination of the north shore of Macquarie Harbour, and the course of the
Gordon River for 30 miles from its mouth ; a short distant of the courses of
the King’s and the Franklin Rivers, and the line of country between the Eldon
Ranges and the west coast.
Throughout this area, the upper Palaeozoic and Trappean formations, so
largely developed in the settled portions of the colony, are entirely absent, there
being nothing intervening between rocks, which I shall show to be of Silurian
age, and others of late Tertiary.
There are several marked divisions of the Silurian rocks, but their exact
sequence has not been determined, since a series of anticlinal axes, coursing to
the west of north and east of south, cause a repetition of the same members of
the formation in parallel zones and the existence of accompanying subordinate
contortions, conjointly with the absence of sections, render their relation
extremely obscure. The most prominent sub-formation consists of fossiliferous
limestones, the entire thickness of which, is probably not less than 1,000 feet.
It Is, in some cases, slightly argillaceous and thickly bedded; but ordinarily
compact and massive. It is jointed in a variety of directions, and the fissures
thus produced have frequently been re-filled by calcareous spar of stalactitic
origin.
Irregular fissures or veins containing calcareous spar and quartz also ramify
through it. These vary in thickness from a few inches or less to several
33i- A > , feet,


Orthoceratites
- 2
Lituites
- 1
Halysites -
- 1
Favosites -
- 2
Raphistoma
- 1
Orthis
- 1
Rhynconella
- 1
Euomphalus
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 2
Murchisonia
- 3
feet, and proved, in some instances, to contain galena or sulphuret of lead. The
spots where this was the case are indicated on the Map.
In the specimens obtained about four miles up the Franklin River, traces of
copper were also detected.
The following are the observations which I made at the last meeting of the
Royal Society, with regard to the fossils contained in this limestone :—“ In these
rocks fossils are abundant; they are only conspicuous, however, in that portion
of the beds exposed to the action of the running water. It is exceedingly diffi-
cult to ascertain their presence on\a fractured surface, although they may be
abundantly concealed in the specimens, and the ordinary atmospheric agencies
appear to simply disintegrate the rock, without causing the specimen to be
exposed in relief, as is the case with many of those upon the table. Hence it
follows that the ground for collecting fossils is limited to the surface of the rocks
between the level of the water and about 30 feet above it, —the greatest height
to which floods attain, as might be anticipated. The different beds or zones in
the formation are not equally fossiliferous, nor do they contain identical species,
one part being conspicuous for the abundance of corals, another of univalve
shells, &c., while a third is characterised by containing abundant fragments of
large chambered orthocerata, &c., &c. I shall briefly enumerate a few of the
most striking, characteristic, and best preserved forms:—
The collective evidence of these fossils is unmistakeable, —they are all Silu-
rian ; and some of them, especially the Raphistoma, and one species of Mur-
chisonia, are Lower Silurian types. The lithological character, and associations
of the strata, east and west (that is, across the strike) of this formation, is the
only evidence of their age (no fossils having yet been discovered in any other of
the group of formations comprised in the western country, except the Silurian
mudstones, &c., of the Eldon River). There can, however, be little doubt that
they are none of them later than Silurian, while some are evidently referable to
the very earliest epochs.”
These limestones appear to be identical with those at the Great Bend, and,
according to some specimens brought from Point Hibbs by Mr. Bennett, with
limestones existing there also. They occupy the course of the Gordon for about
seven miles, and are then succeeded by sandstones and grits rising from below
them, arching over an anticlinal axis, and then dipping again, so as to cause the
re-commencement of the limestone, at the junction of the Gordon and Franklin
Rivers, the courses of both of which it occupies for about six or seven miles.
The next division of importance, is a coarse conglomerate, consisting of quartz
pebbles, cemented by a siliceous matrix, which appears to be succeeded by
siliceous grits, and a variety of sandstones, micaceous mudstones, purple grits,
&c., streaked with quartz veins, and apparently passing down into clay slate,
quartzite, and micaceous schists. The conglomerate forms the most conspicuous
summits of the ranges, west of the King’s River; and my impression is, that the
white-topped rocky mountains running right down to the harbour, as well as the
Mount Direction Range, and the range visible half way between Pyramid Island
and the Frenchman’s Cap will prove also to consist of it. As far as one can
judge, this formation extends across in descending order, from the ford at the
King’s River towards the coast, the lower bed cropping in the course of the last
seven miles of the King’s River.
Mudstones,


Mudstones, resembling closely in lithological character those of the Eldon
Valley, crop out near the mouth of the Gordon ; while Head Quarter’s Island
affords sections of rock which I considered, upon lithological ground, to be the
equivalent of those at Fin gal. Steel gray and yellow clay slates, resembling
those of the Mersey district, occur both in the King and the Gordon Rivers, while
a gradual passage into the metamorphic rock is presented by the granular quart-
zites and micaceous schists, existing on the western side of the harbour, between
Wellington Head and the coast.
If we regard the limestones as the highest member of the series (as I think
we may), it follows that the whole tract of country, with the exception of that I
shall mention hereafter, is occupied by Silurian or metamorphic formations; and
that, in fact, the line of country between the Great Bend of the Gordon and
the west coast, presents every member of the series from, perhaps, Upper Silurian,
down to the metamorphic mica schists and quartzite,—which are represented
as forming, in great part, the range of the Frenchman’s Cap. It is reasonable to
anticipate that all of this may be auriferous, although to what extent it is impos-
sible to say. It is probable that some divisons of the formation may prove
richer than others ; and that hence the more valuable tracts will be found to lie
in zones, running in accordance with the prevalent strike in the direction from
20° to 30° W. of N., and E. of S.
I may point out that, in consequence of the structure of the western country,
any mineral discovery made in one part of it, would almost equally affect the
whole in this manner, —that, as the outcrop of any particular set of beds which
might prove to contain metal must extend in accordance with the strike more or
less to the north, and would probably be repeated in passing from east of west
by the series of parallel anticlinals which affect the country, a series of metalli-
ferous bands or zones of country would thus be found to exist running along its
entire length.
I feel no hesitation in stating my opinion of the importance of continuing,
as uninterruptedly as the. seasons will permit, the Geological Survey of this
portion of the colony. Without a continuous survey of that character, vague
supposition must always supersede authentic information, and the development
of what might possibly prove to be the most valuable portion of the island, be
left to the chance discoveries of casual investigation, in place of the more certain
experience of well-directed research.
It is possible that the hopeful anticipations with regard to it may not be
realized ; but surely it is at least well to know what is the structure, character,
and value of a district constituting a very large portion of the colony, w Inch is
at present almost as much a terra incognita as if it were situated at the South
Pole.
The Tertiary deposits to which I have referred are principally developed on
the north shore of the harbour, and for some miles up the Gordon River, forming
cliffs at many points of 70 or 80 feet in height, consisting of coarse sand rock,
and shales, largely impressed with leaves of existing plants, and containing
occasional thin seams of lignite, which have been the origin of reports of the
existence of coal there.
Raised beaches of loose quartz pebbles surmount them, and form elevated
plateaus of marsh land on the southern as well as upon the northern side of the
harbour.
As you are well aware of the difficulty that I experienced in exploring this
country, and of the Joss of time which unfavourable weather and other circum-
stances caused, and as, moreover, it is, I believe, your desire that I should
re-enter it during the coming summer, it will be unnecessary for me to give
other reasons for not entering into a more detailed description of the litho-
logical character of the various rocks, the more especially as detailed lithological
descriptions would in this instance be, to a great extent, valueless, from
being imperfect and unconnected ; the value of such descriptions depending
essentially upon their applying to a series of rocks of which the sequence had
been fully determined.
331- In


In fact, I consider myself as having taken only a j
country, and present this merely as the forestalment of a
preliminary glance at the
a report which will be the
result of a more detailed and comprehensive examination
I append a list of assays of quartz from various parts
the results of which are, I think, when considered in com
)arts of the western country,
connexion with the discovery
avour to show.
of drift gold, sufficiently encouraging, as I shall endeavour
Proportion
of Gold
per Ton.
Assayed by
Hodgson.
lbs. ozs.
Frenchman’s Cap
Base of Mount Arrowsmith
Between Frenchman’s Cap and Mount
Arrowsmith - - -
Collected by J. E. Calder, Surveyor General
Vein from S. W. slope of Mount Arrow-
smith ------
grains.
134-40
300-98
Quartzite, Port Davey
Micaceous Schist, Port Davey
Mixed with metallic iron.
1 6
These were brought down by Mr. Tully from the
Western Highlands of Tasmania, during his
expedition in search of Gold in the neighbour-
hood of Frenchman’s Cap, January to March
1859, sent to me from Hobart Town, and for-
warded by me to Mr. Hodgson, in Melbourne ;
the results, with the Gold produced, I forwarded,
with a Report, to the Gold Committee, 18th
June 1869. (For Mr. Tully’s Report and my
remarks thereon, see “ Hobart Town Gazette,”
No. 4098).
Eastern Slope of Mount Arrowsmith
Shaft under Frenchman’s Cap
Grotto Reef - - -
37 1
7 -
291-300
353-920
665-280
64-500
20-180
71-680
4 10
Calder’s Reef
44 6
High Reef -
Point Hibbs
23 0
22 2
Pebbles of Quartz from Macquarie
Harbour - - - - -
2-566
Reef No. 1, in the neighbourhood of
Lake Dixon - - - -
dwts. grs.
5 3
} Specimens collected by Mr. Gould in neighbour-
hood of Lake Dixon.
Reef, No. 2, ditto
6 10
Assayed by
Birkmyre.
lbs. ozs.
4 -
grains.
22 4
2 -
Top stratum (burnt Quartz)
Ditto (unburnt)
Lower Stratum (burnt)
Specimens collected by the Hon. J. Whyte,
. M.L.C., from the neighbourhood of Mount
Arrowsmith.
Quartz containing some rust of Iron -
, it is my desire to point out
to be very generally enter-
i remarking upon the results
remove a misapprehension,
of the
which
above
I have
analysis,
found t
have
tained, with regard to the character and value of these and similar determinations.
I am of course aware that, to the very many who appreciate them correctly,
this suggestion will be unnecessary. It will not, however, be the less useful
upon that account to those with whom it is otherwise ; and in them, at least, may
serve to produce a more accurate understanding of the principles upon which
quartz mining is to be undertaken, of the uncertainties attendant on it, and of the
value, either encouraging or disheartening, of statements regarding the prospect of
any proposed or newly established company.
It appears hardly possible that, in these days of gold-mining, educated people
should labour under the delusion (as from experience, I find some do) that the
assay, however correctly made of any small sample of quartz, should furnish infor-
mation as to the general richness of the reef from which that specimen had been
obtained, or, still further, of the auriferous character of the district in which the
reef exists.
Thus to condemn, off-hand, a reef because small samples, indiscriminately
obtained, yield small results, is simply absurd although not uncommon; much more
so is it therefore to condemn a district. It would be more satisfactory certainly
to have found a larger per-centage. It may not contain throughout an average
sufficient to render it payable; but, upon the other hand, it may : and, what is
more, the evidence, so far as it goes, and to those who understand how to inter-
pret it, is favourable to that supposition instead of adverse. Favourable to this
extent;
i
15
39
12
16
4
REPORT ON THE SUBJECT OF


extent; that, provided no error can have crept into the analysis, the reef is
proved to be auriferous, which is the first and most important step to be deter-
mined. Now the researches of geologists and the experience of miners have
proved that quartz reefs are merely mineral lodes, with nothing exceptional in
their character, save this, that the matrix or gangue is present in large proportion
to the useful mineral, and that the former is almost entirely quartz, the latter
gold. They appear to be subject to the same laws and to be indebted to the
same origin.
Thus, ordinary mineral veins, such as copper and lead lodes, are merely fissures
in rocks which have been subsequently filled up with mineral matter so as to
form lamelliform masses of irregular surface of ever-varying width and extent in
depth, with dislocations often accompanying the main lines of fracture, and having
a tendency to split and ramify in various directions.
These fractures, in anyone district, are either all approximately parallel in direc-
tion, or can be classified into sets in which the general direction is parallel according
as the forces which have produced them were synchronous, or in action at successive
periods ; and a local correspondence exists between the direction or age (for the
one indicating the other, the terms in this case are almost convertible) of the lode
and its mineral contents. Thus, for instance, in the mining district of Cornwall,
eight distinct sets of fissures have been noted, originated at different epochs, with,
in several of them, corresponding variation in general direction and contents ;
thus, while in one portion of the district, the right running veins (that is those
coming from E.N.E. to W.S.W.) contain zinc, copper, tin, the north and south
veins mostly furnish peroxide of iron and augentiferous galena.
A general parallelism of directions, viz., to E. and W,, may also be observed
between the lead lodes of Flintshire, between the mineral veins of Schemnitz, &c.
In fact, similar instances might be adduced from the study of most of the principal
European mining districts.
While the general nature of the contents of these lodes appears to be deter-
mined, to a considerable extent, by their direction, their poverty or richness is
equally influenced by a variety of conditions which would at first sight appear to
be less important. Variations in the kind of rock (country) traversed, in the
angle at which the lode dips, in the extent lo which it opens out, or is wrung up,
the falling in of leaders, or ft ibutary veins, either from the one hand or from ihe
other, or from both. The proximijty of dykes, the existence of faults, all influence
more or less the richness of the lode.
It is the miner’s art to study the subtle indication of such changes ; and some,
as for instance, the tributers of Cornwall, depend almost for the means of bare
existence upon the local skill they have acquired in recognising their approach,
and appreciating their value. Characteristics such as those I have described, are
more or less apparent in the quartz veins of this and neighbouring colonies.
Unity of direction, more especially, is common in many districts, and is strik-
ingly illustrated in sheets 9, 13, 14 of the Maps of the Geological Survey of
Victoria, devoted to the Castlemaine Gold Field, where some hundreds of quartz
reefs are laid down, all coursing slightly to the west of the north and east of south,
without a single instance of any great deviation from that direction.
Cross sections of almost any of the reefs in which extensive operations have
been conducted, would show a variation in respect of dimensions, similar and
equal to that presented by the more ordinary metalliferous deposits, while the
capriciousness with which, in the latter, the ore is distributed among the gangue
or matrix is paralleled in quartz reels by an uncertainty of occurrence of gold,
which frequently defies all calculation, although apparently the result of certain
leading principles, of a similar nature to those referred to above. It is obvious,
therefore, that the by no means uncommon impression of the homogeniety of
auriferous quartz is entirely incorrect, and that the assay of any individual speci-
men from a reef affords no information as to the value of the reef generally, since
another specimen taken from within a few inches of the first might, and probably
would, have yielded an entirely different result.
This being understood, it also follows that (even admitting the perfect accuracy
of the assays) no deductions upon the comparative value of the quartz from the
0.79. B various


various localities cited above can be made ; since, as in order to determine prac-
tically the value of either of the reefs, it would be necessary to obtain a variety of
samples from many different points in it, and pursue the method ordinarily adopted
for procuring average samples of ores generally. I should, perhaps, express my
meaning more clearly by stating that, while the positive evidence afforded by a
rich assay is encouraging, the negative results of a poorer one is not discouraging ;
this remark being understood to apply only to results of the assays of small
and individual samples, since the chances are perfectly equal, that the first might
have been in contact with a poorer, and the latter with a richer, quartz ; so that,
had there been a slight alteration in the positions from which the respective
samples were chosen, results exactly the reverse of the others might have been
obtained.
It follows that the well-authenticated occurrence of even a small proportion of
gold in any specimens of quartz from the Western Country is of great importance ;
for, as in all reefs the ratio of the richer to the poorer quartz is small, the chances
are proportionately less than any small sample selected, as those above must have
been, under circumstances of difficulty, and pretty much at hap-hazard, should
contain the maximum or even average yield of gold. It follows equally that too
great confidence must not be reposed in the favourable result of the richer samples,
which are, in fact, only samples of particular portions, and not of the entirety of
the lode.
Had the assays enumerated above been few in number and made at one time,
it would have been open to question whether some error might not have affected
the results —an error which one can easily imagine might occasionally occur in an
establishment devoted entirely to the metallurgy of gold, and in which there is the
possibility of some chance intermixture of that metal taking place.
But the number of specimens procured at different times from a variety of
localities, all yielding gold, ought, independently of the admitted ability of Mr.
Hodgson and concurrent testimony of Mr. Birkmyre, to render such an hypothesis
untenable, and forces us to look elsewhere for the explanation of the fact that,
although all these samples have proved to be auriferous, and in some instances
greatly so, no alluvial gold has been discovered by any of the prospecting parties
east of the Frenchman’s Cap. 1 may further remark that the discovery of drift
gold in the rivers flowing westward gives these assays, much more significance than
they held before, and it is therefore obviously important to verify or disprove them.
A suggestion has been made by the Rev. W. B. Clarke, that possibly gold may
exist in quartz in such a fine state of division as to be not readily detected by the
ordinary washing process. It is, however, merely a suggestion; and, without
strong confirmation, I should fsel disinclined to consider that, if gold existed at all
in quartz, it would not he collected under favourable circumstances into more con-
siderable and more conspicuous masses —preferring to suspect that the ill-success
of searching parties is attributable to the difficulties of exploration, which in the
Western Country I know to be enormous. This opinion being entertained
conditionally, of course, on the supposition of the correctness of the assays.
I think, therefore, we may fairly assume the desirability of further investigating
the Western Country; but how, and by whom, it can be done most effectually, is
a broad question for legislative consideration, on which 1 can only offer a few
suggestions, such, in fact, as might be made by any other person who had pos-
sessed the same advantages of visiting it.
The very considerable extent to which the Gordon River is navigable, renders
that one of the most important routes of access; a small craft being able to ascend,
without danger, to within a mile and a half of the junction of the Franklin River,
while a boat can easily be taken considerably beyond that point. As, moreover,
a good road exists via Hamilton to the Great Bend of the Gordon, and the line of
country existing between that point and the highest point of navigation upon that
river appears for the most part to be, although broken, free from scrub, it would
seem desirable to connect them by means of a track, available at least for pack-
horses, which would present the advantage of traversing the strike of all the
formation, while by it provisions might be readily carried into any part of the
country, which, upon further investigation, should appear to be the probably
original site of the drift-gold collected lower down.
The


The examination of the valley of the Franklin River could be most conveniently
effected by working upwards from its junction with the Gordon, which is within
a few miles of a spot where a provision depot could be permanently established.
Similarly, the drift gold already discovered in the King’s River could be most
effectually traced by following it up from the harbour. In the two latter instances,
a necessary preliminary would be the cutting tracks up the courses of the river
for the purposes of maintaining supplies. Mature consideration will be requisite
to determine whether, after facilities of communication have been thus provided,
the practical exploration of the country should be left entirely to private enter-
prise or undertaking wholly or in part by the Government. For as, even in well
determined auriferous districts, the slightest discouragement is frequently suffi-
cient to deter and send away a large proportion of prospectors, it is questionable
whether men of energy, determination, and patience will be found in sufficient
numbers to fairly test the value of a country presenting extraordinary difficulties ;
or rather, whether men possessing those valuable qualities would be willing to
devote their time and capital without some more substantial return in view than
is afforded by the speculative riches of an undeveloped gold-field, and this the
more especially as the locality, extent, and richness of the auriferous rocks
have yet to be determined, and great results, though possible, cannot be imme-
diately anticipated, since even a superficial examination of the Western Country
can hardly be effected in less than several years, upon account of the difficulties in
traversing it, which are enhanced by the peculiarities of the climate.
Upon the other hand, it must be remembered that, even under the closest
supervision, mere paid employees rarely work so thoroughly and energetically as
those who, depending on their own resources, and determined by their own free
will, are stimulated by well-founded anticipations of success. Whether the
further examination of the country traversed by the Gordon River (which I
should recommend to be made during the early spring) will warrant such
anticipations being held out, remains to be seen. At present it would be
uncandid to do so, the sum of our information being the knowledge of the
existence of drift gold in small quantities in lower parts of rivers flowing from
a country unexplored, but known to be in part occupied by Silurian rocks, and
there being strong grounds for believing it to be entirely so. This, while
sufficiently encouraging to a nation to make further investigation, is as yet
insufficiently so to the individual to make me advise great sacrifices of capital
or time.
I should be sorry to be misapprehended by working men, and to be the
means of their leaving employment and visiting the Western Country under
the impression that they are going to a ready-made gold-field ; if any go at all,
they must do so purely upon speculation. The gold-field has yet to be dis-
covered ; there are strong probabilities of its existence, and its locality can be
approximately defined by broad limits, but its extent and richness remain yet
to be determined.
The observations previously given upon the variable characters of mineral lodes,
and which were made with special reference to auriferous veins, apply equally to
the veins containing galena and traces of copper in the lower part of the Gordon.
It is questionable whether either of those discovered could be worked remunera-
tively, although possible that they might improve materially on being followed in ;
but the indication of the metalliferous character of the formation is none the less
valuable. It would, in fact, be unlikely that the richer portion of lodes should be
so exposed at the surface as to be discoverable upon a hasty inspection.
As tending to the discovery of workable lodes, I think that the strongest
inducement to settle should be held out by the Government, and the greatest
advantages offered to those willing to do so.
A resident population, emulous of advancing at once their own interest and that
of their district, constantly on the spot, and ready to avail themselves of leisure
moments to explore the ranges and gullies within reach, would evidently be more
likely to make discoveries than mere adventurers, who, entering the country for a
season only, find a large proportion of their time necessarily occupied in acquiring
a general knowledge of the country, in getting from part to part, and supplying
themselves with provisions.
0,79. c The


The inducements to settle are agricultural land and timber, both existing in
sufficient quantities to support a moderate population.
Here and there on the banks of the Gordon, for 30 miles of its course, are
small patches of alluvial land, mostly heavily timbered, but not more so than
other lands in the Colony which I have seen successfully cleared and brought
under cultivation. The same is the case on the Franklin River for at least half-
a-dozen miles, and probably further. Produce in each instance can be shipped
and conveyed down the river in flat-bottomed boats.
Pine, myrtle, and other ornamental woods, lightwood, and in some places gum,
abound on the banks of these rivers and their tributaries.
Extensive open marshes afford moderate pasture, and are probably susceptible
of the same improvement which is found to follow continuous burning and stock-
ing in other parts of the Colony.
I have, &c.
The Honourable the Colonial Secretary. (signed) Charles Gould .
8
REPORT ON GOLD IN TASMANIA.








TASMANI
(VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.)
COPY of the Report of Mr. Gould , the Govern-
ment Geologist, upon the subject of Gold in the
Colony of Van Diemen’s Land, referred to in the
last Report of the Governor of Tasmania , 1862.
{Mr. Rogers .)
Ordered, by The House of Commons, to be Printed,
27 May 1864.
[Price 6t/.]
Under 2 oz.
331.
