

A COMPLETE REPORT
OF THE
ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATlON
OF
H.R.H. PRINCE ALFRED;
TOGETHER WITH A
BIOGRAPHY AND PORTRAIT
OF THE
ASSASSIN O’FARRELL,
(from a photo, in Darlinghurst gaol)
And a Plan of the Scene of the Occurrence at Clontarf;
WITH FULL DETAILS OF THE EVIDENCE BROUGHT FORWARD
AT THE TRIAL, AS WELL AS THE ADDRESSES OF THE
COUNSEL, AND SUMMING UP OF THE JUDGE.
SYDNEY:
1868.




A COMPLETE REPORT
OF THE
ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION
OF
H.R.H. PRINCE ALFRED;
TOGETHER WITH A
BIOGRAPHY AND PORTRAIT
OF THE
ASSASSIN O’FARRELL,
(FROM A PHOTO TAKEN IN DARLINGHURST GAOL)
And a Plan of the Scene of the Occurrence at Clontarf;
WITH FULL DETAILS OF THE EVIDENCE BROUGHT FORWARD
AT THE TRIAL, AS WELL AS THE ADDRESSES OF THE
COUNSEL, AND SUMMING UP OF THE JUDGE.
SYDNEY:
1868.


H. J. O’FARRELL.


PREFACE.
The compiler of this pamphlet lays no claim to originality. The
admirable and succinct reports of the daily papers, have supplied him
with ample material, and it is now handed to the public in its present
form, under the belief that a complete record of this terrible calamity,
will be valued by many inhabitants of the Australian Colonies.
Sydney,
April , 1868.


1. Luncheon Rooms.
2. Royal Tent.
8. Band’s Tent,
OP CLONTAEF,
4. Cottage.
6. House.
0. Wharf.
7. Band.
S. Band.
9. Bowling tent.
10. Refreshment Saloon.
11. Fruit Tent.
12. Ths spot on which H.R.H. was shot,


THE
LATE ATTEMPT TO ASSASSINATE
H.R.H. PRINCE ALFRED.
SAILORS’ HOME PIO NIC.
Thursday, 12th March.
It will be recollected that in the middle of the year 1859 practical steps were
taken for the establishment of a Sailors’ Home in this port, and a public appeal
for funds was responded to by a large number of subscribers. The object was to
protect the interests of the seamen who upon coming ashore with hard-earned
wages were frequently victimised by unconscionable crimps, and taken to com-
fortless boarding houses, and often iniquitously eased of the result of years of
toil. The success which had attended similar institutions in the mother country
and in America was also an incentive to the formation of a Sailors’ Home in Syd-
ney. The funds having reached £l3OO, the Government, on application, granted
the piece of land on the western side of the Sydney Cove, near the site of the old
Water Police Station. Preferring the immediate construction of a suitable
building rather than the expenditure of a large amount in providing temporary
quarters, increased exertion was made, and in May, 1861, the foundation stone
of the first wing was laid by Lady Young. Of those who were active and zealous
in this good work might be mentioned the late much respected Captain North
(then Water Police Magistrate), Captain Pike, and Mr. R. Towns, among others
whose aid, though valuable, was less prominent. The Home was opened on the
Ist February, 1865, and up to the sth March, 1866, the number of seamen admitted
was 1146, and during that time the sum of money passed through the deposit
books amounted to £3251 9s. 2d. On the latter date there was £196 in hand.
The presence of so distinguished a sailor as His Royal Highness the Captain of
the Galatea, awakened an idea that the time was opportune for a fresh effort
towards completing the Home. The movement quickly assumed a business-like
shape ; an influential committee was organised, and a picnic was decided upon as
the most suitable mode of raising further funds in aid of the institution. To this
of course it was expected His Royal Highness Prince Alfred would give his
patronage and countenance. The honour was readily conceded, and this event
was looked forward to as one of the chief festivities in connexion with His Royal
Highness’s sojourn in the colony.
The locality fixed upon for thg fete was the picturesque spot known as Clontarf,
on the north shore of Middle Harbour—a spot on this occasion to be rendered ever
memorable by a deed of blood that will convulse popular feeling throughout the
colonies.
Ample accommodation for conveying visitors to and from the ground was pro-
vided, five large steamers being engaged to run from the Circular Quay at regular
intervals during the forenoon, and return in the evening.
About 11 a.m. the R. S. Y. Squadron rendezvoused in Rouble Bay, and soon
after stood out under the command of Commodore Dangar, whose fine yacht, the
Mistral, led the fleet, followed by the Xariffa, Vivid, and eleven others, under fore
and aft canvas. When off Bradley’3 they eased off, ran up the harbour, and


rounded H.M.S. Challenger, saluting Commodore Lambert’s pennant as they
passed. They then hauled on a wind and worked down the harbour for Clontarf,
where their arrival was watched with great interest. The squadron was the largest
ever seen in this harbour, and their appearance, when anchored off the spit dressed
with flags, was extremely pretty. The yachts of the Prince Alfred Club, ten in
number, made the trip to Middle Harbour took their positions abreast
of the senior club, and dressed with bunting in a similar style. Seen from the
shore the effect was striking, the twenty-four yachts, decorated with flags of every
hue, and numerous other sailing boats anchored about the bight, with the steamers
City of Newcastle and Morpeth moored at the end of each line, produced as pretty
a sight as has ever been witnessed in the harbour of Port Jackson. On the ground
a large marquee, neatly fitted up, was added to the permanent buildings on the
ground as a luncheon saloon. A handsome tent, with suitable appointments, was
pitched on the side of the dell opposite the beach, for the convenience of His Royal
Highness and suite. From as early an hour as 10 o’clock, when the first steamer
departed, it was evident that the visitors would be very numerous, and when
the last boat landed its passengers there were between two and three thousand
persons present.
His Royal Highness left the Galatea shortly after 1 o’clock, in the steam jraclit
Fairy, and as she passed, about two o’clock, between the steamers and yachts
which had been drawn up in two lines near the Clontarf jetty, they saluted by
dipping their flags. He was received by a number of gentlemen, members of the
Committee, and escorted to the marquee, where luncheon had been provided.
With His Royal Highness were His Excellency the Right. Hon. the Earl of Bel-
more and her Ladyship the Countess of Belmore, Viscount Newry, the Hon. Elliott
Yorke, Miss Gladstone, Captain Beresford, Mr. Toulmin, and Lieutenant Haig.
Places at a central table were reserved for them, and here they were joined by,
among others, Commodore Lambert and Mrs. Lambert, His Honor Sir Alfred
Stephen and Lady Stephen, Mr. Charles Cowper, Captain Lyons, Mons. Sentis
(French Consul), and the Hon. John Hay. Sir William Manning was in the
chair, on his right His Royal Highness, and on his left His Excellency the
Governor.
After luncheon, Sir William Manning, rising, said it was intended on this occa-
sion to have only a few words and only one toast. He was permitted to propose
the health of Her Majesty. He could not propose that toast without some brief
remark. He desired his hearers to show in the way they received it that they
were as loyal subjects of Her Majesty as any in Great Britain and Ireland, and he
hoped this would be shown by acclamation. He thought he might assure His
Royal Highness that the loyalty of the people of this colony was as true and
genuine as that of any subjects iu Her Majesty’s dominions ; in fact, that they
gloried in beiDg reigned over by such a Queen, under whose auspicious rule they
enjoyed all the liberty they could desire. Fie proposed and begged they would
drink to the health of Her Majesty the Queen, with hearty enthusiasm.
The toast was received with three lusty cheers.
At twenty minutes past three o’clock, and immediately after the toast to Her
Majesty, the company rose and His Royal Highness and suite proceeded to the
tent set apart for their private use.
The sad event that transpired afterwards is described in another notice.
One universal feeling of sorrow, shame, and rage pervades the community. The
whole colony has been wounded in the person of its Royal Guest. A crime, which
every one will repudiate with horror, has shadowed our reputation.
When in Paris "the Emperor of Russia was recently fired at by a Polish assassin,
the Parisians felt tlffe breach of hospitality as keenly as the heinousness of the crime
itself. A similar feeling mingled with the indignation everywhere expressed in
this city. Those who were at Clontarf yesterday, and who mingled with the awe-
stricken crowd, could not fail to be impressed with the universal exclamation of
bitter sorrow that such a deed should have been perpetrated in New South Wales.


The sentiments of loyalty, of hospitality, of national pride, were touched to the
quick. It was a generous shame, which felt a stain like a wound. The passion
would have passed all restraining bounds if the guilty wretch had not been quickly
and safely removed from the reach of the popular vengeance. It was deeply
moving to see how not only the young and excitable were transported with rage
but how even grave and grey-headed men, whose tempers have been toned down
by years, and whose subjection to public order has become a habit, were hungry
for an immediate application of Lynch law. We count it fortunate that the oppor-
tunity was promptly withdrawn for such a display of the popular vengeance. It
would have been a double calamity if the crime of the assassin against the life of
our guest had been followed by a crime of the company against public order. Deep
and bitter as the feelings of the people were and will be, and impatient as those
feelings are for prompt satisfaction, the cause of good government, in which we
are all so deeply interested, would have suffered if the authority of law had been
violently overthrown —overthrown, too, by an assemblage of the educated and
respectable population of the metropolis. Authority, though powerless to pie-
vent the crime, will not be impotent to convict and punish. Let the law be
respected, even in the white heat of some of the strongest passions that can stir
our nature.
We need use no words to paint the blackness of the deed. We have not a
reader who does not feel its enormity to the fullest extent. To try and murder a
guest—a distinguished guest—a Royal guest—one who is here specially as the
representative >of our ancient monarchy and our beloved Queen, and who has
himself behaved with kindly courtesy to all classes, down to the little children
who have sought to do him honour—is a crime so foul, that merely to state it is
enough. Words add nothing to the impression the deed has produced.
Neither can words fully utter that impression. We feel that no language wo
can use can do justice to what the people in this colony feel, and which yesterday
found a partial vent in tears, in reproaches, and in passionate exclamations. In a
calmer moment it will have to be considered what steps should be taken to give
some voice to the public feeling. The colony will vindicate itself from unfounded
aspersion, and express its feelings in some suitable way that will reach the
Throne. _ . ,
Assassination is a new crime amongst us. We are not free, it is true, from
crimes of violence. Robbery has too often gone on to murder. The bushranger
is an evil development with which we are only too familiar. The assassin, how-
ever, has hitherto been a stranger. But the crime is not of home growth. It is
an importation, and we repudiate it. ,
At present there is no authentic information as to the motives which led to the
deed. Suspicions, of course, abound; but we strongly urge our readers to
abstain from premature and unjust conclusions. Let us not, under cover of zeal
for righteousness, commit the wrong of casting undeserved suspicions upon any
person or persons—of confounding the innocent with the guilty, of assuming that
the crime of a man is the crime of a party, and of implicating in the guilt, or
sympathy with the guilty, those who recoil from it as strongly as we do ourselves.
In all the intensity of our sympathy with the Prince, of our patriotic love for our
young country, and of our hatred of the crime of which it has been made the
theatre, we must strive to preserve a moderation and a calmness that will keep us
from excess.
We feel assured that His Royal Highness himself will fully understand the
feelings of this people towards him, He has had ample demonstration of the
hearty goodwill of all classes, and he will not mistake an isolated act as any
reversal of the sentiments towards himself, his parents, and the mother country,
which have been so frequently expressed in addresses and in other ways, and
which he has so often acknowledged.
It will be with the greatest satisfaction that our readers will note that the
latest bulletin is favourable, and that though his Royal Highness may for some
time be an invalid, no fatal effects need be apprehended. We trust it will not be
long before he is able again to appear in public, and no protection that the people
of this colony can afford will be wanting to secure his safety or prevent the
repetition of a similar outrage.


ATTEMPT TO ASSASSINATE H. R. H. PRINCE ALFRED
March 12th, 1868.
It is with, the deepest sorrow that we have to announce a most determined
attempt to assassinate His Eoyal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh. When the
Prince left the luncheon tent at the Sailors’ Home Picnic, he escorted the Countess
of Belmore to the door of the Eoyal tent, and then turned to converse with his
Excellency the Governor, the Chief Justice, and Sir William Manning. They
remained talking a few seconds, and then His Eoyal Highness and Sir William
Manning sauntered across the green towards the clump of trees bordering the
beach, and under which the Galatea Band was stationed. The subject of con-
versation was the Sailors’ Home, and His Eoyal Highness, to mark his appreciation
of the institution, handed Sir William Manning a cheque as a donation.
Sir William made his' acknowledgments for the donation, and then asked His
Eoyal Highness whether he would go round to Cabbage Tree Beach to see the
aboriginals, as they were then ready for some sports. Before His Eoyal Highness
could reply a treacherous assailant, who had just left the crowd of persons con-
gregated under the shade of the trees, stole up behind him,' and when he had.
approached to within five or six feet pulled out a revolver, took deliberate aim,
and fired. The shot took effect about the middle of the back of His Eoyal
Highness, an inch or two to the right of the spine. He fell forward on his
hands and knees, exclaiming, “My back is broken.” Sir William Manning,
hearing the discharge, and seeing His Eoyal Highness fall, turned and sprang at
the would-be assassin, who then jumped back and aimed the murderous weapon
at Sir William. Seeing the pistol directed towards him, Sir William stooped to
evade the shot, and, losing his balance, fell. Fortunately the charge did not
explode ; but as Sir William Manning was in the act of rising, the ruffian took aim a
third time; just at the moment Mr. Vial (of Castlereagh-street), who happened to be
behind, sprang upon the dastardly assailant, pinioned his arms to his side, and
thus the aim of the pistol was diverted from the body of Sir William Manning to
the ground. The weapon was discharged, however, and the shot entered the foot
of Mr. George Thorne, senior, who fainted, and w T as taken away by Mr. Hassall,
and other friends.
In the meantime a number of people, attracted by the discharge of firearms,
and seeing His Eoyal Highness fall, ran to the spot, and three or four of them
lifted His Eoyal Highness to carry him into his tent. It was evident from the
demeanour of His Eoyal Highness that he was suffering great pain, and he asked
his bearers to carry him gently. This wish was complied with as far as possible,
and thus he was borne into his tent. Here he was taken in charge by Dr. Watson’
of 11.M.5. Challenger, who together with Dr. Wright (of Sydney), Dr. Powell of
the Galatea, and Assistant-surgeon Waugh of the Challenger, were immediately
in attendance. The dress of His Eojml Highness was removed, and upon an
examination of the wound it was found that the bullet had penetrated the back
near the middle, and about two inches from the right side of the lower part
of the spine, traversing the course of the ribs, round by the right of the
abdomen, where it lodged, immediately below the surface. No vital organ,
fortunately, appeared to be injured, the course of the bullet being, to° all
appearance, quite superficial.
While this painful examination was in progress another scene, which almost
defies description, was going on in another part of the ground. No sooner had
Mr. Yial grasped the arms of the man who had fired the shots, than other gentle-
men seized him ; and, had it not been for the closing in around them of the police
and other persons, they would speedily have placed him beyond the reach of the
Law Courts. The people shouted “ lynch him,” “ hang him,” “ string him up,”
and so on, and there was a general rush to get at him. The police, headed by
Superintendent Orridge, got hold of the assassin, and they had the greatest
difficulty in preventing the infuriated people from tearing him limb from limb.
In this the police were ably assisted by the Chief Justice, Lord Newry, and the
men of the Galatea Band. Both Lord Newry and Sir Alfred Stephen exerted
themselves to get the prisoner on board the steamer lying at the wharf, while


Mr. Orridge, with herculean strength, kept back the crowd as much as possible.
The task of putting the prisoner on board the ship was not an easy one, and it
was fully ten minutes before they could get him on the wharf. By that time all
the clothing from the upper part of his body was torn off, his eyes, face, and body
were much bruised, and blood was flowing from various wounds ; and when
he was dragged on to the deck of the Paterson, he appeared to be utterly
unconscious. No sooner was he on board than a number of sailors had a rope
ready to string him up, and it was only by the interference of Lord Newry that
his life was spared. Some of the police were very roughly used, detective Powell
getting about the worst of it. In the scuffle he fell over some stones, and had a
chance of being trampled to death. The whole of the police on the ground were
tinder the command of Mr. Fosberry.
The people, out of whose hands the prisoner had been rescued, immediately
gave vent to their disappointment, and at an indignation meeting, summarily
convened, determined to bring him back from the steamer, and dispatch him at
the scene of his crime. A rush was then made for the steamer, which had just
hauled off a few feet from the wharf, and they shouted to the captain to haul in.
For a moment this officer appeared to waver, but the Hon. John Hay, who was
on the bridge, doubtless divining the intentions of the crowd, peremptorily
ordered the captain to haul off. This he did, and the vessel accordingly proceeded
on her way to Sydney.
The effect of this dastardly attempt at assassinating the Prince, among the
immense number of persons congregated at Clontarf, may be more easily imagined
than described. A large number of ladies fainted, others were seized with
hysterics, and the whole multitude was convulsed. Suddenly a joyous throng had
been converted into a mass of excited people, in whose breasts sympathy for the
Loyal sufferer, and indignation for his murderous assailant, alternately prevailed ;
while pallid faces and tearful eyes told of the deep anxiety that was felt in refer-
ence to the extent of the injuries which His Koyal Highness had sustained. People
crowded by hundreds around the tent in which the sufferer lay, until they were
informed that they must keep back, in order to allow free ventilation ; they at
once fell back thirty or forty yards, and formed a complete cordon around the tent,
and anxiously awaited the result of the examination. Finding the people so anxious
about him His Loyal Highness said, ‘ ‘ Tell the people I am not much hurt, I shall
be better presently.” His Loyal Highness, who never lost consciousness, although
feeling faint and weak from the shock to his nervous system, and from loss of
blood, described to his attendants the sensation he experienced when struck by the
bullet. He said he felt as though he was being lifted off the ground.
At about five o’clock His Loyal Highness was placed on a litter, and borne by
men of the Galatea to the deck of the Morpeth, a solemn silence being preserved
by the people, who stood on either side while the cortege passed. Among those
who were in immediate attendance on His Loyal Highness were the gentlemen of
his suite, namely, Lieutenant Haig, Lord Newry, and the Hon. Eliot Yorke, all of
whom were painfully affected by the tragic occurrence. His Excellency the
Governor, Commodore Lambert, Captain Beresford, and Mr. Toulmin, were also
most assiduous in their sympathetic attentions, and proceeded to Sydney in the
same boat. Prior to this the little steamer Fairy had been sent up to Sydney with
a message for the officer in charge of the Galatea, to be prepared with a boat to
convey the Loyal sufferer to the shore ; and when the Morpeth arrived off Farm
Cove a barge from the Galatea came alongside. The Prince, who was lying upon
a stretcher with a soft mattress under him, and his head supported by pillows, was
lowered into his barge, which was manned by a number of his own sailors. On
arriving at the landing-place, he was carefully raised out of the boat. Humours of
the occurrence having reached town, large numbers of persons rushed to the jetty
in front of Government House, where it was presumed the Prince would land.
Here a body of police and marines were posted—some of them guarding the
approach from the wharf to Government House, and others forming near the
landing-place, in order to escort His Loyal Highness. The crowd were forced back
to the high ground, and kept at some distance from the chosen line of route. The
Prince was surrounded by a guard of marines, and the sight of his prostrate and
helpless condition called forth from the crowd many expressions of sympathy.


Upon the arrival of the Paterson at the wharf, the prisoner was landed and
conveyed in charge of Mr. Orridge to the gaol. O’Farrell is a fair complexioned
man, about five feet eleven inches in height, and apparently about five and thirty
years of age. He has a slight beard and moustache, and a military air. He is
perfectly self-possessed, is said to be a man of good education, and in manner is
not unpleasing. He was dressed in a dark coat and trousers and white waistcoat.
His clothes were torn to ribbons by the excited crowd, and he received many
severe bruises, his eyes being blackened, his nose swelled very much, and his lips
puffed out like those of a negro. According to his own statements—although he
says very little and maintains much reticence with respect to himself and the
motives of his dastardly deed—he is a native of Dublin, but left Ireland at a very
early age. Fie has been in many countries, has spent a considerable time on the
European continent, and in America, and about three months ago came from
Victoria to New South Wales. He has expressed a hope that the Prince would
not die, and says that he did not mean to kill, but merely to “ frighten him”—a
statement which is absurd upon the face of it. Two revolvers were found on him,
one of which had hot been discharged, and every chamber of which was loaded,
the other, the w r eapon with which the attempt at assassination was committed,
was picked up by one of the Galatea’s bandsmen after the prisoner’s capture. The
latter is a small Colt’s revolver, such as could easily be carried in the pocket.
Late in the afternoon a rumour w r as brought to the Legislative Assembly that
the Prince was shot. The correctness of the information was doubted, and it was
not until a reply to an inquiry was sent from the Detective Office stating that a
shot had been fired at the Prince, and that a person or persons were in custody,
that the report was believed. Meantime Superintendent Orridge went up to the
House, and reported that a man was in custody, and that he had conveyed him to
the gaol. The House was at once adjourned. The Colonial Secretary, Mr. Parkes,
proceeded to the gaol and saw the prisoner. He ascertained that his name was
H. F. O’Farrell, that he slept on Wednesday night at the Clarendon Hotel, corner
of George and Hunter streets. The Colonial Secretary asked him how he came to
commit such an outrage, to which he replied, “ Come, come, it is not fair to ask
me such a question as that—the Prince is all right—the Prince will live, yon need
not fear about him—it’s only a side wound —I shall be hanged, but the Prince will
live.” On leaving the gaol, the Colonial Secretary, taking with him two police
constables, went to the Clarendon Hotel. The people there knew nothing about
the affair beyond hearing a rumour that the Prince had been shot. They admitted
that such a man as the prisoner was described to be, had lived there, and the room
in which he had slept was at once searched. Some articles of wearing apparel were
found in a broken box and in a table drawer. In various places (in the drawer and
in the pockets of his clothes) were found percussion caps, detonating cartridges,
wadding for revolvers, a Douay Bible, and a number of religious books, in which
his name was inscribed. Having secured these things, the Colonial Secretary
ascertained that O’Farrell had been in Sydney from about Christmas last, and that
whilst the Prince has been here, whenever the other lodgers in the house spoke of
him this man got out of temper, and denounced him. He went out on Tuesday
evening to go to the ball; but, for some reason, did not get in, and came back.
The Colonial Secretary also ascertained that he had lived at Tierney’s Currency
Lass Hotel, corner of Pitt and Hunter streets, and to that'house they proceeded.
Here, in a box, said to belong to O’Farrell, they found a number of articles of
clothing and some written papers, from which it was shown that he had resided in
Melbourne.
It is almost impossible to describe the sensation which the news of the outrage
produced in the city. When first heard it was treated as a mere rumour; many
persons saw the police take the prisoner from the Paterson, but considered him
merely some fellow who had got his clothes torn in a drunken brawl. It was not
until the announcement was made in the Assembly, and that the members on
retiring mentioned the fact, that the news received any credence. The excitement
was intensified by the appearance of a party of mounted police dashing at full speed
towards the Circular Quay ; a party of foot police, fully armed, followed and took
up their positions opposite the landing-stage, where it was reported that the Prince
would be landed. Several thousand citizens were assembled about the wharf and


on board the vessels lying alongside, where they remained until information was
received that the Prince had been taken to Government House. Ihe police then
withdrew and the people dispersed. The streets were thronged with people,
whose sole topic appeared to be the sad event; it was evident that some gigantic
calamity, affecting all classes of the people, had taken place, and spread sorrow
throughout the entire community. At the Prince of "W ales Theatre, where His
Royal Highness had announced his intention of being present on the occasion of
Mr Hoskins’ benefit, a notice was posted, that in consequence of the dastardly
outrage on the person of H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, the theatre was closed
for the nmht At the School of Arts Dr. Carr announced, that in consequence ot
the calamity which had fallen upon the colony in the attempted assassination of
the Duke of Edinburgh, it would be unseemly for any entertainment being given ;
the audience at once acquiesced. An immense crowd also assembled at the gates
leading to Government House, and anxiously inquired of persons coming from that
direction, how the Prince was progressing. _
The Bishop of Sydney, together with the Ministers and other gentlemen, called,
at Government House, but could not see the Prince. Miss Osborne was m attend-
ance, and one of the nursing sisters remained during the night. The medical gen-
tlemen spoke favorably of the case, as the Prince has youth, health, and a good
constitution in his favor.
AN ACCOUNT BY AN EYE-WITNESS.
Many contradictory accounts will doubtless be put in circulation relative to the
deplorable circumstances connected with the attempted assassination of His Royal
Highness the Duke of Edinburgh. In the hurry and consternation occasioned by
the murderous outrage, people were so much excited that their powers of observa-
tion were almost paralysed. The following statement may, however, be depended
upon as a strictly accurate account of the circumstances. . The writer was within a
few yards of the Prince when he was shot, and made it his business to particularly
remark, and note down immediately after, all that occurred.
His Royal Highness had just partaken of lunch, and left the tent as soon as Her
Majesty’s health had been proposed and drunk with the usual honors. He was
walking beside Sir William Manning across the green in the direction of the Royal
marquee, the people were scattered around in all directions enjoying themselves,
when they were startled by the report of two shots in rapid succession. . A rush
was instantly made towards the spot, and cries were heard, “ The I rince is shot!
The Duke is killed.” Nine-tenths of those who heard the words did not credit
them ; and for some moments few could realise that anything so dreadful had
actually taken place. They could not believe that in such a scene of innocent gaiety
and enjoyment any human being could be so diabolically wicked as to commit so
dreadful a crime. The report was, however, too true.
The excitement as soon as the truth was fully comprehended, was dreadful.
Women, and even men, fainted, and for a few moments the scene was one of al-
most indescribable confusion and distress. The first object, as soon as people had
in some degree recovered from the shock was, of course, to ascertain if His Royal
Highness was fatally wounded. The crowd around the spot was so great that for
some time nothing could be ascertained as to the result likely to follow ; but in
less time than it takes to relate the facts, the would-be-murderer was seized by the
multitude, and but for the energetic action of the police, and some seamen, would
have been killed on the spot. “Kill the wretch,” “Lynch him,” “Hang him, ’
burst from a thousand voices. The attempts of so many to reach him with kicks
and blows frustrated the purpose of all. How the wretched assassin was not torn
limb from limb by the attacks of the crowd is a mystery. On his back, his clothes


tom to shreds, amidst a fighting and surging multitude, aiming at his life, his
look was one of the most desperate and determined kind. He was in this condition
partly pulled and partly driven by kicks and blows towards the landing place. The
police and seamen struggled manfully to retain their prisoner, and to take him on
board the steamer, while the avenging crowd as desperately struggled to get him
out of their hands, in order to inflict summary vengeance on the spot. Fortunately
the arm of the law was strong enough to prevent the commission of an act which
all in their cool moments would have deeply regretted. The struggling and fighting
mass at length reached the gangway, and there a scene which baffles description
took place. The enraged people saw that the assassin was likely to be saved from
their vengeance, and fierce cries again rose—“ Lynch him,” “Hang him,” “Up
with him”—and amidst the raging excitement the wretched being was dragged on
board the steamer in a condition better imagined than described. He appears to
have retained his senses up to this time, but soon afterwards became unconscious,
and while he was in that state the steamer started for Sydney.
To return to the Loyal victim of this atrocious outrage : He fell instantly on
being shot, saying “ Take hold—my back is broken.” Medical assistance was for-
tunately quickly available, and as soon as safety would permit, the Prince was
carried to his tent, and in a short time preparations were made to remove him to
Sydney. By this time it was generally reported that the wound was not likely to
prove fatal, and the welcome intelligence was received with the deepest satisfaction
on all sides. The Loyal victim bore his sufferings in the most patient and quiet
manner, and we need not say that everything that kindness could suggest was done
to assist and relieve him.
The following is a, precise statement of what occurred at the moment of the at-
tempted assassination. The man came up rapidly behind the Prince a little diago-
nally! with his right hand by his side, until he was within two or three paces of
his victim. The assassin then moved more rapidly, lifted his hand, placed the
pistol (a Colt s revolver) almost in contact with His Loyal Highness’s left shoulder,
and fired. The Prince instantly fell forward, or rather sunk or tottered to the
ground. The ruffian then, before he could be seized, drew back rapidly three or
four paces, again raised his arm and took deliberate aim, but before he could fire
Sir William Manning, who was walking at the Prince’s side, had turned round on
hearing the report, and attempted to seize the man ; the pistol was then aimed at
Sir William, who ducked or threw himself forward to avoid the shot; but this
time—it was all the work of a moment—the weapon missed fire. The assassin was
then in the act of pulling the trigger a third time, and while doing so was seized
from behind by Mr. Vial, coachbuilder, of Castlereagh-street, who grasped his
arms, and so brought the direction of the weapon at the moment of explosion to-
wards the ground. The shot struck the earth close at hand, and rebounding
wounded a gentleman (Mr. G. Thorne) in the foot or lower part of the leg. ’
O’FARRELL, THE ASSASSIN.
For the following information we are largely indebted to a gentleman who was
formerly a schoolmate of the ruffian. His father and mother were both natives of
Ireland, and shortly after their marriage they left Ireland for Liverpool, where Mr.
O’Farrell started in business as a butcher. He was tolerably successful in this
pursuit, and having saved a considerable sum of money he left Liverpool and came to
Melbourne. 0 Farrell, the would-be assassin of His Loyal Highness, in the year
1841, was placed under the charge of the Rev. David Boyd, who presided over a
school in Melbourne. There he remained for about three years, and then left to
join the Roman Catholic College, near St. Francis’. He spent several years at
this college, and acquired a thorough knowledge of the classics, as well as of the


French language, which he speaks with refined purity. His father destined him
for the Roman Catholic priesthood, and having passed through his preliminary
studies he left Victoria for France, Belgium, and Rome, where he continued his
studies, and at the expiration of ten years, returned to this colony. He was then
prepared to take holy orders, but falling in love with a young lady prevented him
from following this course, and he accordingly turned his attention to more
practical pursuits. We have beenu nable to ascertain the nature of these pursuits,
but it seems O’Farrell spent some time in mining. In or about the year 1862 he
joined a man named Kennedy and opened a hay and com store at the corner of
Doveton-street, Ballaarat, Victoria, in the house now occupied by Mr. Boyd as the
Corn Exchange Hotel. The firm did not progress so well as they desired, and this
partial failure caused Mr. Kennedy to take to drinking, and ultimately he was found
dead in the yard at the rear of the building. O’Farrell also took to drinking ; but
recovering from an attack of delirium tremens, he temporarily abandoned the
habit, and for a time led a steady life. Subsequently he commenced to speculate
in mining, and one morning he met his old schoolmate, and showed him a cheque
for £2OO, which he said he had made in the previous three days by buying and
selling scrip. At this time Fenianism broke out in America, and he pronounced
himself a decided partisan of Head Centre Stephens. He continued to speculate
in mining, and ultimately not only lost all he had, but involved himself in debt to
the amount of some £6OO. He was then sold off by the sheriff of the district
under a writ of fi. fa., the whole of his assets only realising £6O. This occurred
in March, 1867. In the meantime he continued to drink heavily, and had several
attacks of delirium tremens, for one of which he was attended by Dr. Whit-
combe. A humorous incident occured during one of these attacks. One night he
was walking up Sturt-street in a half nude state, when he met a well-known
habitue of the “Comer.” He accosted him, and the habitue, seeing he was
dangerous, replied that he was a constable. O’Farrell asked him to take him in
charge, as he wanted rest for the night. The counterfeit constable told him to
come along and he would find him safe quarters. The two proceeded up Sturt-
street, and on arriving at an empty house above the Western Fire Brigade Tower,
O’Farrell was told to lift up the window and go inside. O’Farrell did this, where-
upon his guardian drew down the window and made his escape. O’Farrell stayed
there all night, and the next morning reappeared at the “ Comer,” the attack of
delirium having subsided. O’Farrell, again, however, relapsed, into his old habits,
and at length found his way into the Ballarat Hospital, suffering from the effects
of drink. Coming to the time of his being sold off, this incident seems to have
determined him to seek out fresh fields for his labours, and accordingly he left
Ballarat for Sydney. There is an anecdote told of him on his arrival at Geelong,
where he stayed some days before leaving for Sydney via Melbourne. He met
some anti-Fenians in the Market-square, whom he had known on Ballarat. They
taxed him with his rebellious feelings ; and he replied that monarchies were the
curse of Ireland, and that the only proper form of government was a republic.
He had often spoken to the same effect at Ballarat. It seems from the Melbourne
papers that he became clerk in a solicitor’s office in Sydney. About three weeks
ago Mr. Travers Jones, the promoter of the Wentworth Estate Company, and
who is now on Ballarat, met O’Farrell in the billiard-room of the Royal Hotel,
Sydney, and they conversed together for some time. Mr. Jones informed us that
O’Farrell spoke quite coherently, and appeared to have thoroughly recovered from
the effects of drink. From all we can learn, O’Farrell is a man of strong temper-
ament, exceedingly impulsive and determined. Evidently, once seized with an
idea, he is not the person to be easily persuaded from it. Of his Fenianistic
4 proclivities there can be no doubt. He has frequently, on Ballarat, not only
defended, but advocated the cause of the Fenians, and expressed himself in terms
which often drew down upon him the animadversion of his hearers.


BULLETINS.
Friday, March 13th, 1868, 4 a.m.
The medical attendants of H.R.H the Duke report that he has passed a tranquil
night. No unfavorable symptoms have presented themselves ; and every hope
is entertained of his case progressing favorably.
8 a.m.
H. R. H. the Duke of Edinburgh has passed a most tranquil night, and could not
be progressing more favorably than at present.
11 a.m.
His Royal Highness is progressing favorably ; but his right leg is very stiff—
supposed to be caused by the ball in its course having grazed one of the nerves.
The ball has not as yet been extracted.
At 12 o’clock yesterday, the following was the bulletin at Government House :
“ H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh continues to progress favorably.”
James Young, Surgeon.
2 p.m.
H. R. H. the Duke of Edinburgh is still progressing.
2.30 p.m.
The bullet has not been extracted, and it is said that it has slightly shifted its
position.
The Prince has been removed to the drawing-room and is much the same.
Saturday Morning, March 14th, 2 a m.
H. R. H. the Duke of Edinburgh continues to progress most favorably.
No. unfavorable symptoms have occurred, and at present no danger to life is
anticipated.
A. Watson, M.D., Surgeon.
Government House, 14th March.
H. R. H. the Duke of Edinburgh continues to progress favorably.
The ball was extracted at 8 o’clock this morning, without causing much pain or
uneasiness.
James Young, M.D.
A. Watson, M.D.
Sunday, March 15tli, 8 p.m.
His Royal Highness passed a quiet afternoon, continuing almost free from pain
or uneasiness. The wounds at the back and chest doing well, and his Royal
Highness is now going on as well as could be expected.
J. Young, M.D.
A. Watson, M.D.
Wm. L. Powell.
Government House,
Monday, 16th March, 3 o’clock a.m.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, K.G., on retiring to bed at 8 o’clock last
evening, experienced some return of the pain in the right leg, which was relieved
by the remedies adopted. He has since enjoyed a refreshing sleep, and is there-
fore progressing favorably.
James Young, M.D.
A. Watson, M,D.
Wm. L. Powell.
Government House, 2 p.m., 16th March.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh has been sitting up since noon, is in good
spirits, and progressing favorably, although there is, as was expected, some sore-
ness along the site of the wound.
James Young, M.D.
W. L. Powell.


2 a.m., 17tli March.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh has so far passed a good night ; is now nearly
free from pain. No apprehensions are at present entertained of a fair recovery.
James Young, M.D.
W. L. Powell, Surgeon, H.M.S. Galatea.
March 18th, 1 a.m.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, K.G., has been sitting up during the day. He
still suffers occasional pain in "back and right leg. At 8 p.m. he retired to rest,
and is now asleep. „ , _ _
James Young, M.D.
A. Watson, M.D.
Wm, L. Powell.
Government House, 1.15 a.m., 19th March.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh was sitting up the greater part of yesterday.
He has been restless and suffering pain during the early portion of to-niglit, but is
now tranquil. ✓
James Young, M.D.
William L. Powell.
7.30 p. m.
His Royal Highness is progressing as favorably a 3 can be expected. He is still
suffering great pain.
8.30 p.m.
His Royal Highness is still progressing satisfactorily. The physicians in atten-
dance upon him do not consider that the wound is likely to prove fatal.
Government House,
1.30 a. m., 20th March.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, after retiring to rest, suffered from severe
paroxy T sms of pain in lower part of back and right leg, but has since been relieved
by a sedative draught, and is now nearly free from pain.
Jame 3 Young, M.D.
A. Watson, M.D.
W. L. Powell.
/
Friday Night.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh passed a portion of the afternoon out of doors,
while the band of the Galatea were performing in front of Government House. He
still suffers from pains of a neuralgic character in the back and right leg, but the
wounds have healed, and his progress towards complete recovery is otherwise
satisfootory - A. WATSON, M.D.
William Powell.
Saturday, March 21st, 2.30 a.m.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh has had some return of neuralgic pains during
the early part of last night, but has since slept several hours, and i 3 now quite
composed. „ „ _
James Young, M.D.
A. Watson, M.D.
Government House,
1 a.m., 21st March.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh has been almost free from pain since retiring to
bed at 8 p.m., and has enjoyed a few hours’ refreshing sleep.
r James Young, M.D.
A. Watson, M.D.


Monday, March 23rd, 2.30 a.m.
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh felt much stronger yesterday, and took some
exercise. In the evening he suffered considerable pain in the back and right leg,
but is now sleeping calmly.
James Young, M.D.
William Powell
Tuesday, March 24th, 2.30 a.m.
H. R. H. the Duke of Edinburgh has so far passed a good night, and is progressing
favorably towards recovery.
James Young, M.D.
William L. Powell.
Wednesday, March 25th, 1 a.m.
His Royal Highness was received on board his ship yesterday forenoon with
every manifestation of joy on the part of his officers and crew. He returned to
Government House at 3 o’clock. He retired early to rest last night somewhat
tired ; but his progress to recovery is still very satisfactory.
2 p. m.
Last night the Duke of Edinburgh enjoyed an undisturbed night’s sleep, and is
perceptibly increasing in strength. He rose early, and at 11a. m. proceeded with
his equerries and physician on board the Galatea, where he now is, in super-
intendence of the arrangements that are being completed for the further progress
of his voyage.
PRELIMINARY MAGISTERIAL ENQUIRY INTO THE
CHARGE AGAINST HENRY JAMES O’FARRELL, AND
STATEMENT BY THE PRISONER,
On Friday, the 13tli instant, a special Court was held in the Debtors’ Prison,
Darlinghurst Gaol, Mr. H . H. Voss, the Water Police Magistrate, presiding, to
inquire into the charge against Henry James O’Farrell of wounding, with intent to
kill, His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, on the 12th instant, at Clontarf,
near Sydney.
Amongst others present there were His Excellency the Right Hon. the Earl of
Belmore, Captain Beresford, Lieutenant Haig, Viscount Newry, the Hon. Eliot
Yorke, Mr. Toulmin, Mr. 0. W. Brierley, the Attorney-General (Mr. Martin), the
Colonial Treasurer (Mr. Eagar), and Mr, Wisdom, M.L.A.
The face of the prisoner (who was attired in the prison dress of white canvas)
presented a sickening sight. The left side of his face was very much swollen, and
the right side cut and bruised in several places, whilst his right eye was black,
protruding, and closed, and his left' livid with bruises and capable of being only
partially opened. The skin down the front of his nose was abraded, and that
feature was also considerably swollen. Prisoner is about 5 feet 10 inches in height
and strongly built, has light hair, and wears all-round whiskers and a
medium sized moustache. He is about thirty-five years of age. Unable to see
except with difficulty, yet he was observant of the proceedings, and although he
asked a few questions he was never disturbed from the almost stolid indifference to
the various statements of the manner in which his crime was committed.
_ Mr. John Williams, Crown Solicitor, conducted the examination, and the deposi-
tions were taken by Mr. Lees, of the Water Police Court.
John Waisthall Orridge examined: I am Superintendent of Police for the
Southern district of this colony; I apprehended prisoner yesterday, and now
charge him with wounding with intent to murder His Royal Highness Alfred
Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburgh, at Clontarf, Middle Harbour ; about 3 o’clock


yesterday afternoon I was at Clontarf, partly on duty, and saw the Duke of Edin-
burgh and Sir William Manning walking from the 'luncheon booth in the direction
of the beach ; a picnic was being held there for the benefit of the Sailors’ Home,
and there was a large assemblage of people present; when the Duke and Sir
William got some distance from the booth with an open space around them, the
people keeping away, I saw the Duke and Sir William apart from the rest of the
peo'ple ; when they had got half-way to the beach, I was then myself about seventy
yards from the Duke ; I then saw the prisoner rush up from behind ; he came sud-
denly from the crowd, took several quick steps, and when within about two yards
of the Duke, whose back was towards him, I saw him present a revolver at the
Duke’s back; I immediately began to run towards the Duke ;as I was running I
saw and heard a revolver discharged, and immediately I saw the Duke fall on his
hands and knees ; the pistol was pointed directly at his back ; a second shot was
fired before I reached prisoner ; I could not tell at whom the pistol was pointed, as
I was running quickly and the crowd was getting in the way ; but a second shot I
heard before I got up to him ; when I got up to prisoner he was seized by gentle-
men who were closer to him than myself, and from them I got hold of hurt, and
then some police came to my assistance; in the heat of the moment I did not
recognise the gentlemen who had hold of him ; I did not lose sight of the prisoner,
but kept him in my company with the assistance of the police and others ; I never
lost sight of him (except whilst he was on board the steamer on the transit up from
Clontarf to Sydney) till I delivered him up in Darlinghurst gaol; I have not seen
His Royal Highness since; I did not see blood flowing from the Duke’s body, as
the crowd immediately came round; I cannot say whether he was wounded ; my
attention was solely occupied in securing the prisoner ; prisoner has given the name
of O’Farrell, but not to me ; I had no conversation with him until I delivered him
into the custody of the gaoler here ; whilst in the cab driving up from the steamer
to the gaol I saw that prisoner was a good deal knocked about in the face ; one eye
was bunged up and his face bleeding ; he said “ I’ve made a mess of it, and all for
no good I know there is a pistol in the custody of police sergeant Musgrove • I
did not see it immediately after ; I saw it in the sergeant’s custody ; I believe he
can prove that he took it from prisoner ; another pistol will also be produced ; one
is in the possession of an officer of the Galatea, the other in the possession of the
police ; I saw a shot fired before the Duke fell ; I saw him fall immediately after
the shot was fired ; I think I stated that the prisoner was about two yards from
the Duke.
Cross-examined by prisoner : Did I make the remark that I had made a mess of
it and all for no good ? Yes.
Prisoner: I think you are wrong. In the struggle it was the party that came
behind that caused the second shot to explode. I have no further questions to ask
the witness.
Henry Clarke, examined: lam a merchant, Victoria wharf, Sussex-street, Sydney;
I was at the picnic at Clontarf yesterday ; I was there a little past 3 o’clock ; I saw
the Duke of Edinburgh there ; I was standing in company with another gentleman
(Mr. S. H. Pearce) near to the edge of the clear ground, close to the trees between
the beach and the pavilion ; I called Mr. Pearce’s attention to the Duke, saying
casually, “There is the Prince,” at the same time looking towards the Duke ; im-
mediately after I spoke I saw a person, not exactly running, but coming at a smart
walk, after the Duke ; I recognise prisoner as being the man ; he came from the
crowd : I was in front of the prisoner, and almost in a line with him and the Duk-
e should say I w r as about twenty feet from him ; 1 saw the prisoner with
in his hand, but at the time really did not know what it was ; he presented what-
ever he had in his hand at the back of the Duke; I suppose he was then about
four or six feet from the Duke; I do not think he was more than four feet; I
heard a report and saw a flash as from a pistol; I then perceived it was a pistol he
held in his hand ; it was pointed at the Duke’s back ; the Duke immediately fell
on his knees and uttered some kind of exclamation—“Oh, oh,” —or something of
that kind ; I cannot exactly say what it Vas ; I then ran towards the prisoner and
before I reached him a second shot was fired ; I distinctly saw the second shot fired,
and saw the pistol also ; I could not exactly say in what direction it was fired ; I
was so much excited and anxious to prevent more damage that I did not see’in


what direction it was pointed ; it was fired by the prisoner in the direction of the
Duke, but whether it was aimed at him or any other person I cannot tell; before I
reached him another person had seized him round the arms from behind ; I do not
know the person’s name ; that was after the second shot was fired—almost imme-
diately the man got prisoner by the arms ; I then caught hold of prisoner, and I
think one or two others did so at the same time ; I think Mr. Pearce was one; I
do not remember the others ; I caught him by the back of the neck, and he then
fell to the ground ; I did not notice that he had a revolver then ; about this time
Mr. Orridge and some of the police came up, and caught hold of the prisoner; I
assisted Mr. Orridge, the police, and others, in placing him on board the steamer ;
lam sure prisoner is the man; I came up in the steamer with him as far as the
New Hunter River Company’s Wharf; in fact I never lost sight of him (except
during the time he was in the hold) until he came up to the wharf ; I accompanied
him in the steamer on the passage up.
Prisoner had no question to ask this witness.
Simeon Henry Pearce, examined: I am a magistrate of the colony; I was at
Clontarf yesterday and saw the Duke of Edinburgh there ; about 3 o’clock in the
afternoon I was in company with Mr. Clark (the last witness), crossing the green
between the luncheon tent and the trees that fringe the beach of Middle Harbour;
at this time Mr. Clarke called my attention to the Duke passing ; on turning round
I heard a report of firearms, and saw the Duke fall; he fell forwards on his hands
and knees, as far as I remember, and I heard him cry ‘ ‘ Oh, oh, ” or something to
that effect; I saw the prisoner at that time retreating backwards from where the
Duke fell; he was retreating with a pistol in his hand ; I think it was a revolver ;
I saw it in his hand; 1 could not see what it was until he fired the second shot;
Sir William Manning was making towards the prisoner, and the prisoner continued
to retreat backwards with a pistol in his hand levelled in the direction of the Duke
and Sir William ; at this time I was immediately opposite prisoner, and about ten
feet from him ; I saw Sir William bend his head forward and immediately the
prisoner fired the shot; Sir William was moving towards the prisoner then, and
immediately this second shot was fired he fell to the ground, and I concluded he
was shot; the prisoner continued to retreat with the pistol in his hand, and a
person came up behind—a person I did not know—(a man in light clothes, I think)
and threw his arms right around prisoner’s body, embracing him in his arms; I,
with several others, rushed on the prisoner and seized him; Mr. Clarke got at him
behind, and as far as I could see, pulled him down on his back ; I cannot say I
noticed Mr. Orridge come up; I noticed the police come up and take him into
custody ; I assisted the police in getting him on board the steamer ; I have not the
slightest doubt about prisoner being the man ; I looked at him well to make sure of
him ; he was never out of my sight till he was safely in the custody of the police; I
saw him safely on the stage, near the steamer, in custody of the police ; afterwards
saw the Duke lying in his tent, but did not see that he was wounded; I saw his
coat with holes in it; it was brought up from the tent.
Cross-examined by prisoner : Are you sure you saw Sir William Manning fall ?
Yes, I did ; he went on his hands and knees as far as I remember, and I concluded
he was shot; that was the second shot and I concluded it had gone through him.
John Harding, examined : I am one of the bandsmen on board the Galatea; I
was at Middle harbour at a picnic yesterday—the Sailors’ Home Picnic ; I saw the
Duke of Edinburgh there ; 1 saw the Duke go into the tent, and a few minutes
afterwards come out and walk towards where I and the rest of the band were
standing just after playing; when he was coming close up to us I turned from him,
and immediately afterwards heard a firing from a pistol, not knowing where it
came from; I turned round and saw the Duke lying on the ground ; he cried out
and had his hand to his right side ; I did not notice the prisoner at the time; then
I heard another fire, and saw three or four men running and struggling like; I
should know some of them again if I saw them ; this gentleman (Mr. Vial) was
one ; he was struggling with somebody; Ido not know who the other two were ; I
then ran over ; they got the man down and moved him a bit, and I then perceived
a pistol and opera glass; I picked them up; I do not know who the men were
struggling with ; this gentleman (Mr. Vial) had hold of a man ; as the man was
struggling on the ground I picked up the pistol and opera glass; I was taking the


pistol away, and the bandmaster seeing me asked me what it was, and took if from
me ; I gave it up to him ; the bandmaster’s name is Pritchard ; I noticed that two
chambers of the revolver were discharged and four were still loaded; that is all I
know of it; Mr. Pritchard the bandmaster is here to-day; I could not say the
empty chambers had been recently discharged.
had no question to ask this witness.
Charles Pritchard examined: lam bandmaster of H. M. S. Galatea, and with the
rest of the band was at the picnic at Clontarf yesterday : the last witness is one
of our bandsmen ; he handed me a revolver yesterday ; I saw a person advance
and fire a shot from a revolver ; I could not swear what person it was ; he had a
hat on; he fired the shot at the back of the Duke of Edinburgh ; I never lost
sight of him ; the Duke was coming direct to us; we never lose sight of him when
we are playing at public places, unless when he goes to dinner or luncheon ; the
man who fired was behind the Duke, and so close to him that he might have picked
his pocket when he fired ; the Duke fell instantly, making an exclamation at the
time ; 1 saw some one seize the man who fired, and then saw a second person
advance to him ; the Duke was barely a couple of feet from the man; as I
advanced I saw a gentleman lay hold of the man’s arms, and I caught hold of him
by the hair of the head, and a pistol fell; I saw it fall; the crowd came round so
quick that we were moved some few yards, and when we got up I saw the pistol
in the hands of the witness Harding; he gave it to me ; I gave it into the hands
of our officer, Lieutenant Bradley.
Cross-examined by prisoner : In reference to a second shot—did you hear and
see a second shot? I saw and heard it.—Was it not while the struggling was
going on ? It was when a gentleman caught hold of his arm and knocked it down
that he was in the act of firing the second shot.
The Crown Solicitor : He had pointed the pistol ? Yes, and was then seized
by some gentleman, a stranger to me ; he distinctly held it up to take aim with it.
By prisoner : Who was it that was aimed at ? Whatever gentleman was with
the Duke ; it was aimed in the direction of the Duke ; it was exactly in the same
direction as the first shot, as the man had receded a little sideways.—Was it not
to intimidate Sir William Manning from advancing? He was advancing—that is,
the gentleman who was with the Duke was advancing towards the man who fired
the shot.
By the Crown Solicitor : Was it immediately before or after the man’s arms
were seized ? I cannot say whether it was immediately before or immediately
after his arms were seized.—All passed very quickly ? Yes.
William Henry Bradley examined : I am navigating lieutenant on board Her
Majesty’s ship Galatea: I was at the Sailors’ Home Picnic yesterday, at Middle
Harbour; I received from the last witness a revolver; I have it with me. [Revolver
pistol produced. The weapon bears the name of Smith and Wesson, Springfield,
Massachusets. It has a six-barrelled revolving cylinder, and the barrel, which is
about seven inches long, turns upon a hinge, admitting of the removal of the cylinder
for the purpose of loading. The ammunition used is a detonating capsule cartridge.]
When I received it, it was in exactly the same state as now, except that it was
then covered with sand ; two alternate chambers are discharged, the intermediate
one appearing to have missed fire; the cap of the one between the two chambers
discharged appears to have been struck by the hammer, and to have missed fire.
William Vial examined : I am a coachmaker, Elizabeth-street, Sydney : I was
at the Sailors’ Home Picnic, at Clontarf, yesterday, and saw the Duke of Edin-
burgh there ; I saw His Royal Highness leave the luncheon table ; I had been in
the tent and left it to walk down the green with two young ladies ; 1 saw the
Duke leave the luncheon booth and proceed to the small pavilion or tent put up
for his accommodation ; near that place he was talking with two or three gentle-
men, among whom Sir William Manning was one ; I next saw His Royal Highness
present Sir William with an envelope ; they were then standing close together in
front of the small pavilion ; they left that place together, and walked down the
green towards where I was standing, which was a position almost in a line between
the Galatea, band stationed under the trees near the beach and the pavilion the
Duke and Sir William were coming from ; I noticed His Royal Highness on the way
down stop to speak to the Hon. George Allen and Mrs. Allen ; just as the Duke


and Sir William got directly opposite me in a line, I stood a little on one side to
let them pass ; I was about twenty or twenty-five feet from them when the scene
occurred; I was still looking at them, when I saw a man come up from the side
and behind, and make four or five quick steps towards the Duke and Sir William ;
before I had time to move towards him, he levelled a pistol at His Royal High-
ness’s back and fired ; as nearly as I could judge, he was about four feet fronj the
Duke —that is, the point of the pistol was about four feet off—when he fired ; the
Duke fell on his hands, and rather on his right side, exclaiming, “My back is
broken,” or something to that effect; Sir William Manning on the moment turned
round and faced the man; the man retreated in a side direction towards me, and
sang out to Sir William Manning, “Stand back he presented the pistol at Sir
William and drew the trigger, but the pistol did not go off; at that moment I
sprang upon him, got my arms round his, and clasped my hands tightly in front
of him; he then had the pistol levelled again in the direction of His Royal High-
ness and Sir William Manning, who were both in a line with him, the Duke being
on the ground, and Sir William just recovering himself after falling ; the four of
us were in a line ; I had jumped on his back and pinioned his arms to his side
whilst he had the pistol pointed ready for another shot; whilst I held him in that
way he twisted his right arm round and pointed the pistol at me, uttering an oath
at the time ; when he found he could not fire at me he levelled the pistol again in
the direction he had itbefore, and then I passed my right hand quickly down his
right arm, knocking it down and diverting the direction of the ball to the ground ;
whilst in this position I put my right heel in front of his leg to throw him over if I
could, but just then I was caught by the hair of the head and treated unmercifully
for a time, beingthrown down, kicked, and beaten in the hurry of the people to get
hold of him ; I saw Mr. Clarke there ; I had no idea what became of the man ; I
had as much as I could do to extricate myself, some having hold of me by the beard
and whiskers, others giving me blows until I bled from the mouth and nose ; when
I came to inquire after the man he was gone ; the man I speak of was in build and
size about the same as prisoner, but when I saw him he was not defaced as now ;
he is now somewhat altered in appearance by his bruised and swollen face ; I believe
Be is the man ; I forgot to mention that I sang out for assistance, saying I had
got him ; plenty of assistance came in a moment; very little time elapsed from
the first moment of the whole affair to the finish; I had seen his face before I got
hold of him ; I saw it when he was retreating, and also when he looked over his
shoulder at me, as we were then face to face.
Prisoner had no question to ask this witness.
Alexander Watson examined : lama surgeon of the Royal Navy, now serving
on board H.M.S. Challenger ; I left His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh
only a few minutes ago ; I saw him yesterday, ten minutes after he was wounded;
I was at the Sailors’ Home Picnic at Clontarf ; I saw him fall, and rushed to his
assistance ; I heard a pistol shot, and was close to him ; I could not say whether
I was in front or behind him, there being a crowd all round; immediately on
hearing the pistol shot I went to his assistance, and gave directions for conveying
him to the tent; there I had him stripped and examined, and found he was
wounded in the back, over the ninth rib, about two inches to the right of the
vertebral column ; I examined the wound as far as 1 could with the probe ;it
was a recent pistol shot, with slight hemorrhage. The bullet has not yet been
removed ; the pistol produced is one by which such a wound might be inflicted,
judging from the size of the ball; the bullet penetrated the three skins; the
probe penetrated the wound about an inch and a half; I have not the slightest
doubt the wound was from the shot I heard ; I heard the shot and immediately
saw him fall.
Prisoner had no question to ask this witness.
Senior-sergeant Rawlinson examined. I assisted in arresting prisoner yesterday,
at Clontarf ; I saw a pistol taken from him by police sergeant Musgrove ; it was
taken from the outside breast pocket of his coat; I helped to bring prisoner from
the steamer to Darlinghurst; I accompanied him in the cab ; he said something
to me on the way from the steamer to the cab ; he looked round at me and said,
“ I’m very much obliged to you for getting my face washedthis w r as on the
wharf, as we were coming from the steamer to the cab ; I had caused the blood


to be washed from his face ; he also said, “ I don’t care for death, I’m sorry I
missed my aim—l made a mess of it; this was said to me voluntarily ; I
had not spoken to him at all; he said he was a Fenian and ‘ ‘ God save Ireland
this was not on the wharf, it was when I first got hold of him at Clontarf ; he was
then kicking and plunging, and I had hold of one of his legs ; he said, “I’m a Fenian
—God save Ireland I was from twenty to twenty-five yards from him when the
shots were fired, and came up immediately he was laid hold of ; there was a rush
made; immediately after he had said he had made a “mess of it,” he said
**l can’t help it now.”
Prisoner had no questions to ask this witness.
Richard Musgrove, examined : lam a sergeant of police, stationed at Sydney;
I was at the Sailors’ Home Picnic, at Clontarf, yesterday ; I heard a shot fired
just after the Duke came from the lucheon table ; I assisted in securing prisoner ;
lie was then on the ground ; I did not notice anybody else there ; I got hold of
prisoner by the hair and shoulder ; he said “I’m a bloody Fenian, and I’ll die for
my countryl noticed a revolver in his left-hand outside breast pocket of his coat;
he was on the ground and just rising ; I seized the pistol; I thought he had hold of
it and was trying to fire it, and told the crowd to look out, as he had another
pistol; I saw that all the chambers of the pistol were loaded and capped ; it is a
small sized Colt’s revolver; I did not find anything else in his pocket; it was in
the same condition as now when I took it from him; it is a new pistol, with the
brand of “ Challener, gunmaker, Sydney I stuck to prisoner till we got near
the wharf, and accompanied him to Sydney.
John Robinson, examined : lam a constable stationed in the Sydney district;
I was on duty at the picnic at Clontarf yesterday ; I assisted in apprehending and
bringing the prisoner to Sydney; I heard shots fired there ; the prisoner in my
bearing said something shortly after the shots were fired; he said, “ I’ve done my
duty and I can die for my countryafter getting him into the steamer, he said,
“It can’t be helped now, I’ve made a mess of itl do not recollect that he had
Said before anything to which this had reference.
Prisoner had no questions to ask this witness. He was remanded till Monday,
the 16th March.
SECOND DAY, March 16th.
Among those present at the inquiry this day were Commodore Lambert, the
Hon. Eliot Yorke, Viscount Newry, Captain Beresford, Captain Lyons, Lieutenant
Haig, Commander Campbell, Mr. 0. W. Brierley, Mr. C. E. Romilly, Lieutenant
Vane, R.N. ; Lieutenant Romilly, R.N. ; the Hon. T. A. Murray, Sir W.
Manning, the Hon. S. D. Gordon, Mr. J. H. Neale, M. L. A., Mr. R. Hill, and
Mr. E. Hill.
Prisoner’s appearance to-day was considerably improved, the swelling of his face
reduced, and his eyes were less inflamed. There is nothing remarkable in the
expression of his countenance, and well dressed as he was when his crime was
committed, he would have passed as an individual of respectable intelligent
aspect.
Superintendent Orridge recalled: The charge upon which I apprehended
prisoner was that of shooting with intent to murder His Royal Highness the
Duke of Edinburgh.
The Crown Solicitor : Wounding with intent to murder ? Wounding with
intent to murder.—ln your deposition of Friday last did you state that you
charged him with this offence ? I did so.
Sir William Montagu Manning, Knight, examined : I was at the Sailors’ Home
Picnic at Clontarf on Thursday last; I was first at luncheon with the Duke of
Edinburgh, and when he retired from the luncheon table I retired with him ; I
went out of the luncheon tent at the same time as the Duke of Edinburgh, His
Excellency Lord Belmore, Lady Belmore, and some others ; the Duke led Lady


Belmore to the pavilion or private tent provided for him, and Lord Belmore,
accompanied by a lady and myself, followed to the same tent; the Duke then
signified to me in some way that he desired my attendance, walked a little way
from the tent, and went in a direction towards the trees skirting the bay—towards
the water—accompanied by myself only; he very shortly after said he wished
to present a donation to the Sailors’ Home, and gave me an envelope ; we went a
little further in the same direction, and meeting with Mr. and Mrs. George Allen,
he shook hands with Mr. Allen, and then proceeded farther, still going in the same
direction towards the bay ; His Royal Highness was conversing with me when I
heard an explosion, which appeared to me like that of some small firework or
cracker discharged in the air ; it was very close to me ; but at the time I had no
idea what it was ; perhaps I should mention that His Royal Highness was on my
right, and I was very slightly behind the line of his course—merely a short,
respectful distance from him, and scarcely enough to say behind him ; I think the
Duke made some exclamation indicating that he was struck, but I could not under-
take to say that I saw him fall, or that I saw he was hit; immediately after the
report he either said something or was falling; whichever it was it led me to an
impression that he was struck; I faced round towards the direction the report had
come from, and I believe I advanced towards the man I saw, but whereabouts that
man was I cannot say exactly ; the definite recollection I have is that I saw a man
standing not far from me ; however much I moved I cannot recollect, whether one
pace or many; when I turned round I saw the man ; I Cannot say whether he
had anything in his hand or not ; I cannot be very definite as to where he was
standing ; he must have been behind the Duke ; I cannot say he was immediately
behind, but he was behind the Duke ; I believe I advanced in a direction towards
him ; after a short interval I noticed a man I should judge to be two or three
paces from me and facing me ; I cannot be certain even of advancing, but I know
that was my impulse ; very shortly I saw a man corresponding in general descrip-
tion to the prisoner now before the Court, but dressed, as appeared to me at a
momentary glance, like a gentleman, and facing me ; he presented a pistol at me ;
I could see the very small single barrel; he was in the act of presenting the pistol
at me as I thought in a line with my head ; it appeared to be so ; it appeared to
me that he was on the very instant of firing, and I lowered myself to the ground as
quickly as 1 could to avoid the shot, as it were, or get out of the line of his fire ; in
so doing I lost my balance, and fell completely down ; I believe I fell, but before I
fell quite down, or before I began to move, or when I was falling, I saw that the
pistol snapped ; I was in the act of rising I believe; almost instantly afterwards,
I saw the man again at what appeared to me a somewhat greater distance, although
I could not be sure of it, and presenting a pistol again ; he was presenting what
appeared to be the same pistol; it was impossible he could have had time to
change it; it appeared to me, having my eye on him at the time, and on nothing
else, that the pistol was pointed directly at myself; just at that instant I saw two
arms come round the man’s arms, from his back, and clasped in front; I could
not see the man, but the arms came from behind just at the instant; the man
with the pistol appeared to be about to fire ; very shortly afterwards the pistol
exploded, but how quickly after I am not able to state ; it was almost immedi-
ately ; the next thing I saw after I got up was a cluster of men on the ground at
the spot where the man had been; they were leaning over something on the
ground and struggling ; I observed one or, as I thought, two policemen trying to
pull some of them off; I think there were two policemen ; it was somewhat at my
right hand that I saw the cluster of men, or so they seemed as I was then stand-
ing ; almost on the same instant I saw on my left hand a number of men carrying
His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh towards his private pavilion or tent,
and I beard His Royal Highness say something to this effect, “ Carry me more
easily, or gently I then followed the party carrying the Duke, and took no more
notice of the man or anything that occurred in reference to him ; I could not take
upon myself to say I recognise the prisoner as being the man ; it occurred to me at
the time that he was a man about five feet ten or eleven inches in height, slight
and straight, a man about his figure and stamp, but I cannot say it was he being
strange to me ; it was a man of his figure, stamp, and general appearance; I have
no recollection of hearing an expression from him, but I recollect something
stopped me short.


By Mr. Voss : Just as he presented the pistol? I know something stopped me
short just before the pistol was presented, but I cannot recollect what it was ; I
cannot state what was said.
Prisoner : I have no question to ask, but I would make a remark. If he had
not come forward I would have shot the Duke a second time.
The Crown Solicitor : Will the prisoner repeat what he has just said ?
Prisoner: If Sir William Manning had not rushed between me and the Duke,
the Duke would have received a second shot. He rushed right at me. The
Prince would have received a second shot, and I should have shot myself ; but I
had not time to do it. Of course I had nothing to do with Sir William Manning.
John Terence M’Mahon examined : lama clerk in the General Post Office,
Sydney; I was at the Sailors’ Home Picnic, at Clontarf, on Thursday last, I saw
the Duke of Edinburgh there ; some time after 2 o’clock I think ; I did not see
him come out of the refreshment booth; I saw him shortly afterwards coming
from his own tent towards the beach ; this was between 2 and 3 o’clock ; I was
then standing near the jetty where the people land ; Sir William Manning was
with him; at that time I saw the Duke coming along towards the beach and
speaking to Sir William, and the lady who was standing speaking to me asked
me to walk towards the Duke so that she might see his face ; I did so ; whilst I
was looking in the direction of the Duke (I do not think I was looking at him),
and when within less than ten yards of him, and meeting him with the intention
when we got nearer to cross on his left, I saw a man coming along from the
direction of the tent, walking outside the crowd ; the people did not follow His
Royal Highness, but seemed to form a kind of half circle ; the man was walking
towards the Duke; after he got close, or within about twenty yards from him,
the man got out of the crowd into the green; he did not quicken his pace just
then, but did so afterwards ; he got closer to the centre of the green as he got
closer to the Duke, and when he came within less than twenty yards he walked
hastily up to him ; I watched him then, as I wanted to know what he intended
to do, thinking he was going to call the Duke’s attention to something behind ; I
kept my eye on him ; when he got straight behind the Duke, he came about a
step, I should think, to the left of His Royal Highness—a little towards Sir
William Manning; he came within an arm’s length of the Duke, so' close that I
am quite positive that he touched his back ; I did not see anything in his hand,
because Sir William Manning was a little between him and me, but I know his
hand touched the Duke’s back, lam quite certain of that; I heard a report
directly, and saw the Duke fall on his hands I think, and give an awful scream j
I did not see a pistol fired ; there was no smoke, and the report seemed nothing
more than that of a Chinese cracker ; I rushed up the moment I saw the Duke
fall; as I was running I passed on my right Sir William Manning and the tall
man who I imagined had fired the shot ; as I passed them I heard the cocking
of a pistol, being quite close ; I heard the snapping and cocking of a pistol just
as I rushed past; I saw Sir William Manning with his hands up, whether one or
two I cannot say ; I thought they appeared to be trying to grapple each other at
the time ; I should think their hands were about a yard apart; I did not hear
another shot; I passed on to the Duke and covered his body entirely from the
prisoner, who was in a line quite behind me ; my body was between the Duke and
Sir William Manning and the prisoner ; then I assisted the Duke into the tent,
and stayed with him till he came to Sydney.
The Crown Solicitor : Now who is the man you have been speaking of who
fired the shot ? Witness: Just ask the prisoner to stand up. (Prisoner, who
had been sitting from the commencement of this day’s proceedings, now rose.)
The man was his height, he is just the style of man, and is the same I believe; I
believe him to be the man; he was dressed in black, and had a very gentlemanly
appearance, so much so that I thought him a person of the Duke’s suite, or con-
nected with the management of the picnic; I have no doubt that prisoner is
the man.
Prisoner had no question to ask this witness.
William Henry Glading examined: I am a publican living at Waverley, near
this city ; I have seen the prisoner at the bar before ; it was on Wednesday last,
about half-past 11 o’clock in the morning ; he came into my house ; he called for


& glass of ale, and asked me if I had heard the report of a revolver ; he said he
had discharged it at the back of my house ; when he left my house I accompanied
him to the hill to shew him Waverley ; he took his handkerchief out of his pocket
and showed me some bullet holes in it; the handkerchief was white, and some-
thing like a lady’s handkerchief ; there were some holes in it; he put his finger
through one, and said “The washerwoman will think I have been doing some-
thing he asked me at what distance I thought he had fired at the mark, and
when I asked him at what distance he said seven yards ; he said something about
going to the ball; he said he was never so much sucked in as he was last night;
I asked him the reason; he said he had bought a ticket, and had no dress coat—
that he went to a tailor and engaged one for the night—that he left the ticket with
the tailor till he called for the coat—and that when he came back for it the coat
and the ticket were both gone ; he asked me what kind of place Clontarf was, but
not in reference to anything else he said, that I can recollect.
Prisoner had no question to ask the witness.
Alexander Watson (naval surgeon serving on board H.M.S. Challenger) recalled:
With the assistance of Dr. Young I extracted the ball from the body of the Duke
of Edinburgh on Saturday morning last at 8 o’clock ; I am now pretty nearly able
to state what his wound is, and where it commenced and terminated; the ball
entered two inches to the right of the spine, on a level with the ninth rib ; it went
to within about two inches of the breast bone ; I believe it has passed round to
within two inches of the breast bone ; I have the bullet with me (bullet produced);
I see the revolver produced (the revolver picked up from the ground, and having
two chambers discharged) ; I believe this bullet would have come from that
instrument.
Prisoner had no question to ask the witness.
John Carffrey examined : I am a squatter, from the colony of Victoria ; I iden-
tify the prisoner ; he was introduced to me as Henry O’Farrell, at his brother’s
house in Melbourne, about fourteen years ago ; to the best of my recollection it
was in 1855 ; it might have been 1854.
Prisoner had no question to ask this witness.
Arthur Balfour Haig, examined : I am a lieutenant of the Royal Engineers, and
an equerry to the Duke of Edinburgh ; his Christian names are Alfred Ernest
Albert.
Prisoner had no question to ask this witness.
This was the case for the Crown.
Mr. Voss : Prisoner, you will now hear the whole of the evidence read over.
Prisoner : You need not read it over.
The whole of the depositions having been read by Mr. Lees, his Worship called
upon prisoner to stand up, and then asked him if he had anything to say, at the
same time administering the usual caution before committals.
Prisoner : I have nothing to say but that the task of executing the Duke was
Bent out and allotted to me.
The Crown Solicitor: Will you repeat what you have just said ?
Prisoner : The task of executing the Prince was sent out to me, but I failed,
and lam not very sorry that I did fail. That is all I have to say.
He was then formally committed to take his trial at the Central Criminal Court,
to be holden at Darlinghurst, on the 26th instant.
ADDRESSES TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS.
From all sections of the community ancl from all parts of the colony addresses of
condolence, expressive of the horror and indignation felt at the attempt to assas-
sinate His Royal Highness, have been forwarded to His Excellency Earl Belmore
for presentation to the Duke upon his recovery. The addresses are, of course, too
lengthy to publish in full, but we give a list of those presented up to this date.


From the—
Legislative Council
Legislative Assembly
Members of the Civil Service
Consuls of Foreign Nations
Warden and Fellows of St. Paul’s
College
Rector and Fellows of St. John’s
College
The colonists of New South Wales in
public meeting assembled
Members of the Union Club
Inhabitants of Manly Beach
Officers and members of the Prince
Alfred Yacht Club
Mayor and Aldermen of Wollongong
Council of the Municipality of West
Maitland
Citizens of Goulburn
Inhabitants of Ashfield
Members of the Unity Lodge of Free-
masons, No. 1169
Residents of Berrima
Inhabitants of Richmond
Roman Catholics of Raymond Terrace
district
Citizens of Newcastle
Bench of Magistrates, Bathurst
Mayor and Aldermen of Morpeth
Inhabitants of Paddington
Mayor and Aldermen of Albury
Inhabitants of Windsor
Inhabitants of Mudgee
Inhabitants of Parramatta
Inhabitants of Clarence Town
Residents of the Hunter River district
Inhabitants of the district of Quoan-
beyan
Roman Catholic Clergy of Bathurst
Inhabitants of Penrith
Inhabitants of Tamworth
Inhabitants of Campbelltown
Inhabitants of Raymond Terrace
Inhabitants of Gunnedah
Civil Service of South Australia
Residents of Adelong
Residents of Young
Inhabitants of Burrowa
Residents of Paterson
Inhabitants of Armidale
Members of the Hunter River Agri-
cultural Association
Inhabitants of Picton
Inhabitants of Murrurundi
Inhabitants of the town and district
of Hay
Inhabitants of Uralla, Rocky River
Inhabitants of Muswellbrook
Inhabitants of Kiama and district
Inhabitants of the Glebe
Residents of the district of Cooma
The Royal Alfred Australian Volun*
teer Fire Company, No. 1
Inhabitants of Ulladulla
Members of Temperance Societies in.
the city of Sydney
Residents of the North Shore
Members of the Sydney Volunteer
Fire Brigade, No. 2
Inhabitants of Carcoar
Inmates of the Hyde Park Asylum
Inhabitants of Gladstone, Queensland
Inhabitants of Nelligen
Residents of Burwood
Inmates of the Liverpool Asylum
Inhabitants of Waverley
Inhabitants of Woollahra
Chinese residents in the city of Syd-
ney
Native-born Australians
Grand Orange Lodge of New South
Wales
Members of the Guild of St. Mary
and St. Joseph
Inhabitants of Waterloo
Inhabitants of Randwick
Inhabitants of Brookfield
Inhabitants of Merriwa
Inhabitants of Yass
Roman Catholic Bishop and Clergy of
Brisbane, Queensland
Inhabitants of Rockhampton, Queens-
land
Inhabitants of Deniliquin
District Council of Maitland
Inhabitants of Wagga Wagga
Mayor and Corporation of Bowen,
Queensland
Inhabitants of Gundagai
Inhabitants of Maryborough, Queens-
land
Irish Residents of Albury
Bishop and Clergy of the Church of
England Diocese of Sydney
Committee of the Wesleyan Church
of New South Wales
Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
Sydney
Citizens of the United States of
America resident in New South
Wales
Members of the District Grand Lodge
of Freemasons
Inhabitants of Bathurst
Inhabitants of Balmain
Mayor and Aldermen of Parramatta
Mayor and Council of Marrickville
Inhabitants of Singleton
Inhabitants of Redfern
Inhabitants of district of Camden
Clergy, Magistrates, and Residents of
the district of Liverpool


His Royal Highness has been pleased to make the following reply to the above
addresses :
Government House, Sydney,
19th March, 1868.
I have received, with sincere gratification, these numerous addresses, and desire
to return my warm thanks for the expression of sympathy which they contain.
The cowardly act of one individual has not, in any degree, shaken my confidence
in the loyalty of the people of this colony towards the Throne and person of Her
Majesty, or in their affection for myself ; and I shall gladly convey to the Queen
the universal expression of horror and indignation which the attempt to assassinate
me has called forth from Her Majesty’s faithful subjects in Australia.
Alfred.
ARRAIGNMENT OF O’FARRELL.
CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT.
Thursday, March 26th, 1868.
0 Farrell was yesterday brought up for trial at a Special Sitting of the Central
Criminal Court, held at Harlinghurst, his Honor Mr. Justice Cheeke presiding.
At an early hour the main entrance to the Court House was besieged by a crowd
anxious for admittance with a view to obtaining places in the body of the Court
most. favourable for observing the proceedings. A large police force occupied the
interior, and were disposed so as to command the whole interior space, while an
almost equally numerous body guarded the avenues and precincts of the building.
On the seats at either side of the bench we observed among others, Viscount
Newry, the Hon. Eliot Yorke, Lieutenant Haig, the Minister for Lands, the
Postmaster-General, the Hon. T. Icely, Adjutant Barker (Qeeen’s Own), Captain
H. Nelson, R. N. The members of the bar present were the Attorney-General,
the Solicitor-General, Mr. Aspinall (of Melbourne), Mr. Halley, and Mr. Charles
Campbell.
The jury panel summoned was more than usually large, in anticipation of an
extensive challenge, the ordinary number of forty-eight or fifty being increased to
seventy-two.
His Honor took his seat on the Bench precisely at ten o’clock.
Mr. Attorney-General Martin, with Mr. Solicitor-General Isaacs, appeared for
the Crown : prisoner was defended by Mr. Aspinall, with whom was associated
Mr. Halley, who has just arrived from Mudgee, at which place he received his
retainer by telegram.
The prisoner when placed in the dock was very much improved in general
appearance since his committal, the discoloration and swelling of various parts of
his face having passed away, leaving a somewhat haggard expression. He was
neatly dressed in a suit of light tweed. There was not the same stolidity of
manner, and he seemed so much more keenly alive to things going on around him,
that they produced an evident uneasiness, more particularly noticeable in his con-
sultations with his attorney, who apparently had some difficulty in engaging his
fixed attention. When the indictment was read, and he was called upon to plead,
he uttered a low and indistinct “Not guilty.”
Mr. Aspinall then said at that stage of the case he had an application to make
to the Court on an affidavit to the following effect :
In the Supreme Court of New South Wales, Criminal Jurisdiction.
THE QUEEN versus H. J. O’FARRELL.
On this twenty-sixth day of March in the year one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, Thoma*
Pavey, of Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria, solicitor, being duly sworn, maketh oath and saith as
follows;


1. I was instructed in Melbourne on Friday last by the sisters of the prisoner to defend him herein,
and on Saturday I proceeded to Ballarat for the purpose of procuring evidence of witnesses on behalf
of the prisoner herein. I returned to Melbourne on Monday, and immediately left per steamer for
Sydney, where I arrived about four o’clock this morning.
2. I have brought with me three witnesses on behalf of the prisoner, but one witness, the proprie-
tor of the hotel at Emerald Hill, where the prisoner resided just before leaving Melbourne, and
whom I am informed and verily believe is a material and necessary witness on behalf of the prisoner,
I was not able to bring with me, and I believe he will arrive by the steamer that was to leave Mel-
bourne yesterday. I have given instructions to procure his attendance and pay his expenses.
3. I am informed and believe there are other witnesses for the prisoner, material and necessary
for his defence, to be procured in Sydney, but owing to my only arriving in Sydney so lately, it was
impossible to have subpoenaed them ; and it is material and necessary a consultation should be had
by the counsel retained for the defence.
4. The defence to be made on behalf of the prisoner is that he is, and was at the time the act was
committed, a person of unsound mind, and this application is made bona fide and not for the purpose
of delay.
With, regard to this affidavit, he (Mr. Aspinall) did not believe the law officers of
the Crown would desire to press on the case under the circumstances it disclosed.
Postponement for any lengthened period was not asked for, nor was it requested
with a view to impede the course of justice. All he sought for was twenty-four
hours, or, if this should not suit the convenience of jurors and the Court, that the
hearing might go over to Monday. If prisoner had the means for his own defence
no doubt—a fortnight having elapsed since his committal —-the Crown might
reasonably have insisted upon proceeding, as he would have had time to make the
necessary arrangements for his defence; but those who alone could provide for it
had not made up their own minds as to his identity and relationship, or as. to
their means being such as to place them in a position in any way to assist him.
They eventually came to the determination that it was their duty to place, the
case before the Court in its entirety, in order that something might be said in
reference to his state of mind. There was no desire to embarrass the Crown in
the smallest degree ; but it might be urged on behalf of the prisoner that it would
surely be a hardship if, on account of inconvenience to jurors and others, he should
be deprived of an opportunity to bring forward witnesses, whose evidence was
deemed requisite for a bona fide defence. He would submit that such a trial
should be conducted with as much deliberation and calmness as possible, and he
trusted the Court would be good enough in its discretion to decide that this man
might not be pressed when any matter material to the satisfaction of justice was
wanting. Justice would not be delayed, and would be more satisfied when the
Court had fully heard both sides. He begged the learned Attorney-General and
Solicitor-General in their mercy would regard this application favorably.. It
might entail extra expense and trouble, but could be no hindrance to the strictest
justice. Twenty-four hours would suffice, although a postponement to Monday
would be of more advantage to the justice of the case, and there could then be no
complaint that reasonable opportunity had not been given to obtain a trial in which
the prisoner’s rights were fully regarded. If this delay should not be granted, the
trial must take its course ; but it was obvious that, having been so recently in-
structed in Melbourne, and having to search for people there, as well as subse-
quently for others in Sydney, his defence could be anything but complete. He
submitted this application, hoping the Crown law officers would see no objection
to it, as having in the slightest any effect likely to defeat the object in this trial,
which they and he must desire to see carried out to the full satisfaction of justice.
Mb. Martin said his learned friend appealed to himself and the Solicitor-
General. Such an appeal was rather a singular one to make to persons in their
position. They had nothing to do with anything but the discharge of their duty
in this prosecution. The defence set up was insanity. Well it appeared to him
quite clear that to warrant the Court in granting an application of this kind the
affidavit should have shown that there was reasonable and probable ground to
infer that evidence could be brought forward in support of such a defence. But
the affidavit did not state a single fact to show that the prisoner was at any time
insane. Unless such circumstances were adduced he would be perfectly war-
ranted in resisting the application. The matter of expense was of no consider-
ation ; it was a matter of no concern whether the trial cost much or little ;. but it
was all important that evenhanded justice should be meted out to the prisoner,
and as the delay asked for was so very short, he conceived, on reflection, that the


proper course for him (Mr. Martin) to take was not to oppose the application. It
was to be hoped that, if the proceedings were delayed till to-morrow, the learned
counsel for the defence would be prepared with all witnesses he might think
necessary to go on with the case, and he (Mr. Martin) should be sorry if material
evidence that could be procured within so short a time were precluded from a
hearing. He consented, on the part of the Crown, to the postponement of this
trial till to-morrow.
Mr. Aspinall would remind his learned friend that if the trial lasted over two
days, as it was likely to do, it would go over the Sunday. If the case were post-
poned till Monday, it might afford a chance of finding one or more persons
necessary as witnesses. Still if this would occasion any public inconvenience, he
would not ask for more than his learned friend had conceded.
His Honor : The evidence cannot be lengthy.
Mr. Martin did not wish any course taken in this trial that would not be
taken in any other ; and whilst he was not desirous of pressing it on rapidly, he
was anxious to avoid groundless delay.
His Honor : If the trial is prolonged to Monday, there will be some incon-
venience.
Mr. Aspinall said, one object of the proposal for postponement was to
ascertain the whereabouts of witnesses in Sydney, wholly unknown to prisoner’s
family. He did not see exactly on what ground a postponement to Monday could
be objectionable, supposing the case would go beyond Saturday. It would give
an opportunity of searching into prisoner’s antecedents in this colony. They were
at present utterly in the dark as to his mode of life here. It might be there were
no witnesses to bring forward ; but there might be those who would save his
life.
His Honor : Prisoner has had notice of trial fully ten days.
Mr. Aspinall : That notice under the circumstances, might be to him very
little. His sister arrived only this morning, and on prosecuting inquiry, it was
found that she was a witness to his insanity at an early stage.
Mr. Martin thought it would be more convenient to the jury if the postpone-
ment were made till Monday.
His Honor : I know jurymen generally do not like to be here on Saturdays.
Mr. Martin ; Then I consent to the postponement till Monday.
Mr. Isaacs suggested that the counsel for the defence should be called upon to
supply by noon on Saturday a list of the witnesses he intended to bring forward,
so that time might be given to ascertain their character.
His Honor : That is rather unusual, I think.
Mr. Martin : Never mind, your Honor ; we do not press it.
His Honor : The postponement being acceded to by the Crown till Monday
morning at 10 o’clock, he would remind jurymen that the whole of the panel
would have to attend at that time.
The Court was adjourned at twenty-five minutes to 11, until 10 o’clock on
Monday morning, March 30th.
TRIAL OF HENRY JAMES O’FARRELL.
CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT.
Monday, March 30.
Before his Honor Mr. Justice Clieeke.
Henry James O’Farrell, who was arraigned on Thursday last on an indictment
which charged him with having on the 12th March instant, 1868, at Middle Har-
bour, in this colony, wounded, with intent to murder, Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke
of Edinburgh, and to which indictment he had pleaded not guilty, was to-day
brought up for trial.


The Court was crowded, and large numbers of the public anxiously sought for,
but could not gain, admittance. Among those present we the French
Consul, the Minister for Lands, Viscount Newry, Captain Lyons, R. N., Adjutant
Barker (Queen’s Own Regiment), the Hon. Eliot Yorke, Commander Campbell,
Dr. Young, R.N., Mr. Farie (Sheriff of Victoria), Mr. W. 0. Brierly, the Hon.
Mr. Fitzgeorge, Captain Taylor, R.N., Captain Beresford, Lieutenant Haig, Dr.
Powell, R.N., Lieutenant Romilly, R.N., Mr. Judge Forbes, Mr. Judge Simpson,
and several members of Parliament.
When the jury came to be sworn there were only four challenges, and those
solely by the Crown. The following was the jury who tried the case •’ Charles
Frederick Priddy, William Newland, John Ogden, Robert Orford, Michael IS eehill,
William Nelson, Edward Newton, Charles Pitt, Alexander Norton, Stephen Nut-
ter, Emanuel Neish, aud Robert Oliver.
Mr. Attorney-General Martin and Mr. Solicitor-General Isaacs appeared tor the
Crown ; prisoner was defended by Mr. Aspinall (of Melbourne), and Mr. Dailey,
instructed by Mr. Pavey (the latter also of Melbourne). _ .
The Attorney-General, in opening the case for the Crown, addressing the jury,
said the prisoner stood charged with wounding with intent to murder His Loyal
Highness the Duke of Edinburgh. Scarcely any crime was more likely to enlist:
the feelings of Englishmen in any position in which they might be placed than this
particular offence with which prisoner was indicted; but this was not the place
wherein to indulge such feelings. The crime must lie examined into and dealt:
with by the jury in no other manner than that in which a like crime committed
against any other person would be treated. His Royal Highness was one of Her
Majesty’s subjects, and the law threw no greater protection around his person
than it did in reference to the meanest of her other subjects. Therefore it w T ould
be improper, if he were able, under any circumstances, to do so, by making any
allusions to aggravate the charge this prisoner was called upon to answer. _ He
should be discharging his duty if he avoided all reference to matters which might
lead the jury away from the precise issue before them. The facts of the case were
simple, and in the evidence it was expected those facts, as placed before the jury,
would be very briefly stated. It was not necessary to take up time by reasoning
upon them, or by impressing them upon the minds of the jury. It appeared that
on the 12th of this month His Royal Highness attended by invitation a large
assemblage brought together at Middle Harbour, for the purpose of raising funds
in aid of a charitable institution. Some thousands of persons were present at a
place called Clontarf, and after luncheon, and about three o’clock in the afternoon.
His Royal Highness, with Sir William Manning, were proceeding from a tent
erected on this ground in the direction of the Galatea band, stationed near the
beach, and had reached an open space in which they were walking about half-way
between the tent and the band, when this prisoner stepped from the crowd, walked
hurriedly, or ran towards the Prince, and, having approached him within a foot
or two, presented a revolver at his back and fired. His Royal Highness fell. Sir
William Manning turned round, looked at prisoner, made a step or two towards
him, and prisoner then presented a revolver at him. All this did not occupy
more than a few seconds, but before prisoner could do more Mr. Vial, a coach-
builder of this city, with great presence of mind, that deserved the grateful recog-
nition of this community and of the civilised world, stepped forward and ran towards
prisoner as he presented the revolver for another shot, threw his arms around
him, then pressed down his right arm as another shot wa3 fired. This was the shot
that wounded Mr. Thorne. From the shot fired at His Royal Highness a bullet
entered his back, and appeared to have traversed the right side and lodged beneath
the skin a little below the breast. A great scuffle ensued, a number of persons
rushed up to seize the prisoner, during which time the pistol that had been hred
fell to the ground. Although it was not absolutely necessary, this pistol would be
produced. Four of the chambers were still loaded, two having been discharged.
It would be necessary to prove, and for the Crown to make out to the satisfaction
of the jury, that prisoner wounded His Royal Highness. The legal description of
a wound was such an injury as cut through the entire skin. Ihe law did not
recognise as a wound any personal injury unless the true skin was divided ; and
therefore it was necessary to prove that the true skin was divided by the bail fired


by the prisoner, and that the prisoner inflicted the wound having at the time an
intent to commit murder, for with no other intent than this could the charge made
against prisoner be made out. The proof of the wounding would be in the evidence
of persons who saw the prisoner fire the shot when within a yard or two feet, or
at all events very close to His Royal Highness. His Royal Highness fell to the
ground, and, on being examined there and then, the marks of what appeared to be
a gunshot wound were found upon his person, and a day or two after a bullet was
extracted from his body, shewing that the cause of his falling was the wound
inflicted by this bullet fired by the prisoner. Then as to intent; any person doing
any act was in law presumed to contemplate the ordinary consequences. If one
person fired upon another with a revolver, the presumption in law was, that the
ordinary consequences of such an act were intended to follow. The law, there-
fore, even although there was not expression of the intent inferred that the intent
was to take life, if in the ordinary course of things life would be taken by firing in
that way. If the prisoner fired from a distance of a few feet, it would appear that
he had but one intent, that was to take the life of His Royal Highness. The per-
son who fired a deadly weapon under such circumstances, when the loss of life,
except by a miracle, must in the ordinary operation of cause to effect ensue, must
be presumed to intend to take life. But the prisoner made use of remarks that
indicated what his intent was. He said he had “ made a mess of it.” It was not
desired to prejudice the prisoner by any statement that would not be borne out by
evidence, but this indication by prisoner of his intention to take the life of His
Royal Highness would be deposed to in evidence ; and the act itself was of such a
character as to leave little doubt that there was an intent to take life. When the
prisoner was seized by Mr. Yial a great commotion took place, as any one might
magine would be the case, and prisoner was knocked about and severely injured,
as also was Mr. Vial. A strong desire was expressed, in something more than
words, to deal with him on the spot, and some persons provided a rope to hang
him there and then. It required all the authority of a number of influential gen-
tlemen present at the time to prevent that catastrophe. We might congratulate
ourselves that no such crime was committed. It would have been a disgrace to
the community, if under the impulse of any excited feelings, however praiseworthy
in their nature, the prisoner had been dealt with without such a trial as the laws
of the country required. It would have been as great a crime as that charged
against the prisoner, and would have showed a lawless spirit, casting an almost
indelible stain upon the country in the eyes of the civilised world. From this
however, fortunately, we had been saved. How, the prisoner was called upon to
answer for the offence,'the jury must deal with him in the same impartial spirit
as that they would show in regard to any other case brought before them, and
although the prisoner might be shown to be guilty, it must be seen that his case
was not dealt with in a spirit of vengeance and partiality, but received the same
calm, cool, and dispassionate inquiry as if the offence were of the most trivial
character. The offence of which he was accused was not to be considered as a
crime against the Duke of Edinburgh, but as a crime against our laws, because he
had committed a felonious act; and the jury would have to examine the evidence
with the same degree of impartiality as they would exercise in any other case.
Happily the life of His Royal Highness had been saved; under Divine Providence
he had recovered from the wound ; and although we might express our indignation
at the attempt made upon his life, it would be some consolation to us to let the
whole world know that we did not deal summarily with his assailant under any
feeling of excitement, but had examined his case calmly, impartially, and fairly,
so that the British Empire and the world might have an example not of our
vengeance, but of our justice,
John Waisthall Orridge sworn, and examined by the Solicitor-General: lam
superintendent of Police for the Southern District of this colony; I remember
being at Clontarf on the 12th of this month ; I recognise the prisoner at the bar ;
I saw him at Clontarf on that day, at about 3 o’clock in the afternoon; His
Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh was at Clontarf on that occasion ; at the
time I mentioned I observed His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh and Sir
William Manning leaving the luncheon tent and walking towards the beach ; I
have no idea what their purpose or intention was ; they were in an open space;


there was a considerable crowd about, but none of the people were close to them,
and I could see them distinctly ; the crowd partially surrounded them, but kept
away from them; I was about seventy yards distant, and on the right hand side
of them ; I was looking in the direction of Sydney, and facing them ; the crowd
was principally behind them ; I observed the prisoner come out of the crowd,
take two or three quick steps, and when he got within two or three yards of His
Royal Highness, present a revolver at his back ; the prisoner was alone ; when I
first observed him he was five or six yards from His Royal Highness, as far as I
can judge, when he took two or three steps and presented the pistol; I then
began to run towards the Prince, and almost immediately saw and heard the
revolver discharged ; I saw the Prince fall on his hands and knees ; I am certain
that the revolver was in the hands of the prisoner, and that the shot was fired by
him ; I did not hear any other shot at that time; I ran as hard as I could towards
the prisoner, and as I was running I heard a second shot; the crowd was gathering
round the prisoner and some bystanders had seized him when I reached the spot;
I seized the prisoner, and did not leave him until I brought him to Darlinghurst
gaol; I heard a second shot fired, but could not observe the direction at the time j
I did not see whether the Prince was wounded ; there was considerable struggling,
and some difficulty in getting the prisoner away, so that my time was occupied in
endeavouring to secure him ; we had very great difficulty in getting him on board
the steamer; 1 had no conversation with the prisoner, but he made an observation
as we were going to the gaol; he said “ I have made a mess of it, and all for no
good that was not in reply to any previous remark made by any one, or in
answer to anything addressed to him ; I imagined the prisoner was speaking to
himself—that was my idea at the time ; I did not get the revolver at the time,
but I believe it will be produced at this trial; the prisoner was a good deal
knocked about; his eyes were blackened, his face much bruised, and his clothes
nearly torn off his back ; there was a good deal of blood on his face.
William Vial sworn and examined by the Attorney-General: lam a coachmaker
residing in Elizabeth-street, Sydney; I was at Middle Harbour on the 12th of this
month ; after I had retired from the luncheon tent, near 3 o’clock in the afternoon,
I walked down the green with two young ladies to the back of His Royal High-
ness’s pavilion ; we stood there, and then I requested the young ladies to withdraw
to allow other persons to pass in ; we left the Royal pavilion, and were walking
down the green in conversation, of which the Prince was the topic, when I saw
His Royal Highness leave the tent with Sir William Manning and some ladies •,
I saw them walk to the pavilion ; His Royal Highness and Sir William Manning
then went apart from the rest, and I saw the Prince present Sir William Manning
with an envelope ; then they walked down towards where I was standing under
some trees ; a short distance off they met Mr. and Mrs. Allen ; the Prince shook
hands with Mr. Allen, bowed politely to Mrs. Allen, and then came along the path
X was standing on ; just as he came into a line with me, I saw a man come out of
the crowd and stand and level a pistol at His Royal Highness’s back ; the pistol
went off, the prisoner being at the time not more than four feet from His Royal
Highness : I saw His Royal Highness fall, and called out, “ My God ! he lias shot
the Prince as the Prince fell Sir William Manning turned round and stepped
towards the prisoner, who called out “ Stand back !” or something like it, and
levelled his pistol; Sir William Manning, to avoid the shot, fell down, and before
the prisoner had time to aim again, I was upon him ; I rushed at him as quick as
possible, and got my arms round his body ; at that moment the prisoner turned
round and swore at me ; he tried to bring the pistol round at me, but found that
he could not do so ; I believe he used the words that 1 stated in my previous
examination; I think those were the words ; he levelled the pistol again, but I
slipped my hand down his arm, and pulled the pistol just as it went off; His Royal
Highness was on the ground then, and Sir William Manning was just endeavouring
to get up ; I believe the prisoner to be the man who fired the shot; I huve seen
him twice since that time ; he fired the second shot when I got him round the
arms ; I called out, “I have got him,” and called for assistance; in a few minutes
there was plenty of assistance, and in the hurry the people used me rather roughly ;
I did not let the man go until after we fell to the ground, when we were literally
pulled asunder by the crowd; that is all I know of the matter ; when I came to


look round I found the prisoner was on board the steamer ; I did not make any
other remark that I can remember besides those I have stated.
Henry Clarke, sworn, and examined by the Solicitor-General: lam a merchant,
carrying on business at the Victoria Wharf, Erskine-street; I remember being at
Clontarf on the 12th of this month ; I saw the prisoner at the bar there a little
past 3 o’clock ; I also saw His Royal Highness there ; I was standing in company
with another gentleman (Mr. S. H. Pearce) between the tent and the trees which
skirt the beach, just before entering the trees, and about twenty feet from the
Prince; at the time I saw him I was coming from the direction of the tent towards
the beach, and the Prince was in a parallel line with me ; Sir William Manning
was with him ; I was looking towards the tent; the Prince’s face was towards the
beach, his back to the tent; he was in the open space just before entering the
trees— the ground was clear there ; I saw the prisoner come out from the crowd
and make three or four quick steps ; I noticed something in his hand, but did not
see what it was ; I saw him present something in the direction of the Prince, and
then I saw it was a pistol he held in his hand ; immediately afterwards I saw and
heard a shot fired which I am confident came from the pistol in the man’s hand; I
was about twenty feet from the Prince at the time, and when I first saw the man
come out of the crowd I was five or six paces off—nearly the same distance;
immediately after the shot was fired I saw the Prince fall, and heard him make an
exclamation like “ Oh,” or something to that effect; I ran in the direction of the
prisoner, and about the time I got up to him a second shot was fired in the same
direction ; then I saw a man come behind the prisoner and clasp him round the
arms ; I then caught the prisoner by the collar, with several other persons who
came up, and the prisoner fell to the ground ; Mr. Pearce was with me, and came
up immediately afterwards; he was the only one I recognised at that moment; the
next persons I noticed were Superintendent Orridge and some of the police who
took the prisoner into custody ; I assisted in taking him on board the steamer,
and did all in my power to prevent his being killed on the spot; the crowd was
very much excited, and there were several other persons besides myself assisting
to get him on board the steamer ; I came up to Sydney in the same steamer ; I did
not hear the prisoner make any remark; I was very tired, and went below to lie
down ; I did not see the prisoner until we got to the wharf when I went down and
looked at him.
Simeon Henry Pearce, sworn and examined by the Solicitor-General: lam a
magistrate ; I was at Clontarf on the 12th of this month ; I saw His Royal
Highness the Duke of Edinburgh there, and I saw the prisoner there also ; I saw
the prisoner there about 3 o’clock ; I was with Mr. Clarke, the last witness, at
the time; Mr. Clarke and I were going across the green when Mr. Clarke said to
me, “ There’s the Prince,” or something to that effect; I believe those were his
words ; I turned round to look, saw the Prince falling forwards, and heard him
cry “ Oh, oh,” or something like that; at the same moment I heard the report of
a pistol, or a firearm of some sort; I saw a person fall forward whom I believe
was the Prince, but I did not know him at the time ; as far as I can remember he
fell forward on his face ; I thought at the time it was some one having a bit of fun,
but looking round I saw the prisoner presenting a pistol at Sir William Manning,
who was making up to him ; I saw the prisoner fire, and Sir William Manning at
the moment bobbed his head and fell to the ground, so that I concluded the
bullet went over his back ; the prisoner then retreated, and I saw a person making
up behind him and passing his arms right round the prisoner ; I saw the pistol
presented the second time, saw the smoke, and heard the shot before the person
seized the prisoner from behind ; I am confident because I was preparing to rush
upon the prisoner at the time; I was about ten feet off; I did not know the
person who put his arms round the prisoner ; he was a person dressed in light
clothes, but it was all done so suddenly that I could not notice him particularly ;
Mr. Clarke rushed in and seized the prisoner, and two or three more caught hold
of him at the same time ; Mr. Clarke got hold of him and pulled him down ; I did
not see Mr. Orridge there ; perhaps I might have seen him if he had been in
uniform, but as it was I did not notice him; I assisted to keep the prisoner in custody
until a person came up and said a man was shot, when I left him ; I saw the
prisoner afterwards on the stage of the steamer, in custody of the police; I have


no doubt whatever that the person I saw in the custody of the police was the
person I saw fire the shot. ~ , . , ,
John Harding, being sworn, deposed : I am one of the bandsmen on board the
Galatea : I was with the band on duty at Middle Harbour on the 12th of this
month ; I saw His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh there on that day ; I
remember seeing the Prince go into the luncheon tent, but I do not remember
seeing him come out of it afterwards ; when I next saw lnm he was coming out of
his own tent, and he had then other gentlemen with lnm ; I saw the Prince
coming towards the Galatea band—the Galatea band was stationed under the trees;
the distance between the Prince’s tent and the 3pot where I was, with the band,
was about one hundred yards ; when the Prince was pretty close out to where we
were I turned round, and I heard a pistol fired; as 1 turned round I saw the
Prince lying down on the grass ; I saw no one near the Prince at that moment at
the time that I saw the Prince lying on the ground ; I then heard another shot
fired and turned and looked directly to where the sound seemed to come from and
I saw several men struggling together ; I saw one man (whom I recognised as Mr.
Vial now in Court) amongst those men who were struggling together ; 1 ran over
to where these men were and found that they had got the prisoner down ; the men
were struggling together, but when they had moved on a little 1 picked up a
pistol in the sand ; the ground on which the men were struggling together was
sandy ; I recognise the pistol now handed to me as the pistol which I picked up,
I did not see the Prince afterwards ; I remember seeing the Prince lying on the
ground, but I do not know what became of him afterwards ; it was about a dozen
yards from the place where the band was to the spot where I picked up the pistol;
it was a sandy place ; I looked at the pistol, and found that two chambers had
been fired—that between the two so fired one chamber had missed, and that the
three remaining chambers were still loaded ; it was about twelve yards to where
the men were struggling together from the spot occupied by the band ; I gave the
pistol to the bandmaster of the Galatea ; his name is Pritchard.
No question was put to this witness by the counsel for the defence. #
Charles Pritchard, bandmaster on board H.M.S. Galatea, being sworn deposedL.
I was at Middle Harbour, on duty, on the 12th of this month ; I saw His Royal
Highness on the afternoon of that day coming from a tent towards where the bsmd
was stationed; this was, I should think, between two and three o clock , it was
after luncheon ; there were lots of people following His Royal High ness as he
came on I saw a person come out from behind the people and fire at His
Highness ; the person I saw came quickly to immediately behind the 1 rince, and
fired a pistol at His Royal Highness ; 1 recognise the prisoner as the person who
so came behind the Prince and fired the pistol ; he was close behind His Royal
Highness, and, as it appeared to me, he fired at his back ; His Royal Highness fell
down when the shot was fired ; the person who had fired at His Royal Highness
retreated, and then came back to the Prince sideways, and he fired again, as many
persons came running up ; I saw him when he fired the second a
deliberate aim at the Prince ; whilst he was so aiming, and just as the pistol was
fired I saw a gentleman turn aside the direction of the second shot, by attempting
to secure the prisoner ; all this took place in a very few moments i; we all ran to
the assistance of this gentleman, and with others seized hold of the prison
the scuffle that ensued the pistol was knocked out of the prisoner s hand, and fell
into the sand; all this took place very quickly ; one of our lads picked up a pistol
on this spot; the pistol now produced is that weapon, and it is in the same state
as it was then, except that it was covered with sand ; I have not theleast doubt
that this is that pistol so picked up; I saw the person who fired the pistol after
the shots had been fired; I recognise the prisoner to be that
much knocked about; I saw the prisoner secured by several, with tlie assistance
of one of our men ; the man who fired the shot was the person who was taken
away by the police; from the time that we laid hold of the man who had fined the
shot 3 till the police took him away on board the steamer, the man was 1
our hands ; I am certain that it is the same man ; the pistol picked up by the boy
was handed over to the police. , , ,
No questions were asked of this witness by the counsel for the defence.
Alexander Watson, being sworn deposed : I am a surgeon oE the Royal JNavy, n.


serving on board H.M.S. Challenger ; I was at Middle Harbour on the 12th of this
month; H. R. H. the Duke of Edinburgh was there; at about 3 o’clock in the
afternoon I heard a pistol fired, and I saw immediately after the shot a naval
officer fall; I did not know who it was that I saw fall, I was too far off at the time ;
I immediately ran over, and found H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh lying on the
ground ; at the distance that I had been when I heard the shot fired I could not
see who it was, but when I got over I found it was the Duke ; I assisted in
carrying His Royal Highness to the adjacent tent; there I had him stripped and
examined, and I found he had received a gunshot wound in the back, close to the
spine, over the ninth rib, about two inches to the right of the vertebral column ;
I examined the wound as far as I could with a probe ; the probe entered in an
oblong direction for about an inch and a-half ; the probe first went on almost in a
perpendicular direction, as the Prince lay; the direction of the wound at its end
took an oblique turn forwards; from the position in which the Prince lay, as I
probed the wound, I should judge the wound to be an inch and a-half or two
inches; I thought at first it was deeper, but I found on examination the skin
there was loose; the wound I probed had been recently inflicted, for there was a
hemorrhage ; the wound was of such a character as might have been inflicted by
the firearm produced ; the probe went freely in for two inches, and then there was
a slight turn ; I found the ball superficially visible in front, the entire skin had
been broken and divided ; I found the “true skin ” to have been severed ; 1 heard
the report of firearms, and on looking round saw His Royal Highness fall to the
ground ; the wound was a penetrating gunshot wound—that is how I should
describe it ; I was, with others, in professional attendance upon His Royal High-
ness after he was wounded; I assisted in extracting the ball; we extracted it on
the following Saturday ; I had been in constant attendance on His Royal Highness
from the time that he was wounded at Clontarf up to the time that we extracted
the ball, and I have no doubt but that that ball which we extracted was the ball
by which he was wounded on the 12th instant; the ball was the same as that we
saw superficially visible after the shot was fired ; I produce the ball we so extracted.
[The ball was produced and handed round to the jury for examination.] From the
change in the direction of the wound made by the ball I should judge that the
ball must have been turned in its course by the bone ; the ball penetrated for about
an inch and a-half, at about two inches from the spine, and it traversed round to
the chest ; the ball appeared to have impinged obliquely upon one of the ribs ; it
had traversed a distance measured externally of about four inches; from the
flattened appearance of the ball I should judge that it must have struck against
the bone; the whole of the three skins were broken, quite cut through ; the ball
had penetrated through them.
Lieutenant Bradley, of Her Majesty’s ship Galatea, being sworn, deposed: 1
was at Clontarf on the 12th instant, where the Prince was wounded ; I know
nothing of the direction of the wound then inflicted upon His Royal Highness ; I
was not far from His Royal Highness when he was shot, and was standing by when
the lad belonging to the band picked up a pistol ; the pistol which I saw in the boy’s
hand is the pistol now produced ; it is now in the same state that it was then ; I
found that two chambers had been discharged, one between the two so fired had
failed, and three were still loaded; the pistol was picked up out of the sand, and
was covered with sand ;in other respects it was the same then as now; I saw the
Eerson who was arrested on the occasion alluded to ; he was then much disfigured,
ut I recognise the person at the bar as being that man ; when I first saw him he
was down on his back; some of the people were struggling to get at him, and
others were trying to take him away in custody ; 1 saw him afterwards on board
the steamer which brought him up to Sydney; amongst those who were engaged
in taking him on board I saw Lieutenant Gowan; I (Ld not see the gentleman now
pointed out to me in Court, but there were many that I did not know ; I only
knew the officer whose name I have mentioned.
Senior-sergeant Rawlinson deposed : On the 12th of March last I was down at
Clontarf, Middle Harbour ; I saw the prisoner there ; I assisted to arrest him ; I
saw a pistol taken from prisoner’s left breast coat pocket; it was taken out of the
pocket by senior-sergeant Musgrave; I accompanied prisoner to Sydney ; the*
pistol produced is that which was taken from prisoner’s pocket by senior-sergeant


Musgrave ; the pistol contains five chambers ; they were all loaded and capped,
and the pistol is in the same condition now as it was in when taken from prisoner’s
coat pocket; prisoner made several remarks to me on his way to Darlinghurst ;
when he was walking towards the cab in which he was taken to Darlinghurst
prisoner turned his head slightly towards me and said—“l am very much obliged
to you for getting my face washed; ” he also said, “I don’t care for death, lam
very sorry I missed my aim ; but it cannot be helped now; ” he also said, “ I
have made a bloody mess of it; ” I believe the prisoner used the word “ bloody,”
but am not quite positive; shortly after I got hold of prisoner at Clontarf he said,
“I am a Fenian ; God save Ireland ; ” prisoner was kicking and plunging about
at the time he said that.
Senior-sergeant Musgrave deposed : I remember being at the picnic at Clontarf
on the 12th March last; I saw His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh there
that day; I saw His Royal Highness about 3 o’clock, about seventy or eighty
yards from the luncheon tent; His Royal Highness \vas walking towards the
beach ; I heard the sound of a shot fired, and at first thought it was a Chinese
cracker ; I saw the smoke, and ran in that direction, when I came upon the pri-
soner, who was in charge of some gentlemen ; the whole of this did not occupy
more than a minute ; I seized the prisoner ; as soon as I took hold of him, priso-
ner said, “lama bloody Fenian, and I will die for my country;” I saw a revolver
in his left coat pocket; I took it from him ; I have had it in my possession since ;
the revolver produced is the one I took from prisoner; it is a Colt’s revolver, and
has engraved on it “ Challener, gunmaker, Sydney ”; I noticed that on board the
steamer ; I with others took prisoner on board the steamer, and took him to Dar-
linghurst Gaol; the revolver is capped and loaded in six chambers, and is in ex-
actly the same state as when I took it from prisoner.
Lieutenant Arthur B. Haig deposed : lam Equerry-in-Waiting to His Royal
Highness Prince Alfred ; His Royal Highness is named “Alfred Ernest Albert.”
John Terence M ‘Mahon deposed : I am a clerk in the General Post Office ; I
remember being at the picnic at Clontarf, Middle Harbour, on the 12th March
last; I saw His Royal Highness Prince Alfred there ; the appearance of the pri-
soner at the bar corresponds with that of a man whom I saw following His Royal
Highness ; the Prince was walking down the open space between the pavilion and
the beach at the time ; I was standing near the jetty with some ladies ; one of
the ladies asked me to walk towards the Prince so that she might see his face; we
walked towards him ; we were to the left of His Royal Highness as he was walk-
ing towards where the band was playing ; we stopped within less than ten yards
of the Prince; whilst we were walking towards him, I saw a man walking
leisurely along outside the crowd ; when he had got up to within about twenty
yards of the Prince he walked hastily up to him ; the man’s right hand was close
to his thigh at this time ; when the man had got up to within about a yard of His
Royal Highness he raised his hand, and I heard a report; I saw no smoke; it was
more like the report of a small firework than a pistol; I saw His Royal Highness
immediately fall; Sir William Manning, who was close to the Prince, turned
round and commenced to follow up the man, who was hastily stepping back; Ido
not think Sir William Manning saw His Royal Highness fall; the moment I saw
His Royal Highness stagger, I rushed to his assistance ; as I rushed passed priso-
ner, I saw him cocking the pistol again; the Prince fell on his chest, but when I
got up he turned suddenly round on his back ; the prisoner was then dressed in
black ; I believe prisoner is the man whom I saw follow His Royal Highness, and
fire at him.
Dr. Watson recalled : Had it not been for the diverging of the bullet, it would
have killed His Royal Highness ; I consider His Royal Highness is not entirely
free from danger yet.
Mr. Martin said that was the case for the Crown.
Mr. Dailey asked his Honor to allow the counsel for the defence a few minutes
for conference. The request was complied with, and after the lapse of about
twenty minutes, counsel for prisoner proceeded to call evidence for the defence.
Caroline Halley, examined by Mr. Dailey :I am related to the prisoner; lam
his sister ; lam the wife of an officer of the Victorian Government, and reside
near Emerald Hill; lam younger than the prisoner; he has been under my obser*


vation for twelve or thirteen years ; lie was about ten years of age when he left
home ; he left home permanently ; we were then residing in Melbourne with my
father and mother ; I was not married then ; he went to England, and I in the
meantime went into the country, and I did not see him again till fourteen or
fifteen years after; he went for his education ; lam quite sure my calculations of
time are correct; he was in Melbourne part of the time, not at home, and
studying for the law, and I was up the country; he was about three or four years
in Melbourne studying, whilst I was up the country ; I include in that period of
fourteen or fifteen years, the period of his residence in Melbourne as well as his
residence in Europe; he was studying for the law first, and he left that to study
for the Church ; he was then about 17 years of age ; before he went to Europe he
had received some training in the Roman Catholic Church ; I did not see him very
soon after his return from Europe ; it must have been fully ten years I think ; it
is about four years ago that I first saw him after his return from Europe ; I saw
him then in Melbourne ; I only saw him a few hours at first, but on my return
from the country eighteen months after I saw him again ; for eighteen months
after his return I did not see him at all ; at that time I was residing in Melbourne ;
before the eighteen months I speak of I had been in the country ; the first time I
saw him in Melbourne I noticed that he was very restless, very excitable, and
seemed always to like to talk upon one subject; he had a brother residing in
Melbourne ; I mean he was continually talking on one subject alone ; it was in
reference to his conversation on the one subject that I noticed particularly his
restlessness, uneasiness, and excitability ; he had sustained some pecuniary losses
by the departure of his brother; he seemed to feel it very much ; I next saw him
at St. Kilda ; he had the same restless manner as before, and could not sit still ;
his mind and conversation were directed to the same subject; for a period of six
months after I did not see him or hear anything from him ; this would bring me
up to January last, 1867, up to which time I heard nothing of him.
Mr. Dailey: What did you then hear of him ?
The Attorney-General objected to evidence in reply to this question.
His Honor : I consider the evidence is not admissible.
The examination of the witness resumed.
In consequence of a letter I saw, I went from Melbourne to Ballarat in company
of my sister, Mrs. Lane; I first saw two doctors and a chemist, and afterwards my
brother in my brother’s house attached to his store; he did not know me at first;
be was awake ; it was daylight; it was about 12 o’clock in the day ; my sister
and myself entered the room together ; he was in bed at the time ; two doctors
were there, and Mr. Russell came afterwards; he did not recognise us at first ; his
non-recognition of us lasted for a few minutes, and then he cried very much ; he
was very much neglected, and had refused admittance to everybody for a week;
be said he had been poisoned by the doctors ; the doctors had only been attending
bim for a short time, I believe ; I don’t know that of my own knowledge ; he told
me he had been poisoned in the presence of the doctors, who were in the room with
bim ; he said that they went to the chemist’s shop and mixed up the medicine out
of all the bottles and gave it to him ; the doctors said he ought to have a strait-
jacket at once ; the doctors were Dr. Whitcombe and Dr. Butler ; they were in
practice at Ballarat, and are there still I think ; we did not like to do what the
doctors advised us to do, but we got a man to attend him in his own house; I for-
get the name of the man ;it was not O’Brien; O’Brien was my brother’s store-
man at the time, and was there, but was not the man we hired specifically to at-
tend upon him ; O’Brien was in his service when we came to Ballarat. [A person
was called into Court, and witness’s attention was directed to him.] That is
O'Brien; we remained at Ballarat with the prisoner about a fortnight; my sister
was there all the time; prisoner told me once that the man we had hired to watch
him would come into his bed, and that he would sleep outside, and in the morning
be came in shivering all over with an opossum rug on, and said he had been
sleeping outside ; he was very bad after it, and we thought he would die ; this was
about a week after we went to him ; he was not incoherent in his conversation,
but used to speak properly ; you would not think there was anything the matter
with him ; he took an unaccountable dislike to my sister, who was very kind to
bim, and could not bear her near him; he used to cover his head with the bed-


clothes or his handkerchief, or anything he had when she came near him ; my
sister was a little older than he was, and he had never manifested any dislike of
her before; I saw him looking at some pistols one day, and he said then that he
would shoot himself ; a banker he had sent for visited him about this time ; the
banker’s name was Mr. Jones, and I think he was the manager of the Union Bank;
I think he called about some advance of money ; after he had been with the pri-
soner a little time, the Manager rushed out, shaking and exclaiming, “ Oh, he’s
mad ; he’s mad !” I saw the prisoner just afterwards ; he was very much excited;
he tried to get the man we had hired to watch him out of the room ; he did not
go anywhere while we were at Ballarat, but he told us that an old woman in an
oyster saloon had given him poison; he spoke of this continually ; he said this old
woman had poisoned him, and that she used to come outside, his room every night
and call him ; he said she came to his window and called him by liis name, and
that he would like to kill her if he could see her ; he had an epileptic fit one after-
noon ; he was sitting taking some beef tea and talking to me when it seized him ,
he was very bad and suffered a great deal; he had another fit about 7 o’clock the
same evening; they were both very violent, and he got quite black about the
chest; we got a Dr. Iceley, who lived near, to attend him then ; the doctor quite
gave him up, and he received the last sacraments of the Church that night; I
never heard the prisoner mention politics at all; he talked more about mining
shares than anything else ; he had lost a great deal of money by them, and I used
to read the prices of them for him every day in the papers; I never heard him.
speak of political matters ; the only time I ever heard him speak of Fenianism was
once when I mentioned it, and then he said, “Don’t call it ‘Fenianism,’ call it
* Fennianism; ’ ” he has never been in America ; he went to Ireland to see his
sister when he first went home, but he only remained there a few days ; when he
left Ireland first he was a baby in arms ; his only knowledge of Ireland was ob-
tained when he was a boy; when we went to Melbourne from Ballarat we took
him with us; he was to stay at my sisters at St. Kilda; he consented to the arrange-
ment before he went, and knew that he was to go to my sisters for a change ; he
went there on his arrival in Melbourne, but only remained one night; he said the
mosquitoes drove him mad, and he could not stay; he went to an hotel; there
were a few mosquitoes there, but nothing to torment anyone ; he got up at
break in the morning, and went to an hotel at St. Kilda ; he then came to me ana
asked me to recommend him some nice quiet house to sleep in ; I told him of one,
and he went but used to come and take his meals with me; he went to an hotel
near my house to sleep ; he was always very kind and affectionate, and he used to
take the children out every day ; he was very fond of children and music ; this
lasted for about six weeks ; I used to go with him to the theatre, and Exhibition,
and all those places ; he searched about for a house, and said that he would buy
one and retire from business for a year ; he proposed to purchase a house from a
Mr. Solomon ; I went with him to see the house ; it was not near mine ; we saw
Mrs. Solomon there, and the prisoner said he liked the house and would take it ;
he talked about it frequently up to the time he went back to Ballarat; he returned
to Ballarat in about six weeks time; in the beginning of April last year we received
information from Ballarat concerning him ; we had telegrams sent us—three tele-
grams in one day ; we got two telegrams from friends, and one from the police ; in
consequence of receiving these telegrams I went to Ballarat on the same night; we
arrived at Ballarat between 11 and 12 o’clock, by the last train ; I ssw the prisoner
immediately afterwards at his own place, in bed ; I think when we first went in he
was asleep, but he woke soon after ; he was not glad to see us, but said we had
better return to Melbourne at once ; my son was with him ; he is about eighteen
years of age ; the prisoner expressed displeasure at our coming up, and said he did
not wish to see us ; he said he was suffering from the effects of the poison adminis-
tered by the doctors and the old woman ; the doctors were not then? in attendance
upon him ; he said his illness was the result of what they had given him formerly;
I did not call in any doctor at first; I remained with him four days, and during
that time he seemed moody, and took a dislike to me ; he would only have my son
with him; he had never before manifested any dislike to me, but was always gentle
and affectionate ; the second day he had another fit—epileptic fit—a very bad one;
the doctor then told me to send him to a lunatic asylum, as there was nothing else


for him ; he was taken to the Ballarat Hospital; the doctor told me to take him to
the Ballarat Hospital; he was there to my knowledge for two days ; it was 12
o’clock at night when the attack came on ; during the two days that the prisoner
was in the hospital he did not know where he was ; he fancied that he was in
Melbourne, and asked me why I had let him be kidnapped at the corner of Eliza-
beth-street in that city ; during the whole of the time that I saw him in the hos-
pital at Ballarat (and I saw him several times) he was in entire oblivion as to where
he was ; he said the hospital was a good place, but that he could not stand the
noise of it; he was under the impression that he was at an hotel in Melbourne ;
he could not be made to understand that he was anywhere else ; I returned to
Melbourne, and saw him a fortnight afterwards ; he came to my house very early
one morning, at 4 o’clock ; he came to my house and made a great noise, knocking
at the street door ; I went and let him in ; he was at that time quite quiet again ;
I had a conversation with him when he so came to my house, and I found that he
had forgotten all that had occurred during the six preceding weeks ; he had for-
gotten all the negotiations about the purchase of the house, and he persisted that
he had not been to the Exhibition, although he had been there on several different
days ; when he was at Melbourne at that time he stayed at an hotel : he, however,
used to come and see me frequently ; it was during his seizure, and before this
last visit to me that he had forgotten what had occurred to him ; he was not
violent when he came down to Melbourne, but he seemed only to care to speak on
one subject—the losses he had sustained by my brother; I never heard him allude
to Collins; I never allowed him to go out with my children after he had had that
seizure; I considered him to be unsound in his intellect—that he was mad—l
never went out with him myself ; it was in September last year that he left Mel-
bourne ; when he went away he did not say where he was going ; he never took
leave of me ; he said that he would come back and say good-by but he did not do
so ; I heard from him afterwards when he was at Rockhampton and when he was
at Sydney ; 1 heard from him now and then ; I supplied him with money for the
cost of his living; 1 did so repeatedly, and am now providing for his defence ;he
had pistols, and swords, and daggers abqut him when he was in Melbourne.
Cross-examined by the Attorney-General: It was in September last year that the
prisoner left Melbourne; I received several communications from him, after he
left—one letter from Rockhampton, and eight or nine letters from him when he
had come down to Sydney ; the letters I received were all letters in which he
asked for remittances in money ; I always destroyed these letters ; I sent money
in my letters for him to three different places—to the Currency Lass Hotel, to the
Clarendon Hotel in George-street, and one to St. John’s College ; the letters he
sent were kind letters; there was nothing else remarkable about them except that
they asked for money; Ido not know that he used to drink—not until within
the last two years ; during the last two years I have observed that he used to
drink—that he took too much ; when I saw him first at Ballarat he appeared to
be labouring under the influence of drink ; I suppose it must have been that; the
doctors who attended him said to me that he was labouring under delirium tremens;
they told me that that was the case, but I do not remember that they told me so
in his presence ; I think they did not; I observed myself at that time that he
was labouring under the effects of drink ; he was wishing to have brandy, and it
was sometimes given to him ; he sometimes said that brandy was good for him,
and sometimes port wine ; I do not know whether the doctors and the druggist
who attended him at Ballarat are at Sydney ; I think they are not; the doctors
told me something about the state he was in; the prisoner was (at Ballarat) carry-
ing on a large bay and corn store ; ho had been engaged there in the same business
for twelve or thirteen years ; I saw the store that he had ; it was a very, large one,
but not more than one man was employed in it; I had not seen him for some
years previous to my seeing him at Ballarat; the doctors told me that O’Farrell
was to be placed under restraint ; I think it was by the doctor’s advice that I
gave O’Farrell wine and brandy ; at the end of the fortnight he seemed very well,
but of course he was very weak ; he often said the doctors w’anted to poison him ;
when I returned to Melbourne, I took O’Farrell with me; during the six weeks he
was in Melbourne, he occasionally drank brandy, but I never saw him the worse
for it; he was always speaking about the losses sustained by my brother; with


reference to that subject he spoke irrationally ; he spoke quite rationally upon all
other subjects ; he used to speak of having lent my brother money, and said he
did not know how he should get on after my brother’s losses ; and he repeatedly
talked about this matter; there was nothing irrational in the remarks he made
about my brother’s losses, except that they were very frequent; he spoke very
bitter against my brother ; after being in Melbourne six weeks he went back to
Ballarat; I received telegrams from him whilst he was there ; I never kept any
of the telegrams ; after he had been to Ballarat I think I saw him labouring under
the effects of drink ; it was on the occasion when the doctors told me he ought to
be placed under restraint in a lunatic asylum ; I did not place him in a lunatic
asylum, but in a hospital; I was at Ballarat only four days on this occasion ; I
left him in the hospital and came down to Melbourne ; he came to Melbourne in
about a fortnight afterwards ; he seemed very quiet when he came to Melbourne ;
but the topic of his conversation was still the same, the losses sustained by my
brother; on other matters he spoke rationally; on the last occasion he came to
Melbourne, I observed he lost his memory ; I never observed such a thing before:
I never knew anyone except O’Farrell who was labouring under fits ; the doctors
told me it was softening of the brain; on the second occasion he remained in
Melbourne five months—until November: during that time he took long solitary
walks every evening ! I did not observe whether during that time he used to
drink to excess; he told me his agent supplied him with the means of living ;
during the five months he was in Melbourne he never appeared to be short of
money ; on one evening he asked me for a few shillings ; when he left Melbourne
in September he did not say where he was going ; he told me he could not get any
money ; about a month previous he told me he was going to commence business
again in Ballarat, if he could procure means; he did not ask me for assistance,
but he asked my brother-in-law for assistance; my brother would not lend him
money because he thought something was the matter with him ; after he left in
September I do not know how long a time elapsed before I received a letter from
him ; Mr. Jones, the manager of a local bank at Ballarat, of whom I spoke, has
not been subpoenaed, and is not here ; Mr. Welsh, my brother’s agent, has been
subpoenaed ; I saw Welsh a few times at Melbourne ; he came to make up my
brother’s books : I knew him in Melbourne many years ago ; he was an acquaint-
ance of some members of my family, but he was not an acquaintance of mine ;
my husband has not had so many opportunities of seeing O’Farrell as I have had ;
Mr. Lane saw him repeatedly ; Mr. Lane is not here.
By Mr. Dailey : When 1 left Melbourne Mr. Lane was not very well; Ido not
know whether he was in bed or not; I know Mr. Pavey, a member of the Vic-
torian Bar, who was retained by me in Melbourne; I never went with him to any
of those persons whose names have been mentioned by the counsel for the prose-
cution ; I knew that he was going to see them.
Bartholomew O’Brien deposed : I have lately been a miner at Ballarat, Victoria;
I know the prisoner at the bar; I first became acquainted with him when I
entered his service in Ballarat; I was in his service from the Ist of October, 1865,
to March, 1867 ; I was engaged by him as storeman ; during that time prisoner
kept a hay and corn store at Ballarat; when I first entered his service, I took him
to be a flightsome man, easily disturbed in his mind ; during the time I was with
him he paid attention to his business; about the month of January, 1867,1 noticed
he sat in his room a good deal; recollect a Mr. Jones going to see the prisoner;
prisoner was in his bed-room at the time ; I did not go into the room with Mr.
Jones, but I believe O’Farrell was in bed ; when Jones came out of the room, he
told me O’Farrell was dangerously ill, and that his friends ought to look after
him—that he was out of his senses and ought to be sent to an asylum ; after that
I remained up several nights with O’Farrell; he was attended by Dr. Butler and
Dr. Whit,combe; O’Farrell used to roll about the bed, and I have seen him roll
out of bed; he was always telling me that the doctors were going to poison him ;
I recollect him one day threatening to shoot Mr. Usher ; Usher was one of the
best friends O’Farrell had in Ballarat at the time ; I one night saw him go out
of his bed-room, and wander about the store with a lighted candle in his hand, for
four or five minutes; there was his sister in the house; there was a dog in the
Stable; he dragged this animal into the room and beat it very violently; I was


there when he was attacked by a fit, and when he was sent to the hospital; I
went with him in the cart; he was right out of his senses at that time ; he got
up half an hour before he was taken to the hospital, and said he was off to Mel-
bourne.
Cross-examined by the Attorney-General: Prisoner did a large business; he
kept his own books ; I kept a kind of journal on the slate till January or March
of last year ; I cannot give any account of the weekly transactions during that
time ; he has sent money by me to the bank ; I have known him send me with
£4O or £SO ; I went but once with that amount; he sometimes took money to the
bank himself; the purchases of the stock were made by him ; I did not sleep on
the same premises with him ; he had a room fitted up in the store, and I lived for
some time in the cottage at the back of the store ; he had no servants in the
dwelling house; I left in July, 1866; he took his meals sometimes inside, and
sometimes my wife got them for him; he employed a washerwoman to keep his
place clean ; she did not reside on the prenrses ; I was six months living in this
place; I could not say where he spent his evenings ; I was not on any occasion
with him away from the house ; I could not say he drank freely at this time ; I
have seen him in such a condition that he seemed to be labouring under the
effects of drink ; I saw there were things preying upon his mind at this time;
he had some losses, I believe; I remember his sisters coming up to him in
January, 1867 ; they remained there some time; they were there very nearly a
fortnight; he was during this time visited by doctors ; I did not hear the doctors
say what was the matter with him; they had attended him two or three days
before the sisters came; he had brandy by the doctors’ advice —a little brandy
with water in it; he had brandy and water several times by the doctors’ orders ;
I believe he got some port wine after his sisters came; he went away with his
sisters about a fortnight afterwards, and I remained in charge of the store; he
appeared to be much better when he left Ballarat; I believe it was the chemist
who asked me to take charge of the store till he came back; he was away about a
fortnight or three weeks, I cannot say exactly ; I did not transmit money to him
whilst he was away ; when he came back he did not resume the management of
the store ; he was excited when he came back, and did not care about business ;
during the time he remained there after his return I do not remember seeing him
under the influence of liquor ; very soon after he came back Mrs. Halley came up
again; he sent for a pawnbroker up there for some purpose, and the pawnbroker
said I would have to watch my master close to night or he would lay an infor-
mation against him ; the doctor had been attending him before his sister arrived ;
I do not think the doctor gave him brandy on that occasion ; I heard the doctor
say he was mad ; I do not recollect him saying anything about his labouring under
the effects of drink ; I have seen a person labouring under the effects of delirium
tremens; I have seen him labouring under what I took to be delirium tremens;
I have not frequently seen him labouring under the effects of drink ; 1 have seen
him in bed when he talked foolishly ; I could not say it was from drink or from
his mind being unsound ; I never smelt any liquor about him at these times ; I
have seen persons, his acquaintances, go into his room ; I went to Victoria first in
1863 ; I did not know anything of prisoner’s family before I went into his ser-
vice ; I first knew his sisters when they came to Ballarat, in January, 1867, and
never saw them before; when he left on the second occasion, in March or April,
1867, the business was given up ; the collection of the outstanding debts was made
by a Mr. White; I did not see anything more of prisoner; there were some of
his things at my place, and I got a letter from him to send them down ; they were
some clothes in a box; he kept a day book and ledger; I looked into those
books ; they were kept very nicely ; I saw them last in Welsh’s hands.
Patricius William Welsh sworn, and examined by Mr. Aspinall : I am a land
agent residing in Ballarat; I have known the prisoner for about fourteen years ;
I have had dealings with him, and sold him the first crop he bought when he
came to Ballarat; afterwards he used to buy land, and place it in my hands for
sale; until the end of 1866 he had the best business in Ballarat; after that ho
had an illness, and he renovered; he gave his sisters a power of attorney to dis-
pose of his property; there was a power of attorney made out by my son, who is
a solicitor in Ballarat; I cannot say what amount of money passed through the


prisoner’s hands, or what his business transactions were ; he was in the hay and
corn business ; I merely traded in land; I had some conversation with him about
the power of attorney which was made out a day or two before he left the hos-
pital ; he must have been in the hospital some four weeks ; he was what is called
a “paying patient;” I don’t know what took place at the signing of the power of
attorney, as I was not present; I was allowed to see him while he was in the hos-
pital on two occasions ; I sought to see him on one or two occasions and was not
permitted; on all these occasions I went to see him with the doctor’s permission ;
I never went there without the doctor’s permission ; I had something to do with
his removal from Ballarat hospital; I went up and paid the fees, took him away
in a cab and put him into the train; it was several days before permission was given
by the resident doctor —Dr. Owen—for his removal ; 1 took him away in a cab
myself; he seemed to be cured; I subsequently realised his property for him ;
that was between March and August—we closed accounts in August.
Cross-examined by Mr. Martin: I have known the prisoner about fourteen
years ; until the end of 1866 he had a business in Ballarat; he had a hay and
corn business, and had stores which he and his cousin occupied; his cousin’s name
was Rennett; I have often seen prisoner excited, but I cannot say whether it was
from drink; I presume it was such excitement as would be caused by drink; I
had no doubt that it was ; on two occasions when I was requested to go down
and see him I saw him so excited ; these occasions were at the end of 1866 and
the beginning of 1867 ; his sisters had been attending him; in my opinion his
illness was the result of excessive drinking; some doctors attended him, but I
cannot say how long; three or four of them altogether ; I don’t know whether
they administered brandy to him ; I can’t say what they gave him ; I was never
there when they were administering anything to him ; I was never present in the
room when the doctors were there ; there were four doctors —Dr. Whitcombe, Dr.
Butler, Dr. Icely, Dr. Owen ; it was my opinion that the illnesson both occasions
was brought on by excessive drinking, and that he was suffering from delirium
tremens; I did not see him in a state of delirium; I saw him at the “ corner” at
Ballarat once, when he ran after me, and asked me if I was writing to my children
about the property; on that occasion I considered ho was under the effects of
drink—not perhaps excessive, but that he was in a state of excitement; I was
often with him previously on matters of business ; whenever I disposed of any
property for him I used to have conversations with him, and he would get very
excited'; I only knew him in the way of business ; I did not meet him at his own
house, but he had a small residence attached to his store ; the Ballarat Hospital is
a large place ; I cannot say how many officials there are there ; I saw a good many
persons about, and was a special warder to attend to the prisoner when he
was there ; it is a large establishment; I don’t knew whether any of the officials
are up here ; there are four resident surgeons, and I presume there are a large
number of nurses ; I vims not there after; the prisoner wrote me several letters
from the hospital; I have not any of those letters with me, but I believe I have
them at Ballarat; there was nothing strange in his behaviour when I took him
out of the hospital; he was a little excited, and seemed pleased to get away from
the hospital ; I put him in a first-class carriage and paid his passage down to
Melbourne ; he came up again in August to close accounts ; he had been drawing
money from me between March and August, and wrote to me six or fight times
for money ; the balance coming to him when we closed accounts was about £ls,
and he had drawn before that about £6O or £7O ; he took a lot of property out of
my hands when we closed accounts—property which I had not sold ; he was a
little excited, and said he wished I would get him a place of business in Ballarat;
I said he would have a difficulty in getting a place of business in a central position,
and he said he had friends who would assist him ; he would get up and sit down
again, and break off the conversation abruptly, and so on ; when we closed
accounts I think he marked the butt of the cheque I gave him ; I never saw him
after that transaction, nor had I any correspondence with him.
Walter Martin called and examined by Mr. Dailey : I am a commission agent,
and reside in Victoria; I was at Ballarat from the beginning of 1864 to the begin-
ning of 1876 ; I knew the prisoner at the bar in 1805; he was then a produce
dealer; he had no other occupation that I know of, but he used to attend the


“ cornerand do business in shares ; at that time I came into collision with him
pret‘y constantly, being then a share broker; there was always a peculiarity in
the prisoner’s manner, especially in his style of conversation ; he was apt to break
off, and was at times excitable ; he seemed very nervous and excitable ; I knew
him up to the time I left Ballarat ; I left Ballarat for good in March 1867, but I
was a good deal away from the place, between October of the preceding year and
March 1867 ; I saw the prisoner in the month of April 1867, in Melbourne ; I had
some conversation with him on many occasions, and I noticed that the peculiarities
of his manner had increased to a considerable extent; he used to stop in the
middle of a sentence and go on to something else : he told me he had had brain
fever, and that while he was lying insensible at Ballarat he was robbed right and
left; I noticed that he had got much thinner ; there was always something pecu-
liar in the expression of his countenance; I saw him occasionally in Melbou.ne
up to July, 1867, and more lately I went to see him at his lodgings at Emerald
Hill; his peculiarities of manner were very noticeable there ; he told me that he
was educated for a priest and had taken the vow of chastity; he said that in
answer to a question of mine as to why he did not marry and settle down; I
noticed the peculiarities in his manner every time I saw him; I next saw him in
Sydney about the end of August or the middle of September; I met him in the
street and had a conversation with him; I told him I was surprised to see him
here ; he said he had come here to see the place; his manner was just the game; I
saw him frequently after this—l can’t say how often, but very frequently—up to
the very night before the attempted assassination took place ; he seemed to have
no occupation, but merely walked about Sydney doing nothing ; about September
I had a conversation with him, and he told me he intended to go to Queensland
the next day ; he wished me good-bye ; afterwards I met him again, and told him
I thought he had gone to Queensland ; he said he had gone down on board the
wrong steamer, had lain down in a bunk and fell asleep, and the vessel started
without him ; I fancy that his peculiarities of manner increased after the arrival in
Sydney of His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh ; he has had conversations
with me about the Duke of Edinburgh ; his first conversation with me about the
Duke of Edinburgh took place about a week after His Royal Highness arrived, in
front of the Commercial Bank ; I asked him if he had seen the Prince ; he said he
had ; he said he had been most anxious to see His Royal Highness, and that he
might do so he had taken a room at the Circular Quay, and had remained there all
the night before he was expected to arrive—so anxious was he to see His Royal
Highness ; he did not, at that time, state at what hotel it was that he had hired
this room ; he said that he had been so anxious to seethe Duke of Edinburgh,
then expected, that he had sat up all the night; he said he had seen the Prince,
and that he was a fine young fellow; I saw the prisoner O’Farrell after that, but
I cannot remember when ; on several occasions when I saw him after the Prince’s
arrival, the Prince’s name was mentioned; he spoke of His Royal Highness in
very favorable terms ; I remember having a conversation with O’Earreli on the
occasion of the ball at the Pavilion ; he said that he wished to go, and asked me if
I could lend him a suit of clothes, as he wished to go to the ball, as he thought he
would see a friend, of whom he would be able to borrow some money ; he wished
me to make arrangements for him to borrow such a suit to go to the ball in; I did
see about the matter, and it was arranged with parties that he might have
the use of a suit of clothes on depositing a sum of money; I saw him the next day
after the ball at Cohen’s, and asked if he had been to the ball; he said “ no, I did
not get the money for the clothes, so I did not goI think O’Farrell’s peculiarities
of manner augmented whilst he was in Sydney; we had many conversations to-
gether, and occasionally we did speak on political subjects; this kind of discussion
or rather conversation, was sometimes begun by him and sometimes by me ; we
frequently spoke together of Fenianism; he used to ridicule anything approaching
to the Fenian movement, deprecating it on all occasions; I never heard him speak
in any way disrespectfully either of the Queen or of the Royal Family; he never
spoke of His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh except in terms of respect and
of affection ; he frequently had conversations with different people on the condition
of Ireland, and often had great fun with them about it.
Henry Long Lewis, being sworn deposed : I reside in Sydney, and am foreman
in a baking establishment; I know O’Farrell, the prisoner at the bar; I became


acquainted with him on Christmas morning last, at the Clarendon Hotel, at the
corner of George and Hunter streets ; I met him frequently aft£r that, and used to
walk about the town with him ; I considered him to be rather an eccentric person;
I saw him on one occasion at Skinner’s Hotel ; he told me that he had bought a
revolver, some percussion caps, some powder, and some bullets ; I remarked that
people would think that he was a Fenian ; he explained to me, after that, that
some person had taken these things out of his room—that the} 7 had pawned them
for fifteen shillings, and that he had got possession of the ticket; he asked me my
opinion of Fenianism, and I said that I thought they were a set of scoundrels;
1 said also that I thought it was well to have hanged the meu at Manchester, and
that it would have been better to have been more severe with the Fenians at first;
that there would then have been less trouble with them ; he asked me whether I
was a Protestant or a Catholic, and I answered that I was a Protestant; on this
O’Farrell said to me, “ That accounts for the answer which you have just given to
methis w T as ten days or a fortnight before the Prince was shot—before the 12th
instant; he made the remark to me, “ What a fine, strapping young man the
Prince is, ” and I assented to the remark; he then turned off the subject in a
rather abrupt manner, and began to allude to wiiat he had seen in France and in
other places where he had travelled; he frequently used to talk in that sort of
way ; he would begin a topic, and, before he had done with the subject so intro-
duced, he would pass on to speak of something else ; he used to break off suddenly
when he had begun to speak ; he asked me if I had ever been in Trinity College,
Dublin, and he gave me to understand that he had been a Bachelor of Arts in that
University, yet he afterwards told me that he had never been there at all; when
I heard what had occurred I went voluntarily to the office of the Inspector-Gene-
ral of Police, and told what I knew of the man, feeling disgusted that I should
have been associated with him.
William Pavey, being sworn, deposed : I am the attorney of the prisoner in-
structing the counsel for his defence ; I know Mrs. Halley, the sister of the pri-
soner, and have heard the questions that were asked of her respecting the doctors
who attended on her brother at Ballarat; I heard her asked whether these doctors
would attend this trial; the names of these gentlemen are Dr. Iceley, Dr. Butler,
Dr. Whitcombe, Dr. Owen (the surgeon at the Hospital at Ballarat), and Mr.
Usher, the druggist; I waited upon all these gentlemen, except Dr. Butler, in
order to secure their attendance to give evidence at this trial; I did not try to get
Dr. Butler to come because I understood that he could do no more than give evi-
dence to the same effect as the others; I wanted to get the evidence of these
gentlemen for this trial; I was engaged for the defence on the Friday and started
at once for Ballarat; I went rip there on the Saturday but arrived too late to make
inquiries that evening; I began my inquiries on the Sunday ; Mr. Usher, the
chemist, altogether declined to come up to Sydney ; he said he had a large family
and a small business, and that if he were to leave that business for a few days he
would be utterly ruined ; Dr. Whitcombe at first expressed his willingness to come
if he were paid £25 and had ten guineas a day allowed him for his expenses ; later
in the day he informed me that Mr. Gordon had met with a severe accident, and
he could not possibly leave under any circumstances. Dr. Owen is surgeon at the
Ballarat Hospital, and he said it was quite out of the question for him to attend;
the patients were all under his charge, and he could not leave without obtaining
permission from the directors ; as to compensation, he treated it as quite out of
the question ; Dr. Iccley said he never was so pushed ; I told him I was not at all
particular as to funds, but he said he could not attend—it was quite out of the
question; his patients would have to be neglected, and he had no assistants ; I
made every exertion to get witnesses, but my exertions were unsuccessful; some
of them said if they had a week’s notice, they might perhaps have obtained some
assistance.
Mr. Dailey said that concluded the case for the defence.
The counsel for the prosecution called
Dr. Joseph Colville, who deposed: lam a surgeon in the Royal Navy; on the Bth
ult. I went to the Clarendon Hotel, corner of George and Hunter-sts, and remained
there about sixteen days ; I saw prisoner there ; I saw him at nearly every meal;
I frequently conversed with him on various subjects ; I remember on one occa-


sion after reading in the paper that a steamer had been ordered from Adelaide to
meet a Fenian cruiser, the prisoner got very excited ; that was the only time I saw
him excited ; I said I hoped the Fenian vessel might get sunk, and every one on
board drowned ; he said he hoped it would be the reverse ; I always found him
exceedingly intelligent; I never in any single instance observed anything irra-
tional about him ; he appeared to have a well regulated mind ; on another occa-
sion, a few days afterwards, when he was talking about Fenianism, I told him I
could not sit and hear such remarks made, and he never attempted anything of
the kind again ; I told him I was a naval officer, and could not hear him speak-
ing in favour of the Fenians ; he said the Fenians were perfectly right in blowing
up Clerkenwell Gaol, and it was then I made the remark to him; I conversed
with him every day on a variety of subjects, but I never observed any peculiarity
in his talk ; one morning, after the fancy dress ball at the theatre, he was excited;
he told me he had purchased a ticket, and that some person who had it got
drunk, and he could not get it; he appeared much annoyed; very few persons
were present on that occasion.
By Mr. Dailey: I have been a surgeon in the Royal Navy for five years ; I
have been in the navy twenty-one years ; I became acquainted with the prisoner
the first day I came to Sydney; I joined the Royal Navy as assistant surgeon at
the age of 21 ; I have had no experience in any asylum or hospital for the treat-
ment of insane persons ; I have attended persons of insane mind ; the number of
insane cases were in the same proportion as other cases ; I have attended one case
of insanity on board ship ; on the morning after the fancy dress ball, prisoner was
excited, and apparently very much annoyed; the only occasion on which I saw
him very excited was when I spoke about the Fenian cruiser; I never saw him
very much excited on any other occasion ; I had that morning read in the paper
that a vessel had been ordered from Adelaide to meet the Fenian cruiser, and I
mentioned the circumstance to him ; I did not perceive his excitement commence
until I remarked that I hoped the Fenian cruiser would be sunk, and that not a
man would be left to tell the tale; he manifested his excitement by getting ner-
vous, and by half indistinct remarks; he trembled slightly; at last he said he
hoped it might be the reverse—that the Fenian cruiser might sink the other
vessel; he said this in a moderate tone of voice ; delirium tremens , if often repeated,
would affect the brain and intellect; supposing the attacks of delirium tremens to
have ceased, that there was nothing of them remaining, and that there
was a total oblivion of circumstances which preceded the attack, the
brain, I think, would be affected by the delirium tremens; I do not, how-
ever, think such cases could occur, but if such a state of things were to
take place, lam of opinion the brain would be affected by it; supposing that
two epileptic fits of excessive violence had occurred during the delirious
attack, it would be no criterion as to the softening of the brain ; epilepsy has been
known to exist for a lifetime, and has no such effect as the softening of the brain;
epilepsy can exist without insanity ; epilepsy is not synonymous with insanity ;
in some cases epilepsy might be the forerunner of insanity ; I do not know a book
entitled “ Schruyven’s Principles of Modern Psychology ; ” I have never seen the
book referred to in other books on the treatment of insane persons ; I have read
no particular books treating of insanity ; I have read iu various medical works
short treatises on the treatment of insane persons._ ...
Mr. Dailey : Do you believe the combination of insanity with epilepsy furnishes
evidence of decided incurability ?
His Honor said witness could be asked questions respecting his qualifications,
no doubt, but he thought the questions which were being put to witness were
irregular. .
Examination continued : Epilepsy was not always an accompaniment of in-
sanity : epilepsy more frequently attacks the brain than the body ; the condition
of epilepsy is consistent with the perfect discipline of the mind.
Horatio G. A. Wright, surgeon, examined by the Solicitor-General : Prisoner
accosted me on board the steamer Paterson on the Thursday on which the picnic
at Clontarf was given ; I never saw him before ; first he asked me what steamer
was goin", whether it was the half-past 12 o clock boat; I told him it was the 12
o’clock boat; he said he was lodging at the Clarendon Hotel, and said lie admired


Sydney very much ; he said it seemed to him like a city of palaces, and the finest
place he had ever been at; the vessel was at this time hauling off from the wharf ;
when going on board he asked me if I knew Mr. Saltley, and said going on board
reminded him of going to see that gentleman ; I spoke of the arch at Circular
Quay, and asked him if they had anything like that in Melbourne, and he said
*• No •” he told me he had only taken his ticket that morning, as he thought it
might be wet, and did not want to waste his money ; he said, however, it was not
the usual Prince’s weather ; he told me there was a nice hotel at the North Shore,
where there was a fine view of the city, and where you could get a quiet game of
billiards ; I said I supposed he meant Dind’s, and he admitted that he did ; 1 did
not notice anything peculiar in his manner or mode of conversation. _
Arthur Brankley, examined by the Attorney-General: I have been in the colony
since about the 26th of last month ; I have met prisoner several times at the
Clarendon Hotel; I have had conversations with him ; I saw him about half-a-
dozen times; I did not perceive anything peculiar in his manuer or irrational in
his conversation ; he conversed very rationally on trivial matters that came under
our notice ; I was out with him on the night of the torchlight procession till the
procession arrived at King-street, and then I lost him in the crowd ; I was with
him about half-an-liour, and was conversing with him nearly the whole time;
there was nothing incoherent or strange in his conversation ; I never had any long
conversation with him ; he did drink, but I never saw him drunk ; I do not recol-
lect the topics upon which we conversed ; they were such as casually arise when
persons meet and exchange a few words. , . , .
Joshua John Fox, examined by the Solicitor-General; lam a draper s assistant;
I saw prisoner for the first time at the Currency Lass Hotel, corner oi 1 itt and
Hunter streets, kept by Mr. Tierney ; I was lodging there at the time, and was
there when the prisoner came there first; I went there in 18b6 ; I was not there
in January or February of this year ; I left at the commencement of January ;
prisoner came there before I left, I think about three weeks, I cannot say exactly ;
I believe he left a little before Christmas; I think he lived there about three
months : during the time he was there I was intimate with him more than any
other lodger, and conversed with him at times ; we scarcely spoke upon any other
subject than on casual topics of the day ; he slept on two or three occasions in the
same room with me; still we had no further intimacy; I conversed with him
occasionally ; I did not notice anything remarkable or peculiar in his conversation,
nor anything incoherent or strange; on one occasion he told me that he was m
business at Ballarat as a wine and spirit merchant, and likewise told me he re-
ceived his money from there ; I had no knowledge of what time he was in the
habit of coming in ; he was occasionally late ; that was towards the latter part of
his residence there ; I was seldom out of my room after 10 o’clock at night.
William H. Aldis, examined by the Attorney-General: I have seen the prisoner
before ; I first saw him about three months ago, whether it was in the Domain, at
a cricket match, or at the Clarendon Hotel, I cannot now say ; I have seen him
repeatedly at the Clarendon Hotel, almost every alternate day ; I have had con-
versations with him, first in reference to cricket; he was eomplimenting my boy
upon his slow bowling, and spoke of a nephew of his named Allan who was a switt
bowler ; he showed me the position in which he threw the ball; haying thus com-
menced conversation it afterwards was resumed on several occasions; 1 did not
notice anything peculiar in his manner or conversation, nothing incoherent or
strange ; I thought he was highly intellectual and of good education ; the first of
these°conversations was about three months ago ; on the morning of the assassina-
tion I was talking to Mr. Mountcastle at the door of his shop in George-street, and
prisoner passing apparently to his lodging, he stopped and spoke to me, passing
the compliments of the morning; I pointed out to him some remarkably cheap
hats in the window ; I said if he was going to the picnic I would advise him to
buy one ; he said “ I think I will,” and he went into the shop to purchase one; 1
did not observe anything irrational in the conversation he had with me; these
conversations extended over a period of about three months, and occurred nearly
every alternate dav. _ _ . ~ ,
William John Clarke, examined by the Solicitor-General : I amm Mr. Mount-
castle’s employment; I saw prisoner on the morning of the Sailors’ Home 1 ionic ;


I saw him then in Mr. Mountcastle’s shop, George-street ; he was looking at some
cheap hats ; he tried one on and paid for it; he did not say anything more than is
customary when persons come to buy hats ; but ten minutes afterwards he returned
and said he did not like the appearance of the hat, it did not look gentlemanly *
he said he preferred an ordinary white hat; he tried one of these on and paid me
the difference ; the first hat he paid for was 2s. 6d., and the second, I think, 10s.;
he gave me a Bank of Victoria note, and I made the remark to him that I thought
there was a discount on it here ; he said no, as he had passed several, so I did not
decline to take it; he said I could find him at the Clarendon Hotel should I
want him ; I observed nothing peculiar in his manner.
By Mr. Aspinall: That is the only time I ever saw him.
William Hilder, called and examined by Mr. Martin : I have seen the prisoner
at the bar, some time before Christmas, at Tierney’s hotel; I met him there half-
a-dozen times perhaps ; I last met him during the month of October ; I spoke to
him on all those occasions, I forget upon what subjects ; the conversations only
lasted a few minutes ; I noticed nothing peculiar in his manner ; he spoke ration-
ally and the same as any one else.
Richard James Veitch, called and examined by Mr. Martin : I am a messenger
employed in the Herald office ; I ha\ T e seen the prisoner before ; I have seen him
outside iierney’s public-house, and I have con\ r ersed with him occasionally ; I first
saw him about six months ago ; the last time I saw him was three or four days
before the excursion to Clontarf; I then saw him on the other side of the street,
and waved my hand to him ; I did not notice any peculiarity in his conversation ;
there was nothing strange about him ; I have spoken to him ten or a dozen times,
and these conversations extended over a period of five or six months ; I have often
met him outside the office at night and just passed the time of day to him
Mr. Martin then suggested that, as it was now 5 o’clock, and his Honor had
announced his intention of adjourning at that hour, no further business should be
proceeded with that evening, although he had one or two other witnesses to call.
The Court then adjourned until 10 o’clock, March 31.
TUESDAY, 31st MARCH.
Mr. Charles Watkins having been called for the Crown, and duly sworn,
deposed as follows : I have at present no particular employment, but am seeking
for a situation up the country ; I have been staying in Sydney since the 21st of
last month ; I have been living at the Clarendon Hotel; I have known the priso-
ner there since the last week in last month; I was at the picnic at Clontarf on
the 12th of March ; I saw the Duke of Edinburgh there, and I also saw the pri-
soner there ; on that particular day I saw the prisoner first on board the steamer
going down to the picnic ; I was talking with him then, and up to within a quarter
of an hour of the time that the Prince was shot ; I was with him for several hours
on that day ; during the whole of the time that I was with him I observed nothing
peculiar in his conduct ; I do not remember what we were talking of ; this man at
luncheon time in the tent said he wished to get behind the Duke ; lie said, “ Let
us get behind the Duke, —let us go round to the other side ; ” this I declined to
do, saying that I did not wish to make myself conspicuous ; at that time—that is
during the luncheon—there was some talk about putting some gentlemen out who
were preventing ladies from sitting down, and I said I would assist in putting
some of the gentlemen out if it should be found to be necessary ; I and the priso-
ner were speaking together of this ; the prisoner said to me, “Will you stick to
me if there is a row ; ” I said 1 would—supposing, of course, that he was only
referring to the anticipated row in the event of certain people being put out; the
prisoner said, “ Will you swear that you will stick to me ! ” and I said that I
would ; I supposed he was speaking about that particular matter ; the prisoner
then Ayent round to go out, but I did nob go with him, not wishing to make myself
conspicuous by going too near to the Prince ; I did not then know what was the
prisoner’s name, but I had had three or four conversations with him at different


times before the occasion I have been alluding to ; on one occasion I was present
at a conversation in which the prisoner took part; it had been reported that a
Fenian cruiser had come out to this quarter of the world to intercept the ship that
was taking some Fenian prisoners to Western Australia ; Dr. Caldwell was present
at the time ; Dr. Caldwell said he hoped that the Fenian cruiser would be sunk,
and prisoner (with much excitement) said that he hoped the ship of war would be
sunk first; there was nothing very remarkable about what the prisoner then said,
except that he was much excited.
No question was asked this witness by the counsel for the defence.
Joseph Hind, being sworn, deposed : I know the prisoner ; I have known him
since the last week in last month, at the Clarendon Hotel ; I had opportunity of
conversing with him very frequently between the 28th of last month and the day
immediately before the affair at Clontarf ; I never, during all that time, noticed
anything peculiar in the prisoner’s manner, further than that I was always much
struck with the calmness and precision of mind with which he arranged his argu-
ments and ideas on political subjects ; lie very often spoke of the wrongs of Ire-
land ; I noticed nothing peculiar about his language ; he was not incoherent in the
language he used, but exhibited a power of argument which I thought rather
above the capacity of those whom he met.
Cross-examined by Mr. Aspinall: Do you take any interest in the wrongs of
Ireland ?
Witness : I am not aware that she has any.
Counsel: How {often did you listen to this man conversing on a subject on
which I understand you not to take any interest whatever ?
Witness : About a dozen times ; Ido not remember how the topic alluded to
came under discussion ; perhaps it may have been through subjects leading to it
having been mentioned in the papers ; Ido not distinctly remember, but I think
it may have been so ; I went to the Clarendon Hotel not to see this man, but to
see Dr. Caldwell; I used to see him in the bar-room or parlour ; I never stood by
when he was speaking on such subjects in the bar ; Dr. Caldwell, was at that time,
the only acquaintance I had here in Sydney, and therefore I went to see him ; I do
not say that I heard the prisoner speaking about the wrongs of Ireland on every
occasion that I was at the Clarendon, nor that on each occasion that subject was
then the topic of conversation ; I cannot say that I took particular notice as to
who were the persons present at these conversations ; Dr. Caldwell was the only
person that I knew there ; I do not mean to say that I sat mute during these
conversations ; I had no particular business there except to see the naval officer
of whom I have spoken; the prisoner, during these conversations, spoke sometimes
to other persons besides Dr. Caldwell; they did not both speak at once, or all
together ; the “ wrongs of Ireland ” formed, as I think, the general topic of
conversation ; it was that the conversation generally turned upon ; I am not aware
that Dr. Caldwell made any secret of the high position which he held as an officer
in the Royal Navy ; I do know that he did ; 1 really cannot form any opinion as
to whether the doctor let it be known what his rank was; there were other subjects
of conversation, but that was the main topic; I did not express any disgust at
having this subject made the “eternal” topic of conversation; I believe the
doctor did, on one occasion, remonstrate upon what had been said by the prisoner;
I am pretty sure he did, but I do not remember the precise time or the words he
used ;lam an officer in the New Zealand Government ; I am a captain in the
Militia ; I was not announced at the Clarendon as Captain Hind ; I do not know
whether the prisoner knew that he was talking to an officer of my rank in the
Militia; Ido not consider that what he talked was open treason ;if it had been,
it could have been more readily taken up ; what he said was—as he always took
very good care—well wrapped up; Ido not know that it was treason that he talked;
it was not such language that he could have been dealt with for it by law ; at the
times that he so expressed himself in this exceptionable manner I cannot say that
I considered what he did say was unfit for an officer to listen to ; I did not hear
him say anything that would necessitate my rising up and giving him in charge to
a policeman ; I never heard him say anything that compelled me to rise and leave
the place where he was—stating that I could not sit and listen to such language ;
different constructions could always be put upon what he said ; I think I did hear


the doctor say to him “ I would thank you not so to express yourself when I am
present ” ; 1 think that I recollect some such occurrence ; the language was not
offensive ; the sentiment was not such as I objected to ; it was refined as well as
the language.
Edward Allen, examined by Mr. Martin, deposed : I am a surveyor ; I know
the prisoner at the bar ; I first knew him in the early part of September last; I
met him at Mr. Jennings, at the corner of George and Hunter streets; I knew him
until the early part of December, a period of about three months ; I reside at
Parramatta; I saw him and spoke to him every day I was in town; he appeared
to me to be a man of great education, and was a gentlemanlike man ; there was
nothing about him indicative of an unsound mind; in his conversation he appeared
intelligent ; I never perceived anything peculiar about him ; he frequently sat
near to me, and on some occasions close to me; that was in the coffee-room.
By Mr. Aspinall : I occasionally stayed at the same hotel; my residence is at
Parramatta ; prisoner never visited me there ; the conversations I had with him
were on various topics ; he conversed in the same way with other people.
George Byers, examined by Mr. Martin, deposed: I know the prisoner ; the
first time I saw him was at Tierney’s, the Currency Lass Hotel ; I have known
him for three or four months, and during that time I have seen him frequently ;
Ido not know that I ever had any conversation with him; 1 have heard him
conversing with other persons ; I have heard him conversing with other people a
great number of times; I never observed anything peculiar in his manner or de-
meanour ; I always thought him a nice man ; I never considered him eccentric ; I
have on one or two occasions seen him playing bagatelle ; on the morning of the
picnic at Clontarf I saw him passing by the Herald Office ; I did not speak to
him on that occasion ; there were two other men with him, or walking near him.
George Cunningham, examined by Mr. Isaacs, deposed : I am a clerk in the
service of the Government; lam acquainted with the prisoner ; I first met with
him at Tierney’s about six months ago ; my acquaintance with him ceased on the
I2th of March last; during the time I knew him I had frequent opportunities of
conversing with him—perhaps a dozen times ; the subjects of conversation were
various ; I never noticed anything peculiar or eccentric in his manner ; on the 12th
of March I saw him on board the steamer going to the picnic at Clontarf; I
believe it was the steamer Paterson ; I met him quite accidentally on board the
vessel; he came up and spoke to me ;he conversed with me for a short time ; he
spoke about the beauty of the harbour and scenery ; I noticed nothing peculiar
about Lis language whatever ; we did not land together ; I saw him subsequently
in the luncheon tent; that was about half-past lor 2 o’clock ; that was the last
time I saw him previous to the Prince being shot; he asked me to have a glass of
wine and I did ; I was conversing with another gentleman who was with me ; I
do not remember anything that was said by prisoner beyond his asking me to have
a glass of wine ; I observed nothing peculiar then in his manner; I cannot say
whether he left the luncheon tent before or after me; Ido not remember his
asking me to acompany him.
This closed the evidence for the Crown. In reply,
Mr. Aspinall, addressing the jury, said: In obedience to duty, his learned
friend Mr. Dailey and he were here to defend the prisoner ; and being barristers
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, and called upon under obligations
which their position cast upon them, they were there to discharge a duty that
could not be offensive to the most loyal of her Majesty’s subjects, for this simple
reason, as must be perceived from the course the case had taken, that there was
not the slightest justification for such an outrage as had been committed. Whilst
it was their duty to defend the prisoner, it was not their duty to vindicate the
crime, if crime it were; for this depended upon the responsibility of the actor.
If a criminal deed was done by a responsible agent lie was liable to the full
penalty of the offence. They attempted no cross-examination of witnesses to that
deed, or any interference with the course of the evidence ; and after the Attorney-
General’s temperate opening of the oase they never attempted to disturb or throw
doubt upon the truthfulness of the witnesses who gave that testimony. They
waited till their time came, and then proceeded at once to say that the foulest of
deeds in a person without moral responsibility were to be construed by the jury


now with temperate calmness and an intense sense of justice, lest, whilst feeing
the indignation that must be roused at the injury to the colony, they should do
wron<* and hurry out of the world a person who might not be responsible before
God. When this young Prince came out to this country he came with an intro-
duction, if it were but a personal one, from a mother, a monarch, the admiration
of the world ; he came with a knowledge on our part that his widowed mot er
had been wife to a Prince who, whilst living, stood in the position of being t e
greatest Prince in the world ; he came as our guest, as your guest as a .Pledge of
amitv from the British nation ; he came, indeed, as had come to their minds, with
everythin«■ that could have recommended him to every human being-democrat,
aristocrat Fenian, or whatever that human being might be Coming soi intro-
duced it must be admitted that it would have been impossible for him not to have
been received as rapturously and enthusiastically as he was ; and when it was
recollected with regard to this colony as well as that of \ ictoiia, how he
won for himself that goodwill and love that he might have relied upon as inheri-
ting it must have struck our minds that when we heard of any outrage upon him,
let alone the heinous one in question, none but a madman could have committed
it For his own sake we might say, whether we were born in the colony whether
long since away from the mother country (and some, no doubt, were so before he
was born), that we had seen more loyalty in this colony than in any positions
we were likely to have been in, we should have seen for ourselves in the mother
country While we had been taught to believe, and had known from various
sources, the excellence of his parents at home, we had learned to regard him from
a more personal point of view, and to feel that of all men he was the last in the
world at whom political animosity or vengeance would be levelled. Let the jury
free their minds from the recollection of outrages at home, of traders in politics
who encouraged assassination there, and they would say the deed of the prisoner
was terrible, but it could not reflect upon the colony or upon humanity, for the
man had been bereft of reason, and to his God only was responsible. Not to any
human tribunal. The Attorney-General, with the most praiseworthy calmness and
sense of justice, avoided all reference to what had taken place outside the Supreme
Court but the mind of almost every person we knew had been inflamed by the
belief’that this act, incomprehensible to human reason, had been done under the
influence of some organised association. We might pray that it was not so, and
we had no reason yet to believe that it was so There was now brought before the
Court a man of whom, he contended, the probability was that he did alone the
crime detailed in this Court, and detailed with infinite additions outside—an act
unaccountable as between man and man on any possible supposition. We had him
stating that he was a Fenian. Without knowing the definition of the word
Fenianism, it might well be said to be a body of men who by keeping up constant
excitement gathered subscriptions for widows and orphans which widows and
orphans never received. There was no such organisation on any great scale in any
part of Her Majesty’s dominions, and most assuredly not in this part. It might
be asked with the resources of this colony and those of Victoria, which had acted
in unison with New South Wales—if such statements as the prisoner was said to
have made were true, and after ransacking every box and paper belonging to him
and becoming acquainted with his greatest secrets, and after they had narrated to
them all that could be adduced of prisoner’s conversations about h emanism with
persons who were likely to take a view opposite to his—whether the existence of
anything like organised Fenianism had been shewn or could possibly be supposed
to have actuated the prisoner in the commission of this offence Not the slightest
trace was found of this project being intended ; but, consistently with the workings
of a diseased mind, the deed having been committed, he declared he was a teman
then and there. Come then to consider the probability of a sane man ever dream-
ing of such an outrage. Look at its atrocity. The nation was not in the very
smallest degree allowed to weigh in that respect; but where a Prince was so much
beloved and had so many claims, national and personal, to the goodwill of the
community, what probable incitement could there be m the mind of any sane
individual to revenge or to treat him as O Farrell did. Having regarded it so,
then we found prisoner said he was a Fenian. Whenever a persons brain wag
affected sooner or later he turned out a lunatic, approaching from time to time till


the culminating point was reached, always full of whatever was the leading topic
of the hour. Asa small illustration, the jury would recollect how in London the
authorities had to cage in the Monument after a person had selected that place for
the purpose of committing suicide. This step being taken under the reasonable
apprehension that the idea of suicide connected with the place engraved upon
previously diseased minds would lead to the performance of similar feats ; not that
conspiracy had anything to do with it, but that the idea would excite already
disturbed intellects. When a great crime was committed, there were in the world
—as had been frequently found—not only with regard to the burning of the
Cathedral here, but in connection with other notorious offences, persons who would
give themselves up as the offenders, their minds when disorganised being engrossed
with the idea of a strange fame to be thus gained. With regard to the celebrated
Road murder at home, more than one gave himself up as the murderer
when it turned out that the really guilty made a confession. After the burst of
indignation that had followed the prisoner’s act, the jury had to consider hia
position when charged with a crime of this kind. They would, he hoped, though
there was so short an interval of time since the act was perpetrated, endeavour for
their own honour and for their oath’s sake fairly to weigh what was put to them
in the defence as well as what was put to them in the prosecution. They saw here
a man with regard to whom their minds were utterly inflamed, righteously in some
respects, wantonly in others ; they had offered their thanksgivings that the
atrocious deed was not successful; they had held public indignation meetings,
and their minds had been worse inflamed by notices and paragraphs in the news-
papers. These they could scarcely exclude from their observation, and they had
also seen that rewards were offered for accomplices, and persons had been brought
with whom prisoner had had conversations. But why was not the doctor of the
gaol brought ? The want of his testimony was a signal omission from the evidence,
and gave rise to a question whether he had not misbehaved himself in inter-
views with the prisoner, or whether he was capable of judging of the insanity of
any person. The witness, who had been a surgeon in the Navy, where there
was little opportunity of studying insanity, was the only medical evidence brought
forward for the Crown. Those witnesses who saw prisoner on the 12th must have
paled there ineffectual fires before a doctor who must have been better able than
they to form a sound opinion as to the prisoner’s insanity, although it might not
be the case that professional men, unless they had specially studied insanity, were
better qualified than laymen to speak authoritatively on mental diseases. The
jury had heard the evidence that must have almost brought tears into their eyes
from prisoner’s sister; and they had heard from almost every witness for the
Crown, that he was suspected of being a member of an organised assassination
club against society, whilst they were also told of his gentlemanly, and what was
more, of his gentle disposition, his kindness, and his intelligence. He was spoken
of as in the midst of a miscellaneous set of acquaintances of every rank in society,
all alike admitting that this was his charcteristic. He was said not to have
peculiarities of manner; but one of the ordinary peculiarities of the insane was a
change of habits on the part of the person whose mind was affected. Take prisoner
as being kind and gentle to his sisters, and then trace him to Clontarf ; then what
would the jury say if they had never heard of Fenianism at all. They would find
bow his brain had been disordered long since—that he had received the last sacra-
ments of his Church after an attack described as absolute lunacy; trace it to
delirium, tremens or what they might. Here is a man actually attacked again and
again with epileptic fits, and they not tending most assuredly to anything but
insanity. The jury were then told of drunkenness and delirium tremens being the
consequences of a man’s own acts, of his folly and wickedness, and as making no
excuse for crime. True it was ; but if a man was permitted by the Almighty to
fall into absolute insanity, though it be the result of his ill behaviour, though it
be the result of intoxication, when it became of such a character as that, his mind
was considered to be unbalanced and unhinged, and no longer under his controlling
power ; that same person, from whatever source his affliction arose, was not legally
responsible, and could not be in a better position than if he were a born idiot. An
authority on the defence of insanity said: “We submit that every man is presumed
to be sane and responsible until the contrary be shewn to the satisfaction of the


jury; that this insanity and irresponsibility must be proved by those who set up
that defence ; and the question for the j ury is as to that defence whether they are
satisfied that he had not such a degree of reason as to know that he was doing
wrong ; whether it has been proved clearly that the prisoner laboured under such
a defect of reason from disease of the mind as not to know the nature of the act
charged as criminal, or, if he did not know it, was unconscious that it was a
crime. ” In the case of the prisoner the act was admitted. Then what state of
mind was he in ? Of course, no man would be safe on the plea of insanity if you
pretend to say proof must be given that at the precise moment of the act his mind
was affected, because it would be calling upon a lunatic to prove his insanity.
Why, the affidavit presented to the Court showed that, but for the intervention of
his unhappy sisters, he would never have made any defence at all. It might be
supposed that, except for affection, no defence would have been made—that he was
as conscious of his crime as when at Clontarf he declared so by his language. So
the jury must see that when insanity was to be proved they had to look gently,
charitably, and not scrutinisingly at the evidence brought before them regarding
it. The prisoner came before them in a train of circumstances that invited their
most merciful consideration. They were told that he was educated, what his
manner was, and what his sister disclosed of him ; and they could trace the
solitude and misery of his lot. Conducing circumstances arose in part from mining
speculations and drinking, leading any one to think that his mode of life was one
that would not unnaturally end in the unhinging of his mind. They found that,
whilst in this colony he was devout and pious, and they would perceive that he
had had truthful relatives about him. Brought up genteelly amongst them, he was
sent to France, took a religious vow there, but whether owing to an unbalanced mind,
or other causes, he w r as not admitted to the priesthood. He returned to the world
without the high and holy object with which he took this vow, and became
neither a layman nor a churchman. He was banished from the priesthood, and he
banished himself from the world. There in this solitude he gave himself up to the
refining influence of music, and to the society of children. He got away from women,
and with men it was seen how courteous he was. He had no power of settlement
in high and holy duties, he was cast upon the world neither a priest nor a layman,
and held in a perpetual excitement. He was a most hard-working man, and
steadily attended to business. At Ballarat one might learn how he came to take
to drink, how he was robbed in mining speculations, and how in the whirl of
excitement his mind got worse, latent insanity developing itself quietly, until it
led him to the point when this attempt upon the Prince’s life occurred. If this
were taken as true, for he had no perceptible intention to do the deed except it
was within some two or three months before, it was surely insanity and not sanity.
Would not the fact that he talked coolly and reasonably, and showed no symptoms
of excitement up to within a few minutes of his committing the act be a proof of
his insanity? Would the jury say from their own experience that any sane man
would be likely to act so ? Was it not probable that this man—fluent, intelligent,
as he was, would not on such an occasion have maintained those characteristics if
he had been sane? We had been told he was perfectly sane for months and
mouths, conversing without the slightest symptom of a deranged mind a few
minutes before he fired the shot—that he was perfectly calm and cool four minutes
before, and yet he was there for the purpose of committing this outrage. We knew
how lunatics could mask their feeling, and we knew of cases of lunacy in which
the persons afflicted had lived reputable lives, had been remarkable for intelligence
and acuteness, and had after all broken out into madness to the astonishment of
all those persons with whom they were acquainted. He asked whether if this
man was a person who had control over his actions, there would have been no
trepidation about him up to the time he committed the deed ? The absence of
trepidation—his coolness under the circumstances—was a mark of lunacy. How
could any sane man going to commit such an act—an act wdiich must result in his
own seizure and death—think of anything else in the short interval before he
committed this crime ? Coming to the other symptoms of insanity—did we not find
that there were always associates connected with political crimes ? Had not this
Government done all that they could to find associates in this crime, and had they
found one ? A man with madness in his brain seized the prominent idea that


presented itself, and imagined himself to be the agent for carrying it out. There
were no associates in this case. There was no pioof, though we had newspaper
paragraphs about the matter day after day, that the man had an associate in the
wide world. And the jury would, if they gave a verdict of guilty, be branding us
all with the taint of Fenianism, and conveying the embarrassing intelligence to
the British Government that no matter where the Princes or powers of that British
Government might go, there would be a secret assassin in the confidence of a
conclave of assassins waiting to strike his blow in New York or Dublin or else-
where. The jury would convey that intelligence on the evidence against this
prisoner—evidence which did not prove his sanity—which did not show that he
was seen with any persons who had a design upon the English throne and Govern-
ment. There was not a shadow of proof that he associated with any persons of
that kind. Where were the proofs of such things ? He understood that large
rewards were offered for persons who would come and give information on these
matters to the Government. Who were the persons to give information? We
had that doctor who had been thirty years in Her Majesty’s Navy, and that
gentleman who was in the militia and who listened to conversations in a bar
parlour. And these gentlemen are selected as the confidants of a traitor. Did
they (the jury) think a man who was chosen to carry out an attack upon a Royal
personage, would select such a warrior as that militia officer, or such a gentleman
as that doctor, to be his confidants? He could not conceive that the man had
uttered anything of a treasonable nature in the presence of these persons. If he
did, one would have expected them at least to retire from his company when the
prisoner said a word of that character. He could not understand how they could
tolerate it; he could understand their acting far otherwise; but he said their
remaining there at all under such circumstances was a great disgrace, and their
listening to and taking part in such conversation was a greater. It was sai ( d that
the man acknowledged he was a Fenian in the presence of an officer in the militia
—an officer who, no doubt, thought the militia took precedence of the Army.
Was it likely that this prisoner would go to this gentleman, who was brimful of
military ardour, and say such things ? Was it not plain that this gentleman had
read what was said by the prisoner by the light of subsequent events ? He did
not tell us what the conversations were, but only his conclusions from those
conversations ; and we knew that Fenianism lately had been in every sound brain,
so that it was likely to be in an unsound one. We had heard that men, and women
too, had lately been declaring themselves Fenians, being delirious with the idea,
but not meaning what they said. Then we were told by a number of persons
that the man was sane, perfectly reasonable when they conversed with him, almost
»np to the day of this occurrence. He went to the picnic actually unconcealed in
any possible way, and the proof of sanity which was set before us is that he wanted
to go like a gentleman, and wear a hat like other people. These things are
given as proofs of his sanity —that he talked about the city, the harbour, the
beauty of the place, and was as calm and collected as anybody there. When he
got there he made half a dozen new acquaintances in addition to what he had made
before. He was represented as a sort of Guy Fawkes, and yet he went about in this
open way. He might have shot the Prince as he took his rides, or in the street,,
or elsewhere, much more easily. But he was described as going down to this
place, making himself known, seeking identification, shooting from a place where
hundreds might see him, and where there was no possibility of escape—he did this
after having talked without disguise to persons under no obligation to him. And
we are told that this man was perfectly sane, although he adopted a course which
only an insane man would have adopted—declaring himself a Fenian beforehand.
Where were the Fenians now ? Why, if the man’s sisters did not come to his
assistance these Fenians would have left him to his doom. If there were any
Fenianism in this colony, which he (Mr. Aspinall) took leave to doubt, how was
it we had heard nothing of it ? Certainly there had been some conversation
in public-houses spoken of, and these public-houses seemed to drive a thriving
trade when they produced so many witnesses to these conversations. He main-
tained that the prisoner’s conduct had not been that of a sane assassin—not the
conduct of a responsible or sane man, who would have the idea of escape at any
rat® —of doing the deed and getting away with impunity. But this deed had been


done in a manner which, if it had been done to a private individual, and the ques-
tion of Fenianism had been disconnected from the consideration of it, the jury
could not fail to regard as that of a madman. When, however, the deed was
done to a person in the Prince’s distinguished position, and a clue was mentioned
by the prisoner, a clue which was the topmost idea in his brain, but which was
really no clue at all, a train of evidence was made by which the colony had already
convicted him. Suppose this man had committed suicide at Clontarf, instead of
firing at anybody else, and the jury were now sitting for the purpose of inquiring
how he came by his death ? Did they think that, after hearing his sister’s evi-
dence, there would be one moment’s hesitation in their minds as to the propriety
of sayiDg on these grounds—his having these attacks—his mode of life (which had
been sworn to by witnesses whose veracity could not be doubted) that the man
was mad ? If he had been a suicide, and the jury were on their oath to say how
he died, could they have heard that evidence, excluding all national topics, and
all except that which bore upon the crime, and not have said there was ample
proof to justify them in treating him as a lunatic ?—in saying that he was no
unfeeling taker of his own life, but died under the visitation of God, and in that
state of mind which would not justify any human being in finding fault with him ?
Would they hesitate a moment in that case, upon the evidence he had laid before
them, and he did not think they would be invited by the Crown to doubt the
veracity of any of the witnesses brought for the defence ? The main thought
required to justify the jury in giving such a verdict as he sought, and which
would be received by all, when thought over coolly, as the wisest and justest they
could give, and which would commend itself to all minds and to their own—was
that the man had not that knowledge of right and wrong, as connected with the
particular act with which he was charged, which would justify them in treating
him as sane. It was almost impossible for doctors or anybody else to come to
any special conclusion about insanity. There were various circumstances which
developed themselves in each case. It was the most terrible issue that a jury
could have to try, because they had, by means of such evidence as was brought
before them, to pass into another man’s brain and find out the condition of his
mind at the time he did such an act as the prisoner was charged with. We were
told here that we could possibly have entirely altered the aspect of this case if
these doctors at Ballarat could have been induced to come here and give their im-
pressions with respect to the prisoner’s state of mind. But see the position we
are placed in. No subpoena from this Court could issue in Victoria, and to induce
these gentlemen to come here became a matter of bargain. With every respect to
those gentlemen, one was inclined to set a high value upon himself when the de-
mand upon him was one of life and death. It was in evidence that we had been
anxious to secure the attendance of these doctors, and had offered them
sums to attend and give evidence in the case. But these gentlemen were kept
from coming by higher motives, perhaps. One had a patient who would probably
die if he left him—another had the charge of a hospital to attend to, and there
would possibly be a risk of his losing some of his patients if he left them ; then
there was this Mr. Usher, who gave a very good and honest reason for refusing to
come—who said that he had a family to support, and would lose his business if
he left the place for any time. Nothing could be more obvious, he apprehended,
than that these conversations on trilling subjects might every one most readily
be admitted. Indeed, if it were not so, it would be contrary to all our experience.
He did not know how these things were conducted here, but in Melbourne they
had balls and parties in the lunatic asylums, and sometimes picnics, at which the
whole of the lunatics assembled without any sort of danger. It was not on every
subject that a man’s mind was perverted. He might get into a terrible state on
certain subjects, and be quite rational upon others. We could all recollect Ox-
ford’s case; or the case of Hadfield, who shot at King George the Third.
Why did he shoot at him? He knew the law was against him, and had
a full consciousness that he was offending the law. What was his
motive ? Simply that he might be executed for doing so. His conscience
would not allow him to commit suicide, but did not tell him he was not rio-ht in
shooting at the king. He shot at him in order that he might be killed himself.
Then a case was reported of a nobleman who wished to get rid of his life, but whose


conscience would not allow him to take it himself. He called up his game-keeper
and ordered him to be more strict in the preservation of his game—told him to
have no hesitation in shooting any person who did not answer his challenge, and
threatened to dismiss the man if he did not follow these orders. Then he was the
first person to throw himself in the way of his gamekeeper and get killed. Then
there was the case of the man who set fire to York Cathedral, alleging that he
was commanded by God to do so. In that case also it was admitted that, wrong
as the action was, the motive of the mind diseased absolved the man. It was true
he thought he had received some such command, and therefore all the atrocity of
the crime was at an end. If the jury would call to mind the case of Oxford, they
would remember that its circumstances were such as to render it, in many respects,
a very similar case to that now before the Court. The circumstances of that case
were of a very singular character’, and almost all precisely resembled those now
immediately under consideration. Oxford who shot at Her Majesty had, it would
be recollected, also professed to be a member of some secret society, with its own
laws and officers—when, in point of fact, there was no such society in existence.
Oxfor 1 had no connection whatever with any such pretended society, and yet he
had directly sought to substantiate the assumption which he had so made. And
that he (Mr. Aspinall) might not be supposed to exaggerate, he would give the
exact narrative from a law book—Carrington and Payne’s Reports, vol. IX, page
1)27, re Regina v. Oxford. The Attorney-General, Campbell, in opening that case
for the Crown, had said, “There would be two questions in that case—whether
supposing the prisoner to be accountable for his actions, he, in point of fact com-
mitted the offence imputed; and secondly, whether at the time that he committed
the act he was accountable for his actions.” [The learned counsel then proceeded
to quote from the law book alluded to, showing the deliberate purchase by Oxford
of a pair of pistols, and a powder flask, &c. The report also stated that Oxford
had been practising at several shooting galleries before he shot at her Majesty, and
had, on the 3rd of June, previous to the offence charged, bought bullets, copper
caps, and other ammunition. On the 9th of June it was further proved that
Oxford still had in his possession a pistol which he declared to be loaded; and on
the following day he had shot at the Queen and Prince Albert on Constitution
Hill, in London. in the law book referred to stated all these facts in
extenso, and also set forth the fact, with very full particulars, as to certain papers
having been found at his lodgings in his pocket-book. Amongst these papers were
rules and regulations of a wholly fictitious society, with names for the pretended
officers, and letters purporting to be a subsidiary proof of the existence of such a
society. The learned counsel proceeded.] In another part of the same volume
from which he had quoted this it would, nevertheless, be found recorded that no
such society whatever had existed ; and it was further shewn to have been very
clearly proved on the trial referred to, that all the pi’etended documentary proof
of the existence of such a society had been fabricated by Oxford himself ; —papers,
letters, rules, and everything else. In another part of the same lawbook (at page
537), it had been shewn, for the defence of Oxford, that the absence of ordinary
motives for sane criminals to commit crimes was in itself a strong argument in
favor of the notion of a prisoner’s insanity. In the case of Hadfield, an extraordi-
nary instance of delusion was mentioned by Mr. Erskine [27 How, St. Tr., p.
1310], as having been related to him by Lord Mansfield. [This case, referring to
the delusion of a man named Wood, upon one point, was detailed by the learned
counsel, the application of it being (as it had been in Oxford’s case) that, in this
present instance, as regarded the prisoner at the bar, there existed in fact no secret
society at all with which O’Farrell was connected, other than the inveterate phan-
tom of his (O’Farrell’s) morbid imagination.] In the trial he had been referring to,
Oxford had been acquitted, and the facts in both cases were, for the purposes of his
argument, precisely identical; for in neither case was there any secret society in
existence with which it could be inferred that the prisoner was personally con-
nected. If a man told you that he was directly connected with a secret society,
and it was found that no such society existed—(and that most certainly was to be
presumed in the present case, for all the great influence that had been brought to
bear upon the matter had altogether failed to elicit the slightest tittle of proof)—
it was only fair to infer that the very fact that an assertion should have been made
by the prisoner of the existence of such a society, and of his connection therewith,
was primd facie a piece of evidence of the prisoner’s insanity. When this most
unhappy man coupled his insane act of purposeless violence with an alleged con-


nection with a wholly fictitious organisation, it could only be reasonably inferred
that the man was so far insane as to be unaccountable, for his acts. .He
confessed he did not rely very greatly upon the professional opinions of the medical
men as to the prisoner’s mental state. Doctors were always to be found, if called
upon in sufficient numbers, ready to substantiate different hypotheses . upon
these matters. The majority would eventually be always found on the side of
that party which possessed means enough to summon the largest number. A
terrible act had been committed, but thank God, it had been followed by no very
terrible results. On the contrary, we might congratulate ourselves on the fact,
that His Royal Highness had not only escaped the danger by which his life had
been threatened, but also that the duration and happiness of that valuable life was
not likely to be, in any wise, lessened through this most lamentable event. His
Royal Highness was, it rejoiced them to think, likely to live long in the high
position in which he was placed ; unless, indeed, he should be called upon to die
on the walls of his country in defence not only of the Queen his Reyal mother, but
also of the realms over which she so worthily reigned. In all the indignation
meetings which had been held in consequence of the act which had caused the
prisoner to be brought to that bar, the greatest amount of popular resentment and
hatred had been freely, and very naturally, expressed against the prisoner; and
even now the anger of the people was obviously unabated. That the case under
these circumstances against this man—who had brought so much sorrow upon the
whole community—-should have been so soon brought on for trial, was, he ventured
to think, a most unfortunate circumstance for O’Farrell. It had been brought
forward when it was still almost impossible, from the state ot the public mind, tor
any jury to consider the whole case as calmly as was desirable for the furtherance
of the true ends of justice. All the matters which had been disclosed by the
evidence for the defence went to show that the prisoner must be a man of impaired
intellect. There was his belief at Ballarat that the doctors had poisoned mm •
his belief that he was poisoned and persecuted by an old woman; his belief that
he was at Melbourne when he was at Ballarat, and his belief that he was at an
hotel in Elizabeth-street, Melbourne, when he was in the hospital; and his oblivion
of all that had occurred after the seizure described—all these were circumstances
that tended strongly to relieve him of responsibility as a moral agent. It was no
infallible argument of a man’s sanity that he did not, in his conversation, display
symptoms of insanity. People who knew men under the circumstances in which
the prisoner stood would not be likely to take apparently sane conversations as
proofs of an unimpaired intellect —a sound mental state. They would be more
likely to refer to such circumstances as they knew of, wherein the then latent
proofs of the man’s insanity had, to their knowledge, been made conspicuously
evident. He desired also to say a few words in regard, to the. position m. which
the prisoner was placed in regard to the absence of medical testimony, very impor-
tant for his defence. On Friday the sisters of the accused see their duty clearly
in regard to him, and on the Saturday, the attorney undertaking to manage the
defence sets off, at their instance, to Ballarat. Arrived there too late on the Satur-
day to be able to do anything, the prisoner’s attorney makes it his business to see
the parties on the following day. and learns that those whose testimony would be
so important to the accused were unable to come up to Sydney there being, at
the same time, no power to compel them so to attend. These poor women had,
as sisters, done what they could to save their brother, but. they had, doubtless, as
married women with families, not found it so easy to raise.the necessary means
for the defence of their relative, and thus there would inevitably be some delay.
It was nor. until a very few days ago that they were able to be fully assured that
the prisoner O’Farrell was indeed their unhappy brother ; butjwhen they had been,
assured of that fact they had used every exertion to save him. He (Mr. Aspinal )
did submit that the non-appearance of the doctors at Ballarat, who might have
substantiated the sister’s evidence, was something which had very materially pre-
judiced the prisoner’s defence. He submitted also that he had reason to complain
that no doctors should have been called to say whether the symptoms that O I ar-
rell was shewn to have exhibited were not such as had, at least, a tendency towards
insanity. He also complained, and he thought he had a good right to complain,
that the doctor of the gaol had not been placed in the box by the counsel on the
part of the Crown, to give evidence on this subject. As to the doctor who had
been brought there, it was clear that, although he might have studied such cases ot
insanity, he had never had an opportunity of testing his theoretical knowledge in.


this direction from actual observation and practice. He did not blame that gentle-
man for his evidence, but he thought some blame did attach to the attempt which
had been made to treat such evidence as conclusive against the accused. Beyond
a doubt, they had many symptoms proved which warranted the conclusion con-
tended for on the part of the defence. There were the epileptic fits to which the
prisoner had, undeniably been subject; and the insanity that he had shown at
Ballarat. Whether that shock to the mental system of the prisoner had only been
of a temporary character, or whether it had not been of such a character as per-
manently to affect the prisoner’s intellect, it was for the jury now to determine.
He thought that the jury, from the evidence which had been placed before them,
must have had their minds utterly disabused of the idea that a person in the
position of this unhappy man could have had any connection whatever with any
secret treasonable society . Let them remember what this man was. He was a
man who had no occupation whatever, —a man who -was actually dependent upon
the charity of his sister for his means of subsistence. It was inconceivable that
such a man, in such a position, should be what he had assumed to be—a political
conspirator, connected with a secret society of traitors—none of whom could be
traced. It remained, therefore, for the jury to say whether this man was, under
all the circumstances, to die a felon’s death, or to be treated like what it was con-
tended that he actually was—a man whose intellect was in such a state that he
could not be held to be responsible for his actions. Believing him to be a man who,
in his right senses, was utterly incapable of being guilty of the heinous crime of
which he stood charged, he (Mr. Aspinall) called upon the jury to give the case a
most patient and dispassionate consideration, and not to find him guilty of this
terrible crime. Amidst the terror, the anguish, the profound and all-pervading
excitement of the time, the unhappy prisoner (who has, said the learned counsel,
shaken our great Australian seciety to its foundations, and the news of whose
bloody deed will fall like a thunderbolt upon Europe) now stands before you to
receive at your hands a verdict, which will have the effect of either consigning him
to an ignominious death, or to a doom still more appalling—the dread solitude of
a lunatic asylum. Upon you, gentlemen, the law—sublime in its conception of
your duty as it is inexorable in the enforcement of your obligations—demands
that you should preserve the calm, the peace, the grand indifference of justice.
Let me, gentlemen, in conclusion, humbly supplicate Almighty God to strengthen,
to illuminate, and to support you in the discharge of your most arduous duty.
Mr. Martin, in rising to address the jury, in reply, said it must be a great satis-
faction to the jury that the prisoner who was charged with this heinous crime had
had the advantage of a very able and eloquent defence. His learned friend urged
upon the jury in strong and energetic terms the duty of considering the case in an
impartial manner. He (Mr. Martin) endeavoured, in opening the case, to express
the same desire. He repeated the expression because, standing there to prosecute
for the Crown, it was no part of his duty to endeavour to persuade the jury to
convict the prisoner if the evidence did not fairly and legitimately lead them to
that conclusion. He was not there for the purpose of securing a conviction at any
sacrifice. He was there for the purpose of assisting in some way in the adminis-
tration of justice.. His desire was that justice, and no more than justice, should
be done. In opening the case he avoided as carefully as he could—and he believed
he succeeded—making any reference to any matter which did not bear directly upon
the crime with which the prisoner was charged. He made no statement which he
believed he would not have been able to support by evidence. He made no refer-
ence to a conspiracy of any kind. He did not even suggest that there was an
organised association, the object of which was to attack the life of Her Majesty or
the life of any other person, or to interfere with the existing Government either
here or elsewhere. There might have been rumours more or less extensively circu-
lated during the last few weeks as to the existence of a society whose agents it was
thought by many persons were spread through different parts of the British
Empire, ft might possibly have been circulated, and believed by many persons,
that the prisoner at the bar was an agent of some such conspiracy. But that he
left out of the question entirely. Tt was not for the jury to consider whether or
not there was a Fenian organisation, or what that organisation consisted of, or
whether prisoner was an agent of any such organisation. No such issue had been
submitted to the jury by him, nor were the jiuy called upon to offer any opinion
about the existence of any such organisation. He had presented to the jury sim-
ply the case of wounding His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh with intent


to murder. That was the case he stated to the jury, and he stated it m words
sufficient, and no more than sufficient, to place facts clearly before them. 1
jury had no other issue to dispose of but that, whether 01 n P ,
wounded His Royal Highness with intent to murder him. It mattered not whe-
ther prisoner belonged to an association or not; the jury were not called upo
go into any inquiry such as that. His learned friend (Mr. Aspmall) had not
thought it necessary in any way to question the veracity of any witness called
behalf of the Crown. He took it, therefore, that Ins learned friend saw it as
impossible for him to lead the jury to the conclusion that the prisoner did not
inflict the wound, or that he did not inflict the wound with the intent to murder.
In his defence of the prisoner, his learned friend relied upon his being able to
make out to the satisfaction of the jury that at the time when the oflence
committed prisoner was of unsound mind. By the law of -Eng a , P .
committed murder, or a crime such as that now under investigation and at tne
time he committed it was insane, then the jury might acquit him of the crime or
which he stood charged; but they were in such a case further directed to h
that at the time such person committed the offence he was insane. I hat ,
the duty of the jury on the present occasion. The law, m offences of this ki ,
provided that proof of insanity must be given either by the prisoner or some pe-
son on his behalf. A person who committed a crime was m the first instance pre
sumed to be of sound mind, and responsible for his actions ; and it 1 *
mitted that such person was of unsound mind, proof of his insanity m ? 3t be /,
by him or by some one else on his behalf. The law in reference to insanity bad been
laid down by Judges in pretty much the same terms. Under these circum-
stances it became material for jurors, when a defence of insanity was set up,
to inquire what was the state of mind of the accused at the time he committed tne
act. It was allowable in inquiries of the kind to go back to the early history ot t
accused—even to go back to the history of his father, grandfather, or more remote
ancestors. And it had been thought that insanity which appeared in an ancestor
might be transmitted through several generations down to the persons on whose
behalf the defence of insanity might have been set up. In the case of Oxford, l
mother was called upon to give evidence of singular acts done by ancestors, and.
other witnesses were allowed to bring evidence of the insanity of his g™ D <Jtath€ s .
But evidence of the kind was not in any way material, unless it led fairly to t e
conclusion that at the time of the commission of the offence insanity existed
person was held to be responsible for his act if at the time he committed it he
knew he was doing wrong-knew that he was committing an offence contrary to
the laws of the land. Whatever a person’s previous state of mind might have
been, the law held him responsible ; if the law did not hold him responsible, there
would be no security for the lives of any of us. It was all very well for ms learn
friend to submit to the jury that it was impossible for any sane person to comm
a crime of such enormity as to attack, without motive a person who bad every
claim to his affection. According to that argument, the greater the crime, the
greater the impunity. It would in such a case be only necessary to show that the
crime was in the highest degree atrocious, in order to prove the insamtyofthe
person who committed it. This was not the way m which juries were called upon
to discharge their duties. It would be impossible for any one to dive into the m j
of the prisoner who stood charged with this atrocious crime ; his intentions could
only be judged by his acts. So far as the prisoner had been concerned no evidence
had been placed before the jury to show that any of his ancestors had been a
time tainted with insanity. Neither the prisoner nor any member of his family,
have been shown to have been at any time afflicted with insanity. So that
hereditary insanity in this case was entirely out of the question It appeared by
the evidence that prisoner was a man of good education, and bad been w
brought up-in fact, had every advantage which could be given him m the way ot
education. His relations brought him out to these colonies at a very early age.
Thev were not content with the education which might have been given him in
these colonies, but sent him to Europe. He was some time at .Pans, and was at
one time destined for the priesthood. But for some reason or other, which was
not material to the injury, he did not proceed any further with his religious career.
He went to Ballarat, and there for thirteen years carried on business as bay and
com dealer. The business was at first carried on m connection with his cousin.
According to the evidence of Mr. Welsh, a land at Ballarat, prisoner was,
during the thirteen years he was in business, one of the most industrious men in


the town-- a town in which there was as much commercial activity as there was in
London, Pans, or New York. Prisoner and his cousin carried on business without
any assistance either in the way of bookkeeping, buying, or selling. Afterwards,
it appeared m 1865, his cousin died, and prisoner then took a salesman into his
employment, but still kept his books, and carried on business by his own exertions
buying and selling, and only leaving his assistant in charge when other business
required his absence. Prisoner managed his business himself up to the end of 1866
or the beginning of 1867. Up to that time, according to the evidence of his sister
be was not addicted to the excessive use of intoxicating drinks—but after that she
said he was so addicted. He (Mr. Martin) was sure no one of the jury could have
listened to the evidence of the prisoner’s sister without being to a great extent
affected by it. The moment she heard that it wa3 her brother who was to be
placed on his trial for this crime, she set about making inquiries in a neighbouring
colony, among persons who knew her brother, with the view of obtaining evidence
which would lead to his acquittal on the ground of insanity. She retained able
counsel for the defence, and left her own family for the purpose of coming here and
appearing in the witness-box to give evidence as to her brother’s insanity. He did
not doubt for a moment that the testimony she gave was truthful. But he would
ask the jury to carefully examine that testimony and see whether there was
anything in it which would enable them to come to the conclusion which his
learned friend had advised them to arrive it. She said that at the end of 1866 or
the beginning of 1867, she had representations made to her which caused her to
go to Ballarat, where she found two or three doctors in attendance upon her
brother. She found him suffering from the effects of delirium tremens, the result
of excessive drinking. He (Mr. Martin) was not aware that it had been at any
time proved,—it certainly had not been proved in the present case,—that a person
who in January,lB67, was suffering from an attack of delirium tremens, would a
fortnight ago be labouring under insanity in consequence. Medical testimony had
no eon rought forward to show that an attack of delirium tremens necessarily
deprived a man of his senses for all time to come. Mrs. Allen proved that the
diseaseiunder which the prisoner was labouring in January, 1867, was delirium
tremens. And that it was still further proved by the kind of medicines that were
presen tied for him. For it could hardly be supposed that brandy would be
prescribed for a man who had brain disease, or any other disease except fluff under
which the prisoner was labouring. Prisoner, it was said, thought the doctors
" ere poisoning him, and that some old woman was poisoning him. When prisoner
recovered his sisters brought him down to Melbourne. He resided in the house
of one of them one night, and then made some excuse about leaving, and took
lodging in the neighbourhood ; he remained there six weeks ; during that time he
was quiet and inoffensive, and frequently walked out with his sisters and their
children ; he did nothing which would lead them to conceive the idea of placing
bun under restraint. He was allowed to go about in the same way as any other
person who was not labouring under disease. After remaining in Melbourne for
six weeks prisoner proceeded to Ballarat; but he was not there long before he broke
out again, and had another attack of delirium tremens. Mr. Welsh, who knew' him
w ell, stated in evidence that lie could not describe the symptoms as any other than
those of delilium tremens. That second attack was more violent than the pre-
ceding one ; and prisoner had epileptic fits during the attack. There w r as no
doubt that disease of this kind would be productive of serious consequences. No
doubt the excessive use of intoxicating drinks would bring about the existence of
e P™P* IC or tits of another character. But still it was on both occasions
delirium tremens under which prisoner w'as labouring, Prisoner was excessively
violent. A manager of a bank with whom prisoner asked for an interview left
the room suddenly, on prisoner calling out “he is there,” “he is there.” It
might be unsafe to allow persons at large vdio v'ere under delusions whilst labouring
under an attack of delirium tremeus. Such persons might have a desire to take
away their own life or the lives of others. The last attack wdiich prisoner had
was so violent that the prisoner had to be placed in the Ballarat hospital, where
e remained a fortnight, after which he was removed. The doctors did not object
to bis removal, and he was taken to Melbourne by train. He remained at Mel-
bourne from March or April until August or September. Now, what was his
conduct during that time t During all that time he ffas conducting correspondence
with Mr. Welsh, who had been appointed his agent to wind up his business. That
business, whether from heavy losses sustained by his brother—w'hich losses appear


to have preyed upon his mind-or from prisoner's own illness, had fallen off, and
it had become necessary to wind up his affairs The winding up of prisoners
affairs was entrusted t> Mr. Welch, and it was with Mr. Welsh he corresponded
during the time he was in Melbourne. Prisoner wrote to Welsh requesting him
to send his remittances. There was no indication of insanity m the request he
made He knew that Mr. Welsh was winding up his affairs and was the proper
person to apply to for money. If the jury could see deliberate design in all
prisoner’s acts, and that in his ordinary conversation with others, nothing more
was shown than what bespoke him to be an educated, acute, and intelligent man
capable of reasoning on topics of common discussion, and that in connection with
the crime he committed he made every preparation so as to be without fear of
interruption, choosing the best opportunity for carrying his design into execution
—all these were evidence of an evil and malignant mind, but. of one in full pos-
session of its faculties. Had it not been for the presence of mind of Mr. Vial too,
it was almost a certainty that prisoner’s design would have been successful, as
another shot would most likely have been fatal. The prisoner took the oppor-
tunity of committing his crime before any interruption near was likely to be
availing Then, after his arrest, was there any evidence of insanity ? It appeared
he was knocked about a good deal; many trampled iipon him, and kicked and
struck Lim, and when one of the policemen had his face washed he said I m
much obliged to you for getting my face washed-I do not care for death—l m
sorrv I missed my aim.” Did not this show consciousness of crime? He saw the
Prince was shot, but not dead, and he obviously meant he was sorry he was not
instantly killed. Then a witness swore to his having said, I have made a b mess
of it ” Whether the adjective was made use of might be doubted, as prisoner
repudiated it, but a witness also said prisoner exclaimed, “ I m a Fenian, Dodsave
Ireland ” His language would show the treasonable intent, it might be a foolish
intent, the intent of a weak mind-as -far as Fenianism (whatever that might mean
was concerned, a mind ill-regulated-a mind that did not enable lnm to understand
the difficulties which persons engaged in such a conspiracy might ha\e to contend
with ; but was he insane? Did he or did lie not know what he was doing when
he fired the shot ? It must unhesitatingly be admitted that apart from the
language he used when in custody the other facts showed that he well knew what
he was doing-knew that he bad committed an offence against the laws and knew
that he was liable to be tried for his life, for he said, 1 don t fear death m
sorry I missed my aim.” Why sorry ? Because he intended to take tne life and
regretted that he had not done so. Was it possible for the jury under these
circumstances to arrive at the conclusion that because fifteen months ago be .freely
indulged in intoxicating drinks, was attacked by delirium treinens from which he
soon recovered, he was insane ? If so, it was scarcely possible to conceive any
case in which this might not be urged as evidence of insanity. He was known for
seven months afterwards ; he talked and walked about like other men ; wrote to
his sister for assistance ; his sister supplied him whenever he wrote, there was
nothing peculiar in his correspondence to lead to the supposition that he was insane.
He conversed, month after month, with a number of people, who saw nothing even
eccentric about him. He deliberately planned this crime in the best way it could be
planned ; dressed himself in such a way as to render him not likely to be suspected,
preferred a ten-shilling hat to one at lialf-a-crown ; went well armed and waited his
opportunity. All these were evidences of sanity, of a design carried out bya sane man
who knew well how to proceed about it with the best chance of success. Under 'these
circumstances could the jury say that the defence was made out ? From March to
August or September, 18G7, he was in Melbourne and in correspondence with
Welsh and wrote to him to send down remittances. There was nothing peculiar
in the’correspondence, no indications of insanity ; he knew money was coming to
him. Next he was found winding up his busmess ; he had to write to people for
payments, and made application in the usual way. In these months Welsh sent
him down £6O or £7O. The prisoner then proceeded to Ballarat, and bad an
interview with Welsh, who produced a balance sheet, showing that the amount
coming to prisoner was some £5 or £6. There was nothing peculiar about his
conversation at that time ; he took the payment, gave a receipt, and closed the
transaction. What evidence of insanity was there here? What evidence of
insanity except the two attacks of delirium tremens in the eaily part of 1867.
Prisoner then came into this colony. His sister had received eight or nine letters
from him whilst he was in Sydney; these she said she destroyed. She said they


were kind letters, but on all occasions asking for some small advance Did she
treat these letters as evidence of insanity? Did anyone, whilst he was in this
colony or in Queensland, take steps to place him under restraint 9 His sister
corresponded with him as sane, and sent him money through Dr. Forrest and on
one occasion through the Rev. Mr. M'Encroe. At this time there was no reason
to suppose he was insane. But if it were conceded that in the early part of 1867
and a greater part of that year, he was in such a state of mind as not to be
responsible for his actions, there would still be the material inquiry, what was his
state of mind when he committed this offence ? for the nearer they came to that
time the more important did the inquiry become. The Crown had called a number
of witnesses who met him in the streets, at places of amusement, at hotels
witnesses who conversed with him, and heard him converse with others ; one and
all told the jury that there was nothing is his language or demeanour in any way
peculiar—nothing different from what was ordinarily seen in the manner and
demeanour of other persons that he was quiet, acute, educated, and gentlemanly
This would lead to the inference that he was a man specially capable of knowing
right from wrong, and perceiving the probable consequences of his acts He
appeared to have been here in September of last year, but there is no evidence
that he was ever in Queensland. Some objection was taken by the learned
counsel for the defence to the omission of medical evidence on the part of the
Crown. It so happened that two medical men were called as witnesses. But it
was said the Crown ought to call medical testimony, especially that of the
surgeon. Although Dr. Caldwell was called it was not to elicit medical testimony
but facts that came within his knowledge by reason of his having been in prisoner’s
company and lodging at the same house. It was not to be presumed that medical
men had an exclusive right to pronounce on cases of this kind, as educated laymen
had often an opportunity of forming equally good opinions. Dr. Wright, too was
called under like circumstances. Dr. Caldwell told the jury that he had many
opportunities of conversing with prisoner during sixteen days, and saw no traces of
insanity or of anything peculiar about him ; that his conversation was acute and
intelligent. This witness said some allusion was made to a Fenian privateer
having gone to liberate Fenian prisoners transported to Western Australia, and to
a man-of-war having been sent to intercept that vessel. Witness remarked that
he hoped the Fenian vessel would be sunk, and prisoner said he hoped the man-of-
war would be sunk. Was this an indication of insanity ? Suppose prisoner to be
a Fenian, as he said he was—that he had a strong hostility to the British Govern-
ment—was there anything insane in his giving expression to such hopes ;
incoherent or irrational in the sense in which the Court was now making inquiry
in such expressions. It might be rash d,nd foolish to give expression in any com-
pany to such opinions; but was it sufficient to justify a jury in saying that a
person who used such expressions was insane ? The language might not be such
as the jury approved of, and the opinions they might condemn, but it was not
therefore that they were to arrive at the conclusion that he was insane. Of these
witnesses, some had opportunities of conversing with him for various periods from
a few days to three months under different circumstances, had elicited his opinions
controverted with him ; they described here and there portions of his conversations
and his remarks on some of the topics ; but the inference drawn by all was that
he was a sane person with nothing peculiar about him, a sensible quiet person and
of more than average intelligence. From what source was the jury to derive the
information by which they were to be guided in determining whether he was insane
or not at the time of the commission of the act ? They could only draw it
from his conduct, his sayings and doings about that time, and by such
evidence as had been placed before them. They had the’ evidence down
to the very time the offence was committed. Mr. Watkins went down with
him in the steamer, conversed with him on the ground and remained in
his for two hours, yet saw nothing peculiar ’in his manner or
demeanour. Then there was the evidence of Mr. Aldis, who spoke to him the
same morning just before prisoner went into Mr. Mountcastle’s shop to purchase a
hat. That hat he subsequently exchanged, and paid the difference in price for a
better one. So good were his faculties that, when he paid the difference with a
Bank of Victoria note, he refused to allow discount, saying that he had paid others
away without discount being charged, and that if he was wanted concerning it he
would be found at the Clarendon Hotel. It was then impossible to conceive that
at this time he was not as sane as other persons around him. The witness


Cunningham was in company with him the same morning, but no one noticed any-
thing peculiar about his actions or words, except Mr. Lewis, who said he was excited
and nervous, that he was conversing about one topic and diverged to some other.
The witness did not say he did not speak coherently or intelligently, or that he said
anything indicating an inability to distinguish between right and wrong. Some
thirteen witnesses had been called to prove what was the nature of his conversa-
tion and demeanour down to the very time of the commission of the offence. It
was committed with great deliberation. He armed himself with two revolvers -
both loaded. He went down to a place where some thousands of people were col-
lected. He did not fire the shot rashly, or so that he would be likely to miss his
aim and strike some other person, but waited his opportunity till the Prince moved
from other persons and walked across the open space. It was then when he found
his way from the crowd where there were none near enough to stay his arm that
he took advantage of the precise opportunity, hurriedly came up behind Inis Royal
Highness, so that neither the Prince nor Sir William Manning even should be in a
position to arrest the accomplishment of design by diverting his arm. Assassin-
like, he went close up to the Prince’s back and fired at him a shot so close that in
a thousand cases would prove fatal. He armed himself deliberately for the
purpose of taking life, and adopted the surest opportunity of carrying out his evil
design. Were the jury, because he was afflicted with delirium tremens fif-
teen months before, to say he was not at the time sane ? How did we know to
what glory he might have expected to achieve by an act like this. The Court had
not to inquire if he had any object of this kind, but they could readily imagine
circumstances under which a man might throw away his life in connexion with a
crime like this. Even supposing he could by any possibility be regarded as insane,
could it be said that at the time he did not know he was committing an ouence
against the laws—that he was not attempting to take life ?It was said that other
evidence might have been adduced for the defence had opportunity been afforded
for the attendance of witnesses. With regard to this, it was well known that our
laws admitted of evidence being taken by commission, but no application for a
commission to examine other witnesses had been made, and no affidavit had been
put in stating what those other witnesses could prove if here. Had any medical
men been called to give their opinion on the evidence put forward ? They might
have had many medical gentlemen in the box to give such opinions. They could
have called persons who had made lunacy their study for their lives. They had
not taken that course, and it did not rest with the learned counsel for the defence
to lead the jury to any conclusion of insanity because certain persons in Victoria
had not been called to prove it. He had not indulged in these observations be-
cause he had any desire the prosecution should succeed. He, and all of us, would
be glad if the prisoner could be acquitted by these means, and the colony freed
from the stain of this great crime. Every one would be glad if it were made
manifest to the jury and to the world that the crime wa3 committed by an
assassin in the full possession of his faculties, but by a person who was insane.
But they would not arrive at such a conclusion as that unless the evidence war-
ranted them in so doing. If they could not say, from the evidence, that he was
labouring under insanity at that time, then it would be their duty to return a \ er-
dict of guilty. _ _
His Honor then proceeded to sum up, and, in doing so, said it would now be-
come his duty to lay before the jury the evidence on the part of the Crown, and
see what was established by that evidence. Before entering upon these matters,
and before submitting the observations he felt it his duty to make, he must beg
them to discard from their minds any consideration of the circumstances under
which this atrocious aet was committed. The case must be tried as between man and
man, according to the oaths they had taken, upon the evidence, and the evidence
alone, which had been taken. The information charged the prisoner with wound-
ing, with intent to murder, Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburgh ; and in sup-
port of that information there were three material points to be considered. The
first was in reference to the wounding—the second in reference to the person who
committed the act—and the third with reference to the intent with which it was
committed. With reference to the wounding, there could be little doubt that the
person of Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburgh, was wounded, and in sup-
port of that allegation there was the evidence of Dr. Watson, which he would
read in its entirety. [Dr. Watson’s evidence read.] According to this there was
a wound inflicted on the person of the Duke of Edinburgh, and that being satis-


factorily proved, we came to the second point—by whom was this wound inflicted?
From the evidence addticed by the Crown there could be no doubt that the man
who did commit this atrocious act was the prisoner at the bar. The evi-
dence of Vial, of Clarke, of Pearce, and of Orridge [extracts from tko
evidence of each were read by His Honor], proved that the prisoner
was the man who fired the shot and inflicted the wound. There was other
independent testimony. A revolver was found upon him at the time of his appre-
hension, and a six-barrelled revolver which had been seen in his hands was
picked up, with two of the barrels discharged, and the others loaded. Then,
again, there was the evidence of Itawlinson as to the admission made by the
prisoner himself. That, if proof were wanting, was most damning proof against
him. The evidence of Rawlinson was also corroborated in part by that of
Orridge, to whom prisoner had said something about his having “made a mess of
it.” There was also the evidence, independent of the remarks made by himself,
that he was the person who committed the attack upon the Prince. Then came
the question as to the intent with which he had committed this atrocious act.
With regard to this point, it had been properly suggested by counsel for the
Crown, that no mortal could look into the mind of another, and it was only by
acts that intents were to be construed. The evidence was that the prisoner went
out with two loaded revolvers of six barrels each ; that he pointed a revolver at
the back of the Prince, and fired, and that the wound was the result of this shot.
What was the construction to be put upon these acts ? What did he intend ?
Was the intention to murder the Prince acting in his mind ; or, if not, what other
construction could be put upon his act ? It was most material to consider this
point. The gravamen of the charge was that he intended to murder the Prince
when he made the attack upon him. If the jury thought that he had no such
intention, they might find him guilty of unlawfully wounding, and negative the
information as regarded the capital felony. Supposing the jury were satisfied on
these three points, and negatived the unlawfully wounding, then of course the
Crown would be entitled to their verdict, and though the case put in that way had
been assented to by the learned counsel who so ably conducted the defence, it was
his duty to put these points to them. Although the prisoner had been guilty of
this act, yet the evidence might satisfy the jury that at the time he committed it
he was insane. Of course, that was a material defence, and one that required a
deal of consideration, because the decisions arrived at thereupon had been some-
what contradictory. They would find that the distinction drawn was the exact
position put forward by the learned counsel for the defence as well as the learned
counsel for the prosecution,—that the man knew the distinction between right and
wrong at the time of the commision of the offence. One or two cases on matters
of this kind had been quoted to them, and he would refer to some others. [His
Honor then quoted from legal authorities upon the species of insanity held to
deprive a man of responsibility for his actions. In support of the opinions ex-
pressed, he quoted the case of Lord Ferrers, tried before the House of Lords for
murder, found guilty, and executed ; the case of one Arnold, tried and found
guilty for shooting at Lord Onslow ; and the case of one Bowler, who was tried,
found guilty, and executed for wounding a person named Burrows.] This last
case was, as his Honor observed, to some extent upon all forms with the case of
the prisoner at the bar, for it seemed that the accused had suffered from epilepsy
some eighteen months previous to the commission of the crime with which he was
charged. As lie was not shown to be insane at the time he committed the act,
the plea of insanity was not sustained.
Mr. Aspinall pointed out to his Honor that in Oxford’s case Baron Alderson had
said, “ Bowler was executed, and very barbarous it was.”
His Honor said that did not alter the law in any way. There were several other
cases to the same purport as that he had submitted to them, and that of
MMSTaughton, quoted by the Attorney-General. There was one other that he
seould quote. [His Honor then cited the case of a soldier who had shot a woman
with a musket, and who was alleged to have been insane.] In this case it was laid
down that the insanity must be clearly shown to be such a 3 deprived the person
of knowledge of the difference between right and wrong, and that the onus of
proving such insanity rested upon the accused. The law would not excuse the
prisoner unless he was insane at the time he committed the act. The evidence
upon this point rested almost entirely upon the unfortunate sister of the prisoner.
Ho one could deplore more than himself the position in which she was placed. She


seemed to have been fond of him, and he fond of her ; and she seemed to have
done for him all that a sister could do—finding him in funds, and employing one of
the ablest counsel of the Victorian Bar to conduct the prisoner’s defence. The
evidence as regarded the prisoner’s epilepsy and derangement of mind was chiefly
given by her. [His Honor then read a considerable portion of the evidence given
by Mrs. Halley.] Such was the evidence of that witness, and the jury would
remark that it was chiefly on the testimony so given that they were requested to
come to the conclusion that the prisoner had, at any part of his previous life been
insane. The jury would have to say whether—supposing him at the time referred
to to have been really insane—his insanity was of such a character as to have con-
tinued from the time that he had the fits and the delirium up to the present time.
He did not think it necessary for him to dwell at any length upon the evidence of
the witness O’Brien. It was only confirmatory of the evidence of the sister’s
testimony as to the medical men who were in attendance upon O’Farrell during his
illness at Ballarat. The evidence of Patrick Welsh was more important, and he
should therefore recapitulate the principal facts of it to the jury. [His Honor
read over notes of the evidence of the witness Welsh, and proceeded.] It would
be seen by that 'evidence that Welsh’s testimony touched upon the state of the
prisoner’s health at the time that the prisoner was visited at Ballarat by his sister
and her son. Up to September last this was the effect of the evidence which had
been adduced as to the state of the prisoner’s mind. It would appear that subse-
quent to that month the prisoner had eventually made his way up to Sydney.
Then they had evidence for the prisoner as to what had occurred in connection
with him whilst he was in this city. The evidence of Walter Martin had reference
to what (according to the hypothesis for the defence) !was supposed to be the state
of the prisoner’s mind whilst he was in Sydney. [His Honor here read notes of
the evidence given by Mr. Walter Martin.] , The testimony thus given continued
the case as to the state of the man’s mind up to the time of the offence
committed at Clontarf. The evidence of Lewis also went to show
what had been the exact state of the prisoner’s mind immediately before he
shot at the Prince. Some remark was, perhaps, requisite as to the position in
which the prisoner had been placed as regarded the difficulty experienced or. his
behalf in respect of the procuring of medical evidence. No doubt, it was a
strong observation of the learned counsel to have to make, but it must be remem-
bered that the place where the medical men referred to resided was in another
colony, and, therefore, it was inevitable that any such evidence, if it did come at
all, must be perfectly voluntary; it could not be compelled. Nevertheless, it
should be remembered that if such evidence were to have been forthcoming it was
sufficiently evident that it could not have materially altered the state of the case
as now presented to the jury. Such evidence, if it had been procurable, could not
have done more than corroborate the testimony of the prisoner’s sister—to the
facts that the prisoner had had fits of epilepsy, and that he had been affected with
delirium tremens. Then came the material question as to whether, admitting the
prisoner to have been mad at that time at Ballarat, his madness had become a per-
manent character, or had only been a madness of a temporary kind arising out of
his own act. It -was stated in the evidence of ten or eleven persons that, for some
time before, and immediately previous to the act, instead of being anxious or of
being in the habit of making strange remarks, he was always perfectly rational
and coherent. It was even stated most distinctly that he had been perfectly calm
in his manner and coherent in his remarks at the time that he started in the
steamer from Sydney to Clontarf on the 12th instant. On the morning of that
day there were other circumstances mentioned in respect of the prisoner. He was
not only seen going to Clontarf but had been spoken to a little before by Mr.
Aldis, who stated that he considered him to be a clever, highly intellectual, well-
educated man, and that he had not seen anything strange or incoherent in his
manner. There was the evidence too of Mr. Mountcastle’s shop assistant, Mr.
Clarke, which went directly to show that the prisoner did not manifest any sign of
mental disturbance. There was the conversation about the hat. Prisoner went
into Mr. Mountcastle’s shop and bought a hat for 25., but as the hat was not suffi-
ciently good for him he returned and gave 10s. more for a better. If the jury, in
their judgment, could conceive there was sufficient evidence to show that prisoner
was insane eighteen months ago, and that that insanity continued up to the time
the act was committed, their verdict would be not guilty, on the ground of
insanity ; but if they believed that at the time the prisoner committed the act he


knew the difference between right and wrong, that he was not then labouring
under the effects of prior insanity, they would bring in a verdict accordingly.
The law on the subject might be summed up thus for the consideration of the
jury :—l. Every person charged as a criminal was presumed to be sane and res-
ponsible until the contrary was shown to the satisfaction of the jury. 2. The
insanity and irresponsibility of the accused, therefore, must be proved by those
who set up the defence. 3. The question for the jury was as to the defence—
whether they were satisfied that the accused had not such a degree of reason at
the time of committing the act as to know that he was doing wrong. 4. Whether
it has been proved clearly that the accused laboured under such a defect of reason,
froin disease of the. mind, as not to know the nature of the act charged as
criminal; or, if he did know it, was unconscious that it was criminal.
The jury retired at twenty-six minutes to three. After an absence of about an
hour they returned into Court with a verdict of Guilty.
fLhe prisoner in a firm and decided tone said he had nothing to say.
His Honor, before passing sentence of death, addressed the prisoner as follows :
~Henr 1 Barnes O’Farrell, the jury have found you guilty under the information
which the Crown preferred against you—that is, of wounding the person of His
Jtloyal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, with intent to murder him, and happily
for you in the position in which you are placed, you have been ably defended bv
the counsel who have appeared for you. The jury have well considered the
evidence which was adduced by the counsel on your behalf, but they have
lelt themselves bound to return a verdict against you. Except from the evidence
adduced, I know nothing, nor can I know anything, of your previous life which
might suggest to me any remarks. I can only see before me a man in health
strength, and vigour, who has deliberately attempted to take the life of a fond and
youthful son of our beloved and revered Queen. Before I proceed presently to
pass the sentence of the Court, let me beseech you by every remembrance of
whatever has been virtuous or good in your past life; let me entreat you by
any, the faintest trace of true religion which may now be in your heart, to
reflect upon the wide amount of sorrow and suffering which your cruel hand
would have caused if your murderous design had been successful. Consider what
unutterable horror and shame would have fallen upon this colony if the providen-
tial care of Almighty God had not defeated your attempt. Contemplate the awful
grief and anguish of the Queen if one of her beloved and innocent children (inno-
cent even of any evil thought against you or arty other human being) had been
thus torn by your ruthless hand from her widowed heart. Let me implore you to
employ the short period of your remaining life in such reflections as I have sug-
gested, and especially in subduing that, callous insensibility of heart which must
originally have led you to your crime. Although happily your murderous intent
was not accomplished, I hold out to you not the least hope of remission of the
sentence of death. For not only am I unable to discover any, even the slightest
circumstance upon which I could recommend any such remission ; but it must also
be manifest to the whole world that all men like you, whose evil hearts may now
be harbouring and nurturing similar murderous intentions and similar traitorous
designs, should be taught by your sad fate how swift, unerring, and stern is the
punishment which all civilised nations must inflict upon such a terrible crime as
yours. Let me again exhort you to make the best use of the short time that may
remain to you in life, and at once apply to those ministers of religion who may
willingly assist you in your sorrowful meditations. It only remains for me now to
pronounce the sentence of the law for the crime of which you have been convicted.
His Honor then, in the usual form, passed sentence of death upon the prisoner.
Whilst His Hod or was addressing him, the prisoner appeared but little moved •
the only perceptible change being a tremulousness of the muscles of his face, fie
observed a calm, quiet, and respectful demeanour throughout the trial.
This being a general gaol delivery, the remaindsr of the cases on the calendar
were called on and postponed.
The Court then adjourned.




