

A COLONIST’S TOUR
IN AUSTRALASIA, THE UNITED STATES,
AND ENGLAND.
BY
THE HONOURABLE P. L. VAN DER BYL, M.L.C.
CAPE TOWN:
J. C. JUTA & CO.
1887.


A COLONIST’S TOUR
IN AUSTRALASIA, THE UNITED STATES,
AND ENGLAND.
BY
THE HONOURABLE P. L. VAN DER BYL, M.L.C.
CAPE TOWN:
J. C. JUTA. & CO.
1887.


PREFACE.
I would ask the reader to remember that my narrative
is the plain, unvarnished tale of one who claims to be
nothing more presumptious than a farmer—a South
African Boer if you like. My object in writing what
I have written is purely to tell my own countrymen
what they will see with their eyes as I saw with mine,
if they would travel as I have done.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Hobart—Sir G. Strachan—Tasmanian Parliament-
Scab disease in sheep —Stock—Protection ... 1
Agricultural Show at Longford—Fish curing—Rail-
way management—Tin mining 7
Ballarat —Agricultural show at Sandhurst—System of
wine farming—New South Wales—Squatting
stations —Pacing—Mining at Ballarat ... ... 11
Melbourne—Sir Samuel Wilson’s stock farm—The
Mallie Country—Racing—lrrigation—Education 19
Melbourne—With the Water Supply Commission —
Adelaide—The country round about —Roseworthy
College—Ostrich farming—Wine farming—Sheep
farming 27
Chinese and Natives—With the Water Supply Com-
mission— St. Hubert’s Bundsora Park Jan
Jean Reservoir—Sydney—lts legislators—A Scul-
ling Match—lts Water Supply 85
Parramatta—Fruit ard Dairy farming—Sydney—
Races—New South Wales —To the banks of the
Darling and Darling Downs —Pastoral and Agri-
cultural aspect 44
Christchurch—Experimental farm—Frozen Meat Com-
pany—Harvesting Machines—Rope from indige-
nous plants—Wellington—Tarawera—Native Ball
—Auckland—Stud farm—Sir George Grey—The
Native races 49
From Auckland to Samoa —Honolulu—San Francisco
—lrrigation—Raisin preparation—Stock 58


PAGE
Sacramento—Denver—lrrigation—Land Companies—
Chicago—Slaughtering Houses—Water Works—
New York—Washington—Coloured Citizens—
White House—Tobacco cultivation—Life in New
fork 66
English experimental farms and colleges—Cirencester
and Dawnton—Continental Tour—Concluding
Remarks 76


INTRODUCTION.
Having always had a great desire to make a tour
round the world, with the object of making myself
acquainted, by means of personal inspection and ocular
demonstration, with the more advanced system of
farming and its general development, and of rendering
the knowledge so acquired of advantage to this colony,
I interviewed several friends on the subject during the
Parliamentary session of 1885, and came to the conclu-
sion that I should lose no time in carrying out my
project. The desire to leave my country for some
indefinite period was more particularly stimulated by
the hope to be of use to my fellow-countrymen on
my return, especially to agriculturists, all of whom
throughout the colony were then suffering from the
depression and dulness in trade in every department of
the farmer’s calling. I have followed up the train which
would lead me to a thorough investigation of the
means by which his labour is simplified, his land
systematically cultivated and the return of his produce
enriched. Without laying claim to forensic views on
everything appertaining to agricultural pursuits, yet I
maintain that the time has arrived when this colony
should be dragged from the slough of despond into
which it has unfortunately fallen. The days of fore-
fatherly customs and forefatherly ideas should be on
the decline, and our farmers taught to observe the


custom of other countries which have attained their
position through modern inventions, scientific investi-
gations and practical undertakings. If our staple pro-
ducts are credited with being of inferior quality, there
is no reason in the world to lay the blame upon our
country,—our negligence, our tardiness in grasping the
real value of an undertaking, is the only cause. But
let us not lose hope. There is at this moment in the
horizon a golden lining to the cloud—that dark
cloud of depression which has hung over the colony
for the last six years ; it still overshadows us, and we
anxiously long for the time when it may be uplifted,
but there is no reason why we should sit still and
await the approach of prosperity. Prosperity will only
be won through a sheer determination on our part —I
speak of farmers in particular—to work with a will, to
consolidate our ideas for the good of our country
and to win a reputation in the records of the world.


TASMANIA.
I left Cape Town on September 6th, 1885, by the
S.S. “ Arawa,” and, after a rather protracted voyage,
reached Hobart on the 26th of that month. On
landing I took private lodgings, made myself as
comfortable as I could, and commenced operations at
once by calling on the different heads of the Govern-
ment departments, all of whom received me with
marked cordiality and greatly facilitated my
movements by issuing to me a free railway pass a?
also a general pass for admittance to any
institution I might wish to see. I next called upon
the Governor of the colony, Sir G. Strachan, who was
delighted to see me, making most anxious enquiries
after old Cape Colonists, and speaking of the kindness
he had always received at their hands during his stay
amongst them. He took me out for miles over a
very beautiful piece of country, and on my departure
promised me letters of introduction to Sir Henry
Loch, Governor of Victoria, at the same time remarking
that he would meet me on the Cup day at Melbourne.
Hobart is a town laid out on three hills with a slight
slope to the beach, the streets being mostly at right
angles. Grand strides are being made to pull down
the old wooden houses and to replace them by buil-
dings of modern style ; they give one an idea of what
the place was like in the days of the earlier settlers.
The suburbs, or rather the country surrounding the
towD, consist of small farms, supplying the citizens
with the necessaries of life ; the market is apparently
B


always well provided. Amongst a great display of
various products I noticed the finest meat I ever saw.
Large importations are, however, now coming in from
Victoria, New South Wales and New Zealand, owing
to the Tasmanian farmers going in more for the pure
bred merino. Living seemed to be much cheaper here
than at the Cape, house-rent also being very low.
At the time of my visit, Parliament was in ses-
sion, and I took the opportunity of witnessing the
proceedings of both Houses. I found the members to
possess sound debating abilities and to be a noble
and aristocratic body. A vote of no confidence was
moved by the Opposition, but was ultimately with-
drawn, the Government having a strong majority.
Being satisfied that I had seen the “lions” of the
place, I left for the country, shaping my course for
Launceston. I went over the farms in the neighbour-
hood and found them to be worked most systematically,
all the latest improvements in machinery being utilized
to save manual labour. The lands are naturally rich,
so that manuring is very little resorted to ; but before
many years are over this important and indispensable
factor in agriculture will have to be used. The average
yield at present is 22 bushels per acre for wheat and
50 bushels for oats. Owing to the depreciation in
value of cereals, many farmers were taking to stock,
going northwards, where the country is composed
of grassy plains and wooded hills, the plains being
turned over by the plough and sown with grass every
four or five years. The grass generally sown is Italian
rye, English rye, cocksfoot red and white clover. The
system of stock-farming in Tasmania is simply perfect.
I had just come in time for the shearing season, and
it was a pleasure to observe the cleanliness of the


sheds, and to see the care with which the different
classes of wool were sorted would have made any
Cape colonist blush.
As fas scab and other diseases in tock are con-
cerned, they are totally unknown, and no wonder,
since this colony has possessed a Scab Act ever since
1870 ; whilst the Cape Colony can only bojst of one
in 1886, and that only a very limited one. I have
before me a pamphlet called “The Scab Act, 1870, and
subsequent amendments, also report and correspon-
dence bearing upon the best modes of cure,” &c., by
the Chief-Inspector of Sheep. Amongst otlie valuable
provisions in this Act is one authorizing a Scab Act
fund, by which every sheep owner is compelled to pay
one farth ng for every sheep possessed by him, and if
payment is not made by the fi st of April, a fine
equal to one-fourth of the original amount is imposed.
The Act says further :—“ There shall be applied out
of the monies standing to the credit of the Scab Act
Fund account such sums of money as shall by the
Colonial Treasurer be certified to be necessary for the
purposes of this Act, and the said Colonial Treasurer
for the time being is authorized and empowered to
appropriate and issue such sums accordingly ; but,
subject, nevertheless to the provisions of any Act
in force for the time being with reference to the
Audit of Public Accounts.” Here is a bit of advice
given which may be applied to this colony :—“ The
subject I desire to direct their (the farmers’) atten-
tion to is quite as important as the eradication of
scab ; and I venture to say that, if sheep breeders will
only follow the advice I now propose to tender them,
they will, in the course of a few years, reap as great a
pecuniary gain as I have already indicated they will
R 9


derive from the eradication of the scab. The means
are entirely in their own hands and the subject is not
like the scab question, one that can be dealt with,
directly and indirectly, by legislation. The evil to be
grappled with is a radically bad system of sheep breed-
ing generally throughout the Island. With the
exception of a small section of sheep breeders little or
no attention is paid to careful selection of sheep and
culling ewe flocks for breeding purposes. Numbers
are more looked to than the quality of the ewes. In
fact, I have reason to believe that four-fifths of the
young ewes put to the ram are never culled and
selected at all, but are taken indiscriminately with the
exception, perhaps, of some hairy looking sheep being
placed with those set aside for fattening. ... It
is no uncommon thing to hear a sheep-owner congratu-
lating himself upon having secured some good rams
at a sale for a change of blood, at from 7s. 6d, to 15s.
per head. Such sheep as these, instead of being cheap
are costly indeed, —as they effectually prevent any
improvement in the flocks of those who use them.”
The Chief:-Inspector of stock, with whom I had more
than an hour’s conversation, told me that not a scabby
sheep was known in. the colony of Tasmania, the
farmers being so satisfied with the working of the Act
that they acknowledge it is to their own interest to
keep the disease out. A scabby sheep is now con-
sidered to be as seriou s a calamity as small-pox.
Would to heavens our farmers were of the same opinion,
and would take all the effective measures in their
power to uphold their own reputation. The number
of sheep has not increased in Tasmania during the last
three years but the average of wool per sheep is over
one lb. The farmer does not contribute his per head


of sheep without any return. Government pays for all
remedies that may be suggested to cure the sheep or
eradicate the disease. All imported sheep have to be
dipped at the port where they land, and any
found to be affected are at once placed under the
charge of the inspector, where they remain until
declared by him free of disease, the owners paying
all expenses. Remarking upon the best dips in use,
the inspector said that he found sulphur and lime most
remedial, taking 1 lb. sulphur and £ lb. lime to 4
gallons of water, well boiled. A great many farmers
prefer tobacco, some Cooper’s, others Little’s dips. I
have seen over 200,000 sheep in perfect health, and I
many a time devoutly wished some of our stock farmers
were with me to witness for themselves to what a
state of perfection a sheep can be brought when proper
care is bestowed.
With the cattle I have been rather disappointed,
perhaps because the sheep have the best run, the
cattle following on the same run. The Durham breed is
the favourite amongst the farmers. Roots are grown
both for cattle and sheep, but for all that they don’t
come up to the imported slaughter cattle. The flock-
master in Tasmania is becoming dangerous to New
Zealand. He exhibits in all the colonies and seem to
carry everything before him, but I attribute this to
the fact that the climate in Tasmania being more
regular throughout the year makes the staple more
even in strength.
To give an idea of what the stock-farmers realize by
having good material, I may take Mr. James Gibson,
of Bellevue, Epping Forest, who is considered to be
the best farmer in the colony, and who made some-
thing like £IO,OOO on one sale of only 1,000 ewes and


a few rams, the stock ewes averaging £SO. Mr. D.
Taylor, whom I met at Campbell town, got at the
Melbourne Show, last year, £l,lOO for a ram.
After a three days stay at Launceston, I left for the
north-west to visit the tin mines of Bischoff, as well
as the agricultural and pastoral lands in the west.
Most of the farms beyond Launceston are only about
100 to 250 acres in extent, all cultivated, and either
growing cereals, roots or grasses ; the grass for the
stock is cultivated, and the latter looked very healthy
indeed. This part of the country is still very wooded,
with no enclosures whatever. The stock is kept
together by stock riders.
The indigenous trees are all evergreen, shedding
their bark instead of leaves. The clearing of un-
broken lands, which consists of removing small trees
and other rubbish which come very handy for fire
purposes, costs on an average from 20s. to 30s. per
acre. English grasses, such as Italian rye, cocksfoot,
clover, &c., are sown when the weather looks threaten-
ing, as the grass springs up sooner. The grass has
the peculiar advantage of remaining in a green state
throughout the year, caused by the refreshing showers
of rain through the summer, and when it has once
taken root the growth is luxuriant, and will keep a
beast or three sheep to the acre ; where the land is
too much wooded the timber is utilized for fencing
purposes, this being done by contract, and costing
about £6O per mile. In most cases these poles are
now being replaced by wire, especially in agricultural
lands, as the transport of wood is too expensive. As
soon as the trees are removed the land is at once
made ready for sowing cereals, or roots, so as to supply
some household requisites—in most instances the


household consisting of the husband, wife and half-a-
dozen youngsters. The crop on the virgin soil is
sometimes enormous; the adage says, “ seeing is
believing,” so I must be content with a little patience.
The great cry at the present moment amongst the
colonists is rrotection. As a protectionist, I must
agree with them that the true definition of a protec-
tion policy should be that necessary taxation is so
directed as to encourage colonial industries. A striking
illustration was pointed out to me : a private indivi-
dual invested all his capital in machinery for manu-
facturing cloth, which proved a great success as far as
the quality of the material was concerned ; but it
required protection in consequence of the cost of
labour in the colonies, which is so dear that the im-
portations could be sold at a lower price. It is the
very same with all other industries. lam of opinion
that machinery for manufacturing dress stuffs can be
set up at some spot along the line of railway in the
Cape Colony ; what is required is a good fall of water,
and a capital of about £6,000, which would set the
business going. In the present impoverished state of
the Cape Colony it is hardly possible that such a venture
would be started, but Government ought to give every
encouragement to any inclination in this direction by
offering a substantial bonus to the first mill set up.
II.
AGRICULTURAL SHOW AT LONGFORD.—FISH CURING.—
RAILWAY MANAGEMENT.—TIN MINING.
After my return from Warratah, I was so knocked
up that I found it necessary to recruit my health for a


few days. I then thought of at once leaving for
Melbourne, but meeting several farmers at my hotel,
they persuaded me to stay for their animal show at
Longford ; to this I agreed and I did not regret it, for
it was astonishing to see what a small community
could do when all pulled together, a result which must
naturally follow, to the inestimable advantage of their
colony. The attendance on the day in question was
very large and the stock in splendid conditi -n. In
horses the Lincoln and Clydesdale breed took the
palm. The sheep were of the purest merino—South-
down and Leicester—most of the large flock-owners
going in for nothing else, owing to their having such
a ready sale in the other colonie-, so that the slaughter
sheep are falling off and large numbers are imported
for consumption. The machinery at this show was of
colonial manufacture and very creditable indeed. At
Longford, Campbell Town, Eman, Latrobe and several
other places, I met a great many of the oldest settlers,
and in the course of conversation managed to find out
on what conditions they settled. This is what I was
told. They were allowed to make selections of from
5,000 to 10,000 acres of land, whilst companies were
privileged to grants of from 100,000 to 300,000 acres,
of which the greater part is still being held on for
better prices ; but land is not so valuable now as it
was five years ago, owing to the depreciation in the
value of produce.
Whilst at Campbell Town I saw some capital sport
in the way of steeple-chasing ; the attendance consisted
mostly of farmers, some coming from a distance of
from 60 to 100 miles, whilst here and there was a
sprinkling of the fair sex. The horses were all ridden
by farmers’ sons, and strong well-built animals these


horses are —a cross between the English thoroughbred
and Clydesdale, standing over 15 - 3, with magnificent
hone and muscle. A word about the riders : they are
without exception the pluckiest lot of fellows I have
seen in my life, one of them having no less than three
falls in a four mile race, each time remoun’ing, and
running second.
Private enterprise has directed its attention in
Tasmania to the curing of fish. Already several kinds
have been introduced into the rivers of the colony, and
salmon and trout are now caught weighing over nine
lbs. Would that private enterprise would step in and
make use of the thousands of fish left in the Dry Dock
in Cape Town after the water has been pumped out
instead of public money being expended to cart them
away and have them buried. But here again protec-
tion is needed ; fish-curing establishments upon which
capital has been expended have been started, only to
follow in the footsteps of other industries. Salmon,
sardines, lobster or creef, are imported in quantities,
while we have the opportunity of supplying ourselves.
And yet we do not see it.
The railways in the colony of Tasmania are all
worked by companies, but Government has neverthe-
less a hold over them. The trains run on a 3’6” guage.
Considerable economy is exercised in the management
of these railways, the stations being of plain wooden
buildings, all watertight, with simple platforms. There
is no lavish expenditure in the construction of good-
sheds, as the goods sent by rail are mostly live-stock,
and are transported from one place to another by
thousands ; seldom, if ever, with loss, great care and
attention being bestowed by the men in charge. But
this may also be due to the perfect construction of the


trucks. The salaries and wages of the officials and
men are higher than those in the Cape Colony.
I visited the different strata of minerals in
Tasmania, and from what I saw there I gathered the
impression that tin abounds in the Cape Colony. The
Tasmar ian tin mine is worked with a paid-up capital
of £12,000. The machinery was cleared by the
profit of the mine, costing the company over £IOO,OOO,
in spite of which a dividend of 600 per cent, on the
paid-up capital has been declared. The yield of pure
tin is something like 250 tons per month. The
smelting is all done at Launceston, and from there
shipped to Sydney for transhipment to England. The
present value of tin is about £9O per ton. Some of
these mines are situated high up on the hills, so that
on reaching the summit one had a splendid view of
the country. As far as the eye could reach there was
a continual stretch of blue and red gums, peppermint,
wattle and any amount of underwood. The country
is formed of narrow ridges running in all directions,
separated from each other by numerous small and
rapid running streams, called creeks. I think this
part of the country will take some time before it is
properly developed. It seems as if the Mining Com-
panies hate prospecting, as it would depreciate the
value of their shares. The coast lines are being well
opened up, owing to the great facilities they offer.
Most of the rivers are navigable for some distance.
Freights are low, while vessels of 100 tons and more
are built at nearly every port —and they appear to be
very good-looking crafts indeed. The trade done
by them which is carried on largely with the Australian
ports consists in conveying cut wood.


AUSTRALIA.
BALLARAT:—AGRICULTURAL SHOW AT SANDHURST.—
SYSTEM OF WINE FARMING.—NEW SOUTH WALES.
—SQUATTING STATIONS.—RACING.—MINING AT
BALLARAT.
After haying seen everything worth seeing in Tas-
mania I took passage in the steamer “ Patience ” for
Melbourne, which we reached in twenty-one hours. I
called on the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture
with whom I spent several hours and obtained every
information and assistance in furthering the objects I
had in view. Mr. Martin, Secretary to Agriculture,
offered to pilot me in a north-westerly direction, which
offer I gladly accepted. We started for Sandhurst,
where a show was to be held, but before attending
this we made an inspection of the Gold-fields near
Sandhurst. The country between Melbourne and Sand-
hurst is beautifully adapted for dairy farming and ia
mainly used for that purpose. The aspect of the
country afterwards becomes hilly but well-wooded and
abundantly watered. On our way to Sandhurst we
passed the seat of Sir William Clarke, who possesses a
beautiful mansion, with grounds elegantly laid out and
worth something like three millions sterling ; his estate
covers over 150,000 acres, and he also possesses one in.
New South Wales, and another in Queensland about
the same size. The hilly country continues until Sand-
hurst looms in the distance, when the traces of the
Gold diggings became more perceptible. I may say
that for miles the country is turned over from two to
ten feet deep, but at Sandhurst one finds shafts having a
depth of 2,500 feet. I descended one of 1,200 feet and
found the tunnels well lit, and the miners pretty happy,.


working with a will as they followed up the reefs.
'The machinery was estimated to cost about £150,000,
the company owning it paying a good dividend. At
Sandhurst and its vicinity 254 companies were in full
swing, employing about 32,000 miners ; taking them
at an average of £2 10s. per week, and the gold found
at three millions, there is an actual loss of over a
million a year. It is, therefore, a regular case ©f
robbing Peter to pay Paul.
Leaving the mines I went to see the show, where I
was again impressed by the labour bestowed by these
colonists in obtaining from Nature what she has really
at her command. The stock I found of the highest
standard, whilst the machinery was of Colonial manu-
facture and of fairly good workmanship. In this
department I noticed a stripper in working order
invented by a young farmer, turning out the grain
quite clean into a bag, ready for the mill. The
majority of farmers thought this machine to be a great
improvement, in fact a better machine than the
Combination Harvester, as it required much less power
in draught. However, the subject that drew my
attention most was the wines, which were not only of
superior quality, but the general get-up surpassed my
expectations. I visited the estate of a German settler,
a Mr. Bruhn, about seven miles from the township of
Sandhurst. Besides his own vineyard there are several
smaller ones in the neighbourhood, the must of which is
bought op by him so as to bring all the wine to
the same standard as that made at his Emu Estate,
in order to meet the demand. What strikes one very
forcibly is the perfect order in which the property
is kept. The land is for the greater part level, and
covers about 40 acres. It slopes gently to the east


and west, the vineyard striking out to the north,,
thus catching the sun nicely. The vines are planted
in sections of 8 by 4 feet and 5 by 6 feet, every-
one of them being dwarf cut, and some supported by
stakes, while others have none; but this depends
upon the age and variety. The stakes are about five
feet in length and procured from the hills ; they are
delivered at the plantation for about 50s. per thousand.
The vineyard soil is light and sandy, mixed with rich
red clay and a subsoil of heavy day, commencing in
some parts at a depth of only a few inches. The
soil is mainly cultivated by manual labour. The
vines that thrive the best are the Hermitage Verdullis.,
Riessling and Chasselas. The property is well enclosed
by a substantial four-rail fence, and the soil is so
nicely situated as to do without artificial drainage.
The vineyard is perfectly healthy ; about Geelong the
disease has made its appearance, but the Government
have taken active steps to prevent it spreading by
uprooting the vines. The wine season generally
commences at the end of March and ends at the close
of April. The labourers engaged in picking the grapes
are mostly boys from the country, who prove to be
better suited than the town lads, who generally apply
for such work when they find they cannot get on
in the town, being enemies to discipline and in the
habit of behaving in a larrikin manner. The wages
paid to these young fellows are five shillings per
week with rations, and they are supposed to work
from early morning until the light begins to fade ; a
couple of old hands are, however, employed to superin-
tend these boys. When the grapes are ripe they are
gathered in buckets, emptied into open headed casks
which are conveyed by cart into a shed where the


presses are to be found ; great care is bestowed in the
gathering of the grapes, only the ripest being picked.
The grapes having been delivered, are thrown into
large wooden tubs, after which the stripping and crush-
ing operations take place. These two processes are
performed simultaneously and are effected through a
patent machine of German construction, which does
its work in an admirable manner. Two men can easily
strip and stow away into the fermenting casks ten tons
of grapes per day. The machine strips the berries clean
off the stalk, and carefully avoids crushing any of the
stones. As the berries are stripped they fail through a
sieve on to two galvanized iron rollers ; where they are
crushed, the juice falling into the tubs below. From
here they are removed into large fermenting tubs of
various sizes, reaching up to a capacity of 600 gallons.
The fermentation process is regulated by the weather.
It has to be constantly watched, the shortest time taken
for red wines in hot weather being from four to six
days, the longest over fourteen days : white grapes
require much less time. The fermenting on the skins
being completed, the wine is drawn off from the vats
and the husks are afterwards pressed, the juice running
from the press being always kept separate from that
which is drawn off from the vats; the wine is then placed
in casks either in the cellar or in the fermenting shed.
The casks vary from 300 gallons to as low as 30, the
wood of which they are made being Baltic oak. The
wine is then stored until all fermentation has ceased,
and directly it becomes bright and clear it is racked
into casks which have been well cleaned by the action
of steam. In about two months, when the wine is
considered to be ready according to its maturity, it is
racked afresh and allowed to age until fit for bottling,


which generally takes place after the expiration of two
or three years. The bottled wines are then stored in
■cellars. I noticed several kinds of presses in use but
cannot say which I consider the best. The cellars are
excavations made in a hill in the shape of the letter T.,
the principal cellar being about 100 feet long by 15
feet wide and 10 feet high ; the roof is made of colo-
nial logs covered with earth. The city dep6t, or rather
the wine store is at Sandhurst, where the greater part
of the space is devoted te the bottling department. On
the first floor will be found the offices and a sample
room, and in a subteranean cellar immediately under-
neath the store some 70 to 80 hogsheads of well matured
wines of different varieties are stored. The bottling
department is well attended to and fitted up with the
latest improvement in machinery. In the backyard
the horses and vehicles in connection with the business
are kept, serving for conveyance of casks in the town
and to the railway station, from whence they are sent
to all parts of the colony.
After leaving Sandhurst, I went as far noith as
Echuca, on the river Murray, which divides Victoria
and South Australia. The country on leaving Sand-
hurst becomes hilly and very thinly wooded, and here
for several miles it was turned over by diggers in search
of alluvial gold. Beyond this is a perfect flat with very
little timber ; grass, however, plentiful, and the stock
appearing to be well-fleeced. I was told that the
farmers living about Echuca when they first settled
were misled by the appearance of the grass, as in three
weeks nothing but a desert of red sand remained.
On the New South Wales side of the river the
country appeared to be better wooded. On the river
a large trade is carried on in timber, the woodcutters


ingeniously utilizing the water by floating the beams
on flatbottomed boats, the stream carrying them down-
wards at a good speed. Steamers of light draught
ply about 150 miles higher up than Echuca, and larger
boats may be seen near the mouth of the river. I
retraced my steps to Melbourne and left the next day
for Colac to see some of the big squatters. I was
indeed fortunate in going about always to have some
one from the Department of Agriculture with me who
showed me every attention as well as endeavouring to
make my trips as agreeable as possible. Speaking of
the squatting stations, I cannot help saying that there
I found some of the grandest places I ever came across.
The homesteads are built of blue stone with white
marble facings, whilst the furniture—not to speak of
the living—is of the best; one can therefore imagine
what a pleasant life a few of these squatters must lead.
At the same time, however, it is but just to add that
they have borne the brunt of the day ; their rewards
have been earned by toiling and toiling, by determined
vigorous and at last successful efforts to succeed.
Glorious country, Australia for energy! Would that
the time were at hand, when the same could be said of
this country ! I am, however, soliloquizing and must
proceed. I was taken all over the grounds and observed
that the runs were kept in perfect order, in fact the
best I have seen in Victoria, five sheep being kept to
an acre on several runs and considered to be nothing
out of the way. The stock appeared to be simply
bursting out of their skins. I happened to be just in
time to see the shearing going on. On some of the
large runs, from 50 to 60 hands were employed, every-
thing being done in a stylish and neat manner. Tl*e
shearing, sorting and packing are done at the same


time, the wool being forwarded to the brokers at
Melbourne, to be sold there, or to be shipped to the
London market.
After having spent two pleasant days about here I
returned to the city and next day left for Newmarket
(Hennington), to see the cracks for the Derby and
Melbourne Cups. I was on the course at a quarter to
five in the morning—the day was just breaking ; I was
barely op the ground when they turned out in twos,
fours, and afterwards in dozens—the canting, gallop-
ing, three-quarter speed, and the best pace simul-
taneously. These proceedings go on for at least two
hours when they begin to thin oft; some come
later on but only a few. The horses, when they are
pulled up, are immediately taken into what they call a
“ scraping stable” being all in boxes twelve feet square,
when they are rubbed down, their clothes put on and
they are walked quietly home. These stables accommo-
date over 100 horses, and as seme go out others come in
—350 horses being accepted at Hennington meeting.
After this spin on tbe course I got back to my hotel, and
in discussing the events of the day, got mixe up with
any amount of trainers and jockeys, had a capital break-
fast and a chat with them, and took advantage of the
occasion to get all the information there was to be had
about the different favourites. When the Secretary
of the Turf Club turned up, we, as arranged a week
beforehand, ordered a carriage and went to have a look
round, inspecting the grounds which cover over 350
acres, beautifully laid out; in fact, 1 cannot describe
the grandeur of the locality, nor can I give an idea of
the impression it created on my mind—it was simply
perfect. Why, there were even needles and thread and
every requisite for a lady’s toilet, with a lady’s maid in
c


the bargain. The cloak room measures about 100 feet
by 30 wide, with glass all around. The gentlemen, of
course, are also well looked after.
After having visited several stables I returned to
Melbourne. The following day I left for Ballarat with
the Chief Inspector, with the object of being at Sir
Samuel Wilson’s annual sale of stock at Erceldoune.
I spent most of my time at Ballarat, wh'ch is an
exceedingly nice and clean-looking city, having
over 40,000 inhabitants. I had occasion to see
several of its institutions. All the iron work, locomo-
tives and carriages for that colony are made here,
300 men being employed on the works, turning
out as good work as could be imported from England.
I had a lovely drive all over the city, and a sail in
the artificial lake, which is about three miles in
circumference with seven small steamers plying upon
it, taking passengers over to the gardens on the
opposite side ; these gardens are kept in perfect order.
The water supply must have cost a good deal of brain
work, at least so far as one may judge by the engineer-
ing work. There are three large reservoirs, the largest
being over two miles in circumference, in some parts
eighty feet deep, and swarming with fish.
My next movement was to inspect the gold mines.
I went down a shaft and saw all the latest improved
appliances in extracting the last grain of the precious
metal from the quartz. I was afterwards taken over
the school of mines by Mr. Oddie, the founder and
at the time vice-president of the school, and one of
the wealthiest bankers in the colony. This school
is the finest institution of its kind in Victoria, and will
eventually reward its promoters and be of great use
to the colonists-


II.
MELBOURNE:—SIR SAMUEL WILSON’S STOCK FARM.—
THE MALLIE COUNTRY.—FACING.—LRRIGATION.
EDUCATION.
On arriving at Erceldoune by coach I found that
the attendance of buyers was very poor, which at
once convinced me that things were as bad there as
at the Cape. Rams which realized £5OO three years
ago only fetched £5O; some of the two-year old
rams and ewes selling as low as a guinea each. This
estate of Sir Samuel Wilson is considered to be the
finest in the colony. I made a thorough inspection
of the property and watched the Australian mode of
washing, shearing, and packing. The washing is done
by the sheep being first driven through a shallow tank,
and whilst going through here a man plays with a
hose on its back, after which the sheep is slipped
into a hot bath (soap and soda being abundantly
used), and then put down in a shoot where it receives
a cold shower bath. The sheep is then run on to a
sloping platform of wood, where it is left for some
time ; it then goes into a large paddock and is shorn
when fit. The whole estate is kept in splendid order.
Sir Samuel Wilson, who is at present living in
England, purchased Eroeldoune from a Scotch squatter
for a quarter of a million, the extent of the estate
being 27,000 acres, but it appears that the return is
not so profitable as might be imagined ; I had been
told that four per cent, was the return.
Starting for Geelong the next day I paid a visit
to the show that was being held there, and, like all
other shows I saw, was well patronised by the public
c 2


from every part of the country. The stock exhibit was
very good, so was the show in machinery, amongst
which were some patents. One especially struck my
fancy and was called Feniers patent wool-press. I
have never seen a simpler and more perfect piece of
machinery. Two men can pack and press three bales
of wool per hour, whilst the same press can be used
for packing skins or hay. The price is £SO, but it
ought to be made for half the money. Geelong is a
clean and quiet little town, owing to the trade being
mostly confined to Melbourne, and when the railway
is completed from Melbourne to Ballarat direct, which
it will be before long, Geelong is bound to come down
to a third-class town. I had spent a good deal of my
time in attending sales of w 001, cattle and land. At the
first-named, men from all parts of the world are seen.
The selling and shipping of wool is mostly in the hands
of companies, the New Zealand Mercantile Company
doing the largest trade. Cattle tales are held twice a
week for slaughtering purposes, the sales taking place
three or four miles from the city. The slaughteiing is
done outside the town, and the carcases brought in by
vehicles specially made for the purpose. The Govern-
ment land sales are regularly advertised, but those
desirous of entering upon agricultural pursuits can get
land direct from the Crown at a cost of 20s. per acre,
payment of which may extend over twenty years with-
out interest the right being at the same time given to
occupy under lease an allotment twice the size of
the farm for grazing purposes. The selected spot
or portion is termed an agricultural allotment, and
of it the selector is bound to cultivate an acre every
year, to make such other improvements as may
be found necessary and to pay off one shilling per


acre every year for seven consecutive years. He
can raise money on it by mortgage. For the
unselected portion of the original allotment,
which is intended for pastoral purposes, the occupier
obtains a lease at a rental of from 2d. to 4d. per
acre for a period of fourteen years, after which he
receives from the Crown an allowance (up to 10s.
per acre) for any improvement at the expiration of
his lease.
The Mallie country is covered with a species of
stunted trees ; in the north-west it covers a large extent
of ground which is also being leased for pastoral
purposes, in blocks of various sizes at rates varying
from 2s. 6d. upwards per square mile.
The Metropolis, the most populous and important
city in the Southern Hemisphere, is truly a noble city,
the streets being wide and regularly laid out. There
is some architectural beauty about a great many of the
buildings, while the parks and public gardens are exten-
sive and well kept, and on Sundays are visited by
thousands of the public. Melbourne at that time was
crowded with people who had come from all parts of
tho Australian Colonies to see the Melbourne Cup run
for. In this line the Victorian sportsmen are second
to no other colony ; their public spirit is unsurpassed ;
it simply means with them that work without play
makes Jack a dull boy. The spring meeting of the
Victorian Turf Club, better known as the cup week,
commenced on Saturday, 31st October. The weather
in the morning looked very threatening, but a little
after twelve it cleared up, and notwithstanding this
the attendance was not so large as anticipated, although
between forty and fifty thousand people put in an
appearance. The arrangements were perfect, every


thing passing off without a hitch, the horses doing their
preliminaries to the minute. Through my acquaintance
with the Secretary, I had the privilege of getting in
anywhere. The Derby was the event of the day and
ended in a magnificent race. The time occupied in
running the 1£ miles was 2*49 sec. On Tuesday, the 3rd
November, being the cup day, the sporting fraternity
were early on the move. I managed to be on the field
by half-past eleven, when the grand stand was filled,
there being twenty ladies present to every gentleman.
The hill at the back of the grand stand was packed, the
lawn in front of the stand and the paddock being one
moving mass of people. The Victorian’s know how
to make these amusements pay, the charge to the grand
stand and paddock being 10s. and 2s. for the hill,
whilst the flat is free of charge. The fair sex evince
considerable interest in sporting matters ; on the stand
it was sweepstake after sweepstake for the cup. As
the time drew on the excitement became greater and
greater —when at last thirty-five numbers were up,
the bookmakers were yelling as loud as their throats
would let them. After a check the flag fell to a
splendid start, the horses passing the stand in grand
style, only one being outpaced. As they swept
round the last turn the excitement became intense,
everyone calling out his favourite. The finish was
really worth coming 6,000 miles to see, Sheet Anchor
winning by a short head in 3 the distance being
two miles. I think myself if Grace Darling could have
got through her horses she would have won. The
other races were well contested and the young stock
displayed great symmetry and action with show of
blood. The cup day being rather warm, the run on the
booths soon began to tell on the stock of liquor which


was fairly sold out before the last race was completed.
To give an idea of the enormous extent of these
booths, it may be mentioned that, although only 200
yards from the Railway Station, they have actually
a train running to the end of the booths so as to
facilitate the transhipment of the goods. When the
trees are older the grounds will assume a park-like
appearance. Whilst in conversation with one of the
members of the committee, I was told that they had
some idea of spending £40,000 on another stand as
the support to the Turf was increasing year by year.
The money collected at the gates amounted to £21,000
whilst £IB,OOO was paid away in stakes. I spent a
good deal of my time in seeing other race meetings,
but they looked very small indeed in comparison to
the cnp meeting. Racing appears to be a National
Institution here, everybody taking a deep interest
in matters appertaining to the Turf, even the fair ones
are weak on it.
I had every opportunity whilst at Melbourne of
seeing several factories of cloth and tweed, agricultural
implements, jams, preserves &c., all industries which
have been started since the extra duty was placed
on these commodities. This afforded another proof
of the encouragement it gives a colonist, when he
sees his way clear to earn an honest penny, when there
is a guarantee for his investment, although the capital
may have to be borrowed, and when by this means
companies are brought into action and the money
remains in the country. Great and laudable efforts
are now being made by the Government of Victoria
for a proper system of irrigation and husbanding of
water, which would be a great source of wealth to
the colony if effectually carried out. The natural


position of the country will materially assist the
venture, the pastoral and a great part of the agricul-
tural lands being, in their present state of develop-
ment, whollv at the mercy of the rainfall. There is
a possibility of constructing storage dams at the head
of the rivers and creeks, from where the water can
be let out by its own gravitation or else by the
application of steam power. The concentration of
water in tanks in the colonies has been more exten-
sively carried out by this than by any other means.
It is applicable to a much larger extent of country
than that upon which dams can ba made, and expe-
rience s ems to have convinced the pastoral farmer
that it is far more certain and economical than sinking
wells. The risk in well sinning is far greater than
may be imagined, as one never knows what the
quality of water may be. Large works are also being
carried on in dam making along the different tracks
in the remote dry districts of the colonies, thousands'
of pounds havirg been expended upon that object.
There is a charge made for supplying water to stock,
but the revenue derived from it is not sufficient to
pay the interest and cost of supervision, so that con-
struction and maintenance are wholly defrayed from
the public revenue. The Government intends to hand
over local trusts and thereby save a large proportion
of the outlay for supervision and maintenance which
has now to be incurred; the annual appropriation
made for watering stock would then be available as
subsidies to induce local bodies to make provision
for supplying water to travelling stock when necessary,
as part of the general scheme to meet the requirements
of their districts. They have also some idea of using
the railway embankments as a means of storing water,


and I am sure they will obtain satisfactory results*
These works will then answer two purposes. I have
seen several works carried out by engineers in what
they term “ dry creeks,” and all over the country one
meets with them. An engineer generally has twenty-five
navvies with him, besides scotch carts, horses, barrows
shovels and other appliances. The manner in which
he starts operations is by opening a drain four feet
wide and as many deep. He then has the drain filled
and puddled to the original surface. He next com-
mences to cart from the bed of the creek, twenty yards
from where the foot of the embankment will run,
never laying on a thicker coat than eighteen inches at a
time fie perfers carting to any other methods, because
the cart and horses make the embankment more solid
and perfectly water-tight. The embankments are
raised several feet above the banks of the creek, so as
to run the water some distance before it gets into the
bed of the creek two or three miles away. This
goes on for miles, the cost being from Is. to 2s. per
yard, according to position and the work to be effected.
The facing is generally done by small stones, just laid
on the slope of the bank and allowed to settle down
by their own weight. Owing to the husbanding of
the water in these creeks larger fields, grass, roots and
lucerne are put under cultivation, so that the squatter
can hold his own against droughts. Several farmers
in Victoria and New South Wales have taken to this
idea, and their example will be followed by the others,
as the saving in stock will repay their labour a hun-
dred fold, and the depreciation in the value of wool
will not affect them in the least, as the quantity will
make up for it. I found that the depression from
which the Cape Colony suffers also exists in the
Australian Colonies.


A word about the Schools, the majority of which are
supported by Government, which spends something
like £500,000 per annum on them. It is compulsory
for all children living within two miles of them to
attend these schools. The object of the Victorian
Government in spending this large amount of money
is to give the lower classes every opportunity to have
their children well educated, so that they may become
intelligent and useful citizens, and not allow themselves
to be led away by political adventurers, but have an
opinion of their own. There are also several private
schools in the city and all over the colonies. A great
drawback to Victoria is that there is not the slightest
indication of coal in that country, but the Government
have not given up hopes, as explorations and boring
operations are continually going on, wherever there is
the least s'gn. Owing to the absence of coal a great
impetus is given to a large community who make a
good living by carting wood to the city and the railway
station, which helps the clearing of lands and adds
to their cultivation. The Government already sees
the necessity of re-planting the poorer lands, and the
Forest Department is most diligent in carrying out
this work by planting the varieties of trees best suited
to the country. This is done by sowing in beds and
transplanting when the winter sets in. Of course, this
involves extra labour, but the transplanted trees take
better. This is merely a matter of opinion, but the
lands I saw under this treatment were properly cleaned
and ploughed, and consequently there would be no
difficulty in getting the seeds to take. In the colony
of Victoria there are still large tracts of lands unoccu-
pied owing to the immense labour required in cleaning.
In Gippsland and in the southern countries there are
thousands of acres, but as the population increases,.


the land will be gradually taken up. The high rate
of wages paid has a great deal to do with the influx
of people, and as the labourers get 10s. and, 12s. per
day for coaling and shipping work, they will not
care to take to the cultivation of the land.
III.
MELBOURNE -.—WITH THE WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION-
—ADELAIDE, THE COUNTRY ROUND ABOUT.—ROSE-
WORTHY COLLEGE. OSTRICH-FARMING. WINE-
FARMING.—SHEEP-FARMING.
I left Melbourne on Thursday the sth of November
with the Royal Commission on Water Supply, the
party consisting of the Hon. A. Deakin, Minister of
Crown Lands, Mr. J. Moore, M.L.A., Mr. Steel,
Inspector-General of Public Works, Mr. Highett,
M.L.A., Mr. Gau, M.L.A., Mr. Siuart-Murray, Secretary
of the Commission, and Mr. Langtree, Secretary of
Water Supply. The object of the Commission was to
see and examine farms in the Columna district in
connection with the water supply of the district, and to
see what irrigation works had already been carried out
by the farmers, as well as what facilities might be
offered for the extention of such works. We first reached
Kerang, a town about twelve miles from the river
Murray, staying over the night and leaving early the
next morning to inspect the country and irrigation
works already commenced by the farmers. Tbe Com-
mission was very well pleased with this. I noticed that
the crops were watered by artificial means and looked
splendid, whilst those not under irrigation were a
total failure. After a thorough inspection and after


enjoying the hospitality of Mr. Garden, our host,
we left for our return journey, taking a different
route. All the country I travelled over after leaving
Sandhurst is very flat in every respect, in fact,
similar to the Free State. The soil is very rich but
water uncommonly scarce. The farmers in most
cases go in for damming, catching up the rain for
their stock. With a proper system of irrigation I am
convinced that millions of bushels of grain can
be grown. I noticed that most of the farming is
done on the 320 acre principle, at Is. per acre per
year for twenty years. The wife and each child is also
entitled to such a grant. I found all the stock doing
well. On our return journey we parted company at
Sandhurst, I shaping my course for Adelaide, taking
the northern route, via Dimboola. After leaving
Sandhurst, the country appears to be a continuous
series of mines until you pome to Stawell, where a
beautiful flat and a rich soil is met with and never
ending grain fields until Dimboola is reached. The
crops were all poor, owing to the want of rain. I left
Dimboola by coach the next morning, travelling very
comfortably at about seven miles per hour, notwith-
standing the roads were bad, reminding me of our
colonial roads. The country all along to Border Town
was very interesting, being dotted all over with small
farms, showing the pluck and energy of these people
in clearing the field of all obnoxious weeds and trees
and replacing them by a fine crop of wheat or hay.
All along the route small townships have been laid out,
the principal buildings in them being a state school,
a church, a public bar or two, and a few small stores.
From Border Town I travelled by rail to Kingston
via Naracoorte, and remained over for a few hours to


see something of the town and farmers in the imme-
diate neighbourhood. The buildings in this town are
made of lime stone, which is very telling to the eye ;
Leaving Kingston 1 again came near to the coast, being
bound for Meningie. The principal stock between the
two places I found to be Hovas, which are kept because
of the length and richness of the grass. The animals
bred are used mostly for heavy draught. From Me-
ningie I took the steamer, crossing the lake into which
the Murray flows, for Milang, the passage taking four
and a half hours ; the lake is very shallow and at
places there are shifting sandbanks so that navigation
is no easy matter. The lake is inhabited by wild swans,
ducks and fish—the supply of the latte*-being sufficient
for the whole of South Australia. From Milang to
Adelaide, which is a distance of about sixty miles, the
country is very undulating indeed ; the first ten miles
of land from Milang is very poor, but the fertility
increases as you approached Adelaide. Thousands of
little hills have to be crossed upon a gradual ascent,
and after having surmounted the highest and last hill
Adelaide lies in sight—and well it looks from a height.
An easy descent is then made to the country about
Adelaid ', which is very flat. The town itself is well
laid out on the river Torrens, the streets running mostly
at right angles. The old buildings are now being
replaced by very handsome granite and marble faced
erections just opposite Government House, which is
also a magnificent structure. The banks, like those in
all other towns, cut the best figure. The sanitary con- 1
dition of the town is excellent, and the water supply
good, whilst the public gardens and grounds are
kept in perfect order, in fact, everything is done
to make the citizen enjoy himself whenever he


may be “on pleasure bent.” After having made
myself thoroughly acquainted with the ins and outs
of the city, I left for Morgan—a small town on the
river Murray, and a little over 100 miles from Adelaide
—in company with Mr. Molyneux, a gentleman of very
high standing in the city and connected with no less
than fifteen institutions, the agricultural reporter of
the Daily Register , the leading paper in the city, and
also the editor of the Agricultural Field, published
once a month. "We arrived at Morgan in six hours,
the travelling being rather slow on this line. Making
an early rise next morning we left with a trap and two
smart horses to mako a thorough inspection of the
country, and also to see the condition of the farmers.
We were occupied for some hours, and travelled over
about fifty miles of country, visiting several farming
establishments as we went aloDg. The farmers about
here we found living in huts, looking well as far as
physique went, but they appeared to be out of sorts
owing to the failure of the crops, on account of the
want of rain Several of these farms I found to have
turned over 500 acres, but the work was shallow and
done rather rudely ; the country is exceptionally rich,
the only drawback is the want of water. We met
several farmers on the road with casks and tanks on
their wagons, conveying water for domestic purposes
from eight to twenty miles. This is something prepos-
terous when one comes to think that the river Murray
runs right through the greater part of the colony, whilst
Government has done nothing in the way of irrigation
by filling th 6 dry creeks which run through miles of
country. Well-sinking has been tried, but no fresh
water found, not even at a depth of 600 feet. For
all that the country can boast of having good


pasturage. I am sure that with a proper irrigation
scheme these lands would give splendid returns, say
from twenty to forty bushels per acre. Returning to
Morgan we left the next day foi Roseworthy, visiting
the experimental farm and College which is three miles
from Roseworthy station. The College was selected
by Government from the poorest 600 acres of land
to be got in a radius of sixty miles from Adelaide, void
of water and with very little wood. The College is
a magnificent building, built of blue stone brought
120 miles, and costing £B,OOO. The lecture-rooms,
bed-rooms and dining-hall are well selected, lofty and
well veniilated. There were sixteen boys in College at
the time »f our visit. It appeared that the Professor’s
hands are tied bv Government on account of his not
receiving proper support. The boys of the institution
appeared to be doing well, they looked at least vtry
cheerful and went through their classes and practical
work very regularly. I found the lands and grounds
properly laid out, while the crops and roots looked
remarkably well, in fact 100 per cent, better than
those for miles around. This I attribute to proper
cultivation. As I have stated before, the land appears
to be so fertile that the seed only requires to be
scratched into the ground. From this institution,
I am confident the country will some day reap
a great harvest, simply because the young men now
under course of instruction will be a better class
of farmers than those at present possessing the
land ; owing to the education they are now receiving
they will be sure to do full justice to the virgin soil
which has not received a particle of manure since the
first settlers settled in South Australia.
Ostrich farming does not appear to prosper, the


mortality among the young birds being very heavy
but the older birds, imported from the old colony, are
doing well, and holders are still sanguine of success ;
but I am afraid the low price in feathers now ruling
will force them to abandon the industry.
I have seen several vineyards, the present area under
cultivation being a little over 4,000 acres. As regards
the vine culture in quantity and quality, I am fully
satisfied the Cape can hold its own if only a little
more pains are taken to produce a good article. The
vineyards are mostly managed by Germans. It seems
that the wines are not appreciated by colonists at the
clubs and hotels, in fact, I seldom heard anybody call
for colonial wine. I should say that now pressure has
been brought to bear on our wine farmers, through
the low prices, they are forced to make a good wine,
and I am perfectly satisfied that our wine trade with
the Continent will revive.
After remaining in Adelaide for a few days’ rest I
started for the north to see the country and visit the
squatters in that direction. On leaving the city the
line of railway runs over a fine flat and rich country for
miles. The crops grown are mostly hay, and even the
small quantity of wheat I saw standing was prepared
for hay, the land appeared to be exhausted on account
of the constant growing of wheat crops. As Port
Augusta was approached, the land became cleaner,
but the crops were poor owing to the absence of rain.
Leaving Port Augusta the country for the first twenty
miles was very hilly, then came large plains which
appeared to be very fertile, but the old story—want
of rain—applied here also. About sixty miles away
from the port one gets into a tract of country very
similar to our Karoo. I came across several squatters


and also met the manager of a large station. The
runs here, I found, are from two to three thousand
square miles, one sheep being allowed to every forty
acres, whilst water is got by damming up the creeks.
The springs are very weak, and few and far between.
The stations I visited were divided into paddocks of
ten to fifteen thousand acres. Each class of sheep is
kept apart, and sheep of different ages are also sepa-
rated. The rams are put in on the Ist November, fifty
ewes being put to a ram. The shearing commences
in August ; when this is done the lambs are looked
after at once. I found all the sheep entirely free
from scab and looking well, in fact, I venture to say
that the disease is not known in the colony. Most of
the leases of these large runs expire in 1888. I think
il; would not be bad if the Government would re-lease
these runs to the same persons again. The country is
unfit for agricultural purposes, owing to the light rain-
fall of and the absence of springs or rivers to irrigate
from. If the Government should ever think of sub-
dividing these runs they should not, in my opinion,
be larger than 10,000 acres, because by making the
runs smaller they become over-stocked and conse-
quently bring on disease and trample down the vege-
tation. I look on wool as the staple product of the
colony. The agricultural industry has seen its best
days unless it can be improved by irrigation being
judiciously, practically and economically carried out,
of which there is every likelihood.
On my return from the north I visited Mr. Hart’s
farm, which may be termed a general farm, covering
8,200 acres of rich land, to which extent it has
gradually expanded from an original small plot. On
this property I came across the best crops in South
D


Australia. When purchased by Mr. Hart, the lands
were quite exhausted on account of incessant growth
of cereals. The manager, at the time, Mr. Thompson,
who is a thoroughly practical man and a splendid
manager, had brought the lands up to what they were
within the space of three years, simply by growing
roots, running sheen and fallowing. The sheep, cattle
and horses generally were in splendid condition, and
the management of the farm and of the whole estab-
lishment was the best I have seen in any of the other
colonies. I thought it very singular that the Austra-
lian bug or Icerya Purchasi, as called by the Austra-
lians, could not be traced in the orange trees, although
the hedges were covered with the insect. Mr. Moly-
neux, a naturalist, showed me a fly which destroyed
them in the orange tree, but the tree appeared, never-
theless, very sickly owing to a black scale which had
attacked it. I found the trees decaying with alarm-
ing rapidity. I left the premises of Mr. Hart, fully
satisfied that land could never be exhausted in any
country when science and practical experience are pro-
perly applied.
I next drove over to Mr. Hartly’s wine farm, which
was about five miles distant from the coast. Although
everything appeared to be in good order, I thought
that a great deal of labour was lost by bad management.
The wines were all planted 9x6, and comprised several
varieties. Before a vineyard was laid out the vines
were planted in beds and re-set the next year. The
soil appeared to be very rich, and something similar
to the Worcester, Robertson and Montagu soils. The
vines run on trellises, with posts at every fifteen yards
and were suspended by wire ; they are never manured,
but the ground is ploughed and grubbed and kept very


clean. The cellar is partly under ground, whilst the
majority of the casks are small, capable of holding
2,000 gallons. At the time of my visit there were over
300,000 gallons of wine in stock. The must, which is
purchased from smaller farmers, were from several
varieties of grapes and of very superior flavour. Ship-
ments are made regularly every fortnight, and then
mostly to England, but the wines are not shipped
before they are two years of age. The casks come
direct and shipment is carried out by the farmer.
Great care is taken in manipulating the wine, and last,
but not least, the cellars are kept solely for the pur-
pose of storing wines whilst ventilation is properly
attended to.
IV.
CHINESE AND NATIVES.—WITH THE WATER SUPPLY
COMMISSION.—ST. HUBERTS.—BUNDOORA PARK.—
JAN JEAN RESERVOIR.—SYDNEY:—LTS LEGISLATORS.
A SCULLING MATCH.—LTS WATER SUPPLY.
During my travels I repeatedly came across Chinese
and natives to whom I spoke freely, and they openly
and voluntarily gave me to understand that they were
very much abused by the Christians, that being
their name for a European. One Chinese stated that
in any of the Australian Colonies, his life was always
in danger. He was never safe, whether by day or by
night, from the attack of miners, labourers, or young
larrikins, the law being so lenient that there is still
greater danger after having once lodged a complaint.
I have myself seen several houses, inhabited by these
people, which had to be barricaded at night as a protec-
tion against the attacks of these ruffians who defy the
D 2


Government. The native question of Australia is
a delicate subject indeed, but on that account it
requires all the more attention, and should receive a
great deal more notice than has been given to it yet,
particularly as there has been any amount of writing
against the South African Colonists on the subject
of the ill-treatment of their natives. I blush to say
that people calling themselves Britishers have shame-
lessly abused their nationality by having through
bribery gained the consent of a father or a brother
to taking the daughter or the sister, or otherwise by
taking the woman by force, and after having kept her
for a time letting her loose again. These are the men
who have brought down upon them the fury of the
native tribes, who in their strife against the whites have
been nearly exterminated from the face of the earth. It
is no rare occurrence to hear an outside squatter speak
of shooting natives, and how many he has already laid
low. Another system in full swing is for the squatter
first to bribe the native into his employ and then to arm
him against his fellow creature. Now the native is
cognizant of the fact that taking the life of his fellow-
man means his clearing out of the country, unless he
wants to swing for it. He thus becomes invaluable to
the squatter, who in his turn looks well after his native.
After having collected some seeds, and spent my
last evening with an old friend, Captain Wilson, at
Lang’s Bay, I made up my mind to leave for Mel-
bourne by sea, having had quite enough of South
Australia. From what I saw of ttie people and
country it struck me forcibly that the prosperity of
both is on the decline, and I think in growing cereals
the Cape ought to compete strongly and successfully
against the Australian Colonies.


I left Port Adelaide in the steamship “ Adelaide,”
and the boat proved to be the pleasantest one I had
ever had the privilege to sail in, whilst the captain was
the very soul of the vessel. I took up my quarters in
13 Treasury Terrace, Spring-street, and hardly had
my coat off, when I was handed a letter from the
Secretary of the Water Supply Commission, inviting
me to come over to their office and give them all the
information I could on irrigation. I need hardly
say that I complied with their request. The Govern-
ment is doing everything in its power to encourage
irrigation works, thinking that they should have prece-
dence over all others.
After a few days’ rest I rtarted for St. Hubert’s, the
wine estate of Mr. Castella, about thirty-two miles from
Melbourne, from whom I received a special invitation.
I made up my mind to spend two or three days, and I
never spent a few days more pleasantly than on this
estate. Mr. Castella has about 260 acres under vines,
which are planted at 6x 5 feet. Pruning is partly
done as at the Cape, but they run the shoots on wire
with supporting poles at every ten yards. The labour
is mostly carried out by Chinese. The wine-making
processes are very similar to ours. Mr. Castella held a
large stock of old wine, which is kept for the purpose
of blending the young wines. The yield per acre
averages from 300 to 500 gallons, This establishment
has also a retail business in Melbourne. Mr. Castella
was, at the time of my visit, just ready to ship about
a thousand hogsheads of wine, which he was sure
would realise ss. per gallon ; that would leave a hand-
some profit. I found in the management and working
of the whole estate a great deal of lost labour. The
owner has invested £35,000 in this estate, and I should


say that the high price of labour tells, as there is not
a ready sale for the produce, the returns of which could
be doubled in a few years time if there were encourage-
ment enough. It was very odd to me to find the
extraordinary prejudice there existed amongst the
colonists against their wines, the lower classes prefer-
ring colonial beer and the upper classes English ale and
French wines.
I left the next day for Mr. Gardner’s Bundoora Park.
This estate is about 3,000 acres in extent and divided
into paddocks of 40 to 60 acres. The stock consisted
of ninety thoroughbred mares and 200 shorthorn cows,
the sires being of the best bloods, and old Marquis ,
now in his twenty-eighth year, still looking well. The
young stock were beautifully kept. The stabling of
the cattle is excellent, whilst the management of the
estate is on the whole admirable. I saw here a most
extraordinary feature in the rearing of young stock,
the foals ran with the dam, the dam and foal not seeing
any corn before the grass began to fall or ripen ; Mr.
Gardner thought it unnatural to feed when nature
had provided the grass. The expense connected with
the working of this establishment was something
enormous, the actual labour amounted to over £12,000
a year. There has lately been a marked depreciation
in the value of the stock, which Mr. Gardner attributed
to over production. r lhe majority of breeders of
thoroughbred stock, have only recently preferred to
make their selection in the colony, as the stock in the
colony are better developed in bone than those im-
ported. The lands on this estate and the surrounding
country are worth £SO per acre and more.
Having spent a very pleasant day, I joined Mr.
F. Hare, a brother of my friend, Mr. R. Hare, at


the Cape. Mr. F. Hare had been in the colony
for some thirty years, and had been closely connected
with the Kelly gang capture. At present he holds
office as Police Magistrate in one of the suburbs
of Melbourne. I attended his court, the proceedings
in which were very lively and interesting. After
court we left for the Jan Jean waterworks at
a distance of twenty-one miles, which supplies
Melbourne with water. The reservoir is filled by
collecting the water from the hill creeks and leading
it into the reservoir along an open blue-stone furrow,
eight feet broad, five feet deep and some seven miles
in length. The reservoir is on an open plain, sur-
rounded by hills, with one opening which had been
closed by a substantial embankment, 3,300 feet long,
175 feet at its base, and 35 feet deep, the gradient
being 1 in 3 in front and 1 in 2 at the back. The
water is led to a reservoir near Melbourne in open,
blue-stone furrows, from where it is again taken in
33-inch iron piping. The quantity in the Jan Jean
reservoir at that time would, without further addition,
last 400 days, taken at an average of 20,000,000 gallons
per day. The quantity running in during the summer
months is 8,000,000 per day, and at a speed of three
miles an hour. The reservoir is 2j miles long, 1£
broad, and 20 feet deep, and costing over £4,000,000.
A larger water supply scheme had already been
commenced, leading from another locality in order
to meet the wants of the increasing population. These
works pay over ten per cent, on the outlay. Some
parts of the country which I travelled over here, i.e.t
about 1,000 square miles of land north-east from
Melbourne, is lightly wooded, without under-growth,
giving a park-like appearance, whilst the grass is


luxuriant and mostly used for dairy purposes. The
country beyond that is hilly and thickly covered with
wood. Here are the water sheds of the colony running
north and south. Staying over for the night at Jan Jean
Hotel, I returned next morning by coach, and met
with every kind of character one could possibly
wish. We stopped at nearly every public house
along the road, these places paying only £2O licence
per annum.
On my return I went off by rail to Sir William
Clarke’s estate, Ravenswood, where a splendid
luncheon was awaiting us, and amongst the guests
were some 300 children with their parents. Amongst
the little ones I saw some of the prettiest faces
one could imagine, elegantly dressed and, in fact,
perfect little models. Every kind of amusement
was provided for them after luncheon. The estate
is over 150,000 acres in extent, the lands being
very rich pasturage, whilst the homestead is a noble
building and the grounds tastefully laid out. At six
our party broke up, Sir William endeavouring to get
me stay, but I -was prevented from accepdng his
kind invitation by my other arrangements, although I
should have liked very much to remain, as it was one
of the grandest entertainments I had been to for a long
while. My time was getting limited in Victoria, so I
began packing up and bidding my newly-made friends
good-bye. The last I met was Mr. Deakin, who gave
me a dozen letters of introduction to different persons
with whom he was acquainted in the United States. I
lpft for Sydney by the 6 - 15 a.m. train on the 16th
December, via Albany, on the river Murray. On leaving
Melbourne the railway gradually rises into hilly country,
there being beauty and grandeur in infinite variety f


which keep one’s mind delightfully employed all day
long, and make one struggle against sleep when the
time for sleep arrives. The line from Melbourne to
Albany, which is a distance of 192 miles, runs through
well-cultivated lands and sheep runs, but although the
fields look productive the buildings have a miserable
appearance, most of them being merely log-huts and
huts of sun-dried bricks. On approaching Albany the
culture of the vine is more general, whilst the system
adopted for the preparation of wine is the same as ours.
The soil appeared to be admirably suited for this
industry. The town of Albany is beautifully situated
in an open plain on the river Murray, and is surrounded
by hillocks.
After having stayed over a day and seen everything
that was to be seen, I started for Sydney. The country
at first was not at all interesting, nothing but po®r
cultivated lands, the remainder covered with gums,
except about the townships, but on nearing Sydney it
became more open and well grassed and stocked with
dairy cattle. The distance between Albany and
Sydney is about 386 miles. The division of territory
between Victoria and New South Wales is out of all
proportion, but the inhabitants of the former colony do
not seem to mind it much, their theory being that
New South Wales has the land and they make the
money. It is wonderful to see the amount of business
done in Melbourne compared to other places. This city
ships double the quantity of wool grown in the colony,
in fact, half of the business done in New South Wales,
South Australia and Queensland belongs to the banks*
wool brokers, &c., of Melbourne. It was unfortunate
that just before I arrived at Sydney there had been
a change of Government, and it is a most singular


fact that all the Australian Colonies appear to be on
the same footing as regards change of Ministry.
The miners and the labourers are the masters of the
country, and are returning third-class men to fill
these important offices. Legislators of this stamp will
soon enough bring ruin on the country they represent.
Sydney is very irregularly laid out, the streets being
narrow and out of shape, while the public buildings
are scattered all over the city. The Houses of Parlia-
ment have something of the appearance of Cogill’s
Hotel at Wynberg, and are by no means worthy of the
legislature of the colony. The Colonial Secretary’s
office is a trifle better, so is the Post Office —a passible
piece of architecture. The Courts of Justice are very
plain buildings and look like private dwelling-houses.
The banks and merchants stores are, however, being
improved upon.
The day after my arrival I went to see the great
sculling match, that was to come off between the
Champion sculler and young Matterson, who is sup-
posed to be the coming man in that line. Great inte-
rest was evinced in the proceedings, some thirty or
forty steam boats plying on the river for the convey-
ance of passengers, the distance being 3J miles. Of
course the Champion was the favourite, although they
were evenly matched. The first mile they stuck
together closely, after which all was over. The
Governor of the colony also joined in the sport, being
heartily cheered as he passed the boats ; he is making
himself very popular by taking part in these sports,
and I have no doubt he will take the place of Sir
Hercules in joining the Turf. Far up the river the
scenery is very picturesque, the rocky hills running
right up to the edge of the water, whilst any number of


villas are dotted all over the place and very nicely kept.
On the morning of my first Sunday in Sydney I stayed
at home, but in the afternoon I walked to the domain,
where the Salvation Army, Blue Bibbon A.rmy and
Political Army hold their usual meetings within a
hundred yards from each other, each vying with
the others in the enthusiastic propogation of its doc-
trine. At the political meeting, however, I heard the
lowest and most abusive language against public men
that I have ever witnessed in a public domain. But
it is the same here as in South Australia : the
Governments are at the mercy of the lower classes. In
order to see every inch of the suburbs I had to make
continual use of the tram, bus or cab. I was very dis-
appointed in the way the residences and gardens of the
fashionable people have been constructed and laid out.
It appeared to me that everyone was his own designer
and his own architect. The grounds all along the har-
bour have no depth of good soil, whilst on the opposite
side it is worse still; no plant unless indigenous will
thrive here unless extraordinary care is bestowed on
it by adding good soil and manure for fertilization.
The water supply of Sydney is very poor, and every-
body is down on the Government about it. They had
just finished a scheme for obtaining a fresh supply from
a new source, but when the water was turned on, the
leakages in the joints were so defective that half of
the water was lost, whilst it cost the Government
thousands of pounds. Taken all in all I have been
very much disappointed with Sydney, &c.


V.
PARRAMATTA:-FRUIT AND DAIRY FARMING.—SYDNEY:
—PACES.—NEW SOUTH WALES:—TO THE BANKS
OF THE DARLING AND DARLING DOWNS.—PASTORAL
AND AGRICULTURAL ASPECT.
When the Assembly met for the first time after the
change of Ministry, I was fortunate in being early in
getting a seat in the gallery. The chamber where the
members assembled is a plain room with very little
decorative work about it; the members closely seated
and no desks before them. The gallery on the occa-
sion of my visit was filled by the lower classes, who
take a deep interest in the legislation of the colony.
There was not much to hear or learn, the outward
appearance and debating powers of the members are
not at all taking, and I consider it to be a disgrace to
such a fine colony. I soon left the hall and took a
short trip into the country, which I enjoyed much
more than the debates of the legislators I had just
left. The country all about the suburbs of the city is
hilly and very sandf, but money does everything here.
Trees have been planted, and grasses sown, and the
houses have shot up like mushrooms, quite a transfor-
mation having been effected within a few years. I
spent a very pleasant day with Mr. Mitchell, father-
in-law to my friend Captain Bower. Mr. Mitchell, who
has a magnificient mansion on Darling Point, was
anxious that I should stay with him, an invitation I
much regretted my inability to accept, as my time was
becoming so short and I wanted to cover more ground
before the end of the year. The rest of the day I
spent in visiting the Zoological Gardens, which were
well kept. I afterwards left for Randwick, where were


the best Turf grounds in the colony, which I found
tastefully laid out, and with stands in perfect order,
and nicely enclosed, the Turf itself having any amount
of elasticity in it. The country beyond Randwick con-
tinued for miles to be very hilly and sandy. Very
little stock is kept, the low lands being cultivated
by Chinese, who only grow vegetables, for which being
so near the city they have a ready sale. These Chinese
are powerful rivals to the small English farmer, and
by under-selling him they create great jealousy. The
hilly parts are grown all over with scrub, which was
being pulled up and replaced by fir and Californian
pine which take remarkably well. Along the coast
the lands are low and very rocky.
The next day I left for Parramatta. This part of
the country is one continuation of fruit and dairy
farming, the produce being run into the city early
every morning, either by rail or by road. The milk
is taken by contractors ; sheds are put up on the
road side where the milk cans are left ready labelled,
every contractor having his particular line where his
milk is to be delivered ; the milk is rattled into town
by vehicle, where the company receives it, and the
vehicle returns for the evening milk, the company
doing the work of delivery and getting the milk at
a certain reduced rate. Butter is disposed of in the
same manner, whilst fruit is vended through agencies.
Christmas-day I spent indoors at Sydney. Boxing day
saw me on the Randwick race course, where I saw some
capital sport. Of course, the Governor being there set
everybody going. The attendance was very good—l
should say between 30 and 40,000. The arrangements
were as good, if not better than at Melbourne ; the
grand stand was a decided improvement on that of


Hennington,and the course (one mile and two furlongs)
not so flat. The Summer Cup was done in 2 - 39 minutes,
the distance being \\ miles. The cricketing grounds
and agricultural show grounds are also in the imme-
diate neighbourhood of the city, both in good order.
I left Sydney the following day for the far
west, in order to see the country and squatting. On
leaving Sydney, after getting beyond the suburbs, you
get into a little open country with cultivated lands,
orchards and vegetable gardens. In the distance it
appeared to be well-wooded. On approaching the
township of Penrith, the range of Blue Mountains
loom in sight running at right angles. Leaving Pen-
rith, the top of the mountain is soon reached, the line
ascending in a zig-zag manner, the height being about
1,230 feet. This high table-land extends for over
sixty miles. In connection with this bit of line there
is some fine engineering work, heavy cuttings and
viaducts to be seen. The country is thickly wooded
until Bathurst is reached, which is a town beautifully
situated amongst hills with rich cultivation all round.
Bathurst is one of the oldest towns in the colony
and has a population of about 10,000 ; its public
buildings, churches and schools are handsome struc-
tures. After leaving Bathurst the country became
less undulating with less timber and more grass. In
low lands, where selections had been made there was
a fair show of cereal cultivation, but the crops were
poor—although the season was favourable—but
that is owing to proper care not having been
taken in the tilling and manuring of the soil.
Next comes Orange Town, but the country remains
the same until Nyngan is leached, when one gets into
flat scrubby and poor lands. From Nyngan to Bourke,


a distance of 128 miles, the line runs straight on the
Darling’s Eiver. From the Darling the character of
the country changes, owing to the overflow of the river;
the land is very rich, but there is no cultivation except
on the banks of the river. Here again the Chinese
show what can be done ; vegetables, grapes and other
fruit are grown to perfection. When I reached the
Darling it was sad to see the river dry and the steamers
lying on the bed, where they had been since last
February. Here I met some old squatters with whom
I spent several hours, and from whom I got some
valuable information. Their opinions on the then
condition of the stock and the great mortality among
them were very contradictory, some attributing the
cause to want of rain, the majority of them, however,
being of opinion that over-stocking was the great evil.
From what I had seen of the country I agreed with
the last opinion. Most of the squatters were running
a sheep to an acre when they ought to have f om four
to six acres to a sheep. During my stay at Bourke I
saw wagons loaded with wool and nicely got up. They
had been two months on the road, travelling on an
average twelve miles per day. Time, it appeared,,
was no object. These carriers appeared to be a
rough lot and lower than the lowest trek boer I have
ever come across. I was highly amused with the turn*
out, there being never less than fourteen or sixteen
bullocks or eight or ten horses to the wagon, with a
load of four or five tons, The condition of the stock
and road are always considered first. A great many
of the carriers are now obliged to take to other occu-
pation on account of the railways having been
extended far west. All this country has now been
filled by sheep runs, squatters having found out


that sheep stand the land better. The breeding of
sheep will probably be the principal occupation of the
people in the north-west district of New South Wales,
the frozen meat exportation giving them every encour-
agement. Sydney will now get the trade which
formally went down by the Darling to Melbourne and
Adelaide.
New South Wales is more a pastoral than an agri-
cultural colony, and large quantities of flour, butter,
potatoes, &c., are imported from New Zealand. A
great many selections were being made under the new
Act which divided the colony into three sections,
namely, the coast, midland and pastoral, so that any-
body could take his choice. Should he take a plot of
land in the agricultural section he is bound to pay 20s.
per square mile, of which 2s. 6d. is to be paid up in
cash and afterwards a quarterly payment of Is. The
pastoral lands are obtainable at 2d. to 6d. per acre,
according to whether there is creek or river pasturage.
On my return from Darling I touched at several
places and saw thousands of sheep and other stock,
the former appearing to be quite free from scab. The
class of sheep are not superior to ours. I spent several
hours one morning at the sales, and saw several hun-
dreds of sheep weighed, none bringing the weight
higher than thirty-eight lbs. My next trip was to
Richmond to see the shed of Mr. Towns, the finest in
New South Wales. With that gentleman I had a very
nice time ; he quite made up for the unpleasant
moments I spent in Sydney. He had several of the
best sires in the colony, both as regards thoroughbred
and draught, and his management in paddocking, &c.,
can not be surpassed. Mr. Towns believed in feeding
young stock early with the dam. All the youngsters


appeared to be well cared for and very promising.
The stud consisted of five thoroughbred sires, three
trotting, two draught, and 120 thoroughbred mares
and 150 draught. Annual sales are regularly held and
without reserve. The dry mares are kept on hay if
the season proves to be unfavourable. Comparing
Victoria with New South Wales, I should say that the
latter has a decided pull over the former, not only being
larger in size but richer in mineral wealth, the coal
alone bringing in a large revenue. No wonder that a
great deal of jealousy exists between the two colonies.
Victoria is, however, the finer of the two. Most of the
pastoral lands in New (South Wales are now stocked
with sheep since the frozen meat export is becoming
a paying trade, and the cattle are consequently removed
further inland, even as far as Queensland.
NEW ZEALAND.
CHRISTCHURCH:—EXPERIMENTAL FARM.—FROZEN MEAT
COMPANY; HARVESTING MACHINES.—ROPE PROM
INDIGENOUS PLANTS.—WELLINGTON.—TARAWERA:
—NATIVE BALL.—LAKE TARAWERA.—AUCKLAND:
—STUD FARM.—SIR GEORGE GREY.—THE NATIVE
RACES.
I left Sydney on the evening of the 9th January by
the S.S. “ Haotota” for Wellington, which we reached
in 6£ days after a very rough passage, and I made
up my mind to leave at once for the south ; but the
steamer being delayed several hours I had an oppor-
tunity of seeing the Government officials, in order to
make arrangements for facilitating my movements.
The Governor, I found, had left for Christchurch, the
E


Premier for Dunedin and Sir Julius Vogel, who is
a great sufferer from gout, for the north, to recruit his
health. The Colonial Secretary was holding whip
for the time being, and he was kind enough to supply
me with charts, papers and verbal advice. I left
by the same boat for Lyttleton, which we reached
in seventeen hours, from where I started by rail for
Christchurch. Lyttleton is a small town built on the
slope of a high range of hills, and will never be much
of a place except as a shipping port for Christchurch,
the distance between the two places being six miles,
of which two miles is done by tunnelling. Christchurch
on the other hand is laid out on a beautiful plain and
has a population of about 20,000, with a good deal
of building ground still open. The town is surrounded
by small vegetable and dairy farms, .vhilst a few miles
outside there is some extensive and flourishing
cereal cultivation. The soil is composed of a rich
brown clay, resting on shingle, the depth of both
varying a great deal; the shingle is all water-worn,
and has a depth of from two to twenty feet, the clay
from a few inches to fifteen feet and more. On the
light soils potatoes are mostly and very extensively
grown. The lands are nicely divided into paddocks of
from 200 to 400 acres, hedges being preferred to wire;
hawthorn and gorse are found to be the best suitable,
both making a very substantial hedge, although the
gorse is by far superior. The only fault I find with it
is that it requires too much looking after, on account of
the rapidity with which it spreads its branches and
sheds its seed. The style of farming here is the most
systematic I have found in any other of the colonies
The soil is tilled properly and the farmers go in for a
rotation of crops, only three crops being grown, one


of wheat and the other oats, whilst a crop of turnips or
potatoes is put in occasionally as a third crop, the
interval of three years being taken up by cultivated
grass, red clover being generally preferred, and grazed
for three years. Fourteen miles from Christchurch the
experimental farm is situated, and a fine pile of build-
ings it is, the grounds being laid out with great skill
and taste. There were thirty-six students all going
through a regular course of study in farm work. The
crops reared on this farm were the finest I had seen
for miles around, and the stock was in prime condition.
The institution was well spoken of by the farming
population round about, who derive great benefit from
the experiments made on the farm.
Returning to town in the evening I left the next day
for Dunedin by rail, the distance, which is 230 miles,
being covered in twelve hours. The country all the way
down to Omaru is flat, well cultivated and dotted over
with fine sheep runs. After leaving Omaiu the aspect
changes and the country becomes hilly but still well-
cultivated until Port Chalmers is reached, where some
grand engineering work in several tunnels and deep
cuttings may be observed. Dunedin is situated at the
end of a fine harbour, which is being made by a
Board of Commissioners invested with considerable
powers, the reclaimed ground repaying the outlay on
the works. The city is built along the shore, backed
up by a hill several hundred feet high. It is nicely
laid out, the eye resting on all the principal buildings
at one glance. Going further south one meets with still
finer country called the Taieri Valley. .In the toAvn of
Mosgiel I saw a woollen manufactory turning out
cloths, tweeds, hosiery, blankets, shawls, &c., &c., in
any quantity, and of superior manufacture. Returning
E 2


to Dunedin I retraced my steps to Christchurch where
I visited the frozen meat establishment, which is
worked by a company at so much per carcase, the large
squatter taking all risk. The price charged was l£d.
per lb. to be delivered on board. The squatter also has
a certain share in the offal. This industry is receiving
every encouragement through the high prices realized
in the home market. All the country I had up to that
time been over was perfectly destitute of indigenous
wood, but every kind of tree introduced grows well,
and every variety of fruit thrives luxuriantly with
the exception of the orange and grape. Roots and
vegetables of all kinds thrive well.
I saw several harvesting machines exhibited and
tried. They were McCormack’s Johnstone’s, Howard’s
Grey and Reid’s (of Dundee) Wood’s and Hornsby’s.
McCormack’s seems to have found most favour,
its draught being light and working gear perfect.
The ploughs mostly used are Grey and Reid’s double ;
its weight is five cwt., it runs on three wheels and
will cut through anything. It requires four good
horses, but it does its work excellently. I also saw
very effective clod crushers at work. Rolling is also
very much resorted to, in fact, farmers prefer rolling as
the seed shows better. New Zealand having become a
large export country for wheat and beef, animal breed-
ing has been taken to on a large scale. The carcases
that sell best are those of the crossed Leicester and
Merino, which in two years’ time will give a weight of
from eighty to ninety lbs. The shorthorn Durham will,
when four years of age, average eight cwts. The soil
and climate of the colony is very suitable for the breed-
ing of stock ; Southdown, Cheviots and Cotswold sheep
being largely bred.


The indigenous reed, called the New Zealand flax, is
gathered in large quantities, and irom it is manufac-
tured a kind of rope which, although strong, is very-
coarse ; large quantities of this rope are exported.
The tops of the bulrush (our palmiet) are used, when
ripe, for stuffing pillows, a good substitute for feathers,
and they answer the purpose remarkably well. The
landlords of the hotels, however, are of opinion that
with a couple of years’ wear it will be reduced to
powder.
Travelling north from Christchurch the country
gradually becomes hilly, and pastural runs will be
found all over it. Returning to Lyttleton very much
pleased with my trip to the south, I took the steamer
for Wellington, which I reached in fifteen hours, and
took up my quarters at the Empire Hotel. I must say
the hotel accommodation at Wellington was very
inferior, but an improvement was soon expected as
the Government were going to made it their head-
quarters. Extensive improvements generally were
apparent ; hills were being pulled down for reclaiming
land in the harbour, whilst great care was being
bestowed in laying out the streets. Having seen the
suburbs for miles around and having enjoyed my short
stay, receiving much kindness from all my new
acquaintances, I made up my mind to start for the
north. The country is very hilly until Kakiriki is
reached, when it slopes gradually to the sea, the level
growing wider until Foxton is insight. From Foxton
to Palmerston the country is a flat rich plain with
heavy timber on the distant hills. From Palmerston
I left by coach for Talmiti, all the country up to this
place being very hilly but covered with beautiful trees.
Taking to the rail again I found the country still well


wooded and the scenery grand until I readied Waip-
kurau. About twelve miles from Napier, which is
next reached and is situated on a peninsula, which some
years ago must have been an island of little hills, the
land is mostly agricultural, covered with cultivated
grasses and large sheep runs. The town is built at the
back of the hills, upon which, and in the valleys are the
chosen sites of the private residences. I left Napier by
coach and the first night reached Tarawera Hotel, a
distance of fifty-six miles. The country is very moun-
tainous and covered with ferns for miles. I was glad
when the hotel was reached for Ihe road did not appear
to be either very safe or in good order ; on the contrary,
having no protecting walls for preventing a capsize
into the ravines they were particularly dangerous. At
Taupo, which I reached the next day, I was detained
for a day, owing to the horses not having been able to
take us further. I passed my time in the Native Land
Courts, which happened to be sitting at the time, and in
the evening went to a native ball, which was very
amusing but not very instructive. The affair came
off in the Court-room where several of the lower ten
were in their element, and here again I received a proof
of the weakness of the European for a black skin.
The half caste woman is handsome—in fact, several
Europeans are married to these women.
During my stay at Taupo I also visited the hot
sulphur springs, which are wonderful, and are used
with beneficial results by people suffering from rheu-
matism. For miles around you find nothing but hot
vapour and mud holes. Pumice-stone abounds in the
neighbourhood and gives one an idea of what this part
of the country must have been years ago. Leaving
Taupo in a small trap drawn by three horses, I


managed to get to Ohiniemutu in ten hours. All the
country which I covered was very poor and badly
stocked. The next day I left for Wairoa to see the
hot lakes and terraces. At Wairoa I got a party to
join me in a boat across Lake Tarawera, the distance
across being about eight miles, after which two miles
have to be done on foot before the lakes and terraces
are reached. The money spent in seeing these works
of nature is not thrown away ; they are simply grand.
I crossed the Rotomahana in a canoe, and returned,
coming down the river in the canoe. It goes without
saying that we enjoyed the trip immensely. We got
back to Wairoa at five and returned to Ohinemutu in
the evening . The valleys here are covered with trees
while the hills are not particularly fertile.
From Ohinemutu I left by coach for Oxford, a town
still in its infancy—a public house, store and black-
smith’s shop constituting the township. From there
the country gradually improves, the fern being de-
stroyed by first burning, and then either lightly
ploughed or scarified : red clover which takes very
readily, is then strewn over. Turnips are also largely
grown, and when fit for consumption, cattle are put
on, six head of animals being generally taken to an
acre. They run into good beef in three months’ time,
giving the owner 30s. to the good on each. At Cam-
bridge the railway, which is being extended to Ohine-
mutu, is again met, and from there the country
improves more and more, wheat and oat-fields being
frequently seen, and any amount of root crops, all well
cultivated. Auckland, the next town I reached, is very
irregularly laid out owing to the hilly nature of the
locality. The harbour is very similar to that of
Sydney. The country all around this is volcanic, mostly


hilly with large hollows at the tops, indicating the
ancient convulsions of nature. After having seen what
was worth seeing in the city, I set to work to view
its surroundings, my first visit being to the New Zea-
land stud, which is kept on a farm, about seven miles
from the town, and I had a thorough look into its
management. The and paddocks were excel-
lently kept and the supervision was good. All the
stock were well kept and in good condition. The stud
horses were inferior to the mares ; the young ones, the
last of Musket, as well as the yearlings were very
promising. I also saw the dam of Martini-Henri and
Nordtnveldt with foals at their sides. The studs consist
mostly of imported thoroughbred mares to the number
of seventy, obtained from the best raciug studs. On
my return I walked up Mount Eden, a little over three
miles from the town, from where I had a magnificent
view of the country.
Several gentlemen who had been at the Cape many
years ago, called upon me and showed me every kind-
ness and attention. After a week’s stay I took the first
steamer for Kawan. This steamer happened to be an
excursion boat, so that we had a regular crowd on
board, a great number of Presbyterian ministers
amongst them. The distance from Auckland, which
is about thirty-two miles, was done in ihree hours, and
we landed at a small wharf about a stone’s throw from
Sir Geo-ge Grey’s residence. Sir George met us on
the wharf, and after having exchanged a few words
with the clergy, he took me by the arm and said,
“Come along Van der Byl, tell us all about the Cape.”
I could not pass over anybody, bis menaory being as
fresh as ever, and he still takes a deep interest in any-
thing atfecting our old colony. He still speaks of the


Dutch Boers as the greatest and best pioneers in the
world. In his opinion England should leave them to
themselves, only seeing that they have proper teachers
amongst them so that they may not be allowed to fall
into barbarism. After having taken a long walk over
Sir George’s grounds, which are nicely laid out,l secured
several rare varieties of seed, and returned by
the same boat, reaching Auckland a little after dark.
A few days afterwards Sir George came over, when
we chatted together for a long time and had several
long walks. During my stay in Auckland, I heard
Sir Julius Vogel addressing the inhabitants. He is a
very intelligent man but an abominable speaker. I
also listened to Sir George, who has grown very feeble
in his voice, but there is still lots of life in him. He
is very popular amongst the working classes, but the
upper classes entertain a great hatred to him.
I next took a short trip up the north where I saw a
fair extent of land under cultivation ; the largest
business here exists in the cutting of timber and gum
for Melbourne and Sydney, but the trees are gradually
being worked out. Looking at the natural features of
New Zealand as a whole, I think that colony has
greater advantages for settling purposes than the
other colonies, its climate being more regular and the
cultivation of crops and breeding of stock more certain.
The price of land had come down over thirty-three
per, cent, during the last three years, and the natives
were also disposing of land at lower rates. I met a
gentleman just before I left Auckland who had pur-
chased a 500 acre farm for £3,000 ; the property being
a neat cottage and out-buildings, the lands all enclosed
in fifty acre paddocks and well stocked with grass.
The natives are really dying out in this colony so far


as I could judge, and knowing that this was the case
I made anxious enquiries as to the cause. Their own
version was that they were being poisoned by bad
liquor and disease ; they told me voluntarily that their
country was being stolen by the missionaries and that
out of the 260,000 natives in the country when it
became a British settlement, only 40,000 were left,
and this in less than thirty years. I found these
natives a very intelligent and well-developed people,
but, like all black races, very lazy. They still hold
a large tract of country, through which the Govern-
ment intend to cut a railway, the result of which will
be the complete extermination of the native races in
a few years. All through New Zealand great depres-
sion prevailed, and everybody was planning what was
to be done next in order to set things going again.
Hotels were empty, public houses doing no trade and
all the best stands for sale or to let. Thousands of
acres of lands were stuck up for sale in every
agent’s window, whilst the labourers’ cry was for
public works. The Government was to be changed
and the new Ministers were go in for a loan in order to
keep the pot boiling. The colony has any amount of
productive resources, but at the same time, it wants
good handling: through management, there is no doubt,
the country will be ruined.
II.
FROM AUCKLAND TO SAMOA.—HONOLULU.—SAN FRAN-
CISCO :—LRRIGATION.—RAISIN PREPARATION.—STOCK.
During my three weeks stay in Auckland, I
thoroughly enjoyed myself, but my boat, the SS.


u Marawa ” turned up promptly, and on the 2nd March
we steamed out of Auckland harbour with sixty first
and eighty second-class passengers. An immense
crowd saw us off, amongst them the Salvation Army,
who had turned up to bid farewell to their Marshal
Booth, jun., who was leaving at the same time. We
had fine weather the first few days, when the weather
got bad and the majority of passengers were on their
beam ends, not one in six turning up at bell time for
the first week ; after that they gradually showed up
and we soon commenced making acquaintance and
formed quite a happy family on board. On the seventh
day we reached Samoa where we landed mails and
a few passengers, at the same time taking in passen-
gers and fruit. Samoa is one of a group of islands
on which several Europeans have settled ; it is twenty-
five miles in circumference, well watered, and the
soil good, the chief product being wool. The natives
turn the soil to good account and are a fine race
greatly resembling the Maories, barring the tattooeing
of their faces; they also dress in European style.
We did not delay much at Samoa, but made headway
for Honolulu. Between these places our engines
came to grief, which occurrence threw the passengers
into a great state of mind, more so as no satis-
factory explanation could be got from cither captain
or chief engineer as to the extent of the damage. The
fact that the ship was disabled in mid-ocean with little
or no canvas to spread added still more to our anxiety.
We were rolling about like a log of wood for twenty-
four hours, when the news was spread that we were
again on the move, the damage having been sufficiently
repaired to take us on to Honolulu. On resuming our
voyage in more cheerful spirits, we managed to kill the


days by getting up all kinds of sposts. On the evenings
of the 15th we reached Honolulu, the tntrance to the
port being very narrow but not dangerous. The pas-
sengers all landed at once, but owing to the very limited
time at our disposal, on account of our having to leave
again at daylight, there was not much chance o.f a spell
on shore. However, on returning to the steamer, we
were informed to our delight that as there was a good
deal of cargo to be shipped and our machinery to be
repaired, we should not be off before ten o’clock, which
announcement put us on the alert to be out early by six
o’clock for a drive to see something of the country. Our
party drove out about eight miles right across to the
other shore ; from some of the high grounds we had a
magnificent view of the island and the town, and were
amply repaid for the money spent, the expense
amounting to two-and-a-half dollars per man for three
hours. The valleys about the island were all occupied
by Chinamen, who grow large quantities of vegetables
and fruits of every description. The town is rather
irregularly planned, but the streets are wide and the
shops very nicely got up, while the suburbs are beau-
tiful, and laid out with great taste, and the tropical
plants, such as the Royal Palm, cocoanut and several
other varieties cut a conspicuous figure. The popula-
tion of the to*vn is about 12,000. The Americans and
Chinamen predominate here and have it mostly their
own way. Sugar is the main product of the island.
The American dollar and cent are the legal tender,
English money being taken at an enormous discount,
a shilling valuing 7| cents, and gold in the same pro-
portion. The hotel accomodation was to our surprise
better than I have found in the Australian Colonies,
but at the same time very expensive. At eleven o’clock


our vessel left the wharf amid deafening cheers from
the inhabitants, and sighting land on the seventh day,
we entered the Golden Gate just after sunset. The
entrance is very grand, the mouth of the channel
being, I should say, about a mile across, with a good
depth of water. Frisco is situated six miles from the
Heads, and appeared from a distance to be a nice place.
I did not land the same night, as we did not come to
anchor before nine o’clock ; but the next morning
early, on coming alongside the wharf, we went on
shore, and, of course, there was a large crowd to
see the new faces. After clearing my luggage I
took up my quarters at the Palace Hotel, about the
grandest building in the city. It is seven storeys
high and has 750 bed-rooms, restaurant, dining-hall,
smoking-room and billiard-room, whilst the frontage is
occupied by shops. Everything of the best was to
be had if one’s purse strings were only long enough.
I visited the suburbs and principal institutions during
the day, and left the next day for the south. Having
crossed the Bay to Oaklands,l took ticket for Los Ange-
los, which I reached in twenty-six hours. The country
along this route is very beautiful, the first forty miles
being a little undulating, but it gradually opens up
into a grand valley, called San Joaquin, which extends
for about 200 miles, averages about eighty in breadth,
and is as fiat as a billiard table. The greater part of
this valley is under irrigation, the water being taken
out of the Kings River in canals from ten to twenty
yards broad and three feet deep, and running
miles an hour. From these canals smaller ditches
are led out, each farmer taking as much water as he
likes, for which he pays at a nominal rate of only
2£d. per acre. The first purchasers paid 20s. for the


water per acre and from 2| to 5 dollars for the land.
All the land was formerly owned by a company which
raised its value by leading the water on to it ; previous
to this the land was not worth much. Irrigation is
principally applied to the vine3 r ards and orchards,
thereby bringing them to perfection.
I visited several farms, among them being those of Mr.
Buxton and Professor Eisen. The first named gentle-
man has about 640 acres under vines ; his cellar is
a very costly affair indeed—l should say £60,000 would
not cover the outlay. The river is very regular in
its supply of water, the Sierra Nevada being always
covered with swamp. A large extent of country is also
under cereals, which do not require any irrigation, the
winter being sufficiently moist to stimulate their
continual grovth. Ploughing is mostly done with
three and four-furrowed horse ploughs. Reaping is
done by the self-harvester, although the combined-
harvester is gradually gaining ground. I was told by
one farmer, who haJ one of the latter in use, that he
could tax his wheat at 2s. per acre.
After leaving the San Joaquin valley, one rises very
rapidly into the coast ranges, some 7,000 feet high into
volcanic country, when you descend and come into the
bed of (he Los Angelos River, and then into the San
Gabriel valley, where a plateau slopes gently from the
Sierra Nevada mountains, until finally'Los Angelos, the
capital of the country, is reached. The city, which
has a population of 30,000, is nicely laid out with
thousands of orange trees all over the place. I saw
some fine groves, the best being that belonging to Mr.
Wolfskill; he has 10,000 trees varying in age from
three years to fifteen. The treatment of the orange
here is very different to ours ; the tree is trimmed up


to five feet, in order to allow the horses and men room,
when ploughing, to reach the stem. During the sum-
mer months they are watered once a month ; when
the ground is sufficiently dry it is ploughed and
harrowed. It is, however, re-plougbed after every
watering. Manure is put on once in every three years
—stable manure being commonly used. The Austra-
lian bug I found on several trees, but the trees are
well attended to, and a solution applied every four
months, that being calculated to be sufficient to check
its progress. Large packing sheds are in the grove,
and a great saving of labour in the management of the
property is evident. The vines here are also prolific ;
Mr. Rose had 2,300 acres under vines and 500 acres
under orange trees. Fresh experiments are being
tried here in the way of irrigation ; the water on the
high lands not being plentiful, a system of piping had
been resorted to, the pipes being laid eighteen inches
under the ground. At intervals of fifteen to twenty
feet there is a hole with a tubular cap just above ground
to prevent any'earth from falling in the openings of the
pipes. A plug is taken out of the tubular cap and the
water is let out so as to percolate into the ground from
below. The invention is good, but the outlay will never
recoup the owner of the enterprise. Large quantities
of cereals are also grown here, the land being worth
only half of what similar lands would fetch in any of
the Australian Colonies. I observed their system of
raisin drying by artificial means, which is done by
placing several hollow wooden frames at an angle of
45°. A large oven is built underneath and the heat is
sent into the wooden casing, the grapes being on the
top ; this system, however, is not universally adopted,
as it is found that the flavour of the raisin gets lost by
artificial heat.


On my return from the south I next took a run over
to Beekely, in order to see the State University. It is
a magnificent pile of buildings with 250 acres of land,
well laid out and planted over with every variety of
forest and fruit trees, as well as the vine. Thirty pro-
fessors were engaged intheditferentclassesamongst2so
students, ladies being also admitted. Every branch of
science is carefully attended to, the professor of chemis-
try going even so far as to prepare, blend and fortify
wines. I had a two hours’ conversation with the pro-
fessor, putting him some side question and getting
evasive answers. This at last vanished on the principle
that as doctors differed men in our line might also
disagree. At all events, I got some valuable statistics
and information which were about all I required. I
found that Baron Von Babo’s system of fermentation
was not approved of here, as wines well made in their
first fermentation require no fining. They prefer the
open fermenting tub with a loose lid, and seven day’s
fermentation, moved twice a day. They also prefer
wine exposed when raking, casks to be cleaned with
soda in proportion : 1 lb. of soda to 20 of boiling water
I found also that wines of six months which had been
experimented on were clear and of good flavour. They
have not yet dropped on any preventative for the
phylloxera, although they have met with success in
grafting on to the wild vine. A kind of louse in the
cereals had, the season previous to the time of my
visit, made its appearance, and had been doing an
immense deal of mischief, its spread being rapid owing
to its being winged, thereby covering a piece of land,
in a short space of time. These men have their hands
very full, difficulties cropping up every day on account
of these pests ; scientific researches are the order of the
flay all over the country.


I returned in the evening, very much pleased with
my visit. I should now like to make one or two com-
parisons between San Francisco and the Australian
Colonies. The city of Frisco in the first place
cannot compare with Sydney or Melbourne, excepting
in the matter of hotel comfort. The city is a dusty
filthy place ; the streets are paved with small stones,
which is an ingenious manner of stimulating the
carriage-makers’ trade. Every street in Frisco has a
tram ; the main street —Market-street—having no less
than four lines. The streets are badly laid out and
the greater part of the city is built on reclaimed land.
The churches and public buildings are a disgrace to
the citizens, while the town-hall was half-finished, and
portions of it on the point of tumbling in. For all
that a lucrative business is done here on account of
the shipping facilities and the large capital in the
different banks and business houses. The markets,
however, are supplied with everything of the best.
Meat, fruit, and, in fact, all the necessaries of life are
cheap, whilst life in an hotel is from two to five dollars
a day. Cab travelling is expensive, but the trams
make up for this, their charge for three miles being
only five cents. I was very much disappointed in
their horses ; I have not seen half-a-dozen fair ones
of any breed. The average hack is the Cape horse
all over. I have seen, though, some fast trotters in
the Park. The cattle, mostly Ayrshire, are good,
whilst sheep can compare favourably with the Austra-
lian Colonies, the pure merino being the favourite
Dreed. Cross breeds have not come under my obser-
vation.
F


IN THE STATES.
SACRAMENTO.—DENVER:—LRRIGATION.—LAND COMPA-
NIES.—CHICAGO:—SLAUGHTERING HOUSES.—WATER
WORKS.—NEW YORK.—WASHINGTON:—COLOURED
CITIZENS.—WHITE HOUSE.—TOBACCO CULTIVATION.
—LIFE IN NEW YORK.
In the afternoon of the 3rd of April I left San Fran-
cisco in a ferry across the Bay and took the train at
Oaklands for Sacramento. At a place called Costa the
Sacramento River is crossed by a ferry which conveys
the whole train, lock, stock and barrel, the distance
being about two miles. We continned our journey up
the Sacramento Valley, which is a beautiful, rich plain
with well cultivated lands of cereals, vines and fruit
trees, and this scene is continued up to Sacramento,
situated on the banks of the river of the same name.
The buildings of a great portion of the city are mostly
of brick : the streets are broad, well-paved and bordered
by shady trees ; there are also numerous elegant
as well as private public buildings, the State Capitol
being most prominent. Churches, private and public
schools are amongst the first things which strike a
stranger. Sacramento can also boast of having a
great many. newspapers. The city is lit by gas, and
water is supplied by pumps. Hotels are large and
spacious and accommodation fairly good. A large
business is done in this bustling city.
Leaving Sacramento a gradual rise is made into
the Sierra Nevada Hills, where hundreds of miles have
to be covered in view of a continuous mountain range
bedecked with snow, until Denver is reached. Casually
a little cultivation may be observed, but very little
is done in this direction, owing to the mountains being


under snow nine months out of the twelve. The
cultivation of Salt Lake Valley and Utah Lake Valley
extends for about a hundred miles.
The soil in these valleys is very rich, cereals and
fruit being the principal products, the result of irri-
gation. At the time of my visit the farmers were
on the point of putting in their wheat, which, being
spring wheat, is fit for reaping in four months. The
three territories, Nevada, Utah and Colorado are noted
for their mineral wealth, some of the mines doing
well whilst others are total failures. From what I
have seen of these mines I am of opinion that the
indication I have seen in the Bokkeveld, Worcester
and Zwartberg ranges are very favourable to the
presence of minerals.
Both at Salt Lake and Denver I had a good look
at the irrigation works, those at Denver being/fhe
most extensive. The longest canal there is eighty-
three miles, and is taken from the River Platto, twenty
miles above the city; the flow of water is checked
by a strong weir, four feet high, and the bed of the
river is paved with boards which prevent the sluice
being washed into the canal. The canal only admits
a certain quantity of water, and when the river rises
the water goes over the weir. For the first mile the
water runs along a wooden trough forty feet broad,
the run of water being four feet and the rate four
miles per hour ; when the water reaches the earth
canal the width becomes sixty feet with seven feet
water running three miles' per hour, all the work
having been done by a company, which also keeps the
main canal in order, but all ditches running from the
main canal were constructed by the occupiers of the
land. The land belonged originally to the Railway
F 2


Company, but since the completion of the railway the
present Land Company have taken it over at 10s. per
acre, and have vastly improved its value through
irrigation, so that when I was there the same land was
selling from £lO to £2O per acre, the water rights
being disposed of when the land is bought, the annual
rent averaging about two dollars per acre. The quan-
tity of water allowed is about one cubic foot per
second. As the streams of water are rather weak, the
occupiers of two holdings generally club together and
take the water in turns. The supply of the company’s
water could at the time irrrigate something like
120,000 acres.
Denver and Salt Lake are both laid out in the same
sort of way, all the streets running at right angles ; the
public buildings are handsome and substantially-built,
and any amount of business is being done in both
places.
After two day’s stay at Denver I left for Chicago,
shaping my course through the territories of Kansas,
Nebraska, lowa and Illinois, through a little over
1,100 miles of slightly undulating country, black in
colour, owing to the quantity of vegetable matter,
and fairly cultivated. All this land formerly produced
a greater quantity of wheat, but other territories
have been opened up since, and everybody has gone
in for the production of the same article. All the
country, as far as my eye could reach, was one
extensive corn-field ; no wonder, therefore, that the
article was so cheap. Kansas and Nebraska have very
little wood and water, the latter being raised by wind
mills ; the stock I saw in all these states were in poor
condition and of inferior breed, in fact, the condition
of the stock was lower than any I had seen in any of


the Australian Colonies. I also saw more dead cattle
here in three hours than I had seen during my five
month’s travel in the colonies. On my way from
Denver I met several farmers having holdings in these
parts, and from what I could gather they were able to
grow corn at 25 cents per bushel, the average return
being forty bushels per acre. The corn is sometimes
sold in cob, 20 lbs. of cob being equal to £6 lbs. clean.
I was very much disappointed with the system of
farming in vogue in the States with regard to cereals ;
they do not think of manuring or changing their crops
to roots, in order to feed their stock, which, through
poverty, die by thousands annually. I met hundreds
of families going West, hunting for better lands than
those they had occupied, and it appeared to me like
South Australia in every respect. The great objection
to manuring land here, I found, was that the cost would
be too great and that it is too bitter for virgin soil. On
nearing Chicago one is struck with the destruction of
manure that is going on. All the sweepings and
manure of the city are done away with by setting
them on fire. When too large a quantity has accumu-
lated some combustible matter is put on the top and
the whole concern set into a blaze.
On my arrival in the city I put up at the Grand
Pacific —a first-class establishment and quite up to the
Palace at Frisco. During my first day I spent most
• of my time in the slaughtering house of Messrs.
Armour & Co., where I saw the wholesale butchering
of cattle, sheep and pigs, on which about 4,000 men
were engaged. The despatch and smartness with which
everything is carried out is enough to open the eyes
of the uninitiated; the quantity of stock slaughtered
is something enormous, being over 360,000 cattle,


45,000 sheep and one million pigs annually. The work
is done with such rapidity that the animal is skinned
and in the ice-room while there is still a kick visible
in the carcase. A bullock weighing over 1,600 lbs.
was done in minutes. The pig stickers do sixty
per minute, whilst the cleaning is done by machinery.
I next proceeded to inspect the water works from
which the whole city is supplied ; the water is brought
to the machinery by a tunnel from the lake, a distance
of three miles, and is forced into the main at the rate
of ninety millions gallons every twenty-four hours.
The machinery is the largest piece of mechanism I
have seen and is well worth a visit.
Taking Chicago as a whole, I must say that although
the streets and buildings are well built and laid out,
they are shamefully kept. I never saw a dirtier city.
Traffic is very large and one has to keep one’s eyes
open in crossing streets. A walk round the Michigan
Avenue gives the visitor a fine view of the lake, which
is very much discoloured by the drainage from the
city. The markets are well supplied with vegetables,
fruit and game from every part of the State. The
market is well worth a visit, but one is very roughly
handled by the class that frequents the place. After
three days stay in Chicago I had had quite enough of
it, and cleared out with an acquaintance for the
Niagara Falls'. Upon arriving we first had a stroll round
the Park about eighty-four acres in extent and
covered with trees, then crossed over to Goat Island,
where we drove about, and afterwards stepped over
and saw the Three Sisters, at the point where the river
divides, the width being, I should say, about lj miles.
The cataracts from this point were very grand, espe-
cially as at that time they were covered with floating


ice. We afterwards returned to the American side and
crossed the Suspension Bridge to see the falls from the
Canadian side. The sight was grand and one which I
can never forget. The descriptions that have been
given of these Falls are altogether meagre and
poor when compared with the reality; they must
be seen to be appreciated. The town of Niagara is
growing day by day, and has already a population of
6,000. The country between Chicago and the falls is
slightly undulating, but well wooded with oaks ; the
climate is cold, and there is very little stock to be seen,
those that are there being kept on hay, the grass making
a very poor food owing to the late winter.
After having spent a delightful day I left for
Rochester, where I met the train from Buffalo, from
where I proceeded to Albany, a large commercial city,
owing its importance chiefly to the fact of its
being situated on the Hudson, and to having railway
and canal communication with every part of the State.
The country round about here is also well wooded and
watered, with well cultivated lands here and there.
From Albany the railway runs all along the Hudson,
a magnificent river between 500 and 1,000 yards wide.
The islands in the river have numerous sheds on them,
which are utilised for storing ice when the river is
frozen over. The scenery between Albany and New
York is very picturesque.
On my arrival at the chief city of the State I put up
at sth Avenue Hotel, which is the hotel of the place
and consequently very expensive. After three days’
stay I cleared out for the South ; touching at Philadel-
phia, Baltimore and Washington. At the latter place
J stayed two days, which I enjoyed very much.
Washington is, no doubt, the cleanest city in the


States. During my stay I visited the Capitol where
both Houses of the Senate meet. The House of Repre-
sentatives is a very noisy body of legislators, so much
so that when a member speaks the reporters are obliged
to sit next to him ; the members collect in groups all
over the hall, and the gathering assumes more the
appearance of a Board of Trade than that of a legisla-
tive chamber. At the same time I must say that great
interest is shown in the debates ; this House was
crowded during the time I visited it. The wings of the
building, which is a grand structure, are of white
marble ; there are grounds all round, and these, toge-
ther with the immediate neighbourhood,are very nicely
kept, and reflect great credit on the authorities. The
monuments in the city were also well looked after. I
spent a good deal of my time in conversing with the
coloured citizens of the town, whom I met in small
groups. They appeared to be very much excited over
the news from the different States, and spoke very
openly, and seemed to be remarkably intelligent. With
reference to the futuie of the States, one citizen said,
“Well sir, the time has arrived when we coloured
citizens have to see to our future. Feeling is running
so high that we intend to organize ourselves into a
body, clear out to the South, to Mexico, if you like,
where there is plenty of room to go to, and form a
Republic. It is better to be in the South than be muddled
up in another civil war, which appeals to be near at
hand.” It seemed to me strange that every coloured
man I met was of the some opinion. I asked them
whether they were prepared to decamp, to organize
themselves and be independent. The answer was, “Yes,
we are armed to the teeth and we have good disci-
pline.” I thought to myself that the state of things


•was bad, the coloured population being all of the same
opinion, speaking very violently. I went to the Com-
missioner of Agriculture, who showed me every atten-
tion and had me conducted over the whole department,
where I obtained a fine collection of seeds. It was the
best collection of its kind I have ever seen. The depart-
ment collects all kinds of seed during their seasons,
and when the time arrives for sowing or planting,
everybody flocks there for some new variety which is
always to be had free of charge. Fifty females are
engaged in the making-up of bags and packages of seed,
so that everything is in shape when anybody calls.
The seeds selected are always of the best varieties. I
also found here some valuable catalogues and reports
on agriculture. During my visit to Washington a
reception came oif at the White House, at which I
was very anxious to have a look in, but having no
dress suit I was rather at a disadvantage. I thought,
however, that there was nothing like trying, so I went
to my room and touched myself up as well as could
be managed under the circumstances, trotted off to the
White House, and found to my surprise that I was the
biggest swell there, and the first man to be introduced
to the President, who appeared very nice. I cleared
out well pleased at having seen the chief citizen of
the United States.
I now had to make my way to the South, in order
to see some tobacco lands, and in this I met with
every success, falling in with men who were only too
glad to give me all the information in their power.
The lands can never be manured too much, both as
regards the beds and transplanting; when the beds
are ready for the seed some dry bush should be placed
in them and burnt, the ashes of which, when cold,


should be mixed and evenly spread with the seed,
and when the seed is sown some light sand should be
thinly covered over the beds. Then the beds must
be covered with bush in order to keep the sun off,
and when the seed begins to show the bush should
be removed. Should the plants show any sign of
weakness a solution of liquid manure should be
made and put on with a watering pan. When the
plant is about three inches high, or in its fourth leaf,
it is fit for transplanting, which must be done on land
well manured and ploughed before the winter, then
reploughed and the plants placed from three to four
feet apart, and kept free from weeds. They must be
earthed from the centre with a double-mould plough.
After the plants have started growing a careful watch
should be kept for caterpillars, for if a leaf is slightly
eaten by one of these insects, it tells on the flavour of
the leaf. No more than from seven to eleven leaves
should be allowed on a plant, and particular care should
be taken in removing the shoots and seeds. Some
men advised me not to cut before the autumn sets in.
The drying must not be done by a forcing process ;
straw or wooden sheds are found to answer best, and
the plants should be hung on sticks. When dry the
leaves must be removed, sorted and placed on planks
four feet thick ; heavily weighted boards should then
be placed on the top, and in two months the tobacco
will be ready for packing, and may be sent to the
manufacturer, who does the rest of the work for expor-
tation. Each manufacturer had his own system of
preparation, which means sorting over again for cut
tobacco, and the removal of the stalk ; the leaves are
then put into layers of four inches, every layer being
well sprinkled over with a solution of water, spirits


and sugar. The stalk of the leaf is used for an extract
of tobacco oil for sheep wash. If it can be possi-
bly avoided never plant tobacco on the same soil for
two successive years, the planting should be only
repeated every four years.
On my return to Washington I immediately left for
New York, putting up at my old place, and visited
several of the institutions ; I also made a trip on the
elevated railway, which took me right round the city
and gave me a view of every nook and corner. New
York is well laid out and nicely built, the streets wide
and clean Brooklyn bridge is to my mind the finest
piece of engineering work, and it took me over an
hour before I could get over the magnificence of this
structure. It is over 1 \ miles in length, 150 feet high
and 100 wide, and it carries a railway, a carriage road,
and a road for pedestrians. I took the car for the
Greenwood cemetery, which looks like a park, the
roads and side-walks, which employ over a hundred
men, are kept in splendid order ; the tombs are mostly
of blue and white marble, some costing over £40,000.
Before leaving New York, I made several trips
across and up the Hudson. Day and night the river
is quite alive with hundreds of steamboats of all
shapes and sues.
Just a passing word about our Yankee cousins.
They are, no doubt, an agreeable, enegetic and intelli-
gent race, but I cannot help saying that I was greatly
disappointed in some of their habits. Of course, there
are many great exceptions, but taken as a whole, they
are everything but becoming in their manners. The
hotels and public places where I met them, if left un-
tended for an hour or so, without bting swept and
sawdust applied, would not present a very respectable


appearance. The women seem to have no taste in
their dress. They have fair figures but not very fair
faces, and they are great rivals of their lords and
masters in adopting the nasal twang, and, to make
a dinner complete, the toothpick must be present.
After a week I had had quite enough of New York,
so engaged my passage in the S.S. Germanic.
Amongst the passengers I met some Spanish tobacco
merchants from Cuba, who had always been in the
trade and who corroborated what I had heard in
Virginia about obtaining seed. The passage was very
pleasant, the ocean being like a mill pond the whole
way, and the floating icebergs the most novel feature
to me. We went several degrees south to avoid them,
as in that season of the year they generally break up
and are carried north by the winds and currents.
IN ENGLAND AND RETURN HOME.
VISITS TO EXPERIMENTAL FARMS AND COLLEGES.—
CIRENCESTER AND DAWNTON.—CONTINENTAL TOUR.
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
I arrived in London on the evening of the 2nd
May, just in time to be present at the opening of
the Indian and Colonial Exhibition, and during the
whole of the proceedings I was fortunate enough to
get a good seat,which Sir Charles Mills was kind enough
to keep open. I have still the liveliest recollection
of the Exhibition of 1851, which was an Inter-
national one, and I can, therefore, draw comparisons.
Our colonists have every reason to be proud of
their Exhibition, as they have shown to the people


of England and the world that they are not a day
behind hand, whether in science, manufactures or pro-
ducts. A good deal of my time was taken up in the
Exhibition, where I always met with some colonial
men, from whom there was a chance of picking up
new ideas which might be beneficial to me. After
having seen a good deal of London, I visited the
Agricultural Colleges and the counties where the best
farming could be seen. In this I was very fortunate.
The first I saw was the estate of the Duke of Bedford
at Woburn ; this estate is more an experimental farm
than anything else, and is under the management of a
Professor of Agriculture. The experiments made
were in some cases quite a novelty to me, especially
in some of the chemical appliances and the feeding of
stock on different fodders, as well as the application of
different manures in order to find out their relative
values. Some of the experiments made, however, were
total failures. The following day, I paid Lord Vernon
a visit, having received an invitation from him to be
present at a Dairy Conference. I was very much
interested in the proceedings, as such a conference was
quite new to me ; I found that the tenantry and
farmers for miles round came up to participate in
it, and some capital addresses were delivered on Dairy
Farming and the remuneration it gave when proper
care and management were bestowed upon it. Lord
Vernon had made some great improvements during
the previous year by erecting the latest inventions in
mechanical appliances for extracting the cream from
the fresh milk. There is also a cheese manufactory
attached to the establishment. I spent a couple of
days with Lord Vernon, and I must say he deserves
great credit for his endeavours to stimulate English


agricultural industries, in order to enable them to
hold their own against the fierce competition of
foreigners.
Having heard a great deal of Cirencester College
in Gloucestershire, I persuaded two of my fellow-
colonists to accompany me thither. We left early
so as to make a long day of it, and passed through a
lovely bit of country, reaching the College about
midday—some three miles from the town. We met
with such a reception that I should advise my friends
not to go a yard out of their way to visit this place,
but as I had travelled 110 miles to see it, I was not
to be put off, and managed to get hold of a messenger
to show us what the establishment was like. We
found that the experimental lands extended for about
three acres, and were covered with cereals and roots.
Of course, I had to stand any amount of chaff from
my friends for having taken them over 220 miles of
country to obtain such results as regards scientific
farming. I must confess that this was the first place
in all my travels where I had met with such a cold
reception, and I was the more surprised as we called
at an anything but unearthly hour—half-past two.
My desire being to see everything, I did not stop,
but went the following week to visit Dawnton College
under the management of Professor Wrighton,
where I was compensated for the misfortune of the
previous week. I found the course of instruction, with
a few exceptions, excellent. Fifty-four students were
going through their course of study in scientific and
practical farming with great regularity, and they are
bound some day to turn out benefactors to their
country.
I also paid a flying visit to Harpenden, near St.


Albans, the seat of Sir John Lawes and under the
stewardship of Dr. Gibbert. Here scientific researches
are made very systematically, the analysing of soils,
manures, cereals and vegetable product being a special
feature.
During my stay in England my first object was to
hunt up the latest inventions in agricultural machinery
for saving manual labour, and so facilitate the deve-
lopment of a country. In this I was rather disap-
pointed ; the very plough and harrow I saw thirty-six
years ago were still in use. The reaping was of the
rudest description imaginable. The old sickle and bill-
hook being mostly resorted to. Indeed, some of the
farmers had a hearty laugh when I brought to their
notice that some of the colonies were half-a-century in
advance of them. Growing tired of London, I left for
the Continent with my old friend P. C. le Roux, the
ex-Wine Commissioner at the Indian and Colonial
Exhibition, who did good service to the Colony by his
endeavours to introduce our wines into the English
market. A few more such energetic men and the
English palate will soon take to our wines.
My trip to the Continent was more a pleasure trip
than anything else, but I nevertheless took advantage
of every opportunity to see, learn and digest. Starting
from London for Paris, I next proceeded to Worth,
Brussels, Rotterdam, The Hague, Amsterdam, up
the Rhine, and finally stopped for two days at
the experimental farm at Geissenheim, which I
found to be a grand and well-organised institution.
We were just in time to see them gathering the grapes
and preparing the wine. The good wines are made
by large companies, the inferior qualities being made
by farmers some distance from the companies’ stores.


Inferior wines are found all over the country and are
unfit to drink. Travelling south through Switzerland,
taking the borders of Italy, we proceeded to Valencia,
in order to see as much of vine cultivation as possible.
In France I saw the phylloxera doing its work of
destruction with marked effect, whilst in Germany it
had not at that time made its appearance, as the
Government was taking every precaution against its
introduction there. In all the country through which
I travelled on the Continent I found that as regards
agricultural labour-saving appliances, the farmers
had made no progress. They still use the old rude
plough the Colonists use, but it is drawn by a mule
or a cow. How these people manage to make a living
out of their labour I cannot tell.
I returned to London after having spent five weeks
on the Continent, packed up my traps and started for
home in the steamship Tarter , arriving at Cape Town
on the 9th December, 1886, after an absence of nearly
eighteen months, during which time I had covered
over 60,000 miles. I shall never forget the great kind-
ness I received from every public servant and colonist
abroad whom I happened to meet. The same may
be said of our Yankee cousins, and as for t English
people, I cannot repay them for the kindness and
hospitality I have always received at their hands.
I have now concluded a brief sketch of my tour
round the World. Were I a Dickens, a Thackeray or
a Mark Twain, I could dish up enough to fill volumes,
but that is not my object. I could lay before the
reader my experience when as a miner in disguise I
went into the bowels of the earth, and sat down with
my newly-made chums and how we had a three-gallon
u kick-off ” before breakfast. I could relate chapters


on the life of the lowest individual in Melbourne,
Sydney, Adelaide, San Francisco, Chicago, New York,
or London, whose dens I have visited in order to
satisfy my curiosity, and enquire into their mode of
living, but my object was to observe and to get infor-
mation regarding the pursuit dearest to me and dearest
to my country.
Since my return I have found that things have not
improved. There is, however, one consolation, and
that is, that trade is bad all over the world, so that we
can sympathize with each other. I would not care to
discuss English politics, but in my opinion, the course
of the stagnation of business in our colony is over-
production and free trade in England, who is taking
the bread from the mouths of her people and giving it
to foreign countries owing to her free trade policy.
We ought to try and revive our trade and regain our
lost laurels, if we ever had any. The fact that gold
is being discovered all over South Africa is bound
to bring on a change for the better. What is now
needed is a powerful Government, and good admi-
nistration and proper measures to stimulate trade
and to secure the confidence of our people in England.
What is required for the good of South Africa is
a gradual stamping-out of disease from our stock
by proper artificial appliances ; the introduction of
thoroughbred stock placed at convenient distances
all over the colony, for the progeny of which we have
a good market in India; irrigation works and the
husbanding of water; the cultivation of grasses and
roots where possible, in order to improve and keep
stock from disease and in better condition for the
market; camping-out of stock where vermin are not
troublesome, and not the over-stocking of sheep-
G


walks, and exhausting of arable lands, and paying of
fancy prices for farms. The farmers must be protected
and encouraged in their industry. Institutions should
be established on similar lines to those in our Sister
Colonies for the purpose of giving our young colonists,
who intend putting their hands to agriculture, a goo 1
and sound practical and scientific education, a want
long felt in this colony. Our farmers must be incul-
cated with new ideas, so that they may hold their own
against all imported pioduce ; farmers’ associations
must be started and conferences held to discuss
matters solely pertaining to the development of the
cplony. There is, however, one fact that should net
be lost sight of, and that is that farming in this colony
cannot be .carried on on the same footing as in the
Australian Colonies, because there they have a magnifi-
cent country and a great many advantages over us—
in fact, it is not the people that made Australia but
Australia the people. There is, of course, plenty of
room for improvement in this colony, which can only
be brought about by more united efforts on the part
of each colonist, and the rooting out of all bad national
feeling—a misfortune which has greatly retarded our
progress and materially affected our good name in
England and elsewhere.
‘ARGUS” PRINTING AND PUBLISHING COMPY. (LMTD.).


Books on Agriculture,
FAItM l N G, &e .
s. cl.
Clater’s Every Man bis own Cattle Doctor 21 u
Youatt & Bum's Complete Grazier and Farmers’
and Cattle Breeder’s Assistant 21 n
Yonatt’s Treatise on Sheep 7 6
Youatt’s Treatise on the Horse ... ... 7 6
Rarey on Horse Taming, &c ... ... 2 0
Armatages livery Man his own Cattle Doctor 21 0
Armatagd's Every F\n his own Horse Doctor ... 21 0
Mayhew's Illustrated Horse Doctor 7 0
Mayhew’s Illustrated Horse Management 7 0
Sidney’s Book of-ihe Horse, with full-page Coloured
Illustrations.; • 3d 0
■-V
Day’s Race Horse in Training, with Hints on
Training * ... .. ... ..10 0
Stephen's Book of the Farm, with 557 Engravings,
2 vols .. ... 50 0
Sheldon’s Dairy Farming : being the theory, practice
and method of Dairying ... ... ... ... 31 6
Steel’s Treatise on Diseases of the Ox 15 0
R. S. Burn's Systematic Small Farming ; or, Lessons
of my Farm ... 0 0
Johnston & Cameron’s IJlements of Agricultural
Chemistry .. ... .. ... ... .. 6 0
Heatley’s Sheep Farming ... ... 6 0
o
N.B.—A Complete Reference Catalogue to the
Best Works on Agriculture, Farming, Horses,
Cattle, Dogs, dc., dc, will be forwarded on
application, free of cost.
J. C. JUTA&COy.,
CAPE TOWN.
