

, ,-, h\ t
,»■ v
— ~~
BRITAIN AND AUSTRALIA.
CONTINUATION
THE CRISIS:
In a Series of Letters addressed to the Secretary of State for the Colonies .
POSTSCRIPT LETTERS.
PUBLISHED IN SIX PARTS.
PART Y.
THE ABORIGINES
ARISTIDES. *
N.B. —the proceeds op the sale of this pamphlet, ip any, after
DEFRAYING THE COST OP PUBLICATION, WILL BE EMPLOYED TO
AMELIORATE THE CONDITION OP THE ABORIGINAL INHABITANTS.
JrV- t


I
*
*


AN ADDRESS
TO
CORRESPONDENCE
WITH THE
LIEUT.-GOVERNOR & THE SECRETARY OF STATE
ACCOMPANIED BY
THE PEOPLE OP VICTORIA, ON THE SUBJECT OF
BRITAIN’S HONOR, OR LASTING INFAMY,
IN THE
SALVATION OR EXTERMINATION OF THE ABORIGINAL
INHABITANTS.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED AT THE MORNING HERALD OFFICE.


✓
—
N.B.—THE PROFITS OF THIS PUBLICATION, IF ANY, WILL EE DEVOTED TO
THE CAUSE IT PLEADS. THE PURCHASER MAY THUS BECOME, TO A
SMALL EXTENT, A SUBSCRIBER TO ONE OP THE GREATEST OP HEAVEN’S
CHARITIES.
■ ' 'C


CORRESPONDENCE.
Melbourne,
February 9th, 1853.
TO MAJOR NORMAN CAMPBELL, PRIVATE SECRETARY TO HIS
EXCELLENCY THE LIEUT.-GOVERNOR OF VICTORIA.
Sin,
The above communication, the result of the interview with which
the lieutenant-governor honored me on the 3rd, I deferred until the closing of
the session of the legislative council would give his Excellency leisure. I trust
he will now turn his attention to the subject, which is pressingly urgent, and
requires not a minute to determine. The united voice of Heaven, earth, and
eternal justice, declare in its favor, and leave no room for a moment’s hesita-
tion. So strongly did Sir George Gipps feel the importance of the aboriginal
question, that, when occupied with the affairs of four settlements—New South
Wales, Port Phillip, Moreton Bay, and New Zealand—and obliged to forbid
the entrance of any officer, even of the staff, civil or military —he gave
express directions for my admission, in order to confer with me on the mode
and the means of rescuing the original owners of the country from their im-
pending fate.
He now lies in the silent tomb; and his ashes admonish us to beware of
the sin and the danger of procrastination.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Yours respectfully,
ARISTIDES.
P. g. —The concurrence of this appeal to his Excellency on behalf of the
aboriginal inhabitants, and the announced discovery, while I was writing it,
of masses of gold of unparalleled magnitude at Balaarat, in a portion of thfe
territory of which they have been so wrongfully dispossessed—one weighing
nearly 140 pounds, for which £lO,OOO, has been refused, and two others
weighing together nearly 180 pounds, and consequently of still greater value—
form coincident testimony in favor of the prayer of my appeal, the most marked
and extraordinary. It is the voice of earth re-echoing the mandate of Heaven


to save from extermination the owners—a race of unknown and unnumbered
generations—that they may hear the gladdening sound of a Redeemer’s name.
These masses of gold proclaim the abundance of means to attain an object in
which angels will rejoice; and which, if neglected, will cover us in the eyes
of the universe, with shame and everlasting contempt.
ARISTIDES.
Melbourne,
February 4th, 1853.
TO MAJOR NORMAN CAMPBELL, PRIVATE SECRETARY TO HIS
EXCELLENCY THE LIEUT.-GOYERNOR OP VICTORIA.
Sir,
The following, written according to direction, will I trust, be concise
enough to meet His Excellency’s wishes.
1. It is a libel upon tbe Redeemer of men, who commanded the gospel
to be preached to all nations, to assert that there is any nation incapable of
receiving that gospel. Nay, more. To say that God did not make all men
of one blood, is to give the lie to the Creator of the universe: and if all men
be of one blood, the Australians have the same passions, the same hopes and
fears, the same forebodings of immortality, the same eternal spirits, and the
same capability of receiving the glad tidings of salvation, as the naked savages
that once roamed the forests of Britain and Scandinavia, and whose descen-
dants now claim the dominion of the globe.
2. But the savages of Australia differ in their manners, habits, and
circumstances from all other savages; and hence the failure of the few misera-
ble, ill devised attempts hitherto made to effect their conversion. Other bar-
barians have some vestiges of civilisation: these have none. They have neither
letters, nor science, nor domestic animals; nor do they till the ground. They
live entirely on the chase ; and are thus obliged everlastingly to roam. They
have had the misfortune, too, to come at once into contact, not with the Chris-
tianity, but with the crime and the convicts of Europe. The missionary is
therefore, to them, a walking lie; the book he unfolds, an enigma; and his
people, a swarm of unprincipled banditti, the invaders of their country, and
the plunderers of their patrimonial inheritance. Missions calculated to Chris-
tianise other nations, are, consequently, useless and impracticable among them.
8. The only plan that promises to be successful to the improvement of
their condition, is that of Inachus with the wandering savages of Greece.
They must be taught to cultivate the ground, and to look to their mother
earth for their living. Civilising instruction must go hand-in-hand with Chris-
tian instruction; just as the Redeemer himself opened the minds of congrega-
ting multitudes to a contemplation of their immortality and its affecting
consequences by first attending to their physical wants and their bodily ail-
ments. The Australians’ abandonment of their roaming habits, is indispensable
to any amelioration of their condition. Nothing can effect this but coloniza-
tion ; and nothing but colonization by themselves, isolating them from depraved
European society and the hopeless of their own race, can either evangelize or
save them from extermination.
4. Let no man tell me that this is impossible. I know them. I have
mingled with them in their own wild forests, at the risk of my life; their spears
have been aimed at me to slay me; I have terminated wars the most sanguinary


between them and the Europeans; and they have bathed my neck with tears
of gratitude.
5. There is nothing required to rescue them from destruction but money.
Sir George Gipps assured me of the support of her Majesty’s government to
the amount of £lOO,OOO, and more, if necessary, to carry into effect my plan
for their civilisation. Circumstances then prevented me; but the rush of im-
migration, giving an impetus to their destruction, roused me to spring into the
field again, in order to stay the work of murder; and I come, commissioned
from On High, to solicit help from her Majesty’s representative in the richest
of her Australian colonies. Victoria has plenty of money. She is gathering
gold in tons from the lands of the people whom, in conjunction with the other
colonies, she is exterminating. The Son of God died for them. Give me aid
to save them. I solicit it in the name of Him that bled on the cross, of Him
before whom assembled nations —all generations of men—will stand to receive
their eternal doom.
6. Give me £lO,OOO, from the land fund, not as a gift, but as a loan,
I will repay it out of my own resources; and will assign over to her Majesty
an estate of ample value as security for the fulfilment of the contract.
7. me, moreover, allowing time for payment, a few thousand acres
of land at the north w r est angle of the colony, on the banks of the Murray—
a few thousand acres of their own land—for the commencement of an aboriginal
settlement; and let this, with all its improvements, be also held as security.
8. This done, and carried into effect, I will not only repay the money —
I will disburden the colony of all the charges of the protectorate. The aborigines
shall be no more an expense to Victoria; nor, ultimately, to any of the colonies.
9. There is nothing in the affairs of Australia more important than the
aboriginal question; nothing that more affects the honor of the British name;
nothing that more deeply in terests the eye of Heaven; and nothing that calls
more imperatively for immediate action.
10. Their rescue from a fate at which humanity shudders, may now be
accomplished without one farthing of cost to the government or the public,
her Majesty, the ministry, the parliament, the nation will approve; and
no act of his Excellency’s administration will give him more satisfaction
beyond the grave, than that of having been instrumental to the salvation of
a deeply-wronged and interesting race. There is not a moment to lose, nor
a shadow of ground for hesitation.
11. Is America to set the example to Britain! Is republicanism to put
monarchy to the blush ! Is the world to point with scorn to our profession of
Christianity ! Is the historian to brand us as a nation of murderers?
12. Expense ! The expense of saving a people we are disinheriting
from massacre ! Can the most hardened in iniquity utter the word ?
13. Shall it be reported in Windsor Castle, shall it be re-echoed in the
skies, shall it be proclaimed in Heaven, that out of a revenue from which tens
of thousands have been granted to sweep the streets of Melbourne, one ten
thousand would not be lent to save from extermination a people, by the plunder
of whose lands Britain and her colonies are enriching themselves to the amount
of millions upon millions! Impossible. The announcement would shroud the
sun in darkness, and provoke the implacable indignation of Deity.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Yours respectfully,
ARISTIDES.


Colonial Secretary’s Office, Melbourne,
17th February, 1853.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 4th
instant, containing a statement of the means which you would propose for the
conversion and improvement of the aborigines; and in reply lam directed by
his Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor to inform you, that it is totally
out of his power to meet your wishes in this respect.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
W. LONSDALE.
Melbourne,
February 19th, 1853.
TO MAJOR NORMAN CAMPBELL, PRIVATE SECRETARY TO HIS
EXCELLENCY THE LIEUT.-GOVERNOR OF VICTORIA.
Sir,
His Excellency is respectfully requested to forward to the Right Honor-
able the Secretary of State for the Colonies, the accompanying letter imme-
diately, and also copies, herewith enclosed, of my correspondence with him
relative to the aborigines.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Yours respectfully,
ARISTIDES.
Melbourne,
February 19th, 1853.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE SECRETARY OP STATE
FOR THE COLONIES.
SIR,
The early attention of her Majesty’s ministers to the accompanying cor-
respondence with the Lieut.-Governor of Victoria, and also to my despatches
by the Great Britain i and the Sarah Sands, is of the utmost importance.
Her Majesty, I feel assured, will receive this communication with no less
astonishment than regret. Her people are acquiring an execrable fame in


Australia. They are gathering gold in tons; they are murdering its owners;
and they are refusing even to sell them a few thousand acres of the very
refuse of their own land.
Victoria, though not twenty years old, has a revenue of about three
millions per annum. The land fund, in spite of the clamor of cliques and
madmen, is still where it ought to be, at the disposal of the Crown, and
amounts annually to hundreds of thousands \ out of which tens of thousands
are given, as presents , to towns rivalling each other in riches and profusion.
Four hundred thousand pounds, in addition to previous donations, has just
been granted in one round sum to Melbourne alone, whose citizens are rolling
in affluence; while a mere loan, to prevent the extermination of the original
owners of the country, is refused.
Why, with such funds at command, and in the face of such muni-
ficent gifts for street sweeping and street washing, this should be “ totally out
of his Excellency’s power,” is, to me, incomprehensible. It is a mystery
which can be solved only in Downing-street, in Windsor Castle, or at the bar
of the Eternal, on the East Day, when gold, and glitter, and responsibility
will cease to be enviable.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Yours respectfully,
ARISTIDES.
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia,
March 3rd, 1853.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE SECRETARY OP STATE
FOR THE COLONIES.
Sir,
I am unexpectedly induced, by the rapid progress of horrible events
again, for an instant, to resume my pen.
For Australia, for Britain, for Heaven’s sake, procure me her Majesty’s
immediate permission to commence the colony of ALBERTONIA. J
I want, I repeat, no money for myself; and none for the important
undertaking. The moment I receive the sanction of the Crown, I shall be
able to place more than £IOO,OOO at her Majesty’s command for colonial
purposes, without any aid whatever from foreign resources.
There are thousands in Australia houseless and homeless, besides tens of
thousands pouring in from Europe, who will be delighted to hail her Majesty
not only as their sovereign, but as the lady of the manors of the south, by
taking land on the terms I propose; and for which there is beginning to be
a loud and universal cry.
My late journey of about a thousand miles, on the borders of the country
where I contemplate the formation of the new settlement, disclosed to me
scenes the most revolting, the _ existence of which would not be believed in
Britain. But, in addition to this, information has just been communicated to
me by gentlemen of unquestionable veracity, far exceeding -any thing I had


imagined possible, of the progress of lawlessness, vice, misery, demoralisation
and their consequences—disaffection to British rule.
The aborigines are obliged to prostitute their women for bread The
offspring is destroyed as soon as born. A loathesome disease is spreading
among them. They are shot, like wild beasts; they are hunted, torn to pieces
and given to the dogs. 1 ’
Nor is the state of things any better among the Europeans. Theft vio-
lence, assassination, and iniquities, once punished by fire from Heaven, are
committed with impunity.
short, prostitution, infanticide, robbery, and murder, are common for
hundreds of miles over districts bordering on and intended to form part of the
colony of Albertonia.
*d • • 80 ex^ cannot be lasting. Based on such a foundation, the
.oritish throne can be neither honorable nor secure.
Give me, I earnestly entreat in the name of the Most High, her Majesty’s
immediate permission to raise the British ensign in the basin of the Murray
wnere no European standard was ever seen, in order to stem the current
ot abominations which are rapidly spreading moral desolation over one of the
tamest portions of her dominions, and turning a natural paradise into a moral
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Yours respectfully,
ARISTIDES.


ADDRESS TO THE COLONY OE VICTORIA.
PREFATORY NOTE.
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor is, I am assured, a man of
Christian feeling. In refusing, therefore, to aid the cause of justice and
humanity, in a way that would cost neither the government nor the public
anything, there must be some difficulty, real or imaginary, some official formality,
some official scruple, which he cannot get over, unless supported by the voice
of the public.
There is no difficulty with the British Government. On the contrary,
her Majesty will rejoice at the manifestation of just and humane sentiments
by her Victorian subjects, and her ministers will give their cordial sanction to
any effort to save the aboriginal inhabitants from extermination, especially
when done without any charge to the treasury.
Nor can there be any real difficulty in the proposed mode of effecting the
object. The British government advance, by way of loan, millions, not only
to ameliorate public distress, but to improve landed estates. Nay, more.
They have advanced hundreds of thousands to the North American colonies,
for the construction of canals and railroads. Would they object to a loan of
£lO 000 to save from destruction the inhabitants of a continent that is now
enriching the British empire ? No. They would sooner sanction what ought
to be given for an object so transcendantly important £lOO,OOO.
That there are many in Victoria who have not bowed the knee to the
Baal of the age, whose golden influence is hardening the hearts and destroying
the morals of thousands in the colony, lam inclined to hope. If there be,
they will not be backward in giving what will cost them nothing, a decided
expression of their sentiments in favor of a measure which may yet save the
British name from indelible disgrace. ARISTIDES
Melbourne,
Friday, March 25th, 1853.
NOTA BENE.
The pious individuals who, some years ago, made some commendable and
hopeful exertions in the vicinity of Melbourne and Geelong, to civilize portions
of the aborigines, are excepted from the censures of the following address;
unless, corrupted by gold and evil communication, they now set themselves in
opposition to those who endeavor to effect what they failed to accomplish. If,


falling into the snare of the wicked one, they espouse the cause of the enemies
of righteousness, they will share their condemnation ; but, if they remain upon
the Lord’s side, they will, in the end, when the battle of life is fought, share
the joy and the reward of the righteous.
In worldly affairs, after many a failure, persevering attempts have been
crowned with success. If, then, in earthly concerns, we surmount accumu-
lated hindrances, why should we despair in the cause of Heaven ? It was
only after repeated attempts and the conquest of many difficulties, that Chris-
tianity found its way into the hearts of individuals and nations that now pro-
fess, and yet dishonor its hallowed name. Why, then, should* not another and
another effort be made by those who are willing, at their ow r n expense, and in
obedience to the commands of Revelation, to make known the Gospel to them
who, for ages upon ages, have been sitting in darkness and in the shadow of
death ?
The following address, though strongly worded, is dictated alike by zeal
for God and the most friendly feelings towards men, which, however, can be
manifested only by the candor of truth. The author, too, believes that, in the
various Christian congregations of the colony, are to be found many of the
excellent of the earth. The design of the address is, not to reproach them
wrongfully, but to set before the people of the province the relation in which
they stand, and the awful position which they have assumed, both pious and
profane, nationally , towards the aborigines; and to do this in language which
faithfulness to a mission from On High imperatively enjoins, in order to elicit
an expression of the sentiments of those who are friendly to the cause of Him
that bled upon the cross for the savage, as well as the civilised tribes of
Adam’s degraded offspring.
ARISTIDES.
Melbourne,
March 26th, 1853.
I have just discovered that some of the professors of religion in Mel-
bourne, profess to disbelieve in the possibility of either Christianising or
civilising the aboriginal inhabitants. Professors of religion ought to be the
last thus to insult the God they worship. Let those w T ho are really sceptical
on the subject, read the following extracts.
From the “ Adelaide Observer” of March 19, 1853.
THE NATIVE MISSION AT PORT LINCOLN.
We have been reqested to publish the following letter from the Lord Bishop of Adelaide to the
Secretary of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, on the Native Mission at Port Lincoln :
Port Lincoln, February 14, 1853.
My dear Hawkins—Having long been desirous of visiting the Native Mission at Poonendie, under
Archdeacon Hale, to ascertain its progress, and report to the Society upon the degree of success with
which his disinterested efforts have been blessed, I gladly availed myself of a favorable opportunity, and
embarking in a small coasting trader of fifty tons, the Bandicoot , which plies between Adelaide and this
place, reached the settlement on Thursday, February 3rd, having left home on the preceding Monday.
It is 190 miles by sea, west of Adelaide. Like every other district, it has been temporarily drained ofj
its male population by the Gold Diggings of Victoria; but since my last visit, in October, 1849, a few
cottages and the pretty church of white limestone have been erected, showing signs of progress even in
this thinly-peopled township. On the first occasion when I visited this place, in July, 1849, I gave
the particulars of a melancholy ride to the scene of destruction, where five natives had fallen victims
to flour mixed with arsenic, which they had stolen from a shepherd’s hut. On my second visit I had
the satisfaction of joining in marriage a native couple, Nytolni and Kilputko, in the presence of the


Governor, Lady Young, Mr. Hoorhouse, the Protector of Natives, and many others, inl the* Court House.
Tt is with gladness of heart that I now am able to report finding this same couple living happily together
at thT-Archdeacon’s eye; the husband shepherding 1,800 sheep, and his wife hut-
tUinTfThinrat mk wages with rations. This omen of success is happily corroborated and fol-
lowed Sp by other instances of solid progress in industrial habits, civilised life, and
After officiating together with the Archdeacon m the church (St. 1 homas s) on I ebruaiy 6th, when
I confirmed fi voun^^vomenTresidents of the place, we left for Poonendie early on Tuesday morning.
The road winds along g the picturesque shores of Boston Bay, and after crossing the pretty little val y
of the River Tod, brought ns to cottages and huts which form the mission settlement of Toonend .
BosidL the clan-boarded cottage in which the Archdeacon lives, three others accommodate the school-
master the overseer and the working foreman. Fourteen smaller huts contain eleven married native
rormles and the other children of both sexes. A kitchen and offices, washing-shed, &c., complete the
mesont, s hamlet of Poonendie, at some distance above and below which, on the river three other stone
detached outagesaßo* belong to the mission. The Native Reserve, set apart by the Local Government
fnr the use of the institution comprise* a fine grassy park-like plain at the base of a range of hills of
mnderate height which afford pasture for between 3,000 and 4,000 sheep. This Native Reserve is so
humanity. f portions of the Malay race, which appears more or less to have peopled the various
crouns of the Pacific Polynesia, the Australian possesses not the slightest implements or arts of civili-
sation The inhabitant of the South Seas cultivates his provision ground, owns property, builds house ,
mnoes makes cloth or matting, fish-hooks, stone adzes, builds temples, worships idols, acknowledges
no kind of feudal chieftainship. The Australian, on the other hand, makes nothing but a spear oi
cloak of skins* a small net or mat of grass to hold the roots he digs up, or the opossum skms which he
nreserves A few branches torn from the trees form his shelter. He owns no superior m his tribe holds
all property in common, is but a wandering hunter within the limits of a certain territory, engaged i ,
frequent feuds with neighboring tribes, treating the wives as slaves; and, by a tyrannical P^ a >’
to the old men of the tribe, or from time to time relaxing this custom into pro-
miscuous intercourse, occasionally driven by starvation to practise.infnnticrde and
Snph is the degraded state of the native Australian, and such the difficulties ol tamm 0 , educating, ai a
bond-slaves of Satan. In the conversion of the
bnw much native agency was employed, and how the conversion of some chiefs facilitated the overtmw
of islands. Vhe missionary in Australia is deprived of all such instrumentality
He has no mind sufficiently developed on which to work; and there is no native authnity whic ,
Table to teach and influence others. The intellect of the wild Australian adult appears
incapable’ almost, of being reasoned with. The next step was obviously to bring the young under
education This accordingly was successfully attempted, and the young Australian was fmmd as cp -
hie ofTng taught This white brother. Nevertheless, here also many drawbacks and difficulties were
to be enTnnS. If the schools were established in the “hush,” then there was the counter-
acting influence of the elder natives, the filth of the “worley,” the contamination of
a r f tes the seductions of the immemorial corrobory. No sooner was the grown-up &nl o y
in some treasure tamed, instructed, and impressed with the truths of religion, than the former was
claimed as the affianced wife of some elder kinsman; and the latter was summoned to go through the
rites, he was admitted to the rank of ‘‘young man,” and permitted to have a wife, it
he could get one, as the number of men appears to be considerablym excess. (
The Archdeacon devoted himself to the holy object of converting, if possible, the remnant that was
left and faving them from the ravages of disease and infamy. The principles on which he proposed to
proceed, wSe ViinSd o,” by past experience and former failure. They were, isolaUon, mdustaal
education, as well as the usual schooling, marriage, separate dwellings, hiring, and iemce
ssS.“Sf3SSKr
IRS
various occupations of an Australian farm and sheep station. For this purpose, Boston
closes Boston Bay, Port Licnoln, to seaward, containing about four square miles, was pitched uponloi
the mission It affords pasturage for 1,200 sheep, as well as land fit for agriculture and garden ground,
tne misbio . „, P ond ia noar enouHi to the settlement to procure medical aid and supply
the opportunity of fehmg and is ne " «“ I di , the Archdeacon landed, September 9th, 1850,
with fiv’e rin“ atS, bes°ides a schoolmaster and carpenter. A tent was pitted
for the Wes, and a hut constructed for the Archdeacon and his companions. There evenmg
nraver was held bv the little band of Christians and catechumens, the commencement of that system
prevailing custom among the native tribes, was thought a sufficient restraint upon the Adelaide schoo
Children to prevent them from leaving the station, while the various duties of farming, sheep and cattle
henling “the best means of training these young people to the habits and


duties of civilised life. The Archdeacon had first to gain their affection. Hist simple, kind, firm,
Christian earnestness, teaching, controlling, reproving, governing, in short, with enlightened charity,
these children of the bush, has at length been blessed with a considerable degree of success. Many
Younsr adult natives, who would have belonged to the most degraded portion of the human family, are
now clothed, and in their right minds, sitting at the feet of Jesus, and intelligently worshipping through
Him their Heavenly Father. . • . , , . . • , ...
Let us look at the present results, under the heads of civilisation, moral training, and Christian
attainments. Firstly : We find eleven married couples decently clothed, clean in their persons, keeping
their own huts and clothes in order, and much attached to each other, in place of the promiscuous un-
chastity and the brutal degradation of the native women in their wild state. A farm ot 20 acres has
been fenced, ploughed, reaped, and stacked by these children of the soil. Two flocks are wholly under
their charge.' These they have shorn,besides two other flocks belonging to settlers; and five are just
about to shear the lambs of Mr, Peter at 18s. per hundred. I saw an excellent kiln of bricks, which,
under the direction of a brickmaker from Adelaide, they had helped to make, mould, and burn. In
fact while the other settlers at Port Lincoln were much hampered by the migration ol their
and*shepherds to the Victoria diggings, the Archdeacon was able to carry on the improvements oi the
mission premises, the labors of the farm, as well as assist his neighbors, with native shearers who shear
remarkably well. Secondly : In regard to moral training, the wild native knows little or nothing ot .he
value of money or property ; but at Poonendie the mission hands earn weekly wages, and, what is
more, “shop” for themselves at the store in Port Lincoln, or even send up orders to Adelaide tor goods.
This indicates a real mental and moral development. The following purchases were made by one ot'
tbe mission natives, Kewue, for himself and friends, while I was present—a pair of shoes, two pairs ot
trousers, a blue woollen shirt, a packet of currants and raisins for puddings, a flask oi salad oil tor the
hair • a bonnet was looked out for his wife, but left for her determination, and a shawl for me throat
reiected as being too dear. The same youth, had he been left to native influence after leaving school,
would probably have become after a short time a dirty, ragged, diseased, lazy sheep stealer, or an
occasional hewer of wood and drawer of water for some of the inhabitants of Adelaide or settlers in the
bush. He is now a nice looking, decent, intelligent, well conducted young man. Thirdly : With res-
pect to conversion, when the Archdeacon came in from Poonendie to meet me, he was followed by ten
of the elder boys and young men, who asked leave to go to meet the Bishop. Some I had known in the
Sunday-school at Adelaide. I was agreeably surprised to see them nicely dressed in the usual clothing
worn by settlers, check shirts, light summer coats, plaid trousers, with shoes, and felt hats, articles
mostly purchased with their own earnings. They were better dressed than the laboring class in general
at home. They had brought their blankets, blacking, brushes, &c., making the broad verandah ot a
wool-shed their sleeping place, and cooking their meals at a fire in the yard. Hot far off, was a small
native camp, and the contrast between these two groups would have convinced any candid, observer
of the truth for which the Archdeacon has always and steadily contended, viz., that the aborigines are
not only entitled to our Christian regard, hut are capable, under God’s blessing, of being brought out
of darkness into light, and from the power of Satan unto God. ,
It was very pleasing to see these young men on Sunday morning before church sitting togemer
reading the New Testament or hymn books which they had brought with them, and afterwards filling
at both services, two benches in the pretty little church. Most of them were catechumens, whom the
Archdeacon thought he could recommend as fit to be baptized. Accordingly, on Ihursday, the 10th, at
Poonendie, I conversed severally with ten men and Tanda, the wife of Conwillan, in the presence of the
Archdeacon. The native manner is naturally shy, reserved, and incommunicative, but gentle and unim-
After hearing them and asking them questions, X agreed with the Archdeacon that there was good
ground for admitting them by baptism into the ark of Christ’s Church, believing them to be the sub-
jects of God’s grace and favor. We held regular evening service at sundown; and after the second
lesson I baptized Thomas Nytchie, James Naroring, Samuel Conwillan, Joseph Mudlong, David lol-
bonko, John Wangaru, Daniel Toodko, Matthew Kowrie, Timothy Tartan, Izaac Petpowie,
Tanda, wife of Conwillan. The other women and girls were not yet so advanced as Martha and Annette,
a little Swan Eiver native, who has long formed part of the Archdeacon’s family. Each native
answered for himself, distinctly, according to the service for adult baptism; and from their devotional
manner and previous answers I have reason to believe that they understood and_ intended to keep me
vow which they then voluntarily made. On the following moping I consecrated the cemetery > where
the remains of those who have died repose. Of these—eight in number— three, in addition to lanka-
nano (of whose last illness and happy death I sent you a printed account), gave strong evidence of tfieir
dying in faith and assured hope. , . , _ ~
1 must here observe, with respect to this mortality, that, compared with Europeans, the ordinary
native is slight in frame and feeble in constitution, easily brought low by sickness, and pining away
often from unaccountable causes, principally pulmonary complaints, aggravated through their own
thoughtlessness and roving mode of life. The seeds of disease have also been widely spread through
the native tribes since their contact with Europeans; and hence dwindling away of the race from pre-
mature death and fmitless marriages, . . ~, ,
One more incident I may mention in proof of their progress in civilisation—a cricket match played
by the Poonendie lads and young men on a holiday given on the occasion of my visit. The author ot
the “Diary of an Invalid,” if I remember rightly, mentions peeling in his travels with an Eton eleven
playing the world. I was not less pleased at watching with the Archdeacon two Australian native
elevens thus enjoying themselves; and remarked not only their neatness in fielding and batting, but
what was far more worthy of note, the perfect good humor which prevailed throughout the game—no
ill-temper shewn or angry appeals to the umpire, as is generally the case m a match ot W rates.
I have little more to add than that the mission is again strengthened by the accession of Mr. George
Wollaston, son of Archdeacon W ollaston, who will act as overseer of the sheep and farm labors. A good
schoolmistress is shortly expected from England, and thus the education of the younger hoys and girls
will be well carried on. A new school-room is projected, and subscriptions are collecting for the purpose.
It appears to me that the mission is so consolidated as to admit of gradual enlargement. There is now


a small body of trained Christtonatives, fixe nucleus c f u^%?bl^kg^^veStoTttend
- that is in Mr. Hale by Christian love and firmness of pur-
POM i sail in a few days for Adelaide, when the wind serves. Meanwhile I remain,
Tours truly, AUGUSTUg ADELAIDE.
I, s._ We set sail on Saturday, the 19th, and reached Adelaide on Monday morning, after a quick
passage.
From the “Adelaide Observer” oe April 1853.
THE ABORIGINES.
L AST week's contains of thqp^ector^th^aboriginesfOT^he^uarter
the
Adelaide by appointment
ninety acres of crop for Mr. Frew of Fulhirton and obliged to return Rome.
European labor, they have been very serv instances Rave come under my notice of
2SSS tLir services, with rations during the time
the whole of them or Lower Murray;
S to *“ food fOT the sick
and reports “ the con '
Mr.
“ With the exception of the murder of W SrF™. tW district the sheepfarmers and other settlers
peaceable. From the scarcity of that no instance has
“ haw Mtives for
Bhepl extract from Archdeacon Hale’s report of the 31st of December,
will Re read with interest natives e-enerally, it gives me pleasure to speak of it in the
“ Witß respect to tRe conduct of theof the readiness with wRicR they are brought
same favorable terms as upon forme Our grain crop, grown entirely by them, has-been,
to the performance of all kinds pf^najy I6l Srkably early, it has been already
lam thankful to say, an a^^? an t ’ to shearing of sheep (an operation still more difficult than
gathered in and stacked. With respect t shorn by the natives, but I was
those of either ploughing or reaping), n J the district. Our shearers went from home to
£, SS trSSjSA”- —pi»« d •»* «* “ • “f- 1
especially noticed. The respect which t - , , gt A interring them in a most careful
unfortunate individuals who ha “ een wimns%Ln furnishing an account of the circumstances
manner, has already been adve Moorundee ? writes, under date 30th November, that
at the time. Mr. Scott, sub-protector at Mooru de , ® s onducted themselves with great credit and
“The aborigines of this portion of the P , on t he Murray have been unavoidably obliged to
forbearance, considering that ded banner inconsequence of the unprecedented floods. It is
leave property exposed in a m S that the natives have not taken advantage of the
“SSSSS&S& u—* ** -w* -»• *- - »•r»
great extent, and without fear of detection. . , . ... .
*‘SsrWTIbSSfS SS' AZSZ f L» “E
of his heart, and hi. Datura enmity W thee.™, of H^vea.
South Australia, though less favored in money and means is setting a
noble example to the other colonies. Will Victoria, rolling in wealth and laden
with gdd“follow the example of her sister in this angelic work; or blush with
guilt'mid shame when standing by her side at the bar of the Eternal on the
Last Day. ARISTIDES.
March' 27th, 1853.


TO THE PEOPLE OF VICTORIA.
Ye have taken possession of a country that is not yours. Ye have disin-
herited and slain its owners—men of the same primeval parentage, made in
the image of the same Creator, heirs of the same immortality, and objects of
the same Divine compassion which induced the celestial Redeemer to lay down
ms hie for you, for them, and for the rest of a guilty w r orld. Ye continue the
work ot extermination, while dividing their gold among you by tons.
11 -cm ses f* on . y° ur legislature—the second since the discovery of the
gold fields has just closed, after appropriating a year’s revenue, amounting to
nearly three millions, for your benefit and their own, without granting a single
farthing to rescue the aboriginal inhabitants from destruction. Provision the
most ample has been made for the supply of every conceivable want, and the
aggrandizement of every class, except that to whose country ye are indebted
for your enormously-increasing wealth. Ye have just granted £400,000, in
one round sum, to the city of Melbourne, without bestowing a thought on its
original owners, who are perishing by murder, poison, powder and ball.
1 ell me not that the greater part of you are innocent, merely because ye
have not done the act with your own hands. Accessories, by social connexion
and participation of the spoil, are, in the eye of the law, and most assuredly
in the eye of Heaven, murderers, as well as the actual perpetrators of the
eed. Nations are composed of individuals; and the acts of nations are the
acts of individuals in their national capacity. Individuals are, therefore,
answerable for national sins, as well as their owm, unless they strenuously
oppose their commission. The thousands wdiom the martyr Stephen charged
With being “ the betrayers and murderers” of the Lord of life and glory, did
not do the deed with their own hands. That was the act, not of the Jews,
but the Romans, who even tried to save him. The guilt of Stephen’s audience
lay, not in doing the deed themselves, but in their silence, consent, and national
connexion with those who clamored for his death.
Deceive not yourselves by a lying subterfuge. No nation, no man, can
mock the Most High, escape the consequences. National, as w T ell as
individual sins, will be punished, and punished more severely, because more
aggravated. Why did the Creator, in his wisdom, sanction appropriations of
industry, enterprise, and abodes to individuals, families, and nations, setting
limits to gardens, vineyards, domains, and kingdoms, without any reference to
the strength or weakness of the owners ?—For the purposes of equity, virtue
and human happiness. The lines of demarcation are as distinctly traced
between the rights of nations as between the rights of individuals. Those
that sever Britain and Australia, are wide as the Atlantic and Indian Oceans,
lo purchase land or sovereignty for a suitable consideration, is lawful: to
seize by force, is to defy the Ruler of the Universe. To refuse compensa-


tlon, is adding cruelty to wrong; and to kill, is diabolical. Thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyself, is the mandate of Heaven. That might constitutes
right, is the maxim of hell, and would not, for an instant, be tolerated among
yourselves. It is the parent of anarchy and blood.
Ye may lull your consciences into a deadly slumber, but your deeds will
not escape the penetrating, all-seeing, and observant eyes of the Divinity. Ye
cannot trifle with the Eternal—ye cannot trespass the boundaries set by Him
who “ divided to the nations their inheritance”—ye cannot thus set the Deity
at defiance, and trample on the laws of Heaven with impunity. If Divine
Providence never allows the perpetrator of an individual murder to go un-
punished, even in this world, flatter not yourselves with the delusion that the
murderers of a nation will escape. The ghosts of the slain, and the very
riches of which ye have spoiled them, will witness against you on the day of
retribution. Nothing can conceal, nothing can palliate the iniquity of your
doings. The accumulations of your wealth—your houses, your lands, your
flocks, your herds, your ships—all ye possess, are the fruits of crime—crime
unrepented, unatoned—and nothing can clear you from unparalleled guilt, but
individual efforts, and a united appeal to your colonial rulers, to aid those who
are ready to devote their services and their means to avert your doom, by
saving the aboriginal inhabitants from a fate which will bring upon you
and your children that vengeance which never fails to overtake the shedders of
blood and the plunderers of the inheritance of others.
Will ye reckon me your enemy because I tell you the truth ?He is
your enemy that suppresses the truth, and deceives you to your moral and
eternal ruin—a ruin involving your offspring in all its consequences, and which
your very gold will hasten and aggravate, unless ye arise and free yourselves
from the guilt of this great, this national crime.
Will any of you presume to plead the want of thought and reflection ?
These are only aggravations of your complicity.
There is no w r ant of means either in land or in money. Your treasury is more
than full; and her Majesty’s ministers, with a forethought that does them
honor, have ordered a reserve, even in the leases of any lands to be let,
under the orders in council of March 9th, 1847, that may be required “ for
the benefit of the aboriginal inhabitants.”
I do not apply to the poorest, but to the richest of the Australian colonies.
I do not appeal to you, w r hen struggling with difficulties incident to the com-
mencement of settling, but when roiling in affluence. Ido not ask you for
your OWII money; I merely request a small portion of that which really belongs
to those whose cause I plead, and which is lying idle in an overflowing treasury:
nor do I ask even this as a gift to the aborigines. I solicit it merely as a
loan, to be expended among yourselves in the noblest of causes, and then
repaid to the treasury out of my resources.
What will her Majesty, what will the ministry, what will the British
people, what will the nations, what will the inhabitants of the invisible
world say, when the Recording Angel of Time’s events shall announce that
the people of Victoria, abounding in wealth and teeming resources, refused,
out of a treasury of unemployed millions, the loan of a few thousand
pounds, and the sale of a few thousand acres of the worst of their own land,
to rescue from extermination a people whom they have dispossessed of one of
the finest and richest countries under the sun ? The announcement will fill
hell with astonishment.
But ye are religious murderers. Ye have just granted £30,000 per annum,


out of the annual spoils of the massacred victims, to build churches, and
stipend ministers for yourselves. Yet even when making this solemn offering
to Heaven, not one farthing was granted to stay the work of murder.
Have ye forgotten, or did ye never read, the following passage in an old
book from the archives of antiquity—a book, the unfolding of which, though
now neglected and despised, will one day electrify with joy, or strike with
terror, every son of Adam :
“ To what purpose is the multitude of sacrifices unto me ? saith the
Lord. When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your
hand, to tread my courts ? Bring no more vain oblations: the calling of
assemblies I cannot bear; it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting. Your
appointed feasts my soul hateth. When ye spread forth your hands, I will
hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear :
your hands are full of UoodP
Thrown among you by occurrences over which I had no control, and for
purposes which Heaven had in view, unknown to me at the time, I watched
the proceedings of your legislative council. I did not think it possible that
they could terminate the session, without any mention of this, to a people
endowed with any moral feeling, the most important of all considerations: yet,
to my great surprise, I could neither see nor hear any thing but that earnest-
ness of discussion which is common in the conclaves of banditti when dividing
the spoil; and who seem to have neither time nor inclination to bestow even
a passing thought on the victims whom they left wounded and bleeding where
they plundered them. The governments of the other colonies have hitherto
pursued the same iniquitous course ; but the guilt of yours is aggravated by
the superabundant means of reparation and restitution which have fallen into
their hands.
Amazed at their silence on a subject interesting to Britans and to angels,
I appealed to the representative of the sovereign; and this produced the pre-
ceding correspondence ; which I now submit to you, in order to see if ye will
arise and wipe away the disgrace, which your indifference to the fate of the
people whom ye have dispossessed of their patrimonial inheritance, has brought
upon you, before it be exposed to her Majesty, to the empire, and to the
w T orld.
To turn a deaf ear to such an appeal, would prove you fiends, and not
men. To bow your knees afterwards in your Christian temples, your pockets
full of gold, and your hands reeking with the blood of your victims, would be
the greatest insult ever offered to Heaven since the world began.
But I expect better things of you. I indulge a hope that ye will prove
yourselves still possessed of a sense of that honor, justice, and humanity,
which have become distinguishing characteristics of the British name, in spite
of the deadening influence on the better feelings which is induced by the
employment of scrambling for gold—gold that will be hereafter scattered to
the winds by yourselves or your posterity.
Do I indulge a vain hope ?
The result will soon be known to Britain, to Europe, and to the world;
and its consequences will be felt on the day when the Lord Jesus, accompanied
by myriads of angels, shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, to take
vengeance on them that will neither obey the gospel, nor let it be preached to
others.
ARISTIDES;
Melbourne, March 4th, 1853.


B
w
■
i


I
* I
\
'
M
■ • 9
A
