









A
TREATISE
ON THE ART OF
PRESERVING OBJECTS
OF
Natural History,
INTENDED TOR THE USE OF
SPORTSMEN, TRAVELLERS,
AND OTHERS.






No. 1. Manner of laking off the Skin.
See P. 7.
No.2. Method of Planing the Wires.
P. 26.


A
CONCISE AND EASY METHOD
OF
PRESERVING OBJECTS
OF
Natural History,
INTENDED FOR THE USE OF
SPORTSMEN, TRAVELLERS,
isjavy, l’
to enable Them to .prepare'and preserve such
©tmous any Bare Articles,
They may wish to transmit in safety to any part of the World.
By WILLIAM BULLOCK,
Fellow of the Linnean Society of London ; of the Wernerian Society
of Edinburgh; Honorary Member of the Dublin Society ; ami
Proprietor of the London Museum of Natural History, at the
EGYPTIAN HALL, PICCADILLY.
SECOND EDITION.
Bontion:
PRINTED FOR THE PROPRIETOR;
AND MAY BE HAD OF THE OV JT-ERS, AND AT THE
LONDON MUSEUM, PICCADILLY.
1818.


M. Brown, Printer, 86, St. Martin’s Lane.


ADDRESS.
THE frequent inquiries made by sportsmen, gen-
tlemen of the Army and Navy, and persons going
abroad, for instruction as to the mode of preparing
Objects of Natural History, so as to enable them
to send home such curious or interesting articles they
may occasionally procure, with as little trouble as
possible, has given rise to the publication of the fol-
lowing Treatise; in which the Author has endea-
voured, in as few words as possible, devoid of every
technical expression, to convey the requisite informa-
tion to those who are supposed to be previously un-
informed on the subject. The instructions will, it is
hoped, be easily understood; they are short and sim-
ple ; but they are the result of long practice and ex-
perience, and have not a little contributed to the
means by which the London Museum has been accu-
mulated, and obtained its present decided superiority
over that of any individual, or probably, in the or-
nithological department, over any national collection


that exists. Many of the specimens it contains have
been prepared upwards of forty years (among these
are the invaluable collections made by Sir Joseph
Banks, in his Voyage of Discovery ivith Captain
Coolc), which retain all the beauty and freshness of
life. By observing the following instructions, with
a little practice, gentlemen will be enabled to give to
their servants, or the natives of the country they visit,
such directions as may be the means of procuring
many new and valuable subjects of zoology ; and thus
of adding to our stock of knowledge in the- produc-
tions of nature, and of contributing materially to one
o) the greatest sources of rational amusement, in the.
examination of the wonderful works of the Creator.
EGYPTIAN HALL, PICCADILLY.
20th September, 1817.


CONTENTS.
Method of removing the Skins of Birds, &c .page 5
Mr. Salt: —Plan he used in bringing home Birds from Aby-
sinia 9
Sea Fowl require particular attention in removing the Fat.. ib.
Quadrupeds and Lizards :—The same Observations apply as
in Birds 10
Fish : —Method of preserving 11
Mr. Weir, of Edinburgh, his Method 12
Mr. Stuchbury (the late) his Method 15
Serpents : —Method of preserving. 16
Mr. Burchall: —His Method ib.
Insects :■ —Method of preserving 17
Articles, what wanted 18
Butterflies and Moths :—How to be preserved 19
Shells —How to be best preserved 21
Marine Productions : —How best procured. 22
Echini, Sea Eggs 23
Star Fish ib.
Crabbs and Lobsters ib.
Corals ib.
Sea Fans :—How to be treated. 24
Sea Weed, ditto . ib.
Plants and Seeds : —How to transmit supply by sea ib.
Sir Joseph Banks, the Method he recommends 25
Directions for setting up recently killed Birds in their na-
tural Position 26
Glass Eyes 28
Recipe for the Preserving Powder used at the Museum. ... 29
The Preservative Soap used at the Museum, Paris ib.
Museum :—Either the Preservative Powder or Soap may be
procured at the Museum >3O




A TREATISE
ON THE
ART OF PRESERVING OBJECTS
OF
Natural History,
mtKod of toMng off the Skins of Birds, Sft.
AS a great portion of the beauty of preserved ani*
mals depends on keeping the skin and plumage
smooth and clean, it is therefore requisite, in the
taking off the skins of birds, that care should be
taken to prevent their being soiled by blood or fat,
as in delicately coloured subjects it is not possible
wholly to remove it ; but it is best done as soon as
convenient with a sponge just moistened with warm
water, and the sooner the animal is prepared after
dis cold the better. If the plumage of the bird be
white, as m many of the sea fowls, it must be laid
on its back upon a clean cloth, the mouth opened
and cleaned with a little tow or linen from all saliva
B


or other matter that might soil the plumage when
the skin is turned over the head ; the mouth should
then be filled with tow, and a little wound round
the beak to prevent the escape of any moisture;
the feathers of the breast must then be separated to
the right and left, when a broad space running
along the whole length of the breast will be disco-
vered ; enter the skin with a sharp pointed knife at
the point of the breast bone, and pass it dow n the
whole length of the bone in such a manner as not
to cut the flesh or open the inner skin which covers
the entrails ; by pulling the skin gently up it will
be found to separate easily from the flesh, so
as to permit the fingers of the operator, or a
small blunt instrument, to pass as far as the back
on each side. The thighs should now be pressed
inward, as in the common mode of skinning a rab-
bit, and the skin turned over it so as to enable you
to cut through the bone with a pair of pincers or
wire cutters a little above the knee joint; then if
the animal be large, take a piece of cord about a
yard long, one end of which make fast to a conve-
nient place for suspending the bird, then with a
running noose fastened round one of the thighs,
the bird or quadruped is hung in such a manner as
enables it to be turned in any direction without in-
jury; (See Frontispiece) then proceed to separate


file rump (which must afterwards have as much as
possible of flesh taken from it) from the body.
Commence now by the tail to turn the skin inside
out, by drawing it over the back till you come to
the wings, which must be treated in the same man-
ner as the thighs, "Cutting the flesh from the bone
and breaking it above the joint with the cutting
pliers. You now proceed to turn the skin over the
neck and head till you have laid the back part of
the scull bare, then remove the carcase entirely by
separating the neck close to the scull; the brain
must now be entirely removed through the opening
in the neck, (which may easily be enlarged) by in-
• troducing a gouge, the handle of a tea spoon, or
some such blunt instrument; then cut away'the
tongue, and as much as possible of the flesh of the
head and mouth. Care must now be taken to remove
the head and eyes whole by the inside: for this pur-
pose break away the slender bones of the head that
separate the top of the mouth from the eyes; then
pressing the skin of the neok that lies over the eyes on
the eye, so as to force it gently inwards, introducing
the bowl or handle (according to the size of the
subject) of a tea spoon, by which it may be pulled
away without bursting. When this is done rub
every part of the head and skin with the sapona-
ceous composition or preserving powder, and then
b 2


turn it into its natural position ; then, if the bird
be larger than a pigeon, with a strong thread or
small twine and a needle, fasten one end to the
rump and the other to the bill, passing it up the
rnside of the neck, so as to prevent the skin, whilst
hung up to dry, from being extended beyond its
natural length, which in large subjects is a common
occurrence, and which is a great detriment to the
setting the bird well up afterwards. The inside of
the wings should now have an incision made in
them, and as much flesh taken away as can be, and
«ome of the preserving composition introduced; a
little tow oakum, or in very large birds, hay,
should be introduced to fill the skin moderately,
but not to distend it. The feathers must now be
placed smooth, the wings put into their natural po-
sition, closed, and the subject laid in a clean dry
place exposed to the air for a few days till dry,
when the stuffing may be withdrawn, and a great
number packed flat on each other. If the feet be
large and fleshy, as in some of the sea gulls,
eagles, &c. an incision should be made ahum the
sole of each foot and the toes, so as to expose the
muscles to the action of the preserving powder and
air, otherwise they would become putrid and rot-
ten. 1 his latter precaution is not required in small
bads, which may also retain the small quantity of


that is put into them, unless the traveller is
restricted for want of room to bring them home, in
which case they may be brought quite flat. The
birds brought by Mr. Salt from Abyssinia were
packed between sheets of paper, in the same man-
ner as an hortus siccus, and most of them very welt
set up on their arrival in this country. When put
in boxes they should be wrapped in paper packed
close together, and camphor, musk, or tobacco
dust with them, or in warm climates they will be
spoiled by the minute insects that infest them.
The boxes should be well closed, and if the seams
Ije done over with warm pitch on the outside, it
will insure their safety, as by these means many
packages have been received from the interior of
Africa and India, the contents of which are now
the ehief ornament of the London Museum.
Till practice has given facility to the operator,
it will assist in keeping the feathers clean, if, as he
open the skin of the breast, he, pins pieces of pa-
per or linen cloth on the inside, and turns them
over the feathers on the outside; but after a few
trials this will not be necessary. Some of the sea
towl are so fat that there is much trouble in sepa-
rating it from the skin, and in warm weather it will
run on to the feathers. Scrape as much off with a
b S


knife as possible, then powdered chalk will
absorb much of it, which should then be removed*
and the process renewed till the whole is got off',
when the preserving composition should be applied
in a larger proportion than in birds that are not
fat. When shooting on the sea coast, the writer
has sometimes used the dry sea sand to remove the
®* ft grease, instead of chalk. With practice, ten
minutes will be sufficient to skin and prepare most
birds.
One general observation must made on pre-
serving dry any animal substance—that the state
of preservation at first must depend on the free ad-
mission of air to every part of the preparation till
dry; without this the skin and every portion of
flesh will become rotten; but by means of a current
of dry air, it would be preserved without any of
the composition, although liable to be destroyed
by insects afterwards.
In the above directions the author has spoken of
birds only the same will apply to quadrupeds
and the larger lizard. The manner of skinning a
hare by our cooks will give a tolerable idea of it,
only the principal difference is, the leaving the
bones of the head attached in such articles as are
to be prepared for the cabinet.


Many persons prefer making the incision for the
purpose of taking off the skin, under the wing, in-
stead of along the breast. It may be done so to
advantage in the oily sea fowl, as the wing covers
any little defect. In the London Museum are some
very well prepared penguins and other divers that
have been opened down the back. There is an
advantage in this method, that it preserves the fine
silky whiteness of the breast in all its purity.
METHOD OF PRESERVING FISHES.
No class of Natural History is more beautiful
than that of Fishes, when first taken from their
natural element: the singularity of form, and the
variety and richness of the vivid metallic and
strongly contrasted colours, vie with and almost ri-
val the splendor of the humming bird. But the ad-
mirer of nature’s works, as well as the scientific
collector, sighs when he contemplates their tran-
sient and fading beauty, which in a few' hours, at
most, vanishes for ever. Many attempts have been
made to preserve their evanescent lustre andlumi


nous appearance when first taken from the water,
none of which have ever perfectly succeeded. If
immersed in spirits, they lose nearly all their co-
lours in a few weeks. A solution of corrosive sub-
limate (oxymuriate of mercury) in water, has been
used for preserving their form, with some success
in America: and some Italian naturalists contrived
to fill half the skin with plaister of Paris, but this
conveyed no appearance of the living animal. The
best collection of this kind, was that of the late Mr.
Mier, of Edinburgh, whose Museum has been dis-
posed of several years, and whose secret of preserv-
ing them, it is believed, died with him. But the
writer of this has no doubt, from a careful exami-
nation of a subject prepared by him, that it was
nearly the same as that now practised by himself,
and which, after many attempts to improve, is the
only method he uses.
Procure the fish (particularly if it be one of
which the scales are large and loosely attached to
the skin) as fresh as possible; lay it on its side,
and cut out the gills with a pair of scissors, then
introduce a little tow or a piece of sponge into the
place to prevent the blood or moisture flowing out
and injuringyour process of skinning. When this
is done, with a damp sponge carefully wipe the




No. 1. Sheurs the manner of sphieading the Fins
of Fish on paper.
No. 2. The method of setting a Butterfly.
P. 20.


sides of the fish, raise the fins, and gently extend
them; cut two peices of paper the shape of each
fin, but a trifle larger, rub a little gum arabic on
one of the peices, then place it under the fin, and
extend the fin on it, press the corresponding peice
of paper on the other side, when it will adhere, and
drying in a few minutes will keep the part extended,
and preserve it from injury till it is wanted to be
put in a case. As soon as this process is completed,
take a piece of thin silk or gause paper and neatly
cover over one side of the fish; the natural gluten
that covers the scales of all fish, while fresh, will
cause it to adhere firmly to them, and it will pre-
sently dry and form a strpng case over the scales,
and admirably preserve them in their places whilst
you take the skin off, which without this precau-
tion it would be impossible to do in such fishes as
the mullet, sea bream, and many others. After
the first coat of paper is sufficiently dry, it may be
still further strengthened by applying another or
two of paper slightly gummed ; this when dry will
not only keep the scales on, but assist afterwards
in retaining the fish in its proper form, by prevent-
ing distention. When these papers are thoroughly
dry, turn the fish on a soft cloth, with the unco-
vered side upwards, and open it with sharp scis-
sors, from the tail to near the nose, along the


ateral line, which is observable in most fishes, cut-
tiwg open the cheek to enable you afterwards to
clear the flesh from that on the opposite side under
the bone, for unless this be done, and that part
filled with cotton, it will inevitably shrink, and have
a bad eflfect. Care and a little practice will now
be required in detaching the skin from the flesh :
begin at the head and work downwards, using a
sharp knife .in separating the muscles of. the skin
from the flesh, and cutting off the fin-bones on the
inside with scissors. When this is completely done,-
by taking away as much animal matter as possible,
(foi in this consists the perfection of preserving of ■
all skins) wipe the inside dry, and apply the preserv-
ing composition as directed for the birds, and then
using great caution not to distend unnaturally, or
in one part more than another, fill the skin to its.
proper form with tow or cotton, and with a needle
and thread sew up the blank division side; it may
then be laid to dry in the air, (not in the sun) and
m a few days the papers may be taken off, by
damping them with a sponge; the glass eyes may.
then be introduced, and the whole well covered
uith two or three coats of turpentine varnish*
Some of the fishes of Shetland and also of the
Mediterranean, preserved by the author in this
manner, and now in the Museum, retain some of


their colour with their exact form, mid are, by
those who never saw them taken from the nets,
considered as extremely beautiful.
The above process may appear tedious at first,
but a little practice will enable any person to pre-
pare several in a iday; and the pleasure that the
naturalist will receive in the preparation of his own
subjects, will amply repay any trouble.
The late Mr. Stuchbury’s method of preparing
the British fresh water fishes, was much admired;
he took off the skin under water, but this was a
very troublesome and dangerous process ; and the
only advantage it is supposed to possess over the
usual method, was the retaining the scales, which
however is done with more certainty, with less
trouble, and no injury to health, by using paper
as above directed.


SERPENTS.
The large ones are generally skinned and brought
here flat, after which they may easily be set up
for the cabinet; they are, unfortunately, generally
brought without the head. The smaller kinds are
usually brought in spirits, but are injured in their
colours, which are often beautiful. If time will
admit, the best way would be to set them up on
the spot, but as this can seldom be done, perhaps
the most advantageous mode would be, that lately
practised by Mr. Burchal in his four years’journey
through Africa, during which time, he has, with
astonishing perseverance, preserved and safely
brought home, the finest collection of the pro-
ductions ol that country, in every department, that
exists. The smaller serpents were entirely skinned
as soon as killed, and then glued flat on paper,
which preserved the size of the animal, and the
skin retains all the beauty of life.
Crocodiles, Iguanas, and all the larger species of
Lacerta, may be treated as the quadrupeds or birds,


and the smaller packed in spirits. Birds, Fishes,
and Reptiles, brought in spirits, should be wrapped
ln pieces of old linen, which will prevent injury
in carriage, and a small bit of thin lead, with a
number on each, referring to a note book, in which
should be noticed the name, country, and history,
as far as is known, of every article preserved. This
should also he done with dried skins.
INSECTS.
That branch of Natural History which relates to
Insects, requires more care, knowledge, and ex-
perience, and time in collecting, preserving, and
arranging the materials, than any other. Several
elaborate treatises have been written on the sub-
ject, some of which are defective, and all much
too long to be introduced into this little work,
the object of which is chiefly to enable persons
before unacquainted with the subject, to pre-
pare whatever they may meet with on their jour-
ney or voyage, so as to transmit them home in
safety. The scientific naturalist who travels for
the purpose of collecting, must be supposed to
c


possess the knowledge and means requisite to
follow his pursuit with every advantage.
The following concise instructions will, it i 3
loped, enabled any person to bring home such in-
sects as they m'ay meet with. Gentlemen preparing
or a foreign voyage and wishing to collect, may
be supplied with further instruction for the pur-
pose, as well as necessary apparatus, by applying
at the Museum.
The following are amongst the articles most
wanted i—gause nets and forceps, for taking those
ot the lepidoptera or butterfly kind; small boxes
imed with cork; a quantity of slender pins of
various lengths; cards, pliers, a pot of preserva-
tive, gum arabic, and several small round tin
boxes.
As soon as any of the hard-winged kinds are
taken, such as beetles, they should be put into
separate boxes, as they destroy each other. They
may then be put into the small tin boxes and closed
«p: put the boxes about half their depth into
boiling water, which will kill them in a few mi-
nutes without injury, and if not very large they
will dry without further trouble. Some have been


sent home in safety by placing them face to face,
and wrapping a little tow round them; by this
means they preserve each others’ legs entire, and
may afterwards be moistened and set up at home,
the same as if recently killed. But the more general
way is to pass a pin through one of the wing covers
in the body, and then pin them to the cork lining
of the store boxes, as close together as they can
without touching. In very large ones an incision
may be made in the abdomen, and the entrails and
all fleshy matter extracted by means of a quill
toothpick; then introduce a camel hair pencil
charged with the saponaceous preservative to every
part, which will effectually preserve them. If you
prefer the powder to the soap, it may be used in
the same way.
Butterflies and moths should, when taken in the
nets, be carefully killed by pressing the thorax
between the fore finger and thumb, or with a pair
of forceps. The large ones should have an incision
made in the inner side of the bodies, and the en-
trails and other fleshy matter extracted. The
preservative may then be introduced with a small
camel hair pencil, and a little cotton rolled up in
the shape of the body, and dipped also in the
preservative, may be put into it, which will be the
c 2


means of preventing the attack of the small mite
for ages. They are now to be pinned on the cork
ki the inside of the boxes in their natural position,
supporting the wings with slips of card, and the
body by passing a pin through it, as represented
in plate 2. In pinning them to the cork, care must
be taken not to injure the antennae or legs, by
letting them touch each other. These directions
will apply to the insects as well as butterflies and
moths. The larger grasshopper, locuts, dragon
flies, &c. must have the entrails taken out, and
preservative and cotton to keep the form entire,
otherwise they shrink and lose their form alto-
gether.
All kinds of insects that are brought home with-
out being set up in their proper attitude, may be
relaxed and made as flexible as when recently
killed, by the following simple process, which is
not in the least liable to injure them. Place them
on a piece of cork which floats in a large basin of
water, covering the top tight with a damp cloth,
so as not to touch the insect: in a few hours they
will be found in sueh a state as to be easily placed
in their proper position.


SHELLS.
This beautiful and durable branch of Zoology,
forms a very interesting part of a cabinet of Na-
tural History, and are more generally collected
than any of the other. They are easily arranged
in systematic order in the cabinet, and require
little or no care in preservation. To gentlemen
visiting foreign climes frequent opportunities offer
of obtaining a collection of them for themselves,
or of obliging their friends at home with an ac-
ceptable present. They are found in various
situations on the coast: many good ones are cast
up on the shore immediately after a storm; but
those that have laid any time on the beach exposed
to the sun and the action of the sea, are of no
value, being what are termed dead shells, and not
worth bringing home. The best are those that-
have the living fish in them; and in distant coun-
tries it is worth while to bring home any species
of them, as it often happens, in this as in every
branch of Natural History, that what are most
common in distant countries, have never or rarely


been brought to England. Every variety of coast
produces different species of shells. Some are
found adhering to the rocks, others buried in sand
and mud : different kinds will he found attached
to old rotten trunks, or inhabiting cavities in stone,
chalk, or clay. They are mostly taken with a
dredge, or trawl. Where these nets are used, many
curious things will be found ; and a naturalist or
collector will find his labour rewarded in attend-
ing the boats that use them, by the vast variety
and number of beautiful marine productions that
are brought from the bottom of the sea with
the nets, which it is difficult to make the fishermen
preserve, they having been so long in the habit of
considering them as “ trash,” and throwing them
overboard immediately. The number of small
fish, crabs, shell, echini, sea eggs, star fish, corals
&c * wh,ch are brought up in this manner are really
surprising, and present on their coming on board,
a treat to those who can admire the minute parts
of Nature’s works, which are often the most
wonderful.
The shells with the fish in them should be put
into hot water for a few minutes to kill the animal,
which as soon as cold should be picked out. Care
should be taken that those shells which are


bivalve, are not torn asunder, but the hinge left per-
fect. All shells should be well washed in fresh
water, and as soon as dry packed tight together in
boxes with dry sand that has also been properly
washed; and care should be taken that the fine
points or edges of the shells are not broken, as
they are of much more value dirty than if cleaned
by acids, which generally ruins them. Some de-
stroy the animal by suspending.
Echini and sea eggs should have a small opening
made near the mouth to let the gelatinous con-
tents escape; then well washed and dried.
Large star fish require to have the flesh cut out
of the inside if practicable, then washed in fresh
w'ater, a little of the preservative put in the inside,
and dried as soon as possible.
Crabs and lobsters, if large, should have the
flesh extracted from the bodies by raising that part
from the back shell, and taking out as much of the
inside and moisture as possible; a small quantity
ot the preservative composition introduced, and
dried in the open air, or by gentle heat.
Corals should be put into fresh water to kill the


inhabiting animals, which will in a few days become
putrid, and may then be washed out.
Sea fans should be treated in the same way as
the last.
The sea weeds must be washed in water, and
then spread out in small parcels to dry: they will
serve to pack other marine productions in, and
may be moistened in water on their arrival in Eng-
land, and spread at leisure.
PLANTS AND SEEDS.
Various methods have been recommended for
the purpose of transporting in safety living vege-
tables and seeds, but they have generally proved
objectionable; and the removal of plants, unless
those of the smaller kinds, is attended with
much trouble, and frequent disappointment. A
method recommended by botanists, is to place
several together and pack them in boxes with
holes in their sides, and well lined and filled
with damp moss: this will succeed when the plants


can be taken up at the commencement of winter,
and arrive at their destination before the begin-
ning of warm weather. They have been brought
very healthy from America by these means; but for
long voyages in warm climates, this mode of treat-
ment will not succeed.
The Writer of this has consulted Sir Joseph
Banks, than whom no man living has had more ex-
perience on the subject, and he recommends in ge-
neral the seeds to be sent home in preference to the
plants, if they be ripe and the seed vessels well
dried. Put them into bags and suspend them
in the cabin of a vessel; they will generally retain
their vegetable faculties unimpaired for two years.
Small growing plants may however, with care,
be transmitted from one country to another, by the
following means; prepare the half of a small tub,
cask, or tolerably deep box, by putting a sufficient
quantity of the proper soil of the plant in it, then
planting them so as to leave plenty of room for the
circulation of light and air. It will be necessary to
keep the tubs in the cabin, at least when there is
danger of the spray from the sea reaching the deck
or place where the plants are kept, as nothing can
he more destructive than saltwater, the admission


*0 as entirely to exclude (lie air. °'
It ha S been recommended to coat the seeds that
Z‘° be broU * , ' t f ™» a considerable ‘
"’ ,th * •*•«» ->f wax and tallorv; but tie ZZ
zz*r th ; besta °'
S “ itS have hecn d orived from this praclice.
directions for setting up recently killed Birds
in their natural Position.
,J° "* gen,kme ” as »' a .V have leisure or incli-
:rr^7f d ;r hei ~
may be » , *** foll<nv, "S short instructions
, 7 enab L 7 ’ “ " i(h *** P»*
tiesfructio”” 8 fro “


After the skin is taken off and prepared (as di-
rected in pages 6 and 7, and represented in fhe
Frontispiece ), let different sized nealed iron
wires be provided, according to the size of the
bird they are to support. Lay the skin of the bird
on its back without stretching it; cut two pieces
of wire, one rather longer than the bird, and the
other shorter, so as not to reach to the head of
the bird; twist them together; sharpen the ends
of the longer by means of a file, and pass one end
through the rump of the bird, and the other
through the crown of the head near the bone of
the bill. Take care not to extend the neck beyond
its ordinary length, a common fault in most pre-
servers: lay a little tow along the back of the
skin for the wire to lay on, then file to a sharp
point two other pieces of strong wire that are to
pass through the soles of the feet up the legs and
thighs, and then to be fastened by twisting them
together round the first wires, which may be sup-
posed to represent the back bone. The wire
should be left two or three inches out of the feet,
in order afterwards to fasten them in a standing
position. Two smaller wires should now be passed
through the wings, as in the legs, and afterwards
fastened to the back, a little higher up than the
leg wires, examining that no part of the skin is


distended beyond its natural position; then com-
mence filling with tow or cotton, (for very large
subjects soft hay may be used) pressing it down
with the hand till it is rather firm, but not so as
to distend the skin. A small slender piece of wood
with a slight notch at the end may be used to
advantage in putting a little of the cotton or tow
into the neck (or what is perhaps better, the wire
intended for the neck may be previously wrapped
with tow of the size of the neck that is taken
away). When the body is filled, the skin should
he drawn together and loosely sewed, passing the
needle from the inside outwards, to prevent drawl-
ing the feathers, which will easily be brought
together so as to prevent any appearance of having
been opened. A hat piece of board or the branch
of a tree, is proper to receive the bird, having two
holes in it to receive the wires of the bird’s feet,
which must be passed through it, and turned on
the other side, will enable the operator to complete
the whole, by placing it in any position he pleases
bending the wires of the neck, legs, and win**
Next place all the feathers, smooth, and introduce
the glass eyes, which should be of the. exact colour
and size of the real ones. They may be purchased
m London, transparent, and may be afterwards
painted behind so as to represent the natural ones.


It may now be left in the air to dry, and in a few
days will be fit to be placed in the glass case that
is to receive it permanently.
It will add much to the value of a collection, if
gentlemen who prepare recent specimens were to
note down the season of the year and the sex of
the bird, (which may be discovered by examining
the testes) as many of the indigenous birds change
their plumage with the season, and the same
species have often been described as different,
|Owing to difference only in the age, sex, or
<%the"year in which it happened to be killed?..
g .[flie preserving Powder used for preparing the !
.subjects in the Museum is as follows : One pound
ojf arsenic, one pound of burnt allum, two pounds
of tanners’ bark, all in powder., and passed through
a sieve together; then add half a pound of cam-
IfSler, and half an ounce of musk, which may be
rubbed together with some of the above powder
in a mortar, and then mixed with the whole, which
mast be kept in bottles, or close tin cannisters.
WEE. . ... :..
The Preservative in use at the Museum de His-
toire Naturelle of Paris, is extremely good if used
D


in tile form of soap. A small quantity of the lathe*
from it being applied to the skins not only effec-
tually prevents the attacks of insects, but keeps
he skins soft and pliable, and does no, cause them
to contract so much as the dried powder. 1, has
ic advantage of being also extremely portable, a
small pot of i, being sufficient to prepare a vast
number of birds.
Either the Powder in cannisters, at 7r. ed. or
the French arseniated Soap at the same price in
m li, ediVS s^ " il! > printed
directions for ; Gd m 7S3'Adi la
°
fefttfmert iiSv&g
may have them put up in the best possible mariflr
at the Museum, where Natural Curiosities of eve'ry
escnption are purchased or exchanged for otlijers.


THE
LONDON MUSEUM ,
EGYPTIAN HALL, PICCADILLY,
Consists of upwards of 32,000 of the most
remarkable subjects of animated nature, displayed
in the most beautiful and novel manner, so as to
convey an idea of their habits and mode of life;
and scientifically arranged according to the system
of Linnaeus, by which the student, or admirer of
the boundless works of creation, may obtain more
information in a few hours’ attentive examination,
than can be possibly acquired by reading only in
many years.
The QUADRUPEDS consist of all that are re-
markable from every part of the world, and are
exhibited in a manner entirely neiV. The spectator
is supposed to be placed in the midst of an Indian
forest, in which every animal is seen as in a state of
nature. The Elephant, Rhinoceros, and Camelo-
pards, are in the woods ; the Lions, Tigers, &c. in
caverns or on rocks ; while those of the Monkey
tribes, and others that inhabit the trees, are seen
r> 2


in every variety of attitude, as in a state of nature.
1 lliS de Partment of the Museum is called the Pan-
thkrion, and is entirely a new Exhibition.
. The BIRDS > 11 Pwards of 3,000 in number, are
■rom every part of the habitable globe, and are uni-
versally allowed to exceed those of any Cabinet in
Europe, either in respect to number, rarity, beauty
° P uma g e > or manner of preservation. They are
or nearly every known genus, and vary in size from
!'! ° str,ch > t 0 tbe alm °st insect Humming Bird
(of wmch there are about 90 distinct species in this
collection) whose bulk scarcely equals that of the
' ee ,- bllt whose radaint and resplendent plumage
exceeds in brilliancy and colour, the most valuable
o our precious stones. This department of the
Museum has lately been enriched (through the
iiburahty of the Royal College of Surgeons) by the
entire collection made by Sir Joseph Banks and Capt.
Cook, during their Voyage of Discovery; among
Mhich are many unique and perfecty new subjects'!
Among tbe numerous and beautifully preserved
CLASS of AMPHIBIA, are all the known Cro-
codiles, Ahgators, Iguanos, Chamelions, Lizards,
1 ortoises, and Serpents. Among the latter are
fwo specimens of the great Serpents of South


America and India, called the Boa Constrictor;
one measures thirty-two feet in length, and thirty-
one inches in circumference, and is finely preserved
in the act of destroying a Deer, which is crushed
and expiring in the enormous fold of its merciless
adversary ; the other has just seized and is killing
the Bengal Tyger.
The FISHES are a selection of those of the most
extroardinary form, from every part of the world:
many are of the most rare kinds, found on our own
Coast, and hare the nppcnrnnco of Lvuing j u ».t t
from their native element.
The collection of INSECTS is extremely splendid
and extensive, containing all the most remarkable
of Africa, India, the Brasils, and other parts of
South America, many of which are of the most
astonishing metallic brilliancy of colours, diversity
of form, and extraordinary size.
The MARINE PRODUCTIONS comprise a
very valuable assemblage of Shells, Echini, Asterias,
Corals, Madrepores, Gorgonias, and other inhabi-
tants of the waters, collected without regard to
expense, and appropriately displayed in the most
elegant manner.


, FOSSI '-S. or organic remains of a
£™" 7‘"? "° Wd * ” re •!>«*. of the
dimotijo America, and some found in. this
oun IV. Ihey consist of a variety of Bones, Teclli
* '"T™ and ° ti,er and non-descript
,ZTu "r‘ K }' ‘"" St I "* ve bccn at least 140 times
‘ bu!k 0f a f!orsc - They have been the surprise
o every enlightened admirer of the wonderful pro-
ductions of nature. This department also eontains
an unique Turtle, as well as Fishes, Crabs, Si,ells,
Z m T r m f” irtals ’ ™"y of tllc “ taken
Mmtio.”' l Bre ' i,e k'Skest possible state of pre-
most are the
Seas during the Vovave f 7 tbe South
Cook Thn ■ IJ g f D,scove, y of Captain
and o'tl.o • / lnC UdC 116 ldentical Ido,s > Weapons,
i omestic and military implements en-
graved ,n the History of those Voyages; amon*
am the superb Feather Cloak and Helmet
Bt-eutedby.be king „f Owyhee t„, and worn
rrrr ore - by ° ur c™™*.
° o* “ fe,v da > s before be fell a sacrifice to the


■mistaken resentment of the natives. Most of the
above were presented by Sir Joseph Banks.
The LONDON MUSEUM is the result of nearly
30 years arduous and unremitting research, and
has been completed at an expense (including the
appropriate building erected for its reception) ex-
ceeding £.55,000, independent of the liberal dona-
tions (which no pecuniary means could have pro-
cured) made by most of the Royal Family, the
principal Nobility and distinguished characters,
either as to rank or science in the kingdom, whose
names appear in the descriptive Catalogue, which
maybe had of the Booksellers, and at the Exhi-
bition, price 2s. An enlarged edition of the Cata-
logue, with numerous engravings by Howitt, 15s.
Ditto, with coloured plates, 255.
Also— Just published for the use of Schools and
young Persons, and may be had at the Booksellers
and at the Museum , price 13?, Natural History,
according to the Linnean system, explained in fami-
liar dialogues in visits to the London Museum, by
John Rippingham, author of the Rules for English
Composition, and the Art of Extempore Public
Speaking, 4 vols. bound, with numerous plates, by
Howitt.
Admittance to the Museum, Is. —Open from
10 till dusk.


THE
ROMAN GALLERY,
OF WORKS OF ART AND ANTIQUITY,
AT THE
EGYPTIAN HALL,
IS always open for the Exhibition and Sale of every
thing connected with the FINE ARTS. It contains
at present, exclusive of a magnificent collection of
the first rate pictures of ancient and modern masters
the celebrated great Picture from the Louvre, of
Brutus condemning his Sons, 32 feet lon-
painted Mon, Le Thier, Pendent J
French Academy at Rome. Also a fine collection
of Statuary, ancient and modern; and the superb
Mosaic Floors lately taken up from the Baths
of Nero at Rome.
Works of Art are received and remain on sale
here one year, free of expense, unless disposed of,
in which case they pay 10 per cent, on the price.
Admittance to the Gaik)y, lx.
M. DROWN, Printer, 86, St. Martin’s Lane.




























