

:
V iH
\V. M. MACLARDY & CO., Printers, S 2 Pitt Street, Sydney.


SIDE
(CURE


u c- t e) (3
THIS COFFEE is guaranteed to be the Real MOCHA
COFFEE, as served in all leading Clubs in the World,
absolutely Free from Chicory or any other adulteration
whatever, and is as such the best Coffee in the World.
THE FLAVOUR AND AROMA are preserved, as only
small quantities are ground at a time, and immediately
tinned. A Trial Respectfully Solicited.


SCIENTIFIC SIGHT TESTING AND SPECTACLE FITTING at
iO reasonable rates. Perfect Correction, Comfort, Satisfaction, and
Preservation of Sight. No Charge for Sight Testing.
GREENFIELD & BARRAOLOUGH,
Spectacle Makers.
371 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY
(Near King Street, next A.J.S. Bank),
And GEORGE STREET, BRISBANE.
Send for our self-sight tests and pamphlet* on the eye and how to care for
it. Free by post to any address.
CATII -£L3ST<3-LAIS,
M MACQUARIE PLACE,
tfye cmft? "'Hesfaurcu?!
in g>ybney.
Luncheon or Dinner, Is, 6d. (Wine included).
This establishment recommends itself by the excellence of its
Cuisine, which is essentially French.
-d ( E. W. DUMAS
Proprietors | p wiBART


by PSYCH


This should be the desire of every one. Your home is your kingdom and
should be just as comfortable and beautiful as your means will allow.
Little expense is necessary to decorate your rooms
James Sandy & Co.,
Plate and Sheet Glass Merchants,
Oil and Colormen and Artistic Decorators,
271 & 330 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
Head-quarters for Absolutely Pure White Lead.
Under Chemical Analysis ,
Decorate your Windows with cheap and effective te Glacier, ” the same as used in
all Palatial Residences.
Largest Assortment of Artists’ Materials always on hand and at lowest prices-


OUNTERBLAST
SPOOKLAND;
Glimpses of the Marvellous
ILLUSTRATED.
18-sr ZF’STZ'CTEHIIHI.
Registered under the Copyright Act, 1879, 42 Vic. No. 20.
<Syhnes:
W. M. Maclardy & Co., Printers, 82 Pitt Street.
1895.


INDEX
PREFACE vii.
CHAPTER T.
THE POET LAUREATE OF JOSEPHINE
CHAPTER 11.
A RETROGADE DISCIPLE . 7
CHAPTER 111.
WEIGHED IN THE BALANCE
CHAPTER IV.
THE HYPOTHESIS OF CONJURING . . . • .43
CHAPTER V.
THE BROKEN LYRE 47
CHAPTER VI.
STRANGE EXPERIENCES OF A SENSITIVE . . . .55
CHAPTER VII.
THE SPIRIT THEORY DISCUSSED BY AN ANTI-SPIRITUALIST . 62
CHAPTER VIII.
the editor’s notes ....... * 78


•a. rs-rr
PREFACE.
The popular mind has been more or less strongly exercised
of late by the exposure of a supposed fraudulent seance
given by the well-known materializing Sensitive of Sydney.
This “ exposure ” has been all the more astonishing because
of the long record of successes by this Sensitive in the old
world, and also in our Southern Hemisphere; striking and
undoubted successes dating back from mere girlhood, and based
upon evidence profuse and apparently reliable, both personally
obtainable, from witnesses, and scattered over various journal-
istic records.
It appears to be the fate of most “mediums” to undergo,
during some part of their existence, certain humiliating ex-
periences ; in some instances, no doubt, deserved ; in other, and
perhaps the greater number of instances, not so. Up to the
time of leaving England, some three years ago, for Australia
this medium’s reputation was absolutely unscathed. She was
pronounced by many, including the well-known journalist, Mr.
Stead, to be one of the most reliable materializing Sensitives
of the present day. This character for honesty has been rudely
shaken by the conduct of an invited guest, at a private stance,
by whom the medium states she was thrown violently off her
seat in the cabinet, her assailant claiming that he had found
,C \\ t ■ ■. \
her on her knees simulating the figure of “Cissy,” one <>£lier
•hSS* -


usual materialized forms. This gentleman’s evidence is backed
by that of certain persons present, some of whom were there
by preconcerted arrangement, and in direct sympathy with the
act; others, still, were weak-minded, follow-my-neighbour
creatures, in whose minds a breath of suspicion would fan
the flame of doubt until it burst out into a conviction of
fraud. Others, again, were totally unconversant with the laws
that govern the subtle and, as yet, little-understood process of
materialization.
The outcome of all this has been a popular outcry that this
medium is a fraud, and materialization a myth. Well, “out of
evil cometh good ” —that is to say, if the unfolding of truth may
be regarded as good in itself—for this alleged exposure has been
the direct means of precipitating tests that have left no shadow
of doubt on the minds of the investigating Committee as to the
fact of genuine materialization through the Sensitive in question.
The appearance of these “forms,” having some of the attributes
of human beings—whatever be the origin of the phenomena —
may not appear to be of any special material advantage to
humanity; but a gentleman who has been closely working up
this matter scientifically, against colossal odds, and in defiance
of ridicule and opposition (which would crush out spirit and
energy from investigators with less grit and determination), has
seized upon the important fact that herein we have proof of “the
evolution of impalpable vital material from the body of sensitives.”
This material, in conjunction with the force called Psychic,
which he has found to register “an enormous dynamic pressure,’
.
on occasions when conditions prescribed by Nature are present,
■•■SMBFi
JSL'fJ&Z


he is confident can be turned to use as “ a means of recuperating
in weakly conditions,” and, possibly, of acting as a natural
healing agent in diseased states. This is a very worthy object,
and one likely to be of advantage to humanity.
Our pamphlet deals, however, with the proof of the ex-
istence in sensitives of this marvellous materializing power, a
fact that those who are honest among hostile critics should
now admit. We treat the subject here succinctly, as, in face of
such proof, there is no occasion for verbosity or literary de-
clamation. Sceptics, we suppose, there needs must be until
that great Dematerialization, when the solid earth, the sun and
stars shall vanish and dissolve, and leave not a wrack behind.




ft Counterblast to “ Stockland;”
“ Glimpses of Mamllous.”
CHAPTER I.
The Poet Laureate of “Josephine.”
ONCE upon a time it was supposed that “every Englishman’s
house was his castle,” but, according to a recent authority,
such an out-of-the-way sentiment was fit only for our remote
ancestors. Therefore, this reformer of our manners, planning how best
he could make a clean sweep of such barbarism, arrived one evening as
a guest at the house of Mr. J. B. Mellon of Woollahra, Sydney. Here
he would strike a blow that, once and for all, would revolutionise
much that was defective in our code of social ethics. But he had
two strings to his bow. He would thereby also—and this was his-
chief string—drag before the world, and hold up to ridicule, the
hostess to whose Spiritualistic Seance, given to a few private friends,
he was invited. His name would thus be handed down to posterity,,
not only as a reformer of obselete social customs, but, above all, as
the great modern exposer of the materializing fraud. This, no doubt,
would be trumpeted forth to the uttermost ends of the earth ; but to
make sure of his ground, he would, to quote his own written words,
“ enter into an arrangement with another person for a consideration ,”
to pxrblish a book containing copy-righted photographs which, in good
faith, were given to him by a gentleman for the specific purpose of their
publication as true psychic pictures, as they really are, and which, if
his own words are of value, Mr. Henry positively believed they were,
and not the fraudulent productions he would now make them out.
To better understand this gentleman, let us take a brief survey
of his attitude and conduct prior to the eventful evening in
Woollahra. He is a “ medium,” and, from time to time, to our know-
ledge, has been under various strong “ influences.” Under, no doubt,
one of these influences, he recently made a pointed and interested


proposal of a monetary nature to Mrs. Mellon, in connection with
her mediumship—a proposal which was indignantly rejected by her.
His moods were variable and unaccountable. All this time he
vowed not only undying friendship to her, but also expressed absolute
belief in her materializing power. He would boil with indignation
when anybody dared to call into question that power, and once, at
the Sydney Theosophical Hall, he championed Mrs. Mellon, in the
loudest and most unmistakable manner, as a materializing sensitive,
literally stamping out those who opposed that belief. Under the
control of one of her so-called spirit guides (“ Geordie ”) he took
the photograph of the latter in Ids hand, and said “ I am Geordie
Thompson,” and further declared that the photograph was un-
doubtedly one of “ Geordie’s,” and very like him. On another
occasion he got violently under the control of a supposed murderer
at the house of Hr. MacCarthy (for whom, by the bye, he also pro-
fessed eternal friendship), and protested he himself was the spirit of
the murderer, whose name he gave as “ Archie.” He cried and
whined and entreated for some relief from his terrible condition,
dragged down those who were with him to the Doctor’s yard,
searched around in great agitation, then, suddenly pointing down-
“Archie burying the murdered one.”
wards, said :—“ Here, here ! She’s buried here, in this very spot!
Dig! Dig! for God s sake—deep, deep, down! You
will find the skeleton. In mercy, dig ! and give me
“ The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


some relief. Oh! why did I do it ! Dig! Dig! Dig!” In
returning to the light he was seen to be livid, bathed in perspiration,
and on his temples and forehead, great knotty veins stood out, while,
in the most abject manner possible, he begged and craved for respite
from his terrible condition. At this time, the Doctor came in from
his rounds. He was clutched by this “ medium,” and underwent
the same series of painful entreaties to “ Dig.” The Doctor laughed,
but the supposed spirit, threatened through Mr. Henry, that he would
“ haunt ” him “ all the days of his life ” if he would not “ dig ” up
his yard. Afterwards, when Mr. Henry was himself again, he said he
believed in it firmly, and repeatedly expressed great anxiety for the
digging trial, saying he would go halves in the expense. He, more
than once, in sober earnest, expressed his surprise that the Doctor
would not accede to his request.
This peculiar mediumistic display was repeated, it appears,
several times in the Doctor’s house, and the floor must have been
well watered with Mr. Henry’s tears, so often were they shed by the sup-
posed spirit in his vain endeavour to get the yard dug up for the
skeleton. The stated object of this was as a crowning act of demon-
stration of the murder, to set the spirit free from his earth-bound
state. He even went so far, in conscious moments, as to ask a gentle-
man to oversee the digging process, should the Doctor consent to it !
Now let us ask, if Henry were really under influence on these
occasions, is it likely that he was only “ pretending,” as he says,
when he recognised “ Geordie’s ” photograph as a likeness of that
personage ? We do not pretend to believe in Spirit influence, but
rather favour Dr. MacCarthy’s hypothesis on this question, But,
whether owing to Spirit possession, or, as the Doctor calls it, to “an
abnormal physiological condition,” it really matters not. Thinking
people will believe with ns, that Mr. Henry was just as likely “ con-
trolled ” in the one instance as in the other, and that if he be-
lieved in the matter of the digging, he also believed in the genuine-
ness of the photograph.
Here, therefore, is the man of moods on whose word we are to
rely for the fact that the sprightly “ Cissie,” darting rapidly from
one end of the cabinet to the other, is Mrs. Mellon on her knees !
We could multiply, ad nauseam, instances of this gentleman’s
peculiar mediumistic seizures during his interesting process of
development; but, for brevity, shall merely give one more. It
appears that for some time, as is common with sensitives undergoing
this, to our minds, rather disagreeable developing process, he
complained of being possessed by some very obnoxious spirit
influence, and, on one occasion so strong was this upon him that he
craved of Mrs. Mellon to ask “ Geordie ” to drive away the disturb-
ing element (we should have said “ elemental ”), and expressed
himself quite relieved when it was done.
But we have by this time a fair estimate of the kind of person
who has essayed to settle for us the vexed question of materialization,
brushing aside as worthless the evidence of such men as Crookes,
Wallace, or of the learned committee that lately investigated the
“ granuma a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


power of Eusaphia Palladiuo. Can the statements, without tangible
proof, of a man of such moods be depended on ? We think not,
and our readers shall further on be more confirmed in this opinion.
We have drawn a portrait of this stalwart person slavering under
spiritual possession. The facts as to Mr. Henry’s claims to be
under the control of spirits can be attested by credible witnesses.
His subsequent action, however, leads to the conviction that he either
emancipated himself from his mediumistic condition, or that this
condition was assumed and was, in fact, an imposture, at least the
equal of that of which he accuses Mrs Mellon. Of the extraordinary
arts by which he insinuated himself into the confidence of those
whose reputation for honesty he intended to destroy—of the violation
of hospitality and the trust reposed in him with which he is to be
credited, enough perhaps has been said. However Mr. Henry’s
literary speculation may have been benefited by his conduct with
regard to Mrs. Mellon, and whatever coveted notoriety he may have
gained thereby, in the end he is perhaps destined to find these things
impotent to balance the loss of that reputation as a gentleman which
he left behind him in Mrs. Mellon’s house after his rape of her
hospitality. These things may be thought of little concern to the
public. That, however, is an erroneous view. We have been thus
explicit in depicting these personal incidents, because in considering
the evidence against Mrs. Mellon, the reliability of the chief witness
against her is a matter which cannot be overlooked. We have
shown that at one time Mi'. Henry carried his spiritualism to an
egregious degree, which stamped him as the victim of curious delusions
or illusions, and, therefore, unworthy of trust in the very matter on
which he was subject to these erratic fancies ; or we have the
alternative that he acted throughout a part of unique deception
which stamped him equally untrustworthy as a witness against those
to whom no such deception has been brought home. It will thus be
seen that the amount of space devoted to Mr. Henry has not been
sacrificed without due consideration. The evidence against the
authenticity of the Mellon materializations is based almost wholly
upon the assertions of this witness. We leave our readers to
estimate its worth. In view of the change in Mr. Henry’s attitude
the following footnote may be interesting. It is taken from an
article on psychic phenomena in the September number of Cosmos,
and refers to a portrait embodied in that article. The footnote was
inserted at the express request of Mr. Henry :
“ * Tins photograph is one of a series taken of Mrs. Mellon
and forms, which will be published as illustrations of a book by T.
Shekleton Henry, to be issued in October, under the title of
“Miracles in our Midst,” and which will comprise a full description
of the seances referred to in this article and others.”
Before finally passing from a subject by no means full of
attraction, the reader may find some elements of humour in the
following poem written and sung by Mr. Henry. It is not at all
such an outburst as might be expected from the valiant exposer of
materialization. Bather does it belong to that former stage of Mr.


Henry’s existence when lie had the faculty of discovering cemeteries
of murdered men in the hack yards of his friends, an occult power which
induced a witty critic to suggest the transformation of Shekleton
into “ Skeleton ” Henry. From internal evidence it would appear
that at the time Mr. Henry wrote his elegant poem he was partially
under the influence of the spirit of Longfellow. The result of
straining Longfellow through Henry might be expected to
resemble this poem somewhat. There is an undoubted suspicion of
the Puritan poet in this rhapsody on “Josephine,” but the merit of
the rest belongs to Mr. Henry. The music and imagery, the tender
feeling, the golden words, with which the poem flashes and enchants,
are all Mr. Henry’s, nor would his worst enemy wish to rob him of
one jot of the responsibility for the strange and beautiful creation.
At the period in which this was written Mr. Henry had no misgivings
as to “Josephine” or “ Cissie.” He approaches his subject with
the reverence with which the devout Mussulman turns to Mecca, or
a lovelorn swain strings an ode to his mistress’s eyebrows. In the
line
“ Might we only gently touch thee,”
there is as yet no prophecy of the savage grab which the poet was
to make at “ Cissy ”in the Mellon sitting-room. However, the
precious effusion speaks for itself;
“JOSEPHINE.”
Dedicated to Mrs. Mellon by T. Shekleton Henry.
When the shadows fall around us,
When the light is soft and dim,
Then sweet influence steals o'er us
While our voices raise a hymn ;
Comes a form now softly gliding
With a grace but seldom seen,
Bringing holy peace amidst us—
Angel friend. Our Josephine.
Loving eyes now rest upon thee,
Longing hands held out to greet,
Might we only gently touch thee
How our hearts would strangely beat.
At thy bidding we draw nearer
And with rev’rence, gentle Queen,
Hare to look upon thy beauty—
Angel friend. Our Josephine.
Come and scatter flowers around us;
Surely these are words of love
Brought to us oft weary mortals
By thine aid from Heaven above.
Soon we too must pass death’s portals
To the land where you have been ;
Oh, then linger here to guide us,
Angel friend. Our Josephine.


Stay, oh ! stay with us sweet moments
In thy Heav’n reflected light,
While we gather knowledge from thee,
Strength to aid us in our fight.
Thou, too, bringest us sweet comfort
From the great dark world unseen,
Where dear friends have gone before us,
Gentle spirit. Josephine.
When the burden of life’s battle
Sorely rests on many a heart,
When from all we love the dearest
Death’s cold hand tears us apart ;
When blind faith holds out no promise,
On thy message then we lean,
Thus thy sting, 0 Death, is broken,
We shall meet then, Josephine.
“ The BILLY TEA ” output is a ton per day.


CHAPTER If.
A Retrograde Disciple.
«Y> ADEN with beautiful floral offerings, wearing his best smiles,
and profuse in his protestations of friendship, came Mr.
(AJX Henry to Mrs. Mellon’s on the historical and eventful
evening of Friday, 12th October, 181)4. It is truly said that
“all is not gold that glitters.” Apply your acids and another
metal will show beneath. Thus, underlying Mr. Henry’s urbane
and confiding ways, was a settled and deliberate determination to
expose his hostess and friend that night, according to preconcerted
arrangement with at least one other person present. Hostile
designs lurked behind his smiles, and his studied blow would receive
the unction derivable from graceful offerings—offerings comparable
“ The dead sea fruit, that tempts the eye
And turns to ashes on the lips.”
The particulars of this sensational coup are so fresh in people’s
minds that nothing more than an epitomized version will now
be needed.
Nearly twenty guests were present at this private seance. In
the course of the sitting, three figures had appeared consecutively,
namely, that of a black man, also a woman who was recognized, and
the form of “ Josephine,” who dematerialized in front of the curtain
in a manner, we are assured, that it would be utterly impossible by
artificial means to simulate, namely, by diminishing gradually in
stature from above downwards until nothing was left but a small
patch, not of drapery, as Henry would have it, hut intensely white
semi-transparent luminous vapor, with a vacant portion of the floor
between it and the curtain, which remained perfectly still; this
luminous material gradually contracting symmetrically from the
periphery to the centre, becoming less and less in size and density,
until at last it narrowed into a mere speck, which faded away. No
such ridiculous explanation will suffice here as stooping and re-
treating behind the curtain and drawing drapery in beneath it.
The form known as “Cissy” eventually appeared, and
Henry, under pretence of handing it a pencil, seized the form and
found that he “had hold of Mrs. Mellon, and that she was on her
knees and had a white material like muslin round her head and
shoulders.” He saw that she had “ a mask of black material over
her face . . . her sleeves drawn up above the elbows, and her
feet bare.” He “ never let go ” his “ hold of Mrs. Mellon until
“ GRANDMA ”—a perfect porridge meal-Cures Indigestion.


the gas in the back room was lit and turned full on, and everyone
present * had an opportunity of seeing Mrs. Mellon in the position
and in the condition * in which” he “ had caught her.” He “ saw,”
besides the mask, “ a false beard,” which “ Mr. Eoydhouse picked
up,” but did not keep. He found “ a small black shawl ” and “ a
small black cotton bag with black tapes attached to it.”
This evidence was, in part, corroborated by Mr. Eoydhouse
(editor of the Sunday Times), Mr. Wallis, with whom Henry admits
he was in league, Miss St. Hill {Sunday Times' 1 Palmist) and one
or two others.
On the night in question, after the seizure took place, one of
the guests, Mrs. Edwards, went over to the cabinet and tried, with
others, to console her dear friend, Mrs. Mellon. Before leaving the
room, in answer to a question as to what suspicious articles she
saw, she distinctly stated to those present that she “ saw nothing.”
This can be duly attested, and yet this lady comes forth days
afterwards with the following statement.
After indulging in a few dozen sentences by way of excusing
herself for her present attitude, she proceeds :
“ Josephine, I had always suspected to be Mrs. Mellon herself.”
Further on she says, “ I saw, at any rate, some black covering on
the lower part of Mrs. Mellon’s face. . . Immediately on Mrs.
Mellon retiring to the cabinet 1 followed. Sticking up from the
bosom of her dress I saw a lump of coarse dark hair. I said,
‘ give me anything you have to hide.' In reply to this, Mrs.
Mellon said, ‘ I have nothing.’ On the afternoon of the day when
the test was to be held at the Sunday Times Office, I called on
Mrs. Mellon. She asked me to help her. I asked in what way,
and she said, ‘ Oh, you know ; one medium can always help another.’
I said I could not help her, and she then said, ‘ Then lam lost. I
shall fail to-night.’ ”
Here is the statement of one who, on the memorable seance
evening, said, “/ t-aiv nothing ,” and whose aroused energies and
loud emotional utterances in defence of “ poor Mrs. Mellon ” at the
Sunday Times Seance cannot readily be forgotten by those present.
Twelve clear days elapsed before she took any action in the
matter.
We shall later on hear the accused dealing with this extraordin-
ary reversal of previous statements and previous conduct on the part
of one who does not even hesitate to confess that she offered to hide
incriminating articles, thereby showing a willingness to participate
in deception.
Mr. Mellon immediately after the alleged exposure, agreed, on his
own responsibility and without consulting Mrs. Mellon, that one or
more tests should be given in a wire cage at the Sunday Times
office, the first trial to take place on the following Wednesday. We
are assured it was agreed not to publish an account of the seizure,
and to keep the occurrence a secret until the tests were finally gone
* The Italics are ours.—Ed.


through, as a primary failure under such exceptional conditions was
not impossible.
We append Mrs. Mellon’s explanation of the occurrences at the
seizure, taken from the Sunday Times of October 21st, 1894 :
“MRS. MELLON’S EXPLANATION.
“Mrs. Mellon was seen yesterday afternoon, and in reply to ques-
tions by our representative, said ;
“ I WAS IN MY NORMAL STATE
during the whole of the seance on the 12th instant ; that is, 1 was
not in a state of trance, as I sometimes am, during the materializa-
tion of spirit forms, and was quite aware of what was going on.
“ You must understand that when the forms are manifesting
they draw most of their substance from me. That fact lias been
proved by weighing the form and the medium on different scales. I
have been reduced in weight from Bst. 61b. to 4st. 131 b. when the
form known as ‘ Geordie’ was weighed, and-he was also weighed in
another scale, and he weighed 7st. 21b.
“To return to Friday’s seance: At the time ‘Cissie was
seized I first felt that something was wrong, without quite under-
standing the nature of the feeling, but as if I must rush out of the
cabinet. Then came a sudden shock, and I fell off my chair on my
knees, all in a heap, and it seemed as if
I WAS SHOT INTO THE FORM
and absorbed by it.
The next thing I was aware of was Mr. Henry holding my
left wrist, and I saw I was completely enveloped in drapery. The
drapery soon dematerialised, and was seen to dissolve in a kind of
steam by Mrs. Gale and one of the gentlemen present.”
“ After some time, and when light was restored, Mr. Henry
released me, and I retired behind the curtain, being immediately
followed by the ladies.”
“ How do you account for Mr. Roydhouse saying that he had
a false beard or whiskers in his hand ?”
“ I cannot account for it at all. I never had any such articles.
Is it likely he would let them go if he had ? I did not take hold of
anything held by Mr. Roydhouse. I think, probably, that in the
excitement of looking for something which he expected to find, be
imagined he saw and held the articles, or was
HYPNOTISED FOR THE MOMENT.
It is quite mystifying to me.
“ I may tell you that at a subsequent private seance I
ENQUIRED OF 4 CISSIE ’
how it all came about, and she tells me that there was a very inhar-
monious feeling at the meeting, and she and her friends felt that
something was going to happen. They therefore thought it better
not to entrance me that evening because it would have been much


more dangerous to me liad I been in an abnormal condition. So
whilst in my normal state they drew only from the lower part of my
body, principally from my legs—in fact at one time I felt as though
I HAD NO LEGS AT ALL,
they were rendered very small and shrunken, and that is how 1 ex-
plain my shoes and stockings coming off.”
“ And about the bag referred to by Mr. Henry, Mrs. Mellon ?”
“ Oh, that was an old bag formerly used by the children, but
lately used by me as a duster. I had been dusting the musical box
just before the seance, and, being rather late, in my hurry put it into the
pocket of the dress 1 was wearing, and which had an outside pocket.
“ Regarding the seizure of the form, everyone who knows any-
thing of the science of materialization knows that if the form is inter-
fered with it must either fly to the medium or the medium to the
form. As the form was held
X HAD TO GO TO IT,”
“ Would you not suppose the form would de-materialise in such
a case ?”
“ Oh, no ; ‘ Cissie ’ was too strongly materialised. She had
too much of my body.”
“ I often feel when ‘ Geoxxlie ’ is outside the cabinet as if I am
he, although I know well that lam not. We have been seen walk-
ing on the lawn in the moonlight at Mr. Joubert’s at Hunter’s Hill,
both together and apart. That was about two years ago. When
‘ Geordie ’ and I were photographed, I felt as though I were he,
though I knew well I was not. We have both been heard speaking
at the same time.”
THE FOLLOWING IS MRS. MELLON’S AFFIRMATION.
“I, the undersigned, do solemnly and sincerely declare as
follows :
“ That I, Annie Mellon, residing at Wahi’oongah, Waverley
Road, Woollahra, gave a piuvate seance for materialization at
my private residence on Friday night, October the 12th, 1894.
Thei’e were px’esent, by invitation, about eighteen guests.
Having read Mr. Henry’s statement, and also the cori’oboration
thereto, I deny them in toto, with all the force of which I am
capable. I fell in a heap off my seat when Mr, Henry grasped
the forax, and then found my left wrist grasped in his. I
seemed to shoot into and absorb the form. I and spiritualists
understand that the phenomenon of my wrist suddenly resolving
itself into that of the form grasped by Mr. Henry would be
explained in the same way as the passage of matter through
matter, as desci’ibed by Mr. Henry’s pet author Johan H.
Zollner, professor of astronomy in the Univei’sity of Leipsic.
“ I cannot reconcile Mr. Henry’s action with his past ex-
periences and protestations in spiiutualistic manifestations-
through me. lam aware that Mr. Henry, being himself a
“ The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


medium, and once having been actually controlled in my pre-
sence and that of others by one of my guides, ‘ Geordie,’ took
‘ Geordie’s’ photograph in his hand, saying, ‘1 am Geordie, I am
Geordie Thompson, Mrs. Mellon’s Geordie. This is my photo-
graph, taken by the doctor, and it is like me, very like me.’ I
am also aware that this gentleman (a frequent guest of mine)
was engaged in publishing a series of psychic photographs, taken
recently through my mediumship, the genuineness of which
photographs he was perfectly clear about, and frequently ex-
pressed himself so in my presence and in the presence of abun-
dant witnesses.
“ This gentleman also undertook, from Professor Zollner’s
remarkable experiments with Mr. Slade, to expose and show up
to contempt an article in the book called ‘ Mediums and Their
Dupes,’ which article was written by Dr. Knaggs in this city.
Though doubting that the book to be published by Mr. Henry
would be a financial success, I, nevertheless, in the cause of
truth, gave Mr. Henry £5O as my share of the undertaking.
“In Mr. Henry’s book, which he called ‘ Miracles in our
Midst,’ was to have appeared a record of our test seances, all of
which he attended, and to none of the details of which he or
any member of the circle objected, except in one instance, to a
searching of me, which searching, however, on the next occasion
was done in the most complete manner by Mrs. Eves and her
maid, both of whom are prepared to solemnly attest it.
“ Mr. Henry himself was prepared to swear to all the facts
of the seances, and I am aware that he wanted to hasten the
matter of this final affirmation, so as to include the fact in his
book.
“ Mr. Henry, being a strong, tall, muscular man, bent upon
exposing me, had ample opportunity to take any mask, beard,
or shawl, or other article, and to prevent me from concealing
them as he said I did. I wore no such old-fashioned appendage
as a bustle, in which he presumes I concealed these articles.
My dress was made very narrow and fitted close to my figure.
“ From the rough and vindictive manner in which Mr. Henry
carried out his intention, and from his evidently preconceived
determination, at all hazards, to expose me—even though he
came laden with floral offerings to me that evening—it would be
absurd to suppose that he would have missed taking his final
proof of fraud in the articles which he states were employed by
me.
“ If a poison be alleged to be administered, surely the poison
must be obtained before proof of guilt is forthcoming.
“Mr. Henry failing to produce these material proofs, which
he could henceforth have brandished as the best advertisement
of his feat, I now, on my part, declare that when my medical
adviser permits it, I shall be prepared to give, and shall, with
God’s help, give proof of my well-known materializing capacity
GRANUMA”—a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


by sitting, after previous searching, in a locked and sealed wire
or iron cage in the presence of reliable and representative wit-
nesses, non-spiritualists included. And I make this on declara-
tion conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by virtue
of the provisions of an Act of the Legislative Council of New
South Wales, passed in the ninth year of her present Majesty,
intituled an Act for the more effective abolition of oaths and
affirmations taken and made in various departments of the
Government of New South Wales, and to substitute declaration
in lieu thereof, and for the suppression of voluntary and extra
judicial oaths and affidavits.
“ ANNIE MELLON.
“ Made and signed before me, at Sydney, this 20th day of
October, 1894.
“ CHARLES LOVELY, J.P.”
Coincidently with the above there appeared an affirmation
made by Mrs. Gale, Mr. Joubert, Mr. Hetherington, Mr. Rumble
and another gentleman whose name we do not wish to give, as
being connected with certain educational departments it might do
him injury. (Strange admission in this boasted age of toleration !) :
“We were present at a seance held at Mrs. Mellon’s house,
Woollahra, on Friday night, October 12, 1894. We were sitting
in the front row of the circle, and, consequently, had the best
opportunity for observing. At the time Mr. Henry grasped the
form we all distinctly heard a thud or sound of a fall, as if the
medium had fallen off her chair. This corroborates Mrs. Mellon’s
statement that she was not on her knees when Mr. Henry grasped
the form, but was suddenly drawn forward off her chair. We saw
neither false beard nor shawl, nor mask, but only the empty black
bag that had been used before the seance to dust the musical box.
Neither shawl, beard, nor mask was produced subsequently, but
only this small bag or common duster. When the light was turned
up all of us, without exception, saw Mrs. Mellon’s face, and we all
of us emphatically declare that there was no mask on it.”
The particular gentleman above alluded to, while having had
exactly the same opportunity as Henry to see, having been over
with him from first to last, has repeatedly reiterated his statement
that, except the drapery, which he distinctly saw “ dissolving away
like smoke,” he saw not a single one of the suspicious articles
mentioned by Henry and Co. Another lady, Mrs. Elverson, was
absent from the city when the above statement was made, else she
would have signed it. It was subsequently said that, owing to her
position on the night in question, she was unable to see anything.
This she asserts is not a fact. She tells us that she was quite close
to Mrs Wallis, and in as good a position to see and hear, and
distinctly heard the thud of the fall of Mrs. Mellon off her chair,
and that when the light was struck she looked straight at Mrs.
Mellon, who, she positively states, wore no mask, nor were any of


the other articles mentioned present. Henry speaks of “ positive
and negative evidence,” thereby implying that nobody could see
anything but himself and his few supporters. But if we refer to
his evidence we will find that he distinctly states that “ everyone
present had an opportunity of seeing Mrs. Mellon ” (mask and all,
of course) in the condition in which “ he had caught her.”
Needless to say that the Press was flooded with correspond-
ence, and overwhelming evidence of Mrs. Mellon’s materializing
power was given by Mr. Joubert, Mr. Morgan, hon. sec. of the
Psychical Research Society of Victoria, Mrs. Rose-Soley, Dr.
MacCarthy and others. The publication of these statements would
of itself fill a volume. The following is a sample of unsolicited
testimony as to her power in times gone by :
“ TO THE EDITOR DAILY TELEGRAPH.
“ Sir, —As I have known Mrs. Mellon for perhaps a longer
period of time than any other person in this colony, and have had
opportunities of witnessing the phenomena produced through her
“ mediumship ” 18 years ago in Newcastle-on-Tyne, as well as
within the last few months in Sydney, I trust you will allow me to
bear testimony to the entire absence of any opportunites for fraud
at any of the seances that I have attended. The story told in your
columns in this morning’s issue is apparently an exposure of fraud,
but it is so oidy to those who have not studied and investigated
spiritualistic and other phenomena. I have no hesitation whatever
in saying that the explanation given by Mrs. Mellon is a correct one,
as far as it relates to the occurrence in question ; but while for many
years I accepted the theory of the spiritualistic school, further
investigation has satisfied me that although the facts of the
phenomena are beyond dispute, the explanation of those phenomena
given by spirits are not sufficient or complete.
“I am pleased to add my testimony to the genuineness of the
manifestations that I have witnessed through the medium both as
Miss Fairlamb and Mrs. Mellon.—Yours, etc.,
“ Lorimer E. Harcus.
“ Sydney, October 19
Mrs. Rose-Soley, of “ Monad,” Balmain, Sydney, in describing
a remarkable seance held in a haunted room in Balmain, says, after
first explaining that Mrs. Mellon was wired in behind the curtain :
“ A materialization before the curtain was demanded and shortly
produced.
“ Two feet in front of the curtain, and the wires behind them,
which imprisoned Mrs. Mellon, in the midst of the ‘circle’ the
now somewhat notorious ‘ Cissy ’ materialized, developing from a
small, nebulous patch on the floor to the four feet high figure in
white drapery, who danced, tripped about, rang a handbell, and
scattered sugarplums. ‘ Cissy ’ was undoubtedly not Mrs. Mellon,
supposing that lady to have been at large at the moment. Mrs.
Mellon may or may not be agile on her knees, as Mr. Henry asserts


she is, but as it was a physical impossibility for her to pass through
the wires, she could scarcely have been skipping about in that
comfortless posture. M. Joubert, who was sitting next to me, took
* Cissy’s ’ hand, which was palpably that of a child, not of a grown,
well-developed woman. After the usual performances, ‘Cissy’ retired
as she had come, slowly shrinking down to the floor, only a white
patch, the size of a hand, being left at last to melt away on the spot
where it first appeared two feet in front of the curtain, and not
more than four feet from the farthest removed sitter.”
The above was in corroboration of Dr. MacCarthy’s instance of
materialization outside the cabinet. The latter gentleman also
described a figure standing away from the sensitive, while both the
sensitive’s hands were in evidence, and instanced many other
remarkable and convincing occurrences.
The question of shrunken extremities, alluded to in her
evidence, being one which people generally cannot understand, Ave
had a short interview with Mrs. Mellon on the subject. She said :
“ Throughout spiritualistic literature many instances of such
are related. If I had sufficient opportunity I should point these
out to you. The case of Madame d’Esperance has already been
cited. Florence Marryat relates a remarkable instance in the case
of Miss Showers. Here it is : ‘ The materialized form led the way
(into the cabinet). I found Miss Showers reposing in an arm-
chair. The first sight of her terrified one. For the purpose of
making any change in her dress as difficult as possible, she wore a
high, tight-fitting, black velvet frock, fastened at the back, and high
Hessian boots, with innumerable buttons. But she now appeared
to be shrunk to half her usual size ; and the dress hung loosely on
her figure. Her arms had disappeared, but, putting my hands up
her dress sleeves, I foxmd them diminished to the size of those of a
child—the fingers reaching only to where the elbows had been. The
same miracle happened to her feet, which only occupied half her
boots. She looked, in fact, like the mummy of a girl of four or six
years old.”
“ And, now, Mrs. Mellon, as regards the sudden absorption of
the sensitive by the fully-materialised form, when the latter is
roughly grasped, what have you to say ?”
“Well, those who know anything of psychic laws or literature
know that this almost invariably happens in such cases. It is
simply a question of balances. If a form takes one-half my
substance and energies, where is the limit ? Why not take three-
fourths or five-sixths, or, for that matter, all, if the balance be
violently disturbed? Hence, when Mr. Volckman rudely seized
‘ Katie King,’ he found he had Florence Cook the medium in his
arms. But on another subsequent occasion this same ‘ Katie
King ’ consented, in proof of genuineness, in the presence of Mr. C.
S. Hall, and others, to dematerialize in the full light of three gas
burners, a melting away process which those who witnested could
not readily forget. This same ‘ Katie King ’ was also viewed all
over with the aid of a phosphorus lamp, and thrice examined as she
“The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


stood beside the medium, Florence Cook, by the celebrated Wm.
Crookes, F.R.S., whose discoveries in chemistry, and important
contributions to science in general, have won for him a world-wide
reputation. Mr. Crookes, to the present day, remains firm in his
convictions, but has grown sick of trying to convince those whom
no amount of evidence will satisfy, and consequently for years back
this once shamefully reviled and persecuted man has, in his
own interests, wisely dropped out of any public investigation of
these matters.”
Here is an important bit of evidence on the part of Mrs. Annie
Besant, as regards the genuine dematerialization of forms at a
seance given by Mrs. Mellon for the latter at the residence of Dr.
MacCarthy, Sydney. We extract it from an interview accorded by
Mrs. Besant to the Melbourne Herald :—
WHAT MRS. BESANT SAW AT ONE OF THE SEANCES.
“As she was present by invitation, Mrs. Besant was disin-
clined to take what might have been regarded as liberties in order
to test the genuineness of the Mellon seance. She says, however,
she is convinced that there was no trickery about the materialization,
still less about the dematerialization of the forms. She felt Mrs.
Mellon’s hands after the seance, and they were exhausted, cold,
flabby, and in every way just like what they should have been after
materialization. ‘ Indeed,’ added Mrs. Besant, ‘ I had to use some
personal effort to bring Mrs. Mellon round.’ She further said, ‘ 1
can only say that I believe the dematerialization was genuine.’
‘ How many forms did you see on the afternoon of your visit ? *
—‘ Four. Three came out together without Mrs. Mellon being
visible, and one with Mrs. Mellon being visible.’
‘ About the disappearance of the forms ? ’ —‘ Well, I saw them
gradually die away to a little spot on the floor, which subsequently
vanished.’ ”
The special figure, the dematerialization of which so satisfied
Mrs. Besant, was that of “ Josephine,” from whom she previously
took a flower. She remarked to Dr. MacCarthy, who sat next her,
in allusion to the dematerialization, “Well, there can be no mistake
about this.” He tells us the curtain did not stir during the time,
and assures us that Mrs. Besant sat within a yard of the form
during this process. It must be remarked that Mr. Henry then, as
usual, was away from the cabinet.
In reply to a letter of ours on the subject of Mrs. Edwards’
strange evidence, given at the eleventh hour, Mrs. Mellon writes :
“ Sir, —One naturally marvels at the conflicting evidence given
after the alleged exposure, especially that by Mrs. Edwards. I shall
not, however, enter into this portion of the subject, except that I
shall ask it to be borne in mind that Mrs. Edwards, is a sensitive
or medium, and, like all sensitives, is subject to influences, and very
powerful ones at times. This is the most charitable view to take.
With due deference to that lady I must say her evidence cannot be
“ GRANUMA a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


considered reliable, so strangely inconsistent has her behaviour been
throughout, I should like to put a few questions.
“ I, Why did she not come forward in the beginning with her
evidence ? . ,
“2. Why have offered to conceal suspicious articles for me,
thus becoming a participant in fraud, if there were any ?
« 8. Will she explain why it is if 1 had these articles, I did not
give them, fearing a search, but on the contrary, indignantly denied
their possession ? ...
“4. Why, having always known ‘Josephine’ to be myself,
did she not long ago, ‘ for the sake of her beloved cause for which
she would shed her blood at least give me a chance of redeeming
myself by pointing this fraud out to me before denouncing me, as it
was her duty to have done, as Lady President of Spiritualists ?
“ 5. Believing me thus to be a fraud, why did she, nevertheless
continue to visit my house weekly as one of her dearest friends and
most devoted adherents ?
“ 6. Why subsequent to the supposed exposure, did she, in
presence of three witnesses state, as attested at a meeting at the
Spiritualistic Hall, that was ‘ an honest medium ?
“7. In what frame of mind was she when she wrote the
following significant paragraph, which appears over her full presi-
dential signature in the Phrenological Journal of Nov. 7th, present
year ? ‘ I think that even Mrs. Besant, will have to speak a little
less positively on the Spiritualistic question after being favoured
with a seance by our wonderful Materializing Medium, the cele-
brated Mrs. Mellon , whose reliability and truth are beyond question.
How are we to reconcile this statement with her subsequent one that
she believed ‘ Josephine ’ to be ‘ my ain self ? ’
“ As regards the horse-hair pads on which she lays such stress,
one knows they are sometimes worn. Many of my friends know I
was in the habit of wearing them (though not next the skin as
stated), and some have seen me wear them when I had no idea of
holding a seance. Why does not Mrs. Edwards, try to be just ?
To my mind however, her most transparently unjust accusation was
that in which she made it appear, that I solicited fradulent help from
her on the night of the seance in the Sunday Times office. How on
earth could she have helped me, when I was in a locked wire cage ?
“ Those who know anything of psychic matters are fully aware
that this ‘ asking for help ’ is just a stock phrase used by mediums
when soliciting psychic aid or sympathy. Mrs. Edwards, herself a
medium, must surely be familiar with it. It was such help that I
desired from Mrs. Edwards. I did not get it, even though the
latter tearfully protested against ‘ the indignity ’ which I had to
suffer during the ‘ humiliating ’ searching to which I was subjected
in her presence.
“ I am, sir, sincerely yours,
“ Annie Mellon.
“ ‘ Wahroonga,’ Waverley Road,
“Woollahra. Ist December, 1894.”


The following letter from Dr. MacCarthy, in reply to a com-
mmnication of ours, the purport of which will be evident as we
read, gives further insight into Mr. Henry’s psychic capacity and his
serious exercise of it, and shows what little dependence can be
placed on his denial thereof :
“ Dear Sir, —
“In reply to your note of November 25th, asking my
opinion as to the genuineness or otherwise of Mr. Henry’s controls
and other phases of mediumship, especially in view of his assertion
that his recognition of the likeness of the materialised form known
as ‘ Geordie ’ was mere pretence, I beg to say that, from abundant
and close observation, 1 am convinced that these so-called ‘ controls’
of Mr. Henry were perfectly genuine instances of the peculiar
hyper-normal physiological condition common to Sensitives. His
other phases of so-called mediumship were equally genuine. These
included clairvoyance and mesmeric power. It is difficult to under-
stand how Mr. Henry can deny he was under genuine influence on
the occasion referred to. I was a witness, and, when he took the
psychic photograph into his hand, his condition was exactly similar
to that exhibited on numerous other occasions. The livid face,
glazed and suffused eyes, accelerated respiration, altered manner,
altered voice, completely altered expression, and uncontrollable
excitement, are unmistakable signs, all of which Mr. Henry
exhibited. I have seen him cry bitterly when under such influence,
and sometimes his voice was raised to the pitch of bellowing, so that,
ultimately, I was in dread to allow him at night into my study,
fearing he would arouse the neighbors.
“As a telepathist and clairvoyant, he exhibited his power
(especially in the latter phase) hundreds of times in my house, and
I can vouch for his undoubted power as a mesmerist. I shall give
an instance, which will no doubt interest you, as showing the subtle
nature of the forces that underlie psychic phenomena, and the
necessity herein for well-balanced conditions. You know of my
door test. Well, a short time ago I went to the country to recruit
my health. On my return, feeling much stronger, I called my
psychic, Maggie Power, to try this test as usual anticipating that, with
increased health, I should be able to give her increased psychic aid,
especially as her health was then in good condition. But the door,
which, before I left, would close instantly with a bang without
contact, would not now yield an inch. We tried several times and
failed. 1 was astonished and puzzled. I could not account for it,
but at last an idea suddenly occurred to me, and I asked if anything
had happened in my absence. She said, ‘ No, doctor, except that one
night we were sitting, and Mr. Henry made passes and mesmerised
me.’ The secret was out! My power over her was, for the time
being, supplanted by Mr. Henry’s mesmeric influence ! 1 was
greatly annoyed, and, I assure you, many weeks elapsed before I
-could break down that influence.
“ Mr. Henry, during some of our sittings, made frequent,
unexpected attempts to mesmerise me, but my will power was always


too strong for him. During these sudden and futile efforts on his
part, his passes were so rapid, and the muscular exertion used so
great, that the floor would actually shake, and the whole room
tremble with communicated vibrations.
“ I am, dear sir, yours truly,
“CHARLES W. MacCARTHY, M.D.
“ Sydney, Nov. 27th, 1894.”
In relation to the test at the Sunday Times office, the following
speaks for itself :
Mrs. Mellon having been asked by us for her opinion regarding
certain arguments of the Sunday Times , mainly in relation to her
health, comparing results at different seances, sent the following
reply :
“ It is another specimen of what I think is termed ‘ bolstering
up ’ Press arguments, turned and twisted to suit the ends in view,
without any hesitation in using what is inaccurate. This further
attack on me is cruel and unjust in the extreme. Will these people
never stop harassing me ? Where is boasted human feeling, when
a few paltry advertisements or the possibility of gain by a sensational
paragraph is sufficient to change its tone regardless of the wrong-
done or the suffering caused to an individual 1 These statements of
the Sunday Times are the most manifestly unjust of any that have
yet appeared. A comparison is drawn between the seance in their
office and the results at the Besant seance and late tests. They say
that at the Sunday Times seance, ‘ judging from appearance,’ I
was ‘ not in a much poorer state of health than usual.' I wish one-
of these gentlemen experienced my condition then, and he would
hold a very different opinion. I tell you mere unvarnished facts. For
three or four days previously my mind was in such a state of torture
that I could not eat. I also suffered from hemorrhage ; and when,
I arrived at the seance room I was more fitted to be in bed than un-
dergoing a trying ordeal. The indignities I, as a lady, had to sub-
mit to at the hands of a professional searcher, even called forth the-
vehement and almost tearful protestations of Mrs. Edwards, whose
subsequent conduct I cannot explain, unless by some spontaneous
mesmeric influence. These indignities were revolting to me in the
extreme, and the half veiled sneers with which I was greeted by cer-
tain people (I do not allude to the Sunday Times officials, who, on
the whole, treated me courteously) were hard to be borne. Why, I
was looked upon by these people alluded to rather in the light of a
condemned criminal or a wild beast than a human being. Every
fibre in my body revolted. Where came the kind ‘ sympathetic’
circle then ? My former friends, who until now protested their be-
lief in me, had turned sourly against me, and were here in force
antagonizing my psychic effort, If Nature’s great law of sympathy
be absohxtely essential for results, where was that sympathy then ?
It was only present with a few fast friends, The harmony of the
circle was rudely broken. Henry and others, until the night of the
alleged exposure, whatever they may now say, believed in me and
“ The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


gave their sympathy, else they were speaking and acting a falsehood.
Even if they doubted, the effect would only be neutral. But now ?
I caught from their looks and presence (I suppose because I am
blessed or cursed with the faculty of sensitiveness) nothing but vin-
dictiveness and hatred. Their words and acts confirmed me.
“ If physical strength were necessary in me for my effort, where
was it ? If mental calmness were essential was it to be found in the
worried creature in that cage ? I seethed in mental agony. No
wonder I fainted and collapsed. I saw too late my mistake. I
should have waited till in good health. I failed. How could I have
succeeded ? But Avhy should the Sunday Times have broken faith
with me, and rushed off to print without permitting me to try again,
as I distinctly understood was the agreement ? Press interests were
at stake.
“ They say that at the Besant seance 1 was in as poor
health as at the seance' held at their office. Far from it. I
was some days before in bed, to be sure, with severe pain, but this
pain had passed completely away and did not disturb my constitu-
tion in the least. Mrs. Besant, on previously speaking with my
medical adviser, learned from him that ‘ the illness ay as trivial ’ and
had passed away, else she Avould never ha\ T e desired a seance, Mrs.
Besant can verify this. Such a statement, therefore, on the part of
the Sunday Times is untrue. It is equally untrue to say I Avas ‘in
much better health at the seance presided over by Sir William
Windeyer than at the Besant Seance.’ There Avas a vast difference
in my condition. (See the medical certificates.) For those aylio
understand the A B C of psychic matters, it Avill be readily intelligi-
ble that results at a test seance like this must be far less than at an
ordinary seance — at least until ucav and harsh conditions are, after a
lengthed period, OA’ercome. It is necessary, in fact, to become
familiarised Avith entirely neAv conditions. It is childish for a news-
paper to argue that there was ‘no occasion ’ for other tests after
the failure at its office. It is equally erroneous to lead the public
to believe I produced only Avliite drapery at the recent tests. To
prop up this statement they use the Avords ‘ forms of an intensely
Avliite appearance like drapery,’ No such words, or any having a
similar meaning, appeared in the report of the committee.
Here are the exact words employed by the committee, viz ;
4 Forms and Avhat appeared like drapery of an intensely Avliite color,
have appeared in a manner not to be accounted for by the kiAvs of
Nature, as at present understood.’ And, as if to emphasize the fact
that forms and not drapery alone appeared, four more allusions to
4 forms ’ occur in the report; for Ave read in it that 4 two in-
tensely Avliite forms appeared . . . One form appeared several
times . . Tavo forms appeared in succession. . , The other Avas a
much taller form , &c. . . In fact, to be plain, the Sunday Times,
as I have shown, has contorted the evidence here and suppressed
these facts to support its statement. Is this Justice ? But
though, under a very bad condition of health and mental disturbance,
I have thus materialized, I hope to give such full satisfaction yet to
4> GRANUMA”—a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


my committee as shall leave no further open for my enemies to vent
their petty spleen because of my success and the overthrow of theii
miscarried specvdations.”
For ourselves, mere outsiders in this matter, and to whom these
psychic marvels, a few of which, in the lower phases, we haAe wit-
nessed, are as inexplicable as they are impossible to simulate except in
miserably poor fashion —the sham being apparent and very unlike the
reality—we are forced, at all events, in viewing the evidence of this
seizure to notice certain facts which stand out clearly and unmis-
takably. They are as follows :
(1) The wildly contradictory evidence. We allude to the
positive evidence of those who could see as well as others, and yet
did not see anything incriminating.
(2) The previous attitude of the chief witness against Mrs.
Mellon ; his various mediumistic influences, and proneness not
alone thereby to conjure up in his mind certain fixed absurdities,
such as the discovery of cemeteries in the back yards of private
residences, but also his persistent efforts to force his opinions on
others.
(3) His power as a mesmerist. By this we do not of course-
mean to insinuate that he would deliberately mesmerise people into
his way of thinking ; but it is just possible that in the atmosphere
of the seance room spontaneous mesmeric influences would arise
through a sudden, unwitting transference to receptive minds, of
strong mental impressions.
(4) Defective knowledge of psychic laws generally, this subject
being yet a comparatively unstudied one.
(5) Evidence of similar apparent deceptions in those whoso
psychic powers have been subsequently proved.
(6) The non-production of any of the incriminating articles
mentioned.
(7) Believing the description given of the genuine demateriali-
sation of the form known as “ Josephine ” on the night of the
seizure, crediting also Mrs, Besant’s description of a similar
dematerialization, this process, in the same figure, having been also
critically witnessed on many occasions by others, including Dr.
MacCarthy, who had always the privilege of being near ; and com-
paring it with a similar process described by the latter gentleman
and by Mrs. Rose-Soley, in relation to the little figure of “ Cissie,”
we wouid naturally ask ourselves two questions, viz.:—
First.—Why, if “ Cissie ” were produced by psychic means on
other occasions, should it be necessary to simulate the figure on this
particular occasion ?
Secondly.—lf it be answered that the poAver had Avaned and
was propped up artificially as regards this one form, Avhy have
selected the least difficult, namely, a small form, while the larger


one, “ Josephine,” was psychically produced, as evidenced by her
inimitable dematerialization into “luminous semi-transparent
vapor,” gradually narrowing to a “ little spot on the floor,” which
was previously observed by Mrs. Besant ?
Taking into account the above considerations, and others
equally strong, and bearing in mind the overwhelming testimony,
now and for years past, of Mrs. Mellon’s psychic powers, the con-
tradictory evidence arising out of Mr. Henry’s ill-conceived effort
should utterly fail to bring conviction of deception on her part
home to the minds of thinking individuals.


CHAPTER 111.
Weighed in the Balance.
The Tests and Subsequent Correspondence.
SO positive were the accusers of Mrs. Mellon that
no further tests would he forthcoming, and so
deeply imbued was the popular mind with this idea,
that quite a sensation was created on the morning of
Saturday, Ist December, 1894, when the following
correspondence appeared in the Sydney Morning
Herald :
SOME TEST SEA NGES.
We have been requested to publish the following correspond-
ence on a subject which has excited public curiosity:—
“ To his Honor Sir William Windeyer, Judge of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales.
“ Sir, —The genuine character of my mediumship having
been disputed, I should esteem it a great favour if you would
consent to superintend the examination, under test conditions,
of the bond fide character of the phenomena occurring by reason
of the psychical powers attributed to me.
“I would leave to you the choice of the committee of
investigation, with full permission to adopt any test which
would guarantee the actuality of the phenomena obtained, and
I will give the committee appointed by you full power to publish
their opinion with reference to the sitting.
“ I am, Sir, truly yours,
“Annie Mellon.”
“Sydney, November 2nd, 1894.
“Dear Mrs. Mellon, —In reply to your letter received this
morning, requesting me to superintend an examination under
test conditions as to the bond fide character of certain phenomena
alleged to take place through your influence or mediumship, I
think it right in the interest of truth to comply with your
request, on condition that the choice of the committee of
investigation is left entirely to me.
“2. That we adopt any test that we think expedient.
“ 3. That we are to be at liberty to publish the result of
our enquiry, these being, in fact, the terms suggested by you
in your letter.
Yours truly,
“ W. C. Windeyer.’
“The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


“Sydney, November 29th, 1894.
“To Mrs. Mellon.
“ Dear Madam, —We, the undersigned members of the
committee which was formed and sat under the conditions
mentioned in your letter to Sir William Windeyer, asking him
to conduct an inquiry as to the reality of certain phenomena
said to occur in your presence, having held three sittings—on
the 16th, the 23rd, and 26th instant—have felt it our duty to
discontinue our investigation till you are in better health, in
accordance with the medical opinions given by Drs. Creed and
Pickburn in the accompanying certificates. We think, however,
that it is only just to you to state the result of our inquiry so
far as it has proceeded, as we are informed by the medical
gentlemen before mentioned that a prolonged suspense in your
present state of mental anxiety may not only retard your
restoration to health, but may still more seriously impair it.
“We hope, however, to continue our inquiry on your
restoration to health. The result of our investigation is that
we are all convinced that in your presence, when you have been
tested under conditions that prevented any deception being
practised by you, forms and what appeared like drapery of an
intensely white colour have appeared in a manner not to be
accounted for by the laws of nature as at present understood.
“In conducting our sittings, all doors and -windows giving
access to the room in Mr. Greville’s house in which we sat were
locked and fastened with tape, nailed and sealed. You were, as
we are informed by two ladies of the committee who superin-
tended that portion of the investigation, provided with an entire
change of clothing for the sittings. You were then, in the
presence of all of us, placed, on two occasions, in a black calico
bag, the string of which was drawn round your neck in such a
manner as to prevent any possibility of your getting out of it,
and the string and knot securing it fastened with an impressed
seal made with sealing-wax. You were then placed behind a
black curtain, and had a strong thread fastened with a secure
knot drawn closely round your neck, this thread being reeved
through a fixed object in such a manner that if you moved from
your chair your moving must have been detected by Mr.
Copeland, the member of the committee who held the end of the
thread, and who certifies that no movement of yours took place
which would allow of your appearing where the curtain was
opened, and two intensly white forms appeared, even supposing
you could have got out of the bag, which at the end of the
sitting was found with the seal unbroken. At one of these
sittings one form appeared several times, at the other, two
forms appeared in succession. The smaller was between 2ft.
and 3ft. high, and was seen and heard to move as if dancing.
It also emitted a kissing sound. The other was a much taller
form. You were on a third occasion placed in a cage made of
|in. wire netting, placed close against the walls in a corner of
GRANUMA”—a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


the room. The cage was 6ft. high and 3£t. square, and was
wired all over the top and securely fastened to a separate
wooden floor of its own. The door of the cage was locked with
a padlock brought by the chairman of the committee. A wire
was then reeved in and out of the wire netting and carried all
round the cage, its ends being twisted together and secured by
sealing-wax to a piece of card which was sealed with a seal. On
this occasion the searching ladies of the committee not only
state that your clothes were entirely changed, but that no white
garment was worn by you, and that no white pocket-handker-
chief was allowed you. Under these conditions the black
curtains outside the cage were opened, and an intensely white
appearance like drapery extended apparently Sin. or 4in.
beyond the curtain from the ground to a height of between sft.
and 6ft. and Sin. or 6in. wide. The drapery at its foot appeared
to lie upon the floor in a rounded mass about a foot in diameter,
and after the upper portion of the figure disappeared still
showed on the floor till it gradually faded away. A voice,
apparently of a male, was heard at the same time, stating in
answer to a question that the figure was not strong enough to
put its hand out. At the close of this sitting you were found
sitting in your chair, apparently in a deep sleep, with the
fastenings of the cage before described perfectly intact. There
were two gas-burners in the room, giving sufficient light to
enable the members of the committee to see each other sitting
in their chairs whilst this phenomenon took place, and to leave
no doubt on the mind of any of us as to its reality, and as to
the impossibility of the appearance being produced by you by
any kind of trick or deception.
“ Of the sitters Sir William Windeyer sat nearest to the
curtain, about 3ft. off’ it; the rest of us in a circle extended
from him, and no one being more than 10ft. from, and all in
full view of it and of each other.
“No person was in the room, except yourself and the
undersigned,
“W. C. Windeyer “ Annie Bright
Jno. M. Creed
Ewd. Greville
Thomas Pickburn
N. Joubert
Henry Copeland
A. R. Rose-Soley
Charlotte Ross
Ellen Ellis
Ida L. Copeland
Lily Copeland.”
Certificates referred to in the above letter.
“ 22 College-street, Hyde Park.
“Mrs. Mellon is in very feeble health, and has been
suffering for some time from hemorrhages ; she requires several
weeks’ rest and change for her recovery.
“ Thomas Pickburn, M.D.
“November 23, 1894.”


“ Mrs. Mellon is in such ill-health (accompanied by
hemorrhage) that complete physical and mental rest for some
weeks is essential to her recovery.
“John Creed, L.R.0.P., &c.
“November 27, 1894.”
Needless to say this came like a thunderclap
upon those who disbelieved, or pretended to dis-
believe, in Mrs. Mellon’s super-normal powers. It
was easy to perceive that certain gentlemen, running
an innocent little literary speculation, arising out
of the supposed exposure, would take their dis-
comfiture with had grace, and would call heaven
and earth to the aid of their imperilled speculation.
In this they were considerably aided by a tactical
error on the part of the Committee in not, in the
first instance, having included one or more members
of the City Press on the Committee ; and, secondly,
in having forwarded the report to one journal only.
We feel sure, if members of the Press had been
present, that they would have done justice to Mrs.
Mellon. The Country Press, however, took gene-
rally an impartial view, and showed, in some
instances, a decided leaning towards Mrs. Mellon.
The following letter from I)r. MacCarthy to
the Sunday Times of the 2nd December, speaks for
itself:—
“ Tests whicli were by certain people supposed not to be
forthcoming have taken place, and Mrs. Mellon s super-normal
power has been satisfactorily demonstrated. Of course we shall
hear of objections, else my knowledge of human nature is faulty.
These objections will probably resolve themselves into three, viz,,
hypnotism, partiality, or conjuring. It is unlikely that two
noted hypnotists like Dr. Creed and Mr. Joubert could have
been hypnotised. Bias may be trumpeted forth, however absurd
the supposition, but who can question the competence, honor and
truthfulness of those who have so clearly and minutely stated
the facts in relation to the tests gone through 1 There remains
the last straw grasped by an overwhelmed opposition, viz., con-
juring. Well, we can settle the matter readily. A clever
conjurer is at present in town, Mr. Hosking. I shall give him
£5O if, under exactly the same conditions as with Mrs. Mellon,
he can produce similar forms. I shall allow him a cartload of
paraphernalia, and shall also allow him Mr. Henry’s assistance
into the bargain.


“ These objections being thus easily eliminated, if the Com-
mittee, one and all, saw these forms, as unmistakably testified by
them, they, as a matter of course, saw them composed of
material which was produced by some occult means. Therefore,
they witnessed a materialisation through Mrs. Mellon.
“ It is astounding, considering her very low state of health,
that any occult manifestation whatever came through her; but,
at least, in a sympathetic circle, she was afforded the conditions,
without which nature will not allow of the evolution of the
necessary forces and material.
“ But let me again say that this does not prove spiritualism ;
and let me warn those who think it does, and who at the same
time wish to preserve intact their orthodox opinions, to keep out
of an investigation which is only fit for those who can keep
their heads cool, and who look, as I do, for some tangible good
to humanity from the study and utilization of this all potent
dual combination of material and force.”
As events proved, the Doctor was correct in
his prediction of the objections that would be used
by the now overwhelmed opposition.” Sir
William Windeyer and his committee were credu-
lous fools, and were decievedby this artful conjurer;
a stern judge, conversant with all species of fraud,
was outwitted and befooled by a mere woman, and
so also were wise legislators, profesional gentlemen
of ability and prominence, and others of both sexes
whose astuteness cannot be questioned.
Forsooth! a conjurer should have been present!
What is the value or necessity of a conjurer’s
evidence in face of tests that precluded the possi-
bility of the possession or use of paraphernalia on
the part of Mrs. Mellon, or of movement from the
position in which she was rigidly imprisoned ?
There is a limit beyond which conjuring is im-
possible, and that limit was well passed in these
tests. Now, as proof of its impossibility, Dr.
MacCarthy offered £5O in his challenge to Mr.
Hosking, who came to Sydney “ on spec ” after the
alleged exposure, and who, here and in Melbourne,
had been doing “ bag tricks ” and producing sham
materializations of Mrs. Mellon’s forms before ad-
miring audiences.
“ The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


Those who have witnessed Mrs. Mellon’s
materializations, and have also seen the conjurer’s
imitation, assert that the sham is widely different
from the reality.
Here is Mr. Hosking’s characteristic reply,
headed in large type in the Daily Telegraph. (The
epistle does no discredit to his admitted juggling
powers):—
“A CHALLENGE ACCEPTED.
“ Mr. Ernest Hosking, a conjurer and society entertainer,
writes as follows :
“ 1 Dr. MacCarthy challenges me to produce the same
phenomena, and under the same test conditions, as given through
Mrs. Mellon. lam quite ready and glad of the chance to accept
his liberal offer. I want no assistance. lam quite able to look
after myself. So, if the Doctor will arrange for me to see this
wondetful manifestation through, in order that I may know
what I have to do, I will immediately set to work and give him
and a committee of gentlemen appointed the same results, and
perhaps more. All I can say is that I hope he will bring the
seance about at once, for my stay in Sydney is limited.
“ ‘ I also challenge Dr. MacCarthy to exhibit his phenomenal
door test before a committee of gentlemen, two to be selected by
himself and two by me, on any door suggested by the committee
—I to apply the test.’”
Now comes the Doctor’s reply, which leaves no
loop-hole for the conjurer, who, in face of the
tempting offer of <£so. would undoubtedly come
forward if he were able to accomplish this boasted
sham materialization under the severe conditions
imposed on Mrs. Mellon. But the Doctor very
well anticipated the outcome. It appears that Mr.
Hosking a few days before, speaking with him on
the subject of the “ hag trick ” of conjurers, freely
admitted that he could not do it it placed and
secured in a bag not prepared for this special trick
by himself or an accomplice, and if tied and held in
the manner adopted with Mrs. Mellon, leaving
aside other overwhelming precautions taken with
regard to this lady :
“ GRANUMA a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


“ CHALLENGE TO MB. HOSKING.
“ TO THE EDITOR.
“Sir, —As Mr. Hosking’s stay in town is limited, not
knowing his address, I hasten to reply to him through your
columns. You have, as a heading to his letter in to-day’s issue,
in large type the words “A Challenge Accepted ; ” but, if you
will read carefully Mr. Hosking’s remarks, you will find that my
challenge is not accepted ; for, after the manner of conjurers, he
cunningly puts in the proviso, £ if the Doctor will arrange for
me to see this wonderful manifestation through, in order that I
may know what to do,’ &c. In other words, he will not attempt
the performance of this feat unless afforded an opportunity of
witnessing the tests just gone through successfully by Mrs,
Mellon ! lam not a conjurer, but I have some common sense.
I shall not allow him to wriggle out of the matter in this way.
“Now to business. He says he requires no assistance.
Here, therefore, are my terms, in exact accordance with my
challenge, and following exactly the conditions of the tests just
accomplished by Mrs. Mellon :
“1. As Judge Windeyer appointed Ids own committee, I
shall, to prevent collusion, appoint mine.
“2. I shall select the place of meeting, to which he shall not
have access until the night of the sitting, when he shall finish up
with both tests, bag and cage.
“3. I shall supply the bag, cage, clothes and other articles in
accordance with those employed at the recent tests.
“ 4. I and another member of the committe shall see him
undress to the skin. We shall then search him, bring him to
another part of the room, as was done in Mrs. Mellon’s case, and
re-dress him in clothes supplied by me, he not to have access
to the seance room until these things are accomplished, and not
to come in contact with any but the searchers untill he shall
step into the bag or the cage, we not to lose sight of him
meanwhile.
“5. That I shall superintend the fixing of him in the double-
seamed black bag, as used in Mrs, Mellon’s case; also the tying,
sealing, fixing of ‘strong thread’ round his neck, and the
reeving of it through ‘a fixed object,’ namely, the cage, in and
out across two corners, commencing a few inches from and behind
his head to the right, as in Mrs. Mellon’s case ; the string being
finally carried at right angles and held by myself during the
sitting, both ends of the tapes of the bag after tying and sealing
them to be brought over the curtain-rod and secured there in
view of everyone during the sitting, as in Mrs. Mellon’s case.
“6. That the seals, knots, and bag shall be examined sub-
sequently, as in her case.
“7. That I and the other searcher shall superintend the
subsequent undressing, and shall again search him, this when
both tests are gone through.


“8. That I supply a padlock for the |in. mesh cage, which
will be of same dimensions, &c., as that employed in Mrs.
Mellon’s case.
“ 9. That 1 shall superintend the locking of him in the cage,
as well as its being reeved through with a strand of wire, the
twisted ends of which I shall see secured and sealed.
“ 10. That, under these circumstances, he must produce both
4 forms and drapery,’ the latter of ‘ intensely white appearance,’
both coming ‘ three or four inches beyond the curtain,’ and
ranging in height between two and six feet; one of these forms
to be ‘ seen and heard to move as if dancing.’ One of the
figures must de-materialize, as in the case of that described by
the committee
“11. That the cage and seals shall be examined subsequently,
and the re-searching, <fec., done as before mentioned.
“ 12. That I shall have the option of publishing the result.
I shall allow him to bring his own slippers with light soles, as in
Mrs. Mellon’s case, and not boots.
“ These are my terms, in exact accordance with Mrs. Mellon’s
recent tests. Now, then. Mr. Hosking, yes or no? lam
waiting.
“ As regards his allusion to my door test, we shall talk about
that when he performs his feat. One thing at a time, please,
Mr. Hosking. It will not do to create a diversion by the con
venient ‘patter’ peculiar to the genus conjurer. You may
cleverly do the common bag trick which most of us know all
about, Mr. Hosking, but you will not do the bag test as done by
Mrs. Mellon. —Yours, &c.,
“ Charles W. MacCarthy, M.D.
“ 223 Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park,
“Sydney, December 3.”
The public eagerly awaited Mr. Hosking’s reply
to this straightforward demand.
r Lhe next morning’s Dally Telegraph contained
the reply of the celebrated conjurer who was going
to stamp out Mrs. Mellon in one act—even as his
coadjutor Henry had boasted he could do, if given
the same conditions :
“ DR. MACCARTHTS CHALLENGE.
“to the editor.
“Sir, —ln your issue of to-day I see that Dr. MacCarthy
would like to have this test seance all his own way. I say again
that I must see Mrs. Mellon go through these tests, for, with all
respect to the members of her committee, I cannot place any
reliance whatever in the statements made in their I’espect. Here


is a case in point : In their signed declaration, there is no men-
tion of Mrs. Mellon’s hands being tied, but in to-day’s issue of
your paper Mr. Copeland writes:— ‘ I will defy either Mr. Henry
or anyone else to untie the knots I tied, with their hands at
liberty, and in the light, while hers were sealed, in the black
bag, and in the dark.’ Were her hands tied or not 1 ? And, also,
in the first portion of the report there is no statement leading
one to believe that she had white underclothing on, but Mr.
Copeland writes to-day that she had white underclothing and a
white collar on. I should also like to know very much why the
curtains in front of the cage were left open. Let me see this
living phenomenon that is baffling so many level-headed and far-
seeing people, and I will at once duplicate her work, or stop her
materializations. I only want what’s fair. I might ask the
doctor, would lie prescribe for a patient whose case he had not
diagnosed ? With regard to the bag test I perform, I may state
that the doctor is far out. I can, if he likes, soon satisfy him on
that point, for he forgets, perhaps, he gave me a little information
about bag tricks at his house. Hoping that the doctor will
speedily bring about Mrs. Mellon’s test seance, so that I can set
to work, —Yours, etc.,
“Ernest Hosking.”
Mentally, as well as physically, it is apparent
that Mr. Hosking has few rivals in the great art of
Wriggling. He was not required to “ diagnose ”
the case, but the prescription was handed to him in
black and white to produce, if he could, similar
results with it. He knew right well he would not
he included in the test committee.
So under this flimsy,pretext, the worthy con-
jurer hacked out of it. The Doctor’s proposition
was safe. It would have been equally safe had his
challenge been accepted. With tests similar to
Mrs. Mellon’s, “ the trick ” simply could not be
done. His pretended acceptance, and subsequent
graceful refusal, to accept conditions undergone
successfully by Mrs. Mellon, raised her case to
Alpine heights. Mr. Hosking’s exhibitions could
in no light be regarded as equivalent to tests. All
the opportunities for conjuring were transparently
present in them. The white undergarments he
alludes to in Mrs. Mellon’s case (a mere white
tight-fitting combination, bought by a member of
“The BILLY TEA’’ output Is a ton per day.


the Committee, and not worn in the cage test),
would have been supplied to him by the Doctor,
but it would have been utterly useless for his
purpose —and he well knew it.
So much for the conjuring theory. Let us
now glance over the furious efforts of Henry to
“ boom his little speculation.” We extract from
the Daily Telegraph of December 3rd, 1894 :
“ WHAT MR. HENRY SAYS:
“Asked what he thought of the affair, Mr. Henry said;
•“ She has completely got away with them. With the exception
of one or two of the sitters, about whose attitude I am in doubt,
they were all Spiritualists, and, of course, a circle of people like
that are not competent to judge as to the genuineness or other-
wise of Mrs. Mellon’s performances. She has had 25 years
experience as a medium, and has been sharp enough to undergo
some very strict tests at the hands of the London Psychiral
Research Society, actually producing ‘ manifestations ’ before
that body; but it is only fair to add that the Society were so
impressed at the time with the appearance of deception, that
they refused to sign any reports. In fact, it has been placed on
record that the whole of Mrs. Mellon’s seances before the London
Psychical Society, extending over three years, were ‘ thoroughly
unsatisfactory.’ Those are the words of Mrs. Henry Sidgwick,
“ To return to Mr. Justice Windeyer’s test stance, however,
you observe that in the report presented by them to Mrs. Mellon,
the sitters say : —‘You were, as we are informed by two ladies
of the Committee who superintended that portion of the in-
vestigation, provided with an entire change of clothing for the
sittings ’
“ ‘Yes ; but I do not think that any of those ladies are com-
petent to search a woman of Mrs. Mellon’s professional standing.’
replied Mr. Henry. ‘ I think that, had a couple of professional
searchers, like those engaged by Mr. Roydhouse, in view of the
Sunday Times seance, been employed, there would have been no
manifestations. Careful searching, both before and after, is the
key to the whole position.’
“ There were other precautions taken. For instance, Mrs.
Mellon was tied up in a black calico bag, the string of which was
fastened round her neck, and further secured by an impressed
seal; whilst another cord, tied round her neck, was reeved
through a ‘ fixed object,’ and held by Mr. Copeland, who de-
tected no movement during the manifestation of the forms,
which are described as ‘ two intensely white forms.’
“ Well, it often happens that the most important point in a
search is overlooked, and in the end transpires quite accidentally.
granuma”— a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion


I know myself that in writing these accounts of seances pub-
lished in ‘ Spookland,’ there are very many little points I should
have overlooked had I not been suspicious, but which, when
joined together, made an important chain of evidence. It seems
a small thing in itself that ‘ Cissie ’ never crossed the curtains,
but still it was the point that gave me the ultimate clue. They
say that the thread was £ reeved through a fixed object.’ They
ought to have explained what the fixed object was—whether a
piece of furniture or a ringbolt in the wall.
“ And, now, as to the manifestations. Speaking of the two
first tests of the series, the members of the circle say—
MBS. MELLON AND “GEORDIE,
‘At one of these sittings one form appeared several times, at
the other two forms appeared in succession. The smaller was
between 2ft. and 3ft. high, and was seen and heard to move as if
dancing. It also emitted a kissing sound. The other was a much
taller form.’
“ The ‘kissing sound ’ goes for nothing,” said Mr. Henry,
“because that could be done by the medium. And as for the rest,
provided that she were able to secrete a needle and cotton, there
was nothing to prevent her ripping the seam of the bag and
getting a hand or foot out, in which case the seal around her
neck would be of very little moment. By the way, it does not


say whether the bag was carefully examined afterwards, a most
important point. This black bag business is a very old trick
with mediums, and has been exposed over and over again. It is
often done by the medium pulling the thread out of the bottom
of the bag. She is then practically free.”
“ But how about sewing the seam up again ?”
“ Mrs. Mellon might have previously secreted a needle and
thread in the cabinet, or, for that matter, in her hair. Indeed,
I am not sure that all the white material she would require to
produce the manifestations might not have been secreted in her
hair. Then, again, on these occasions the medium was not
MRS. MELLON, “ CISSIE,” AND “ JOSEPHINE.
secured to the chair, which would leave her free to move about
quite enough for her purpose, if she did take the string out of
the bag, I notice, too, in reading the description of the third
1 test,’ that no white garment was worn by Mrs. Mellon on that
occasion, but we are not told that a similar precaution was taken
on the two former occasions. At the first two seances Mrs.
Mellon was not in a cage. At the third she was ; but judging
from the report, she was not then placed in a bag, nor was she
tied to any 1 fixed object.’ She was thus at liberty to manoeuvre
iust as she pleased inside the cage


“Very good. And now as to the third seance. We are
told that Mrs. Mellon was placed in a cage of |-in. wire netting;
that the door of the cage was locked ; and further, that the cage
was bound round by a wire, the two ends of which were joined
and sealed to a card. Nor was that all. ‘On this occasion,’ we
are told, ‘ the searching ladies of the committee not only state
that your clothes were entirely changed, but that no white
garment was worn by you, and that no white pocket handker-
chief was allowed you.’ Yet
‘ Under these conditions the black curtains outside the cage
were opened, and an intensely white appearance like drapery ex-
tended apparently 3in. or 4in. beyond the curtain from the ground
to a height of between sft. and 6ft., and Sin. or 6in. wide.’
“ Since Mrs. Mellon underwent a complete change of cloth-
ing in order that she should have no chance of making use of
white garments in the production of the forms, it would be
interesting to know by whom the change of clothing was pro-
vided. Mas it another suit of her own clothes, or were they
supplied by some member of the circle ? This is important,
because I have no doubt that it would be quite possible for her
to secrete in the lining enough white muslin for the kind of
‘ manifestation ’ described. Once having obtained the necessary
material, it would be a very easy thing to project a piece of wire
or a stick through the opening of the curtains and suspend from
it ‘the intensely white appearance-like drapery.’ Such a piece
of stick or wire might be concealed in the medium’s shoe, or even
a piece of whalebone from the dress bodice might have been
employed.
‘ Then we are told how the lower portion of the drapery
gradually ‘ faded away.’” Listen to this:
The drapery at its foot appeared to lie upon the floor in
a rounded mass about a foot in diameter, and after the upper
portion of the figure disappeared, still showed on the floor till it
gradually faded away.’
“Well, I have frequently,” said Mr. Henry, “seen the lower
portion of the drapery lying on the floor for some time after
the form itself had disappeared, and it always struck me that
the medium had forgotten to pull it into the cabinet. It is an
easy thing to make the upper part of the figure disappear by
pulling it back a little and drawing the curtains together in
front of it, leaving- the lower portion of the drapery alone
visible, and that lying on the floor, as described by the sitters,
untd eventually it also was dragged behind the curtains. If
they give me the same conditions I will produce a similar effect.”
And then the voice—A voice, apparently of a male, was
heard at the same time stating in answer to a question that the
figure was not strong enough to put its hand out.’
“Mr Henry smiled. ‘ Well, with regard to the voice,’ he
added, ‘ I have heard that voice so often that I know its capa-
“ The BILLY TEA ” output is a ton pep day.


bilities, and could swear positively that I have detected Mrs.
Mellon’s intonations on several occasions when ‘ Geordie ’ has
been supposed to be speaking. Indeed, I said so to several
persons previously to the exposure. Upon one occasion, at a
small-table seance at Miss St. Hill’s, when Mrs. Mellon was
giving an exhibition of her power as a physical medium, the
same gruff voice addressed the sitters, stating that he was
1 Geordie,’ and making a few remarks. The voice then said
‘ Good-night ’ three times—first, apparently, in the middle of
the table, and the second time by Mrs, Mellon’s left hand. Miss
St. Hill was sitting next to Mrs. Mellon, at her left-hand side,
and when the voice said 1 good-night ’ for the second time, she
states that she felt Mrs. Mellon’s hair brush against her elbow
as if she had suddenly lowered her head to produce the voice in
that position. It was undoubtedly clever, but depended
principally for its success upon the marvellous audacity of the
woman.
“ There were two gas-burners in the room, giving sufficient
light to enable the members of the Committee to see each other
sitting in their chairs.
“ Mrs. Mellon is always very careful to have no light near
the cabinet. There may have been two gas-burners in the room,
but doubtless they were sufficiently far away from the cabinet
to answer the purpose of the medium. I have seen one gas-
burner in the front room of Mrs. Mellon’s own house turned full
on for a couple of minutes whilst ‘ Geordie ’ was showing him-
self, and yet the light in the back room near the cabinet was so
dim that one could not distinguish whether he was looking at a
mask or a human face. Obviously there is great art in regu-
lating the light, and Mrs. Mellon has i-educed it to perfection.”
“ Pardon me. Whilst the phenomenon took place the
light was sufficient 1 to leave no doubt on the mind of anyone of
us as to its reality, and as to the impossibility of the appearance
being produced by you (Mrs. Mellon, that is) by any kind of
trick or deception.’ ”
“ That is a very bold statement, considering that these
people were all relying on the evidence of their eyesight, the
most easily deceived of all the senses. The three-card-trick man
at work in broad daylight deceives his ‘ circle,’ *yet nobody
pretends that he works by the aid of superhuman agencies. One
would have thought that before so glibly asserting ‘ the im-
possibility of the appearance being produced by any kind of
trick or deception,’ they would have taken the precaution to
subject the forms to the evidence of touch. All I can say is
that I should recommend to the judge and his colleagues the
study of Mrs. Mellon’s achievements before the Society for
Psychical Research of London.”
“ GRANUMA” —a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


The following is the crushing reply of the
ex-Minister for Lands, Mr. Copeland. (There are
some points not touched upon hy Mr. Copeland,
hut which shall be dealt with later on) :
“ MRS. MELLOWS THREE TEST SEANCES.
“ Mr. Copeland in Reply.
“to the editor.
“ Sir, —I don’t know whether the recent hot weather has
had anything to do with the mental state of the various parties
whose effusions go to make up your article on the above subject
in your issue of to-day, but I would strongly recommend to each
of your contributors that a somewhat protracted cold bath
might assist in toning down their imaginations to the level of
ordinarily prudent men, and prevent their jumping to hasty con-
clusions. As to Mr. Henry, I should recommend him to adopt
that never-failing specific for cooling an excited brain which was
found so infallible by that ever-memorable philosopher, Mr.
Samuel Weller, viz., to hold his head under the yard pump for a
period before breaking out afresh.
“Your scribe commences the article referred to by describing
the investigating committee as ‘a committee of spiritualists.’
This description I dissent from, as I do where he states that
‘ every one of whom may be described as considering the
evidence in favor of spiritualism sufficiently strong to justify
them in spending a good deal of time in search of proof.’ Now,
if the last word of the quotation had been written ‘ truth ’
instead of ‘ proof ’ it would have been a fair statement of the
facts. Mr. Henry, in his new-born zeal, characteristic of recent
perverts, and with the same assurance he would have asserted in
favor of the manifestations a month or two ago, modestly asserts
that ‘ She (Mrs. Mellon) has completely got away with them.’
Of course all the gentlemen forming the committee (leaving the
ladies out of the question) rolled into one would not possess and
could not exercise the amount of astuteness emanating from the
brilliant comet just appearing above the horizon in the person of
Mr. Henry. I think, however, 1 shall be able to show to
unprejudiced minds that whatever may have occurred at
previous seances at which this gentleman shed the benign and
confiding influences of his luminous presence, if anyone has been
‘got away with’ in this instance, it is Mr. Henry and not the
committee.
“We are told also that ‘ Mr. Wallis is dissatisfied,’and that
he has no faith in either ‘judge or jury,’ at which no doubt the
judge and jury will immediately collapse into a state of paralysis.
I believe it is quite a usual occurence for a culprit not to have
much faith in either judge or jury when the case on the evidence


goes against him. I may, however, correct him in one particular
—where he, with unwarrantable liberty, states that I and my
daughters are spiritualists ; not that I should consider it any
reproach to be known as such were it a fact. As, however, the
statement is made with the sole object of belittling our discern-
ment, I may say emphatically that neither I nor my daughters
are spiritualists, having never been convinced of the spiritual
origin of the manifestations we have at various times seen, and
least of all of those manifestations termed ‘materializations.’ I
may say here that we have declined numbers of invitations to
attend ‘ sittings,’ but on the few occasions—some half-dozen—
that my daughters have attended with me we have gone there
with open minds—free from prejudice on the one hand and
equally free from pre-disposition to accept evidence on the other.
We were open to conviction as to the spiritual origin of the
manifestations, but so far such has not taken place, and I may
go further and say we are rather convinced of the absolute
inutility of what are termed ‘seances,’ believing they amount to
an absolute waste of time. At any I have attended or read of,
nothing but the veriest common-place statements have been
made with a great deal of twaddle and nonsence, and as for
acquiring spiritual or scientific knowledge, I have never yet
heard ‘ words of wisdom ’ equal to those which might have
emanated from any of the sitters themselves in their own
normal condition. That there is some mysterious power
emanating from certain persons called ‘ Psychics ’ is proved by
overwhelming evidence, attested by numbers of the leading
scientists of the world, and that this subject is engrossing the
minds of many of the leaders of thought of the present day can
easily be seen by those who take the trouble to read the
literature on this subject—in fact, turn which way you will, you
cannot avoid this evidence, inasmuch as all modern romances
and other light literature is more or less permeated with
spiritualistic theories. It may be said that spiritualism is in the
air. And I am inclined to think that its general effect has been
beneficial in diverting the current of thought from materialism,
and accompanying annihilation to that of an after, or, rather, a
continuous life. Yet I venture to assert that most people, after
spending a large amount of time for very little profit, will come
to the conclusion that seeking knowledge at spiritualistic seances
is a game which is not worth the candle.
“My reasons for accepting the position of one of the com-
mittee of investigation are two: First, that it would be a
desirable thing in the public interests to set the question at rest,
either by exposing fraud or by certifying to the genuineness of
the manifestations; and, secondly, that this result was more
likely to be brought about by persons who, on account of their
past experiences, may to some extent be considered experts,
rather than by persons new to such inquiries, who generally see
these manifestations for the first time with open-mouthed


wonder. While I feel sure that most, if not all, of the com-
mittee are free from foregone conclusions, which they do not
desire to support any more on the one side than on the other,
which certainly cannot be said of either Mr. Henry or Mr. Wallis,
the remarks of the former betraying nothing so much as self-
satisfied egotism, while the latter is evidently inclined to arrive
at hasty conclusions.
“ Your writer says, ‘As to the results, they were certainly
poor enough.’ Certainly they were. But inasmuch as we were
not there to bolster up the medium, is it not desirable that the
world should know that under the strict conditions imposed the
results were ‘poor enough.’ Should the committee continue to
sit after Mrs. Mellon’s shattered health is restored, and no better
manifestations are procured, I should undoubtedly accept it as
evidence that the conditions are stronger than the ‘spirits.’ If,
on the other hand, the manifestations did return, notwithstand-
ing the strict conditions, then, although it would clear the
medium in my opinion of the charge of fraud, at least so far as
those sittings were concerned, yet in my humble judgment it
would not establish as a fact that what have been euphemistically
termed ‘ spooks ’ are really the materialised forms of dead
persons returned for a brief period to an earthly existence, many
of the surrounding circumstances being, in my opinion, too
absurd and trivial to withstand the test of common sense.
“ Now, as to the conditions, and Mr. Henry’s profound objec-
tions thereto or comments thereon. On each occasion Mrs. Mellon,
as soon as she arrived at Mr. Greville’s house, was taken upstairs,
and relieved of absolutely every article of clothing by Nurse
Ross and Mrs. Ellis. Her hair was taken down, examined, and
tied in a knot. She was then supplied with clothing, every
article being provided by the committee, and immediately after
the seance, in the presence of the same ladies, this clothing was
taken from her and retained by the committee, On the first
occasion the medium had on an article of white underclothing and
a white collar, but she was deprived of these at the other sittings.
Now, it is positively absurd to assume under these conditions
that the medium could secrete white muslin on her person, and
two shrewd, intelligent women under these circumstances not to
detect it. I hen, as to the ‘piece of whalebone taken from the
dress bodice,’ what becomes of it when I say she simply had on
one of my daughter’s dressing gowns, which contains no whale-
bone? What also becomes of the statement that she could
secrete in the lining enough white muslin for the kind of mani-
festation described ? The sleeves are loose, and known as angel
sleeves, and though there is a little lining at the breast, is it to
be supposed that she could rip this open and sew it up afterwards
in the presence of the two examiners in full gaslight without
detection 1 There was also a very small pocket on the outside of
the dressing-gown, but the muslin, small as the amount would
have had to have been to get into that pocket, would have
“The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


immediately been seen as soon as she entered the seance room.
Then, as to the black calico bag into which she, immediately on
entering the seance room, was immersed. The bag was carefully
examined before her arrival, and was found to have a seam on
each side, which was doubly machine stitched, and as it was also
carefully examined after she was taken out, the machine stitching
could not have been substituted by ordinary sewing. So let us
see what Mr. Henry’s brilliant elucidation of the mystery
amounts to. He says, ‘ Provided she were able to secrete a
needle and cotton, there was nothing to prevent her ripping the
seam of the bag and getting a hand or a foot out,’ It must be
self-evident that, in addition to the roll of muslin and the needle
and cotton, she would have required a pair of scissors or a knife,
with which to rip the seam open, but she would also have required
to secrete in her untied hair (for that was the only clothing she
stood in possession of at one time) one of the may kinds of
sewing machines in use. Perhaps she dematerialised this sewing
machine, and materialised it again while inside the bag! As,
however, there were twelve wide-awake persons listening for any
sound, I presume the machine must have been one of the
‘ noiseless ’ sort, and I suppose she must have also secreted a
table or stand on which to rest the machine while at work, which
would also have to be inside the bag, as she would have to do
the machining with herself inside. Mr. Henry says— ‘ If they
give me the same conditions, I will produce a similar effect.’
Verily, the vanity of that celebrated frog we read about w’as as
nothing to that of Mr. Henry. There are several other com-
ments equally as puerile and absurd, but space, which I have
already outstretched beyond reason, prevents me from further
retort. I may briefly state, however, that neither Mr. Mellon or
any other member of the family was present or had any connec-
tion with the sittings except Mrs. Mellon, and that the cage was
provided by Mr, Joubert. The string that I fastened securely
round the neck of the medium was what I think is called saddler’s
thread—so fine and yet so strong that I will defy either Mr.
Henry or anyone else to untie the knots I tied with their hands
at liberty and in the light, while hers were sealed in the black
bag and in the dark. Moreover, the knots would have had to be
tied again, which was an impossibility for her in that position,
and I may say that by the aid of this string I could tell during
the whole sitting to half an inch where the medium’s neck was.
“ In conclusion, may I suggest that the members of this
committee deserve credit instead of blame for having the moral
courage to take up such an unpopular subject, having no object
to gain other than the public good as a reward for their loss of
time, which to busy men is a matter of some moment. That the
accusers of Mrs. Mellon should snarl and show their teeth augers
badly for their cause. However, it may be hoped that justice
will be done, whichever side is entitled to blame.—Yours, etc.,
“Yarraville, Decembers. “Henry Copeland.’’
“Gr Ais uN' A ” —a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


As regards Henry’s allusion to the voice
of the form known as “ Geordie,” we have
made several enquiries on this point from dis-
interested persons who have heard this particular
voice at Mrs. Mellon’s seances. One and all assert
there is not the smallest resemblance between
it and that of the sensitive. One gentleman,
whose name we are not at liberty to mention,
writes as follows : —“ I have been credited with
posessing what is generally known as a musical ear,
which means, amongst other things, the faculty of
appreciating and discriminating between various
degrees and qualities of musical sound, vocal or
otherwise. I can state positively that the quality
of Mrs. Mellon’s voice is not in the remotest way
recognizable in the voice of ‘ Geordie.’ Moreover,
the pitch and register of her voice would prevent
her effectually from imitating the deep though
sometimes whispered tones of the latter. In pro-
nunciation and accent there is also a marked
difference.” Two gentlemen, we are also assured,
distinctly heard, in the middle of the day, the voice
of u Geordie ” close to them in a room while Mrs.
Mellon was out in the hall-way speaking on house-
hold affairs. The following is an extract from an
able letter to the Daily Telegraph by the Hon. J.
M. Creed, M.D. ;
“ TO THE EDITOR.
“ Sir, —In the correspondence relative to the phenomena
attributed by some of the writers to the manifestation of some
little-known natural force, my name has been given some
prominence. As lam unwilling that there should be any mis-
conception as to my attitude in the matter, I think it well to
state my opinions. I may premise that lam not a spiritualist,
merely one desirous to observe occurrences which many men of
the highest intelligence consider to be manifestations of the
return to mundane regions of intelligences which, at a former
period of their existence, inhabited and animated men and
women now deceased.
“In reference to the phenomena which occur in the
immediate neighborhood of Mrs. Mellon, I can only say that
whether it is the materialization of the spirits of deceased


persons or not, I have seen things which, in my opinion
(whatever it may be worth, and I think I am generally
considered fairly practical), were not producible by fraud,
either by herself or other persons present; but as they took
place without such precautions as proved deception to be
impossible, they would be of no value if quoted in the
controversy. With regard to the test seances, conducted
by Sir William Windeyer, by whose invitation I was present,
1 have only to say that the precautions taken were such as,
I believe, rendered the production of the appearances by Mrs.
Mellon’s manual dexterity impossible ; and I venture to think
that were similar safeguards applied to Mr. Hosking, talented
conjurer as I hear he is, he would fail to produce similar
phenomena.
“Many things which are now received as matters of everday
fact were a few years since so much beyond human conception
that they would, if described, have been scouted as the veriest
fairy tales. Therefore, I submit that anything, however
extraordinary and impossible it may appear, which receives
support of the honest belief of a number of ordinary
intelligent persons is worthy of inquiry. As an example
of the overthrow of apparently immutable scientific law.
I would instance the recent experiments of ‘ Tesla,’ which
show that under changed conditions an electrical current of
very many times the intensity which would, under ordinary
circumstances, produce instant death, may be passed through
a man’s body without injury to him. Again, if there
was one thing which it was supposed that science had
really definitely determined it was the composition of air.
Nevertheless, Lord Rayleigh announced at the recent meeting of
the Scientific Association of Great Britain that he had dis-
covered an additional hitherto unsuspected constituent.
“ If the phenomena, the possibility of which has caused so
much discussion, are to be studied as manifestations of psychic
force, they are not one whit more extraordinary or inexplicable
than those appertaining to hypnotism. For instance, are they
more beyond the conceptions of the uninformed than that when
unable to accompany them I have been able to send patients to
brother practitioners for special operations, carrying a note
saying that when directed to do so by the intending operator
they would go into a hypnotic condition, during which the
operation would be performed without pain, and that at its
termination they would, by direction, at once recover conscious-
ness,—Yours, etc.,
“John M. Creed.”
“December 8.


As a sample of honest criticism from the
country press, we extract the following from the
Cootamundra Liberal of December 4th :
“ Poor Mrs. Mellon ! What between the wearing and
tearing influence of spook-creation, and the heap of unkind and
hard-hearted things which are being said and written—par-
ticularly written—in the papers of the metropolis, Mrs. Mellon,
the wonderful ‘ materialising medium ’ of Sydney, is having a
rough time of it generally. The one happy and redeeming
feature of the whole business is the unfailing gallantry with
which her friend, Chas. MacCarthy, M.D., stands by the harshly
criticised woman. We like Dr. Chas. MacCarthy. His well-
written and chivalrous letters to the press in defence of the
‘ Henry-worried woman,’ calls forth our sympathies. Upon our
word, we should much like Mrs. Mellon to turn out two or three
fine, healthy perfect samples of indisputable spooks, just to
flatten out Mr. Henry. Mr. Henry may be a very reliable and
honorable man, but the fact remains that the place where these
things happened was not on a public platform, nor at a ‘ paid for
show,’ but in Mr. and Mrs. Mellon’s private house. Was, or is,
any guest justified in ‘ exposing ’ anything under such circum-
stances ? But let that pass. The question now is—and it has
become as public as the change of Ministry, or as the passing of
the principle of land taxation—are such things possible ?
“When we find such men as Judge Windeyer, Mr. Henry
Copeland, ex-Minister for Lands, Dr. Creed, and other well-
known and level-headed men, invited to sit in judgment upon
the case, and testify to what they see, can we reasonably suppose
that this ‘fragile little woman’ has the daring and the effrontery
to resort to legerdemain to accomplish her ends'? What ends?
Simply to go on imposing on her friends ! It is incredible.
“The judge and jury were called upon to witness and
testify, and we should say their testimony was true, though
spiritualism may be as false as hell—and we are inclined to
think it is. The mistake is to suppose there are no phenomena
on which to base the claims of spiritualism. It would have
gone under long ago if there had been nothing but trickery and
fooling to sustain it. Dr. MacCarthy has seen enough to con-
vince any doubting Thomas, and he wnites ably of the forces
which govern its working.”
“The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


CHAPTER IV.
The Hypothesis of Conjuring.
IT would be strange, indeed, if the alleged exposure did not
bring “ grist ”to somebody’s mill. In the matter of doubtful
eclat, and subsequent various little speculations, Mr. Henry
must, of course, scoop his innings. But Mr. Henry must not have
it all his own way. The professional conjurer comes in for his
bite out of the “great Comet.”
“ The great big fleas have smaller fleas
Upon their backs to bite ’em ;
These smaller fleas have other fleas,
And so ad infinitum.”
This society entertainer has been trying, at other people’s
expense, to make a good thing out of it, but he has fought shy of
an offer of £5O to produce Mrs. Mellon’s results, as at late tests,
under similar conditions.
We interviewed Dr. MacCarthy on the conjuring hypothesis,
as follows :
“ Doctor, in view of recent mock-seance exhibitions of a conjurer,
what is your opinion as to the possibility of conjuring on tbe part
of Mrs. Mellon in her tests with Judge Windeyer’s committee ? ”
“ Such a suggestion is pure nonsense. No thinking individual
can, on giving this matter due thought, arrive at the absurd
conclusion that Mrs. Mellon was conjuring. I shall tell you why.
“ First of all, Mrs. Mellon, having been carefully disrobed,
thoroughly searched (I know the particulars of the search), and
then re-clothed in another part of the room, in an entire set of
garments never worn or seen by her before, had no possible means
of concealing the necessary material or paraphernalia for conjuring
or deception, as was the case with the conjurer who, we are told,
1 provided his own garments.’ Secondly, even if she had such
opportunity, these things would have been useless to her for the
following reasons, which I shall try to give alphabetically :
(a) The bag into which she stepped, seeing it then for the first
time, was not of her own design, nor was the stitching
thereof.
(6) It was double-seamed, without interrupted or slip stitches,
with a lock-stitch, not a chain-stitch, sewing machine,
so that, even had she concealed a scissors to rip it, she
could not re-stitch it as before, though she had fifty
of Mr. Henry’s ‘ needles ’ in her possession.
GRANUMA”—a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


(c) There was no earthly use in attempting to unfasten the bag
at the neck, as it was not, and could not have been,
fastened after the well-known manner of the bag trick
of conjurers, and it was tied so tightly that I am told
by one of the committee that fear of too great
constriction was expressed by one of its members.
( d ) She was fixed in position, in the first instance, by the
bag-tape, which was carried over the curtain bar and
fastened close to the top ; and, secondly, by another
string tied tightly around her neck by Mr. Copeland,
with a knot known only to himself, and found impos-
sible to open. It had, I am told, to be cut subsequently.
Her head was rendered immovable by this string being
reeved, within a couple of inches of it, through the bars
of the cage, and held by Mr. Copeland. In this
position the wall against which she sat prevented back-
ward movement, the strings preventing upward, down-
ward, forward or side to side movement. In fact, she
was unmistakably fixed in position. It was very
different on the part of the conjurer attached to his
chair, from which he could easily have got free, if even
that were necessary, by either a slip-rung mechanism or
the employment of special conjurer’s knots. On
speaking to him about the bag-trick just before the
publication of evidence by the committee, he admitted
to me that, with the special tying and maintaining in a
fixed position, with other precautions mentioned, he
could not do this trick.
Lastly, in the cage test, conjuring, in Mrs. Mellon’s case, was
an utter impossibility, because the same, nay even more stringent,
previous precautions were gone through. She had not a shred of
white or light-colored material about her. Moreover, this cage,
with five-eighth inch mesh, was not her own, nor did she know how
it was constructed. A conjurer can, of course, do a trick with a
cage of his own design, or possibly if allowed to bring with him his
own special portable property into any cage. But as to the cage test
with precautions taken in Mrs. Mellon’s case, pooh ! he could not
do it. Other precautions being equal, the words “ not his own
design,” “not supplied hy himself,” “not aided by a confederate ”
—whether personally masquerading for him, slipping him material,
or stitching the bag a la mode , in the presence of the audience, it
matters not—these are the master keys to the position, but of
course other precautions must not be neglected.
Here, in fact, in a nutshell, are certain opportunities which a
conjurer would have for the production of these effects—
(1) “ His own conveniently padded clothes.
(2) “ His own specially-stitched bag, possibly single-seemed
and sewn throughout, or in special parts, with easily-
ripped or interrupted stitch.


(3.) “ His own specially designed taped, corded, or stitched
arrangements at the mouth of the bag, so as to favor
manipulation of the string while the bag is being closed,
and thus to leave seals intact on opening,
(4.) “ A large roomy bag, in which, without getting out of it,
slow progression is possible, or through the interposed
material of which hand manipulation is possible, or
through which, as facilitated by means above mentioned,
the hands and arms alone, or hands, arms, and feet may
be slipped, retaining the bag without disturbing the fas-
tening at the neck or the seals.
(5.) “ His own chair, with possibly slip-rung or other mechan-
ism, and possibly also false bottom or other means of
concealment,
(G.) “ His own curtain and other receptacles for material.
(7.) “ His not being secured to a fixed object and held there.
(8.) “ Special knots easily opened by him,
(9.) “ Assistance from confederates in many ways, as in stitch-
up the bag (publicly it might be) in accordance with a
well-rehearsed method.
“Of course, it would be all the better to use his own room or hall
where he might employ trap-doors, hidden recesses, &c.
“ I wish to point out that most, if not all, of these opportuni-
ties have been open to the present conjurer to take advantage of or
select from at pleasure (the selection of two or three of them would
be quite sufficient). On the other hand, none of them were afforded
to Mrs. Mellon, He had his own conditions ; she had uncomplain-
ingly to accept those laid down for her, and they absolutely excluded
conjuring or trickery. ’
“ Do you think it, therefore, erroneous to say he was producing
these mock phenomena under ‘ test conditions ?’ ”
“ Tests, indeed ! What nonsense ! They were far from being
equivalent to tests ; and as for anybody comparing them with those
recently undergone by Mrs. Mellon, it is both unjust and dishonest.
The conjuror may be very clever, but this false comparison should
not be thrust on the public. It is a manifest injustice that, either
directly or by inference, he should be boomed by interested sup-
porters at the sacrifice of another’s reputation. He fought shy of
being tested with even one of the conditions Mrs. Mellon had to
submit to ; a gentleman who came to his entertainment prepared,
by what he considered a bond fide public invitation, to thus test him,
having been refused admittance to the platform !
“ In fact, keeping closely to the conditions imposed hy Judge
Windeyer’s committee, not all the united efforts of all the conjurers
in the universe, aided by piles of literature on prestidigitarianism,
could produce the results produced by Mrs. Mellon. The conjuring
hypothesis, in this instance, is dead and buried.
“In one of your letters to the Daily Telegraph, Doctor, in
referring to Mrs. Mellon’s recently-proved materializing power, you
make use of the words ‘ as she did when a mere child, ’ and you ask,


‘ did the difficult art of conjuring arise spontaneously in her then ?’ ”
“ I know what you are driving at. I have been brought to
task by ‘ Outis,’ whose crisp style by-the-bye I much admire, for
making this statement, ‘ as she did when a mere child,’ on hearsay
evidence. Possibly Mr. Henry has given the hint that I accept Mrs.
Mellon’s word in all these matters. As it happens, however, I can
lay my fingers on abundant records, which, if true (and records of
bare occurrences before an audience, regardless of the origin of these
occurrences, are not likely to be exaggerated) prove her to have been
when ‘a mere child’ either one of the most remarkable conjurers
that ever existed or a true materializing sensitive. But I have it
also on the unsolicited testimony, already published, of a gentleman
who, as a sceptic, witnessed her in conjunction with the late Miss
Wood, materializing when a mere child. I have also several records
of materialization by her separate from Miss Wood. I extract part
of the statement of that gentleman, Hr. Barkas, of Sydney, from the
Sunday Times of September 23rd, 1894. After mentioning that
he formed ‘ a committee of scientists, all except his father sceptics,
including himself, and hired two rooms on the first floor of a large
building of solid stone, the only access being by a flight of stairs up
a narrow passage which was closed by the door at foot,’ he goes on
to say that, after having been placed in the cabinet, ‘ a long piece of
gloss silk was tied round each wrist, each ankle, and round the neck.
Beneath each knot a piece of tissue paper was placed and sealed with
wax, and stamped with a different seal. Then
THE GIRLS WERE LAID ON THE FLOOR,
and the ten loose ends were nailed separately to the floor, tissue
paper being placed over the nails and sealed with wax. Still,
under these conditions the forms appeared, and as varied in sex
and height. After this sitting J asked the mediums if I could
apply any other tests. “Oh 1 yes ; anything you like, if you do
not hurt us,” was the reply.
‘‘‘For the next seance I hadalattice doorfitted to the cabinet,
to open outwards, with a patent catch-lock, so that when the door
was shut it could only be opened by a key. To the top of the
door I had a cord attached and passed over a swivel, this inten-
tion being that when a form appeared one of the sitters should
pull the door to with the string, when the door could not then
be opened except by myself, who held the key. At our next
stance the mediums were put into the cabinet and fastened down,
as described in our last seance. When the first form came out
and was fairly in the middle of the room, the door was pulled to
and shut The result that followed was simply the form dis-
solving away in front of us. On opening the door, the mediums
were fastened to the floor, no seals being broken.’
“ Here is a piece of direct evidence from a gentleman whose
calm unbiassed judment on these matters outweighs tons of rash
statements on the part of a clever press humourist, and has infi-
nitely more weight than the biassed utterances of an interested
bird of passage in his laboured efforts to soar aloft with his prey .”
“The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


CHAPTER Y.
The Broken Lyre.
¥SE append an interesting interview which we were able to
obtain with Dr. McCarthy on the subject of Mr. Henry’s
recent publication, in which the Doctor’s tests are
freely dealt with. Owing to the professional demands on his
time, the interview was necessarily a curtailed one. He, how-
ever, courteously gave us an hour, while he plunged with a will
into the subject.
“Have you read Mr. Henry’s pamphlet, Doctor,” was our
first question 1
“Yes; and I have laughed a good deal over it. I have
occasionally been amused before by certain efforts at exposing
so-called spiritualistic frauds; but, for absurd suggestions,
contorted statements, and downright cool effrontery, this effort
of this gentleman certainly puts the roof on all previous
attempts in the same direction.”
“ Can you give some instances, Doctor 1 ”
“Well, his book teems with instances; but if you have
patience to run through a blue-pencilled copy with me I shall
give you a few of them, especially those relating to tests
proposed by me. For the better understanding of this subject,
I shall repeat these tests. They are briefly as follows :
Dr. MacCarthy’s Tests.
(1.) That Mrs. Mellon should materialize one or more
“ forms” in our presence, outside the usual curtained recess.
(2.) That, in daylight, she should, after previous searching,
materialize one of her “ forms,” both the form and herself to be
photographed together.
(3.) That the form called “ Geordie” should be materialized.
That both she and this form should walk together out of the
cabinet, and speak, if possible, simultaneously into a phonograph,
the hands of the sensitive and the form being meanwhile held
by two of the sitters.
(4.) That, after previous searching and other precautions,
she and the form or forms should be weighed simultaneously, on
separate scales, a register of any variation in her weight being
also made during the process of materialization and devolution.
That there should also be a measuring and medical examination
of herself and the forms at various stages in the process. (I con-
sidered subsequently it would be necessary to make three parts
“ granuma” a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion


of this test—the weighing process one sitting, the measuring
another sitting, and lastly the medical examination.)
(5.) That, after due preliminary precautions, we should get
wax moulds of the feet or hands, or both, of various materialized
forms, and also of the sensitive for comparison.
(6.) That we should get evidence of the so called passage of
matter through matter as follows A ring ( metal or wooden)
without joint, made to fit my wrist closely, and which was not
to come into her possession before the trial, was to be placed on
my wrist while holding her hand, her other hand being mean-
while held by another sitter.
(7.) That we should also try for psychic photographs of
invisible forms through Mrs. Mellon, by daylight and with
magnetism flashlight.
It will be seen that tests 6 and 7 have no reference to
materialization proper, but relate to other developments of the
psychic capacity.
The above were proposed by me after carefully grouping all
possible objections to the acceptance of the fact of materializa-
tion, and then placing the corresponding test or tests opposite
each objection. When they were prepared, after a good deal of
care, I submitted them to Mrs. Mellon, who not alone made no
counter proposals, but in no single instance suggested an
alteration or modification. They were also acceded to without
demur by the committee formed to carry them out, and though,
on account of the preparation of a book, which Mr. Henry named
“ Miracles in Our Midst/’ and of which his present pamphlet
is a turn-coat pattern, Mr. Henry himself had abundant
opportunity to raise objection to any of them, yet he never did
so. In fact, he acquiesed in each and all. When, therefore, he
states that he and others who took part in them could not accept
them as tests, he says that which is neither logical nor true.
If not so regarded, why were they undertaken ?”
“Well, Doctor, what of Henry’s insinuation that Mrs.
Mellon aided you to formulate these tests ? At least he states,
as you point out, that you ‘ formulated them after consultation
with the medium.’ ”
“It is entirely false. These tests were absolutely of my
own choosing, and, neither in form nor substance, had Mrs.
Mellon anything to say to them. As I have already stated, I
submitted them to her after they were formulated by me, and
they were immediately and unhesitatingly acquiesed in and
accepted by her.”
“ Why did you not propose, say the wire cage test, Doctor ? ”
‘ For many reasons. First, I was dealing with a lady,
who, whatever she might have been previous to this, is not now
a professional medium. Secondly, my tests (even some of them
s^n were as conclusive as any cage test. Thirdly, though at
one time this was actually contemplated, I thought it advisable
to keep it in reservation.”


“ Do you think Mrs. Mellon would have objected to it at
the time?”
“ As a matter of course, when it was spoken of first of all,
I think by Mr. Joubert, she said to me, ‘As I am dealing with
you, Doctor, in these tests, if you think of selecting this special
one as well as the others, I shall be satisfied.’ In fact, she said
distinctly that she would submit to any test that I might name, and
the only proviso ever broached was that once a test was named,
after due consideration, it should be adhered to closely, and sub-
jected to no interference. This, for the sake of order, was so self-
apparent that I saw the justice of it at once. You see, there-
fore, that Mr. Henry’s statement as to her persistent refusal to
undergo tests is a myth.”
“Well now, Doctor, what of other particular mis-statements
on the part of this gentleman ? ”
On which the Doctor, again referring to Henry’s pamphlet,
said, “Look here on page 16, where he deals with Test No. 1,
i.e., materializing outside the curtained recess. See, I have
underlined the words ‘ I undertook the writing of the record of
each [test] as it occurred.’ As regards this test, he did nothing
of the kind. As a matter of fact, it was I who made the record
of it, doing so directly the sitting was over, while the facts were
still fresh in my memory. Some days after, he asked me if I
had time, which I had not, to refresh his memory on the subject. I
mention these things to show the want of accuracy of this
gentleman, who carefully twists his special premises to draw
therefrom his own convenient conclusion. Now, perhaps, you
can credit me when I tell you that the record of this test seance
is, in the main, incorrectly and, in some instances, untruly given.”
“ Can you specify ?”
“Oh, yes ; I do not make vague general statements ; Rem
acu tetiyisti is a proverb from which I am not above taking a
hint. Well, look therefore further down this same page : We find
underlined the words ‘ Mrs. Mellon permitted me to tie her
hair up in a peculiar knot at the back, in such a manner that
it could not be untied without notice.’ This is absolutely untrue.
He made one or two suggestions, but it was I who tied this knot
in this particular way, and I have recorded in my notes that I
employed a peculiar knot known only to surgeons. Follow on a
little further, and we find what clearly appears a want of
accuracy on his part. He says, ‘ I could only see a piece of
white tape on the medium’s hair showing against the dark back-
ground of the curtains.’ Now, if we refer to Mr. Henry’s
diagram of the room and sitters, &c., anybody can see that, from
where he sat at “ B,” it would be impossible for him to have seen
this white tape at the back of the medium’s head showing against
the curtains , as it would shoot out of line with them. As a
matter of fact, come into my room and I will show you that it
is an impossibility.” I did so, and was convinced it was impos-
sible, after which the Doctor resumed. “Further down Mr.


Henry says : ‘ After about 8 or 10 minutes a white hazy form
seemed to grow gradually up from Mrs. Mellon’s lap
Next a short form appeared about 12 inches from the medium on
the side nearest the window.’ This is not correct. He simply
reverses the order of things. The short, child-like form was the
first to make its appearance. From where he sat it was impos-
sible for him to tell how many inches away from the medium’s
side this figure was, unless he could see clairvoyantly through her
body. As a matter of fact, 1 have recorded it as two feet, my
position having been directly behind and exactly one yard and
two inches away from Mrs. Mellon, and at almost similar distance
from the figure. He states that after a few minutes it appeared to
be re-absorbed into the medium.’ By this, of course, he means that
the figure and drapery touched the medium and were apparently
taken up by her. Nothing of the kind ; this is absolutely incor-
rect. The materialised figure did not touch the sensitive from
first to last. It built up from a small patch of luminous vapour
on the floor, two feet away from her, while she remained perfectly
still, with her hands on her knees. This I closely watched. I
also noticed that the form was at first semi-transparent as well
as luminous ; that it became more and more opaque and less
luminous as it built up, until fully formed, and that the de-
materializing process was exactly the reverse of this. It gradu-
ally diminished in height and bulk, losing at the same time
opacity, until ultimately nothing was left but a small globular
patch of luminous vapour on the floor, which patch gradually
narrowed to a minute point until it altogether disappeared.
People who are interested in critically examining Mr. Henry’s
evidence cannot now do better than to compare my unvarnished
statement of the materialization and devolution of this small
form with Mr. Henry’s puerile and ludicrous explanation of how
it can be accomplished by ‘ a telescopic rod or cross-jointed
XXX collapsible implement such as is used in drapers’ shops for
reaching articles in the windows!’ My word ! Mr. Henry’s
ingenuity licks creation. I suppose this ‘ patent collapsible
implement’ of his went through the |-inch meshes of the cage
in which Mrs. Mellon was locked by the test committee, after
previous searching and re-dressing in clothes not her own, she
not having on her person one particle of white drapery, not to
speak of this wonderful patent collapsible marvel,
“ Continuing the record of this first seance I find,” he says,
‘we expressed ourselves so far satisfied.’ lam glad to find that
he has the candour to acknowledge so much ; indeed, I put the
question : ‘ gentlemen, are you all satisfied 1 ’ I was answered
‘yes,’ without any dissent. In fact, so far, our test was closed,
and anything that happened afterwards in the cabinet was
quite exclusive of the proposed test. However, regarding this
portion of the proceedings, there are one or two points on which
I must correct Mr. Henry. He presumes to say, in reference
to my measurement of the hair of ‘Josephine’ that I ‘did not
“The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


take the opportunity of ascertaining that it was not a wig she
was wearing.’ I have already stated publicly, as also recorded
in my notes, that I made myself well aware at the time that it
was no wig she was wearing. I jelt the scalp all round, and
pulled the hair, of which I took two measurements, from two
different points—one from the crown of the head, and the other
from the tip of the ear. He is truthful in one particular, where
he says that I described the hand of one of the figures to which
I was called over as ‘not fully formed.’ l\ly verbal statement
was that the fingers were ‘ mere stumps.’ In my notes I call
them ‘ rudimentary.’ I must correct him in his statement that
only one of Mrs. Mellon’s hands w T as visible when she appeared
with this figure. Her whole body, including both her arms
were visible to me; moreover, the figure was right away from
her, close to the window. I find he reiterates the statement
about the knot constructed by him. I have on the tip of my
tongue a very common-place expression to use in reference to
this and other statements, but shall refrain from using it. So
much for his criticism of test No. 1.”
“Are there any other points in regard to Henry’s
statements that you wish to speak about ?”
“Well, it would carry you over too much ground by going
into the various points, and it is unnecessary after what I have
already stated to you. However, we shall go at random over
one or two others. He speaks about searching Mrs. Mellon,
prior to the photographic test, in such a manner as to lead
people to believe that no search would have taken place only for
his interference. The truth is that I had fully made up my
mind to have Mrs. Mellon searched—it was, in fact, part and
parcel of this test. I reminded her of it on the landing, before she
entered the seance room, and she consented to it at once, and cer-
tainly without the ‘ hesitation ’ that Mr. Henry speaks about. I
subsequently considered, however, that the searching was hardly
sufficient, and told Mr. Henry and others that we might be
more thorough next time. Accordingly, before the next seances,
I stated specifically the manner in which the searching should
be carried out, going into minute particulars. To show the
value of Mr. Henry’s statement that the ‘ domestic who assisted
the second searcher ’ (by the bye, she was not then a domestic),
was ‘ not a free agent,’ and consequently would ‘ follow the lead of
her mistress,’ I may mention that she was the very first to
suggest more thoroughness. Prior, therefore, to the last
successful photographic seance, the searching was done in a
manner to preclude the least possibility of doubt as to its
exhaustive nature. I am aware that Mr. Henry has tried to
throw cold water on this last searching. I have the certificate
in face of which he dares not make such a statement, even with
the object of covering the only point of argument on which
hinges his contention. And let me further tell you that Bridget
granuma”-a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


Morrissey, the second searcher, on account of the nature of her
duties, while holding a position for a considerable time in a public
institution here, is an expert at searching.
“On page 25, alluding to his surreptitious use of a mirror, his
description of ‘ Geordie’s ’ face by no means tallies with the
description given to me by two other spectators He goes on to
say that he noticed that the face of another figure which appeared
afterwards was ‘ fair and animated and the eyes blue,’ thereby
plainly insinuating that it was the face of the medium. In a
previous paragraph he declares that, owing to the failing daylight
(the window blinds had been also pulled down), an exposure of
the lens for 10 seconds failed to catch any impression of this
figure. Now, it is very strange that a powerful Ross Cabinet
Lens, with full aperture and with rapid sensitised plates, failed to
catch the faintest impression after 10 seconds’exposure ; andyetMr.
Henry was able, in this period, to minutely describe, not alone
the facial expression and complexion, but also the actual color of
the eyes, even though he had his back turned and was looking
through a small mirror ! Of course, this is one of Mr. Henry’s
clairvoyant feats, but its value as evidence will be as duly
appreciated as his other statements.
“ We come now to his statement about the small figure photo-
graphed at the final photographic test. As regards the recogni-
tion of a likeness in this figure, he jumbles up this circumstance
with the appearance of a figure of the lady seen clairvoyantly by
him through the mirror at the first photographic trial—in fact
he is rather purposely mixed here, and, at all events, wishes to
wriggle out of a difficult position by stating that ‘the head was
draped round with white so as to conceal the eyes and chin.’
As a matter of course, the chin is sufficiently seen, and there is
room for the eyes to be seen if the exposure had only been
sufficient. Enough of the features remain for recognition. Put
this small photograph before me for the first time half-a-dozen
yards away, and I would recognise the 1 ikeness instantly. The same
features were recognised at once, and without previous expectation,
or suggestion by eight persons separately, these persons having
been intimately acquainted with the individual whose face is here
shown, three of them being mere children. In every instance
recognition was instantaneous and absolute.”
“But, Doctor, this appears an unaccountable admission on
your part, considering that you state you disbelieve in spiritual-
ism.”
“Well, Sir, this brings us into side issues, but perhaps we
have had enough of Mr. Henry for the present. I see a like-
ness, to be sure, and a very striking one. You know lam a bit
of an artist (I beg Mr. Henry’s pardon), and I am not easily
deceived in these matters; though indeed it does not requir ean
artist to catch the unexplainable something which impresses one


when viewing the likeness of a friend. Well, though the likeness is
evident here, I am no more convinced that the figure from which
it was taken was the resuscitated form of my dead friend than I
am of Mr. Henry’s capabilities for investigating these abstruse
psychic matters.”
“ But how do you explain it, Doctor ?”
“Very easily; I had been some days previously thinking a
great deal about my dead friend and had actually been trying
some sketches of his face which was, so to speak, photographed
on the tablets of my memory. I had, to be sure, forgotten all
about the face during the seance, but the idea was taken from
my subliminal consciousness telephatically and spontaneously by
the sensitive, when I was in the best condition for such an
occurrence, that is to say non-expectant. It was then projected
and objectified (materialised) under subtle sympathetic influence
by means of the psychoplasm proceeding from the body of the
sensitive, but the figure was a mere automaton, bearing tempo-
rary life manifestations from the medium, and was in no way
connected with the spirit of my departed friend. It was simply
an evolved thought-form, taking on certain characteristics in
facial expression, etc., through sympathetic force, and material-
ised through the medium’s special power.”
“Thank you, Doctor; very interesting, but, I fear, not
readable.”
“Why did you ask me for my explanation, then?”
“Well, I apologise. But, on the subject of Henry, ‘Oliver
asks for more.’ ”
“ I really think you ought to he satisfied on this
score. However, let us look at Chapter 7, page 64. It is
astounding that Mr. Henry can have the temerity to say that he
has ‘fully and faithfully described the so-called tests.’ Let any
person with common sense compare his descriptions with the few
facts that I have already stated to you from my notes taken
immediately after the test, and say whether Mr. Henry’s second-
hand effort is a faithful record. By the by, it just occurs
to me that it would be very interesting to see the original
notes made by him for the book ‘ Miracles in Our Midst.’
Before we have done with him, there are just one or two more
things here that Iwould make allusion to. He has the audacity to
call in question my statement, as a medical man, to the effect
that when I examined ‘ Geordie’s ’ chest I found that it was not
that of a woman, and that the female mammae were absent. He
speaks of my examining ‘ through the clothing.’ Let me tell
him there was merely a thin piece of gauze-like material between
me and the highly attenuated chest walls. Such an examination
does not require any special expert evidence. This word
‘ duped ’ that he is so fond of making use of, will, in view of


present evidence, be considered more applicable to himself and
his blunted power of observation, arising no doubt from his
highly emotional and poetic tendency. He refuses to accept my
‘ unsupported evidence ’on this abstruse medical point. No
doubt he will also refuse to accept another rather disquieting
and inopportune piece of evidence on the part of such incompe-
tent individuals as a judge of the Supreme court, an ex-Minister,
a shrewd man of business, two prominent medical men, a
Member of the Legislative Council of New South Wales, and
half-a-dozen keen-witted and clear-headed ladies ! ”
“ The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day


CHAPTER VI.
Strange Experiences of a Sensitive.
fij( «Y» T just occurs tome, Mrs. Mellon, that I might get from
I you some information on certain of your phases of sensi-
X tiveness that might be of interest. Would you care to
tell me, before we go into any of your more prominent phases of
mediumship, have you any faith in the employment of psychic force
as a healing agent ?”
“ Candidly I have. I was once myself what is called a healing-
medium.”
“ Please relate your experience in this direction,”
“ I will try to tell you. I found that by laying my hand on a
person suffering from an ailment, it was guided by some power to
the spot affected, though I had no previous knowledge of it. I
felt something go out of me at the time.”
“ Did you feel that you were rendered weaker by this some-
thing going out of you !”
“Not generally.”
“ What was the general result? Was it beneficial or other-
wise ?”
“It was always beneficial; the individual generally lost pain
and slept well afterwards.”
“ Did you find that as well as relieving pain you gave increased
vigor to the individual ?”
“Yes, always.”
“ How did you know that ?”
“ Oh, on several occasions patients expressed themselves as
more vigorous.”
“Do you remember any instance of actual healing of disease
through that psychic power of yours ?”
“Well, here is one instance which I remember very well,
because this lady was, on account of being healed, a great friend
of mine afterwards. She suffered from an internal complaint. Her
agony was so great that for many nights she could not sleep. I
magnetised her. She instantly lost her trouble, and slept well
afterwards, and the trouble did not return. This happened quite 19
years ago, and the lady has remained well to this day, at least she
was well when I recently heard of her.’
“ Do you mean that you mesmerised her ?”
“ Certainly not. It was merely diffusion of magnetic force,
or whatever it is, by contact. It was not mesmerism.
“ granuma”—a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


“ Mrs. Mellon, did you ever try any other method than by
contact ? Did you ever join in a circle for the purpose of healing ?”
“ Frequently.”
“ Are yon of opinion that being in contact with the people in
the circle increases your healing power ?”
“ That depends exclusively on the quality of the sitters, and
particularly on their sympathetic feelings ; in fact, it is exactly the
same as one would expect in a cii’cle for materialisation.”
“Do yon think, then, that healing circles, if well chosen,
would be a step in the right direction ?”
“ Most certainly I do.”
“ Have yon any theory as to how the power is exerted in
healing disease ?”
“ That is a subject I leave to the doctors to determine. I
cannot explain it. I only know that I possessed the power and
possess it still, but only in a minor degree.”
“ Are yon aware if this psychic healing is exercised in any
special country ?”
“ Yes, I know of many healing mediums in England who
exercise this power successfully. I believe it is also employed
extensively in America, and in fact is to a limited extent in this
country. We have frequent records of it in our Spiritualistic
journals, and I know instances of its efficacy from personal
observation.”
“ Is the psychic faculty used to discover the nature of disease
as well as to treat it ?”
“Yes ; for instance, it is usual for people who are ill to go to
a medium for diagnosis without mentioning what is the matter.
The medium generally goes into a state of trance, and is able to
point out the seat of the disease—to tell its exact nature and to
prescribe for it.”
“ But, leaving on one side this phase of discovering disease,
do yon think that there is as much promise in psychic healing as
Dr. MacCarthy supposes ?”
“ Most certainly 1 do. Here is a power great beyond concep-
tion. So many strange things are achieved by it that if it were
only studied deliberately in the manner that Dr. MacCarthy wishes, I
have not the smallest shadow of doubt that it could be made even
far more effective in the treatment of disease than it already is. But
you see, not alone will scientific bodies not take it up, but if an
investigator goes earnestly into it’s study, instead of being
encouraged he is literally crushed out by the ignorant and 'pre-
judiced. People will be blind to their own interests.”
“ Before I ask any questions on your other phases of medium-
ship, tell me whether this power yon possess is hereditary ?”
“Yes; my mother had the power of physical mediumship.
Her mother and grandmother were likewise mediumistic.”
“ Are other members of your family mediumistic ?”
“Yes; three brothers, two sisters and a niece have all this
faculty, some being clairvoyant and others physical mediums. My


children are also medhmiistic. All my children have seen forms
clairvoyantly.”
“ You believe this is a natural inherited gift ?”
“Certainly I do.”
“ At what age did the power first show itself in you ?”
“ About the age of nine. At that time we had no idea what
it was. My eldest brother was abroad at this time. We had not
heard from him for some months, and one night I sprang up in bed
(I suppose I was dreaming) and screamed out, ‘ Oh ! my brother is
drowning.’ I cried bitterly. My cries arroused the whole house-
hold. My mother feared that my dream might be too true.
Some time afterwards we had a letter from him, and in it he stated
that they had been almost lost at sea —that he was a considerable
time struggling, half-drowned in the water. The date corresponded
with the date of my dream. Without mentioning other instances,
I come to the time when my people began seriously to investigate.
The very first night my hands and arms began to tremble violently,
and were jerked about spasmodically. My uncle thought that
perhaps this was an indication of the automatic writing phase ; that
is to say, being able to write ideas which are not your own, and of
which you have no thought—this writing being done sometimes
rapidly from left to right, or backwards, that is to say the last letter
of each word being written first and the writing carried on back-
wards until the sentence is completed. 1 did not succeed the first
time. It was illegible scribbling. Next time words and sentences
were formed with immense rapidity—almost lightning speed—l
having been unconscious of what my hand was writing ; in fact, up
to the shoulder I had no feeling ; my hand and arm felt quite dead.
I myself had no power or control over it whatever. I soon began
to show other signs of mediumship. For instance, I became
clairvoyant and clairaudient. One phase of my clairvoyance was
as follows : —My eyes used to be bandaged. I would then fall
into a trance and would describe events happening at the time
many miles away—events which were subsequently verified. There
are many other instances which I can only partially recall just now.
“ What is the exact meaning of clairvoyance, Mrs. Mellon ? ”
“Well, as the name indicates, it is clear-sightedness, or, to use
an expression common in Scotland and Ireland, ‘ second sight
that is to say, the faculty, as already instanced, of seeing things
through a solid opaque substance interposed between one and the
object or things to be seen; or else, as also instanced, it means the
faculty of seeing forms invisible to others, whether the forms of the
departed or of the absent living.”
“ What w r as your next experience in mediumship ?
“ I began to develop what are called physical manifestations.
There was one rather interesting levitation which I may mention.
I was placed in a kind of smoking chair, my arms were strapped
with leather to the arms of the chair, and my feet were tied to the
legs of thechair. I became entranced, and in this state I was levitated.
Haps came, and the sitters were requested to light up. This was


done, and to the astonishment of those present I was seen still
entranced, sitting strapped to my chair, which was placed on a large
beam running across near the roof. The lights were again put
out, and I was floated down instantly from my perilous position.
Many persons present, and still living, can testify to this levitation.”
“ Have yon ever had what is known as slate-writing ?”
“Yes ; once only, bnt I did not follow up that phase.”
“ What was your next phase ? ”
“ Materialization came next. I may mention that in previous
seances we had frequent touches of fingers and hands in onr circle,
such as happened so often through Maggie Power in Dr,
MacCarthy’s house, all of us with hands joined at the time. What
is known as the passage of matter through matter, you may
remember, happened lately in three instances at the Doctor’s
house. On the first occasion Mr. John Ferguson held my left hand,
Mr. Joubert holding the other hand at the same time, when a
tamboiirine hoop was linked on to my left arm. On the next
occasion my left hand was held by Mr. Stewart, member of the
Psychical Research Society of Victoria, while the tambourine hoop
was passed over my left arm. Mr. Kidgell, of the Sunday Times ,
was, I think, holding my right hand. On the third occasion, when
again it was linked on to my left arm, my left hand was held by one
of the sitters, my other hand grasping Dr. MacCarthy’s left arm,
while he was playing his Auto-harp. But to continue about my
development long ago for materialization, I thought I would try
sitting in the cabinet in subdued light. The very first night a small
patch of luminous white came. It was only a little larger than an
ordinary handkerchief. I was entranced. In fact, I always was at
that time when attempting materialization. Soon after there were
hands and faces. It took many months before we had a fully
materialized form. When told after I awoke that it had come I
was wild with delight. Well, we went on and on until we had two,
three, and as many as four full forms out at the same time. At
least one form and I were seen together at nearly every seance. I was
then about sixteen years old. I suppose certain people will say this
was conjuring. Where did I, learn it at this early age ?
“Dp to this time I was always in a deep trance during these
manifestations, but one night, as I entered the cabinet in my
normal condition, a small form was there before me. I may mention
I used at this time to sit in the circle first of all outside the cabinet,
all hands joined, to work up the power. When I saw this form I
was terrified and rushed back into the circle. It was with great
difficulty that I could be persuaded to return.
“ It was after this period that these forms made such a sensa-
tion. We had people from Paris, St. Petersburg, America and
different parts of England visiting Newcastle to witness the
phenomena. It was at this time also that the late Alderman Barkas,
whose name was a household word through the North of England,
investigated and reported on the seances. I was often undressed,
searched, and re-dressed in other clothes which were not my own,
“ The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


yet the forms appeared. I was frequently fastened with silk, with cat-
gut that would not slip ; with common thread that would if 1 moved
break; and sometimes was even hand-cuffed. I have been in all
kinds of bags—of linen, muslin and even paper—and still the forms
appeared. I have been enclosed in a wire cage, at Weir’s court in the
Freemason’s Hall, and yet had full forms out. Mr. Armstrong and
others can testify to this. I have also been placed in a small recess
with one door and no window, the open space for the door having
been securely latticed, and yet forms walked out and dematerialized
outside. Dr. Barkas of Sydney, son of Alderman Barkas, has already
testified to this unreservedly. On one occasion the head of one of
the forms was the first part to dematerialize. At the Freemason’s
Hall, Weir’s Court, a form after walking about, lay down on the
platform, stretched out the limbs in the presence of all (there was
dim daylight at the time) and each member of the body separately
dematerialized. Numbers can verify this. Another remarkable
seance was the following : —I was bound and fastened down with
ropes in the same hall as previously mentioned. A stout form,
recognised as ‘ Sam ’ came out. He was clothed only with drawers
and a striped shirt. Among those present were Mr. Armstrong, Mr.
Miller, Mr. Mould and Mr. Blake. The latter, who was a par-
ticularly stout man, said, ‘Sam, wouldn’t you like more clothing?’
and offered to lend him his coat. ‘ Sam ’ bowed assent (he could
not speak as ‘Geordie’ does) and put on the coat. Yet it would
barely meet round him. It must be remembered that lam a small
woman. In parenthesis, I may here mention it has been said by
designing people, bent upon self seeking and certain speculations,
that no other forms than ‘ Cissie,’ ‘ Josephine ’ and ‘ Geordie ’ were
materialized through me. But, I have had ‘Sam,’ and ‘Willie,’
and ‘ Minnie,’ and ‘ Jeaneretta ’ and ‘ Peter,’ and many others, not
including friends who have been recognized.”
“ Have you ever had any moulds of hands and feet of your
forms, Mrs. Mellon ?”
“Yes; several times, and I hope to have them again, as this is
one of the yet uncompleted tests proposed by Dr. MacCarthy. I shall
mention one of these sittings for moulds. It occurred in the
course of Alderman Barkas’ investigation. Here are the exact
particulars. There were present Mr. Miller, Mr. Armstrong, Aider-
man Barkas and others. Before beginning the seance, the wax
(white paraffin) was weighed by Alderman Barkas, who then placed
it in a small foot-bath containing hot water, and placed the bath
alongside another bath of cold water in the cabinet, which had beon
thoroughly searched. I was then seated in a chair, and my ankles
tied together tightly. I wore very high buttoned boots. The
string coming from my ankle was held during the whole of the
seance by Alderman Barkas. I was entranced. On waking the
light was turned up full, and a beautifully-formed, delicate, fragile
wax mould of a large foot was found resting on a sheet of paper.
The wax without the mould weighed lighter than before, and, with
the mould added it, was exactly the same weight as at the beginning
of the seance. The string fastening my ankles was found intact.”
“ granuma ”-a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


“ Thank you, madam. I will not trouble you for more experi-
ences.”
“ Oh, well, I can give you any amount, as it is to me a great
pleasure to recall those reminiscences. I feel as if I could go on for
ever. What I have already given you is well authenticated and
published not in Spiritualistic journals alone, but also in the Daily
Press.”
“Well, perhaps you will answer me one or two questions, sug-
gested by certain theories of Dr. MacCarthy, regarding the origin
of the manifestations ?”
“Oh, I know Dr. MacCarthy’s theories very well. We agree
to differ on this point.”
“Do you believe in the projection of what is called ‘ the
double 1 of an individual ?”
“ Yes ; I have seen it more than once. I know that Dr.
MacCarthy has also seen the double at the time of the death of the
person. One remarkable instance in my own experience is this :
One afternoon I lay down to rest, as I was about to hold a seance
in the evening, and I always rest beforehand. I could not sleep, but
once I closed my eyes, and on opening them I saw before me a
woman holding her child. The woman was shabbily dressed, looked
very distressed, and had an old shawl round herself and the child.
The vision suddenly faded. Well, in walking that evening to the
seance room, and not thinking at all of the vision of the afternoon,
I was much startled to see standing against a wall the identical
woman, wearing the identical dress, and holding the child in her
arms, with the same old shawl round the child and upper part of
her body, and looking in the same distressed, haggard way. I took
compassion on her, and gave her all I had in my pocket, which was
not much. On arriving at the toll gate I hadn’t a halfpenny left to
pay, and had to walk a long way around, so I was late for the
stance. I explained to the manager the reason of my being late.
He often afterwards spoke aboxxt my recounted experience.”
“ Now, another question. What are your sensations when
entranced or ‘ controlled,’ as you call it ?”
“ I feel a cold shivering, a sensation as of water running
down my back, noise in my ears, and a feeling as if I were sinking
down into the earth ; then I lose consciousness.”
“ Do you feel subsequent exhaustion ?”
“Yes ; the degree depending on the length of the trance and
on what has taken place during it. For instance, after materializa-
tion, especially in the presence of unsympathetic influences, I feel
greater exhaustion. Sometimes during a trance the eyelids have
been lifted up and the whites only seen visible, the bails being rolled
upward. I very soon, as a rule, recover from the exhaustion. My
appetite is usually good after a seance. I find that oysters are very
useful to resuscitate me.”
“ When you are not entranced and a form is materialised
through you, describe your sensations.”


“ I feel as though I were that form, and yet I know I am not,
and that I am still seated on my chair. It is a kind of double
consciousness—a far-away feeling hard to define. At one moment
lam hot, and the next moment cold. I sometimes have a choking
fainting, sinking sensation when the form is out. My eyes ache a
good deal after a seance, and generally my lower limbs are thin,
sometimes very thin (this, I believe, is a common experience with
materializing sensatives), and usually 1 feel a pain in the left side.”
“ Is there any truth in the report that you received £BO at the
Besant seance, Mrs. Mellon ?”
“It is quite false. I did not receive a penny.”
“ Is is not a fact that, after several other seances here, you
received abundant presents T
“ I received occasional presents, but they were few and far
between, and always unexpected ?”
“ Did you ever receive a present from Mr, Henry ?’
“Yes ; a bunch of flowers with a thorn in them.”
“ Have you ever, since your arrival here, made a charge for
seances ?”
“ When first we came, and before my husband got a position,
a charge was made by a member of our committee on our behalf, hut
much against our will, for 12 seances. Since then, except on one
occasion for a charitable purpose, I have never made a charge, though
I have held scores of seances, and have been frequently offered large
sums of money if I would consent to enter into an engagement.
What I received in Melbourne was voluntarily presented to me.”
“ It is not true, then, that you have done well financially by
your materializing capacity while in the colonies ?”
“ Quite untrue. Indeed, had I wished, I could have enriched
my family thereby.”
“ What was Mr. Henry’s action on the night of the presenta-
tion at the ‘Metropole ?”'
“ He was, on that night, one of the loudest and most effusive in
his praises of my mediumship, and in expressions of his belief in
spiritualism. His earnest and highly emotional, though labored,
speech is still ringing in my ears.”


CHAPTER VII.
The Spirit Theory Discussed by an Anti-Spiritualist.
THE man who stands prominently forward in these colonies in
his persevering efforts, amidst much discouragement, to
study and find some possible means for the utilization of a
“ much-wasted force ” in the relief of bodily ailment, is undoubtedly
Dr. Charles W. MacCarthy, of Sydney. To this gentleman, therefore,
we have come for information on the question of the origin and
application of this force. His statements are clear and precise, and
his deductions logical. This interview will be read with special
interest:—
“ Pardon me, Doctor, for asking, as a matter of public interest:
Is not this investigation that you are pursuing discountenanced by
the Church ? ”
“Your question is too general a one. The Church is always
rightly on guard against interference with its teachings, and, no
doubt, the introduction of the absurd spirit theory into the investi-
gation should call forth its strong disapproval. Herein lies the
danger. If people understood these forces as they really are, namely,
as part and parcel of nature alone, without having any connection
whatever with disembodied spirits, there would be no such danger.
But certain people are ignorant or obtuse, and cannot dissociate
what they cannot understand from the idea of the supernatural.
Hence I can conceive it possible that the Church might dis-
countenance, or at least advise against, making public even an
otherwise legitimate investigation, if harm to the ignorant or
superstitious might thereby unwittingly arise. This, however, is
only a passing opinion of mine, as I am not a theologian.”
“Would you not, as a Catholic, abide by the Church’s decision
in these matters ? ”
“Well, in the question of right and wrong in what I do, while
consulting my conscience, I should pay due deference to the opinion
of individual authorities in the Church, and should certainly bow to
any general decision. I can, at all events, state that the Church, far
from being a hindrance to scientific progress, has always allowed
free scope for the stady and development of natural forces ; and,
however misty our conception of certain forces might be, I am quite
sure we would receive every encouragement from it in our effort to
clear off the mist.”
“Do you think that superstitious people should keep out of
such an investigation ? ”
“ Most certainly. The emotions of such people generally get
the upper hand ; and they are prone to accept the spirit theory.
“ The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


Acceptance of this, in its full sense, means death to orthodox
religious opinions. Therefore, with all the power that is in me, I
warn such people to keep out of it. In fact, this investigation
should be undertaken in camera , and confined, as far as possible, to
cool-headed members of the medical profession, whose duty it is to
study every physiological or psychological phase, however strange,
ns the investigation of the body and its workings is essentially theirs.
This is why I applied for an investigation to the Royal Society of
New South Wales, and, had it been accorded, we should have had
no more of the press controversy, which was really forced upon us ”
“ What was the need of newspaper records of seances ? ”
“ I freely admit this was a mistake. It arose through
undeserved taunts, chiefly from the Melbourne Press. But who
amongst us does not occasionally make mistakes ? ”
“ Perhaps, then, you object to the publication of this inter-
view ? ”
“ Not at all. It will, I hope, make certain people think twice
before accepting the spirit theory. But let us continue.
“ And, now, as regards the existence of the natural force
which I have called ‘ psycho-magnetic,’ and Avhich acts outside, and
yet is connected with, the body—a force, the existence of which is
shown in my door-test, the genuineness of which has already
been amply proved by rigid investigation, here is the exact
wording of my proposed test to the Royal Society of New South
Wales.
“ To show the movement of a solid body without contact, and
flso to measure the force, I wrote thus :
“ ‘ Get constructed a heavy, unpainted wooden slab (the wood
being dry), and attach it by hinges to a strong wooden frame,
standing perpendicularly and well supported in the middle of a
room, so that one can see all around it; we not to see it or know
where it is placed until the day of trial, and not to be allowed prior
to any subsequent trials to come into the room unless in presence of
witnesses. The Avooden slab should swing freely on its hinges.
Let our feet be confined by a cord or hoop, held at the back, and
let our feet and hands, &c., be Avatched. Get also a spring Aveigh-
ing balance and affix to it a self-registering index. Sink the
balance in a small Avooden frame, and let it lie flat on a firm support
a couple of yards from this door or slab, being fixed to the support
at one end of the balance only, so that the latter may swing round,
following the slight curve made by the door Avhen closing, thus
securing, proximately, a direct pull, such pull being made by means
of a cord attached to index and door or slab.’
“ I also suggested a forward and backward sliding arrangement
Avith ball bearings, and said I Avould ‘ give any lengthened investiga-
tion, and would bear all expenses incurred in the preparation of
apparatus.’
“My only proviso was that the result of the investigation
(Avhich Avas purely that of 4 determining the existence of a force
generated by or in the body, and acting outside it ’) should be pnb-
‘GRANUMA’’—a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


lished in the proceedings of the society. I would ask for a committee
comprised of ‘ a physicist, an astronomer, a chemist, a physiologist
and a physician,’ prepared as I was to lay, subsequently, the medical
aspect before the medical section of the society.
“Theforce I asked the society to investigate, I had already
got to register 251bs. pressure on a massive door, and subsequently
361bs. by repulsion—this while holding the sensitive’s hands
as we both stood fully a yard away, closely watched during the
time. It had also registered Hlbs. pressure by attraction, with-
out contact. This was at a time when the mental and physical
conditions and surroundings were favourable towards its evolu-
tion. Recently, owing to illness and other interferences, the
force has considerably weakened for the time being ; accordingly
we have had during our attempts (sometimes resulting in
failure) to keep closer to the door. In consequence of it having
been suggested by certain people that the door was thus kicked,
pushed with the knees or elbows, &c., I have, in the presence of
witnesses, carried out successfully a test which entirely removes
that supposition, viz., I have covered the door with white paper,
I have rolled up the sleeves of the sensitive, blackened her hands
and arms thoroughly with carbon, &c., and got her to kneel on a
chair with its back to the door, without, however, touching it.
The use of feet, knees, elbows, arms or hands on the door was
hereby rendered absolutely impossible without detection. Yet
the door moved as usual, sometimes with a sudden and forcible
swing, the chair still in position and the paper remaining un-
soiled. In the positive absence of concealed springs or other
mechanism, where does ‘trickery’ come in here I should like to
know? Where is reason in this supposition when we stand a
yard away while closely watched 1 and yet the door, without
contact, flies away from us, sometimes with a double swing,
registering a great pressure on an indexed balance ! Where
comes ‘trickery’ when the door, without contact, is, at desire,
attracted towards the sensitive, sometimes so forcibly that it
hurts the arm ?
“ And now, having eliminated the highly absurd supposi-
tion of trickery in a simple-minded girl, whose strange
power was discovered in her (as also in another servant),
and developed by myself, and tested in all conceivable ways
hundreds of times with the most minute exactness, you are, no
doubt, waiting for my theories as to origin of this natural force,
which, by the bye, I have found to be hereditary.”
“ Yes, let us have your theories, doctor. I perceive you
make use of the word ‘Natural.’ I presume, then, you do not
accept the theories of angelic or demoniacal influence as originat-
ing these phenomena ?”
“Well, it ought to be pretty well known by this time that,
on the contrary, I take an entirely material view of these
phenomena, which I consider can be explained by purely natural
causes. It is a sorry angel, or a weak poor devil, indeed, that


cannot move ineit matter, or cannot materialize, if the sensitive
be out of health or the sitters non-sympathetic, or if, through
some cause, disturbance of vibrations or dissipation of molecules
should take place.”
“In your account of your theories and observations as
opposed to spiritualism, please try not to be too scientific Dr
MacCarthy.” ’
‘As well ask a farmer from the Glen of Aherlow to try
not to use the brogue. I shall be brief, at all events, though I
verily believe, however lucid I might be, there are some persons
who either could not or would not understand my theories. The
small minds of such people are double padlocked against the
reception of truth, which, either through prejudice or incapacity,
they cannot understand. Taking the main question of psycho-
magnetic force, as seen in the lower phases called ‘ physical
manifestations’ (shown in simplest form in my door test), the
following questions suggest themselves, viz.:
“ (1) Whence does this force come ?
“ (2) What excites its evolution?
“(3) Whence comes the accompanying intelligence, if
any ?
“ (4) What calls it forth ?
“To the first question I reply that it must be generated
from either or both of two sources, viz. ;
(a) From the surrounding atmosphere, through some
hidden physico-mental influence on the part of the
sensitive ; or,
(b) directly from the bodily structures themselves.
“ In support of the latter and probably correct assumption,
there is strong evidence in the lowered surface temperature
during a manifestation of psychic energy. I have often on
these occasions felt the previously warm fingers get suddenly
icy cold, a fact frequently verified by medical men and others
present. I always thus know at a sitting when we are about
to have well-marked phenomena. This loss of heat (evidence
of which I have also obtained by the thermometer) is proof of
loss or evolution of force ; heat and force being correlative, the
one convertible into the other. Moreover, on these occasions, I
have heard sensitives say that they feel as if they £ lose some-
thing.’ I have often heard Maggie Power say, on questioning
her as to her sensations when a solid body, such as a table or
door, is being moved through her influence without contact, that
it is like as if ‘ something goes out of’ her, and gives her ‘ a weak
feeling ’ at the moment This latter I have repeatedly verified
by immediate medical examination.
“ That this something—that is to say, force—returns quickly to
the system I have no doubt. I have best seen this in the pheno-
menon of levitation in her, after which the body, which just prior to
the process felt intensely cold to the touch, again quickly resumed
its natural warmth.


“The next question as to what specially excites the evolution of
this force, would, were I to go fully into it, necessitate too lengthened
a reply. I shall, therefore, do little more than touch on the primary
exciting cause—the one great indispensible requisite, the fountain
and origin of all psychic wonders—Sympathy. This is in itself a
force, and I wish to impress clearly that, without Sympathy, no
psychic result whatever can be obtained. You might as well try
to move mountains as to get a psychic manifestation in the absence of
this exciting agent. Bearing in mind this indisputable fact, we can
at once understand the deterrent and nullifying effect of an antagon-
istic mental influence. How stupid and unreasonable, therefore, to
require a sensitive to produce results before hard, unsympathetic
sceptics ; and herein lies the difficulty of affording distinct proof to
everybody.
“ The working of Sympathy is best seen in telepathy, which is, in
fact, the temporary flight of the intelligence, or rather portion of the
intelligence or spirit of the living, whereby correct mental impressions
are transmitted from the brain of one to that of another in sympa-
thetic vibration with it in the distance—sometimes an enormous dis-
tance. This same Sympathy is also the exciting medium for the evo-
lution and projection of psycho-magnetic force, while the brain is the
instrument for consciously determining such projection, after which
the latent mind, or subliminal consciousness, works out the problem
while the sensitive remains passive. Indeed passivity is essential.
There are also various other conditions (which I shall not now enter
into) prescribed by Nature, which has her fixed unalterable laws.”
“ But, Doctor, you spoke of an intelligence.”
“Yes ; this is the gist of the matter as relating to the spirit
theory. Even in the lower manifestations, such as my door test, we
find an intelligence at work. The door does not move forwards or
backwards by a blind force, but will move either way by our desire ;
that is to say, if we conceive a desire that it should close, not open,
and then remain calm and passive (nervousness or anxiety will effectu-
ally upset the conditions), the idea is transferred to our latent minds,
and, should the force be sufficient and Nature’s conditions present,
the problem, as I said before, is worked out through the pro-
jection of the required energy, and the simultaneous transference of
our intelligence along the same impalpable channel of communication
as in telepathy. This intelligence presides over and directs the
evolved energy; it precipitates the dynamic effect, and the door
closes. I here is no disembodied spirit agency at work here. Nor
is there need, as I explained in a recent controversy, to rake up the
spirits of the departed in explanation of such trivialities as table-
tilting 01 dooi opening without contact, when manifestly we our-
selves, through supernormal, not supernatural agency, can perform
these feats. It is to me as plain as noon-day that if our intelligence
can take flight to the other end of the world and manifest itself there,
it can, with at least equal facility, manifest itself at a door-opening
test or in the seance room, In the one instance it sets up vibrations
in the biain of another in the distance ; in the other instance it sets
“The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


up vibratory action in the vital material and force projected from
the sensitive.
“ I have invariably contended that, to prove or disprove the spirit
theory, we should fix our attention on the lower and less complex
manifestations. Now, if our projected intelligence be at work, as I
have shown it to be, in the opening and closing of a door without
contact by psychic means (this intelligence following up, after the
manner of telepathy, the evolved energy until the acme of accumula-
tion is reached and the specially desired effect produced), it is only a
matter of degree when, without physical contact, a table moves
rhythmically, by desire, to the sound of music. The table movement
is produced similarly to the door movement, and the up and down
rhythmical action is analogous to the backward and forward move-
ment of the door. It is only a matter of higher degree when the
keys of a pianoforte are suddenly lowered at a distance from the
sensitive producing discord, or, in a still more advanced degree,
melody or harmony. If solid bodies, large or small, thus move
rhythmically under the direction of our projected intelligence, we
begin to understand, as we proceed higher in the scale, how a pencil
may move without physical contact, its point-forming letters, words,
or sentences. Independent slate writing is a higher development
still. By-the-bye, this reminds me that recently I was told by a
conjurer, whose audacity is amusing, how he proved Fred Evans, the
celebrated slate-writing Sensitive, to be a fraud. He said: ‘We
were told previously to write down on slips of paper the names of
some of our spirit friends. I wrote my own name, and I got a spirit
message in that name.’ He looked complacently. His story was
told. ‘But,’ I said, ‘I am waiting for the exposure !’ ‘Oh!’ he said,
‘ I have told you.’ To which I replied : ‘ I have only heard that Mr.
Evans was able to take that special name telepathically from you,
and that it was projected with the special message on your slate.
This simply goes to prove my anti-spirit theory in such mani-
festations.’ (I may mention that a gentleman has just related to me
that he brought his own slates, which were laid in various parts of
the floor of the room all round him, within full view ; and that, while
Evans chatted with him, messages appeared on the slates and also
one in his pocket book while placed in the breast pocket of his coat.
On this gentleman’s veracity I have implicit confidence.) I fear that
the conjuror’s ‘ exposure ’ belongs to the same category as his
recent attempts in a similar direction in Sydney. His next attempt
should be to oonvince Mr. Gladstone of the absurdity of that
gentleman’s belief in occult slate writing, and to make him with-
draw his present of a locked slate given to the celebx*ated sensitive,
Mr. Eglinton.
“ The material hypothesis in manifestations such as the fore-
going has at least a tangible and rational basis, which cannot be
said of the hypothesis of disembodied spirits. We have clearly
seen that in these phenomena the forces and intelligence come
from ourselves. But these very manifestations alluded to, are
the great foundation, the supporting dome of spiritualism. The
“ GRANUMA a perfect porridge meal-Cures Indigestion


foundation being thus removed, the whole superstructure tumbles to
the ground.”
“Doctor, what about ‘the sub-conscious mind,’ so frequently
mentioned by you ?”
“ An important factor is this snb-conscious mind, or subliminal
consciousness ; and it demands our keenest consideration in the
great question of the origin of the intelligence in these phenomena.
“ In this latent consciousness are buried the myriads of forgotten
impressions of a lifetime ; and it often happens that when those who
have not given the matter due thought, come into the presence of a
telepathist, one of these impressions, not re-called to memory at the
moment, is, so to speak, made ready for projection under the subtle
power of the strings of sympathy, without impressing the conscious
mind of the individual. How, acting with vibratory influence on the
receptive mind of the telepathist, it is impressed there consciously, and
is thus correctly given forth, to the astonishment of the sitter. This
very astonishment begets more confidence, and, with consequently
increased sympathy, minutest details of the life-time of the sitter are
freely disclosed.
“ This is not exaggerated. I myself have experienced it with
a clairvoyant, or, rather, telepathist. How, not alone thoughts,
words and events are indelibly photographed on, and may be unfolded
in this way from the brain, but also the form and color of things and
the form, expression, mannerism and the various characteristics of
persons. I could relate several instances of the correct visualizing
of objects in the distance, the sensitive having had no previous
knowledge of them ; and also the correct detailing of current events,
impossible for the sensitive to have been cognisant of in the
ordinary way. I have also had correct descriptions of living persons
in the distance, and unknown to the sensitive.
“If, therefore, through the telepathic abstraction of indelible
impressions from the mind, a correct description of an absent living
individual, otherwise unknown to the sensitive, can be given, as
regards sex, age, form, expression, mannerism and general charac-
teristics ; and, in fact, if this mental picture can be projected and
seen by the sensitive, why should not this as easily happen though
the individual had died ? The impression on the brain still remains.
As a matter of fact, it does often happen ; and this will effectually
explain how, in such descriptions by clairvoyants, we maj r be led
erroneously to believe that the spirit of our departed friend is beside
us, whereas it is nothing more than a primarily subjective image re-
flected through the means above stated, and having no connection
whatever with the spirit of the departed.”
“What do you mean by the expression ‘primarily subjective?’”
“ Simply that, according to a theory of mine, an image
primarily subjective and unreal may become secondarily objective
and real. For instance, if, together with the faculty of visualizing,
the sensitive should also possess the faculty of sub-consciously pro-
jecting from the body the material called psychoplasm, this material
may follow up and, so to speak, fill the space occupied by the subjec-


live image, thereby materializing it. The material in the first
instance may be gaseous, invisible and impalpable, but yet suffi-
ciently actinic to impress a sensitized photographic plate. Thus a
psychic picture of an invisible human form may be accounted for.
The condensation of material from the gaseous into the solid would
explain the higher phase of materialization, where the figure is
visible and tangible. This hypothesis appears a rational one.
“ For my part, I can never understand why it should be more
difficult to accept the fact of materialization than to accept the fact
of telepathy or the appearance of ‘ the double,’ many instances of
which are on record. If that all-powerful natural force called
Sympathy can span the seas and create such special vibrations in
the mind of another as to produce therein true impressions of
objects, images and words, surely it is not more difficult to conceive
that it can, in the seance room, set up,in the vital material projected
from the sensitive, such special vibrations as will shape it into distinct
forms under the direction of the sub-conscious mind ? Please, also,
bear in mind that for the same reason that intelligence is communi-
cated to another’s mind in the distance, or that the mind of a
hypnotised individual can be taken possession of by the operator’s
intelligence, so also may intelligence be conveyed along the delicate
film that binds this now materialized form to the sensitive. These
forms would thus be regarded as mere automatons, moving, and it
may be speaking, through the material, the force and the intelligence
borrowed temporarily from the sensitive, plus whatever psychic aid
might be afforded by the sitters, and in no way connected with disem-
bodied spirits.”
“ Such forms, then, according to your theory, doctor, could not
be correctly termed ‘ spooks ?’ ”
“Well, this pet Theosophical term has, it appears, become
fashionable of late. I am not sufficiently advanced in mental
development to accept a re-hash of Buddhism, Brahminism and
other Paganisms, served up to moderns under the inviting name
Theosophy. Consequently, I regard these forms as what they
really are, namely, mouldings from projected bodily material
through the operation of natural laws not yet understood, rather
than as Theosophical ‘ Kama-rupas ’ or ‘ shells ’ or ‘ spooks.’
They are, in fact, multiple thought-forms, part and parcel of the
Sensitive. In some instances they may be regarded as bearing
some relation to the ‘ double ’ or second self, or, in other instances,
they may be looked upon as objectivated multiple personalities or
selves. There is strong evidence of this, unwittingly given by Mrs.
Mellon. (That lady will pardon me for taking advantage of it.) It
is where she describes her sensations during the materializing
process, as that of ‘ double consciousness ’ or the consciousness of
double presence, she, feeling that she was the figure, and yet
knowing she was sitting on her chair. Important evidence this
is against the spirit hypothesis.
“ Resuming the important consideration of the source of the
intelligence in the intellectual phases of so-called spiritualism, I


will read you the following portion of a letter of mine to the
Sunday Times , of September 30th, 1894 :
“ ‘ Intellectual, refined, educational, or special manifestations
in a circle appear to be in exact proportion to the intellectuality,
educational training, or special characteristics of the sensitive.
The celebrated sensitive, D. D. Home, was musical, hence musical
results through his so-called spirit controls. The remarkable
psychic, Stainton Moses, admitted that if he himself were musical
he would have got better results in his sittings in this respect.
Our own psychic, Maggie Power, has received a limited education,,
hence we get crude results in the intellectual line at our seances.
She has, however, a musical ear, and keeps excellent time to music.
Consequently (and this is significant), the tabic—without contact,
of course—keeps absoluteiy correct time to music, and even an
occasional materialised hand will strum rhythmically and sometimes
tunefully the strings of my auto-harp. This has occasionally been
done, as well as the production of direct occult writing (scribbling),
while alone with the sensitive in a locked room, holding both her
hands in mine. By-the-bye, these facts would throw grave doubt on
Mrs. Besant’s
THEOSOPHICAL THEORY OF ‘ ELEMENTALS ’
as producing such physical manifestations. I have no doubt
whatever that if we developed Maggie’s other faculties we would
get proportionate results at our seances, which would indicate that
her supposed ‘ controls ’ are but a reflex of herself ; in reality,
projected multiples manifesting automatically through her forces,
including her intelligence.
‘ The following train of reasoning would now suggest itself :
‘ 1. If a disembodied spirit posseses a distinct intelligence, why,
in order to manifest intellectually, should it be necessary for it to
do more than use the psychic’s brain, which has in it at least the
material to be acted upon by an outside intelligence, the brain’s
normal functioning in this direction being kept absolutely
quiescent: Is there, therefore, a need for it to get mixed up with
the psychic’s intelligence ? Ought not, in fact, the spirit intel-
ligence be manifested pure and unadulterated, no matter through
what medium it passes ?
f 2. If, as spiritualists say, in being filtered through a medium
it receives a coloring therefrom, why should we then not get say
a half-and-half result—at least some writing capacity where none
exists, or som». attempt at grammatical speaking where the
psychic is in this respect deficient, and so on 1
‘3. If, as no doubt will be suggested, “ like attracts like,”
and that, consequently, the illiterate and ill-refined cannot attract
high influences, how will this fit in with the other evidence,
which, no doubt, will be brought forward, of illiterate people
“ under control ”
DELIVERING LEARNED ADDRESSES
or speaking in a foreign tongue unknown to them, unless by
falling back upon my explanation, telepathy, in which
“The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


case the spirit theory is abandoned 1 I have no doubt that if
Maggie, our psychic, were a telepathist we should get such
results. As, however, she does not receive this external aid,
her own mentality is exactly mirrored in her supposed 4 controls. ’
“ And now, Doctor, can you account, on non-spiritualistic
lines, for the phenomena of spirit lights, spirit raps, automatic
writing, and trance speaking?”
“ Oh, these are, one and all, easily explained. So-called
spirit lights—genuine lights impossible to simulate as regards
color or other peculiarities by phosphorus or any known sub-
stance—lights which have an inimitable and indescribable some-
thing about them ‘once seen never to be forgotten,’ and which,
on many occasions, I have observed in mid-air, flashing out
intelligent answers to questions—yards away from the sensitive,
whose hands I held—are simply a form of psychic energy, the
transmutation of one force into another, just as magnetism is
converted into electricity ; this transmuted psycho-magnetic force
still remaining under the direction of the intelligence protected
from the sensitive. Raps or concussive sounds are simply forms
of concentrated psychic energy, and these also carry with them
the sensitive’s intelligence. Messages thus conveyed are, as I
have witnessed frequently, a reflex in part of the sensitive’s mind
and partly of the minds of the sitters, transferred by telepathic
agency. Out of my own latent mind things have been often
thus extracted, which I had quite forgotten at the time, and
which, were I credulous, might have pointed to disembodied
spirit agency. Sometimes one or more separate mental
impressions are abstracted, and then somehow spliced together to
make sense. I quote an instance from my communication just
referred to ;
“ One night in waking moments I had a vision of a
man standing at the foot of my bed, and, out of curiosity, I went
next day to a professional and powerful clairvoyante, or, rather,
telepathist. She spoke of the presence of ‘ a spirit ’ beside me.
and her description tallied with that of my nightly visitant,
Raps—genuine raps produced by invisible agency—came
instantly, and, by repeatiag the alphabet, we discovered that the
name was ‘ James Burns,’ that when in the flesh he was a miner,
that he was
KILLED AT HILL END
eleven months before, and came to impress me to invest in a certain
mine, the value of which two friends had urged a couple of days
previously. This latter information was perfectly correct. I had
been urged a couple of days before to go in for this particular mine,
and the fact was unfolded from my sub-conscious mind by the
telepathist. But now for proof of the identity of my supposed
spirit friend. I wrote to Hill End mine. No such person as
James Burns was killed there eleven months before, or at any time
within recollection. On referring a day or two subsequently to a
certain book which I had previously been reading, behold ! I found
“GRANUMA”—a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


the name of ‘James Burns’ in a prominent advertisement which I
then remembered having seen before going to the clairvoyante, but
bad forgotten all about at that time. The mental impression,
however, had gone into the recesses of my sub-conscious mind, and
remained stored up there until, with other impressions, including
the subjective image of the man, it was pumped out by the tele-
pathist. This is one out of many instances I can record. Were I
a spiritualist, possibly I would not have questioned, but would have
accepted the whole thing as a genuine spirit manifestation.’
“You ask about automatic writing and trance speaking?
Well, the former can be explained through the agency either of a
living sympathetic influence after the manner of telepathy, or else
through the agency of the sub-conscious mind, in taking coiitrol, in
either instance, of the structures which preside over the automatic
movements of special muscles of the hand and arm. Trance speak-
ing can be explained by the same species of sub-conscious auto-
control, or else by the influence of a living person in the distance.
“So we have now gone over most of the ground. No doubt,
even with many people outside of the spiritualistic community,
there is a natural anxiety to get occular and tangible proof of
another existence. But on what is such proof founded ? Surely
not on the ringing of hand-bells and the flitting about of tinkling
tambourines, or a pandemonium of confused sounds, frightened
sitters, hurled chairs and upturned tables ? Surely not on the
stalking forth of a few harmless materialized automatons, whose
greatest achievement consists in a nod to one or more enchanted
sitters, or in a few laboured words by which nobody is benefited ?
“ But, even without regard to any previous arguments used by
me, how can reasonable people ascribe to spirit intelligence the
light nonsense or unreasoning twaddle that we usually hear rapped
out in the seance room ? Put your rapping spirit to the test; pin
your spirit friend to some dirert question which even an ordinary
mortal could answer satisfactorily, and usually you will find that,
after the manner of the weak school-boy, the reply is either shifty or
irrelevant, or simply the stereotyped phrase ‘ Don’t know.’ Press
this manifesting intelligence further, and you are either given infor-
mation that subsequently proves to have been incorrect or lying, or
else you are treated to a hash of generalisms, all fighting shy of the
mark. Demand—say, through a trance speaker—information such
as one would naturally expect from a spirit that has soared aloft,
undergoing, as the spiritualists say, ‘a process of development,’ and
you are generally treated to a compound of vagaries and silly
nonsense, intermingled, perhaps, with grandiose descriptions of im-
possible homes in spirit-spheres, generally winding up with a few
flattering predictions as so your coming greatness ; all of which in-
formation, when calmly resolved into its constituent parts, leaves, as
a precipitate, not one iota calculated to enlighten or elevate you!”
“ But, if you thus deny the spirit theory, how then about
the episode of Samuel and the witch of Endor, and other Bible
miracles in this direction ? ”


“ As well ask, does the thing called light always proceed from
the same source ? It is not always sunlight, however close the
resemblance. A miracle, as I take it, pre-supposes some changing
of the order of nature, presumably for some great or exceptional
purpose, and cannot be looked upon as a mere development of a
natural process beyond normal limits. If miraculous, it ceases to
be natural. The psychic capacity, no doubt, resembles that alluded
to in these Bible records. The former, however, is but a mongrel
and abortive imitation, and bears to the latter the same comparison
as the light from an oil wick to the rays of the sun.”
Observations On and Possible Utilization of
Psycho-Magnetic Force.
“ I glean from your remarks, Doctor, that you consider these
materializations and other seances a useless waste of time ? ”
“Hot alone this, but also a great waste of psychic energy and
bodily material that might possibly be directed to some use.”
“Pardon me for asking why, holding such views, you
attended seances 1 ”
“You forget, sir, I am a student, and that these are the
only means I have had for observing and accumulating facts in
view of the possible utilization of these forces. Of course I
mean utilisation in a medical sense ; though, even outside of
this, certain problems have suggested themselves to me. For
instance, taking especially into account the marvellous pheno-
mena of levitation, which I have occasionally witnessed in our
servant, there arises the question : Is the force or influence that
presides over it vibratory 1 Can we, by arriving at a knowledge
of and control over this influence, produce this phenomena
artificially on one or more inert substances 1 If so, would we
not have made rapid strides towards artificially counteracting
or nullifying, for prolonged periods, gravitation in the case of
certain substances 1 Surely a momentous question, the solution
of which would also mean the solution of one of the most
important problems of the present day—namely, that of loco-
motion through the atmosphere. At all events, such a clue to
the discovery of control over gravitation is here afforded as has
not yet been otherwise obtainable. However, this is not my
special province to discuss. It is only one of the by-paths of an
investigation full of wondrous possibilities. But even in the
midst of the trivialities of the seance room, I have also made
abundant observations that have direct reference to the profes-
sion to which I belong.”
“Would you please mention a few ?”
“Well, many of them would hardly be intelligible to the
lay reader, but, without entering into special details, or into
collateral channels, such as the possibility that suggests itself, in


view of the actinicity of objectivated though invisible psychic
images, of being able to photograph the aura of an approaching
infectious disease, here are a few lines of thought suggested in
the course of these seances and given at random :
“71.) The possible relation between the psychic capacity
and certain phases of lunacy. Is there, in this direction, a
laxity in our symptomatology in lunacy ? Are, for instance,
the symptoms known as ‘ hallucination ’ and ‘auricular delirium ’
synonymous with what are known amongst sensitives, as
‘clairvoyant vision’ and ‘ clairaudience?’ If so, might not
occasional unfortunate mistakes arise in the confining of mere
psychics—especially those in whom these faculties arise
spontaneously—in lunatic asylums ?
‘‘(2.) Are certain convulsive seizures difficult of classification
nothing more than the ‘ control ’ of psychics, that is to say, their
sudden possession by ‘an influence ? ’ If so, what is the best
means for preventing such convulsive controls ?
‘ (3.) If ‘ influences ’ be readily communicated in the
seance room, may there not also, through the intermingling of
projected force and material, be received an impression from a
diseased member in the circle, rendering the recipient more
prone to the reception of this special disease under exposure to
its germs? If so, are such impressions communicated thus in
every-day life, and are there any means, mental or otherwise,
for antagonizing them ?
“(4.) What influence, if any, has ‘suggestion’ on the
psycho-dynamic and other occult results in the seance room ? In
what measure, if at all, does ‘auto-suggestion’ come into play?
“ (5.) Is there any relation between what is known as ‘ faith
healing ’ and psycho-sensitiveness ? May there not be, on the
part of the healer and the healed, some unconscious mutual ex-
ercise of a psychic phase, a knowdedge of the laws governing which
would ensure its more general and efficient application ?
“ (6.) Is there any relation, and if so to what extent, between
the originating factors of the usual psychic phenomena and the
causes of the phenomena of Hypnotism ? Do hypnotic effects
readily arise at seances, and are they sometimes spontaneous,
that is to say unconsciously propagated?
“ (7.) W hat relation, if any, is there between psycho-magnetic
force and what was once termed odic force, odyle, or animal
magnetism ? Are they one and the same ? Does any special
force of this kind exist at all in the mesmerist—is there in fact
any fluidic factor at work in his case, or do mesmeric effects arise
through induced disturbance of the balance of the special force
or forces in the sensitive through suggestion alone ?
“(8.) W ould the latter hypothesis be sufficient to account for
certain of the higher phases of mesmerism, including intro-vision,
retro-vision, pre-vision, ecstacy, etc ?
“The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


“(9.) Whether the forces in operation belong to the operator
or the subject or both, is there any means whereby we may
divest hypnotism of certain objections to it ?
“ (10.) Ought we not, in fact, by an intimate study of the laws
governing these forces, try to arrive at some means of controlling
them and directing them into useful operation in another way
than by hypnotism, even while recognising the undoubted power
and utility of the latter as a medical agent in suitable cases ?
“Taking this ground, I have placed before myself a few facts and
queries, the chief amongst which are as follows ;
“(1.) Here is a Force found frequently associated with evolved
bodily material, and which may or may not exist separately from the
latter. This force I have found to be transmutable, like other
forces. It is generated by the human body. Its dynamic power is
very great, and this power is increased according to the number and
quality of the sitters. The manifested energy I have found often
to greatly exceed the possible muscular energy of any one of the
sitters. Can we not find a means of directing its special transmu-
tation, and usefully guiding its action ? If it will act on inert
matter, is it not reasonable to infer that it will act as readily, or even
more readily, on the body, of which it is a product ? Can it, in
other words, be turned into medical use as an energizing agent ?
“ (2.) Here is a Force which I have also found to be
permeable, cumulative and capable of extension or diffusion. It
is also selective or concentrative. If it can (and, after close
observation and personal experiment, I am forced to admit it
can), permeate and diffuse itself through the body, and act as an
energising agent, may we not be able to make it select certain
bodily parts or structures on which to concentrate itself as a giver
of the tone required to cast off effete products, and thereby to
remove special pain or sickness ?
“ (3.) Here is a Force one of the extraordinary developments
of which is the so-called passage of matter through matter, which
thrice occurred at a sitting here ; other instances being detailed
by Professor Zollner, of Leipsig University, and by Mr. Myers,
hon. sec. of the London Psychical Research Society, in his
account of the experiences of the late Stanton Moses ; a pheno-
menon no doubt accomplished through the rapid displacement of
molecules without their severance ; possibly through some subtle
effect on inter-molecular vibrations ; possibly through sudden
devolution (dematerialization) and equally sudden re-arrangement
of molecules. Well, if such as this can be accomplished through
its agency, might we not, by a careful study of the laws that
govern this extraordinary phenomenon, arrive at some means for
directing psycho-magnetism through thought-force, or rather
mind agency, towards the dematerializing and dissipation of disease
products and disease germs in the system ? Such a possibility may
be regarded as chimerical. Some years ago the idea of the telephone
or phonograph would have been considered equally so. It is only
a matter of degree in our application of the Force. At all events I feel
“ GRANUMA a perfect porridge meal—Cures Indigestion.


that the deductions arising from points 1 and 2 can be, and are being-
daily established. However orthodox, and chary of inter ference from
outsiders, we medicals may be, such reiterated statements of cure by
psychic agency, as are to be found throughout so-called spiritualistic
literature, demands thoughtful enquiry. Most great sensitives have
exhibited this psychic healing phase. Instances of its efficacy in
disease are referred to in the biography of the late I). D. Home
and others. Observations of cases, and experiment on myself, have
convinced me that ‘there is something in it’—a great deal more
than one would conceive. It is a matter that demands careful study,
and I commend it to those amongst my medical friends who, for
the sake of adding usehdly to this too long neglected sphere in
medical psychology, would brave the foolish popular prejudice of the
hour. I can cite remarkable instances of successful psychic healing
which have come directly under my notice. But already I have
gone on too great length, and these matters are more fit for medical
ears. I fear, Sir, what I have already said is too dry to be read-
able, At all events I have, as you see, not been idle while observing
the so-called ‘ trivialities ’of the seance room. An apparently trivial
occurrence may have an astounding origin, and the study of small
things may lead to important results. Observing the steam moving
the lid of a kettle originated the conception which culminated in the
steam-engine.. The law of gravitation takes its origin from the
falling of an apple. At all events in the seance room questions and
problems of moment, some of which I have detailed to you, have
suggested themselves to me. Their initial and more difficult study
lias been got over. If, chiefly owing to want of help, which ought to
be due in this matter, my realisation cannot be fully accomplished
in my day, I have at least, I hope, contributed in a small way in
adding to our as yet limited stock of knowledge on this phase of
psychology, which is essentially a medical study.”
“ But, Doctor, does not this project of yours oppose itself to
practical medicine and the use of drugs ? ”
“ What a question ! I call that essentially practical which
relieves pain, whether it be cocaine, morphia, or psycho-magnetism.
The latter, as a medical agent, can no more interfere with the
employment of drugs than does hypnotism,
“ Do you intend, Doctor, to pursue this investigation further T
“ Whatever I may do in my private sanctum, I shall not again
court publicity in this matter, I had reasonably hoped to have at
least received no interruption in handling an unstudied subject in a
new country like this, where not alone are opinions supposed to be
unfettered, but where one would imagine that any attempt to
advance in a new sphere would be regarded with favor and receive
some encouraging stimulus. Instead of that, while pursuing, for a
good end, in the midst of a busy professional life, a complex study
that intimately relates to my profession, I have been dragged back at
every step and my work made painful and doubly laborious. Were


I, as an outsider, to see an honest student intent upon his work
goaded and pricked and annoyed at every step, I should say ‘ shame
upon such conduct!’
“For myself I simply bend to my work and strive against
opposing elements, while in my inner mind I feel—and this may be
some partial excuse for unmerited opposition—that not alone with
the driven herd, but also in the case of certain torpid conservative
scientists, the time is not ripe to regard favorably an investigation
like this.
“It matters not ! Every man is, I take it, bound to contribute
his share, however small, in the evolution of things here below ;
and, as I once said to one whose opinions are as grains of gold, and
whose friendship I highly value, I shall feel an inward satisfaction if
I can only add one tiny bit of mortar to the edifice of knowledge.
Even in scientific matters we live in the midst of contention, but a
forward march should be the order of the day. Whatever the
obstacles and risks encountered, I shall certainly feel more proud as a
common soldier, fighting my way honorably in advance, than as that
hybrid individual once styled by the witty O’Connell, ‘ Mr. Officer,
no soldier,’ lagging in shelter and safety behind.”


CHAPTER YIII.
Editor’s Notes.
In the air men hear their voices; their
feet on the rocks are seen.
Yet we all say, Whence is the message and
what may these wonders mean ?
IN the preceding pages there is abundant argument as to the
existence of psychic force. Nor are these arguments
wanting in substantiation by men in the foremost ranks in
.science, art, literature and politics, including members of famous
Universities, astronomers, chemists, electricians, poets, philoso-
phers and statesmen. We need only mention the names of
Flammarion, of the Paris Observatory, Zollner and Fechner, of
Leipsig University, Professor Axakoff, and Buttleroff, of St.
Petersburg, Wm. Denton, geologist, W. Oxley, Egyptologist,
Lombroso, Shiaparelli, Hare, Crookes, Alfred Russel Wallace,
Serjeant Cox, Yarley, Huggins, Professor Barrett, Gerald
Massey, etc., etc., all men of note, and many of great eminence.
These gentlemen have not alone pinned their faith to the broad
question of psychic force, but many of them have even acknow-
ledged the almost incredible fact of materialization. Nor has
the main subject been deemed unworthy of serious investigation
by such men as Gladstone, Balfour, Myers, Sedgwick, and
Ruskin. While certain investigators favor the spirit hypothe-
sis as an explanation of these phenomena, others hold that
they are explainable by natural though at present mysterious
agencies. This is the view accepted by the present writer.
There are grave reasons for doubting the spiritualistic hypothesis,
the weightiest, perhaps, being the fidelity with which, in general,
the manifesting intelligence reflects that of the medium, as
pointed out so convincingly by Dr. MacCarthy in his replies
to our questions. If, indeed, there be disembodied spirit
intelligence in the forms which glide from the medium’s
cabinet in dim half light, the spirit world must be vastly
different from the realm visioned by the imagination of man.
It was a suggestion of the wise and witty writer of the Break-
fast Table series—who has ere now tested its wisdom—that when
the soul frees itself from the trammels of flesh, it may in a
single instant be so overflowed by the luminous tides of know-
ledge that things before seen as through a glass dimly, would
become clear and intelligible—that the being who had solved the
mystery of Death would, through that change, come at the
“ The BILLY TEA” output is a ton per day.


meaning of the mystery of Life. Nothing of this fuller know-
ledge has ever been gleaned from the Spiritualists’ seances. No
ray of light has been shed along the path in which we grope
blindly from the cradle to the grave ; from an Eternity we have
forgotten to an Eternity in which we shall forget nothing, or
everything, —who knows ?
To aid us in coming at the great crying problems continually
besetting the human mind—the problems of life here and life
elsewhere, the sum total of the work of all the spiritualistic
seances ever held has been—nothing. The great longings of the
mind, the medium has contributed nothing to satisfy. Some
there are who profess to have received satisfactory tidings of the
state of affairs in that land which lies east of the sun and west
of the moon j but there is little need to take these people
seriously, even though they include Mr. Stead and Professor
Wallace, and other eminent personages.
The attitude of the majority of people towards materializa-
tion and other evidences of psychic force is unquestionably that
of Thomas the Disciple towards his resurrected Lord. Each
man must have proof for himself that the phenomena he is
called upon to believe are true and tangible to his senses. Other-
wise he rejects them with that lordly contempt which most of
us have for experiences which have not entered into our own
lives.
But every man cannot witness a materializing seance, nor can
the man in the street summon up phenomena from the vasty deep.
The medium alone has the power to do this, and to do it the
medium must have sympathetic surroundings. A seance of sceptics
would be unlikely to succeed in producing phenomena in whose
existence they do not believe ; for we have never yet heard of anybody
being a medium in his or her own despite, though even this may be
possible. The most liberal intelligence excludes as little as may be
from the sphere of Possibilities.
Of course, if sceptics cannot be convinced they must remain
sceptics. Perhaps this is well. There are disturbing conditions
attached to psychic investigation which would render it inadvisable
for us all to set about investigating. The exploration of the regions
of the occult should be left to the small band whose training and
earnestness fit them for the task.
That we are upon the threshhold of great discoveries in the
world of psychology, only perhaps the materialist who disbelieves in
everything that is not attested by his five senses will doubt. The
materialist of a century ago would have scoffed at the triumphs of
modern science, had they been prophesied in his time, just as his
successor of to-day scoffs at the claims of the enthusiast in psychic
research. Yet, because the materialist exists, the world is not
“ dispeopled of its dreams.” The rationalist, the materialist—these
two spend a third of their lives in a condition in which their mental
processes are in a state of topsy-turvydom, when indeed the captain.
“GRANUMA a perfect porridge meal-Cures Indigestion.


Will, is thrown overboard and the pilot, Reason, mast-headed.
Dreams everybody will plead guilty to, and dreams, the poet tells us,
“ are true while they last.”
A more significant phenomenon is the fact, now pretty gener-
ally admitted, that the will of the Hypnotist can efface the will of
his subject, so that the will of the Hypnotist for the time being has
two separate bodies to execute its behests. If the Hypnotist can
take possession of another’s personality when in juxtaposition with
that other, why not at a distance ? What is there in mere terrestrial
distance to interfere with the overpowering magnetic forces at the
command of the Hypnotist?
To come to phenomena more generally acknowledged, is there
any intelligent man or woman who does not store up on the memory
tablets on which the experiences of existence are narrated, some in-
stances of what is called “ telepathy,” for want of a better name for the
phenomena of thought projection. Walking along with a sympa-
thetic friend, who does not remember an occasion when the same
thought couched in similar terms has arisen simultaneously to
the lips of both, perhaps to be voiced at the same moment ? That is
a common instance of Telepathy. Between those two friends there
is some medium of communication beyond that of the known five
senses. That medium of communication is the force which the
psychical investigator takes for his own. There is little doubt that
this sympathetic interfusion of thought can take place, and that it is
along the same medium of communication that those warnings and
whisperings and visions of which we hear so much in the form of
second sight, etc., travel over sea and land and shoot from soul to
soul across the earth’s diameter.
Instances are innumerable in which individuals have seen the
counterfeit presentment of dearly-loved friends at the instant in
which those friends were suffering the last pangs of snapping life.
The evidence for the existence of such phenomena are in many cases
detailed and definite, and on the whole as worthy of credence as that
by which cases are decided in our law courts. These phenomena
are akin to the power of the thought reader, which has never yet
been explained. That one man should be able to plunge into the
depths of another’s consciousness, and filch therefrom his most
carefully-guarded thoughts, is a matter which may well provoke
incredulity. Yet these achievements are admittedly on record. The
movement of solid bodies without physical contact, by means of a
power transmitted from and yet remaining connected with the body,
is already amply demonstrated. The present writer has frequently
witnessed it in the course of Dr.MacCarthy’s experiments in full light.
All this indicates that there is such a thing as psychic force, which
moves either unconsciously between persons in exquisite sympathy
with > one another, or consciously, when, as in the case of the
hypnotist or the thought reader, the stronger dominates the weaker
individuality. In this region the labors of the explorer are likely
to be rewarded eventually with startling successes.


A more difficult question is whether the intelligence behind
the force, which is apparently intermingled with temporarily
evolved and impalpable vital matter, is also sovereign over it. Can
it build up forms in human semblance, supply them with power of
speech, and render them visible to the human senses ? These are
matters upon which no effective generalisations are yet possible. All
we know is that there are intelligent and conscientious investigators
who believe that they have seen these things done. However,
we recognise that before these phenomena are accepted by the
popular intelligence, there must be many years of patient investi-
gation, and in the matter of evidence Pelion must be piled on Ossa
before the power of these forces is generally credited. However,
the investigators are not discouraged. In the preceding pages may
be found an honest record of experiences in search of the truth in
this matter of psychic phenomena, with some unavoidable comments
upon recent unpleasant events in connection with that search.
Though the editor has no sympathy with the spiritualistic hypothesis,
he has allowed Mrs. Mellon, who is an ardent believer in that
hypothesis, to present her views fully, though the weight of evidence,
even a portion of her own evidence, is arrayed againsther theory of the
spirit origin of the phenomena evolved by her mediumistic powers.
That there is much in this little volume which will be amusing to
the sceptic, the editor is quite prepared to believe; but, concerning
the charge that any of it is impossible, he takes his stand with one
who was much too great to be a sceptic, and replies that there are
“ more things in Heaven and earth than are dreamt of in our
philosophy.”
ARMAND JEROME.


GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO.,
BOOKSELLERS, PUBLISHERS,
manufacturing; stationers, printers, paper rulers,
LITHOGRAPHERS, BINDERS, &c.,
363, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY. 363.
'©♦fsJ-O— i-
NEW AUSTRALIAN PUBLICATIONS.
Will be published in October— Max O’Rell’s New Work on the Colonies:
JOHN BULL & CO.: The Great Colonial Branches of the Firm —Canada.
Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, By Max O’Rell.
With upwards of 50 Illustrations by Irving Montagu. Cr., 3s. 6d.
MAURICE; Or, the Red Jar. —Will be published in November.
A Tale of Magic and Adventure for Boys and Girls. By The Countess of Jersey.
Illustrated, Cr., 6s.
A MEMOIR OF GEORGE in November.
An Australian Politician, and Chief Justice of Victoria, By Edward E. Morris.
%* Orders may now be registered for the above. Cr., 10s. 6d.
HALF A HERO: An Australian Novel. By Anthony Hope, Author of “A
Prisoner of Zenda” &c. Special Australasian Edition. Cr., 6s.
“I do not know (writes our London correspondent) the degree of relationship, if any,
between Anthony Hope, the Author, and the Earl of Hopetoun. . . , There is internal
evidence that the author has had Government House, Melbourne, in his mind’s eye when lie
wrote his very amusing story. — Melbourne Age.
NOTES ON THE BOOK OF REVELATION. By the Very
Rev. H. B. Macartney, D.D., Dean of Melbourne. With a Photographic Portrait
Bvo, handsome cloth, ss.
PERLYCROSS: A Tale of the Western Hills. By R. D. Blackmore, Author
of “Lorna Doone,” &c.
St. James's Gazette. —“We are almost inclined to think that “Perlycro«s” is the best
book we have had from its author since his first great success.”
Standard. —“ There is abundant entertainment to be found in the book.”
IN STRANGE COMPANY: A story of Chili and the Southern Seas
By Guy Boothby, Author of “On the Wallaby.” With 6 Full-Page Illustrations
by Stanley L. Wood. Crown Bvo. cloth gilt, bevelled boards, ss.
“ Full of strange adventures from the first page to the last. A wealth of original
incident. A thoroughly exciting story.”— Glasgow Herald,
SEVEN LITTLE AUSTRALIANS. By Ethel S. Turner. With 26
Illustrations by A. J. Johnson. Crown Bvo. cloth, gilt, bevelled boards, gilt
edges, 3s. 6d. Just ready.
“This new work has all the simple domestic interest of Miss Alcott’s ‘Little Women,
with an added lightness and delicacy of touch recalling ‘Little Lord Fauntleroy,’ as well as
all the delightful fun and humour which made the success of ‘Helen’s Babies.’ The book
will appeal to readers of every class and every age. Of all the children, ‘Judy,’ the lovable
little tomboy and madcap, is likely to become as famous a figure in fiction as ‘Topsy’ of
‘Uncle Tom’s Cabin.’
New Novel by Mr. Hornung: THE UNBIDDEN GUEST. By E. W. Hobnuno,
Author of “A Bride from the Bush,” &c. Crown Bvo. sewed, 2s. 6d., cloth, 3s. 6d.
“Mr. E. W, Hornung’s new story will certainly not detract from his reputation as a
writer of Australian tales.” —Daily News.


Notice.-To Squatters, Farmers, Ac.
THE CO-OPERATIVE
PURCHASE & DOMESTIC AGENCY,
120 STEAITD ARCADE, SYDITET
Manager—Mrs. E. M. COX (latb or Mddgeb).
'This Association has been formed to aid residents in the
Country making purchases in Town, by providing personal
supervision of a lady to see that their requirements are
satisfactorily carried out. The Association undertakes to
obtain anything required without extra cost to the purchaser.
To hire and despatch
Governesses, Lady Helps, Domestic Servants
and Station hands.
Apartments inspected and engaged, and all other domestic
affairs attended to for a nominal fee.
Particulars, References and Terms given on application to the
Manager at the offices of the Association,
120 STRAND ARCADE , SYDNEY .
EEFEBENCES:
W. M. M. ARNOLD, Esq., 95 PITT STREET,
CITY BANK.
MAIDEN, Esq. (GOLDSBROUGH, MORT & CO., Ltd.), CIRCULAR QUAY.


h"uSea JOHN HUNTER’S
BOOT
fo, wr’ s City Boot Palace,
CANNOT BE
EXCELLED
for Style,
Fit, Durability,
and Comfort.
GEORGE AND MARKET STREETS.
These Goods are Obtainable at the Following Branches
NEW
SOUTH WALES.
Oxford Street.
Darlinghurst.
Paddington,
Glebe.
Pyrmont.
Balmain,
Newtown.
Leichhardt.
Waverley.
Petersham.
Summer Hill.
St. Leonards.
REGISTERED TRADE MARK.
Rozelle.
Burwood.
Parramatta.
Wollongong.
Newcastle.
West Maitland.
Goulburn.
Bathurst.
Tamworth.
Armidale,
Inverell.
Orange.
Young,
Wagga.
See that the above Registered Trade Mark is on each Boot.
THE CITY BOOT PALACE
Is Stocked with the Largest Selection of
BOOTS AM'D SHOES
In the Australian Colonies,
Sole Manufacturers of
I null U| I KIT CD
Standard Screwed UUNN NUN I tK
Work a Speciality.
TENNIS,
CRICKET,
BOATING
GOODS
always kept in stock.


4t Like the tap of the British Drum, the name ‘ Gordon & Gotch ”
is heard all round the World.”— Cape Times.
oot-don A ootch?
123 PITT ST., SYDNEY,
AND AT
]VEelbourrie, Brisbane, Capetown, and London.
FUS LI SHERS im r ORTERJ OF PERIODICAL
Sole Wholesale Agents for “COSMOS,” &c.
Subscriptions "gleccioeb for am? or
'gtctrspapcr ip tbc
AbVERTI/INQ AQENT/ ANb CONTRACTOR/.
Estimates Supplied for Newspaper and other Advertising of
Every Description.
Faser Merchants i Printers’ Furnishers.
PRICE LISTS OR APPLICATION.


W, M. MACLAKDY & CO., Printers. 82 Pitt Street, Sydney.
