









A
COMPANION
TO THE
LIVERPOOL MUSEUM,
containing
A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF ITS
Curiosities, Natural & Artificial,
WORKS OF ART,
&C. &C.
OPEN FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION,
AT THE HOUSE OF
WILLIAM BULLOCK ,
CHURCH-STREET,
JEWELLER AND SILVERSMITH TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
THE DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.
O Nature! how in every charm supreme!
Whose vot’ries feast on raptures ever new.
O ! for the voice and fire of seraphim.
To sing thy glories with devotion due !
BEATTIE.
THE FIFTH EDITION,
LIVERPOOL,
PRINTED FOR THE PROPRIETOR,
BY G. F. HARRIS,
1807.


THE futl value given for rare and uncommon Quadrupeds, Birdsj
Fishes, Reptiles, Shells, old Paintings, Carvings on Wood or Ivory, Stained
Glass, ancient and foreign Arms and Armour, or any uncommon pco-
duction of Art or Nature.


NAMES
OF THE
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
WHO HAVE PRESENTED CURIOSITIES TO THE
LIVERPOOL MUSEUM .
RESIDENTS OF LIVERPOOL.
ASHTON, N. Esq.
Atherton, Edward, Esq.
Angus, Chai les
Adlingfon, (late) George
Astley, Thomas
Astley,
Backhonse^TTEsq.
Bushell, Captain
Bennock, J.
Brennard, Captain
Brettargh, William
Bowdon, Joshua
Bullock, George
Barr, Captain
Blundell, Bryan
Barrow, Captain
Bolton, John, Esq.
Bolton, J. Mrs.
Currie, Mrs.
Caldwell, Charles, Esq.
Campbell, Captain
Clarke, Captain
Cliff, Adam
Directors of the Blue Coat School,
Dickson, William, Esq.
Farrer, (late) John
Fisher, Lieut. R, N.
Forbes, William
Haworth (late) George
Haycock, Mr.
Harper, William, Esq.
James, Nath.
I Johnson, Robert
Koster, J. T. Esq.
Kirkjaan, Robert
Lowe, J.
! Laurence, Charles, Esq.
, Loundes, Mr.
Mousden, Mr.
Murray, J.
Moore, Henry Glover
Neilson, William, Esq.
Pennington, Mr.
Preston, Robert
Powell, Captain
j Pearson, Captain
I Parry, Henry
Pettigrew, Captain
Riramer, Mr.
Roach, Captain
Roberts, Captain
Smyth, Rev, John
Stauiforth, (late) Thomas, Esq
Stanifbrth, Samuel, Esq.
Schofield, T.
Slater, William
Smith, R.
Turmeau, John
Touhy, Miss
Wood, Miss
Wright, Captain
Wlnte, Mr.
Ward, Robert
NON*


NON-RESIDENTS IN LIVERPOOL.
Allen, Oldham. „ - r
Ash, Thomas, Esq. 1 £\ t
Bruce, Miss, Demerara.
Brettargh, J. Trafford-Hall.
Blackier, J. Esq. late Sheriff of Dublin.
Battersby, Miss, Dublin.
Bullock, J. Surinam.
Bootle, Sir Wilb. Lathom House.
Barret, Mr. Birmingham/
Brown, Mr. do.
Bisset, James, do.
Blundell, Henry, Esq. Ince Hall.
■ Blackburn, John, Esq.
Brown, Mr. Norwich.
Bollingbroke, Mr. do. Mt YS®
Boulter, J. Yarmouth. r.na •r.
Bradley, Mr. Sheffield.
Bradwell, J. do.
Bottom, Mr. do.
Clarke, Henry, Esq. Middlewich.
Chappel, Rev. Coventry.
Clark, Rev. Adam ; f jfjtnriao Jt
Cooper, Mr. Lynn.
Crowdroy, William, Manchester.
Dartmouth, Countess of
Darling, Dr. Hull. ,q
Dadford, Thos. Esq. Wolverhampton.
Dublin, Royal Society of
Eggingten, Mr. Soho, Birmingham.
Edwards, Rev. £ I
Fryer, Dr. Rastrick.
Gnmey, (late) Bartlet, Esq. Norwich-
Gapp! Mr. do.
Grey, Mr. Lynn. £688910X3
Green, (late) Mr. Lichfield.
Green, J. Birmingham.
Gascoyne, Mrs. I Childwall-Hall.
Goodings, Mr. Sheffield. ,
Howpll,.. Coventry.
Jackson, J. Esq. London.
James, Mrs. St. Lucia.
Kemble, Rev. Birmingham.
Kirkwall, Lord
Leger, Hon. Col. St. Dublin.
Langton, Mr. Chesterfield.
Leicester, Sir John, Bart.
Madden, Esq. Dublin. A
Mars, Captain, America. A
Nixon, Mr. Coventry.
Nally, Leonard, M', Esq. Dublin.
Phillips, Leigh, Esq. Manchester.
Pollock, Mrs. Dublin.
Pulestoh, Cbl. (late) Eraral, Wrexham.
Pollito, S.
Robinson, Jos, Esq. Stamford. 3
Steel, Mrs. Anglesea.
Sharp, Thomas, Coventry.
Sharp, Rev. do.
Stephenson, Wjlliara, -Esq. Nor wich.
Salt, Jon. Sheffield,
Smith, ). B. ; Dr. P. L. S. i
Smith, William, Esq. Dublin,
Stanley, Rt. Hon. Lord, Knowsley-house.
Stanley, CoJ. I$,P, .
Townsend, Miss, Birmingham.
Turner, William, Llangollen.
tJnit, Mr. Birmingham.
Wright, Richard, Lichfield.
Ward, R. Esq. Sheffield.
Wallis, Mr. Hull. , .
Wallis, George, do.
Wallis, R. 5 do. fulj
Wallis, T. do.
Wilson, Mr. Leeds;
Young, Dr. Sheffield.


PREFACE.
ACTUATED, by the repeated solicitations of
his friends and respectable visitors for a
IbP the Liverpool Museum, the Proprietor
presumes that no apology is necessary, for intro-
ducing to thein<*£a&s this fifth and improved Des-
cription of his Cabinet. In the former edition, a
general objection having been made against the Lin-
mean Glasificatiop, not permitting the visitors to
apply with satisfaction to the specimen they wished
to examine, the evil complained of, it is hoped, has
been in some degree removed, by arranging the
whole of the objects in a numerical manner * with
reference from the subject under examination, to
the page and number expressed in the treatise.—
Those then, who u, look thro ’ nature , up io Nature's
Cl ,gauo { , .üßivfufwfafinO, 1 .nM .an
God;" or, to speak less metaphorically, who can
derive knowledge and entertainment from a con-
templation of the works of a Supreme Power ; or,
can examine with surprise and delight, the pro-
ductions of the untutored Indian, as well as those
ingenious pieces of art of the more enlightened
part of mankind ; will certainly find, in the present
publication, a more faithful companion to the mul-
tiplicity


tiplicjty of curiosities assembled and preserved in this
collection, than in those hitherto published; and at
the same time will have in private, a pleasing re-
source, to assist them in explaining to the circle of
their domestic friends, the gratification they have
received ; for, next to the enjoyment of beholding
what is strange or beautiful, is the desire of recount-
ing the wonders we have seen. In an introductory
preface of this description, it is but too often the
custom, to lavish a profusion of encomiums on the'
subjects intended to be presented to the inspection
of the public ; such-like conduct in no respect has
yet been practised, nor if to be avoided ever will be
followed. The credit on which the Museum at
present stands throughout the Imperial Dominions,
is a sufficient passport it is judged, to make every
pompous declaration unnecessary. In one instance,
however, a small acknowledgment is requisite, nor
must the Proprietor be accused of vanity should
he declare, that he intends making his Museum
an increasing depot of every thing rare and curious
in the animal and vegetable kingdoms, combin-
ing also the works of art and antiquity. To
this intent, he therefore craves the assistance of
the ladies and gentlemen of Liverpool, and those
of the neighbouring counties, whose taste and stuV
dies are congenial with such pursuits; humbly
hoping, that his endeavours will invariably be
found not unworthy the honour he solicits. With
respect to the literary department of this work, but a
few


few words are deemed sufficient: the articles of Na-
tural History have been carefully compiled from
those authors, who have given the most authentic and
pleasing relation of the animal; whilst in the des-
criptions of the Artificial Curiosities, all that has
been aimed at, is an accurate delineation of the sub-
ject, described in a simple and intelligent language.
If this treatise then, under all its imperfections (for
no one will doubt but there are many) should afford
one hour of entertainment, or can assist the re-
searches of those patrons and friends, who have so
liberally countenanced its Proprietor since his be-
coming an inhabitant of this populous and spirited
boiough, his hopes are in some degree exceeded,
and the wishes of his heart in a manner accom-
plkh&L a: | £in 0 j bashm ei i\ ihoqgzrcf jnsbtftug k
WILLIAM BULLOCK.
UVERPOOL MUSEUM
JANUARY %, 3.907,} i




A
COMPANION
TO THE
LIVERPOOL MUSEUM.
SOUTH SEA CURIOSITIES.
WE shall first direct the notice of the visitors to this Museum, to
the Curiosities brought from the South Seas, by Captain Cook.
Small Glass Case , No. /.
Contains specimens of the Painted or Stained Cloth from the South
Sea Islands, The cloth is made of the inside bark of the Touta, or
Cloth Tree, without either spinning or weaving, being matted to-
gether somewhat iti the manner of our hats. That which is intended
to be painted, is of a thick and strong texture, several folds being beaten
and incorporated together; after which it is cut into breadths about two
or three feet in width, and is painted in a variety of patterns, with
a comprehensive regularity of design that bespeaks infinite taste and
fancy. The exactness with which these intricate patterns are continued,
is surprising, when we consider that they have no stamps, and that
the whole is done by the eye, with pieces of bamboo cane dipped in
some colouring mixture, the hand being supported by another piece
of cane, in the manner practised by our painters. The colours are
extracted from berries and other vegetable substances. The business of
painting belongs entirely to the women, and is called kipparee ; and it
is remarkable, that they always gave the same name to our writing. The
young women would often take the pen out of the hand of our sailors,
and shew them, that they knew the use of it as well as they did, at the
same time telling them, that our pens were not so good as theirs. They
looked upon a sheet of written paper as a piece of cloth, striped after
the manner of their country; and it was not without the utmost diffi-
B culty


culty that they could be made to understand that our figures had a mean-
ings by which we could communicate our ideas one to another, with-
out speaking.
2. Over this case hangs the instrument called a Cloth-beater, used
in the manufacturing of the before-mentioned cloth.
3. A Rattle, made of the shells of hard nuts, which on being shook
produces a noise, that may be heard to a considerable distance.
4 and 5, Tabooing Rons, or Wands. One of them is made of a
beautiful close-grained red wood, and is pointed; on the other is the
head of Eatooa,°or God, finely carved. These wands are carried by the
priests, and sometimes by another person particularly appointed to that
office, who is called Tonata, (or the Taboo Man.) They are made use
of on various occasions, both public and private, and any thing touched
by them is considered as prohibited or forbidden. The word Taboo, is
used emphatically to denote any thing sacred, eminent, or devoted.
When a particular space of ground is tabooed , several of these rods or
wands tufted with dog’s hair, are fixed up, and until they are removed
no person will presume to tread on that ground,
6. 7, and 8, are different kinds of long War-Clubs used in the
Friendly Islands. These are made of a wood equal in hardness to
the Brazilian, and superior in beauty to mahogany : and when it is
remembered that iron and steel are wholly unknown to these people,
few specimens, for laborious and skilful workmanship, can vie with
them. The carving, though executed with no other instrument than a
shell, a shark’s tooth, or a flint, by dint of industry and ingenuity is
perfectly uniform in pattern, and highly ornamental.
g. Paddle, or Oar, with which the natives of the Friendly Islands
row their canoes. It is about five feet long, and is six inches across the
widest part, and yet is so light, as to weigh little more than a pound.
10. A Fish Gig, or Spear, of New Zealand, six feet long, made of
light wood, armed at the bottom with two pieces of barbed
ivory, or the bone of some sea animal, a foot long. About the middle of
♦he spear three other sharp pieces of ivory project in a triangular
form iu such a manner, that if they miss the fish with the first part,
they generally catch it upon the points of the second. The New Zea-
landers frequently use these gigs in their battles.
11. A Bow, from the Friendly Islands.
12. 13, 14, and 15. Various kinds of short Hand-Clubs, or Pat-
tapattoos, of different forms and materials. They are worn by the
natives of the South Seas, in the same manner as daggers are worn by
the Asiatics, and are usually made of hard wood, bone, or green ba-
saltes.
16, A Knife from the Friendly Islands, made of Wood, edged with
shark’s teeth, used by the natives of those islands for cutting up their
enemies taken in battle.
17. Basket from New Zealand.
]B. A DRESS, worn by the Natives of Prince William’s Sound,
principally made of Seal skins, with the hairy side outwards. It is a
kind of jacket, nearly resembling a carter’s frock, with a hood to that
fits


fits tight round the face, which is the only part of the body that is seen;
the skirts of the frock reach nearly to the knee, and under it are worn a
kind of drawers, made of thr; same materials,as the above ; the Jegs are
covered with stockings made of skin with very thick hair on, and over
these are drawn a pair of curious boots, made of the skin of some sea
animal. The whole of this dress is well calculated for the cold climate
where it is worn. The sewing is performed with small sharp fish bones,
and the sinews of the whale split into thin fibres for thread ; yet we be-
lieve that few European tailors could exceed either the neatness or
strength of the work.
19, and 20. Axes, or Adzes, made of very hard black stone,
nearly resembling the basaltes. These hatchets are wrought in a
regular form with much labour, by rubbing one stone against another ;
with these the natives cut the wood for their canoes, war-clubs, and house-
hold utensils ; the heads of these axes are firmly fastened to the handles
with strong cords, made of the fibres of the cpcoa nut twisted together.
21- A large Fish Hook, for taking the shark ; it is one foot long
and six inches broad, and is made of a crooked piece of W'ood, pointed at
the end with a substance resembling horn.
Glass Case , JVo. 11.
A pair of ponderous Ear-rings made of white shells, from Chris-
tian’s Island. gbifKff? c dbrls
A Necklace of Human Bone, from New Zealand. , , ,
Beautiful Feather Necklaces, from the South Seas.
Part of the Chief Mourner’s Dress used at the funerals of Owhyhee;
composed of small slips of mother of Pearl, very ingeniously put toge-
ther. aAmZ to ,niD A Of
Knee Ornament, wopi by the dancers of New Zealand. The
ground work is a strong close netting, on which fastened several
hundred small shells, which, when put in motion, produce a rattling
sound, to the music of which the dancers keep time.
In this case is also a variety of the Fishing Tackle of the Sandwich
and Friendly Islands. The hooks are made of mother of Pearl, bone,
or wood, pointed or barbed with small bones or tortoise shell. They
are of various sizes and forms ; that marked A, is the most common ; it
is between two and three inches long, and made ia the shape of a fish,
which serves as a bait. B, is of tortoise shell.
The lines are made of different degrees of strength and fineness.
That marked C, is the finest kind, and is of human hair platted together,
and is used chiefly for things of ornament. D, is a specimen of the
common kind, made of the bark of the cloth tree, neatly and evenly twist-
ed in the same manner asnur common twine. E, is a softer kind, made
of the bark of a small shrub called Areemah, platted together, and is
flat. That marked F, is of great strength, being made of the platted
sinews of some sea animal.
They likewise make another sort of cordage, which is flat and very
strong, and used principally in lashing the roofs of their houses, or
whatever they wish to fasten together; it is made of the fibrous
strings


strings of the cocoa nut husk, in the same manner as our sailors make
their points for the reefing of sails. That on the shark hook is of this
kind. Considering the materials of which these hooks and lines are
formed, their strength and neatness are really astonishing: “ and in fact,
(says Capt. Cook) we found them upon trial much superior to our own."
The Combs marked G are from Otaheite, and are specimens of their
exquisite wicker work-
A quantity of Fishing Lines, made from human hair, brought from
the South Seas.
A Net Mesh from the South Seas.
A Shoe of a Chinese Lady.
A Shoe of Count Borulaski, the Polish Dwarf.
A Tattowing Instrument, from the Sandwich Islands. Capt. King, in
his Continuation of Capt. Cook’s third voyage, vol. 3, page 135, observes,
“ That the Sandwich Islanders have the custom of tattowing the body in
“ common with the rest of the natives of the South Sea Islands, The
“ arms and hands of the women are also very neatly marked, and they
“ have a singular custom among them, the meaning of which (Capt.
“ King says,) we could never learn, that of tattowing the tips of the
“ tongues of the females. From some information we received relative
“ to the custom of tattowing, we were inclined to think it is frequently
“ intended as a sign of mourning on the death of a chief, or any other
“ calamitous event; for we were often told, that such a particular
“ mark was in memory of such a chief, and so of the rest. It may be
a here too observed, that the lowest class of natives are often tattowed
“ with a mark that distinguishes them as the property of some chief."
22. Model of an Otaheitean Canoe.
23- New Zealand Canoe.
24, 25. 26', and 27. Models of Canoes of different nations, Eski-
jnaux, Nootka Sound, Davis’s Straits, New Zealand, Bcc.
28. Lines for Fishing, made of human hair.
29. Basket to hold liquids, from the Sandwich Islands, South Seas.
30. Bread Pounder from Otaheite. It is made of black basaltes, and
is an astonishing effort of labour, executed by a people to whom the use
of iron instruments are unknown. It is used in pounding the Bread
Fruit.
31. Spear Caster from New Zealand, with which the natives
strike fish with a surprising celerity.
32. and 33. Caps from Nootka or King George’s Sound, made of
sea grass, finely woven together ; on one is designed the process of their
Whale Fishery. “ This, (says Capt. Cook,) though rudely executed,
serves to shew, that though there is no appearance of the knowledge of
letters among them, they have some notion of representing actions in a
lasting independent of what may be recorded in their songs and
traditions." They are worn by both sexes without distinction.
34. Hats, from the Sandwich Islands, made of the feathers of Par-
rots and other Birds.
35. Matting from the South Sea Islands.
36. A Dancing Girl’s Apron, from Otaheite.
37. A


37. A MANTLE from Nootka, or King George’s Sound. This
kind of ornament passes under the right arm, and ties over the left
shoulder, by which means both arms are at liberty, it is made of flax
so curiously knotted together, that on examination it must astonish the
beholder, more especially when he considers that it was made by a na-
tion to whom the loom is unknown.
38. Wooden Sword, from Botany Bay. It is worthy of remark,
that when Capt. Cook first discovered New Holland, he was astonished
to behold the natives so expert in handling the sword after the European
manner, fiom which he concluded they had seen and copied the use of
that weapon.
39> Bow and Arrows from Owhyhee.
40. Arrows of different nations.
41. Two small Cloaks made of Feathers to cover the shoulders, from
the South Seas.
42. An IDOL, from the Sandwich Islands. This monstrous and
uncouth representation of the human countenance is made of wicker-
work, curiously covered with small feathers of various colours, wrought
in the same manner as their cloaks. The eyes are made of large pearl
shells, with a nut of black wood in the centre ; the mouth is beset with
a double row of Dog’s teeth, which, together with the rest of the fea-
tures, are strangely distorted.
Glass Case , No, HI,
Most of the articles in this Case were presented to the Museum by
Dr. James E. Smith, of Marlborough-strect, London, President of the
Linnaean Society.
Specimen of the bark of the Lagetto Tree, the curious texture of
which resembles gauze. King Charles 11. (it is said) had a pair of
ruffles and a cravat made from this bark, which were presented to him by
a merchant from Jamaica, which he frequently wore. The Cloth of the
South Sea Islands is made from a , (similar Bark.
Fine Specimen of the Banksia Serrata in flower. This is one of the
four species of Banksia described in the Supplementum Plantarum of
Linnaeus, specimens of which, are contained in the Herbarium of that
great naturalist, now in the possession of Dr. J. E. Smith.
The Banksia Serrata is considered as the most stately of the genus.
Its trunk is thick, and rugged ; it is a native of New Holland, and re-
ceived the denomination of Banksia in compliment to Sir Joseph Banks.
Banksia Serrata in Fruit, a fine species.—New Holland.
A non-descript Banksia in flower.
Wooden Pear, Xylometurn Pyrijorme. This Species was first
discovered at Botany Bay, New Holland, when the coast of New South
Wales was first explored by Sir Joseph Banks and Dr. Soiander. The
natives call it the Merry-dugur-ro. The tree which bears this ligne-
ous pear is an evergreen.
Heath-leaved Banksia, Banksia Erici-folia , from New Holland.
Yellow Gum from Botany Bay, Xanlhorrhaa Hastik.
Cy list tt


Cylisla Comosa , from Sierra Leone.
Afzelia Speciosa, from Sierra Leou'c.
Botany Bay Flax, Plwrnuum Tenax.
Curious Flower of an unknown Plant.
Beautiful everlasting Flower.
Strings of Beads made of Aromatic Berries from South America.
Pod of a very large Bean.
On the first lauding, of the Stairs, turning to the left, the eye is at-
tracted by the Horn of the Narwhal, or Sea Unicorn, nine feet long.
Of all the variety of weapons with which nature has armed her various
tribes, there is notone so large or formidable as this. The horn or
tooth of the Narwhal, is as straight as an arrow ; it is about the thickness
of a man’s arm at the root, but gradually tapering to a sharp point, is
beautifully wreathed or twisted, and is whiter and more hard than ivory.
. Near to this horn is that of a very large Rhinoceros, weighing up-
wards of ten pounds.
Glass Case , No. IV.
Contains a number of Miscellaneous Articles.
1. A pair of ancient knit Silk Stockings, worked with crimsoii
and gold.
2. A Gentleman’s Glove, curiously embroidered with silver, sup-
posed to have been used in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
3. Pair of Garters, curiously variegated.
4. Work Bags of curious workmanship, one of which is made of
different coloured Beads.
5. Musical Pipes from China.
6. African Ivory Ornament, curiously carved.
7. Curious Punch Ladle.
8. Small Horn of the Narwhal, presented by S. Staniforth, Esq.
Liverpool.
Over this Case hangs a variety of
CURIOSITIES FROM NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA.
1. Halter, made of the Bark of the Lacetto or Cabbage Iree.
2. Maucassons, or Shoes, worn by the Indians of North Amenca,
•rnamented with Porcupine quills, and tassels of red hair. The lea-
ther is said to be dressed in blood, which prevents the wearer’s feet from
freezing; on which account they are often used by Europeans in that
country.
3. A Quiver of POISONED ARROWS, with the Tube used m
discharging them ; brought from Demerara. These instruments of
destruction are nine inches long, and- about the thickness ot a small
quill;


ouill; they are made of a light wood sharply pointed, and are dipped i«
poison to the depth of two inches, which generally proves fatal to, the
object that is wounded by them ; they are discharged with unerring
certainty, by being blown through a hollow tube of wood, nine feet long.
Near the Quiver hangs a small basket, which contains a down-like sub-
stance, a small piece of which is put into the tube after the arrow,
which prevents the escape of the air, and causes it to fly with almost
incredible velocity.
4. An ornamental Belt used by the North American Indians, for
bringing home the skins of animals taken iu hunting excursions-
sT Bow and Fish Arrows, from the North West coast of America.
6. Several Pouches, some of them very curious, from North Ame-
rica.
7. Pair of ornamental Garters, principally made of Porcupine
Quills, from North America.
" 8, and 9. Scalping Knives, the Sheaths finely ornamented, from
North America.
10. A Purse, or Tobacco Pipe, made of the skin of the Stifling or
Squash, ornamented with tassels of Deer’s hair, from North America.'
11, and 12. Maucassons, or Indian Shoes, same as No. 2.
13. Ornament for the Neck, made of the shells of some small hard
Nut, from Demerara.
14. Bow and Quiver of Arrows from ditto.
15. Several Musical Instruments from Demerara, among which
is a kind of Flute.
16. A great variety of Bows and Arrows, from Surinam.
17. A Mexican Gourd.
18. Calumet, or Pipe of Peace, used by the North American In-
dians, to smoke Tobacco, bark leaf, or herb, when they enter into an
alliance, on any serious occasion, or solemn engagement; this being
among them the most sacred oath that can be taken, and the viola-
tion of it is thought deserving of the punishment of Heaven.
ip A Snow Shoe, from Hudson’s Bay, upwards of five feet long ;
if is very light, and covers such a space, as prevents the feet of the
wearer from sinking into the snow. tiM StfU I
20. A Pair of Snow Shoes for a Child.
21. A Pair of Snow Shoes from Canada, not so long as the preced-
ing, but broader and rounder in front.
22- Neck Ornament, made of feathers, from South America.
23, and 24. Two Palaqujns or Hammocks, of curious workman-
ship, from South America, presented to the Museum by the Hon. Col.
St. Leger, of Dublin.
Small Glass Case , No. , V.
A Wampum Belt, of great value among the Indian Chiefs of Nortk
America ; often given as a pledge of honour.
A C *p, from Africa, made of platted grass.
Chinese Money. These pieces have square holes through them, and
arc


are always strung together. Seventy-six of them arc of the value of an
English sixpence.
Rouge, used by the Chinese Ladies to colour their faces.
Rattles of the Rattle Snake, or Crotalus Horridus of Lin.
N. B. The Skin of this Snake may be seen in the Room which con-
tains the parts of Animals, &c.
Specimen of Chain Armour.
Specimen of the Cloth made of Asbestos, that will remain in the
hottest fire without burning. Pliny mentions his having seen napkins
of this cloth, which being taken from the table after a feast, were thrown
into the fire, and by that means, were better cleansed than if they had
been washed in water. But its principal use, according to that author,
was for making shrouds for royal funerals, to wrap up the corpse, so that
the human ashes might be preserved distinct from those of the wood.
Asbestos, or Mineral Flax, in its natural state.
Mica, or Talc, used for windows before the invention of glass.
Clear white plates of this substance are used for glazing the lanterns of
men of war, as fire has little effect on it.
AFRICAN CURIOSITIES.
No. 1. A singular Musical Instrument, from the Slave Coast,
somewhat resembling the Italian Sticcado; it is made of pieces ot hard
sonorous wood of different lengths placed upon a frame, under which
are fixed gourds of various sizes. It is played upon by beating it with
two sticks with balls at the end. On the coast of Africa they called it
the Balafou ; and when m it is played by a skilful hand it produces an
agreeable harmony.
2. A small kind of Sticcado, made of sonorous wood,
3. An Instrument consisting of a small square board, on which are
fixed pieces of very pliant wood, which on being struck, produce a mu-
sical sound.
4. African King’s Sceptre, in shape like a rod, being made of small
split pieces of Bamboo cane. These are valued according to their
length, for by that, the rank of the person is known. That of the
King’s being made of the longest joints of bamboo that can be found in
his dominions.
5. 6, and 7. Curious Cartouch Boxes.
8- A Circular Fan, covered with a parchment-like skin, curiously
painted.
g. Several Poucues, some of them very singular in construction.
]O. A Pair of Sandals, or Shoes, These, in Africa are seldom
used.
11. Common Black Bottle, curiously cased with wicker work.
12> African Comb, similar to that of the Sandwich islands.
13. A


13. A rude Necklace, composed of stones, that have holes naturally
through them without boring.
14. Various kinds of Gourds, used as vessels to carry liquor.
15. African Spoon, madeofWood,
16. Curious Wooden Fan.
17. A large Ladies’ Pocket, or Pouch, finely embroidered with the
Needle-work of the country.
18. African Female Apron or Flap, made of matted grass.
19. African Bows and Quivers of long Poisoned Arrows.
20. Great variety of African Lances, Arrows, and Daggers.
See the Daggers in the Armoury.
21. A small Instrument similar to a Scottish Mull, supposed
to be used for the same purpose, viz. that of grinding tobacco into
22. African Long Drum, covered at the end with skin.
23 African Pair of Bellows, of very curious construction.
24. African Harp.
25. Very large Calabash < carry water.
26. An African Flambeau, made of Flag-leaves, filled with Am-
bergris.
27. Pouch or Pocket, made of Grass, used by Negro servants to
carry letters, &c. ~
28. A kind of Hammock, of singular net-work, used in Africa, either
for sleeping or travelling _
29. Small Gourds, covered with net work, on the mesh-knots ol
which are strung a kind of Black Berries, that produce a sound similar
to Castinets. They are used by the Africans when they dance.
30. An African Charm called Fetish, consisting of a Ram’s Horn,
to which is suspended a brass chain and bell. This is worn round the
neck, and is imagined by the wearer, to charm or drive away evil and
tormenting Spirits, and preserve life. It was taken from the breast of
a Black Man, engaged in battle, by Captain Clark of the ship Roe-
buck, of Liverpool ; who presented it to the Museum.
, 31. Specimen of African Cloth, made of grass.
32. A curious Sleeping Net or Hammock, from Africa, presented
by Captain Roberts, of Liverpool.
Large Glass Case*.
CONTAINING CURIOSITIES FROM THE SANDWICH
ISLANDS.
Letter A.—A superb CLOAK, made of the black feathers of th«
Powhee bird, ornamented with a broad chequered border of red and yel-
low. This Cloak is so long as to touch the feet of the wearer, and is
C
considered
* Several of tbe article* in this Case were once the property of the celebrated!
Captain Cook.


considered of the greatest value. It is worn by none except the Chiefs,
and by them only on particular occasions; as they never appeared in.
them but three times during Captain Cook’s stay at Owhyhee, viz. at
the procession of the Kihg'and his people to the ships, on their first art
rival; in the tumult when the unfortunate commander fell a victim to
their fury and mlstakeri resentment; and when two of the Chiefs
brought his bones to Captain Clarke.
B. Red feathered Cloak, decorated with yellow, from ditto. The
ground work of these elegant and singularly beautiful Cloaks fo net-
work wrought by the Hand, upon which the feathers are so closely fixed,
that the surface resembles the thickest and richest velvet, both in deli-
rate'softness and glossy appearance.
C. —A HELMET, composed of wicker-work, covered with red fea-
thers. ■ .
D. —Another Helmet of a different construction, covered with black
feathers. These Helmets, with the Dresses, form the principal riches
of the Chiefs of the South Sea Islands.
E. —A large Hat, made of red, yellow, and black feathers'; remark-
able for its resemblance to those of Europe.
F. —Two Neck Ornaments, made of different coloured feathers,
from the Sandwich Islands.
G. —A Breast-plate, or Gorget, from the Sandwich Islands.
H. —Small Pagod or Idol, of black wood, from ditto.
I. —War Club, from the Friendly Islands. This Club, which be-
longed to a Chief of Owhyhee, is armed with a very hard, sharp, polish-
ed stone, which makes it somewhat like a Battle-axe ; the other end is
pointed for the purpose of a Pahoo or Dagger.
K. — A Basket, from the Friendly Islands. That the untutored In-
dians of the South Seas exceed the artists of every civilized nation in
this kind of work, the above Basket is a proof, for it is of so close a tex-
ture, as to hold any liquid. It was used by the gentleman (who brought
if from the South Seas, and presented it to this Museum) as a punch-bowl.
L. Fish-Hook, from the' Sandwich Islands.
M. — A Necklace, made of the Teeth of the Peccary,
N. —Head Ornament, from ditto, made of mother of pearl and tor-
toise shell.
O. —A beautiful Fly-Flap, purchased at the late sale of the Lcve-
rian Museum. In the first part of the Reference Catalogue to this once
celebrated repository of curiosities, an ample account is given in a note
how it came into possession of Sir Ashton Lever, which relation we
will here insert for the information of the carious. Mr. Samwell, late
surgeon of the ship Discovery, who published a Narrative of the Death
of Gapt. Cook, informs us, he brought this Fly-Flap home with him, of
which he gives the following account: — u The Natives of the Sandwich
4 ‘ Islands always endeavour to carry off the dead bodies of their friends
“ slain in battle, even at the hazard of their own lives. This custom is
“ probably owing to the barbarity with which they treat the body of an
“ enemy, and the trophies they make of his bones; a remarkable in-,
“ stance of which I met with at Atowai. Tomataherci, the Queen of
“ that island, one day paid us a visit on boat d the Discovery, accompa-
“ nied


‘V nied by her husband Taedh, and one of her daughters by a former
“ husband, whose name was pteeha. The young Princess, who was
** called Orereemo-horanee, carried in her hand a very elegant Fly-Flap,
«of a curious construction. The upper part of it was variegated with
alternate rings of tortoise-shell and human bone, and the handle,
which was polished, consisted of the greater part of the Os Humeri
14 (bone of the upper arm) of a Chief, called Mahowra; he had belonged
“ to the neighbouring island of Oahoo, and in an hostile descent he
44 made upon this coast, had been killed by Oteeha, who was then King
44 of Otowai. His holies were in this manner carried about by Ore-
-44 reemo-horanee, as trophies of her father’s victory. The mother and
44 daughter set a great value upon it, and were not willing to part with
<4 it for any of our iron; but Tomataherei happening to cast her eye
upon' a wash-hand bason of inine, which was of Queen’s ware, it
44 struck her fancy, and she offered to exchange. 1 accepted of her
f 4 proposal, and the bones of the unfortunate Mahowra came at last into
44 my possession.”
P. —An under Garment made of the Bark of the Touta or Cloth-
tree, curiously decorated, from the Sandwich Islands; presented by the
Rev. Adam Clarke.
Q. and R.—Two Caps from Africa; one made of Grass, which for
fineness pf workmanship and regularity of pattern, exceeds any thing of
the kind of European manufacture. What must appear wonderful in
this work of art is, that it is knit with wooden sticks after the manner of
stockings.
The One marked R. was presented by Captain Campbell, and is
made of the fibres of bark.
Near to this large Class Case is placed, One Valve of the great
Clamp Shell, or gigantic Cockle, Chuma Gigas of Linnaeus, from the
island of Borneo. Its length is 42 inches, its breadth 2-i inches, and
its weight 236' pounds. A view of this specimen will easily reconcile
us to the .seemingly extravagant assertion of voyagers, who mention
their having dined on a cockle, sufficiently large to feast a whole
boat’s crew.—This is the largest known species of the testaceous ani-
•laytehnc | T£3 q ~j 0 isdjom to shear ,cJ3ib mofi .Tuant awaO q ajH —Vi
APART MEXT.
CONTAINING, THE WORKS OF ART, MODELS IN RlCE-
ritem PASTE, &c. &c.
No. l. A superb PIECE of MECHANISM, originally a part of
Cox's Mtrs tUM, out of which it was sold for 5001. It contains a variety
of curious movements and figures ; and is thus described in Mr. Cox's
.»vil iiwo tiailHohtssfifl
• “ A Goat made of molten copper, wkh the closest exactness, and in
every respect a high finished imitation of the animal: it is chased with
great skill, so that the shaggy hair, beard, or other parts, are surpri-
singly depicted’- ovt r the body is a housing adorned with jewelry, bor-
" deved,


tiered, fringed, and tasseled with pearls; upon the back are richly em-
bossed ornaments in relief, which support an elegant case of fine work-
manship ; at the four bottom corners are leopards’ heads, and at the up-
per corners gold eagles with extended wings ; on each side,’ within
frames of jewelry, are spiral stars, which are all set with stones ; these,
during the playing of the musical chimes fixed in the body of the animal,
are set in motion, and have a most pleasing effect : upon the top of the
casethat contains the stars, are flower-pots of jewelers’ work ; over the
flowers butterflies vibrate ; a Gothic railing of rubies and emeralds sur-
rounds the place where the flower-pots are placed, and within the rail-
ing are lour golden branches, uniting at the top, where there is a large
flower pot, nosegay, and butterfly, finely set with different coloured
stones. The pedestal that supports this magnificent piece, is a qua-
drangular rook, supported by four elephants, caparisoned and ornament-
ed with pearls ; at each corner are Tartarian figures, with javelins in
their hands, striking at dragons fixed on the rock; within the recesses,
in front, is a running stream of artificial water; festoons of foliage, finely
chased and richly gilt, hang down on each side between the elephants,
Two of these pieces were purchased at a great price in Canton, from
whence they were sent with the presents annually made to Ike Court of
Pekin in that province.
S. A complete Model of a MAN of WAR, of 54 guns, nearly three
feet in length, made entirely of glass.
3- A beautiful Model of a Chinese Pagoda, or place of worship,
made entirely of mother of pearl. This valuable piece was made in
India; it is seven stories in height, and is richly ornamented with carv-
ing and gilding.
4. A complete Model of a Max of War, mffle of ivory, only six
inches long.
5. Eight Balls of Ivory, cut within each other out of one solid
piece, by the Chinese. What is the more astonishing in this work of
art, is, that every ball is pierced of a different pattern, as fine as lace.
6. Three small Pieces in Ivory, done in China, representing a vari-
ety of their Summer-houses, Pagodas, &c.
/. A Fleet of Ships under sail, astonishingly curious and minute,
in ivory.
8. Two very small Pieces in Ivory ; one representing a Temple
with a Landscape and Figures ; in the other is distinctly cut a gentleman
in his phaeton and four hor»es, with a servant on horseback alter him,
in size less than a sixpence.
5. Some beautiful Turnings In Ivory, by Mr. Perry of London.
30. A fine Piece of Mosaic Work, done in marble of its natural colour.
11. Two beautiful Imitations of most of the English Flowers, made
entirely of shells of their natural colour, by Miss Humphreys, of Lei -
cester-square, London.
12. A Case of Flowers, made of Butterflies’wings.
13. A Looking Glass, which so distorts the hmnah countenance,
that few can look in it without being ashamed of, or laughing at, their
f o J O O /
*\vn face.
14. An


14. An Imitation of Engraving, executed in Pen and Ink, by
Mons. Mongenot, of the Royal Academy of Paris.
15. Representation of a Tyger, in its natural colours, done in Sand,
it). A Picture, which on being viewed in different directions, pro-
duces three different subjects.
17 A Model of a Fountain at the Palace of St. Cloud, executed in
glass by the proprietor. . . .
18. Group of Flowers, beautifully cut m marble. This is a won>-
derful production of art. ,
19. Portrait of Sir Isaac Newton, in wood, finely turned in a lathe.
20. Representation of a Hawking Falcon, curiously done in folded
satin, by the Chinese. _ . .
2i \ Picture representing various Birds, executed with their na-
tural feathers.
22. Beautiful Model for an Ancient Armoury, on a scale of an
inch to a foot. It contains accurate models and representations, of every
kind of armour and warlike weapons used by our ancestors, from the
time of the Norman conquest to the restoration of Charles 11.
23. Group of Flowers cut in Card Paper, presented by Mr Mad-
den, Dublin. , .. ,
24. A very line Carving in Wood, executed by Chevalier Aubert
Parent, representing Flowers, Bird nest and young, dead Hare and
Snipe; dedicated to Monsieur Metayer, treasurer to the Duke of Or-
leans; presented to this Museum by John Blackier, Esq late Slier iff ol
Dublin. , . .
25. Picture of a Vulture and Snake, finely done m ditterent co-
loured sand. .
26'. Pope Gan can el li, or Clement XIV. m coloured Wax.
27. Representation of Hercules destroying the Hydra, carved out
of a piece of Amber, of extraordinary dimensions.
28* Fine Bust, as large as Life, of Master FI. W. Betty, the young
Roscius, at the age of 14 years; cut in Carrara Marble, by Mr. Ga-
hagan, London.
' MODELS IN RICE-PASTE, WAX, &c.
No. 29. Busts of the four following British Admirals:—Lord Hood,
Lord Bridpqrt, Lord Nelson, and Sir Thomas Paisley, modelled
from life, by Mr. Gahagan.
30- Mr. Kemble, in the character of Cato, and Mrs. Siddons as
Queen Catharine.
il. Mr. Cooke, in the character of King Richard the Third.
32. A pair of capital Busts of Demosthenes and Cincinatus, from
the Antique Marbles at Rome.
33. Busts of the dying Seneca and his wife Paulina, from the
Antique Marbles at Rome. Seneca was a celebrated philosopher, and
preceptor to the Roman Emperor Nero, who, when he was ninety years
of age, put him to death, on a frivolous charge of conspiracy. The
veins of his arms and legs were opened, and he was put into a warm
bath,


bath, to cause his blood to run more freely ; in this situation he if re-
presented almost expiring. The extreme anguish, mixed with resigna-
tion, depicted in the countenance of this dying philosopher, is such as
must excite admiration and pity in the breast of every beholder. The
hand of Paulina (whose veins were opened at the same time, but who
was afterwards recovered,) is inimitably line, and attracts the attention
of every close observer of human nature.
34. A fine Crucifix.
35. A small Bust of Voltaire, the celebrated French writer.
36. A small Figure, done from life, of the French General Humbert,
who was taken prisoner in Ireland.
37. A very high-finished Anatomical Figure, from the original of
Dr. Hunter, shewing the muscles and tendons of the human body.
This is done in Rice Paste of its natural colour, and has the exact ap-
pearance of the finest ivory.
38. Profile Heads of the following celebrated Painters :— Titian,
Raphael, Michael Angelo, Correcio, Carracci, and Carlo Ma-
Ratti,
39. A most capital CRourof Figures, exhibiting the progress of In-
ebriety ; finely modelled in colours, by Mr. Piercy.
40. An ancient Model, in white wax, ofllenry VIII.
41. A beautiful Equestrian model, done In Rice Paste, of Edward
the Black Prince.
42. An exquisite Model of the Death of Voltaire, dune in Rice
Paste, by Mens. Querrin, of Cologne 'universally admired for its won-
derful expression, and .the delicacy with which it is finished.
43. Portrait of an unknown Lady, Rice Paste.
44. Two minute and beautiful Models in Wax, representing Groups
®f Cupids and Flowers.
45. A small Bell-glass, inclosing some curious Shells and Plants, be-
ing part of the Linna;an Collection, with a Specimen of the Hand-
writing of that celebrated naturalist; presented to the Museum by Dr.
James E. Smith, P. L. S.
4f). Small Bell-glass, containing the Skeleton of an unknown Leaf
disected, to shew the curious fibres.
47- Bell-Glass, inclosing a large Nautilus Pompilius , Lin.
In this Room, are also two superb Bell-Glasses, of very large dimen-
sions ; one containing a variety of Humming-Birds, and the other an
assemblage of the most rare and beautiful Shells and Corals, elegantly
disposed.
Bell-Glass of Shells.
This Glass, which turns on a pivotted ffame, supported by four crabs,
exquisitely carved in wood, contains-tbe following Snells, named accord-
ing to LinnjEus :
No. 1. Partridge Tun.
2. Organ Coral*.
3. from Japan.
*:■; 4.


4. r ‘ Jf-bmlfi fcuniswt
5 -
I®* i/lurex Romosus, ri „ t , Tf; nobciicnbfi sjijjo »wni
n . •;!..« ww fwpriw) finifuß*! lobnsil
8* Trochus. ,jf
9* .DiDifiii ntuiuil io Tovraado oaob riavD 1«
10. Mur ex Indiai. . :0 |V: .
11. Conas 7e.W/fr. ~ ?3^U tjoV 1o reuS ikrnu A .&8’
o.HJp jlii mci} ‘ioob ,aHuai’S llsim~A*
13. Marble Cone, tonus Marmoreus. r ,fr fi
14. \ tm’i ■ vpi S'# >3d; ind-fhpii vtav A
15. Ribbon Snail, Turbo Petholalus. „io
16. I
17. Wild Boar, Murex Hauslellum.
18- , hita vmrM :nui> tailstt .BB
19. Fluslra Foliacea
520. Echinus unknown.
21. Mitre-Shell, Volute Episcopalis.
22. White branched Coral.
23- m;w hi .bboM 'naionfi nA ,C&
24. Poached Egg, Cyprcea Qvala.
25 * ... P .30vur 4 1 xoaoS 91l
26. Assis-ear, Haholus Assmium.
27. Sun Trochus, Trochus Nilolicus-
-28 Helix jEgophthalmos.
29. from Botany Bay.
30. . (oM iJHjußod btiE dtunirn owT *44
51. Painted Nerite.
32. :)moS ‘ eBß | S -Ibi| A c 4
33. .7 HoiTDSJJtoD Vi lmviJ orbio jtcq»i
34. Conus Litleraius.
35- g , J .3 j»un
36. Madrepora Ananas.
37 ' , # bs^i
38* u . ;-s fc l s sniaolaini .eecMMUoS
3 9-
40. Banded Pi keman, Buccinum Maculatum.
41. H lo q J 3h£V K 2 nimr)[joo ano " gno
42. , fi m 3 Hj lo 9Tfi ,.
45.
44. Pellucid Oyster. Pellucens.
45. Bronze Limpet, Patella.
46. Gold Brocade, Volute Porphyria.
47. Agate Bulla, Achatina.
48. Strawberry Cockle, Cardium Flavum,
49. Buccinum Glaucum.
50. Buccinum Erinaceus.
51. Madrepora Area lata.
52. Buccinum Dimidialum,
53. Purple-side Gorgonia , Gorgonia Sanguinoknta,


54. Turberculated Paper Nautilus, Argonaula Nodosa.
This is the animal from which man is first supposed to have learned
the art of sailing. Pope, in his Essay on Man, alludes to it, where
he says,
“ Learn of the little Nautilus to sail,
« Spread the light oar, and catch the flying gale.”
Pliny describes It thus, “ But amongst the principal miracles of
nature is the animal called Pompilos, or Nautilus: it ascends to the sur-
face of the sea in a supine posture, and gradually raising itself up,
forces, by means of its tube, all the water from the shell, in order that
it may swim the more readily ; then throwing back the two foremost
arms, displays between them a membrane of wonderful tenuity, which
acts as a sail, while with the remaining arms it rows itself along, the
tail in the middle acting as a helm to direct its course; and thus pursues
its voyage like a little ship, till alarmed by any appearance of danger,
when it takes in the water, and descends.
55. Rose Madrepore, Madrepora Rosea.
5 6. Red Coral, Gorgonia Nobilis.
57. Black-jointed Coral, Isis Hippuris.
58. Black Coral.
59.
60. ' .
61.
62. Manx Babylonius.
63.
64.
65. Buccinwn Dimidiatum.
67. Bear-paw Cockle, Tellina Scripia.
68.
69.
70.
71. Harp Sheel, Buccinum Harpa.
72. Cardium Hemecardium
73. Music Shell, Volula Musica.
74. Opal Muscle, Mytilus.
75. Music Shell, Valuta Musica.
76.
■77. I ■■•■.. *KfT
78.
79. Harp- Shell, Buccinum Harpa.
80.
81. Murex Longicauda.
82. Spotted Melon, Volula Indica ,
83. American Muscle, Mytilus.
84. Necklace Cone, Conus Glaucus.
85.
86.
87.
88* Pegasus, Pegasus draco, Lin.
This


This fish is an inhabitant of the Indian seas, and on account of the
size of its pectoral fins, it is supposed, that like the flying-fish, it can
support itself some moments in the air, while it springs occasionally
over the surface of the water.
Bell-Glass of Humming Birds.
This Glass stands upon an elegant bronzed Egyptian tripod, which
strikes the eye by its neatness and simplicity of workmanship. It con- 1
tains the following Birds, at present known, named according to LIN-
HiEUS.
Say who can paint
Like Nature ? can Imagination boast.
Amid her gay creation, hues like these? Thompson.
Of all animated beings (says Buffon) the Fly-Bird is the most ele-
gant in form, and superb in colours. The precious stones polished by
art, cannot be compared,to this jewel of nature. Her miniature pro-
ductions are ever the most wonderful ; she has placed it in the order oi
birds, at the bottom of the scale of magnitude; but all the talents that
are only shared amongst the others, she has bestowed profusely on this
little favourite. The emerald, the ruby, and the topaz, sparkle in its
plumage, which is never soiled by the dust ot the ground. It is incon-
ceivable how much these brilliant birds add to the high finish and beauty
of the western landscape. No sooner is the sun risen, than numerous
kinds are seen fluttering abroad : their wings are so rapid in motion,
that it is impossible to discern their colours, except by their glittering;
they are never still, but continually visiting flower after flower, and ex-
tracting the honev. For this purpose they are furnished with a forked
tongue, which enters the cup of the flower, and enables them to sip the
nectared tribute; upon this alone they subsist In their flight they
prate a buzzing noise, not unlike a spinning wheel; whence they have
their name.
The Nests of these birds are not less curious than their form : they
are suspended in the air at the extremity of an orange branch, a pome-
granate, or a citron tree, and sometimes even to a straw pendant from
a hut, if they find one convenient for the purpose. The female is the
architect, while the male goes in quest of-materials, such as fine cotton,
moss, and the fibres of vegetables. The nest is about the size of half a
walnut. They lay two eggs at a time, and never more, in appearance
like small peas, as white as snow, with here and there a yellow speck.
The time of incubation continues twelve days, at the end of which the
young ones appear, being then not larger than a Blue Bottle Fly. “ I
could never perceive,” says Father Dutertre, “ how the mother fed
them, except that she presented the tongue covered entirely with honey
extracted from flowers.” Those who have tried to feed them with syrups
could not keep them alive more than a few weeks; these aliments, though
of easy disgestion, are very different from the delicate nectar collected
from the fresh blossoms. It has been alledged by various naturalists,
that during the w inter season they remain torpid, suspended by the bill
from the bark of a tree, and awakened into life when the flowers begin
D ' f


to blow ; but these Hctions are rejected, for Catesby saw them through
the year at, St. Domingo and Mexico, where Nature never entirely loses
her bloom. Sloane says the same of Jamaica, only that they are more
numerous after the rainy season ; and prior to both, Marcgrave men-
tions them as being frequent the whole year in the woods of Brazil.
The method of obtaining these minute birds is to shoot them with sand,
or by means of the Trunk-Gun ; they will allow one to approach within
five or six paces of them. It is easy to lay hold of the little creature
while it hums at the blossom. It dies soon after it is caught, and serves
to decorate the Indian Girls, who wear two of these charming birds, as
pendants from their ears. The Indians, indeed are so struck and daz-
zled with the brilliancy of their various hues, that they have named
them the Beams or Locks of the. Sun. Such is the history of this little
being, who flutters from flower to flower, breathes their freshness
waptons on the wings of the cooling zephyrssips the nectar of a thou-
sand sweets ; and resides in climes, where reigns the beauty of eternal
spring. Ip qpj adi mod aamibnios
No. 1. Topaz Humming Bird, (Trochilus Pella) inhabits Surinam.
2. Topaz do. femalp«ri3 -isiijo djiw boxifli actoftii bug
3. Do. do. nsdw ;lr noqu koouirfo lo
iljplw, - noadi Wraoa firm ,'islfiw ad) d^umdi
ioan&m noinmoa yd nsdj •fomßaeslq tbmn bns Jooo aiiup
, «ml«a arb mtorufi rmxul fe brabienoa- ? i aniioffa do borijam
7. Sapphire and Emerald H. (Trochilus Bicolor, Lin.,/ inhabits
Gaudaloupe.
8, Least Humming Bird, /! Trochilus MinimusJ inhabits South
America. This is the least of all known Birds.
t). Least H, female and nest. .
10. Violet-ear ed H./'T rochilus Aurilus) inhabits Brazil and Guiana.
11. Little H. (Trochilus Exilis) inhabits Guiana,
12. Green Jacam.au- (Gulhula ViridisJ inhabits the moist woods of
Guiana and Brazil.
13. Ruby-necked H. ( Trochilus Modulusj inhabits Guiana,..Brazil,
gblrdWH lt» abem a-eavuaO- A .d
14. Grey-bellied H. (Trochilus Pegasus) Inhabits Cayenne.
15. Black-capped H. (Trochilus PalyhnusJ inhabits South Ame-
rica and Jamaica. ,83oh8 z'nonioW’ bias noM h ohsV .B
1 6. Garnet-throated H. (Trochilus Auralus.J
mfilfa Do. odw do. ■ }o bboM ,01
18. Red-breasted H. (‘I rochilus jugularis) inhabits Surinam.
iq. Green and Bure H. JJ rochilus OurissiaJ inhabits Surinam.
20. D. do. female, u mpvaTq oJ ii, e bifig
21. Honey-sucking H. (Trochilus Mdlifugus) inhabits Cayenne.
22. Do. do. fcraalcf utb bad ad) lo aanod
23. Do. do, /nq ibiriw ,aodß noil ns xd yadi
24. Black-breasted H. (Trochilus Grainiiieus} ’ ''" s '' l a
25. Collared Creeper, (Certhia Ghalybea) inhabits the Cape of Good
Hope; feeds on insects and the nectar of flowers ; sings charmingly*
2b. Black and Violet Creeper, (Certhia Brasiliami) inhabits Brazil.
27* Golden


27. Golden-crested Wren, (Molacilla Regains) inhabits the
whole world ; is the least of British Birds, and sings melodiously.
CHINESE CURIOSITIES, &C.
No. 1. A Chinese PAGOD, or Idol, made of brass, somewhat
in the shape of a Lion, with an aperture in the back for putting in in-
cense and fire, the sruoak of which ascends through the mouth.
2. Indian HOUGA, or Tobacco Pipe. The snake or pipe through
which the smoke is conveyed to the mouth, is a flexible tube, covered
with red silk, about five yards long; at the end of this is a vessel, hi
the form of a bell, several pounds weight, which is filled with water,
sometimes rose-water; from the top of this bell rises another small
tube, about ten inches long, at the end of which is the head of the
pipe, which contains the substance they smoke, composed of odorifer-
ous herbs mixed with other things. It is lighted by putting small balls
of charcoal upon it; when they begin to draw, the smoke ascends
through the water, and comes through the long tube into the mouth
quite cool, and much pleasanter than by the common manner. This
method of smoking is considered as a luxury Wong the natives of the
East, and they have a servant whose office it is to attend his master
with his pipe.
3. A beautiful Chinese Bow and Arrows. The bow is made of
ffiorn, finely painted and japanned, and when unstrung, turns back in
such a manner that the ends nearly touch. The method of uniting the
horn for these Bows is unknown to Europeans.— See this Bow in the
Armoury,
4. A Chinese Halbert, the stock inlaid with mother of pearl.—
See Armoury.
5. Chinese two edged pointed Sword — See ditto.
6. A Chinese Shield, made of Buffalo’s hide, japanned and pain-
ted.— See ditto. .H aaTiaatf-ya?
7. A left handed two edged Sword.— See ditto.
8. Various kinds of Men and Women’s Shoes, from China.
9. Curious Stockings, from ditto.
10. Model of the Leg of a Chinese Lady, who had worn the Iron
Shoe, taken from one in possession of Sir Joseph Banks. This ridicu-
lous custom practised by the Chinese on the fashionable ladies, it is
said, is to prevent them from straying too much from home. The
manner of performing, it is thus. When the child is three years old, the
bones of the feet are broken, and a tight bandage put on, over which
they fix an Iron Shoe, which prevents the growth of the foot, and makes
the wearer have an awkward gait in walking. The Shoes which fit this
Model are in Case No. 2, and Miscellaneous Case No. 2.
11. Two Fans from China; one made of (ieathers. the other is of
a curious construction, and is made of iv#nr.
12. A


12. A Chinese Sun Fan, seven feet long.
13. A Ily Flap, carried in the hand to keep the flies from the face.
Some have a servant whose employment is the performance of this
office. _,YHOTBIH JAflllTA/X
14. A Banner, carried before the Emperor of China when he goes
in person to the wars ; it is composed of silk of various colours, the
middle of which is ornamented with a number of the most horrible fi-
gures that can be conceived.
1 5. A Man’s Hat, made of cane lacquered, on which are some Chi-
nese characters.
16. Another Hat, made of cane,
17. Whistling Arrows from China, the heads of which are made
of horn perforated with holes, which, by cutting the air in.their flight,
produce a loud whistling sound, whence the name. The same kind of
Arrows were formerly used in England, and shot from one friendly
camp to another, by way of signals.
18. and 19. Two Musical Instruments, with three strings, played
upon after the manner of a Guitar ; they have a kind of drum at the
end, one of which is covered with the skin of a snake. Presented by
H. Blundell, Esq. of Ince, . T .os
20. Chinese Gong, which is an instrument of semi-metal resembling
a pot-lid ; this on being struck produces a sound, similar to the tone of
a large bell. They are suspended by the Chinese at the head of every
vessel when tracked along the canals, and struck as occasion requires,
by the people on board, to inform the trackers when to desist hauling,
and when to resume their labour. By this method much confusion is
prevented, where the great concourse of vessels would be continually
running fpu| of each other, if not warned by this contrivance. These
Gongs have so many various notes, that the trackers know perfectly
vyhen the signal is made from the vessel they are hauling. They are
likewise used at the garrisons, and beat at the approach of a Viceroy
or Mandarin of rgnk, &c. ~ Ijq 3MI tertaqo ii' | f nisq rilr/r
21. A Pair of BRAMIN’s SHOES, from the East-Indies. Perhaps
no article of dress to the eyes of an European will appear more ex-,
traordinary than these shoes. They are made of hard wood, of one piece,
in the form of the sole of a common shoe, raised from the ground
about the height of a patten, by a projecting piece of wood being left at
the front and at the heel. The means by which they are fastened to the
feet, is by a peg of wood, that stands between the two largest toes, which
secures them in walking.
Weapon, used by the Polliguars in the East-Indies. They are
thrown with amazing velocity and certainty, being principally aimed at
the legs of their enemies. w .
25. Part of the Mainsail of the Ship Resolution, Capt. John Pet-
tegrew, of Liverpool, which was rent and knotted in an extraordinary
manner, in a gale of wind on the 14th of August, 1 802. ■. ,*
5V 24. Several French Shoes or Clogs, called Sjiahots.
25. Rope made of Wood, found in the Bog of Allen, County of
West Meath, Ireland. Used by the peasants for agricultural purposes-
Presented by Leo. M‘Nal]y, Esq, Dub% „
ytoaA 1 ' NATURAL


NATURAL HISTORY.
QUADRUPEDS .
These are tliy glorious works. Parent of Good, i^,.
Thou sitt’st above those heavens
To us invisible, or dimly seen e - oJ qo.iEi
bo/iito tl>y lowest works; yet those declare y
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine.
. 9n3 Jfi fninu ?** 5 At- k Milton. V *
No. 1. Variegated, Tufted, or Ursine Baboon,
iiii329T tnlsm-imae | tytHi'a Mormon , Lin.)
This Baboon is very numerous about the Cape of Good Hope, and is
one of the largest of this tribe of animals, measuring, when full grown,
nearly five feet in height. It is very strong, fierce, and libidinous, yet
-*at the same time is capable of attachment and gratitude. One that was
‘-sent to the proprietor of this Museum, in the year 1803, had two deep
wounds in its loins, owing to the pressure of a heavy chain by which tl<l
was confined, fridging the skin in such a manner, as almost to sever the'
flesh from the bone ; on appearing anxious to examine the wounds, it
presented the lacerated part to inspection, and after one side was dressed'
with a very sharp mixture, (though at the same time it was agonized-
with pain,) it opened the other wound for the same application, which
it continued to do, until such time as the excoriated places wefe healed.
It remained at the Museum some time afterwards, and although mis-
chievous to the family, yet on the least motion of the hand, or on litter-
ing an angry word, it was all attention and'submission. These baboons
in their native country do considerable damage to the gardens and planfh
rations, carrying on their depredations in large troops, with such bold-
ness and resolution, * JO ° Ji y cl
2. Negro Monkey, (Sunia Maura.
That sagacious observer of nature, Mr. G. Edwards, seems to have
been the first described'W*this■ specieslt is a native of Ceylon aw
Monkey, fSarnia Jcxchus,
( This extraordinary little animal, no larger than a Squirrel, is an in-
habitant of Brazil. In a native state, these Monkeys are supposed to
feed upon fruits, .but iia a;„stkfc of confinement they Will occasionally feed
on insects, snails, See. Edwards, in Ids Gleanings, makes mention of a
pair of these animals, which belonged to a* Ldhdoh merchant, who
resided at Lisbon, had young that plate, dff'hfee'/attheir birth Wdre
IkSUlTk'* exceeding


exceeding ugly, having no fur. They would frequently cling fast to the
teats of the dam; and when they grew a little, they used to hang upon
her back and shoulders. When she was tired, she would rub them off
against the wall or whatever else was near, as the only mode of ridding
Herself of them. On being forced from the female, the male immedi-
ately took them to him; and suffered them to hang round him, to ease
her of the burthen. This kind of Monkey is very scarce.
4. The Madagascar Bat, f Vespertilio Vampyrus , Lin.y
This uncommon animal is called by Buffon the Rousette ;it measures
nearly three feet from the tip of one wing to the other; the body isnearly
as large as that of a cat, but it resembles a rat in the shape of the head ;
it is covered with short hair of a reddish brown colour; the top of each
wing is armed with a strong claw, with which it fastens itself to the
branches of trees; it has likewise five sharp daws oh each foot. Some
of these animals grow to an enormous size ; and in the islands of the
East-Indies they are sometimes seen in such numbers, that they darken
the air at noon-day. They are carnivorous, and very voracious. In
a scarcity of flesh and fish, they feed on vegetables and fruits of every
kind. This is the Bat to which Linnaeus applied the title of Vampyre,
on the supposition of its being the species of which so many extraordi-
nary accounts have been given relative to its power of sucking the blood
of men and cattle. nffto sril zb laiinKm: onifia odlni 4 ougnoJ sill
5. White Bat, f Vespertilio Aurilus Var. Lin. J This is a variety
of the long-eared Bat.
6. The Sloth, ( Brady pus Tridactylus, Lin./ r-c.uovi .-Oi
These are of all quadrupeds the most slothful and indolent. Na-
ture (says the Count de Buffon) seems to have created this ill construct-
ed mass of deformity for nothing but misery.” They have neither ca-
nine nor incisive teeth; their eyes are dull and heavy; their mouths
wide and thick; their fur refembles dried grass; their thighs are almost
disjointed from their haunches; their legs are very frhort, and badly
shaped; they have no soles to their feet, nor toes separately moveable,
but only two or three claws, excessively long, crooked downwards and
backwards. They can neither seize on prey, nor feed on flesh, and are
therefore reduced to live on leaves and wild fruits. They take up a
long time in crawling to a tree, and are still longer in climbing to its
branches. When at last one of them has accomplished its end, it fas-
tens itself to a tree, crawls from branch to branch, and by degrees strips
the whole of its foliage; in this manner it remains several weeks with-
out moistening its food; and when it has consumed its store, and the
tree is left quite naked, unable to descend; h continues on till hun-
ger presses, which becoming more powerful than the fear of danger,
or even death itself, it drops to the ground, without being capable of
exerting any effort to break the violence of the fall. Its manners are
sluggish to an excessive degree; its general appearance disgusting; its
voice plaintive, piteous, and even horrible. It can live a prodigious
lime without food ; Kircher says forty days. It has vast strength in the
paws, and fastens its claws into any thing with such force, that they
cannot be disengaged ; hence, when beasts of prey attack this animal, it
adhere


adheres to them so strongly, that they both are found dead in each other*
Middle Ant-Eater, f Myrmecophaga Tdradaclyla, Lin./
Inhabits South America, goes out in the night, and sleeps during the
day ; when irritated, it seizes on a stick or other object with its fore
daws, and fights sitting on his hind legs; the extremity of the tail is
naked and prehensile, by means of which, it is enabled to suspend itself
to the branches of trees. ,taS aAt>BAO*OAM anT
8. Least Ant-Eater, (Myrnucophaga Didiiclyla , Lin.y
Inhabits Guinea, and the hottest parts of South America. It climbs
trees in quest of a species of Ants that build their nests among the
branches; they thrust out their clammy tongue into the nest, and draw
it into their mouths covered with insects. Their tail is of great use to
them in climbing, for they twist it round the branches to prevent their
failing, akhi ail? hi.bns : 3sia: auoimorra-'ne of y/o*ta el&imns essdl 10
9. Porcupine Ant-Eater, (Myrnucophaga Aculeala , Shaw./
This is one of those curious animals which have been lately discovered
in New Holland. It differs from all the other Ant-Eaters in having the
body coveied with sharp spines, resembling Porcupine’s quills, only
they are shorter and thicker in proportion. It has a remarkably long
tubular snout, with a very small mouth, out of which it shoots its worm-
like tongue, in the same manner as the others. It burrows under the
ground with the greatest ease, nature having furnished it with amaz-
ing strength in its legs and feet.
10. Long-tailed Manis, (Manis Telradadyla, UnJ
This rare animal is a native of India and Africa. It is perfectly
gentle and harmless, though it has the most formidable appearance, be-
ing entirely covered vvith large sharp scales, which it erects when
irritated. Bnffon says, “The most cruel and voracious of beasts,
such as the Tyger and the Panther, make but useless efforts to devour
these armed animals; they tread upon, and roll them, but when they
attempt to seize them, they are grievously wounded; they can neither
terrify them by their violence, nor crush them by their weight.” This
animal has a strong affinity to the Ant-Eaters, from which they chiefly
differ in the covering of their body. to 3vif ol ha
alt ill. o Short-tailed Manis, (Manis Penladaclyla, tin.J
This animal differs from the former, in being of a shorter and strong-
er form, and in having the scales much broader. In the neighbourhood
of Bengal it is called Vajracite, or tbs Thunder-bolt reptile, from the
excessive hardness of its scales, which are said to be capable of giving
fire with a flint. Jt is sometimes found of the length of six feet, but
.Seldom more than half that size*q atom §fii«tpDsd 'd
12. Nine-damped- Armadillo, (Dasypus Kovcmanclus, Lm./
•vn It received the name of Armadillo, or Hog in Armour, frmn the Spa-
niards, and from the impenetrable coat of mail w ith which it is furnished
by nature for its defence. It is a native of South America, where
there are several kiudstfcf them.; but the principal difference consists in
the number of bands! of folds, of which the armour that covers the
tbody is composed. It is a harmless, inoffensive animal; feeds on roots,
fruits, and other vegetables; grows very fat, and is much esteemed tor


the delicacy of its flesh. The Indians hunt it with small dogs trained for
the purpose : when ir is surprised, it runs to its hole, or attempts to
make a new one, which it does with great expedition, having strong
claws on the lore feet, with which it adheres so firmly to the "round,
that if it should be caught by the tail whilst making its way into the
earth, its resistance is so great that it will sometimes leave it in the
hands of its pursuers; to avoid this, the hunter has recourse to artifice
and by tickling it with a stick it gives up its hold, and suffers itself to
be taken alive. If no other means of escape be left, it rolls itself up
within its covering, by drawing in its head and legs, and bringing its
tail round them, as a band to connect them more forcibly together; in
this situation it sometimes escapes by rolling itself over the edge of a
precipice, and generally falls to the bottom unhurt.
13- Common Seal, fPkoca Vitalina, Li n.j
Ibis animal is a native of the European Seas, and is found about ail
the coasts of the northern hemisphere, and even as far as the opposite
one, being seen in vast numbers about the Southern polar regions
We are informed by Mr Pennant, that it also inhabits some fresh water
lakes, as that of Baiket, Oron, &:c. Seals may often be observed sleep-
ing on the rocks, near the coast; hut when approached too near, they
suddenly precipitate themselves into the water. Sometimes they sleep
sound, and it is affirmed by some, that the Seal sleeps more profoundly
than most other quadrupeds. The structure of the Seal is so singular,
that, as Buffun well observes, it was a kind of model, on which the*ima-
gination of the Poets formed their Tritons, Sirens, and Sea-gods, with
a human head, tire body of a quadruped, and the tail of a fish. The
Seal is possessed ot a considerable degree of intelligence, and may be
tamed, so as to become familiar. Lhe female Seals produce their young
in the winter season, and seldom bring more than two at a birth. It is
said, that they suckle the young ones for about the space of a fortnight on
the spot where they are born, after which they take them out to sea r
and instruct them in swimming and seeking their food, which consists
offish, sea weeds, See. The Seal is supposed to be long-lived, Buffbn
says it attains an hundred years. The voice of a full grown Seal is like
the barking of a dog ; that of the young resembles the mewing of a kitten.
They arc said to delight in thunder storms, and at such periods to sit on
the rocks and contemplate with seeming delight the convulsions of the
elements. Seals are generally very fat, and are hunted for the sake of
their oil. r [ he Seal in this Museum was brought alive from Ireland
and lived sometime after, in the possession of the proprietor.
14. Panther, ( Fdis Pardus , Lin.y
The Panther is an untameable animal, and is next in siae to the Ty-
ger. It inhabits Africa, Barbary, and the remotest parts of Guinea; is
extremely fierce, and attacks every living creature without distinction,
but happily prefers the flesh of brutes to that of mankind. The anci-
ents were well acquainted with these animals. The Romans drew pro-
digious numbers from Africa, for their public shows. Scarus exhibited
130 of them at one time; Pompey, 410; and Augustus, 420. They
probably thinned the coasts of Mauritania of these animals; but they
still


fitlll swarm in the southern parts of Guinea. The Skin of this Panther
was presented by Mr. Pollito.
Maroay, or Tyger Cat, (Fells Tigrina, Li n.)
This diminutive species of Tyger, which is scarcely as large as the
domestic Cat, is a native of South America. In the disposition of its
colours it greatly resembles the Panther. It is very fierce and un-
tam cable.
1.3. The Ichneumon, (Viverra Ichneumon, Lin.,/
In India, but still more in Egypt, the Ichneumon has always been
considered as one of the most useful and estimable of animals; since it
is an inveterate enemy to serpents, rats, and other noxious creatures
which infest those regions. In India it attacks with courage, that most
dreadful reptile, the Cobra de Capeilo, or hooded Snake. It also dili-
gently seeks for the eggs of Crocodiles ; for which reason, as well as its
general usefulness in destroying all manner of troublesome reptiles, it
was held in such a high degree of veneration by the ancient Egyptians,
as to be regarded as a minor deity, or one of those benevolent beings pro-,
ceeding from the Parent of the Universe. For the purposes above spe-
cified it is stilldomesticated by the Indians and Egyptians, in thesame man-
ner as the Cat in Europe; and ithas also the merit of being easily tamed,
and performing with alacrity, all the offices of that creature. Like many
others of this tribe, it is a most dangerous enemy to several animals
larger than itself; over which it gains a victory, and sucks their blood.
In a wild state it frequents rivers, in quest of prey, where, it is re-
ported to swim and dive like an Otter, and continue a length of time
under water. As it is a native of warm climates, it of course is greatly
injured by a removal to the cold regions of Europe, to the variations of
which, it generally falls a victim.
1 The Civet, (Viverra Civelta, Lin.,/
This animal is sometimes erroneously called the Musk Cat. It is a
native of the hottest climates of Africa and Asia; yet it is capable
of living in temperate or even in cold countries, if it be carefully
defended against the injuries of air, and provided with delicate and suc-
culent food. The Civet Gat is a wild fierce animal, and feeds on its
prey in the same manner as the Fox. In Holland they are frequently
reared for the sake of their perfume, which greatly resembles musk.—
This is produced in a pouch under the tail; and those that keep them
for this purpose, put them into a long narrow box in which they can-
not turn; this box is opened behind twice or thrice a week by the per-
son who collects the perfume, who drags the animal backwards by the
tail, and keeps it in that situation by placing a bar before it, while with
a small spoon he scrapes the odoriferous substance from the pouch in
which it is produced.
17. Ermine, (Mas tela Erminea, Lin.,/
Is found principally in the wilds of Russia, and other cold coun-
tries. It is from the skin of this animal that the valuable white fur is
made. They are said to change their colour, being brown in summer,
and white in winter. „ t
18. The Coati, or Brazilian Weasel, (Viverra Nasua, Lin.,/
H inhabits Brazil and Guiana, runs up trees very nimbly. eats like a
E dog,


dog, and holds its food between its forelegs like a bear. It is said to
gnaw its own tail.
ip. Squash, or Stifling, (Viverra MephitisJ Lin.
It is a native of Mexico ; and feeds on beetles and small birds. It
destroys poultry, of which it only eats the brains. When afraid, or ir-
ritated, it voids an offensive kind of odour, which no creature dares to
approach. Professor Kalm was in danger of being fuffocatcd by one
that was pursued into a house where he slept ; and it affected the cattle
so much that they bellowed through pain.
20. Petaurina Opossum, (JJidelphis Pelaurus, Var.)
The size, colour, and form, of the Petaurina, or Great Flying Opos-
sum of New Holland, renders it one of the most beautiful and extraordi-
nary of Quadrupeds. The whole length is rather more than three feet,
of which*"the tail is nearly one half. The body is about the size of a
small Rabbit, and the general appearance is that of a Flying Squirrel.
An expansile membrane, covered with fur, stretches from the fore to the
hind legs on each side of the body, which enables the animal to
spring at pleasure to a great distance. The general colour of these ani-
mals. is a deep grey brown; but the one in this Collection is of a uni-
form white, with a very faint shade of grey down the back. The na-
tives of Botany Bay call it Hepoona Roo.
21. The Great Kancuroo, (Didelphis Gigantea, Lin. Macropus
Major, Shaw’s Zoo. J .
Of all the animals which the vast Island, or rather Continent, of
Australasia has presented to Our view, the Kanguroo must be considered
as one of the most extraordinary; its size, general conformation, teeth,
and other particulars, conspiring to render it a most interesting object to
every naturalist. The first discovery of this remarkable Quadruped,
was in the year 1770, when Capt. Cook was stationed on the Coast of
New Holland. It is the only Quadruped our colonists have yet met
with in New South Wales that supplies them with animal food. There
are two kinds ; the largest that has been shot weighed about 14-Olbs. and
measured from the point of the nose to the end of the tail, 6 leet 1
inch; the tail, 2 feet 1 inch; head, 8 inches ; forelegs, 1 foot; hind
legs, 2 feet 8 inches ; circumference of the fore part of the body
near the legs, 1 foot 1 inch ; and of the hind feet. The
smaller kind seldom exceed 6'olbs. This animal is furnished with a
pouch similar to that of the Opossum, in which its young is nursed and
sheltered. It feeds on grass and other vegetable substances- In their
native.state these animals are said to feed in herds of 30 or 40 together ;
and one is generally observed to be stationed as if apparently on the
watch, at a distance from the rest. One of the most remarkable par-
ticularities of the Kanguroo is the extraordinary faculty which it pos-
sesses of separating ,at pleasure, to a considerable distance, the two long,
fore teeth in the lower jaw. The Kanguroo may be considered in some
degree as naturalized in England, several having been kept for many years
in the Royal domains at Richmond, which have, during their residence
there, produced young, and promise to render this most elegant animal
a permanent acquisition to our country.
2 2. Rat


52- Rat Kanguroo. (Macropus Minor, Shaw.y
This species, which, from its colour and the general aspect of its upper
parts has obtained the title of the Kanguroo Rat, is about the size of a
rabbit: the general shape of the animal resembles that of the Kanguroo,
but is far less elegant, the proportion of the parts less pleasing, and the
hair, which is a dusky cinereous brown, of a coarser nature. In its
teeth it agrees with the great Kanguroo, except that it has eight instead
of six front teeth in the upper jaw, the two middle ones being sharp
pointed; the fore teeth in the lower jaw are like those of the great Kan-
garoo as to shape and position, but are smaller in proportion ; the grin-
ders are three in number on each side both above and below, the fore-
most being fluted or channelled with several longitudinal ribs ; the two
remaning°ones plain. The structure of the hind feet in this species
resembles those of the Kanguroo, but the fore feet have only four toes. The
female is furnished with an abdominal pouch for the reception of the
young. Some of this species were imported in a living state from New
Holland, and brought forth young. Its native name is Polo Roo.
23. Polar, or White Bear, fUrsus MarilifnusjLm. Sys. Nat. Gmel.
This is a far larger species than the common Bear, and is said to
have been sometimes found of the length of 12 feet. The head and neck
are of a more lengthened form than in the common Bear, and the body
itself is longer in proportion. The whole animal is white, the ears round
and smallthe eyes little, and the teeth of extraordinary magnitude :
the hair is of great lengh, and the limbs are extremely large and strong.
It seems confined to the coldest parts of the globe ; being found wdthin
80 degrees of north latitude, as far as any navigators have yet pene-
trated. The shores of Hudson’s Bay, Greenland, and Spitsbergen, are
Its principal places of residence ; but it is said to be carried sometimes
on the floating ice as far south as Newfoundland. The Polar Bear is an
animal of tremendous strength and fierceness. Barcntz, in his voyage
in search of a north-east passage to China, had proofs of the ferocity ot
the animals, in the Island of Nova Zembla, where they attacked the
seamen, seizing them in their mouths; carrying them off’ with the
greatscst ease, and devouring them in the sight of their comrades. It
is said, that they sometimes will attempt to board armed vessels, at a
distance from shore, and have been repelled with difficulty. The usual
food of the Beat consists of seals, fish', and the carcases of whales; but
when on land, they prey on deer and other animals. They eat also
various kinds of berries they happen to find. They are frequently seen
in Greenland in droves, allured by the scent of the flesh of seals, and
they will sometimes surround the dwellings of the natives, and attempt
to break in ; and it is added, that the most successful method of repelling
-them is. by the smell of burnt feathers. They grow extremely fat, a
hundred pounds of grease having been taken from a single beast. The
flesh is said to be coarse, but the skin is valued for the coverings of var
rious kinds, and the Greenlanders often wear it as a clothing. The
split, tendons arc said to form an excellent thread. During the summer
they reside chiefly on the ice- islands, and pass frequently from one to the
other ; being cxjiert swimmers. They have been seen on these 'ice-
islahds at the distance of more than 80 miles from land, prey'ing and
feeding


feeding as they float-along. They lodge in dens, farmed in the vast mas-
ses of ice, which are piled in a stupendous manner, leaving great ca-
verns beneath ; here they breed, and bring forth one or two at a time.
The affection between the parent and young is so great, that they will
sooner die than desert each other. They follow their dams a long time,,
and grow to a large size before they quit them. During winter they
retire, and bed themselves deep beneath the snow or else beneath the
-fixed mountains of ice, where they pass in a state of torpidity the long
and dishial arctic nights, appearing only with the return of the Sun,
The skins of the Polar Bear, says Pennant, were formerly offered lay
the hunters in the arctic regions to the high altars of cathedrals and
other churches, for the priest to stand on during the celebration of mass
in winter. Presented by S. Staniforth, Esq. of Liverpool.
24* ? Wm , t^ ! MoLE, fJftlpaEuropcßa, Var; Lin j
25. Black Rat, (Mus Rattus, Lin.y o> r
This species is now almost extinct, (though formerly very common)'
being nearly extirpated by the common rat, which is originally a na-
tive of Norway. it gmqqoo (U {gblan-moa m foidaahn lo
26'. White Rat, (Mus Decumanus , Var. Lin.y caught in a mill
near Warrington.
27. Marmot, (Arclomis Marmola, Lin )
The Marmot, when taken young, is more capable of being tamed
than any other wild animal; it will easily learn to perform feats with a
stick,-to dance and obey the voice of its muster -, it bears a great antipa-
thy to the dog, and when it becomes familiar in a house, and is certain
of being supported by its master, it wall in his presence attack the larg-
est dogs, and boldly fasten on them with its teeth. They are natives ol
the Alps and Pyrenean mountains, and remain in a tor pid state from
the end of September to the beginning of April. They live in societies;
from five to fourteen in number, in burrows which have several pas-
sages constructed with great ait ; the principal apartment at the end is
warmly lined with moss and hay; and it is asserted, that this work is
carried on by the whole company, that some cut the finest grass, others
pull it up, others take it in their turn to convey it to the hole; upon
this occasion, it is added, one of them lies on its back, permits the hay
io be heaped upon its belly, keeping its paws upright to make room,-and
in this manner, it is dragged, hay and all, to their common retreat;
Whenever they venture abroad, one is placed as a centinel, sitting on
an elevated rock, while the others amuse themselves in the fields below;
gnd no sooner does he perceive a man, an eagle, a dog, or any other
enemy, than he informs the rest by a kind'of whistle, and is himself
the last to take refuge in the cell. 1 hese animals run much swiftei up
hill than down ; they climb trees, and run up the clefts of rocks, with
"real case ; indeed it is ludicrously said of the Savoyaicls, who ..re the
general chimney-sweepers of Paris, that they have learned their trade
from the Marmot.
Grey Squirrel, fiSciurus'Cinerous, Limy
This Squirrel is an inhabitant ot the northern pails of Ameiica,
where they are sometimes so injurious to the plantations, that a reward
M three pence each for those destroyed, is given by several of the Ame-
rican


man States. Pennsylvania alone, ih the year 175©, [paid no less a.
sum than 8,0001. for destroying them. £ iyj; - :
Black Squirrel, {Sciurus Niger, Lin.y
The black Squirrel differs principally from the former Squirrel in its
Colours.; its habits and manners lacing nearly the same.
SO. American' Flying Squirrel, (Sciurus Volucella , Lin.,/
Is less than the common European, being not above five inches long,
and is of a grey ash colour on the back, and white on the under parts;
he has blaclTprominent eyes like a mouse, with a large broad flat tail,
The name seems to imply, that he is endowed with wings like a Bat,
which however is not the case; for he has only a loose skin on each
side, extending from the lore to the hinder feet, with which it is con-
nected ; this skin he can stretch out like a sail, which holds so much
air, that it buoys him up, by which means he can jump from one
tree to another at a great distance, insomuch that some have thought
he had the faculty of flying. He feeds on the same provisions as other
Squirrels, and may easily lie made tame; but he is apt to do a great
deal of mischief in corn-fields, by cropping the corn as soon as it begins
to ear. ' . f .
31. Botany Bay Flying Squirrel, (Sciurus Pelaurus Australis.)
This is the largest and most elegant of the Flying Squirrels yet des-
cribed. Its most remarkable characteristic is, the rounded thumbs,ror
great toes, of the hind feet, which are furnished with a flattened nail;
while all the other toes, five to each foot, have sharp hooked claws. In
its manners it resembles the preceding Flying Squirrel.
32. Pygmy Antelope, (Antelope Ptjgmcea s Lm.J
This beautiful and diminutive species of Deer is a native of the hot-
cst parts of Africa, and is easily tamed, but of so tender a nature as
not to bear our climate even with the greatest care. The height of the
full grown animal is only nine inches, yet so remarkable are the pow-
ers of its activity in its native regions, that it will leap a wall of twelve
feet fn height. The legs are scarcely thicker than a large quill, and
are frequently tipped with gold and used as tobacco stoppers.
33. The Rhinoceros, f Rhinoceros Unicornis, Lin. 7
Next to the Elephant, the Rhinoceros may be considered as one of the
most powerful of animals; in strength indeed he is inferior to none, and
his bulk, (says Bontius) equals the Elephant, but is lower only on ac-
count of the shortness of his legs. The length of the Rhinoceros from
head to tail is usually 12 feet; and the circumference of the body nearly
equal that length. Its nose is armed with so hard and formidable a
horn that the Tyger will rather attack the Elephant, whose probocis he
can lay hold of, than the Rhinoceros, which he cannot face, without
danger of having his bowels torn out, by the defensive weapon of his
adversary. The body and limbs of the Rhinoceros are covered with a
skin so hard and impenetrable, that he fears neither the claws of the Tygep
nor the trunk of the Elephant. It is said to turn the edge of a scimiter
and to resist even the force of a musket ball. The upper lip of the Rhi-
noceros Is capable of great extension, and is so pliable, that the animal
can move it from side to side, twist it revmd a stick, collect it? food, or
seise


seize with it any thing it would carry to its mouth. The Rhinoceros
without being ferocious, or carnivorous, is, totally untractable
and rude. It seems at times to be subject to paroxysms of fury*
The one which the King of Portugal sent to the Pope, in the year 1513 i,
destroyed the vessel which transported it. Like the Hog, the Rhinoce-
ros wallows in the mire, is a solitary animal, and delights to rove near
the banks of rivers. It is found in Bengal, Siam, China, and other
countries of the East, where it feeds on the grossest herbs, prefering
thistles and shrubs to the finest of pasturage. The female produces but
one at a time, which during the first month, exceed not the size of a
large dog. At the age of two years, the horn is not more than an inch
long ; at six years old, it is 10 inches long ; and grows to the length of
3 feet. From the peculiar construction of his eyes, the Rhinoceros can
only see what is immediately before him. When he pursues any ob-
ject he proceeds always in a direct line, overturning every thing in his
way. His sense of smelling is so acute, that his pursuers are obliged
to avoid being to windward of him. They follow him at a distance,
and watch till he lies down to sleep. They then approach, and dis-
charge their muskets into the lower part of his belly. filnu
BIRDS.
10 901% t . , , , , . Almighty Being, Olio
Cause and support of all things, can I view
These objects of my wonder; can I feel ; :Ja?i Mil bnoyail
, ■■■> , These fine sensations, and not think of thee ? . V ;
sved oJ i3V9a sa&afe jqatm aid) lo noiifianufixs no .aAj; ziailj
Large Glass Case , marked A. non!
No 1. Honey SuckingHuMMiNC Bird, rochilus Mellijugus, Lin.J
This minute Bird is placed in this case, as a contrast to the superb
Argus Pheasant.
2. Cocotzin, or Ground Dove, f Columba Fasserina, Lin i) s'A
We retain the name Cocotzin given by Fernandez, because the bird
on which it was bestowed seems to differ from all others, and as it is smal-
ler than the common Turtle, many naturalists have called it the Little
Turtle. It is found through all the southern parts of the New World,
and sometimes advances to the coast of Carolina, where it feeds on
berries, especially those of the Fellitory.
3. Bronze-winged Pigeon, (Columba Chaleoplera, Lin. J inhabits
Norfolk Island, &c.
4. Crowned Pigeon, fColumba Coromla, Lin .)
The gigantic size of this species, which is not far short of a Turkey,
has caused some naturalists to place it rather among the gallinaceous
tribe than in the genus Columba. Its characters are however so clearly
and


and decisively marked, as to declare at once its proper genus. It is un-
doubtedly one of the most elegant of birds, and is a native ol the Molucca
Islands. Its voice resembles that of the Wood Pigeon, but in so loud
and hoarse a tone, that it is recorded of some of Mons. Bougainville’s
sailors, that they were greatly alarmed on hearing it for the first time
in the unfrequented spots of some islands on which they landed ; sup-
posing it to have proceeded from the savage cries of hostile and concealed
natives. This bird is frequently brought to Europe alive, and is con-
sidered as one of the greatest ornaments of the menagerie. The above
bird when living, was many years in the possession of her present Ma-
jesty.
n-: 5. Red-legged Partridge, (Pelrao Rufus , Lin.J
This Partridge is found in most of the temperate and mountainous
countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa. It is seldom seen in England.
6. Botany Bay Bird of Paradise, (Manura Superba.j
In the 6th volume of the Linnasan 1 ransactions, this highly singular
bird is mentioned as a non-dcscript, and is found in the hilly parts of
the country of New South Wales, where the inhabitants call it the
Pheasant. In respect to its manners and food, no particular
account has yet been obtained.
7. Argus Pheasant or Luen, fPfiasianus Argus , Lin.J
This superb and majestic Bird was first described by Edwards, in the
55th volume of the Philosophical Transactions, who says 14 It is the
largest of the Pheasant Genus yet known, being in size equal to a full
orown Turkey. The wings and tail are besprinkled with a multitude
of round spots like eyes ; whence it has received the name of Argus. —
The feathers in the middle of the tail are very long, and project much
beyond the rest: its head is covered with a double crest. It has been
doubted, whether this bird had not originally metre than two long-tail fea-
thers ; this, however, on examination of the rump, seems never to have
been the case. Mr. Pennant describes it as having spurs like the com-
mon cock, but this also appears to be an error; for this bird, although a
male, and of full growth, has not the slightest appearance of them.—
This extraordinary bird with its wings extended, measures eighteen
feel in circumference. It is a native of the North of China.
No, 1, King of the Vultures, fVultur Papa, IAn.J
f"' The Vulture is the most ravenous ol the feathered race, since he kills
prey not from choice, but in general devours only such animals as are
dying or found dead and putrid. His sense of smelling is so exquisite,
that he is able to scent a dead carcase at an amazing distance. “ They
are (says Pennant) greedy and voracious to a proverb; and not timid,
for they prey in the midst of cities, undaunted by mankind. * In some
of the battles of the East, where vast slaughter takes place, of elephants,
horses, and men, voracious animals crowd to the field from all quarters,
of which Jackals, and Vultures, are the chief. Even in the places
where the last are at other times seldom observed, the plain on these
occasions, will be found covered with them. Vast multitudes will be
Seen in the air descending from every side to partake in the carnage. These
thfc Indians believe to be brought by having an instinctive presentiment
of


of slaughter some days before the event. It is observed, that Vulture«-
in general become less numerous as the climate becomes colder ; and
that in the more northern countries they are never found. They are
undoubtedly a kind dispensation of Providence, in the hotter regions, ip
prevent the putrid effluvia of the dead from too much injuring the
health of the living.
2. Golden Eagle, (Falco Chrysaefos, Lin./
This is the largest bird of the rapacious tribe ; it measures from the
point of the bill to the extremity of the tail upwards of three feet; Its
breadth from wing to wing about eight feet; and weighs from ]6' to 18lbs.
The strength of this noble bird is such, that it can with ease carry a
lamb ; and several instances are recorded, of its having carried off chil-
dren. It is found in various parts of Europe, but abounds most in the
warmer regions ; it has been known to breed in the mountainous parts
of Ireland; it lays three, and sometimes four eggs, of which seldom
more than two are prolific.
3. Ring-tailed Eagle, fFalco Fulms, Lin .)
> ■« Is more numerous than the Golden Eagle, and is very destructive tp
Deer, and carries off lambs, pigs, and even children. It builds in prd*
cipices and sea rocks, and is found in most parts of Europe, and as far
north as- Hudson’s Bay.
4. Gentil Falcon, C Falco Genlilis, Lin.y found in Britain, &:c.
5. Common Buzzard, (Falco Buteo , Lin.y
These Birds, though possessed of strength and agility, are cowardly,
inactive, and slothful, will fly before a Sparrow-hawk, and when
overtaken, will suffer themselves to be beaten, and even brought to the
ground. It is a common species in Great Britain.
6. Kite, (Falco Milms, Lin.J
This bird is distinguished from the Buzzard by its forked tail. It is
common in England, and continues with us the whole year. It feeds on
small birds, particularly on young chickens.
7- Kestrel, male and female, (Falco Finnunculus, Lin.y
The Kestrel is widely diffused throughout Europe, and is found in the
more temperate parts of North America. It is a handsome bird, it's
sight is acute, and its flight easy and graceful. It breeds in the holes of
trees, rocks, and ruined buildings. It was formerly used in England
for catching small birds and young partridges.
8. Hen Harrier, or Blue Hawk, (Falco Cyaneus, Lin.y ‘
The Hen Harrier feeds on birds, lizards, and other reptiles; it
breeds annually on Cheviot Bills, and on the precipices under the Roman
wall by Craglake, Northumberland.
9. Great Snowy Owl, (Slrix Nyctea, Lin.y
Inhabits the northern parts of Europe, Asia, and America; it is of
the largest size, being upwards of two feet long. The head is smaller
in proportion than any of the Owl tribe; the legs, feet, and toes, are
thickly clothed with long downy white feathers; the bill and claws arc
black, and very strong, it flies about in the day, and preys on He-
rons, Hares, Marine Quadrupeds, and Birds.
10. Short-eared Owl. (Stiix Brachyotts. Lin.y
1 hi*


10. Short-eared Owl, [Strix Brachyotos, Lin.). .
This rare and beautiful bird, is supposed by Pennant to be a bird of
passage, as it only visits us the latter end of the year, and returns In
spring to the places of its summer residence. It is found chiefly in
woody or mountainous countries, and feeds on mice.
11. White Owl, (Strix Flammed, L'm.J a very common bird in
England.
12. Black and white Butcher Bird, (Lanius Atricapillus, Lm.J i
native of Surinam.
Large Glass Case , marked B.
PARROTS, (Psiltacus.)
Of all foreign birds, the Parrot is best known in this country, and is
most admired; nor without reason, as it unites the greatest beauty with
the greatest docility. Its voice more exactly resembles the human
than that of any other bird, and is capable of numerous modulations,
v. Inch even the tones of man cannot reach. The facility with which
this kind is taught to speak, and the degree of memory that it possesses,
are not a little surprising. So numerous are the stories respecting
the loquacious faculty of the Parrot, that they would Till a volume,—
Parrots, of one variety or other, are uncommonly numerous in the
tropical climates. The forests swarm with them, and the beauty of
their plumage, though not their natural voice, adds a degree of vivacity
to the loveliest of scenes. Though the Parrot is commonly domesti-
cated in Europe, it will not breed here on account of the cold. In
indeed can survive our cold winter; but its spirits and appetites are
both visibly affected by severe weather. It then becomes torpid and
inactive, and seems quite changed from that bustling bird which it ap-
pears beneath a more genial sky. Nevertheless, with proper attention,
it will live a number of years under the protection of man. The ex-
treme sagacity and docility pf this bird forms the only apology that can be
made for the time which is spent in teaching it to talk. At first it ob-
stinately resists all instruction, but seems to be won by perseverance ;
makes a few attempts to imitate the first sounds ; and, when it has or.ee
acquired the articulation of one word distinctly, the rest, of the lesson is
generally learned with great ease. The sagacity and docility, however,
which Parrots shew in a domestic state, seems also natural to them in
their residence among the woods. They live together in flocks, and
mutually assist each other against their enemies, either by their cou-
rage, or their notes of warning. They breed in the hollows ol trees,
where they make their nests. The larger kinds lay only two or three
eggs; but it is probable that the smaller ones lay more. The natives
are very assiduous in finding out the places where they nestle, lor the
purpose ol procuring the young; because those prove thp most teachable
and lively which are reared in confinement. Indeed, the Indians arc
not anxious to possess these birds for their talking alone, for sale, or for
their beauty, but also for food : since, though some are ill-tasted, other*
are very delicate eating, particularly the parrakcet kind Numerous
as the species are, and widely as they are disseminated over Asia, A-
F frica.


frica, and America, yet it appears, that they were not very generally
known to the Greeks. The green Parrakcet with a red neck was the
first of this family imported into Europe; for Onesicrites, the conductor
or Admiral of the fieet of Alexander the Great, brought them from the
Island of Taprobane. They were indeed so new and uncommon, that
Aristotle in his Bth book of animals, seems not to have seen them, and
mentions them only from report, for he says “ there is an Indian bird
called Psillace, which is said to speak.” The beauty of these birds
made them however objects of luxury among the Romans, who lodged
them in cages of silver, of shells, and of ivory ; and the price of a parrot
often exceeded that of a slave. To enumerate what number of distinct
species of these birds have already been discovered, would lie impossible,
since our vessels from New-Holland and the Southern Islands, are daily
adding new ones to this extensive and beautiful genus;
No. I. Banksian Cockatoo, fPsillacus Banksii.) Inhabits New-
Holland, where it was first discovered by Sir Jos. Banks.
2. Unknown. , ' \ . , . . „ .
3. Caledonian Parrot, fPsillacus Caledonicus, Lin y Inhabits
New Caledonia.
4. Red-breasted Parrot, (Psillacus Hcemalotus , Lin.j Inhabits
Amboyna and New-Holland.
o. Red-breasted, female.
6. Blossom-headed Parkakeet, (Psillacus Erylhrocephalus , Lin.)
Inhabits India.
7. Taeuan Parrot, Psillacus T'abuensis.) Inhabits the Friendly
Islands. • j ry
8. Taeuan Parrot, female.
p. Splendid Parrot, (Psillacus Gloriosus , Lin./ Inhabits New
Holland,
10. Splendid Parrot, female. f
11. Rosc-riugcd Parrot, (Psillacus Alexandria Lin .) Inhapjts
Asia, lijdia, and Africa. \ ; r ,n ■«
1 2. Nonpar i el Parrot, ( Psillacus Exunius.J Inhabits New-Holland.
13 Nonpariel Parrot, female. b s «o*w jt ibuiit-Ho
34. Mustsacho Parrot, f Psillacus Pondicherianus t Lin.y Inha-,
bits Pondicherry.
15. Black-winged Parrot, (Psillacus Melanopferus, Lm.J Inha
bits Java and Luzoniti, ' ' " * .•
If). Crimson-fronted Parhakelt , (Psillacus Concinnus,. J Inhabits
New-Holland.
17* Chinese Parrot, (Psillacus Sinensis , Liu J Inhabits the South-
ern China, Amboyna, and New Guinea. ’ .
18. Guinea or Ethiopian Parrakeet, (Psillacus Pullarius, Limy
Inhabits Guinea, Ethiopia, India, and Java. ■ . •
19. Guinea Parrakeet, female. ‘ ■»
20. Molucca Lory, (Psillacus Ruber , Limy Inhabits the Moluc-
ca Islands, and New Guinea. f ] f .q™ '
Attached to this Case, is one of a small size, marked Miscellaneous }
Ao. I, in which are the following articles '
A.—Two


A. —Two Roman Lachrymatories, or Tear Bottles, These vessels
are found in the urns wherein are deposited the ashes of the dead, and
were used by the Romans to contain the tears of friends collected at the
funeral pile of the deceased.
I).—Specimenof the Brea d-Fruit.—Dr Hawkesworth relates, “that
the Bread-Fruit is found at Otaheite, in the South Seas, on a tree about
the size of a middling oak, or horse-chesnut; its leaves are near a foot
m length, of an oblong shape, resembling in some respects those of the
Fig-tree. Its fruit is not unlike the Cantaloupe melon, botii in size and
shape ; it is inclosed in a thin skin, and has a core as large as a person's
thumb. It .has an insipid sweetish taste, and is somewhat of the con-
sistency of new bread, and is as white as the blanched almond. It di-
vides into parts, is roasted and baked before it is eaten, and admirably
supplies the place of bread to a people ignorant of the arts ofcultiva-
tiom”
C.—Roman Lamp, made of earthenware, found at Herculaneum. .
D —Teeth of the Alligator, (Lacerla Alligator, Lin.y
E. Roman Lock, found at Stamford, in Lincolnshire.
F. —Two curious turnings in Wood, representing Roman Emperors.
G. —Leaf of (he Papyrus, on which are written some Hindoo cha-
nix&fk. - { ' ' '' ‘"" ,J f ... '-*1 ■
H. —Leg of the Guinea Deer, f Antelope Pygmcea , Lin.y often tip-
ped with silver, for a tobacco stopper,
J. — Beak of the Flamingo, (Phcenicoplerus Ruber , Lin.J dtinl
K. —Piece of Lead, curiously intermixed with corn, found in the
ruins after the dreadful lire which happened in the year 1802, at
Goree, Liverpool.
L. —An ancient Celtic Sword, made of brass, found near Navan,
in Ireland. Presented by Leonard M‘Nally, Esq, of Dublin.
M. —Two antique Silver Rings.
N—Ancient Ivory Comb, curiously carved.,
O. —Part of the Tooth of an Elephant, containing an Iron Ball. ,
P. furious ancient Sandal, supposed to be Roman,, which, with
the niongs that lace it over the instep, is ingeniously cut out of one piece
of leather. It, was found in the year 1788 in Howford Moss, in Che-
shire,' about 12 feet below the surface of the earth.
Q. of Chain Armour.
R. A curious ancient oval watch, the mechanism of which is kept
in motion bv a catgut, instead of a chain. This Watch is supposed to
have been of the earliest invention. hifellaH
S. -Singular Lip Ornament, worn by the natives of the North West
coast of America. Of all the monstrous ways of disfiguring the human
countenance, this seems t|ie most extraordinary; it is composed of a
piece of hard wood three inches long, by one and a half broad, and is
introduced into an orifice of the same size, made by incision between
the chin and undpr lip, in such a manner, as to give the wearer an ap-
pearance of having two mouths.
T. — A Roman Stylus, or Ghaphium.
An instrument used for writing on waxen tables. Authors, while
•omposing, usually wrote first on these tables for the convenience of
making


making alterations, and when any thing appeared sufficiently correct,
it was transferred on paper or parchment, and published. It seems a
person could write more quickly on waxen tables than on paper, where
the hand wa ; retarded by dipping frequently the reed in ink.
U. —Specimen of the Hu ra, or Sand-Box, from Barbadoes. The
tree from whence this fruit is produced grows to. a very large size, often
40 feet in height, yielding a shade of as many feet in diameter. The
fruit is called Sand-box, from the use people make of them for that
purpose,
V. —Certain instruments called Celts, of a wedge-like form, of
which several have been discovered in various parts of Europe, and are
of (he highest antiquity. Julius Caesar mentions thfeir having been
found in Britain in his time, where tire use of them, was then unknown
to the unenlightened inhabitants. Antiquaries have been much divided
respecting their origin and use. Mr. Whitaker calls them British battle
ixes, but this is supposed to be erroneous, for a mould answering to the
shape of the Celt having been lately found in Ireland, where the before-
mentioned brass sword was discovered, presents strong proof that these
disputed antiquities, were once the manufacture of the ancient inhabi-
tants of that island, long before England was in a state of civilization/
The one marked V. found in Ireland.
W. -Found at Wiuwick, near Warrington-
X- Found in the River Ribble, Lancashire.
Y-—Curious ancient Iron Ktv.
Jj, —Nose of a small Saw-Fish.
Jud .aosTJ ojnsio orilno cnilotiiD ■ ill bemd ?fmd sc.-riT .sulci ii?i
THE BIRDS CONTINUED.
r Nth 13- WniTjE-THROATED Toucan v (gamphastos TocO) Liu.J
The bill of this curious bird is of a most uncommon size, being near-
ly-asjlarge as the whole body, which gives the bird somewhat the ap-
pearance of having thrust its head into the claws of a large lobster ;
this extraordinary creature is seven inches and a half long, and seven in
circumference ; it is extremely slight, and as thin as parchment. This
bird, so formidable in appearance, is quite harmless and gentle; it feeds
principally .on pepper, which it devours very greedily, gorging
itself in such a manner, that it voids it crude and unconcocted; this,
however, is no objection to the natives using it again. They even pre-
fer it to that which is fresh gathered from the tree; and seem persuaded
that the strength and heat of the pepper is .qualified by the bird, and
that all it£ noxious qualities are thus exhausted. It is a native of South
ni hooa ylloaupoil <nR hoc ? oo*bu> omh smm
14. Black and white Crow, (Conms ,J from Botany Bay.
. 15. Brown Rook, (Corvus fugdegus, Lin. Var.J
This is a variety of the common Rook, and was shot at Wavertree by
John Blaekburne, Esq. who presented it to the Museum,
ih. Hooded Crow, (Corvus Oornix, Lin.J *
17. The Motmot; (Rantphaslos Mornola , Liu.J
Inhabits Brazil; is about the size of a blackbird in the body, but
measures eighteen inches long, owing to the great length of the two
middle


aaiddle quilk of the tail, which for two inches near the tips are without
Webs *, its bill is strongly serrated.
18. American, or Blue Jay, (Corvus Christatus, Lin.J
This Jay is brought from Carolina and Canada, and in those coun-
tries it must be very common, for many are sent to Europe.
19. Banana Bird, (Oriolus Xanthomas, Lin.)
These birds must be of a'very sociable disposition, since love, Which
divides so many other societies, seems on the contrary to unite theihk
more closely together They do not separate to accomplish the views
of nature in secrecy, but a great many pairs are Seen on-the same tree
performing the act of incubation. Their nests are ot a cylindrical form,
suspended from the extremity of the high branches, and waving freely
in the air ; so that the young are continually rocked as if in a cradle.—
This bird is reckoned very docile, and easily subject to domestic slavery.
It is dispersed through the regions of Carolina and Brazil, &c.
20. Red-breasted Blackbird , (Tanagra jfacapa, Lin)
Is found in South America, and in general two together, m gardens
and in the neighbourhood of houses. It lives on fruits, and makes a
cylindrical nest of fibres and leaves, suspending it from the branch of i
low tree, with the entrance undermost.
21. Painted Finch, [Emberb:a Ciris, Lin.)
The beautiful of this bird, Nature requires some tinie to
form, nor is it compleated before the third year. The young Findies
arc brown the first year; in the second, their head is of a vivid blue,
the body greenish blue, and the wings and tail brown edged with green-
ish blue. These birds breed in Carolina on the orange trees, but do
not continue there during the winter.
In this Case is also the nest of the above bird.
22. Long-billed Grakle, ( Gracula Longiroslra , Lin.) Inhabits
South America.
23- Virginian Nightingale, or Red Bird, [Loxia Cardinal is
The warble of this bird’ js charming, and resembles the song ol the
Nightingale. It can be taught to speak like the Canary Bird. It is
bold, strong and vigorous, but is easily tamed. iuva"na
24. Pompadour. (Ampelis Pompadora, Lin )
This beautiful bird is migratory: it appears in Guiana, near the in-
habited spots, in March and September, when the fruits on which they
feed are ripe ; they lodge among trees on the banks of rivers, but never
retire into the wide forests.
25. Wrynecks, [Ji/nx Porqmlla, Lin.)
These beautiful little birds are natives of this country, arriving about
the same time as the cuckoo, and are frequently seen in company with
it; hence they have received the name of the cuckoo’s mate. They
hold themselves very erect on the branch of a tree where they sit; their
bodies are almost bent backwards, whilst they writhe their heads and
necks by a slow and involuntary motion, like the contortions of a reptile.
26. Lesser Spotted Woodpecker, (Picas Minor. Lin.)
2 7- Large American King F'isher, (Alcedo Porquado, Lin.)
This species is sixteen inches in length.
28. King Fisher, male and female, (Alcedo Ispidd, Lin.J
The Greeks celebrated this bird by the name »f Alcyon, or Halcyon;
the


the epithet Alcxjonian , was applicable by them to the four clays before
and after the winter solstice, when the sun shone brilliant, the sky se-
rene, and the sea smooth and tranquil. It was then the timorous ma-
riners of antiquity ventured to lose sight of shore, and shape their course
on the glassy main. The King Fisher is the most esteemed of British
birds for the brilliancy of its colours. It nestles on the brink of riverf
and brooks, in holes made by water-rats. Gessner observes, that it can
never be tamed, and that it is always wild. Its flesh has the odour of
bastard musk, and is very unpalatable food; its fat is reddish; its sto-
mach roomy and Haccid, as in birds of prey; and like them too, it dis-
charges by the bill the undigested fragments, scales, and bones, rolled
into little balls. ..tmd k lo Jsdb Ho'jssrz am Juodc
29. Hoopoe, (Upupa Epops, Lin. 9 - •
This singular bird is common in some parts of Egypt, and is fre-
quently seen in Germany, but rarely in Great Britain. The one in
this collection was shot in Yorkshire. 5:1 ’
30. Wattled Bee-Eater, (Merops Canunculalus.) Inhabits Bo-
tany Bay.
31. Loriot, or Golden Oriole, (Oriolus Gdtbula. Lin. 9
The Loriot is of a roving disposition, continually changing its abode.
They build their nests on lofty trees, and form it with singular industry.
They feed on caterpillars, worms, insects, in short whatever they can
catch; but they are fondest of cherries, figs, &c. It is not easy to be
tamed. These birds have sometimes spread from one end of the Con-
tinent to the other, without suffering any change in their external
form, or their plumage. It is found in Switzerland regularly twice a
year. ■ <...
32. Eider Duck, (Anas Molissima. Lin. 9 mi sow e*
The Eider Duck is of a size between the goose and domestic duck,
and appears to be one of the graduating links that connects the two
kinds. That beautiful substance known by the name of Eider Down, 1
is produced from this bird, which it plucks from its breast for the pur- s
pose of lining its nest. Presented by S. Staniforth. Esq. bo:>sriiq
33. Sheldrake, male and female, (Anas ‘For dona. Lin ) '"-v
The Sheldrake is not common on the British shores, though they are
numerous in the British isles.
34. Scoter, or Black Diver, ; (Anas Mgra. Lin. ) ■ hud aril
35. Golden-Eve Duck, ( Anas Clanguia. Lin. ) ocnl
These birds do not congregate on the British shores in large as
Other birds of this genus do. saezotf ti&df ol ooivim
36. Velvet Duck, (Anas Fusca . Lin. 9 Inhabits Europe and
South America.
37. Gargasv, (Anas Querquedula. Lin ,) It is a scarce bird in
England; ..F f Toi/ij.s>uD aoAjfl .w
38. Teal, ( Anas Crecca. Lin. )
These beautiful little Ducks seldom exceed 11 ounces in weight, or
measure 14| inches. They are common in England.
39. Dun Diver, (Mergus Castor. Lin. 9
40. Smew, or White Non, (Mergus Atbellus. Lin. 9 It breeds
in the arctic regions.
41. Puffin,


41. Puffin, or Coultehneb, (Alca Arclica. Lin./
It is not easy to describe the bill of this odd looking animal, the
coulter of a plough may furnish the best idea of its shape: it is Hat, but
very different from that of a duck ; its edge is upwards, very broad at
the base, but ending in a sharp point. When the Puffin prepares for
building, which is in a few days after its arrival on our coasts, it be-
gins by scraping a hole, not far from the sea shore, and when it has pe-
netrated the earth a little, it throws Itself upon its back, and With bill
and claws thus burrows inwards, till it has dug a hole in the ground,
with several windings, near ten feet deep; in. this fortified place it lays
one egg. Though this bird is very little larger than a pigeon, its egg
is about the size of that of a hen’s.
42* Razor Bill, (ALcaTorda, Linri '
The Razor Bill breeds in some places in England, and in the He-
brides it is numerous, where it inhabits the highest rocks that impend
over the sea. While hatching, these birds sit close together in vast
numbers, and in rows one above another, the male and female doing
the duty alternately.
43. Patagonian Penguin, (Aptenodyles Palachonica. Lm.)
This highly curious bird seems to form the connecting link between
the feathered and the scaly race. It is upwards of three feet in height;
its hu-like legs being placed at the extreme end of its body, it can stand in
no position but quite upright; in place of wings, it has two dangling
flaps, which when in the water serve as fins, but are of no use on
shore, as it is totally incapable of flight; it seldom comes to land, but
for the purpose of depositing its eggs, and is then so easily taken, that
(Oapt. Cook says) a man might kill w ith a stick in a few hours as many
as would load a large boat. .h- . 1; ■■ *
44. Pelican, (Pdicanus Onocralolus. Lin.) : I-jcl I
The Pelican of Arabia is nearly the size of a swan, and is of a pale
rose or flesh colour ; ks bill is near twenty inches long, and is furnished
at the end with a sharp hbok, with which the ancients believed it
pierced its breast, in order to procure blood for the sustenance of iis
young. To the under mandible is attached a strong bag or pouch,
which it is capable of distending in such a manner, as to hold from 12
to Islbs. of fish.
The birds of this class are furnished with a web more on each fool
than any other of the feathered tribe. They sw r im and di ter with great
agility, and may be tamed and instructed so as to render an essential
service to their possessor, by their facility in fishing.
4 6. Shag, (Pdicanus GracuLus, Lin,/
A common bird on the shores of Great Britain.
46. Guillemot, (Colymbus Priolc, Lin./
47. Black: Guillemot, [Colymbus Grylle , Lin./ Inhabits Greenland
and the Orkney isles. ’
48. Speckled Diver, (Colymbus Stellalus, Lin./
49. Crested Grebe, (Colymbus Crislatus, Lin.J
The largest of the Grebes is very common in the fens of Great-
Briiain ; and is principally remarked for its scalloped feet, and tlie
plumage of the breast, which is a beautiful silvery white, and as glossy
as satin, o f..
50. Little


50. Little Grebe or Dodchick, (Colymbus Minutus, Lin.)
The least of the Grebe tribe, and inhabits Europe and America.
51. Common Tern, or Sea Swallow, (Sterna Hirundo, Lin.)
Very common on the British coasts.
52. Spoonbill, (Plalatea Leucorodia , Lin .)
A rare bird in England, though common in the Low Countries, be-
tween the Ferro isles and the Cape of Good Hope. The bill of this
bird is different from any other; it is about 8 inches long, quite flat,
and running out at the end, is there about an inch and a half wide. It
is found in many parts of Europe, particularly in Holland, where it
builds on trees, and feeds on frogs, lizards, Bcc.
53. Heron, (Ardea Major, Lin.p
These birds in England were formerly ranked as royal Game, and
protected by the laws. Twenty shillings penalty was levied on those
who destroyed them, or their eggs.
54. Demoiselle, or Numidian Crane, ( Ardea Virgo , Liu.)
This beautiful bird has received the name of Demoiselle, or Miss, on
account of its elegant form, its rich garb, and its affected airs, It was
famous amongst the ancients, though it was little known and seen in
Greece or Italy.
55. The Royal Bird, or Crowned African Crane, (Ardea Pa-
vonina, Lin.)
It owes its title of royal, to a sort of crown which decorates its head.
It inhabits Africa, especially Gambia, the Gold Coast, and Gape Verd.
It is of a gentle and pacific disposition ; its defence is its stature, and
the rapidity with which it runs and flies. It is less afraid of man than
of its other enemies ; we are assured, that at Cape Verd these birds are
half domesticated, and that they come into the court yards to eat grain
with the Guinea fowls. Their cry is like the Peacock’s. The Portu-
guese in the 15th century, it is supposed, were the first people that
brought these birds into Europe, at the time they discovered the Gold
Coast.
56'. Bittern, (Ardea Slellaris , Lin.^l
The Bittern, though a shy solitary bird, yet when attacked by tire
Buzzard, defends itself with great courage. It was once held in esti-
mation at the tables of the great.
57. Heron, (marked Liveil) unknown.
58. The Green Ibis, or Curlew, (Le Courly Verd de Brisson.)
The above bird was shot near Liverpool, and is imagined to beulie
•nly instance of its being taken in Great-Britain. It is about the size
of the Curlew, of a dark olive brown colour, with green reflections.
The figure of this bird, bears the nearest resemblance (to any yet disco-
vered,) to the Liver, represented as the coat and crest of the Liverpool
Arms.
59. Scarlet Ibis, (Tantalus Ruber, LinJ \
Inhabits the boarders of the great lakes and rivers of South America.
The colour of the whole bird, except the tips of its wings, which art
black, is bright scarlet. It feeds on small insects and crabs, and will
breed in a domestic state.
60. Curlew,


6(). Curlew , (Scolopax Arquala, Lin./
61. Whimbrel, (Scolopax Phaopus, Lin.^
62. GommonGodw.it, (Scolopax SEgocephala, Lin.)
The common Goclwit is esteemed by epicures as a great delicacy, and
sells very high. - , .a ■ ■
6S. Red Godwit, Male and Female, (Scolopax lapponm , JLinJ
Not very common in Great Britain, though numerous about the Cas-
pian sea, auJ in Siberia. v - '.f
st. Green shank;, [Scolopax Liu.)
. Not common in England, though frequent in Russia, Siberia, kc.
g 5, Spotted Redshank, Male and Female, (Scolopax Tolanus , Lin.J
65. Ruff. (Tringa Pugndx, Lln.J ■»*
These birds migrate from Great Britain in winter; in spring, as
tooa as they arrive, each of the males (of which there are a greater number
than females) immediately fixes upon a spot of dry grass in the marsh,
whichhe runs round and round, until it is trodden.bare; to this spot
it appears he wishes to invite the female, and waits in expectation of
her taking possession and becoming an inmate* As soon as a single
female arrives, and is heard to cry, the nudes are roused to war, for
they instantly begin to fight with desperation ; at the end of the battle
the female l>ccoines, the prize of the victor. At this time they are
caught in great numbers by the fowlers, who send them with other fen
binds to tfie markets of the-metropolis. These birds are common in
Denmark and Sweden during summer. j .
57. Common Sandpiper, Male and Female, [7’ruiga JHypoleucos,
1o bifiile z&l njl .boIB Hue B*lol Ji ibidw Aim yjibiqin sdj ,
•This elegant little bird breeds in this country, but they are not nu-
merous. sanu TOjii udlfanjs .hateoiissmob Rsti
68. Dunlin, Male apd Female, [Jnnga Alpina, Lin.)
69. Asm-coloured Sandpiper, (TVinga Cuurea , Lin.)
Pennant says, these birds appear in vast flocks on the shores of Flint-
shire. _ #
70. Purre, Male and Female, [Pringa kin,/
vlffvtiuerous on the shores of Great-Britaia.
71. Grey Plover, [‘friaga Squatarola, Lin. .
72. Little Stint, or Least Sandpiper, (‘ Tiinga Pusjjlfa Tip.)
73. Avoset, or Scooped, [Eecutvinoslra Avo sella Lin.)
74-. Water Rail, [Rallus Aquahcus, Lin.) This bird is not' com-
mon in Great-Britain.
75. Dor-i r s|s, Male and Female, [Ckaradnus Monnellus, Lin.J
75. The A...UU, or Cassowary of Nlvv South Wales, [Strulhw
Mice Hollandue, While’s journal) anas ■ . '
Is 7 fect;high, .measuring from the ground to the, upper part of the
head, and in every respect is much larger than the common Caasovyary
of all authors, and differs, so .much therefrom, that it capoot be reckoned
otherwise than a new species. The colour ol its .plumage isgreatly si-
milar, consisting; of a dirty brown and, grey ;on the.belly somewhat
whiter , the remarkable structure of the.,feathers, in having two quills
with their webs arising out of one shaft, is seeti in this weu .
common sort. It differs materially in wanting the horny appendage
G « n


®n the head. The head and beak are more like those of the Os-
trich than the common Cassowary, both in shape and size. Upon the
head the feathers look like hairs. The wings are exceeding short,
which forms a ridiculous contrast with the body, as they are less than
the Cassowary’s ; they have no quills in them, being only covered with
the same small feathers as the body. Another singularity also presents
itself in this species, which is in respect to its legs: the back part of
them are indented like a saw. The toes are three in number, the mid-
dle one long, the others short, with strong claws. On examining the
viscera, it differed from that of every kind of birds; particularly in
having no gizzard or second stomach ; and the liver was so small in
proportion to the bird’s bulk, as not to exceed the size of a Black bird’s.
The crop of one killed at Botany Bay by the Governor, was hi led with
at least 6 or 7lhs. of grass, flowers, berries, and seeds. The flesh of
this bird (says Mr White] is good eating, and tastes not unlike young
tender beef. It is not an uncommon bird in New Holland, as it is fre-
quently seen by the settlers, both at Botany Bay and Port Jackson, but
is exceeding shy, and runs faster than a Greyhound.
77. Crested Curassow, ( Crax Aleclor , Lin.)
Inhabits Surinam and other warm parts of South America : its size is
nearly that of a Turkey ; the feathers of the head and neck are black and
white; the whole of the body is a rich mixture of fine cream-colour
and black; the head is ornamented with an erect crest, each feather
being bent a little forward, which gives the bird a very majestic ap-
pearance. It is domesticated in South America, and is said to be ex-
cellent food.
78. Golden Pheasant, of China, [Phasianus Piclus , Lin.)
Of the brilliancy with which nature so often decorates the feathered
tribe, the Golden Pheasant is one of the most striking examples ; a
bird of which the colours are so powerfully lucid as to dazzle in a full
light the eyes of the spectator, and can only be exceeded by the polished
lustre of the Humming Bird ; even the Peacock himself, with all his
gaudy plumage, falls short in the comparison. This splendid bird is
now bred in this country, and will stand our winters tolerably well.
j 79- Pencilled Pheasant, of China, Male and Female, [Phasianus
J\ r ycthemerus, Lin.)
This species, except in its colours, very much resembles the former
species, and is soon domesticated.
rBO In this Case is also an Hybrid bird, partaking of the common
Pheasant, and domestic fowl.
81. Black Grouse, Male and Female, [TdraoJ’efrix, Lin.)
v They frequent heaths, and woods of birch and poplar, and often
during winter are found buried under the snow.
82. Quail, ( Petrao Coturnix , Lin J \
Quails are universally diffused throughout Europe, Asia, and Africa;
they are birds of passage, and seen in innumerable flocks crossing the
Mediterranean sea from Italy to the shores of Africa in autumn, and
returning in spring; frequently alighting in their passage on the islands,
which they cover with their numbers. They are not very numerous in
England* The Chinese are much addicted to the amusement of fight-
ing


ing Quails, training them up for the sport, by feeding them very high.
In some parts of Italy they are, it is said, also trained for the same
purpose.
83. Black: Skv-Lark, ( Alauda Arvensis , Lin. Var.) Killed in
Derbyshire.
84. White Sky-Lark, { Alauda Arvensis, Lin. Var.) Shot at Stam-
ford.
85- Wood-Lark, ( Alauda Arborea, Lin.)
This bird is somewhat smaller than the Eield-Lark, but resembles it
in its colours. The Wood-Lark is found in woods, from whence its
name ; it sings during the night, so as to be mistaken for the Nightin-
gale.
8 6 Red Lark, (Alauda Rubra, Lin.)
Inhabits North America.
87. White Star lint., [Slurnus Vulgaris, Lin. Var.)
88. Spotted Starling, (Slurnus Vulgcuis , Var. Lin.)
Shot near Liverpool.
89. Water Ouzel, [Slurnus C'inclus, Lin.) This bird inhabits Si-
beria and Persia.
90. White Black-Bird, [Turdus Merula, Lin. Var.) Shot near
Derby.
pi. Ring Ouzel, {‘fundus Torquatus, Lin.)
These birds inhabit Europe, Asia, and Africa, and are found to
breed in Wales and the Highlands of Scotland, where they*.continue
the whole year. They feed on berries and insects.
92 African Ouzel or Thrush, [Turdus Morio , LuL) Inhabits
Africa.
93. Brasilian Tanager, [Tanagra Brasilia, Lin.) Inhabits South
America.
Large Glass Case of Birds , marked C.
V t'La f f -tmmoa adi ni nods diet ybofcg
No. I, King Bird of Paradise, [Paradisca Regia. Lim)
This superb bird is usually called the King of the Birds of Paradise J but
this appellation is drawn from fabulous accounts. Cl us ins was informed
by the mariners, from a tradition which prevailed in the east, that each of
the two species of the Birds of Paradise had its leader, whose royal
mandates were received with submissive obedience by a numerous train
of subjects: that his majesty always Hew above the flock, issued orders
for inspecting and tasting the springs, where they might drink wrth
safety. Inhabits the islands of the Indian Ocean, and letufns to New
Guinea in the rainy season ; feeds on berries, is a solitary bird* and is
highly valued on account of its rarity and beauty of plumage.
2. Black-Bird of Paradise, (Paradiseu Furcala. Lm.)_
The Black-Bird of Paradise is very rare. Dr. Turton in his transla-
tion of the works of Linnaeus took his description of this bird from
one in the late Levcrian Museum, which he mentions as being anincora-
[ilete specimen. G «««


s. Greater Bird of Paradise, fftiradisea Apoda. Lin.) " r
No birds perhaps have more puzzled the naturalist, than those which -
are termed Birds of Paradise. They have been described as the inha-
bitants of the air, never resting on the earth, and living on the dews of
heaven. Others have asserted that they live on insects ; while some have
insisted that they have no legs ; others again contend, that they have not
only strong and large legs, bat that they are birds of prey. But the
fact is, that the inhabitants of the Molucca islands perceiving the incli-
nation the Europeans have to obtain these birds, and at the same time
taking advantage of their credulity, originally practised many deceits in
order to enhance their value. Error, however, is not of very long
duration; and, in the present instance, it was at length discovered, that
these birds had not only legs, but that they were so disproportionably'-
large, that they took away a considerable share of the elegance of the
birds, on this account it is not improbable they were deprived of them
by theislanders. Bulfon, inhishistory of birds, says, this beautiful bird is
not much diffused ; it is in general confined to that part of Asia which
produces the spiceries, and especially the islands of Arou. It is known
also rn the part of New Guinea opposite to those islands; but the name
which it there receives, Burung-Arou , seems to indicate its natal soil.
The Bird of Paradise is supposed to subsist on the aromatic productions
of these islands, at least it does not live solely on dew. Linnaeus says,
it feeds on large butterflies ; and Bontius, that it sometimes preys upon
birds. Its ordinary haunt is in the woods, where perching in the trees,
the Indjans watch it in slender huts, which they attach to the branches,
and shoot it with their arrows of reeds. The ancients seem to have
been totally unacquainted with the Bird of Paradise. Belon pretends,
that it was the phoenix of antiquity; but his opinion is founded on the
fabulous qualities of both. The phoenix, too, appeared in Arabia and
Egypt, while the Bird of Paradise has remained always attached to the
oriental parts of Asia, which were very little known to the ancients.
The extreme elegance of the tail feathers of this bird, have made them
expensive articles of female decoration. Bob eve} ? Efnri
4. Little Owl, [SLrix Pusserina. Lin.) bud KiriT
This is the least known species of the'Owl genus. In Europe it is a
solitary bird, and builds its nest in fir trees; feeds on mice, bats, and
grasshoppers.
5. Green Tody, (Todus Viridis. Lin,)
Feeds on insects, and inhabits wet and sequestered spots. When
caught they are difficult to tame; yet they may be domesticated if taken
when young. It is a native of Cayenne add South America.
(5, Goluen-winged Woodpecker, fPicusAurolus. Lin.)
Inhabits North America; migrates to Hudson’s Bay; feeds on worms
and insects, and for want of these on berflM. w av
7. Golden-winged Woodpecker, female.
8. Grenadier Grosbeak, ( Loxia Orix. Lin )
Is a native of Angola, and other parts <>f Africa; they are frequently
sold in the markets at Portugal, for the purpose of keeping in cages.
I| received its trivial name from its colours resembling the uniform worn
by some Portuguese regiments.


9. Senegal Finch, ( Ftingilla Senegala. Lin.) , Inhabits Senegal
und Abyssinia. f ...
10. Crested Manakin, or Cock of the Rock, [Pipra Rupicola. Lm.)
Though this bird is of an uniform colour, it is one of the most beau-
tiful of South America. They are found in great numbers on the moun-
tain Luca, near Oyapoc, and on the mountain Coufouaye, near the
river Aprouack. They arc esteemed for the sake of their plumage,
and are very scarce and dear; because the savages, either from super-
stition or fear, will not venture into the dark caverns where they lodge.
11. Unknown.
12. Red and Black Manakin, [Pipra Aureola. Lin.)
This is the most common of all the Manakins. Inhabits South
America. «i { m j oa hzd ebtid ssadj
13. Violaceous Tanager, (J’anagra Violacea.)
A native of South America, and principally found at Cayenne.
14. Crested Dominican Cardinal, [Loxia Cucullata. Lin.i
Found at the Brazils, at a great distance from any habitation. (n
10. Crested Dominican Cardinal, female.
• 16. Summer Red Bird, or Tanager, (7 anagra Rubia. Lin.}
Inhabits the woods of Canada, Mexico, Peru, and Brazil.
17 Female Summer Red Bird. lo MsilT
18. Painted Finch, [Emberha Cirus, Lin.) :.dl lo
The beautiful plumage of this bird, Nature requires some time to
form, nor is it corapleated before the third year. Ihe young finches
are brown the first year; in the second, their head is of a vivid blue,
the body greenish blue, and the wings and tail brown edged with
ish blue. These birds breed in Carolina on the oiangc-trees, but do
not continue there during the winter. .
ip. Black Headed Flycatcher, { Musacapa Fusca Lm.) Julia-^
bits Carolina. * oaibs-mSf 1o biiS bllxlw .jqygSt
20. Black Headed Flycatcher, female. . !; t jo
21. Java Sparrow or Grosbeak, [Loxia Orijuvora Lm. j
Inhabits China, Java and Africa; is very destructive to Rice plan-
tations. This bird is often confined in a cage, and w ith care wnUjWea-
dier the rigors of an European winter, without being seemingly much
effected by the cold.
22. Java Grosbeak, female. .KTsqqodgacag
23.
24. Tyrant Shrike, [Lanius Pyrannus, Lm.)
A very fierce and audacious bird, fixing itself on the back of Tag es
and Hawks, making a continual chattering noise, so as to force them to
take flight. It inhabits America.
25. Unknown. . c
26. Ruby Crowned Wren, ( Motacilla Calendula , Lm.) InhahiqL
North America.
2 7- Ruby crowned Wren, female. # . ~
28. Cupreous Cuckow, ( Cuculus Cupreus , Lin.) Inhabits Africa*
rare.
2Q. Cupreous Cuckow, female.
a 30- Crests#


30. Crested King-Fisher, { AlcedoCrislala , Lin.) Inhabits Amhoy-
na and Cayenne.
31. Crested King-Fisher, female.
32. Senegal King-Fisher, [Aloedo Senegalensis , Lin.) Inhabits
Senegal and Arabia.
33. Crescent Starling, ( Slurnus Ludovicianus , Lin.) Inhabits
North America.
34. Pensive Thrush, ( Turdus Manillensis , Lin.) Inhabits Ma-;
nilla.
35. Blue Robin red breast, ( Molacilla Stalls , Lin.)
Inhabits Virginia and Carolina, as far as Louisiana, and the Bermuda
islands.
36. Blue Robin, female.
37. Black and blue Creeper, rare, [Cerlhia Cyanea, Lin.)
The face of this beautiful bird is of a brilliant sea-green ; there is a
bar oh the eyes of velvet black; the rest of the head, the throat, and
all the under part of the body, the lower part of the back, and the supe-
rior coverts of the tail, of an ultramarine bine, which is the only co-
lour that appears when the feathers are regu|arly disposed, though each
has three colours ; according to Brrvon, brown, green, and blue, it is
found in the Brazils, and occurs also in Guiana and Cayenne.
38- African Jacana, [Parra Ajrtcana , Lin.) Inhabits Africa.
3p. Oriental Roller, { Coraaas Onenlaiis , Lin.) Inhabits India.
40. New Zealand Bee-eater, [Merops JVovce Seelandice.J An ex->
tremely rare and singular species.
41. Black headed Green Creeper, [Cerlhia Spiza , Lin.) Inhabits
America, but uncertain what part. nglbirf
42. Black headed Green Creeper, female.
43. European Bee-eater, [Merops Apiastef, Lin.)
This beautiful bird is a native of many of the wanner parts of Europe,
but is rarely seen in the British dominions, It is extremely common in
Greece, and the islands of the Archipelago : and in Crete is more plen-
tiful. It is in this latter island that the carious mode of bird-catching
described by Bellonius, is said to be frequently practised with success,
viz. a cicada is fastened on. a bent pin, or a and tied-do a long
line. The insect, when thrown from the hand, ascends into the air,
and flies with rapidity; the Merops, ever on the watch lor insects,
seeing the cicada, springs at it, and swallowing the bait, is thus taken
by the Cretan boys. The Bee-eater builds ip the banks pf rivers,, and
forms its nest of moss.. , . -rl.-rA+hU •« do assfil-iroi bssH --dd
44. Reel-shouldered Tanager, [Tanagra Dubia, , Shaw.) Inhabits
Africa. . 2C jin## ..son# 83 iajkl -7. H
45. Cayenne Barbut or Woodpecker, [Bucco Cayanensis, JLin.)
Inhabits Cayenne and Guiana.
46. Unknown. ~ d
47- Superb Warbler, [Molacilla Superba .) Inhabits New South
Wales,
48- Not known, Inhabits New South Wales. 1
49. Red Bellied Trogon, [Trogon Curucui, Lin.). ou, - ■
Lives solitary in the thickests woods of New Spain, aijd Eery. If


builds m hallow trees, and lays twice a year three or four eggs, equal
in size to those of a Pigeon.
50 Swamp Fly-catcher.
‘sl. Grey Poll Warbler.
52, Cinereous head, or white-eyed Fly-catcher, { Muscicnpa Virens.
Lin.) Inhabits during summer in Carolina. Rare.
53. Black Poll Warbler, {Molacilla Striata , Lin.) Inhabits
New York.
s+. Green Jacamar. ( Galbula Viridis , Lin.)
This bird is found both in Guinea and Brazil; it inhabits the forests,
afld prefers the wet places, as affording in most abundance its insect
food. It never joins in society, but constantly resides in the darkest
coverts Its flight though rapid is short; it perches on the middle
boughs, and remains at rest tHe whole of the night, and the greatest
part of the day ; it is always alone, and perpetually tranquil. Piso
says, that its flesh, though hard, is eaten at the Brazils.
55. Chinese Bird Nests- These nests are constructed by birds of
the Swallow kind, and appear to be composed of the fine filaments of
certain sea-weeds, cemented together with a gelatinous substance col-
lected from the locks and stones on the sea-shores. They are chiefly
found in caverns on the islands bn the straits of Sunda, and on an ex-
tensive range of rocks and islands, called the Paracels, on the coast,of
Cochin China. These nests, when dissolved in water, become a thick
jelly, which to a Chinese taste has a -most delicious flavour, and commu-
nicates, in their opinion, an agreeable taste to whatever food it is com-
bined with. They are therefore highly prized by the upper ranks, and
their great expence excludes their use among the poor. ’T "
The Small Micellaneous Case No 2. attached to the above Large
Case, contains tlie following articles.
A.—Large tooth of the Crocodile. .
B— African Apron or Female Flap, made of different coloured
beads. This Apron in some parts of Africa, constitutes the whole of
a female’s dress.
G. —Specimens of Spar from Labradore, remarkable for reflecting
various prismatic colours.
D.—‘Chinese Dotchin or Scales, on the principal of the Roman
SteeLyard.
lv.-—Curious polished Stone,
F. Head and Beak of sManks Puffin, {Procellaria Puffmus . Lin.)
G—Curious polished Stone, called Plumb Pudding.
H. —-Chinese Ladies Shoe, same as Case, No. 2, on the Stairs.
j.— Chinese Pack of Cards.
K. —Large Scales of a Fish, from Africa.
L. —Beak of the Red Billed Toucan, (Ramphastos Erythrorkyn-
chos. Lin.)
M. —Petrified Serpent Stone, or Cornu Ammonis, found in various
parts of Great Britain.
N. —Ditto ditto
O. —Ditto ditto
P,—Fossil


p. Fossil Stones, impressed with the leaves of fern, kc.
Q. Part of a Ball of Hair, found in the stomach of a cow,
1C An Iron Ball, found in the tooth of an eiephant.
S. -Spun Glass, resembling human hair.
T. Curious ancient. Watch, similar to the one in Case 1, mark-
edß‘ BIRDS CONTINUED shodiß bus fiiaeoH
% JzujjuA lo dmom odi ni .oridzcmhiodA .UuEimvnl itsa aJjmoi
03. Mocking Bird, Urdus Fol m lotlus, Uu.) f
Without any exterior attractions, the Mocking Bird possesses facul-
ties which render it one of the greatest objects of curiosity and admira-
tion among the feathered tribes. It is about the size of a thrush. Its
natural notes are musical and solemn; but it likewise possesses the s,n-
«rUlar power of assuming the tones of every othei animal, whetaer
quadruped or bird It seems to divert itself with alternately
terrifying other birds, and to sport with their hopes and their fears.
Sometimes it entices them with the call of their mates, and on their
approach terrifies them with the screams of the eagle, or some otfijCr
bird of prey. It frequents the habitations of mankind, and is ca.sih
domesticated. It builds its nest in the fruit trees, near the houses of
the planters ; and sitting, sometimes most of the night on the
their dummies, assumes its own native melody, and pouis forth tlie
sweetest and most various strains. The savages call it CaicoiitkilaUh or
400 languages. It is found in Carolina, Jamaica, New Spam, & .
In Jamaica it is very common in the Savannas,, where it perches on t c
highest tree to chant its song. Us flesh is esteemed excellent dhu oae
in this collection was kept alive some tune by the piopnetor of this
M q S r c’rested Chatterer, {Ampdis Crislata. Lin ) Inhabits America.
05. Bohemian Chatterer, [ Ampelus Garrulus. Lin.
This bird inhabits Europe, Asia, and America, and is i often secern
the neighbourhood of. Edinburgh m February, where it :ei* W ,
berries of the mountain ash. In its nativewuntry it feeds on grapes
It builds in caverns, and is remarkable for the horny red appendages at
the tips of seven of its flag feathers. ; . r
96. Blue Ribbon, or Purple-breasted Chatter hrAWM 1 *
of blue breast ’
bird the appellation of Blue Ribbon, or Knight of the Holy Ghost. , : It
odi iib.s ojfidxa jrisim, eewubh
07 Cross Bills, [Loxia Curvircslra. Lm.) .w ibiriw tt f3Pi;Bq
This bird is frequently found in our country. It received its name
from the peculiar formation of its bill, the upper and lower mandible
curving in opposite directions, and crossing each other at the points ,
the use°of which seems to be for the purpose of detaching the scales of
the hr cones, and obtaining the seeds lodged beneath them* which arc
their principal food; it raises each scale with its lower mandible, an
breaks it with the upper. _ . .
os Hawfinch, [Loxia Coccothrausles. Lm.) :
Inhabits Europe] and feeds on the kernels of the abnond, walnnt.


and cherry, breaking with the greatest ease their hard stones with its
bill: it is thus injurious to gardens.
99- Hard Bill, or Great Bullfinch, [Loxia Enudeator . Lin.)
These birds are found in all the northern parts of America, from
Canada to the western side of the Continent. They are frequent in
Russia and Siberia. Mr. Pennant says, that he saw them in the pine
forests near Invercauld, Aberdeenshire, in the month of August.
100. Great Grosbeak, ( Loxia Grisea, Lin.) Buffon says this bird
is little known. Inhabits Virginia.
101. Black Grosbeak, [Loxia Nigra. Lin.) Inhabits Mexico.
102. Angola Grosbeak, ( Loxia Angolensis , Lin.) Inhabits An-
gola, in Africa, wsdii
103. Indigo Bunting, [Emberiza Cyanea. Lin.) Inhabits Carolina
and Mexico, nliw llo;
104. Sisken, Aberdevine, ( Fringilla Spinus. Lin )
The song of the Sisken, though not so loud as the Canary, is pleas-
ing arid sweetly various *, it imitates the notes of other birds, even to
the chirping of the sparrow. Like the goldfinch, it may be taught; to
draw Water. They are common in most parts of Europe, though they
do not breed in England.
105. Lesser Redpoles, or Linnets, ( Fringilla Linaria. Lin.)
These birds are not unfrequent in our island, and breed in the north-
ern parts. t soa;uiK’ j ni bfmdj
1()6. Tawney Buntings, [Emberiza Mustdina. Lin ) From Carolina.
I‘GT'* Nightingale, fMotacilla Lusana. Lin.J
This bird so deservedly esteemed forks song, is not remarkable for
the variety or richness of its plumage. The Nightingale, though com-
mon in this country, never visits the northern parts of our island; and
is seldom seen but in the western counties of Devonshire and Cornwall.
The following description of the varied song of this unrivalled bird is
taken from the ingenious author of the Histoire des Oiseaux ; “ The
leader of the vernal chorus begins with a low and timid voice, and he
prejiarcs for the hymn to nature by essaying his powers and attuning
his prgans ; by degrees the sound opens and swells, it bursts with loud
* tfnd Vivid flashes, it Hows with smooth volubility, it faints and mur-
murs, it shakes with rapid and violent articulations; the soft breath-
ings of Jdve and joy are poured from its inmost soul, and every heart
beats J nhisbn, and melts with delicious languor. But this continued
richness might satiate the ear: the strains are at times relieved by
pauses,, which bestow dignity and elevation. The mild silence of the
evening heightens the general effect, and not a rival interrupts the so-
lemn scene.” They begin to build-in May. $ ifiiluaaq sdj moil
108. Wren. • •••..* ;?• ?-,>
10.9- Summer Black Gap. - . c v ;o
110. Soft Tail Finch, [Muscicapa‘ Malachura.) . ’.i
Inhabits Neif South Wales *, frequenting the marshy places, where,
it lives, and hides itself in a very dexterous manner among the long
grass and rushes. ' >:, J '■■■ -■ ■■ -■ : • yg
r; 111 P ChnmoN 'OKstPERy*- \CfcrlhfoSanguinea.) Inhabits -the Sand-
"Wich islands.
H 112. Superb


112 Superb Warbler, [Molacilla Superba.) Inhabits New South
Wales.
113. Loxia Guttata. Inhabits New South Wales,.
114,. Whin Chavs, male, female, and nest, [Molacilla Rubelra.
Lin.) Inhabits Europe,
115. Gray Wagtail, [Molacilla Boamla. GmeL)
This bird is frequent in England; breeds in the northern part of the
island, and shifts in winter to the south. It feeds on hies and gnats,
and frequents streams in winter in pursuit of them.
116. Yellow Wagtail, [Molacilla Flay a. Lin.)
This bird is seen early in spring in the meadows and fields; it haunts
the sides of brooks and springs, which never freeze with us during the
winter.
117. White Wagtail, (Molacilla Alba. Lin. Var.) Killed at
Halifax, in Yorkshire.
118. The Yellow Willow Wren, [Molacilla Proclaim. Lin.)
The Yellow Wren arrives in this country early in spring, and de-
parts in autumn: it frequents the tops of trees, Lorn whence it often
rises singing; its note is soft and sweetly varied. It also inhabits
America. %
Up. Golden Crested Wren, [Molacilla Regains. Lin.)
The Golden Crested Wren is the least of British birds; and though
frequently seen in some parts of the kingdom, in other situations is
rarely observed. It is a hardy bird, and inhabits the thickest biakcs
and woods. .
120. Blue Backed Manakin, and Nest, [Pipra Pareola. Lin.)
In the same case with this beautiful bird, is one of the curious Hang-
ing Nests, made by several species of birds in South America and the
Philippine islands. On the banana and plaintain tieesof those regions,
are seen the most various and hostile assemblage of cieatures that can be
imagined". The top is inhabited by monkeys of some particular tribe,
which drive off all others; lower down on the great trunk, numbers of
large snakes are found, waiting till some unwary animal comes within
their reach ; and at the extremity of the branches hang these nests,
inhabited by birds of the most beautiful plumage. When the time of
incubation approaches, the birds fly about in quest of a long fibrous kind
of moss, which bears being moulded into any form; this the little ar-
chitect first glues, by some viscous substance gathered in the forest, to
the end of a twig, or a Strong leaf, that will bear no more weight than
themselves and that of the nest; when they commence building an ha-
bitation, they work it downwards like a long purse,-at the bottom of
'which the bird enters through a retort shaped passage, until it comes to a
kind of door, where the apartment it, in which it intends icaiing its
121. Bearded Titmice, male and female, [Pams Biaimicus, Lin.)
These birds are found chiefly in the southern parts of England., It
is said that they were first brought to this country from Denmark by the
Countess of Albemarle, and some of them having escaped, formed a
colony here: but Latham, with great probability, supposes that they
are ours ab origine. * 122. Long


12‘2. Long-tailed Titmice, male, female, young, and nest, [Parus
Caudalus. Lin.)
Inhabits Europe and Siberia*, is very destructive to gardens; forfns
a nest of an oval shape, with a hole near the upper end ?or admission.
123. Rice Bird, or Bunting, ( Eniberiza Oryzivora■ Lin.)
It is almost incredible what devastation these birds make among the
rice plantations in Carolina. It is said, that negroes are continually
employed to range from field to field, often up to their knees and waists
m water, from the time the rice begins to ear, until it is cut, to prevent
these birds from alighting thereon. They arrive in September, while
the giain is yet soft and milky; and what is very remarkable, amongst
the innumerable flights of these birds that migrate from remote parts,
at first not a single male is found, being all females. The males ac-
companied by the females make a transient visit together in the spring.
They are esteemed in Carolina a great delicacy. They generally stay
three weeks, and retire when the rice begins to harden. °
Large Glass Case of Birds , marked D.
No. 1. Red Breasted Parrot, (Psillacus HcemaiotusA Inhabits
New Holland.
2. Great Ani, [Crolophaga Major. Lin.)
Inhabits the warmer parts of America, and builds a very large nest,
in which five or six females lay their eggs twice every year, each taking
care of her own brood, and covering them carefully with leaves. The
bill of this bird is very remarkable, having a very high sharp ridge
on the upper mandible, which makes it almost oval. This bird is of a
blackish violet colour, the feathers have green edges.
3. Lesser Ani, (Crolophaga Ani. Lin.)
Inhabits South America. It is gregarious, many females la) ing ia
the same nest, each taking care of its own brood. It feeds upon fruits,
seeds, various insects, and worms. The cattle it is said in those parts
lie down, in order that the bird may pick from their backs the insect
called ( Acarns Ricinus , Lin.) with which they are infested.
4. Wmidah Bunting, {Emberizu Faradisea, Lin.)
This curious little bird is about the size of a Sparrow; but the tail
is at least three times the length of the body, and is composed of fea-
thers like those in the tail of a domestic cock. It is a native of Africa,
where it moults twice a year, and has different plumage in winter and
summer.
5. Small Wax-Bill, ( Loxia Aslrild, Lin.)
Inhabits the Canaries, America, and Africa. It hides itself under
the grass and herbs, and feeds on seeds.
6. Amaduvade Finch, (fringilla A/nandam, Lin.) Inhabits Asia,
and is easily tamed.
7* Ultramarine Finch, ( Fringilla Ullramarina , Lin.) Inhabits
Abyssinia, sings melodiously.
8. Crimson Fronted Parroqwet, ( PsiUacus Gondnnus.) Inhabits
New South Wales.
9. Shaft


g, Shaft-tail Bunting and Nest [Emberiza Regia, Lin ) Inha- ■*.<
l)its A.fnc3*
10. Yellow Winged Bunting, [Ember ha Chrysoptera .) Inhabits
Falkland Islands. . .. . J s>
11. Piperine Toucan, (Ramphaslos Pipenvorus, Lin.) Inhabits
Cayenne, and is a rare species. lo t aa3onc-TAoO .Ev
12. Blue Creeper, ( Cerlhia Cerulea , Lin.) Inhabits Cayenne;
makes a nest of dried grass, in the shape of a retort and open beneath,
which it suspends from the slender branches of trees.
13. Blue Bellied Finch, [Fringilla Bengalensis, Lin.) Inhabits
Angola, and Bengal. HJomjuonLxuiw ytt nns
14. Cut-throat Sparrow, or Red-throated Grosbeak, [Loxia jugu-
lar is, ti imf Jeni corn nsilool £ moil t PUfK*g
15. Cut-throat Sparrow, Female. . ;
16. Baltimore Oriole, (Oriolus Ballimorus, Lin.) So called m
honour of Lord Baltimore. Inhabits North America. . . tl.
17. Golden Crested Wren-, (Motacilla Regains , Lin.) Inhabits
Europe. . t• \ 1
18. Great American Goat Sucker, [Cnpnmulgus Maximus , Lin.)
The length of this very singular bird is about 18 inches. What r€n-
ders it very remarkable is its mouth, which when open extends beyond
the eyes, and makes the bird look as if its head was cut in two.-r
Like the Owl, it is seldom seen in the day time, unless disturbed; it
feeds on insects, which it catches on the wing. iA rao-il
19. African CAiAoor Brag, (BuceroS Africanus, Lin.)
When we consider the uncommon expansion and cumbrous over-
growth which swells and deforms the bill of this bird, we are struck
with the incongruity and discordance of its structure. Though large,
it is weak and ill compacted, and so far from being useful, it proves
burthensome : it is like a long lever where the force is applied near the
fulcrum , and consequently the extremity acts feebly: its substance is so
tender, that it shivers by the least attrition, and these accidental cTacks
have been mistaken by naturalists for a regular and natural indenting.
These produce a remarkable effect on the bill of the Rhinoceros Calfco ,
for the ifiandebles meet only at the point, and the rest remains wide open,
as if they were not formed for each other. The interval i-s wont and
broken in such a manner, that this part would seem intended to be use-
ed only at first, and afterwards neglected. The above Galao inhabits
Africa. JhwmoO moil nomiooqp luiiJufioS .01
20. Red-winged Oriole, [Onolus Pfuemceus, Lin.)-
Inhabits in vast flocks from New York as far as New Spain, and is
very destructive to rice plantations. It devours with avidity the swarms
of insects and worms that infest the low grounds.. It builds a pensile
nest among the reeds, far beyond the reach of the floods, in which it
lays eggs of a white moil Toqqo J oJqin i -2S .
21. The Tour aco, [Cuculus Persa, Lin.) i
This bird is one of the most beautiful of the African species ; for be-
sides that Us plumage is brilliant, and its eyes sparkle with fire, it has
a sort of crown and crest on the head, which confers on it an air of dis-
tinction. When hungry, it utters a very loud scream, Co, Go, Co, Co,
Co,


Co , ,£fl, Co, the first notes low, the others higher, rapid, and. noisy,
with a shrill and harsh voice. In a domesticated state, it discovers a
fondness for apples and oranges. Edwards says, that this bird is indi-
genous to Guinea.
22. American Lark, (Alauda.) A] ■ i : t
23. Goat-Sucker, or Night Jar, ( Caprimulgus Europeus, Liu.)
The Goat Sucker is found in every part of the old continent, from
Siberia to Greece, Africa, and India. It arrives in Great Britain about
the latter end of May, and departs some time the latter end of August;
it is no where numerous, and never appears In flocks. They feed upon
insects, and fly with their mouths open, making a sort of buzzing noise
like a spinning-wheel. The name of Goat Sucker was given to this
genus, from a foolish idea that they sucked the teats of goats or sheep ;
a circumstance so improbable as scarce worth mentioning. Scopoli
however, one of the most celebrated and accurate of naturalists, seems
to have given credit to it.
24. Spur-winged Plover, [Charadrius Spinosus , Lin.) Inhabits
Egypt, Europe and Asia.
(.nidi tvsgkmU -xxaDO? ~ aoOat f trm .l
Attached to the above Case of Birds, is a small Glass Case, marked
No. 1 , containing a select collection of Minerals, numbered as follows. ,
No. 1. Quartz Crystals on Lead Ore. =,dj
2. Copper, mineralized by Sulphur, intermixed with Chert-rock,
from Anglesea. vb, ; t •-•nr z; 1
3. Fat Quartz with Copper Pyrites, pure Magnesian earth, and
Schistose mcnmooau orfi aabhnoa ow naiiW
, Ai Group of Crystals, from Hungary.
5. Crystallized Tin, from Cornwall. : , , /
>■: 6. Crystallized Sulphurous Pyrite. ,
orhTu Phosphorated Lead aaval 'gnol k ajlii ?,s h : 3mo?nodrtnd
oi 8. Iron Ore, from Hungary. \
ih&. Flour Spar. Jis Jafiol 9/I3 yd
10. Amethyst Crystal. ■ J :> .d
11. Opal, in the Matrice. no laafio ofdjcdr krtq aaSdT
I2v Crystal, commonly called Cornish Diamond, from Cornwall.
bJ 3i Chalcedony. _ r, // vs Hi
14. Native Golden Limestone, from Transylvania.
1 5. Silver Ore with Spar, from the county of j£ yloo ha
16. Beautiful Specimen of Copper, from Cornwall.
17. Specimen of Mundic, from Cornwall.
18. Crystals of calcareous moil etidcdal .
19. Very fine Specimen of Crystallized Tin. r/iJainteob yiw
20. A beautiful Specimen of Sulphurous Pyrites. fine eJo:,
21. Phosphorated green Lead Ore.
22. Purple Copper Ore, from Anglesea.
23. Sulphurous Pyrites, inclosed in calcareous Spar, resembling
vegetation.
24. Purple and yellow Copper Ore, of the richest kind, from An-
glesea. no ?.T3lrroD dbiiiw ? bJK»d aril no taem Bns ,rr> r.. 1<
£ naJJn Jx nodW
26- Copper


26. Copper Ore, of an inferior quality, from Anglesea.
27* Sulphate of Copper,
28. Crystallized Sulphur, intermixed with Granite.
29. Phosphorated green Lead Ore.
30. Ore of Zink, commonly called Black Jack.
31. Fine specimen of purple Copper Ore, intermixed with Spar, from
the Paris mountain, Anglesea.
52. Brilliant specimen of Emerald like Iron-ore, from the Isle of
Elba.
Small Glass Case, jYo. 2.
MINERALS ATTACHED TO THE QUADRUPEDS.
No. 1. Fine group of transparent Crystals, from Cornwall.
2. Do. do.
3. Grey Copper Ore, from Cornwall.
4. Fine group of Topaz Crystals, from Germany.
5. Sulphate of Iron : Martial Vitriol, from Anglesea.
6. Copper Pyrites, on quartz.
• 7- Brilliant specimen of crystallized Iron Ore, from the Isle of Elba.
S. Do. do.
9. White Crystals, from Alston Moor.
10. Crystallized Tin-ore, from Cornwall.
11. Crystallized green Lead Ore.
12. Topazine crystallized rock, from Dauphine, in France.
13. Yellow Copper Ore, mineralized by Sulphur, from Cornwall.
14. Copper Ore, intermixed with crystals, from Cornwall.
15. Sulphur of Lime.
16. Calcareous Spar, with sulphurous Pyrites, from Derbyshire.
17. Malleable Copper, from Cornwall. ?.
18. Native Sulphur, from Cornwall. fdmaasi Itnonos s moT!
19. Iron Stone, from the Alps. aiooloo n } vlncl
20. Curious Specimen of Lead Ore, on quartz. 13I ju; a
21. Specimen of Iron Ore, very fine. oami ecll
22. Fine Specimen of native Asbestos, or mineral Flax.
AMPHIBIOUS


AMPHIBIOUS ANIMALS.
“ Were cv’ry fault’ring tongue of man,
“ Almighty Father ! silent in thy praise,
" Thy works themselves would raise a general voice j
<f Even in the depth of solitary woods,
“ By human foot untrod, proclaim Thy Power.”
Milton,
REPTILES.
eeseud o—to red ise.
1. Common Tortoise, [Eestudo Graca, Lin.)
This animal is considered as the most common of the European
species, and is a native of almost all the countries bordering on the
Mediterranean sea. This animal lives to a most extraordinary age,
instances being adduced of its having considerably exceeded the period
of a century.
2. Geometrical Tortoise, [Eestudo Geomelrica, Lin.)
From its strong and well-contrasted colours and regularity of pattern,
the present species is more readily distinguishable at first view than
most others of this perplexing tribe. The native country of this beau-
tiful tortoise is perhaps not truly known ; though the shell is more fre-
quently seen in Europe than that of any other kind,
3. Radiated Tortoise, (Eesludo Radiala, Lin )
From a general resemblance in the pattern of the shell, and a simi-
larity in colours, it appears that this animal has been considered
either as the same species, or at most a variety of the above tortoise.
It is impossible, however, to view them without allowing them to be
perfectly distinct. The native country of this species is said by Grew,
to be Madagascar.
4. Close Tortoise, [Eestudo Clausa, Lin.)
The Close Tortoise obtains its name from the unusual manner in
which the under part of the shell is applied to the upper, being conti-
nued in such a manner round the margin, that when the animal with-
draws its head and legs, it is enabled accurately to close all parts of the
shell entirely together, so as to be in a complete state of security; and so
strong is the defence (says Shaw, in his Zoology,) of this little animal,
that it is not only uninjured by having a weight of 5 to bOOlb, laid upon
it, but can walk in its, usual manner beneath the load. It is a native
of many parts of North America, being chieHy found in marshy places.
It is principally sought for on account of its eggs. It feeds on beetles,
mice, and even serpents, which it seizes by the middle, and draws into
its shell, and thus crushes them to deatlu
f. Concentric


5. Concentric Tortoise, [Tesludo Concenlrica , Lin.)
This species is a native of North America, and is sold in the market
of Philadelphia and elsewhere, by the name of Terrapin. It is an in-
habitant of waters, and is saidtobe a wholesome and even delicate food.
It is also found in Jamaica.
6, Snake Tortoise, [Tosludo Serfreiilim, Lin )
This species, first described by Linnaeus, appears to have been ob-
scurely known. It is a native of North America, where it inhabit*
stagnant watersj growing to the weight of 15 or 20lbs. and preying on
fish, ducklings, kc. Whatever it seizes in its mouth it holds with great
force, and will suffer itself to be raised up by a stick rather than quit
its hold. This animal conceals itself in muddy waters, in such
ner as to leave out only a part of its back, like a stone or other inani-
mate object, by which means it the more easily obtains its prey. In
New York it is called the Snapping Tortoise.
It was kept alive in the Museum upwards of eight months, during
which time it never tasted food. It possessed a most amazing strength,
carrying 200 lb. without any apparent inconvenience. Its disposition
was excessively fierce.
J. Galeated Tortoise, [Tesludo Galeala , Lin.) The native place
of this tortoise is unknown.
8. Loggerhead Turtle, ( Tesludo Caretta , Lin.)
This Turtle exceeds in size every other known species. It inhabits
the same seas with the Green Turtle, but is also diffused into very re-
mote latitudes, being often found in the Mediterranean, and about the
coasts of Italy and Sicily. In a commercial view, it is of little value;
the flesh being coarse and rank, and the plates ot the shell too thin to
be of use. It is a strong, fierce, and even dangerous animal.
g. Tortoise, unknown.
10. Tortoise, ditto.
SERPENT ES—SERPENT S.
Before examining the Large Glass Case inscribed Serpents, we will
direct the attention of the Visitors to those of this species which hang
on the walls of the Room.
No. 1. Great Boa, (Boa Constrictor, Lin.)
By those who are unacquainted with the wonders of nature, the de-
scriptions given by naturalists of some of the more striking and singular
animals are received with a degree of scepticism, or even rejected, as
exceeding the bounds of credibility. Amongst these animals may be
numbered the prodigious serpents which are sometimes found in India,
Africa, and America; Serpents of so great a size as to be able to
gorge even some of the larger quadrupeds, and of so enormous a length
as to measure 20 or 30 feet. There is reason to believe, that these im-
mense serpents are become less common than they were some centuries
back, and that in pioportion as cultivation and population have
increased, the larger species of noxious animals have been expelled
from the haunts of mankind. They are however occasionally seen,
and sometimes approach the plantations nearest to their residence. It
is


is happy for mankind that these serpents are not poisonous; they are
therefore to be dreaded only on account of their size and strength,
■which latter is so great as to enable them to kill cattle, deer, and other
animals, by writhmg themselves round them so as to crush them to
death by mere pressure; after which they swallow them in a very gra-
dual manner, and when thus gorged with their prey, grow almost tor-
pid with repletion ; and if discovered in this state, may without diffi-
culty be dispatched. These enormous serpents are natives of Africa,
India, the Indian islands, and South America, where they inhabit
marshy and woody places. The one in this collection measures up-
wards of nineteen feet in length, and was presented to the Museum by
John Bolton,. Esq. £ yd qu 09
2. Striped Rattle Snake, (Crotalus DurissuS, Lin. )
The Rattle Snake is one of the most poisonous of reptiles, and is the
largest of the serpent tribe that inhabits America. The most conspi-
cuous distinction this animal bears from all other of its species, is. the
rattle, which makes so loud a noise while the creature is in motion, that
its approach may be known,-and danger avoided. Many naturalists
are of opinion, that the Snake acquires an additional bone to the rattle
every year; from the number of which bones, the precise age of the
Snake may be known. Catesby, in his History of Carolina, says, “ the
Rattle Snake is the most inactive and sluggish of animals, and is never
the aggressor, except in what it preys.upon; for unless he is disturbed,
he never bites, and when provoked he gives warning by shaking his
rattles, sotliata person has rime to escape.’' It is said that this Snake
has the power of charming or fascinating small animals within its reach
which it devours. Squirrels and birds? are its principal prey, and no
.sooner do they spy the Snake, than they skip from bough to bough, ‘and
approach by degrees nearer to the ; enemy, regardless of atiy danger,
until they enter the extended jaws that are open to seal their ruin.
Bartram observes, that some Indian Nations never kill the Rattle Snake,
or any other of the species, alledgmg, as their motive, that it would
influence its living kindred to revenge, the- injury nr violence done to it
when alive. The flesh of the Rattle Snake is said to be much, relished,
even UyiEuropeaus. >a > reC'; -i) agraJ r>ih
isri 4b2 Boa, unknown. .aoifj oi ZloiiiiV SfiJ 1o
4. Rock Snake, (Coluber.) from the East Indies.
5. Spectacle Snake, or Cobra ds (Coluber Li n.J
The Coluber Naja, or Cobra de Capellb, is a native of India, where
it appears to be one of the most common, as well as the most noxious,
of the serpent tribe; very frequently proving fatal in the space of a
few minutes, to those who unfortunately experience its bite. In India
it is exhibited as a show, and is of course, more universally inown in
that country than almost any other of the race of reptiles. - It is carried
about in a covered basket, and managed by its proprietors in such a
manner, as,to assume a dancing motion at the sound of a musical in-
strument. The Indian jugglers, wdio thus exhibit the animal, deprive
it of its fangs, by which they are secured from its bite.
i


Larve Glass Case, inscribed Serpents.
No. 1. Pintado Snake, (Coluber Meleagris, Lin.; This Snake is
a native of Ceylon.
n Copper-bellied Snake, ( Coluber Erylhroguster, Shaw.;
The Copper-bellied Snake is a native of North America. They fre-
quent the water, and very probably feed on fish ; but birds, and suck
other animals as they are able to overcome, they also devour; for fre-
quently entering the pent houses of poultry, they suck the eggs, and de-
vour the fowls : they are bold, nimble and active, but are generally reputed
not venomous, and have no tangs like the viper kind.
3. Unknown.
4. Unknown.
5. Caspian Snake, ( Coluber Caspius , Lm.J .
This Snake is said to be found on the shores of the Caspian Sea, m
low grounds and bushy places; when disturbed, it first endeavours tp
escape, but if pursued, springs forwards on its assailant with great fury,
though incapable of doing any injury by its bite.
6. Unknown. .
7. Lacuesis Snake, (Coluber Lachesis , Shaw.; r
This Snake is a poisonous species, being armed with large fangs,
and, from its general appearance, seems to be an animal of considerable
strength. It is a native of Ceylon, where it is k*nvn by the name 0!
Biten. This Snake was unknown to Linnaeus.
’B. Unknown. , . „ _ n
(). Crimson-sided Snake, (Coluber Porphynacus, from Botany Bay,.
10. Wampum Snake* ( Coluber fcisciaius, Lin.; ,
This is one of the handsomest of the North American Snakes. It
received its common name from its colours, which resemble those of tht
strings of Indian money called Wampum. It is a native of Carolina
and Virginia, and is an innocent animal. ....
11. Coach-whip Snake, (Coluber Hagelluin, Lin./
Is a native of North America, and not uncommon in Carolina and
12. Garden Boa, (Boa Horlulana, Lin.; 1 his elegant Serpent is
a native of South America.
13. Common Snake, (Coluber Minx, Uu.j Common m England,
but is an harmless animal.
14. Common Viper, (Coluber Berus, Lin.)
The Viper, which appears to be pretty generally diffused over the
whole ancient continent, is by no means uncommon in our own island.
Its bite has been considered the most venomous of serpents. vet
instances, in our island at least, seem to be far less frequent than
generally supposed; and though the bite of this animal produces pain-
ful and troublesome swelling, yet it is rarely of any other bad conse-
quence.
15. Unknown,
16. Vertebra? of a Snake.


Larne Glass Case, inscribed Lizards.
O '
No. 1. Common Guana, ( Lacerla Iguana. Lin./
Though the Lizard tribe affords numerous examples of strange and
peculiar forms, yet few species are perhaps more eminent in this respect
than the Guana, which grows to a very considerable size, and is often
seen the length of from three to five feet. It is a native of many parts
of America and the West India islands, where it inhabits rocky and
woody places, and feeds on insects and vegetables. It is reckoned
an excellent food, being extremely nourishing and delicate; but
observed to disagree with some constitutions. The common manner
of catching ft is by casting a noose over its head, and thus drawing it
from its situation ; for it seldom makes an effort to escape, but .stands
looking intently at its discoverer, inflating its throat at the same time in
an extraordinary manner. Guanas are sometimes salted and barrelled
up for use in Jamaica, and other West India islands, inconsiderable
quantities. The Guana may easily be tamed while young, and in that
state is both an innocent and beautiful creature. The larger one in this
case lived some time in the stove of the Liverpool Botanic Garden, but
it never was observed to take food. It was easily irritated, at which
time it puffed up the pouch under its throat in an extraordinary manner;
and on tire near approach of a dog, &c. it struck the object that offended
it very forcibly with its tail, but it was never known to bite.
2. Muricated or Rouen Lizard, ( Lacerla Mur kata. J From Bo-
tany Bay, New South Wales-
3. Green Lizard, f Lacerla Agilis. Lin.J
This species is found in all parts of Europe, frequenting gardens,
warm walls, and buildings, &c. and is an active animal, pursuing with
celerity its insect prey. If taken, it soon becomes familiar, and may
even be tamed to a certain degree; for which reason it is considered as
a favourite animal in many parts of Europe.
4. Unknown.
5. Ditto. Jrapooui mei bus f *uus-u / b*Uv
6. Ditto. hi.JV t 3AAiO i ; H W-H 0 A 0«3 .i
” 7. Ameiva Lizard, [Lacerla Amciva, Lin.J Inhabits South Ame-
rica, Asia, and Africa.
'* 'B. Monitory Lizard, ( Lacerla Monitor . Lin.J
The Monitory Lizard is one of the most beautiful of the whole tribe,
aihA fs sUo btih of the largest, sometimes measuring not less than four
or five feet from the nose to the tip of the tail. This elegant animal is
a native of South America, where it frequents woody and watery places;
and if. credit may be given to the reports of some authors, is of a dis-
position as gentle as its appearance-is beautiful, ft has gained the name
of Monitor, from its supposed attachment to the human race, and it
has been said that it warns mankind of the approach of die Alligator,
by a loud and shrill'whisth.
q. Geckottu, '(' Lacerla Dubia. Li n. j
This species is found in France, where it is called T arenle. It in-
habits ruins, walls, houses, Bcc. delighting much in the sun shine. It
is an innocent animal.
" 10,. Azurc


10. Azure Lizard, //arcer/n Azurea , Lin./ Inhabits South Ame-
rica and Africa.
11. Smooth Crested LizArd, fLacerla Principalis Lin./ A native
of South America.
12. Strumous Lizard, fLacerla Strurnosa, Lin,,/ Inhabits South
America.
13- In this case are also two Great Scolopendr.e, or CentPiDes,
f Scolopendrce Morsilans. Lin./
There is something uncommonly formidable in the appearance ol
these insects. They are found both in the East and West Indies, as
well' as in the different parts of Africa. These Scolopendrae are of a
poisonous nature, and are furnished with forceps, through which the
insects inject a poisonous juice when they bite. They inhabit the woods,
where they are preyed upon by different species of snakes; but, like the
European ones, they sometimes are found in houses, and are said to be
so common in particular districts, that the inhabitants are obliged to
have the feet of their beds placed in vessels of water, to prevent their
being annoyed during the night by these horrible reptiles.
14- Double-tailed Green Lizard, (Lncerta Agilis. Var. Lin.,/
This Lizard is supposed to be a variety of the common Green Lizard.
Tfie following Lizards are in separate Cases, dispersed in the dif-
ferent rooms:—
No. 1. Common Chameleon, (Lacerta Chamcdeon. Lin./
Few animals have been more celebrated by natural historians than
the Chameleon, which has been sometimes said to possess the power of
changing itS colour at pleasure, and of assimulating it to that of any
particular object or situation. This, however, must be received with
great limitations; the change of colours which this animal exhibits va-
rying in degree, according to circumstances of health, temperature of
the weather, and many other causes, and consisting chiefly in a sort of
alteration of shades, from the natural greenish or bluish grey of the
skin into pale yellowish, with irregular spots or patches of dull red.
The Chamaeleon is a creature of a harmless nature, and supports itself
by feeding on insects ; for w hich purpose the structure of the tongue is
finely adapted, consisting of a long missile body, furnished with a di-
lated and somewhat tubular tip, by means of which the animal seizes
insects with great ease, darting out its tongue in the manner of a wood-
pecker, apd retracting it instantaneously wdth the prey Secured on its
tip. It can also support a long abstinence, and hence arose the idea of
its being nourished by air alone. It is found in many parts of the
World, and particularly in India and Africa, and also in Spain and Por-
tugal. One that w r as kept alive in Liverpool, was regularly fed with
sugar and bread, and appeared to haye an affection for the person w r ho
had the care of it. Its change of form w r as as remarkable as that of
its change of colour.
% Galli Wasp, fLacerla Occidua. Shaw./
The Galli Wasp is a native of the American islands, and seems to
be particularly common in Jamaica, w here it is said to frequent woody
and marshy districts, The Galli Wasp, (according to Brown, in his
Natural


Natural History of Jamaica,) is reckoned the most venomous reptile in
that island, and it is said that no creature can recover from its bite;
but this he very properly considers as merely a popular error. This
animal was unknown to Linnasus.
3. Lace Lizard, { Lacerla .) From Botany Bay.
4. Alligator, [lxicerta Alligator , Lin.)
This animal bears so near a resemblance to the crocodile, that many
naturalists have considered it as a mere variety, rather than a distinct
species, Catesby says, the largest and greatest number of Alligators
inhabit the torrid zone. They frequent not only salt rivers near the
sea, but streams of fresh watei in the upper parts of the country, where
they lie lurking among reeds to surprise cattle and other animals. In
Jamaica, and many other parts of the Continent, they are found about
twenty feet in length. They cannot lie more terrible in their aspect
than they are formidable and mischievous in their natures, sparing
neither man nor beast they can surprise, pulling them down under water
to drown them, that they may with greater facility, and without struggle
or resistance, devour them. As quadrupeds do not often come in their
way, they almost always subsist on fish. This destructive monster can
neither swim nor run any way than straight forward, and is conse-
quently disabled from turning with that agility requisite to catch his
prey by pursuit; therefore they doit by surprise, in the water as well
as by land. The Alligator is supposed to be a long-lived animal, and
their growth is extremely slow.
FISHES.
See thro’ this air, this ocean, and this earth.
All matter quick, and bursting into Jyrth 5, v
„• Above how high progressive life may go, . «tV>laait ■
Around how wide, how deep extend below !
’' Vast chain of being, which from (3od began,
-ib,S rfliv/bssNature’s etherial, human; angel, man,
*9513?. IsnhfU Beast, bird, fish, insect, what no eye can sea,
» No glass can reach ; from infinite to Thee,
From Thee to nothing !
Pope.
jLarge Glass Case of Fishes , marked A.
No. 1. Coryphene, or Dolphin, fCoryphcena Hippurus, Li n.J
The Dolphin is an inhabitant of the Mediterranean, Indian, and At-
lantic seas, where it often appears in large shoals, and is sometimes
observed to follow ships, devouring with avidity any occasional article
of food which may happen to be thrown overboard : it will even swal-
low substances of a different nature; and we are informed from the
authority of Plumier, that in the stomach of one of which he examined,
; r- <■a Were


were found four iron nails, one of which measured more than five
inches. When taken out of the Avater, the beautiful colours (with Avhich
this fish is decorated wheii living] fade as it expires; the lustre vanish-
ing by degrees, till at length it becomes of a dull grey colour. This gra-
dual evanescence of colour in the dying Coryphene is contemplated bf
sailors with as much delight as the Romans are said to have exhibited
on viewing similar changes in the expiring Mullet, Avhen brought to
their tables before the feast began. The Coryphene is a strong and
vigorous fish, and swims with great rapidity. It is perpetually en-
gaged in the pursuit of the smaller fishes ; is considered as one of the
most cruel persecutors of the Flying-fish. The flesh is said to be ex-
cellent.
2. Flying Gurnard, (Trigin Volitans, Lin.J
This highly singular and beautiful species is a native of the Medi-
terranean, Atlantic, and Indian seas, where it swims in shoals, and is
often Seen flying out of the water, in tire same manner as the flying-
fish, Exocaetus. In its native element, the colours of this fish are
extremely brilliant. It is crimson above, pale or of a white colour
underneath. The pectoral fins are extremely large, transparent, of art
olive-green, richly varied with numerous bright blue spots. The tail is
pale viofot, with the rays crossed by dusky spots, and strengthened on
each side the base by two obliquely transverse bony ribs or bars.
3. Small Saav-Fish, ( Frislis Antiquarian , Lin.)
The Saw-fish is a species of Shark, growing to the length of
feet or more. It is an inhabitant of the Mediterranean and Northern
S6as, and Avas known to the ancient writers by the name of Prcstis.
4. Striped Cii.ltodon, (Chcetodon Strialus, Lin] , ;
This fish is a native of the Indian and American Seas. r/ ; A iUiyt-
5. Sparus, unknoAvn.
(). Porcupine-Fish, ( Diodon Hysirix, 1 in.'}
In point of habit or external appearance, the remarkable genus Dio-
don, may be said to connect in some degree the tribe of fishes with that
of the spiny Quadrupeds, such as the Porcupines and Hedge-hogs: it is
also allied in a similar manner to the Echini, or Sea Urchins, The
Diodon Hystrix, commonly termed the Sea Porcupine, is said to afford
an amusing sight Avhen taken by a line and hook, baited by a species o’F
crab : after seizing the bait, by a sudden spring, on finding itsdif hook-
ed, it exhibits every appearance of a violent rage, inflating it's body,
and elevating its spines to the highest passible degree, as if endeavour-
ing to wound in all directions* till, after having tired itself by its Vain
efforts, it suddenly expels the air from its body, and becomes flaccid for
some time : but when draAvn towards the shore, it redoubles its rage,
and again inflates its body; in this state it is left on the sand, it being
impossible to touch it Avithout danger till it is dead. It is a native of
the Indian and American seas, and is considered as a coarse fish, but is
sometimes eaten by the inhabitants of the West-India islands*
ni bits ? aoifoni SI ic Ol io fljgnirl tuft
8. Torpedo Ray, [Raja Torpedo , Lin.] ,• n
The Torpedo has been celebrated both by ancients and moderns, for
its wonderful faculty of causing a numbness or painful sensation in the
i - -■I t,• f. zyyxiiyi : 'limbs


limbs of those who touch or handle it. The shock or sensation given
by tins Ray, is attended with all the effects of that produced by the elec-
trical machine, so far as experiment has hitherto enabled us to discover.
Although this fish does not appear to be furnished with any striking
exterior qualities, although it has no muscles formed for great exertions,
nor any internal conformation differing from the Ray kind ; yet such
are the wonderful powers it possesses, that in an instant it can paralyse
the hand or body that touches it, and cause for a while a total suspension
of the mental faculties. Reaumer has, by several experiments at-
tempted to demonstrate, that it is not necessarily, but by a voluntary ef-
fort, that the Torpedo benumbs the hand that touches it. On every
trial he could readily perceive when it intended to give the stroke, and
when it was about to continue inoffensive. In preparing to give the
shock, it flattened its back, raised its head and tail, and then, by a vio-
lent contraction in the opposite direction, struck with its back against
the finger that touched it; and its body, which before was flat, became
round and lumped. It is said that the negroes can handle the Torpedo
without being affected; and we are told the whole secret of securing
themselves from its effects, consists in keeping respiration suspended at
the time. The electrical power, however, is known to terminate with
the life of the animal, and when dead, it is handled or eaten with per-
fect safety. It is an inhabitant of the Northern, European, and the
Mediterranean Seas.
9. Sea House, ( Syngnaihus Hippocampus , Lin.y
The Hippocampus is a fish of a highly singular appearance. In its
dry or .contracted state, this animal exhibits the fancied resemblance
from which it takes its name ; but in the living fish, this appearance is
somewhat less striking, the head and tail being carried nearly straight.
It is a native of the Mediterranean, Northern, and Atlantic Seas.
JO. Eive Rayed Stakfish, [Asterius Luvigala, Lin.)
11. Carved Asterias, [Asterias Foreuma, Lin.)
It is a native of the Indian Seas, and is found of various sizes, from
an inch to 6 inches in diameter.
12. Enormous Crab’s Claw, measuring in the broadest part up-
wards of 10 inches in circumference.
13. Another Crab’s Claw, of a very curious construction-.
14.. An elegant circular specimen of white Coral.
15. Another specimen of Coral with Sea-weed.
Iti. Foliacea Flustra , Lin.
Small Glass Case of Fishes, marked B.
No. 1. Harlequin Angler, ( Lophius Hislrio , Lin.)
This species is a native of the Indian and American seas, growingta
the length of 10 or 12 inches, and in manners resembles the European
Angler. Monsieur Renard, in his History of Fishes, affirms, that he
knew an instance of an individual of this species kept for three days
tut of water, and which walked about the house in the manner of a dog.
2- Remora, or Sucking Fish, [Rcfuneis Remora, Lin.)
Thi s


This Fish has the power of adhering to whatever it sticks against,
in the manner as a cupping-glass adheres to the human body. It
is by such an apparatus that this Fish sticks to the body of the shark,
drains away its moisture, and produces a gradual decay. It is found
principally in the Mediterranean and Atlantic seas, where it grows to
the length of about 18 inches.
3. Round Diodon, or Sea Hedge-Hog, [Diodon Orbicularis, Lin.)
The Round Diodon is considered as a poisonous fish, and is an inha-
bitant of the tropical seas.
4. Lasher Bullhead, ( Callus Scorpius, Lin.)
This Fish is an inhabitant of the Mediterranean and Northern seas,
and is said to be plentiful about the coast of Greenland, where it is es-
teemed good food. It is a strong fish, swimming with rapidity, and
preying on the smaller fishes. It is said to live a considerable time
out of the water, having a power of closing the gill covers in such a
manner, as to exclude the effects of the atmospheric air. When
caught, if held in the Hand, it exerts a strong and peculiar sound by
the expulsion of air through its mouth ; during this action the mouth is
opened to the utmost width, the pectoral fins are strongly expanded,
and the whole body is agitated by a vibrating or tremulous motion.
5. Oceanic Flying-Fish, [Exocatus Evolans, Lin.)
The fishes of this genus, which are fevy in number, arc remarkable
for the extreme length and size of their pectoral fins, by which they
are enabled to spring from the water, and support a kind of temporary
Right or continued motion through the air, to the distance of 2 or 300
feet : when the fins become dry, they are obliged to commit themselves
to their own element. The fish here described, is an inhabitant of the
American and Indian seas, but is occasionally observed in the Medi-
terranean. Pennant records an instance of its being seen about the
British coasts. The celebrated Bonnet considered this species of fish
as forming a kind of connecting link between fishes and birds, similar
to that which bats may be supposed to form between birds and quadru-
peds.
Small Glass Case of Fishes , marked C.
No. 1. Beaked Angler, or Bat-Fish, ( Lophius Restrains, Lin.}
A native of South America, and preys upon small fishes and worms.
2. Hake-Mouth Globe-Fish, [Telrodon Lagacephalus, Lin.)
This genus, like the Diodon, has the power of inflating its body at
pleasure. It is an inhabitant of the Indian and American seas, but oc-
casionally strays into the northern .latitudes, and has been taken 1 ac-
cording to Pennant) about the British coasts, viz, near Penzance in
Cornwall.
3. Thunk Fish, unknown.
4. Hobned Trunk -Fish, (Oslracion Camillas, A native of
*he Indian and American Seas.
5. American {Exocalus Mesogaster, Lin.)
Allied to the one preceding as to general appearance, but somewhat
different


different in the fins and size. It is a native of the Atlantic Ocean, and
seen about the coasts of the Antilles.
6 Old Wife, or Ancient File-Fish, [BalisHs Vetula, Lin.;
A native ol the Indian and American seas. It is supposed to have
obtained its popular name of the Old Wife, from the appearance of the
mouth when viewed in front, as well as from the sliglit murmuring
noise which it utters when first taken.
7* LoNG-riNNEn ChaiTouoN, (ChoUodon Teira, Lin.;
This curious fish is a native of the Indian and Arabian seas* and is
said to arrive at a considerable size.
Small Case of Fishes , marked D.
* v* fi illL ...T'-i: '• ;■■ *•
No. 1. Porcupine Fish, same as in the Large Case marked A. No 6.
2. Angel-Fish. t h»o
3. 1) 10 uon, unknown.
4. Dragon£J, (Callionymus Lyra , Lin.; Inhabits the Mediter-
ranean and Northern seas,
5. Diodon, unknown.
6‘. Youkg Tuktle, (Ttsludo Caretla.J
7. Porcupine Diodon, (Diodon Histrix, Lin.;
Hippocampus* or Sea Horse, {Syngnalkus Hippocampus Lin.;
9. Young Sturgeon. [Acipenser Slurio, Lin.;
Inhabits the European, Mediterranean, Red, Black and Caspian
seas, and annually descends the rivers in spring. It is a fish of slow
movement, is very fertile, and preys on other fish. Its flesh is some -
times eaten.
sl*l JJlRJfviffUll Jl*. M SUW 3 5 jn * - V*- - I-- • * *' ? *«
Tim following Fishes being too large for the Gases, are hun<v up in.
the di he rent Rooms. 0 ■
Fiaa. .Fish, _ or Angler, [Lop/uus Europcms, Lin.;
The Frog f ish is remarkable lor its uncoutli appearance. The one un-
der consideration is an inhabitant of the European seas, where it sometimes
arrives at a great size. It is observed to frequent shallow parts of the
sea, lying m ambush, Covered with weeds and mud, in such a manner
that tne amaller fishes, deceived by its-fcntacula, or long processes on
t ic head, by their resemblance to worms, on attempting to seize them
become a prey to the Lophius.
Dolphin, unknown. , . • > : ,;,g : #
Young Shark r (Squahis Carharias ,* Lin.; 5 "
.The Shark is as formidable in appearance, as he is also dreaded for
his courage and activity. No fish can swim so fast, for he will outstrip
the sw 1 1 test ship. “ They are (says Mr. Pamant) the dread of sar-
iors in all hot countries, where they constantly attend the "vessels, in
expectation of what may drop overboard ; a man that has that misfortune
perishes without redemption ; they have been seen to dart at him like
gudgeons at a worm. ’ They are said to attack Negroes in preference to
Europeans, and to attend with assiduity the Slave Ships from Africa to
the West Indies. I lie Shark grows to an enormous size, commonly to
30 feet in length. ■
k r.vsjrcrs.


INSECTS.
Each moss,
Each shell, each crawling insect, holds a rank
Important in the plan of Him, who form'd
This scale of beings ; holds a rank, which lost
Would break the chain, and leave a gap
That Nature’s self would rue !
Glass Case, No. 1.
No I. Locust, Gryllus , unknown.
2 Great Locust, (Gryllus Dux , Lin.^
Of all the insects which are capable of adding to the calamities of
mankind, by devouring the products of the earth, Locusts seem to
possess the most formidable powers of destruction. Legions of these
voracious creatures arc from time to time produced in the various parts
of Africa and the eastern world, where the havoc they commit is al-
most incredible, changing in a few hours the most fertile plain into an
appearance of a desert; nay, even when dead they are terrible, since
the putrefaction which arises from their inconceivable numbers is such,
that it has been regarded as one of the principal causes of a beginning
pestilence The largest species of these insects are used as an article of
food, and in many markets of the Levant they are publicly sold. The
female is regarded as a very nutricious sustenance, and is much sought
after.
3. Underside of an unknown Papiuo. ~. .
4. Upper and underside of Papiuo Nestor, Lin. Inhabits South
America. . ajqittatjfi fadw • jbod
5. Papiuo Luna, from South America.
6. Papiuo Thoas, Lin. from South America. .
7. Bird Catching, or Great Surinam Spider, (Aranea Aveauana ,
Very little appears to be known respecting this Spider: it is however
not uncommon in many parts of South America. It resides amongst
the trees, and seizes on small biids, (particularly Humming Birds,)
which it destroys by sucking their blood, after having first wounded
them by its fangs. This Spider has eight eyes, which are disposed
somewhat in the form of an oblong square; two are perfectly round,
the others are of an oval shape.
Common Cicada, (Cicada Plebeia, hm.J <
The Cicada, so often commemorated by the ancient poets, and so
irenerally confounded by the major part of translators with the Grass-
hopper, is a native of the warmer parts ol Europe, and is particularly
plentiful in Italy and Greece, The common Cicada appears in the hot


test summer months, and continues its shrill chirping during the great-
est part of the day, sitting amongst the leaves of trees.
8. Green Cicada, ( Cicada ) unknown.
9. C ETON!a Chineksis, Lin.
This insect is very rare, and inhabits China, See.
10. Papilio, unknown.
1 1. Tarantula Spider, (Aranea Tarantula, \An.)
Curious anecdotes are told of the effects that the poison of this Spider
has on those who have had the misfortune to be bitten by it. Accord-
ing to Dr. Mead, although the bite at first is no greater than the sting of
the Bee, yet the part is shortly discoloured, and the patient in a few
hours is seized with sickness, tremors, and a weakness in his head;
he grows melancholy, stupid, and timorous, and in a short time expires,
unless music is called to his assistance, which alone, without the help
of medicine, performs the cure : for at the sound of an instrument he
sets to dancing, and continues the arduous exercise until he falls to the
ground, from whence he is conveyed into bed, where he refreshes him-
self from fatigue, Bcc. repeating the exercise for days together, until
cured. Notwithstanding the great authorities which can be referred to,
of music curing the Tarantula frenzy, there is good reason to believe the
whole story fabulous, and a vulgar error; for it is treater! as such by
an Italian physician in the Philosophical Transactions, and by a great
many gentlemen of veracity, who have resided at Taranto, during the
time in which the bite of the Tarantula is said to be most pernicious ;
who affirm there was not a physician in the country who believed there
was-ever such a distemper from such a cause. Among the vulgar there
is a tradition, that distempers, attended with very extraordinary circum-
stances, had been excited by the bite of a Tarantula ; but that no person
ever remembers a single instance; and that there is no Spider found in
that country different from those which are found in common hi most
warm climates. _ '
This curious Spider was presented to the Museum by Mr. 15. Blun-
dell, Liverpool, who caught it on board a vessel discharging in George’s
Dock ; when attempted to be seized, it made a vigorous resistance,
and had a bag attached to its hinder parts, containing its young, larger
than the egg of a Pigeon.
12. Great Black Wasp of Pennsylvania, (Vespa.)
This great Wasp supplies itself with food by roving about the mea-
dows, catching prasshoppers, and other insects ; on these it feflds, and
not on fruits, as other Wasps do. But what is more remarkable, is
the method of making their nests, and providing for their young.
With great pains and industry they scratch an horizontal hole, near an
inch diameter, and a foot long, in the steep side of a bank ofloamy
earth; then away the Wasp flies, and catches a large grasshopper, and
lodging it in the farther end of the nest, there she lays an egg, and then
goes and catches two more, and deposits them with the other, then
plasters up the hole. The egg soon produces a maggot; these grasshop-
pers are, by marvellous instinct, provided for its food, until it changes
into its pupa state, in which it lies for a certain period, and then eats
its wav out, and flies away seeking its mate. What may deserve our
7 ’ farther


farther attention, is the wonderful sagacity of this creature, not only in
catching these large grasshoppers, though bigger than itself, which are
like ours, and are very strong and nimble; but their peculiar skill is
to be admired in disabling them, either by bite or sting, so as not to kill
them; for then they would soon putrify, and be unfit for nourishment.
Life sufficient is left to preserve them for the time the maggot is to feed
upon them. The sting of this Wasp is painful, but does not swell like
.others. > i
13. Elephant Beetle, (Scarabaus Elephans , Lin.y
The Elephant Beetle, one of the largest of the genus hitherto known,
is found in South America, particularly at Guiana, Surinam, and about
the river Oroonoka. Of any peculiar habits which may distinguish
this species, we have no information that can be depended upon. This
Insect js extremely rare.
14. Scaraeceus Bucephalus, Lin. Very common in China, and
other parts of the East Indies.
15. Diamond Curculio, (Curculio Splendens , Lin.,/ Found in
Brazil.
1 6. Herculus Beetle, (Scarahceus Hercules, Lin. J
The Beetle here described is a native of the island of Guadaloupe;
but on the Continent of New Spain this species is said to be often seen
of very large dimensions. The horn of this beetle above is toothed on
each side, and beneath it is covered with a substance resembling yellow
plush; the proboscis below is also toothed. Between these, it is said, the
insect takes the smaller branches of trees, and by swiftly flying round
soon saws them off, for the purpose of building its nest. The teeth cut
away the wood, and the plush part serves to brush away the saw-dust.
Dr. Shaw, however, (in his Naturalist’s Miscellany) says, that on a
narrow inspection of the proboscis of this beetle, it will appear no ways
calculated for the sawing off branches from trees; he reckons therefore
the whole operation as a vulgar error. It is a very mischievous animal,
and exceedingly difficult to be taken.
17. Cerambyx, unknown.
18. Cerambyx, ditto. ■ > i
19. ScARABOius Nasigornis, Lin- Found in Europe, as well as in
China.
Glass Case. Insects , J\ r o. >2.
'No. 1. Papilio, unknown.
2. Ditto ditto. , J 7. jiodj-
3. Ditto ditto.
4. Ditto ditto.
5. Chinese Lantern Carriers, f fulgoai Candelaria, Lin .)
These insects are found in China, and are peculiarly noticed for emit-
ting a lively shining light in the night time, which according to some
authors is sufficient to read by. The light is generally supposed to issue
from the trunk, or elongated projection of the forehead.
6. Papilio, unknown.
7. Ditto ditto.
8. Papilio


8. Papiuo Paris, inhabits China.
9. Papiuo Glaucippe, from ditto.
10. Papiuo Almana, from ditto.
11. Papllio, unknown.
12. Ditto ditto.
13. Papiuo Oenone, from China.
14. Ditto, unknown.
15. Ditto ditto.
16. Papiuo Orythia, from China.
17- Ditto, unknown.
18. Papiuo Orythia.
ip. Ditto Almana.
20, 21, 22, and 23, from China, the names unknown.
The remainder of the Insects in this Case are unworthy inspection,
being mostly the common Papilios and Phalame of Great Britain, in
bad condition.
The following Insects are dispersed in the different Glass Cases:—
No. 1. Stag Beetle, ( Lucanus Cervus, Lin .) This Beetle is the
largest of the British species.
2. Phala:na Erycina of Shaw, and the Phal.ena Hesperius of Lin.
This insect bears so near a resemblance to the Atlas Moth, as scarcely
to admit of a specific separation ; but it is an insect of still greater ele-
gance and beauty than that magnificent species. In the Glass Case of
Birds, marked D.
3. The Great Mantis, (Mantis Gigas, lAn.)
The imagination can hardly figure to itself a more singular insect
than this is; and had we only the account of authors, without having
seen the animal, we might be inclined to question the truth of its ex-
istence. In its winged or perfect state, it is rarely met with in collec-
tions, being generally seen in the less advanced growth, in which thC
rudiments of the wings are but just visible; in that state it is called the
Walking Stick. It is a native of Amboyna. in the Blue Manakin
Case.
The Walking Stick, (Mantis Gigas, Lin .) This is the young of
the above species before its wings are grown.
4. Phasma Hecticum, Lin.
5. Brown Locust, (Gnjllus Migratorius , Lin.y
In the year 1748 this species appeared in irregular flights in several
parts of Europe, as in Germany, France, and England; and in London
in particular great numbers were seen: they perished, however, In a
short time, without doing any mischief.
6. Scorpion, (Scorpio Europceus, L'm.J
Scorpions (of which there are several in this Collection] are found
in the West-Indies and the southern parts of Europe.
CANCER


CANCER — CRAB.
Glass Case , No. 1.
No. I. Mantis Crab, (Cancer Mantis, Lin./ Tfiis curious Crab
inhabits England, and is also found in China, See.
2. Crab, {Cancer.) unknown.
3. Ditto ditto unknown.
4. Cancer Homarus, Lin.
5. Long-armed Crab, fCancer Longimanus. Lin./ Native of the
European seas, and is seldom found of a large size.
6. Supposed (Cancer Artificiosa, Lin./
7. Cancer , unknown
8. Young Turtle, (Testudo Carella, Lin./
9. Hippocampus, or Sea-Horse, (Syngnalhus Hippocampus, Lin./
10. Cancer Craniolaris, Lin. Inhabits the shores of Malabar, where
it is often found petrified.
11. Soldier Crab. (Cancer Bernhardus, Lin./
This species being deprived of the strong covering behind, as in the
other genus, takes refuge in the deserted univalve shells. As it grows
in bulk, it changes its small habitation for a larger. Its tail, which is
naked and tender, is furnished with a hook, by which it secures itself
in its lodging, and carries it about in search of prey. Inhabits Great-
Britain, &c.
Glass Case , No. 2.
CANCER.
No. 1. (Cancer Pdagicus, Lin./ Found among sea-weed.
2. Spider Crab, (Cancer Araneus, Lin./
The fishermen suppose this species injurious to the beds of Oysters ;
and therefore when they dredge it up, they do not throw it back into
the sea, but destroy it. It is often covered with a Byssus. Inhabits
Europe.
3. Land Crab, (Cancer Ruricdla, Lin./
The Land Crab resides in woods; and in the Bahama Islands they
are so numerous, that the ground seems to move as they crawl
about. In breeding time they make to the sea-shores to deposit their
eggs, and no obstruction can turn them out of their way. They live
on vegetables, and are esteemed excellent food.
r \Q o VnK 1
5. Green Crab, ditto.
Cancer, ditto." 1 ‘ 1 jc.IM. SJ3HTO CK4A,.
7. Cancer Forceps, Lin. Inhabits the ocean.
8. Cancer , unknown.
9. Hippocampus, (Syngnalhus Hippocampus, Lin.)
10. Cancer, unknown. .. • ; _ . r
11. Supposed (Cancer Crislatus, Lin.) Inhabits the ocean.
12. 13, 14, 15, 16. Unknown,
’ ’ 17- Hermit


17. Hermit Crab, (Cancer Diogenes, Lin-,/ Inhabits an univalve
shell the same as the Soldier Crab.
Horrid Crab, [Cancer Horridus , Lin.) Is a native of the Asiatic seas.
Indian Monoculus, Mollucca, or King Crab, [Monoculus Poly-
phemus, Lin.)
The name Monoculus was bestowed on this genus of insects from the
circumstance of the eyes being generally seated so near each other, as
upon a cursory view to appear as if single. In some species, how-
ever, (as in the present,) it happens that they are really remote from
each other. Of all the animals which naturalists have agreed to dis-
tinguish by the appellation of insects, the Indian Monoculus is by far
the largest yet known. It is a native of the Indian Ocean, and is said
to be generally found in pairs, or male and female, swimming together.
To what has been said of the Monoculus, I should hot omit to add,
that the eyes in this animal, according to the observations of Mr. An-
dre, (Phil. Transac. vol. 72 ) consist of a great number of very small
cones; in this respect they differ from those of most other insects, in
which the outward coat of the eye is composed of innumerable slight
convexities, bounded by an hexagonal outline.
VERMES, ZOOPHYPES, be.
Gradual, from these what numerous kinds descend.
Evading e’en the microscopic eye!
Full Nature swarms with life ; one wond’rous mass
Of animals, or atoms organized,
Waiting the vital breath, when Parent Heav’n
Shall bid his spirit blow.
Thomson.
la Vermes, Zoophytes, Bcc. this Museum at present is very deficient.
Those already known are the following:—
Several species of the Asterias, or Star Fish.
Carved Star Fish, [ Asterias Torcuma, Lin.)
Thirteen-rayed Star Fish, ( Asterias Helianthemoides , Lin.)
Sea Fan, [Gorgonia Selosa, Lin.)
Prickly White Coral, [Madrepora Muricata, Lin.)
Mushroom Madrepore, ( Madrepora Fungilis, Lin.)
Brain Madrepore, ( Madrepora Cerebrum , Lin.)
Common Coral, ( Corallina Officinalis, Lin )
Funnel Sponge, [Spongia Infundibulum, Lin )
PARTS OF UNCOMMON ANIMALS ,
AND OTHER NATURAL MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES.
No, 1. Numerous extraordinary and stupendous remains ol non-des-
cript animals, found in'the vicinity of the rivers Ohio, Wabash, Illi-
nois, Mississippi, Osage, Missouri, Kc. brought to Englan


gentleman who passed several years on a rnineralogical tour in those
states. They consist of different parts of animals, such as heads, ver-
tebrae, ribs, grinders, and horns? among which, the most worthy of
remark is the foot of a clawed animal of the Jer<e genus, or tigdP spe-
cies. Tliis paw, clothed with flesh, skin, and hair, filled with mus-
cles, flexors, and cartilages, must, when dilated on its prey, have co-
vered a space of ground four feet by three. Did the animal to whom
it appertained partake of a strength of body proportionate to the size of
this foot, an<l at the same time add the agility and ferocity of the ti-
ger-to his unequalled magnitude, he must have been the terror of'the
forest, and of mankind. That such an animal did exist, this Specimen
is a sufficient proof; nor, did it alone inhabit the American States,
for we have reason to believe that an animal similar in some respects
to the above, once had possession of our island ; for various remains
of non-descript animals have been frequently dug up of late, in difc
ferent counties. The thigh-bone marked A. which is nearly four feet
in length was fouud in digging the Ellesmere Canal in the year IBofl,
near the Village of Wrenbury, in Cheshire. On the subject, how-
ever of these Incognita, but a few words are necessary ; they have been
on the whole the surprise of the enlightened naturalist, and the ad-i J
miration of the classical scholar; we therefore refer those who wish to
be more particularly informed respecting these remains, to a pamphlet,
entitled “ Memoirs oj Mammoth and other extraordinary and stupen-
dous Bones written by the gentleman who brought them to England,
and sold them to the Proprietor of this Museum.
2. Glass Case, containing an Egyptian Mummy.
/The ancient methods observed- by the Egyptians in embalming hu-
man bodies, according to Herodotus, were performed after this manner ;
There were certain persons appointed for the business, who had three
prices according to the workmanship. In the most esteemed method
of embalming, they extracted the brains by the nose with a crooked iron,
and then poured in drugs; afterwards they opened the body, took out the
bowels, washed the inside with palm wine, and having rubbed into it
pounded pei fumes, filled the cavity with myrrh, cassia, and other
spices, and then sewed it up. After this they washed the body with
nitre, then let it lie 7 0 days ; and having washed it again, bound it up
in folds of linen, besmearing it over with gums, which the Egyp-
tians used instead of glue. The relations then took home the body,°and
inclosing it in the wooden figure of a man, placed it in the Catacombs.
Another method of embalm ing, was injecting turpentine of cedar with a
pipe into the body, without cutting it ; they then salted it for 70 days,
and afterwards drew out the pipe, which brought along with it the in-
testines. The nitre dried up the flesh, leaving nothing but skin and
bones. The third way was only by cleansing the inside with salt and
water, and salting it for 70 days.’ From what Diodorus observes,'One
would imagine that there was a w r ay of preserving the bodies much supe-
rior to either of.the former ; for he says, their eye-brows and eyt-lashes,
* Tliis Pamphlet may fee purchased at the Museum


with the form and appearance of the whole body, were so well preserv-
ed, that they might be known by their features : whence many of the
Egyptians kept the bodies of their ancestors in houses adorned at a.
great expense ; and had the pleasure to see their forefathers for many
generations back, and to observe alf their features as well as if they
were living. It does not however appear that any bodies were ever
discovered embalmed in this manner.
The Mummy in this collection was brought from Egypt by the
French, and taken from them by an English privateer, and was re-
markable lor containing only the head, and part of the thigh and leg
bones, which were enveloped in folds of fine linen, nearly three inches
thick. The linen in some parts was as white and perfect as when first
done, and on the legs there was some appearance of the flesh still re-
maining, although (from a moderate calculation) it must have been
embalmed upwards of 20(H) years.
3. Head of the ancient Irish Elk, or Moose Deer. The species
extinct. This head was found nine feet under ground in a marl pit, on
the lands of Dewstown, the seat of the Right Honourable Lord Farn-
ham, in the county of Meath, Ireland, Anno 1801. Presented by
Leonard M‘Nally, Esq. of Dublin.
4. Large Horn of the American Stag, presented by Capt. Mars,
ef America.
5- Elephant's Head and Grinders, presented by Samuel Stani-
forth. Esq. Liverpool.
6. Leg of the Flamingo. he g
7- The Skull of the Babyroussa, orlsniAs Hoc. The most dis-s
tinguishing characteristic of this animal consists in four large tusks, the
two stoutest of which proceed, like those of the Wild Boar, from the
under jaw, pointing upwards; the two others rise up like horns, on
the outside of the upper jaw, just above the nose, and extend in a
curve above the eyes almost touching the forehead, and are about se-
ven inches long. The use this animal makes of these tusks is in sleep-
ing, which they do like the Elephant, by hookiug them on the branch?*
of Jrecs, The Babyroussa is found in several of the islands of the
East-Indies. . nhun gnivEfitniT; 01 oil li Jol naiU
8. of an Elephant's Grindeu.
9- The Horn of an Ibex, enoitiloi 9'rtT jauty to bsolam fata toi
10. The Horns of the Chamois. • t •
11. The Tail of the Beaver.
12. Tiie Egg and Thigh Bone of an Ostrich.
13. The Leg of a Cassowary. aqiq
14. 15, 16. Three Noses of the Saw-fish. The largest of these
is three feet seven inches long, eight inches broad at the base, and
four at the point; it is armed at the sides with thirty-eight strong
teeth, about an inch and a half long, and two inches from each other.
17. The Jaws of an enormous Shark, which measure six feet six
ruches in circumference. ♦
18. The Fossil Tooth of a Shark, nearlv four trmqs as large a$ those
in the above jaws.
19. The Cavity of a Whale’s Ear,
The Jawjs ? Porpoise,
h SI. Jk


21. A singular Bone, supposed to belong to some sea animal.
22, and 23. Shells of the nine and three-banded Armadillos.
24. Part of the Hide of a Rhinoceros, remarkable for its thickness,
being pistol proof.
25. Skull of the Walrus. This animal inhabits the Northern seas,
and grows to an amazing size ; the tusks are sometimes upwards of two
feet in length.
26. Skull of a Bear.
27. Horns of the White Antelope* The horns of this animal
are very long and slender, of a black colour, and sharp pointed. The
animal is of a milk-white colour, and inhabits the island of Gow Bah-
rein, in the Gulph of Eassora.
' 28, Teeth of the Hippopotamus, which are of vast strength and
size, particularly the tusks or canine teeth of the lower jaw; they
sometimes measure more than two feet, and weigh upwards of six pounds.
30. Skull of a Gangetic Crocodile.
31. Glass Case containing four different Beaks and Heads of the
Calao, or Hornbill Bird ; remarkable for the singular appendages on
the upper mandibles.
32. An Elephant’s Tail,
33. Skin of a Snake, nine feet long, from Botany Bay.
34. The Skin of a Rattle Snake.
35. A Mumm yof the White Ibis.— The White Ibis, though now
unknown to the Egyptians, was formerly worshipped by them as a god,
in consequence of the great service it did them, in destroying tire vast
quantities of serpents and reptiles with which that country was infest-
ed, Their veneration for them extended even after their death ; for
whenever the body of a dead Ibis could be found, it was carefully em-
balmed after the manner of the mummies. Mr. Bruce, the Abyssinian
traveller, mentions his having opened several of them, in which the
bones, and even some feathers, were entire. Buffon says, “ he re-
ceived several of these mummies from the bird pits in the plains of
Saccara; that the shape of all of them was a sort of doll, formed by
the bandages which incased the bird; of which the greater part fell
into black dust when the ligatures were removed.”
36. A curious Wasp’s Nest, from the West-Indies.
37. Another Wasp’s Nest, from South America, on the branch, o f
an oak, on which it was formed. The hole in the side is cut to shew
the structure of the combs. The entrance to it is at the bottom, and
is contrived in such a manner that no rain can enter. _
38. Skeleton of an Ostrich. Skeletons of Birds, viz, the
Creeper, Snipe, Oyster Catcher, Lark, Starling, Green Linnet, field-
fare, and Moor Game.
39. Skeleton of a Rabbit.
40i Vertebra; of the Spermaceti Whale.
41. Head of the American Jabiru, (Mycteria Americana, hni.J
The American Jabiru, till lately the only species known, is a native
of South America, frequenting watery places. Its size is somewhat
larger than the stork ; indeed some specimens approach nearer to that ol
the Ostrich. #
42. Specimen of Fossil Oak, found in a quarry near• Coventry.
r v TKfc


THE ARMOURY.
Charm’d with the sight, the ardent breast is fir’d
With thoughts like those which ancient bards inspir’d.
On entering this room, (which is painted in the Gothic manner, and
lighted by an elegant arched window of stained glass,) the contemplative
visitor cannot but feel a degree of respect and Veneration for the me-
mory of his forefathers. Surrounded by such a multiplicity of ar-
mour and war-weapons, he will, if not solely engrossed by other pur-
suits, be capable of reflection, and form to himself a variety of conjec-
tures on times tong past; his active mind will contrast the manners,
customs, and military exploits of those days, with the present ones ; draw
a line of comparison from the different centuries, aryl mark the progres-
sion of art and science, from a state little better than barbarous, to an.
age, when refinement and ingenuity are nearly arrived at the acme of
perfection.
On taking, however, a general survey of the objects that present
themselves, lie, without doubt, will first glance his eyes on the tasteful
display of the different antiquities, such as armour, helmets, breast-
plates, lances, and swords, which are grouped in so classical a manner,
that they cannot fail to merit particular commendation. Among such
groups, the Armour will stand the most conspicuous to view : here,
an ample field will be open for meditation: the form, make, -and ma-
terials of these war-suits, will be a source of admiration and surprize.
When a thought is cast on the quondam warriors, whose strength
enabled them to sustain such a weight of metal, and at the same time
were capable of exerting themselves, performing under it every exploit,
and enduring every toil of war, he will be overcome with astonish-
ment, and feel his consequence lessened, whilst he considers himself
as the offspring of a dwindled race of mankind. -
A ,r ain, should the warlike instruments arrest attention, which for
certaux have been the cause of carnage and bloodshed, and sent many a
noble and generous heart to that bourn
« From whence no traveller returns,”
he muses m silence, as he blames the ambition that stirred up the fire
of contention, and regrets the enmity that subsists between man and
man. • ,
But turning from such painful remembrances, his thoughts will pla-
cidly dwell on the progressive improvement of fire arms, from the
first invention in remote times, to those of a later date. Should the one
of English manufacture appear any way worthy inspection, its pon-
derous and rude workmanship will furnish a strong contrast to those
executed


executed iu the present ctay; it those ot a foreign make have any
thing peculiarly stacking, he will find them richly "decorated with a di-
versity of ornaments, and in every respect suitable to the wealth and
grandeur of an eastern nation. 11, once more, he condescends to exa-
mine the articles (in appearance), less attractive than the preceding, he
will find many things to commend, but more to meet Ids praise and ap-
probation. 1
Shch are the subjects to which we wish to introduce the visitor,’and
we have the vanity to think, that he will not enter this apartment with-
out giving way in a small degree to the ejaculations we have attempted
to describe, nor quit it, without having added something new or interest-
ing to his general stock of knowledge.
The First Figure under the Gothic Niche nearest to the window, is
dressed in a Hauberk, or ancient Suit of Mail, such as was worn in the
array of William the Conqueror, when he invaded this country, ft is
composed of small rings of iron, which passing through four others, are
rivetted together in such a manner as not to prevent any motion of the body.
Besides their ordinary clothes, the knights wore under the Hauberk a loose
garment called a Gambeson, which descended as low as the knee; it was
stuffed with woollen or cotton, and quilted; its use was to deaden the
stroke of a sword or a lance, which though it did not divide the mail,
might severely bruise the body. Between the Hauberk and Gambeson
a breast-plate of iron, called a Plastron, was occasionally put on, and
over all, men of family wore surcoats of satin, velvet, or cloth of gold
and silver, richly embroidered with their armorial bearings. Thus en-
veloped, and loaded with such a number of weighty incumbrances, it
is by no means wonderful that in the midst of summer, iu the heat,
dust, and press, of an engagement, men at arms should be suffocated
in their armour; an event which we learn from history often happened.
Besides the inconvenience of being thus Swathed up like an Egyptian
mummy, a man could have but little power of action, and this in some
measure accounts for the small number of knights slain in an engage-
ment with cavalry only: probably as ransom was so great an object in
those days, they rather wished to capture than kill their enemies, and
for that purpose endeavoured to unhorse them, for when they were
overturned, they were immoveable, and lay on the spot till rempunted
by their friends, or overtaken by their enemies. This venerable relic
of antiquity came originally from the Castle of Tong, in Shropshire,
and was presented by the Rev. Bnckridge to the Museum of the
late Richard Green, Esq. of Lichfield, from whence it was purchased
by the present proprietor. It is presumed, that this Hauberk is the
only one of the kind remaining in England, as there is not a specimen
exhibited cither at the Tower or British Museum*- In the Treatise
on Ancient Armour, written by the late Francis Grose, Esq>F,A.S.
a description is given of this identical Suit of Mail, in volume ii. -page
9, plate 21.
The Centre Figure is dressed in acoxnplete suit of Pi icemen's Armour.
worn by the and musquttcers, at the first introduction of
lire


fire arms. It is in line preservation, and belonged to an officer, who
probably used it at the memorable siege of Latham House, as it was
inown to have been preserved at Cross Hall, in that neighbourhood, a
considerable number of years. It was presented to the Museum by
Col. Stanley, M.P. the present proprietor of Cross Hall.
On the right hand Is the Figure of a JCnmght in a suit of bright Steel
Armour, of the time of Queen Elizabeth: this is called plate armour,
and is of more modern date thari the mail, as it came into general use
about the middle of the fourteenth century. At its first introduction
it was made of prodigious strength and thickness, and was fitted to
every part of the body so close, that it was impossible to pierce it with
a lance.
At the battle of Fornoue, under Charles VIII. a number of Italian
knights w r ere taken, who could not be slain on account of the strength
of their armour, till broken up like huge lobsters with wood-cutters’
axes, by the followers of the army.
Large Glass Case.
No. 1. Singular Iron Turkish .Bridle Bit. , „ t ,
2. Another Bridle Bit of a different make.
3. An Ancient Spanner and Primer.
-i A very ancient and uncommon Arqucbu.se Match-Lock: the butt
very much curved, and richly ornamented with inlaid work in ivory ;
on which is also a representation of a Spanish soldier in the dress of the
age. The trigger is about twelve inches long, shaped to the curve of
the butt. It is said to have been taken oh board the Spanish Armada.
5. Turkish Scimiter, richly decorated on the scabbard and handle,
with different coloured stones. ' t V n :,d obnoinovnoani odj zoblaSw
6. A very curious Mahratta Horseman’s Sword, between four and
five feet long, of excellent temper: the blade, which is very thin, is fix-
ed into a kind of gauntlet, that reaches nearly to the wearer’s elbow,
and in which there is a grasp across the inside for the hand; See Grose. ,
pi. 50. No. I and 2. . A ,. j&movEabnb oeoqiuq is:dj
7. Highland Pistol, brass mounteffi c i^ D 7
,S. Two Highland Pistols, made of iron, and of diflcrent constructions.
g. A Sword, with a Pistol in the handle; taken from a French
officer on board the Villc de Paris. v bblxiaaaiQ acvr
10. A very curious double Wheel-lock Musket, from the Grand
Duke of Tuscany’s Gallery at Florence* This piece has two pans, two
wheels of steel, and two flints ; by which contrivance it discharges twice
with once loading.
11. A Turkish Cun, bell-mouthed; the barrel fluted and damasked,
a snaphaunch lock, and the stock inlaid with ivory.
12. A Turkish Musket, the stock, lock, and barrel, like to the former,
but richly ornamented, and mounted with silver. This curious piece
was taken from the Turks by Count Orlow, the Russian General; af-
terwards exchanged with an English gentleman for a fine horse : the
gentleman presented it to the Right Honourable Lord Paget, who gave
il


it td Lichfield Museum, from whence it was purchased by the present
Proprietor.
13. A very curious modern Fowling Piece, made by C. Malbon, ol
Chester ; it has two pans, the hindmost is shut by means of a short lever
or regulator, while the foremost is used. It fires twice with once
loading.
14. A most curious and beautiful ancient Spanish Wheel-Lock Fusee,
the whole stock of which is entirely covered with the most exquisite
inlaid work in ivory and mother of pearl, representing a variety of fi-
gures or men, beasts, birds, flowers, &x.
15. A beautiful small French piece, of very capital workmanship,
16. A Magazine Gun, made in Italy in the year 1666, which, when
loaded at the butt end, may be discharged by moving a short regulator,
ten times in less than half a minute.
17. Lance, called Assigay, used by the Caffraria Chiefs, Cape of
Good Hope.
18. Mahratta Dagger, of curious construction.—See Grose’s Ancient
Armour, plate 56, No. 4. Vol. 11.
In this case are also a variety of ancient Spurs, many of them very
curious.
The Bottom Case contains the following miscellaneous articles
No. 1. An ancient Manuscript Missal on vellum, finely illumi-
nated, written belore the invention of printing;
2. A Reading Desk, for holding the above, which folds together,
and is made of one piece of wood.
3. Ancient Shoe and Clog, supposed to be English.
4. Curious Shoe lined with hair, and wooden bottom, similar to
those worn in Russia and other Northern countries.
5. Steel Tobacco Pipe, to which is fixed a pistol lock, for light-
ing it. .
6. Several pieces of Roman Pottery, found near Colchester, in
Essex. .
6. Curious Brass Box, on which are designed the Battles and Vic-
lories of Frederick the Great.
g. Ancient Brass Bell.
g. Curious Ink-Stand, cut out of St. Michael’s Cave, Gibraltar..
10- Small antique Vessel, made ol Lava.
11. Curious antique Marble, representing God, Christ, St. Peter,
ancT the Pope.
The following Fire Arms, are arranged on each side the Large Glass
Case, beginning at the right hand:— '. .
19. An ancient English Match-Lock Musket, of the first invention ,
it belonged originally to the family of the Wingsfields ol Aldcrton, in
the county of Salop, whose names and arms are engraved on two escut-
cheons of mother of pearl, on the stock ; the barrel is very Heavy, and
nearly four feet long ; on it is the date 1615.
20. Another Match-Lock, very large and heavy, dated 1640.
oi. An ancient English Fowling Piece, with a snaphaunen lock, the
stock


stock richly inlaid with ivory and pearl shell engraved. This piece is
supposed originally to have belonged to the Skeffington family, formerly
owners of Fisherwick, now the property of the Earl of Donegall.
22. Ancient Match Lock, with singular stock.
23. Blunderbuss Pistol, brass barrel.
24. Large Blunderbuss, brass barrel. This piece the Duke of
Argyle had with him at the Battle near Dunblaine in Scotland, in the
year 1715. A servant of the Duke’s preserved his master’s life by
shooting a rebel with it, who had presented his piece at his Grace, with
a design to kill him. It was given by the above servant to Mr. J.
Wickens of Birmingham, who gave it to the Lichfield Museum, from
whence it was purchased by the present proprietor.
25. A Persian Match-Lock, with a square barrel, inlaid with gold;
the stock splendidly ornamented with painting and gilding.
26. A curious Indian Match-Lock Musket.
27* Ancient Calabre, Snaphaunch Lock.
On the left hand of the Case are the following Fire Arms :
28. An American Rifle, taken at Fort Washington.
29. Spanish Fowling Piece, with curious Lock.
30. Ancient Snaphaunch Musket.
31. Wheel Lock Muskef,
32. Magazine Gun, made at Pontefract, in Yorkshire, by Martin
Raynald; it may with ease and safety be fired eight times in half a mi-
nute with only once charging.
33. A long Gun, purchased at the late sale of the Leverian Museum.
With this piece General Wedderburne (brother to Lord Loughborough)
was killed, when reconnoitring a fort in the East Indies. The distance
from the fort w'as so great, that the shot could not be accounted for, un-
til the place was taken, and this long Gun discovered.
Several other curious Guns ; the whole forming a complete series
from the first invention, and shewing their gradual improvement.
34. Snaphaunch Pistol-stock curiously inlaid.
35. A singular Pistol, with an inlaid stock.
36. A Wheel-Lock Pistol, made in Germany in the year 1586.
37. A brace of curious French double-barrelled Pistols.
38. A brace of ancient Rifle-barrelled Pistols.
39. A pair of Spanish Boarding Pistols.
40. A number of ancient Gun Locks.
41. Over the Glass Case that contains the Guns are displayed a va-
riety of ancient Weapons, many ol which are at present unknown,
among them is the Norman Bill, and several Pikes, Halberts, Sec. ta-
ken on board the Spanish Armada.
42. Impression of a fine Roman Helmet.
43. A suit of Dutch Light-horse Armour, and Helmet, with three
moveable bars in front. It belonged to the ancient family of the Ve-
nables, in Cheshire. ,
44. An open fronted Helmet, found in a ditch near Wigan, a few
years since, on the spot where the Earl of Derby had a battle with the
Parliament forces, in the vear 16'51, in favour ot Charles 11.
45. A


45. A Helmet, found at Carthage, about the year ISOO, by J.
Jackson, Esq. of liasiaghall-street, London. It greatly resembles the
Morions worn in Europe in the time ofjames I.
46\ A fine Tilting Helmet, in high preservation. The Tilting
Helmet is perforated only on the right side; the leftside of the face,
the left shoulder and breast were covered by a plate called a grand
guard, which fastened on at the stomach. On each shoulder was also
fixed a plate declining from the face like wings; these were intended to
protect the eyes from the point of the lance, and were called pass guards.
See Grose’s Ancient Armour , vol. ii. pave 254.
47. A Venetian Helmet, resembling the Roman one.
48. A Morion, or open kind of Helmet, without visor or beaver/
somewhat resembling a hat; it was commonly worn by the Arquebu-
siers and Musquetcers.
4p. An open-fronted Helmet,
50. Several Pot Helmets, or Iron Hats, with broad brims.
51. The Plastron, or breast-plate, usually worn under the Hau-
berk, Bcc.
52. A Roundel, Rondache, or Norman Shield. (See Grose’s An-
cient Armour, plate 34, volume ii.) This shield derived its name from
its circular figure; it is made of oziers, boards of light wood, sinews
or ropes covered with leather, plates of metal, or stuck full of nails in
concentric circles or other figures. The Norman soldiers carried this.
Shield, fastened to a strap and hung over the shoulder. The Roundels
of metal, particularly those richly engraved or embossed, seem rather to
have been insignia of dignity, anciently borne before generals or great
officers, than calculated for war, most of them being too heavy for con-
venient hse, or too slight to resist the violence of a stroke, either from
a sword or battle axe.
53. An Haucergeon, or Shirt of Mail. This is made in the
same manner as the Hauberk, only It is without sleeves, and reaches n»
lower than the waist. By the statute of Winchester, passed in the thir-
teenth year of the reign of Edward I. every man possessing lands to the
yearly amount of fifteen pounds and forty marks in goods, was obliged
to keep in his possession an Haubergeon, an iron head-piece, a sword,
a knife, and a horse.
54. A complete Suit of Ancient Armour for the Horse, composed
»1 several thousand plates of steel and brass, firmly united by nvitted
iron rings, of the same construction as the Hauberk, along with which
it was supposed to have been worn. This kind of horse armour is ima-
gined not to have been very common, even at the time it was invented,
as not a single specimen except the present has reached us, nor has a
correct representation of it been published. On this account, it must
be highly interesting to those who arc fond of examining such relics
of antiquity.
55. A Persian Coat of Mail, made nearly in the same manner as
the Hauberk, only the work is more beautiful. The collar is of crim-
son velvet, on which in gold studs is \vritten in Persian the following
characters AU Fatima Husain Hasan Alla Mohammed” On th«.
breast is a Talisman, or charm, to preserve the wearer’s life.
56. A


56. A Beicandin'e Jacket. This is mentioned hi Jeremiah, ch. li.
ver. 3. and in an act passed by Philip and Mary in 1558. It was used
nrinci .ally by the archers, and took its name from the tight aimed
troopsNvho first wore it, being called Brigands, It is composed of a
number of small plates of iron, sewed upon quilled linen through a
small hole in the centre ol each plate, their edges laid over each other
like tiles, or the scales pf a fish ; these scales are covered with doth, so
as to have the appearance of quilting ; it is proof against the push of a
pike, or the stroke of a sword, and yet is extremely pliable to every
motion of the body. The Helmet for this suit, was called a Skull, or
C A great variety of Pieces of Armour , for all parts of the body ;
amono-which are several pieces presented by the Corporation
ford to the Lichfield Museum, and a number of Back and BrcasUPlates
of different kinds, given by the Corporation of Coventry to this Collec-
105*8. Chinese Halbert, the handle inlaid With mother of pearl.
50. A singular Sword, used by the 1 artars.
6o* A Chinese Shield, covered with Buffalom(Je, jnpanued*
61. A Mameluke's Shield, made of a Rhinoceros’s hide, bullet:
proof.
62- Two Highland Swords and Targets.
63. A variety of ancient Swords, of different nations.
64.. A large Two-handed Sword, nearly six feet long.
65. Singular Iron Pike and Gun Pest,
66. Great variety of Gun Locks, some of them very curious.
67. Halbert, made in the time of Oliver Cromwell, formerly car-
ried before the Mayor of Chester.
68. Indian Match Lock.
69. A Sack Bottle. '
70. An ancient Hat, made of the undressed skin of the wile
A Pair of Warrior’s Gloves, made of Buffalo’s hide.
W An ancient Burr Gauntlet, or covering for the left arm, worn
in the time of Charles I. by Sir Francis Pbodcs, of Balbrougb-l.alk iu
Derbyshire. It is contrived to answer the purpose of a shield, being
composed of three skins of buff leather, and one of strong pasteboard
jt is figured in Grose’s Ancient Armour, vol. H. plate 3p. fig* 5* and 0.
73. An ancient Cuoss-Bow, remarkably strong.
74. The stock of a very rich Arcubalista, or Cross-Bow, ionun
alwnt the year 1/73, by some labourers, on Bosworth Field, rcnowfica*
m hiW for the victorv obtained by the Earl of Richmond (afterwards
Henn VII.) over Richard 111. in which he lost Ins crown and life.
It is so exquisitely carved, as to authorise a conjecture thaHt was the
weapon of no mean warrior: indeed, very few specimens ol the chisel
of the present day excel it. The bow is Unfortunately lost, and the iion-
svork that remains is much corroded by lying, its it assuredly did, SQB
vears in the ground ; on it there ait yet to be dhcoveml, a number o|
studs and ornamental pieces of gold. It is made of yew, the ccfmp|ct ;
of which wood has so well preserved it from decay.
O M I«


Tn a scarce poem, written by Charles Allen, 'which contains a parti-
cular account of the battle of Bosworth, are the following lines :
“ The archers stript their sleeves, who must define
“ The controversie here debated on.
" The sun of Richmond’s hope was in the sign
“ Of Sagittarius, and there chiefly shone.
“ The feathers of their shafts sung as they went,
" Being newly set to the one-string’d instrument”
This fine remain of antiquity is figured and described in the Gentle-
mans Magazine for Feb. 1784, which, with several other antiquities
'in the yearJSOS Were i xhi^ed before tiie Ro >' al Antiquarian Society
75. A Basket and Hat of cane, made in the time of Queen Eliza-
beth; these are of very curious tvorkmanship.
76. Chinese Quiver and Bow-case, made of leather, finely em-
bossed with stiver. y
/?. Chinese Bow and Arrows. See Chinese curiosities.
/8« A number of Pikes and Eances from Africa.
frlhoi re3t varßt y ob J KISH Pikes, such as were used in the late Re-
-80. Pair of Jack Boots, commonly called Gambado’s.
81. Specimen of Chain Armour.
82. A collection of ancient and foreign Stirrup Irons and Bridle
Bits ; some of tnem of an extraordinary size and weight.
83. Ancient Brass Snuffers and Stand.
84. Ancient Brass Girandole.
Small Glass Case.
rs°. 1. An ancient Sword, formerly used by the English Noblemen
m their hunting excursions. On the hilt and scabbard of this Sword
(w nth are of ivory) are most exquisitely carved, the death of every
animal of the chase, comprising more than ninety-seven figures.
mis admirable work of art, serves in some measure to shew, in what
a magnneent manner our ancestors followed their favourite amusements:
#.i i is imagined that but few artists of the present day could produce
and X fcuk lte 3 perf ° rmance * Within the Scabbard, there are a knife
2. Ancient Spur.
3. Do.
, s‘ ver T rich Pair of Spurs, found in the spring of ISOO,
Pnsworta field; they are of brass enaraeiltd, and very
O'. A singular Iron Spur, the Rowels of which, are IS inches in
circumference.
Eitltl CuRI ° US Iron Spuß} phased with silver found, on Bosworth
8. Ancient Iron Spur.
9, and


p, and 10. Pair of Gilt Brass Spurs ; such as are worn by the Knights
ot Bath, on days of ceremony. 6
85. Iron Arrow, (purchased from the Leverian Museum,) found in
the year 1792, in the Held on which stands the Castle of Harwood York-
shire. ’
86. Leather Skull Cap.
8/. Asiatic Sword of singular make, with a scabbard of wood
curiously carved. ’
. ancient Brass Dish, supposed to be Saxon ; on the bottom
is a rude representation of the Annunciation, and round the edge a le-
gend in Saxon letters.
S - A Moorish Spur, which weighs one pound three ounces; in-
stead of rowels, it is armed with a sharp spike of the thickness of a
person s finger, and about 4- inches in length. This singular instrument
appears better designed to kill a horse, than to urge it forward.
90. A Large Turkish Powder Flask, mounted and embroidered
with silver, formerly belonging to Prince Eugene, at the sale of whose
effects it was purchased. Presented by Henry Blundell, Esq. Ince-Hall.
91 A Roman Bottle, used by the soldiers to cany liquor in.
92. An ancient Leather Bottle, embroidered with silk ; it holds
nearly a gallon.
93. Bandileers or Wooden Cylindrical Boxes, used by the Mus-
queteers of the reign of James and Charles I, for carrying their powder.
Twelve of these were fixed to a belt worn over the left shoulder. The
bag that contained the bullets was suspended to the belt.
94. Curious Horn, imagined to be Scotish.
, 95. Ancient Cornet. This horn is supposed to be of the earliest
invention, and to have been one of the first kind of musical instruments
used in a military baud.
THE END.


In a short time will be published
BY SUBSCRIPTION,
In two Vols. 8vo. (dedicated, by permission, to the Right Hon. Lord
Stanley,) Price to Subscribers, 1 1. -Is.; —An Accurate DESCRIP 1 ION
of the SUBJECTS of NATURAL HISTORY, Foreign and other
CURIOSITIES, See. &c. &c. in the LIVERPOOL MUSEUM ;
illustrated by upwards ot Thirty Etchings, by Howitt, and com-
prising such Articles of Natural History and Antiquity as have been,
found in Lancashire and the adjoining Counties.
PRINTED BY G. F. HARRIS, HOUGHTON’-STREET,
MVERPOOI..








