

A- CONTRIBUTION
TO THE
GEOLOGY AND PETROGRAPHY
BATHURST,
NEW SOUTH WAL ES-
BY THE
REV. J. MILNE CURRAN, F.G.S.,
Lecturer in Geology, Department of Technical Education.
SYDN
ANGUS & ROBERTSON,




A. CONTRIBUTION
TO THE
GEOLOGY AND PETROGRAPHY
BATHUEST,
NEW SOTJTZHI W-A-LES.
BY THE
REV. J. MILNE CURRAN, F.G.S.,
Lecturer in Geology, Department of Technical Education.
SYDNEY:
ANGUS & ROBERTSON,
CASTLEREAGH STREET.
yy'h'b ss I f


SYDNEY
F. CUNNINGHAMS AND CO., PRINTERS,
146 PITT STREET.


\From Vol. VI. (2nd Series) of the “ Proceedings of the Linnean
Society of New South Wales ” (27th May , 1891 ).\
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE GEOLOGY AND PETRO-
GRAPHY OF BATHURST, NEW SOUTH WALES.
By J. Milne Curran, F G.S.
(Plates xiv.-xvm.)
CONTENTS.
x. —lntroduction.
ii.—Area dealt with,
m. —Previous observers.
iv. —General Geology.
v. —Formations represented.
vi. —Minerals of Bathurst.
vii. —Rocks of Bathurst.
A. Igneous Rocks
C. Altered Rocks
viii.—■ The Sedimentary Rocks,
ix.—The Igneous Rocks.
Granite
Basalt
x.—Economic Geology
xi. Other points of interest.
xii. —Conclusion.
B. Sedimentary Rocks
I Plutonic—Acidic.
( Volcanic—Basic.
{Arenaceous.
Argillaceous.
Calcareous.
{Hornfels.
Schists.
Knotenschiefer.
a. In the field.
b. Origin of.
c. Microscopic examination.
d. Chemical composition,
a. In the field.
b. Microscopic examination.
c. Chemical composition.


i. Introduction.
The material embodied in the following paper, is the result of
observations, made at intervals, during the last ten years. A
residence of some eight years in Bathurst gave me special" facilities
to study the geology of the district. During that time 1 have
carefully examined some 180 square miles of country, taking the
City of Bathurst as a centre. Although lam conscious the paper
deals with nothing that may be regarded by geologists as novel or
striking, for all that, it may be acceptable to place on record my
observations on a district on which very little has hitherto been
written. The present contribution will, I hope, be merely an
introduction to the geology of a portion of the country that
presents rare facilities for the study of many of the great questions
connected with the nature of metamorphism, and the phenomena
presented by altered strata in the regions of eruptive rocks.
The hand-specimens which accompany this paper will help to
make clear descriptions of rocks of uncertain affinities. The
micro-photographs of rock-slices, on Plate xiv., will also help to
illustrate the structure of the basalts. This is all the more useful
in the present unsettled state of petrological nomenclature.
As there is a growing tendency among petrologists to follow
Professor Rosenbusch’s classification of the eruptive rocks, I have,
as far as possible, referred the Bathurst rocks to his system.
There are many interesting questions immediately connected
with the geology of Bathurst not touched on in this paper. The
contact area, for instance, that forms a fringe of metamorphic
rock around the central boss of granite, would demand more
knowledge and experience in the refinements of modern petro
graphic methods than I can lay claim to. In fact I have stu-
diously avoided, or merely pointed out, debatable questions. But,
having described what almost all geologists are agreed on, the way
is clear in the future to deal with the more obscure, but possibly
the more interesting, problems that may be studied in and around
Bathurst. In dealing with the microscopic structure of the basalts


and granites I have received much kind assistance from our leading
petrologist—A. W. Howitt, Esq., F.G-.5., now Under Secretary
for Mines, Melbourne.
ii. Area dealt with.
I propose to deal with the geology of the country immediately
around Bathurst. Every reference contained in this paper deals
with localities or sections that are included in a circle having a
radius of ten miles, taking Bathurst as a centre. A few interesting
features outside these limits will be referred to when presenting
points of interest known to me. These may serve as a guide to
future students.
The stretch of country forming, for the most part, the well-
known Bathurst “ plains ” is, in reality, part of a plateau, on an
average about 2350 feet above sea level. Bathurst Railway
Station is 2153 feet above sea level, and the highest point of the
Bald Hills is some 630 feet above this datum. The extreme diffe-
rence in level between any two points in the district referred to
may be taken as 740 feet.
hi. Previous Observers
The first reference I can find to the geology of Bathurst is
contained in Captain Wilkes’ “ Narrative of the United States
Exploring Expedition,” Yol. n. p. 259.* In this work reference
is merely made to the fact that the plains of Bathurst were at no
distant date an inland lake.
Mr. Stutchbury, who was appointed Geological Surveyor in
1850, made frequent reference to the Bathurst district in his
reports to the Colonial Secretary. The only reference of his to
the country immediately around the City of Bathurst that I can
find is contained in a report, dated “ Belabula Rivulet, Carcoar,
County Bathurst, April 12th, 1851.”
* Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition during the years
1838-1842, by Charles Wilkes, Commander; Philadelphia, 1842.


Speaking of the country on the Western Road, between Junc-
tion Hill and Bathurst, he says,* “The rounded blocks, which
when free upon the surface, appear to be immense boulders, or
erratic blocks, are not such, but large glandular or globular masses,
often connected by veins, and evidently intruded subsequently •
these may be seen in many places in the road-side sections,
imbedded in coarse granite, traversed by quartz veins in all
directions.
“ The foot of the hill is composed of disintegrated granite,
forming a loose sand. About one mile east of the river the granite
is overlaid by clay slate, ‘ killas,’ Granite, with fragmentary
trap-rock, appears to form the whole of the country to Macquarie
and Bathurst plains ; the plains are alluvium, and, judging from
the debris in the water-runs, most probably investing granite.
“ Lead mines were reported as occurring at Brucedale, near
Peel, about eight miles from Bathurst, a little eastward of north,
the residence of Mr. W. Suttor; the road then contains much
micaceous sand and quartz pebbles.
“ On descending the last hill, about two miles from the house,
blocks of decomposing granite are occasionally observed; upon
crossing the creek it is found, in place upon a ridge running nearly
east and west, associated with mica slate, much disturbed, passing
into clay slate; the dip of the clay slate is west north west.
“ To the eastward of south, half a mile from Mr. Suttor’s house,
a mine has been opened, in which the following varieties of ore
have been found :
“ Sulphuret of lead, with arsenical pyrites.
“ Green phosphate of lead, in veins in the clay slate.
“ Arsenio-phosphate of lead, and
“ Argentiferous sulphuret of lead.
“ The cross lodes make their way west north west through clay
slate, the angle of dip being 50°.
* Geological Survey Papers, laid upon the Council Table by the Colonial
Secretary and ordered by the Council to be printed ; 2nd December, 1851.


“The mines, as at present exhibited, do not promise to be
remunerative; the ore appears to be sporadic rather than in
regular lodes.
“ On the eastern side of the creek there are numerous fragments
of grit stone, containing impressions and casts of Spiriting,
evidently belonging to the coal measure; these must have been
transported some distance.”
In a paper by the Rev. W. B. Clarke on- the Transmutation of
Rocks in Australasia, read to the Philosophical Society of New
South Wales in May, 1865, mention is made of metamorphic
rocks near Bathurst. Says Mr. Clarke, “ One of the most remark-
able changes I have ever noticed in the neighbourhood of granite
occurs a little south of Bathurst. . , slates are converted into
mica schist and griesen, and limestone is changed into saccharoidal
marble.”*
In 1867, the Rev. W. B. Clarke, M.A., F.R.S., published the
first edition of his “ Sedimentary Formations.” He refers to the
“ existence of gneissoid strata and of schists, of very ancient aspect,
at Cow Flat, near Bathurst.”!
In his annual report for the year 1878, Mr. C. S. Wilkinson,
F.G.S., Government Geologist, refers as follows to the geology of
Bathurst: —“ Immediately north of the village of Perth, near
Bathurst, are some table-topped hills—the Bald Hills—capped
with basalt. The basalt rests on a very siliceous, tertiary pebble
conglomerate, which, in tuim, rests on granite. ... I believe
that this basalt is an outlier, or remnant, of the basaltic stream
which, in pliocene times, flowed down the Campbell’s River valley
from near Swatch field. The basalt is, in places, columnar, and on
the Bald Hills this columnar structure is splendidly shown, the
* Trans. Phil. Soc. New South Wales, 1862-1865 ; Sydney, Reading and
Wellbank, 1866, p. 267.
t Remarks on the Sedimentary Formations of New South Wales, by Rev.
W. B, Clarke, M.A., F.R.S. (fourth edition) ; Sydney, Thomas Richards,
Government Printer, 1878.


five and six-sided columns being of considerable length and well-
formed ; sometimes they are curved in a remarkable manner.”*
In the annual report of the geological surveyor in chargef, for
the year 1879 (p. 214), we find Mr. Wilkinson again making a
short reference to Bathurst as follows :—“ Following the road
from Bathurst to Hill End the first eight miles is over granite,
then silurian schists to Wyagdon, then granite again for one mile
and a half to near Wattle Flat.”
The Department of Mines issued a volume in 1882, entitled
“ Mineral Products of New South Wales.” On p. 39 of this work,
Mr. Wilkinson says : —“ Near Bathurst upper silurian rocks have
been considerably metamorphosed, the sandstones passing into
quartzites, slates into gneiss and hornblendic schists, and the coral-
line limestone into crystalline marbles in which nearly every trace
of fossils has been obliterated.”
Finally, Mr. W. J. Clunies Ross, B.Sc., read a paper, before the
Melbourne meeting of the Australian Association, on the Plutonic
and Metamorphic Rocks of Bathurst, New South Wales. Up to
the date of writing it has not appeared in print, so that I am
unable to refer to the paper in a more detailed manner.
iv. General Geology.
Taking a general view of the district round Bathurst, we have
presented to us a central mass of granite, forming the floor, and
partly the sides, of a great valley. Higher up the sides silurian
rocks rest on the granite. On the floor of this valley a great
sheet of recent alluvium shingle and clay deposit is spread, and
through these latter deposits the Macquarie has eroded its present
bed. A chain of basalt-capped hills rises prominently above the
granite floor, forming a line generally parallel to the present river.
* Annual Report of the Department of Mines, New South Wales, for the
year 1878; Sydney, the Government Printer, 1879.
+ Annual Report of the Department of Mines, New South Wales, for the
year 1879; Sydney, the Government Printer, 1880.


An aureole of altered rocks separates the granite from the silurian
slates, phyllites or limestones. In short, we have a great saucer-
like depression, the edges of which are silurian rocks ; below these
there is a belt of hornfels, or metamorphic rocks, and, finally,
granite with recent superficial deposits fills the floor of the valley.
Through this valley, as stated already, rising abruptly from the
general level, there runs a line of basalt, burying an old river-bed
of pliocene age. The granite, from its first appearance to the east,
to the boundary of the silurian rocks on the Bathurst-Orange Road,
measures some thirty miles across. From the contact rocks on
the Winburndale Creek, to the junction of the slate and granite,
south of Bathurst, the distance is some eighteen miles, that is 540
square miles. But, allowing for a very irregular line of junction
and the small patches of basalt, I take the granite area to measure,
at a very moderate estimate, about 460 square miles.
In this area the lowest rocks—granites and hornfels—are the
more recent, as will be made clear in another section of this paper.
Surface Geology.
This granite country presents a surface of gently undulating hills
and ridges with broad valleys. Except in cuttings in creeks, or on
the river-banks, the granite hardly ever shows on the surface, and
when it does it is so decomposed as to disintegrate readily and
rapidly. As is usual with granite, the decay commences in the
felspar grains, thus setting free the other constituents—quartz,
hornblende, and biotite. The depth to which decomposition extends
varies much ; sometimes to a few feet, and sometimes, in cases
that came under my notice, to a depth of 70 feet. The “rolling
downs ” character of the granite country contrasts strongly with
the surface appearances of the surrounding slate. The hills in the
slate country show the bed rock freely in escarpments and bars
parallel to the strike. The vegetation, moreover, assumes a
noticeable change on passing from the granite to the slate country.
The accompanying photographs show in an admirable way the
difference in weathering in granite and in slate country. Fig. 1


shows the channel of the Macquarie in typical granite rocks. A
short distance down stream (Fig. 2) the river passes into silurian
slates, dipping at a high angle. The same sharp contrast extends
through the country, as a whole, and may be studied to advantage
in the hills about Cow Flat to the south of Bathurst, and in the
Winburndale Creek, some seven miles to the north of the same town.
Immediately round Bathurst the granite is overlain by detrital
deposits, varying in age from pliocene to the most recent, or now
in process of formation. This applies especially to the strip of
country, including that on which Bathurst stands, between the
chain of the Bald Hills and the Macquarie River. Deep water-
courses have cut through these deposits, exposing beds of allu-
vium from two to fifteen feet in thickness, or decomposed granite
in some instances to a depth of thirty feet. That these erosions
have been effected rapidly, that is within the past fifty years, can
be readily proved. Some of the old settlers recollect a time
when many of these creeks were shallow water channels. Roots
of, comparatively speaking, young trees may oftentimes be seen
stretching from one wall of these gullies to the opposite one,
showing that the very beginning of the erosion must have taken
place at a time when the trees were fairly grown. It is impossible
not to be struck with the resemblance, in miniature, that some of
these creeks with their vertical walls bear to the cafions of Colorado.
The photographs exhibited, taken about one and a half miles to
the south-west, illustrate these features very clearly. The exact
locality lies between the racecourse and the slopes of the Bald
Hills. The oldest of these detrital deposits are, undoubtedly,
those that flank the Bald Hills, and the more recent are those
that form terraces to the present river. Further on we shall see
that the line of basalt that crowns the ridges of the Bald Hills
marks the course of the one-time bed of the Macquarie. From the
time it occupied this position, the river has, at various intervals
eroded channels over the whole country between the Bald Hills
and the opposite slopes of the valley. In this way are accounted
for, the beds of shingle, gravel, and detrital matter that
conceal the granite. Large deposits of shingle and water-worn


material, marking the position of ancient river beds, may be
studied at Kelso, near the Railway Gates; near the Church of
England grounds; on the slopes to the right of Kelso-Peel Road,
about two miles from Kelso ; on the gravel-topped hills between
All Saints’ College and the General Cemetery ; near St. Stanislaus
College, and generally on the ridges between the Yale Creek and
the Macquarie.
v. Table of formations
REPRESENTED AROUND
Bathurst.
<
HH
H
EH
H
g n
O
Ph
Most recent or now in
PROCESS OF FORMING ...
A. Deposits of loam, clay, sand,
gravel sj and decomposed
granites.
Post Pliocene
B. Gravels and shingle beds, at
various levels, between the
basalt and the present
river bed.
pH
H-I
E-i
P 3
H
H
P 3
W
Ph
Ph
0
Volcanic.
Pliocene
C. Basalt flow, capping hills.
D. Clays, sand, gravels, and
conglomerates forming
“ leads ” under basalt.
Lower Pliocene
E. Silicified conglomerates
older than “ leads.”
MESOZOIC ROCKS
I.—Not represented.
d
HH
o
cs
o
<
Ph
Igneous and Meta-
MORPHIC
' F. Granites.
G. Hornfels rock, gneissic
schists, spotted schists, mica
schists and marbles,
r H. Clay slates, phyllites, lime-
\ stones.
Silurian


the district.
1. Calcite.
Minerals.
15. Sphene.
2. Apatite.
16. Galena.
3. Quartz.
17. Green phosphate of lead.
4. Garnet.
18. Arsenio-phosphate of lead.
5. Olivine.
19. Limonite.
6. Topaz.
20. Mispickel.
7. Prehnite.
21. Pyrites (iron).
8. Felspar.
22. Magnetite.
a. Orthoclase.
23. Copper (native).
b. Plagioclase, Oligoclase. 24. Malachite,
c. Albite.
25. Copper pyrites.
9. Augite.
26. Grey ore.
10. Hornblende.
27. Azurite.
11. Actinolite.
28. Argentiferous galena.
12. Muscovite.
29. Gold.
13. Biotite.
30. Diamond.
14. Kaolin.
31. Manganese (black oxide).
vi. Minerals op Bathurst.
Before dealing with the formations and the rocks in detail, it
may be well to enumerate the minerals and rocks I have found in
Note. —The following are also reported from Glanmire: —
Rhodonite (Annual Report Dept. Mines, N.S.W., 1885, p. 141),
manganese ores, and baryta (Annual Report Dept. Mines, N.S.W.,
1884, p. 161).
1. Calcite. —Calcite is found in veins in the limestones on the
Cow Flat Road, about four miles south of the village of Perth.
It also forms veins in fissures in the granite. This seems an
unusual occurrence, and only two instances came under my notice.
It was rather plentiful in a joint or fissure, cut through in the
large well of the water-works, Bathurst. There is little doubt
but that it is a secondary mineral, formed from the decomposition
of some lime felspar.


2. Apatite. —Apatite occurs as microscopic needle-shaped bodies
in the quartz and felspar crystals of granite. It is very conspicuous
in some slices.
3. Quartz. —Quartz is very abundant in the district, and is
found as veins in the slate rocks adjoining the granite, from a few
inches up to some feet in thickness. It may be easily studied in
the slate hills about Peel, eleven miles north of Bathurst, and
over the country five miles south of Perth. There are large
quantities of water-worn quartz on the various terraces that the
river has left in eroding its way from the level of the Bald Hills
to it present bed. It is almost unnecessary to refer to it as a
constituent of the granite. In fine, a very pure form of silica is
found, as silicified wood, in drifts that have been denuded of a
covering of basalt.
4. Garnet. —Garnet, the exact species not determined, occurs in
the river sand, and when sand or gravel is washed for gold
some garnets are always found. It occurs also as inclusions in the
felspars of the granite.
5. Olivine. —This mineral is only known as a constituent of the
basalt; it rarely attains macroscopic dimensions, but under the
microscope it is found in crystals, relatively so large as to give the
basalt a micro-porphyritic structure ; this is well shown in the
rock-slices, Plate xiv. In polished slabs of basalt it can be detected
as specks, somewhat darker than the matrix, and easily acted on
by warm hydrochloric acid. Infusible before the blowpipe ] com-
pletely soluble in hydrochloric acid ; olive-green in colour ; colour-
less by transmitted light.
6. Topaz. —Commonly found with the gem sand washed from the
alluvial deposits in searching for gold. I have only met with small
stones.
7. Prehnite. —A pale green to almost colourless and translucent
mineral was found, associated with calcite, filling a fissure in
partly decomposed granite at the water-works. lam indebted for
my specimen to Mr. W. J. Clunies Ross, B.Sc. It answered as
follows to the tests applied— Streak: colourless, Hardness: 6,


Fracture: even but brittle. Heated in the closed tube, gave off a
little water. Dissolves completely in hydrochloric acid. Contains
silica, alumina and lime ; proportions not determined. Before the
blow-pipe intumesces to a porous mass. This mineral I take to
be prehnite.
8. Felspar. —Orthoclase occurs as a leading constituent in the
Bathurst granite. Near White Rock, and other places, it occurs
in a porphyritic granite as crystals from half an inch to two inches
long. Under the microscope it is more cloudy than plagioclase,
which sometimes accompanies it. In most old rocks, when
examined in thin slices, orthoclase usually appears more or less
impure, on account of foreign substances and cleavage planes that
exist in it. In this respect Bathurst orthoclase follows the general
rule. No analysis of this mineral has been made, so far as lam
aware ; but from the intense colours, afforded by Szabo’s methods,
lam inclined to think the percentage of potash is high. Typical
orthoclase contains silica 64'6, alumina IS'5, potash 16’9.
Plagioclase. —lt is rare to find a thin section of Bathurst
granite entirely free from plagioclase, but there is no predominance
of this mineral anywhere in the district over the monoclinic felspar,
by which the granites might pass locally into quartz diorites.
About four years ago I sent some slices to Mr, A. W. Howitt,
then of Sale, and he determined that the triclinic felspar of the
Bathurst granite was, in all probability, oligoclase. Triclinic
felspars, as one should certainly expect, are abundantly developed
as microscopic lath-shaped bodies in the basaltic rocks. Any
slice of the Bathurst basalt will show this clearly. See PI. xiv.
Alhite. —Mr. Howitt detected this felspar in some micro-slices I
submitted to him in 1886. It occurred as minute veins in ortho-
clase, placed approximately in the direction of the ortho axis.
9. Augite. —This monoclinic pyroxene is known only as a micro-
porphyritic constituent of the basalts. Sections, approximately
parallel to the clinopinacoid, are readily obtainable. It also
occurs as minute grains in the ground mass of the basalts. Its


abundance in this relation can be ascertained by treating a rock-
slice with acid so as to separate the soluble olivine and magnetite.
10. Hornblende. —ls found as a macroscopic mineral in the
granite ; crystals vary in size, the largest I have noticed measuring
from one-sixteenth to one-eighth of an inch along the vertical axis.
11. Actinolite. —Found to the south of Bathurst, forming veins
in quartz. M ost of my specimens come from Cow Flat. It formed
fibrous, radiated masses of dark green colour, easily fusible before
the blow-pipe. After fusion it becomes strongly magnetic. Specific
gravity 3 - 5.
12. Muscovite. —Muscovite, or common mica, is found as an
accessory mineral in the Bathurst granites. Towards the edges of
the granite mass it often entirely replaces the black mica so
characteristic of the typical Bathurst granite. Muscovite occurs
in considerable quantities in the river sands. When fresh it is
usually colourless, when slightly decomposed it appears as a rich
yellow, and an opaque golden hue is very common. It also is
found in the sands of almost every creek in the district.
13. Biotite. —Black, magnesia, iron mica occurs as small, partly
formed crystals and scales, disseminated through the granite, but
occasionally, particularly near the edges of the granite rocks, large
plates can be detected. By transmitted light it sometimes appears
of a deep green colour. After loug heating it decomposes in
sulphuric acid. Fusible without much difficulty. Plates, corre-
sponding to basal sections, are easily picked out in decomposing
granites. The dark colour of the granite is due to the exceedingly
large proportion it contains of biotite and hornblende.
14. Kaolin. —Kaolin, of various degrees of purity, can be found
both as decomposed granite in situ, and in small beds of trans-
ported material. A pure white kaolin was found on the Bald
Hills, a little to the right of the line of section A B marked on
the map. When washed free from particles of quartz it formed a
tolerably pure kaolin, but the percentage of iron was too high for
a marketable article.


15. Sphene. — The sands, resulting from the decomposition of
the granites, are full of magnetic ironstone and titaniferous iron.
This material is so plentiful that after floods it will be found
deposited as black sand in the creeks to the south of Bathurst and
about Kelso. Mr. A. W. Howitt first drew my attention to it in
the micro rock-slices. J have since detected wedge-shaped crystals,
of a deep brown colour showing dark borders with transmitted
light, in slices of granite from near Mt. Stewart. The titaniferous
ironsand may be collected in large quantities by passing a magnet
through the dry sand in any of the creeks within the granite area.
In this sand I have frequently detected titanium by fusing the
mineral with bisulphate of potash until decomposed. The fused
mass is then warmed in water in just sufficient quantity to dissolve
the soluble material. A few drops of nitric acid are added to the
filtrate, and the latter diluted with six or seven times its bulk of
water and boiled. Titanic acid separates as a white powder. The
powder can be further tested before the blow-pipe in a bead of
microcosmic salt.
16. Galena. —ls known to occur in veins and lodes in connection
with quartz reefs. So far as observed, it is unknown in granite
rocks, but is found at, or near, the junction of the slate and granite,
both to the north and south of the granite formation. A typical
occurrence of this mineral may be studied near the residence of Mr.
Suttor at JVI t. Grosvenor, Peel. As has been found in other parts
of the world, the galena here contains variable amounts of silver.
It is not found in such large quantities as to make it profitable
as a lead ore. The silver assays are always low, the highest not
exceeding 20 oz, per ton of ore.
17. Phosphate of Lead. —Occurs sparingly as an incrustation on
decomposed galena ore on the Grosvenor Estate, near Peel, i
have never detected the arsenical variety of this mineral referred
to by Mr. Stutchbury, ante p. 176.
19. Limonite. —Limonite is found as veins filling cracks or
joints in the granite. It is clearly in these instances a secondary


product. It is met with in the excavations at the water-works,
and also in a tunnel driven to test the wash in the Bald Hills.
Thin layers of this mineral may sometimes be noticed in dried-up
water-holes, near the decomposed basalts in the Bald Hills. Clayey
ironstones are also found as a cementing material, binding quartz
pebbles together, forming post-pliocene river drifts. Peculiar pea-
shaped concretions of ironstone are often met with in deposits
formed from decomposing basalts.
20. Mispickel. —Arsenio-pyrites or mispickel is tolerably abun-
dant in the schistose and slate country along the southern granitic
boundary. It occurs both massive and crystallized. This mineral
was found in a well, associated with iron pyrites, on Mr. Butler’s
selection near Green Swamp, on the Kelso-Rockley Road,
21. Iron pyrites. —Is very plentiful in the slate country about
Bathurst. A very notable occurrence was discovered in a shaft
put down by Mr. J. Wilde on Butler’s farm, to the south of Perth.
The crystals were mostly cubes, and formed the greater part of
the rock. Microscopic crystals of pyrites are very common in
some of the slates about Cow Flat. I have also noticed yellow
iron pyrites in micro-slices of granite from a railway cutting
beyond George’s Plains ; also in slices of the same rock from the
base of Mount Pleasant. It can easily be recognised in microscopic
sections by reflected light, the bright yellow of the pyrites being
clearly seen.
22. Magnetite. —This is only known as a microscopic constituent
of basalt. It will be referred to, in detail, in dealing with the
microscopic structure of the basalts.
23-28. Copper Minerals. —lt has been already remarked that
the metalliferous minerals are confined to the zone of contact
rocks. It is in these rocks that native copper, malachite, copper
pyrites, grey ore, and azurite have been discovered. I have found
native copper in hornfels rock at Duramana, on Kelly’s farm.
Malachite occurs sparingly at Cow Flat, south of Bathurst. In
the specimens I examined it seemed to result from some alteration
of azurite or blue carbonate of copper. In keeping with this fact


I have often noticed fibrous green malachite as pseudomorphs
after azurite at the Cobar copper mines. Grey copper ore is
recorded, on good authority, as occurring in the Cow Flat copper
mines. These mines are now closed.
29. Gold. —Gold is found in the drifts of the Macquarie, and,
more or less abundantly in the shingle beds forming river terraces
back to the pliocene “ leads.” The fact that gold is found in
water courses cutting through decomposed granite rocks, such as
in those creeks on the common near Bathurst, is thought by some
to prove that the gold has been shed from a granitic matrix. While
admitting that, in some instances, gold may be derived from a
granitic rock,* yet, in our case, it is unnecessary to fall back on
any such supposition, I venture to account for the presence of
the alluvial gold in this way. The Bald Hills are some 600 feet
above the Bathurst Plains. On their summits there rests a
layer of basalts covering pliocene drift. This drift has been
proved by tunnelling to carry gold. At some points the basalt
and underlying drift have been entirely removed by denudations,
while along their whole length the margins of the drift have been
eroded. The detrital matter, with its auriferous deposit thus
obtained, has been spread out between the hills and the river,
during all that period that the river has been cutting its way from
its old position to its present level. The gold now obtainable in
the granite creeks is, in fact, a re-distributed pliocene lead. The
character of the gold confirms this theory. It is not possible to
distinguish the gold washed from the creeks from some flakes
found in the highest drifts. In the creeks referred to the precious
metal was never found in quantities sufficient to pay for its
recovery.
30. Diamonds. —Although I have not seen a diamond from any
of the drifts round Bathurst, it may be well to refer to the fact
* For an interesting article on gold in granite, see Clarke’s “ Southern
Gold-fields : Researches in the Southern Gold-fields of New South Wales,
by the Rev. W. B. Clarke, M.A., F.G.S. Sydney, Reading & Wellbank’
1860.


1.
ROCKS OF BATHURST.
Igneous Division.
A. Plutonic Acidic Rocks.
Amphibole granite. 4. Graphic granite.
2.
Granulite.
5. Greisen.
3.
Aplite.
6. Porphyritic granite.
1.
Clays.
7. Felsite.
B. Volcanic Basic Rocks.
Basalt.
Sedimentary Bocks.
A. Argillaceous.
2. Slate.
1.
Sands.
B. Arenaceous.
2. Sandstone. 3. Conglomerate.
1.
Hornfels.
C. Calcareous.
Limestone.
Altered Rocks.
2. Schists. 3. Nodular schists.
that the Rev. W. B. Clarke records four diamonds as coming from
the bed of the Macquarie, near Suitor’s Bar. None have been
discovered of late years.
vii. Rocks of Bathurst.
In enumerating the rocks of Bathurst, 1 think it well to define
the terms used in describing the igneous rocks. It makes little
matter what system of nomenclature one follows, provided always
that the terms are clearly understood. Throughout this paper the
rock names will be made use of in the sense here indicated.


vii. Igneous Division.
a. Plutonic Acidic Rocks.
1. Amphibole granite. —A crystalline, granular rock, composed
of quartz + orthoclase + plagioclase + hornblende.* This corre-
sponds to the granulite a amphibole of Fouque and Levy. These
authors, in the splendid work just referred to, define granulite as
consisting of black mica, oligoclase, orthoclase, quartz and horn-
blende. Granulite a amphibole merely differs from this rock in
the total or partial substitution of hornblende for black mica.f
2. Granitite. — A crystalline, granular rock, consisting of
quartz + orthoclase + plagioclase + magnesian mica. This agrees
with granitite of Fouque and L6vy.
3. Aplite. —A granular compound of potash felspar (orthoclase
or raicrocline) and quartz, with muscovite mica as an accessory.
4. Graphic granite. —This variety of aplite, in which the quartz
laminae form figures bearing a fancied resemblance to Hebrew
letters, is sometimes found as water-worn fragments about Poor
Man’s Hollow and at Perth.
5. Greisen. —Thin veins of a rock, composed of quartz and mica,
may be found near the boundaries of the granite and slate country.
6. Porphyritic granite. —ln very many parts of the district the
felspar crystals of the granite are so large and well-developed,
being frequently two and three inches in length, as to entitle the
rock to be called porphyritic granite.
7. Felsite. —An intimate, granular-crystalline admixture of
orthoclase and quartz. Common in the drifts.
* Rosenbusch, Mikroskopische Physiographie der Massigen Gesteine, p.
29; Zweite Auflage.
t Min4ralogie Micro-graphique Roches Eruptives Francises, pp. 156,160.


b. Volcanic Basic Rocks.
Basalt —An intimate dark blue or black compound of augite,
labradorite and olivine, with some glassy matter. Magnetite and
ilmenite are generally present as well. The Bathurst basalt is
micro-porphyritic in structure, and, according to Mold's classifica-
tion, our rock is a plagioclase basalt. Boricky would call
it a felspar-basalt. Rosenbusch makes basalt include all neo-
volcanic rocks of basic composition, which essentially contain
plagioclase and augite. Olivine, this author does not consider as
an essential constituent. As regards structure, this basalt falls
under Division 4 in Rosenbusch’s classification, and is, therefore,
termed hypo-crystalline porphyritic.*
vii. Sedimentary Rocks,
Argillaceous Rocks.
1. Clays. —Composed of hydrous silicate of alumina. The
Bathurst clays contain mixtures of sand and iron oxides in various
proportions.
2. Slate. —lndurated clay, sometimes fissile in planes forming
an angle with the bedding, but more often fissile in the direction
of the bedding.
Arenaceous Group.
1. Sand. —Chemical composition, silica. Mineral components,
quartz or flint, Beds of sand are common in many of the more
recent formations.
2. Sandstone. —The shingle of the drifts consists of siliceous
sandstones to a very great extent; pure quartz and felspar
pebbles, however, predominate.
3 Conglomerates . —This rock consists of rounded pebbles of
quartz, sandstone, slate and jasperoid rock, cemented either by
siliceous or ferruginous matter. As stated on p. 181, we have two
conglomerates, similar in composition but different in age, near
Bathurst.
* Rosenbusch, Mikroskopische Physiographic der Massigen Gesteine, p.
728; Zweite Auflage.


Calcareous Rocks.
Limestones.— Chemical composition, carbonate of lime. Some
of the crystalline limestones, of a clear white colour, from Cow
Flat, are good examples of this rock. At the limekilns, some 18
miles north of Bathurst, there are very considerable beds of lime
stone. Some are white, but, in most instances, they are blue or
grey, from the fact that the last remnants of organic life have not
been destroyed.
Altered Rocks.
1. Horn/els. —A black or bluish-black rock, close-grained and
heavy, with blebs of a milk-blue quartz. In hand specimens this
rock might be taken for a fine-grained gneiss or an altered schist.
Study of the rock, in situ, shows it in every variety, from
massive and holo-crystalline to schistose.
2. Nodular Schist (Knotenschiefer). —Schists in which small,
rounded concretions are present, and which stand out like knots
on the planes of foliation. Splendid examples of this rock may
be found in a creek by the roadside on the Bathurst-Peel Road.
The exact locality is at a point where a small bridge or culvert on
the main road crosses a tributary of the Winburndale Creek, near
the foot of a steep hill, about 7 miles from Bathurst.
3. Schistose Rocks. —The schistose rocks about Bathurst might
be described as clay-slates in which layers of mica have been
developed and exhibiting distinct foliation. A typical mica schist
is an aggregate of quartz and mica only. Hand specimens can be
found about Bathurst that cannot readily be distinguished from
typical mica schists. But, as a rule, the rocks that I have noticed
might be described as felspathic, mica schists, in fact a transition
rock, or a variety between the normal type and a gneissic schist.
They are abundantly developed about Cow Flat and in the country
round the upper Winburndale Rivulet to the north-west of
Bathurst,
viii. Sedimentary Formations,
Upper Silurian. —The slates, gneissic schists, and limestones
near Bathurst, have been regarded by all our geologists as of


Petraia sp.
. Suttor.
Mines Department. ||
Stromatopora striatella ..
/ Clarke.
1 Curran.
... De Koninck.
Favositesfibrosa ...
I Clarke.
1 Curran.
De Koninck.
upper silurian age.* The lithological characters of the rocks
suggest, almost at first sight, that the slates and limestones are
similar in age to well known silurian formations. Very few
fossils have been discovered, and all those that have been described
point to the same conclusion. De Koninck mentions Siromatopora
striatellai from the Limekilns 16 miles north of Bathurst. Recently
I have collected specimens of the same fossil from the same place.
De Koninck also mentions Favosites fibrosa from this locality. J A
short time ago I noticed well preserved examples of the silurian
coral, Phillipsastnm, near the Benglen Caves Limekilns. Mr.
Etheridge, jun., palaeontologist to the Australian Museum, to
whom I submitted my specimens, informed me that the Phillips-
astraea is a new species.§ The fossil evidence stands thus :
COLLECTED BY. IDENTIFIED BY.
Phillipsastrcea sp.
Curran.
Etheridge, jun.
* Wilkinson, Notes on the Geology of N. S. Wales, p. 39 of Mineral
Products of N. S. Wales; Sydney, Government Printer, 1882.
+ Recherches sur les Fossiles Paleozoiques de La Nouvelle-Galles du Sud,
p. 10.
X Fossiles Paleozoiques, p. 22.
§ Mr. Etheridge considers the Phillipsastrcea a new species. He proposes
to describe it at an early date as P. Currani. Regarding this coral, he
writes, under date 12th February, 1891 :—“ Phillipsastrcea. —This is a very
interesting coral and does not appear to be identical with any of the European
or American species, so far as the works of reference at my disposal will
enable me to judge. P. Currani is peculiar in the absence of all trace of a
columellarian tubercle, and the central area or calici being entirely tabulate-
vesicular, on to which the septa do not pass. De Koninck records P.
Verneuilii, Ed. & H., as a New South Wales species, but speaks, in his
description, of the corallum as composed of superimposed layers, and
possessing a thin columella. Neither of these features are present in your
specimen.”
|| Annual Report of the Department of Mines, New South Wales, for the
year 1881, Appendix H. p. 148; Sydney, Government Printer, 1882,


These are silurian in type. There can be no question that
the. fossiliferous limestones are interbedded with the phyllites
and slates; so the whole formation may be unhesitatingly
accepted as silurian in age. There is still additional evi-
dence pointing in the same direction. Resting uncpnformably
on the slates are to be found in places a series of sandstones
and grits containing the well known brachiopods Spirifer
disjunctus and Rhynchonella pleurodon. These Devonian rocks
are in turn overlaid by carboniferous beds. These succes-
sions can be studied well by examining the country to the
east of the Bathurst-Limekilns Road, on the upper reaches of
the Winburndale, and generally, from the spurs of the Winburn-
dale Mountains, in the same neighbourhood, across to the Lime-
kilns. To sum up, we have evidence from the fossils enumerated,
as well as stratigraphical and lithological proofs, of the position
of the slate formations in the geological series.
When one approaches Bathurst, from any side, it will be noticed
that as the granite region is approached the slates show signs of
disturbance. They become more fissile in character, and faults are
frequently developed. Contorted strata, principally slate, are to be
seen in every creek or favourable cutting. Good examples of this
occur about Peel, and an exceptionally good contorted section is
exposed in a road cutting on the right of George’s Plains and Cow
Flat Road. Travelling still towards the granite, glistening plates
of mica become apparent on splitting the rock, showing a new
phase of crystallization. Further on, the mica becomes more
plentiful, so much so as to be recognisable as alternating layers along
which the rock easily cleaves. While still nearer the granite the
now schistose rock exhibits a peculiar puckered and wavy surface
with a satiny sheen. Then dark spots make their appearance,
and knots, ovoid and round, stand out on the weathered planes.
These spots vary in size from a pin’s head to a pea. In this we
have an excellent example of the interesting metamorphic slate
known as Knotenschiefer. Finally, a mass of rock is met with of
a dark blue colour, with no traces of schistosity in any direction,
forming a typical hornfels. This interesting succession of zones


of contact metamorphism can be followed in a line due north
from Mr. Coombe’s residence, Glanmire. Spotted schists and
hornfels can be followed by travelling up the creek (a tributary of
the Winburndale) from the culvert referred to on p. 192. The
hornfels will be found exposed between the head of the creek and
the road. Hornfels rock, in many interesting varieties, can be
collected too at Duramana, where it is used for road purposes. Good
outcrops of the same rock are easily accessible in a road cutting
on the Orange Road, near the “ Rocks,” as well as on the Rockley
Road, south of Perth, and on the Blayney Road, near the granite
boundary.
The aureole of metamorphic rock around the granite may be
divided into thi’ee zones, but, from the very nature of the case, it
is evident that no hard and fast line can be drawn between these
belts. The zones may be distinguished as—
1. Zone of micaceous clay slate.
2. Zone of knotted slate, often mica slate (Knotenglimmer-
schiefer).
3. Zone of hornfels rock.
It will of course be understood that these zones of rock do not
follow each other in due succession at every point. That this
should be so would suppose denudation to have excavated the
river valley equally on all sides—a manifest impossibility. As a
matter of fact knotted and altered slates may be found at times
nearer the central granite mass than hornfels rock. But this
difficulty is easily explained by assuming an underlying mass of
granite not yet exposed, or by noticing that sometimes the granite
dips away under the slate rock at a low angle and further on
comes once more to the surface.
Relative Age of the Sedimentary Rocks. —Silurian slate is the
oldest rock around Bathurst. At first sight this may seem rather
puzzling. The position and structure of these slates show them to
be sedimentary in origin. But we have abundant proof that they
were laid down, consolidated, and crushed into great folds long
before the granite was erupted. Of course we might suppose the


granite to be the result of extreme metamorphism, as possibly
some granites are, but in studying the geology of Bathurst one
soon abandons all hope of maintaining such an origin for the
granitic mass as a whole. This will be dealt with further on.
Wherever I have studied good junctions I always'noticed that
the slates are cut off suddenly by the granite, and in no instance
have I ever seen a slate rock resting on a granitic floor in a way
that would suggest it was originally laid down there. Indeed, no
idea can now be formed of what may have been the character of
the old sea-bed on which the sediments were first deposited. No
trace or vestige of it remains. The granite behaves in every
respect as a rock that was erupted into overlying slates, and is,
therefore, the newer. Slate, then, we take to be the most ancient
formation. Next in age come the granites. The overlying
Devonian rocks are, of course, more recent than either.
From the character of the material forming the great bulk of
the slates, we can surmise that the rocks were formed on a deep
sea-bottom. The margins of any sea-bed would naturally be made
up of coarser material. Bocks, corresponding to these deposits,
are abundantly represented. The lines of limestone had an origin
not unlike the coral reefs of our own day. The proximity of lime-
stone to conglomerates points to the presence of a shallow sea or
sea-beach. The old silurian ocean had its lines of coast, and
there must have been a continent at no great distance off, the
wearing down of which supplied the material to form the rocks
we are discussing. In what direction did this continent lie 1
What was the nature of its rocks 1 Has it disappeared to its very
foundations 1 These are questions, full of interest as they are to
the geologist, to which no satisfactory replies can be given.
The only formations resting on the granites and slates are the
drifts. These are all of tertiary and post-tertiary age. Between
these two widely separated formations there exists an immense
interval, regarding which the rocks of Bathurst contribute nothing
to our knowledge. It is difficult to think that no other rocks,
Devonian, Carboniferous, or Jurassic, ever existed above where


Bathurst now stands. Evidence is accumulating to show that the
Devonian rocks, found both to the east and west of Bathurst, once
formed a great anticlinal fold over the granite. This, probably,
formed an island in Carboniferous and Jurassic seas. But all
direct proof is missing and practically nothing is known of the
physical surroundings of this district from Devonian to Jurassic
times. The most tenable opinion is that we had dry land here-
abouts when the Carboniferous formations to the north and west
were being deposited. This means that rivers from Bathurst
mountains flowed into Carboniferous and probably Mesozoic
seas, and that our hills were old when many parts of Europe
and Asia were still under water.
The drifts referred to are all alluvial, marine deposits being
quite unknown. Every drift about Bathurst owes its origin to
the present river. The oldest deposit is some 540 feet above the
present bed, so that the amount of eroded matter is very consider-
able. By joining the basalt hills marked F, A, H, K, on the
accompanying map (PI. xvill.), the bed of the old pliocene river may
be approximately traced. These basalt hills were, there is no
doubt, once continuous, and the gaps now present are the result of
subaerial denudation. The history of the changes, since the days
when the Macquarie flowed through this channel nearly 600
feet above its present level, is shortly this. The river was the
main drainage line of the country, therefore, the lowest depression
within the water-shed. Active volcanoes were pouring out floods
of lava about Swatchfield and Orange. One of these streams of
liquid rock flowed down and filled up the valley of the Macquarie.
The river waters were thus displaced and forced to erode for them-
selves a new channel. The granite proved more yielding than the
compact basalt, so that while the basalt remains the granite has
been subjected to every agent of denudation. In effecting this we
can with much reason suppose the river to have been a far greater
stream that it is now. Volcanic eruptions are always attended
with atmospheric disturbance and heavy rains; moreover, the
rainfall was undoubtedly greater. Then the rock was, in all


probability, suffering from la maladie du granite so noticeable
now,*
A glance at section i, PI. xvi, will show some of the various posi-
tions of the river from its oldest bed to its present course. The
remnants of old channels on the slopes between the river and the
Bald Hills vary in age. The oldest drift we know to be Pliocene.
The newest is now forming, and the most we can do is to point
out that the drifts cover intervals from the Pliocene to this day.
ix. Igneous Rocks.
Granite —In the field. —There is no lack of outcrops of granite,
even within the limits of the sketch map appended. Wherever
the granites show on the surface they are decomposed. This is so
constant a character that it may be taken for granted that the
whole surface of the granite is undergoing rapid decomposition, as
stated in a former part of this paper. In sinking wells, ten and
twenty feet of decomposed rock are frequently met with. All
along the river valley wherever the rock crops out it is invariably
decomposed. Indeed, Bathurst affords a good instance of the
sickening of granite referred to by Dolomieu. Even when the
minerals of the rock hold firmly together, their slices, cut from
surface specimens, show cloudy felspars and incipient kaolinization.
For microscopical purposes the best locality to procure chips for
micro-slices is at the waterworks, where a deep shaft has been
put down, and among the broken boulders on the northern slopes
of Mt. Pleasant.
Granite is exposed up the river to O’Connell’s Plains, and along
the railway line to Locksley. Between Locksley and Brewongle
some interesting junctions may be noted, one in particular at a
bridge crossing the line between the two stations. Following the
* The disintegration of granite is a striking feature of large districts in
Auvergne, especially in the neighbourhood of Clermont. This decay was
called by Dolomieu “la maladie du granite.” The phenomenon may, without
doubt, be ascribed to the continual disengagement of carbonic acid gas from
numerous fissures. Lyell’s Principles of Geology, 11th edition, Vol. I. p. 409.


line west, good junctions of the Silurian rock and granite can be
seen a little to the Bathurst side of Newbridge Station. Decom-
posed granite is exposed in a cutting on the river bank at the foot
of George Street, near the railway gates, Kelso, near the rifle
butts, at Rankin’s Bridge, in the railway cuttings between Bathurst
and Brewongle, and in almost any of the creeks on the slopes of
the Bald Hills. Following the river down, junctions of slate and
granite rocks wflll be found in the neighbourhood of the “ Forge,”
some sixteen miles from Bathurst. The change from the granite
to the slate country is very marked in this vicinity. The granite
rocks are worn into smooth boulders, reminding one of the roches
moutonnees produced by ice action, while the slate shows jutting
points and pinnacles that conform more or less to the strike of
the slate. Boulders of a hard, undecomposed granite are to be
found on the railway line beyond Wimbledon. Porphyritic
granite is common, but limited in quantity, in each locality.
There are some good specimens near the river crossing on the
road to White Rock.
A rather noticeable feature in the Bathurst granite is the
inclusions that are by no means rare. These vary from a few inches
to many yards in length. The prevailing tint of the granite is
a light bluish-grey. The inclusions are always dark coloured.
When examined minutely they are found to consist of the same
material as the body of the granite in a finer state of division.
These inclusions contain a considerable amount of titanic or
magnetic iron. When the rock is powdered a magnet will
separate it readily. If the Bathurst granite is of metamorphic
origin, then the inclusions may represent fragments of the
original parent rock that have withstood metamorphism. On the
other hand, they might represent fragments of slate caught up
by the molten granite. After studying a great many of these
inclusions, I find it hard to believe that they are the result of any
chemical or selective influences in the cooling mass. I rather
incline to the view that they are mechanical. Some of the
inclusions consist entirely of black mica, felspar and quartz.
There is no sharp line separating the one from the other.


In weathering, the granite gives rise to a rather poor and barren
soil. Fortunately, soils resulting from either granites or sand-
stones are seldom found alone. Everywhere there is spread about
a certain amount of alluvium from the old river beds.' And over
large tracts traces of a rich soil, resulting from the decomposition
of basalts, can be detected.
Origin of the Granite. —There is a growing belief in the meta-
morphic origin of many granites. The Bathurst granite, being
limited in extent and easily accessible to its boundaries, presented
special facilities to study its origin. It is now a common position
for geologists to hold that, although in many and perhaps most
instances, granite is an intrusive rock of plutonic origin, yet
granites do occur which are the result of extreme metamorphism.
Examples are eagerly sought for to show that granite can be pro-
duced by the metamorphism of sedimentary materials in situ.
At the very outset I may state that although I am tolerably
familiar with the line of junction between the slates and granites,
I have never met with one instance of a gradual change by which
granite could be said to melt away on all sides into the surrounding
strata, or in which an undoubted granite shades off, by gradations,
into a rock of clastic origin. In studying the origin of the granite,
the boundaries and junction lines will naturally afford interesting
material. Are these boundaries marked by a hard and fast line ?
Does the granite mass behave like an eruptive rock ? Does it
alter the rocks it touches 1 Does it thrust dykes and veins into
the rocks around, or do the many square miles of granite melt
away, by insensible gradations, into slates and phyllites ?
Wherever I have observed contacts, the line of junction has
been hard and fast. The granite does thrust out veins into the
slates near it, and, without doubt, it alters clay slates to hornfels.
The granite is, therefore, in a sense intrusive, but this does not
exclude the view that it may have been, for all that, derived from
pre-existing sediments. I will now describe a few instances that
will maintain my position as to the intrusive nature of the granite,
and then consider the probabilities of its being derived from pre-
existing sedimentaries.


A junction of granites and Silurian rock can be well seen near
the bridge over the Winburndale Creek, on the Bathurst-Peel
Road, a few hundred yards up stream. Two rocks are noticeable,
one of flesh-coloured granite, which is very marked in its contrast
with the other, a massive, compact, bluish rock —a hornfels or
altered slate. The granite is mainly binary with strings and nests
of translucent quartz. There are occasional flakes of black mica,
and layers of white mica are sometimes developed along the joints.
The flesh-coloured porphyritic granite sends veins of varying
thickness into the hornfels. One vein, not above an inch in
thickness, is shot in a right line into the altered slate for fully 20
yards ; see PI. xv. fig. 5.
In the same locality I noticed a granitic vein springing from the
main mass of granite and entering the hornfels as a dyke about a
foot thick. A short distance away it is narrowed down to five
inches, at the same time bending round to form a right angle with
the first direction and then continuing in a right line in its new
course. Smaller veins connect the two arms at the angle. A
diagi’am of this interesting intrusion will be found on PI. xv. fig. 6.
A little further along the same road, in the direction of Bathurst,
a tributary of the Winburndale is crossed. It is dry at most
seasons of the year. By following up this creek, a variety of
rocks will be met with, indicating that the junction of the slate
and granite is not far off. Near the culvert, in fact under it,
splendid samples of “ spotted slate ” can be found with a general
strike to the north-west.
I will narrate, in the order they are met with, some of the
varieties of rocks that may be studied here, following the creek up
from the road.
1. Some three hundred yards from the culvert there is a vein of
felspathic rock, containing blebs of translucent quartz, silvery
mica, and quartz veins. This is some three feet in thickness, and
contains inclusions of a schistose hornfels.
2. Slate, dipping north-east at a high angle.


3. A granitic dyke, with inclusions of a schistose hornfels. The
general direction conforms to that of the slate. It consists of
felspar, quartz and white mica. Besides the mica distributed
through the rock, there occur nests of the same mineral, oftentimes
with the mica contorted and broken.
4. Spotted slate, with occasional thin veins of quartz.
5. A dyke of granite, with large felspars and white mica. There
are layers of white mica on every joint.
6. Slate,
7. Coarse granite, with parallel jointings.
8. Spotted slate.
9. Granite vein, some six yards wide, in places almost as fine-
grained as a felsite. The rock is rendered porphyritic in places
by nests of silvery mica and felspar. There are also thin veins of
quartz.
10. A thick belt of spotted slate, nearly two hundred yards
wide, with occasional thin veins of quartz.
11. A vein of granite, with black mica.
So far, although we are approaching the main granitic mass,
neither black mica nor hornblende has yet been developed.
12. Boulders of porphyritic granite, with dark fine-grained
inclusions.
13. Beyond these last named x’ocks there are few exposures of
the bed rock, but some hundred yards further on the typical
Bathurst granite is met with, containing both hornblende and
black mica.
The succession here detailed points out that the actual junction
between the older and newer rocks is a wavy line with sharp and
deep bends. In one place the granite runs into the slate in dykes
and veins, while between these there are left jutting points and
arms of the old rock standing between walls of granite. Junctions
of a similar nature are described by Mr. A. W. Howitt in his able
paper on the Diorites and Granites of Swift’s Creek.*
* Transactions of the Royal Society of Victoria, Vol. xvi, pp. 11-87.


Near Newbridge, the junction of the igneous and sedimentary
rocks presents the same features. In a cutting on the Bathurst
side of the railway station bars of igneous and slate rocks can be
studied in actual contact. The boundaxy-line between the two is
still sharp, and no evidence can be found of a slate merging into
a granite. On the contrary, examples can be found where the
intrusion of the granite in a liquid or pasty condition, but
evidently under great pressure, has bent and crushed, and pushed
on one side, the easily yielding slates. In cases where the granite
does alter the rock with which it is in contact, the alteration
consists in the development of a rock not in any way resembling
a granite. Where the alteration is most complete, a hornfels is
the result, and where incipient alteration is noticeable, a close
examination reveals merely a rearrangement of old minerals and
the introduction of only one new one. Between Locksley and
Brewongle, on the railway line, a good example is exposed of
the alteration produced by the intrusion of granite. Near a high
level bridge, between these two stations, a mass of granite will be
found lying partly to one side and partly under a micaceous and
schistose rock. The granite sends veins into the overlying
beds. This upper rock, as stated, is of a schistose character, and
it will be noticed that the planes of schistosity are parallel to the
mass of the intrusive rock. In this instance the schistose planes
are horizontal, which gives the rock a bedded appearance. But in
other parts of the district, notably on the Hockley Road, south of
Peel, where a foliated or schistose structure is developed, the
foliation planes are vertical. This inclines one to the view that
an envelope of foliated rock once surrounded the granite mass, so
that when a portion of the original sediments remain above the
granite the schistose structure will be horizontal, but when they
are seen forming a vertical boundary to the intruded granite the
planes of schistosity will be vertical. In connection with this
peculiar structural development, it may be mentioned that a
schistose structure can be induced in wax and mixtures of oxide of
iron and pipeclay by pressure,* and that, in these instances, the
* See Tyndall’s “ Fragments of Science,” Yol. I. p. 366.


planes of the laminae are found to arrange themselves in rudely
parallel planes perpendicular to the lines of pressure. Whatever
may be the explanation, we have here at Bathurst a foliated or
schistose structure developed in sedimentary rocks when in contact
with an intrusive granite. When a fragment of these ancient
sediments is found above, and resting on, the granite, the foliated
structure lies horizontally, and when found adjoining the granite
mass, the folia stand vertically. A diagram showing the intrusive
veins at Locksley will be found on PI. xv. fig. 1. The sketches
were made some eight years ago, when the face of the cutting was
fresh. I examined the same section a few months ago, and
although the rocks have disintegrated a little and vegetation is
beginning to take hold there, the intrusive veins can be easily
studied.
With the evidence of these sections before us, we are now in a
position to enquire into the origin of the granite. Everything
that we know points to the one conclusion, that the Bathurst
granite is intrusive. The granite alters rocks with which it comes
in contact. It sends tongues, veins and dykes into the adjoining
rocks. Nowhere can we trace a gradual change from a sediment
to a rock granitic in structure. The proximity of granite has
converted phyllites into hornfels. It has caused a rearrangement
of old minerals in the sedimentary strata, and caused the
development of one new mineral in abundance, namely, mica.
But this is all. Nothing approaching a granite can be found
resulting from any metamorphic process, and in no one section
have I ever discovered anything like a change from a clastic to a
holo-crystalline rock, granitic in composition.
When I first examined the rocks around Bathurst the prevailing
impression left on my mind was that the granite melted away by
insensible gradations into the surrounding rocks. A more minute
examination rendered this position untenable; but it will be
interesting if we can yet discover a granite truly metamorphic in
origin. There can be no difficulty, as far as chemical composition
of some slates goes, in believing that the constituents of a slate


rock may be rearranged so as to give rise to a rock that may not
be distinguished from granite. The evidence advanced in support
of the metamorphic origin of many granites broke down when the
rocks were subjected to the test of microscopical examination.
But there are still cases where all the refinements of modern
geology have been employed without shaking the conclusion that
some granites, at least, and certainly some crystalline schists, can
be produced by the metamorphism of rocks in situ *
There is little doubt, then, but that the granite was intruded
into Silurian rocks after their folding and elevation. Possibly the
granitic intrusion formed an anticlinal, and lifted the sediments
yet higher. Silurian rocks once occupied the place now taken by
the granite. Were the former rocks simply lifted or thrust aside,
or were they absorbed by the molten or plastic granite ? Lifted, I
should say. There is little proof to show in support of this view,
but it is an impression left after a study of the whole district. I
have no doubt at all but that portions of the Silurian rocks were
absorbed by the granite in its intrusion. When we examine the
outer edges of the granite, we find that for a short distance from the
contact it differs from the typical rock. There is, for instance, an
absence of hornblende, the mica is in nests, and the minerals,
generally, are not arranged as in a normal granite. Quartz,
instead of filling up the spaces left by the other constituents, is
found in grains and blebs through a much larger body of felspar.
All this might be accounted for by the more rapid cooling of the
margins of any intrusive rock. But I consider it as the result of
the absorption of a certain amount of the pre-existing phyllites.
In this connection I would like to draw attention to some views
on the origin of crystalline rocks as set forth in the volume of the
International Geological Congress for 1888. f
In a paper on the “Archaean Geology of the Region N.W. of
Lake Superior,” Dr. A. C. Lawson points out that the archaean
* See Green’s “Physical Geography,” Chapter ix., second edition.
+ Congres lnternational 4me Session —Londres, 1888. Etudes
sur les Schistes Cristallins.


rocks of that region can be resolved into two great divisions. The
lower composed of rocks which but for their foliation are regarded
as of plutonic igneous origin. Resting on these is a mass of
stratiform rocks, partly detrital, partly volcanic. These latter, or
upper series, were certainly not laid down on the lower. The old
floor on which they were deposited has disappeared ; and again,
Dr. Lawson points out that the lower series could not have been
the crust from which the detritus for forming the upper rocks was
derived.
“ There is but one way of reconciling these statements. It is a
simple conception, and one well in accordance with established
geological truth, that certain portions of the earth’s crust upon which
strata are accumulating may sink gradually. Now, that portion
of it upon which the upper archean was accumulating, to a thick-
ness of several miles, may be conceived to have been depressed,
either by reason of the superincumbent weight or from other
causes, till it came within a zone of a sort of fusion compatible
with the conditions of such depths. This fusion gives us the
magma which is implied in the conception of the laurentian gneisses,
granites, and syenites, being of plutonic igneous origin.” 44
Vancouver Island furnishes another example that may throw
some light on the origin of the Bathurst granite. Dr. G. M.
Dawson has described the relations of granites to triassic beds in
Vancouver and the adjacent coasts. Triassic beds are frequently
found in contact with, or resting upon, granite rocks. They were
not, however, deposited on a granitic floor, as the granites are
evidently of a later date. “ The circumstances attending the line
of junction of the granites with the rocks of the Vancouver
(triassic) series have been carefully examined at a great number
of points. The granites near this line are usually charged with
innumerable darker fragments of the Vancouver series, which,
when in the immediate vicinity of the parent rock, are angular
aud clearly marked, but at a greater distance become rounded and
blurred in outline, and might then be mistaken for concretionary
* Congrfes Geologique International, Londres, 1889 ; pp. 75, 76.


masses in the granite, into the substance of which they have been
in process of being absorbed. The width of the belt characterized
by these fragments is very variable, and where the plane of the
present surface cuts that of the junction of the two classes of rocks
at an acute angle—as is often the case—it is considerable,
frequently exceeding half a mile. . . . The only explanation
which appears to satisfactorily account for the appearances met
with, is, that we have at the surface a plane which was at one
time so deeply buried in the earth’s crust that the rocks beneath it
had become subject to granitic fusion or alteration.”*
The bearing of these extracts on the geology of Bathurst is
obvious. Here we have Silurian rocks resting on a granite. There
must have been a solid floor on which they were deposited. The
granite on which they rest was certainly not the pre-existing base-
ment. And it is extremely improbable that granitic rocks formed
the crust from which the sediments were derived. Thus far the
conditions are very similar; and it is hard to resist the conclusion
that when the original floor of the Silurian was being absorbed in
the granitic magma, some of the Silurian rocks suffered a like fate.
The Devonian and Carboniferous formations are now estimated, by
Mr. C. S. Wilkinson,f to measure 20,000 feet in thickness. With
two miles of strata resting on our Silurian rocks, we can see the
possibility of the lowest series being brought within a zone of
fusion, which would furnish the required magma, and make the
Bathurst granite, in a sense, at once metamorphic and intrusive.
We have abundant proof, as shown above, that the granite is
intrusive in character. It is quite another question to decide
whether the material that forms the granite was drawn from a
deep-seated source, or whether it is the result of the profound
metamorphism of a previously existing sediment.
* Annual Report of the Geological Survey of Canada, 1887 ; Report 8.,
pp. 11-13.
t See “ Notes on the Geology of New South Wales,” by C. S. Wilkinson,
F.G.S., contained in “Mineral Products of New South Wales;” Sydney,
the Government Printer, 1887.


I am not in possession at the present time of sufficient material
to deal with this question, but, as a first step towards a solution
of the problem, I may state that there is abundant reason for
believing that the granite exposed about Bathurst is but a small
portion of a very large mass that underlies the palaeozoic rocks on
all sides. In keeping with this view, we find that the granite is
exposed for a much greater distance up and down the river than
across the valley. The lowest rock for miles around is probably
granite, and the Bathurst rock shows merely where the overlying
beds have been denuded.
Microscopic Examination of the Granite. —l have made some
twenty-five slices of the granite for microscopic examination.
Nearly all the minerals of the rock can be seen macroscopically,
particularly in polished specimens. Certainly there are fine-grained
varieties, but the average Bathurst granite is coarse-grained.
Crystals of black hornblende are not unusual of 9 mm. in length.
Glistening faces of felspars, 16 mm. long, are frequently found.
In polished specimens the silica and felspars appear in about equal
quantity, or perhaps with felspars slightly in excess. The minerals
proved to be present by a microscopic examination are :
Essential Minerals. Accessory Minerals.
Quartz. Muscovite.
Felspar. Apatite.
Hornblende. Sphene.
Biotite. Garnet.
Magnetite. Calcite.
Quartz. —Under the microscope, in plain parallel light, the
quartz is easily distinguished from all other minerals by its water-
clear appearance, the absence of inclusions, and its fresh, unaltered
aspect. It is found filling up the spaces left by the other consti-
tuents. Under higher powers, inclusions will be noticed, but not
in such quantity as to lessen the contrast between the clear quartz
and the cloudy felspars. The hair-like lines that cut through the
quartz in every direction fall under the heading of trichites,
described by various observers. These trichites can be noticed


striking in every direction through the clear quartz. A power of
one hundred diameters shows them in great abundance. They
branch, sometimes meet at a point, fifteen or twenty diverge from
one point, and sometimes opaque blebs are found at various
points along their length, or, more often, at the end. I can offer
no explanation as to their real nature. Cavities are abundant in
the quartz. They can be detected in every slice. I have noticed
one spontaneously moving bubble. Besides the trichites and
bubbles, tubes can be seen in the silica with a power of fifty
diameters. They are evidently tracks left in the plastic mass by
moving bubbles of gas.
Examined in polarized light, with crossed Nicols, the quartz
displays the usual gorgeous broad sheets and bands of colour, one
colour imperceptibly shading into another. In very thin slices
it appears a dull blue-grey. The great abundance of cavities in
the silica of all the slices is explained by the fact that the quartz
was the last mineral to crystallize. When rocks that have cooled
from an igneous magma are studied, it is often noted, as we should
expect, that the most fusible mineral was the last to crystallize.
But it is found that this does not apply to granitic rocks. Every
student knows that quartz is commonly called infusible, while the
felspars are considered fusible in various degrees. In the con-
solidation of granite from an igneous fluid or paste, felspar was
the first to crystallize, while the more infusible quartz filled up
the interspaces and was the last to solidify. Our granite is no
exception to the rule, for the silica occurs in an amorphous state,
enclosing the other minerals as in all true granites. This is
explained by supposing that the original plasticity was induced in
some other way than by what we understand as dry igneous
fusion. The fluid inclusions prove the presence of water and
various salts. The quartz, being the last to harden, took in any
fluid residue and, from its enduring nature, retained it. A notable
feature of the quartzes, under the microscope, is the presence of
microscopic dust which seems to have accumulated on the outside
surfaces of the quartz granules.


The proportion in which the minerals occur, as revealed by the
microscope, may be expressed as follows, felspar being * the com-
monest : —l. Orthoclase ; 2, Silica ; 3. Triclinic felspars ; 4. Bio-
tite; 5. Hornblende ; 6. Magnetite; 7. White mica.
Felspars. —With crossed Nicols, the felspars can be readily
divided into orthoclase and into felspars with distinct triclinic
striations. The orthoclase occurs in sub-crystalline patches, and,
in most slides, is the more plentiful of the two. In its general
appearance the orthoclase is always cloudy, even in the thinnest
sections. The cloudiness and opacity of the orthoclase is a constant
character in all the slices I have cut. I attribute this peculiar
dimness to pores and fractures that no doubt hasten incipient
kaolinization. This structure has, no doubt, a great deal to do
with the “ sickening of the rock ” before referred to. Indeed,
anyone accustomed to micro-petrographical work, would, on
account of these characters, at once decide that the rock was not
of an enduring character.
Triclinic Felspars. —The banded appearance, so characteristic of
the triclinic felspars, is at once noticeable under crossed Nicols in
every slice. The amount of plagioclase relative to the orthoclase
varies much. The plagioclase is often in excess, and sometimes
the two felspars seem equal in quantity. I sent a few slices of
this rock to Mr. A, W, Howitt, our leading Australian petrologist,
and he decided, from the structure of the crystals and from their
obscuration angles, that the felspar was oligoclase. Sections are
not uncommon with the fine bands of colour crossing at an angle of
90°. This felspar contains inclusions of other minerals that had
crystallized before itself. Magnetite is a common inclusion, as
well as corroded crystals and plates of hornblende.
Hornblende. —Every slice will show hornblende more or less
plentifully under the microscope. The crystals are generally much
corroded, showing that they were formed long before the felspars.
A few examples show the exact prismatic hornblende. Most of
the sections, however, are in zones other than the prismatic, and
show only one set of cleavage lines. In thin sections it appears


of a deep brown colour, and sometimes of a rich sap green. Nearly
every slice has a favourable section on which the angle, formed by
an axis of elasticity and a crystallographic axis, can be measured.
Sometimes it is not easy to distinguish between hornblende and
biotite in slices of the Bathurst granite. For the information of
students who may make use of these notes, I may just indicate the
difference. The micas, including of course biotite, show no sensible
dichroism in sections parallel to the base. In sections across the
cleavage the biotites will show very strong dichroism on rotating
the lower Nicol prism. Hornblende is also dichroic, but a few
sections can usually be found on the slice parallel, or nearly
parallel, to the base; these will show two sets of cleavage.
Sections of hornblende, parallel to the vertical axis, show but one
set of cleavage lines, and in this resemble mica. But tlie cleavage
planes of the hornblende are generally coarse, or seldom so close
as those in mica. Mica, too, has usually a more ragged look than
hornblende, and the ends of the laminae have a frayed-out appear-
ance. Finally, unless the section be cut exactly parallel to the
orthopinacoid, hornblende does not extinguish when the cleavage
lines are parallel to a diagonal of the Nicols. Between
crossed Nicol prisms all sections of biotite will be black when the
cleavage corresponds with the plane of vibration of either Nicol, since
the cleavage corresponds with an axis of elasticity. With horn-
blende this is not the case, and, in the larger number of its sections,
the point of maximum darkness will be obtained when the cleavage
makes a certain, though not great, angle with the plane of the light.
Biotite. —Biotite is common in all the slices. It appears as
irregular plates, with parallel striae, corresponding to the cleavage
on sections, parallel to the vertical axis. The absorption exhibited
by rotating the polarizing prism under the section is very marked.
Sometimes flakes show of a light brown colour, without any
cleavage lines, exhibiting no dichroism. These I take to be
biotites cut parallel to the basal planes or cleavage. They
resemble, in every respect, flakes or plates cleaved from biotites
and mounted separately for comparison.


Muscovite. —Muscovite is, comparatively speaking, rare. Mr.
A. W. Howitt first pointed out its presence to me. It is common
enough in the aplite and kindred rocks on the borders of the
granite country. But in the main body of the granite it lias been,
up to the present, detected only under the microscope.
Magnetite is readily recognised in every slice by its remaining
opaque in the thinnest sections, and by its peculiar lustre in
reflected light. Sphene is another rare constituent. It appears
in clear brownish-red granules. Sometimes wedge-shaped crystals
can be seen with dark or almost opaque edges.
I have selected four fairly typical slides from my rock slices,
and I will give a short description of their microscopic characters.
1. (Slice 48). The general appearance of this slice under the
miscroscope is that of a holo-crystalline rock. Some of the micas
and hornblende show crystalline faces, but the quartz and felspars
are, for the most part, allotriomorphic. With crossed Nicols, a
considerable quantity of plagioclase becomes visible, but it is
altogether subordinate in amount to the orthoclase. The quartz
occurs in broad plates, filling up the interspaces between the other
minerals, and showing in polarized light the customary brilliant
colours. Glass cavities and fluid cavities are very abundant in the
quartz. Fluid cavities, with bubbles of gas, can be readily found
with a magnifying power of about seventy-five diameters. By
using immersion lens, cavities containing spontaneously moving
bubbles can be detected. The Bathurst granite affords abundant
material for studying this wonderful phenomenon. The slide I
am describing contains many good examples of spontaneously
moving bubbles. Some of these bubbles move round the cavities
slowly, reminding one of the movements of a rotifer in search of
food. Others are stationary until the slice is slightly heated, when
the bubbles are seized with a sort of trembling motion and suddenly
start off travelling round the cavity. I have noticed many in
which the movements are so rapid that it is difficult for the eye to
follow them in their course. In this slice brown dichroic mica is
abundant. It becomes almost dark in some positions as the


polarizer is rotated. There are also a few crystals of hornblende,
which is also strongly dichroic; but, as has been already explained
in a former portion of this paper, there is little danger of con-
founding the two minerals. The orthoclase felspar is cloudy,
appearing of a snowy white by reflected light. The hornblendes
contain some bright green patches of decomposition matter.
2. (Slice 38), This slide contains a hornblende crystal 4 - 6 mm.
along its vertical axis. The largest patch of quartz is 2 mm. by
T 8 mm. Triclinic felspars are present showing a beautiful
banded structure under crossed Nicols. The quartz is clear and
limpid, containing few inclusions other than the fluid cavities.
The hornblende and biotite are the only minerals showing
traces of boundary planes.
3. (Slice 34). The minerals present are quartz, biotite, felspar,
orthoclase, and triclinic felspar. Fluid cavities are very plentiful
in the quartz, numbers coming into the focus of the glass as the
different planes are reached by the fine adjustment. The felspars
are in places almost impellucid. A few crystals of magnetite are
included in a flake of biotite.
4. (Slice 37). Under the microscope some finely striated, clear
brown mica is seen. Even in the thinnest section it is strongly
dichroic. When the cleavage lines are parallel to the plane of
vibration of the light, the sections are black or very dark brown.
A few crystals of apatite are enclosed in the quartz and biotite.
A reddish-brown wedge-shaped sphene will be noticed on the
margin of the slice. The biotite alters to a leek-green material
that often preserves the dichroic character, but the cleavage lines
are lost. The felspars as is usual are impure and cloudy, and the
quartz beautifully pellucid. The hair-like microlites, to which
reference has been already made, are abundant. Triclinic felspar
is present, but not so plentiful as orthoclase.
Chemical composition of the Granite.
Specific gravity at 18*5° C 2‘85-2'93
1 am indebted to Mr. Mingaye, F.C.S., of the Geological Survey
Laboratory, for the following analysis of the granite. The


Silica
66-69
Alumina
17-03
Ferric oxide
315
Ferrous ditto
-69
Manganous ditto
Lime (Ca 0)
1-82
Magnesia (Mg 0)
2-50
Potash (K 2 0)
6-26
Soda (Na 2 0)
1-21
Phosphoric acid ....
Sulphuric anhydride
Titanic acid
Moisture
-48
specimen submitted for analysis was fairly typical of the general
character of the rock ;
Hornblende-biotite-granite.
99-83
Comparing the above with well-known granites, it will be seen
that the Bathurst rock contains about 10 per cent, less silica
than the normal type of West of England granite, while it is
richer than the average granite in alumina and potash.
Basalt.
The basalts have been defined as dai’k-coloured lavas of basic
composition and high specific gravity, representing the extrusive
or volcanic type of the gabbros and dolerites. Dr. Geikie limits
the term basalt to the contemporaneous lavas of basic composition.*
They consist of a compact or finely granular ground-mass, through
which crystals of plagioclase, augite and olivine are scattered.
Again, some authors use the terms dolerite, anamesite and basaltf
for rocks which, chemically identical and all holo-crystalline, differ
* British Petrography, by J. J, Harris Teall, M.A. ; London, 1888, p. 193.
t Professor J. G. Bonney—Anniversary Address to the Geological Society,
London ; Quarterly Journal Geological Society, Vol. xli. p. 70.


in the coarseness and fineness of their grains, so that the last term
is applied to a rock which either may be holo-crystalline or may
retain a glassy base. It would be convenient, then, to restrict
the term dolerite to the holo-crystalline variety, using the epithet
coarse-grained or fine-grained as the case may be ; to apply the
name anamesite to the hemi-crystalline varieties ; and to include
in the term basalt all that retain a glassy base.
The Bathurst rock I shall refer to under the name of basalt
simply. It is not as fine-grained as the typical anamesite, nor as
coarse-grained as a dolerite, and the amount of glass in the base
is variable. I would describe the Bathurst basalt as a blue-black,
compact, apparently homogeneous rock, that breaks with a
splintery and conchoidal fracture, and in which the component
minerals can be studied only with the microscope, unless occa-
sionally scattered porphyritically through the mass. It occurs as
a contemporaneous flow and consists essentially of triclinic felspar,
augite, olivine and magnetite, with small portions of an unindi-
vidualised glassy base.* Zirkel, in studying the basalts of the
fortieth parallel of North America, separated the felspar-bearing
basaltic rocks into four distinct groups.! The Bathurst rocks
would naturally fall into the group which he describes as
“ possessing a microscopically very fine-grained, totally crystalline
aggregation of crippled microlites, largely felspar and augite,
which serve as a ground-mass, in which micro-porphyritical and
macro-porphyritical larger crystals of felspar and olivine, with
occasional augites are distinctly and sharply embedded.” Add
magnetite and occasional patches of a glassy base, and the above
description answers fairly well for the Bathurst rock. Of course,
in speaking of basalts generally, we would call our rock a felspar
* The fact of its being a contemporaneous flow does not affect the classi-
fication. I agree with the English geologists who refuse to accept the
geological age of a rock as a character on which its nomenclature ought to
be based. See Judd, “On the Tertiary Gabbros,” &c., of Scotland,
Q.J.G.S., Vol. xlii. p. 60.
f Zirkel, Microscopical Petrography of the Fortieth Parallel; United
States Geological Exploration, p. 253.


basalt, which would distinguish it at once from the leucite basalts
that are known to occur at Harden, Byrock, and Cobar. Com-
pared with the basalts immediately around, those of Orange and
Carcoar for instance, the Bathurst rock is distinctive enough.
This is most easily detected in preparing thin slices for the micro-
scope. Long before the slice is sufficiently thin, the Orange basalt
is seen, by transmitted light, to consist of a felted mass of plagio-
clase, with augites and olivines for the most part wedged between.
The Bathurst slice on the contrary will show micro-porphyritic
minerals in a holo-crystalline base with an abundance of magnetite
and drop-like grains of augite. Basalts of this type are not
uncommon in Europe and America. The resemblance extends
even to such minute details as the serpentinization of the olivines,
and the sharp well-marked features of the iron oxides. Zirkel’s
remark, relative to the American basalt, applies well to this
Australian example. “It is worth while,” he says, “to pause and
remark that in these widely remote quarters of the globe the
product of the solidification of a molten mass, although exposed
to many casualties, has nevertheless maintained a surprisingly
close identity of microscopical composition.”*
Basalt in the Field. —A glance at the map accompanying this
paper will show the extent of the basalt. It marks the course of
an old river valley. At the outside it is not more than 150 to 200
feet in thickness where it lies deepest. It can be studied well at
the quarries on the Bald Hills, where stone is obtained for road
purposes. Perth railway station is very convenient to the hill
marked F. Here the basalt forms one of those table-topped hills
which, in the western district, are invariably recognised, even from
a distance, as basaltic. The road from Perth to Evans’ Plains
crosses a saddle in the hills. On this road sections of decomposed
granite are exposed, where the weathering of the rock can be
noted. About half way up the hill water-worn pebbles will be
found, increasing as we ascend. These have weathered out from
the drift that lies between the granite and basalt. As soon as no


more water-worn pebbles can be found, it may be takeu for granted
that the highest point of the drift and the lowest point of the
basalt have been reached. The weathered surfaces of the rock on
the hill tops show no evidence of the prismatic structure under-
neath. This prismatic structure may be seen in the quarries
referred to. They are situated on the line A—B. The columns
are utilised in their natural state for kerb stones. They break in
some directions with a conchoidal fracture, while in other directions
the stone can be broken in parallel flakes. From Perth the basalt
may be followed without a break to the point marked L. Here
there is an isolated hill with a basaltic cap, known as the Pinnacle.
The table-topped hill overlooking Evans’ Plains is the next remnant
of the once continuous sheet. Then there is a long break to Mt.
Pleasant, near Mr, Stewart’s residence. Perth and Mt. Pleasant
are the extreme points of the basaltic flow around Bathurst. Of
course these points were not the original limits of the basalt
plateaux. Allusion has been already made to the source of this
basalt. Mr. Wilkinson pointed out that the stream came down
from the neighbourhood of Swatchfield. Possibly a microscopic
examination of the Swatchfield basalts could throw light on
this question. It is certain, however, that no volcanic “ neck ”or
traces of a crater exist within a radius of ten miles of Bathurst.
Very little has been done to expose the drifts under the basalt,
so that some idea may be gathered as to the nature of the old
valley. Along some points, where the basalt has been entirely
worn away, there is an abundance of silicified wood strewn about
the surface. This, no doubt, has been derived from the drift, and
shows that the river valley flowed through a forest-clad region.
At the present time the ridge of basalt forming the Bald Hills
stands from 400 to 600 feet above the surrounding country. In
the pre-volcanic days it was of course the lowest point. We have
here, then, a splendid example of the effects of subaerial denuda-
tion. The old mountains and valley have both disappeared, and
the untiring hand of Nature has spread out the material of which
they were composed over the great tertiary plains of the interior.
In this connection I must draw attention to a fact oftentimes


overlooked when dealing with our geology. We are, for the most
part, accustomed to consider the material removed by denudation
as eventually carried to the sea. None of the material removed
by denudation from around Bathurst in Tertiary times ever reached
any sea. It was disposed of in the same way as is the vast amount
of material brought down each year by the Macquarie. None of
this material ever gets to the sea, but is deposited over the plains
between Dubbo and the Darling. “ The precipitous and rugged
country about the Upper Macquarie, the chains of basalt capped
hills in the Bathurst district, and all the surfaces which form the
valley of the river down to Wellington, have been carved into
their present shapes by the subaerial influences of air, fiost, xain,
and rivers. Near Dubbo we might draw the line which would
show the limit of deposition, denudation and deposition being
synchronous and co-equal. The basaltic hills referred to have
their representatives at Dubbo, but with their summits barely on
a level with the surrounding country.”* Professor A. Geikie
describes geological features very similar to our own in a paper on
the “Tertiary Volcanic Rocks of the British Islands. Refening
to the ridge of Eigg, he says;—“ In Eigg a fragment of the river
valley has been preserved solely because it has been sealed up
under streams of vitreous lava which could better withstand the
progress of waste. Thus the Scur of Eigg, like the fragments of
the older basalt-plateaux of Auvergne, remains as a monument
not only of volcanic eruptions, but of a former land surface, now
effaced, and of the irresistible march of those slow and seemingly
feeble agencies by which the denudation of a country is effected.
It is very probable that a columnar structure is developed along
the line of hills, but unfortunately there are no natural exposures
of this interesting phenomenon. A large opening has been made
nearly on the line of section AB, PL xvi. Here the columns of
basalt show well. Many are curved in a peculiar manner, but for
the most part the columns are straight. Between the joints they
vary in length from two to seven feet. The cup and socket
*J. Milne Curran, “ Notes on Geology of Dubbo.” P. L. Soc. N.S.W.
01, X. p. 170.


structure so characteristic of the jointings in basalt is nowhere to
be seen. The joints are planes, sometimes normal to the sides of
the columns and sometimes forming small angles with them. As
regards thickness, there is no uniformity in the columns. The
average size might be taken as eighteen inches across. The
weathering of these columns is rather noticeable. As the basalt
decomposes it peels off in layers, and the centres of these films are
fairly fresh. Plate xvil. shows this peculiar weathering.
The columns are, for the most part, tetragons, pentagons, and
hexagons. With regard to the relative frequency of the various
kinds, the following may be taken as a fair estimate—tetragons
4 per cent., pentagons 20 per cent., hexagons 65 per cent.
I made some measurements of the angles of the basaltic columns
with these results :
Tetragons (sum = 360°) :
(i.) a 93° (ii.) a 113°
b 110 b 81
88
68
Pentagons (sum = 540°)
(i.) a 112°
(u.) a 133°
b 121
b 118
c 81
d 115
e 95
c 100
d 98°
e 89
(iii.) a


In hand specimens, the Bathurst basalt bears a strong resem-
blance to the Rowley Regis basalt of Staffordshire. It is not
unlike, in its texture, a basalt in my own collection from Madeira.
It differs, however, from the basalt flows of the same age about
Orange and Dubbo. It is commonly known as “ blue metal,”
and I think that the Bathurst rocks have a decidedly bluer
shade than the generality of western basalts. This peculiar
blue-black is noticeable only on fractured surfaces, polished
surfaces being very dark or almost black.
Microscopic Structure of the Basalt. —l have cut thirty slices of
this basalt, collected at various points between Perth and Mt.
Pleasant. Five slices were cut from rocks from the high hill
overlooking Perth. Ten slices were made from the columnar
basalt in the quarries already referred to, and were taken from an
average depth of fifteen feet from the surface. A few slices were
collected from the hill known as the Pinnacle, and the remaining
number from Mt. Pleasant. Under the microscope there is no
essential difference between any of the slides. In fact there is
not even a structural difference between the slices from the most
widely separated localities.
In grinding down the sections, the first mineral to show is
olivine. While the section is still comparatively thick, the micro-
porphyritic crystals of olivine are seen as clear spots in the, as yet,
opaque slice. The next mineral recognisable is invariably the
augite, and as the section thins down the plexus or network of the
tiny felspars becomes visible. As the section grows thinner, the


base resolves itself into tiny globules of olivine, augite and felspar.
In this ground-mass augite is much more abundant than would be
supposed at first sight. In every slice black grains of magnetite
are plentiful, and remain opaque in the thinnest sections. It is
usually well preserved and shows no signs of decomposition. It
was the first mineral to separate from the glassy magma, and is
the only primary constituent ever enclosed in the olivines.
Broadly speaking, the structure is decidedly micro-porphyritic.
A “ streaming of the felspars ” is a very characteristic structure
at once recognised under the microscope. It is hardly pronounced
enough, however, to be termed a fluxion structure. The lath-
shaped plagioclases are often seen sweeping round the larger
olivines and augites, pointing, without doubt, to movements in the
molten magma. This structure is shown on PI. xiv. figs. 4 and 5.
The abundance of black magnetite which remains opaque even
in the thinnest slices is the next feature to attract attention.
From Professor Judd’s researches, I could conclude from this
feature alone that the rock cooled at or near the surface. As
Professor Judd remarks,* in most deeply-seated rocks the iron
oxides enter into complete combination with the silicates, and in
other cases there is a progressive increase in the quantity of
magnetite which is separated according to the proximity to the
surface at which consolidation has taken place.
Magnetite was one of the first minerals to separate from the
magma. It is the only mineral ever included in the olivine, but
its enclosure in this mineral is a very common occurrence. The
large olivine crystal on PI. xiv. fig. 4, shows a cube of magnetite.
The felspars, too, it will be noticed, seem for the most part per-
fectly fresh and unaltered. These plagioclases exhibit parallel
twin-striation in polarized light, a feature common to rocks of
this sort throughout the globe.
The olivines are abundant in every slice, showing, as is usual,
that peculiar ground glass surface which helps to identify it.


rock.
Porphyritic olivine ...
... 13 percent.
„ augite
... 9 per cent.
Olivine is of course no longer regarded an essential constituent
of basalt, but it occurs in such remarkably fine crystals in these
rocks that their presence distinguish it at once from all Aus-
tralian basalts with which lam acquainted. By taking a micro-
photograph and cutting out the portions representing the olivines,
the percentage of olivine can be calculated. With the porphyritic
crystals this is easily done, but in estimating the granular olivines
of the base a large margin for error must be allowed. The applica-
tion of this method is common with petrologists, and was originally
devised by Dr. Sorby.* I have cut several micro-photographs in
this way with fairly even results for the average structure of the
rock under Rosenbusch’s class of olivine-basalt.f
This comparatively large percentage of olivine would bring the
Besides the large crystals of olivine there is the granular
olivine which with augite and felspar form the base. Under a
magnifying power of 100 diameters a micro-photograph can be got
of this granular base, from which the parts representing olivine
can be cut. My experiences gave me 23 to 29 as the per-
centage of this mineral in the base.
A glance at the micro-photographs appended will show the
presence of porphyritic augites. But there is also a very large
amount of augites in the micro-granular ground-mass. The
quantity of augite is easily shown by treating the slice (after first
getting a micro-photograph) with warm hydrochloric acid. After
four hours’ digestion, the magnetite, serpentinous matters and
olivine dissolve, and the felspars and augite only remain;
olivine and magnetite being soluble in HCI., while the augite
and plagioclase are scarcely affected.
* J. J. H. Teall, “ Petrological Notes on some North of England Dykes.”
Q.J.G.S., Yol. xl., p. 216.
f H. Rosenbusch, Micro-Physiographie der Massigen Gesteine, Zweite
Auflage, p. 733.


Another reaction that renders the olivine of the ground-mass
distinct enough from the augite is effected by treating the slice
with warm HCL, until on gently drying the olivines gelatinize
slightly, when they can be stained by fuchsin. The olivines will
then stand out in marked contrast to the augites.
In many of the slides patches of an isotropic glass can easily be
detected, particularly with the help of the quartz plate. The glass
often seems of a light wine-red colour by transmitted light. I notice
that prolonged treatment with acid has no appreciable effect on
this substance. The glass is, therefore, not of a tachylytic nature,
but more acid in character.
From what has already been said it will be gathered that there
are two generations of olivine, augite and felspars in the Bathurst
basalts. This is quite in keeping with the observations that have
been made on similar rocks in the Old World. In the peridotites
it is common to find olivine in the ground-mass and the same
mineral as porphyritic crystals. In many dolerites labradorite and
augite form the principal ingredients of a ground-mass in which
the same minerals occur porphyritically* I have met with no
explanation altogether satisfactory of this common condition of
igneous rocks. In the paper just referred to Dr. Bonney remarks
that although an explanation of these anomalies does not seem
hopeful, we may bear in mind that the temperature of consolida-
tion for a mineral out of a magma is not necessarily identical with
that of the isolated mineral, as one substance acts as a flux on
another.
As throwing some light upon this interesting question of the
separation of minerals from a molten magma, the following extract
from a paper by Professor Judd applies to our own rocks.
“ In some instances the mechanically injured condition of the
crystals and other appearances strongly suggest their actual trans-
port from below in the midst of the materials of the surrounding
ground-mass. But in others the porphyritic crystals exhibit zoned
structures and other characters not found, perhaps, in the deeper-
* See Professor T. G. Bonney, Q.J.G.S., Vol. xli., p. 79.


seated rocks of the class in the same area. May we not in these
cases explain the phenomena in the way suggested by M. Michel-
Levy by the consolidation having taken place at two different
periods 1 It is not difficult to imagine conditions which would
bring about such a result. If, for example, a mass of igneous
materials were in a liquid state at a great depth from the surface,
the conditions might be favourable to the separation of a felspar
of a given composition from the magma. The continued abstrac-
tion of certain elements from the base would alter the composition
of the surrounding magma, and this would modify slightly the
conditions causing the successively formed zones of the crystal to
vary slightly in composition. But if a fissure were formed above
such a molten mass, then the pressure upon it would be greatly
and suddenly relieved, even though no actual movement occurred
in the deeper-seated portion. Under the entirely new conditions
thus originated, the magma surrounding the zoned crystals already
formed might be induced to crystallise in a totally different manner,
the order of the separation of the minerals and the forms and
relations of their several crystals being determined by these new
conditions.”
As some of the minerals in the basalt present features worth
noticing, I may refer to the characters they present when seen
under the microscope.
Olivine. —The porphyritic crystals of olivine are so abundant
that, with very few slides, sections may be found in various zones
sufficient to study its leading optical properties. I have noticed
sections close to basal planes, and sections approximately parallel
to the macropinacoid, so as to show an interference figure in con-
vergent polarized light. Sections roughly showing the form of an
elongated hexagon are plentiful. The peculiar ground glass
surfaces, due to its high refractive index, are very pronounced.
In fairly thin slices the mineral shows a very faint yellow-brown
colour. But the most remarkable feature in the olivine is the
fact that it is the first mineral in the rock to fall a victim to
alteration. Every large crystal shows serpentinous lines of


decomposition. I have not met with an instance where the
alteration is complete. The green serpentinous matter follows the
cracks and cleavage lines and gradually eats its way across the
intervening spaces. The micro-photographs on PI. xiv. figs. 2 and 4
show this change clearly enough.
The edges of the olivines are sharply defined and show little or
no signs of corrosion. The form of the crystals does not seem
affected in any way by the surrounding minerals, so that, to use a
term of Rosenbusch’s, they are for the most part idiomorphic.
Inclusions of magnetite are common, as well as patches of a semi-
devitrified glassy base. It is more than probable that some of the
large olivines were formed at a depth and floated up before the
second generation of olivines consolidated. On PI. xiv. fig. 1 will
be noticed a crystal of olivine that was broken along a central
line ; one half is seen in the micro-photograph, and the other half
is found on another part of the slide.
Augite. —The augite in the Bathurst basalt is not penetrated by
the felspars, so as to give rise to an ophitic structure. But the
consolidation of the augites must have been subsequent to that of
the felspars. The augite is sometimes to be seen partly moulded
around the ends of the laths of plagioclase. An example is shown
on PI. xiv. fig. 5. Here a large zoned augite is seen partially
penetrated by a felspar as if the latter was forcibly carried against
the augite when the pyroxene was still in a plastic condition.
On slide 41 an augite will be found with well defined edges.
It shows a figure in convergent polarized light. Faint traces
of cleavage lines seemingly parallel to the prism can be
detected, so that it is evidently a section. The same
slide shows some good examples of zoned and twinned
augites. On slide 46 a fine example can be found of a porphju’itic
augite sliced in the clinopinacoidal plane. The crystal is partially
penetrated by a felspar, and with inclined Nicols shows the well
known hour-glass structure often noticed in augites.
Felspar. —Mr. A. W. Howitt made some measurements of the
felspars in this basalt, and noted that, as all the obscuration angles


measure 20° in the zone OP go Pco , the felspars were not more
basic than andesine. For the present it will be sufficient to
describe the felspar, whether andesine or labradorite, as plagio-
clase. Twin crystals are very common in every slice. Sometimes
broad cruciform twins are seen, one good example of which may
be noted on slide 41.
Magnetite. —l have never isolated the black crystalline
bodies which I have provisionally named magnetite. On being
analysed they may prove to be ilmenite or titaniferous magnetite.
By drawing a magnet through detrital matter, near the basalt,
large quantities of a magnetic iron can be collected. This gives a
strong reaction for titanium. I have not been able to decide
whether this may not be derived from the adjoining granite.
The magnetite in the basalt I take to be a primary constituent.
It is invariably sound and undecomposed. It -can be noticed
enclosed in clear augites and olivines. I have noticed secondary
magnetite in other basalts, but in that case the olivine and some
of the augite had disappeared, and the iron of the ferro-magnesian
minerals was represented by the magnetite. The augites in our
rock are beautifully clear, and no olivines are wholly decomposed.
I have selected three slices as fairly representing the microscopic
character of the whole basalt. I will describe their general
structure.
1. (Slide 45). The micro-porphyritic structure of this slide is
just visible to the unaided eye. Under the microscope large
olivine crystals are seen, set in a paste or granular base of magne-
tite, augite and felspar microlites. The olivine crystals are beauti-
fully clear, magnetite and blebs of glass being the only inclusions.
The olivines are better preserved than it most slices, showing
very little signs of serpentinization. The streaming of the felspars
is very characteristic. One large olivine has evidently moved when
the paste was partially set, as it is seen to have pushed on either
side a collection of felspars. Besides the lath-shaped felspars,
broad rectangular plagioclases of another species probably are
represented. The magnetite crystals seem disposed to gather
around the edges of the augites and olivines.


Specific gravity at 18‘5° C
2-63-2-75
Silica ,,
44-67
Alumina
21*38
Ferric oxide
2-82
Ferrous ditto
5-99
Lime (Ca 0)
10-24
2. (Slide 48). Large twins of augite can be detected without
the use of the microscope, their yellowish-brown colour contrasting
with the other almost colourless minerals of the slice. Under the
microscope the greater number of the lath-shaped felspars show
incomplete terminations. A few small olivines are seen altered
completely to a light green serpentine. Many other patches of a
like green secondary product, that show no definite boundaries,
originated in the same way. All the magnetite seems a primary
constituent. A few large augites show lines of uncertain inclusions
just inside their boundaries and parallel to the outer edges of the
crystal. With inclined Nicols, faint traces of zones can be
detected. There is very little glassy matter.
3, (Slide 9). Under the microscope, shows the general structure
of the Bathurst basalt. Porphyritic crystals of augite, olivine and
plagioclase, set in a much finer ground mass of the same minerals,
with cubes of magnetite abundantly developed. The felspars flow
round the augites, but are not seen to penetrate them, so there is
no arrangement approaching to the ophitic structure. Patches of a
light red isotropic body are seen set in the dark hemi-crystalline
base. It is probably glass. The large compound augite has
some inclusions of the same material. The augite contains well
marked cubes of magnetite as inclusions. The olivines are seen
cracked in directions evidently independent of the cleavage lines.
They are also somewhat corroded along their outer edges.
The microscopic structure of the basalt is so uniform along its
length in the field that the above descriptions may be taken as
fairly typical of the whole.
Chemical composition of the Basalt.


Magnesia (Mg 0)
. 9-58
Potash (K 2 0)
. 1-03
Soda (Na 2 0)
2-70
Phosphoric anhydride
•22
Sulphuric ditto
trace
Titanic acid
. trace
Moisture
•79
99-42
For this analysis I am indebted to Mr. J. Mingaye, F.C.S.,
Analyst to the Department of Mines. The chemical composition
shows a basic rock quite in keeping with its microscopical
characters.
To facilitate the future study of the rocks of Bathurst, I now
append a few remarks to point out the means of seeing the various
features of interest in connection with the district. The passage
from a granitic to a slate country, and the characters that accom-
pany the change, can be observed in a morning’s drive. By taking
the Peel Road, via Kelso, tertiary drifts are seen on the right
from Kelso to the trigonometrical station, at the first turn to the
right. Granite country continues until the descent is begun to the
valley of the Winburndale Creek. In this creek, and in a small
tributary already referred to, contact rocks can be noted. When
the village of Peel is reached the student finds himself in the
midst of slate country. Take the road that leads back to Bathurst,
via Duramana. Some worked out alluvial deposits can be examined
on the creek. With a local guide then follow the road to Rankin s
Bridge, via Kelly’s farm and Duramana. About Kelly’s farm
hornfels rocks, semi-granites, and the weathering of granitic
boulders can be studied. Getting on to the main road to Rankin’s
Bridge we are again in granite country ; outcrops of the rock are
plentiful near the bridge. From the road near Seage’s farms good
views can be had of the sheets of the basalt away to the south,
forming the Bald Hills at one extremity and Mount Pleasant at
the other.


On reaching Peel another route could have been takeu. Beyond
the village a road leads away to the right through Silurian
slate country. This’road joins the Bathurst Limekilns road, which
latter can be followed home. At the bridge crossing the Win-
burndale, good casts of Brachiopods —Spirifer and Rhynchonella—
can be found in the water-worn pebbles of the creek. These have
been washed down from the Devonian sandstones that are exten-
sively developed up the valley.
A very good idea of the slate and schist country about Cow
Flat can be gained by driving south through Perth, and following
the Rockley Road to the top of the first range. Here contorted
slate, clay slate and crystalline limestone crop out. A road
through Cow Flat to George’s Plains railway station leads away to
the right. Along this latter road splendid examples of meta-
morphosed rocks, slate country and quartz reefs can be seen.
Basalt is best seen by ascending the Bald Hills at Perth, and
then following a track that leads along the hill tops to Bathurst,
via the basalt quarries and Poor Man’s Hollow. A separate trip
should be taken to study the drifts and basalt on the hill over
Evans’ Plains, and the same rocks at Mount Pleasant.
The localities of the contact rocks have been already referred to
in sufficient detail.
x. Economic Geology.
Gold. —There is little prospect of finding payable gold in quantity
immediately round Bathurst. It is not probable that it has been
derived from the granite. We therefore fall back on the only
alternative that it has been drifted from a distance. And the
nearest auriferous country whence it could have been derived is
too far away to leave any hope of heavy deposits.
Granite. —For building purposes the granite will hardly ever
become a marketable commodity. Even at a depth the felspars
are kaolinized and the whole rock suffers from incipient decom-
position. True it will take a polish, but I have had an opportunity
recently of examining a polished slab of Bathurst granite that had
been exposed to the weather for eleven years. Already the laminae


of biotite were fraying out, and the large hornblendes were honey-
combed and had quite lost every trace of polish. Disintegrated
granite is used extensively about Bathurst for walks amd gardens
in the same way as gravel is used in other countries.
Basalt. —The basalt is used extensively for road making, for
which it is admirably suited. It is fortunate that there is so
large a reserve of this useful rock in the vicinity of the town. It
is sometimes used for building purposes. The basalt can be easily
dressed with a hammer into rectangular blocks, and buildings in
which it is used must be of an enduring nature. Its very dark
colour is its only fault. It is as durable as any building stone
need be. Some that has been in use for fifteen years shows no
trace of weathering, being so dense and compact that not even
a lichen had taken hold on its surface.
Kaolin. —The deposits of kaolin have been frequently tested and
condemned, chiefly on account of a rather high percentage of iron
that they contain. When good fire-clay and kaolins are so easily
procurable in the colony, it is hardly likely that the Bathurst
article will prove of economic value.
Copper. —The lodes of copper about Cow Flat were at one time
extensively worked. Many who are familiar with the under-
ground workings ai’e of opinion that they will yet prove a source of
wealth. The whole country about Cow Flat is highly favourable
for mineral deposits, A belt of highly mineralized country runs
from here along the granite boundaries. Large deposits of pyrites
occur in highly metamorphosed slates. Very little has been done
to test their value.
To the north of Bathurst the country about Peel seems favour-
able for auriferous reefs. Odd samples of copper-stained rocks are
occasionally found in the metamorphic rocks round Duramina.
These point to the occurrence of copper lodes not yet discovered.
Clays. —Excellent clays for brick-making are found all along
the alluvial flats. Where the alluvial material mingles with the
decomposed basalts the bricks improve both in quality and colour.


xi. Other Points op Interest.
About eighteen miles to the north of Bathurst some very
interesting geological country is easily accessible, particularly
about the Limekilns and the Ben Glen caves, where good collec-
tions of Silurian fossils can be made.
At Blayney a finely typical example of the interesting rock
diabase occurs. It will be found in a small quarry near the R.C.
Church. To the naked eye it might pass for a diorite, but on
slicing the rock it is seen to consist entirely of felspar, magnetite,
and a monoclinic pyroxene, augite. The augites are porphyritic,
and many of them beautifully zoned.
At King’s Plains, near Blayney, rich and extensive patches of
gold bearing drift are known to occur, which have not been worked
chiefly on account of the great body of water that has to be con-
tended with. Gold also occurs here in a steatitic slate, which
once contained large quantities of pyrites. The pyrites has
altogether disappeared, but the rock is full of cubical cavities
pointing to its former existence.
I have in my own collection a monster twin pseudomorph of
pyrites found here, in which the faces of the cube measure two
and a half inches.
About Carcoar some highly interesting gabbros are extensively
developed. These are holo-crystalline rocks of coarse texture,
consisting of pyroxene and felspar. In calling these rocks gabbro
I follow Professor Judd’s classification in his paper on the gabbros
of Scotland and Ireland.*
At the Three Brothers Hills, between Bathurst and Blayney,
an interesting basalt is found with a flaggy structure. I have not
examined the locality, but I have seen slabs of basalt brought in
from there varying in thickness from two inches to four.
Steatite is found in a slaty condition about Hockley and
Locksley.
* Q.J.G.S., Vol. xlii. , p. 61.


Wood opal, that polishes well, can be collected in some paddocks
between the cemetery and Mount Pleasant. Good fire opals are
known from Rocky Bridge Creek, where they occur in a decom-
posed trachytic lava flow. Good coloured amethysts and rose
quartz are frequently brought in from the country between
O’Connell and Oberon.
xii. Conclusion.
1. Getting results together we find that about Bathurst granitic
rocks are extensively represented.
2. This granite area is surrounded by an aureole of metamorphic
rocks.
3. There is no insensible gradation from a clastic to a holo-
crystalline rock, from a sedimentary rock to a granite.
4. The granite is intrusive as regards the surrounding slate
rocks.
5. This is not necessarily opposed to the view that part of
the granite may have been formed by a whole or partial fusion of
pre-existing sediments. Like the granites of Vancouver, the
Bathurst granite is probably at once intrusive and, in a sense,
metamorphic.
6. The silurian slates are the oldest rocks now represented in
the district—older than the underlying granites.
7. The granite comes next in order of time.
8. The granite rocks underlying the slates are not the floor on
which the slate rocks were originally laid down.
9. This floor has entirely disappeared through sinking within a
zone of fusion, or through being absorbed by an ascending molten
magma.
10. Under the microscope the granite is a hornblende-biotite-
granite with a triclinic felspar.


11. On a microscopic examination the “blue metal” is found
to be a true olivine basalt and an old lava flow that filled up an
ancient river bed. The point of eruption was near Swatchfield.
No doubt pages and chapters of the geological record are missing,
but the foregoing is my reading of the history of Bathurst as
written in her rocks.
EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
Plate xiv.— Reproduced from microphotographs of thin slices of Bathurst
basalts. Fig. 1, x 50, shows the general structure of the basalt at Pinnanlg
Hill. To the right two olivines are seen, traversed by serpentinous lines of
decomposition. The lower olivine represents one half of a crystal, the
other half of which floated away to a considerable distance. The lath-
shaped felspars show a tendency to stream round the large crystals. Fig
2is a basalt from Mt. Pleasant, enlarged 50 diameters. A very character-
istic olivine occupies the right of the figure. The dark lines following the
cracks are bright green decomposition products. On the other side of the
figure there is a large plagioclase, containing some inclusions of the base.
Fig 3 shows a thin slice of basalt from the quarries at Bald Hills, enlarged
50 diameters. At the top of this figure there is a portion of a micro-
porphyritic olivine, and some distance below a basal section of augite.
These and other large crystals are set in a micro-crystalline ground mass.
The lath-shaped felspars show a decided flow. The magnetite is very
abundant as black grains. Fig. 4, x9O diameters. Under this magnifying
power magnetite shows clearly. The large olivine in the upper portion of
the figure shows inclusions of this mineral, one being a perfect cube. The
other large crystal is an idiomorphic augite. Between these two crystals
a streaming of the felspars is very noticeable. It will be remarked that the
felspars have incomplete terminations and sometimes bifurcate at either
extremity. Fig. 5. —In the lower left hand portion of this figure a large
augite is seen partially penetrated by two plagioclase prisms. The smaller
lath-shaped felspars flow round the augite in an interesting manner.
Magnetite is scattered through the slide. The two clear spaces at the top
are olivines. The thin slices in Figs. 4 and 5 were cut from basalt used for
kerb-stones in Bathurst, and quarried on the Bald Hills a few miles south
of the city.
Plate xv. —Fig. 1 shows a vein of granite intruding a much altered
sedimentary rock. Between Brewongle and Locksley this section is exposed


in a railway cutting. Fig. 2 shows an intrusive vein in 'Silurian slates, on
the outer boundary of the granite, near Newbridge. Fig. 3is a sketch of
forking veins of binary granite, near Newbridge. Fig. 4 shows a younger
and lighter-coloured granite penetrating a dark coloured rock of the same
character. Figs. 5 and 6 show veins of granite cutting through altered
sedimentary rocks. These were sketched in the Winburudale Creek, above
the bridge on the Bathurst-Peel Road. Fig. 7 represents junctions between
slates and granite. The line of junction is very sharp and well defined,
and is exposed in a railway cutting on the Bathurst side of Newbridge
railway station.
Plate xvi. —The highest point of the basalt is about 600 feet above the
river. The drift which is shown under the basalt was pierced by a tunnel.
The relations of the rocks to the sections are drawn from notes made during
the progress of the tunnelling works. Fig. 2 gives the relative positions of
all the basalt around Bathurst. Some four miles of the ridges do not
show in the sketch, as at the left of the section the chain of hills bends
away south at right angles and so is hidden from view. The view is from
the north.
Plate xvii. —Prismatic basalt, Bald Hills. This quarry is very nearly on
the line of section marked AB on the map. The weathering of the rock is
shown. Large flakes of decomposed matter peel off the sides of the prisms.
These flakes are from half an inch to one and a half inches in thickness,
and often contain a core of undecomposed basalt. As work goes on it is
probable that better columns will be exposed.
Plate xvxii. —Sketch map representing the boundaries of the basalt as
accurately as is possible on this scale. It is easy to join the isolated patches
and thus trace the former course of the river.
I have to thank Miss Annie Herlihey, of the Dubbo Superior
Public School, for much valuable assistance in the preparation of
this paper.


P. LS.N.S.W.(2'? < ? Ser.) VoI.VI
PI.XLV
J M C, Del.
ST-Leigh i Co.Jith




R L.S.N.S.W.(2 nd Ser.) VoI.VI




RLS.N.S.W.(2" d Ser.) VoI.VI
PI.XVI


■


PL.S.N.S.W.(2 nd Ser)VoL.VI.
PI.XVII
J-MCj Del BASALTIC COLUMNS, BALD HILLS, s-T-LtMtCo. HHt
BATHU RST




PLS.N,S,W.(2 nd Sec) VoI.VI.
PLXVIII


