





A CRUIS
IN THE STEAMER
“GOVERNOR MUSGRAVE”
AMONG THE ISLANDS
SPENCER’S GULF
JANUARY 1907
Reprinted from the Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia : South Australian Branch
ADELAIDE
j. l Bonython & Co., “ The Advertiser ” Office
King William Street




NOTES
ON THE
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY
AND EARLY HISTORY OF
KANGAROO 1 S LAN D
SOME OF THE ISLANDS
IN SPENCER’S GULF
ALSO
REPORTS
ORNITHOLOGY
BOTANY
GEOLOGY
AND ON THE
ABORIGINES
OF THE LOCALITIES VISITED BY
SCIENTISTS AND OTHERS IN THE
S.S. “GOVERNOR MUSGRAVE ” IN
JANUARY 1907




CON T E N TS .
List of Plates and Illustrations ... ... ... vi.
Members comprising Party ... ... ... ... vii.
A Cruise in the s.s. “Governor Musgrave,” in January, 1907,
by Thomas Gill, 1.5.0. ... ... ... 2-96
Ornithological Notes of an Expedition to Kangaroo Island
and Spencer’s Gulf, by J. W. Mellor, A.O.U. ... 97-111
Botanical Notes, relating to a Trip in the s.s. “ Governor
Musgrave,” in January, 1907, by J. H. Maiden, F.L.S. 112-115
Geological Observations on some of the Localties visited by the
“Governor Musgrave” Party, in January, 1907, by
Walter Howchin, F.G.S. ... .. ... 116-131
Some Anthropological Notes on the South Australian Aborigines,
by Thomas Gil), 1.5.0. ... ... 132-160
Index ... ... ... ... ... 161-162
Maps of Localities visited in S.S. “ Governor Musgrave ” .. at knd


Page
Sir Joseph Banks 2
S.S. Governor Musgrave 3
Lighthouse and Keepers’ Resi-
dences, Cape Jervis (1.) .. 7
Captain Matthew Flinders,
R.N. (II.) 9
Boat Harbor, Cape Jervis (111.) 11
Cape Jervis, showing Kangaroo
Island across the Passage
(IV.) 13
Jetty, Penneshaw (Hog Bay).. 14
Christmas Cove, Penneshaw
(Hog Bay) (V.) 15
Two of the Oldest Residents of
Kangaroo Island 16
Dome Covering Frenchman’s
Rock (Hog Bay) 18
Inscription on Frenchman’s
Rock (Hog Bay) 19
View of a Beach Eastward of
Kangaroo Head, Kangaroo
Island (VVestall) (VI.) .. 25
View of the Centre of Kangaroo
Island, showing Dwarf
Scrub (VII.) '. .. 31
View showing Forest Trees,
about thirty miles east of
Cape Borda (VIII.) 32
Kangaroo Island, from Peron’s
Voyages (Fie Deeres (IX.) 36
Extinct Emu of Kangaroo
Island (X.) 44
View showing th e Old Site of
Kingscote, Kangaroo Island
in 1886 (XI.) 48
Kingscote Telegraph Station .. 49
Kingscote, View of the Present
Township (XII.) 50
Lighthouse on Neptune Island.. 52
Lighthouse and Cottages, Nep-
tune Island 53
Copy of Copper Plate, erected
by Flinders at Memory
Cove (XIII.) 57
Tablet Erected at Memory
Cove, 1897 (XIV.) 50
Tablet at Memory Cove, Janu-
ary. 1907 (XV.) 61
Memory Cove (XVI.) 63
Dangerous Reef, portion of,
with Seal (XVII.) 72
The figures in parentheses refer to
Page-
Reevesby Island, the only resi-
dence on 74
Port Lincoln, as seen from a
distance (XVIII.) * 75
Port Lincoln, from the old jetty
(XIX.) 77
Copy of Original Tablet on the
Monument at Stanford
Hill, near Port Lincoln
(XX.) 86
Flinders’ Monument, Stamford
Hill (XXL) 87
Port Lincoln Jetty 94
Boat off Kirton Point, Port
Lincoln 95
Williams Island, Cove at North
End (XXII.) 104
Dangerous Reef, seals on .. .. IC6
Dangerous Reef, disturbed birds
at 107
Robert Brown, F.L.S 113
Cliffs near Kingscote, Kangaroo
Island (XX 111.) 120
South Neptune Island, dyke in
(XXIV.) 122
Thistle Island, Indurated
Sands, &c 124
Thistle Island, view of north .
end of 124
Dangerous Reef, portion of
(XXV.) 126
Wedge Island, cliffs of 127
Reevesby Island, landing-place
(XXVI.) 128
Wedge Island, caves in rocks
(XXVII.) .. 130
Narrinyeri Aboriginals’ Camp
(XXVIII.) 134
Narrinveri Man and Woman
(XXIX.) 136
Smoking Bodies of Dead Abori-
ginals (XXX.) 142
Human Skull Used as a Drink-
ing Vessel 144
Tasmanian Aboriginals—Man
and Woman (From Peron’s
Voyages) (XXXI) 155
Tasmanian Aboriginals—The
Last Man and Woman
(XXXII.) 156
Parnkalla Tribe, S.A. Aborigi-
nals (XXXIII.) 158
the numbcis of the B'ull Plates.
VI
LIST OF PLATES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.


~J~HE following Members of the Australasian Association for
the Advancement of Science comprised the party in the
S.S. “Governor Musgrave ”
NEW SOUTH WALES
Mr. J. H. MAIDEN, F.L.S.
Rev. E. STANLEY WILKINSON.
Dr. W. G. WOOLNOUGH, D.Sc.
Mr. CHARLES HEDLEY, F.L.S.
Mr. W. J. CLUNIES ROSS B.Sc.
Mr. T. GRIFFITH TAYLOR, B.Sc., B.E.
VICTORIA
Professor RICHARD J. BERRY, M.D.
Professor ERNEST W. SKEATS, D.Sc.
Mr. GEORGE SWEET, F.G.S.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
Mr. WALTER HOWCHIN, F.G.S.
Dr. R. S. ROGERS, M.A., M.D, Ch.M., Edin.
Dr. W. G. TORR.
Mr. DOUGLAS MAWSON, B.Sc., B.E.
Mr. ANDREW FERGUSON, B.Sc.
Mr. J. W. MELLOR.
Mr. B. S. ROACH.
Mr. THOMAS GILL.
OFFICERS OF THE S.S. ‘'GOVERNOR MUSGRAVE’
Captain PATRICK WEIR, Master.
Mr. RICHARD LAMB, Mate.
Mr. W. H. BROWN, Second Mate.
Mr. J. S. MORRISON, Engineer.
Photographer: Mr. W. S. SMITH, Adelaide.




A Cruise in the S.S. “ Governor Musgrave.”
(Captain P. Weir in command).
With Notes on the Physical Geography and Early History of
Kangaroo Island, and some of the Islands in Spencer’s Gulf.
Also Reports on the Ornithology, Botany, Geology, and On
the Aborigines of the localities visited.
By Thomas Gil.], 1.5.0., Hon. Treasurer Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, South Australian branch.
The suggestion of making a short visit to the islands
in Spencer’s Gulf originated with Mr. J. H. Maiden, F.L.S.,
Government Botanist of New South Wales and Director of
the Botanic Gardens at Sydney, who was desirous of follow-
ing, a century later, in the footsteps of the discoverer of
South Australia, Captain Matthew Flinders, and the emi-
ment botanist, Robert Brown, who accompanied Flinders in
the “Investigator.” It is not generally known that Mr.
Maiden has in the Herbarium of the Botanic Gadrens, Syd-
ney, some specimens of the original collection made by
Robert Brown, during that important voyage in 1802. By
making a duplicate collection after an interval of a hundred
years from the same localities, Mr. Maiden no doubt realised
that he would materially add to the scientific value of the
Sydney specimens of Brown’s collection by having the
existing flora to compare with them.
An interesting memento of this great botanist we had
with us in the form of a presentation copy of Flinders’
Volumes and Charts, inscribed by him, as follows“ For
Captain Sir John Franklin, R.N., Governor of Van Die-
men’s Land, from his attached friend, Robert Brown.”
From these Volumes, extracts have been freely made, and
embodied herein, under the various places visited.
Excepting the description given by Flinders of many
of the islands in Spencer’s Gulf very little more is known,
and as the meeting of the Australasian Association for Ad-
vancement of Science in January, 1907, would bring to-
gether in Adelaide a number of scientists from all parts of
Australia, it was considered that an interesting and instruc-
tive outing would result from a visit to those islands where


SIR JOSEPH BANKS.
Sir Joseph Banks is aptly called by Mr. J. H. Maiden “ The Father
of Australia.” Owing to his influence, and the interest he took in
Australia, Captain Flinders received the appointment of Commander
of the “Investigator.”
[See the new work by Mr. J. H. Maiden, Government Botanist, &c., of
New South Wales, on “Sir Joseph Banks.” Obtainable at all
Booksellers.]


the conditions were practically unaltered since Flinders
and Brown discoursed together on their new finds in these
strange lands.
No person is better acquainted with the navigation of
Spencer’s Gulf than Captain P. Weir, of the steamer
‘‘Governor Musgrave.” To obtain ids services it was
necessary to apply to the Premier, the Hon. Thomas Price,
M.P., who, with the concurrence of the Marine Board, most
generously agreed to place the Government steamer at the
disposal of the scientists for several days, the programme to
be arranged with Captain Weir; and so it came to pass
The Steamer “Governor Musgrave.”
that before midnight on the 14th January, 1907, the “Go-
vernor Musgrave” steamed down the Port Adelaide River
with a party of enthusiastic members of the Science Con-
gress, who all appeared as anxious as Mr, Maiden to gaze
upon the lands and scenes so graphically recorded in the
scarce and interesting volume ycleped “A Voyage to Terra
Australis, - ’ by Matthew Flinders, published in London in
1814.
The following narrative deals principally with the phy-
sical geography and the early history of the places visited,


together with an account of the aborigines who were ori-
ginally located at Cape Jervis and Port Lincoln. Contri-
butions on the Botany, Geology, and Ornithology of the
various districts, kindly furnished by the scientists in these
important divisions who accompanied the party, add mate-
rially to the value of this paper. However uninteresting
and uninviting the general appearance of the localities are
to the human eye, there lingers in and around these places
even in our comparatively unfrequented shores, historic and
hallowed associations, which invest them with particular in-
terest, especially to minds possessed of respect or regard for
the past. One event of a very pathetic nature is that which
led to the naming of Memory Cove, Cape Catastrophe, ami
the adjacent islands, to w r hich further reference will be made
when describing Memory Cove.
CAPE JERVIS.
Our first place of call w r as fixed at Cape Jervis, where
the steamer arrived at about 6 o’clock on the morning of the
15th January, after a smooth passage. We w r erc all astir
shortly after daylight, and the steward having considerately
provided coffee and biscuits about 5.30 a.rn., w r e did not
delay in getting ashore immediately after the steamer
anchored. The run from Largs Bay occupied about six
hours. The map will explain the geographical position of
Cape Jervis; this promontory forms the extreme southern
portion ..of the mountain range which extends in a north and
south direction for about five hundred miles, the highest
points being—Mount Lofty, 2,334 ft.; Mount Remarkable,
3,178 ft.; Mount Horrocks, 2,017 ft.; Mount Brown, 3,200
ft.; and Mount Arden, 2,750 ft. The geographical positions
of these eminences are as follows:—Mount Lofty, lat. 34
deg. 58 min. 29 sec. S. long., 138 deg. 42 min. 24 sec. E.;
Mount Horrocks, lat. 33 deg. 55 min. 55 sec. S., long. 138
deg. 40 min. 29 sec. E.; and Mount Brown, lat. 32 deg. 30
min. 21 sec. S., long. 138 deg. 0 min. 29 sec. E. Flinders
named Cape Jervis on March 23, 1802, from Kangaroo
Head, previous to meeting Baudin at Encounter Bay. He
records in his journal:—“Not being able to obtain a distinct
view from any elevated situation, I took a set of angles from
a small projection near the ship named Kanguroo Head;
but nothing could be seen to the north and the sole bearing
of importance, more than had been taken on board, w r as that


of a high hill at the extremity of the apparently uncon-
nected land to the eastward; it bore N. 39 deg. 10 min. E.
and was named Mount Lofty. The nearest part of that
land was a low point bearing N. 60 deg. E. nine or ten miles;
but the land immediately at the back was high and its
northern and southern extremes were cliffy. I named it
Cape Jervis and it was afterwards sketched by Mr.
Westall.”* (Atlas of Flinders, plate XVII., view 12.) It
is not recorded after whom it was named.
Immediately following Flinders we have Baudin’s
voyages, edited by M. F. Peron. He says:—“The Penin-
sula Fleurieu* (Cape Jervis) is first discovered from 15 to
16 leagues in length, formed of very lofty lands presenting
many tiers of mountains from all appearance of granitic
nature. West of this peninsula a gulf is seen extending
100 miles into the interior and which was named Josephine
Gulf (Gulf St. Vincent). Before and nearly fronting this
gulf is Deere’s Island (Kangaroo Island), 210 miles in cir-
cuit, separated by Colbert’s Strait (Backstairs Passage),
from the Peninsula Fleurieu (Cape Jervis) on the east and
by Lacepede Strait (Investigator Straits) on the west
from a second peninsula, 120 miles in length, called by us
Cambaceres’ Peninsula (Yorke’s Peninsula), the Archi-
pelago Vauban (Althorpe Islands), composed of eight
islands, is a little distance from its western point.” Spen-
cer’s Gulf, whither we were bound, was named Bonaparte
Gulf.
Flinders, who preceded Baudin, had named the various
localities, but Peron for some reason ignored the English
names, which are introduced in the forgoing to better illus-
trate the attempt made to rob Flinders of his discoveries.
Baudin has been unjustly charged with this act. As
he died at Mauritius before returning to France the blame
should be attached to Peron, who was aware, at the time
when he edited the voyages of Baudin, that Flinders was
then detained a prisoner of the French at Mauritius, where
he had called on his return journey to England.
About three years since a grand-nephew of Fleurieu
visited Adelaide, when he suggested that the Government,
or the Geographical Society, should restore the name Fleu-
* Flinders’ “A Voyage to Terra Australis,” vol. i., p. 170.
t Named after Comte de Fleurieu. the then French Minister of Marine; the
point Capo Jervis was named Cap Dupleix by the French.


rieu Peninsula, but his request met with no response, and
he was no more successful in Tasmania in having a bay
originally named Fleurieu Bay, now Oyster Bay, restored to
the Tasmanian maps. In the latter case, however, his re-
quest was just and reasonable, as the bay was discovered and
named by French navigators.
The lighthouse at Cape Jervis is situated on a sloping
projection of the headland, the light being about 100 ft.
above sea level and a short distance to the north of a dan-
gerous ledge of rocks, which extends about 1,200 ft. almost
at right angles to the coastline. (A portion of the reef is
shown in the accompanying illustration.) On January (3,
1871, both Houses of Parliament passed a resolution that it
was expedient to erect a lighthouse at Cape Jervis. It is
a round stone tower, built in 1871-2, at a cost of £7OO, The
light is fixed, and white of the fourth order, and is visible
for about 12 miles, being sufficiently strong to extend across
the strait to Kangaroo Island, which is known as Back-
stairs Passage, so named by Flinders in 1802. A telegraph
line to Cape Jervis was constructed also during 1871-2.
Vessels from and to Melbourne and the eastern States
come and go through this passage, its entrance being lighted
at night by Cape Willoughby light on the south-western cor-
ner and by Cape Jervis light on the south-eastern corner.
Tu further ensure the safe navigation of Backstairs
Passage a fixed light has been erected at St. Alban’s Cape,
about 2V 2 miles north of Cape Willoughby, on the eastern
point of Antechamber Bay. + A proposal to remove the
lighthouse at Cape Jervis to a more elevated and conspicu-
ous position was mooted some short time since, but nothing
definite has yet been done in the matter.
Cape Willoughby lighthouse is about 17 miles south of
Cape Jervis light, on the extreme eastern point of Kangaroo
Island. It is also a round stone tower, and was the first
lighthouse erected in South Australia; its light was first
exhibited on January 10, 1852. The cost, with the keepers’
cottages, is recorded at about £4,343, and was known as tin 1
Sturt light. l Its lantern. 247 ft. above sea level, is of the
first order and exhibits a white light, which revolves every
t St. Alban’s Cape was named by Captain Thomas Lipson in March, 1850, in his
report on a “Survey of the South Coast of Kangaroo Island,” “Government
Gazette,” 1850, p. 200.
I Vide “Government Gazette,” 1851, p. 590.


«d
g
<u
*■s
<u
a
CO
a
w
o
u
c
aj
T 3
M
<u
K
«H
a>
a
<u
«
■a
c
CO
a>
■
9
O
J 3
*-
£<
2?
3
M
<
J
Ph


90 seconds and is visible for 24 miles. Telegraph commu-
nication is established with Adelaide via Kingscote by cable
to Normanville and thence overland. The exact positions
of the two lights are recorded as follows:—Cape Wil-
loughby,’ hit. 35 deg. 51 min. 6 sec. S., long. 138
deg. 9 min. 36 sec. E.; Cape Jervis, lat. 35 deg.
37 min. 0 sec. S., long.l 138 deg. 7 min. 30 sec. E.
These two lights are visible over the whole entrance of
Backstairs Passage. So far back as May, 1859, the ques-
tion of telegraphic communication between Cape Jervis an
Adelaide was discussed, when the naval officer. Captain B.
Douglas, was instructed by the Government to report on
the most eligible site for a telegraph station in the vicinity
of Cape Jervis to signal in Adelaide the arrival and depar-
ture of the English mail steamer. f At that time the English
mail steamers received and landed the South Australian
mails at Nepean Bay. Kangaroo Island, whither a steamer
was dispatched from Port Adelaide to await the English
steamer there. Prior to February, 1859, the English mails
were conveyed direct to Melbourne, and reshipped by inter-
colonial steamer to Port Adelaide, involving a delay of about
a week in the delivery of mails in Adelaide. l In July. 1860,
the mail steamers ceased to call at Nepean Bay owing to the
strong objections made by Victoria in consequence of its
mails being delayed by the detour of the mail steamer to
Kangaroo Island. The South Australian Government then
decided to send a steamer direct from Port Adelaide to King
George’s Sound to take over the Adelaide mails, thereby se-
curing an early delivery of English letters, and avoiding
the transhipment of mails and delay at Melbourne, which
formerly- prevailed by carrying the mails past our shores
and bringing them back again. This service was continued
until February, 1872, when passengers and mails were em-
barked at Glenelg, per P. & 0. steamer Bangalore.”
Cape Jervis, in the County of Hindmarsh, is sparsely
populated, and on account of its isolated position is seldom
visited by travellers. It is about 7 l / 2 miles south of Rapid
Bay 22 miles from Yankalilla (Yangkallya-
wangk). and about 69 miles from Adelaide. The land
being hilly, with many deep gullies, is little cultivated and
is therefore chiefly used for grazing purposes. To the
+ Vide Parliamentary Paper No. 104, of 1859.
I Vide Parliamentary Papers Nos. 30, 35, 91, 109, and 141, of 1860.


Plate II
Captain Matthew Flinders, R.N.


south-east of the lighthouse, on the highland, there are
deserted farm buildings, and the country for some distance
around the lighthouse slopes gradually from the hills to the
sea and is almost denuded of trees and shrubs. A telegraph
line via Yankalilla is connected with the lightkeepers’
quarters, by which all passing vessels can be reported to
Port Adelaide. Prom here to Encounter Bay, about 35
miles by sea, and about 29 miles in a direct line, there is
no safe landing place, the coastline being rocky and precipi-
tous, but a little cove called Tunkalilla, about midway be-
tween Cape Jervis und Encounter Bay, on the south coast,
is at certain seasons used as a shipping place by the resi-
dents of the locality; its position is about hit. 35 deg. 38 min.
S., long. 138 deg. 20 min. E. A little bay, formerly used
as a whaling station, lies to the south of the lighthouse, and
was called by the natives Pat Bun gar *; it has been aban-
doned for the present sheltered boat harbor. Nearly
midway between Cape Jervis and Cape 'Willoughby an
extensive shoal exists, known as “Yatala Shoal.” It is
over three miles long and a quarter of a mile broad; a red
and white buoy was placed in a shallow position on this
shoal by Captain Weir, of the steamer “Governor Mus-
grave,” on September 22, 1906.
Captain Thos. Lipson, harbormaster at Port Adelaide,
made an examination of this sandbank in the Government
schooner “Yatala” in March, 1850, hence the name.
In September, 1880, the Orient steamer “Sorata” ran
upon the rocks, a short distance south of the lighthouse, but
was floated off some weeks later. The lightkeepers re-
ported some remarkable escapes of vessels from shipwreck
owing to the navigating officers hugging the coast near the
lighthouse in broad daylight.
From the highland south of the lighthouse, an exten-
sive view can be obtained. To the south “The Pages.” a
group of rocky islets, are visible, the two largest, called the
“North Page” and the “South Page,” are about 60 ft. in
height. Kangaroo Island from Cape Willoughby to Kan-
garoo Head is distinctly visible from this elevation, the
nearest p,art of the island being about eight miles distant.
The aboriginals had a legend associated with this ex-
treme point of the mainland. A being, or spirit, named
Ooroondooil. after creating the country to the east made
10
A CRUISE IN THE S.S. “ GOVERNOR MUSGBAVE.”




the Big Murray, or Eastern Tribes first, and then the
Lower Murray people, teaching them all the arts of life
they possessed, and instructing them in the knowledge of
their mysteries, and in those rites which they still observed.
After he had made all there was in the country, he left it,
by swimming to make other lands. Two of his lubras, who
tried to follow him, were drowned, and turned into the
two islands called “The Pages.” He made Kangaroo
Island rise out of the sea, and went on making countries to
the westward, where he still lives. This story appears in
a poetical contribution to “The South Australian Maga-
zine.” “The Spirit of the Murray.” “Legend of Ooroon-
dooil,” vol. 11., pp. 31-6.
A description of the country at and around Cape
Jervis in 1851 was published in the “S.A. Register” of
April 25, 1851.
Mr. A. R. C. Selwyn, Government Geologist of Vic-
toria, visited Cape Jervis in 1859. Ilis official reports are
embodied in Parliamentary Papers Nos. 119 of 1859 and
20 of 1860.
The once important Talisker silver lead mines, now
lying idle, are about 2 y 2 miles south-east of the lighthouse.
A full description of the mines is to be found in “Record
of the Mines of South Australia,” by H. Y. L. Brown,
Government Geologist, Adelaide, 1908.
The Rev. J. E. Tenison Woods, in “Geological Observa-
tions in South Australia,” records: —“At Cape Jervis a
mountain range commences, which runs nearly, north and
south, and this is bounded on its eastern and western sides
by a recent tertiary deposit.” (P. 16 and 110.)
In “South Australia Illustrated.” by G. F. Angas, a
view of the point near the lighthouse is given.
Mr. Angas says:—“This scene is taken at low water
from the rocks of micaceous schist that extend between
Rapid Bay and Cape Jervis; it commands a fine view of
the cape, with the opposite shores of Kangaroo Island about
Antechamber Bay. ’ ’
The weather being calm, some of the party were landed
on the rocks opposite to where the “Musgrave” anchored,
whilst the geologists and others were taken to a sheltered
spot protected by the reef already referred to, and under


I'-!-
. jwiiiiiiiii. i. 1
Vyg -■■ jRSgV Jit *,jaam ,_> jflK
/Xg£ **;
j3f. •■ ’ ..<■ ' 1 '■(P 1
-’ «? y * //y. "W* Jr ik% rsztSSwS ' V *N
4P 1*W. ' j™yr s " :;' # .■" * t £
Plate IV.
Cape Jervis, showing Kangaroo Island across the Passage (from Angas).
«


the guidance of Mr. Howchin spent an interesting couple of
hours in an examination of the rocks, which will be ex-
plained in Mr. Howchin’s geological notes at the end of this
paper.
The party having returned on board the steamer we
left Cape Jervis about 9 o’clock for Hog Bay, or Penneshaw.
Kangaroo Island, and landed on the jetty there about half-
past 10.
Jetty, Penneshaw (Hog Bay).
PENNESHAW (HOG PAY).
Having decided to visit the China Clay mine (called
China-town), distant about twelve miles, two vehicles were
engaged for the purpose. AVhile waiting for the horses,
which were paddocked some distance from the bay. we made
a hurried visit to Christmas Cove, under the leadership
of Mr. Howchin, where interesting geological features were
examined and discussed. Owing to the difficulty i.i obtain-
ing the necessary horses, we were late in starting for the
clay mine. The first part of the journey was over the
14
A CRUISE IN THE S.S. “GOVERNOR MUSGRAVE.”


I;J| s
wy 7a cd
|- J in
&mm c
c
£
I J £
ij 91 o
, fSI u
n w
jHriia co
W E
all "E
JEB JC
JS*| °
>
U
H
<
J
Pu
•oo
o
X


hill facing the bay, where the road passed through some
large forest trees on the high land, and then entered a dense
scrub of eucalyptus, interspersed with banksia and other
shrubs. After three or four miles, the land on either side
of the road was being cleared and burnt off for agricul-
tural settlement; the road was also being constructed here.
Further on we passed a couple of comfortable-looking home-
steads. when we entered on a bush track amongst the yacka.
Two of the Oldest Residents of Kangaroo Island.


or grass-tree, country, in which the clay mine is situated.
A considerable amount of work has been done in excavating
and tunnelling in order to prove the quality and quantity
of the materials. It is claimed by the manager of the
mine that all the necessary ingredients for good china are
obtainable on the spot, and that the best chin aware can
be manufactured from the material foimd here. A num-
ber of tourmalines have been found in the excavations at
this mine.
Our party were taken over tin 1 mine and were pleased
at the attentions shown them. The return journey was
a pleasant one until we arrived at the top of the hill over-
looking the bay. The drag on which the greater number
of the party was carried took the lead, and on entering
the steep road the brake got useless, when the horses be-
came unmanageable. The driver fortunately retained his
presence of mind and ran the horses and drag into a thick
growth of young eucalyptus trees on the side of the road,
and by that means brought the coach to a standstill. Some
of the party sitting on the back seat, as soon as they realised
their position, jumped off and fortunately escaped unhurt.
The remainder of the journey they preferred to complete
on foot. Had the driver taken the usual precaution of
tying up one wheel before going on the decline the mis-
hap would not have occurred. We hope that our experi-
ence will not be repeated; at the same time we advocate
securing one wheel as the wisest course to adopt when
travelling down a steep road. The road on which this
adventure occurred is a dangerous one, for not only is it
very steep, hut it turns at right angles on the verge of a
high cliff. Excepting for the fright, we were thankful that
no person was injured.
Hog Bay is also known as Penneshaw. The latter
name is a combination of the surnames of Pennefather and
Shaw. Mr. Pennefather was private secretary to the Gover-
nor when Miss Shaw (now Lady Ludgavdi, of “The
Times,” was making a trip to Australia. The township is
pleasantly situated on the slope of a hill and the flat
leading to the jetty. As to the origin of the name Hog
Bay, the late Mr. W. A. Cawthorne, in an interesting series
of chapters on “The Islanders,” founded on facts and pub-
lished in “The Illustrated Melbourne Post” in 1865, refers
to this bay in the phraseology of an old resident of the


island in these words—“ That’s Hog Bay, as we calls it,
hekase some pigs got on shore in a wery mysterious way,
do yer mind; so we names it Hog Bay.” Mr. Cawthorne
took a special interest in our early history and in the
South Australian aborigines. We can, therefore, accept
his version, which he obtained from the sealers, as reliable.
This bay is noted for having within its borders the
renowned Frenchman’s Rock. It was visited by members
of the party, and a photograph taken of the dome which
Dome covering Frenchman’s Rock, Hog Bay.
now protects the rock from the weather. From having
been exposed to the elements for more than a hundred
years the letters were slowly wearing away. Suggestions
were made to transfer the rock bodily to the Adelaide
Museum, but the South Australian Geographical Society
opposed the removal of the stone and suggested its being
covered over and coated with a preservative. The cost
of the present structure was met by private subscriptions


collected by Mrs. Stow, the head mistress of the State
school at Penneshaw, which the South Australian Govern-
ment subsidised pound for pound. The designing and
building of the shelter was placed in the hands of the
Superintendent of Public Buildings (Mr. C. E. Owen
Smyth, T. 5.0.), who commenced the work in July, 1906.*
The illustration shows the inscription and the rock prior
to its being covered in.
Inscription on Frenchman s Rock, Hog Bay.
Owing to th<‘ limited time at the disposal of the party
it was decided to proceed direct from Hog Bay to Kings-
cote, or what was until recently known as Queenscliffe. Kan-
garoo Head, the eastern entrance to Lagoon Bay, or Ameri-
can River, was soon reached. On the slope of this promi-
nence a cairn of stones was erected a few years ago by
’For a detailed description of the Rock and Shelter, see Proo. Boy. Geogr.
Soc. of Australasia, S.A. Branch, Vol. VIII., pp. 55/58.


the Superintendent of Public Buildings, assisted by the
children from the Hog Bay School, under Mrs. Stow, the
head mistress. Passing by Lagoon Bay we observed Pros-
pect Hill, so named by Flinders, which is a very con-
spicuous object, and we regretted our inability to enter
the bay and visit this interesting locality and the islands
in the lagoon, called “Pelican Lagoon” by Flinders. The
question was discussed as to why this bay was also called
“American River.” The only explanation is that Captain
Sutherland, who had traded between Sydney and Kanga-
roo Island in the year 1819, reported to a company formed
in London in 1831 for colonising South Australia, that an
American ship had been wrecked on the coast about 1811,
and that the crew had built a schooner in Lagoon Bay,
which enabled them to get away after a residence of seve-
ral months on the island. * This fact induced Captain
Sutherland to suggest that the timber around the bay
was suitable for ship’s spars and other purposes of ship-
building. It is somewhat incongruous that a large bay
terminating in an extensive shallow lagoon of salt water
should still be called “American River,” particularly when
no river exists in the locality. The original names
“Lagoon Bay” and “Pelican Lagoon,” should be re-
tained, especially when it is remembered that Mr. James
Montgomery’s famous poem. “Pelican Island,” was sug-
gested to him after reading the description of these locali-
ties given by Flinders. A portion of the poem is re-
printed, which is followed by the passages in Flinders’
voyage referring to the physical features of the lagoon and
the undisturbed haunts of the pelican.
SELECTIONS FROM THE POEM. “PELICAN ISLAND.”
Nature’s prime favourites were the Pelicans;
High-fed, long-lived, and sociable and free,
They ranged in wedded pairs, or martial bands,
For play or slaughter. Oft have 1 beheld
A little army take the wat’ry held,
With outstretch’d pinions, form a spacious ring.
Then pressing to the centre, through the waves,
Enclose thick shoals within their narrowing toils,
* This statement is based upon a report made by Captain Sutherland, and pub-
lished in 1834 in a small work, entitled “The New British Province of South Aus-
tralia. &c.” Since writing the foregoing- another reference to American River,
extracted from the “Hobart Town Gazette” of 12th June, 1826, is also embodied
herein; the latter, written by the editor of the "Gazette,” is probably the most
reliable account yet published.


Till multitudes entangled fell a prey;
Or, when the flying-ttsh in sudden clouds.
Burst from the sea. and flutter'd through the air,
These giant fowlers snapt them like mosquitos
By swallows hunted through the summer sky.
I turn'd again to look upon that isle.
Whence from one pair those colonies had issued
That through these Cyclades at freedom roved,
Fish’d every stream, and fed on every shore;
When, lo! a spectacle of strange extremes
Awaken’d sweet and melancholy thoughts:
All that is helpless, beautiful, endearing,
In infancy, in prime of youth, in love;
_i.ll that is mournful in decay, old age.
And dissolution; all that awes the eye.
And chills the bosom, in the sad remains
Of poor mortality, which last awhile.
To show that life hath been, but is no longer;
—All these in blended images appear'd.
Exulting, brooding, perishing before me.
It was a land of births.—Tnnumber'd nests,
Of reeds and rushes, studded all the ground:
A few were desolate and fallen to ruin;
Many were building from those waste materials;
On some the dams were sitting, till the stroke
Of their quick bills should break tin* prison-shells.
And let the little captives forth to light.
With their first breath demanding fond and shelter.
In others I beheld the brood new-fledged,
Struggling to clamber out, take wing anti fly
Up to the heavens, or fathom the abyss.
Meanwhile the parent from the sea supplied
A daily feast, and from the pure lagoon
Brought living water in her sack, to cool
The impatient fever of their clamorous throats.
It was a land of death. —Between those nests.
The quiet earth was feather'd with the spoils
Of aged Pelicans, that hither came
To die in peace, where they had spent in love
The sweetest periods of their long existence.
Where they were wont to build, and breed their young,
There they lay (.own to rise no more for ever,
And close their eyes upon the dearest sight
On which their living eyes had loved to dwell,
—The nest where every joy to them was centred.
There rife corruption tainted them so lightly,
The moisture seem’d to vanish from their relics
As dew from gossamer, that leaves the net-work
Spread on the ground, and glistening in the sun;
Thus when a breeze the ruffled plumage stirr’d,


That lay like drifted snow upon the soil,
Their slender sueletons were seen beneath,
So delicately framed, and half-transparent.
That I have marvell’d how a bird so noble,
When in his full magnificent attire.
With pinions wider than the king of vultures’,
And down elastic, thicker than the swan’s,
Should leave so small a cage of ribs to mark
Where vigorous life had dwelt a hundred years.
Such was the scene; the dying and the dead,
Next neighbours to the living and the unborn.
U how much happiness was here enjoy’d!
How little misery had been suifer'd here!
Those humble Pelicans had each fulfill’d
The utmost purpose of its span of being,
And done its duty in its narrow circle,
As sureiy as the sun, in his career,
Accomplishes the glorious end of his. (Canto VI.)
The following passages, which include the reference
to the Pelicans, are from the journal of Captain Flinders
(See Vol. 1., pages 182-5) :
On the 4th April, 1802, “I was accompanied by the
naturalist in a boat expedition to the head of the large
eastern cove of Nepean Bay; intending, if possible, to as-
cend a sandy eminence behind it, from which alone there was
any hope of obtaining a view into the interior of the island,
all the other hills being thickly covered with wood. On
approaching the south-west corner of the cove, a small open-
ing was found leading into a considerable piece of water;
and by one of its branches we reached within little more
than a mile of the desired sandy eminence. After I had
observed the latitude, 35 deg. 50 min. 2 sec., from an
artificial horizon, we got through the wood without much
difficulty; and at 1 o ’clock reached the top of the eminence,
to which was given the name of Prospect Hill. Instead of
a view into the interior of the island, I was surprised to
find the sea at not more than one and a half, or two miles to
the southward. Two points of the coast towards the east
end of the island, bore S. 77 deg. E., and the furthest part
on the other side, a low point with breakers round it, bore
S., 30 deg W., at the supposed distance of four or five
leagues. Between these extremes a large bight in the
south coast was formed; but it is entirely exposed to
southern winds, and. the shores are mostly cliffy. Mount
Lofty, on the east side of the Gulph of St. Vincent, was


visible from Prospect Hill at the distance of sixty-nine
miles; and bore N. 40 deg. 40 min. E.
“The entrance of the piece of water at the head of
Nepean Bay, is less than half a mile in width, and mostly
shallow; but there is a channel sufficiently deep for all
boats near the western shore. After turning two low
islets near the east point, the water opens out, becomes
deeper, and divides into two branches, each of two or
.three miles long. Boats can go to the head of the
southern branch only at high water; the east branch ap-
peared to be accessible at all times; but as a lead and
line were neglected to be put into the boat, I had no op-
portunity of sounding. There are four small islands in
the eastern branch; one of them is moderately high and
woody, the others are grassy and lower; and upon two of
these we found many young pelicans, unable to fly. Flocks
of the old birds were sitting upon the beaches of the
lagoon, and it appeared that the islands were their breed-
ing places; not only so, but from the number of skeletons
and bones there scattered, it should seem that they had for
ages been selected for the closing scene of their existence.
Certainly none more likely to be free from disturbance
of every kind could have been chosen, than these islets
in a hidden lagoon of an uninhabited island, situate upon an
unknown coast near the antipodes of Europe; nor can any-
thing be more consonant to the feelings, if pelicans have
any, than quietly to resign their breath, whilst sur-
rounded by their progeny, and in the same spot where they
first drew it. Alas, for the pelicans! Their golden age
is past; but it has much exceeded in duration that of
man.
“I named this place of water Pelican Lagoon. It is also
frequented by flocks of the pied shag, and by some ducks and
gulls; and the shoals supplied us with a few oysters. The
surrounding country is almost everywhere thickly covered
with brush wood; and the soil appeared to be generally
of a good quality, though not deep. Prospect Hill and
the parts around it are more sandy; and there seemed to
be swamps at the head of both branches of the lagoon. The
isthmus which separates the southern branch from the sea.
is low; but rises gradually up the cliffs of the coast. Not
being able to return on board the same night, we slept near
the entrance of the lagoon. It was high water by the


shore on the morning of the sth at 6 o’clock; but on
comparing this with the swinging of the ship, it appeared
that the tide had then been running more than an hour
from the westward. The rise in the lagoon seemed to be
from four to eight feet.
“A few kanguroos had been obtained during my ab-
sence, as also some sealskins; but one of the sailors, hav-
ing attacked a large seal incautiously, received a very severe
bite in the leg. and was laid up. After all the researches
now made in the island, it appeared that the kanguroos
were much more numerous at our first landing-place, near
Kanguroo Head, than elsewhere in the neighbourhood. That
part of the island was clearer of wood than most others;
and there were some small grass plats which seemed to
be particularly attractive, and were kept very bare. Not
less than thirty emus or cassowaries were seen at different
times; but it so happened that they were fired at only once,
and that ineffectually. They were most commonly found
near the longest of the small beaches to the eastward of
Kanguroo Head, at the place represented in the annexed
plate; where some little drainings of water oozed from the
rocks. It is possible that with much time and labor em-
ployed in digging; water might be procured there to supply
a ship; and I am sorry to say, that it was the sole place
found by us where the hope of procuring fresh water could
be entertained. Having received on board a good stock of
wood, the launch was hoisted in. and everything prepared
for going to sea. Next morning, so soon as the sun was
sufficiently elevated to lx* observed in the artificial horizon,
I landed to take the last set of observations for the time-
keepers; after which the anchor was weighed, and we steered
out of Nepean Bay with a light breeze from the south-west.
Towards noon it fell calm, and finding by the land that
the ship was set westward, an anchor was dropped nearly
in our first place, off Kanguroo Head; and Mr. Westall took
the sketch given in the Atlas.'’
More than 10 years before South Australia was
founded, the following article on “Kangaroo Island and
the Runaways in the Straits’’ appeared in “The Hobart
Town Gazette” of 12th June, 1826: —
“This island, nearly 300 miles in circumference, is the
Ultima Thule. .It lies opposite Spencer’s and St. Vincent
Gulphs, and at one part is separated from the main by a


wm^'*
— .-4 .. . ■ f ' - , — 1
HR* •■••"' ' mj
i- -
W.
siJZg&r
1 " ’ ' **’
;.r ■ (/ ' ■ ‘ ' .. Ml
■:i<- ■■ ■:■'-Vv : - WS^
•'— -\v- l r. •':? : ' 1
- '
-.'. ■ :•’ .’„•. •'": jZUrt ■&'*■ ;* v ltv
,-V
'. ■- ■ ...
■■;■'■'■■ v •■: • r . .
?••*•• •■ ■ ■ ,'■ . ■ • • ■•..';■■.•, -:Kuf
%. s ' ;■■.•:• '>» • ■*<'■■. •,'■■•■ ■:•'. ;>■■ i? . '• /
,
L t /;' ,
pfe
.nil-" «f ■■
g ' ; ' "’g C ' ■■' ■ - ‘ ggigrfgggf
''/;■ ' - '
lH : *
ir ■.. : ,,
■
Ifni
P*V ; ; ■■
Plate VI. View of a beach eastward of Kangai
Voyage to
•oo Head (reduced fro
Terra Australis, 1802
m Westall’s sketch in Flinders’
).


narrow channel of only 8 miles across. The hills, though
numerous, are not lofty, and there is the appearance of
much level good land, with a climate, perhaps, the most
enviable in the world. A hay, called the Bay of Shoals,
on the north coast next the main, is resorted to by the
fishermen on account of a salt lagoon, or sea pool, which,
when dried up after the rainy season, is filled with excellent
salt to the depth of sor 6 inches. Near it is a lake of fresh
water, both being situated about 2 miles from the beach,
which distance the productions are carried on the back to
the boats. This, as well as every other labour, is performed
by the native women, whom these unprincipled men carry
off from the main, and compel to hunt, work, and fish, and
do every ofher menial service, while they themselves sit on
the beach and smoke, drink, and sleep by turns, occasionally,
perhaps, rousing to kill a.young seal while basking on the
sunny beach. This food, though far from palatable, is all
that their indolence will in general allow them to procure,
and they sometimes salt it down for future store. It is
much to be lamented that so debased a specimen of the
Christian race as these men. should ,be the first to give an
impression to the natives, who are there very numerous, and
of a superior cast to those’ here and at Sydney. They live
in regular villages, are all clothed with a cloak made of skins
stitched together and ornamented, and though, like all other
savages, addicted to stealing, are, nevertheless, friendly and
hospitable. The tide in this bay rises about 6or 7 ft.; it
is not. however, safe for any large vessels, and about three-
quarter ebb. numerous shoals are visible. Ten miles to
the east is a fine river, called American River, with an
excellent harbor. It is so named from an American, who
visited that neighborhood about ten years ago, and built
a very handsome schooner of the pine tree, peculiar to the
island. This wood resembles red Swedish timber, and con-
tains turpentine. Air. Smith sailed 13 miles up this river,
and, by cutting one of these trees in halves, scooping it
out with an adze, and afterwards uniting it with hoops,
he constructed an admirable pump for his vessel. The
trees common here (Tasmania) also abound there, and the
small species of kangaroo is very numerous. Among the
animals which we have not seen here is a large kind of
edible guana, a species of bear about the size of a fox. and
a species of cockatoo, of a grey color, with a red crest. The
fish are very superior and well flavored; among them a kind


of whiting is described as being excellent eating. When the
fishing season for seals is over these men, with the native
women and their offspring, amounting in all to about 40,
retire into a valley in the interior of the island, where they
have a garden and huts.
“ One man, called Abyssinia, has led this life for fourteen
years. Are, then, these men, thus strangers to religion,
strangers to principle, among whom rapine of every kind,
and even murder is not unfrequent—are they to be suffered
thus to debase human nature? They are at present sup-
ported and encouraged by the colonial vessels that visit for
the purpose of bartering their skins for rum. Many of
them are armed, and in a short time it will not be safe
even for a large vessel to go amongst them. A person, sign-
ing himself W. IT. Skelton, published a letter in a Sydney
newspaper about three months ago, in which he says that
he has traded for the last three seasons among these islands.
We hope that that gentleman, whom the publisher of his
letter calls a captain, will also publish the names of the mer-
cantile houses established in the straits with whom he has
carried on business for so long a period, and will say
whether we have to thank him, and such as him, for the
enticement held out to these wretched men to embark in
and continue their abandoned course of life. By his
account, he assisted Mr. Whyte in capturing the various
runaways. He suspected their haunts, and but for his co-
operation the plan would have failed. Other accounts do
not, however, corroborate this statement, and the plan, we
believe, alluded to, if there was such a plan, must entirely
have failed but for the exertions of Mr. Smith. By his
means chiefly the runaways were discovered and appre-
hended. He had but just before saved from their hands
his life and part of his property, with which he escaped as
if by a miracle. This shows how injudicious it would be
to permit any settlers on these islands and other remote
situations, except in numbers, and with property sufficient
to induce Government to protect it by a detachment of mili-
tary. We have heard conjectures respecting the eligibility
of some of these islands as a secondary penal settlement;
for ourselves, we have doubts of the propriety of a distant
establishment for the severer punishment of offenders.
“ If such a place be chosen, it ought certainly to be secure
from escape, and not of too large dimensions; and the em-


ployment of the prisoner ought not to be scattered over a
large surface in the woods, but within safe limits. Hence,
it resolves itself into an extensive House of Correction or
Penitentiary.
'• Of all means to punish and reclaim, solitary confine-
ment is the best—a system which we must come to at last,
or employ men at sufficient salaries to take out the worst
characters in small divisions and reclaim them. The suc-
cess of the chain gang under a military guard is such as
will probably make the necessity of penal settlements less
obvious. In the meantime, no boats ought to be permitted
among the islands; and we trust that Kangaroo
Island, being without the jurisdiction of this colony,
will not be any obstacle to speedy and efficient
measures being adopted to check this serious and
growing evil. The Governor-in-Chief of New South
Wales is invested with the command of these seas;
and we doubt not, from the paternal interest which actuated
General Darling in watching over and promoting the pros-
perity of this part of the British dominions, that a repre-
sentation will be made to the Lords of the Admiralty, and a
swift sailing armed cutter be stationed here, which, visiting
the coast of New Holland, the Straits, sweeping round this
island, entering the Derwent and the Tamar unawares, and
at unexpected times, will awe and annihilate these irregular
characters, and add life and security to the exertions of the
colonists.”
Some idea of the early settlement of this portion of
Kangaroo Island, when the first settlers arrived in Septem-
ber. 1886. may be gleaned from the following extracts of
letters from a passenger per the “Cygnet.”
“Nepean Bay, Kangaroo Island,
“ September 14th, 1836.
“ We arrived off the western coast of Kangaroo Island
the beginning of last week after a favorable run from Rio,
but had calms and contrary winds until Sunday morning
at half-past 7 o’clock, when we entered Nepean Bay.
“ It appears to me that no country can present a safer or
pleasanter entrance from the sea than does that of my
adoption; at least, at that part of it which we have always
considered the most valuable, viz., the two Gulfs, Spencer’s
and Saint Vincent's, and Kangaroo Island. The strait


between the island and the mainland is well protected on
all sides and without a rock, shoal, or reef. This opinion is
not mine only, but also that of a captain in the navy, the
master of our vessel, and a great many old sailors. In fact,
most of them said they had not seen anything like it be-
fore. I mention this because I deem it of great advantage
to the interests of the colony. Three ships of the company
were here six weeks before us, and the manager has made
a temporary settlement on the south-western shore of Ne-
pean Bay. I was with him yesterday, and had every
reason to be satisfied with the aspect of the place. The
soil upon the small hill, at the base of which tents and
huts are fixed, is a light black loam of a rich and productive
quality. The land might be cleared with very little diffi-
culty, as the vegetation, although luxuriant, consists gene-
rally of dowering shrubs and plants. The tea-tree is
abundant here; its leaves afford a refreshing and wholesome
beverage, used by the sealers, who have been on the island
for years, and by the company’s officers and men since their
arrival here.
“ The company’s manager has a small farming establish-
ment to the southward and westward of his storehouse, to
which he has sent some very valuable Merinos and Leices-
ters brought from England.
“ There are six sealers on the island. One of them has
been here eighteen years, another fifteen years, and the
rest for shorter periods. Some of them have wives.
“ I have no doubt we shall find these men of great use,
and they have all expressed pleasure at the opportunity
of entering into the relations of civilised life. They charac-
terise the natives as being generally peaceable and well-in-
clined.
“ The scenery about the bay is fine. There is an im-
mense expanse of water, surrounded by a diversified and
hilly shore, with Cape Jervis, the southern point of the
eastern side of Saint Vincent’s Gulf, forming a fine break
to the view across the strait.
“ Colonel Light brought the Rapid in through Back-
stairs Passage, the eastern entrance to the strait, and pro-
nounced it to be easy. We entered by the western open-
ing.”


“American River, according to the Sealers.
“Pelican Lagoon, according to Flinders,
“September 21st, 1836.
“ In my former letter 1 was only able to speak of the
land on Kangaroo Island from report, since which time I
have had an opportunity of seeing several parts of the
country round Nepean Bay and a little inland. I went
with Mr. Kingston last week up the river (on which we
have formed a temporary settlement) to a place occupied
and cultivated by two of the sealery. The land we passed
over was of very different characters, some of it being a
rich light loam and in other places clay.
“ The spot farmed by the sealers is fine land, in a very
pretty part of the country, with some fine timber upon it.
They have about five acres under cultivation, and grow pota-
toes, turnips, cabbages, watermelons, onions, wheat, and
barley. The vegetables are all good. We purchased tur-
nips from them at sixpence a dozen. Their wheat is excel-
lent, although grown five successive years without changing
the seed on the same land. I think they said it weighed
lb. to the bushel, and they got last year in quantity 70
bushels from about one and a half acres.”
From the same :
“Kangaroo Head,” according to Flinders,
‘‘Anse des Sources,” according to the French Navigators,
“Hog Bay,” according to the Sealers,
“ September 22, 1836.
“ I broke off yesterday in order to go up the American
River, or Pelican Lagoon. It is a very pretty place, abound-
ing in birds and oysters. In the neighborhood of a salt
lake, which is about half a mile from the head of the
lagoon, there is a very rich and light land. There was very
good soil along the point at which we first stopped the
day before yesterday; and in the immediate vicinity of the
place where we are now bivouacing it is most excellent.
‘l2 o’clock.—l have been for the last two hours walk-
ing about the neighborhood, and have found some very
beautiful land, extending along the sea shore and back to
the hills, distant about three-quarters of a mile. There is
a natural grass upon it, which is very sweet, and would,
doubtless, in its present natural state, feed cattle.”


—
Plate VII. A View of the Centre of Kangaroo Island, showing Dwarf Scrub.


-ifcCU f t !
* • , ( , v . V' '4 " v <>:
Plate VIII. View showing Forest Trees about thirty miles east of Cape
Borda, on the Telegraph Line.


Flinders appeared to be greatly puzzled with the state
of the forest trees on Kangaroo Island and other large
islands. He says: —
“A thick wood covered almost all that part of the
island visible from the ship; but the trees in a vegetating
state were not equal in size to the generality of those lying
on the ground, nor to the dead trees standing upright.
Those on the ground were so abundant that in ascending
the higher land a considerable part of the walk was made
upon them. They lay in all directions and were nearly
of the same size and in the same progress towards decay;
from whence it would seem that they had not fallen from
age nor yet been thrown down in a gale of wind. Some
general conflagration, and there were marks apparently of
fire on many of them, is, perhaps, the sole cause which can
be reasonably assigned; but whence came the woods on fir* 1 ?
That there were no inhabitants upon the island, and that
the natives of the continent did not visit it, was demon-
strated, if not by the want of all signs of such visit, yet
by the tameness of the kanguroo, an animal which, on the
continent, resembles the wild deer in timidity. Perhaps
lightning might have been the cause, or possibly the fric-
tion of two dead trees in a strong wind; but would be
somewhat extraordinary that the same thing should have
happened at Thistle’s Island, Boston Island, and at this
place, and apparently about the same time. Can this
part of Terra Australis have been visited before, unknown
to the world? The French navigator. La Perouse, was
ordered to explore it, but there seems little probability that
he ever passed Torres Strait.
“Some judgment may be formed of the epoch when
these conflagrations happened from the magnitude of the
growing trees, for they must have sprung up since that
period. They were a species of eucalyptus, and being less
than the fallen trees had most probably not arrived at
maturity; but the wood is hard and solid, and it may
thence be supposed to grow slowly. With these considera-
tions, I shall be inclined to fix the period at not less
than ten, nor more than twenty years before our arrival.
This brings us back to La Perouse. He was in Botany Bay
in the beginning of 1788; and if he did pass through Torres
Strait and come round to this coast, as was his intention,
it would probably be about tin* middle or latter end of


that year, or between thirteen and fourteen years before
the Investigator. My opinion is not favorable to
this conjecture; but I have furnished all the data to enable
the reader to form his own judgment upon the cause
which might have prostrated the woods of these islands.
“Never, perhaps, had the dominion possessed here by
the kauguroo been invaded before this time. The seal
shared with it upon the shores, but they seemed to dwell
amicably together. It not unfrequently happened that
the report of a gun tired at a kanguroo near the beach
brought out two or three bellowing seals from under the
bushes considerably further from the waterside. The seal,
indeed, seemed to be much the most discerning animal of
the two; for its actions bespoke a knowledge of our not
being kangaroos, whereas the kanguroo not unfrequently
appeared to consider us to be seals.” (Yol. 1., pp. 171/2.)
Dr. VV. H. Leigh, who resided on Kangaroo Island in
June and July, LS37, refers to a fresh water lagoon about
seven or eight miles from Kingscote, near which there was
an old hollow gum-tree. On its bark was cut out, “This is
the place for fat meat, 1800.”* No further particulars are
given. If, as stated, the inscription was made in the bark, it
is doubtful whether, after the lapse of thirty-seven years, it
would have been then legible, for in much less time an over-
growth would have obliterated the letters. To support the
theory of a visit to the locality referred to, Captain J. Lort
Stokes, R.N., in his account of the voyage of D.M.S. “Heagle,”'
states that “ between the years 1800 and 1805, the islands
in Bass Straits, and those fronting the south coast of Aus-
tralia, as far westward as the Gulfs of St. Vincent and
Spencer, were frequented by sealing vessels from the old and
the new country, if I may use this expression for England
and Australia. *f* Captain Stokes quotes as his authority
for the statement the Straitsrnen living on the islands. As
Flinders did not explore these regions until 1802, it raises
the question : Wore the Straitsrnen the discoverers of
Kangaroo Island ?
*Keconnoitering Voyages and Travels with Adventures in the New Colonies of
South Australia, Ac. By W. H. Leigh, London, 1839, p. 126.
tDiscoveries in Australia, Ac., by J. Lort Stokes, Commander, UN. 2 Vols . Lon-
don, 1846, Vol. II , p. 449.


The following translated extracts are from Vol. 11. of
the “Voyage de Decouvertes aux Torres Australes” of MM.
Peron and Freycinet;—
“On the third of January, 1803, we were opposite
to the south cape of Kangaroo Island. We called it Cape
Gantheaume. Two small islets, completely surrounded by
reefs, are at a little distance from it, in a S.S.E. direction.
We next discovered the bay Vivonne, which has an opening
of 4to 5 leagues; but, like the one preceding it, has no depth
and would afford no shelter against the impetuous winds
which blow in this locality.
“ At five or six miles out to sea from this bay and to-
wards its western end exists a long chain of reefs, to
which we sailed as close as possible.
“ From Cape Kersaint, which on the west closes Vivonne
Bay, as far as Cape du Couedic, a distance of over 30 miles,
Kangaroo Island lies fairly east to west, the coast showing
no remarkable feature.
“ The sea dashes violently along the coast, and here and
there reefs are visible, which appear to lie very near the
shore. One, however, of these reefs, lying athwart a small
cape, which we called Cape Bouguer, juts out more than
three leagues to sea, is especially dangerous and to be feared,
being level with the surface of the water.
“ Cape du Couedic itself is enclosed by a double chain of
breakers, and the islets of Casuarina are also surrounded by
reefs.
“ Maupertuis Bay, lying between Cape du Couedic and
Cape Bedout, is of the same nature as the preceding ones,
and offers no more interest.
“ Beyond Cape Bedout, which forms the extreme western
point of the island, we discovered a deep ravine, which must
be the bed of some torrent, and called it Ravine des Casoars,
in consequence of the great number of emus living ou the
island.
“ On the morning of the 4th we doubled the north cape,
which we christened Cape Borda. From this point we could
see the coast running due east, with several capes jutting
slightly out, which we called Cape Forbin, Cape Prony,
Cape Cassini, Cape d’Estaing, and Cape Vendome.* This
*Point Marsden, of Flinders.




last one is the most northern extremity of the island and the
western end of a large bay, which we called Bougainville
Bay (Nepean Bay), in honor of the respected doyen of
French explorers. We cast anchor in it on the morning
of the 6th January.
“ This hay, situated in the N.E. portion of Kangaroo
Island, is the greatest of all such openings that exist on it,
and is also the most important in every respect. Its situa-
tion shelters it from the south winds, and its (size) extent
enables it to be used as a harbor for numerous fleets. It
has a breadth of more than 20 miles by a depth of 8 to 10.
“The depth of water varies between 9 and 10 fathoms,
and the floor of the sea is sand and loam mixed with sea-
weed, and affords good anchorage. In the western end of
this bay are two conspicuous creeks, one very narrow, but
deeper than the other, we called Anse des Ilauts Fonds,
because of the raised ground which obstructed its entrance;
the other, larger and easier of access, seemed to be a
favored place of refuge to innumerable amphibious ani-
mals. We therefore called it Anse des Phoques.
“A sort of very prominent cape (Kangaroo Cape) occu-
pies the middle of the bay, and separates the lastnamed
creek from a little port, irregular in shape, and nearly
everywhere blocked by sand banks, but in whose placid
waters innumerable legions of pelicans find their food. We
gave it the name of Port Dache. *
“ Cape Delambre, on the east, closes Bougainville Bay.
Two miles beyond this cape is “Anse des Sources,’’"f*
which must have a special notice, as it is the only point
in the island where we were able to get fresh water.
“Further on is Du Guai Tronin Bay* whose breadth ard
depth vary between 3 and -I miles, and where we anchored
the previous year (1802).
“ From this lastnamed point the coast trending S.S.E.
reaches Cape Sane,§ of which mention was first made.
“ From this complicated configuration of the eastern
part of Kangaroo Island it would appear that the por-
tion comprised, between Port Dache and the lastnamed
cape forms a peninsula 25 miles long by one league broad
*Pelican Lagoon, of Flinders.
fHog Bay, or Pcnneshaw.
♦Antechamber Bay, of Flinders.
§ Cape Willoughby, of Flinders.


in its narrowest part, and we called it Peninsula of la
Galissonniere, in memory of the conqueror of Admiral
Byng.
“ Kangaroo Island, notwithstanding its greatness, pos-
sesses no highlands which properly can be called moun-
tains. The entire formation of the land is essentially one
of hills of more or less height, and whose summits are
regular and uniform. All along the south coast these
hills are in one uniform plan, with a perpendicular height
of 200 to 300 ft. The slopes are so even that in their
upper parts they look like slides, but on the sea shore these
same hills rise abruptly from the waters and form every-
where a sort of rampart.
“ Their tints are sombre and wild, varying from grey to
brown and even black; the parts of a lighter shade are of
yellowish ochre color, more or less dirty.
“ From Cape Bedout as far as the Ravine des Casoars
the land offers one uniform range of hills, exactly similar
to those on the south coast, but somewhat higher; and, not-
withstanding that they are completely without any trees,
here and there patches of green are to be seen.
“ Cutting through this chain of hills the Ravine des
Casoars affords a glimpse to the hinterland, where other
hills are visible, some of them wooded. The northern coast
is parched and bare, and, like the southern one, shows
everywhere a similar formation.
“ The shores of Bougainville (Nepean) Bay consist also
of low hills, but the green growth that covers them, and
the forests, whose tops are visible in several places, lends
to this portion of the island a more cheerful and agreeable
appearance.
“In such a guise it appears to the navigator, who on
his path circumnavigates it, the largest island belonging
to Australia; this description which I have just made,
thoroughly exact as far as the coast is concerned, would,
no doubt, however, have been more interesting and diversi-
fied if it had been possible for us to penetrate into the
interior to study its formation and numerous products.
“ Deprived of mountains, in want of that active vegeta-
tion which develops and maintains the freshness of the
soil, Kangaroo Island appeared to us completely destitute


of fresh water. It is true we found ourselves there during
the hottest months of the year. By digging a few holes
we, however, managed to oljtain in Anse des Sources (Hog
Bay) a sufficient quantity of water for our daily use.
“ It was not alone on the coast of Kangaroo Island at
the time of which I am speaking that this want of fresh
water was being felt. There was a peculiarity in the life
of the animals inhabiting it that seemed to indicate that
this dearth was then, if not absolute, at least widespread
in the interior.
“ As soon as the heat of the day began to abate there
oame from the innermost recesses of the woods large mobs
of kangaroos and flocks of emus, who sought from the
ocean that quenching draught which mother earth, no
doubt, refused them.*
“ This scarcity of water, the lowness of the land, and
the general stuntedness of plant growth, all tending on
these shores to increase the heat of the atmosphere, it is
not surprising that the mean of our thermometrical obser-
vations for midday was 18 deg. 7R. The 20th, 25th,
27th, 29th, and 30th January were the hottest days we
had, and on shore in the shade at 2 p.m. the mercury rose
to 27 deg. SR.
“ The land breezes, those of N.E., N.N.E., E.N.E.. were
then blowing, and we could easily see that they partook
of the nature of those burning winds which desolate the
interior of Australia.
“ The mineral riches of Kangaroo Island are less various
than those of King Island, hut offer a greater interest
than the latter. They are essentially formed of primary
schists, between whose layers are found veins of opaque
quartz, generally of a whitish color, but sometimes reddish.
“The entire western portion of Bougainville (Nepean)
Bay is principally composed of a ferruginous, red, and
*This is an extraordinary statement to be marie by a French scientist, and
it seems hardly credible that the kangaroos and emus could quench their thirst
or live for any time on salt water as a beverage. It can therefore be assumed
that the animals and birds found in the sea the existence of a fresh water spring
to which they repaired in the evenings of the warm days for the double purpose
of a bath and a drink. Although we cannot now locate the exact place referred
to by the French navigator, it would be interesting and of practical value to
the settlement of the island if the Governor Muegrave was fitted with the
necessary marine hydrometer and apparatus to collect information on this im-
portant matter, which would enable the springs to be tapped before they dis-
charged into the ocean.—(Ed.)


very hard granite. It is to this peculiar rock that Kan-
garoo, Geographe, Rouge, and Vendome Capes owe their
reddish tinge, and which enables them to lx* easily recog-
nised afar off.
“ Two other granites are found on this island, one
belonging to the primary of a quartzy nature and close-
grained forms some of the larger portions of the coast;
the other, of the secondary, calcareous and softer in tex-
ture, occupies in the geological description of this land
a place, if not more important, at least more peculiar than
the first. It is embedded in this rock, that are found petri-
fied trees and even whole portions of forests. In several
places where the downs are cut into perpendicular cliffs
the trunks of these trees are easily distinguished; every
little detail is visible, and their smaller branches also petri-
fied, sink and lose themselves in the common mould. Even
the parasitical and climbing plants, also petrified, are to
be seen twisting and twining around the trunks of the
trees.
“ In certain districts these granite downs have collapsed,
the detritus arising from their fall has been washed away
by the rains and dispersed by the winds; the ground has
been levelled, showing places more or less even, and some
of considerable extent. It is in such places that these
curious petrifieations of which I am speaking, appear in
a more singular form. Cut level with the ground the
trunks of these trees form like large mosaics, which on close
inspection reveal tin* various layers of ligneous tissue.
“ The mind is struck with surprise at such a phenome-
non. and seeks to find in Nature the causes and agents of
such a metamorphosis.
“ In several spots in Bougainville Bay two other calcare-
ous stones are to be found; one very close-grained, the
other resembling more a chalky formation. These cal-
careous stones are generally found overlying the schistous
rocks, and primary granite, and are to be seen at more
than 50 or 60 ft. above sea level; at that height they
contain a vast quantity of detritus and broken fossil
shells.
The sand of the sea shore is of a fine texture, quartzy
nature, and mixed with about one-fifth of a very poor cal-


careous earth. This sand, driven inland by wind and
tide, rises in parts of the coast in downs, varying in height
from 60 to 80 ft.
“ At the end of the bay which we are describing are
to be found forests which appear to stretch far into
the interior of the island, and are composed, as all forests
of these distant lands, of different varieties of Eucalyptus,
Banksia, Phebalium, Mimosa. Casuarina, Metrosideros,
Leptospermes, Styphelia. Concilium, Diosma. Hakea, Era-
bothrium.
“ Amongst these trees, and more so amongst the largest
ones, are to be found a great number so completely rotten
in the interior that they are useless for any good pur-
pose. This deterioration appeared to me to be caused by
the poorness of the soil, which does not furnish these
plants with a sufficient quantity of nutritive elements.
When grown to a greater size they require more water for
their existence.
“ What can 1 say of the uselessness of the forests of this
island in providing food for man or beast ? r l hey, like the
forests of Australia, and the islands depending thereon,
have that same sorry character; character the more incom-
prehensible, as these far-off lands produce such a vast
amount of magnificent plants.
On the shores no trace of human life is to be found,
and we saw only three species of mammalia.
“ One belongs to the pretty genus of opossums; the
two others are new to us. and seemed to belong to the
biggest of the curious family of kangaroos.
“ Several of these in Kangaroo Island, when holding
their bodies erect and squatting on their tail and hind-
legs. appeared as tall, if not taller, than a man.
“ Free from the fear of all enemies, these large quad-
rupeds have multiplied greatly on the island and are to
be found in large mobs.
“ In the places most commonly haunted by them the
ground is so beaten that not a blade of grass is to be seen.
“ Broad, open paths, coming through the forest from
every point in the interior, finish off on the sea shore.
These paths cross one another in every direction, and are


so trodden down that at first sight one would be lead to
believe that a numerous active population inhabited the
neighborhood.
“ In consequence of this great abundance of kangaroos
hunting them is as easy as it is remunerative. We thus
managed to secure 27 living specimens, which we sent on
board, not to mention those that were killed and eaten by
the crew.
“ This valuable acquisition cost us neither ammunition
nor trouble. A dog alone, named Spott, was our sole
purveyor, broken in by English seamen to this way of hunt-
ing. lie followed the kangaroos till he had caught up
with them and then killed them by tearing open their
jugular arteries.
“ Only the presence and shouts of the huntsman could
snatch from sudden death the unfortunate victim. With
this dog and this system of hunting some men settled on
Kangaroo Island could have lived at ease, as far as food
is concerned; and it is easy to imagine that the peaceful
and harmless kangaroos would in a few years be com-
pletely exterminated by dogs of a breed similar to the one
I speak of.
“ Amongst the numerous seal families who had .estab-
lished their homes on the shores of the island we noticed
a new species of the genus sea lion (Euotaria cinerea),
which attained a length of 3 metres to 3 metres 20 (9 to
10 ft.). Its fur is very short, very hard, and very coarse,
but its skin is thick and strong; and the oil that can be
obtained from its fat is good in quality and abundant.
“For both these reasons the hunting of these amphibia
would offer valuable results. The same observations will
apply to some other species of seals, smaller in size, that
are also found in large numbers on these shores and
whose furs are of good quality.
Should a speculation of this sort be started, Anse des
Sources (Hog Bay) would supply the fishermen Avith suf-
ficient water for all their Avants, and the kangaroos and
emus will furnish them with a wholesome and inexhaust-
ible store of food.
“ the other uninhabited islands of Australia, this
one gives shelter to immense flocks of land and sea birds.


'■ The first comprise a host of beautiful species of par-
rots, cockatoos, tom-tits, wrens, fty-catchers, finches, and
thrushes.
“ There is to be found the beautiful pigeon with golden
wings: the wren with ultramarine blue collar ; the
finch with scarlet rump; the white goshawk of Australia ;
and a sort of screech owl. Amongst the sea and shore
birds were specially noticeable the yellow-necked pelican,
with white and black striped wings; the mallows, of which
one of the larger species was conspicuous by the lovely
lilac color of the underpart of its body.
“ Terns, oyster birds, and several species of petrels, a big
sea eagle, and several widgeon, prominent by the brilliancy
and variety of their coloring.
“ But of all the birds with which Nature has endowed
Kangaroo Island the most useful to man are the emus.
“ These large birds seem to live on the island in
numerous flocks; but as they are fleet of foot, and we did
not waste our time in hunting them, we only managed
to secure three living ones. *
“ On a land deprived of fresh water, it is not surprising
that we found no trace of toad, frog, or tree frogs; but,
on the other hand, the family of lizards, whose organism
agrees so well with parched and sandy surroundings, were
represented by a great number of new species, such as the
black skink (Scincus aterrimus, N.), the Gecko pachyurus,
the Gecko sphincturus, and the ocellated seincoid (Scin-
coides oeellatus, N.). and the iguana of Kangaroo Island
(Iguana Decresiensis, N.).
“ Much, however, as these different animals may be valu-
able, their scientific interest fades before that of two
saurians, which I have described under the names of Tri-
dactyle and Tetradactyle.
“ The first, like the lizards and chalcides, has only three
digits on each foot, while the other has four, both on front
and back feet • a combination of digits unknown till now
amongst reptiles, but of which my illustrious master, M.
de Lacepede, has proclaimed the existence as possible, if
not probable.
•It is regrot table to state that not a single bird of this species is now to be
found on the island.




“Of the several parts of New Holland which we
had an opportunity of visiting, Kangaroo Island ap-
peared to he one of those least abounding in fish.
All our ordinary inodes of fishing and all our researches
succeeded in obtaining scarcely a dozen species of fish;
new ones, it is true, but five or six of which are not usually
eaten.
“ Amongst these species were to be found a labrum,
who, by its colors —dirty, grey, and dull —deserved the ap-
propriate name of squalid. A scomber, very much like
the European mackerel, but differing in its size, which
was a great deal smaller and in certain peculiarities of its
fins; a kind of mackerel, with a back of azure blue ; a
Scombresocis, about 22 in. in length, glittering with all
the colors of the prism; a small, reddish Coryphoena, two
barracoota, one trumpet fish, three file fish, of which one
is conspicuous by the four brown stripes on its sides, the
other by the beautiful purple tinge of its pectoral fins; the
third is a Balistacanthure, and is easily recognised by tin;
black color of its body and the four big spikes, which
defend each side of its tail.
“But of all fish of this island the most remarkable is
a species of shark, which attains 15 to 20 ft. (French) in
length and which is very common in Nepean Bay. Day
and night many, of these monstrous animals were seen sur-
rounding the vessel in search of food.
“ One of these formidable sharks having hooked itself,
we had to reeve some tackle to haul it on board; it mea-
sured 5 metres (15 ft. 6 in.), and weighed between 500 and
600 kilos (1,100 to 1,300 Eng. lbs.). Its hideous jaw
was furnished with seven rows of teeth and measured
open 74 centimetres (23 in.).
“There were, however, in the water, sharks a great deal
larger than this one. What other animals can satisfy
the voracity of such monsters? No doubt the unfor-
tunate seals and their young; for it is the only way to
account for the presence of these gigantic sharks in a bay
where fish are so scarce.
“ To proclaim that Kangaroo Island enriched my col-
lection by 3)16 different species of Crustacea, spiders, in-
sects, worms, zoophytes, will be a sufficient excuse for not
dealing more fully with this enormous quantity of ani-


mal life. I will merely summarise some of the principal
results of my observations on this subject.
“At the entrance of Pelican Lagoon we found a large
species of oyster, which forms very extensive beds at this
point; the flesh of this animal is tender and delicate.
“ Amongst the shell fish belonging to this coast L will
single out a species of ear shell, whose pores form pro-
tuberances on the shell, in shape like small, open, truncated
cones (Ilaliotis conicopara, X.).
“ A second species of the same genus, and to which I
gave the name of cyclobactis, because of its very deep and
nearly circular mouth, is 0m 1 of tin* finest and largest
Ormiers known; its mother-of-pearl sparkles with all the
colors of the prism (Ilaliotis cyclobates. X.).
“Towards the bottom of the bay is a kind of marsh
covered with seaweed, in which live, buried in the mud
and sand, millions of Piunoe Marinue. or muscles. These
shellfish furnish a silk equal, in all respects, to that obtained
from similar animals along the coasts of Calabria and
Sicily, but the European muscles dwell at a depth of .‘lO or
40 ft. and the fishery is attended with great difficulty,
whilst those of Kangaroo Island are covered with scarcely
25 to 30 in. of water, and thousands might with ease he
collected in a few hours. (Is this a long-negleeted industry?)
“ Our entomological collections were increased by 54
new species belonging to 33 different genera.
“Amongst these species are —One of termites, whose
nests reach to a height of 60 to 90 centimetres (2 to 3
ft.) ; several of ants, whose innumerable legions were to
be found everywhere.
“ To be noted, also, two of scorpions, six of spiders, a
magnificent eossyphus, nine of cockroaches, grasshoppers,
crickets, two of woodlouse, one tulus, two of centipedes,
(one of which was conspicuous by the brilliant red of its
abdomen), two of wood bugs, one black earwig, a species
of butterfly of the division of Brassicaires, of M. Latreille;
also various species of Chrysomela, Spanish fly, Oedemera,
Lebrunae, Opis, Helops, Cerambyx, and Thynnidae, &c.
“ Kangaroo Island is certainly one of the richest locali-
ties in sponges, and I here collected 26 species of the finest
and largest.


“ This great abundance allowed me to make a special
study of these zoophytes, which, by their organism, are
classed in the lowest one of animal life, and to establish
in the genus, in which they are included the three fol-
lowing subdivisions:—
“Sponges without ocellated pores or well-defined tubes,
Blind sponge.
“Sponges provided with ocellated pores,, but not well-
defined tubes— Ocellated sponge.
“Sponges provided with well-defined tubes —Tubular
sponge”
Captain John Hart, C.M.G., who was master of the
schooner “Elizabeth,” visited Nepean Bay, K. 1., on De-
cember 20, 1831. He procured from the Salt Lagoon
five tons of salt, and bought 150 sealskins and 12,000
wallaby skins from the islanders. He.says:—“These
islanders were principally men who had left various sealing
vessels when on their homeward voyage, the masters readily
agreeing to an arrangement by which they secured for the
next season all the skins obtained during their absence.
This island-life had a peculiar charm for the sailors, being
supplied from the ship with flour, tea, sugar, tobacco, and
a tew slops, and living generally in pairs on the shore of
one of the little bays. They cultivated a small garden
to supply them with potatoes, onions, and a small patch
of barley for their poultry. They thus lead an easy, inde-
pendent life, as compared with that on board ship. They
obtained wives from the mainland; these attended to the
wallaby snares, caught fish, and made up the boat’s crew
when on a sealing expedition to f lu* neighboring rocks. At
Kangaroo Island there were some sixteen or eighteen of
these men. On a certain day, once a year, they assembled
from all parts of the island to meet the vessel in Nepean
Bay and dispose of their skins, getting a supply in return
for the following year, the only money required being a
sovereign or two for making earrings.”*
That Kingscote was early considered of some impor-
tance. Capper states that on “May 24, 1838, being her
Majesty’s natal day. it was celebrated at Kingscote by
several boat races. The vessels in harbor were decorated
with a great variety of flags and the South Australian Corn-
* Letter* from Victorian Pioneers. Melbourne, IS9B. pp. 302/3.


J
■
r . 4P 1
r WJ4rlu "*^ : ' j 4ii$ttMk &*$$$ t »ir
* . ■ * •• •— *-~ ■• . -.. .-*_.
■ s ,L- r.w *---, - • * * ■ • , • r
..- K -»!»-; ~... ■ ~ » . ..... ;-■■* - ■ ■ .
:
■ V ■.•-;■:■>'* r fV 1 ■ • ■•' - ' ' " w ‘ ■ '■ •
■ f'-> >. .<* '
Plate XI. View showing the old site of Kingscote, taken in 1886.


pany ’s'schooner. “John Birie.” fired a royal salute of 24
guns. In the evening there was a splendid display of fire-
works and an illumination.”
On June TO. 1888. Governor Ilindmarsh visited
Kangaroo Island in 11.M.5. “Pelorus.” Captain Harding.
His Excellency landed on the 11th. and fixed upon spots for
the erection of a Custom-House and other public buildings*
On June 28. 1888. Nepean Bay was proclaimed a legal port.
On July 11. 1888. Governor Ilindmarsh issued a pro-
clamation under an Act to establish courts of resident
Kingscote (Queenscliffe) Telegraph Station.
magistrates, &c.. that Kangaroo Island shall be one dis-
trict, to be called the District of Kingscote. William
Giles, Esq.,‘to be resident magistrate of the district, and
George Hutton Barnard to lx* Collector of Customs of Ihe
port of Nepean Bay and postmaster of Kangaroo Island.
' Capper's South Australia, 3rd edition, London, 1839, p. 99.




For further particulars concerning the early settlement
at Kangaroo Island and its vicissitudes, the reader is re-
ferred to an interesting little brochure on “Kangaroo
Island. Adelaide’s Sanatorium, with Map and Illustrations,
by a Native (E. 11. Hallack). Adelaide: W. K. Thomas
and Co., 1905.”
Our steamer arrived at Kingscote jetty (formerly
called Queenscliffe) at about 6 p.m. The geologists were
anxious to examine the rocks and the formation to the north
of the jetty towards Point Marsden, and they immediately
proceeded along the shore in that direction. On the way
thither an excavation from which white clay had been ob-
tained was examined, and further north an old quarry from
whence large quantities of small stones were obtained for
the road from Port Adelaide to Adelaide in the early
forties. (See plate in Mr. Howchin’s Geological Notes).
The sensible proposal to discard the name of Queens-
clitfe, and revert to the original name of the first settle-
ment in this locality, has met with general approval.
The name Kingscote was adopted by the early settlers
in 1830. in honor of Henry Kingscote, one of the original
Board of Directors in London of the South Australian
Company.
The old mulberry tree said to have been planted by
Menge, the first geologist in South Australia, was visited,
and also the little cemetery on the slope of the hill.
A monument to the memory of Flinders was erected in
Kingscote on the centenary of Flinders’ discovery of the
island in 1902.
At 8 p.m. the steamer was again under weigh for the
South Neptune Islands.
SOUTH NEPTUNE ISLAND.
Arrived opposite the lighthouse shortly after daylight.
This island is about 160 acres in area. There are two
islands conjoined, and only in calm weather at low water
it is possible to pass from one island to the other with-
out the aid of boats.
The lighthouse, which is an iron structure, is built
c:i the highest point; its cost with cottages is stated to be


£10,785. Four lightkeepers are stationed here. The
annual upkeep is about £650. The light, which is white,
revolving every 50 seconds, is visible for about 20 miles,
and was first exhibited on November 1, 1901.
Lighthouse at Neptune Island.
The cottages are built of granite, on granite rock
foundations, and roofed with French-Marseilles tiles.
These red tiles give the cottages a neat and comfortable
appearance, but we were informed that they are porous
and useless for roofs on this island, and will have to be


replaced at an early date. Another mistake was made in
not providing chimneys and fireplaces, it being apparently
considered by the architect that kerosine stoves for cooking,
&(*., would meet all domestic purposes. The lightkeepers
are strongly averse to the substitution of stoves for open
fire-places, more particularly on this exposed island, where
the sea-spray percolates the blocks of granite, with which
the cottages are built, and consequently during the cold
stormy nights in winter, with damp walls and leaky roofs,
Lighthouse and Cottages on Neptune Island (from the
Anchorage).
the interior aspect is far from cheering. However, the
keepers, especially their wives, are hoping for early altered
conditions, which will tend to make their secluded lives
more cheerful. We strongly support their claims for early
and favorable consideration.
The west and south portions of these islands are
bordered with huge granite boulders, against which the
waves of the Southern Ocean dash with relentless fury.


The lightkeepers assert that when a strong southerly wind
blows the spray passes over the whole of the island, and
in some of the chasms, not far from the lighthouse, the
spray is forced up in a vertical column about 50 ft. above
the rocks, forming a grand and imposing spectacle. Im-
mense boulders of granite, which lie scattered in all direc-
tions on the south sides of these islands, clearly indicate
that any vessel driven on these rocks would be instantly
shattered to pieces.
In October, 1840, a cutter named the “Frances” was
wrecked on one of the Neptune Islands. The crew sub-
sisted on penguins for fifty days, after which two of their
number ventured in a dinghy boat to Port Lincoln, a dis-
tance of 50 miles, where they arrived safely. A whale-
boat was immediately dispatched and brought back the
remainder of the crew.
The islands were charted by Captain Stokes of H.M.S.
“Beagle” in 1840, and were visited by Captain Howard, of
the Admiralty Survey, in 1873-4.
The sandy summits of these islands are the breeding-
places of the mutton birds (Puffinns tenuirostris). These
extraordinary birds burrow holes in the sand for their
nests, under the atriplex and other dwarf bushes. The
entire surface is perforated with holes from 1 to 3 ft.
deep, not unlike rabbit burrows; in each hole one egg only
is laid, which in size and appearance resembles a duck’s
egg, and on which the female bird closely sits during in-
cubation. Although there may he thousands of birds sit-
ting not one is visible during the day. After sunset, and
when the shades of the evening are deepening, a wonder-
ful scene is to be witnessed here, and on all the sandy
islands on the south coast of Australia, more particularly
in Bass’s Straits. It must be seen to be realised. In
the stillness of a summer’s evening, with no other sound
than the surging of the ocean, one or two dark forms flit
by. These appear to be the pilots of the myriads which
follow in a few seconds; not a sound is uttered by the host
now obscuring the sky, backwards and forwards ihcy glide,
getting nearer the surface of the island as they circle
round, when they pounce down and each dives into its
burrow. A chattering commences immediately the re-
turned bird enters the hole. It may be a recount of the


day’s adventures, but whatever the conversation is, it is
sufficiently loud to he heard for some distance from the
burrow, so that the whole community, numbering several
thousands, quickly transform the place into an ornitholo-
gical pandemonium. The lightkeepers, before they became
accustomed to the noise, were unable to sleep. At early
dawn the birds again take flight to southern latitudes, and
so day by day the birds disappear, returning at nightfall
only, when each bird disgorges a fish, generally a pilchard,
which is immediately eaten by the bird in the burrow.
The breeding season of the mutton birds is during the
months from October to December, and it is only during
these months and while the young are growing that the
birds frequent the islands. The lightkeepers state that
these birds visit the islands on the same day in each suc-
cessive year. Where they go during the other months
of the year is not ascertained. Contemporary with these
visits shoals of fish appear to be also visitants to the Aus-
tralian coasts, and from these the mutton birds, no doubt,
obtain their food supply during the period of incubation.
Mr, Mellor’s paper, included herein, gives some interesting
information regarding these extraordinary seabirds, which
I regret to say are being most ruthlessly destroyed on their
periodical visit to our Australian islands. Early legislation
is necessary to prevent the wanton destruction of these and
other seabirds, hundreds of thousands of which are killed
simply for their feathers.
The Neptunes, named by Flinders, and sighted by him
on February 21, 1802, when anchored off Thistle Island,
is recorded in his journal as follows:—“On the opposite
side, six leagues out at sea, there was a small cluster of low-
islands and some rocks and breakers at a less distance;
these were called Neptune’s Isles, for they seemed to be
inaccessible to men.”
Our stay here being limited, w r e left about 8 o’clock.
WILLIAMS ISLAND.
About two hours after leaving Neptune Island we
anchored in a little bay on the north side of Williams Isle,
about 1 i/j miles south of Cape Catastrophe. This cove has
a small sandy beach at its head, with rocks on either side.*
* Sec Illuviation under Geological Notes by Mr. Howchin.


The party landed on the western side on the rocks. The
approach to this island is dangerous, owing to sunken
rocks on which the sea only breaks occasionally. This
island, named by Flinders on 20th February, 1802. was
not visited by him, but was charted by Captain Lipson,
R.N., who landed on it in 1840. Its area is about 500 acres,
and is destitute of trees; it is, however, covered with
stunted bushes, principally atriplex cinerea. The matted
vegetation, varying from 18 in. to 2 ft. in height, is in many
places undermined by the mutton birds, which made walk-
ing a laborious undertaking. Three of our party, with
considerable difficulty, reached the higher grounds, having
seen several snakes in their course. The surface of the
island is composed of a white barren-looking sand, and at
certain seasons of the year is evidently a favorite resort of
mutton birds. Its slopes near the sea are steep, and hav-
ing no attractions either for the naturalist, or the sports-
man, it is seldom visited. A big male seal much scarred
was seen on this island. Left here about 11.45 am. for
Memory Cove, on the mainland.
MEMORY COVE.
Directly the party were landed at the head of this little
bay a photograph was taken of the post and tablet which
was erected by the South Australian Government in 181)7
to replace, as far as possible, tin* post and tablet erected
there by Flinders in 1802. The original copper tablet was
engraved on board the Investigator, but Flinders, strange
to say, does not record the words which were engraven on
it. Several navigators refer to the existence of the plate
at the time they visited the cove, but so far as known no
copy was made of the inscription. Portions of the original
tablet are framed and exhibited in the Public Library,
Adelaide, these pieces are insufficient to enable us to say
what the actual words were, and an attempt has been made
to A ll in the missing words by Professor Stirling. C.M.G.
the last line is still unsolved* These pieces of copper-
plate are probably the only relics in Australia of the In-
vestigator. They have a special value from the fact that
Flinders, and. no doubt, all his officers and crew, had seen
these identical copper sheets as now inscribed, at a time, too,
when their hearts were filled with sorrow at the calamitous
event thereon recorded.
*£ei- Plate No. XIII.
56
A CRUISE IN THE S.S “GOVERNOR 51USGRAVE.”


Plate XIII.
Copy of Copper Plate, erected by Flinders at
Memory Cove.
[The dark portions are from pieces of the original plate now
in the Public Library, Adelaide; the other portion is only
conjectural.]


On the day of our visit the weather was warm. Before
leaving an attempt was made to penetrate the scrub, hut
the dwarf trees, which consisted of melaleuca and eucalyp-
tus, were too thick to permit of any examination of the
country, at the back of the cove.
With a light seabreeze and a comparatively smooth sea,
the whole of the party were in high spirits; but, notwith-
standing the pleasures of the novel situation in which we
found ourselves, we were confronted with huge monuments
all around reminding us of men whose lives had been lost
in the cause of Australian discovery. Men whose eyes had
beheld the same views that were now presented to our gaze.
Men who, when they embarked in their little boat in this
cove, little anticipated that the islands near and around
were to be their perpetual monuments, and that before the
morning sun would appear an unsolved mystery would
be recorded in which they would be the principal actors.
To enable the reader to become fully acquainted with
the tragical event that led to the naming of Memory Cove,
Cape Catastrophe, Thistle Island, and other islands in this
portion of Spencer’s Gulf, the whole of the journal of
Captain Flinders dealing with the circumstance is repro-
duced in full.
On February 21st, 1802, Captain Flinders sent Mr.
Thistle from where the “Investigator” was anchored on
the western side of Thistle Island, over with the cutter to
the mainland in search of an anchoring place where Avater
might be procured. Flinders says:—“At dusk in the even-
ing the cutter was seen under sail returning from the main-
land; but not arriving in half an hour, and the sight of it
having been lost rather suddenly, a light Avas shown, and
Lieutenant Fowler Avent in a boat with a lanthorn to see
Avhat might have happened. Two hours passed without
receiving any tidings. A gnn was then fired and Mr.
Fowler returned soon afterAA r ard, but alone. Near the situa-
tion where the cutter had been last seen he met with so
strong a rippling of tide that he himself narrowly escaped
being upset, and there Avas reason to fear that it had actually
happened to Mr. Thistle. Had there been daylight it is
probable that some or all of the people might have been
picked up; but it AA r as too dark to see anything, and no
answer could be heard to the hallooing or to the firing of


Plate XIV. Tablet at Memory Cove, erected February 21st, 1897.


muskets. The tide was setting to the southward and ran
an hour and a half after the missing boat had been last
seen, so that it would be carried to seaward in the first in-
stance ; and no more than two out of the eight people being
at all expert in swimming it was much to be feared that
most of them would be lost.
“ This evening Mr. Fowler told me a circumstance
which I thought extraordinary; and it afterwards proved
to be more so. Whilst we were lying at Spithead, Mr.
Thistle was one day waiting on shore, and having nothing
else to do he went to a certain old man, named Pine, to
have his fortune told. The cunning man informed him
that he was going out a long voyage, and that the ship, on
arriving at her destination, would be joined by another ves-
sel. That such was intended he might have learned pri-
vately; but he added that Mr. Thistle would be lost before
the other vessel joined. As to the manner of his loss the
magician refused to give any information. My boat's crew,
hearing what Mr. Thistle said, went also to consult the
wise man; and after the prefatory information of a long
voyage were told that they would he shipwrecked, but not in
the ship they were going out in; whether they would escape
and return to England he was not permitted to reveal.
“This tale Mr. Thistle had often told at the mess table;
and I remarked with some pain in a future part of the
voyage that every time my boat ’s crew went to embark with
me in the Lady Nelson there was some degree of apprehen-
sion amongst them that the time of the predicted ship-
wreck was arrived. I make no comment upon this story,
but recommend a commander, if possible, to prevent any of
his crew from consulting fortune-tellers.
“At daybreak I got the ship under way and steered
across Thorny Passage over to the mainland in the direc-
tion where the cutter had been seen, keeping an officer at
the masthead with a glass to look out for her. There were
many strong ripplings and some uncommonly smooth places,
where a boat, which was sent to sound, had 12 fathoms. AVe
passed to the northward of all these, and seeing a small
cove with a sandy beach steered in and anchored in 10
fathoms, sandy bottom; the mainland extending from north-
half-west, round by the west and south to east-south-east,
and the open space being partly sheltered by the northern
islands of the passage.


N
O
05
»
CO
3
C
CO
*3
<U
>
o
o
>»
o
g
<u
S
CQ
0>
s
ca
H
T 3
C
s
o
Jh
cd
i s
: . u
cd
i i
o
tfl
<U
X)
E
4>
s


“A boat was despatched in search of the lost cutter
and presently returned towing in the wreck, bottom upward ;
it was stove in every part, having to all appearance been
dashed against the rocks. One of the oars was afterwards
found, but nothing could be seen of our unfortunate ship-
mates. The boat was again sent away in search, and a mid-
shipman was stationed upon a headland, without side of
the cove, to observe everything which might drift past with
the tide. Mr. Brown and a party landed to walk along
the shore to the northward, whilst I proceeded to the
southern extremity of the mainland, which was now named
Cape Catastrophe. On landing at the head of the cove I
found several footmarks of our people, made on the preced-
ing afternoon when looking for water; and in my way up
the valley I prosecuted the same research, but ineffectually,
although there were many huts and other signs that natives
had resided there lately.
“From the heights near the extremity of Cape Catas-
trophe 1 examined with a glass the islands lying off and
all the neighboring shores for any appearance of our people,
but in vain; I therefore took a set of angles for the sur-
vey and returned on board, and on comparing notes with
the different parties it appeared that no further information
had been obtained of our unfortunate companions.
“Next morning 1 went in a boat 10 miles along the
shore to the northward in the double view of continuing the
search and carrying on the survey. All the little sinuosities
of the coast were followed, and in one place 1 picked up a
small keg, which had belonged to Mr. Thistle, and also some
broken pieces of the boat; but these were all that could be
discovered. After taking angles at three stations on the
mainland I crossed over to the northernmost and largest
of the six small islands lying within Thorny Passage. It is
a mile and a half long, with a, small islet off the north,
and another off its south end. These 1 called Taylor’s Isles,
in memory of the young gentleman who was in the cutter
with Mr. Thistle. They lie near two miles from the
main, and the depth between is from 7 to 10 fathoms, on a
sandy bottom. A ship might anchor and be sheltered here
off a small beach at the north end of the largest island; but
1 did not find any fresh water either there or on the oppo-
site parts of the mainland.


V - • v • • ■ ■ ■••• - M
■jH
., |S** W*WMW» •■„,
****** -
*, «£%
’
Vf, i. *■ “" . ■ . '
: ■ ‘ ., • $ »
'
"**'< v- • rC“ ’ '"’* — t
■■ • ■
— *
"’ - ■ ■ '
. *<•'?&' - : : ,.. sX JJ< > ♦■ . :
J&fc* - r;
Plate XVI,
Memory Cove.


“On returning to the ship I learned from some of the
gentlemen who had been at the top of the highest hills at
the back of the cove that they had seen an inlet, going in
westward, a little beyond where my excursion had termi-
nated. Next day I went up with instruments, and having
climbed upon a high lump of granite, saw the water extend-
ing 40 deg. behind the coast, and forming, apparently, an
extensive port. The annexed view, taken from near the
same spot by .Mr. Westall, shows what was visible of this
fine piece of water, and the appearance of the neighboring
land.
“This morning Lieutenant Fowler had been sent to
search the southern islands in Thorny Passage for any re-
mains of our people; but he was not able to land, nor in
rowing round them to see any indication of the objects of
his pursuit. The recovery of their bodies was now the
furthest to which our hopes extended; but the number of
sharks seen in the cove and at the last anchorage rendered
even this prospect of melancholy satisfaction extremely
doubtful, and our want of water becoming every day more
pressing, avc prepared to depart for the examination of the
new opening to the northward. I caused an inscription to.
be engraven upon a sheet of copper and set up on a stout
post at the head of the cove, which I named Memory Cove;
and further to commemorate our loss, I gave to each of the
six islands nearest to Cape Catastrophe the name of one of
the seamen; Thistle’s and Taylor’s Islands have been al-
ready mentioned. Mr. Westall’s view from the ship in
Memory Cove represents Thistle’s Island and three of the
small isles in front of it.
“The reader will pardon me the observation that Mr,
Thistle was truly a valuable man, as a seaman, an officer,
and a good member of society. I had known him, and we
had mostly served together, from the year 1794. He had
been with Mr. Bass in his perilous expedition in the whale
boat, and with me .in the voyage round Van Diemen’s Land,
and in the succeeding expedition to Glasshouse and Hervey’s
Bays. From his merit and prudent conduct he was pro-
moted from before the mast to be a midshipman, and after-
wards a master in his Majesty’s service. His zeal for dis-
covery had induced him to join the Investigator when at
Spithead and ready to sail, although he had returned to
England only three weeks before, after an absence of six
A CRUISE IN THE S.S. “GOVERNOR MUSGRAVE.


years. Besides performing assiduously the duties of his
situation, Mr. Thistle had made himself well acquainted with
the practice of nautical astronomy, and began to be very
useful in the surveying department. Ilis loss was severely
felt by me, and he was lamented by all on board, more
especially by his messmates, who knew more intimately the
goodness and stability of his disposition.
“Mr. William Taylor, the midshipman of the boat, was
a young officer, who promised fair to become an ornament
to the service, as he was to society, by the amiability of his
manners and temper. The six seamen had all volunteered
for the voyage. They were active and useful young men,
and in a small and incomplete ship’s company, which had
so many duties to perform, this diminution of our force was
heavily felt.
“The latitude of our anchorage in Memory Cove was
34 deg. 58 rain, south, and longitude,l3s deg. min. east.
“The soil of the land round Memory Cove and of Cape
Catastrophe in general, is barren, though the valleys and
eastern sides of the hills are covered with brushwood, and in
the least barren parts there are small trees of the genus
Eucalyptus. The basis stone is granite, mostly covered
with calcareous rock, sometimes lying in loose pieces; but
the highest tops of the hills are huge blocks of granite. Four
kanguroos, not larger than those of Thistle’s Island, were
seen amongst the brushwood, and traces of natives were
found so recent, that although none of the inhabitants were
seen they must have been there not longer than a day be-
fore. Water does consequently exist somewhere in the
neighborhood, but all our researches could not discover it.
Before quitting Memory Cove a boat was sent to haul a
seine upon the beach which was done with such success
that every man had two meals of fish, and some to spare for
salting. In the morning we sailed for the new discovered
inlet, and at 2 o’clock passed round the projection which
had been set at N. 18 deg. W. from Thistle’s Island. It
formed the south side of the entrance 1o the new opening,
and is named Cape Bonington.’ '*
After an examination of Port Lincoln, Flinders, on the
3rd March, continues: —“The refitment of the ship being
nearly completed, Lieutenant Fowler was sent round to
♦Kliiders. Vol. 1., p, 140


Memory Cove in a boat to make a final seareli along the
shores and round the islands in Thorny Passage for the
bodies of our late shipmates, which the sea might have
thrown up. On the sth the “Investigator” anchored under
Cape Donington. In the evening Lieutenant Fowler returned
to the vessel from his search. He had rowed and walked
along the shore as far as Memory Cove, revisited Thistle’s
Island, and examined the shores of the isles in Thorny Pas-
sage, but could find neither any traces of our lost people nor
fragments of the wreck.”!
The names of the ill-fated crew who were lost, and
whose names are recorded in the adjacent islands, are: —
John Thistle, master, an'd William Taylor, midshipman. The
Christian names of the six seamen are not recorded in the
list of officers and others published by Flinders, and we can
only accept the names of the islands nearest Cape Catas-
trophe. viz.—Williams ,Smith, Lewis, Little, Hopkins, and
Grindal, as evidence of the surnames of those who lost their
lives in the vicinity.
We can imagine the despair of mind and the reluc-
tance with which Captain Flinders bade farewell to the
locality where his crew had been so sadly decimated. Be-
fore leaving he ordered a detailed examination of the coast
to be made in the vicinity where the missing boat was last
seen, in the hope of either finding some of the men on the
islands or their bodies; but all his efforts were unsucccess-
ful, and he was compelled to abandon the search and pro-
ceed with his explorations. As he gazed for the last time
on the islands which he had named after his lamented
shipmates, he had at least the melancholy satisfaction of
knowing that he had perpetuated the names of the men
whose lives had been sacrificed in the interests of science,
and whose monuments would endure until the end of the
world. After a brief stay we steamed off to Whaler’s Bay,.
Thistle Island.
THISTLE ISLAND.
Thistle Island is 12 miles long in a north-westerly direc-
tion and from half a mile to two miles wide, and comprises
an area of about 9,700 acres. Near the middle of the island
the land rises to a height of about 770 feet. It comprises
‘Flinders. Vol. 1., p. 150.


some well-grassed undulating country, consisting of sandy
loam with limestone between the ridges and occasional sand-
hills. and is timbered with sheaoak, tea-tree, malice, acacia,
and low bushes. The island is almost surrounded by high
fossilated limestone cliffs having a granite base. Good water
is obtainable from wells. The land was surveyed into sec-
tions in 1880. and is now held under Right of Purchase, Per-
petual, and Miscellaneous Leases by two tenants.
This island, so far as known, was first visited by Flin-
ders. who refers to the circumstance as follows:
“Early in the morning, February 21, 1802, I went on
shore to the eastern land, anxious to ascertain its connexion
with, or separation from, the main. There were seals upon
the heach and further on numberless traces of the kanguroo.
Signs of extinguished fire existed everywhere; hut they be-
spoke a conflagration of the woods, of remote date, rather
than the habitual presence of men, and might have arisen
from lightning or from the friction of two trees in a strong
wind. Upon the whole, I satisfied myself of the insularity
of this land and gave to it shortly after the name of
Thistle’s Island, from the master who accompanied me. In
our way up the hills to take a commanding station for the
survey, a speckled, yellow snake lay asleep before us. By
pressing the butt end of a musket upon his neck I kept
him down whilst Mr. Thistle, with a sail needle and twine,
sewed up his mouth, and he was taken on hoard alive for
the naturalist to examine; hut two others of the same species
had already been killed, and one of them was seven feet nine
inches in length. We were proceeding onward with our
prize when a white eagle, with fierce aspect and outspread
wing, was seen hounding towards us; but stopping short, at
twenty yards off, he flew up into a tree. Another bird of
the same kind discovered himself by making a motion
to pounce down upon us as we passed underneath, and it
seemed evident that they took us for kangaroos, having pro-
bably never before seen an upright animal in the island of
any other species. These birds sit watching in the trees,
and should a kanguroo come out to feed in the day time
it is seized and torn to pieces by these voracious creatures.
This accounted for why so few kanguroos were seen, when
traces of them were met with at every step, and for their
keeping so much under thick bushes that it was impossible
to shoot them. Their size was superior to any of those


found upon the more western islands, but much inferior to
the forest kanguroo of the continent.” *
“Thistle’s Island is about 12 miles long, and from one
to two or three in breadth, and in the middle part is high
enough to be seen 10 or 12 leagues from a ship’s deck. The
stone of the north-east end was found to he calcareous; but
at the top of the north-west head, not less than two hundred
feet high, there were many small pieces of granite, rounded
to all appearance by attrition in the water. Some of the
cliffs on the western side are white, as if composed of chalk,
and the soil in general seemed to be sandy; yet the island
was pretty well covered with wood, principally eucalyptus
and casuarina. No water could be found, and as the ship’s
hold was becoming very empty I returned on board.”!
Captain (Le Chevalier) Dillon, who discovered relics of
La Perouse’s expedition at the Malicolo v Islands in 1827,
visited Thistle’s Island early in 1816 in the brig “Spring,”
from Van Dieman’s Land, lie anchored to the north-west
of the island and went on shore, where he remained for three
days. Grass was abundant and his party killed several
wallabies. No fresh water was found.!
We landed on the Eastern side of the island at a little
bay sheltered by Horny Point, called Whaler’s Bay, where
it is said the whalers had a station. The remains of several
old fireplaces were still visible among the bushes which
grew on the narrow sandy beach. One of the dilapidated
fireplaces, built of limestone, was photographed. Here
the whalers had boiled the blubber, but only the fireplaces
remained to tell the tale of a bygone industry. It is in-
teresting to note that on 2nd March, 1840, Governor Gawler
assented to an Act (No. 11) for the Regulation and Protec-
tion of the AVhale Fisheries. The following is a reprint of
the Preamble:—
“WHEREAS various Fishing Stations have been estab-
lished in or near to several of the Inlets or Bays of this
Province for the purpose of killing and taking Whales and
a considerable number of Vessels and Boats are engaged in
such Fishery therein and also on the High Seas: And where-
*Flinders. Vol. 1., p. 133.
fFlinders. Vol. 1., p. 134. JOutlino of the Plan of a Proposed Colony to be
founded on the South Coast of Australia, &c. London, 1834. P. 66.


as disputes often arise as to the property in fish when
struck by several harpooners and also respecting the settle-
ment of the accounts of the persons engaged in the said
Fisheries: And whereas it is expedient that for affording
encouragement to the said Fisheries the rights of the several
persons engaged therein should be better defined and a sum-
mary remedy be given for the punishment of misconduct on
the part of the men engaged in such Fisheries and also for
protecting them in their rights.”
The following year further legislation was passed (Act
2 of 1841), but both Acts were disallowed by the Imperial
authorities, probably because they included the “High
Seas” in their proposed scope.
Captain John Hart (afterwards C.M.G.*), who fur-
nished a short account of his early experiences on the South
Australian coast in a contribution which appears in “Let-
ters from Victorian Pioneers,” published in Melbourne by
the Public Library in 1898, when referring to the islanders
living on Kangaroo Island in 1831, said: —“There was an-
other class of men also, who probably had escaped from Van
Dieman’s Land; these lived generally on islands apart from
the others, some on Thistle Island, near Port Lincoln, and
other islands in Spencer’s Gulf, and there was one man
who had been unvisited for three years when I saw him
on this trip. This man lay under the suspicion of having
murdered his original companions. lie had two wives,
whose woolly heads clearly showed their Van Dreman’s Land
origin. Although so long without supplies, he had every
comfort about him. A convenient stone house, good gar-
den. small wheat and barley paddocks, with pigs, goats, and
poultry, made him quite independent of the vessel, except
for tea and tobacco. He had collected 7,000 wallaby skins
of a kind peculiar to this island (? Thistle Island), very
small, fine-furred, and beautifully mottled in color. I
sold these in Sydney for the China market.” (P. 303.) Al-
though it is not clear that Captain Hart refers to Thistle
Island, it is more than probable that it is the island referred
to. It is the largest and being well timbered would con-
tain the greatest number of animals.
*Captain Hart subsequently settled in Adelaide and engaged in commercial pur-
suits. He built a flour mill at Port Adelaide, and entering Parliament became
Minister of the Crown, holding the offices of Chief Secretary and Treasurer. He
died suddenly on January 28th, 1878.


On July 18th, 1900, Mr. T. H. Peet, residing at Har-
row, Victoria, addressed his Excellency Lord Tennyson
with reference to some old ruins and an inscribed stone he
had seen many years ago at Thistle Island. Mr. Peet was
of opinion that the buildings had been erected by the
crew of some shipwrecked vessel. There were three stone
buildings, about 5 feet high, built without mortar, each of
them having an opening for a doorway. At the doorway
of the largest was a stone let into the ground and level
with the floor of the building, on which were the figures
178; there had been another figure close to the 8, but Mr.
Peet could not say what it was. He was of opinion that
the inscription had been made before 1790, and hazarded
the idea that La Perouse had called there after having left
Sydney in 1788. Unfortunately nothing is known of La
Perouse excepting that both of his vessels were wrecked on
the reef that surrounds the island of Mannicolo, also called
Vanikoro, or Pitt’s Island, in Lat. 11 deg. 36 min. 30 see. S.,
and Long. 166 deg. 53 min. 24 sec. E. A copy of Air. Peet’s
letter was sent to Mr. T. R. Tapley, a resident on Thistle
Island, who reported that he had examined the ruins re-
ferred to and unearthed the*stones in the doorways, but
could find no marks or numbers on any of them.* Some
day further evidence on this interesting question may be
discovered.
Capper, writing in 1838, says:—“The Black Whale
Fishery, which is carried on in the bays of the colony during
the winter months, was commenced by the Company in
1837, at Encounter Bay, and during the first season about
140 tuns of oil, besides whalebone, were obtained. Having
been transmitted to Hobart Town, it was forwarded from
thence in the ‘Seppings,” and was sold in London in Novem-
ber, 1838. For the last season (1838) the South Aus-
tralian Company established another fishery at Thistle
Island, and by recent accounts their whaling parties at the
two fisheries had obtained about 220 tuns of oil and a con-
siderable quantity of whalebone, the first portion of which
is on its way to London in the brig “Goshawk.”!
In 1861, Mr. 11. T. Morris. Chief Inspector of Sheep,
reported that “sheep won’t live on this island, being subject
*Proc. of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, S.A. Branch. Vol.
IV. Adelaide, 1901. P.p. 80/2.
fCapper’s South Australia. Third edition. London, 1839.


to coast disease; and cattle won’t even do well on it. ’ ’ He
stated there is plenty of water and good feed on the
island. *
On landing at Horny Point a photograph was taken of
the rocks-f* and of one of the old fireplaces ; we then ascended
the steep cliffs of limestone and sand with the intention of
crossing the island to the western side to Fossil Point, where
the French navigators reported the existence of petrified
roots of trees, but having neglected to carry compasses we
could nut find the locality, and therefore were unable to
discover any traces of the petrified remains. Mr. How-
chin’s paper will deal with the geological features of this
island, and Mr. Maiden’s on its botany.
The day was warm, and as our stay was limited we were
unable to make an examination of the precipitous banks of
the western side of the island, where it is understood no
landing can be effected excepting in very calm weather.
The soil is fertile, and judging by the heaps of barley
stacked ready for bagging, the yield was satisfactory, but
as we did not meet any of the residents of the island we
could not obtain any particulars. We noticed in our walks
the fruit of a species of pig-face (Mesembryanthemum),
about the size of an elongated cherry, and of a crimson color.
It has a thick skin, inside of which is a glutinous, sweet
substance of a peculiar flavor. This species is also abun-
dant at Port Lincoln, and was much relished by the abori-
gines, where it was called “Karkalla.” No snakes were
seen, but judging by the impressions on the loose, sandy
patches in the middle of the island there were still a few to
be found. We returned to the steamer somewhat disap-
pointed, having missed Fossil Point, and did not see an
animal on the island. An old dry well on the elevated
land, near Horny Point, was seen in the paddock, which was
fenced off for barley-growing. The party having returned
to the steamer we now proceeded northward to Dangerous
Reef.
DANGEROUS REEF.
Is N. 14 W., nearly ID/2 miles from the south point
of Thistle Island, F.S.F., 11% miles from Cape Donning-
+ Par. Paper No. 102, 1861.
ISee plate in Mr. Ilowchin’s Geological Notes.


' *=<: * I- ■ ;
<4 f
/ V . p- iS-V • •*
1
* . i ■***&*
i — ,i ,.
, y
C-..>. *. ’ y, 0 - ««
.— • L
it''-- kw
" , . i
' ] .'$
' r . . 1 " ; .. i : ; ;
/ . -u ,
wHfexi.Bsi® .. -•"' *•
\ :
,, ’,1 ,
) ; ' ••*-> * ~
* • *
t 4 V ;V '
■
P \
■ ' ' ’
. 1
•»-. - • .•v--;?.
wr. t _ ’
* • > ’ C
■ *.1„,;7-.»
’■m*~
Plate XVII.
Portion of Dangerous Reef, with Seal.


ton, and S. by W. \ W., nearly 9 from Stickney Island,
is composed of four large rocks above water, extending W.
by S. 6 cables, and S.E. 7 cables from the largest one; none
of them being more than 200 yards broad; 10 to 14 fathoms
half a mile off the reef all round, and 12 to 17 fathoms
channel between it and Stickney Island.*
“Dangerous Reef” is the name recorded in the origi-
nal charts of Flinders, but why it was so named is not
stated in his journal. At the time of our visit the whole
so-called reef was alive with birds and seals. No trees or
shrubs, excepting a few stunted saltbushes, were to be seen
on these comparatively low rocks, and as it was just after
sunset some of the party were landed for a few minutes,
Captain Weir having promised to call here on his return
trip to enable the photographer to obtain snapshots in full
daylight. This was done on the following afternoon, and
some good views were secured of the birds and seals. Mr.
Mellor’s contribution on ornithology, included herein, de-
scribes the bird-life on this islet.
REEVESBY ISLAND.
On Sunday, March 7th, 1802, Flinders landed on
Kirkby Island to take bearings of the different islands
in the group which he named Sir Joseph Banks’ Group.
He says—“ Twelve other isles of the group were counted
and three rocks above water, and it is possible that some
others may exist to the eastward, beyond the boundary of
my horizon, for it was not extensive. The largest island
seen is four or five miles long, and is low and sandy, except
at the north-east and south ends. It was called Reevesby
Island, and names were applied in the chart to each of
the other isles composing this group.”
The islands and capes in the vicinity of Port Lincoln
were named by Flinders after towns and villages in the
county of Lincoln, but in this case the town in Lincoln
is spelt “Revesby,” not “Reevesby,” as recorded in Flin-
ders’ voyages. ,
“ There is a little grass on this island and some brush-
wood; there is also a small well upon it, giving sufficient
water for the use of a hut, but no water for stock. Sheep'
have to live entirely without water and are kept alive;
by the dew by grazing at night .”f
*Sawtell’9 Nautical Almanac (published annually).
(Report of Chief Inspector Morris, part paper 1861.


The island is about three miles long, north and south,
and half a mile wide, and contains an area of about 1,150
acres. The soil is sandy over limestone and granite. Five
sheaoaks (Casuarina stricta) were the only trees we saw on
this island.
We landed early in the morning and all parties were
quickly engaged in their several pursuits. The photo-
grapher took a photo, of the residents with their residency,
which is the only one on the island. The conchologist,
Dr. Torr, obtained some additions to his collection of shells
on the extensive sandy beaches. As the rocks were few
and near the landing-place there was little to engage the
The only Residence on Reevesby Island.
attention of the geologists. A couple of hours sufficed
for an examination of this locality, and returning on board
the steamer made for Port Lincoln.
The weather was all that could be desired for a trip
in the gulf; a very light breeze enabled the steamer to speed
along without rolling or pitching; in fact, our passage so
far was practically over a smooth sea.
About 10 o’clock we ran into Boston Bay, and landed
our party on the jetty opposite the Institute at Port
Lincoln.




PORT LINCOLN.
The following extracts are from Flinders’ Journal:—•
‘ ‘ Our soundings in passing it were from 7 to 9 fathoms,
and in steering south-westward we left an island four miles
long, named Boston Island, on the starboard hand, and
passed two islets on the other side, called Bicker Isles,
which lie off Surfleet Point. On the depth of water
diminishing to 5 fathoms we tacked and presently came to
an anchor on the west side of this point, in 4 y 2 fathoms,
soft grey sand. We were then three miles within the
entrance, and the nearest shore was a beach half a mile dis-
tant, lying under the hill which had been seen from Thistle’s
Island. This is a ridge of moderately high land, about two
miles long, but. when seen to the north or south it assumes
a conical form. I named it Stamford Hill; and there
being a good deal of wood scattered over it, a hope was
given of procuring water by digging at the foot. A boat
was sent to make the experiment this evening at the back
of the beach; but the water which flowed into the pit was
quite salt; and, notwithstanding the many natives’ huts
about, no fresh water could be found.
“Boston Island at the entrance of the port being also
woody and of some elevation, the boat was sent next morn-
ing to search there for water; and in the meantime I landed
with the botanists and ascended Stamford Hill to ascertain
the nature of this inlet and take angles. The port was seen
to terminate seven or eight miles to the west-south-west;
but there was a piece of water beyond it, apparently a lake
or mere, from which we might hope to obtain a supply, if
no more convenient watering-place should be found. Be-
twixt Cape Bonington at the entrance and Surfleet Point
was a large cove with a sandy beach at the head, capable
of sheltering a fleet of ships if the depth should be sufficient,
as it appeared to be, to receive them. This was named
Spalding Cove. Wood was not wanting there, but no
stream of water could be distinguished. On the north
side of the port, higher up, was a projecting piece of land,
with an island lying off.it nearly one mile in length. This
island, which was named Grantham Island, contracts the
width of that part to one mile and three-quarters, whereas
above and below it the width is from two to three miles.
“The eastern entrance to the port, between Boston
Island and Cape Bonington, is one mile and a half wide;


- —
9Q&> .
MmM if ■ /
'^^^^BBP^guigjHBaaBSg
ip3r3
W S* w *•
IPSsIC
w
Qy
)■'-
i !;/§ ! '
UW ”
*,, |
11fk ; v
**•■>%>
•** ' « •. * I « ■
\ !
■-' •£* •— i -'5T J
■
. - • ' .-^J:
Plate XIX.
Port Lincoln, from the old Jetty.


the western entrance, betwixt the island and what is called
Kirton Point, is larger, and appeared to be as deep as the
first, in which we had from 7to 9 fathoms. From Kirton
Point, northward, the shore curves back to the west, and
makes a semi-circular sweep round the island, forming an
outer bay, which was named Boston Bay. It is terminated
by Point Boston, a low point one mile and a half from
the north end of the island, but whether the water between
them be deep was not ascertained. From Point Boston
the shore takes another sweep to the west and northward,
and comes out again three or four leagues to the north-
east, at a low, but somewhat cliffy, projection, to which I
gave the name of Point Bolingbroke. The large bight
within received the appellation of Louth Bay, and two low
islands in it, of which the largest is more than a mile in
length, were called Louth Isles. At Point Bolingbroke the
land appeared to trend north or westward, and could no
further be perceived from Stamford Hill.
“Three small isles had been seen from Thistle’s Island
and their bearings set, and the discovery of them was now
augmented by several others, forming a cluster to the east-
ward of Point Bolingbroke. This was called Sir Joseph
Banks’ Group, in compliment to the right honorable presi-
dent of the Royal Society, to whose exertion and favor the
voyage was so much indebted.
“The port which formed the most interesting part of
these discoveries I named Port Lincoln, in honor of my
native province; and having gained a general knowledge
of it and finished the bearings, we descended the hill and
got on board at TO o’clock. The boat had returned from
Boston Island, unsuccessful in her search for water, and
we therefore proceeded upward, steering different courses
to find the greatest depth. Soon after 1 o’clock we
anchored in 4 fathoms, soft bottom, one mile from the
beach, at the furthest head of the port, and something less
from the southern shore.
“Fresh water being at this time the most pressing of our-
wants, I set off the same afternoon, with a party, to examine
the lake or mere discovered from Stamford Hill. The way
to it was over low land covered with loose pieces of cal-
careous rock. The soil was moist in some places, and.
though generally barren, was overspread with grass and
shrubs, interspersed with a few clumps of small trees.


After walking two miles we reached the lake, but to our
mortification the water was brackish and not drinkable;
the distance, besides, from Port Lincoln, was too great to
roll casks over a stony road. This piece of water was
named Sleaford Mere. It is one mile broad ,and appeared
to be three or four in length. The shore was a whitish,
hardened clay, covered at this time with a thin crust, in
which salt was a component part. The sun being too near
the horizon to admit of going round the mere, our way was
bent towards the ship, and finding a moist place within a
hundred yards of the head of the port I caused a hole to
be dug there. A stratum of whitish clay was found at
3 ft. below the surface and on pentrating this water drained
in, which was perfectly sweet, though discolored, and we
had the satisfaction to return on board with the certainty
of being able to procure water, although it would probably
require some time to fill all our empty casks.
“Early in the morning a party of men was sent with
spades to dig pits, and the timekeepers and astronomical
instruments, with two tents, followed, under the charge of
Mr. Flinders. I went to attend the digging, leaving orders
with Mr. Fowler to moor the ship and send on shore empty
casks. The water flowed in pretty freely, and though of a
whitish color, and at first somewhat thick, it was well tasted.
Before the evening the observations for the rates of the
timekeepers were commenced, and the gunner was installed
in the command of a watering party, and furnished with
axes to cut wood at such times as the pits might require to
be left for replenishing.
“The necessary duties being all set forward under the
superintendence of proper officers, I employed the following
days in surveying and sounding. The direction of the port
was too remote from the meridian to obtain a baseline from
differences of latitude, which, when observed in an artificial
horizon, and at stations wide apart, I consider to be the
best; nor was there any convenient beach or open place
where a baseline could be measured. It was therefore
attempted in the following manner. Having left orders on
board the ship to fire three guns at given times, I went to
the south-east end of Boston Island, with a pendulum made
to swing half-seconds. It was a musket ball slung with
twine and measured 9.8 inches from the fixed end of the
twine to the centre of the ball. From the instant that the


flash of the first gun was perceived to the time of hearing
the report I counted eighty-five vibrations of the pendu-
lum, and the same with two succeeding guns; whence the
length of the base was deduced to be 8.01 geographic miles.
(This length was founded <m the supposition that sound
travels at the rate of 1,142 ft. in a second of time, and
that 6,060 ft. make a geographic mile. A base of 15 min.
24 sec. of latitude was afterwards obtained from observa-
tions in an artificial horizon, and of 25 min. 17 sec. of
longitude from the timekeepers with new rates, both cor-
rect, as I believe, to a few seconds. From this long base
and theodolite bearings the first base appeared to be some-
what too short, for they gave it 8.22 instead of 8.01 miles.
The length of the pendulum in the first measurement was
such as to swing half-seconds in England; and I had not
thought it, in this case, worth attention that by the laws
of gravity and the oblate spheroid the pendulum would not
swing so quick in the latitude of 35 deg. I must leave it
to better mathematicians to determine from the data and
the true length of a geographic mile in this latitude,
whether the base ought to have been 8.22, as given by the
observations and bearings: It was proved to be sufficiently
near for all the purposes of a common nautical survey.) A
principal station in the survey of Port Lincoln was a hill
on the north side, called Northside Hill, which afforded a
view extending to Sleaford Mere and Bay, and as far
as Cape Wiles on one side and to the hills at the beak of
Coffin’s Bay on the other. A great part of the bearings
taken from hence crossed those from Stamford Hill very
advantageously.
“Many straggling bark huts, similar to those on other
parts of the coast, were seen upon the shores of Port Lin-
coln, and the paths near our tents had been long and deeply
trodden; but neither in my excursions nor in those of the
botanists had any of the natives been discovered. This
morning, however, three or four were heard calling to a
boat, as was supposed, which had just landed; but they
presently walked away, or, perhaps, retired into the wood
to observe our movements. No attempt was made to follow
them, for I had always found the natives of this country to
avoid those who seemed anxious for communication;
whereas, when left entirely alone, they would usually come
down after having watched us for a few days. Nor does


this conduct seem to be unnatural, for what, in such case,
would be the conduct of any people, ourselves, for instance,
were we living in a state of nature, frequently at war with
our neighbors, and ignorant of the existence of any other
nation? On the arrival of strangers, so different in com-
plexion and appearance to ourselves, having power to
transport themselves over, and even living up an element
which to us was impassable. The first sensation would pro-
bably be terror and the first movement flight. We should
watch these extraordinary people from our retreats in the
woods and rocks, and if we found ourselves sought and
pursued by them should conclude their designs to be in-
imical ; but if, on the contrary, w r e saw them quietly em-
ployed in occupations which had no reference to us,
curiosity would get the better of fear, and after observing
them more closely we should ourselves seek a communica-
tion. Such seemed to have been the conduct of these
Australians; and 1 am persuaded that their appearance on
the morning when the tents were sjtruck was a prelude to
their coming down; and that had we remained a few days
longer a friendly communication would have ensued. The
way was, however, prepared for the next ship which may
enter this port, as it was to us in King George’s Sound by
Captain Vancouver and the ship ‘ ‘ Elligood, r to whose pre-
vious visits and peaceable conduct we were most probably
indebted for our early intercourse with the inhabitants of
that place. So far as could be perceived with a glass, the
natives of this port were the same in personal appearance
as those of King George’s Sound and Port Jackson. In
the hope of conciliating their goodwill to succeeding visi-
tors some hatchets and various other articles were left in
their paths, or fastened to stumps of the trees which had
been cut down near our watering-pits.
“In expressing an opinion that these people have no
means of passing the water, it must be understood to be a
deduction from our having met with no canoe, or the re-
mains of any about the port; nor with any tree in the woods
from which a sufficient size of bark had been taken to make
one. Upon Boston Island, however, there were abundant
marks of fire; but they had the appearance, as at Thistle’s
Island, of having been caused by some conflagration of the
woods several years before, rather than of being the small
fireplaces of the natives.


“There are kangaroos on the mainland, but none were
caught; our efforts both in hunting and fishing were in-
deed very confined and almost wholly unsuccessful. What
has been said of the neck of land between the head of the
port and Sleaford Mere may be taken as a description of
the country in general; it is rocky and barren; but has a
sufficient covering of grass, bushes, and small trees not to
look desolate. The basis stone is granitic, with a super-
stratum of calcareous rock, generally in loose pieces; but in
some parts, as at Boston Island, the granite is found at the
surface or immediately under the soil. Behind the beach,
near our watering-pits, the calcareous stone was so imper-
fectly formed that small shells and bits of coral might be
{licked out of it. This fact, with the saltness of Sleaford
Mere and of a small lake on the south side of the port,
accords with the coral found upon Bald Head and various
other indications before mentioned, to show that this part,
at least, of Terra Australis cannot have emerged very many
centuries from the sea; the salt imbibed by the rocks having
not yet been all washed away by the rains. In the moun-
tains behind Port Jackson, on the east coast, at a vastly
superior elevation, salt is formed in some places by the
exhalation of the water which drips from the grit-stone
cliffs.
“Port Lincoln is certainly a fine harbor, and it is much
to be regretted that it possesses no constant run of fresh
water, unless it should be in Spalding Cove, which we did
not examine. Our pits at the head of the port will, how-
ever, supply ships at all times; and, though discolored by
whitish clay, the water has no pernicious quality, nor is it
ill-tasted. This and wood, which was easily procured,
were all that we found of use to ships, and for the estab-
lishment of a colony, which the excellence of the port might
seem to invite, the little fertility of the soil offers no induce-
ment. The wood, consists principally of the eucalyptus
and casuarina.
“Of the climate we had no reason to speak but in praise;
nor were we incommoded by noxious insects. The range
of the thermometer on board the ship was from 66 deg. to
78 deg., and that of the barometer from 29.94 to 30.20 in.
The weather was generally clouded, the winds light, coming
from the eastward in the mornings and southward after


noon. On shore the average height of the thermometer at
noon was 76 deg.”
The French navigators appear to have been favorably
impressed with Port Lincoln, if we may judge by the fol-
lowing extract from Peron’s Voyages:—
“New Holland is intersected to form the Gulf Buona-
parte (Spencer’s Gulf), which runs across this continent
for a length of more than 200 miles, and its shores spread
over an extent of above 600 miles. This vast gulf appears
at the mouth like a. large river and insensibly becomes
narrower towards the end. On the western shore of this
gulf, and near the entrance, is the Port Champagny (Port
Lincoln), one of the finest and safest harbors of all New
Holland. The bottom is in every part good. The sound-
ings. even close in shore, are from 10 to 12 fathoms, and
the extent of this port is so large that there is sufficient
room for very numerous fleets. Off the mouth of it is
the Isle Lagrange (Boston Island), which is about four or
five leagues in circumference, and which, situated exactly
opposite the middle of the gulf, leaves on each side a
passage of two or three miles in width, in which it is both
easy and safe to work to windward. Finally, as if nature
particularly favored the Port Champagny (Port, Lincoln),
the general appearance of sterility is here no longer to be
seen, but the lands are high and clothed with thick forests.
It is, neverthless, true that we could not discover any
fresh water, but the strength and healthy appearance of
the vegetation, and the height of the lands, strongly indi-
cates that there must be some streams, or, at least, some
considerable springs. On this most favored part of Napo-
leon’s Land*, there doubtless exists numerous tribes of
inhabitants, for the whole coast appears as if covered by
the fires. So many superior advantages belonging parti-
cularly to the Port Champagny (Port Lincoln) insures it a
very great degree of importance, and we may, without
hesitation, assert that of all the points of this land this
is the most proper for the establishment of a European
colony.”
An interesting article on “Port Lincoln and its Neigh-
borhood,” by Neales Bentham, subsequently known as Mr.
Bentham Neales, was published in “The South xiustralian
Land embraced the south coast of Australia from Wilson’s Promon-
tory to Nuyt’s Archipelago.
83
A CRUISE IN THE S.S. “GOVERNOR MUSGRAVE.”


Magazine” of November, 1841. It deals with the early his-
tory of the settlement, its possibilities, and its position in
October, 1841. The date of the Port Lincoln special survey
is recorded as 27th February, 1839. Mr. Neales stated the
population to be 195 persons, and the housed were 8 first-
class, 20 second class, and 20 cottages; 143 acres of land
were under cultivation. He estimated that £24,000 had
been expended on the settlement, and referred to the
whale fishing on the coast. He said—“ Last year four
French whalers and one American fished between this place
and Fowler’s Bay, and this year (1841) at least six
foreigners are on the fishing ground, taking away the riches
we neglect.” He describes the harbor as “perhaps one of
the finest in the world, forming a perfect semi-circle, en-
tirely land-locked, with deep water close to the shore. The
town takes in all the sweep of the fine beach, and the
general rise immediately at the back forming one of the
most beautiful sites for a large city that imagination can
possibly depict. The general character of the land for ten
miles round is open sheaoak forest, with good soil on a fine
limestone stratum. The scenery from the hill at the back
of the town is magnificent, about two-thirds of the edges
of the beautiful bay being a fine beach, and the remainder
bold rocks, which by merely facing down might be rendered
as fine quays as any in England, with water to float a five-
hundred-ton ship alongside them. To the north-east of the
town is Happy Valley, a fertile spot of about two hundred
acres, on which are to be seen many excellent gardens,
affording in their present appearance abundant proof of the
richness and capabilities of the soil. The River Tod, a
stream of about one hundred feet in breadth and thirty feet
in depth, lies in the same direction, running several miles
into the country, its source being in the Mount Gawler
Range, about 38 miles distant. The soil of the valley
through which the river flows is of a very superior quality,
and is now laid out by Government in 80-acre sections.
Mount Gawler, too, is an important feature in this district,
extensive sheep runs diverging from this point in several
directions, and great quantities of good agricultural land
being available at its base.”
Early in 1840, the then Governor, Colonel Gawler,
visited Port Lincoln. He also described Boston Bay to be
one of the finest harbors in the world.


In January, 1841, while Sir John Franklin was Gover-
nor of Van Diemen’s Land, now called Tasmania, his
devoted wife, Lady Franklin, visited Adelaide for the pur-
pose of erecting, on behalf of her husband, a monument to
Captain Flinders on Stamford Hill, near Port Lincoln.
The marble slab, with the inscription thereon, which Sir
John Franklin sent from Hobart, is now exhibited in the
vestibule of the Public Library, Adelaide. * The original
stone having been fractured in several places, the Govern-
ment of South Australia rebuilt the monument in 1866,
and replaced the memorial stone with a slab of a similar
inscription.-f- Lady Franklin, while in Adelaide, was the
guest of Governoi Gawler at the new Government House.
She proceeded to Port Lincoln in the “ Abeona,” a
schooner of 96 tons, on Januarv 9, 1841. To provide
accommodation for Lady Franklin and her suite, Governor
Gawler caused the official documents and papers, which were
kept in the Governor’s office, to be removed to the old
Government House, near where the present stables are
situated. Unfortunately, a fire occurred a few nights sub-
sequently, which destroyed the old viceregal residence, and
the priceless records of the early official transactions of
South Australia. An eccentric individual who had been
the guest of Governor Gawler, having had to betake himself
to fresh lodgings, when Lady Franklin appeared at North-
terrace, was charged at the Police Court with having wil-
fully set fire to the old structure, but the evidence was
considered insufficient, and the case was dismissed. There
was little doubt that the ejection of the man, and his
jealousy of Lady Franklin, led to the act of incendiarism,
which deprived South Australia of most important State
papers connected with the founding of its Legislative and
Executive departments, and its earliest history.
The newspapers of the day do not appear to have
evinced much interest in Lady Franklin’s visit to Port
Lincoln, and the important historical event of the building
of the first monument to the discoverer of South Australia
appears to have passed unrecorded.
A photograph of the original slab and of the existing monument on
Stamford Hill are reproduced, and appear in plates XX. and XXI. herein.
fOost of Rebuilding, £705.


/' >l*
£ . .. '•
TI,IIS FLACK '
p /*r<mt u r liicfi’tiic'Cuir find i.f>
y . - .]
hlYopcf-' were, surveyed
y : or; 2d ’R-jJT 1802 v by
f;j.ni)EJcs. u:y.
beamin' oJgjt3s3. invest ioatlft
phe Dfsfcovcper Cou n (r:;y
b' 1 ' «ct ' *4|
L E 6n 12*. db;.i. 18 M <. ■£
v with the, ftanciion of
Ji:f. COb.
ph.en Governor-of the CoJnhvA*
4 t v/f.
rand,in I h e 1 i tycar o I' Lkt y
boveimment oh CA PT. G.y^H.liTi.'
p ■ '>% « 1. -"hr | '
vad ornbd vv rr h rhi s AT</h ume n i"t
to the perpotrla iXlei i;jm'yyf
of the rjlusf rigti sr Na,v/o'o.(or* .
• / J / *-s v. ' i
hi sKbno Pe d yC/o min and ei • »
i ■ . *j§ \ i ■ i
c.\ ft. rr.s.
'' v " K.Cr.PI. K.ll. * , • • -
j/r/G-oVEiiNori of .
‘ VA.JV 'J )JKf\ TKJUfk' NO. -
' 1 , f ,*\* K , . I
i- ; ’ - I ' c. .
' -V. . *I '• .. .TLj&tm „
Plate XX.
Copy of Original Tablet on the Monument at Stamford
Hill, near Port Lincoln.
86


Plate XXL


The earliest notes on the Natural History of Port Lin-
coln appeared in “The South Australian Magazine” of De-
cember, 1841, written by Mr. J. B. Harvey, C.M.Z.S. (p.p.
210-212).
As very little was then known of the fauna of the
southern portion of Australia, Dr. Harvey appears to have
adopted the nomenclature of the fauna of the northern lati-
tudes. To ascertain the correct names of the animals in-
cluded in Dr. Harvey’s paper I referred it to Mr. A. Zietz,
who, with the permission of Professor Stirling, has kindly
supplied the corrected names, so far as the descriptions
given by Dr. Harvey enabled him to judge. It is to be
greatly regretted that some of the animals referred to by
Dr. Harvey are not represented in our Museum. These be-
long principally to the marsupial order. Unless early
steps are taken to secure specimens they will be lost for
ever. Their extinction is being rapidly effected by the ex-
tension of agricultural settlement over the whole of the
Eyria Peninsula. Professor Stirling, C.M.G., Director of
the Adelaide Museum, has frequently deplored the absence
of specimens of our marsupials, and it will be to our
everlasting disgrace if we neglect the present opportunities
to complete our splendid collection of animals, more parti-
cularly those which are indigenous and confined to special
localities. It would not be asking too much to have living
specimens transferred to the proposed National Reserve on
Kangaroo Island to save these harmless animals from be-
coming extinct.
A SKETCH OF THE NATURAL HISTORY OF PORT
LINCOLN.
BY J. B. HARVEY, ESQUIRE, CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE
ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON.
“ Having been requested to furnish a list of the specimens
composing the “Fauna” of the Port Lincoln district, as far
as they are yet known, I herewith send you the first sec-
tion, containing all the Mammalia that I have had the op-
portunity of collecting or examining since July, 1839. I
shall continue the series down to the zoophytes, in a suc-
cession of papers, confining myself to the enumeration of
such specimens only, as have either passed through my
hands, or have been explained to me by persons upon whose
judgment I can rely for accuracy of description. I pro-
88
A CRUISE IN THE S.S. “GOVERNOR MUSGRAVE ’’


pose to follow the arrangement of Cuvier, and I shall, as
much as possible, avoid all technicalities.
‘‘As this list must necessarily be very imperfect, and as
the animals proper to this colony are but little known, it
cannot be expected that I should give the trivial names, (nor
in some eases even the generic) to all the specimens. As
far as I am able, I intend to give all the local names by
which they are known, adding also the native names, wher-
ever I have been able to obtain them.
“I may also mention that several of the specimens
which I obtained in 1839 and 1840 were hastily preserved,
and forwarded to the Zoological Society without examina-
tion —my time then being fully occupied. This will ac-
count for several of the genera being superficially reported.
Class I.— Mammalia.
ORDER TIL—CARNARIA. FAMILY I. —CHEIROPTERA.
“Genus Vespertilio. —l. Vesp. pipistrellus—common
bat. 2. A bat very nearly allied to Vesp. discolor —com-
mon.
“Genus Plecotus. —l. Plee-auritus —long-eared bat
—frequent.
“Genus Rinolophus. —A bat much resembling the
smaller horseshoe bat of Europe.
Family ll.— lnsectivora,
“Genus Sorex. —A mutilated specimen of the shrew
was found on the Port Lincoln Downs, December, 1839.
“Two small animals were caught in one of the free-
stone quarries at Port Lincoln in 1839. They were of the
size and external form of mice, but they had teeth of the in-
sectivorous family. I sent them to the Zoological Society
without taking any notes of them.
Digitigrada.
“Genus Naisira, —A small animal nearly allied to the
coatis, (native name, “Ead-nar”), called a native cat, is
found at Port Lincoln. It climbs trees —feeds upon in-
sects, birds, fruits, eggs, &c. It is about the size of a half-
grown cat; skin of a brownish yellow, slightly tinged with
green, with white spots; habits nocturnal, not marsupial;
lives in holes. Teeth as in the following formula, in
pairs—


Incisors. Canine. False molars. True molars
Top .... 1 3 1 2 4
Bottom ..03 1 3 3
“Genus Mustela. —A species of the weasel was taken
in July, 1839, in the act of killing a fowl. Its fur was long
and soft, that on the body of a bluish grey; on the face
and the end of the tail, black. The ears tufted; the hairs
on the tail long.
“Genus Canis. —Hyoena Venatica, Bursch —wild dog
(native name, “Wil-ger”), black, red, and of a mixed color
—common.
“N.B.—Whether the wild dog of South Australia belongs
to the Hyoenas or not, I leave to others to determine, until
I can procure a perfect specimen. I have had several
skins, but I have not been able to obtain a head, so as to
have an opportunity of examining the teeth.
Ampiiibiae.
“Genus Phoca. —3 species of seal are taken in
Spencer’s Gulf—One, the common, greenish-brown seal.
Second, the spotted seal; both known as the “hair” seals.
Third, the fur-seal.
Order IV. — Marsupialia.
“Genus Didelphis. —l. Did. perricillata—ash-colored
opossum, (native name, “Pe6-lah”), common. 2. Bing-
tailed opossum—rare.
“Genus Dasyurus. —Subgen. Perameles—Bandicoot
(native name, “Coor-cool-lar”), common. Lives in holes;
feeds upon insects and roots; has four young at a time.
“Genus Hypsiprymnus. —l. Hyp. minor—kangaroo
rat (native name, “Cool-gar”) common. 2. A larger species
of kangaroo rat is also found here. It is rather larger than
a rabbit; lives in holes, and feeds by night. Skin of a
lighter color than that of kangaroo rat; tip of tail white
(that of kangaroo rat is black). Very destructive to gar-
dens.
“Genus Macropus. —Five species of kangaroo are
found here. 1. Red Kangaroo (native name, “War-roo”),
rare. 2. Brown kangaroo-large (native name, “War-roo”),


common. 3. Brown kangaroo—small (native name, “War-
roo”), common. 4. Grey kangaroo (native name, “War-
roo”), frequent. 5. Wallaby (native name, “Eu-rid-ny”),
common.
“I think that we have two species of wallaby, but I am
not yet quite certain of it. Our wallaby is very different
from that taken in such numbers at Kangaroo Island.
“Genus Piiascolomys. —Phas. ursinus—the wombat
(native name, “Wer-tue”), common.
“This extraordinary animal is obtained of very large
size—frequently upwards of 100 lb. weight. It has much the
appearance of a bear, with its legs broken and bent under its
body. It has amazing strength, frequently pulling the
dogs into its hole. The wombat is gregarious, living in
great numbers in one common chamber, which is many feet
below the ground, to wdiich there are seven or eight en-
trances. The hillocks caused by these excavations gene-
rally occupy an area of from 800 to 1,000 square feet. The
flesh is considered by some to be good, but it has a peculiar
taste and smell. The wombat feeds by night. It is gene-
rally shot by moonlight.
Order V. —Rodentia.
“Genus Myoxus. —A species of the Dormouse was
taken at Franklin Harbour, in April, 1840. It had the
tufted tail, the teeth, and the general economy of the genus.
The fur soft, of a silvery grey; the tail long, the tip black.
“Genus Mus. —Mus Musculus—common mouse, com-
mon; the white mouse, a variety common. Mus decumanus
—a species of the brown rat, but of a smaller size, is fre-
quently taken at Boston Island.
Order VI. — Edentata.
“Genus Echidna. —Echid. Hystrix—the spiny
Echidna. I here mention this animal, because from the de-
scription given to me by the sealers of Kangaroo Island, I
believe it occasionally to be met with at Western River
on that Island. It is said to be very fine
Order Vll.— Pachydermata— None.
Order VIII. — Ruminantia. —None.


Order IX. —Cetacea.
‘ ‘ Genus Delphinus. —Subgenus Phocoena —porpoise
common.
‘ * Genus Physeter. —Phy. Macrocephalus—sperm
whale taken on the coast.
“Genus Balaena. — Bal. Mysticetus—the black whale
(native name, “Con-dol-ly”) common; the Grampus, fre-
quent; the Finback, common; the Thresher, common.”
NOTES BY MR. A. ZIETZ ON THE FOREGOING
PAPER OF DR. HARVEY.
Class Mammalia.
“Genus Vespertilio. ” —No. 1 is pumilis
(Little Bat). No. 2, doubtful.
“Genus Plecotus Plec-auritus ” (the long-eared
bat, is a European species).—This is Nyctophilus timorien-
sis (Australian long-eared bat).
“Genus Rhinolophus.” —No bat belonging to this
genus is known to me from South Australia.
Family Insectivora.
“Genus Sorex” (not Australian). —This is most likely
Sminthopsis crassicaudatus (Fat-tailed Pouched Mouse).
Digitigrada.
“Genus Nasira” (Dasyurus viverrinus). —Native cat.
“Genus Mustela” (is not Australian). —Phascologale
penicillata (Brush-tailed Phascologale).
Hyaena viatica is Canis dingo (The Dingo)
Amphibia (Family Phocidie).
The “Genus Phoca” (is not Australian). —The three
seals referred to are (1) Arctocephalus lobatus (Hair Seal),
(2) Stenorhynchus leptonyx (Leopard Seal), (3) Euotaria
cinerea (Fur Seal).
Marsupialia.
“Genus Didelphts.” —(l). Is the Phalangista viver-
rina (Phalanger) ; (2) Phalangista Cooki (Ring-tailed
Phalanger) ; Perameles obesula is our bandicoot.
“Genus Hypsiprymnus-minor” (Kangaroo Rat, with
black tail tip) is Potorous tridactylus. (2) A larger species


of Kangaroo Rat (tip of tail white) is Bettongia lesueuri
(Lesueur’s Kangaroo Rat).
“Genus Macropus.” —(l) Is Macropus rufus (Great
Red Kangaroo). (2) “Brown Kangaroo (large),” is Mac-
ropus giganteus (Great Grey Kangaroo). (3) “Brown
Kangaroo (small) ” —Probably the young of the Great Grey
Kangaroo. (4) “Grey Kangaroo”—This could be the
female of Macropus rufus (the Great Red Kangaroo). (5)
“Wallaby” is Macropus eugenii (Dama Wallaby).
“Genus Phascolomys Ursinus” is Phascolomys latifrons
(Hairy-nosed Wombat).
Rodentia.
“Genus Myoxus. ” —The description seems to point to
the Pinto, Peragalea lagotis, but this is not a rodent.
“Genus Mus (Common Mouse).” —It is uncertain if
this is the introduced House Mouse or a native species.
“Mus Decumanus. —The Brown Rat” (introduced),
but of smaller size, taken at Boston Island. This could be one
of the native rats.
Order Edentata.
“Echidna llystrix” (Porcupine Ant-eater) is cor-
rect.
Cetacea.
What the author (Dr. Harvey) calls the Porpoise is a
European species (Phocaena communis), which abounds in
river mouths (Thames, &c.), but the Australian species is the
almost cosmopolitan Delphinus Delphis (the Dolphin).
“ Physeter Marcrocephalus” (Sperm Whale) is correct.
“ Balaena Mysticetus” is the right Greenland Whale.
This is not known from Australian Seas. The species meant
is either the Pigmy Whale (Neobalaena marginata), which
occasionally occurs on our coast, or the Black Whale (Euba-
lacna Australis).
“The Grampus” is either Grampus Richardsoni or
Globiocephalus macrorhynchus, South Sea Black Fish. The
latter has been found on the South Australian coast.
“The Finback” is Physalus Australis (Southern
Finner).
“The Thresher.” —The name Thresher is generally
applied to the Thresher-Shark (Alopecias vulpes), which


occurs on our coast. But as Dr. Harvey refers to the
Whales, it is not unlikely that the Thresher-Whale or Killer
(Orea gladiator), or the Tasmanian Black-Fish (Pseudorca
meridionalis), or an allied species are referable to his
“Thresher.”
The foregoing notes may prove of value to students
of natural history, who reside in or around Port Lincoln,
and to those who may visit the district.
Should any such students become possessed of rare
specimens, living or dead, it is hoped they will be generous
Port Lincoln Jetty.
enough to remember the Zoological Gardens in Adelaide
for living specimens, and the South Australian Museum
on North-terrace, for skins, skeletons, or preserved speci-
mens. These institutions deserve more consideration from
the public, and persons who have the opportunity should
remember that in giving a little of their time to one or
other they would benefit both.
The Railway from Port Lincoln northwards to Cum-
mins, was in progress, but time would not permit of the
members of the party making an inspection of the pro-


posed line. The new jetty at Kirton Point was also in
course of construction. Many new buildings were near-
ing completion, and the township presented an animated
appearance. Allotments on the slope near Kirton Point,
which a few years since were obtainable at about five
shillings each, were now changing hands at from ten to
twenty pounds. Unfortunately none of the original pur-
chasers has lived to benefit by the altered conditions now
being effected by the railway.
Port Lincoln, which has been occupied for a period
exceeding three score years and ten, has an interesting and
Party leaving Kirton Point, Port Lincoln.
variable colonial history, but space will not permit of even
a brief reference to the events which attach to this locality,
to be made in these columns.
Some of the party walked to Kirton Point, and were
met by a boat sent by Captain Weir to the new jetty.
Mr. Maiden, who was anxious to botanically explore
this locality, and the surrounding district, left the steamer
here. ■ ,


About midday we were again on board, and left for
Dangerous Reef, and from thence to Wedge Island, passing
on the way Stamford Hill and Cape Bonington.
Our second visit to Dangerous Reef was in the early
part of the afternoon. Myriads of birds covered the rocks,
and a number of seals were disporting themselves in the
water. All the party landed and the photographer suc-
ceeded in obtaining photographs of the birds and seals,
some of which are reproduced in different divisions herein.
After about an hour’s stay on the rocks the steamer
made for Wedge Island.
WEDGE ISLAND.
From a High rock near Memory Cove Flinders, on 24th
February, 1802, says—"l obtained bearings of Cape Wiles,
of the furthest extremity of Thistle’s Island, and of a group
of four islands and two rocks five leagues beyond it to
the east-south-east. The largest of these was named Wedge
Island, from its shape, and the group Gambier’s Isles, in
honor of the worthy admiral (now Lord Gambier), who
had a seat at the Admiralty Board when the Investigator
was ordered to be fitted.” Wedge Island is situated in
lat. 85 deg. 11 min. S., and long. 186 deg. 29 min. E. The
cliffs at the S.E. end are several hundred feet high, and
the highest point of land is about 660 feet above the sea.
The island is about three miles long and one mile wide,
comprising an area of 2,340 acres, or about 8 2-3 square
miles. Captain Hutchison, R.N., charted it in 1867, and it
was surveyed into sections in 1883. The whole of the land
is held under perpetual lease by Mr. AV. F. Hague. The
surface consists of light loam, well grassed and timbered
with dumbs of sheaoak (Casuarina) and scrub eucalyptus.
A hardy useful pony is bred on this island, which always
commands a good price in the Adelaide market. Unfortu-
nately our stay was limited, as we did not reach the landing-
place until late in the afternoon. We, however, made the
best use of our time and hurried up to the highest point
through fairly high timber. The shades of evening com-
pelled us to beat a hasty retreat and we returned on board
just about dusk. No people were seen on the island. The
weather was fine and pleasant, and we regretted our in-
ability to stay here until the morrow.


Ornithological Notes of an Expedition to Kangaroo
Island and Spencer’s Gulf, in January, 1907.
(By J. W. Mellor, A.0.U.)
The birds seen on this visit to the islands in Spencer’s
Gulf were fairly plentiful, and interesting notes were taken
at various places of call, but the restricted time at our dis-
posal greatly handicapped any extensive operations being
taken or observations being made very far afield when we
touched at points on the mainland.
CAPE JERVIS.
The first port of call being Cape Jervis, we were early
astir on the morning of January 15, and landed in the little
boat harbor near the lighthouse, hut owing to the bare,
rocky nature of the locality and the exposed situation bird-
life was practically non est, but was, nevertheless, an ideal
place for the geologists.
HOG RAY (KANGAROO ISLAND).
Hog Bay (Kangaroo Island) was reached the same
morning, and the country here proved exceptionally good
for the feathered tribe; a notable bird was the black-winged
crow-shrike (Strepera melanoptera), which was seen in a
number of situations; near the seashore it was observed feed-
ing on the purple berries of the Myoporum bushes, which
grow on the sand dunes. This bird is also extremely fond
of insects and is very useful in keeping down pests in this
direction; it was observed searching beneath the loose bark
on the old dry and rotten logs in quest of spiders and such-
like tit-bits, upon which it generally feeds its young. It is
wonderful to watch the antics and energy of the parent oird
in spying out and capturing its prey, the modus operandi be-
ing to insert its sharp, closed bill into a crack or crevice of
the dry bark, and then open the somewhat powerful jaw
with a jerk and so wrench off the obstruction, when it cap-
tures the insects with the greatest ease, and carries several


in its bill at a time to its nest, which is generally situated
in a tall sapling, and here two or three fledglings are ever
ready to devour the dainty morsels. The nest is built of
sticks lined with fibre and fine grass and hair, and has the
appearance of a very neatly-constructed crow or magpie
nest; the eggs are about the same size as the crow’s, but dif-
ferently marked, being of a light brown ground color with
dark brown blotches, and markings of a deeper brown dis-
persed irregularly over the entire shell. The bird is alert-
ness in itself and ever on the watch, its bright yellow eyes
contrasting greatly with the sombre black feathering of its
body, and it will swoop away with undulating flight, giving
forth a sharp, piercing cry of two notes, sounding like crry-
ling, crryling, uttered twice, with the accent on the last part
of each note. The white-backed magpie (Gymnorhina leu-
conota) was seen on the open country, especially where large
trees are thinly scattered. The raven (Corone Australis;
was also noted, its habits being the same as those of the
mainland.
A drive to the China Clay Mines, over ten miles in-
land, through scrub and heath country, gave more scope to
notice some of the land birds; the blue wren (Malnrus
superbus) flitted from bush to bush in search of small in-
sects, the beautiful blue and black plumage of the male,
catching the eye as he darts from cover to cover, followed
by a retinue of half a dozen sombre brown wives. The
white-shafted fantail (Rhipidura albiscapa), ever-restless,
and animated in its actions, could not be missed, ever and
anon skipping out from a twig to catch a gnat on the wing
and returning to its perch to eat it. Several of the wattle-
bird family were seen as we drove along the narrow lane-
like roads, growing high on either side with the narrow-
leaved eucalyptus, from which the renowned eucalyptus oil
is abstracted. The red-wattled bird (Anthochaera caruncu-
lata) was present in these bushy glades; also its smaller ally,
the brush wattle-bird (Anthochaera mellivora), whose harsh,
guttural notes can be heard for a long distance away..
Another of the honey-eating family seen was the white-
bearded honey-eater (Meliornis Novae-llollandiae), and in
the ‘ ‘ black-boy'' country, where the eye can see for miles on
every side the giant black stems of the tall Xanthorrhea. the
tawny-fronted honey-eater (Glyciphila fulvifrons) sits on an
elevated twig or flower-stem of a grass tree and pipes its.


solitary notes. In the open country the tin-tac (Ephthia-
nura albifrons) hops over the ground in search of insects;
and the pipit, or ground lark (Anthus Australis), was ob-
served running in and out of the little tracks and paths of
its preference. As we drove by a secluded water-hole by
the roadside, in the thick scrub, a quick flap and sharp
whirr was heard, and a bronzewing pigeon (Phaps chalcop-
tera) flew across our frack with lightning-like rapidity, and
was lost to sight in the dense green foliage of the dwarf
eucalypts. In sonic low bush country the note of the rufous
thickhead (Pachycephala rufiventris) was heard, and later
the hen bird was seen; while near the township the
widely-distributed black-and-white fan tail (Rhipidura tri-
color), commonly known as the “ willie-wagtail, ’ ’ or shep-
herds’ companion, was observed, following out its usual avo-
cation of catching flies and moths near the farmyards and
gardens. As our steamer was leaving in the afternoon for
Kingscote our interesting observations had to be cut short
and we returned to Hog Bay again to board our boat; but,
while waiting near the jetty, we. observed near by in the
low sandhills the spotted scrub wren (Sericdrnis maculata)
hopping about in the quiet seclusion of the thick bushes;
and the singing honey-eater (Ptilotis sonora) was helping it-
self to certain wild berries that grew on the bushes and
took the place of its honey diet; the brown tit (Acanthiza
pusilla) ever and anon flitted through a bush as we ap-
proached and twittered its little notes in the topmost
branches of the larger shrubs on the foreshore. But the
warning whistle of the “Governor Musgrave ’’ called us
back from our wanderings and we were soon steaming to
KINGSCOTE.
Here we had a couple of hours ashore in the evening-
time, but too late in the day for much active work. A
silver-eye (Zosterops. halmaturina) was found, with its
nest of two pretty blue eggs; this bird differs slightly from
the mainland species (Z. caerulescens), and Mr. A. J.
Campbell considers it sufficiently distinct to give it the Kan-
garoo Island designation. There are some fine bird haunts
within easy distance of here on the spit, a narrow strip
of land running out into the bay, where innumerable gulls,
terns, cormorants, and other aquatic birds used to breed in
the early days, but now the inroads of civilization have all
but wiped them off the place. American River was also a


paradise for birds in the early days, where they used to
lay and breed on the numerous small islands in the upper
reaches of this quiet inland sea or lagoon; but now they are
no more, even the stately pelican, spoken of by Flinders and
immortalised by Montgomery in the poem “Pelican Island,"
bieeds no more in this favorable locality, all that is seen of
this peculiar bird being an odd straggler out of breeding
season, the advance of mankind into the inmost recesses of
the breeding-places and wanton destruction have practi-
cally annihilated the birds.
An old and highly-respected resident of the place states
that the destruction started some years ago, when yachting
parties of gentlemen from Adelaide, who ought to have
known better, used to take trips to Lagoon Bay for their
holidays and shoot indiscriminately at all and everything
they came across, and as the tide went out it is affirmed
that a continuous stream of dead bodies of pelicans and
other sea birds could be seen floating out to sea.
Another party testified to the taking of buckets-full of
eggs and because they were partly incubated they were
used to pelt one another in sham-fight fashion. This state-
ment of such disgraceful conduct is no romancing, and can
be vouched for by eye-witnesses. Is it, therefore, any
wonder that to-day the sea birds do not breed to any extent
here ?
The following list of birds identified in the central
portion of the northern district of Kangaroo Island by the
scientific expedition to that locality, held in connection
with the Adelaide Congress of the Australasian Ornitholo-
gists’ Union, October. 1905, will be found useful: —
Compiled by J. W. Mellob, A.O.U. (Leader).
(1) Wedge-tailed Eagle— Uroaetus audax. (3) White
bellied Sea Eagle— Haliaetus leucogaster. (6) —Osprey —
Pandion ieucocephalus. (10) Little Falcon — Falco lunu-
latus. (13) Kestrel — Cerchneis cenchroides. (36) Boo-
book Owl— Ninox boobook. (53) Welcome Swallow
Hirundo neoxena. (55) Tree Martin —Petrochelidon
nigricans. (73) Dusky Wood Swallow— Artamus sordid us.
( —) Yellow-rumped Diamond-bird —Pardalotus xanthopy-
gius. (84) Striped Diamond-bird — P. ornatus. ( —) Black-
winged Crowshrike —Strepera melanoptera. (93) White-
backed Magpie— Qymnorhina leuconota. (103) Black-faced


Cuckoo Shrike —Graucalus melanops. ( —) Yellow-breasted
Thickhead —Pachycephala meridionalis. (123) Grey Shrike-
thrush — Collyriocincia harmonica. (134) White-shafted
Fantail —Bhipidura alhiscapa. (139) Black-and-white Fan-
tail — B. tricolor. (141) Restless Flycatcher —Sisura in-
qnieta. (165) Scarlet-breasted Robin —Petroeca Leggii
(185) Blue Wren— Malurus superbus. (206) Red-rumped
Ground Wren —Hylacola cauta. (218) Spotted Scrub
Wren— Sericornis maculatus. (220) Brown Tit— Acanthiza
Zietzi. (227) Striped Tit—A. lineata. (231) White-
fronted Tin-tac —Ephthianura albifrons. (240) Ground
Lark —Anthus Australis. (245) Little Grass-bird — Mega-
lurus gramineus. (249) Firetailed Finch— Zonaeginthus
bellus. (253) Red-browed Finch— Adgintha temporalis.
(275) Mountain Thrush —Geocichla lunulata. (290) Raven
— Corone Australis. (296) White-bearded Honey-eater—
Meliornis N.H. ( —) K.I. Crescent Honey-eater— M. hal-
maturina. (301) Tawny-fronted Honey-eater— Glyciphila
fulvifrons. (311) White-eared Honey-eater— Ptilotis leuco-
tis. (313) Wattled-cheeked Honey-eater— P. cratitia.
(331) Red Wattled-bird — Anthochaera carunculata. (332)
Brush Wattle-bird — A. mellivora. ( —) K.I. Spinebill—
Acanthorhynchus halmaturina. ( —) Larger Brown-headed
Honey-eater— Melithreptus magnirostris. ( —) K.I. Silver-
eye—Zostcrops halmaturina. (379) Fantail Cuckoo — Coxo-
mantis flahelliformis.. (391) Sulphur-crested Cockatoo —
Cacatua galerita. (400) Leache’s Cockatoo—Calyptorhyn-
chus viridis. (401) Black Cockatoo — C. funereus. (415)
Crimson Rosella— Platycercus elegans. (444) Blue Moun-
tain Lorikeet— Trichoglosus N.H. (449) Blue-crowned
Lorikeet — Glossopsittacus porphyrocephalus. (462) Bronze-
wing Pigeon —Phaps chalcoptera. (480) Painted Quail —
Turnix varia. (496) Scrub Curlew — Oedicnemus grallarius.
(498) Pied Oyster-catch er-llaematopns longirostris. (499)
Black Oyster-catcher— ll. unicolor. (500) Spur-winged
Plover — Lohivanellus lohatus. (502) Black-breasted Plover
—Zonifer tricolor. (508) Hooded Dottrel —Aegialites cucu-
lata. (548) White-fronted Heron —Notophoyx N.H. (555)
Reef Heron —Demiegretta sacra. (557) Nankeen Heron—
Xycticorax caledonicus. (563) Bald Coot —Porphyria mela-
notus. (567) Moor Hen —Gallinula tenebrosa. (585)
Black Duck —Anas superciliosa. (596) Great Gull — Gahi-
anus pacificus. (597) Silver Gull —Earns N.H. (601)
Crested Tern —Sterna Bergii. (652) Black Cormorant—


Phalacrocorax carho. (654) White-breasted Cormorant —
P. Gouldi. (669) Little Penguin —Eudyptula minor. The
figures before the names are those quoted in “Gould’s Hand-
book to the Birds of Australia. ” Abbreviations in the fore-
going—“K.l.” for Kangaroo Island; N.H. for Nova?-Hol-
landiae.
NEPTUNE ISLANDS.
By next morning (January 16) we were at anchor at
the South Neptune Island. Not a moment’s time was
lost in getting ashore on the Lighthouse Island, where we
were met by the head keeper (Mr. C, 11. West) and
shown over the lighthouse and keeper’s quarters. The
island, with others in close proximity, was found to be per-
fectly honeycombed with the nesting burrows of the mutton
bird, or petrel (Puffinus. tenuirostris) ; the birds, having
started to lay in November and beginning of December,
the eggs were now far advanced in incubation, and some
eggs were hatched out; nearly every burrow contained a
single egg or young bird, and occasionally an addled egg
was found. The egg is very large for the size of the
bird, being quite white and nearly the size of a small goose
egg, while the bird is little larger in the body than a
common pigeon; the burrows vary considerably in depth,
from a foot to 4 or 5 ft., while some birds, not being able
to find space enough to burrow, sought the shelter of some
neighboring low bush and laid its egg beneath it. When
the egg is laid the hen bird sits on it, and the male bird
departs to sea to get food, returning just at dusk, and enters
the hurrow, when there starts a peculiar gurgling sound,
which increases as time goes on, and the male bird starts
to feed its mate. The noise is kept up all night, and with
a rookery of thousands of these birds all around the
noise is a veritable “bedlam;” I have slept, or tried to
sleep out in these rookeries all night to observe the habits
of the birds, but, what with the noise and a fine plump bird
dropping right on one’s face, in its endeavor to reach its
burrow near by, sleep ivas out of the question.
It is wonderful how each bird knows its respective bur-
row and its own mate, but such is only one of Nature’s mys-
teries. The male birds depart again with the first streaks
of dawn, but as they cannot fly right off the ground owing
to their long wings it is necessary for them to go over
some rising prominence or cliff, when, falling over, they


stretch out their long, narrow, raking wings, and soar away
out on the bosom of the ocean.
As incubation advances, both birds take part and feed
the young, but only having a single bird to look after the
task is easy, consequently'the offspring gets rolling fat. and
after it has been brought to maturity the parent birds leave
off their attentions and desert their plump infant in its
underground tenement. Here, in its solitude, its system
gradually absorbs its adipose coating, until at last it be-
comes the proper weight for flying, when it sallies forth to
the ocean to start life on its own. The young are used for
food by opening them and salting down for winter use.
Some of the burrows were occupied by the little penguin
(Eudyptula minor), which lays two eggs of much smaller
size than the mutton bird.
The penguin is a little larger in body than the mutton
bird. It was late in the season for these birds, as some
had already left their nests, while large young were also
found. The birds are peculiar in appearance, with their
stiff, hair-like feathers, and flippers, in place of wings, fitting
them for progress beneath the water while after the fish that
they live on; in fact, they are more at home beneath and in
the water than on dry land.
Some great gulls (Gabianus Pacificus) were seen, also a
number of silver gulls (Larus Novae-Hollandiae), the lat-
ter being veritable little robbers of other birds’ nests of eggs
and young, and were apparently arriving ready to nest in a
rocky, sheltered space. Several Caspian terns (Hidro-
progne caspia) were gracefully soaring overhead, a picture
of ease and comfort in their flight. In various places over
the rocky island silver-eyes (Zosterops) were seen in the
low bushes, which grow in sheltered slopes and recesses.
WILLIAM’S ISLAND.
Our next place of call was William’s Island, which is
uninhabited and treeless. It is densely covered with a low,
thick bush and long grass, making it difficult to see the
ground beneath, which was of a sandy nature. Here mut-
ton birds and penguins were numerous; every few r steps one
would find himself floundering thigh-deep in burrows, which
were hidden under the grass and bushes, and out would
pop a large black snake with red beneath its belly and
scuttle away into the next burrow, a performance that


T 3
„s, i
•I : vi/ »
' c
I ca
a
I
i’• ‘ '
i-f ' 2
o
u
■a
■ ’ 1 ■ I
*
1 i I
.2
■ ir. ' v i
HH
t-H
X
X
'Jj
H
<
J
P-i


somewhat scared those who had ventured on the slopes of
the island. Having discovered a small grass-bird living in
these snake-infested bushes, every effort was made to cap-
ture one, and after an hour’s chasing and tearing through
snakes, bushes, and burrows, the game had to be given up,
as the steamer once more sounded the warning note, “All
hands aboard! ” It is thought from the brown appearance
and plaintive little call of pee-pee-pee, that it was the little
grass-bird (Megalurus grandneus). A swamp hawk (Circus
Gouldi) was seen soaring over the bushes in search of its
accustomed meal of a nice fat mutton bird, or even a
snake, as the bird is as fond of reptiles as of feathered
joints.
MEMORY COVE.
This little bay was reached shortly after mid-day, and
although only half an hour was allowed for landing, seve-
ral interesting forms of bird life were noted in the dense
eucalyptus scrub, which comes right down to the water’s
edge. The yellow-rumped diamond bird (Pardalotus
xanthopygius) was observed seeking out its food in the
gum leaves. The diet of this useful little bird consists
of small injurious insects, which live on the leaves of
various trees. Another species noted was two male birds of
the thickhead family (Pachycephala meridionals), whose
bright yellow under-surface attracted attention, and with
their black heads, half-circle across the chest, and white
throats were particularly showy little birds.
THISTLE ISLAND.
Our course was next steered to Thistle Island, where
broader lands lay open to the course of the naturalists, and
a good long tramp across the island disclosed many points
of interest; a fine white-bellied sea eagle (Haliaetus
leucogaster) skimmed over the cliff's at our approach, and
undoubtedly it had had its nest in some inaccessible nook or
crannie facing the raging foam, as it is in this locality that
it loves to place its breeding quarters, close to the ocean,,
from which it obtains its fish supply and on which it
rears its two young ones. Soaring aloft was noted also a
pair of wedge-tailed eagles (Uroaetus audax),but these kept
more inland. A strepera or crow shrike was flushed from
a clump of eucalypts in a sheltered spot, and from the con-
spicuous white patch or spectrum in each wing it was plain
that it differed from those seen on Kangaroo Island, and


was probably the leaden crow shrike (Strepera plumbea).
The spotted scrub wren was also seen here, and was search-
ing in its usually inquisitive style amongst the dead leaves
and grass under bushy trees and scrub. On the seashore
several hooded dottrels (Aegialites cuculata) were observed
running along the beach, but no nesting-place was
found, it probably being too late in the season.
DANGEROUS REEF.
Late in the afternoon the “Governor Musgrave got
away from Thistle Island and at sundown came abreast
Seals on Dangerous Reef.
of Dangerous Reef. Captain Weir, wishing to give the
party a good view of the grandeur of the ocean swell
breaking over these low, desolate rocks, kept close in, and
it could be seen that innumerable birds were breeding on
the rocks, while seals were amusing themselves in innocent
play and gambols on the shore and in the water amongst
the partially-submerged rocks. It was, therefore, decided


to land a few of the most enthusiastic naturalists, with
the camera-man, and investigate the situation. The risk
proved well worth the trouble, as it afforded a study that
would take fully a week to comprehend. Hair seals were
quite tame and numerous and allowed the boat to come
quite close ere they hobbled into the sea with awkward
Disturbed Birds on Dangerous Reef.
gait; even then they would come up to the rocks and
peer into one’s face inquisitively. On one end of the reef,
which was only a few hundred yards in extent, a large
colony of crested terns (Sterna Bergii) had taken up their
breeding grounds, and their eggs were lying about as
thick as they could be placed amongst the small stones and


pebbles. One could hardly tread between them, their pecu-
liar protective coloring and varied markings making them
hard to discern amongst the stones.
As we approached, the birds flew up in a vast cloud,
making a harsh, discordant cry as they hovered, swallow-
like, above the rookery. One egg only constituted a clutch,
being laid on the ground without any pretentions to a nest,
•and no two eggs were alike, although there were thousands
of them lying about. Some were spotted and blotched on
a creamy white ground color, while in others the markings
assumed the shape of lines and scribblings, resembling all
kinds of hieroglyphics. Several snapshots. were taken as
the birds rose and the illustration shows their numbers.
On another part of the reef, only a stone’s throw away, a
colony of white-breasted cormorants (Phalacrocorax
Gouldi) were nesting, the nests being composed of bits of
seaweed and twigs of a variety of saltbush that was grow-
ing near by. The clutch was two, three, and four chalky-
white eggs, rather elongated in shape, and about the size
of a hen’s egg. The smaller number was common and the
larger number rare. Some of the nests contained large
young birds. Numbers of silver gulls (Larus Novae Hol-
landiae) hovered round, and directly the cormorants left
their nests a dozen or more of these scavengers of the sea-
shore would pounce down, break the eggs in a second, and
devour the contents, or would attack the helpless young
cormorants in the nest, right in front of one’s eyes, and
it was with great difficulty that they could be driven off.
A few great gulls (Gabianus pacificus) were on the rocks
some distance off, and a few little terns (Sterna nereis)
bitted aloft, like white swallows, or skimmed over the
bosom of the restless ocean as we rowed back to the steamer
in the uncertain light of the evening shadows, thus ending
a most interesting day’s observations amongst the feathered
tribe of the islands. But one is grieved now to hear that
the authorities, for a paltry pittance, have allowed this and
other islands to be molested by guano-seekers, who destroy
the haunts and rookeries of these interesting birds, in spite
of their being totally protected by law during a period of
the year when these and other species are undergoing their
a nnual close season.
Note. — The Birds Protect!cn Act,” No. 74.1 of 4900, ha.- by rrcdamation
been extended to include “Dangerous Reef,” “The Pages,” and “Casuarina
Island,” since the foregoing was written.


REEYESBY ISLAND.
Next morning, January 17th, we were off Sir
Joseph Banks’ Group and in the early dawn
landed on Reevesby Island, where a settler
Mr. R. Sawyer, has his small dwelling. On enter-
ing the low sand dunes where the myoporum bushes
were in fruit, numbers of rock parrots (Neophema petro-
phila) were noted eating the purple berries, and there
being a waterhole near by, the only fresh supply on the
group, the birds were getting their early-morning drink
and bath, prior to facing the heat of the day. In a
cornfield the well-known note of the stubble quail (Coturnix
pectoralis) was heard, and the bird was eventually
flushed. On the shore the sooty oyster-catcher (Haema-
topus unicolor) was seen, also silver gulls and the Caspian
tern. The Cape Barren geese (Cereopsis Novae-Hollandiae)
are known to breed on some of the islands close by and are
totally protected by law.
PORT LINCOLN.
This township was visited during the day, but only
as a port of call; nevertheless, some of the party made
straight for the scrub, which comes right down to the water’s
edge, a little distance from the town, and here a few birds
were identified, notably the chesnut shouldered wren
(Malurus assimilis), there being one male, in full nuptial
plumage, and several females; the sombre tree-tit (Smicor-
nis brevirostris) was present, with a brood of young
just out, and formed a little covey of extremely minute
feathered friends. Several honey-eaters were busy amongst
the flowers on the dwarf eucalypts, the white-bearded
(Meliornis Novae-Hollandiae) being plentiful, the red-
wattled bird (Anthochaera carunculata), and the brush
wattle bird (A. mellivora), representing the larger mem-
bers of the family. The white-winged chough (Corcorax
melonorhamphus) is also found inland from here, its pecu-
liar large mud nest placed on a horizontal bough being an
object of interest to travellers. It is basin-shaped and lined
with soft fibre and feathers, the clutch of eggs being
generally four or five, creamy white on the ground color,
spotted over with dark brown markings, some of which
appear below the surface of the shell and are therefore
lighter in color. I have also found in the hills at the


back of Port Lincoln, on a former visit to study the bird-
life, the Western Australian form of the yellow robin, viz.,
the grey-breasted (Eopsaltria gularis), showing the great
range of this western species.
DANGEROUS REEF.
Leaving Port Lincoln early in the afternoon, a course
was again shaped for Dangerous Reef, as the photographer
wished to get some more photographs of the seals and
bird-life, fearing that those taken the evening previously
had not been exposed sufficiently in such a dull, uncertain
light. On landing again on the reef the seals were found
to be still more tame and allowed the cameras to be set up
while they were photographed in situ on land. We found
that the silver gulls, those pirates of the sea, had made
great havoc among the cormorants, nearly wiping out all
the eggs and young ones since our visit on the previous
evening. The mutilated bodies of the large young birds
lay about on all sides, being too cumbersome for the sm.au
gulls to devour, and were festering in the hot rays of the
sun, causing one to have a somewhat loathsome feeling to-
wards the gulls for such seemingly wanton destruction.
Strange to say, not an egg of the terns was touched, per-
haps because these birds, being next of kin to the gulls, were
allowed to go unmolested.
WEDGE ISLAND.
A course was next direeted to Wedge Island, which
was the last place visited on this interesting expedition.
The island is well wooded and very precipitous, it being
almost impossible to land on the ocean side owing to the
steep, rocky cliffs and dangerous and treacherous reefs
that abound. ,
After a landing had been accomplished the aspect was
found to be most interesting to the naturalist in general,
there being thickly-wooded gullies running down to the
shore, in which birds were plentiful. The kestrel (Cerch-
neis cenehroides) was seen hovering over some thick,
grassy land, where in all probability mice were to be found,
as this bird is most useful in keeping down this pest. In a
grassy glade a stubble quail (Coturnix pectoralis) rose and
whirred away like a shot from a gun. The common white-
backed magpie (Gymnorhina leueonota) was present, ply-
ing his useful avocation in the open land in eating up the


larger insect pests. Some ravens (Corone Australis) at-
tracted our attention by their loud caw-cawing, and
appeared to be quite at home amongst the large trees, while
a brown hawk (Hieracidea orientalis) swooped down and
across the gully in front of us as the sun was setting, pro-
bably returning to its nest of recent young ones. In the
smaller birds, the blue wren (Malurus superbus) was noted
in the thick bushes, also the brown tit (Acanthiza pusilla),
while our old friend, the spotted field wren (Sericornis
maculatus) was as busy as ever prying into the dead leaves
and rubbish on the ground beneath the bushes. The yellow-
rumped tit (Acanthiza chrysorrhoa) was in more open
country, where it builds its somewhat bulky nest in the
overhanging bough of a sheaoak or such-like tree. It was
only the shades of night that forced us back to the steamer,
as there was plenty of work to interest us here for at least
a couple of days, and as this was practically the last of our
trip we reluctantly retraced our steps and boarded the
“Governor Musgrave ”in the twilight. The anchor being
weighed at 8 p.m., we held off the shore, and turned our
thoughts homewards, our only trouble being that the three
days spent had been all too short for such an amount of
scientific work, and that at least a fortnight would be
needed to investigate the gulf and its wealth of bird-life
and other natural history aspects. We were in Port Ade-
laide again by 10.15 next morning, January 18, and met
by a rather hot spell of 106.4 in the shade. In all between
40 and 50 species of birds were met with and identified.


Botanical Notes relating to a Trip in the s.s.
“Governor Musgrave” in January, 1907.
(By J. H. Maiden, F.L.S., &c., &c.).
South Australia will be ever of especial interest to the
Australian botanist, because it was the first terra incognita
that Robert Brown explored (eoastally). He was with
Flinders on his voyage of discovery, but the Australian land
first touched by that navigator—south-western Australia —
had been previously visited, and some attention had been
given to its botany, but in South Australia Brown was the
first botanist to see its plants (with the reservation, as re-
gards Leschenault de la Tour,* who visited, it is believed, a
portion of eastern South Australia).
As has already been explained, the “ Governor Mus-
grave” visited a number of places, chiefly in Kangaroo
Island and the southern part of Spencer’s Gulf, which had
been visited by Brown in the ‘ Investigator” with Flinders
When J. J. Bennett, Brown’s assistant at the British
Museum, died in 1876, a number of specimens, collected by
the latter on what is now South Australian territory, were
distributed to various herbaria throughout the world. A
set was offered to Melbourne and gladly accepted, but, as re-
gards Sydney, my predecessor did not even acknowledge the
offer; but I was fortunate in obtaining some from non-Aus-
tralian sources a few years ago.
I was therefore very pleased to revisit some of Brown’s
collecting grounds and collect where he collected, which is
the next best thing to possessing the identical plants he
gathered. I suppose that all the plants from Brownian lo-
calities are in the herbarium of the University of Ade-
laide; but I am anxious to impress upon South Australian
"This French Botanist accompanied Captain Baudin’s expedition to Australia in
1800-3, and served on the “Naturaliste” and “Geographe.” Through illness he was
left by the expedition at Timor on 2nd June, 1803.


friends the very great importance of collecting where the old
botanists gathered their types and other specimens.
Dr. R. S. Rogers and iMr. Thomas Gill, 1.5.0 i, collected
with me, and an account and a list of our collections will be
found in the "‘Proceedings of the Royal Society of South
Australia for 1908.” Ido not. therefore, propose to make
a detailed enumeration here of what we obtained; but I re-
peat. that, in order to make the study of South Australian
plants much more convenient to students, it is desirable to
publish brief plant lists of each locality (florulas), as the
Robert Brown, F.L.S.
floras of South Australia, or of considerable areas, are too
comprehensive for the purpose.
All the localities we visited were adjacent to the sea,
and some of them windswept and (wen splashed by the spray
of the sea. Consequently, many of the plants were charac-
terised by their extreme succulence and by their saline
nature. Such plants possess a good deal of similarity to
those of inland localities with saline conditions. Such are


xerophilous plants, and it is an interesting study to com-
pare species from inland and coastal localities.
The plants of coastal localities are usually widely dif-
fused, and partly for that reason, and partly because the
vegetation of South Australia has been so well worked by
botanists, it was not to be expected that many finds could
be recorded in our few localities and during our rapid visit.
But we found two new varieties of wattles, one of which
—a thin, straggling, wiry shrub, of 6 ft. or more, from the
Port Lincoln district —was called Acacia retinodes, Schlecht,
var. Gillii, in honor of Mr. Walter Gill (the Conservator of
Forests of South Australia), and of Mr. Thomas Gill.
Another wattle, forming a compact, umbrageous shrub,
of 3 to 6 ft. or more, found near Port Lincoln and other
places on the coast, was named Acacia salicina, Lindl., var.
Wayae, in honor of Sir Samuel Way, Chief Justice and
Lieutenant-Governor of South Australia, who took so great
an interest in tlie Adelaide meeting of the Australasian As-
sociation for the Advancement of Science. This shrub pro-
mises much as a horticultural subject.
As regards eucalyptus. I made a special study of that
genus on our trip, especially E. odorata, Behr., which is so
well developed in South Australia. That one species alone
affords a useful study in variation. I proved the “Pink
Mallee” of Port Lincoln to be a variety of E. odorata, and
proposed the name var. purpurascens for it. E. fasciculosa,
F.Y.M., and E. Cambagei, Deane & Maiden, should be added
to the flora of South Australia, vice E. paniculata, Sm., and
E. goniocalyx, F.Y.M., respectively.
I also show that E. amygdalina, Labi 11., E. macrorr-
hyncha, P.Y.M., and E. Stuartiana, F.Y.M., are doubtful
members of the flora of South Australia.
I stayed behind at Port Lincoln for a few days, and
botanised in the district and as far west as Lake Wangary,
extending my trip to Port Augusta.
As regards Kangaroo Island, we only touched at two
points, and so could not do justice to so large an island,
but the material we collected abundantly showed its affinity
to that of the Tasmanian flora, and a subsequent visit to
Cape Borda by Dr. R. S. Rogers resulted in the discovery of
a new and beautiful Grevillea, which I have had much plea-
sure in naming after that gentleman.


I arranged my localities in the same sequence as that
followed in the ‘ ‘ Australia Directory, ’ ’ used by all mariners;
so it will be very easy to trace them and to interpolate
others, from which plants may be obtained in the future.
But, beyond my scientific results, I shall always look
back on the trip with pleasure, because of the making of new
friendships and cementing old ones. It is in the highest
degree desirable that the workers of the various States
should meet each other to compare notes and to study prob-
lems of common interest on the spot. The effects of the
personal converse and the impressions formed during the
trip, and thorough study of the material collected, will be
felt long after the actual termination of the all too brief
cruise.
Mr. Maiden very kindly gave his permission to reprint
in whole or in part his paper, entitled “A Contribution to
the Botany of South Australia. ” The paper belongs to
the Royal Society’s publications, and the reader who is
desirous of becoming acquainted with the details of Mr.
Maiden’s report should consult the volume of the Proc. of
the Royal Society of South Australia, 1908, pp. 252-286.
115
A CRUISE IN THE S.S. “GOVERNOR MUSGRAVE.”


Geological Observations on some of the Localities
visited by the “ Governor Musgrave ” Party in
January, 1907.
BY WALTER ITOWCIIIN, P.G.S.
The stratified rocks which came under observation are
placed in chronological order in the following Table:—
PLEISTOCENE AND RECENT.
Blown Sands. —Sand dunes of sea shores and mari-
time districts.
Travertine Limestones.— Formed by rain water on
calcareous soils in dry situations.
Indurated Sandhills. —Old sand dunes, often distant
from the coast, covered by a travertine crust.
Raised Sea Beaches. —Contain existing sea shells.
raised 12-20 ft. above sea level.
Volcanic Outflows. —Basaltic sheets from extinct vol-
canic vents.
CAINOZOIC (TERTIARY).
Freshwater. —Variegated sands and clays.
Marine. —
Newer —Fossiliferous sands. Oyster beds.
Older —Polyzoal limestone, &c.
PALAEOZOIC (PRIMARY).
Permo-Carboniferous. —Glacial sands and boulder
clays.
Cambrian. —Schists, quartzites, and conglomerates.
PRE-CAMBRIAN (ARCHvEAN).
Aplites, Pegmatites, Graphic Granites, Gneiss, &c.
CAPE JERVIS.
The bed-rocks of Cape Jervis consist of schists, clay-
slates, and quartzites of Cambrian age. They are closely
connected with the great granitic zone, bordering the


southern coast, forming the prominent headlands of Port
Elliot, Rosetta Head, Cape Willoughby, and the southern
extremities of Kangaroo Island. The Cambrian beds have
been greatly altered, not only by their proximity to the great
mass of granitic intrusions, but by a regional metamor-
phism, which has given them a crystalline or sub-crystalline
structure. These beds form the foreshore and base of the
cliffs at the Cape, up to a few feet above sea level.
The main portions of the cliffs at Cape Jervis consist of
glacial beds of assumed Permo-Carboniferous age (see Plate
III.). These rest uneonformably on the Cambrian schists,
and form part of the immense sheets of morainic material
which overlie the southern portions of South Australia,
reaching as far north as Hallett’s Cove and Ardrossan. At
Cape Jervis the glacial beds vary from a gritty sandstone,
on the south side of the lighthouse, to a dark-colored
boulder-clay (till), on the north side. Many large erratics of
granite and quartzite have weathered out from the till and
are strewn along the beach, or occur in groups on the face
of the hills at the back of the lighthouse. Selwyn noted
the presence of these granite boulders in 1859. Many of the
stones included in the till are ice-scratched, but no polished
floor has been hitherto detected on the underlying Cambrian
at this spot. The schists, of which the Cambrian mostly
consists, are friable and rotten, and are, therefore, unfavor-
able for the preservation of the evidences of ice move-
ment.
Resting on the glacial beds, in places, are the re-
mains of a raised sea beach, containing recent shells, whilst
soil and blown sand form the superficial deposits.
KANGAROO ISLAND.
Kangaroo Island is a continuation of the topographical
and geological features of the mainland, with which, at no
very distant date, it was connected. What was once a very
extended peninsula has been cut through by the sea at the
neck (Backstairs Passage), which converted the one-time
peninsula into an island. Kangaroo Island owes its east
and west direction to a great curve in the geological axis.
The main ranges of South Australia have a general trend
which is nearly north and south, but as they approach
Cape Jervis they gradually swing round to an east and west
direction. This change of direction is the result of an al-
teration in the geological strike of the beds. At Cape tier-


vis the Cambrian quartzites have a strike N. 25 deg. E.,
whilst across Backstairs’ Passage, at Hog Bay, the strike
is N.E., and the orientation becomes still more marked as
the beds are followed in their westerly trend. This im-
portant curvature in the strike of the rocks may have been
the primary cause of the breach made by the sea in the for-
mation of the Passage.
The older rocks (Cambrian) at Hog Bay have a similar
character to those seen at Cape Jervis, hut give greater evi-
dences of crush and strain, and are somewhat more highly
metamorphosed. Interhedded with the schists, at the east
point of Christmas Cove, and also along the coast on the
westward side, is a conglomerate bed which is of consider-
able interest. This bed bears a close resemblance to the
Cambrian Glacial Till of the mainland, but is not so thick,
and is more highly metamorphosed than the latter. The
strain, occasioned by the great twist in the strike of the
beds, has led to powerful contortions, with rock flowage in
places, whilst the included pebbles or boulders are fre-
quently indented or twisted by the great pressure to which
they have been subjected. Many of the included stones
also exhibit the transverse fracture planes so common in
the boulders of the Cambrian glacial beds of the main-
land.
The geologists of the “Governor Musgrave” party went
a few miles inland from Hog Bay, to inspect the
Kaolin Mine. The stone is a decomposed graphic-granite,
with much felspar, passing into kaolin. It was in this
decomposed rock that the precious tourmalines (green,, blue,
and pink) occurred, and led to the mining operations in
the first instance. The precious stones proved to be only
a local development and gave out, whilst the matrix has
created another industry. The rock probably forms part
of the Pre-Cambrian geological axis of Kangaroo Island.
The Permo-Carboniferous glacial beds, which form the
main cliffs at Cape Jervis, reappear on the other side of the
strait, and make an important feature on Kangaroo Island.
The beds readily decompose, and, as soils, form the strong,
arable land surrounding Hog Bay, Kangaroo Head, the val-
ley of the Cygnet River, the country around Smith Bay,
and elsewhere. Christmas Cove, at Hog Bay, has been cut
out by the sea in these glacial beds, and hundreds of erratics,
some of great size, have been washed out of the boulder-clay


and encumber the shores of the Cove (see Plate V.). The
beach on the western side of Point Marsden is also strewn
with large erratics of great variety. These erratics, as well
as the boulder-clay, in which they are included, were in
Permo-Carboniferous times ice-borne from snow-capped
highlands, situated to the south of the present continent,
which have disappeared by the slowly encroaching Southern
Ocean.
Evidences of the oscillations of the land, in relation to
sea level, may be observed in the succession of geological
events in Kangaroo Island. During the Permo-Carbon-
iferous Ice Age the land was probably considerably higher
than it is to-day. Later, during early Tertiary times, the
land had so far sunk that probably the whole of what is
now Kangaroo Island was below sea level, and when in
the condition of a sunken reef it received the marine de-
posits, which can still be found in isolated patches in vari-
ous parts of the island. At that time the two great gulfs
of South Australia were probably merged into one, and the
sea went up the valley of the Murray as far as the southern
portions of New South Wales. These Older-Tertiary marine
deposits form cliffs at Queenscliffe and continue for some
distance along the shores of Nepean Bay. Much of the
Tertiary limestone has been operated upon by rainwater,
dissolved, and redeposited in the form of surface travertine
and marly subsoils, which have a thickness in places of 15 ft.
or 20 ft.
At Queenscliffe the Tertiary limestones are seen to
rest on the eroded surfaces of the glacial-till, supplying
the evidence that the latter is of Pre-Tertiary age.
In middle or late Tertiary times Kangaroo .Island was
the scene of volcanic activity. A fissure-vent existed at
one time near the original settlement on the island, at
Kingscote, at the entrance to the Bay of Shoals. It ap-
pears to have had but slight explosive force. Streams of
lava flowed down some of the old river valleys, one of which
is seen in the cliffs near the Kingscote jetty, and has been
worked for road metal. *An important lava-sheet flowed in
a north-westerly direction, and to-day occupies an elevated
position, forming the Gap Hills, resting on an old sand-
stone floor, which is probably of Miocene age. No palieon-
tological evidence has been obtained by which the volcanic
*See Plate XXIII.


■
Plate XXIII. Cliffs near Klngscote, worked for Road Metal.


action might be correlated, or otherwise, with the volcanic
regions of Millicent and Mount Gambier. The present
elevated position of the basaltic rocks give evidence of much
waste and lowering of the land-surface since this period of
volcanic eruption.
PORT LINCOLN.
Port Lincoln was visited during this cruise of the
“Governor Musgrave,” and the rocks along the shore ex-
amined, but the time spent on the spot was too brief to secure
many scientific results. The geological structure is ex-
tremely varied and complicated. The rocks consist of
highly crystalline schists and augen-gneiss, carrying acid
and basic intrusions, making a geological complex which
will require much time and labor to decipher. The beds
are probably of Archaean age.
THE ISLANDS.
The numerous islands which occur in Investigator
Strait and Spencer Gulf (as well as the adjacent coasts) are
of uniform type, and have had a geological history in com-
mon. The fundamental rocks are of remote age (Cambrian
or Pre-Cambrian), and form a most intricate series of
metamorphic, plutonic, and volcanic rocks of deep-seated
origin. These old rocks occur mostly at an elevation, vary-
ing from a few feet above sea level to a few feet below sea
level, and represent a base level of erosion—probably
marine. On this platform of older palaeozoic rocks there
rests a capping of very recent date that will be referred to
below.
South Neptune . —This is the most southerly of the
islands in Investigator Strait, and was one of the most in-
teresting, from a geological standpoint, visited. Much of
the island is free from cover, and the rocks can be in-
timately studied —exposed by a bare floor. The island
consists essentially of coarse-grained granite, sometimes
gneissie. A striking feature is the occurrence of numerous
dark-colored, basic dykes, varying in width from 1 inch to
50 feet. These dykes intrude the granite, nearly vertically,
in parallel lines, and approximately in a north and south
direction. The dykes are transversely jointed, and are,
therefore, more easily operated upon by the destructive ac-
tion of the waves than the more massive granites. The
sea has worked out many of these dykes into deep and nar-
row clefts (or chines), up which the waves are directed
N


Dyke, South Neptune Island.
Plate XXIV.


with great force (see Plate XXIV.)- The materials of some
dykes and granites are curiously intermingled in the form
of breccia —granite in dykes and dyke-material in granites.
Whether such intermingling was effected at the time of the
basic intrusions, or followed later under conditions of
crush, was not quite clear.
Over the higher and central and protected portions of
the island, sand has gathered, which is sometimes hardened
by the presence of lime into a limestone crust. This sandy
ground was honeycombed by the burrows and nests of
mutton birds, which readily caved in under the foot, and
made travelling difficult.
Williams Isle is about one mile distant from West
Point, the extreme south of Eyre Peninsula. The island
consists of a flat platform of older rocks —granite penetrat-
ing sedimentary beds—covered by indurated sands at no
great elevation above sea level. The shores are rugged,
but a landing was effected in a sheltered bay on the north
side of the island. The indurated sand-beds on the beach
contained sub-fossil bird bones firmly held in the recent
rock.
Memory Cove is a narrow, sandy beach,, about half a
mile in length, situated on the mainland, north of Cape
Catastrophe (see Plate XVI.). At either side of the Cove the
older rocks are bared. The outcrop on the north side ex-
hibits a dyke of dolerite, 20 ft. wide, penetrating granitic
rocks. At the back of the Cove, hills of indurated sand
rise to a height of about 500 ft.
Thistle Island, east of Cape Catastrophe, is the largest
island of Spencer Gulf. It is 9 miles long and 772 ft. in
height. Its geological structure is similar to others in the
Gulf, possessing a basement of older rocks, on which rests
a great thickness of indurated sands. On the west
side of the island is Fossil Point, which takes its name
from a gully close by, which is said to contain “fossil trees.”
The spot was regarded inaccessible for landing, so a course
was taken through Thorny Passage, and a landing made at
Whaler’s Bay, on the eastern side of the island. Very
fine sections of cliffs of indurated, calcareous, wind-blown
sand were seen as the steamer rounded the north end of
the island and passed down on the east side. The
beds looked in places very compact, suggestive, from appear-
ances, of older formations Illustrations of false-bedding


Indurated Sands resting on older rocks, Thistle Island.
were frequently apparent in the face of the cliffs. At
Waterhouse Bay these recent sands form considerable cliffs,
and, on weathering, produce architectural effects in pillars
and tracery. These calcareous concretions or “sand-
pipes,” which occur very commonly in drift sand, were, no
North End of Thistle Island.


doubt, the objects mistaken for “fossil trees” on the west
side of Thistle Island, as well as similar “fossils” observed
by Peron in blown sands in Nepean Bay. The soil of the
island is light and sandy, and, in places, is under cultiva-
tion.
Dangerous Reef includes a small group of low islands
and submerged reels, in open sea, about 14 miles north of
Thistle Island. The largest is about a quarter of a mile
long and 200 yards wide, and, at highest point, 12 ft. above
sea level. It is the home of large rookeries of sea birds
and seals. The islands are almost bare, and afford good
illustrations of the last stages of denudation by the sea re-
moving the more friable recent formations, and thereby
exposing the rocky door of an older land surface. The
reefs are colored white from a shallow deposit of bird guano.
(See Plate XXV.).
Rcevesbi) Island. —Sir Joseph Banks’ Group consists
of twenty islands, of which Reevesby Island is the largest.
It is 2 y 2 miles long and a half-mile in width. With the
•exception of a hill at the southern end, which is about 100
ft., it is not more than from 20 to 40 ft. high. The party
landed on the west side, where a long, sandy beach proved
rich in shells. Occasional ridges of crystalline rocks jut
out from the land. The superficial beds are sandy lime-
stone, of recent origin, weathered into cavities, giving
shelter to the sea birds. (See Plate XXVI.).
Wedge Island. —The Gambier Islands are situated
about midway between the extremities of Eyre Peninsula
and Yorke Peninsula, at the entrance to Spencer Gulf.
Wedge Island, which is three miles long by one mile broad,
is the largest of the group, and takes its name from its
wedge-like shape, as seen from a distance. The south-
east side of the island rises, in a nearly perpendicular cliff,
to a height of 660 ft., and gradually slopes away towards
the north-west. At the landing-place, near the south-east
angle of the island, false-bedded rocks, consisting of sands
and calciferous sandstones, show in the face of the cliffs in
various colored bands. The rock easily frets away by
action of the weather, and forms caves, supported by pillars
of the same material. (See Plate XXVII.). Near the
water’s edge the beds make horizontal shelves, which pass
below sea level. A steady climb over sandy soil and through
scrubby vegetation brought us to the highest point, which


■ tit «*-5
' <u
'% \ - <u
£?* «
2,
*,} t
ji Jr «B
ir ®
C, y o
c
o
"C
o
Oh
t-'
Bp x
I|| x
a
h
M J
ph


forms the perpendicular cliff of “the wedge.” A fine
sight is obtained from this vantage spot. The sea broke
on the same kind of roek at the bottom, and at a distance of
about a quarter of a mile from the shore was a curious
pyramidal, tent-like hill, in the form of a sea-stack. This
fragment had evidently, at no very distant date, formed
part of the main island, as a point from the latter extended
in the direction of the small island. No old rocks were no-
ticed on Wedge Island, unless the dark-colored base of the
pyramidal islet was of this nature, the rapidly-fading light
of evening made this determination uncertain.
Cliffs, Wedge Island.
Near the summit of the ridge the loose sand had been
blown away, leaving considerable spaces of bare travertine
crust as a floor, Under similar circumstances, on the
mainland, there would have been almost certainly the evi-
dences of aboriginal settlement, in the form of chipped
stones, &c., but in no place was a chip of any kind of
stone found. Although there is no hard stone on the
island, if it had been at any time frequented by the
aborigines, they would most probably have left evidences of
their presence by tools or chips, as they usually carried
these, as well as the cores for manufacturing stone imple-
ments, with them in their migrations. This negative evi-
dence seems to indicate that man’s advent in Southern Aus-




tralia lias been subsequent to the separation of Wedge
Island from the mainland.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
The present coastal features of South Australia have
been developed at no very distant date.
In early geological times, and as late as the Permo-Car-
boniferous period, high lands existed on the southern
borders of South Australia, and extended some distance in-
to what is now the Southern Ocean. This is proved by the
lines of dispersion during the two great periods of glacia-
tion through which the country has passed—Cambrian and
Permo-Carboniferous —at which times the watershed of
the country was to the south and the drainage towards the
north. This view is confirmed by the extensive outcrops
of granite and other abysmal rocks throughout the regions
in question, necessitating the removal of great uplands by
denudation, before these deep-seated rocks could show at
the surface. It was probably during later Paheozoic, and
throughout most of the Mesozoic periods, that the greater
part of these southern uplands suffered denudation, for, in
early Cainozoic times, the southern portions of South Aus-
tralia were submerged to even a greater extent than is the
case to-day.
In Cainozoic and recent times there have been consider-
able oscillations of the land in relation to the sea. In early
Cainozoic (Eocene) there was a subsidence of several hun-
dreds of feet. In Middle Cainozoic (Miocene), the land
rose, shallowing the seas, and raising the sea-ffoor, in places
above sea level. The sea operated on the comparatively
soft and incoherent marine deposits—the gulfs were ex-
cavated by wave action, and where the sediments were shal-
low these were swept away by the sea and denudation was
carried down to the beo-rock of granite.
Following these events, in more recent times, an eleva-
tion of the land greatly reduced the size of the two gulfs,
or possibly restored the whole of this area to dry land, and
much of the continental-shelf was raised above sea level.
In this gradual retreat of the sea the low-lying maritime
districts were open to ihe drift-sandwhich travelled inland
from the Southern Ocean. Immense deposits of this kind
were left in the wake of the retreating sea. Rainwater dis-
solved the calcareous part of the drifting sand and, by pre-




ci pi tat ion, cemented the loose sand into indurated beds,
which in places formed ranges of hills. There are still
thousands of square miles of this indurated blown-sand
country occupying the South-East districts, Kangaroo
Island, the islands of Spencer Gulf, and the lowlands of
Eyre Peninsula. The enormous sand dunes of Cape
Gantheaume, Kangaroo Island, and the pinnacles of sand
existing on the islands, such as at Wedge Island, can only
be explained by an extension of the continental area, and a
retreating sea coast.
In times immediately antecedent to the present, the sea
returned over its old areas, re-excavated the gulfs, and is
now washing away the soft wind-constructed sandstones
that were left in the line of its former retreat. So far as
Spencer Gulf and Gulf St. Vincent are concerned
the work has been completed, except in the case of a few
small areas which, possessing a basement of solid rock rising
a few feet above sea level, have been protected from the
power of the waves, and are the remnants of the lost lands
of South Australia.
Literature. —Geological observations on some of the
localities visited by the “Governor Musgrave” Party will
be found in the following:—Peron’s Voyages (Kangaroo
Island), 1807-16; J. B. Jukes (Cape Jervis), Brit. Asso.Ad.
Science. 1846; A. R. C. Selwyn (Cape Jervis), Pari. Paper,
1859; R. Tate (Kangaroo Island), Roy. Soc. S. Aus., 1888;
Prof. T. W. E. David and W. Howchin (Cape Jervis), Roy.
Soc., S. Aus., 1897; H. Y. L. Brown (Kangaroo Island),
Pari. Paper, 1898; W. Howchin (Kangaroo Island), Roy,
Soc., S. Aus., 1899 and 1903.


Some Anthropological Notes on the South
Australian Aborigines.
BY THOMAS GILL, 1.5.0.
Peculiar Customs of the Aborigines who inhabited Cape Jervis
and Port Lincoln, two of the localities visited by the Members
of the A.A.A. Science in the S.S. “ Governor Musgrave ” in
January, 1907.
The difficulty of obtaining reliable information from
original sources has induced the compiler to bring together
in a collected form the following notes confined to two .sub-
jects only relating to the Aboriginal natives of the localities
referred to in the heading of this paper. (1) Their original
numbers and the decadence of the Tribes; and (2) Their
burial customs. The particulars now published exist in
scattered and scarce publications, many of which are out
of print and not available to the ordinary reader. It is
singular that the greater portion of the statements em-
bodied in this paper are not generally known to persons
who have taken an interest in the habits and customs of our
aborigines, probably because some modern writers have not
regarded the matters of any importance, or that the facts
had been overlooked. The statements appearing herein are
from authentic reports published by men of science and
others, who had lived and labored amongst the two tribes
named.
THE ABORIGINES OF CAPE JERVIS.
Cape Jervis, called by the Aborigines Parrewar-a-ngg,
was occupied by a portion of the Narrinycri Tribe, whose
headquarters were on and around Encounter Bay and Lake
Alexandrina. It is the nearest point to Kangaroo Island
(Ku Ka Kungarr). No aboriginals how exist on this pro-
montory; it is therefore difficult to ascertain what their
numbers were when the district was first visited by Euro-
pean settlers in 1836. The Narrinyeri occupied a tract of
country which would be included within lines drawn from
Cape Jervis to a point about thirty miles above the place


where the River Murray discharges itself into Lake Alexan-
dria, and from thence to Lacepede Bay. They were
divided into eighteen tribes, and each was regarded by them
as a family, every member of which was a blood relation,
and therefore between individuals of the same tribe no mar-
riage could take place. Every tribe had its ngaitye, or
tutelary genius, or tribal symbol, in the shape of some bird,
beast, fish, reptile, insect, or substance.*
The Narrinyeri Tribes were responsible for the murder
of Captain Collet Barker at the Murray Mouth on April
30, 1831, which place he visited to endeavor to ascertain
the outlet of the River Murray whilst on his way from King
George’s Sound to Sydney.
It is to be regretted that no ethnographical map was
compiled showing the location of the various tribes when
this State was established.
The Protector of Aborigines, Dr. Matthew Moorhouse,
in his second report dated January 14, 1840, on the Abori-
gines of South Australia,t estimated the number of five
tribes which Europeans then had contact with, as follows:
1. Inhabiting Muliakki, Milner Estate (Port
Gawler) 20
2. The Wirra Tribe, or those inhabiting the
borders of the Para River 120
3. The Adelaide, or those inhabiting a dis-
trict from 10 miles north of Adelaide,
to the foot of Mount Terrible (Myponga) 80
4. The Putpunga, or those inhabiting the
southern coast from Mount Terrible to
Rapid Bay .. , . 90
5. The Ramong Tribe, or those inhabiting the
country from Encounter Bay as far as
the upper two-thirds of the Lakes, and
the Country of the Pomonda Tribe, con-
taining 230
Making a total of 540
*The Narrinyeri, an account of the Tribes of South Australian Aborigines, in-
habiting the country around the Lakes Alexandrina, Albert, and Coorong,
and the Lower part of the River Murray, &c., by the Rev. Geo. Taplin, Adelaide,
1874; Bvo. (Reprinted in The Native tribes of South Australia, Adel., 1879.)
tlmperial Papers Relative to South Australia, London, 1843, p.p. 322/4.


1/
1/ /
f 1
F /
/I /
7
1/ /i
A
Ly // JJ
X. • ■' ■ IV
V w.
«iiK 1
f 1 *1
*•■& jR&' ■ j3f * ■■■ ■
B|fPp/Y# Vi:A«
1' Aces ' y\* k \
If 1 ® A
r *-/» - :meW|F^aF-J
. t a I*' £,>.►%
Tk^
IIL. y
Tfc : , %P „ .*&■ j
;m.\ 4
[-Sr'' v . :*|llv i- *
g& .'U\ m
;’ ' jaKK v * «.• -^7t n '
Plate XXVIII.
Camp of Aboriginals of the Narrinyeri Tribe (Taplin).


The first four tribes (which are now extinct) he said,
spoke nearly the same language. It was evidently the
same originally, but the extent of the country belonging
to them was so great that it apparently caused them to be
separated when in search of food and allowed slight modifi-
cations to be introduced into the language. In his opinion,
the modifications were not more than obtained in contiguous
counties in England.
In February, 1841, the Protector, Dr. Moorhouse, in
his report for the second half-year of 1840, made the follow-
ing estimate:—“l venture now to state an opinion upon
the numbers within a certain area. I think we are ac-
quainted with almost all the Aborigines inhabiting a dis-
trict of 80 miles to the north and 60 miles to the south of
Adelaide, running parallel with the coast 20 miles; this
makes an area of 2,800 square miles, and in it we know
650 natives, or one in every four square miles. This
number I have seen and conversed with; but considering
their unsettled and wandering habits, I may not in my
journeys in the interior have met with every group, though
lam satisfied there are very few I have not seen. There
is the greatest concentration on the banks of the Murray.
In December, 1840, I, accompanied by the Rev. W. Teichel-
mann, had an interesting tour on the eastern side of its
banks and those of Lake Alexandrina. We there met with
130 in a distance of 25 miles. They have an inexhaustible
source of food from the fish so abundant there. They
treated us with great kindness, and supplied us abundantly
with such food as they possessed. We were anxious to
know what dialect was spoken there, and in four days ob-
tained sufficient information to state that it very nearly
approaches the Encounter Bay dialect. The duals and
plurals of substantives and adjectives are formed in the
same manner; and the personal pronouns, which are the
most important in studying the oneness of a language, differ
but slightly from those of Encounter Bay. When I ar-
rived in town I forwarded to his Excellency the Governor
a report of our journey containing a tabular view of the
formation of the duals and plurals of nouns and the pro-
nouns of the Adelaide, Encounter Bay, and Murray
Tribes.”
Various authorities differ as to the native population
when South Australia was colonised. The late Rev. Mr.


Jjt
v 1
_ I
|p|
—/ ‘
— r
/f
Esfa
- //
,/J
Plate XXIX. Ngunaitponi. Mimukulari.
Man and Woman of the Narrinyeri Tribe (Taplin).


Taplin stated that according to the most trustworthy evi-
dence the Narrinyeri tribes in 1840 numbered about 3,000
souls, and in 1873 he said there are living about 600 of all
ages. The tribe in and around Encounter Bay he called
“Raminyeri,” that is, the tribe belonging to the wattle gum,
an exudation of a tree, Acacia decurrens. Dr. Moorhouse,
in 1839, as previously stated, called the tribe “Ramong,”
and their number he estimated at 230.
As Mr. Taplin included no less than eighteen tribes
under the term “Narrinyeri,” no proper comparison can
be made of his figures with those of Dr. Moorhouse. Dis-
eases in various forms have evidently been the prime factors
in keeping in check the Aboriginal population.
The Narrinyeri tribe have a tradition that some sixty
years ago a terrible disease came down the River Murray
and carried off the natives by hundreds. This must have
been smallpox, as many of the old people now have their
faces pitted who suffered from the disease in childhood.
The destruction of life was so great as to seriously diminish
the tribes. The natives always represent that before this
scourge arrived they were much more numerous. They
say that so many died that they could not perform the usual
funeral rites for the dead, but were compelled to bury them
at once out of the way. I think that there must have been
more than one visitation of this kind judging from the age
of those who are pock-marked.t
Mr. S. Gason, when referring to the diseases of the
Dieyeri tribe of Central Australia, states: —“ ‘Moora
Moora’ is unquestionably smallpox, to which the natives
were subject evidently before coming into contact with
Europeans, as many old men and women are pock-marked
in the face and body. They state that a great number
have been carried off by this disease, and I have been shown ,
on the top of a sandhill, seventy-four graves, which are said
to be those of men, women, and children carried off by this
fell disorder. ’ +
Mr. G. French Angas also ascribes the limited number
of the aborigines to the ravages of smallpox. He says:—
“In the year 1789 the aboriginal tribes of New South Wales
were visited with the smallpox, which made dreadful havoc
fThe Narrinyeri.—Rev. George Taplin, Adelaide, 1874, p.p. 32-33.
JThe Dieyeri Tribe. —S. Gason, Adelaide, 1874, p. 28.


amongst them, and swept off incredible niunbers. , The
natives imagined that it was the infliction of an evil spirit.
It was this epidemic of which the natives of South Aus-
tralia speak; they say that it came down the Murray from
the Country far to the eastward, and almost depopulated
the banks of that river for more than a thousand miles. I
have myself seen two aged men from high up the Murray,
beyond the great North-West bend, who were deeply marked
with the effects of smallpox.”*
There can be no doubt that epidemics have contributed
to limit the original native population. Smallpox has
known in some instances to almost annihilate certain tribes
of American Indians, and this formidable disease when once
introduced among uncivilised people has swept over the
land like the blast of a furnace, slaying in its course both
young and old with frightful rapidity.
Mr. Curr has diligently enquired into the introduction
and ravages of smallpox amongst the aborigines of Aus-
tralia. His investigations are embodied in Chapter YIIL,
“Diseases and Decline of the Aboriginal Race.”t A perusal
of the evidence submitted by him appears conclusive that
smallpox, however virulent amongst the natives, is not epi-
demic amongst the Whites. If Mr. Curr is correct in his
statement that in no case had he read or heard of Whites,
vaccinated or unvaccinated, catching the malady from a
dark-skinned race and having it epidemically, it raises the
question of whether the Australian Colonies have been justly
or unjustly forced into Quarantine at considerable expense
and inconvenience when vessels have arrived with some of
their colored crew disabled with smallpox. It is not pre-
tended that the compiler of these notes has any scientific
knowledge in the matter, but from the interesting collection
of facts brought together by Mr. Curr it is doubtful whether
the Health authorities have been justified in subjecting
travellers to Quarantine, as has been done in the past, when
colored people only on the same steamers have been affected
with smallpox.
AN ABORIGINAL BURIAL GROUND.
On a high ridge about half a mile south of the Cape
Jervis Lighthouse there is an old aboriginal burial ground.
♦“Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand.” London, 1847. Vol.
11., p. 226.
f "The Australian Race.”—Edward M. Curr. Melbourne and London, 1886.
Vol. 1.


This elevation commands an extensive view of the coastline
and of Kangaroo Island, from Cape Willoughby to Kan-
garoo Head. The soil here is a dark sand overlying lime-
stone. In its pristine state it was well sheltered with trees
and shrubs, prickly acacia and casuarina predominating,
and was no doubt an ideal spot for an aboriginal cemetery;
the sand being several feet deep could be easily excavated
with the rude implements in use by the natives. At the
time of our visit only two or three straggling shrubs
and decaying trees remained, and these would, from their
present appearance, also disappear in a short time, leaving
this eminence exposed to every passing breeze. Even now,
there being neither grass, nor shrubs, to prevent the denuda-
tion of the soil, the drifting sand had left many bones ex-
posed to the action of the elements. Three of the party
interested in Anthropology made an examination of the
ground, but the only relics obtained were a few arm and
leg bones, although a number of skeletons in situ in various
stages of decay were seen. No method of burial appears
to have been adopted, as no fixed position was assigned to
the bodies, the bones of which had certainly remained undis-
turbed since their original interment.
AN EXTRAORDINARY CUSTOM. SKULLS USED AS DRINKING
VESSELS.
We were somewhat disappointed at the absence of
skulls, but found portions of the lower jaws and the teeth.
It is therefore evident that the natives of this district re-
moved the skulls before the ipterraent of the bodies. Mr.
George French Angas, in “South Australia Illustrated,”
published in 1847, Plate XXVII., depicting the ornaments
and utensils of the Aboriginal Inhabitants, says“ Figure
25 represents a human skull ornamented with pieces of shells
fastened on with gum and vegetable resin, used as a drink-
ing vessel by the natives about Lake Albert and along the
Coorong. It is said they generally prefer the skulls of
their deceased parents or other near relatives to those of
strangers.” Our examination of this little cemetery con-
firms the statement made by Mr. Angas, and establishes
the fact that similar customs prevailed amongst all the tribes
from the Lakes over the peninsula to Cape Jervis.
The first Annual Report of the Protector of Aborigines*
*See Imperial Papers ReNtive to South Australia, London, 1843, p.p. 321/2.


(Dr. Matthew Moorhouse), dated October 9th, 1839, also re-
fers to the use of skulls as drinking vessels. As the report
is of special interest in relation to the burial customs of a
primitive people it is reprinted in full. “In July and
August I visited several districts where natives were located.
I left Adelaide on the 23rd of July and reached Encounter
Bay on the 26th; I there met with three encampments; one
consisted only of 11 widows, a peculiarity that I had not
met with before; a second consisted of 39, belonging to
Rapid Bay and the Southern coast generally; the third
was the most numerous, having 116 of the Murray tribe.
Those from the Southern coast and Rapid Bay serve as a
connecting link between the natives of Adelaide and those
of the Murray River, as they speak both languages. They
differ little from the natives of Adelaide in their physical
structure or their habits. Their spears, wirrie, and other
weapons were of the same construction and character; their
huts, however, were somewhat better built and more cal-
culated to protect their inhabitants from wind and rain.
The Murray Tribes only visit that place during the whaling
season; they are superior to the Adelaide or Para tribes in
their physical development, more ingenious in making avail-
able apparatus for procuring food, but I am satisfied that
influences their constructive powers. On the banks
of the Murray they live a great deal upon fish, and they
have nets and baskets of a very superior character for the
express purpose of fishing. In their huts I saw no vessels
for cooking purposes, and the only thing capable of holding
fluids was a female skull; every hut contained a skull; and
on enquiring for what purpose it was applied they took
us to a well, filled the skull with water, and drank out of
it. There was another circumstance which took our atten-
tion ; the skull had in its cavity a quantity of dried grass,
which, as the water in that neighborhood was very impure,
acted as a filter. This mode of filtering the water is im-
portant for Europeans to know, especially when travelling
in the hot season and having to drink water teeming with
animalcules. On my road to Milner (Port Gawler) about a
month ago, I came to some water on a marshy place, and
finding numbers of animals in it I refused to drink, though
very thirsty. I had two native boys with me, and after
Ir.ughing at my ignorance in not knowing how to drink


without at the same time taking in the animalculae, they took
some dried grass, placed it upon the water, and their mouths
upon it, and then drank.
“The rites of burial differ, as well as the language, in
different tribes. At Encounter Bay I was told by some
settlers that the Aborigines wrapped the body in European
rags, skins of animals, or dried leaves, and then placed it
in a tree; after the lapse of two or three months it is taken
down and deposited in the earth. I Cannot say how far
this is correct. On the banks of the Murray I saw a male
corpse fixed on some branches of trees and placed over a
fire at a height of four or five feet. It had a singular
appearance. Around the head was fixed a bandage, pass-
ing over the forehead and eyes, and tied at the posterior
part of the head. Through the division of the nose a twig
or piece of bone was passed; the fingers were folded in the
palms of the hand, and the fist tied over with net; this net
w r as of considerable length, and after extending about a yard
from the hand was tied to the branches as if intending to
fix the body in the sitting position; the legs crossed each
other. We were told that the body would have to remain
there imtil the flesh decomposed, and then the bones would
be properly interred.”
One of the early Lutheran Missionaries, the Eev. H. A.
E. Meyer, who had spent some years among the Encounter
Bay Tribe, makes the following statement:—“They have
several different modes of disposing of the dead, depending
upon the age and sex of the deceased. Children stillborn
or that have been put to death immediately after birth are
burned. If a child dies a natural death it is carefully
packed up, and the mother or grandmother carries it about
with her for several months, or a year; after which it is ex-
posed upon a tree until the bones are completely cleaned
after which they are buried. Young and middle-aged per-
sons are buried in the following manner;—As soon as the
person is dead the knees are drawn up towards the head
and the hands placed between the thighs. Two fires are
kindled and the corpse placed between them, so as to receive
the heat of the fires and of the sun. After a few days the
skin becomes loose and is taken off. Such a corpse is then
called grinkari. This custom may explain why this name
has been applied to Europeans, from the resemblance be-
tween their color and that of the native corpse after the skin


1
to
«
c
'•CO
’C
o
Si
<
■a
ca
a>
T 3
O
to
<u
•a
o
Si
4»
A
•oo
c
2
o
E
CA
X
x
X
w
H
<
J
eu


lias been removed. After this, all the openings of the
body are sewn up and the whole surface rubbed with grease
and red ochre. Thus prepared the corpse is placed upon a
hut, so arranged that the head and arms can be tied. It
is then placed with the face to the east and the arms ex-
tended, and a fire is kept constantly beneath. It remains
thus until quite dry, when it is taken by the relations and
packed up in mats, and then carried from one place to
another—-the scenes of his former life. After having been
thus carried about for several months it is placed upon a
platform of sticks and left until completely decayed. The
head is then taken by the next-of-kin and serves him for a
drinking vessel; and now his name may be mentioned, which,
if done before, would highly offend his relations and is
sometimes the cause of a war. This may be the reason of
there being several names for the same thing. Thus, if
a man has the name ngnke (which signifies water), the
whole tribe must use some other word to express water for
a considerable time after his death.*
The author of the “Legend of Ooroondooil” says:—The
grass-tree (Xanthorrhea) is one of the most useful of the
indigenous productions to the Australian Native. It is the
sole means he has of obtaining fire, by friction of its dry,
pithy stalk. The “tear” exudes in the form of a gum-resin
amongst the roots of the leaves; also from the seed-vessels.
The whole plant abounds in resin and is very inflammable.
This resin, mixed with some other gum or dark substance,
makes one of the strongest cements of this description that I
have seen. The Natives use it for general purposes, for fixing
shell and glass on their battle-spears, and for cementing bits
of shell over the sutures of the skulls of their deceased rela-
tions, to render them capable of holding water, to which
purpose they commonly apply them.t
The next reference to the extraordinary custom of using
skulls by the natives is recorded in the Report of the British
Association for the Advancement of Science for the year
1844.
At page 63 of the Transactions of the Association, it is
stated that Professor Owen exhibited a human skull.from
* “Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of the Encounter Bay Tribe, South
Australia,” by H. E. A. Meyer. Reprinted in “The Native Tribes of South An*
tralia,” Adelaide, E. S. Wigg & Son, 1879.
I“S.A. Magazine.” Oct., 1843. Vol. 11., p. 334.


South Australia which had been used for the purpose of
carrying water; in fact, as a widow’s cruse. The absence
of the art of pottery was the inducement for thus using this
part of the human skeleton. The ancients, at their feasts,
were said to quaff their wine from the skulls of their ene-
mies, but he believed this was the first case in which it had
been ascertained that any part of the human skeleton had
been used as a domestic utensil.”
At page 77 a further reference is made to the subject
as follows:—‘‘The skull of an aboriginal of South Aus-
tralia, transmitted by Governor Grey as an example of the
habit of the tribe to convert that part o$ the human body,
into a vessel for holding and carrying water, was exhibited
Human Skull used as a Drinking Vessel.
by Professor Owen. He explained the mode in which it
had been made applicable to this purpose. After removal
of the soft parts of the head and the lower jaw, the bones
of the face had been broken away, with the partition and
roof of the orbits, and the cranial box was then suspended
by a neatly plaited net-rope of threads, made of twisted
vegetable fibres, passed through the hole made in the roof
of the orbits and through the foramen magnum, this sus-
pender being terminated by an ornamental tassel. Leakage
by the sutures of the cranium, especially the squamous
suture, had been prevented by pitching them over with a
native bitumen and cementing pieces of the nacreous lining
of shells along the course of the sutures.


“The exterior of this specimen of barbarous art was
polished, and the processes and other protuberances worn
smooth by habitual use. The effects of this were most
obvious on the external angular processes of the orbits,
which seemed to have served as the spouts of the vessel.
The aborigines of the tribe appear to have practised this
art from time immemorial; each gin, or wife, possesses and
usually fabricates her cranial calabash, with which she
fetches the domestic supply of water from the pond or river,
and suspends it in the hut or on the branch of an adjoin-
ing tree. They have no arts of pottery, and nature has
not supplied them with vessels from the vegetable kingdom,
like those which the cujete or cocoanut furnish to more
favored tribes.
“The Scandinavian legends tell of the ancient warriors
who quaffed their wine from the skulls of their enemies,
but Professor Owen believed the present to be the first in-
stance of the habitual conversion of part of the human
skeleton into a drinking vessel.”
If, as generally stated, the aborigines were averse to
mentioning the name of a deceased member of their tribe,
it is somewhat anomalous that the skull of a relative, or,
in fact, any human skull, should have been used for domes-
tic purposes in carrying water, where it would be constantly
before their vision. We have, however, incontrovertible
evidence of the use of the dead people’s skulls as domestic
utensils, the sight and the handling of which must have
recalled in a more impressive manner the existence of the
original owners than would have been made by uttering
their names. That the extraordinary custom of the Nar-
rinyeri tribe in using the skulls of their immediate relatives
as drinking vessels has not received more attention at the'
hands of ethnologists is somewhat remarkable, and it is no
less singular that the custom was confined to that particular
tribe of South Australian Aborigines. The Andaman
Islanders, also called Mincopies, generally considered to be
the most primitive and the lowest in the scale of civilisation
of the human race, appear to have also a gruesome regard
for skulls.
“ When a member of any of their communities dies the
Mincopie make little if any demonstration of grief. There
is neither weeping, nor wailing, nor gnashing of teeth. The
body of the dead man, while still flexible, is tied tight to the


knees and then buried in an upright position. After decay
has gone on for some time and the body is almost entirely
decomposed it is again dug up, and each relation appro-
priating any bone of the deceased he may be able to ob-
tain, they all commence howling over it, although so long
a period has elapsed since the death of their relative. If
he was a married man, the widow obtains his skull, which
she suspends by a cord round her neck, carrying it about
as a lugubrious kind of ornament, which for the remaining
period of her natural life is considered as a manifestation
of the affection with which she regarded her deceased hus-
band It is a curious fact that the slinging of the
husband’s skull round the neck of the widow is also a cus-
tom prevalent among the natives of Terra del Fuego.”t Sir
John Lubbock adds—The skull forms a very convenient box
for small articles.!
Since writing the foregoing I have been informed by
the Hon. John Lewis, M.L.C., that during his travels in the
Northern Territory he had seen the natives at the Alligator
liiver using human skulls as drinking vessels.
Mr. Curr also asserts that by some of the northern
tribes the skulls of the deceased are used as drinking ves-
sels. || I am unable, however, to find in his valuable and
interesting collection of original reports any confirmation of
his statement.
It is worthy of note that in the collection of utensils of
prehistoric man in the British Museum there is a reindeer’s
skull which was used as a drinking-vessel by men of the
Stone Age. This is figured in “ Harms worth’s History of
the World,” vol. 1., p. 140.
The Rev. J. G. Wood, in “Natural History of Man,”
p. 86, when quoting Mr. G. F. Angas as his authority, re-
fers to skulls as follows: —“Among many of the tribes may
be seen a strange sort of ornament, or rather, utensil,
namely, a drinking cup made of a human skull. It is
slung on cords and carried by them, and the owner takes
it wherever he or she goes. These ghastly utensils are made
from the skulls of the nearest and dearest relatives, and
when an Australian mother dies it is thought right that
+“Adventuree and Researches Among the Andaman Islanders,” by Frederic J.
Mouat, M.D. London, 1863, pp. 327/8.
I “Prehistoric Times.” Third edition, 1872, p. 437.
|| Curr. —“The Australian Race.” Vol. 1., p. 89.
146
A CRUISE IN THE S S. “GOVERNOR MUSORAVE.”


her daughter should form the skull of her mother into a
drinking vessel. The preparation is simple enough. The
lower jaw is removed, the brains are extracted, and the
whole of the skull thoroughly cleaned. A rope handle
made of bulrush fibre is then attached to it, and it is
considered fit for use. It is filled with water through the
vertebral aperture, into which a wisp of grass is always
stuffed so as to prevent the water from being spilled. ’ ’ *
“Inconsistency is ever the attribute of savage minds.
Although they consider that to convert the skull of a parent
into a drinking vessel and to carry it about with them is an
important branch of filial duty, they seem to have no very
deep feelings on the subject. In fact, a native named
Wooloo sold his mother’s skull for a small piece of tobacco.
His mind was evidently not comprehensive enough to admit
two ideas together, and the objective idea of present tobacco
was evidently more powerful than the comparative abstrac-
tion of filial reverence. The specimen exhibited in the
illustration was drawn by Mr. Angas from one which was
carried by a little girl ten years of age. Like ‘Little
Nell, ’ she was in attendance upon an old and infirm grand-
father, and devoted her little life to him. In nothing was
the difference of human customs shown more plainly than
in the use of the mother’s skull as a drinking vessel—an act
which we should consider as the acme of heathen brutality,
but with these aborigines is held to be a duty owed by the
child to the parent.
“Perhaps my classical readers will remember a chapter
in Herodotus which bears on this very subject. He finds
fault with Cambyses for breaking into the temples of the
Cabeiri, burning their idols, and so hurting the religious
feelings of the people, and remarks that he was wary in
offending against any religious sentiment, however absurd
it might appear to himself. He then proceeds to tell an
anecdote of Darius, who had at his court some “Indians
called Callatians, ” and some Greeks. He asked the Greeks
(who always burned their dead as the Hindoos do now)
what bribe would induce them to eat the bodies of their
dead parents, and they naturally replied that for no bribe
could they perform so horrible a deed. Then, in the pre-
sence of the Greeks he asked the Callatians, who ate their
•Natural History of Man.” Rev. J. G. Wood. Vol. 11., p. 86, Also,
‘‘The Aborigines of Victoria.” R. Brough Smyth Vol. 1., p. 318.


dead (as several savage nations do now), for what sum they
would consent to burn the bodies of their dead. They, as
it appears from the style of their answer, were even more
shocked than the Greeks at the idea of such horrible sacri-
lege, and would not deign to give a direct answer, but
begged Darius to “speak words of good omen.” (See
Thalia xxxvii., 8.) ....
“We now come naturally to the burial of the dead, and
the various ceremonies which accompany the time of mourn-
ing. Although the relatives seem so careless about the
sick person they really keep a watch, and, as soon as death
actually takes place they announce the fact by loud cries.
The women are the principal mourners, and they continue
to sob and shriek and moan until they are forced to cease
from absolute exhaustion. They cut their bodies until the
blood streams freely from the wounds, and some of them
chop their own heads with their tomahawks until their shoul-
ders and bodies are covered with blood.
“The reader will probably have noticed how widely
spread is this custom of wounding the body as a sign of
mourning, and especially as a lamentation for the dead.
We have seen that it exists in Africa, and we shall see that
it is practised in many other countries. That it was prac-
tised in ancient days by the people among whom the Jews
lived, we see from several passages of Scripture. See, for
example, Deut. xiv., I—“Ye shall not cut yourselves, nor
make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.” Also
Jer. xvi., 6—“ They shall not be buried, neither shall
men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make them-
selves bald for them.” There is also the well-known pas-
sage concerning the sacrifice that the priests of Baal offered,
in the course of which they “cut themselves after their man-
ner with knives and lancets till the blood gushed out upon
them.”
“The body is not disposed of at once, but is suffered
to remain for a considerable time, during which decomposi-
tion takes place, and is allowed to work its course until the
flesh is separated from the bones. The body is watched
carefully during the night; and if a passing meteor should
appear in the sky the people shout and wave firebrands in
order to drive away a certain evil spirit named Yumburbar,
which is thought to be the real, though invisible, cause of


death qnd all calamities, and to haunt the spot where a dead
body lies for the purpose of feeding upon it.
“When decomposition has done its work, the bones are
carefully collected, cleaned, and painted red, after which
they are wrapped up in bark and carried about with the
tribe for a time. This term being fulfilled, they are finally
disposed of in various ways, according to the customs of the
tribe to which they belonged. Some tribes scoop holes in
soft rocks and place the remains therein, while others pre-
fer hollow trees for that purpose. Sometimes the body is
placed in the cave without being reduced to a skeleton, and
in some places the soil is of such a nature that the body
becomes dried before decomposition can proceed very far.
During the Exhibition of 1862 one of these desiccated bodies
was exhibited in England and called the “petrified” man.
It was, however, nothing but a shrivelled and dried-up body,
such as is often found in very dry soils. . . .
AN ERRATIC LANGUAGE.
“As is the case with many tribes in different parts of the
world, as soon as anyone dies the name borne by the de-
ceased is no more mentioned. So strictly is this rule ob-
served that if another member of the tribe should happen
to bear the same name it must be abandoned and a new
name taken, by which the bearer will ever afterwards be
known.” *
Mr. Geo. B. Wilkinson, when referring to the death
of a Rapid Bay native, named Bob, says:—“As soon as the
breath had departed all mention of his name was discon-
tinued; and if any of the tribe were asked where Bob was
they looked as if they did not know who was meant; and
if further pressed, would earnestly request that his name
might not again be mentioned to them on any account
whatever, saying that if he were talked about it was not un-
likely that he would return and be very angry with them
for disturbing him. This is carried to such a length that
if another of the tribe be called by the same name they in-
stantly alter it, and it is not again resumed. ”t Bp. 338-9.
This is further evidence of the conflicting statements made
from time to time concerning the customs of the aborigines.
Still it is possible that the customs of contiguous tribes
may materially differ.
“Natural History of Man,” vol. 11.,' p. 89.
f “South Australia.” by O. B. Wilkinson, London, 1848.


Mentioning the Australian prohibition of uttering the
names of the dead, Mr. Eyre says:—“ln cases where the
name of a native has been that of some bird or animal of
-almost daily recurrence, a new name is given to the object
and adopted in the language of the tribe. Thus, at Moo-
runde, a favorite son of the native Tenberry was called Tor-
pool, or the Teal; upon the child’s death the appellation
of tilquaitch was given to the teal, and that of torpool alto-
gether dropped among the Moorunde tribe.”*
The change of language in Tasmania, which has re-
sulted from dropping the names of the dead, is thus de-
scribed by Mr. Milligan :— 1 ‘ The elision and absolute
rejection and disuse of words from time to time has been
noticed as a source of change in the Aboriginal dialects. It
happened thus:—The names of men and women were taken
from natural objects and occurrences around, as, for in-
stance, a kangaroo, a gum tree, snow, hail, thunder, the
wind, the sea, the waratah, or blandifordia, or boronia when
in blossom, &c.; but it was a settled custom in every tribe,
upon the death of any individual, most scrupulously to ab-
stain ever after from mentioning the name of the deceased—
a rule, the infraction of which would, they considered, be
followed by some dire calamities; they therefore used great
circumlocution in referring to a dead person, so as to avoid
pronunciation of the name, —if, for instance, William and
Mary, man and wife, were both deceased, and Lucy, the de-
ceased sister of William, had been married to Isaac, also
dead, whose son Jemmy still survived, and they wished to
speak of Mary, they would say, “the wife of the brother of
Jemmy’s father’s wife,” and so on. Such a practice must,
it is clear, have contributed materially to reduce the num-
ber of their substantive appellations, and to create a neces-
sity for new phonetic symbols to represent old ideas, which
new vocables would in all probability differ on each occa-
sion, and in every separate tribe; the only chance of fusion
of words between tribes arising out of the capture of females
for wives from hostile and alien people—a custom generally
prevalent, and doubtless as beneficial to the race in its
effects as it was savage in its mode of execution.”!
’“Journals of Discovery, &c.,” by Edward John Eyre. London, 1846. Vol.
11., p. 354.
fßoy. Soc., Tasmania. Milligan.—Papers, &c. Vol. 111., Part 11., 1859, p. 28L


The Abipones of South America (Paraguay) appear
to have had a similar custom. Martin Dobrizhoffcr, the
Jesuit missionary, gives the following account of the way
in which this change was going on in the language of the
Abipones in his time. “The Abiponian language is in-
volved in new difficulties by a ridiculous custom which the
savages have of continually abolishing words common to the
whole nation and substituting new ones in their stead.
Funeral rites are the origin of this custom. The Abipones
do not like that anything should remain to remind them of
the dead. Hence appellative words bearing any affinity
with the names of the deceased are presently abolished.”
It is also stated that when a man died his family and neigh-
bors would change their own names to cheat Death when he
should come to look for them.*
A FAST-VANISHING RACE,
Mr. George Blakiston Wilkinson, who lived in the
Southern district, makes the following statement regarding
the decreasing number of the Aborigines of this tribe; —‘ ‘lt
seems to be pretty general that where civilised man goes
the nomadic savages die off; and nowhere is this better ob-
served than in Australia; for during the short time I was
in that country I could perceive a great diminution in the
number of natives, and should say that they were less by
one-third than when I first saw them about seven years be-
fore. In one part a tribe of thirty or forty was reduced to
twelve or fifteen, and these had joined neighboring tribes,
so that as a distinct tribe they were lost. This was at a
part on the coast between Rapid and Encounter Bays,
called the Tunkalilla and Wipinga district. This I learned
from the blacks themselves, who told me that that was their
country, but that their friends were ‘ crack-a-back, ’ meaning
dead. In other parts the decrease has been great, though
not to the same extent.”!
Mr. E. J. Eyre’s lamentation of sixty years ago, gains
emphasis as time rolls by. He said:—“Of the blighting
and exterminating effects produced upon simple and un-
tutored races by the advance of civilisation upon them we
have many and painful proofs. History records innumer-
•Dobrizhoffer. —“The Abipones.” London, 1822. Vol. 11.. p. 203 and 273.
Tylor—“Researches into the Early History of Mankind, &c.” London, 1866, p.p.
145/6.
t“South Australia,” by G. B. Wilkinson. London, 1848. P. 321.


able instances of nations who were once numerous and
powerful, decaying and disappearing before this fatal and
inexplicable influence; history will record, I fear, similar
results for the many nations who are now struggling, alas,
how vainly, against this desolating cause. Year by year
the melancholy and appalling truth is only the more appa-
rent, and as each new instance multiplies upon us it becomes
too fatally confirmed, until at last we are almost, in spite
of ourselves, forced to the conviction that the first appear-
ance of the white man in any new country sounds the
funeral knell of the children of the soil.”t
It is impossible to stand on these wind-swept ridges of
Cape Jervis and gaze upon the mouldering fragments of
humanity without feelings of melancholy, which are accen-
tuated by the fact that the primitive people who less than
a century ago were the happy and undisputed owners of this
district have been civilised off the face of the earth.
Not even a solitary member of the tribe can be found
to tell the tale of his ancestors, with their weird and occult
ceremonies. Sad it is that our so-called civilisation is the
responsible factor. The breaking up of the surface of the
sandy soil, the disappearance of shrubs and grasses by th§
grazing of sheep and cattle, and the removal of trees by the
ruthless axe of the white man, assisted by every wind and
breeze that blows across this elevation, has converted what
was originally a little shrubbery into a desolate spot of
barren white limestone, which may hereafter, if for nothing
else, serve as a sepulchral monument of a departed race.
As to wfiien the interments of the bones were made it is,
of course, impossible to form any approximate data. Judging
by the various stages of decay of the teeth and bones seen
here, it is evident that long intervals elapsed between many
of the interments, ‘probably extending over centuries. In
many places in England where interments had been made in
dry sandy soils the bones and teeth were found in fairly
good preservation after having been buried for over a thou-
sand years. * Here the locality is well drained and the rain-
fall rapidly absorbed by the sand and the underlying white
limestone. While the bones are not near tlie surface of the
soil their decay is retarded, but when exposed to wind and
weather rapid decomposition ensues.
tEyre.—Vol. 11., p.p. 412-3.


Unless early steps are taken to collect and record all
available matter and material concerning our aboriginal in-
habitants it will be too late in a few years’ time to obtain
either. At Cape Jervis the bones will disappear in dust in
a short while, and no vestige whatever will remain to indi-
cate the last resting-places of the original owners of the
country. A few pounds judiciously expended in collecting,
illustrating, and printing the few facts still available would
be appreciated by Ethnological and other Societies through-
out the world, especially as it would, if placed in the hands
of a competent authority, record interesting and valuable
information respecting a dying race now rapidly becoming
extinct.
A little incident connected with this locality is nar-
rated by Air. Taplin in his work on the Narrinyeri. “Many
years ago some white sealers on Kangaroo Island stole
from the mainland near Cape Jervis three native women
and took them to the island. When the prisoners had stayed
with their captors a few weeks they began to cast about for
means to get back to their husbands and friends. At last
they found a small dinghy belonging to the sealers. It would
only hold two. Now, two of the women had no children,
but the third had an infant at the breast; so the two child-
less lubras took the dingy and started for the mainland
and reached it in safety. The poor mother left behind with
her babe must have pined sadly for her country and friends;
but nothing was heard of her for some time. One day the
natives found her body on the beach just above high water
mark, with her baby tied to her back. She had swum Back-
stairs Passage, and then, in a state of utter exhaustion,
crawled up the shore and died.” Her bones may now be
bleaching in the little burial ground which we had visited.
Who knows? The narrowest part of the channel between
Cape Jervis and near Hog Bay, Kangaroo Island, is about
eight miles across and the coastline is infested with sharks.
These facts were no doubt well known to the poor woman
before she attempted the heroic act which terminated the
lives of both the infant and herself. Unfortunately her
name will be unrecorded in history, but here is a theme for
an Australian Montgomery to immortalize this unknown gin
of the Narrinyeri tribe.
In this locality some months previously I found an
upper jawbone, but no skull, which evidently belonged to an


aged woman. A double tooth on either side had grown in-
side the jaw. One fang of each tooth extended over the
jaw between the teeth and had filled the cavities on both
sides where the teeth should have grown. 'I his freak of
nature was of special interest because from the length of
the unbroken fangs they must have perforated the flesh
of the cheeks during the existence of the owner, who had
evidently lived to a good age judging by the worn appear-
ance of the double teeth and their substitutes still remaining
in the jaw. This curiosity is now in possession of Profes-
sor Watson, of the Adelaide University, and although it has
been examined by experts none could say whether it be-
longed to an Australian or a Tasmanian native woman.
The possibility of the jaw belonging to a Tasmanian
Aboriginal woman is mere conjecture. It is, however, a
well-known fact that several Tasmanian native women were
kidnapped by the whalers and convicts who frequented
Kangaroo Island and Cape Jervis in the early days prior
to the founding of South Australia, and it is more than
likely these women would live and die with the South Aus-
tralian aboriginals at Cape Jervis, as no natives existed
on Kangaroo Island., In the jaw referred to the teeth were
discolored and smaller than those usually found in the skulls
of Australian natives. It may be interesting to note that
the aborigines of Tasmania were distinguished from the
natives of the Australian Continent by their woolly hair, re-
sembling the Negro, whereas the natives of the Continent
were all straight haired. Portraits of the Native Tasman-
ians first appeared in the Atlas of Cook’s Third Voyage, and
in the Atlas of Peron’s “Voyage de Decouvei tes aux Terres
Australes”—two of the latter are reproduced on the oppo-
site page. The two last Tasmanians’ portraits are also
reproduced by kind permission of Mr. J. W. Beattie, photo-
grapher, of Hobart. (See Plate XXXII.)
While this paper was going through the press Dr.
Ramsay Smith made an examination of the jaw and
teeth of the specimen referred to. He is of opinion
that it belonged to a South Australian aboriginal
woman, whose teeth were discolored and worn by chew-
ing a strong fibrous grass for making twine. This grass
grows along the sea coast. In the “ Legend of Ooroondoil,”
already quoted, the following note bears out the doctor’s
opinion :


nnK;
si
UmP- " * V
'■:
$|jjjfc - ;■
■'>§■, \\
i
mm?- ■’•' Ifijiik-' 1 ? IpPlb
' r 45. ’' mly $\m
11®' lli
* * ?** ■ ;^4- 1 ||f| . mL
\n».
Aboriginal Man of Tasmania. Aboriginal Woman of Tasmania.
Plate XXXI. (Carrying Child on her back.
Copied from Peron’s Voyages (1803).


**
jzMs&BU** -
1 l|||
■pHll Si&'
,rl
* iLUZ’ _*%&, dak** i'*f*
l^Wfe, *fe‘ Ipr
i
I w ieI.. .
J*- ' " if
—— * V?v «
**\ f ’
% : ' ST^'
wS&'fiiiip **H» V
{
WMkj0& W;. JP*'
■’ 1 n BKr .ffiBB
JVSk ..,-
» ■ >\
■ ' "■' ■«$&
"■’ -■•■ • vBfSpSpj^^^y^* r ? ’%’ f v■
:'«■ • V ■” * ■' ’
Wm. Lanne.
Trucanini.
Plate XXXII. The Last of the Tasmanian Aboriginals. (Beattie, Hobart).


“The natives make lines by letting a species of grass
or flag that grows near the beach macerate in water for
some time, and then separate the fibres by chewing it. They
then twist it into line by a peculiar motion of the hand on
the thigh. This twine, when well made, is a very strong
and neat manufacture” (“S.A. Magazine,” October, 1843).
No skeleton nor skull of a Tasmanian is to be found
in our Adelaide Museum, so that a comparison of the lower
jaw referred to could not be made with an actual specimen
of that race.
THE ABORIGINES OF PORT LINCOLN.
The aborigines of Port Lincoln were originally two
tribes —the “Nauo” and “Parnkalla.” Other tribes were
the Nukunnus, from Franklin Harbor, north-easterly; the
Kukatas, from Port Elliston westwards; and the Nganni-
tyiddis northwards to the Gawler Ranges. The last-named
seldom visited Port Lincoln.
To Mr. George French Angas* and the Rev. C. AY.
Schurmannf we are indebted for the early information of
the natives of Port Lincoln. The two tribes, Nauo and
Parnkalla, are nearly extinct. A few years ago a photo,
was taken of the only camp of aboriginals then at Port
Lincoln. (See Plate XXXIII.)
Mr. Schurmann estimated that each tribe numbered
about 200 souls. The Port Lincoln natives were divided
into two distinct classes, viz., the Mattiri and Karraru
people. This division seems to have remained among them
from time immemorial, and had for its object the regula-
tion of marriages, none being allowed within either of these
classes, but only between the two, so that if a husband be
a Mattiri his wife must be a Karraru, and vice-versa.
“The mode of burial observed by the Port Lincoln
natives is described by themselves as attended with many
ceremonies, which are, however, sometimes dispensed with,
as was the case with an old man, the only person that I
have seen buried. A pit about 5 ft. in depth and only 4 ft.
in length was dug; on the bottom some dry grass was
spread, and on this the body was laid, with legs bent up-
♦South Australia Illustrated, by G. F. Angas, London, 1847.
(The Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln, in S.A.. &c., by C. W. Schurmann
(reprinted in “The Native Tribes of 5.A,,” 1879),


c
o
u
c
3
ti
o
Pi
<-•
CO
OJ
X*
S
CO
p
Ih
CO
(U
<u
£
CO
ca
<U
xs
H
X
x
x
w
H
<
J
Ph


wards. The head was placed towards the west—a custom
that, I am informed, is always observed and is founded
on their belief that the soul goes to an island in the east.
The body is covered with a kangaroo skin and strong
sticks are placed lengthways over the mouth of the grave,
one end being stuck in the earth a little below the surface,
and the other. resting on the opposite edge of the grave.
On these the earth is put so as to leave a vacuum between
them and the body, and to form a mound of earth over the
grave. A few branches or bushes thrown carelessly round
the mound complete the simple ceremony.
After the death of any of their friends they assemble
and weep most bitterly, the females generally taking the
lead. The loud lamentations simultaneously poured forth
by them at such times may, perhaps, be looked upon as an
hereditary custom, since they always cry together and make
use of external means, such as rubbing the eyes or scratch-
ing the nose to produce tears, if the mournful disposition
of the mind should not be sufficiently affected by the
example of others. The cries or sobs are also at the com-
mencement of a wail rather formal and apparently forced,
leading one strongly to suspect that their desire for a
mournful frame of mind is greater than their feelings war-
rant. Still, lam persuaded that the natives feel keenly
and regret sincerely the loss of their friends, for these
reasons: —They lament their decease for weeks, and even
months, after the event. Very frequently, in the evening,
on arriving at their resting-places, when they are tired and
may be supposed to be in mood suitable for recollection and
reflection, one person will suddenly break out in slow and
sorrowful cadences, gradually inducing all the others to fol-
low his example. After a wail they preserve for a while a
demure silence and exhibit every other symptom of per-
sons in affliction. Never upon any account is the name of
the deceased mentioned again for many years after, not
from any superstition but for the professed reason that
their mournful feelings may not be excited, or, to use their
own expression, “that it may not make them cry too much.’’
If they have occasion to allude to dead persons, it- is done
by circumlocutions, such as these: —I am a widower, father-
less, childless, or brotherless, as the case may be, instead of
saying my wife is dead, my father, child, or brother is dead.
If a deatii occurs among them in the bush it is with great
159
A CRUISE IN THE S.S. “GOVERNOR MUSGRAVE.”


difficulty that the name of the deceased can be ascertained.
In such a case the natives will remind you of incidents that
may have happened in his lifetime, that he did such a thing,
was present on such an occasion, &c., but no persuasion on
earth will induce them to pronounce his name.” *
Twelve years ago the British Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science held in Liverpool passed the following
resolution : — 11 That it is of urgent importance to press upon
the Government the necessity of establishing a Bureau of
Ethnology for Greater Britain, which by collecting informa-
tion Avith regard to the native races within and on the bor-
ders of the Empire will proA'e of immense value to science
and to the Government itself. ” So far little has been done
in this direction in this State. The suggestion Avas that the
most effective and least expensive plan for such a bureau
to secure the information was either through the British
Museum or the Imperial Institute. As the former has an
extensive Ethnological collection with officers Avell versed
in Ethnological research, it Avas considered the bureau might
with advantage be attached to the British Museum. If
the officers of that institution Avould prepare and issue the
necessary instructions, suggestions, and questions to the
Directors of all the Colonial Museums something practical
would probably result. Every day’s delay lessens the op-'
portunities of obtaining the desired information.
* The Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln (Schurinann).


IN D E X .
Page.
Abipones of South America .. 151
Aboriginals, Burial Ground .. 138
Camps 134,158
Smoking Dead Bodies .. .. 142
Aborigines of South Aus-
tralia 132-160
Cape Jervis, Narrinyeri.. .. 132
Port Lincoln 157,160
American River 20-26,30
Andaman Islanders 145,146
Angas, George French 12,137,139,157
Anthropological Notes .. .. 132-160
Barker, Captain Collet 133
Barnard. G. H 49
Baudin’s Voyages 5
Birds, Notes on, by J. W. Mel-
lor 97,111
Boston Island 33,76,81
Botanical Notes Relating to a
Trip in the S.S. “Gover-
nor Musgrave” .. .. 112,115
Brown, Robert. Botanist.. 1,112-113
Burial Customs of S.A. Abori-
gines HI
Camps of Aboriginals .. .. 134,158
Cape Catastrophe 58-65
Cape Donington 65
Cape du Couedic 35
Cape Jervis 4,14,97,116,220
Cape Willoughby Lighthouse .. 6
Capper’s, S.A 10,49,70
Cawthorne, W.A 17
Christmas Cove, Kangaroo
Island •• 15,118
Copper Plate Tablet, Memory
Cove 57,59,61
Curr. Edward M 138
Dangerous Reef
71-73,106,108.110,125,120
Deeres, Do LTle. Plan of .. .. 36
Dieyeri Tribe 137
Dillon Captain (Le Chevalier) 68
Dobrizhoffer, Martin 151
Drinking Vessels, Skulls for
139,143-147
Page.
Emu of Kangaroo Island .... 43,41
Erratic Aboriginal Language .. 149
Eyre. Edward J 150,151
Fire at Government House.. .. 85
Fish of Kangaroo Island .... 45
Fleurieu, Comte de 5,6
Flinders, Captain Matthew. . .. 9
Monument, Stamford Hill.. 87
Franklin, Lady 85
Franklin, Sir John 2.85
Frenchman's Rock, Kangaroo
Island 18-19
Gascn, S 137
Gawler, Governor 85
Geological Notes by W. How-
chin 116-131
Giles, William 49
Gill, Thomas, Paper on a Cruise
in the S.S. “Governor
Musgrave” 1-96
Anthropological Notes .. .. 132-160
Hallack. E. H 51
Harvey. Dr. J. 8., Zoology of
Port Lincoln 88-92
Hart, Captain John 47,69
Hindmarsh, Governor 49
“Hobart Town Gazette” .. .. 24-8
Hog Bav, Kangaroo Island ..
14-18,30,97,118
Howard, Capt 54
Howchin, W., Geological Notes
116-131
Hutchison, Captain, R.N 96
Jervis, Cape 4 14,116,132
Jetty, Port .Lincoln 94
Penneshaw, Hog Bay .. .. 14-19
Kangaroo Island .. 24,51,99,117,131
Forest Trees of 32,33,41
French Chart of 36
Emu of 44
Birds of 100-102
Views of Interior 31-2
Geology of 40,117-121
Westall’s Sketch 25


Kingscote, Kangaroo Island
34,47-51,99.119,120
View of Old Site 48
Kirkby Island 73
Language, Aboriginal, Erratic 149
La Perouse 33,70
Legend of Ooroondooil .. 10,143,154
Leigh, Dr. W. II 34
Light, Colonel 29
Lighthouse, Cape Jervis 6,7
Page
“Register,” S.A 12
Reevesby Island .. 73,74 109,125,128
Salt Lagoon 47
Schuxmann, Rev. C. W 157
Seals on Dangerous Reef .. 72,106
Selwyn, A.R.C 12
Shaw, Miss 17
Skulls used as Drinking V es-
sels 139,143-147
Smallpox 137,138
Cape Willoughby 6 South Neptune Island .. 51,121,122
Neptune Island 52,53
Lubbock, Sir John 146
Maiden, J. H 1
Botanical Notes .... 112-115
Mellor, J. W., Ornithological
Notes .. 97-111
Memory Cove 56-63,105,123
Tablet at 57,59,61
Meyer, Rev. H. A., 141,142
Mountains in S. of 4
Moorhouse, Dr. Matthew
133,135,140,141
Mouat, Dr. Frederic J 140
Mutton Birds 54,102-103
Narrinyeri Aboriginals.. 132-137,153
Portraits of 136
Neales, Bcntham 83
Neptune Islands .. 51-55,102,121,122
Ornithological Notes, by J. W.
Mellor ~ • • 97-111
Owen, Professor 143-144
Pages, The Islets .. .. .. . • 10-12
Peet, T. H 70
Pelican Island, Poem 20
Pelican Lagoon 23,30
“Pelorus,” H.M.S 49
Penneshaw, Kangaroo Island 18-20
Pennefather, Mr 17
Peron and Freycinet’s Voyages
5,35-47,83,154
Port Lincoln 76-95,109,121
Aboriginals of 157.-160
Natural History of .. .. 83-94
Views of 75,77,94,95
“Sorata,” S.S 10
Sponges 47
St. Alban’s Cape o
Stamford Hill Monument .. 86-87
Stokes, Captain J. Lort .. .. 34,54
Stow, Mrs 19-2(J
Straitsmen 34
Talisker Mines 12
Taplin, Rev. George .. 133-137,153
Tasmanian Aboriginals .. .. 154
Portraits of 155-156
Language of 150
Telegraph Station, Kingscote 49
Thistle Island .. 33,66-71,105,123,124
Victorian Pioneers, Letters
from 69
Voyage de Decouvertes aux
Terres Australes .. ~ 35-47
Weir, Captain P 3,10
Wedge Island.. .. 96,110,125,127,130
Westair* Sketch, Kangaroo
Island 25
Whale Fisheries 68
Williams Island .. .. 55,103-105,123
Wilkinson, G. B 149,151
Wood, Rev. J. G 146.149
Woods, Rev. J. E. T 12
Yatala Shoal 10
Zietz, A., Notes on Dr. Har :
vey’s Paper 92-04
Zoology of Port Lincoln, Dr.
Harvey on 88-92
Mr. A. Zietz on 92-94
Of Kangaroo Island .. .. 41-47
162
INDEX






SURVEYOR GENERAL’S OFFICE , ADELAIDE A Vaughan. Pkoto-fUfwgrnf**-


■ •


SUBVFYOH GENERALS OFMCE ADELAIDE A Vaughan.. PUotn hlhogrofttirr


