

W
KM! L JF UykJf
in the finances
and development
■■ErSSSMS
j ■ v i£# <.kb- . . y vJ? Wgr ,-,-giMBfe ■» j « »-* t<0 . .• ■ MliaBfP^r
p g in,‘^fri^‘TP Jst - E
N VICE-CHANCELLORS’ COMMITTEE


€%/;\
iLLORS’ COMMITTEE
Professor S. H. Roberts, M.A., Litt.D. (Mclb.), LL. D. (Brist.), D. Sc.
(Econ.), (Lond.)
Vice-Chancellor, University of Sydney Chairman
Professor Sir Douglas Copland, K.8.E., C.M.G., M.A., D. Sc. (N.Z.),
Litt.D. (Melb., Q'lcl. and Harv.) LL.D. (McG.)
Vice-Chancellor, Australian National University— Deputy Chairman
Professor N. S. Bayliss, B.A. (Oxon), B.Sc. (Melb.), Ph.D. (Calif.)
Acting Vice-Chancellor, University of Western Australia
Professor H. Burton, B.A. (Q’ld.), M.A. (Oxon and Melb.)
Principal, Canberra University College
Mr. A. Denning, B.Sc., Dip.Ld. (Syd.)
Director, New South Wales University of Technology
Professor T. Hytten, M.A. (Tas.)
Vice-Chancellor, University of Tasmania
Professor T. G. H. Jones, D. Sc. (Syd.), L.C.S.
President of the Professorial Board, University of Queensland
Dr. R. B. Madgwick, D.Phil. (Oxon), M.Lc.
Warden, New England University College
Professor G. W. Paton, 8.A., B.C.L. (Oxon), M.A.
Vice-Chancellor, University of Melbourne
Mr. A. P. Rowe, C.8.L., B.Sc. (Lond.)
Vice-Chancellor, University of Adelaide
Secretary. Mr. A. j. T. Lord, M.C., B.Lc. (Syd.)
The Australian Vice-Chancellors’ Committee is a consultative body
consisting of the administrative heads of all of the Australian Universi-
ties and University Colleges. The main object of the Committee is to
consider problems of common moment to the Australian Universities.


C 2 DUS7
-J DEC 1952
THE AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES
ARE YOUR CONCERN
The Universities are destined to play an increasingly important role in
Australian development. Their future is a matter of grave concern to you
and to every other member of the community. Yet there is an alarming
degree of public apathy regarding their affairs. While they are accepted
as an integral part of our educational system, there is little public appre-
ciation of the wide nature of their responsibilities to the community.
Accordingly the Australian Vice-Chancellors’ Committee has prepared
this paper for the express purpose of drawing public attention to the func-
tions of the Universities, to their immediate financial difficulties and to the
need for a co-ordinated plan for University development to meet the
expected increasing demand on University facilities in the next decade.


THE FUNCTIONS OF THE UNIVERSITIES
(i) The provision of facilities in which learning and scholarship in the
various arts and sciences may be fostered to the highest possible degree.
(2) The provision of specialist training for the architects, engineers,
scientists, doctors, dentists, lawyers, teachers, economists, etc. necessary
for a modern community.
{3) The conduct of research which has the threefold advantage of;
(a) leading to the advancement of knowledge;
(b) indirectly maintaining the interest and vigour of the staff with
benefit to teaching standards: and
(c) providing trained research workers for applied research con-
ducted by such bodies as the Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organization and by industrial concerns.
(4) The preservation of our cultural heritage and of our democratic
traditions of freedom of thought and speech and the development and
exchange of new ideas.
Indeed the contribution of the Universities to society should not be
reckoned only in terms of the professional proficiency of the graduates
they produce or of the value of their contributions to research but rather
in terms of their part in determining and moulding our way of life.
IMPORTANCE OF THE UNIVERSITIES TO NATIONAL DEVELOP-
MENT AND DEFENCE
Within the next fifteen years the Australian Universities will be called
upon to supply an increasing number of graduates to implement the vast
programmes contemplated for national development and defence. Engi-
neers will be needed for public works; doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects
and teachers to meet the needs of a growing population; and scientists will
be required to apply developments in scientific farming if our national
food production drive is to be successful and also to apply technical devel-
opments to our secondary industries.
CAN OUR UNIVERSITIES FULFIL THESE OBLIGATIONS?
There is no doubt that the basic framework of our University structure
is sound but it is equally certain that the Universities have been sorely
over-taxed in recent years.
In 1939 our Universities were barely equipped with the essentials of staff,
buildings and equipment for the student population of approximately
14,000. Enrolments have more than doubled since then but Universities
have, owing to financial difficulties, been unable to increase their facilities
commensurately.
Consequently most Universities are in need of some new buildings;
modern equipment is necessary and additional staff will be required both
for new departments and to obtain a reasonable ratio of staff to students
in existing departments. Owing to the heavy pressure of student numbers
post-graduate work and research have been relatively neglected.


x 945
(15.586)
1950
(30.630)
1955 I
(3 1 .3°Q) |
i960
(39. 1 00)
1965
(47.5oo)
Given adequate resources the existing Universities will be able to remedy
these deficiencies and to meet the immediate requirements of a growing
community. But the problem is wider than that. Estimates indicate that
there will be a substantial increase in the student population after 1953
and it is necessary now to plan facilities to cater for the increased numbers.
The following chart shows actual student enrolments for 1945 and 1950
and predicted enrolments for 1955, i960 and 1965;
Increased student numbers have contributed to the financial difficulties
which have confronted the Universities in recent years. The other signifi-
cant factor has been the effect of inflation on running costs. Universities
have been, more than any other undertaking, the victims of inflationary
pressure since, unlike most enterprises, they are unable readily to adjust
their revenues to an increasing cost structure. The only revenue source
under their direct control is students’ fees and these comprise less than
one-fifth of University revenue. Although the Universities have made sub-
stantial increases in fees (in Sydney approximately a 181 per cent increase)
it would obviously be impossible to meet increasing costs from this source.
The Universities have consequently been forced to turn increasingly to
the Governments, both State and Commonwealth, as a source of funds.
INCREASING GOVERNMENT SUPPORT
As a result the University revenue provided from Government sources
has increased substantially. Whereas in 1939 the State Governments col-
lectively provided £330,000 for the Universities, in 1951 they provided
£1,860,000 for the same Universities and in addition the New South Wales
Government provided a substantial sum for the recently established
N. S.W. University of Technology.


The Commonwealth Government too has shown an increasing interest
in University education. Through the Commonwealth Reconstruction
Training Scheme it provided subsidies on running costs and funds for
buildings and equipment to meet the needs of the reconstruction trainees.
As the numbers of reconstruction trainees began to fall the Common-
wealth Government recognized the consequent deterioration in University
finances and appointed a Committee to inquire into the needs of the
Universities and in particular to report on their finances, their require-
ments in relation to existing activities and the need for their future
development. Subsequently as a result of a report of this Committee,
the Commonwealth Government enacted the States Grants (Universities)
Act 1951 which provides grants to the States for University purposes of
from £803,000 to £1,103,000 per annum for three years, depending upon
the amounts by which the State Governments are prepared to raise their
own grants to Universities.
THE IMPACT OF INFLATION ON UNIVERSITY FINANCES
Had costs and prices remained as they were in 1950 when the recom-
mendations of the Commonwealth Committee were formulated then the
increases recommended would have enabled the Universities to look
forward with confidence to a period in which they could have maintained
existing activities and undertaken some modest developments. It was this
minimum standard which the Commonwealth Committee had in contem-
plation when formulating its recommendations. It was hoped that the
funds provided would afford the Universities a breathing space while the
Committee conducted a long-term inquiry.
But since then costs have increased to such an extent that what appeared
necessary to achieve the Committee’s objective has in the event proved
inadequate. Since July 1950, when the recommendations were formulated
the “C” series price index prepared by the Commonwealth Bureau of
Census and Statistics reveals an increase of over 40 per cent. Each increase
of ten shillings in the basic wage alone costs the Universities collectively
more than £90,000 per annum while increases in the basic wage since
July 1950 have cumulatively cost the Universities some £BOO,OOO per annum.
The inevitable result of these increased costs has been that the Univer-
sities have had to modify their plans in order to keep within budget limits.
Consequently, the standards contemplated by the Committee have not
been attained and developments embarked upon by Univex-sities as a result
of the increased funds are now in jeopardy.
The chart opposite compares the relative change in University enrol-
ments and finance over the years 1945-51.
The chart makes quite apparent the lag of finances behind enrolments
over the years 1946-9 and brings out the fact that the Universities have
been unable to carry out the recommendations of the Commonwealth
Committee. Inflation has undermined the effectiveness of the increased
funds available so that Universities are now no more adequately provided
for than in 1945.


1945= 100
(TO ,
200 m v? ?? ftTt Ef/l
*Vl ;>7\ V,'/ Z;Z
Z *Z %A ZZ
150 fa —
I K i 0 0 0
IZ zz zz zz zz zz
z; y v»'/ ,■>// v'z / &*'/ *;•> / z>
ZZ CZ iv
V-'/y ► '.V V' /> Z' A *.v // V-\'/ ‘Z /
o iyz m nz m m m\
1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951
UNIVERSITY ENROLMENTS AND FINANCE 1945-1951
(Excluding Expenditure of Australian National University)
200
Student
Enrolments
Finances deflated
b y “C" series index
COMPARISON OF AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITY EXPENDITURE
WITH THAT OF OTHER COUNTRIES
Expenditure per student in the Australian Universities has been mark-
edly lower than in the United Kingdom. Whereas in 1950 -1 the United
Kingdom Universities spent approximately XA324 per student the Austra-
lian figure, despite increased funds, was still only £A 179 per student. Yet
expenditure on Universities in the United Kingdom is not regarded as
being unduly high. Indeed, despite the economic difficulties which the
United Kingdom is experiencing, Treasury grants to the Universities have
been substantially increased for the next quinquennium. During the last
year of the old quinquennium 1951-2 the grant was £Stgi6 6 million; for
! 95 2 ~3 the grant will he increased to _£Stg2o million and by the end of the
quinquennium the grant for general running expenses of the Universities
will be /Stg2s million. Clearly the United Kingdom Government attaches
considerable importance to the conduct of the Universities.
A table on page 15 in the main text provides an interesting comparison
of the expenditure on Universities in Australia with that of the United
Kingdom, Canada and the United States.
Expenditure in Australia is lower in each case and provides a measure
of the relative neglect of our Universities.


ACTION NECESSARY TO PLACE AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES
ON A SOUND FOOTING
(i) Increased financial support should be provided by the State and
Commonwealth Governments sufficient to enable the Universities to
strengthen the existing structure and to attain a standard comparable in
all respects with the Universities of the United Kingdom.
The level of assistance necessary to achieve this end should he the subject
of an immediate inquiry by the existing Commonwealth Committee.
(2) In addition the existing Committee or a new Committee specially
constituted for the purpose should prepare an overall plan for University
development so that our Universities will be in a position to meet Austra-
lia’s increasing needs.
The foregoing introductory statement has been included in the hope that
those who do not have time to read the following more informative state-
ment will at least be aware of the problems of the Australian Universities.
The following will provide more information on any point for those whose
interest has been aroused, or a source of reference on University problems
generally.


A CRISIS IN THE FINANCES
AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES
(i) INTRODUCTION
For some time the members of the Australian Vice-Chancellors' Commit-
tee have been gravely concerned by the ever-mounting financial difficulties
which have confronted the Australian Universities in the post-war years.
They also view with alarm the lack of anv co-ordinated plan for Univer-
sity development to meet the increasing demands which they expect will
be made on Universities in the next decade or so. From time to time both
this Committee and the individual Universities have sought increased
financial assistance, both from the Commonwealth and the State Govern-
ments, and in many respects the response has been very gratifying. The
fact remains, however, that the finances of the Australian Universities are
in such a parlous condition that the Universities can barely maintain their
activities at the present minimum level and unless something is done they
will be in no position to plan adequate developments to cater for Austra-
lia’s University needs in the next few years.
This paper has therefore been prepared by the Australian Vice-
Chancellors’ Committee for the express purpose of bringing before public
attention the problems and difficulties being experienced by the Universi-
ties. It is for distribution to members of Parliament, both State and
Commonwealth, to representatives of the Press and to other responsible
members of the community likely to be interested in the well-being of the
Universities. The members of the Committee are firm in the belief that
the enlightenment of the public regarding the problems facing the Univer-
ties will engender the support necessary for the Universities to surmount
their present obstacles. Briefly, this paper is intended firstly to state the
case for immediate increased assistance to the Australian Universities, not
only from the Governments of the States and the Commonwealth but also
from industry and private resources. Secondly, the paper is designed to
draw attention to the pressing need to plan now to meet the University
requirements of the future.
Before elaborating on the nature of the problems confronting the Uni-
versities, in the form both of immediate difficulties and the long-term
necessity of developing a University structure capable of meeting Austra-
lia’s increasing needs, it is desirable to outline the important part which
the Universities play in a modern community.


(2) THE ROLE OF THE UNIVERSITIES IN A MODERN
COMMUNITY
The primary responsibility of the Universities, and one which is gene-
rally recognized, is the provision of suitable staff and facilities in which
learning and scholarship in the various arts and sciences may be fostered
to the highest possible degree. An important responsibility of the Univer-
sities is the training of the many specialists necessary to the community;
the doctors, scientists, engineers, architects, teachers, lawyers, economists,
dentists and so on. The significance of the part played in all these fields
and in public leadership by University graduates is common knowledge
and needs no elaboration here. Suffice it to say that if we neglect our
Universities and fail to maintain teaching standards, it will inevitably
follow that the standard of the graduates of our Universities will deteri-
orate, and sooner or later the living standards of the community, and the
quality and strength of the nation will also decline.
But the teaching function, or the training of graduates necessary to our
pattern of living, is only one aspect of the wide service which the Univer-
sities provide for the community.
An essential adjunct to good teaching is research, and it is not surprising
therefore that the Universities have long been the home of a considerable
amount of research work both in the applied sphere, in the sense of seeking
solutions to specific problems, and in the fundamental sphere of pure re-
search— the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake. Unfortunately, in the
Australian Universities the amount of research activity has been restricted,
largely owing to the heavy teaching load unavoidably imposed on staff by
the increasing student numbers and also owing to lack of adequate funds
for research. More will be said of this later as it has long been recognized
that if University staff members arc to retain the inspiration and vigour
indispensable to high teaching standards and the proper conduct of a
University in the full sense of the term, then they must have a reasonable
opportunity to undertake research in their own specialty and some of their
number especially gifted as research workers must be allowed to spend
most of their time at this work.
Research activity in the University can be of particular value when it is
related to the problems confronting the industries of the area in which
the University is located, whether they are primary or secondary indus-
tries. The close association between the Universities and industry in
America affords a splendid example of the important contribution the
Universities can make to industrial development by research on specific
problems. There is scope for a greater development of this type of research
activity in the Australian Universities, both in association with Common-
wealth and State scientists in Government Departments and in organiza-
tions such as the C.5.1.R.0. and also, where overlapping is not a danger, on
their own account. The Universities too should provide the training ground
for the increasing number of scientific workers required in the C.5.1.R.0.,
Government Departments and other research organizations concerned
with the application of scientific knowledge to production in this country.


Mention has thus far been made of the part that a University plays in
the community by providing the facilities for higher education and for
research. It is unfortunately true that these aspects of University activi-
ties with their increasing practical application to the economy of modern
society tend to obscure other responsibilities less tangible but no less im-
portant. The true contribution of the Universities to society should not be
reckoned solely in cold statistical terms of the professional efficiency of
the graduates they produce or the value of their contributions to research.
The ultimate value of University education is measurable in much broader
terms than these.
What type of citizens do our Universities produce? Do our University
graduates leave their Universities as specialists with limited horizons, or
have they by virtue of their education gained a broader appreciation of
the part they should play in society? Are our Universities mere schools
of rote learning or does their atmosphere stimulate a thirst for knowledge,
the exchange of ideas and the development of new ones? Do the Univer-
sities keep alive the cultures of the older civilizations and foster our own?
These are some of the wider aspects of education at the University level
and it is upon the answers to these questions that we should to a large
extent base our judgments of the value of our University institutions.
(3) THE CHANGING NATURE OF UNIVERSITIES
This statement would be deficient without some mention of two factors
which are having a profound effect on the nature and structure of the
Universities.
The first of these, the impact of technology, began to influence the
development of the Universities towards the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury. This was naturally to be expected in the light of the developments
then made in the technological field. No one will deny that the technical
faculties have their place in the Universities, but considerable concern
has been expressed by University leaders, both overseas and in Australia,
at the manner in which the study of the humanities is being, so to speak,
“crowded out” in favour of the disciplines which offer a more immediate
practical return. This tendency, if permitted to continue, could undermine
the whole concept of University education, which has its very foundation
in a liberal rather than a specialized training. In short our Universities
could become narrow technical institutes and their graduates, though no
doubt competent in their own fields, would lack the broad education pro-
vided by the stimulus of study of the humanities and the exchange of
ideas with students in all fields of study.
The other important influence on the Universities is of recent origin.
During the period between the two wars there was a considerable exten-
sion of the opportunities to obtain a University education. The Universi-
ties came to be regarded as an open door of opportunity for all able young
people and less as a preserve for the privileged few. This trend is found
both in the United Kingdom Universities and in Australia, and is still
more evident in New Zealand, Canada and the United States of America.


The process has been greatly accelerated by the war and its aftermath
which have established an apparently heightened sense of social justice.
In Australia after the last war the University gates were thrown open
to an extent hitherto unknown to admit large numbers of ex-service stu-
dents under the Commonwealth Reconstruction Training Scheme. Already
ex-service men and women who graduated under this scheme are taking
their place in the professions and in other spheres, many with conspicuous
success. The value of the scheme to the nation became so apparent that
the Commonwealth Government decided to inaugurate in 1951 the Com-
monwealth Scholarship Scheme, which in effect greatly extends the oppor-
tunity afforded the children of parents of modest means of securing a Uni-
versity education. Under this scheme 3,000 scholarships are awarded by the
Commonwealth Government annually. As a result nearly 10,000 Univer-
sity students will eventually be enrolled in the Universities at the expense
of the Commonwealth Government; many of them will receive living
allowances throughout the period of their training. There is no doubt
that this scheme will prove a beneficial one from the national viewpoint.
It will ensure that the opportunity is provided for the best brains in the
country to be given a University education for specialized service in the
community.
But perhaps more important than cither of these factors has been their
indirect effect of bringing the Universities more than ever before into the
public eye. There is now a stronger public awareness of the contribution
which the Universities can make to the well-being of the nation, whether
during a period of peaceful economic development or in time of war. The
old “ ivory tower ” concept is fast being dispelled and the Universities can
now look forward to a greater recognition of their service to society and
consequently to increased public support.
These changes in the Universities have not been unaccompanied by
problems and difficulties in the Universities themselves. The Universities
have, however, shown their capacity to accept the challenge and to live up
to their increasing obligations to society. There is every reason to believe
that the Universities will prove capable of meeting the increasing demands
to be made upon them in the future but we cannot expect them to do this
unless they are accorded the resources necessary for the task.
(4) SHORTCOMINGS OF THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN
UNIVERSITY STRUCTURE
Even before the war, Australia as a nation neglected her Universities.
In 1939 our Universities were barely equipped with the essentials of staff,
buildings and equipment for the student population which was then ap-
proximately 14,000. Training facilities and equipment, with some excep-
tions, were even then outmoded and the Universities were prevented from
remedying the position by lack of finance. There were important gaps in
the academic structure, an insufficient diversity in the subjects studied,
lack of balance between the faculties, a shortage of scientific equipment,
and the teaching load on staff members was too heavy. Despite these
limitations the Universities did have to their credit an imposing academic


record, but by and large their work was confined to undergraduate
teaching.
There was a disturbing lack of post-graduate work and research activity.
Consequently students intending to continue their studies and take higher
degrees tended to think only in terms of overseas Universities, usually in
the United Kingdom, where the facilities provided were much better than
in Australia. Research organizations such as the C.5.1.R.0. arranged (and
still do) for their staff members to have additional training in research
methods at overseas Universities. Post-graduate work is, however, impor-
tant not only for the individual student but as a stimulus to the under-
graduate work being conducted in the University. The Australian Univer-
sities have not been unmindful of this, and though recognizing the fact
that it will always be necessary for specialists in certain fields to go away
from their home Universities to institutions having facilities suited to their
specialist fields, they have endeavoured to foster vigorous research activity.
In this they have had some measure of success but their efforts have con-
sistently been hampered by lack of finance.
This barely adequate structure was called upon in the post-war era to
meet what really amounted to a crisis in University education. University
enrolments which had stood at approximately 14,000 in 1939 increased to
approximately 25,500 in 1946 and then jumped quickly to a peak of 32,500
in 1948 as a result of the influx of ex-service students under the Com-
monwealth Reconstruction Training Scheme. The Commonwealth pro-
vided funds and the Universities were able to arrange for additional
buildings, often Army huts or other temporary quarters, and for some
additional equipment and staff. The increases thus made in buildings,
equipment and staff were insufficient to match the increase in student
enrolments. That the Universities under these conditions were able to
maintain high teaching standards was a very creditable achievement. It
was only possible by constant overwork and improvisation on the part of
University staff members. The strain has never really lessened. University
enrolments have remained at a high level and staff numbers have not
been sufficiently increased to ease the teaching load in all departments.
The additional funds which Universities have received have largely been
absorbed by the increasing costs of existing activities.
Consequently in most Universities there is very serious over-crowding
and often the buildings in use are unsatisfactory structures of a temporary
nature. Where temporary buildings are of a good type there is no doubt
that they will have to remain for some time, but the unsatisfactory ones
should be replaced by well-designed permanent buildings and we should
ensure that there is sufficient space for all departments. It is distressing
to see the poor accommodation provided in some cases for instructional
work, and in many cases for collections of specimens used in the study of
subjects such as Geology, Zoology, Biology, Botany, etc. Accommodation
for research projects being undertaken by post-graduate or honours stu-
dents or by members of the staff is, with some notable exceptions, often
unsuitable and inadequate.


Many of the Universities are in need of modern equipment, both for
teaching and research, to replace equipment which is really obsolete. It is
important that University workshops and laboratories should be provided
with equipment of the most modern type if our Universities are to be able
to take their place on an equal footing with Universities overseas. The
question of suitable equipment and research facilities is particularly im-
portant in connection with the encouragement of post-graduate studies
and research activities, and in both of these fields the Australian Univer-
sities, although they have made many improvements recently, still have
many shortcomings.
The reason for this apparent neglect of post-graduate work is to be found
in the general financial position of the Australian Universities over the
last few years. They simply had to concentrate available funds and re-
sources on undergraduate teaching; and research and post-graduate work
perforce suffered. Staff, too, owing to the heavy teaching load over this
period, have been unable to turn their attention sufficiently to research.
The pre-occupation of staff members with undergraduate teaching will,
if allowed to continue, have an adverse effect on teaching standards. Atten-
tion must now be directed to the fostering and building up of the research
and post-graduate activities in the Australian Universities to a satisfactory
level, especially as it is upon these activities that our Universities will
depend for their standing and reputation.
The inadequacy of present research facilities in the Universities can
best be demonstrated by the fact that organizations requiring scientific
workers (e.g., the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Or-
ganization) have to send University graduates overseas on fellowships to
complete their education. The Australian Universities should be should-
ering the responsibility of completing the fundamental training of scien-
tists in Australia. To some extent the recently established Australian
National University, which is primarily to promote fundamental research
and to train research workers, will help to restore the lack of balance
between undergraduate and post-graduate training in Australia. But this
will not he enough; the post-graduate facilities in the State Universities
must also be built up.
It is interesting to compare the level of post-graduate work in the British
and Australian Universities. The latest available figures show that there
were more than n,ooo post-graduate students working in the British Uni-
versities in the academic year 1949-50. This compares with 890 post-
graduate students in the Australian Universities; that is to say that the
British Universities have almost thirteen post-graduate students for every
one in Australia, compared with less than three undergraduate students
for every one in Australia. Nothing could illustrate more clearly the lack
of balance between the two fields in Australia. There is no doubt that if
steps are not taken to rectify this ill-balance then University standards
will suffer.
The provision of residential facilities is another aspect of the Australian
University structure which has been badly neglected. All University


leaders are united in their belief that some period spent in residence at
a University College, or a hall of residence, is of inestimable value to
a student. College facilities and halls of residence have not been enlarged
sufficiently since before the war to provide accommodation in an academic
atmosphere for students. Many students are compelled to live in lodgings
which are often unsuitable for study purposes and in any event do not
provide the student with the stimulation to thought and study provided
by contact with other keen young minds. The New England University
College provides an instance of the value of students being in residence.
It is the only University institution in Australia which provides residen-
tial facilities for almost all its students.
(5) THE CAUSES OF THE PRESENT DIFFICULTIES
We do not need to look far to discover the principal factors responsible
for the difficulties which the Universities have experienced since the end
of the war. The two chief causes are to be found in the considerable in-
crease in student numbers, of which mention has already been made, and
in rapidly increasing costs over this period.
Let us now turn our attention to the problems which the Universities
have had to face as a result of the impact of inflation on University
finances.
(6) THE EFFECT OF INFLATION ON UNIVERSITY FINANCES
(i) Income. Universities, in common with other undertakings, have in
recent years experienced very substantial increases in the costs of wages
and materials. Unlike business enterprises, however, the Universities are
not in a position to be able to take steps to increase their revenue auto-
matically to meet inflationary pressure. Owing to the nature of their
sources of revenue the Universities are indeed in the unfortunate position
of having to cope with the problems of inflation without recourse to the
normal business procedures of increasing prices or charges.
The revenue of the Universities is derived from four main sources. These
comprise students’ fees, Government grants —both from the Common-
wealth and State Governments —and endowment income. Students’ fees
while forming quite a valuable source of income for Universities, are by
no means as significant as is generally believed. Indeed, only a small
portion of the cost of a University course is met from this source. In 1939
students’ fees comprised only 26-4 per cent or a little over a quarter of
total University income, while in 1951 estimates indicate that this percen-
tage will have fallen to 18 6 per cent or less than one-fifth of total Univer-
sity income. Universities, for obvious reasons reluctant to increase stu-
dents’ fees, have nevertheless been forced to adopt this expedient in the
endeavour to make ends meet.
The University of Melbourne and the Canberra University College
increased their students’ fees by 50 per cent in 1951. The University of
Melbourne has since made a further increase of 25 per cent for 1952, mak-
ing an increase of 87 per cent for the two-year period. The University
of Queensland increased its fees in most cases by 100 per cent in 1951,
while at the same time the University of Tasmania increased its fees by


50 per cent. Since the end of the war the University of Sydney, whose
tinances have been in a continual state of crisis, has been forced to increase
fees by no less than 181 per cent.
The Universities cannot, however, look to further increases in students’
fees as a solution to their financial problems. It is true that the Universi-
ties will have to review the level of students’ fees from time to time in
the light of changing economic conditions but to endeavour to meet in-
creasing costs solely from this source would be out of the question. It
would involve raising students’ fees to a level likely to deter serious stu-
dents from undertaking or continuing their studies at a time when the
national need for graduates is pressing.
The next most important source of revenue for Universities other than
Government grants is endowment income. In 1939 this source provided
174 per cent of University revenue whereas recent estimates suggest that
now only approximately 5 per cent of revenue is derived from endowments.
The reasons for this are twofold. In the first place the yield on investments
of the type from which University endowment income is derived has by no
means kept pace with the general rise in prices. Secondly, while there have
been many splendid gifts to Universities in recent years, there have been
fewer gifts in the form of capital funds to provide income for general
purposes. It appears, to say the least, doubtful whether there is any pros-
pect of increasing funds from this source. Heavy taxation on higher
incomes has reduced the ability of public-spirited people to give practical
expression to their support of the Universities in this form. To a certain
extent the reduced volume of gifts and endowments to Universities is also
attributable to a new outlook on the part of the public. The Universities
have in recent years come to be increasingly regarded as a responsibility
of Government. It does not in fact seem unreasonable that Universities
should rely principally on the Governments, both State and Common-
wealth, to meet their running expenses. This does not mean that there is
no opportunity for private individuals to help the Universities. There is
still the vast field of capital needs for specific purposes, buildings and equip-
ment to improve the facilities of our Universities. The Universities should
always encourage private benefactions to help to provide some of their
capital needs. Indeed, the support of local industry and individual bene-
factors provides the University with a valuable stimulus and an incentive
to keep in close contact with its supporting local community, and in turn
the community should enjoy a pride in the achievements of its University.
There seems then little real prospect of the solution to the financial
difficulties of the Universities being found either by increasing students’
fees or by a substantial increase in public benefactions. The Universities
are compelled therefore to seek increasing support from the Governments
of both the States and the Commonwealth. A brief outline of the support
accorded to the Universities by the Governments, both State and Com-
monwealth, is given below but before proceeding, it appears advisable to
give some idea of the effect of inflation on the expenditure of the Univer-
sities and of the magnitude of the problem now confronting them.


Nominal
Rates
“ Real ”
Rates
Nominal
Rates
“Real” Wage
Adult Males
*939
1000
972
T 938-39
I0 44
1015
i94 6
1132
867
1946-47
*4*3
1087
1949
t 4 87
892
1949-50
x 9 r 3
1147
J95 1
r 975
901
Sept. Qtr.
*95*
2629
1200
(ii) Expenditure. The largest single item of expenditure incurred by
Universities is for teaching salaries. In 1939 the six State Universities
spent about 45 per cent of their total expenditure of approximated
£ 1, 000,000 on teaching salaries alone. This represented a not incon-
siderable portion of their total expenditure but since then the increase in
monetary terms has been staggering and teaching salaries now represent
a greater proportion of University expenditure than in 1939. Whereas the
six Universities spent in the vicinity of £450,000 in 1939, by 1949 the same
six Universities spent approximately £1,400,000 of a total expenditure of
a little over £3,000,000. By 1951 a further phenomenal increase had taken
place and the same Universities spent approximately 55 per cent (£2,200,000)
of their total expenditure of a little over £5,000,000 on teaching salaries.
Since these figures are so remarkable and teaching salaries are such an all-
important factor in University finances, it is worth giving them some
further consideration.
Part of the very large increase in the amount expended on teaching
salaries in the six State Universities is attributable to the increased num-
ber of staff appointed to cater for the greatly increased student numbers
in the post-war years. Since 1939 the teaching staff employed by the Aus-
tralian Universities has almost doubled.
The remainder of the increased expenditure on teaching salaries is
accounted for by increases in the level of salaries payable to Universitv
staff members. These increases were necessary not only in fairness to
University staff members but also to ensure that the Australian Universi-
ties would be able to offer to staff being recruited overseas salaries com-
mensurate with the salaries offered in United Kingdom Universities. By
1949 the general level of University salaries in monetary terms had in-
creased by almost 50 per cent over the 1939 figure. In 1951 University
salaries generally were reviewed and the increase over the 1939 figure
became almost 100 per cent. Yet, despite these increases, the level of sala-
ries in Universities has not increased in the same proportion as the income
of the remainder of the community.
The following table will serve to illustrate this point:
Comparison of the relative increases in the University salary level and in the
general level of remuneration in the community
UNIVERSITY TEACHING SALARIES WEEKLY WAGE-RATE INDEXES
Note: Base for University salary level 1000 in 1939. Figures for general level
are based on average three years ended June 1939=1000 and are quoted from
information published by the Commonwealth Statistician.


The table brings out the fact that while the real purchasing power
of University salaries has decreased by approximately 7 per cent the
real purchasing power of the income of the average male worker has,
according to the figures prepared by the Commonwealth Statistician,
increased by almost 20 per cent since 1939. University salaries not high
in 1939 cannot he regarded as being in any sense high now.
Other items of expenditure have also increased heavily. Administra-
tive costs, maintenance of buildings and grounds, provision of equipment
and materials for teaching and research, light and power are all very
much more costly now than they were in 1939.
There is one other important factor which is having a very serious effect
on University financing. That is the basic wage or cost of living increases.
Part of the increase in University salaries mentioned above is attributable
to increases in the cost of living allowance, but in addition to the teaching
salaries the basic wage adjustments affect directly the salaries of the ad-
ministrative and technical staff and in the long run affect all other costs.
It is estimated that each increase of ten shillings in the basic wage
increases the wages bill of the Australian Universities collectively by over
£90,000. In the case of the Universities of Adelaide, Queensland, Western
Australia and the N.S.W. University of Technology the direct cost of
basic wage increases is met by the State Governments, but in the
case of the Universities of Melbourne and Tasmania and the Canberra
University College, no such provision is made. The difficulty of admini-
stering those Universities where no provision is made for meeting the
cost of basic wage increases may well he imagined and there is a real
need for a new approach to this question in those cases. Even where such
provision is made the University has to contend with the indirect effect
of the basic wage and of other inflationary pressures operating to increase
the general costs of the conduct of the University.
(7) SUPPORT OF THE AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES BY STATE
AND COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENTS
There is in the capital city of each State of the Commonwealth a Uni-
versity of the conventional type. In each case these Universities were
established by the State Government and the State Governments have
rightly retained the prime responsibility for their conduct. In New South
Wales the New England University College was founded as a College of
the University of Sydney in 1938, and in 1949 the New South Wales Uni-
versity of Technology was established. This latter now has a college in
Newcastle. These institutions are also the responsibility of the State
Government of New South Wales. The important part which has been
played by the State Governments in the development of the Australian
University institutions cannot be overlooked and to them the credit must
go for the growth of the Universities to their present stature.
In 1939 the State Governments collectively provided approximately
£330,000 which amounted to 45 per cent of the income of the Universities
then existing. Rv 1951 this amount had increased to more than £1,860,000


University
Amount of Grant
Percentage of
Total Income
Sydney
£428,700
35-8
Melbourne
499,200
376
Queensland
248,339
43-05
Adelaide
226,500
45’3
Western Australia *
24 0 .347
604
Tasmania
130,911
512
NewEnglandUniversity College
90,000
673
for the same Universities, providing approximately 42 per cent of their
total income. In addition the State Government of New South Wales pro-
vided in 1951 the greater part of a budget of approximately £’730,000 of
the recently established New South Wales University of Technology.
The following table illustrates the extent to which Universities depend
upon finance provided by their respective State Governments:
Table of Grants to the Universities by the State Governments for general
purposes in igsi
£1,863,977
42-43
* The high percentage of funds received from the State is partly due to the fact
that no students’ fees are charged bv the University of Western Australia.
The Commonwealth Government too has shown an increasing aware-
ness of the value of the Universities to the nation. For many years the
Commonwealth Government assisted the Universities by means of special
grants for research purposes. These grants were made with the object of
promoting original research work and encouraging the training of research
workers. The Commonwealth Research Grant to the Universities gradu-
ally increased until in 1950 the Universities received £llO,OOO from the
Commonwealth for research purposes. The value of these grants to the
Universities was inestimable.
During the war the increased demand for specialist University gradu-
ates focussed the attention of the Commonwealth Government on the
necessity of ensuring that an adequate number of graduates would be
forthcoming from the Universities for all forms of national service. With
this object in view the Universities Commission was established in 1943
to advise the Government on manpower problems concerning University
students. A scheme of financial assistance for University students was also
inaugurated in order to attract the most able students into the avenues of
study essential to the maintenance of the utmost national effort. Work
was also commenced by the Universities Commission, in conjunction
with the University administrative officers, on the preparation of post-
war plans for what came to be known as the Commonwealth Recon-
struction Training Scheme. Under this Scheme provision was made
for large numbers of ex-service men and women to receive a University
education. The Commonwealth, in addition to paying the University fees


ol all reconstruction trainees, together with a living allowance, agreed to
subsidize the Universities to the extent of the difference between student
fees and the actual cost per student of providing the course. In addition
the Commonwealth also provided very large sums for the purpose of
providing buildings and equipment necessary to cater for the very signifi-
cant increase in the number of students over the 1939 level due to recon-
struction trainees.
Without this timely assistance from the Commonwealth the Universi-
ties would have been unable to make the C.R.T.S. the success it undoubt-
edly was. Indeed, the Universities still have a great deal of equipment
and many buildings which they would never have had hut for this
Scheme. Owing to its form the C.R.T.S. also acted as a valuable buffer
for the Universities against price increases. But as the numbers of recon-
struction trainees started to fall in 1949 and 1950, and consequently the
C.R.T.S. subsidies were reduced, it became apparent that the financial
position of the Universities would deteriorate seriously.
It was against this background that the Commonwealth Government,
early in 1950, appointed a Committee to enquire into the needs of the
Universities and in particular to report on their finances, their require-
ments in relation to existing activities and the need for their future devel-
opment. This Committee prepared and submitted a very valuable interim
report on the immediate needs of the Universities and, acting largely on
the recommendations made, the Commonwealth Government enacted late
last year the States Grants (Universities) Act 1951. In this manner the
recognition of the national value of the Universities has been given prac-
tical expression by the Commonwealth Government which, in doing so,
has come to accept some measure of responsibility for the future of the
Universities.
(8) EFFECT OF THE STATES GRANTS (UNIVERSITIES) ACT 1951
The enactment of the States Grants (Universities) Act has done much to
improve the financial position of the Universities. Under the Act the
Commonwealth is providing grants to the States, for University purposes,
of from £803,000 to £1,103,000 per annum for three years, depending upon
the amounts by which the State Governments are prepared to raise their
own grants to Universities. The Commonwealth Government already pro-
vided in 1950 approximately £500,000 for the Universities by way of
C.R.T.S. and research subsidies, so that the amounts provided by the Act
are not in effect all new money for Universities. The Act docs, however,
obviate the difficulties which Universities would otherwise experience
were assistance from the Commonwealth to decline as the number of
C.R.T.S. students falls. Estimates indicate that under the Act the Com-
monwealth will have effectively provided in 1951 an additional £450,000
for Universities over what was provided in 1950. In addition to these new
funds the Universities have, as a result of the inducement offered by the
Act to the State Governments to increase their grants, received from the


State Grants increased by
■ • £475> 000
Income from Students’ Fees increased by
225,000
Commonwealth Grants increased by ...
450,000
the States an estimated £475,000 more in 1951 than was received from the
State Governments in 1950. New revenue of approximately £225,000 was
also received by the Universities as a result of increases made in student
fees during 1951. The total increase in the income of the Universities was
then approximately £1,150,000 made up as follows;
£i,i5 0 ’ 000
But even this substantial improvement in the finances of the Universi-
ties has not placed the Universities on a sound footing or enabled them to
plan the developments necessary with any confidence. A large proportion
of the new money has been swallowed up bv way of very necessary salary
increases, the carrying out of deferred maintenance on buildings, the
appointment of a minimum of additional staff, and a modest provision
for research and for more equipment. These improvements were envis-
aged by the Commonwealth Committee inquiring into the Needs of the
Universities, on the recommendations of which the new Act has been
framed. There were, however, influences at work of which the Committee
could not take proper account and which have effectively precluded the
Universities from carrying out many of the improvements for which the
Committee intended to provide.
Since the preparation of the report on which the Act was based condi-
tions have changed to such an extent that what appeared reasonable to
provide for the immediate needs of the Universities at that time has now
proved inadequate. The "C” series price index prepared by the Common-
wealth Bureau of Census and Statistics has since then increased by over
40 per cent. This provides an indication of the extent to which inflation
has interfered with the financial provisions made by the Act. More
tangible evidence is provided by the fact that during the same period the
cost per annum of basic wage increases to the Australian Universities has
been no less than £BOO,OOO. It is not intended here to deprecate the value
of the Commonwealth assistance received; indeed, without this assistance
the plight of the Universities would have been a sorry one. It is necessary,
however, to emphasize that the provisions of the Act which had been
intended to provide the Universities with some means to remedy their
present deficiencies and to embark on new developments on a modest scale
have, owing to the effects of inflation, proven barely sufficient to tide the
Universities over their immediate difficulties.
Before proceeding to a consideration of the steps which should be taken
to deal with the immediate problems and the broader question of long-
term development it appears desirable to draw some comparisons with
the Universities of the United Kingdom, which have always served as
somewhat of a pattern for the Universities here.


(9) COMPARISON WITH THE UNIVERSITIES OF THE UNITED
KINGDOM AND OTHER COUNTRIES
In the United Kingdom, since the war, considerable importance has
been attached to the development of the Universities and to the part
which they can play in the nation’s future. Through the University Grants
Committee, which was first set up in 1919, the Government has voted
increasing amounts for the conduct of the Universities and in 1951-2 pro-
vided a sum of approximately XStgi6-6 million which amounted to over
60 per cent of the Universities’ income. Expenditure per student in the
United Kingdom Universities has been markedly higher than in their
Australian counterparts.
The following table provides an interesting comparison:
Comparison of Expenditures of representative Australian and United Kingdom
Universities
(Latest available figures: Australia 1951, United Kingdom 1950-1)
Full-time Total Expenditure
Equivalent Expenditure per student
Students £A £A
Sydney 7,544 1,216,268 161
Melbourne .. 6,603 1,160,257 176
Adelaide 1 3,140 476,591 \ 152
Queensland 2,881 567,864 197
Western Australia .. .. 1,358 326,128 240
Tasmania 447 438
Total Australian Universities 26,374 4,720,590 179
Birmingham 3408 1,236,832 363
Bristol 2,655 1,128,379 425
Leeds 3,453 1,214,346 352
Manchester- 4,677 1,469,169 314
Nottingham 2,199 562,626 256
Sheffield 2,120 736,039 347
Edinburgh 5,856 1,336,509 228
Total U.K. Universities . . 93,663 3°,337,365 324
1 Includes Waite Agricultural Institute.
2 Does not include Manchester College of Technology.
Notes: For purposes of comparison all expenditures are expressed in £A. The
figure for full-time equivalent students has been calculated counting a full-course
or full-time student as one student unit and a part-course, part-time or external
student as a half-student unit.
The above table must be used carefully as it ignores the differing spread
of faculties in the different Universities, a factor which of course has a con-
siderable influence on the cost per student. Cost per student is also affected
to a great extent by the size of the University. Thus it is not surprising
that in a small University, such as the University of Tasmania which has
a wide spread of faculties, the expenditure per student is relatively high.


J952-53
20,000,000
1 953-54
21,000,000
1954-55
22,250,000
1 955-56
23,500,000
1 956-57
25,000,000
A more significant comparison is obtained by referring to the average
expenditure per student in the Australian Universities, which in 1951 was
per student, whereas the United Kingdom Universities had an
average expenditure of iA.324 per student.
Yet the level of expenditure of the United Kingdom Universities is not
regarded as being in any sense high and despite the period of economic
stringency which the United Kingdom is experiencing the Chancellor of
the Exchequer has recently announced increased grants for the Universi-
ties over the next quinquennial period. These are as follows:
These grants compare with £StgB-85 million in 1947-48, the first year of
the last quinquennium, and £Stgi66 million for the year 1951-52, the last
year. The last quinquennium witnessed a substantial increase in student
numbers but it is anticipated that student numbers in Great Britain will
remain at approximately the present level during the next five years. The
increased grants are not to meet the needs of increased student numbers
but to provide increasing resources so that the cost of inflation can be met
and some modest developments can be undertaken. How much more do
our Universities need some assurance regarding increased financial re-
sources when faced with the certain knowledge that student enrolments
and the demand for graduates will increase substantially in the next few
years?
A further indication of the extent to which the scale of University
expenditure in Australia is lagging behind other countries is provided by
the following table;
Comparison of amount spent on current running costs of the Universities
United United
Kingdom States Canada Australia
(^So-S 1 ) (! 946-47) ( r 9s°) ( I 95 I )
Total running costs of Universities m - $l,OOO m. $4O m. /A 4 7 m
Amount per head of population
(Australian currency) .. .. 12s. £3 £i .ss. ns.
Percentage of National Income 21 136 31 15
It is disturbing to realize that expenditure in Australia on the Univer-
sities is so far behind the expenditure on University education in each of
these other countries of similar culture to our own. The more so when
account is taken of the fact that the demand for University graduates
will be heightened in the next few years by the stage of development of
the Australian economy and by the immigration programme.


(io) INCREASING DEMANDS TO BE MADE ON THE AUSTRALIAN
UNIVERSITIES WITHIN THE NEXT FIFTEEN YEARS
(i) Increasing student numbers. It is not possible to forecast with full
confidence the trend of University enrolments but estimates based on the
number of persons reaching University age each year and on the propor-
tion of these possessed of the ability to complete a University course, indi-
cate that enrolments may in 1953 fall a little below their present level of
approximately 29,400. After that enrolments should steadily rise until in
i960 they should reach a figure of approximately 40,000. By this time
student numbers will be increasing by more than 2,000 each year as
a result of the higher birth-rate during the war years and, to some extent,
of the immigration programme. The full effect of the immigration pro-
gramme will not, however, be felt until the middle 1960’5. Another factor
which is likely to affect future student enrolments is the increasing extent
to which South-East Asian countries are looking to Australian Universi-
ties as training grounds for the University graduates essential to the
development of their countries. Australia is committed under the Com-
monwealth Technical Co-operation Scheme to provide opportunities for
students from South-East Asia, and already there are many students wiio
have come to Australia under the scheme. In addition to these students
there has been an increasing number of students coming from South-East
Asian countries to complete University courses at their own expense. In
broad terms we can expect that by 1965 the Australian Universities will
require facilities sufficient to cater for a student population of perhaps
50,000 or three to four times the pre-war figure.
(ii) Increasing demand for University graduates. The other aspect of
the call which will be made on the Australian Universities is the national
need to provide the graduates essential to the development of the Aus-
tralian economy. While Australia is facing a period of peace-time develop-
ment geared to the demands of a large-scale immigration programme,
and at the same time is confronted with the necessity to provide for an
adequate defence programme, there can be no slackening in the demand
for University graduates in all fields. Engineers will be needed to under-
take the great developmental works which have been planned; doctors,
lawyers, dentists, architects, teachers to provide for the needs of a rapidly
expanding population; scientists to ensure that the latest developments in
agriculture and technology are applied without delay to our primary and
secondary industries. A comparison of the present number of teachers
trained each year, namely 2,500, with the future requirement of 4,000 each
year, provides a practical indication of the magnitude of the problem.


(ii) WHAT SHOULD BE DONE TO PLACE THE AUSTRALIAN
UNIVERSITIES ON A SOUND FOOTING?
(i) Steps immediately necessary. A first essential to any programme for
the development of the Australian Universities is the eradication of the
weaknesses existing in the present University institutions. In order to
accomplish this increased financial support for the Universities hy both
State and Commonwealth Governments will be necessary. Sufficient sup-
port should be accorded to the Universities for them to attain a com-
parable level of activity, both in teaching and research, to the Universities
of the United Kingdom. This should not prove a difficult task, provided
the funds are made available, for the framework is already there.
To implement this proposal the already constituted Commonwealth
Committee should proceed immediately to review the level of Common-
wealth assistance to Universities paying regard to the effect of inflation
on the funds provided. This Committee should be asked to prepare a
public report for the guidance of both the Commonwealth and State
Governments on the matter of University finance. Action should then be
taken by the Governments to ensure that sufficient resources are available
to the Universities to enable them to establish a reasonable ratio of staff
to students, develop post-graduate and research activities and embark on
modest developments designed to fill the gaps in the academic structure.
(ii) Need for a plan for long-term development. The development of the
existing Universities alone, however, will not suffice to meet the rapidly
increasing demands of the next few years. Already the Universities of
Sydney and Melbourne may be beyond the optimum size for a University.
They are, for example, already almost twice the size of the large provincial
Universities in the United Kingdom. It therefore appears necessary that
future University development should take the form of new University
institutions, at least in New South Wales and Victoria, rather than the
undue expansion of existing Universities.
Just what form the new institutions should take and where they should
be located are matters of national significance. The existing Universities
with increased financial support can cater for the immediate demands but
steps must be initiated now to plan the esablishment of the new institu-
tions which will undoubtedly prove necessary towards the end of this
decade. Many years must elapse before blueprints can he turned into
buildings, the necessary staff must be available, courses need to be planned
ahead. Indeed, the time is now ripe for the formulation of a really
balanced programme of University development to meet Australia’s needs
for the next few years.
The State Governments have always carried the primary responsibility
for their respective Universities. This practice has been beneficial in ensur-
ing a maximum of local interest in the Universities on the one hand and
providing on the other the best opportunity for the University to assist
with the development of the region. While it appears desirable for the
States to retain this responsibility it does appear necessary for plans for


■
ilie future development of University facilities to be prepared on a national
rather than a regional basis.
With this object the existing Committee (or a new Committee appointed
for the task) should proceed with a long-term inquiry and prepare an over-
all plan for University development to meet future needs. The opportunity
should also be taken during this inquiry to eliminate the financial uncer-
tainty which has continually interfered with planning by the Universi-
ties. Australian Universities have always been limited in their capacity
to plan ahead by the fact that their finances are provided on an annual
basis. Every endeavour should now be made to provide University finances
over a period of three to five years. This would accord with the practice in
the United Kingdom where the University Grants Committee allocates
Treasury grants to the Universities on a quinquennial basis, the Universi-
ties thus being enabled to plan ahead knowing the extent of the resources
which will be available to them.
(12) NOW IS THE TIME FOR ACTION
There will be those who, though they agree with the value of an effec-
tive University structure, will nevertheless consider that the task should
be deferred until times are better. This would be a grave error. The Uni-
versities are an essential clement in our developmental programme.
The United Kingdom with much graver financial difficulties than our
own has voted increasing amounts to her Universities since the war.
Indeed in June 1948 Sir Stafford Cripps admirably stated the case when
he said:
“The darkness of the economic outlook gives no ground for economy in
the sphere of University grants. The Universities have a great contri-
bution to make towards national economic recovery. We look to them
to continue with unabated vigour the search for new knowledge and
the education of increased numbers of young men and women from all
classes of the community. For it is on the advances made in scientific
knowledge and on the energy, initiative, directive capacity and cour-
age of these young graduates that the economic future of the country
will largely depend.”


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Melbourne University Press, Carlton, N. 3, Victoria


