

TH
3leUC>
A CUSTOMS UNION FOR
AUSTRALASIA.
Jl faptt
Bead at the Confekence of Delegates feom the respective Chambebs
or Commerce and Manufactures, on Monday, 23bd July, 1883,
HUGH R. REID, Esq
MEMBERS OF
Representatives
of THE
of ftcrmmem.
JOHN BLYTH, Esq., President.
P. S. GRIMWADE, Esq.
H. R. REID, Esq.
J. M. BRUCE, Esq.
ANDREW NEWELL, Esq.
W. W. COUCHE, Esq.
Joint
W. H. C. DARVALL, Esq,
CONFERENCE.
Representatives
OF THE
of Iprafaxtem.
J. B. WHITTY, Esq., President.
DANIEL WHITE, Esq.
PHILIP BLASHKI, Esq.
DAVID MUNRO, Esq.
FRANK STUART, Esq.
GEORGE FINCHAM, Esq.
Secretaries
and J. H. HAYDON, Esq.
HWbonme:
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West.
mdccclxxxiii.




A CUSTOMS UNION FOR
AUSTRALASIA.
sapci* |Xcab
To the Members op the Conference of Delegates from the Chambers
op Commerce and Manufactures,
HUGH R. REID, ESQ.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
When with the aid of the iron horse New South
Welshmen and Victorians are shaking hands with one another across
the border, protesting that the days of unfriendly jealousy are over,
and that henceforward they will remain bound together in the bonds
of brotherly amity, it seems in accordance with the fitness of things
that a Conference of matter-of-fact merchants and manufacturers,
removed by a good many miles from the glamour surrounding a
combination banquet, should endeavour to find out if anything can
be done to prevent these goodwill greetings passing resultless away
with the garish decorations and profuse hospitality under whose
influences they were uttered.
If we can imagine some bright stranger or intelligent foreigner,
fresh from Empyrean space, visiting our shores, and studying so
sublunary a subject as customs tariffs, it would be no stretch of
imagination for us to assume that the predominant feeling pervading
his visit would be one of extreme surprise to find that a contingent
of energetic intelligent Englishmen, speaking the language of Shaks-
peare and Milton, whose mission it was to found a vast southern
empire, should make it their special object, their crowning piece of
statesmanship, to devise such hostile tariffs as to cause bitter wrang-
lings and undignified reprisals, finally resulting in the beneficent and
fertilising Murray proving a barrier as effective as the great wall of
China to the elevating influences of civilising commerce.
Here, if anywhere, our visitor might say the golden age of poets
should be ushered into existence, for nowhere has the kindly mother
England offered to her sons a nobler heritage ; nowhere has man the
worker had brought within his reach so many rich fruits and diversi-
fied products.
But there is no poetry in the perpetual struggle for pre-eminence
which characterises commercial life, and we are afraid that the


business men of the colonies, instead of following the Scriptural
precept, have rather carried out the Stock Exchange commandment
of endeavouring to “ do” others, for they will be sure to try and
“do” you.
Indeed, it is only simple truth to assert that the policy which has
permeated our various customs tariffs can justly be designated as
exasperating and disintegrating.
It is in the belief that all ranks and conditions of men are
becoming more and more impressed with the unwisdom of these
internecine jealousies, are beginning to think that by losing a little
they will be gaining a great deal, if the various colonies can be in-
duced to come into closer association one with the other, that I have
now the honour of addressing you.
Some writers have argued that a federation of the Australian
colonies must precede any attempt to form a customs union, but I
take entirely the contrary view. So many large and intricate sub-
jects are mixed up with the question of federation (the re-arrangement
of boundaries not being the least important) which would not enter
into the discussion of a customs union, that I look upon federation
as at present simply a dream of the future, whereas a uniform tariff
for this continent, with a division according to population, is to me
within “measurable distance” if our leading public men were sup-
ported by an intelligent public, content to think not merely of the
individual interest, but desirous of acting up to the axiom of “ The
greatest good for the greatest number.”
Suppose the electors of New South Wales and Victoria were
content to leave the framing of a common tariff for both these great
colonies to their present Premiers, can any one doubt that these two
statesmen, having mercantile education, large experience, and quick
comprehension, would not produce in a few hours a revised list of
duties which would be satisfactory to themselves ? but are we not at
the same time morally certain that the very day Mr. Service pro-
posed to the wisdom of Parliament the tariff which we believe would
meet his own matured views, that very day he would be deposed to
the cry of “ protection in danger,” and chaos would come again ?
The desirability of introducing a customs union amongst the
colonies has been discussed again and again.
In 1863 a Conference was held in Melbourne, which was attended
by representatives of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
and Tasmania, and resulted in the following resolutions being
passed :
1. “That this Conference deems it desirable to settle the basis of
a uniform tariff for the Australian colonies, and also for Tasmania.”


“ That this Conference is of opinion that the ad valorem mode of
levying duties upon goods is open to so many objections that it ought
not to be resorted to.”
“ That the following tariff be adopted by this Conference :
Spirits, imported, 10s. per gallon ; wine, in wood, 2s. do.; do., in
bottle, reputed quarts, Bs. per dozen ; do. do. do., pints, 4s. do.; ale,
porter, and beer, in wood, 6d. per gallon ; do. do. do., in bottle,
reputed quarts, Is. per dozen ; do. do. do., in bottle, reputed pints,
6d. per dozen ; malt, 6d. per bushel ; hops, 3d. per lb.; tobacco,
manufactured, 2s. do.; do., unmanufactured, Is. do.; do., sheepwash,
3d. do.; cigars and snuff, 4s. do.; tea, 6d. do.; sugar, refined, and
candy, 7s. per cwt.; do., unrefined, ss. fid. do.; molasses and treacle,
3s. fid. do.; coffee, chicory, cocoa, and chocolate, 3d. per lb.; opium,
manufactured, 20s. do.; do., unmanufactured, 10s. do.; rice, 4s. per
cwt.; dried fruits, nuts, and almonds, 10s. do.; candles, Id. per lb.;
oils, whether of natural or of artificial origin, and fluids used for
burning or lighting purposes, fid. per gallon ; salt, 40s. per ton.”
“ That the members of this Conference undertake to urge upon
their respective Parliaments the adoption of such tariff.”
“ That, in the opinion of this Conference, the tariff, which has
been agreed upon after the fullest deliberation, ought not to be
altered by any one colony, nor until after the proposed alteration
shall have been considered in a future Conference.”
“ That drawbacks be allowed on the following articles—viz.,
wines, hops, tea, sugar, rice, coffee, chicory, cocoa and chocolate,
left-open ale, beer, porter, candles, and oil.”
2. On intercolonial customs duties and their distribution—
“ That, in the opinion of this Conference, customs duties ought to
be paid to the revenues of those colonies by whose population the
dutiable articles are consumed.”
“ That this Conference is of opinion that the colonies of New
South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia ought to co-operate
with each other to secure to each colony the revenue to which it is
entitled, either by the distribution of the customs revenues collected by
all at stated periods rateably, according to their population, or by some
other mode which may be considered equitable and practicable.”
No parliamentary action followed, and in 1870 another Conference
was held in Melbourne, at which the same colonies were again repre-
sented, but with the same fruitless result. The following minutes
will show which colony was responsible for the fiasco. The first is
from the pen of the Hon. J. G. Francis, the then Treasurer of
Victoria :


“ The representatives of the Government of Victoria express their
willingness to consider and submit to the Parliament, and support by
every means in their power propositions to effect a ‘ custom union’
and ‘ intercolonial free trade’ between the colonies parties to this
Conference ; provided that the four colonies can agree upon any
uniform tariff which shall not substantially reverse or abandon the
present fiscal policy of Victoria, and which favours ‘ discriminating
duties’ on raw materials for manufactures.
“ Further, Victoria would, if necessary, concur in alterations in
her tariff the main objects of which were to simplify it, to exclude
from duty unproductive and unimportant items, to substitute some
other for the ad valorem principle, to alter the excise import and
make new regulations therefor, and to make the tariff inalterable
except by mutual consent of all parties to the agreement, and also to
agree generally in commercial regulations for the government of
commerce, and making all port and lighthouse charges as nearly
identical as possible.
“ But, inasmuch as it has appeared in the progress of this Con-
ference that the consent of the colony of New South Wales to an
agreement on the foregoing basis is for the present unobtainable, the
balance of influences and advantages in the contract is so materially
altered thereby that Victoria would require in any treaty as between
that colony, South Australia, and Tasmania, to consider the larger
right which her proportion of contribution to any common stock
suggests, and which being (the mean of 1868-9) —
Victoria £1,190,623
South Australia 208,775
Tasmania 134,540
£1,533,938
Victoria would expect that her present tariff should he accepted as
the common tariff of the federation, and that there should be a
general interchange of goods between the agreeing colonies, being
duty-paid in, or the produce of, any of these colonies.
“ That the Parliament of Victoria should exercise the right to
amend the tariff as circumstances might from time to time require.
“That the measure of payments into the common fund by the
different colonies pro rata to population (or its other adjustment)
should govern the subsequent distribution thereof.
“ That the basis for division should be the census of 1871, and
the net receipts from duties of customs in each colony for 1868-9, as
published (excluding wharfage dues, &c.).
“ That the agreement be for five years.


“ That these preliminaries being agreed to, such other measures
shall be at once proceeded with, as may be requisite to obtain the
legislative confirmation of the different colonies, and the concurrence
of the Imperial authorities.”
The delegates from South Australia and Tasmania recorded their
views in the following memo, (appendix S): —
“We, the representatives of the colonies of South Australia and
Tasmania, desire to place on record our opinion that a general
customs union, a uniform tariff, and an equal distribution of the
revenue therefrom, on the basis of population, together with a free
interchange of colonial products and manufactures amongst the con-
tracting parties would be of great advantage to the inhabitants of
the several colonies.
“ That in our anxiety to give effect to such an arrangement, we
have in this Conference declared our willingness to make large con-
cessions where our tariffs have differed from those of the other
colonies, in order to arrive at one common conclusion ; and thus far
the Treasurer of Victoria (the Hon. Mr. Francis) in his paper dated
30th June, 1870, agrees, but only on the condition that New South
Wales should be a contracting party, which condition is immediately
afterwards stated, in the same document, to have been previously
ascertained to be impracticable.
“That failing the concurrence of New South Wales, the paper
submitted by the Hon. Mr. Francis proceeds to lay down new terms
and conditions, not only highly detrimental to their interests, but
also contemplating the surrender by these colonies of their right to
a co-ordinate voice with Victoria in any readjustment of the tariff.
We are, therefore, unable to acquiesce in such a proposition, or to
recommend it to our respective Governments.
“With reference to the statements of revenue for the years 1867,
1868, and 1869, upon which the Hon. Mr. Francis bases the claim
of Victoria to an unequal distribution per head of the population, in
favour of that colony, we would remark that they are unreliable for
so grave a purpose. For instance, no deduction is made for draw-
backs on the gross customs revenue of Victoria; and the fact is
ignored that on the part of South Australia with a uniform tariff
and excise regulations, an addition of 6s. 6d. per head of the popu-
lation would be obtained on spirits and tobacco alone.
“ It is impossible that we can advise our Government to legislate
upon the basis of a proposal which binds South Australia and Tas-
mania to maintain a common tariff for the period of five years (as
proposed in the paper already referred to), whilst Victoria claims the
right to alter this ‘ inalterable’ tariff from time to time, as circum-


stances or inclination may prompt. We regard it as a first principle
of common justice that an agreement between contracting parties
should be equally binding upon all concerned, and consequently view
this stipulation on the part of Victoria as fatal to the project of a
customs union, even if no other objection existed.
“ (Signed)
John Hart.
John H. Barrow.
J. M. Wilson.
Thomas D. Chapman.
“ Ist July, 1870.”
In Melbourne in November, 1880, and afterwards at Sydney in
January, 1881, another and final Conference was held, which was
attended by representatives from the entire group of the Australasian
colonies.
The following was the only resolution finally adopted, namely:—
That in the opinion of this Conference a joint commission of all the
Australian colonies should be appointed to consider and construct a common
tariff for the group; and that in the constitution of such commission Vic-
toria should appoint three members, New South Wales two members, New
Zealand two members, South Australia two members, Queensland two mem-
bers, Tasmania one member, Western Australia one member ; and that it be
an express instruction to such commission that any common tariff must
recognise fairly the interests and special circumstances of each colony.
In the division upon the foregoing the “ Ayes” were composed of
New South Wales, South Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania, and
Western Australia, while the solitary “ No !” was Victoria.
As Victoria insisted upon standing out, this Conference like its
predecessors resulted in proving nothing except that her representa-
tives would agree to no common tariff which did not provide for
protection to native industry. And now let us compare the tariffs and
the progress of the two great colonies of the group, in order that we
may discover if we can in what direction prosperity lies.
Up to the Ist July, 1851, Victoria, then Port Phillip, had every-
thing in common with the mother colony, the same tariff being appli-
cable to both territories.
The customs revenue for 1850 was as follows:
New South Wales. Port Phillip.
Spirits £84,514 .. £40,823
Tobacco.. .. .. .. 40,471 .. 24,248
40,471 .. 24,248
Ad valorem of 10 per cent, on foreign
goods 17,834 .. 11,408
£142,819 £76,479


For many years after the separation the policy of both colonies
’was a custom-house for revenue purposes only, and up to 1865 im-
ported duties were levied in Victoria on twelve articles only, viz.:—
Spirits Tea Bice
Wine Sugar Malt
Beer Coffee Hops
Tobacco Opium Dried Fruits.
These produced in 1864, with a population of 601,000 persons,
£1,048,334.
Since 1865, when the country declared in favour of “protection,”
every alteration in the tariff has been made in accordance with that
policy.
From the detailed customs returns just published, I find that in
1882 there was collected in Victoria, under the enormous number of
333 headings—
£l,B2o,Bs3
Less drawbacks 93,414
Net revenue £1,727,439
Seeing that the population of the colony increased 50 per cent,
between the free-trade year 1864 and the protective year 1882, it
follows that the duties levied on twelve articles produced per head
nearly as much revenue as those charged on 333 different lines, the
exact result being as follows:
1864 £1 14s. lid. per head
1882 .. .. .. .. £1 18s. 4d. „
So true it is that the custom-house can only be used to a certain
limited extent in taxing the consumer.
Now let us turn to New South Wales. For several years after
1851 the mother colony, under the able guidance of Sir Deas Thom-
son, flourished under what was then probably the most perfect
system of free trade known to the world ; but to this succeeded a
limited policy of protection, the ad valorem duties being fixed at 5 per
cent.; but finally New South Wales in 1873 boldly declared, as far as
she was concerned, that the custom-house should be only used to
collect duties for the purposes of revenue. Last year, 1882, there
were duties collected in New South Wales on 77 headings, as against
333 in Victoria.
The amount realised, with a population of 817,000 persons, was
£1,445,189 14 3
Less drawbacks .. .. 38,414 19 10
Net revenue £1,406,774 14 5


SHIPPING INWAEDS.
Victoria.
New South Wales.
Tons.
Tons.
624,061
479,827
756,103
874,804
1,349,093
.. 1,686,620
I will not stop to comment upon the productiveness of one custom-
house as compared with the other, but will proceed to lay before you
some rather startling statistics, showing the commercial progress of
the two colonies since 1870 :
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS.
ASSETS OF BANKS IN THE
New South Wales
South Australia
Western Australia
New South Wales.
7,757,281
7,990,038
15,747,319
13,672,776
13,003,941
26,676,717
21,281,130
16,716,961
37,998,091
RESPECTIVE COLONIES.
£31,248,584
31,714,134
17,851,144
10,812,499
9,133,038
2,989,827
772,060
£104,521,286
Victoria.
12,455,758
12,470,014
24,925,772
15,705,353
14,196,487
29,901,840
18,748,081
16,193,579
34,941,660
AMOUNT TO THE CREDIT OF DEPOSITORS IN SAVINGS
BANKS, 1882.
Victoria .. .. .. £3,121,246
New South Wales .. .. 3,011,594
I am well aware that mere imports and exports do not constitute
the wealth of a new country. Behind the imports are the con-
sumers, and behind the exports are the producers. A century ago,
for all the use Australia was to humanity it might as well have
been as barren as the Sahara desert; it was the cry of the ad-
venturous immigrant which aroused the island continent from the


POPULATION.
Victoria.
New South Wales.
1870
726,599
502,861
1882
906,225
817,468
Increase .
179,626
314,607
sleep of ages, and it was the tramp of the army of colonisers which
called this new world of industry into existence ; but if we read
statistical returns they tell us that from 1870 to 1882, for every
thousand souls added to Victoria, almost two thousand have been
added to New South Wales.
The returns are as follow :
This means that before the present decade is concluded the mother
colony will be the most populous of the group, giving sustenance to
one million persons.
These statistics all show how rapid has been the commercial pro-
gress of New South Wales as compared with Victoria, and will
surely convince our politicians that it is useless to expect our neigh-
bours to cripple their trade with fetters in order to enjoy the benefit
of a customs union, and the federation which such a union would
undoubtedly lead up to.
As a Victorian, with all my interests centred in what we still
fondly call the premier colony, I regret that it is so fast being com-
pelled to take a secondary position; but instead of repining and
envying, ought it not to be pleasing to see any part of this great
dominion advancing so grandly to its manifest destiny, more espe-
cially when we remember that it is Victorian brains and Victorian
money which have helped to so surprisingly develops the immense
resources of our neighbours.
Every able-bodied man, it is calculated, is worth a capital sum of
£2OO to a new country, but no Ministry could afford to meet a
Victorian Parliament with a proposal to introduce immigrants at
the public expense. In marked contrast is the action of the New
South Wales Ministry, who recently obtained, by an enormous
majority, authority to bring out something like 1000 persons per
month at the cost of the State.
We talk of Australian exhibitions to be held in the metropolis of
the world, but what better advertisement can any young colony want
than the fact of 500 healthy Britishers, full of pluck, energy, and
boundless hopes, leaving London every fortnight by a mammoth
steamship for an Australian port? Gathered, as they are, from
every village of the land, the head of each emigrating family becomes
an emigration agent of the very best kind.


If Victoria is determined to maintain her heavy protective duties
at all risks ; if she is determined to make no concessions to the
tendencies of her neighbours in the direction of unrestricted trade,
then I would despair of any compacted union between the colonies ;
but now that the infant “ protection” has become a lusty stripling
with eighteen summers over his head, I do trust that you, the Vic-
torian manufacturers, will soon come boldly forward, and say that
under the flag of a United Australia you are strong enough to walk
unaided by the State crutch.
The whole question lies in a very small compass. Any customs
union between Victoria and New South Wales is impossible, except
concessions are made on one side or the other. Is New South
Wales, in order to increase her trade with 900,000 persons in Vic-
toria, likely to cripple her trade with the millions across the sea by
levying 25 per cent, duties for protective purposes ? That contin-
gency can, I think, be relegated to the limbo of stillborn expectations.
The other alternative remains. Will the Victorian manufacturers
agree to a substantial modification in the tariff, in order that they
may have a larger volume of trade with the Australasian colonies,
and especially with their neighbour New South Wales ?
Some sections of the industry, like the biscuit manufacturers, will
reply, “We are now prepared to waive all protective duties and
stand alone.” Others will probably say, “We are willing to allow
duties to be reduced at the rate of, say, per cent, per annum,
until a minimum of 10 per cent, is reached, and we will fight on that
line;” whilst others, probably the majority, will assert that not one
iota of the protection they at present enjoy can be removed, except,
indeed, they receive ample compensation from the State.
It will undoubtedly be a wise statesman who will reconcile all
the vested interests in Victoria to any great reduction in the
present protective tariff, but only in that direction is there any possi-
bility of a customs union being successful. Even with federation
accomplished and an Australian Parliament sitting in Albury, a 25
per cent, protective tariff would in my judgment have very little
chance of a lengthened existence. I think it would be more likely
that a majority of the electors of the new dominion would declare in
favour of a graduated return to moderate customs duties and more
direct taxation.
All this is, of course, a mere matter of opinion; but whatever may
be our views as to the practicability of a customs union for Austra-
lasia, this at least is certain—that there is a growing feeling in all
the colonies for a closer intimacy one with the other. Dr. Arnold,
of Rugby, declared that with the introduction of the railway the days
of feudality had passed away for ever ; and so with the locomotive
engine bringing Melbourne and Sydney within twenty-four hours of


each other, we may look forward to a closer community of interests
between colonists generally than has ever been the case before.
With a bond of union such as exists between England and Scotland,
the Greater Britain in the southern seas would be indeed “a country
worth fighting for.”
Look at its size. It would have an area equal to three million
square miles, or twenty-five times greater than the United Kingdom.
Think of its probable population. The United States of America
can now boast of having 52 millions of human beings under its flag.
In the first census, taken in 1790, its free population was 3,231,630.
Is it too much to anticipate that there are children now in Mel-
bourne who will live to see 50 millions of people on Australasian
soil?
Then, again, reflect what a marvellous expansion of trade must
follow the obliteration of all customs boundaries on our continent.
In 1840 the sea-borne trade of the United Kingdom only reached
£123,312,740, made up as follows ;
Imports ... ... ... ... ... £62,004,000
Exports ... ... ... ... ... 61,308,740
In 1880 it amounted to the almost fabulous sum of £697,644,031,
and this was exclusive of bullion and specie.
But the trade of the Australasian colonies is now almost equal to
the commerce of the United Kingdom forty-two years ago. Here
are the figures in round numbers for 1882:
Victoria .. .. ... •• ... ... ... ... 35,000,000
New South Wales .. .. 38,000,000
New Zealand .. .. 15,260,000
South Australia .. .. 12,000,000
Queensland ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,500,000
Tasmania 3,250,000
Western Australia 1,000,000
113,000,000
I trust that these results will receive the thoughtful attention of
every Victorian. We are all proud of our connection with “old
England, the mother of us all.” We stand amazed when we reflect
that the British Isles, measuring 120,892 square miles, can boast of
colonies and dependencies having an area of 7,805,000 square miles.
We rejoice that the Queen’s free laws “ run” over lands tenanted by
three hundred millions of human beings; that the combined trade of
the empire has reached a commercial value of one thousand millions
of pounds per annum; that every year her free citizens voluntarily
tax themselves to the extent of one hundred and eighty millions, in
order that the country’s flag may wave untarnished, and that equal
justice shall be meted to all “ without fear, favour, or affection.”


The genius of England’s explorers and the bravery of her seamen
have opened out to us unbounded wealth, giving us with unexampled
generosity the fullest right to dispose of vast lands, which, if they
belonged to any class, surely could be claimed for the toiling millions
whose earnings were expended in discovering them, and whose
statesmen started us in life with all those advantages which have
proved half our success.
No colonial politician can hope to successfully carry any pro-
position which would bring the United Kingdom within the benefits
of an Imperial customs union. Indeed her leading statesmen
refuse to listen to such a proposal. But the times are ripe for
another attempt to be made to bring the scattered Imperial
daughters inhabiting these southern lands within the operation of a
union which shall prove to them practically that “ blood is thicker
than water,” to their great mutual advantage.
I close with one practical suggestion—Let us urge the Victorian
Parliament to send a peace-offering to our neighbours by at once
abolishing the exasperating and ill-advised stock tax. Such an act
will speak louder of our desire for friendship than gushing speeches
or exuberated expressions of goodwill.
Books and documents consulted in preparing the foregoing
paper:—The Statesmen’s Year Book; statistics compiled by the
Financial Reform Association of the United Kingdom; Government
Returns for New South Wales and New Zealand; the Victorian
Year Book; Custom House Returns for Victoria; The Mother Colony,
Hon. G. H. Reid; Report Sydney Chamber of Commerce for 1882;
Speeches at the Cobden Club Dinner, held in London, 1882; Reci-
procal Tariffs and Intercolonial Free Trade, by Mr. B. Cowderoy,
secretary Chamber of Commerce, Melbourne; the Sydney Morning
Herald, the Melbourne Daily Press, Australian Insurance and
Banking Record.


MASON, FIRTH AND M‘CUTCHEON,
GENERAL PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


