

A
DAUGHTER
OF
ISHMAEL
TWELFTH EDITION]
"WHY SHOULD I WANT
HIM TO LIVE"




"I thought mayhap ye’d be lonely.




A DAUGHTER OF ISHMAEL.
THE LIFE STORY OF MAGGIE O’DONOGHUE.
AN OUTCAST AND A MURDERESS
WHO BECAME A SAINT AND A SALVATIONIST.
fHel&autne:
Printed at the Salvation Army Headquarters, 185 & 187
Little Collins Street.




PREFACE.
There are two classes of people on whom it is hoped this story of a
wonderfully eventful life will have a beneficial influence.
Surely no one knowing anything of the love and compassion of
Christ but will feel that an organisation which takes hold of such
as Maggie O’Donoghue, and, inspiring them with a new hope,
helps them to build up a new life, deserves not only sympathy and
kind words, but also financial assistance. The story of Maggie’s
career and conversion is told partly with the object of enlisting
this practical sympathy with our work on behalf of the fallen.
Many a woman on being released from gaol, or when weary of the
wretched life of the streets, has longed for a friend to help her out
of her circumstances and out of her sins. The Army is prepared to
be this friend in need, and our officers are continually helping the
Maggies of street and police court and gaol. But this work costs
money. Let the story of this poor Irish lassie be a reminder of
our needs.
It is our prayer also that many of the class we live to help will
gather hope for time and eternity from this little brochure. Those
who have trodden in poor Maggie’s footsteps in the dreadful way
of shame, may, after reading these pages, also follow her through
the doors of an Army Rescue Home, into a life of purity and
usefulness. May it be so.
It is hardly worth while to apologise for any lack of completeness
in the narrative itself. The facts were taken down in shorthand
from Maggie’s own lips a few hours before she crossed the river. It
was a tedious and painful story for her; she was very weak, and
her breath came in gasps. Neither was it a pleasant tale, nor one
on which she could dwell with any satisfaction, but in spite of all
this she cheerfully did her best, because she knew what it was for,
■and was anxious that if she could not any longer testify with her
lips, she might from the printed page tell of the wondrous love of
her Saviour. S.


jKF you are anxious to know more of the
gjs wonderful work that God is doing for
the souls and bodies of men, read
THE “WAR CRY,”
a weekly illustrated newspaper of sixteen
pages (sixty four columns) which is entirely
devoted to the work being accomplished
by the Salvation Army. Price, Id.; yearly,
6s. 6d.
“FULL SALVATION,”
a missionary magazine, containing news of
soul-saving work from all parts of the world,
also making holiness teaching one of its
strong features. Thirty-four pages; well
illustrated; 3d. monthly; 4s. yearly.
THE “YOUNG SOLDIER.”
The best of children’s papers; bright,
interesting and spiritual; illustrated. Price,
Id. weekly; 6s. 6d. yearly.


A DAUGHTER
OF ISHMAEL
CHAPTER I.
A VERY UNWELCOME INTRUDER.
Ballygale forty years ago was far from being a noteworthy
place. One might go further and say that even in this
well-informed year of our Lord—this year of census-taking
and blue books—certain reputable directories could be quoted
jn which even the name of the hamlet would be sought in
vain. If it had been nearer Cork, or had it even been located on
the main road to some larger town, it might have ridden into
public notice behind its more populous neighbour, much in the
same fashion as the Irish farmer’s good wife in those parts
accompanied her sturdier half to mass. But Ballygale was
not on the way to anywhere, it was simply an isolated little
settlement of Munster farmers, who cultivated the slopes of
the mountain glen where their forefathers had lived from time
immemorial. They had little need to care for the outside
world, as raising their own potatoes, rearing their own bacon,
cultivating their own flax, and spinning and weaving it after-
wards, they were independent of the world at large, and,
beyond a traditional belief in the existence of Cork, they


probably had very little idea of what might exist any further
afield than the romantic dark mountains which hemmed them
in on all sides. Not only were they ignorant of life outside
their own glen, but they looked upon visitors from beyond th«
hills as downright intruders. Once, many years before our
story opens, a wandering artist with sketching apparatus had
indiscreetly ventured into the glen in search of “ suggestions ”
in light and shade, with which to enrich his portfolio. He
had settled down to a delicious tit-bit. The bum that glides
placidly down the glen takes at one place a sudden turn and
leaps madly down in a succession of rippling silvery cataracts.
Near this spot he sat and sketched, rapidly transferring to his-
paper the tossing torrent, with the dark contrasting ferns, the
rustic bridge further up the stream, and then the velvety
slopes of undulating pasture land, backed up by the intense
black mountains.
The beautiful scenery, however, which surrounded Ballygale
had not given the farmers thereabouts sufficient poetical
instinct to enable them to appreciate the efforts of their un-
invited visitor, and ere he had finished appropriating the
waterfall and the rustic bridge, he found himself crossing the
latter at a rapid and undignified rate, closely pursued by certain
geological specimens, and by the sturdy peasants who had
furnished the propelling power.
The fact is the inhabitants of Ballygale were a Conservative
people. ' Their motto was “ Ballygale for the people of the
valley alone,” and they wanted no intrusion.
One fine day, however, two of the squire’s men commenced-
to build a house in the most populous part of the glen.
Jerry Connelly’s public-house was only a quarter of a mile
further down, and Mick Delaney’s shebeen was within a
hundred yards, across a field. For whom could the place be T


Mick Delaney and his associates went over the ground in the
moonlight. It was to be no common cabin, but a good house
evidently. It was for no one in Ballygale that was certain, for
everybody there knew everybody
else. None but the Squire's men
would dare erect it, for it would
have been bum l o the ground,
and the builder baptised in the
bum the very night after the
turning of the first
sod. “Be the holy
althar,” said Mick
at length, “if the
Squire brings any-
one from over the
mountains intc
Ballygale, he’ll
never die in his bed, or me name’s
not Mick Delaney !” % To this
they all assented, for, while it
■was necessary to keep on good
terms with the Squire, they also
agreed that it was equally ne'cessary
to keep a stranger from introducing any “haythenish” innova-
tions amongst them. “ More be token,” said one of them,


“ as the sthranger moightn’t dhrink whiskey, or do any other
dacent Christian thing, and then, what’s to become of Mick’s
little plant of the Queen’s own, an’ all the fun we have ?”
But, when in course of time the hated stranger arrived
with his family and belongings, the original inhabitants
gradually forsook their prohibitive policy. It came about like
this : Peter O’Donoghue, the stranger, had been a coast
guardsman, and, although his new neighbours did not under-
stand this fact, his massive frame and keen eye got for him a
certain measure of respect from the very first day of his resi-
dence amongst them. His sons, too, were not to be despised,
and at a meeting held at the sheeben, it was decided, over a
bottle of whisky, that the best way of showing him that his
presence was obnoxious, was to refrain from dealing at the
store he had opened. This, it was agreed, would be the easiest
way to drive him out. Our readers will understand that,
although the events to which we are referring took place
before the days of Captain Boycott, the principle is a time-
honoured one in Ireland.
Somehow the boycott was not a success. When Mrs.
O’Shannessy wanted to clean her dresser and chairs for the
day when Father Casey would hold a “ station ” at her house,
she all at once bethought her that if she bought a piece of soap
at the new store, it would do the work quicker and better than
sand, besides leaving a little over for the colleens to wash their
faces with, an operation for which they had been accustomed
to use oatmeal. Then, when Katie More got married, she
could not resist the temptation of purchasing a bunch of gay
ribbons; and in this way, bit by bit, the store won its road
into favour.
Peter O’Donoghue was a very respectable man, probably the
best-informed person in that part of the country, excepting of


course the folks at the big house. He had a family of grown-
np sons and daughters, besides a young wife and the begin-
nings of a second family. Mrs. O’Donogliue was a very pious
woman, who paid the greatest heed to all the requirements of
the church and, moreover, abstained from alcoholic stimulants
altogether. In this she was a wonder. Peter and his eldest
sons, while not so strict, were far from the ordinary run of
drinking men, and except at market times were never known
to touch liquor. But, while they mingled not with the peasants
around in their faction fights and drinking orgies, they were
very careful not to arouse their enmity by any active interfer-
ence therewith. In course of time their house became a
recognised centre of respectability; and people who loved
order soon began to lease the holdings near the store; fresh
cabins were erected, and quite a little village sprang up, to
which even Mick Delaney could not object, for it all brought
grist to his mill. The Squire, too, was pleased at the success
of the law and order party, and occasionally, on such special
events as wakes and weddings, favoured the village with his
presence.
And thus, with a new leaven at work, Ballygale began
slowly but surely to lose its exclusive character, although much
of its old clannishness survived the intrusion of the strangers,
who, at first unwelcomed, and received with but scant courtesy
in the village itself, had now become part and parcel of its'
people. And just here our story opens.


CHAPTER II.
MISCHIEVOUS MAGGIE—A HOPEFUL CASE.
“ Ocii ! Biddy Flannaghan, it’s heart-scalded I am wid that
little graceless ay a Maggie, bad scran to her,” exclaimed Mrs.
O’Donoghue to a neighbour one morning, “although it’s ill my
common to say it, she’ll go a sliraugliran and make us all sup
sorrow yet.”
The child to whom this dark prophecy referred was the
eldest girl of the second family in the O’Donoghue household.
Although only ten years of age, she had already given abun-
dant promise of becoming the black sheep of the family.
Maggie’s latest breach of discipline had arisen out of her
fondness for frolic, accompanied by a fast growing passion
for punch. It was Easter time, and the slack season when,
for want of something belter to be done, weddings were of daily
occurrence. Only the previous evening a gay party had cantered
past from Father Casey’3 house to the residence of a local
bride. 1 . It wa3 a merry scene, the married women rode on
horseback behind their respective husbands, and the girls, gay
with ribbons, clung in the same way to their “ bachelors.”
There was shouting and singing, racing and falling off, ■ not to
mention a little courting and kissing, to add spice to the pro-
ceedings. Probably the horses were the only strictly sober
members of the party. Maggie had watched the merry pro-
cession from a hedge, and at nightfall had scampered, bare


footed and untidy to the house of revel. Her well-dressed
step-sisters were there, flirting and laughing, but little dream-
ing that Maggie, with hair loose, and clothing and face-
dirty, was present also, dividing her time between various
hurried retreats, to avoid meeting them, and the pleasure of
helping to drink the whisky so liberally supplied to all-comers.
The night passed ; Maggie, silly with drink, slept in a barn,
and early in the morning was brought home to her angry but
sorrowful mother.
Mrs. O’Donoghue knew not what to do with the child. She-
A MERRY SCENE.
never touched spirits herself, her husband was remarkably
temperate compared with the farmers around, and yet Maggie
seemed to have been born with an inveterate appetite for
intoxicants. One day, when only five years of age, they had
found her down at Mick Delaney’s, lying with her mouth to a
hole which, with an old nail, she had worked in a whisky cask.
She had scratched away between two staves, until she was able
to suck the liquor through, and, when discovered, was com-
pletely overcome by it, the shebeen keeper, to whom the sight
was nothing but a joke, gleefully emphasising the fact that
“ she had her little skin full.”


Getting her skin full seemed to be the poor little creature’s
-only aim in life. Her parents
could exercise no control over her,
for, though she was often thrashed,
she really seemed to he im-
pervious to correction. If
she was punished for
losing her school-
books, she
•would be seen
ten minutes
later scamper-
ihe road to
ing down
spend in apples or drink the money
■she had received by the clandestine sale of the said
books. Before she was any higher than her mother’s
counter she was an expert thief, and, when circumstances
were favourable, she frequently robbed the till by getting
under the counter and squeezing her little hand into
it from the rear. It was the custom for the children
attending school to bring with them a sod of turf each
as their quota towards heating the primitive educational
-establishment. If they did not bring their turf they would
not be allowed near the fire. Maggie used to choose as large
& sod as possible ; this was broken in two, one half was handed
in to the pedagogue and the remainder went in barter for
.alcoholic delights. When her father foimd this out, he no
longer allowed his children to carry their turf, but once a week
.filled two panniers with sods and drove a donkey with it to the
school. In this and other ways he tried to check the girl’s
vicious tastes. All his precautions, however, could not prevent
the frequency of funerals, weddings, and festivals, and the
child herself was so cunning that not many days ever passed


by in which she had not had more liquor than would upset
an adult three vime3 her age. Mrs. O’Donoghue was a very
strict, rigid woman. Often she sat Maggie before her and
would address her thu3 :—“ Now, ye are the child of respict-
able parents, and ye shouldn’t look either this way or that.”'
But these lectures always aroused in Maggie an intense spirit
of opposition, and such a conference was always followed by
some fresh outbreak of juvenile iniemperance or recklessness..
Poor child ! her life wa3 not a happy one. Her parents were-
ashamed of her, and her step-sisters looked upon her almost as-
an evil spirit.
If ever there was a feminine Ishmael, her proper name must
have been Maggie O’Donoghue. Among the chief joys of her
young life was thieving apples or stealing the wherewithal to get
them; fighting her schoolmates, of both sexes and of any age
doing all sorts of madcap, foolish, and dangerous things, and in
consequence finding herself in tribulations oft. Her mother,,
although kind enough with other members of the family, con-
fessed that she always lost patience with Maggie, and the poor
child had her head banged against the wall, and was forced to-
undergo unnumbered thrashings, even when her offence was-
light or her guilt not clearly proven; just as present day
justice punishes a man for having been punished before, and
gives him a double sentence on account of “ previous con-
victions.” Her previous convictions hung around her little-
neck like a millstone.
Always some new prank. When only seven years old she r
one night, let herself down from a high window and scampered,
bare-legged and almost naked, for several miles over the
mountains in a direction she was altogether unfamiliar with,
guided merely by the flash at intervals of the lights of a-
wedding party, some distance ahead. Her mother was away r


■so she reckoned it was all right, there could be no discover}
When she arrived, a poor wet, dirty, miserable-looking little
creature, against whom should she run but her mother, dressed
in her best. What a humiliation for that mother, amongst
all the well-clad guests at this rather stylish wedding!
On another occasion, when about the same age, she had
been sent supperless to bed as a reward for some delinquency,
and, awaking at midnight desperately hungry, she crept as
gently as a little mouse into the big living room. It was
pitch dark, but she knew the lay of everything in the room.
Finding the bread, she climbed on to the table to reach the
top of the dresser, where the butter was kept. The table
was one of that kind with an extra leaf in it, and Maggie
treading on this leaf, proved too heavy for it. When it gave
way with a crash, she grasped at the dresser, and down it
came with all it contained. That was an unfortunate escapade
for Miss Maggie. There was tenderly laid away on the snowy
white shelves of that dresser, an array of old china, which
had been in the family for not less than a century, and
which was never used except on those high and important
occasions when the priest made his annual station with the
O’Donoghue’s. * When the terrified child realised what had
happened, she did not wait for her mother’s footstep, but
Imrried half naked across the fields, not caring whither her
steps might carry her. She even ran, without fear, past a
gloomy cabin where a murder had been committed, and which
was supposed to be haunted. At another time she would not
have passed this place even in daylight for a fortune.


CHAPTER III.
MAGGIE WANTS TO BE PRETTY.
It will easily be supposed that a child who so frequently fell
under her parents’ displeasure, and who was shunned by the
respectable children around, would at times take it to heart.
People had frequently remarked that she was an ugly child and
a child possessed. She supposed that if she had only had a
pleasant face she would be able to gain their sympathy and
approval. Poor little creature ! She had a heart beneath her
half-tamed bosom, and often would glide away to a sheltering
hedge to weep over her loneliness and ugliness. But generally
these weepings were followed by a fiercer outbreak than usual
of the old disobedient, lawless spirit. She had yet to learn that
the ugliness with which the neighbours most reproached her,
was that want of moral symmetry which she displayed, rather
than any defect of physical form or feature. True, she was
not a pretty or an engaging child ; she was under-sized and
dwarftd-looking, even. When, at five years of age, she was for
the first time found intoxicated, her little limbs were so small
that she was reported to be only three. Her skin was almost
as dark as a gipsy’s ; her hair was black and glossy, but
unkempt and uncared for, and her eyes, though black and
bright, were so small that when, as was usual, she looked
furtively from under her brows, they had a very unpleasing
effect. No, she was not pretty, and yet, all through her child


hood, there would corae moments when she would earnestly
desire to be good and to be pretty. There was no doubt in her
mind that the good and the beautiful go together as hand and
glove, and, in her little warped, twisted way, she reasoned that
if she could but be pretty, she would be good, and thus gain
what her poor little shrivelled, half-starved heart longed for,
as the brightest heaven— love —the love of her parents and step-
sisters—kind words from the neighbours, and the fellowship of
the boys and girls who, though so free with each other, seemed
to despise and keep aloof from her. Ah, yes, if she could but
be pretty she would be happy.
When these ideas took hold of her she would spruce
herself up in her best, spend hour 3 combing her hair and
trying to make the most of her small graces, and then,
proud in the consciousness of victory, she would pas 3in
and out of her mother’s house, or set off to the chapel
where mass was being celebrated, so as to earn the kind
words of her fellows. It seemed always a failure. Her
sisters would laugh at her and say, “ What a little lady
Maggie has become all of a sudden ! Clean for once—how long
will it last ?” and so on, and the girls, with whom she tried to
associate, who sat outside the primitive chapel waiting for
Father Casey to arrive, would nudge each other and giggle at
“ the airs that Mag O’Donoghue was putting.on.” What
wonder if after such rebuffs she frequently vowed never to be
good again ; only to make a fresh attempt in the course of a
short time, and as usual be laughed out of it again after a
brief period of high hope. On one occasion, when she had a
“ good and pretty ” fit, her sisters gave her an old umbrella
from which the covering had long since gone, leaving only the
fringe and beads. Umbrellas were in that part of the country
a sufficient novelty to make many an ambitious neighbour


envy the Misses O’Donoghue, and when Maggie became pos-
sessed of one of these old-fashioned and cumbrous articles,
with its huge double-jointed stick and naked ribs, she felt
that now at last there was a chance of being beautiful to some
purpose. It was not raining, and falling water was necessary
for the proper display of such an acquisition, so a few minutes
afterwards Maggie might have been seen with the umbrella
elevated beneath the full stream of an old pump. She was
soaking wet, but never mind 1 the umbrella was up, and there-
fore she must be pretty, and consequently happy.
The years glide swiftly by. Maggie is now fifteen years of
age, has developed physically, and is getting more womanly in
her ways, but still possessed with the desire for liquor and
for prettiness. Perhaps the former is now to a certain
extent kept under, but the hankering after beauty has become
the passion of her soul. Father Casey once told her that
the Lord had made her ugly as a punishment for her
giddiness, and her inattention to the rites of the Church,
and henceforth she became deeply religious. For a season
no budding maiden was more given up to mass and the
confessional than Maggie, and the burden of her prayers,
the secret longing of her soul, was for some share of that
comeliness, which she had been taught to believe had been
altogether denied her. Many an evening she sat beneath a
blossoming hawthorn, and wept and prayed to God and The
Virgin for this boon, and cursed over her failure to obtain it.
In a few minutes she would dart from the extreme of devo-
tional ecstasy to that of devilish rage.
No trouble was too great. A long distance up a lonely glen
there existed a beautiful spariding spring of water, which darted
from beneath a huge flat stone, and formed a pool in a natural
basin below. The surroundings were wild and romantic.
B


This basin of water was reputed holy. In ages long past a
Christian martyr, so the story ran, had been buried beneath
that rocky slab. In a short time miraculous water burst
from beneath the stone, and it had been believed for centuries
that, by the performance of certain rites, and bathing in the
waters of this spring, the penitent sinner might not only be
absolved from his transgressions, but also have any other
blessing he might choose to claim. Rumour had it that the
reason Mick Delaney’s liquor was of so prime a quality was
that the little water (and that was little enough) that entered
into its manufacture was obtained from the holy well of the
Dripping Stone. At most times Maggie was not considered
a very good Catholic, but none believed more devoutly than
she in the virtues of the well of the Dripping Stone ; and,
although to accomplish her end she was compelled to pray a
great deal, and perform a pilgrimage on her bare knees before
the water’s fabled virtues could be hers, she cheerfully com-
plied with the conditions, in her passionate longing for
prettiness. Sometimes she thought she had suceeeded, but
the taunts of the villagers, on her return, soon undeceived
her.
Finding that, in her case, this sacred oracle failed to act,
she, without the slightest hesitation, decided to try a means
which was under the distinct ban of the Church. This was
the wishing chair. It was formed of three huge slabs in the
form of a chair, was situated in another of the lonely and
wild glens near Ballygale, and wa3 supposed to have been
erected by the fairies. Among the more respectable adults
the locality had rather an §vil name, and children and young
people were warned against frequenting it. But it had an
almost irresistible charm over the maidens of Ballygale, and
wonderful were the stories circulated about it. Tradition said


that, if a maiden went alone to the wonderful chair at grey
dawn on a May morning, unknown to her friends—or, better
still, if she left her father’s cabin at night, soon after the
family had retired to rest, and, wending her way to the enchanted
spot, sat in the chair for a season—the fairies would grant
her any wish that came to her heart while so enthroned.
It was said, too, that, if she chose, the fairies would spirit
her away to their native bowers, and she, instead of being a
human drudge, might spend the remainder of her existence
as a beautiful sprite of the air, and live among the flowers.
The clergy and the respectable farmers around ridiculed or
shook their heads at these stories. True it was, that maidens
had visited the chair and never returned to their sorrowing
families, but the elder members of the community told strange
tales of wrong and riot in connection with that wishing chair.
A half-silly girl of the neighbourhood once wandered off at
midnight to spend the dawning hours in the enchanted chair,
and her corpse was found, a day or two afterwards, not very
far from the spot—the work, not of fairies, but of dissolute,
inhuman brutes of the neighbourhood, who had taken advan-
tage of a poor daft girl’s helplessness, and lest their horrible
deed should be discovered, had killed the wretched victim.
Rumour had it, too, that when Katie Delaney, Mick’s buxom
daughter, refused to marry Dan McGrath, from over the
mountains, Dan bided his time, and when, in the stillness of
a May morn, Katie crept up the glen to the wishing chair,
she found herself seized by a body of ruffians, with Dan
McGrath at their head, and carried bodily to his home. The
poor girl might have returned to her people a few days after-
wards, as the brute who had wronged her gave her the option
of doing, but she preferred to marry him, heartless and cruel
as he had proved himself, rather than go back to her own


people disgraced. Such facts as these could not be talked of
before the younger folk, and, as Katie did not return, her
girl friends mostly concluded that she had taken up her abode
with the fairies of the upper glen. The glen did not lose in
popularity in consequence of these disappearances, you may
be sure, for even those who half understood the truth about
the matter, felt an extra interest on account of the flavour of
romantic and illicit pleasure hanging about the place, just as
the men who patronised Mick Delaney’s whisky loved it the
more because no excise had been paid thereon.
Maggie, in her quest of beauty, had sat in the fairies’ chair
several times during the month of May in years gone by, but
it had brought her no success, and she had finally abandoned
it, and gone in search of her objects by the more orthodox
methods of praying to The Virgin, and washing in the well of
the Dripping Stone.


CHAPTER IV.
A FATAL CHRISTMAS EVE.
In the midst of the poor girl’s longings for something to bring
her the love of her fellows, the messenger of death arrived in their
house, and Mrs. O’Donoghue was called away. Before passing
HER MOTHER WAS WEEPING, AND EXCLAIMING, "MY POOR
MAGGIE!”
into the realms of eternity, she called each of her children to
her bedside, and gave them that advice which she deemed most
important for their future well-being. Maggie was the last to
take her stand by the old oaken bedstead. Her mother was
weeping, and exclaiming, at intervals, “My poor Maggie!” It


was a revelation to the poor girl, who, though almost a woman
now, had never known a really kind word from either parent.
Did her mother really love her, after all ? The girl wept with
joy at the bare possibility, and, flinging her arms convulsively
and passionately round her dying parent’s neck, they' wept
together in unison. She had often wished her mother dead,
but now, oh 1 what would she not give to keep her alive!
Controlling herself, Mrs. O’Donoghue passed her thin hand
through the jet black, glossy hair of her wayward daughter,
and, exerting all her strength, warned her of the dangers to
which she, as a motherless girl, would be exposed. Especially
was Maggie to keep far from the dreadful fairies’ wishing
chair. The poor dying woman shuddered as, with almost
prophetic power, she foreshadowed the dangers likely to result
(f Maggie ventured near the unhallowed place. Having thus
delivered her soul, and extracted from the weeping girl before
her a promise that her wish in this matter should be sacred,
she sank back exhausted on her pillow. The priest had only
time to administer the sacrament before she died.
This last interview made a great impression on the young
girl’s mind; her mother had never seemed to love her, and yet it
turned out after all that she did. Perhaps others did as well ?
Her step sisters, with the exception of one, had all gone abroad
to America and Australia. She would try and love that
one, and possibly would be able to earn her love in return.
She made some efforts in that direction, but only to be repulsed.
Ah, no ! she concluded—nobody would love her. She moped
most of her time away now, until, at midnight mass on
Christmas Eve, a new world opened to her.
Although the squire was a strict Protestant, the young men
of his family used frequently to mix with the farmers’ sons
in their pastimes. Their reputation was not of the best, but


it was considered by the lads a great honour to have their
company, and even the best of the girls were glad enough to
dance with them. After the mass on Christmas Eve, Maggie
was moodily crossing the lonely fields. Earlier in the day,
she had mingled with the dancers on the green, and now,
sulky at the way she seemed to be shut out of the company
of her equals, she was in no very pleasant frame of mind as
she picked her way through hedges, and over ditches, to the
huckster’s shop she called home. She had no need of the
flaming bog-fir torch that, in her neighbours’ hands, looked
so pretty flickering in and out amongst the fields and hill-
slopes. She knew every step of the way, and was afraid of
nothing. Suddenly, however, a footstep in the rear startled
her, and, stoppmg to look round, whom should she face but
Bonaparte Fitzgerald, the squire’s youngest son. “What,
Master 80, is it you ?” she said half inquiringly, and perhaps
a little afraid. “ Yes,” said he, “ I saw you leave the chapel
alone, and I thought mayhap ye’d be lonely, and all by yer
own self, too.” Maggie was almost speechless with surprise.
Master 80, of the big house, to care enough for ugly Maggie
O’Donoghue to walk home with her from mass ! As he
strolled by her side, and gossiped about the little things that
were going on in the glen, with' now and then a neat little
compliment thrown in, Maggie walked as in a dream. It
seemed to be a perfect heaven to have someone to put his arm
over her shoulder and to speak kindly and softly to her.
Bo Fitzgerald was himself rather taken back by the readi-
ness with which she allowed him to link his arm in hers, and
the almost eager way in which she permitted him to kiss her
when, after the pleasantest hour’s intercourse she had ever
known in her life, he left her by the hawthorn bush, where
so many of hey brooding, sorrowful hours had been passed.


As he strode down the hedge-bordered lane, she watched him
until out of sight, and so long as his footsteps could be heard,
she listened breathlessly. Then, flying into the house, she
threw herself on her bed, and wept in an ecstasy of delight,
until she fell asleep. The Christmas Day sun had run a good
measure of his diurnal journey ere she wakened, and, gazing
on her surroundings, wondered what had happened. What a
beautiful dream she had had! Why, she dreamt that, coming
home from midnight mass, Master Bo Fitzgerald, of the big
house, had actually walked home with her, and talked as though
he but surely it was more than a dream ! Yes, it was
true, sweetly true. He had kissed her—she seemed to feel
its warmth even now. Maggie went about the cottcge that
Christmas Day, and many succeeding days, in a half dazed
state, but so happy that she could scarcely feel her feet
touch the earth. True it is that
There’s nothing half so sweet in life
As love’s young dream !
even when, as is so frequently the case, the love is all on
one side. Maggie often saw her Bo after that, under the old
hawthorn and in other places. He was so good—treated her
as an equal, allowed her to talk to him familiarly, as if he
were one of the fanners’ sons around ; and yet there was a
something about him with which she was not quite satisfied.
If he really loved her as he said, why was he so careful not
to let anyone know it ? Very often his last injunction, after
one of their stolen meetings, was “ not to say anything to
anyone” about their meeting. Her first impulse had been to
tell everybody, but his desire for privacy, united to the phantom
of a fear that possessed her own soul, prevented her from
saying anything about it.
Quite accidentally, through seeing some trifling present


that young Fitzgerald had given her, her father first learnt
of the intimacy between the young people. He was greatly
incensed with Maggie for her part in it, and told her enough
of young Fitzgerald’s past history to have made her recoil
shuddering from the object of her affection, if it had not been
that her father’s very harshness drove her towards her lover
for sympathy. She shrank from him, and, even though she
felt his earnestness, she gave no credit to his tale, and con-
sidered her Bo the more to be loved as a species of martyr,
in consequence of her father’s accusations, especially when the
vexed, nay, furious man, threatened that, if ever he saw them
together, he would shoot the squire’s son like a dog, no
matter if he hung for it.
She dare not, she could not tell her lover all about this
unpleasant interview, but she earnestly implored him never
to allow her father to come near him, as he had vowed to
kill him if he got the chance. Maggie was wild, and, if
Bo had been willing, would gladly have left her home and
the glen to spend her days with him, the only person, as she
said, that had ever shown her any love. But Bo could not
see it in that light. He was as anxious to avoid Mr.
O’Donoghue as ever Maggie could wish, but he had not the
slightest thought of leaving the home of his people with this
little clinging wench, although he made her all sorts of
pleasant promises. He explained to her, however, that her
father’s antipathy to him was an additional reason for keeping
their intimacy as secret as possible. Henceforth the trystings
at the thorn bush had in them a spice of danger to add to
the zest of their enjoyment—for you may be sure that wilful
Maggie loved the fruit the more that it was forbidden. Oh,
how happy she was all these months, with someone to think
■of, and someone whom she could look forward to meeting.


Her father, however, caught them at last, and a scene-
ensued ; but, to her delight, Bo escaped the piece of lead l
THEY MET AT THE FAIRIES’ CHAIR AT MIDNIGHT.
that had been so faithfully promised him. When they
managed to steal a conference again, they were both in high
dudgeon, and Maggie was nothing loth when Bo proposed
that she should meet him at the fairies’ chair at midnight,
so that they could talk over their trouble at their leisure, and
decide how to proceed to have their own way, and at the same
time spite the father. Maggie was blinded by two passions—
love and hate—and yet, through it all, the voice of conscience
reminded her of a promise yet green, made to her dying
mother. The promise and her mother’s warning, however, were-
pushed out of her mind, and, when the moon was fast slipping
to rest, she crept from her home, and hurried with nimble
feet up the mountain slopes to the glen of the wishing chair.


Ah, Maggie ! it were well that you had taken your mother’s-
advice, and shunned that place of evil name. When the lass
crept, guilty and trembling, back to her home and threw herself
on her little comer bed, she was not so happy as when, a few
hours previously, she had tripped lightly up the glen to meet
her lover. And, as she lay waiting for the dawning and the
day’s duties, she wept as she thought of the warning she had
received, and in the opening hours of that May morning she
rued her folly. Could all the evil stories she had heard of
the squire’s young son be true ? What if they were, and
that, after all, he did not intend to act any more honourably
towards her than he was reported to have done to others?
But she drove the thought from her mind. It could not be ;
he would do all he had promised.
During that month of May they often met at the wishing
chair in the midnight hours ; and, although Maggie knew she
was doing wrong, yet the very fear that, having taken the-
wrong step, if she angered him now he might turn his back
on her, and leave her to her fate, prevented her retracing her-
SHE THREW HERSELF ON HER LITTLE CORNER BED.
steps. He seemed already a little petulant, and sometimes-
answered her sharply. Occasionally it had happened, if she


ventured to push him to action—to marry her there, or leave
the village, and marry her elsewhere—he spoke in a careless
manner, which frightened her.
The crisis came. After they had been visiting the chair
in company almost nightly for a fortnight, Mr. O’Donoghue
got an inkling of how things were going, and, following
Maggie on one of her visits, pounced on young Fitz just
as the two were exchanging their first greetings. It was
MR. O’DONOGHUE POUNCED ON YOUNG FITZ.
a short fight; but the sturdy farmer was too much for the
dissipated young swell, and the last words the young man
heard were that, if he were seen in the glen again, he would be
shot, and not know who had done it. The next day the news
gained currency that Bo Fitzgerald had “ cleared out,” and
those who knew him best were the least surprised.
Poor Maggie was in great trouble. She could hardly


believe lie had deserted her, and night after night she visited
the old thorn bush and the wishing chair, lest he might be-
soniewhere about. He, however, gave no sign. Her father
seemed not to guess the truth about their intimacy, and,,
knowing that the young man had left the district, he was,
satisfied.


CHAPTER V.
A MISSION OF HATE.
'SoojT after young Fitzgerald’s hurried departure an event
happened which made a complete change in Maggie’s exist-
ence—namely, her father’s sudden death. He retired one
night in apparently the best of health, and the next morning
was found a corpse. Everybody exhibited more or less sorrow
—except, perhaps, little hardened Mag. “Why should I
want him to live?” she said savagely, to one who reproved
her ;“ he never loved me, and drove away the only one
that did.” She fully expected that Bo would come back
■now, and fulfil his promises ; but, though she waited long,
he came not. She felt that she must do something shortly,
or she would be disgraced before the whole village. There
was some money left at her father’s death, and, by the time
all his assets were realised, and everything settled, about
£IOO fell to each of the children.
What would Maggie do ? She had heard that the squire’s
son had, by his brothers’ assistance, gone to Australia. Her
blind and passionate love was fast turning to hate as strong.
With the £IOO left her at her father’s death, she would
go to the Antipodes after him. She determined to go
abroad somewhere, to escape the exposure of her shame,
and to Australia because there she might find her deceiver,
and, if he would not marry her, she had made up her mind
that he should have a very short time of it. So, before any


•of lier acquaintances guessed the truth, she was off to Liver-
pool, thence to take ship for Melbourne, keeping her destina-
tion a secret. She was the first one, she often said afterwards,
who had ever brought disgrace on their family, even as far back
as they could trace it.
At Liverpool she took passage in the ship “ Lightning
that was in June or July of 1860, and Maggie was now
about sixteen years of age. She had thoroughly abandoned
herself to the worship of Bacchus, and, for fear grog might
not be forthcoming on board, she took with lier in her cabin
a jar of whisky, another of brandy, and a quantity of porter.
She was determined that the voyage should not be a dry one,
at all events, and pretty well soaked she was all the way.
We must no longer think of Maggie as a wayward, misguided
child, though but little more than a child in years. The sad
and momentous events recorded in the last chapter—the
death of her father, the desertion of her lover, and her
-approaching motherhood, had transformed her into a woman
before her time. The necessity for hiding her shame, and
the lack of a single friend in whom to confide, had called
forth all her powers of self-reliance, strengthened by her
growing hatred to her betrayer. In personal appearance,
too, she has greatly altered since her earlier childhood.
Though still by no means beautiful, her glossy hair, bright
eyes and piquant expression, had developed a certain degree
of attractiveness which was not likely to prove a help to one
with such natural tendencies to vice, in a new country, and
without earthly or heavenly check to her wild inclinations.
Drink had, as we have said, again assumed its sway over her
character, and it is no wonder that Maggie O’Donoghue
made no friends of a desirable character on board the
•“Lightning.” The passengers were not more respectable,


on an average, than were those of other vessels trading to
Australia in those exciting times, but Maggie, by her inebriety
and her violent actions, distinguished herself as one of the
worst women on board. When the vessel arrived at Melbourne,
she went ashore and sought out a lodging where she stayed
until necessary to enter the Lying-in Hospital. Twelve days
after her confinement, she left the hospital with her babe in
her arms, without a friend in the country, and not knowing
MAGGIE DISTINGUISHED HERSELF AS ONE OF THE WORST.
where to go, or what to do. She had a little money left from
her share of her father’s will, but that she sensibly concluded
to husband as long as she could.
On leaving the hospital she stood, trembling and faint,
at a street comer for a full hour, debating what to do. She
was far from wishing to enter on a life of wilful wickedness,
and the result of her deliberations was that she made her way
to a registry office for female servants, where she found no


difficulty in obtaining a situation as a nurse at 255. per week.
Her own infant she put in other hands, and perhaps this was
ju3t as well, as she had but little love for it. Indeed, the
child’s existence seemed to add to the murderous hatred she
now felt towards the heartless and faithless Fitzgerald, upon
whom it was the one desire of her heart to avenge herself.
But for this and the drink, of which it was partly the cause,
her life might have been peaceful, and comparatively happy.
Many a time, in the quiet of her own room, she would brood
over her wrongs, and mutter, “Oh, if I could but meet him
now!” and it would have been an ill time for him had she
done so. Once, indeed, while out with her charge, she caught
a glimpse of him on a ’bus, but the surprise was so great that
she did not think to hail the vehicle, which rapidly passed out
of sight. The incident, however, gave impetus to her re-
vengeful feelings,
and she took
more active means
to trace him.
Alas, poor girl!
she had better
have met with
worse success.
Through an in-
quiry agency,
Fitzgerald was
ascertained to have gone to a gold rush at Pleasant Creek,
and here the misguided girl followed him. For once, her beset-
ting sin stood her in good stead. Making quite sure that she
now had him in her grasp she ventured on a little drinking bout,
ind when lying in a gutter, under the influence of liquor, she
law him going by with a gay woman on his arm. She tried
c


to use the loaded weapon she carried, but was too intoxicated.
Her oaths and exclamations, however, attracted his atten-
tion ; and he must have recognised her, for, on trying to find
him next day, the bird had flown.
But we are ahead of our story. While she was nursing
the lady’s baby her own infant died, and she was thankful.
During her wet-nursing her passion for liquor had not mode-
rated. She was allowed her bottle of porter a day, “to keep
up her strengthbut during the fifteen months she stayed
in this situation she spent all her earnings, and more besides,
in the purchase of whisky.


CHAPTER VI.
FOUND GUILTY OF WILFUL MURDER.
On her return to Melbourne, after the humiliating Pleasant
Oreek journey, she took a reformation fit. She would not
drink so much, Fitzgerald should be allowed to live, and she
would get honest employment, and try and better herself,
HEAVY SALES MEANT HEAVY DRINKING.
She soon obtained a situation as traveller for a carpet bag
factory, and, succeeding well, found herself earning good
wages, and a splendid commission as well. Travelling had


however, one drawback, as other “ commercials” have found out
as well as she, and that was that heavy sale 3 meant heavy
drinking. Little and often, gradually became more and
oftener, till she soon found herself muddled most of her time ;
and, as sure as she became intoxicated, so sure her old hatred
against the man who had wronged her and her family revived.
Strange to say, it was rather the disgrace to the family than
her own that troubled her, for it was her continual boast that
for 200 years not one of her name had ever done a dishonour-
able action. She was a drunkard, she had been immoral, but
“ her family ” —none could say a word against that; it was
Sana reproche.
She was now fairly started on the down grade. Her hum-
drum work as “ commercial” soon became unbearable, so she
gave up her situation, and, having made the acquaintance of
some girls of her own stamp and worse, took lodgings, and
for a season tried to enjoy herself by drinking, theatre-going,
and still more questionable pleasures. This kind of thing
went on for a good while. At intervals she took situations
for a month or two, and then, when her irregular habits dis-
satisfied her employers, she would go back to her immoral
associates, and find a living in a gayer though less honour-
able way.
' She often sickened of the existence she was living. Its
slavery galled her, its degradation was chafing to her pride ;
but she had gone too far now, and, casting aside any lingering
relics of virtue, she recklessly plunged into the career of a
courtesan. There is such a fascination about this life in its
earlier stages that many poor foolish girls are caught like
moths by its glare and tinsel, only afterwards to find out
the hideous vortex in which they have become involved.
Maggie sank lower and lower, until, in a few brief months.


we find her one of the attractions of Little Bourke-street,
in the lowest depths of the pit of Melbourne outcasts.
She was always formerly characterised by a spirit of in-
dependence, but for purposes of “ trade ” she now threw in
her lot with two other girls of her own class—one, Annie
Crozier, a young girl of nineteen, pleasant, and a favourite
with Maggie, but not over strong, and ill suited for the awful
life she was lead-
ing; the other
member of this
disreputable
confederation
being Mary
O’Rourke,
a woman of
thirty-four
or thirty-
five. The
latter was an old resident of the place, a cross-grained
and figlitable woman, “ well known to the police,” and
bearing an evil reputation, even in so wretched a locality
as Little Bourke-street. They lived in a rather neat
brick house of three or four rooms, situated on the left-
hand side of Punch’s Lane. Inside, the rooms were usually
in a filthy state, the principal articles of furniture being the


row of empty bottles which generally graced the mantel-pieca
of the front room. What few articles of clothing they had
might be found scattered here and there, and on entering you
would probably find a broken chair in one comer, a dirty
pillow in the middle of the room, liquor bottles in every
direction, and perhaps an old knife and part of a loaf of
bread on a shelf, or in a musty cupboard. What a change-
to poor Maggie from the quiet country home of her girlhood,
and how often, as her thoughts flew back to the past, she
cursed the waywardness that had brought her to her present
dreadful state. It seemed to her, however, that there was no-
ray of hope, and a fit of remorse was usually followed by an
alcoholic outbreak that forged new links in the chain that
bound her.
The trio had thus lived together in Punch’s Lane for about
six months, as many years having passed since Maggie
arrived in Melbourne, when the storm of tragedy which had
always overclouded the poor girl’s life burst in all its violence.
It was the 19th August, 1872, one Monday morning, that
Maggie awoke as from a nightmare, with a shuddering fear
of some impending disaster. She had almost forgotten her
lover-enemy by this time, but this morning she seemed to
have a presentment that she was going to meet him and, as
she expressed it, “do for him,” or that some other terrible
event was about to happen. Annie Crozier lay sleeping at
her side, and rousing her in the semi-darkness, she told her,
shuddering, what she felt, concluding with the remark, “ I
feel I oughtn’t to go out to-day.” Good-naturedly falling
into her mood, the other girl replied, “Very well, let’s stay
in bed, then, and get a good rest.”
Maggie’s drink craving, however, soon began to assert
itself, and within an hour the two were drinking at a


neighbouring public-house, in company with a number of men
and some women of their own class. By evening all three
of these companions in sin were more or less intoxicated.
Crozier went
home to bed,
while Maggie
and her older
“pal” drank and
quarrelled in
company.
A month before
this, O’Rourke
bad, in a cross
mood, said sev-
eral nasty things to her companion, and, not satisfied with
personal abuse, had touched upon a very tender spot by insin-
uating that the mother of such a girl as Maggie could not
have been all that was desirable. She had long ago found out
that the quick-tempered Irish girl could be goaded to madness
by any reflection on her parentage, and so whenever they
quarrelled O’Rourke, drank or sober, generally managed to
throw out a hint that there were skeletons in the O’Donoghue
cupboard. Maggie cherished revengeful feelings against her
on this account, not deep enough to be continually at daggers
drawn and yet sufficiently strong to break out afresh when-
ever any dispute occurred.
On this Monday evening high words were uttered and many
threats made; when, however, after a few hours on the
street the two met at Punch’s Lane, they had forgotten
that they had ever known a grievance. They were far
from sober, but yet far from satisfied. Just on closing
time Maggie elected to go round to the pub. and try


and raise sixpenn’orth of rum on tick, as money was
short. “If he (meaning the landlord) won’t let me have
it, I’ll shake it,” she said. Boniface was in a good humour,
and she secured her prize. They had had some men in the
place earlier in the evening, but now they were alone, and at
midnight settled down to drink and chat. Crozier was
awakened to have her share, but after a nobbier she crept back,
tired and sick, to bed. The two poor creatures, already very
muddled with what they had partaken, then talked and drank
for a considerable time, the conversation gradually working
round to the life of their girlhood. As the hours passed by they
again became quarrelsome, and the liquid fire imbibed did not
help to refine or restrain their language to each other. Taunt
succeeded taunt, and in the flood of mutual abuse O’Bourke
recklessly ventured on the old battle-ground, and flung the
reproach in Maggie’s face that like daughter, like mother.
“ Your mother could only have been a , else she would
never have had such a thing as you.”
Maggie sprang to her feet like a fiend incarnate. A toma-
hawk lay on the floor. In her blind fury she seized this, and
in a moment her tormentor lay dead at her feet, her skull
crashed in. What happened afterwards can only be surmised.
The wretched murderess herself, after dealing the one awful
blow behind the ear of her victim (which must have instantly
proved fatal, as she fell to the floor with a thud and never
moved again), lost all consciousness of her actions, as, though
she afterwards showed every disposition to acknowledge her
part in the deed, and even remembered the Town Hall clock
tolling, like a death-knell, the hour of four, she had no
recollection of inflicting other fearful gashes in the forehead
of the corpse, nor could she account for bruises and broken
ribs, which seemed to prove that she had, in her mad revenge,


jumped upon O’Rourke’s body in the fiendish exultation over
her fallen foe, inspired by gratified spite and inflamed by her
alcoholic potations. When her madness had spent itself,
HER TORMENTOR LAY DEAD AT HER FEET.
Maggie lay down to sleep alongside of the corpse, being
too muddled to properly understand the state of affairs.


She woke a little later on, and seeing the blood lying all
around her, attempted to bind up the head with a muffler
to stanch the bleeding, and then struggling up to the
attic where Annie Crozier was sleeping, she turned in
with her. When the girls awoke about eight o’clock,
they were still far from sober, and Maggie rose and went
for more rum, which they had with their breakfast. She
excused the absence of the murdered woman by saying,
“ Mary is lying drunk in the back room, don’t bother her.”
They stayed in the house drinking all day, and towards even-
ing strolled off to see some friends in Fitzroy. From Fitzroy,
Annie Crozier went to a friend’s house in Collingwood, and
Maggie, about nine o’clock at night, returned to the city.
At midnight, and while still under the influence of liquor,
she met Constable Flannagan in Bourke-street, and told him
in an apparently jocular manner that she had murdered a
woman. He did not believe her, and replied “ Nonsense !"
He was pushing past her, but she detained him, saying,
“ Yes, I have ! I have smashed a woman’s skull with an
axe ; if you come with mo I will show you where she is.”"
He thereupon accompanied her to the place, still doubting,
for the girl was evidently drunk, and mumbled about her
mother and the murder after a very unintelligible fashion.
When they reached the house she conducted the constable
to the kitchen, and, lighting a match, showed him the dead
body, which, although the face was covered with blood, the
horrified constable immediately recognised as that of Mary
O’Rourke. He had no option but to take the poor girl, a
confessed murderess, to the police station at Swanston-street,
When Annie Crozier, ignorant of the whole affair, reached
home on Wednesday morning, she too was taken into cus-
tody, and the poor creature was not quite certain that she
had not also taken a part in the horrible transaction.


Maggie awoke in the cells next morning, and, recognising
where she was, for it was not the first time she had occupied
such lodgings, she began to wonder what offence she had
committed. So confused was she that it took her some time
to realise the awful truth, and even when taken into court
and placed in the dock, before Mr. Sturt, charged with wilful
murder, she at first did not appear in the least to compre-
hend her position. As the policeman who arrested her, how-
ever, gave his evidence, the facts in all their vividness seemed
HE DID NOT BELIEVE HER.
to dawn upon
her, and she
sank her eyes to-
the floor. The
spectators were
surprised at her
appearance and
demeanour,
which were any-
thing but those
of a criminal
capable of the
foul murder
described in the
papers, and the
reporters rather
sympathetically
described her as
being “comparatively well dressed, with dark hair, pale square-
ly-built face, and rather good-natured looking than otherwise.’ r
There were several remands, which to poor Maggie only
seemed like the cruel way of animals feline when toying with
their prey. Every adjournment added to the torture of her


mind. She cared not for death ; in a savage sort of way she
almost longed for it, but this horrible suspense was excru-
dating torture to
her. After vex-
atious and weary-
ing delays—for,'
as she has since
expressed it, “ ev-
ery day during
this long remand
was hell itself ’’ —
the case was tried
by Mr. Justice
Molesworth, on the 16th of September. Mr. (now
Sir Bryan) O’Loghlen was Crown Prosecutor, and the
counsel for the prisoner was Mr. Wrixon (since Attorney-
General for Victoria). Annie Crozier’s evidence was not
without effect. She deposed that O’Bourke was of an ex-
ceptionally quarrelsome and aggravating disposition, and was
always in fights, in which she frequently received sound
thrashings. Only lately she had received a great chastise-
ment from a German whom she had robbed. She also stated
that when sober O’Donoghue was a veiy kind girl, and that
when O’Rourke was diseased and ill the prisoner had waited
on her, and treated her very generously. Mr. Wrixon, in
addressing the jury on the poor girl’s behalf, emphasised these
facts. He also dwelt on the fact that the prisoner, together
with the girl Crozier, had been made thoroughly drunk on
sixpennyworth of rum. Such rum as was sold in that
neighbourhood, he argued, was of a deadly poisonous nature ;
it was maddening in its effects, and set the brain on fire. It
had intoxicated Crozier, who only had a sip or two, to the


verge of stupor. O’Donoghue had taken more than her
companion, and it had gone to her brain, so that she was
not accountable *for her actions. He concluded his speech'
with a very earnest appeal for mercy, in the midst of which
his emotions overcame him, and with a broken voice lie-
interceded for the unhappy girl before the bar.
His Honour gave a very careful summing-up, in which he
appeared to attach a good deal of value to the arguments
advanced by the counsel for the defence. Maggie until now
had stood stolid and unmoved. She knew she had committed
the offence, the punishment for which was death ; therefore
she must die. That
and, being so, she
mind to meet the
What was life to
value it ? No, she
gladly leave this
had never treated
she had never tak-
She hated life and
That was the kind
dulged in as the
when Mr. Wrixon
was a certainty,
had made up her
inevitable stoically,
her that she should
would die and
wretched world. It
her rightly, and
en kindly to it.
longed for death,
of reverie she in-
case proceeded, but
had pleaded for
her, and the judge had summed up partly in her favour, a
glimmering of hope shot into her soul. What if after
all there was a chance of life; but the half-formed longing
was crushed out when the jury, after a very brief retirement,
brought in their verdict of “ guilty,” though with a strong
recommendation to mercy. When the judge rose to pass
sentence of death upon her, Maggie was as indifferent look-
ing as the most unconcerned looker-on in court.


CHAPTER VII.
THE SENTENCE—MAGGIE IN PRISON-
RIFTS IN THE CLOUDS.
A crowd of eager pleasure-seekers jostle one another through
the doorway of a Melbourne waxworks show. Within, the
flaring jets throw garish light on the waxen effigies, some of
which are bedecked as to rival Solomon in all his glory. But
it is not these which attract the chief attention ; they are but
of secondary interest. The sensation of the hour is the
O’Rourke murder, and as the gaol walls sufficiently exclude


the murderess in proper person from public gaze, the morbid
and ghoulish find some little consolation—a shillingsworth,
at any rate—in staring at her image in wax. The likeness is
not a good one, by any means, and the composition had pro-
bably served for a dozen other “ nine days’ wonders ” before
pourtraying this poor wretch of a Maggie ; still it serves its
purpose. It is certainly horrible enough, and Maggie is
tried and pitilessly condemned by the successive pleasantly
horror-stricken groups.
To them Maggie O’Donoghue was a tigerish murderess, who
amply deserved any condemnation which might be pronounced
against her—to herself she was a miserable wretch within »
prison cell, whose fierce spirit leaped up within her in per-
petual self-accusation, far more scathing than any which could
be hurled at her by a liasty-judging public. They who
feasted their eyes upon her features, and ignorantly sought to
trace thereon the vicious blood-thirstiness which they con-
cluded must dwell behind them—how could they guess the
remorse which filled her soul 1
No, they knew nothing of her inner life, and many of
their mouth-pieces, the newspapers, represented that, though a
young woman, she was a dangerous criminal, whose only
fate should have been the gallows—for the recommendation
to mercy had proved effectual, and the Governor had exer-
cised that attribute which, in instances of this kind, is a
synonym for twenty-one years’ imprisonment with hard, labour.
Maggie had given up all hope when she was made acquainted
with the fact that her life had been spared. Then a new era
dawned—the blackness of her previous despair was as the
pitchy night preceding the day of hope which burst on her
soul as a result of the reprieve. Twenty-one years, she
reasoned, would be a long, dreary term, but by good conduct


this might be shortened. The latent good in her character
asserted itself once more, and Maggie made a steadfast
resolve that in her prison life she would so act that she
should have the benefit of all the good conduct marks possible.
This resolve was made in her own strength, for practically
she knew nothing of a power higher than her own. The only-
church she acknowledged was the Eoman Catholic, and so
disloyal a member of that body was she that even when lying
for weeks in the condemned cell, expecting to end her days
on the gallows, she resolutely refused to be ministered to by
the priest, and on entering on her regular gaol life she
shunned him as carefully. She did not want religion of
any kind. It had no attraction for her, she felt no need of it,
and was thoroughly -scep-
tical about the reality of all
religious profession.
For the first three years
gaol life was all but in-
tolerable to the unhappy
girl, for though probably
as bad as most of the
women with whom she came
in contact within the walls
of Melbourne Gaol, her
“ pride of family ” had
always enabled her to dress
better, and hold herself a
little above the general run
of her Little Bourke-street
associates. Here in prison it was galling to have to
stand in a row with the rest for roll-call. She loathed
the thought that she had to be one of such a crowd.


She hated her prison dress; her sun bonnet was an
especial abomination to her. It was against regulation to
go about the gaol with her bonnet off, but whenever the
warders were not present she would snatch it off, and carry
it under her arm. To make it more presentable in appear-
ance it was her custom to strain her hominy, and use the
liquid as a starch, with which to stiffen her unfashionable
head-gear, afterwards mangling it under her blanket as she
slept. In the early years of her confinement she was
deprived of many luxuries that were granted her afterwards.
Tea she did not taste for three years, and her bed was the
floor of her cell, the hardness and coldness of which were barely
modified by the blanket which she spread over it, using her
boots as a pillow. She suffered a great deal from the cold,
and at last, rheumatics and other ailments coming on, she
was obliged to have a little more consideration shown her. In
those first bitter, monotonous years, the food, too, was a great
hardship. The hominy—three ounces of meal, and half-an-
ounce of dark sugar—was sometimes more than she could
manage to swallow, and, if she turned against her breakfast,
four ounces of meat, twelve ounces of potatoes, and twelve
ounces of bread did not go very far at midday to make up for
the fasting. Hominy again for tea made up the day’s dole
of a prisoner’s fare.
In spite of the fact that for two weary, painful years she was
afflicted with rheumatics so badly that she could not comb her
hair or lift her hand to her shoulder, yet she never missed a day’s
work. She felt so ill at times that she would willingly have
died, but the longing for liberty kept her on her feet. She
knew that every day she lay abed would tell against her.
A black mark would mean so many more, days and weeks of
this intolerable gaol life—this living death. She had made up
II


her mind to get the shortest possible term of imprisonment,
therefore with her indomitable pluck she kept at work.
The poor girl, suffering nearly every day, had been eight years
an inmate before she was considered sufficiently delicate to
require medical treatment.
Maggie, as the time went by, rapidly gained in favour
with the officials, and ere long we find her forewoman of the
needle room. There was a great variety of work to be done,
and she had to learn how \to make everything so as to show
the others. This gave her something to occupy her mind, and
in a small way, something to live for, and more cheerfully than
before she endured the daily round and common task. Usually
she had about seventy women working with her. There were
others of course in the gaol, picking oakum, scratching the
fur off rabbit skins, and doing other work of a like character,
but these seventy or eighty were picked out as adapted to
needle-work. Some of the work was very rough, such as mak-
ing corn sacks, haversacks for the military, sandbags, wanted
at the time of the Russian scare, and many other such jobs.
The gaol also did all the sewing needed for the lunatic asylums,
the industrial schools, the “ Nelson ” training ship, and similar
institutions. Maggie’s position was one of responsibility, and
she was much trusted by everybody in power. She considers
that she only made one enemy all the time she was in gaol, and
never had a bad mark for misconduct. Although she had so
much in her hands, she never stole an article, which is some-
thing unusual among prisoners having her opportunities.
It was her duty to measure out the material to the prisoners
working under her, and also to cut out the patterns. Every-
thing in the gaol is measured to a fraction. They know
exactly how much cotton or calico, or other material it takes
to make each article. For instance, one reel of cotton will


sew four shirts, and a girl or woman who is given a reel is
expected to show four finished shirts as a result. If a needle
is broken, the two halves must be accounted for before
another one can be supplied. Everything has to be counted
over, even to pins; for, if anything were left over, the
majority of the prisoners would not hesitate to appropriate
it to their own use.
Maggie was much respected by her fellow prisoners, many
GLIMPSES OF THE SALVATION ARMY.
of whom loved her, far more than prisoners usually love each
other ; she had a great influence over them, and could by
a word often quell a rebellious spirit when the punitive
measures of the gaol had been quite unsuccessful. Towards
the latter part of her detention her lot became more bearable ;
she had more liberty and greater comforts. She on one or two
occasions caught glimpses of Salvation Army marches from


top windows, and on enquiring from short-sentence women,
she heard a good deal of the Army’s kindness to ex-prisoners’
and others of her class. She had begun to think of her
approaching entrance into the world again, and she felt so-
helpless that she almost looked forward to it with fear, on
account of what looked to her the only possibility of her earn-
ing her bread and shelter. But gradually she began to see her
way clear to a better life ; rescue officers visited the gaol regu-
larly to hold meetings, and were allowed, under certain
restrictions, to talk personally with the prisoners in their cells.
Maggie had several opportunities of speaking with them, and
was much impressed with their evident desire to help her.
One thing, however, was much in her way. True, her
allegiance to the Romish faith had been of the slenderest, but
she had a superstitious dread as to what would happen to her
if she allowed herself to be helped by these Salvation Army-
people. She had imbibed the notion that because the Army
is not connected with the Roman Catholic Church we must
necessarily be Protestants, and antagonistic to the religion of
her family. When someone urged her to make up her mind
and give her heart to God, “ I’m a Catholic,” would be her
response; “I cannot come.” But as from cell to cell she
took the evening meal of hominy and brown sugar, many an
earnest word of warning and encouragement from our visitors
fell upon her ears, to sink into a heart which silently treasured
them whether she owned it or not—words which haunted her
in her dreams, and which nothing, day or night, seemed able
to shake off.
True loyal Catholics were her family, two of her brothers
having taken orders as Romish priests, respectable all of
them, and respected in their circle of acquaintance. They had
never done much for her, it is true, and yet she feared to break


away from the traditions of what she was pleased to consider
her “ good family.”
At last, after fourteen weaiy years (cut down to that as a
result of her uniform good conduct), her day of release dawned.
The Governor of the gaol took her on one side and gave her
' -some good advice, kindly offering to send her to another colony
if she pleased, but she preferred to go to the Brunswick Rescue
Home, and on the 15th of September, 188 S, a blessed day to
her, she took her seat in the Army conveyance and was
speedily at the Brunswick Rescue Home, where she was re-
ceived with open arms. It seemed good to Maggie to be
welcomed thus, and yet she did not like receiving favours,
■especially from those she looked upon as Protestants. Once,
on the way, she nearly jumped out of the vehicle, but when
she reached the shelter of the Rescue Home, and saw the
snug warm beds, with their snowy coverlets, and breathed for
the first time for so terribly long the atmosphere of lioerty ol
peace and of home, her half rebellious fit was dispelled, and
she burst into a torrent of grateful thanks.


CHAPTER VIII.
MAGGIE FINDS LIBERTY AND PEACE.
For some length of time, however, after her admission to
the Home, Maggie refused to listen to anything about her
soul. “ It’s no use talking to me,” she would remonstrate;
“ I’m a Roman Catholic, and all these years in prison I’ve
never once offered a prayer.” “ Ho, no, it’s no use ; part of
my punishment these years has been to lie on the boards, and
lying there I’ve cursed God from my very heart.”
She was weak and ill at first and very feverish, and for a
long time was obstinate and quick tempered. Sometimes
she would fly away to her room in a great rage, but after a
short time would re-appear, saying, “ I’m a fool after all.”
Twice during those early days she rushed madly out of the
house, vowing never to return, but each time the Captain
caught up to her before she could reach the tram in Sydney
Road, and a few earnest loving words of reason brought her to
her senses, and back to the shelter she had so foolishly left.
Her keen, almost mad remorse made it especially difficult to
deal with her so as to encourage her to trust God for
salvation. To the end of her life the anniversary of the
murder was a terrible day for the officers of the Home. On
that morning she would come out of her room looking fierce
with misery. She could not eat, nor would any diversion lead
her to forget the date of that event which had burnt its every
detail into her memory. Once she took a Rescue officer


into the house in Punch’s Lane, where the murder was com-
mitted, but it was a dangerous thing for herself, as the
thought of the murder almost drove her mad.
“ Let me suffer,” she would groan to any would-be com-
forter, “ I deserve it. I’ve sent a soul to hell. Let me be.”
However difficult a task to bring hope and peace to so des-
pairing a soul, the officer in charge never gave it up. Over
and over again she would take Maggie aside to her own little
room to pray and plead with her for the Saviour’s sake. But
when her good friend prayed, Maggie would never kneel.
“ Such mockery for me,” she would explain, “ when there is
no prayer in my heart.”
One day there had been special private prayer for Maggie
THREW HERSELF ON HER KNEES.
all over the Home, and believing much in this, the same officer
once more drew her apart for personal dealing. Suddenly


“THANK GOD, I’M FREE.”
enough even to surprise her counsellor, Maggie threw herself
down on her knees and sobbed like a child—the first tears she
had shed for fourteen years. The healing hand of the world’s
Saviour was laid upon her soul in that hour. The hard look
vanished from her face immediately, and although very, very
ignorant of her duty as a Christian, she was a changed woman,
and tried to do her best.
When she rose from her knees she said, “ This is a new
life to me.” The next Sunday morning she testified in one


of the barracks: “ Thank God this morning because I
am free ; for nearly sixteen long years I never bowed the knee,
and neither feared man nor devil, but now I’m saved and free
—free from a prison cell and free from sin."
In public testimony she very rarely, if ever, mentioned the
darkest page of her life, yet her few simple, earnest words
would invariably melt the hearts of those who heard her. She
felt all she said far more deeply than she could speak, and the
conviction of this always told powerfully.
One of her great fights for a long time was to get
the better of her temper. The remembrance of the past
was a bitterness to her, and any fresh reminder would
throw her temper out of gear altogether. When in gaol
her cell number was 21, and by some mere accident this
was the number put on her locker and bed when she came
to the Home. When she saw it she tore her hair and raved
like a maniac for hours. “ That 21 will never leave me!”
she cried. The officers prayed with her and said they
would alter it. “No, no,” she said at length, “leave it
there, it will be a reminder to me and help me to gain the
victory.” On another occasion the devil assailed her
through the drink craving. She was wearing the uni-
form, . and had already got her bonnet off so as to enter
the public-house, when by looking to God in the very
nick of ■ time she got the victory. When she reached
the Home she told the officers, adding, “It was the
bonnet which saved me, or else I would have been drunk
before now.” She finally got rid of her evil temper in a Home
meeting, and wrote to a dear friend afterwards, “ I don’t flare
up now.” This was true, and as a result her usefulness was
very much enhanced.
One of poor Maggie’s last great battles was over the


appetite for snuff ; she had acquired it in gaol, where this
luxury (?) is obtained from short-sentence prisoners, who-
bring it in hidden in their hair and in other ingenious ways.
She used to say to the Home officer, “ Oh, Captain, I can do-
anything else for you except give that up.” At last, in a
great holiness meeting at South Melbourne, the snuff went
the way of every evil, Jesus, as she afterwards quaintly
testified, being more to her than her snuff.
THE BONNET SAVED ME.
Maggie O’Donoghue was peculiarly fitted by her natural
gifts, and the experience acquired in her long intercourse with
the criminal classes for dealing with such women and girls as
came under the care and control of the officers of the Bruns-
wick Home. Most of the applicants for admission she knew
personally. If the Home officer was not satisfied with the
story told by an applicant, Maggie would be brought, and


possibly the girl bowled out in a tissue of falsehoods,
Maggie would ask, “ Do you remember the day I helped
DO YON REMEMBER THE DAY?
to bath you ?’ r
or with some-
similar perti-
nent question
would she con-
vince the de-
ceiver that truth
would be more
likely to serve
her end than
fiction. Even
when she did
not know a girl,
her extensive
acquaintance
with that class-
of character en-
abled her te
patch little
pieces of information together. She would spend hours un-
ravelling a mystery in any girl’s history, and she would
generally have it right in the end. The officers considered her
invaluable ; she was soon put in charge of the needle room,
was promoted to Sergeant, and later on, when a hospital ward
was opened, she found her work assisting her poor sisters in
sin back to health and to virtue. She was very successful in
the hospital. If the doctor was detained, she always knew
what was wanted, and never failed to give the right medicine.
She could understand the girls better than anyone else, and
her knowledge of their characters, their leanings, and their


•temptations, enabled her to help many a one in time of trial,
and endeared her to the hearts of all. She laboured zealously
for their salvation, until failing health compelled her to rest.
This she only sorrowed over, on account of the girls she so
longed to help. “Now, ye young ones,” she said in one of
her last talks with them, “ if yez’d only take my advice, ye’d get
saved yourselves from the gaol and from sin. It is.all very
■fine now, but wait till yez get a long sentence, and then ye’ll
think of my words.” Yes, her words live in many of their
hearts, for there are girls in situations to-day, virtuous and
happy, who owe to Maggie O’Donoghue their first step
■towards a pure life.
One more great battle with the enemy of her soul was to
•be Maggie’s lot. When she heard of the death in gaol of
poor Annie Crozier, she nearly went out of her mind, and
had to be carefully watched for days. One thing that helped
to bring her through was a dream she had had a few days
before her conversion. In this the devil had appeared to her,
telling her he had got O’Rourke—he would soon have
Crozier ; and, although Maggie was slippery, he would have
her yet. This made her mors than usually watchful. The
disease that was making itself her master was consumption,
and as it advanced she had many seasons of despondency, but
by looking continually to God she conquered. The devil used
to bring before her mind the face of the woman she had
murdered, and would try to make her doubt her acceptance
-with God. Her last fortnight on earth she was especially
tried, but her character had strengthened, and her faith was
clearer and purer than in the early days of her Christian life.
It was only natural that, after the friendlessness of her
•girlhood, she should cling to those who showed her love in
-these later days, and her ideas of heaven were much tinged


by her love for and belief in the communion of saints. In-
her long-lingering dying days this was much in her thoughts.
Only the Friday before she died she spoke to the Captain of
the joy she would have in meeting Mrs. Booth and other
Army saints in the glory-land. While the Captain was
praying with her she said, “Well, some time will be your
SOME TIME WILL BE YOUR LAST VISIT.
last visit, but you will get near to me in heaven; I will be-
able to carry a message to lots of them up there.”
She remembered with great satisfaction a woman who had
been rescued from a Chinese camp, and had often filled a
prison cell. This woman she had been privileged to point to
Christ in the Home ; and when, a short time afterwards, the
former had gone to be with God, Maggie held her hand in
hers, and whispered, “ It’s all right; I will meet you by-and-
by!” As death drew nigh she looked forward to fulfilling


Tier promise. “ What a row there will be in heaven!” she
said one day, as she spoke of this re-union. A few hours
before she died, and when no one was expecting death so
soon—for she looked and felt as well as she had done for
months—she was asked if she had any doubt of her acceptance
with God. She replied, “No ;it is all right—it is just a
•clear sky I”
She was up and walking about the house the last day she
spent on earth. She ate hearty meals, and at nine o’clock
At night the Captain put her to bed, and had only left her a
few minutes when, hearing her coughing violently, she re-
turned, to find her with her head hanging over the bed, and
blood trickling from her mouth. She had broken a blood-
vessel ; and, as the Captain held her in her arms, she passed
away. Her comrades had hoped she might live a good while
longer, but she always shook her head; the superstition of
her childhood was too much for her—this was the fatal month
of May. On the 16th May she was bom, on the 11th May
she paid that cursed visit to the wishing chair, on the 21st
May she received sentence of death for murder. It must
needs be that she should die in the same month ; and so, as
we have seen, on the 24th of May, 1891, her spirit passed
away to be with God.
Great as her influence was known to be among those whom
she had special cause to regard as her sisters, the real depth
of the love she had won was only realised by our officers as
they conveyed the news of her death to the localities where
those poor sisters resided. In the slums it for a time hushed
the lewd laugh and the careless conversation, and Maggie’s
death formed a sad but interesting topic of talk, and many
the instances of kind deeds and loving words recalled*
which perhaps Maggie had herself deemed forgotten long ago.


In the cells of the Central Police Court, as the visiting
■officers told the sad tidings to the poor inmates, the general
grief displayed was extraordinary, and two young girls
■especially, who had come under her influence in our Bruns-
wick Rescue Home, were even violent in their demonstrations
of sorrow, weeping bitterly at the thought that the one of all
■others who understood them so thoroughly, and loved them
so well, had gone for ever.
Her funeral was largely attended, the crowd itself being a
living testimony to the redeeming power of Christ—the
presence of officers and soldiers of all grades who had wit-
nessed her self-denying labour as a Rescue officer, the groups
of girls of the fallen class, who knew both her dark past and
•the beautiful change in her later life, and numbers of others
whose respect she had won—all testified to the reality of
Maggie’s Christianity and conversion.
The earlier life of this daughter of Islimael had been spent
in strife—“ her hand against every man, and every man’s
■hand against her”—but the religion of Jesus Christ had so
■transformed her that her life was given up to serve and save
her fellows. She is in heaven now, and has met some of
those who were made a blessing to her and others whom she
led into the liberty of Christ. Her trials are past, and her
labours ended. She is at rest.
Maggie’s is not an isolated case. Hundreds of girls who
•come to Army Rescue Homes drunken and depraved have
been turned into good wives, respectable servants and Chris-
tian members of society. Shall the Army go on with their
work of lifting the fallen ? They can only do it to the extent
■of the financial assistance rendered by their friends the public.
of girls come pleading to be helped who have re-
luctantly to be told that there is no room. There ought to


be room for every penitent Magdalene. Will the readers of
this little life-story please see that the blessed work of rescue
shall not suffer from lack of funds 7
4.; . ,/;/;
é“- '1? ) V11»; 14/
3.. £4? 5;:
CONTRIBUTIONS.
Persons desirous of helping
the Salvation Army in its work of
Rescue and Salvation,
are invited to send contributions to the
Officer in charge of the Colony, or,
THE COMMISSIONER,
HEADQUARTERS. MELBOURNE.




“Her heart was filled with tenderness again.”


A DAUGHTER OF ISHMAEL.
THE
STORY OF MAGGIE O’DONOGHUE
TOLD IN VERSE.
ffltlboutne:
Printed at the Salvation Army Headquarters, 185 & 187
Little Collins Street.




PREFACE.
The enormous success and sale of the prose version of “A
Daughter of Ishmael ” have encouraged the publication of a new
edition of the same story told in verse. It occupies less space
and for this reason will be found of great use to officers wish-
ing to recount this true and wonderful instance of the power
of Divine grace, not only to pardon ana cleanse one whose
sins were indeed “as crimson,” but also tc make such an one
a power for good as formerly an agent of evil. With this in
view, songs and solos have been arranged suitable to meetings
of such a character. The llustrations are reduced copies of
a number of the coloured slides prepared at considerable cost
for use in limelight exhibitions.


"3IU tc au^eC^


A DAUGHTER
of ISHMAEL
INTRODUCTORY.
STAGE I. —CHILDHOOD.
Band (Irish airs)—“ March and fight," B.J. 28; “I’ve left the
devil,” B.J. 17 ; “ Land of rest,” B.J. 149.
WIOIM away amid the Munster hills,
YfJjT Almost shut out from other human ken,
• I'. And knowing naught of party strife or ills
Which vexed in other parts their countrymen ;
Troubled but little by the hated tax,
And neither grieving o’er nor brooding harm,
In peace the peasants grew the feath’ry flax,
And in contentment tilled the fertile farm.
Such were the humble folk of Ballygale,
The hamlet’s name at which begins my tale.


ONE LITTLE DAUGHTER YOUNGER THAN THE REST


a
down the hill, near where the rustic bridge
Crosses the mountain stream above the falls,
is There stands an inn ; while nearer to the ridge
A whisky shop of ill repute, where brawls
Would mar the quiet of the lovely vale,
And lawless liquor prompted lawless deeds ;
Here did the foolish youth of Ballygale
Of future ruin sow the certain seeds.
Not far from either, and between the two,
A shop kept by one named O’Donoghue.
m Pf? ](i H T ' n l l ™™* o life and fair in trade,
Peter (for short we use his Christian name)
1 • Had here for years a steady income made,
The while his second wife, a thrifty dame,
His family of sons and daughters trained.
These now had mostly
left the parent nest,
Mated and married, but
there still remained
One little daughter,
younger than the
rest—
Maggie, five years of age,
our heroine,
Just now, however,
drunk at Mick’s
shebeen.


drunk at five years old, a wayward child.
Her mother’s sorrow and her father’s shame ;
Looked down on by her half-sisters, a wild
And wilful sprite, whom none as yet could tame.
Truant from home to shirk some household task,
To Mick’s shebeen her little feet have strayed ;
Her lips are sucking at a<
whisky cask,
A hole in which a rusty
nail has made.
And Mick, a godless man,
looks on with glee,
Nor tries to check the-
child’s depravity.
tANf a thrashing-
- r fell to Mag-
gie’s lot,
And oft her head was
hanged against a wall,
While kicks and cuffs front
all around she got—
All hands against her, hers against them all.
For, truth to tell, the little loveless maid
Cared precious little what they said or thought,
But like a very outlaw she repaid
New punishment by some new mischief wrought.
At ten years old a thief and drunkard too,
The way looks dark for Mag. O’Donoghue.


more years glide away, by Maggie spent
Just how she list: some part indeed at school,
. • More often truant on some mischief bent,
Or in the lonely glen beside a pool
Whose holy waters (so tradition [saith)
Sprang from a spot where flowed a martyr’s blood,
And ’twas believed that, ever since his death,
Great blessings followed bathing in the flood.
A stone which marked the martyr’s grave was known
"To pilgrim bathers as the Dripping Stone.
(VERSE AND CHORUS.)
Tune 13, M.S., August, 1888.
A Fountain flows from Jesus’ side
To wash away your sin ;
Come, plunge beneath its crimson tide !
’Twill make you white and clean.
Oh, come to this Fountain —sinner, come!
There’s cleansing in its flow;
The Saviour says, “ Come, and from thy sin
I’ll wash thee as white as snow 1”


V
Q M 3 Q Maggie had a motive here to roam—
/Wl With years had come a longing in her breast
' vJ' For human love. Not one of those at home
A single kiss upon her lips had pressed,
Or said a kindly word for kindness’ sake -.
Since she was little ; while the neighbours feared
To let their daughters a companion make
Of one so wayward and so wildly reared ;
Poor Maggie thought ’twas beauty that she lacked,
And for this did the holy pool attract.
V 7 M 5 rain the pilgrimage upon her knees—
(V ’Tis not for her its fabled virtue flows ;
vy In rain the stern old parish priest she sees,
He naught but prayers and penances bestows.
Vainly she tries her utmost to be good,
Her every effort met by taunts and jeers ;
Made fun of, sneered at, and misunderstood,
Wild rage and passion take the place of tears.
In evil moment in her dire despair
Maggie bethinks her of the Wishing Chair.


(SOLO—BEAUTY.)
Tune —"’Tis yetrs since last we.met
’Tis not by magic spell
That beauty must be sought,
’Tis not in convent cell
That beauty may be bought;
’Tis purity of heart
Brings beauty to the face,
’Tis when from sin we part
We learn the truest grace.
Who lovely as the Lord,
The Bright and Morning Star ?
His beauty our reward,
If we His likeness wear.
Ciiokus —Oh, the Blood, it cleanses me, &c.
fQ martyr’s shrine she ignorantly came,
But still with motive pure. The Wishing Chair
Bight well she knew did bear an evil name,
For deeds of shame and sin had happened there—
Dark deeds, discussed with fear and bated breath,
And darker hinted at of rape and wrong,
Of lustful love and murder’s horrid death ;
Yet had this awful place attraction strong,
For legend said, “ Who sitteth here at dawn
Shall have her wish, nor disappointment mourn.”


r all must reap according as we sow,
'if'? For S or desires, like garden seeds,
/\\ Must each develop if allowed to grow,
And blossom into good or evil deeds.
Poor Maggie’s brought to her both joy and pain
The first a mother’s love, for ere she died
Her heart was filled with tenderness again,
And with her failing breath too late she tried
To warn her weeping daughter to retrace
The steps which led to folly and disgrace.


STAGE II.—MAIDENHOOD.
HIS ACCENTS SOFT FELL ON HER EAR.


M-*
\P F Christmas Eve, returning from the mass,
J Vi 1
'w A gay gallant, “ Bo Fritz ” o’ertook the lass,
■ "Wending her way across the lonely fields,
Heedless the danger that the darkness yields.
Eor when his accents soft fell on her ear,
“Is that you, Maggie ? ” felt she aught of fear.
The Squires handsome son ! where was the harm ?
A reason for surprise, but not alarm.
And as he chatted, walking by her side,
She felt as if in Dream’and in her pride.
T&j? OT once ’ nor *' vlce ’ w^len shades of evening fell
]|v| The pair would meet in some secluded dell—
. Maggie, for fear her father’s fiery wrath,
Bo Fritz, to weave his web in secret path.
jet in innocence
on Maggie’s part
She met the scoundrel
who had won her
heart;
And when a trifling
gift their secret told,
Defended Bo in
language hot and
bold ;
Refused to listen to
her father’s word,
Believed them lies the
stories that she
heard.


Ml If D lie ’ un s entle
in liis anger,
. \ swore
To kill lier lover if she
saw him more.
And thus it was at mid-
night, while he slept,
She to the trysting-
place in trembling
crept.
Forgotten now her mo •
ther’s dying prayer—
The trysting-place was-
at the Wishing Chair.
Dark shadows fell
: round the guilty twain,
Shadows of sin which, ne’er could lift again.
Unbridled passion, whether love or hate,
To certain ruin is the open gate.
\l. '
K[f? L one drowning, clutches at a rope
jM However rotten, Maggie nursed the hope
•j v Her trusted lover would, to save her name,
Make her his lawful wife, and hide her shame.
Vain hope indeed ! The coward libertine
Left her—nor more in Ballygale was seen.
None can foretell what will'in life betide,
And at this juncture Maggie’s father died.
A sudden death—more'unexpected still
Ho left one hundred pounds to her by will.


(SONG.)
(Tune 14, JSI.S. , August, 1886.)
A hiding place from every storm,
A shelter that defends from harm,
A light that cheers the path of gloom,
Is Christ to all who to Him come.
To heal the broken heart he came,
To free the captive from his chain;
The blood He epilt when He was slain
Brings guilt}- sinnerthome to God!
Oh, wounded heart ! thy sorrow bring,
For thou may’st gain relief from Him
Who gave His life, so to redeem
Each grieving soul o’erthrown by sin.
Thy bonds shall break, oh, captive one !
For Christ to set thee free has come ;
He waits to give the precious boon
The freedom thou hast sought so long i


STAGE III.—WOMANHOOD.
Jgirl of sixteen—nay, a woman now,
For sad experience lias marked her brow :
'T' Experience that ages more than years,
Taught in sin’s school and learned with bitter tears.
To those, who only judge by outward gaze
More comely far than in those childhood days,
Yet reckless of her life, and hard of heart
As for Australia’s shore we see her start.
Not now for beauty or for love she yearns,
But for Revenge on her betrayer burns.


f'
Af? ? I to none * icr secret to betray,
- She seemed to others gayest of the gay -
Danced, drank and Rested all the voyage through,
Nor scarce a sober day pcor Maggie knew.
Melbourne at last was reached ; her child was born,
But never lived its parentage to mourn.
Maggie a situation soon obtained,
And might a peaceful live’ihood have gained
But for the murd’rous hate, which like a fire
Smouldered and burnt in impotent desire.
fwes as a 'bus passed swiftly down a street,
- She caught a glimpse of him she wished to meet,
But rush of feelings left her mute and pale,
Without the power the vehicle to hail.
Yet to Revenge this
disappointment
cruel
Fresh impulse gave,
as fire fed by fuel.
Through agents she
employed her
quest to seek,
She learnt that Bo
had gone to Plea-
sant Creek.
The poor, misguided
girl gave up her
place,
Hoping at last to
meet him face to
face.


e s m? F°p even Maggie, in a sober mood,
jj Dared not upon her awful purpose brood ;
So when she reached the little mining town
In fiery liquor tried her thoughts to drown.
And while she helpless in a gutter lay
Bo passed—upon his arm a woman gay.
She cursed and raved, and yet it might le said,
For once her weakness served her in good siead.
Oh, with what gladness she the morning hailed,
To find her wicked, murd’rous plans had failed.
(SOXC.)
Though dark be your pathway, dear sinner,
Not one ray of light do you see;
Come now to our blessed Redeemer—
He’s anxiously waiting for thee.
Why not, why not, why not come to Him now ?
Why not, why not, why not couie to Him now ?
You’ll find in Him perfect salvation,
By repenting and turning front sin;
Let go this vain world and deception,
And let the dear Master come in.
Step into the Fountain, poor sinner,
The blood washes whiter than snow ;
Then right into glory you’ll enter,
As shouting and singing you go.


m kas [ like him of old of whom we read,
'yjgff Whep from the power of devils seven freed,
Instead of taking Christ with him to dwell,
Admitted “other sev-
en ”; so, sad to tell,
Maggie, whilst giving
up her wicked hate
And schemes of ven-
geance, left an open
gate
Through which the
demon drink soon
led the way
To vice and folly’s soul-
destroying sway.
And, trusting her own
feeble might, in vain
Her struggles, often
made, to burst their
chain.
\(f- Q j-j | Jsj 1 Q her life as lower still she sank,
To drown remorse the deeper Maggie
drank,
Until with two companions of ill-fame,
She plied the dreadful trade without a name ;
Her home a brothel, where the wretched three
Lived for a while in wanton gaiety.
The joyless gaiety that breeds Itegret,
And leaves the one desire but to forget.
This was in ’seventy-two, a fatal year-
To fallen Maggie, as you now shall hear.


\.
fj'j’ night, while in a street called “Little Bourke”—
A Melbourne slum—Maggie, and one O’Rourke,
.>. With Annie Crozier, Maggie’s other mate,
Got on a drunken spree, returning late
To what they called their “ home,” in Punch’s Lane.
Ere closing time Maggie went out again,
Making her way once more to a hotel,
To get more rum—true liquid fire of hell.
Crozier, o’ercome with drink, oblivious slept.
The two talked on as past the dark hours crept.
/®I KI? aS 1G l’ < l uor v^e benumbed their brains
Dark passion o’er their souls usurped the rein 3
''yjf'* And drove them on from idle jest and vaunt
To words of anger, bitter sneer and taunt,
Until in fatal mo-
ment came a
word—
The last that from
O’Rourke was
ever heard—
“ Your mother was
a Scarce
the slander said
Than, mad with
fury, Maggie
struck her—
DEAD.
A tomahawk upon
the floor had lain,
And Maggie sent it
crashing thrJtfgli
her brain.


Qjg le cor P se the wretched murd’ress lay
In drunken stupor till the break of day,
Then staggered to the attic where her mate
Slept all unconscious of O’Bourke’s sad fate.
To drown her sorrow and her secret hide,
Maggie with rum herse'f and Annie plied,
And then it happened, wandering in the street,
Crozier an old acquaintance chanced to meet ;
And Maggie, left alone, o’ercome with dread,
Bethought her of her crime—and of the dead.
Jj-j shuddered at the thought
of going home,
• ,x - Yet from the spot her foot-
steps would not roam.
Then midnight struck, and "caring
but for rest,
She to a constable her sin confessed,
But when she woke next morn in
prison cell,
She woke, alas ! but to a living hell.
Before her gaze arose the awful past,
Which o’er her soul its fearful shadow cast.
Maggie was tried, condemned to death, and would,
But for God’s mercy, ’neatli a gallows stood.


(SOKG).
(Tune 1, M. S., duly, 18SS.)
When God has set His judgment-throne,
Sinner, you’ll be there !
Then each will have to stand alone,
Sinner, you’ll be there !
Wlien the stars from heaven are falling,
And for mercy sini ersare calling,
On that great eternal morning,
Oli. sinner, you’ll be there 1
When saints appear on God’s right hand,
Sinner, you’ll be there !
And sinners on the left shall stand,
Sinner, you'll be there !
When God shall say, “Ye blessed, come !”
Sinner, you’ll be there !
Or, “Flee, ye cursed, to your doom !”
Sinner, you’ll be there !


] F^W 3 long years in prison Maggie spent,
jP Her conduct showing how she did repent
Her past career ; and yet she did not know
The pardon Jesus waited to bestow.
But now and then the Army marching by,
Seen from a window, caught the prisoner’s eye,
And she from fellow prisoners learnt the aid
They offered with their Prison-gate Brigade.
And thus it came about on her release
She found a home and, better far, found Peace.


(SOLO—PEACE.)
Tune —“ Write me a letter from home.”
Not the rustle of uncut corn,
Nor the whisper of swaying trees,
Nor the echo of music borne
On the breath of a summer breeze.
Not the song of a distant sea,
Nor a chord from a harp Divine ;
So restful the voice that to me
Spoke peace to this poor heart of mine.
It filled all my soul with its calm
Like a pool on a surf-beat shore ;
It healed all my .wounds like the balm
That they tell of in Gilead of yore ;
It spoke of an infinite love
And bade all my troubles to cease —
The voice that from heaven above
To this poor heart of mine whispered ‘ ‘ peace. ”
pointed her
J( unto the One
•*' who gave
H s life that such as Mag-
gie He might save,
And she who once so much
for Hate had striven
How strove from Love—
for much was she for-
given.
She donned the uniform
and worked for God
And in her Saviour’s footsteps years she trod.
But many a tempest swept o'er Maggie's soul
And many a fight before she reached the goal;
Like tidal wave dark Memory would surge
And from the Rock her footsteps seek to urge.


JmN’D doubt would enter whether such as she,
Who’d sent a soul to God, could pardoned be,
And once the thought near drove her to the drink
“ The bonnet ” checked her on the very brink,
And taking up again her cross she sought
Fresh help from God and in His service wrought ;
Raising the fallen with a
loving hand,
Until God called her to
the glory land.
And still her memory
lives in many a heart
Who found it hard from
Maggie then to part.
fwa* zj::
' May in 'ninety-one
Her fight was ended and
the victory won,
And round her grave lie r
loving comrades wept
En grief-, yet joy, to think of her who slept
The sleep that He to His beloved gives,
The body resting while the spirit lives
To sing with ransomed hosts around the throne
Of Him who is the sinner’s Help alone.
“ Worthy the Lamb who was for sinners slain,
Whose blood was shed that we might heaven gain ”


Tune 12, if. S.. Vo\. /., B. 19.
When the shadows are thickly falling,
As I pass through the valley of death,
And the trumpet for me is calling,
I will shout with my latest breath.
By the Blood that did redeem me,
0 Lord, Thou wilt receive me !
And before the throne then flying,
I will answer, “ Here am I!”
When the trumpet sounds, I’m ready now to go, &c.
He to me gave His pardon freely,
From my name He has blotted my sin,
And in death’s valley He’ll be near me—
Of His mercy I then will sing.
Hay by day His hand has blessed me,
His love has never failed me ;
And I therefore love Him truly,
And with joy shall greet His call.


AN ALTERNATIVE SERIES
OF
SONGS & BAND MUSIC
FOR
MUSICAL COMPANIES.
“Sad and Weaky ” ... B.J. 78. Sing chorus
Company Song “ Flows for Me,” M.S., Vol. IV.
> “ Where the angels bright are
singing ”
Band “Pardoned through the blood,”
B.J. 97
Solo “ Poor fallen one,” M.S., Vol. 111.
Company Song “ Weighed and wanting ”
Band “ If the Cress,” or any other regular
Army tune as if in the distance.
(The March past the prison)
Band “Home, Sweet Home,” B.J. 85.




