

' IyfjV. IvAlJn Jjlulnl . r
/flits* rfof'd ■tviih 70 TJuf/rn rintjs on Wood hi/ S. (Julrn-f. -
'lmon, /■ . i(‘ M‘Cutrhf' ,i, \ n/Uriti ■'US Collin*- SK, thorn nr. '■/
r 4 •, a-




REV. J. J. BROWN.




A DELINEATION
OF THE
CHARACTER, TALENTS.
PHYSIOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS
NATURAL ADAPTATIONS
By REV. RALPH BROWN.
WITH A TABLE, ON PAGE 3, NAMING OVER 200 PURSUITS IN
LIFE. AND SHOWING THOSE FOR WHICH BY
NATURE IS BEST ADAPTED.
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
516 Little Collins Street West.
mdcccxcii.


PREFACE TO THE CHART.
This chart, I think, will be found as perfect a delineation of the
physical and mental powers, character, and adaptation of the person
for whom it is intended, as can be given without a carefully written
personal description, which would require too much of my time and
your money.
The illustrations with which this little work abounds make it
more interesting and instructive than any other phrenological chart
I know of.
Of course, in a printed delineation the real details of the character
are only approximate. No two persons are exactly alike, and to
bring out all the nice points of difference would require a carefully
written analysis.
You must bear in mind that the same sized organs will not, under
all circumstances, manifest the same strength and activity. Thus,
Mr. Smith, with language marked 7, but with activity 4, and
secretiveness and caution 6 each, will show less talking power
than Mr. Brown, whose language is marked 5-J, but whose activity
is 7 and secretiveness and caution 4 each. Again, Jones, with
destructiveness and combativeness each, may manifest less of
those qualities in his character than Robinson, who has them only
5 or 5-|, because Jones has the counteracting organ of benevolence
7, but Robinson has it only 4.
The table on the opposite page, with a list of trades, professions,
&c., alphabetically arranged, and marked to show the pursuit, or
class of pursuits, for which you are most adapted, I hope will be
found most useful. Some cannot follow that for which nature has
best fitted them, hence it is well to know the next best thing. The
lad may be designed by nature for a profession, but his father cannot
educate him. Some can turn their hand to a great many things ;
so I mark a number of pursuits by figures, showing the degrees in
which I consider you suited for them. Hence 7 means the highest
adaptation; and the trade or profession underlined, thus, baker, is
the one I consider you most suited for. I hope by this means to
guide many a lad into his right path in life, and to help many a
young man to make his life a success instead of a failure.
N.B. —I desire to acknowledge my indebtedness, in the prepara-
tion of this chart, to the works of Messrs. G. S. and L. N. Fowler,
R. B. D. Wells, Bridges, Sir Geo. Coombe, and others; also to
the care and skill of Mr. S. Calvert, of Melbourne, in the prepara-
tion of the illustrations.
R. B.


TRADES AND PROFESSIONS.
I. Mechanical. —Blacksmith, bricklayer, builder, butcher, baker,
bookbinder, basketmaker, brickmaker, barber, brassfounder, carpen-
ter, chandler, coacbbuilder, cabinetmaker, cabman, contractor, con-
fectioner, cooper, carver, compositor, cutler, cutter, carriage-trimmer,
closer of boot uppers, coachman, dairyman, drayman, dyer, engineer,
fellmonger, factoryman, foundryman, farmer, general mechanic, gar-
dener, gunsmith, gasfitter, hatter, hairdresser, barnessmaker, horse-
man, horticulturist, instrument maker, joiner, jeweller, locksmith,
labourer, mason, machinist, manufacturer, miller, mill work, moulder,
miner, musical instrument maker, monumental mason, pattern maker,
painter (house or coach), printer, paperhanger, plasterer, plumber,
polisher, picture-frame maker, penman, saddler, shoemaker, silver-
smith, stonecutter, sailor, shipbuilder, tailor, tanner, tentmaker,
trimmer (carriage), tinsmith, turner, upholsterer, undertaker, watch-
maker. Females: Cook, dressmaker, milliner, mantlemaker, matron,
tailoress, fancy work, housekeeper, lady’s companion, lady’s maid,
parlour maid, domestic, nurse, hospital nurse.
11. The Fine Arts. —Artist, artificial florist, architect, carver,
drawing, draughtsman, designer, decorator, engraver, florist, gilder,
painter (historical, landscape, or portrait), landscape gardener,
modeller, musician, music teacher, musical composer, poet, portrait
colourist, photographer, pianoforte tuner, sculptor, telegraph operator,
teacher, governess.
111. Professions: Literature, Science, and Education. —Actuary,
accoucheuse, author, attorney, analyst, anatomist, assayist, botanist,
barrister, biblewoman, bishop, chemist, college professor, clergyman,
conveyancer, correspondent, captain (mariner), civil engineer, dentist,
doctor, diplomatist, demonstrator, editor, elocutionist, geologist,
governess, herbalist, historian, journalist, judge, lawyer, lecturer,
librarian, linguist, metallurgist, minister, mineralogist, missionary,
naturalist, navigator, novelist, orator, politician, post-medical pro-
fessor, professor, preacher, physician, phrenologist, reciter, reporter,
solicitor, surgeon, surveyor, statesman, teacher, veterinary surgeon,
writer.
IV. Commerce and General Business. —Agent, accountant, auc-
tioneer, auditor, banker, boarding-house-keeper, broker, bookkeeper,
bookseller, baker, butcher, cashier, canvasser, commercial traveller,
clerk, clothier, collector, conductor, contractor, dentist, druggist,
draper, dry goods, financier, fancy goodsman, fruiterer, furrier, grocer,
grain merchant, general dealer, hardware, hotelkeeper, importer,
insurance agent or secretary, ironmonger, jeweller, land agent,
landlord, merchant, music seller, manager, office work, publisher,
produce dealer, salesman, saleswoman, stationer, storeman, specula-
tor, shipbuilder, stockbroker, undertaker, wholesale warehouseman,
assistant in business, master in business.
V. Miscellaneous. —Explorer, mariner, farmer, policeman, detec-
tive, politician, stock breeder, squatter, stock-dealer, horseman, post-
man, watchman, caretaker, position of trust, shorthand writer,
copyist, secretary.


Number and Name or Condition
or Organ.
Size of
Condition
or Organ.
Number of Page where
Described.
m
A
I. Vital Temperament
See page 6 or 7
O
hH
H
II. Motive Temperament ..
» 8
Q
A
III. Mental Temperament ..
„ 9 or 10
O
■
o
IV. Balance of Temperaments
„ io
< {
o
V. Activity
„ 13
O
o
1-5
VI. Excitability
„ 13
o
1—1
02
VII. Organic Quality ..
„ 14
w
Oh
VIII. Size of Brain*
„ 15
1. Amativeness
„ 16 or 17
A. Conjugality
„ 17
2. Parental Love
,, 18 ,or 19
3. Friendship
>> 19
4. Inhabitativeness ..
5. Continuity
99
,, 21 or 22
E. Vitativeness
„ 22
02
£
6. Combativeness
>. 23
<1 ,
o
7. Destructiveness ..
,, 25
Oh
8. Alimentiveness
„ 26
O
F. Bibativeness
„ 26
9. Acquisitiveness
.. 27
10. Secretiveness
„ 28
11. Cautiousness
>. 29
12. Approbativeness ..
„ 30
13. Self-Esteem
,, 31
. 14. Firmness
„ 32
, , Circumference. Oyer Top. Over Refleotives. Over Percent; vet
Average Measurements of 1 , v
an Adult Male Brain 1 22 lnches - • • 14 inches. .. 13 inches. .. 12 inches.
Do.
Do. Female Do. 21£ ,,
.. 134 „
h- 4
to
»-*
* Your Head Measures —
TABLE for marking the Sizes of the Conditions and
of the person thus
I would mark any man’s head measuring below 20 inches, by 1; from 20 to 20i
Sove 2s| b/7’ 3 ! t 0 211 ’ by4; 22 t 0 22i ’ by 5 ; to 23 *’ by 6 5 anything


25. Form ..
26. Size
27. Weight .. ..
28. Colour
29. Order
30. Calculation
31. Locality ..
82. Eventuality
38. Time
34. Tune
35. Language ..
36. Causality ..
Organs, and the pages where the Character and Talents
marked are described.
Number and Name
of Organ.
Conscientiousness
16. Hope
Spirituality
Veneration
Benevolence
Constructiveness
21. Ideality
B. Sublimity
22. Imitation ..
Mirthfulness
Individuality
Comparison
Human Nature..
Size of the
Organ.
Page where Described.
See page 38 or 84
„ 52
„ 54
„ 54
Agreeableness
EXPLANATION OF THIS TABLE.
Our scale for marking the relative strength and activity of the different conditions of
the body, size of the head, and organs of the brain, is from Ito 7: Figure 1 means
too small; 2, very small; 3, small; 4, fair; 5, full; 6, large; 7, very large.
When an organ is half-way between two sizes, it is represented by as or 3J.
In such cases read both paragraphs, and the medium between the two will be right.


VITAL TEMPERAMENT.
REV. C. H. SPURGEON.
This embraces the heart, stomach, liver, lungs, and bowels; in fact,
that whole system of internal organs which sustains life.
Where this temperament is large the person is not large-bodied,
but is broad built, broad and round-shouldered; the face is plump
and round, the features fairly even, but all formed on the broad
rather than long principle.
7. Very large. —You are plump, round, and full-chested. You
are fond of fresh air, and a good table when you come home. You
are active, and fond of exercise, but would rather take it in the shape
of play than hard work. Your fondness for good living, lively
company, plays, sports, amusements, all expose you to the danger of
forming habits of intemperance. You are impulsive, enthusiastic,
full of versatility of talent, but too fond of a change of study.
Your turn of mind is practical rather than theoretical. You are in
danger of running into the lymphatic temperament, which would
ruin you mentally and physically. A fast now and then would be
better for you than a frequent feast. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are well proportioned, and your physical machine
is well supplied with the oil of life. You are impulsive and
enthusiastic. Unless your mental temperament is also fully
developed, you are more suited for work or business than for a pro-
fession that requires fine literary tastes. It is true that Spurgeon,
who shows the vital temperament very large, is one of our most
successful living preachers, but he has a good proportion of the
mental, and his forte is his great force of character, with fine
sympathies, rather than anything purely mental. You will need all
the caution, will-power, and grace of God you have, to save you
from the temptation to indulge your propensities, which will at times
beset you. This temperament requires not so much restraint as
guidance.
5. Full, —You possess a fair share of the vital element. You
are as described in 6, but in a less degree. You will do your fair
share of the work of life if you see success ahead. While you are
not lacking in life’s force, yet you haven’t much to spare.


4. Fair. —Your vitality is sufficient to sustain life and health to
a fair age, if well cared for, but you have none to waste, and cannot
afford to take liberties. Take a fair amount of outdoor exercise,
but have your rest also. Don’t worry about the affairs of life. Take
enough of plain but nutritious food, else you will suffer from indi-
gestion. Get all the enjoyment out of the old world you can.
“ Laugh and grow fat.”— Cultivate.
3. Small. —You lack vitality, and are too languid and inefficient.
You soon get exhausted, and do not get the nutriment out of the
food you eat. You will often feel dejected and low. Use all the
fresh air, good, sound, plain food, and rest you can, to get up
your steam power. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You lack vitality and physical strength, and
unless you increase these your mental powers will never be worth
much, as the blood won’t flow to the brain to give it vigour. You
are troubled with cold hands and feet. Your heart is too weak to
drive the blood to the extremities. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You are altogether wanting in vitality. Your
life will be a short one, and not much good.
LYMPHATIC TEMPERAMENT.
MOTIVE TEMPERAMENT.
The Man who Lives for his Stomach
Fig. 5.
The WORKING MAN.
LYMPHATIC TEMPERAMENT.
This is the phlegmatic temperament, or the “ eat, drink, and no
work temperament.” It gives a double chin, large abdomen, and
general fulness of person—too much fat. This of late years has
scarcely been called a separate temperament, but is considered rather
an over-development or diseased form of the vital temperament.
Where there is a tendency to this development, the remedy is little
food, but plenty of work.


MOTIVE TEMPERAMENT.
(See Fig. 5, p. 7.)
This is a development of bones and muscles. Action is a necessary
part and parcel of life, and it is produced by bones and muscles.
All these bones and muscles make up the framework of the physical
man. They give the body its build and form. Fowler says they
are to the man what “ ropes, timbers, and pulleys are to the ship,
and constitute what is called the ‘ motive temperament.’ ”
7. Very large. —Your physical frame is strong, tough, and
enduring. You would be hard to kill. You will never carry much
flesh—all muscles and bones, and these of the hardest, strongest
kind. You could endure prolonged labour and fatigue without being
exhausted, and even when “done up” would soon recuperate. You
are energetic, determined, and persistent; never give up. With
the mental temperament also largely developed you will make a leader
in the world, but with it small you are much more suited for a
“ working man” than a thinker, and would then be well adapted for
some mechanical pursuit in life.
6. Large. —You are strong, hard, and tough. If you give your
body fair play it will last you a long time, and do much work in the
world. You feel strongly about any matter you take in hand, and
without a good share of the mental temperament and some culture,
you will express your thoughts and feelings in a forcible but rather
coarse way. This temperament, with the mental or 6, is the one
that makes itself felt in the world ; but, mind, it needs controlling
and guiding, for when people of your constitution become bad, they
become very bad. It is a great power for good or evil, and generally
lives long to accomplish either. You are a worker, and will be
doing something.
5. Full. —You have a fair share of motive power, and have some
vigour and determination. You are not afraid to work. You can
do and endure it very well. You are suited for an active life, but
the relative development of the other temperaments will determine
the direction of your action, whether of a mental or physical
character.
4. Fair. —You have only moderate motive powers, and cannot
endure a long-continued strain of either muscle or brain. You can
do work of a certain kind, but not fond of what we call hard work.
You prefer some lighter employment, which is quite right for you.
But cultivate your muscle and bone all you can, for you need it.
Cultivate.
8. Small. —You lack motive power in your constitution. You
haven’t the physical strength for continued exertion. You are
easily tired, and will never be able to do much with muscle and bone.
Cultivate these at any cost, or you wdll be a poor tool physically,
2. Very small. —You are very weak in muscular force. You must
give attention to the cultivation of this. Walk, run, row, swim,
dig, chop, ride—anything to make muscle and bone.


MENTAL TEMPERAMENT.
Fig. 6.
REV. F. W. ROBERTSON.
This embraces the brain and nerves, or that portion of the body that
is specially used by the mind in the production of thought, feeling,
memory, &c. This temperament is shown by a fine silky hair, a
thin, clear, delicate skin, fine sharp features, and a pear-shaped face,
with the large end of the pear up.
7. Very large. —Your brain is of a very fine, active quality, and
predominates over your body. Your mental states have a powerful
influence over your physical condition. You are very refined in your
tastes, quick and clear in your perceptions. Your mind is very
active, and you can easily think and learn. You are sympathetic,
aspiring, earnest, and eager to learn. You should be a book-worm,
and your whole nature will be greatly gratified with some literary or
artistic pursuit. If your language and eventuality are large, with
good application and physical strength, you can learn anything, and
will gain any honours you set your heart on. As a man, you will
be a leader in thought; and if your self-reliance is in proportion to
your ability, you will occupy a foremost position in any profession
you take in hand.
6. Large. —You are as described in 7, but in a smaller degree.
You are more inclined to mental than physical enjoyments. You
will be fond of literature and art ; ambitious, clear-headed, quick-
witted. You can be brilliant, if not really great, and could succeed
in the higher branches of literature, art, or science if you have had
early mental culture. Win your bread by your brains.
5. Full. —You have a fair endowment of mental power, and with
early training and proper mental culture you could write and speak
well. You are not so sensitive or delicately organised as the man
described in 6 and 7, and so, perhaps, you are better fitted to come
in contact with all classes of people. With large vital and motive
temperaments you will have more force than refinement of thought.
Other things being equal, you are better suited for business or some
mechanical pursuit than for the purely literary.


4. Fair. —You have some mental power, and with early educa-
tional advantages you will get on. But with the vital and motive
full you are better adapted for manual labour, manufacturing,
mechanism, or business than for a profession, and will like work
more than books. Cultivate. (&gN
3. Small. —You are not fond of study, and would fall to sleep
over a dry book. You would rather work than read, unless the
book was of the exciting and trashy kind. Get your bread by the
“ sweat of your brow.”
2, Very small. —You are mentally obtuse, and it would require a
surgical operation to get a thought into your head.
BALANCE OF THE TEMPERAMENTS.
A well-balanced temperament, with each strongly marked, is by
far the best. Then you have greatness, genius, strength, and force
of character with perfection and harmony. When each is fully marked,
and all equally developed, then you have the true and really great man.
Excessive vital gives life, enthusiasm, physical power, and enjoy-
ment, but with too little of the mental and moral to guide and
control; it then gives coarseness and animality, also a liability to
intemperance and over-indulgence of the lusts and passions.
Excessive motive, with deficient mental (as in fig. 5, page 7), gives
force, power, but too much of the harsh and sluggish, so that the
talents lie dormant.
Excessive mental (see fig. 6, page 9) gives too much mind for the
body, too much theory and sentiment, exquisitely beautiful and fine,
but lacking force, ruggedness, and stamina. But let each be large,
and you have vital energy, physical stamina, and force, with mental
power and grandeur of thought.
In the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon (see fig. B,page 6) the vital is the largest,
which gives him his enthusiasm, sympathy, susceptibility, and force;
but he has also a good share of the mental, with large moral qualities.
The late Rev. Dr. Yaughan (see fig. 7, page 11), Archbishop of
Sydney (Roman Catholic), had the mental 7, the vital 6, and motive
4. He was truly a great man mentally, with much culture and refine-
ment. But with the motive 6he would have had more force of
character, and, humanly speaking, a longer life to have accomplished
the desire of his heart.
The Rev, Dr. Moorhouse (see fig. 8, page 12), Bishop of Melbourne,
has the mental 7, the motive 6, and vital 4 or 5, with great activity.
This is the temperament that rules and governs the world when
joined with large self-esteem and firmness. Bishop Moorhouse has
had all the advantages of early training and culture ; also, good
language, and a splendid memory , and lam proud of him. He is a
grand man. He is fitted by nature to be a leader among men, and, by
the grace of God, he is using his extraordinary natural powers with
vigour and diligence. Like David, he is serving his generation
according to the will of God. I pray, God bless him ! and make
him even a greater power for good in the old land than he has been
in this young but fair and glorious Australia.


TEMPERAMENTS.
Mental, 7; vital, 6; Motive, 4.
Fig. 7.
THE LATE REV. DR. VAUGHAN, ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY,




TEMPERAMENTS.
Mental, 7; motive, 6; vital, 5.
Pig. 8.
REV. DR, MOORHOUSE, LATE BISHOP OP MELBOURNE.




ACTIVITY.
7. Very large. You are very agile, lithe-limbed, and quick-
motioned, and your mental operations are equally rapid and facile.
You are always wide-awake, eager, knowing, and brilliant. You
are liable to over-work yourself and become prematurely exhausted.
Restrain.
6. Large. —Yours is a restless, active, lively organisation. You
speak rapidly, comprehend quickly, and decide at once on the course
to be pursued, unless caution is large. You are never still.
5 and 4. Full or fair. —You have a fair degree of activity, but
are likely to be sufficiently deliberate to weigh the pros and cons
before deciding bow to act; are not lazy, but prefer light work to
heavy. Put steam on, and push ahead. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are rather slow and deliberate in your movements,
are seldom or never in a hurry, and always take plenty of time to
consider Your mental operations are slow, and you are apt to see
the point of a joke, if at all, after the laugh is over. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are too slow to be of much service to your-
self or anybody else—decidedly inert. Try to cultivate activity by
pushing about. You should have some one “ after you with a sharp
stick.” Cultivate.
EXCITABILITY.
7. Very large. —You are remarkably impressible, very easily
excited, subject to extremes of feeling ; greatly exalted at one
moment and much depressed the next ; driven now this way and
then that by constantly changing impulses ; and very much disposed
to exaggerate everything, whether good or bad. Your need is to
restrain this excitability—first, by avoiding all stimulating food and
drink, and all unnatural or violent mental excitement; and, second,
by cultivating a calm, quiet, enjoyable frame of mind. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are constituted as described in 7, only in a some-
what lower degree—too susceptible to external influences for your
own welfare or that of your friends.
5. Full. —You are sufficiently susceptible to exciting causes, but
not readily carried away by any sudden impulse ; are self-possessed,
and act coolly and with forethought.
4. Fair. —You are very cool, deliberate, and placid, and allow
external things to sway you but little. You act from judgment, not
impulse.
3. Small. —You are rather dull, and not easily impressed by
surrounding circumstances. You are too cold and passionless. As
you cannot be roused yourself so you cannot impress others. As a
speaker you would be too slow and dry.
2. Very small. —You are dull and obtuse—generally half asleep,
and might as well be fast asleep. Wake up, man, and enter with
some spirit into the busy, active world around you.
13


ORGANIC QUALITY.
“7. Very large. —You have a remarkably refined, sensitive, and
delicate organisation ; are susceptible of exquisite enjoyment and
intense suffering; and are greatly affected by extremes of heat and
cold, especially the latter. You are adapted to fine and light work
rather than to that which is coarse and heavy, have poetic and
artistic tastes, lofty aspirations, and tender sympathies. Being
inclined to live too far above the common interests and pursuits of
life, you fail to find full appreciation, and are subjected to much
suffering by contact with the rough every-day realities of this life.
Cultivate a more robust bodily condition—eat, drink, sleep, and
grow fat—and try to live more in the real and less in the ideal world.
6. Large. —You are fine-grained, high-toned, and delicately
organised ; susceptible, sensitive, and sympathetic; refined in your
tastes, pleasures, and aspirations ; and repelled by whatever is low,
coarse, or gross. You are liable to extremes in feeling and acting ;
you suffer keenly, enjoy deeply, and are often greatly exalted or
much depressed; have exquisite tastes, love the beautiful, and
desire, if you do not always seek, the good and the true.
5. Full. —Yours is neither a coarse nor an over-wrought organi-
sation. Your tendencies, so far as your constitution affects them,
are upward rather than downward, and your tastes elevating rather
than degrading. Still, you must avoid all those habits which
minister to the animal passions and clog mental manifestation.
Strive to elevate yourself far above the coarse and low in life.
4. Fair. —You are rather deficient in quality or delicacy in your
organisation, plain in your tastes, practical in your views, not very
poetical or sentimental, and better fitted for the matter-of-fact
routine of every-day life than for the higher walks of literature and
art. You must cultivate the mental temperament, and be careful to
contract no debasing habits, as one error in a person of your organi-
sation is likely to lead to others, and to final ruin.
3. Small. —Your organic quality is below the average, and your
mental manifestations sluggish and weak. You are better adapted
to manual labour than to study, and should not attempt any of the
more delicate mechanical trades. You must try to make up, by the
assiduous cultivation of your intellectual and moral powers, for your
lack of natural organic endowments. Avoid, by all means, drinking,
smoking, and low company.'
2. Very small. —Yours is a coarse-grained structure, and all your
appetites, tastes, and desires are of the plainer, coarser kind. There
is the most urgent need in your case to restrain the passions, to put
yourself in the way of moral and religious influences, and to cultivate
the intellectual faculties so far as you are able.”— R. B. D, Wells.


SIZE OF BRAIN.
7. Very large. —lf your organic quality be good and your activity
sufficient, you should manifest extraordinary mental power; and if
there be also a proper balance between the various groups of faculties,
you are capable of taking a place in the first ranks among the
intellectual giants of the age. Such a mind, backed up by adequate
physical stamina, will overcome all obstacles, and achieve greatness
in spite of all difficulties. But quality must be there as well as
quantity; but the very fine quality is rarely found in a head so
large as yours.
6. Large. —lf your organic quality is large, yours is a mind of
great power, and you can, if you will, make yourself widely felt in
society. You are capable of managing extensive enterprises, taking
broad views of things, and of drawing correct conclusions from
ascertained facts. If you are a scholar, you should be widely known
and admired in the sphere of letters, and exert great influence
wherever the supremacy of mind is acknowledged. Much, however,
depends upon the tendencies impressed upon your character by the
predominating group of organs, and your power will be a blessing
or a curse to yourself and to the world, according to the manner in
which it is used.
5. Full. —With the proper physiological conditions, you are capable
of accomplishing much, and attaining a high position in the direction
of the leading faculties, acquiring an excellent education, and mani-
festing talent of a high order, but have not that commanding and
all-conquering genius which can bend everything to its will.
4, Fair. —With activity largely developed, and good bodily con-
ditions, you are capable of manifesting fair talent, and of succeeding
well in a business for which you are specially fitted. Out of this
sphere your abilities would be commonplace and your success
doubtful. You are quick of perception, but neither original nor
profound.
3. Small. —You have sufficient brain, if conjoined with good
organic quality and a fair share of activity, to give you a moderate
degree of ability in practical matters, but little planning or directing
talent. You will do best when working under the direction of persons
better endowed than yourself with mental power. Strive to improve
your intellect by means of reading, study, and conversation with
intelligent persons.
2, Very small. —You are weak in mind, and need the guidance of
other intellects in every undertaking ; are incapable of managing
any business successfully yourself.


I.— AMATIVENESS.
Fig. 9. The FLIRT.
Fig. 10. The OLD MAID.
Love foe the opposite sex—desire to be with them, to
CARESS, KISS, AND FONDLE THEM. EXCESS OR ABUSE :
Sensuality, licentiousness. Deficiency ; Cold-hearted.
7. Very large. —Love to the opposite sex is one of the leading
traits in your character, and will influence your whole life. You
have an ardent desire to love, and be loved. You always show
your best side in their company. You are winning in your manner,
gentle and sympathetic, and wish to fondle the loved one. You also
yearn for the caresses and endearments of affection. Coldness or
indifference from the beloved one would make you feel that life is
worse than death, especially if your hope is small. You need a
large moral development to guide and control this passion, or it will
drive you to ruin. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are described in 7, but in a less degree. You
have a strong attachment to the opposite sex ; they act as a load-
stone to you ; and this strong love element will powerfully influence
your whole life for good or evil—as you control it, or allow it to
control you. You are greatly influenced by personal beauty and a
good bodily development. Seek intellectual capacity and, above
all, genuine moral worth in the one you love, and this power in you
will be an ever-flowing source of joy and blessing. But, remember,
the fire that warms and cheers, also destroys.
5. Full. —You love the opposite sex, especially if personal beauty
be joined to moral worth and mental power ; yet you can control
your love.
4. Fair. —You can be warm, and even loving at times, but
generally show only a moderate degree of attachment to the opposite
sex. You can do with them, but can do without them too. You
can be happy in the marriage relation, but will need real worth and
genuine love in your companion to keep the fire of your own love
burning steadily to the end of life. Cultivate.


3. Small. —You are rather indifferent to the charms of the other
sex. If your friendship be large, you will make friends, but your
attachment will be more friendship than sexual love. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You may not hate the other sex, but you neither
love them, nor will you be loved by them.
1. Too small. —You dislike the company of the other sex, and
will show the vinegar side of your character to them.
A.—CONJUGALITY.
Desire to marry strong attachment to one constancy.
Excess and abuse : Jealousy, envy towards love rivals.
Deficiency : Fickleness, inconstancy of love.
7. Very large. —You will love really but one, and will be blind
to the charms of all others. You will be blind to the faults of the
one, but will require the same exclusive attachment from that one.
If you have not yet lost your heart, be careful where you bestow it,
for if disappointed you will never forget it; and if your continuity
be large it will seriously affect you to the end of life. Restrain.
6. Large. —You will be perfectly satisfied with the companionship
of the one you love. Keep your love under control till you are sure
that the object is worthy, and that your love is reciprocated, for you
cannot afford to fail in the love of your heart. You will not be
quick to see faults in the loved one, and when seen will cover them,
and in fact will tolerate in the loved one almost anything but infi-
delity to yourself—that would break your heart, A person with
this organ 6 will rarely make a flirt, unless amativeness be larger
still.
5. Full. —You can love warmly and truly the one of the other
sex to whom you give your heart, yet will not be blind to their
faults, nor will you be trodden on by them. Moreover, if your
attachment be interfered with, you would feel it very much for the
time, but would love again under proper circumstances.
4. Fair. —If fortunate in your first love, it may be yours for life;
but if not, you may have a good few, for you can change the object
of your affection, saying, “As good fish in the sea as ever were
caught.” Cultivate.
8, Small. —The charms of one will not blind you to the attractions
of others, and if your amativeness is large you can flirt a bit, and
enjoy it, too ; yet you may be caught some day. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —Through amativeness you may be a general
lover of the opposite sex, but would not soon tie yourself down to
one. If a man you would get on at Salt Lake,
1. Too small. —You will make a crabby old bachelor, or a
crotchety old maid.
K.B.—The round dove-like eye denotes this organ large, and the
long, half-closed eye small.


2—PHILOPROGENITIVENESS, OR
PARENTAL. LOVE.
Pig. 1L
Pig. 12.
GOOD MOTHER.
BAD MOTHER.'
Love of childeen, pets, and animals in geneeal, especially
FOE THE YOUNG DESIEE TO HAVE CHILDEEN. EXCESS:
Will spoil childeen. Deficiency : Will neglect
THEM, OE BE HAESH WITH THEM.
7. Very large. —Your love for children and pets is very great, and with-
out a good deal of firmness and some destructiveness you will surely
spoil your children by over-indulgence. You will sacrifice your all
for them, and if they are taken you will refuse to be comforted. If
your caution is large and hope small you are in a constant state of
anxiety about them ; and if you have no children you will surely
have some other pets to take their place in your heart. Restrain.
6. Large. —As a parent you will he tender and indulgent to a
fault, and unless guided by firmness and high moral consideration,
you will spoil your children ; and even when almost forced to punish
them, you will be much more hurt than they will. You are fond of the
young, and they like you ; they will soon rally round you and trust.
Mind, for then- sake, you must, contrary to your own feelings, be
firm and determined with them, demanding absolute submission and
perfect obedience.
5. Full. —You can love your children well enough, yet not
foolishly ; can be kind and loving with them, yet firm and resolute ;
will work hard for them, yet will not sacrifice everything to them.
4. Fair. —You will love your own children, and, with benevolence
large, will feel compassion for the helpless young ; yet children in
general must be clean, neat, and good to win your love. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You don’t care much for children, and become irritated
when you see other people spoiling them. As a teacher you would
be too severe, unless your benevolence is quite large. Cultivate.


2. Very small. —You don’t like children or pets, unless they are
very bright and good ; even then you only tolerate them.
1. Too small. —You dislike children, and they don’t like you a
bit.
3-FRIENDSHIP.
Social feeling—leads to friendliness, sociability, love
of society. Excess : Blind attachment to friends —
WOULD BE LED TO GOOD OR EVIL BY THEM. DEFICIENCY :
Cold-hearted, unsocial, selfish, distant.
7. Very large. —You make friends quickly, and your love for
them is of a very warm, strong kind. You will make almost any
sacrifice for them. When you have once made friends you will be
blind to their faults, and you will not allow a word to be said
against them in your hearing. Friendship forms a leading part in
the happiness of your life. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are very social, warm-hearted, and friendly.
You crave for friends. If impulsive, you make friends quickly, and
you like to stick to them through thick and thin—in prosperity and
adversity you are the same. You should be very careful in the
choice of friends, for they will greatly influence you for good or ill.
You are hospitable, kind-hearted, generous, and, in fact, a “jolly
good fellow.” But if your acquisitiveness and caution are not large,
you are likely to get into financial difficulties in helping your friends.
Don’t back their bills, for some day they may sink and take you
with them.
5. Full. — You are friendly, and can make friends, but not
foolishly so. You will not sacrifice all for them. You are social,
hospitable, and will have many friends, yet will have few right
through life.
4. Fair. — You can make friends, and if they serve your purpose
you can keep them for some time. If your acquisitiveness is large
and benevolence small you will consider business before friendship,
when your friends get stranded. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are slow in making friends ; in fact, you never
had many. People generally think you distant, cold, and unsocial,
and they are not far wrong. It is only one here and there that
gets through your ice to the warmth of your heart.
2. Very small. —You don’t care for society ; would rather be
alone. You don’t make many friends, and don’t care to. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You are a regular grumpy old hermit.


4—INHABITATIVENESS.
Fig. 13.
Fig. 14.
“ STICK-AT-HOME.”
“RAMBLER.”
Love of home —patriotism—desire to stick in one place
7. Very large. —You are almost foolishly fond of your home
and country. This is the organ that makes patriots, that has led
many to die for home and country. You are homesick and miser-
able when from home, and if possible will reach it at night, no
matter how rough the road or dark the night. It will be a very
bright prospect that will tempt you to leave home. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are very fond of home, and would like to live
and die in that one place. The place where you have lived, loved,
and acted is to you the dearest, loveliest spot on earth. No matter
how humble it may appear to other eyes, you can always see some-
thing about it very charming, and will always feel “ Home, sweet
home ; there is no place like home.” You would not change it for
the mansions of the rich. If well mated your home will be your
heaven here. You will be happy in it, and make it happy.
5. Full. —You are attached to the old house at home, and
would not desire to leave it merely for a change ; yet if circumstance
drives you, or Providence calls you from it, you will soon get
over your home-sickness, though it will be painful for a time. You
will make another home, and settle down to be happy there.
4. Fair. —You like home if the surroundings are pleasant and it
makes you happy, but you will not break your heart about leaving
the old place. If your locality be large, you would like to travel and
see the world. You would not lay out all you have on home, as
though you intended to stick there for ever. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You don’t care much for home. It would not take
much to drive you from it, and you would greatly enjoy travelling,
as you like to see new places. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are a rambler, or a rolling stone, and, if
continuity be small, you want a constant change of scene. Cultivate.


S.—CONTI N UITY.
Fig. 15.—Man of one idea. Fig. 16.—Wandering thoughts.
Connectedness of thought and feeling—power of keeping
THE THOUGHT FIXED ON ONE DRY SUBJECT APPLICATION.
Excess: Prolixity; too much amplification and
detail. Deficiency; Too much love for change, lack
OF APPLICATION.
7. Very large. —You have great power of application; you may
not be quick to fix your mind on a subject, but you are slower still to
change. You dislike to leave anything unfinished. You want to
exhaust the whole subject in hand before you leave it, and, as a public
speaker, would exhaust the patience of your hearers, too, through
your over-elaboration of one point. Your danger will be monotony
and sameness in all you do. Restrain.
6. Large. —You can apply your whole mind to the subject in hand
and follow out a train of thought, even on a dry subject. You will
be very thorough in all your studies, and will attend to all the
details in any plan. You will appear absent-minded at times—
absorbed in one thought. You will dwell too long on one thing, and
will be called long-winded. You dislike change, and if your affec-
tions are once fixed, you would feel disappointment very keenly; in
fact, if your hope is small, it would break your heart. Restrain.
5. Full. —You are disposed to have one iron in the fire at a time,
and to stick at the thing in hand till quite finished; yet not foolishly
so, for you can drop it if necessary, and fix your attention on another
subject, though reluctantly ; as a speaker or thinker you will
work out the subject or argument without being tedious.
4. Fair. —You can fix your attention on one thing, yet you can
change without difficulty. You like to have many irons in the fire.
When you have done with one thing you like to get to another with-
out delay. You can take hold or let go easily- If disappointed, you
will not break your Leart, With araativeness large and conjugality
small, you might become a flirt or coquette. Cultivate.


8. Small. —Yon lore change. You will leave many things un-
finished. You are afflicted with wandering thoughts. With large
friendship, easily make new acquaintances. Your great lack is
application. You will never go mad through dwelling on one thing.
Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are rambling in your thoughts and conver-
sation, and mix up a lot of things in confusion. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You are very fickle. Never the same two minutes
together. Cultivate.
E—VIT ATI VEN ESS.
Love of existence—tenacity of life. Excess ; Dread of
death. Deficiency : No love for life, rather wish
FOR DEATH.
7. Very large. —You cling to life with great tenacity; you won’t
die till you can’t help it, and then only after a great struggle. You
dread death too much, and dying will be hard work to you.
Restrain.
6. Large. —You love life, and shrink from death as though it
were annihilation. You have great power to resist disease; and will
never say die ; in fact, when attacked you will rally and recover
when friends despair, and when many would die. You fear death
too much, and should learn to think of it not so much as death, as
really an introduction to a far more glorious life. Restrain.
5. Full. —You love life fairly, yet have no very great dread of
death, and, if your religious faith be strong, you will meet it with
fortitude.
4. Fair. —You cling to life, and have fair power to resist the
approach of disease, yet have no great dread of death as such ; in
fact, in trouble you would almost wish to die. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You don’t care for life for its own sake. You would
like to live for the sake of children or friends, but apart from the
good you hope to do here, you would as soon die as live ; and if
hope be small, at times you will wish to die. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You have very little power to resist disease, and
not much desire to stop death. Unless very favourably circum-
stanced, you will find an early grave. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —Existence is nothing to you, and is only desired
as p. means of gratifying other propensities.


6.—COMBATIVENESS.
LARGE.
SMALL.
Fig. 18.
Fig. 19.
“Will have the last Word."
“ Peace at any price.”
Courage, defence, pluck, boldness, self-defence. Excess :
Fault-finding, snarling, fighting. Deficiency : Lack
OP PLUCK AND BACKBONE.
7. Very large. —You have plenty of courage, but are too fond of
opposition. You are too fond of arguing for the mere love of opposi-
tion. No danger or difficulty will daunt you; in fact, the greater
the opposing force the more tenaciously will you hold ground. You
prefer a life full of incident and danger—a grand battle here and a
hairbreadth escape there would be a congenial atmosphere for you.
Unless your caution be large, you will be more foolhardy than prudent,
and will often get into hot water. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are resolute, brave, and determined, but too fond
of argument. You are very quick to resent an insult, and will
defend what you think your rights with great vigour. You are quick-
tempered and even acrimonious at times. If small in benevolence,
you will be cutting and sarcastic. You will court opposition, and
have presence of mind in danger. All this will be a great power
for good, if directed by the intellect, and controlled by good moral
qualities; but unless so controlled it will make you irritable and
disagreeable.
5. Full. —You have plenty of energy and courage, and enough
backbone to “ Stand like the brave, with your face to the foe;” but
you would not fight nor contend for the sake of contention merely.
4. Fair. —Your energy and courage will depend on other circum-
stances, but on the whole you love peace rather than war, and
would rather suffer a wrong than fight. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You have no force of character, and will be inefficient
in life. You shrink from opposition, and will fail where contention
is required. Cultivate,


MORAL SENTIMENTS.


7-DESTRUCTIVENESS.
LARGE. SMALL.
Pig. 24. Fig. 25.
Executiveness, energy, severity. Excess: Cruelty, malice,
revenge. Deficiency : Inefficiency, namby-pambyism.
7. Very large. —You have great force, energy, determination, and
executive power. You will remove mountains, and tear up what-
ever lies across your path. You would and could do two days’ work
in one if necessary. When provoked you experience the most
powerful indignation, amounting to rage and violence. You can be
very, sarcastic, and, without large approbation, you will be harsh and
morose—nay, without large benevolence you will be bitterly cruel.
This organ gives you great power and force, but unless controlled it
will work your own destruction. Restrain.
6. Large. —You have great energy and executive power, and will
break down or tear up whatever is in the way. You have a temper
of your own, and when roused you can be bitter and cutting. As
a doctor, you could cut off an arm or leg with ease. This organ,
though it has an ugly name, yet will give you power and force for
good if rightly and wisely controlled, but otherwise it will be a
curse to yourself and others.
5. Full. —You can be forcible and determined, but you are not
cruel or vindictive. You are quick-tempered, and, if of an excitable
temperament, you can be easily roused; but if benevolence be
full your anger will manifest itself more in bark than bite, for
you would shrink from inflicting pain unless really necessary.
4. Fair. —You have not enough of executive and driving power.
You lack that determination and force which makes stepping-stones
of difficulties and removes mountains of obstacles. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You lack force and executive power. You threaten
more than you do. You shrink from pain, and if ever you are
obeyed it .will be more from love than fear. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are too tender or chicken-hearted for this
rough world; faint at the sight of blood, and greatly lack energy
and force. Cultivate.


B—ALIMENTIVENESS
Fig. 26. Enjoys a good Dinner.
Fig. 27.
Relish foe food —enjoyment in eating
7. Very large. —You hare a large appetite. You enjoy food
very much. You are epicurean in habits, and inclined to be intern*
perate in eating. The sight of food will tempt you to eat when
nature has had enough. You have splendid digestive powers,
if not destroyed by gourmandising. Restrain.
6. Larrje. —You have a good appetite, and greatly enjoy a good
dinner. You have very good digestive powers, which will be a
great blessing to you if you take care of them.
5. Full, —You have" a good appetite for food when in health.
You enjoy the good things of the table, yet not fastidious about
food. You don’t live to eat, but rather eat to live.
4. Fair. —Your appetite is not great, and will want to be tempted
by good food, nicely cooked. Take a fair amount of plain food, but
plenty of fresh air, or you will suffer from indigestion. Cultivate.
8. Small. — You are dainty about your food, and fastidious about
the quality. Unless very nice you will just pick a little bit and
leave it. You are troubled with indigestion. Cultivate.
2. Yery small. —You have very little relish for food. You are
a subject for dyspepsia, and without great care your life will be a
short one, and most of that spent under the doctor’s care. Cultivate.
F.-BIBATIVENESS.
7. Very larye. —You are fond of water. You love bathing, swim-
ming, sailing, &c. You would live on and in the water. You
should never taste alcohol in any shape, for with a perverted appe-
tite you would easily contract the habit of over-indulgence. I warn
you to beware of the “ social glass.” Restrain.
6. Larye. —You enjoy drinking, and will take a good deal of one
kind or other. You would enjoy bathing, swimming, and, with
large locality, would like a seafaring life.
5. Full. —You are as described in 6, but in a less degree.
4. Fair. —You are not fond of water, drink very little of it, and
would make a bad sailor. Cultivate.


9-ACQUISITIVENESS.
LARGE. SMALL.
Fig. 28. “SHYLOCK.” Fig. 29.
Desire to acquire—economy—to trade, to hoard. Excess :
Grasping, miserly", and avaricious. Deficiency : Prodi-
gality, waste.
7. Very large. —Your desire for accumulation is excessive, and
without large benevolence you will make a god of your gold, and
become a miserable miser. With a well-balanced head you would
make a keen, sharp, business man ; but you are close-fisted, and
will make hard bargains, which is not always the best way to make
the most money. You will require a good moral development and
large conscientiousness to keep you from over-reaching in your
hunger for money. Restrain.
6. Large. —You have a strong desire to acquire property. You
like to turn the penny over to make it two. In this respect you
are well adapted for business. You would buy in the cheapest
market and sell at the highest price obtainable. Making money
will afford you great pleasure ; you would like to be wealthy ; and
with energy and a well-balanced head you will make money. With
large benevolence, it will afford you pleasure to give to worthy
objects ; but those who want to reach your pocket must do so
through your sympathies.
5. Full. —You will work to get money, and will be fairly saving.
But you don’t love money, only as a means by which you can attain
some other more loved object in life. With benevolence and friend-
ship large, you will be very ready to give to charitable objects and
to help friends, even when you know that you can’t well afford it.
If in business, be guided by your judgment, not by your sympathies,
else you will give credit when you ought to say No.
•4. Fair. —You will work to earn property, but will use it, not
hoard it. I fear you will never be rich ; you will spend as fast as
you get. If your sympathies are large, don’t go into business on
your own account, for you will give credit and endorse bills when
you ought to say No.
8. Small. —Your difficulty is to keep money when you have it.
You will never be rich. Without large conscientiousness, you will
live beyond your means. If you have a wise wife, let her keep the
purse, or you will soon have nothing to keep.
2. Very small. —You are too prodigal with your money, too
wasteful and extravagant in your habits. Cultivate.


10.-SECRETIVENES&
Fig. 3a Fig. 81.
Policy, reserve, evasion, scheming, concealment. Excess:
Cunning, duplicity, deception* Deficiency: Bluntness,
CANDOUR AND OPENNESS, BUT WANT OP TACT.
7. Very large. —Your ability to restrain your feelings, and to
generally conceal your inner self, is very great. You seldom appear
what you really are, or say all you mean. Even when you appear
candid you have some second or ulterior object to accomplish. You
are foolishly reserved and mysterious. You may call it policy or
shrewdness, but your friends are never sure that they really know,
and they never will get to the bottom of your purposes and plans.
With small conscientiousness you will be tricky, deceitful, and gene-
rally untrustworthy; and with large acquisitiveness you could both
cheat and lie to get gain. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are very secretive—very reserved in the expres-
sion of your views, and keep your plans to yourself—go off on a
journey without letting your friends know, and on your return will
say very little about what you saw or did. You generally go round
about instead of straight to the point. You will be reserved if not
cunning, and, even when your purposes are perfectly honest and good,
people will often suspect your motives, and you have no one to blame
but yourself. Take down the shutters and let them see into you.
Restrain.
5. Full. —Yon have good self-restraint. Can keep your own
counsel, and the secrets of other people if necessary. You can appear
to know nothing about the matter, when you know all. You have
plenty of policy and tact when you want to accomplish your purpose ;
yet your friends at times will give you credit for candour and openness.
4. Fair. —You are not cunning or sly, rather open and candid,
yet you restrain your feelings, except when excited—then you will
out with the whole. If caution be large, it will restrain and make
you careful of what you do or say; still, you will not make a good
diplomatist.
3. Small. —You are not reserved —open and frank. Your friends
know your faults and virtues, for you are what you seem to be. If
caution be small, you will be indiscreet—will say and do things that
you will be sorry for. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are transparent. People can easily pump
your secrets out of you. You are too plain-spoken and candid.
Cultivate.


11-CAUTIOUSNESS.
Fig. 32.
Fig. 33
Sense of danger, carefulness, anxiety, solicitude, timidity.
Excess : Over-anxiety, indecision, unnecessary fear.
Deficiency : Indiscretion, recklessness.
7. Very large. —You are too cautious and anxious. You are
always in a state of dread or worry about accidents and evils that
have no existence, and that never come. If your hope be small, you
are always looking at the dark side of things, and never enjoy the sun-
shine of life, because of the dark cloud that is coming. If a mother,
you are always in a fume about the children. It takes you a long
time to decide, and when your mind is made up you are afraid to
act lest it should be wrong. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are careful, prudent, watchful, and anxious, but
too apt to procrastinate in action. You are always anticipating
difficulties, and trying to prepare for them. You are slow in coming
to a decision; always trying to be on the safe side. You are not
often sorry for what you say or do, but you are for what you don’t
do ; for you often miss a good chance through fear to take a little
risk. Slow and sure is your motto. Your plans may be good, but
you are not prompt enough in carrying them out. If your hope is
also “ 6,” this paragraph will not all apply to your case; for then
you will require large caution to balance hope.
5. Full. —You have a good share of prudence and forethought,
but not of a timid or procrastinating nature. You are fairly watch-
ful and careful about the plan, but once satisfied on that point, you
will carry it out without fear. You are not inclined to meet trouble
half way, unless your hope is small,
A. Fair. —You have none too much prudence. If of a very quiet
temperament you will get credit for more caution that you deserve ;
but if of an excitable temperament you will act more from impulse
than judgment, and will say and do things that you wall be sorry for.
3. Small. —You lack prudence, and will often blunder in life.
You will say that you are unlucky, but others will put it down to
your stupidity. You will do the right thing at the wrong time, and
will say the right thing in a wrong way. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are stupidly incautious—never prepare fora
rainy day. You will often get into hot water. Cultivate.


12.—APPROBATIVENESS.
LARGE. THE APPROBATIVE MOUTH.
Fig- 34. Fig. 35.
Ambition, politeness, display, desire for popularity.
Excess: Vanity, conceit, outside show, affectation.
Deficiency ; Disregard for the opinions of others.
7. Very large. —You are exceedingly sensitive to praise or blame ;
you are always dreading the one and craving for the other ; you are
a martyr to your owa feelings ; you are far too touchy ; you often
feel aggrieved and hurt when no one means you to; you are too
much mortified by a word of censure, and too much elated by a kind
word of commendation. If a lady, your danger is vanity; if a man,
pffeminacy. Respect yourself more, and the opinions of others
less. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are very sensitive—.fond of praise, and too
easily and deeply wounded by a word of adverse criticism, or by an
apparent slight. If your organic quality be large, you are a
martyr, not to the unkindness of friends, but to your own feelings.
You are very ambitious to shine, but too much alive to the smiles
or frowns of others for your own peace of mind. You are rather
given to flatter, and at times weak on the side of flattery yourself.
Unless conscientiousness be large, you may be tempted at times to
sacrifice right and truth in order to be agreeable to others, or for
fear of bringing on yourself their frowns. Dare to do the right,
no matter what “ Mrs. Grundy” may say.
5. Full. —You are ambitious to some degree, and would be
encouraged and stimulated by praise, but would not be greatly cast
down if public opinion was against you. You can say nice things
if you feel them, but not much given to flattery. You can be
courteous, but would not be led away by fashion or show.
4. Fair. —You are not insensible to blame or praise, but you are
independent, and somewhat careless about public opinion. If praise
comes, all right; but if not, it is still all right. If your self-esteem
is large, and you are satisfied yourself, it does not matter much
about what others think. You are rather brusque and off-hand in
manner, and careless of etiquette. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You disregard popularity and despise flattery. You
can be sarcastic, and have a nasty way of saying a thing. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You care nothing about what others say of you;
have a distaste for etiquette, style, and fashion. You are repulsive
in manner. Cultivate.


13. SELF-ESTEEM.
Fig. Fig.
SUBMISSION. “I AM SIR ORACLE."
Dignity, self-reliance, independence. Excess: Egotism,
ARROGANCE, TYRANNY, IMPERIOUSNESS. DEFICIENCY : HUMI-
LITY, SUBMISSION, SERVILITY, MEANNESS.
7. Very large. —You have unbounded self-confidence. You are
very dignified, but haughty, proud, domineering, and stiff-necked.
Whatever is to be done, you are the man that can do it, but if your
combativeness is large you cannot brook opposition, and must have
your own way. You will take any amount of responsibility, but
must ride the first horse or none. You must lead and command, no
matter who may follow. This is a fine organ if saved from ruin by
good caution and large veneration. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are very independent, self-confident, and dignified,
but unless this organ is counterbalanced by good veneration you are
not -worth a bit more than you think you are, and the public will be
slow to take you at your own price. You have great will-power
and decision of character. Very fond of your own way, and will
generally get it if you have common sense. You have a strong
desire to get to the top of the tree in your own line or profession.
You sometimes ask for advice, but will generally act on your own
judgment. With small causality and large combativeness you will
be very dogmatic and domineering at times.
5. Full. —You have a good degree of self-reliance and indepen-
dence, but you are not proud, overbearing, or too greedy of power.
You may prefer to lead, but you can follow another without chafing
about it. You will never be one of the great leaders of the nation,
but will win the respect of your fellows. Cultivate.
4. Fair. —You have a fair degree of manliness, but you rather
under than over estimate your own worth. You will be led by those
who are mentally inferior to you who have more self-confidence.
Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are humble-minded, lack self-reliance, and allow
your inferiors to leave you behind in the race for position. Remem-
ber, if you don’t believe in yourself, no one else will. Cultivate.


14-FIRMNESS.
Fig. 36.
Fig. 37.
FIRM AS A ROCK.
INSTABILITY.
Perseverance, stability of purpose, decision op character.
Excess : Obstinacy, stubbornness, piggishness. Defi-
ciency : Instability, fickleness, feebleness.
7. Very large. —You have plenty of energy and force of character,
but you are too obstinate. You cannot be driven and not easily
led. You are very persevering, but sometimes frustrate your own
purposes by too much stubbornness. Restrain.
6. Large. —You are firm and determined, have considerable will-
power, and plenty of decision of character, and if guided by good
moral principles you can be relied on. There is plenty of back-bone
in your character. It is not easy to convince you that you are
wrong, and you generally carry your point by persistent effort. You
should be very careful about the formation of your views or adoption
of your plans, for when once you enter upon a course you are not
likely to turn back. This is a grand organ when employed in a good
cause, but, mind, it will stick at it just as persistently when the cause
is a bad one.
5. Full. —You are persevering enough for ordinary duties of life,
but you have not that stick-at-it necessary to carry through great
enterprises with many difficulties in the way. If shown that you
are wrong, you can change ; and if friendship be very large, friends
could persuade you to give up your purposes and change your plans.
Cultivate.
4. Fair. —You have not enough of firmness and stability of
purpose ; in fact, your firmness will soon give up and change unless
backed up by large combativeness or conscientiousness. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are too fickle—love change—will give up if
difficulties appear, and you are too easily led this way and that.
You will never do much in the world ; you will go with the stream.
Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are as unstable as water—fickle, fitful, and
impulsive. You will change with every wind that blows. Cultivate.


15—CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.
Pig. 3a Fig. 39.
Sense of moral obligation, honour, justice, integrity. Excess :
Great self-condemnation, and feeling of unworthi-
ness. Deficiency ; Lack of consistency, truthfulness,
AND PENITENCE.
7. Very large. —You are governed by moral principle. You hare
keen sense of right and honour. You are guided not by reason or
policy, but by conscience. You set up a very high standard of
morality for yourself and others, and you think that all should come
up to it. If you fail yourself you are full of remorse, and ready to
repent in the dust. You are too exacting with others, and inclined
to be censorious. Unless you control this faculty, you will become
morbidly sensitive in matters of conscience
6. Large. —You mean to be strictly honest and upright in all
your dealings. You hate everything that is dishonest or unjust.
You are not a creature of expediency, but of duty. Your first
concern is about the right of it, and though you may be fickle in
other matters yet you are firm where conscience is involved. You
are very penitent when conscious of having done wrong, but very
exacting in regard to others. Mt is very important that your con-
science should be correctly informed as to what is right and wrong ;
for if you believe a thing to be right, though wrong, you will pursue
it to the end.
5. Full. —You are in the main honest and upright. You love the
right, but you do not stop to split hairs about it, and may yield to
temptation where expediency and policy have their say. Duty is the
uppermost in your mind ; but it does not always rule. ou will at
times persuade yourself that it is not always wise or expedient to be
too strict. Cultivate.
I. Fair. —Your motives in the main are right, but you do not
always keep to the strict line of truth and right. Under temptation
you will colour the truth, and.will try to justify yourself for doing it.
You are influenced too much by considerations of expediency, and
if your acquisitiveness be large you will be tempted to dishonesty
for" gain. If your propensities are large, lust will be your danger.
Cultivate.


3. Small. —Your sense of right and wrong is too feeble. If right
and duty clash with your wishes or interest, they must go to the
wall. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are not trustworthy. You may do right if
expediency and self-interest dictate it; but you are generally deceit-
ful, dishonest, and untruthful. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You love lying rather than truth, and the wrong
more than the right. Cultivate.
16-HOPE.
Joyful expectation ; confidence in the futuee ; cheerful-
ness. Excess : Unreasonable expectations, castle build-
ing, RASH PROMISES. DEFICIENCY; WANT OF ENTERPRISE,
AND GENERAL DESPONDENCY.
7. Very large. —Your expectations of the future are unreasonable.
You are always going to succeed, though you have often failed in
the past. Everything you desire seems possible to you. You have
lots of castles, but they are like the balloon—in the air. You have
numbers of ships at sea, all coming in soon, laden with treasure ;
only somehow they are always lost just before arrival, and because
you are so often “at sea” in your calculations. You live in the
future, which is to you always bright. You are very often disap-
pointed, yet always going to succeed next time. Restrain.
6, Large. —You look at the bright side of things, are cheerful
and buoyant. Your hope overlooks the difficulties ahead, but
doubles the joys. You undertake far more than you can accomplish ;
often fail, but never say die. There is always “ a good time coming.”
Your danger will be extravagant expenditure and rash speculations.
You are too sanguine about success. Sit down, man, and count the
cost, for hope does not always redeem her promises.
5. Full. —You are not of the gloomy cast of mind, but your
expectations are generally realised. You hope for the best, but with
good caution will prepare for the failure that may come. You are
not desponding, except when out of health, yet not too sanguine
about success.
4. Fair. —You are not hopeful enough. When disappointed you
go down very low—too much depressed. You see all the difficulties
that may come. At times you will have a little sunshine when
unexpected success comes, but you too soon see a cloud coming up
the horizon of life. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are too desponding and gloomy. You don’t
expect enough good from the future, and anticipate too much evil.
You lack enterprise and speculation. You act on the little-and-
sure gain principle. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You expect very little good from the future, but
much evil. You are too gloomy. You have been fearing a thousand
evils that have never come, and never will.
1. Too small. —You are a gloomy, melancholy, unhappy soul.


17-SPIRITUALITY.
Wonder, faith, trust, impressibility, faith in the unseen.
Excess : Superstition, Fanaticism, faith in Ghosts.
Deficiency : Infidelity, scepticism, and general
UNBELIEF,
7. Very large. —You have unbounded trust and faith in the
purely spiritual and unseen. It is easier for you to believe in what
you don’t see, if of a spiritual nature, than in what your eyes behold.
You have strong impressions of what you ought to do, and if your
conscience has been properly educated your impressions will in the
main be right. But you are in danger of believing too much in
dreams, omens, fortune-telling. If brought up in some parts of the
world you would be superstitious, and believe in hobgoblins, ghosts,
&c. In certain states of your physical system you would be clair-
voyant, or what the absurd system of spiritism would call a “ good
medium,” Restrain.
6. Large . —You have strong faith in the invisible, and love to
meditate on spiritual subjects, such as the immortality of the soul,
the future life, the existence and perfections of God. You enjoy
very much spiritual exercises and the blending of soul with soul.
You are full of wonder, and have a love for the marvellous, and in
certain states of the body will have dreams and visions, some of
which may be true. Properly guided by reason and common sense
this will be a great blessing and a constant source of happiness to
you. But mind you don’t allow your living, glorious faith to
degenerate into superstition, and your genuine piety into fanaticism.
5. Full. —You are not lacking in faith, and have a good amount
of spiritual feeling, and at times even intuitive inspiration; but you
do not always yield to these impressions. You desire to believe in
all truth, but you at times like to see as well as walk by faith; you
have doubts, and would like to be sure of the foundation. Yield
yourself up to spiritual influences, and your happiness will increase.
Cultivate.
4. Fair. —You are not superstitious a bit; rather inclined to
doubt the unseen, and be sceptical. At times you have some faith,
but again doubts come, and you want to see and know. Remember
there is nothing so certain as the unseen in the universe. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You lack faith, and want the thing proved before
you receive it. You doubt the spiritual, and are in danger of being
led into scepticism and infidelity. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are a “Thomas;” have no faith in the
spiritual; and rather despise those who have, as weak-minded
creatures. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You disbelieve and sneer at things of a spiritual
or religious kind.


18-VENERATION.
Fig. 41. Fig. 42.
7, Very large. —You are of a devotional turn of mind, have a
great feeling of awe and reverence for God, and in your devotional
exercise will naturally assume a humble posture, with your head
bowed at His feet. Your manner of address is respectful and
deferential to superiors. You are conservative in your tendencies,
having great respect for time-honoured usages, forms, ceremonies,
and institutions. Your heart will always be moved with pity to
the aged poor, and will have great love for the good and great. You
would almost worship position or relics of old and sacred things.
6. Large. —You are by nature strongly inclined to worship, and
will have great delight in real, fervent, religious exercises. You
would be very humble in penitence, and earnest in prayer. You are
awed in the presence of the high, and have great respect for the
aged; could wipe the feet of the truly good and great. You are
naturally conservative in your tendencies, and would defend old-
established customs—admire and stick to the “ good old ways.” If
not well trained and wisely educated, you are in danger of religious
bigotry, and of being led. by a blind impulse. If your self-esteem is
small, you will pay much deference even to your inferiors.
6. Full. —You have a good degree of religious fervour and devo-
tion when this faculty is excited by favourable circumstances ; yet
you need a stimulus often, or your fervour will grow cold. There is
a constant conflict -going on within you between the worldly and
spiritual, and the one or the other will triumph, according to sur-
rounding influences or the relative development of other faculties.
Cultivate. .
4. Fair. — You will worship and be devotional in times of revival
or special influence, but it is not your dominant tendency; in fact,
you too often make it give way to others. Large conscientiousness
and benevolence will help, but you are not a religious person. You
are democratic in your tendencies, and lack due respect for parents
and the aged. Cultivate.
3. Small.— You are not respectful in your manner or speech;
have no reverence for creeds or ceremonies, and inclined to discount
religion, though you may like honesty. Cultivate,
2. Very small. —You dislike religion ; could easily take God’s
name in vain, and generally act on the sentiment, “ Jack is as good
as his master,” and better too if you are Jack. Cultivate.


19-BENEVOLENCE.
Fig. 43. Fig. 44.
“His pity gave ere charity began.” The Miser.
Sympathy, kindness, tenderness, liberality, unselfishness,
DESIRE TO DO GOOD.
7. Very large. —You have a large, loving, kindly, benevolent
heart. If your pocket is as big as your heart, no one will starve
near you. You may have a hot temper, but you are very forgiving
—soon forget an injury. If your acquisitiveness is small, you will
bring yourself to poverty ; and if your conscientiousness is small,
you will give away that which belongs to your creditors. Let reason
keep her hand on the purse, and don’t throw it open to your feelings.
Restrain.
6: Large. —You have large sympathies—tender-hearted, generous,
and obliging. Suffering and want around you make you feel
miserable if you can’t relieve them. You really feel that “it is more
blessed to give than to receive.” You are forgiving, and would
sacrifice your own comfort and interest to help others. Like your
Master, you ought to be “ going about doing good,” and in such a
walk in life you will find the greatest happiness. IE acquisitiveness
is large, it will greatly restrain the action of benevolence in the
direction of giving money.
5. Full. —You are kind and obliging to those you like, and to
most people if it does not cost you too much; but, in giving, you
do not forget the claims of self and those near you. You give
freely in fits when your sympathies are greatly stirred, but generally
you act on the “ just-before-you-are-generous” principle.
4. Fair. —You are not a philanthropist. You can be kind to
those you love, but you never forget Number one. Of course you
may be generous at times when it pays better than the other course,
and so advance your own ends best, but you would never be a chum
of mine. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are selfish in your nature —too much so. Man!!
you lose a heaven of happiness in this world by not opening your
heart to the needy, and your purse to supply their wants. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You have little or no sympathy, and care nothing
for the sufferings of others so long as you are at ease. You say,
“It is no business of mine.” The Lord have mercy on your cold,
miserable heart! ! Cultivate.


20.—CONSTRUCTIVENESS.
Fig. 45.
Fig. 46.
Ingenuity, contrivance, dexterity, arrangement, mechanical
talent. Excess : Trying to invent -some impracticable
contrivance. Deficiency! Want of management and
SKILL. “ A POOR TOOL.”
7. Very large. —With the motive temperament large you should
have a great deal of mechanical ingenuity. You will find some way
of overcoming a difficulty, some scheme by which to get out of your
fix. You can use tools naturally, and can do a little at any trade
without having learned it. You are always wanting to find out
some improvement. With the mental temperament largest, this
faculty will manifest itself in the construction of sentences, and
arrangement of your thoughts ; and then you will he quick at find-
ing some way of turning your opponent’s argument against himself.
6. Large. —You have great talent for mechanical pursuits—can
construct, build, make, or mend naturally. With good common
sense you would make a good engineer, and will have great love for
machinery. With large imitation you can make anything you have
seen a pattern of; and with large causality and ideality you will
invent new ways of doing things. With artistic taste through
ideality and sublimity you would make a good designer; but with
the mental temperament leading, this faculty will manifest itself in
the arrangements of your thoughts and the construction of your
sentences* With large calculation this organ has been a fortune to
many a contractor in this country.
5. Full. —You can use tools fairly, and with practice would make
a good mechanic, but are not a genius in that way. If you are a
mechanic, stick at it, unless you manifest talent in some other line,
for you will get on fairly—nay, with energy, well. Cultivate.
4. Fair. —You are not what they call a “general handy man”—
rather awkward with tools. Get your bread in some other way.
Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are an awkward fellow with tools—have very
little constructive faculty or mechanical ability.
2. Very small. —You are a poor tool—could not construct a hen-
coop or dog-kennel to save your life. Cultivate.


21-IDEALITY.
Fig. 47.
Refinement, delicacy of
Excess : Distaste for
imaginary* Deficiency
Pig. 48.
feeling, imagination, poetry.
EVERYDAY LIFE ; TOO IDEAL AND
; Too ROUGH AND MATTER-OF-FACT.
7. Very large. —You have exquisite taste, and an intense love for
the beautiful. You live in an ideal world, and set up too high a
standard in character and manners. You have a vivid imagination,
and with mental temperament large would make a poet, or would be suc-
cessful in the fine arts. You are in danger of becoming too ideal and
theoretic for success in this rough world of the real and practical.
As a speaker and writer, you would be poetical and flowery.
6. Large. —You are imaginative, refined, and have good taste ;
love poetry, and have a great admiration for the beautiful in nature
and art. A speaker that is eloquent and flowery captivates you ; and
as a speaker or writer, you would strive to bo chaste and finished
in thought and expression. Your ideas will flow rapidly, and under
inspiration your language will be choice.
5. Full. —You have good taste, refinement, and love of the
beautiful, and appreciate elegance and etiquette, but you would not
be carried away by any of these. You like the beautiful, but would
not sacrifice the useful and practical to the ornamental. You think
poetry is very good in its way, but it does not buy the child a frock,
nor butter your own bread.
4. Fair. —You are a utilitarian, a matter-of-fact individual. You
want to know if the thing is useful in everyday life. You are plain
in your manners, and are disgusted with the fellow that puts on a
lot of “ side.” In talk you don’t use many flowers, just a few
plain words that will convey the idea. Cultivate,
3. Small. —You are deficient in refinement and taste—are country-
fied in manners. You have very little love for the fine and beautiful
or the poetic in life. You want to know if it is useful. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You altogether lack taste, polish, and refine-
ment ; coarse and harsh in expression. Cultivate.
39


8.-SUBLIMITY.
Sense of the grand, sublime, vast, magnificent, wild, or
TERRIFIC.
7. Very large. —You are very fond of the grand, sublime,
magnificent, or vast, and have a great admiration for grand, rugged
mountain scenery, the raging ocean, or the war of the elements—
thunder and lightning. You will use big, high-sounding words
when plain ones would do ; in fact, you are in danger of becoming
extravagant in speech—in fact, a bombast. Beware.
6. Large. —You greatly admire the sublime in nature ; have an
admiration for grand scenery—the snow-capped mountains, the
roaring cataract, or the starry canopy above—anything that shows
the omnipotence and greatness of God. Ideality gives love for the
fine, the beautiful; sublimity gives love for the grand, the vast, the
romantic.
5. Full. —You can enjoy the grand and the sublime, but you can
live and be happy without them. You cannot understand others
going into ecstasies about scenery. Cultivate.
4, Fair. —You can enjoy good scenery, and would say so, but you
would not go far to see it, nor would you lose much sleep or many
chances of riches through it. Cultivate.
8. Small. —You have not much love for the mountain scenery,
and don’t like to see thunder and lightning. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You have no taste for the grand ; it has no
charms for you.
1. Too small. —You are worse still than Ho. 2.
PERCEPTIVE FACULTIES.
Fig. 49.
The Practical Man.
Fig. 50.
The Theoretical Man.
40


22-IMITATION.
Fig. 51.
Fig. 52.
Power of imitating ; mimicry, gesture. Excess : Imitation
OF THE RIDICULOUS, BUFFOONERY. DEFICIENCY : INABILITY
TO COPY, TO CONFORM TO OTHERS.
7. Very large. —You are a born mimic or actor. Can mimic or
imitate to the very life in voice and gesture. With large con-
gtructiveness you could make anything from a pattern ; and with
large wit you will see the comical side of things, and could keep a
company m roars of laughter by your exact persouilication of men
and things. This is a great power, but mind, if you cultivate it you
will not have much originality—you will lose your own individuality,
and become a mere imitator of others. Restrain.
6. "Large.— You have a great propensity to copy others, and to
do and say things as you have seen others do them. In manner,
gesture, and voice you will be the counterpart of the man or woman
you admire ; and if your wit be large you will copy the ridiculous
side of the person. You can readily adapt yourself to circum-
stances, and put on any mood, grave or gay, and can act it out well
You can be any one else as easily as be yoursel£ You will often
act one and then another of your friends to the very life in voice,
gesture, walk, and expression. If you cultivate tins, faculty you
will pay the penalty in the loss of originality.
5. Fall. —You can imitate, copy, and mimic to some extent, but
you have no great gift in that way. On the whole, you will be
yourself in life, and do things in your own way.
4. Fair. —You will not imitate or mimic except under exciting
influences, and then you will not do it well. You prefer to do
things in your own way, and be yourself. Cultivate.
3, Small. —You are not a good imitator or copyist. With
causality large, would prefer to strike out a way of your own. You
have a greater admiration for the original man than you have for
the actor or mimic. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —lt is hard for you to conform to society and to
do things as others do them. You have a way of your own.
Cultivate.


23- MIRTH FU LN ESS-WIT
Fun, wit, merriment, jocularity, humour. Excess: Will make
FUN OF THE SOLEMN AND RIDICULE EVERYTHING. DEFICIENCY:
Excessive gravity : never laugh.
7. Very large. —You are very witty; have a great love for' jokes,
and will be sure to see the comical or ludicrous side of things. You
will find fun anywhere and in everything. With an active brain
you would be very good at repartee; but with small ideality you are
in danger of becoming clownish, and of descending to low, coarse
jests, and with small veneration you will make fun on solemn
occasions. Restrain.
6. Large. —You fully appreciate a good joke, and can make one
yourself. You laugh heartily, love fun, and will do your part in
making it; you can entertain a company, can keep them in a good
humour. If your ideality be small, your jokes will not always be in
good taste, and with large combativeness and comparison you could
be very sarcastic —very biting with your wit. This is a very power-
ful weapon for fight, but it is a dangerous one to play with, for the
temptation to use it becomes very strong, and without great care
and self-restraint you are sure to offend and hurt your friends at
times. If, however, your agreeableness be large, you will delight
and flatter them with your wit.
5. Full. —You appreciate wit and humour in their right place,
and you can be witty, playful, and jovial in certain company; but
you would not sacrifice everything to fun, nor are you remarkable
for original wit.
4. Fair. —You can enjoy a joke at times of a certain kind, but on
the whole you are sober, and generally grave and solemn. You are
not given to fun-making, and sometimes wonder what others are
laughing at. With small hope you will not be cheerful enough in
life. Cultivate.
8. Small. —You are grave and serious, and can’t see any good in
fun at all; regard it as foolish, if not a sin, to laugh. The Lord
pity you ! It would do you good to have a laugh at times.
2. Very small. —You are serious and sedate. It takes you a long
time to see the point of a joke, and then you don’t like it.


24-INDIVIDUALITY,
Fig. 55.
Fig. 56.
Power of observation, desire to see, memory of what is
seen. Excess : Curiosity, the impudent stare.
7. Very large. —You have great powers of observation, and must
see everything, and every side of everything. You look minutely
at every part of a thing, and notice every peculiarity. You learn
more quickly by seeing than by reading, and will remember what you
see much easier than what you hear. You never go about with your
eyes in your pockets. I do not say restrain this faculty, except
this : do not so far forget your good manners as to stare impudently
at any one. Remember you can think without staring.
6. Large. —You are a great observer of men and things. You
see everything around you, and learn quickly by seeing, and
remember easily what you see. ‘"With large human nature, you
will be very observant of character, and will be a good judge of
character. This organ has been called the ‘‘window of the mind.”
Certainly light, or an understanding of things of a practical kind,
come intuitively to you. Even though you cannot give the reason,
your judgment will be sound. You would learn much by travel.
5. Full. —You are good at observation, and can see clearly, yet
you do not peer into it like some. You take a general look at the
whole rather than look minutely into the details of the matter.
Your eyes are not shut, nor are you at all oblivious of all that is
going on around, yet you are not a starer. Cultivate.
4. Fair. —You are not very observant. You see the main or
conspicuous features of the view rather than the details or filling
up. Your curiosity is too small to lead you to go out of your way
to see particulars of things ; hence your description of a thing will
be very general, or vague rather than minute. Cultivate.
3. Small. — You lack the power of observation. You don’t
notice things, and fail to describe them in detail. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —Your eyes are not much use to you so far as
observation goes, for you pass a hundred things and never see them
at all. Cultivate.


25-FORM.
Fig. 57. Fig. 5a
7. Very large. —You are remarkably observant of shapes, forms,
outlines, configurations, and you have a good eye for symmetry,
proportion, beauty of form, &c. Your memory for faces, shapes,
and forms is very good. You would carry the shape of a thing away
in your eye, and could make one like it without the pattern. You
can use your pen or pencil well.
6. Large. —Your memory of faces, forms, features, outlines, &c.,
is excellent. You could remember names better by writing them
out. You should be able to learn shorthand, and to read music
easily. You would succeed in cutting-out, as dressmaker or tailor,
and ought to draw well with practice.
5. Full. —Your memory of faces and forms is fair, but not remark-
able, Cultivate.
4. Fair. —You are fair in this faculty, but need to cultivate it.
If a lady, and your colour and order are large, you would get on
better as milliner than as dressmaker. Cultivate.
3. Small. —Your memory for faces and shapes is poor; you soon
forget people. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You forget the shape and form of what you have
seen very soon. You will be a poor writer, and bad at cutting,
shaping, or carving.
26-SIZE.
7. Very large. — You are a good judge of magnitude, and can
with the eye alone tell accurately the length, breadth, or height of an
object. You have a good eye for proportion, and would see in a
moment any departure from architectural proportions.
6. Large. —You have a good eye for measuring angles, propor-
tions, and relative distances or sizes, and your eye would soon be
offended by disproportions.
5. Full. —You have a fair share of eye-measuring power, but
to be sure of correctness you will either require the rule or a great
deal of practice. Cultivate.
4. Fair. —Don’t trust your eye in measuring. If a mechanic, use
your rule, and make sure of your distance.
44


3. Small. —You are a poor judge of size and proportions, and
should never go on without your rule or line.
2. Very small. —You are a poor tool in this line.
27-WEIGHT.
Sense of balance —ability to ride, shoot, climb, or swim.
7. Very large. —You have a remarkable sense of balance, or of the
strength it requires to throw a quoit, stone, or ball a certain distance.
You are very sure-footed—can climb a mountain side like a goat ;
would walk or climb a rope like a monkey. With any practice you
would make a good if not a graceful rider, could stick to a buck-
jumper like his own skin. You would be a good shot or marksman,
or a good cricketer. Your perceptions of the laws of gravity are
very good, and you should seldom trip, even when walking in the
dark. With practice, you would perform remarkable feats in walking
a tight-rope, balancing poles, vaulting, riding a bicycle, &c.
6. Large. —You have a nice intuitive perception of the laws of
gravity, and should be easy and graceful in your movements, unless
your temperament be of the coarse kind. You would make a good
rider, skater, or a good shot. You have a steady hand and a sure
foot; can walk with safety what to others would be dangerous places.
With large constructiveness, you would make a good mechanic, and
would be fond of machinery.
5. Full. —You have a good sense of weight or balance, but you
are not a goat for climbing the mountain-side. You will do well to
keep on the ground, where there is no danger, then your movements
will be easy and safe enough.
4. Fair. —You are rather clumsy in walking, and will often trip
or stumble ; would not be a good rider. Get a quiet horse, that
is sure-footed, and don’t attempt to walk the rope or plank ; leave
all that to the man that has weight marked 7or 6. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You have no skill for skating, riding, rope-walking,
climbing, or working machinery. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You would find it difficult to walk a narrow
plank or to look over a precipice; you would become dizzy, and
would roll about on a ship at sea. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You are awkward in your movements, and a
general stumbler. I shouldn’t like to have to ride you; fear you
would break my neck or your knees. Cultivate.
28-COLOUR.
Sense of colours, perception of the different shades of
colour ; also, taste for the proper arrangement and
BLENDING OF COLOURS.
7. Very large. —You have a passion for colours, and an instinc-
tive perception of their harmonies. As a painter, you would blend
all the shades, hues, or tints with greatest skill and the most
perfect taste. You would make a good colourist. As an artist, you
would excel in the tinting. This is a very valuable faculty in a
milliner, and necessary to the artist.


U 6. Large. —You have great taste and talent for mixing, arrang-
ing, applying, and remembering colours. As an artist, you would
excel in the tinting; your blending of colours would greatly please
the eye. As a milliner, your arrangement of colours, ribbons, and
flowers would be in perfect taste. Unless your form and construction
are very large, you would succeed better as milliner than dressmaker,
and better at painting than drawing.
5, Full. —You are a good judge of colours, and of their various
combinations, but you require training or education to excel in the
finer shades, tints, or blendings.
4. Fair. —You do not possess natural talent for tints, shades, or
colours, and if a painter, you had better mix at once all the paint
necessary to finish the job. Cultivate.
8. Small. — You are naturally defective in your sense of colours,
and will seldom observe the colour of hair, eyes, or dress. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —The colours must be very pronounced for you to
observe or to distinguish. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You are colour-blind, andean hardly tell red from
black.
29.—ORDER.
Method, system, neatness, arrangement.
7. Very large. —You are very precise and very systematic—have
a place for everything, and everything in its place. If a wife, you
will work like a slave to have things nice, neat, and tidy, and the
servant that is not neat will not be long with you. You will be
fussy about order and neatness. If your ideality be large, you will
be fastidious about dress, personal appearance ; to have every hair
in its place. This is a very nice faculty to have well-developed ;
but, mind, you may be its slave, and become more nice than wise.
Restrain.
6. Large. —You have a keen sense of order and arrangement.
You are regular and systematic in your habits. You like to work
by rule—have places for things, and things in their places; have
certain duties for certain days or hours ; and you are annoyed and
pained if any of them are put out of their regular order.
5. Full. —You like order and system; they please you very much,
but you are not a slave to them. Your order will manifest itself
more in theory than practice, unless you have been trained where
order was indispensable. Unless your activity be large, you would
rather see things orderly than put them so yourself. Cultivate.
4. Fair. can do with oruei \en wen, aad even admire it
in others, but you are not methodical. With large ideality, you
will be neat, but you lack system. You will drop things where you
last used them, and throw your clothes on the floor at night.
Cultivate.
3. Small. —You lack order; you drop things where you last used
them, and then hunt for them when you next need them. You are
untidy and careless in your dress and general habits. As a wife,
you will have your house in a state of glorious confusion—always
just going to tidy it up, but it is never done! Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are careless, untidy, disorderly, and have a
slip-shod, slovenly way of doing everything. Cultivate.


30.—CALCULATION.
Mental computation ; quickness in figures, business, esti-
mates; MATHEMATICAL ABILITY.
7. Very large. —You have remarkable natural talent for compu-
tation, also a love for it—multiply, divide, add, or subtract without
an effort; can solve difficult problems in mathematics as by instinct.
You take a great delight in figures, statistics, and in working out
difficult mathematical questions. You have great natural talent in
that direction.
6. Large. —With a little practice you would excel in mental
arithmetic; add, subtract, multiply, or divide without an effort.
You are fond of putting down the actual figures, and working out
the statistics of anything, and well suited for an accountant.
5. Full. —You can calculate very well, and work out a sum with
ease and fair accuracy; yet you are not remarkable in this line, and
without practice would not be quick at mental arithmetic.
4. Fair. —Your mathematical power is small, and will need
practice to calculate readily and accurately. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are not good at remembering numbers; dislike
arithmetic, and would make a poor accountant. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are slow at arithmetic; you have neither
the taste nor the ability for it.
31-LOCALITY.
Memory op places, desire to travel, talent for geography.
Excess: Desire to rove. Deficiency: Forget places,
AND LOSE YOUR WAY.
7. Very large. —You have a splendid memory of places and their
relative positions; never lose your way either in the bush or city.
You have a talent for learning geography, and are fond of travel.
If your inhabitativeness is not large you will be a rover —always
wanting to see some new place. You would make a good bushman
or explorer. Restrain.
6. Large. —Unless your inhabitativeness be large, you will be
very fond of travel, and if you can afford it you will see the world.
You like to read works of travel, and are fond of the study of
geography and astronomy. You never forget a place where you
have once been, and can easily find it again. You would not easily
lose yourself; with order large, would know just where to find
anything, even in the dark.
5. Full. —Your memory of places is good; you can find your
way about fairly, and would enjoy travel under favourable conditions ;
yet you are not a rover. You can travel if you must, but can stay
at home if necessary.
4. Fair. —You forget places, and the way to them. With
inhabitativeness at all large you will stay at home, and stick in
one neighbourhood. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You have a poor memory for places, and would easily
get lost. Just blindfold you, turn you round, and you would never
find your way home.
2. Very small. —You are stupid in remembering places and
finding your way to them. Cultivate.


32-EVENTUALITY.
LARGE. SMALL.
Memory of events ; facts, stories, news. Deficiency : Bad
MEMORY OF FACTS AND HISTORICAL INCIDENTS.
7. Very large. —You have a splendid memory for facts, incidents,
and general knowledge. YoU should have a thirst for information,
and want to know what is going on in the world ; hence will read
books and newspapers, and your memory will take in the events as
a sponge would take in water. With large language, you can
remember names easily, and could acquire a knowledge of languages
very easily. With large time and calculation, would remember dates
and the order of them for years. As a speaker your addresses would be
full of anecdote and quotation. You should be thankful for such a
memory, for you can learn anything with comparative ease.
6. Large. —You have a retentive memory of historical events,
incidents, stories, and, in fact, general information. You should
be fond of reading anything that relates to history or biography, and
as you can remember what you read, you ought to be well informed
on a variety of subjects. With the mental temperament 60r7 it
would be easy for you to become a scholar.
5. Full. —lf you have cultivated your memory it is good for
events and circumstances, but it will not be remarkable. Your
memory will be good for what you like, or for anything you have
much interest in. If your reflective faculties are large and language
only fair, you will remember general principles, outlines, arguments,
and thoughts much more readily than details, names, or the words
in which the thoughts have been expressed. Cultivate.
4. Fair. —Your memory is only fair, and will retain only those
things that have taken hold of your heart, or in which you have
been greatly interested. You forget details, and without very large
language you have much trouble in remembering names. Cultivate.
3. Small. —Your memory is poor, and you forget details very
quickly. You are a poor hand at telling stories or anecdotes.
2. Very small. —You have a treacherous memory. Write down
what you want to remember, for you would forget your head and
leave it behind if not screwed on well.


33.—TIME.
Knowledge of chronology, sense of duration, memory op ages
AND THE TIME WHEN THINGS OCCURRED, TIME IN MUSIC, AND
MEASURE IN RHYTHM. DEFICIENCY : NoN-PUNCTUALITY, FOR-
GETFULNESS OF THE LAPSE OF TIME, BAD TIMIST IN MUSIC.
7. Very large. —You have an intuitive knowledge of the lapse of
time, and can tell the time of the day almost as correctly as the
town clock. You would wake out of sleep at any pre-arranged
hour. You ought to be punctual in keeping your engagements.
You will keep excellent time in music, and could beat time for a
choir with absolute correctness. Unless your tune is also very
large, keeping time will be your forte in music.
6. Large. —Your memory of dates and events should be good.
You can carry your diary in your head. You keep time in music
very correctly, and rarely forget appointments, and like the party to
be there at the appointed moment. With large eventuality, you
would make a good historian, and could from memory tell the
history of families, neighbourhoods, or churches with great accuracy.
This organ is generally rather small, and is nearly always smaller
than tune.
5. Full. —You are a fair judge of the lapse of time, and with
practice would be a good time-keeper in music, but to excel you will
require practice. You will require to put down dates in order to
make sure of them, but with order large you will be punctual. This
is a faculty that can be cultivated and greatly improved. Cultivate.
4. Fair. —Your memory of dates and tunes is poor, and you are
defective in keeping time in music. You will require much practice
to be good in this respect. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are a poor judge of the lapse of time, and will
often be out of step in marching in company, and, I fear, will often
be too late for the train or ’bus. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —Dates will be jumbled up together like dice in a
box. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You forget dates, birthdays, and appointments.
Cultivate.


Fig. 61. Pig. 62.
MASTER HUTCHESON,
The Australian Mozart.
7, Very large. —You are passionately fond of music, and have
extraordinary musical taste and talent, Good music will draw you
anywhere, and time seems nothing when listening to music. This
will either be a bane or a blessing to you. Its influence over you
for good or evil will be very powerful. You can remember a tune
from hearing it once or twice. In singing and playing you will
have a lot of feeling and expression; and with large ideality, your
taste will be excellent, and with large causality and comparison you
would compose music well. With a fine organisation and good
imitation, I would say, Get your living at music, for you will excel
at it, and it will afford you a heaven of pleasure.
6. Large. —You are described in 7, but in a less degree. You
love music, and would excel in ft. With a fine mental temperament
and large ideality, you will be a natural musician ; devote yourself to
it, and success will be yours. If a speaker, with large ideality, you
will be full of flowers and poetry, and naturally eloquent, having
a fine ear for sounds, emphasis, and modulation. It does not follow
that if you have tune large that you must therefore be a good singer,
for you require good vocal organs for that; but with or without them
you will be fond of music and a good judge of tune.
5. Full. —You have good musical taste, are fond of it, and with
plenty of practice will be a fair performer. If ideality, imitation,
and form be all large, they will greatly help you in learning and
performing. Cultivate.
4. Small. —You like music of a certain kind, but you are seldom
carried away by it, and can’t understand others going almost mad
after certain music. You have a greater love for “ the concord of
sweet sounds” than the ability to produce them yourself. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You don’t care much for music, and would not be a
graceful speaker either. Cultivate
2. Very small. —Your taste for music is poor, and your ability to
produce it less still. Cultivate.
—Trust my judgment less in Time and Tune than about any
other organ.


35-LANGUAGE
Ability to talk and to express our thoughts. Excess
Redundancy of words, loquacity, wordiness.
7. Very large. —You have a great command of words, great
facility and eloquence of expression, and a good verbal memory.
With you the right word comes to the end of your tongue just
when you want it. You are fond of quotations, and can learn
languages with great ease. With large ideality, you would write
novels easily. With self-reliance, you would talk whether you had
anything to say or not. Your danger will be in using a lot of
grandiloquent words about Think more and express your
thoughts in simple words. Restrain.
6. Large. —\ou are free, fluent, and copious in the use of
words, both in writing and speaking. You have a good memory for
words, but with large sublimity would use a big word when a small
one would do. Your danger is verbosity, wordiness. As a public
speaker your temptation will be not to study, as you can always get
up and talk—and talk on after you are done. You need never
hesitate for a word. Store your head with thoughts, and you will
be worth listening to.
5. Full. —You have a good command of language, and can
'express yourself with considerable ease ; but you are not remark-
able for your'fluency of speech or redundancy of words. With
practice you could make a fair speaker, but unless you are of an
impassioned or excitable temperament you could write better than
speak.
4. Fair, —You are not a man of many words. You are not
fluent, nor fond of talking, and use as few words as possible to express
yourself. With practice you may write fairly, but not fluently.
Cultivate.
3. Small.— You find some difficulty in getting your ideas out.
Your memory of words is poor, and so your vocabulary is small.
As a speaker you would not succeed, and as a writer your st}le
would be rather dry and stiff. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You are often stuck for a word, and speak with
difficulty even in private. Cultivate.


36-CAUSALITY.
Fig. 65.
Fig. 66.
The WHY AND THE WHEREFORE ; ORIGINALITY OF THOUGHT ;
inquisitiveness; logical reasoning ; argument. Excess:
TOO THEORETICAL. DEFICIENCY : WANT OF ORIGINALITY ;
NARROWNESS, DOGMATISM.
7. Very large. —You are blessed with a strong original and
comprehensive mind. You are naturally a thinker, and if of the
mental temperament you are a natural philosopher, and will not
be satisfied with a surface knowledge of things. You want to know
the why and wherefore; will go back from effect to cause. You will
be fond of science, and with the perceptive faculties large and the
mental temperament well developed, you will be known in the world
of science ; but if your perceptive faculties are small, you are in
danger of becoming a mere theorist, and will be laughed at for your
castle-building propensities. Mind, your theories are of very little
use unless they can be reduced to practice.
6. Large. —You have good reasoning powers ; can see through
principles easily, and are not satisfied with a superficial knowledge.
You want to know why and wherefore, but without large perceptive
faculties you are in danger of being more theoretical than practical.
If your combativeness is large, you will be rather fond of argument,
and if you don’t keep yourself in check here you may become a bore.
Rightly used this organ is a grand one, and no one will be much of
a thinker without it.
5. Full. — lou like to know the cause if you can, and you have
the capacity to plan and adapt means to an end ; but you are not a
profound thinker, and will never be a great philosopher, though you
have enough of this organ for all practical purposes, and may be a
greater success in life than the man who it 7.
4. Fair. —You can reason and plan, but your mind is not of the
comprehensive or philosophical kind. With good perceptive organs
you will be much more practical than theoretical. You won’t trouble
about the theory if the thing will bring in bread and butter.
Cultivate.
3. Small. —You lack reasoning power, originality, and the power
to plan or to think out a plan unless it be of a very practical kind.
Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You have no reasoning power, and cannot plan
or contrive.— Cultivate.
52


37-COMPARISON.
Fig. 67. Fig. 68.
Sense of resemblances ; criticism ; ability to analyse, clas-
sify, AND DRAW INFERENCES. EXCESS: HyPERCRITICISM;
TOO FIGURATIVE IN SPEECH. DEFICIENCY : INABILITY TO
ANALYSE ARGUMENT OR TO APPLY KNOWLEDGE.
7. Very large. —You have great powers of analysis, and would
be critical and cutting to an opponent. You see at a glance the
points of comparison and contrast in an argument or illustration.
With the mental temperament large, you could cut an opponent’s
argument to pieces and turn him to ridicule. With large combative-
ness you would be quick and powerful at the bar. With wit large
you would be a natural punster, and would be very sarcastic. Sar-
casm will be a powerful weapon in your hand, but mind it is a
dangerous one to use ; it has lost many a man a true friend.
6. Large. —You have great ability for comparison and analysis.
You can discriminate between truth and error easily, and can see
the points of analogy and contrast at a glance. \ou are very fond
of illustration and analogy. You have a good capacity for discovery
of new thought and argument, and should be able to put your
point clearly, and be very apt in the illustration of your argument.
5. Full. —You see clearly through truth or error, and appreciate
illustrations and comparisons very much; but unless your language
is good you will not be able to get it out, or to make it as clear to
the minds of others as it is to your own.
4. Fair. —You will rather fail in analysis, and ire not good at
illustration. You like it in another, but will fail in putting your own
point clearly. You may have the right idea, but without large lan-
guage you will make rather poor work in expressing it. \ our jokes
will not be well-timed, and not always nicely expressed. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are weak at drawing inferences, and fail to say a
thing in the appropriate way and time. Cultivate.
2. Very small.— Your attempts at comparison will be very weak.
Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You utterly lack this faculty.


C-HUMAN NATURE.
Discernment of character ; perception of motives.
7. Very large. —You study human character with great delight.
You form impressions at first sight, and they will generally be
correct, especially if the opposite sex. You read character by intui-
tion, and if in business act on your first impressions. You will
look at people as though looking through them. This power to
read character is a great gift, but if you have it marked 7 you will
be rather suspicious, and always looking behind the act or word to
the motive.
6. Large. —You read character intuitively. You should be fond
of phrenology and physiognomy, hut apart from any knowledge of
mental science you will read character correctly, and may safely
follow first impressions. With large individuality and comparison
you will notice every word, act, or look, and will apparently be
prying into people’s motives. You ought to know just how to take
men. With large secretiveness you may be too suspicious, and
with large wit you will be tempted to make fun of people.
5. Full. —You are a fair judge of character, but will at times be
deceived by false friends, and those who tell you a tale of want and
misery. Cultivate.
4. Fair. —Your judgment of character is not to be trusted, and
with secretiveness small you will often be deceived by taking people
for what they profess to be. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You fail in judging character, and you will say the
right thing in the wrong way or time. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You will often be deceived and taken in. Cultivate.
1. Too small. —You are blind, and can hardly tell the rogue and
fool from the wise and true.
D.-AGREEABLENESS.
7. Very large. —You are remarkably bland, winning, and per-
suasive ; very conciliatory ; and generally please everybody. Are
more like a Frenchman than an Englishman in that respect.
6. Large. —You have an agreeable manner, and a pleasant way
of saying and doing even disagreeable things at which no one can
take offence, and which makes everything you say and do acceptable.
You are conciliatory and persuasive, and are almost universally liked.
5. Full. —You are pleasing and bland in your manners, and, with
large ideality, polite and agreeable ; but when angry may make use
of blunt and sharp expressions. Cultivate.
4. Fair. —You are generally pleasant in conversation and man-
ners, but may when excited become very brusque and repulsive. Are
more like “ John Bull” than a Frenchman. Cultivate.
3. Small. —You are rather deficient in agreeableness, and have
little ability to smooth over your words or actions. Cultivate.
2. Very small. —You have an unpleasant way of saying even
pleasant things, and often quite unnecessarily provoke the ill-will
of those around you. Cultivate.
54


80 5
I £
£889*7200


•
1. Amativbnrss, Love between the sexes.
A. CokjcoXuty. Matrimony—love of one.
2. Farkntal Loyb,Regard for offspring.pets, &c.
3. Friendship, Adhesiveness-sociability.
4. Inhabitativenbss, Love of home.
6. Continuity, One thing at a time.
E. Vitativenkss, Love of life.
6. Comrativeness, Resistance -defence.
■ 7. Destructiveness, Executiveness—force.
8.. Alimbnltvf.ness, Appetite— hunger.
AcquiSitivkness, Accumulation.
10. Srcrekvennss, Policy—management.
11. Cautiousness, Prudence- provision.
12. ArPROBA'fiVENKss, Ambition- display,
13. Self-Esteem, Self-respect— dignity.
14. Firmness, Decision—perseverance.
15. Conscientiousness, Justice—equity,
x—_lvL-J. 10- Hope, Expectation—enterprise.
17. Spirituality, Intuition—faith-credulity.
Veneration, Devotion— respect.
'•nbvolenck, Kindness—goodness,
- . >22^—
Ncf ■ * W
20. Constructivrnf.ss, Mechanical ingenuity.
21. 1 okamtv, Refinement —taste—purity.
B. Sublimity, Love oI grandeur--infinitiftk.
22. Imitation, Copying—patteminal
2d. Mirtuiulnf.ss, Jocoseness —wit,—fun.
24. Inki vidua I.ity, Observation.
25. Form, ReeolTeption of shape, , v
26. Size, Measuring by the eye. L
27. Weight, Balancing—climbing.
28. Colour, Judgment of colours.
20. Order, Method - system—arrangement.
30. Calculation, Mental arithmetic.
31. Locality, Recollection of plajcs.
32. Eventuality, Memory of facts. ,r
33. Tims, Cognisance of duration.
3i. Tone, Sense of harmony and melody.
36. Language, Expression of ideas.
36. Causality, Applying causes to effect, (tiou.i
37. CoMi ARiiJof Inductive reasoning- illustra-
0. Human Nature, Perception of motives.
I). Agkekabukness, Pleasantness—suavity; ; V
7
tlhouv ■
