

The Royal College of Sydney
[?] University
[?]
1822


A
DIGRESSIVE DESCRIPTION
OF THE
ROYAL COLLEGE OF SYDNEY,
FOUNDED AND FINISHED
IN THE REIGN, AND UNDER THE AUSPICES, OF
GEORGE THE GOOD:
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF SOME OF ITS MANNERS AND CUSTOMS,
AND A SELECTION OF A FEW OF ITS LAWS.
BY TWO PROFESSORS OF SAID ROYAL COLLEGE.
DEDICATED TO THE TRESEST LORD SECTOR,
Gaudet nunc, fructui sibi Remtueucam esse, et lanus, Honorarium accipit.
Lie. Lib. v. cap. iv.
SYDNEY:
Printed and Sold by DonAld Base, Judith O’Craddt, Barnet O’Brabiet & Co.
Peter Qujolet, Farabi ait a; and all other respectable Booksellersiu Auetralu.
RE-FRINTED AT GLASGOW,
TOR WALTER M'ILQUUAM, COLLEGE STREET,
And Sold by him and the other Booksellers in High Street.
1822.


Graham & Co. Priuteii,
13d, Ttongate.


TO THE PRESENT LORD RECTOR.
Your Lordship will be highly delighted with the dis-
tinguished honour we lately conferred on you, when our
Royal College unanimously elected you Lord Rector.
We dedicate this little volume to your Lordship, as another*
and greater, proof of the high esteem in which we hold
you ; and we trust that all your endeavours will be given
to uphold the credit of our Royal College, and to sanction
and defend all its laws.
We are most constantly,
Your Lordship's sincere friends,
THE AUTHORS.
Royal College, - )
Sydney, 1822. J




A DIGRESSIVE DESCRIPTION.
Sydney, the capital of Australia,* is situated on a most beau-
tiful bay. It is a very thriving city; and, in a few years, will
vie in its population, its commerce, its manufactures, and its
public buildings, with many of the most celebrated of the mother
country. To consider what it was last century, one can hardly
think it has risen otherwise than by magic. The harbour, in
which at that period were to be seen only one ship and a few
fishing boats, is now crowded with vessels from all quarters of
the world. The bustle and business to be seen on its quays,
make Britons forget they are so far from home, and they suppose
themselves wandering in Leith or Liverpool, or some other Brit-
ish seaport- Sydney is regularly built, its streets intersecting
each other at right angles. The public buildings and institutions
are numerous, and very judiciously set down in good situations.
The view of the city from the top of any of the neighbouring
eminences is exceedingly interesting. The more prominent
objects are the governor’s house, the churches, the barracks, the
bank, our royal college, the jails and hospitals. There are
numerous other buildings, which are worthy of the notice of the
stranger, such as the public schools, particularly the school for
educating and civilizing the aborigines of the country. There
are likewise bible societies formed, and sabbath schools instituted,
which do much honour to the citizens of Sydney. For a general
description of these buildings we refer our readers to the numer-
ous and respectable works which the Sydnean press has issued,
and which treat of them in detail. It is our intention to confine
ourselves to a description, though somewhat digressive, of our
Koyal College, which has been erected, after much labour and
expense, but which affords a proof of the perseverance and
• Australasia is generally understood to comprehend the islands south of the con-
tinent of Asia; and, as the island commonly called New South Wales, or New
Holland, is the largest of these, we have chosen to rescue it from such unwarrant-
able appellations, and to have it called, in all time coming, by the sole and thy
fignificant name of Australia.— Kote by the Authors.


tha liberality for which Great Britain is so much and so justly
renowned.
The Royal College of Sydney was begun and finished in the
reign, and under the auspices, of George the Good: a king
whose memory will be cherished by all who knew him or have
heard of him, and whose descendants and successors will be loved
for his sake. He was the promoter of peace, and the patron of
learning. It was on his birth-day, the foundation stone was laid,
and he was represented on that occasion by the Right Hon. the
Earl of Sydney, a nobleman, profoundly skilled in all the secrets
and mysteries of masonry. On this auspicious day, many were
allowed to join the procession, who, as soon as it was over, were
ordered back to their several employments, and imprisonments.
They were proud that they were allowed to assist at laying the
foundation stone of a seminary, which, they hoped, would soon
be distinguished for sending abroad men of learning and men of
worth, who would be engaged in encouraging the growth, and
promoting, the spread of useful and elegant literature, over the
uncivilized districts of Australia.
The Royal College of Sydney, modelled after one of the mother
country colleges, is situated due north and south. The massive
projecting balconies on each side of the arched gateway, give the
front a very heavy, though by no means a bad, appearance. The
united arms of Great Britain, Ireland and Australia, in bas-relief,
and beautifully gilded, are placed immediately over the grand
entrance. They are adorned with the initials of our late good old
king. The length of the front buildings gives “ a powerful idea”
of the magnitude and consequence of our college establishment.
It is evident, at first sight, to any who are acquainted with archi-
tecture, that , our College is built after an old-fashioned model.
The peculiar construction of the chimneys, the variety of sculp-
ture which adorns the windows, and the very high roofs, carry
one far back in the era of architecture. Notwithstanding our
veneration, for antiquity, and every thing pertaining to its ages,
many of us are of opinion that ; our College should have been
designed and constructed by native Australians. If it had been
so, we would have looked with honest pride on our Royal College,
our descendants would have pointed to it as a fair specimen of the
progress of architectural science at the time of its erection, and
our earliest history would have boasted of it as a monument
which Australian genius had planned, and Australian skill had
constructed. But things being as they are, it is needless to com-
plain, and we must just put up with a disgrace which will be as
lasting as are the materials of which our Royal College is com-
posed. We would hope, however, by whatever 1 circumstances
individuals may be influenced in the construction of private houses ,
that, in future, all public buildings will be designed and constructed


by native Australians. This disgrace which bas been thrown ami
entailed on us, makes us more sensibly affected with the everlasting
opprobrium that will soon be thrown on the kingdom of Scotland,
once a kingdom of honourable independence, but now we fear no
longer so. All in this country who are Scotsmen by birth, that the
Australians by destiny or choice, look with foul scorn on the base
attempt made by enemies, to disgrace the history and intellect of
Scotland, by substituting in her fair metropolis the imitation of a
Joreign building, to serve as a national monument, instead of
a building which ought to be planned by Scotish genius and
erected by Scotish workmen. Our feelings are exasperated when
we think that she would so little regard her own honour, as to
receive the proposal to raise on Edin’s proud heights, such a'
mimic monument. If her sons still possessed the spirit of their
forefathers, or if their bosoms were animated with half the honour-
able ambition of Napoleon, who was but half a Frenchman, they
would not be satisfied with sending out an individual to measure
the walls and copy the remains of the ruined and robbed ornaments
of the Athenian Parthenon; but they would bargain with, and
purchase from the noble-souled but enthralled Greeks,- the build-
ing itself, and have its materials brought home wherewith to build
their monument. If the Scotish Parthenon were built of the
materials of which the Grecian Parthenon is constructed, and were
made to raise its lofty walls on the heights of Modern Athens,
then would Scotland have a monument of her success in warlike-
achievement, and-of the bravery of her sons. But to search in a-
foreign land fora building which she may imitate, and to make it
serve as a National Monument, is afoul disgrace which will exist
for ever. It is saying, and it is acknowdedging, that there is no
elevated genius to be found amongst her lolty mountains who-
could plan a noble edifice that would do honour to her taste, and'
bear testimony to the advanced progress she has made in archi-
tectural science. And, besides, it argues a spirit of jealous
illiberality to search for models out of the British dominions. If
suitable models do not already exist there, thousands of the
architects of England and Ireland would volunteer their services,
and out of their contributions there would surely be one plan
which it would not be disgraceful to adopt. But to select, as a
model, a foreign building, which has been stripped of'its most
valuable ornaments by the ravages of time—which has been
plundered before the eyes of weeping Greeks, by the rapacious
hand of greedy and hard-hearted travellers, and whose ornaments
can neither be recovered nor supplied—to build after such a model
would be at once to build a monument in ruins, and a ruinous
monument. Farewell to Scotland’s honour, if ever it be erected.
It will be a monument, but a monument of disgrace, and every
Englishman, and every Irishman, and every foreigner that will see


It, will point at it the finger of derision, and the sons of Caledonia
will hang their heads in confusion, and be ashamed of their folly.
Rather would we hear that a rude cairn of stones were substituted
in its place, as every stone thrown on it would be a distinct tribute
of grateful remembrance of past achievements, and every Scots-
man that was near it would add to its increase. We who are far
distant from Britain’s shores will feel disgraced if this plan be
pursued, and we hope it will not. When Scotland raises her na-
tional monument we hope it will prove a monument of her taste,
of her genius, of her productions, of her wealth, and of her public
spirit, as well as of her success in arms. We wish to learn that
the plan of such a monument has been designed by a Scotsman,
that its materials will be of Scotish production, that the hewers of
wood and drawers of water have been Scotsmen, that the most deli-
cate and most difficult parts of the cunning workmanship have been
executed by the chissel of Scotsmen, that the expense has been
totally defrayed by the voluntary contributions of Scotsmen, that
it has been erected under no other patronage than under the pat-
ronage of Scotsmen. Then will we be proud of our country —
our country will be proud of her monument; it will be spoken of
in distant lands, it will be visited by people of other countries, and
being applied to a sacred and holy use, it will tend to foster and
uphold that spirit of religion which has so long exalted the nation:
and whilst the trophies of military heroism will be seen sculptured
on its walls without, within it will be heard the sound of that holy
message which is to effect “ peace upon earth, and good will toward
the children of men.” Our zeal for Scotland’s honour has forced
us to digress rather far from our subject, but we now return to it.
The College buildings occupy a large extent of ground, owing
to the spaciousness of the several courts. One of these is very
“large and handsome, is neatly flagged and gravelled, and is border-
ed on three sides by capital dwelling-houses of free-stone, in which
reside the Professors and their families.” Our houses are suffi-
ciently large, and students who get a peep into some of our rooms
each time they present their Honorarium, say they are elegant and
Every convenience is attached to them, and every en-
deavour has been made to render our situations, as literary men,
as comfortable as possible. Our houses are remote from noise,
that our lucubrations may in nowise be disturbed, and by shutting
the gates of our court, we can secure ourselves from the effects of
any violence to which the good and honest citizens may occasion-
ally be exposed.
The Halls and Class-rooms of our Royal College, are, in gene-
ral, sufficiently large and commodious, and are well fitted up to
answer their several purposes. In the first Court are the Faculty
Hall, the Divinity Hall and Library. A broad and substantial
stone staircase, leading to the Faculty Hall, attracts the attention


of the stranger A lion and unicorn guard it. This Hail'is
ornamented with a great deal of beautifully carved wood,
and its walls are adorned with several very, valuable paintings,
by celebrated artists. 'I he Divinity Hall is large and con-
venient, accommodating upwards of two hundred students. As
we cannot yet boast much of the progress of the fine arts amongst
us, it is not to be expected that fine paintings, executed by Aus-
tralians, should adorn the walls of our Halls and Class-rooms,
We value, however, at great price, the works of our forefathers,
and will continue to do so even when we excel them. A few good
portraits have been transported hither, and they are hung on thb
walls of the Divinity Hall, as being the most suitable place for
them. They are likenesses of the Reformers and their friends;
of those pious persons who stood firm in the profession of the Re-
formed Religion, and suffered for their constancy; of those who
boldly countenanced and aided the glorious work; and of others,
who, since more peaceable times, have lectured in Scotish Colleges,
(tnd have done^ every thing in their power to render their Students
accomplished in learning and piety. We are careful of these
paintings, as they are Scotish relics, of great value. They serve
as fond remembrancers of the struggles which Scotland endured,
when fighting for religious liberty, and they encourage us to per-
severe in the course these men followed, and to preserve the inva-
luable blessings which they procured for us. As often as we look
on these portraits they kindle up that love of country which can
never be extinguished, but which will doubtless be enfeebled, if
ever such a national monument be built in Scotland as that which
is proposed.
A large and well-filled Library is attached to the Divinity Hall,
and belongs to the Hail students. It is wholly under the manage-
ment of their professor and themselves. The students contribute an
annual sum for its support and increase, and at present it is in a
flourishing condition. Two or three years since, our Senate
thought it would be adviseable to have all the class libraries thrown
into the public library, and that by the payment of a trifling sunt
the students would have access to all the books contained in iti
But the Hall students would not part with their own collection of
books. We have forced them, however, and all other students, to
fee the public library, whether they read from it or not. If they
read, a heavy deposite is demanded, with which the Hall students
were unwilling to comply, as they justly said it was impeaching their
honesty. Rather then than make this deposite, they have come under
a general agreement to answer for each other’s good usage of the
books belonging to the public library. This conduct on their part
we consider as praiseworthy; it proves what firm reliance they can
place in each other’s integrity, and it gives evidence that our Aus-
tralian youth have attained somewhat of the nobleness of Britons,
A 5


and it augurs well for the increase of that open decision of charac-
ter, which testifies greatness of soul and soundness of principle.
A tall and handsome spire rises over the arched entrance that
leads from the first to the second or middle court. This court is
bordered by tiie Common Hall, the Class Rooms, and a range of
buildings that was at one time appropriated as lodgings for stu-
dents. This range, though at present in disuse, is yet tenanted by
a race of creatures of unbounded curiosity, which run over more
books in an hour than learned men can do in a week. Their thirst,
or rather their hunger, for learning is such, that they devour books
much quicker than they can digest their contents. If we believed
in the transmigration of souls, we would endeavour to prove that
they were possessed by the souls of Monks, who still retained their
liking for solitude and literary pursuits. The Common Hall is as
large and elegant as any we have seen. In it all public meetings,
take place, and on the Ist of November, which is the commence-
ment of our summer, prizes are annually distributed in it to de-
serving students. This hall serves as a Chapel on Sabbath days
during the Session, and students are charged nothing for their
seats. Even strangers are not excluded, and many come to it from,
curiosity; or perhaps they expect to hear much eloquent and mas-
terly elucidation of theological subjects from men distinguished for
piety and learning. Till of late, one or other of the clerical pro-
fessors preached on these occasions, as it was not then thought
proper to engage licentiates of our church to preach before us.and
if we had engaged them we would have been under the necessity
of remunerating them for their pious labours. A change of opinion,
however, having at length taken place, we have seen the propriety
of employing licentiates, and of bestowing on them the salary that
was formerly distributed to the clerical professors. We likewise
employ a well-trained singing band to conduct the sacred music,
and the students are thus saved the trouble of joining in the un-
fashionable exercise of psalm-singing.
It would be a needless task to describe the several Class Rooms
which border the north and cast sides of this spacious court. The
projecting, circular, turreted staircases, and the high roofs of the
several buildings, give it a very ancient and grand appearance.
From it another arched and ornamented entrance, in a direct
line with the former, leads into a third court in front of which
stands the Museum, an elegant building of the doric order. It
lias six lofty columns in front, with a second row behind. The
magnificent dome which crowns the building, gives it a grand
finish—a broad flight of steps leads up to it. The principal hall
contains anatohiical preparations, and numerous recesses off'it are
filled with natural curiosities, the roost, if not all of them, being
donations presented by generous individuals. The saloon for
paintings is really elegant, and many valuable paintings are hung
round it; several of them are valued at upwards of a thousand


pounds stcrlingeach. The Library which lies offthis Saloon is stored
with old, valuable, and scarce books, and gives strangers a high
opinion of cur extensive lore. We are sometimes, however, put
to a stretch of ingenuity, in removing the doubts of those who,
seem to think, from the quantity of dust that covers them, that they
are very seldom opened. We are proud to take this opportunity'
to state to the public, that the greater part of the curiosities, the
Library, and upwards of eight thousand pounds sterling, to build
and maintain the Museum, were bequeathed to our Royal College
by a generous individual. Before it came into our possession, it
was open to the public, and many think it ought to be so’ still; but
we ourselves are of opinion that it ought not. For a long period,
the students believed they had aright to be admitted to it once a-year,
but we soon showed them that they had no such right, and there-
fore we have given up our former practice of admitting them. Many
of them also think that whatever belongs, or is given as a donation,'
to the Royal College, belongs also to them, and that therefore they
have a right to facilitate their studies as much as theyplease, by fre-
quent examination of the contents of said Museum. But this ought
not to be, and cannot be. What is left to the College is left to the
professors, and students have nothing to do with it. It would bo
a fine story indeed to have it said that they had it in their power
to visit ..occasionally a Museum, which is allowed to be one of the
first in Europe. In the words of a Virgilian Poiiographer, “We
trust, the Museum will always, in order and cleanliness, conspicu-
ously exhibit the value set upon it by the learned and scientific
body with whom, for the -public benefit, instruction, and delight , it
has been deposited.”
Our College Library stands insulated from the other buildings.
It is a very fine piece of architecture. From the facilities which
arc afforded it by law, the books deposited in it are above 40,000
in number, besides manuscripts. Sensible of what great advantage
such a Library must be to the young men attending College, wd
have generously thrown it open, and all students have “ easy
access” to it.
Among the numerous conveniences attached to our Royal Col-
lege, there is one which particularly deserves notice. It would
have been an unpardonable omission not to have mentioned it. It
is this; we have allotted part of the front building to answer the
double purpose of a Porter Lodge and a Porter House. These
are phrases which, if critically examined, might be found to bear
the same meaning originally, but which now, by custom, and the
gradual changes introduced into conversation find writing, have
very different significations. The latter phrase, Porter House, has
particularly a very extensive meaning. It does not mean simply
that owe particular juice of malt, but that all the several juices
extracted from it, arc sold there: and it is likewise understood-;


that in such a house the juice of the grape may be easily procured,
fa'ucii articles are to be met with in our Porter House , and we would
recommend them to the public as being kept there in genuine
purity. The homo is likewise very clean, which is another induce-
ment to repair hither. Nothing can be more pleasing than when
passing the door, to look into the kitchen. The house is always
well lighted. A large cheerful fire blazes in the grate. The floor
is strewed with the whitest sand, and measures of ail sizes, from the
gill to the pint stoup, mads rusm zaeairsgao of “ shining pewter,”
are suspended alongst the edges of the shelves, and sparkle bright-
ly as the lambent flame sports in the opposite chimney. They are
judiciously placed in full view of the passenger, inviting en-
trance. This house is of such advantage to our Royal College and
the public, that we cannot dispense with it; and, to do every thing
in our power for their convenience, we have placed it in the most
convenient situation. The principal door opens off the principal
entrance into our Royal College, so that none can mistake it.
There is likewise a back door, which is proverbially called the
bishop’s, door, and which opens into the Court. Immediately
beside it is the great door of the Celia Vinaria. From the back
door, they who have been refreshing their bodies and recruiting
theirminds by gentle iibationsat the altar of Barleycorn or Bacchus,
have convenient egress, as, without attracting much attention, they
can mingle with the crowds of peripatetics who are strolling under
the piazzas. JVe understand that large parties meet there occa-
sionally in the evening, and as they meet for the purpose of mutual
amusement and edification, we think it is proper to encourage
them. On these occasions, the utile et dulcc are mingled together,
and those antic sports and tricks are often played which indicate
men of genius, the little inconsistencies of whose character are so
many sure proofs of the versatility and extent of their talents.
Their hilarity is enviable, as they appear to be truly happy; and
with the aid of song and classical quotation, they spend the evening
in reasonable and advantageous amusement. Several of the citi-
zens are so regular in their visits to this house, that they are well
known to the students, and a student lately hinted that the words
“ Vires acquirit eundo,” might very appropriately be painted over
the door. We arc so well aware of the beneficial effects produced
by having our porter house kept up in a respectable way, that we
intend making application to his Fxceilency the Governor very soon
for the purpose of getting an annual salary attached to this indis-
pensable part of our Royal College establishment.
The Pleasure Grounds belonging to our Royal College, “al-
though,” as an elegant living writer observes, “ now somethin"-
less than formerly,” are still considerable. They are a gift to our
Royal College, from the most noble the Duke of Paramatta, much
celebrated for his classical attainments, and his love of the sciences.


He thought that a piece of ground appropriated as a place of re-
tirement ami amusement for the students, would be as much condu-
cive to their interests, ns the endowment of a new' professorship'.
Around these grounds excellent gravel walks are formed, and they
wind amongst beautiful trees. The pleasure grounds are divided
into two halves, by a pure crystaline stream, which flows due north
and south. The students are allowed the use only of the western
half. On the verdant and inviting banks of this classical stream,
the poetic student oft reclines, moralizing on the happiness of the
fishes he sees sporting in its waters, or contemplating and admir-
ing the beauties of nature which spring up around him in plente-
ous profusion ; or meditating on the folly of his thoughtless fellow
students, who enjoy much greater happiness in witnessing the
bound, and following the flight, of the elastic foot-ball, than in
searching for fine ideas, or clothing them in beautiful language.
The students are opt to suppose that they have a right to the
undisturbed use of these grounds; but to show them that they
have no absolute right, wo sometimes forbid the servants to unlock
the gates. When this is the case, they do not ascribe it to any want
of respect or attention on our part towards them, but they put it
down to a forgetfulness, arising from the multitude and severity of
our literary pursuits, to order them to be unlocked. When this
happens, the more sedate part of the students content themselves
with looking through the railing, and gazing at the temples,
towers, and monuments which arc seen overtopping the intermina-
ble “grove of chimneys” which spreads out before them. But the
more thoughtless and playful part climb over the railing, assemble
on the mound, unrobe themselves of the toga prcEtexia , and, forget-
ting alike their disobedience and their idleness, engage with eager
ambition in many a merry game. When tired or hungry, they
resume the toga, help each other over the railing or over the wall,
and make their way homewards, to satisfy their craving appetites,
to refresh their wearied limbs, and commence their literary labours.
Over the stream which meanders through the middle of these
grounds, is thrown an elegant wooden bridge of one arch. This
bridge we have shut up, that students may not trespass on the
grounds on the eastern side of the stream. These we let annually
to the city butchers, who keep sheep in them till they are ready for
the knife. On the highest eminence of this eastern half of the
pleasure grounds, an Observatory is built for the reception of the
valuable astronomical apparatus bequeathed to the Royal College
of Sydney, by a generous individual. The bounty of the governor
has likewise been extended to it, and lie has appointed a professor
of practical astronomy, and granted him a yearly salary
sterling out of the exchequer. His business, however, is not to
teach practical astronomy, but “to make observations for the im-
provement of that great branch of physics.” He, therefore, gives


no public lecture, it being supposed and understood that this “great
branch of physics” is ably and perfectly taught in all our parish
schools, and that all students have made sufficient attainment in
this sublime science before they enter our Royal College.
A new, singular, and judicious, method being discovered
and adopted by one of the professors, for enforcing attendance,
attention and obedience in his class, it deserves particular
notice. To save that portion of time to his students which has
hitherto been consumed every day in collecting the fines, he does
not now so much.as read out the names of those who have incurred
them, alleging, as a reason, that all who have violated the laws in
any way must be aware of it, and therefore ought to pay what they
justly owe; and these gentlemen are required to repair to the pro-
fessor’s house, on certain days that are specified, and at a certain
hour of these days, with their fines wrapt up in white paper, with the
delinquents’ (tbeirown) nameswritten onsaidpaper,anddeliver them
into the hands of the servant maid. We have only one objection to
make against the adoption of this new method in our own classes, hut
it may possibly be removed. Our objection is, that the maid may
be dishonest, retain the fine, apply it to her own use, and deny the
receipt of it. Now the mere possibility of this being the case
causes much trouble to the students, because they who have fines to
pay are obliged to takealongwith them two of their companions, who
may be witnesses that the fine has been honestly paid into her
hapds. But indeed this objection may be removed, for the profes-
sor may authorize the servant girl to issue discharged receipts,
signed either with her own, or her master’s, name. By the bye,
there is another objection that may he made to this plan, and it is
this:—The student may attempt to cheat the maid, as well as the
maid try to cheat the professor. The student may deliver only
part of his fine to the maid, and then she may be wrongly accused
of dishonesty, in retaining a part of it. But a little ingenuity also
gets rid of this difficulty. She may easily acquire as much of the
Latin tongue as is necessary for the situation of fine-gatherer, that
she holds, and have all the names of the mulcted students on slips-
of paper, arranged under the respective charges of sero ingredien-
tes, absenies, non parati, and male sese gerentes. Knowing then
the meaning of these learned phrases, and knowing the quantum
pecunice that is chargeable for each transgression, she can manage-
matters in a very safe and expeditious way. To secure, therefore,
the regular payment of these fines, at the appointed hour and place,
ail are informed, thatifnot then paid, they willincrease daily ata rate
somewhat greater than compound interest, and they have them-
selves to blame if they allow them to increase to an alarming mag-
nitude. If this new method succeed, all the professors will adopt
it in their several classes and it will probably accomplish a reform-
ation in students, which no voice of authority, which no repre


sentation of coming disgrace, which no assurance of future honour,
would be able to effect.
Since the opening of our Royal College, only one circumstance
has occurred which was attended with very violent displeasure and
outcry, on the part of the students. It arose from what they as-
serted was a twofold breach of the law on the part of the professors,
and which we again retorted was only an accommodation of the
law' to the “ necesssity of circumstances.” It happened at a time
when our Royal College was honoured by a visit from two foreign
princes. We wished to receive them handsomely, and that they
might carry away a favourable opinion of our Royal College, w’e
forbade the non-togati to enter the hall: but to make amends for
this, their several professors told them that they might arrange
themselves in two rows in the courts, and stand uncovered, while
the Archdukes and professors, preceded by the mace-bearer with
his mace, walked from the Faculty-hall to the Common-hall. Not
relying, however, on the submissive and respectful obedience of our
Australian youth, we called in the assistance of the military, who
paraded before the gates and doors with guns and fixed bayonets.
The voice of rebellion- was for the first time beginning to wax
loud, and with difficulty it was repressed. We, and the Noble
Archdukes, were descending the broad stair on our way to the
Common-hall, when our ears w'ere assailed with a loud and trium-
phant shout. The students had thrust the soldiers under the
hanging stair that leads up to the hall, and having no room to em-
ploy even defensive weapons, the mingled throng was rushing up
stairs. Even -xe and the Noble Archdukes were obliged to stand
without, till the hall was completely crowded.! It was with diffi-
culty we could force our way up stairs, and when we reached the
hall door, what a sight did we behold!! The non-togati, inter-
mingled with some of the “prqfanum vulgns ,” hqd completely,
filled the seats allotted for them on public occasions!!! We had
to bear with this insult offered to our authority, for it was impossi-
ble to turn them out. The Most Noble Archdukes were highly
amused with the gay sight, and seemed gratified with the reception
given them. Yet they were ungrateful. No sooner did they re-
turn to their own country than they published their travels; and, by
the representation they have given in them of us and our Royal
College, they have shown themselves unworthy of the attention
we paid them.
The introduction of these armed soldiers within the walls of our
Royal College, was the subject of conversation among the students
for several weeks-, and they did not care to assert within our own
hearing that we had grossly violated the law of our Royal College.
Were we to interpret this law according to the letter thereof, it
would really be difficult for us to justify our conduct in any other
way’than by saying, that the necessity of the case required it. As to


excluding the non-togati, that, we acknowledge, was a trifling
fault. In future, however, there will be no occasion for such
disputes between professors and students, as the non-togati
(who are amenable to the laws of our Royal College as well as thd
togati), will be freely admitted to the Common-hall on all publid
occasions in time coming, and we assure them, that soldiers armed
with such destructive weapons, will never, on any account, be
admitted within the walls of our Royal College of Sydney.
A foolish noise was raised two years ago by many students, and
it was increased by the unanimous disapprobation of our citizens,
because we determined that the students should increase their Hon-
orarium, or gift, a third higher than it has been these many years
back. They said we had no right to demand any Honorarium ;
that we had only a right to receive it when voluntarily offered ; and
many of them were indignant that we should force students to pre-
sent a Honorarium of any specified sum, and particularly, as they
said, at a time when money was double its late value. To prove
that what they said was just, they reasoned in this very illogical
manner;—“ If the professors have a right to demand an increased
Honorarium this year, they may double it next year, and triple
it afterwards." Such reasoning as this is a proof of their igno-
rance, rather than of the common sense that we supposed they
possessed. It proves that they are completely ignorant, that there
is a point oj endurance which may be reached, but which dare not
bo passed ; and granting that they knew this, which they did not,
they certainly would pay very little respect to our superior discern-
ment, if they supposed that we would so far “ outstep the modesty
of nature" as to attempt to violate all decency and propriety. It
would be the height of folly even to propose it. They likewise
talked much of our College being a Royal College, and so un-
doubtedly it is. But they attach some indefinite and romantic
meaning to the word Royal , which does not belong to it. They
suppose that we have large salaries from Government, and that we
are possessed of rich funds, arising from the tiends which we lift iri
a few of the neighbouring parishes; but they judge very wrong,
for we are allowed such very moderate salaries, that “ we depend
chiefly for subsistence upon the Honorariums of our students.” The
citizens likewise muttered something about the difficulty that stu-
dents had to gather even the amount of the former Honorarium.
But they seem to forget that we must live by our professions; that
if it presses hard on student’s incomes, they should not presume to
think on going to our Royal College, for who ever heard of any
man of genius who was born and bred apoor man's son !! Indeed
a thousand sufficient reasons might be given for demanding an in-
creased Honorarium, and one of the strongest, and that too which
influenced us in making the demand is, that education is never
properly appreciated, excepting when smartly paid for. In one of


our most useful classes, no Honorarium js demanded from the stu-
dents; and, aware of the bad effects arising from this plan, we have
counselled and advised the professor thereof to demand a Honor-
arium from the students of his class; but he seems contented with
his salary, and therefore says that perhaps his successor may follow,
pur advice, but for his part, that he never will do it. We, however,
would say, and say honestly, using the language of a celebrated
Poliographer, that “no deficiency, on this account , is imputable
to the professor in this department, either with respect to zeal in
teaching, or with respect to those liberal and tolerating principles,
which are so conformable to the spirit and genius of Christianity.”
- We by no means, however, intend to insinuate that our Royal
College has no funds, meaning thereby that the funds are of no
value. It is true that our Royal College, using the figurative but
forcible language of the Poliographer, to whose work vye are so
much indebted; it is true that our Royal College. “ came into the
world as naked as every individual does,” yet it did not always con-
tinue so; for, during the scramble that was made by the crown, the
nobility, and the cities, for a share in the plunder of the rich fa-
bric of the heathen hierarchy, when it was pulled down by.our
fierce nation, long oppressed and little accustomed to regular go-
vernment, yet “ some crumbs came, by second hand,” to the Royal
College of Sydney. We are also much indebted, and we acknow-
ledge it, for “ the donations made by subjects, of books or prints
to the public library, or money to purchase books.” The names;
of the benefactors, though little known to the public, are carefully
preserved in the annals of the Royal College of Sydney, and we are
proud to say, that already our Royal College can enumerate
amongst its benefactors, the names of kings and noblemen, and
clergy, and commoners, many of them “ distinguished by the
largeness of their donations.”
We might have attempted a more minute description of our
Royal College, and have mentioned several other manners and
customs, blit we wish not to tire our readers. These may serve as
materials for some future work, when our Royal College will have
attained greater celebrity. We will, therefore, conclude our work
with mentioning a few of our most useful laws, that strangers and
foreigners may know something of the “ Naiuralis Societas,” which
hinds together professors and students, and which encourages them
to co-operate in accomplishing the object of a College education.
We are anxious, however, to have it understood, that it is merely
a translation of these laws that is given, for according to the law',
the laws are written in Latin. It may be, that in some places they
have been difficult to understand, and consequently they may in
such places be improperly translated. If it be suspected that any.
slips of this kind may have been made, recourse may be had to the
lsws in the original.


A Selection of a few of the Laws of the Royal College of
Sydney, extractedfrom the Law Book of said College.
Law I. AH the laws and records of tlie Royal College of Sydney shall be written
in pure and classical Latin. As often as said laws shall be read to the students at-
tending said Royal College, the more difficult and seemingly unintelligible parti
shall be translated into the current language of Australia, for the benefit of the igno-
rant and the slow in understanding.
Law VI. It is declared unlawful for any person or persons to appear within the
l walls of the Royal College of Sydney, carrying or wearing clubs, swords, fire-arms,
javelins, tomahawks, or any offensive weapon whatever; and It is likewise declared
unlawful for any person or persons whatever to introduce any other person or per-
sons within tbe.walls of said Royal College, who shall be known to carry or wear clubs,
•words, fire-arms, javelins, tomahawks, or any other offensive weapon whatever.
Law IX. On all public and solemn occasions (Sabbath-days excepted), prayers
shall be said in Latin, It is left, however, to the officiator to word his own prayer,
only he is recommended to use that form of prayer, unexceptionable both in matter
and language, which our pious forefathers were careful to have printed at the end of
the Rudiments of the Latin Tongue, along with the Creed and the Ten Command,
ments.
Law XV. AH professors and students belonging to and attending the Royal Col-
lege of Sydney, shall have the free and unconstrained right to vote for, and elect, a
Lord Rector annually. The nobility and gentry most in favour with the governor of
Australia and his friends shall be constantly recommended to the students as most
proper candidates for this high and important office.
Law XIX. The right of Ruffing being now established by the old law of “ Use
and Wont,” ruffing shall be practised "at the conclusion of every classic or portion of
classic, that shall be read in the several classes of the Royal College of Sydney; on
which occasions it shall commence on a signal being given for that purpose by the .
hand of the professor, and it shall cease as soon as said signal shall be discontinued.
The said fashionable and College-acquired accomplishment shall be practised on the
day of election of Lord Rector, on the foUowing occasions:—l. At the commence-
ment of the business—2. At the nomination of every new candidate—3 At the con-
clusion of the business, as soon as one of the students shall have ascended the rostrum,
have proclaimed the due and lawful election of the successful candidate, and have
pronounced the word Plaudite.
Law XXIII. The pleasure grounds, attached to the Royal College of Sydney,
being a gift from the Most Noble the Duke of Paramatta, they shall be the unalien-
able property of said Royal College for ever and ever. No encroachments shall
be made on these grounds without the unanimous consent of the professors of said
Royal College; in which case it shall be lawful to said professors to feu off for the
use and benefit of said Royal College, certain portions of said pleasure grounds; such
encroachments commencing on the south side, may be carried round the said pleasure
grounds. But on no account whatever shall it be lawful to run streets directly
through the middle of said pleasure grounds belonging to the said Royal College of
the city of Sydney.
Law XXIX. The Museum of the Royal, College of Sydney having been built with
part of the money bequeathed by a generous individual, to said Royal College, foe


the reception and arrangement of the valuable collection of anti quities, library of boohs,
&c, &c. likewise bequeathed to said Royal College, by said generous individual, it,
(the Museum, to wit,) shall be the lawful property of said Royal College for ever and
ever. The several professors of said Royal College, shall have the free and uncon.
strained right for a certain number of years to introduce the whole of the students at-
ending their respective classes into said Museum, for the purpose of seeing and exa-
mining said antiquities, &c. contained in it; and after the expiration of said number
of years, the said professors of said Royal College of Sydney shall unanimously di-
vest themselves of foresaid right; it being provided and understood that any student
attending said Royal College of Sydney, whose prying disposition and meddling cu-
riosity make him exceedingly anxious to see and examine the antiquities, &c, of said
museum, shall, after making what his professor considers respectful application, bo
admitted to said Museum ; or if he decline asking this favour, It shall be in bis power,
as well as in the power of the citizens of Sydney, to purchase an admission ticket for
said Museum at the janitor’s house. It is likewise declared unlawful to shew the said
Museum on Sabbath days to any excepting noble strangers; on which necessitous oc-
casions they shall be accompanied by some of the professors, and during such visits the
Royal College gates shall be carefully shut and bolted, that the examination may be
made without any unnecessary interruptions. And it is hereby declared lawful for
the directors of said Museum to receive from the public, donations either of money or
curiosities, for the benefit and support of said Museum of the Royal College of the city
of Sydney,
Law XXXIV. The Royal College of Sydney being entitled by law to a copy of
every book printed in the kingdom of Australia, the books procured by said title shall
be deposited in the Royal College library. The professors shall, at all'times, have
free and ready access to the books of said library, without payment of fee or reward.
All students, without exception, shall be forced to fee said library, before they pre-
sent their three-guineaed Honorarium to their respective professors. All students who,
after having feed said library, and presented said Honorarium, may wish to peruse
any volume belonging to the library, shall deposite the sum of one pound sterling in
the librarian’s hands, to answer; for their honesty, Australians not being yet very re-
markable for the practice of this praise-worthy virtue. The immense sums of money
arising from said fees, together with the interest arising from said deposites, shall be
laid out in the purchase of foreign books, till the library be well supplied : after which
the money thus collected shall be applied to other useful and necessary purposes.
Law XLI. An Observatory having been erected by the Royal College of Sydney,
for the'reception of the valuable collection of astronomical apparatus, bequeathed to
our Royal College by a deceased friend, for the purpose of forwarding the delightful
and sublime science of astronomy, the said apparatus shall be carefully deposited in
said observatory, out of the reach of accident or use, till the “ decline and fall” of said
sublime science shall be heard of, and confirmed. When this shall have taken plac?,
the said apparatus shall be brought forth from the place of concealment, and applied
to the purposes for which the generous donor intended them.
Having thus presented to our friends an imperfect description of
our Royal College, with an account of some of its mariners and
customs, and a selection of a few of its laws, we hope our labours
will not prove unacceptable or useless. The friends of our Royal
College will learn with satisfaction, that it is every day rising in


.deserved reputation. We particularly congratulate ourselves and
.our republic, in having elected to a chair, lately vacant, an indivi-
dual who is the scholar and the gentleman. His noble enthusiasm
in the literary pursuits of his profession, has imparted a new-sti-
mulus to the exertions of his students, and his manners, elegant and
refined, as were those of the people whose lofty language he teaches,'
have stolen and secured the affections of all who have been un-
der his charge. “Study while you study, and play while you
play,” is his maxim to students. We were not aware for some
lime of the cause of that strong regard which even the senior stu-
dents have for him, but we are now of opinion that it arises from
their admiration of his literary and mannered accomplishments, and
because he differs from us in not thinking it to be below his dig-
nity to feel interested in encouraging the amusements of the stu-
dents, and in interceding for them, when, in the exercise of lawful
authority, they are deprived of the means of carrying them on. We
mgy, therefore, assure the public that they who intrust their sons to
our tuition, on their return from our lloyal College, will find
their health improved, their manners polished, their morals puri-
fied, their understandings cultivated, and their minds enriched
with academic lore. The superior accomplishments that wifi
be acquired under our tuition will mark out the College-bred trades-
man from all others, in whatever rank they may move, or to what-
ever class of character they may belong. Much might here bo
paid on the advantages of a Royal College education, but we leave
it to disinterested persons to state them. We conclude, by saying,
.that all who have attended our Royal College, may be proud of
their education, that Australia may be proud of her Royal College,
that we, professors, have reason to be proud of the situations we
hold, and that we believe that the constitution of the royal
COLLEGE OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY IS AS PERFECT AS HUMAN WISDOM
CAN POSSIBLY MAKE IT.
N. B. We learn with pleasure that, during the Holidays, a learned
individual of our number has been arranging and preparing for publica-
tion, " A foil, true and particular Account” of the Private History of
the Royal College of Sydney, for the last forty years ; interspersed xcilh
original anecdotes of the members of our Senatus Academicus :—To be
published sometime previous to the end of the Session: of which due notice
will be given .
FINIS.
Graham A- Co,
JX», Trouble.


The Royal College of Sydney
[?] on [?] University
[?] 1822
