

A
DISSERTATION AND ELEGY
OX THE
LIFE AND DEATH
OF THE IMMORTAL
MAXIMILIAN ROBESPIERRE.
REVEALING, FOB THE FIRST TIME, THE REAL CAUSES AND
AUTHORS OF HIS DEATH;
WITH TRUE PORTRAITURES OF THE THREE ASSEMBLIES THAT
MADE THE REVOLUTION THE STATES-GENERAL, THE
LEGISLATIVE, AND THE CONVENTION;
AND OF THEIR
HISTORIC CELEBRITIES;
SHOWING HOW COMPLETELY HISTORY HAS MISREPRESENTED THE
originals: as also
AN ODE TO LOUIS NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.
BY
JAMES BRONTERRE O’BRIEN,
Author of the “ Origin and Progress of Human Slavery" &«.;
“ Odb to Lord Palmerston”—‘‘Vision of Hell, or
Peep into the Realms Below,” &e., &c.
PRICE EIGHTPENCE.
PUBLISHED BY HOLYOAKE & CO., FLEET STREET, AND
E. TEUELOVE, STRAND.
1859.




A
DISSERTATION AND ELEGY
ON THE
LIFE AND DEATH
OF THE IMMORTAL
MAXIMILIAN ROBESPIERRE.
REVEALING, FOR THE FIRST TIME, THE REAL CAUSES AND
AUTHORS OF HIS DEATH;
WITH TRUE PORTRAITURES OF THE THREE ASSEMBLIES THAT
MADE THE REVOLUTION —THE STATES-GENERAL, THE
LEGISLATIVE, AND THE CONVENTION j
AND OF TBEIH
HISTORIC CELEBRITIES;
SHOWING HOW COMPLETELY HISTORY HAS MISREPRESENTED THE
originals: as also
AN ODE TO LOUIS NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.
BY
JAMES BRONTEKRE O’BRIEN,
Author or the “ Origin and Progress op Human Slavery" &e.;
“ Odb to Lord Palmerston” —“Vision of Hell, or
Peep into the Realms Below,” &e., &c.
PRICE EIGHTPENCE.
PUBLISHED BY HOLYOAKE & CO., FLEET STREET, AND
E. TEUELOVE, STRAND.
' 1859.


TO MANY ENQUIRING OLD FRIENDS WHOM I CANNOT
ANSWER BY PRIVATE LETTER.
The reasons why I hare not reprinted my “ Origin and Progress of
Human Slavery , showing how it came into the world , and how it shall
be made to go outf and why I have been unable to finish my “ Life of
Rohespierref and to execute the larger and more important works I
promised the public twenty-two years ago,—including a Philosophical
History of England—A Real History of the French Revolution—and a
Philosophical Review of the Life and Times of Oliver Cromwell, &c.,
will be seen in the following Dissertation. What is not stated there
may be easily enough inferred. Voluminous and elaborate works,
requiring great research, profound thought, and the exercise of the
gravest judgment, as well as of the higher faculties of the mind in the
way of critical analysis and disquisition—ought not to be lightly
undertaken. Such works can come only from men in circumstances
sufficiently easy to ensure to them personal safety, mental composure,
and diligent application to the work on hand, undistracted by every-day
cares and anxieties, merely to subsist a family from hand to mouth.
I need say no more.—Had the chartists of 1839 kept their word with
me, I could have kept mine with them.
James B. O’Brien.
[Alt Communications, Subscriptions, and Donations, in aid of Mr, O'B.'e
forthcoming publications, to be forwarded to his address , Eclectic Hall , 18 Z»en-
mark-street, Soho, London \ and it is urgently requested by the members and
friends of the National Reform League , that all who have read their recent
Appeal will form Committees , in town and country, to promote the subscription,
so that no time may be lost in bringing out the Works 7'eferred to. The Secretary ,
Mr. J. Brown, jun., 39 Cromer Street, Gray's Inn Lane , London, will supyly
copies of the Address to all that may apply for them , and he or Mr. O'Brisi*
will answer all communications in reference (hereto.]— J
-J. Brown, Secretary.


DISSERTATION
ON THE
LIFE AND CHARACTER OF MAXIMILIAN ROBESPIERRE.
With remarks on the Assemblies, the Men, and the Events which
caused the excesses of the revolution and its crimes—more especially
the murder of Robespierre by the Convention at the height of his
unexampled moral power and renown; and while projecting the
regeneration of France, through political laws and social institutions,
based on justice and mercy to all that would be just and merciful.
TO THE MEMBERS AND FRIENDS OF THE
NATIONAL REFORM LEAGUE.
Dear Friends,
If you and I attached any value to dedications, I should certainly
dedicate this work to you, and to you only, as being the parties in this
country most capable of appreciating both the motives of its author,
and the sublime virtues of its hero. But, as you and I have higher
purposes to serve, than bandying conventional civilities with each other,
instead of a dedication, I proceed at once, through the medium of this
epistle, to give you briefly, (for my space is limited) such a dissertation
on the life and character of the illustrious subject of it, accompanied
with such strictures on his contemporaries and detractors, as will not
only, 1 trust, justify the encomiastic strain of the Elegy, but also show,
(what nowhere else has yet been) the real motives to Robespierre’s
death, and the guilty parties. This preliminary discourse, together
with the Elegy itself, and the notes thereto appended, will, 1 venture to
say, enable ail who read them to form a sounder appreciation of the
Revolution of 1789—0 f its three famous, or infamous assemblies—of
its leading events and proposed ends—above all, of its reputed Celebrities
—than could possibly be derived from the most voluminous compila-
tions got up in the interest of the u property” classes, who have spared
no pains nor expense to suppress, or pervert, all the essential facts of
the revolution, and to blacken and desecrate its illustrious memories.
Of Robespierre’s pedigree, parentage, and early life, I have no room
for details here, nor for those of bis every-day private life in maturer
age; much less for details of his stormy public life. I can but refer the
reader to reliable sources, where he may tind all the information that
now can, or need, be desired on these matters. You must be contend


too, my friends, with only a rapid survey of those broad features of his
character, and of those marked incidents of bis career, which distinguish
him from every other actor in the revolution, and make him stand out,
as it were in relief, from every other legislator, statesman, orator, phi-
losopher, politician, or philanthropic reformer of ancient or modern
times. The space to which lam limited makes it impossible for me to
do more. To do anything like fall justice to Robespierre, 1 should
require at least, three volumes of the size of the first and only volume
of my “ Life of Robespierre,” &c , published by Mr Watson, in 1838,
and which hud to be discontinued, through no fault of mine, nor of the
publisher, (Imth of whom have been grievous sufferers from its non-
completion) bnt from a dark, cruel, and systematic private and public
persecution, in which the middle classes involved me at the time, partly
on account of my then influence as a social reformer amongst the
chartists, but chiefly with a view to compel me. through absolute ruin
to stop the progress of a publication, in which I made, and was about
to make, revelations which no man has been suffered to make up to
this hour, nor even to attempt without absolute destruction to his repu-
tation and private interests. For, let me here, at the outset, apprise
the reader that no truthful history of the revolution has yet appeared,
nor ever can appear, until there be another resolution, which shall
rescue the populations of Europe from the fangs of the middle classes,
whose present social position gives them both the will and the power to
effectually crush all such attempted publications, and all who may be
daring enough to undertake them. A truthful history of the French
revolution would necessarily have to trace ail its crimes and horrors to
the haute bourgeosie and to its middle-class sympathisers throughout
Europe—England in particular—who can be proved to a demonstration
to have been the wilful cause of all. Yes I—a faithful and enlightened
historian holding himself accountable to God and posterity for his
work, would be constrained by his conscience, to lay at the door of the
ravenous commercial middle classes, the countless plots, massacres,
insurrections, gnillotinings, panics, famines, and conflagrations of that
epoch, and to show these classes guilty in the sight of mao, as they are
in the sight of God, of having knowingly and wilfully caused all these
horrors, in order to enrich themselves at the expense of king, aristocracy,
ehurcb, and people. In other words, he would have to show that they
made the revolution what it was—a revolution of blood and rapine, in
order to seize and appropriate to their own uses the royal, national,
and ecclesiastical domains—(which constituted, at that epoch, more than
two fifths of the territory of France) to seize the tithes and other pro-
perty of the church, of the incorporated regular clergy, of the religions
and educational foundations, monasteries, convents, hospitals, &c., and
to drive the nobility and wealthier gentry into revolt, or emigration, in
order to have their estates sequestrated to their own ultimate profit,
but, above all. in order to reduce the producing classes, mechanics, and
tabourets of every description, and all who lived by the labour of their
heads and hands through the aits and sciences, to a degree of physical,
mental, and moral bondage, such as was never dreamt of in the darkest


ages of French history, nor iu any part of the world, till tbe parliament
of Henry VIII. and Oliver Oromwell. made, with the aid of the middle
classes of their day, two immense strides in the the same direction.
An honest historian, if also a philosophic one, would be obliged,—
in revealing these revolutionary atrocities, to make his reflections
thereon—reflections wnich must necessarily embrace the past as well as
the present, for the edification of the future; and amongst these must
be this conspicuous one, that the history of all past revolutions in
all countries, is little else than a record of the crimes of the said
middle classes to compel privileged Orders above them to divide their
plunder with them and to keep the classes below them, (from whom it
was stolen, or taken by force), from being able to recover, or get any
portion of it back. But we shall see more of this as we advance.
Suffice It to say here, that no man in the present day dare publish such
a history of the French revolution as would be useful to the world.
Let those who doubt me make the attempt, and they will speedily And
out, at the cost of their utter ruin, that the world they lived in before,
is not the world they will be obliged to live in afterwards. To all who
from ignorance, or malice, have blamed me for not finishing my Life of
Kobespierre, I can only say in self-defence, that I was actually and
effectually crushed before I gave it up—that 1 held to the work till I
was literally sold up for debts 1 did not owe, and for debts I did owe,
but could easily have paid, it allowed time, and not debarred from
employing that time profitably for myself and others. To speak out-
right, (it is no good, mincing matters), I discontinued the work only
after I had been literally turned into the streets with a young and
helpless family, without a roof to shelter them, a chair to sit on, or a
bed to lie on; stripped of books, furniture, and every essential conve-
nience of life, including all visible means of sustaining life, itself. I
was soon after locked np in Lancaster Castle for eighteen months,
ostensibly for an illegal speech 1 never made, (one manufactured for
the occasion,) but, iu reality, for many perfectly legal speeches I had
made, and in which 1 committed the unpardonable sin of enunciating
some ugly, but incontrovertible facts, touching the virtwjus middle classes.
Three several times have 1 had to go through a similar ordeal of seeing
my home stripped of all I could scrape together, with the help of
friends, and such employment as I could get; nor have I been worth a
shilling to call my own since I left Lancaster Castle, though, notwith-
standing the loss of my profession as a barrister—due to similar causes
—I could have realised an income of at least £ISOO a year, during
the last twenty years, from literature alone, aided by my lectures, had
it not been for the dark and malignant combinations by which the
middle classes have closed the public press against me, shut me out of
every literary and scientific institution in.the kingdom, as a lecturer,
and, latterly, all but banished me from the public platform, through the
agency of hired, or deluded, mobs, headed by ez-cbartist renegades and
ez-socialist impostors, who have made their peace with the middle
classes, to escape starvation and be let live an easy life.
It is with great reluctance, my friends, 1 make these statements, but


I owe them to you for the confidence you have so long placed in me,
both by way of reply to the slanderers who have so long abused me for
not having finished the Life of Robespierre, (the cause of which they
well knew), and to show you why it is that you can no more have
honest historians, than you can have honest newspapers, honest
lecturers, honest parsons, or honest anything else. The middle classes
will suffer no honest influences to prevail in any department of society;
for, their whole system is one of fraud and murder from top to bottom.
Just as they were the wilful cause of all the crimes of the French
Revolution, so have they been in all ages, and in all countries, the prin-
cipal authors of all the slavery, outbreaks, wars, famines, and such like
calamities, which constitute the staple of past history, and they continue
to this hour, the mortal and perfidious foes of all real or Christian
reform throughout the worlds wilfully keeping the industrious and
virtuous classes everywhere in ignorance, poverty, and subjection to
privileged aristocracies recruited from their own ranks, whom they
craftily maintain in exaltation and seeming authority, in order to throw
upon them, in dangerous times, the odium and responsibility due mainly
to their own liberticidal and homicidal acts. You will see, as we
advance, how they made the revolution to enrich themselves from above
and from below, and then the counter-revolution to keep possession of
the spoils—in both which processes they had necessarily, and therefore
knowingly and wilfully, to cover France with scaffolds, blood, and
mourning.
Those wishing to acquaint themselves with the pedigree, parentage,
infancy, and early life of the illustrious subject of my Elegy, will
find the information required in the Memoirs of his sister, Charlotte
Robespierre, supposed to be written from her dictation by Laponneraye;
and in another work entitled “Autobiography of Robespierre ” —a
work clearly apocryphal, but true in its main facts, and ascribed to
Laponneraye himself. At the time of the July revolution (1830)
Charlotte Robespierre, was still living in an obscure corner of
Paris, and Laponneraye, an enthusiastic admirer of Robespierre, made
it his business to find her out, and learn from her lips every particular
incident, and minute circumstance connected with his infancy and early
career, that her note-book or her memory could supply, over and above
what was then already known. These are given in the Memoirs, and
in the Autobiography, supposed to be the production of Laponneraye
and his friends. This latter work makes Robespierre tell the story of
his own life down to the close of the Constituent Assembly, in two
octavo volumes. Though feebly and tamely written, and containing
nothing that would give umbrage in this country, Laponneraye has
left it unfinished, owing, it is said, to the persecutions and imprison-
ments be was subjected to, under Louis Phillipe’s Government.
All that is of interest or importance in the two works just mentioned
will be found in vol, i. of my “ Life of Robespierre”, published by
Mr Watson. That volume, in addition to all the then known particulars
of Robespierre’s descent, parentage, infancy, school-boy days, early
habits, university carter, literary and forensic progress, and Successes,


&c., &c., gives also the most complete account, yet published, of bis
public and political career, down to the close of the Constituent Assem-
bly, in October. 1791; including faithful translations of all bis principal
orations and addresses in and out of the Assembly, or lengthy ex-
tracts from them—translations also of sundry biographical notices,
literary dissertations and critiques—extracts from memoirs and histories
of the revolution, together with a dissertation of my own, in which I
have exposed in extenso the utter falsity and groundlessness of the
monstrous and malignant inventions of the Royalist historians, such as
Mongaillard, Desodoards, Montjoye, Dulanre, &c., and the still more
injurious, because more perfidious, misrepresentations of such historians
as Thiers, Mignet, and others of the “ liberal," or middle-class school,
who, knowing that the outrageous fabrications of the Royalist writers
would no longer obtain credit except amongst the very bigoted and
superficial, have been at great pains to give such artfully dressed-np
and cunningly-qualified characters and softened portraitures of Robes-
pierre as should seem impartial, and therefore probably correct; while,
in reality, they are far more calculated to deceive the reader into con-
clusions the very opposite of the truth. I have also given in that volume,
and refuted, where I thought necessary, the articles of Charles Nodier,
in the Revue de Paris —of Deschiens, in the Bibliographie dee Jour-
naux, and the misstatements and misconceptions of many others, in-
cluding our own countrymen—Mr Adolphus and Sir Richard Phillips—
the latter of whom —honest, but weak-minded —saw in the Girondists
the demi-gods of the revolution. Amongst the interesting papers
published in that volume will be found a Biographical Sketch of Robes-
pierre, by the celebrated Buonarroti, his personal friend, who gave me
the manuscript but a few months before his death. Were there no
other evidence of the grandeur and goodness of Robespierre’s nature
than the intense love and enthusiastic devotion be inspired in such
exalted patriots as Buonarroti, that evidence alone would be conclusive;
for, never yet did man of Buonarroti’s stamp lavish admiration on any
but God Almighty’s own nobles, and those only of the highest order
—the salt of the earth—the very flower of humanity. I have seen
that brave and venerable old man at the advanced age of 78 shed tears
like a child at the mention of Robespierre’s name; and the slightest
aspersion thrown on his memory would fire the old man with an indig-
nation such as no possible injury to himself could make him feel.
Of Robespierre’s private life at mature age, and up to the time of
bis death, I have nowhere seen a juster, fuller, nor more graphic account
than will be found in the 2nd vol. of Lamartine's “ History of the
Girondists,” (p. 192 to 201 included—Bohn’s edition.) I find it to be
in strict keeping with all I could learn from divers conversations I
held with several distinguished men in Paris in 1836, and 1837,
including Buonarroti himself, who had shared Robespierre’s private
intimacy, as well as his opinions, and is one of the parties named by
Lamartine, as ordinarily composing Robespierre’s private social circle,
gathered within his own domicile. Djdier, the locksmith, another old
Jacobin named by Lamartine, was also living at that time; and, though


from the circumstance of his being bed-ridden and deaf, I could not
see him, I saw others, the friends of Didier, who described that old
man as quite as devoted to the memory of Robespierre as Buonarroti
himself. Lamartine’s account squares also with all I could learn in
repeated conversations with the late Armand Carrel the then reputed
head of the republican party, with M. Cavaignac (brother of the General
of that name), M. Etienne Arago (brother of the great Astronomer),
with M. Thibeaudeau (son of the Count Thibeaudeau, known as one of
Buonaparte’s most devoted adherents during “ the 100 days,”) with
M. Teste (brother of Louis Phillippe’s minister of that name), a
republican of the true Robespierrean stamp, and a very different man from
the corrupt minister; with M. Marrast, late president of the ex-consti-
tuent Assembly, who, the first time I questioned him about Robespierre,
exclaimed— u Oh, mon Dieu / Robespierre etait un /Saint,” —and with
divers others, who, though not old enough to have known Robespierre
personally, concurred, all, in giving me just such a description of
Robespierre’s private life as that sketched by Lamartine; having got
their information from some few of Robespierre’s surviving friends, and
from members of the Duplay family, with whom Robespierre resided at
the time of his death—including Duplay’s youngest daughter, married
to the brave Lebas, who chose to die on the scaffold with Robespierre
rather than (as he expressed) “ participate in the infamy of such a
proscription.” Lamartine’s picture of Robespierre’s private life may
therefore be safely relied on; for one and all of the parties I have
named concurred in describiug it as pure and exemplary in the highest
degree,—the life of a cheerful, affectionate, open-hearted man, of the
most simple tastes, and the most amiable manners, loving and beloved
by all who had his confidence; and with no other earthly ambition than
to deliver France from its oppressors, and retire into the country, to
bury himself in obscurity for the remainder of his days, living on one
of the farms saved out of the patrimonial inheritance, there to enjoy
peace and domestic happiness, as he hoped, with the eldest daughter of
Duplay—the object of his affections, betrothed to him, and whom he
was to make his wife when the storms of the revolution had passed.
Let any unbiassed man who has read what I have recorded of Robes-
pierre’s early and public life, from his infancy down to the dissolution
of the States-general, and what Lamartine has related of his private
every-day life up to the day of his death—just ask himself whether
there is even a possibility that such a man could be a bad man in any
sense of the word, or other than a man of the most exalted virtues and
talents in public life. Up to this hour, although thousands of venal
tongues and pens have been let loose upon him, not one has been able
to fix a stain upon either his private or political life, with the shadow
of a fact to sustain it, or give it an air of probability. Instead of being
sanguinary and cruel, he was humane and compassionate even to
weakness. When a child a few years old, he cried for the death of a
pigeon exposed to the night air, and bitterly rebuked his sisters for
exposing it; and about the same period rebuked his younger brother
for not seeming to share in his sorrows for the death of their mother.


When a youth he visited the hermitage of Rousseau to bestow the
tribute of his homage, reverence, and sympathy for the persecutions
and sufferings of that great man, whose memory he ever after honoured
and never failed to exalt in the days of his power. When a man, in
the vigour of life, and the reputed chief of a party then in the as-
cendant, he shuddered with horror at the bare thought of the massacres
of September, (organized by Danton and the commune on behalf of the
petite Bourgeosie), and paced his room in distraction all night, unable
to compose himself, refusing to take his usual rest in bed while so
many of his fellow-creatures were being summarily disposed of, although
almost every one of the victims that perished on that occasion were
royalists who, had they got the upper-hand, would have made no
distinction between Danton and himself, but handed both over to the
public executioner without scruple, without remorse. Saint Jnst,
whose heart was not composed of such tender materials, though his
conscience would not let him participate in such scenes, was astonished
at finding Robespierre pacing his room at an early hour the next morn-
ing, and not to have gone to bed, and slept soundly, like himself, while
the brigands of the middle class were butchering the “ suspected ”
brigands of the aristocracy. We find Robespierre, at a subsequent
period, when Hebert and his ferocious rabble were howling for the blood
of the queen, of the king’s sister, and “the impure remnant of the
Capets,” exclaiming in mortified spirit, “ Encore du sang! toujours du
sang! rien que du sang! pour ces monstres!” —“More blood, ever
and always blood I nothing but blood will satisfy these monstersl
Again we find him, not long after, risking his name, fame, and popu-
larity —the sole guarantees for his life—in repeated and successful
attempts to save some 73 Girondists from the scaffold, when the
sections of Paris, hounded on by the Hebertists. called aloud for their
blood. Robespierre alone had influence to save, and he did save these
base wretches, every one of whom would have sent himself to the
scaffold, and who afterwards became his bitterest persecutors —even to
the death.
But novices and imbeciles may here exclaim, “if Robespierre had so
much power to save, why did he not save the thousands of victims
that perished by the hands of Fouche and Collot d’ Herbois, in Lyons—
of Barras and Freron, at Toulon—of Carrierin La Vendee— of Tallien,
at Bouvdeaux, and by the other terrorist proconsuls throughout France?
Why did he not prevent the mitraiUades and the noyadts. at Lyons and
Nantes, and the Jbvrnees , or batches of 40 and 50 victims a day, sent
to the guillotine, on the Place de la Revolution , in Paris?” Honest
men would never ask such questions if they knew Robespierre's actual
position, and that of his enemies, at the time, Robespierre had no more
power to save these victims, than had one of the scavengers of Paris.
In the first place, a very large proportion of the victims deserved their
fate; for they would have murdered every democrat in France, had they
not been destroyed, themselves. In the next place, to attempt to save
all would have been to put himself in antagonism with the committees
of government, with the Convention, and with the mass of the people, as


well as with the terrible commissioners, or pro-consuls themselves; and
instead of saying the victims, he would have been voted a traitor to his
country, and made a victim himself. In the third place, notwithstanding
the almost hopelessness of such an attempt, he did all it was possible for
a man so placed to do. Lamartine admits that he, Gouthon, and St
Just, saved thousands of lives during that epoch of terror—Gouthon at
Lyons, St Just at Strasburgh, and Robespierre everywhere throughout
the republic, wherever his influence extended.—And the proof—the un-
erring proof—that he had no share in those horrors is, that he incurred
the mortal hatred of all the ferocious pro-consuls, and of their patrons
in the committees of government and in the convention ; also of their
partisans in Paris who never forgave him for the indignation he ex-
pressed at the excesses committed, and all of whom lent their aid to
overthrow him on the 9th Thermidor. In fact, he was himself mur-
dered, by the very terrorists he is supposed to have been at the head of,
and to have had the power to punish. And the secret of his overthrow
was, his attempt to wrench power from their murderous hands, on the
one hand, and the covert hatred all the factions in the Convention had
of his democracy, on the other—these parties being but too glad to for-
give the terrorist butchers all their crimes, if they would only rid France
of the exalted democratic and social reformer, whose renown and moral
power gave strength and prestige to the working classes and their
friends throughout France. The convention well knew that in order
to overthrow the republic, put down universal suffrage, and eject the
working classes from the constitution and from the state, it was an in-
dispensable preliminary to destroy Robespierre and his party in Paris,—
So soon as they found the Mountain terrorists and the committees
of government ready to do this bloody work for them, they jumped at
the chance, and gave their traitorous sanction to the sacrifice, the moment
they saw it might be accomplished with safety to themselves. They
knew that in Robespierre and his party lay the future moral and
physical force of the real democracy of France—that the Monntainists
professed universal suffrage only to climb by it to power and place, and
would be glad to kick it aside when they had got what they cared for—
riches and station—and that such few of them as were sincere would be
powerless after Robespierre’s fall. They had, therefore, every corrupt
motive to join the Monntainists against Robespierre : well knowing that
when the latter was destroyed by the former, the republic must come
to an end, and the Mountain itself either seek refuge in the ranks of its
opponents, or else fall under the weight of its own crimes and of the public
indignation. Nothing but a dictatorship in the hands of Robespierre
could have prevented the 9th Thermidor. Yet was he too conscientious a
man to seize or even to accept it, unless it were freely voted him by
the convention, or by the people themselves, acting in their sovereign
capacity, through the medium of theirprimary assemblies—a condition
manifestly impossible at a time when the mass of the public neither
suspected his danger nor their own. Had Marat been alive in the crisis
of Thermidor, he would not have hesitated a moment to grasp the
dictatorship, whatever might be the consequences—for, Marat was not


a man to stop to count the cost either to himself or others, where he
saw palpable treason to the democracy—and he cared little or nothing
for legal forms or government authority, when he saw them used only
to cloak, sanction, or protect oppressors in their crimes against the
people. At the risk of being destroyed by the people, themselves, as a
usurper, Marat would have put himself at the head of the insurgent
forces of the Commune and the Jacobins on the 9th Thermidor, and
dared all, in the hope of sending the traitors to the guillotine. As a
man of action, Marat, at such a crisis, would have been invaluable for a
coup de main against the coup d'etat of the convention and the com-
mittees. He would have taken advantage of the fervor of the Jacobins
on the night of the Bth Thermidor, accepted the offer of Coffinhal and
Payan, on the part of the commune, to Robespierre—and marched at
once upon the committees and the convention—putting the former to
death, and compelling the convention, on pain of the like fate, to rescind
its decrees; and on the next day he would have sent all the leaders
of the conspiracy to the scaffold, and decimated the convention itself,
though at the risk of a civil war throughout France. Kill or be killed;
down with the traitors or perish—would have been Marat’s motto in
such a crisis, and the world, which admires daring, will ever give the
meed of its applause to such a policy.
Let not my readers suppose I mean to detract from Robespierre by
this apparent eulogy of Marat. The two men were essentially different
in their organizations and in their capacities. Robespierre was not a
jot less courageous than Marat—nor feared death for himself a jot
more. The proof of that is, that he voluntarily gave himself up to
certain death, when the Commune and the Jacobins offered him the
chance not only to save himself, but to destroy his enemies on the spot.
But what he did not fear for himself, he feared for his country —for
the republic—for the people—but above all—for the glorious principles
he had illustrated by a genius and a life of devotion never surpassed—
never equalled. He feared the character of a usurper would stain his
principles in the eyes of the world—discredit everything he had said
and done in the revolution—make him and his party appear to France
to have been hypocrites and impostors all their lives, seeking only their
own ambitious ends, while preaching liberty, fraternity, and equality to
the people. Besides, he knew that the democracy he sought to found
could spring only from an enlightened public opinion and a pure public
conscience, and could never engraft itself on a coup de main , or a
coup d 1 etaf , against the established authorities of the state, however
criminal they were, or however apparently justifiable a usurpation of
dictatorial power might be at such a crisis. Such a dictatorship once
seized upon, and inaugurating itself with blood—even though tempo-
rary success might crown its first onslaught,— must necessarily march
on from blood to blood, maintaining and extending its authority by
blood, and by blood only:—for, all legal authority being suspended, the
enemies of democracy would appeal to law and to democracy itself
against an empire of brute force, (as they would qualify the dictatorship);
and with the organized craft, wealth, hypocrisy, and power of the upper


and middle classes on the one hand, and the shallow credulity of the
masses on tbo other, (who always mistake words and symbols for the
thing itself.) the power of such a dictator, whether he were a Marat,
a Robespierre, a Danlon or anybody else, must speedily be overthrown—
not less by the shallow democrats themselves, than by their crafty enemies;
and then farewell to all hopes of spreading enlightened democratic
opinion in the world for many a long day. The very name of demo-
cracy would be associated In the minds of every community with murder
and usurpation, so that no man dare mention the word with respect,
much less demand the establishment of the thing, itself. Robes-
pierre evidently foresaw all this; and as be cared nothing for bis own
life in comparison with the lives of the people, and with preserving to
them a glorious cause unsullied, so that its triumph might be of easier
accomplishment at a future time, he peremptorily refused to lend his
name to an insurrection having for its aim the conferring of a dictator-
ship upon himself, and which, whatever might be its immediate successes
in Paris, must have made a civil war inevitable, covered France with blood
and mourning, and in the event of defeat—aresult more than probable—
consign the cause of democracy and himself to the maledictions of pos-
terity, which would judge of the usurpation only by its fruits. Nothing
short of absolute certainty of success could have induced Robespierre to
incur such a responsibility,—for, it is only in the event of success that the
true motives to the usurpation could appear—in the dictator bestowing
beneficent institutions on his country, founding peace and prosperity on
the ruins of all factions, and then laying down bis dictatorship at the feet
of an enlightened, free, and grateful people. In the then condition of
France—in the then state of public opinion amongst the labouring
classes—such a result was clearly impossible. The masses would support
no dictatorship not conferred by themselves; and even if there were time
and opportunity for it, no man would dare make such a proposal at that
period. The proof that Robespierre acted rightly rs this—had the mat*
of the people been as ripe for insurrection as the Jacobins and the
commune, on the 9th Thermidor, they would have risen spontaneously
and put down Robespierre’s enemies without consulting Robespierre at
all, who ought never have been asked to compromise himself in such
an affair. It is the right and duty of every people to'make insurrec-
tions when they see law, justice, and virtue trampled on by crime
and treason in their rulers: but it is not the right of individuals, so
oppressed, to demand insurrections for themselves. Their duty is to
let the public will manifest itself freely, after doing all they can to
enlighten it, and abide by the issue. They who blame Robespierre for
not putting himself at the head of the insurrection on the 9th Ther-
midor, ought rather to blame those who asked him to assume such a
position; and still more, the people themselves, for not making the
insurrection on their own account: for, if it could not have been made
without the authorization of Robespiene, it ought not to be tried at all
—since, on no other condition than its spontaneity, could it be decisively
successful. Robespierre only spoke fact when he said to the leaders
of the insurgents—“ You destroy me, you destroy yourselves , you


destroy our cause." Were there no insurrection* the Convention and
the committees would have either to murder him in secret (which they
dared not do), or send him for trial before the revolutionary tribunal,
where be was sure to be acquitted, and bis accusers made to take his
place. This was just what bis accusers iu the convention and in the
committees wanted to prevent; therefore the insurgents of the commnne
and Jacobins only played their enemies* game, and fell into the trap
hid for them, when they essayed an insurrection, which should not
have been attempted except in the event of Robespierre being condemned
by the revolutionary tribunal—a thing quite impossible unless that
tribunal were entirely remodelled; —and then not only would an insurrec-
tion have been justifiable, but it must have been also successful from
the indignation Robespierre’s disclosures before the tribunal must have
excited in the population of Paris and the departments. In a word,
insurrections are justifiable only when all legal means have been tried,
and failed, and when there is a reasonable chance of success. This
latter condition is a sine qua non —seeing that in the event of failure,
the condition of the oppressed must be only made worse, not better,
than it was before.
The revolution turned up other great and true men besides Robespierre,
some few of whom surpassed him in certain showy qualities, essential to
a reformer in stormy times; such as oratorical vigour and fire, the advan-
tages of physique and exterior, prepossessing manner and insinuating ad-
dress, inflexibility of purpose or will, daring impetuosity, and the rongber
kinds of mere animal dash and courage such as may be found amongst
soldiers, brigands, sailors, and gens d’ armes. But I cannot, in the
whole circle of history, find another man that will bear a comparison
with him in respect of that ensemble of the loftier and holier qualities of
the bead, heart, and conscience requisite to form an exalted human
nature of the first class—an inspired,—a born regenerator of humanity.
—Marat and Saint Just came nearest to him in the revolution, and
certainly surpassed him in some of the above-named qualifications; but
neither possessed his eloquence, his far-sightedness, his indulgence for
mere error, his entire exemption from every kind of fanaticism, his
generous emotions and nice susceptibilities of heart; nor did either of
them combine in himself so many of the loftier qualities of genius
and virtue. Moreover, their spheres of action and influence in the
revolution lay lower, and were far less comprehensive, than his. The
numerous ardent admirersof Marat, and tha fewer, but more thoughtful
admirers of Saint Just, honoured and revered Robespierre; but the
latter had multitudes of worshippers that cared little for Saint Just,
except as Robespierre’s confidant and right arm; and who, while they
recognized Marat’s energy, probity, disinterestedness, and devotion,
disliked his cynicism, and feared to see the common cause compromised
by his vehement denunciations, however richly they might be deserved.
He went, they thought, not too far—but too fast. Saint Just was one
of the most original and extraordinary men of the revolution. But
for the disadvantage of being ten years younger than Robespierre,
and some twenty-two years younger than Marat, there is no saying to


what eminence he might not have attained. Scarcely twenty-four
years old when be became a member of the committee of public safety
(which he entered before Robespierre did), he was the boldest—the
most daring—yet the coolest and most self-possessed—and the most
inflexible member of it. He shrunk from no responsibility, either in
the cabinet, or on the field of battle (whither he often went to give
examples of courage to the soldiers, and to watch the aristocratic
generals and officers he suspected of treasonable designs against the
republic), and was, generally, the member of the committee selected to
report on the graver and more perilous state affairs which involved the
proscription of powerful factions. Once convinced that he was right,
he proceeded to the execution of his duty with a stern and inflexible
will which nothing could daunt, nor bend—determined to perish, or
deliver his country from traitors. His influence was considerable, but
subordinate to that of Robespierre; and being rather a closet influence
than a public one, was not operative with the masses like that of
Marat, who was more the idol of the rough insurgent combatants of
the Faubourgs than Robespierre himself. The latter they honoured and
respected rather than loved, he not having taken part in any of their
insurrectional movements ; whereas, Marat had had a principal share
in instigating, if not organizing, them all.
But, although Marat and Saint Just played conspicuous parts in the
revolution, and, next after Robespierre, were the most devoted, intellec-
tual and energetic leaders of the real democracy, neither, nor both,
contributed anything like so much to the formation of that new public
opinion, without which, the republic could have bad no life, no soul,
nor influence upon foreign states, as did Robespierre—nor did they
inspire a tithe of a tithe of the terror which Robespierre did in the
coalesced despots of Europe, and in the enslavers of the human race
everywhere. Much less have they produced those deep-rooted, enduring
effects upon the world’s mental and moral progress, which Robespierre’s
labours have; and which will, for all time to come, make his name a
tower of strength to real reformers all over the earth, and transmit it
down to the remotest posterity, with an ever-increasing lustre propor-
tional to the spread of moral and intellectual light in the world, more
especially amongst its down-trodden classes and races. There is not an
enslaved population, nationality, nor race in Europe, that the name of
Robespierre is not working its way amongst, and, with it, his doctrine }
and that does not appreciate him in the exact measure of their own
virtue and intelligence. I have ascertained this fact personally, from
Spaniards, Portuguese, Poles, Belgians, Germans, Italians, and even
Russians; in fact, from men of every European state except Holland,
where the people seem to have had their souls debased beyond redemption
by mercantile money-grubbing pursuits. The French people too,
admire Robespierre at the present day far more than at any period
since the revolution; time and events having shown them by woful
experience how hopeless it is to found a republic on any principles but
his, and how utterly useless universal suffrage is without those moral
and social guarantees with which he sought to accompany it in the form


of just fundamental laws on property , on commerce , on education, on
the constitution of juries and corporations , on the organisation of the
army and the national guards —upon strictly democratic principles—
above all, on the constitution of the legislature , the government , and every
subordinate jurisdiction—all based on the true principle of perfect equality
between citizen and citizen, rich and poor, in the eye of the law.
The democracy of France, enlightened by the past, now see the
necessity of these reforms; that universal suffrage is worthless and
cannot subsist without them; that they are all as much the people’s
rights as universal suffrage itself —that they are, in fact, infinitely more
important without universal suffrage, than is universal suffrage without
them. Under Robespierre’s constitutional laws, the legislature could
only frame and discuss projets de lots , or bills; but could not pass them
into laws without the previous sanction and consent of the people,
themselves, voting in their primary assemblies. For this, fifteen clear 1
days were allowed; so that there could be no usurpation of the rights
of the people by the legislative assemblies, as afterwards happened.
Neither could there be any coups cf elat : for, by Robespierre’s constitu-
tional laws, the troops of the line could not act against the citizens
under any pretence, nor by any authority, without committing high
treason. Only the national guards could be called out to suppress
disturbances or assist the magistrates in maintaining the peace. But the
national guards were the whole adult male population able to carry
arms, (poor and rich being upon a strict equality, and the officers all
chosen from the ranks) so that the rich and the murderous middle
classes could have no hireling assassin-force at their call to drown the
rights of the people in their blood, and then make them bondsmen as
they have since done. Under such laws there could be no June massacres,
no December butcherings, no coups d ’ etat, no traitorous usurpations
by Chambers, Presidents, or Emperors. The intelligent social reformers
in France now see these things, and hence their admiration of
Robespierre. It is said that already there are nearly two millions of
statuettes of Robespierre distributed throughout France in private
houses; not conspicuously, for, the Bonrgeosie will tolerate no
admiration of Robespierre in public; the present hideous despotism
having been set up by these robbers, for the express purpose of
forcibly suppressing every book, pamphlet, newspaper, ballad, effigy,
and symbol that might recal the memory and the works of that illus
trious apostle and martyr of liberty. Indeed the 600,000 troops placed
at Bnonaparte’s disposal exist for no other purpose than to prevent an
insurgent population from rising to wreak vengeance on the Bourgeosie—
assassins (whose class is now pretty well known to have been the mur-
derers of all the people’s devoted champions, and the real authors of all
the bloodshed, and of all the crimes committed in the three revolutions
of 1789, 1830, and 1848), and to enthrone the constitutional laws of
Robespierre upon the ruins of their godless system of exploitation ,
rapine, lies, and murder.
Where is the public man of any school or class, in modern times, of
whose posthumous influence over the future, facts like these could be


predicated? There is not one. Who, out of England, or in England,
cares anything, nowadays, about our Cromwellian heroes—the Pyras,
Hollises, Vanes, Russells, Sidneys, Hazzlerigs, Bradshaws, or Hamp-
dens of our Commonwealth? nor about those more modem celebrities—
the Chathams, Pitts, Burkes, Foxes, Sheridans, Wyndhams, Cannings,
Tierneys, and Ponsonbys of our own time? Not one in ten thousand of
the population. And why? Because these orators and statesmen
lived, or died, only to promote the ephemeral interests of bloody land-
usurpers, and base profit-hunting middle-class vampires. With the
real people of England, they never had an idea in common—nor one
particle of earthly sympathy. In truth, all their boasted reforms
only tended to sink them lower in the social scale, and make them
more helpless slaves than ever to their all-desolating oppressors. ’Tis
much the same with the French chiefs opposed to the party of
Robespierre, Marat, and St Just—the Mirabeaus, iafayettes, Baillys,
Sieyes, Lameths, Barnards, Brissots, Vergniauds, Petions, Barreres,
Collots, Billauds—nay, even the Dantons, Camilles, Barrases, Talliens,
Bourdons, and Legendres of the Mountain. Not a man of these has
the least hold of opinion, nor the slightest influence over the future, in
the present day. Although the Girondists and the Mountainists called
themselves republicans, and professed universal suffrage, as did Robes-
pierre, every rational and well-informed democrat knows nowadays, that
like Napoleon the Little, they took the name and garb of republicanism,
only the more easily to stilletto the republic, and availed themselves of
universal suffrage only as a temporary scaffolding necessary to raise
them to a level with their work, but to be pulled down and pushed
aside, the moment its help was no longer needed to complete the edifices
of their own fortunes, built up at the public expense, and cemented
with its blood. Unlike Robespierre, who sought universal suffrage
only for the people’s own sake—only for the general benefit—the
despicable intriguers of the Gironde, and the brigand-terrorists of the
Mountain desired it only for themselves, and only as long as they could
promote their own interests better with it than without it. As for
those institutions on property, commerce, education, and internal
defences, without which universal suffrage could be but a name—a
phantom—the Mountainists not only set their faces against every-
thing of the kind, but were ready to assassinate the first man or party
that should attempt any reform of that description. In a word, they
considered society to be the natural prey of whoever could rule it with
the strongest hand, and the least mercy for the weak. Robespierre had
a perfect horror of these wretches, regarding them as worse men than
even the rash, false, intriguing, cowardly Girondists. On the night of
the 9th Thermidor, he disdained to address them a word except
indirectly through the chair, when, glancing at them, he exclaimed —
u President of assassins, hear me for the last lime! ” He knew they
were only agents for feudal and commercial villains in the part they
played that night. But a few months before, many of them would
have been ready to kill every landlord, manufacturer, and merchant, in
France, to enrich themselves with the spoils of their crimes. Having


now grown rich by their brigandisms in the provinces, they were equally
ready to dip their hands in the blood of the people’s defenders, in
order to keep, unquestioned, what they had got. Robespierre’s nature
was too noble to address these wretches in their own persons. He
knew it was his blood, not his justification, they wanted. He does not
appear to have been equally cognisant of the intentions of the Constitu-
tionalist-chiefs and base Girondists towards him; although these
scoundrels were just as ready to sacrifice him as was the Mountain: but
being either more cowardly, or less desperate, they dared not strike the
first blow.
To compare Robespierre with any of the chiefs of these factions,
would, I repeat, be a wanton and cruel insult to his memory. Virtue
and crime ought not to be placed in juxta-position—much less in com-
parison, as if they had anything in common. They can only be con-
trasted ; and never was contrast more striking than that presented by
Robespierre’s revolutionary career, contrasted with theirs. Every one
of these parties had formed plots and conspiracies to assassinate him for
his virtues. He had never formed one to get them destroyed for their
crimes. In the revolution he was the author of all ttte new and
ennobling ideas destined to shape the future of mankind, —to redeem
them from sin and bondage. These factions, on the contrary, did nothing
throughout the revolution, but intrigue, plot, burn, corrupt, rob, and
murder, in order to drown the democracy in its own blood, and deliver
up France, chained like a malefactor, into the custody of land-usurpers,
capitalists, and counting-house villains, who, they expected, would
richly reward them for their exploits. With all the pains taken by
historians to hold up these monsters for the admiration of posterity, and
to present Robespierre and his party, as the great bug-bears of the
period, they cannot point out a single law, decree, speech, or docu-
ment, emanating from the chiefs of any one of these factions, worth
preserving in the present age, nor that can be of interest to posterity,
except as monuments of lying meretricious eloquence, perfidious
intrigues, and murderous plots—to destroy the lives and reputations of
all known to be in the interest of the oppressed classes, and to puff
themselves and one another, as saviours «f their country, while they
were pillaging it from end to end, and deluging it with slavery, blood,
and crime.
After the dethronement of the King,(lOth of August, 1792), when
universal suffrage and the republic became inevitable, these murderous
factions, in order to get themselves elected to the Convention, became
sudden converts to universal suffrage and republicanism, professing
wondrous admiration of both —although they had shot down thousands
for only petitioning for them, some twelve months before. I need not,
after what I have said, describe what sort of a republic they wanted—
nor what they wanted it for. Their arguments in favour of it were
to Robespierre’s arguments what a bad half-crown is to a good one.
Both would pass current for the same sum, so long as the public
knew not the difference between the genuine and the base metal—and
just (hai long the factions resolved their republic should last, but no
c


longer. They threw it to the people as a toy to amuse them,, while they
were secretly plotting the destruction of every man in France that desired
it to be a permanent reality; just as we have seen the same game
played, and for the like purpose, within the last few years by the
middle-class hypocrites who “ accepted ” the republic of 1848, but
only to stab it under its own wing, and used universal suffrage
to destroy all its real friends, and then, for universal suffrage, gave
to France in its room, their own uncontrolled despotism disguised
under the form of a military empire, with their puppet Buonaparte at
its head. Robespierre’s republic was to the republic of these brigands,
what a flower-garden is to a charnel-house; or what a rich vale covered
with teeming harvests, orchards, and vineyards, is to a howling wilder-
ness, where nothing is to be seen but beasts of prey, and the bones and
offal-remains of the tame animals they had killed and devoured. In other
words, the grizzly republic of the Gironde and thrf Mountain-terrorists
no more resembled the beneficent republic of Robespierre, than the
grinning skeleton of a malefactor hung in chains, resembles a living
model of the Belvidere Apollo, radiant with youth, vigour, grace, and
beauty. Robespierre’s republic would (to use bis own words) “substitute
the greatness of man for the littleness of the great, and a people flourishing,
virtuous, and happy, for a people frivolous, poor, and miserable.” The
republic, such as it issued from the hands of the Gironde, Mountain,
and other murderers of Robespierre, only tended to make France a
nation of deformed pigmies, governed by the lash, with closed doors,
and to substitute for the greatness of man the littleness of the great;
ending at last, after fifty years of rapine, war, and tyranny, with a
Napoleon the Little, surrounded with 600,000 bayonets, to attest the
blessings of middle class government.
Compare, or rather contrast, Robespierre with these grasping, ambi-
tious, and treacherous men. Everything said and done by him was
said and done for tfce nation, not for himself, or a faction. He is always
truthful—always disinterested —always wise and provident for the
people’s welfare. Lamartine admits he sacrificed everything for the
republic and the people—youth, love, repose, domestic happiness, am-
bition, fortune, the society of the gay—the polished—the great —even
life itself—everything, even his memory and his work. Yes, he sacri-
ficed all—even the two last, temporarily at least. And what a sacrifice!
—how different from those eulogized in ancient history I Rome had her
Regulus; Sparta, her Leonidas; Athens, her Godrus; indeed, every
old Asiatic State has its list of self-immolating martyrs, who gave up
their lives for a dynasty—a creed—a dogma—a point of national
honour—of military etiquette—or in obedience to some oracle com-
manding some barbarous rite, or imposing some form of self-immola-
tion. But who would compare the self-sacrifice of Robespierre with
those of these semi-barbarous enthusiasts and fanatics? His was the
self-immolation not of a blind fanatic, or crazy enthusiast, for some
deplorable creed or dogma, that the world might or might not adopt,
without taking harm either way—not for the success of a dynasty, a
faction, a war or battle, the fulfilment of a prophecy, the submission


to an oracle, or the establishment of some barbarous code of honour.
It was the self-immolation, of the most highly-gifted, highly-prized
citizen of the most advanced nation and age, for no less grand an object
than the deliverance of the whole human race from the vices of tyranny
and slavery, which had hitherto made it wretched and crimeful—devoid
of faith in Providence or in itself, and ignorant of virtue, freedom, and
happiness. So grand a mission, with so grand a self-immolation to
crown it, was never witnessed in the world before. It is a phenomenon
—unique in history. There was not a crowned head in Europe that
would not have been glad to treat with Robespierre in 1794. To
secure him on their side, they, and their aristocracies would have
guaranteed to him the highest position in his own country, with the
most coveted honours in their power to bestow. But sooner than betray
the cause of humanity to the banded tyrants of the earth—rather than
replace the sons and daughters of toil (whose recognition, as citizens
of the State, he had won) under the yoke of land-usurpers and their
base middle-class accomplices (who everywhere uphold individual pro-
prietorship of the soil, in order to have a monopoly of its occupancy,
as tenant farmers, for themselves, and the ejected m Ilions for their
serfs and slaves) —rather than commit this crime against God and
man, he spurned every solicitation of ambition .and cupidity; pre-
ferring to accept death on the scaffold along with the certainty of pos-
til umous infamy to weigh on his memory as long as the monsters of a
*• civilisation ” which victimises the many for the gain of the few,
should be able to impose their regime of rapine and murder on the
world. An example of self-immolation like this is not, I repeat, to be
found in all history.
Napoleon said at St Helena that had Robespierre been offered
20,000,000 francs to betray the republic, he would have spurned the
offer with disdain. Napoleon might have said a deal more, ou the
evidence of Robespierre’s whole life. Had he possessed the riches of
all France he would have expended th±m in establishing the laws of
nature and the “ Kingdom of Heaven on earth,” all over the world, as
well as in France. It is difficult to make a commercial people like
that of England appreciate, or even comprehend, an exalted being of
Robespierre’s stamp —bred up as they are in the midst of speculators,
fluukeyism, profit-mongering exploitation, and Mammon-worship in all
its most debasing forms. A man sacrificing himself for others, who
care nothing for him, appears incredible to a people accustom-d, all
their lives, to see the opposite example of everybody trying to sacrifice
every other body to himself. If not absolutely mad, they are apt to
regard such a being as either more or less than man. Besides, they
have no type of such a character in their own country, where patriot-
ism consists in taking all you can from those above you,'and keeping
all you cau from those below you ; and where “ every man for himself
and the devil take the hindmost” is the golden rule preached, under
the term "self-reliance." It would be, therefore, a cruel insult to
Robespierre’s memory to compare him with any of the noted “ patriots ”
and “ reformers ” of English history. I know of no British legislator


or statesman that ever had a higher, or holier, ambition than that of
compelling the aristocracy to divide their power and plunder with the
commercial middle-class, in order to make both stronger, and abler to
wring more plunder, by their united action, from the labouring classes,
than they could do, when disunited. If ever they went beyond this,
it was only to throw back some crusts and crumbs to their hungry
victims, to keep them from desperation, lest they might turn upon
their despoilers, and suddenly discover the secret of their own strength.
The idea of making the people really free, intelligent, masters of their
own time, and proprietors of their own produce, seems never to have
entered the head of a British statesman. The boasted “ patriots ” and
“ reformers'” of our Cromwellian Commonwealth knew no higher, no
holier, mission than converting themselves from land -holders into land-
owners at the expense of crown and people—stripping the crown of
all its feudal revenues to put them into their own pockets, and making
the land-less people supply their place with excise duties wrung by
the bayonet from their labour—driving Ireland and Scotland into revolt
and carnage, in order to seize the church property of both, and the
estates they coveted, by attainting the blood of their massacred victims,
and dividing amongst themselves and the base squirearchy and shop-
ocracy they represented, the bloody spoils they had acquired by usurp*
ing the prerogatives of the King, the privileges of the Peers, and the
rights and liberties of the “ Sovereign people whom they imprisoned,
pilloried, whipped, branded, hung and shot like dogs under the opprobions
name of “ levellers,” for the crime of asking for their own. Assuredly,
no just man would offer such an outrage to Robespierre’s memory as to
compare him to hell-hounds of this description, who ended their every
massacre with a hymn or a prayer, and had “ the Lord ” on their lips
as constantly as they had the devil in their hearts, and the spoils of
their victims in their homes.
If we descend to our own times, the difficulty of finding a parallel
for Robespierre becomes greater. In the days of the Commonwealth,
England could boast of many brave and disinterested men—especially
in the educated, if not wealthy grades.—Andrew Marvel, Milton, and
Colonel Lilburn, are examples. But they were, all three, mere children
in politics compared to Robespierre, and had no public influence worth
naming. In the present day, there is not a vestige left of the old
puritanical sincerity in any class, except the very poorest. Our modern
patriots and reforming celebrities are, without exception, the most auda-
cious quacks and hypocrites of the age. At the moment I write, the
feudal aod mercantile spoilers who inherit, amongst us, the blood-begotten
fruits of the Commonwealth, and of the “glorious revolution of 1088,”
are plundering the industrious classes of the United Kingdom of, at
least, £350,000,000 per annum, and have made them such complete
ciphers in the state, that about half a dozen landed-proprietors, and the
like number of millionaire-capitalists in London city, exercise more
real influence over the national councils and over the destinies of the
state than do five and a half millions of skilled and unskilled workmen
—representing twenty millions of its population, and producing all its


riches (some 700 to 800 millions of pounds sterling per annum) as well
as fighting all its battles. And while a cry for reform rings throughout
the land, not one slave, nor slave’s friend of any class, dare vent the real
cause of the national distresses at any public meeting, nor through any
newspaper, through fear of being ruined in private life by the middle
classes. Yea, the most belauded, be-slobbered, of our great public men,
—our loudest reformer and Bright-e st popular legislator—can discover
no deeper grievance—no greater iniquity ip our system—than our church
rates, game laws, and the difference between the succession duty paid
by landlords, and that paid on the devolution of property, other than
land!!!
A cancer is preying on the heart or stomach of the nation, and our
state-doctors par excellence —our Buncombes, Roebucks, Brights, and
Cobdens, are busy at work to cure it by paring away at some corns on
its toes. What were the real evils of France in Robespierre’s time, are
still the real evils of both France and England, only enormously aggra-
vated. They are, on the one hand, outrageously unjust fundamental
laws on land, credit, and commercial Interchange, which make property
almost synonymous with robbery , and industry with poverty , by giving
to aristrocratic sybarites and mercantile vampires, the great bulk of the
fruits of other men’s industry,—and on the other hand, the usurpation
of all the powers of the state by those said sybarites and vampires, in
order to perpetuate their own rule, and, with it, their own irresponsible
power of dragooning, plundering, and enslaving the nation. The Bright
and Cobden remedy for this two-fold evil is to suppress all mention of
the first or social evil, so that the multitude, kept in ignorance of its
cause, may, if asked what they want the suffrage for, be unable to assign
any rational or adequate reason, or make fools of themselves by par-
roting some of their own ridiculous stock-grievances—church rates,
game laws, succession duties, primogeniture, established church, bishops
in parliament, House of Lords, &c., &c., —And for the 2nd or political
evil—(the seizure of all the powers of the state by landlords and profit
mongers —tbe seizure of both houses of the legislature, all the corpora-
tions, vestry boards, grand and petty juries, educational boards, poor-law
guardian boards—army, navy, and church—in short, of every thing down
to newspapers and parish beadles) —their grand remedy for this monster
evil, (designed to preserve the first) —is to increase the power of the
middle-classes in all the principal towns of the kingdom, by doubling or
trebling the number of their representatives in parliament, and giving
those classes (the real authors of all the nation’s woes) the mask of the
ballot to conceal them from their victims, while they are sucking the
nation’s blood. The proposed machinery for effecting this is, the assim-
ilation of the parliamentary to the municipal franchise, with the ballot
super-added and a more equal distribution of seats in parliament in
proportion to electors. Mr Bright (who would be an honest man, if tbe
middle-classes would allow any able man to be honest without combining
to ruin him) has lent his sanction to this concoction of fraud and injustice,
which would not seat one honest man in parliament in a century. And
with the help of the newspapers (all in the hands of the middle-classes)


)ie is persuading the unrepresented, that the Reform Bill just sketched will
fully emancipate them from the yoke of the landlord and the capitalist !
whose power it is designed and admirably adapted to largely augment.
No man will be allowed a vote, but the man who least wants it—the house-
holder rated to the poor for three years in the town he resides in —i.e.
tlie man well enough conditioned to be able to keep others besides himself
and family, (which is not the condition of one working-man in seven or
ten), and as the house he lives in is sure to belong to some landlord or
profit-monger, and as the work he lives by depends on the same classes,
(to give or withhold.) it is obvious the landlord and profit-monger will
have an ultimate controlling power over every poor-rated inhabitant in
the borough. Besides, the few working-class votes possible under
such conditions, would be perfectly useless to the voters, as they would
in every borough, be swamped by the vastly larger number of voters
the aristocracy, clergy, and middle-clashes, with their dependants,
could bring to bear against them. In short, the working-classes would
not be able to return even one representative of their order throughout
the whole kingdom. A bill that would enable them to return only a
dozen representatives for the twelve largest towns, to be chosen exclu-
sively by non-electors, would be infinitely better for them than the
hocnspocussing bill projected by the Manchester school. Through
twelve able and conscientious men so chosen, their real wants, grievances,
and sentiments, could be made known to the world through parliament,
and so force a real reform ; but under the Bright and Cobdpn concoction,
they would not be suffered to return one such member as would be of
any use to them, in a hundred years.
Compare the magnificent organic laws proposed in the Constituent As-
sembly and Convention, by Robespierre, with the concoctions of fraud and
injustice which our “liberal” patriots seek to impose upon us in this
country. Verily, it maketh the heart sick to reflect on the sort of
progress, which patriotism, and the rights of man have made since 1794,
under the inspirations of middle-clas newspapers, middle-class parlia-
ments, and middle-class bribery and bayonets. It would seem just
now as if the bourgeoisie of France and England had subsidized hell,
itself, to help them to eradicate from man the image of his Maker, and
to squeeze the souls out of the bodies of the poor in this world, to
escape their reproaches, before they come to jeopardize their own in
the next.
Robespierre’s noble nature would have shrunk with ineffable disdain
from these juggling artifices of our British legislators, statesmen, and
trading politicians, calling themselves reformers. No wonder the latter
should dread and abhor lis name: for, his success would have been
the extinction of all such jugglers all over thewotld.
It was Chateaubriand's opinion that, notwithstanding the prodigious
efforts and sacrifices of so many eminent men of the revolution to
immortalize their names in history, only three great memories will
survive with posterity, viz.—Mirahcau, Robespierre, and Buonaparte.
Of these, 1 venture to say, Robespierre will stand alone for admiration.
Mirabeau and Buonaparte will survive only to inspire contempt and


horror at their profligate and criminal abuse of great natural talents.
Mirabeau will be remembered as the representative par excellence of
Bourgeois corruption, venality, and perfidy; Buonaparte as the high-
handed incarnation of Bourgeois brigandism and blood-letting. Their
names will never be pronounced in connection with Robespierre’s, except
in the sense of contrasting great vices and great crimes , with great
works , and great virtues. Their fame will be only that infamous sort
of notoriety which will for ever [cling to the memories of Sylla, Herod,
and Lysander; hardly preferable to that of Judas Iscariot, or of the
despicable wretches who sold the pass of Thermopylae, and burned
Diana’s Temple at Ephesus. They have left nothing behind them;
they never attempted anything in life, for which posterity can owe them
gratitude or admiration. Plato, and a greater than Plato, tells us that
they who flourish by the sword shall perish by the sword. The systems
of Mirabeau and Buonaparte can live only by the sword—and by the
sword shall both perish. The system of Robespierre founded in nature
and reason—the only system that can reconcile man to his Creator-
must be co-eternal with human nature itself; —and—once realized in
practice by man’s reason matured—must be indestructible ever after.
No more revolutions—no counter-revolutions, after that.
Robespierre’s labours in the Constituent would alone suffice to immor-
talize a dozen names, were justice done them. Never did man, under
more discouraging circumstances, make such a struggle as did he, in
that corrupt assembly, to subject its councils to the empire of reason,
justice, and humanity, with a view to the future welfare of France and
the world. Had its decrees and its constitution been what he struggled so
arduously to make them, there would have been no revolution in the
sense of convulsion. Instead of purchasing increased rapine and
slavery at the expense of rivers of blood, France would have acquired
the freest government, and the happiest social state ever known, at the
cost only of some quires of foolscap, and some pounds’ weight of
printers’ ink. Let any unprejudiced man only compare Robespierre's
projets de loi (bills), and speeches in that assembly with those of his
opponents, and he will see at once who were the men of blood—who,
the real authors of the calamities which ensued. I have given a brief
analysis of the assembly’s decrees and constitution in Vol. i. of my
Life of Robespierre; and whoever has seen, from the facts therein stated,
the atrocious manner in which the assembly disposed of the rights,
liberties, and property of the people, will wonder—not at the torrents of
blood and crime they let louse—hut that a single land-usurper, or
Bourgeois robber was left alive in France. The authors of such
monstrous concoctions of fraud and cruelly towards the mass of the
population, could not be left alive in any country, with safety to its
inhabitants. They treated every man that was not a landlord or
Bourgeois villain as if he were a dog, or a beast of burden.*
Against the assembly’s deeds of rapine and tyranny, one voice—that
often a solitary one—was uniformly raised.
Robespierre. In no one instance did he fail to invoke the laws of God
and humanity against its homicidal decrees, and to predict the future


c onsequences of its Bourgeois constitution. Anything to equal Iris
u ntiring perseverance, his indomitable zeal and energy, his unflinching
m oral courage, and incorruptible devotedness, during two years and five
m onths of endless conflicts with the assembly, I have nowhere seen,
In the history of national councils. Everything that aristocratic morgue ,
and Bourgeois insolence could contrive to unnerve and abash him, was
put in requisition. He was always received with sneers or murmurs,
continually interrupted, often coughed down, seldom listened to with
common decency, and frequently not listened to at all. But mindful
of the voluntary pledges he had given to his constituents, and of the
solemn mission he had undertaken for the friendless outcasts of society,
he confronted and bore all for their sake, though not one in a thousand
of them could have been cognizant of his labours and sufferings, to say
nothing of the endless dangers he ran, like Marat v of being assassinated
by royalist hirelings and bourgeois mobs. While preparing projeis
de hi , and discourses to support them, for the assembly, lie was
constant in his attendance at the Jacobin-club, issued frequent addresses
to his constituents and other bodies—warning them of intrigues against
their liberties—wrote articles for his own and other journals to enlighten
public opinion, and co-operated with the choice spirits of the day in
rousing the dormant energies of the country to assert its rights. Well,
indeed, may Lamartine say his life was one continuous self-sacrifice: and
pity it is that one so conversant as Lamartine with all the great facts
of the revolution, and who, generally, does Robespierre justice,
when he has facts to deal with, should rarely, if ever, render him
justice in the inferences and reflections with vfhich he accompanies
them. This, lam aware, is a tribute lie pays to the ascendancy of the
middle classes, and without which, his “History of the Girondists”
could not have been published with safety to himself. But it was
better, I hold, not to publish the work at all, than damage his reputation
by giving us faithful narratives of atrocious acts on the part of the
Girondists and Constitutionalists, without a word of indignant comment
upon them, (nay, often accompanied with high encomiums on the actors
themselves); whilst the glorious acts of Robespierre, which he acknow-
ledges, he almost always accompanies with injurious reflections of his
own, utterly at variance with the facts lie is recording. No degree of
danger lie might have incurred from the middle classes by being
as honest in his reflections as lie is in his facts, ought to have
intimidated him into a course so injurious to his honour as a man,
and so prejudicial to his weight and reputation as a historian.
Throughout his work, the constitutionalists of the assembly appear
with a halo of eloquent praise thrown around them, as if they had been
a ga’axy of shining impersonations of all the virtues and talents. Then
the Girondists are the professed heroes of Ills work, written ostensibly
to record their virtues, talents, eloquence, patriotism, and untimely end.
Yet not one fact has Lamartine adduced, nor could he, to justify his
encomiums of these factions, or to prove either of them entitled to any
other commemoration than contempt for their hypocrisy, selfishness,
and cowardice, with abhorrence of their notorious crimes—amongst


which, rapine, massacre, usurpation, and dastardly plots to assassinate
opponents (who opposed them only with reason and facts) —are not the
least prominent. Lamartine, for instance, describes the bloody massacre
of the Champ de Mars , (in which some thousands of men, women, and
children were cold-bloodedly butchered while peaceably signing a
petition), without uttering a word of condemnation against the constitu-
tional-chiefs of the assembly who had concocted it; nor against Bailly,
the mayor, Lafayette, the commandant, and the base cowardly Bourgeois
national guards of Paris, who executed it, and who never fought,
save against unarmed starving people. Not a spark of indignation
does Lamartine let fly against the perpetrators of this and similar
massacres. Nay, the principal of them are subjects for his most
glowing panegyrics. In like manner, he coolly narrates how the
Girondists plotted at the house of that metaphysical intriguer, Sieyes,
(the future accomplice of Buonaparte), the destruction of Robespierre,
Marat, &c., with that of the workmen of the Faubourgs, by hireling sol-
diery; but not a sentence does he utter to brand with infamy the villains
capable of such a crime. On the contrary, he wearies and disgusts us
with praises of the hollow, declamatory, meretricious eloquence of these
malignant assassins, and seemingly for no better reason than because
they were in the pay and interest of the murderous Bourgeoisie, and
bad for their object the subjugation of France to the exclusive rule
of those would-be Christ-crucifying miscreants.
lam disposed to make great allowance for Lamartine. I know be
wrote his book under a terror of the Bourgeoisie, who would have des-
troyed him, had he done complete justice to Robespierre, Marat, &c., or
denounced the crimes of their persecutors, the fruits of which the said
bourgeoisie .now inherit. Indeed, as it is, they have ruined Lamartine
for his truthfulness in respect of narrating facts: for,it isowing to their
underhand malice he is overwhelmed with debts and private obloquy.
Still I assert that no degree of danger to be incurred from the base
middle classes ought, for an instant, to have weighed against the
certainty of irretrievably damaging himself in his own conscience, and
witli posterity, for eulogizing criminals, whose crimes he relates, and
vilifying the very flower of humanity, whose virtues, genius, and
philanthropy he bears witness to, by the very acts and facts he records.
He ought, therefore, either to have done full justice to all parties, or
not have written his book at all; —at least, deferred it, till it might be
less dangerous to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth.
Upon Lamartine’s own showing, (confining ourselves to the facts lie
records and admits) the Constitutionalists and the Girondists have no
claims whatever upon our admiration, but, on the contrary, have fully
earned the scorn and execration of posterity for the parts they played
in the revolution. While, on the other hand, Robespierre, St Just,
Couthon, and their party, are entitled, upon the same showing, to the
admiration, gratitude, and benedictions of posterity for their heroic and
almost super-human struggles and sacrifices to deliver France and the
world from aristocratic and bourgeois rule, which can nowhere live but


by the sword, and at the cost of slavery and misery for the mass. If
I do not add Marat to this list, it is not because I deem him unworthy
of it, but because Marat was notoriously an active agent in promoting
the September massacres and other violent movements, the guilt or inno-
cence of which it is for God alone to determine, because He , and (le
abrne knows the secrets of all hearts and the motives by which men act.
We frail mortals can only conjecture, or deduce by reason, often fallible,
what man’s motives are. Judging by this method—l could not, for a
moment, place Marat in the same category with Danton and the middle-
class Commune who organized these massacres and had the victims*
graves actually dug. and their assassins hired and armed, before they were
paraded, for “ trial” before their mock “judges;”—nor in the same
category with Petion, the mayor, and Danton’s ministerial colleagues,
who, with the national guards and other public forces»under their com-
mand, took not a single step to prevent those massacres, but basely
connived at them, with an eye to reap the profit of them, on the one
hand, which they did; and to get a spurious character for humanity, on
the other, by afterwards denouncing what they secretly desired, and
took no steps to prevent. These men only sought to replace royalist
crimes by their own crimes, and to substitute for the king’s rule their
own rule—infinitely the worse of the two. But Marat’s noble and self-
sacrificing nature makes it morally certain that his only object was to
save the republic from invasion, by striking terror into the coalition on
the frontiers, and to establish the sovereign rights of the people on the
ruins of all the monarchical factions in the realm. Lamartine, I regret
to say, makes no distinctions of this kind throughout his work, although,
as a man of superior mind an I culture, he must well know that the
same act may proceed from the most opposite motives, may be devoted
to the most opposite ends, and may therefore be either a very great
crime, or a very great virtue, according to the motive impelling, or to
the end proposed. Marat’s violence was the violence of virtue against the
violence of crime—a temporary and exceptional violence to overthrow a
system of permanent violence, and to substitute for it one that would
require no violence at all. Danton and the bourgeois commune whose
motives and ends were even more guilty than those of their victims (as
evidenced by their lives) only sought to substitute a violent regime of
their own in lieu of what th°y overthrew, or to speak more correctly, to
perpetuate the same system under new names and forms; but having
themselves at its head, instead of the party of their victims. Lamar-
tine ignores all such distinctions. Worse still; wherever he does draw
the line, it is to place virtue on the culpable side, and vice and crime
on the other side. For instance, while be repeatedly vilifies Robespierre
and his friends for acts of unquestionable virtue and magnanimity, he
such men as Brissot and Louvet, the former, a low trader
in libels, the latter, the author of obscene publications, (both of whom
he knew to be unprincipled hirelings of the bourgeoisie of Paris, paid for
caricaturing men whom they knew to be above reproach), and such
cowardly wretches as Guadet and Vergniand, who voted for the king’s
death after having denounced every man who had conscientiously, but


reluctantly, expressed a similar opinion, (through fear of a civil war,
which would deluge France with blood) —wretches who with the cant of
“ peace . law , and order “ moderation “ morality ,” &c., &c., eternally
on their lips openly preached atheism and ridiculed the acknowledg-
ment of God’s providence in the preamble to the “ Declaration of Rights,”
and who never ceased plotting to pull down those above them, and to
keep down those below them, from the moment they set foot in Paris—
to say nothing of their everlasting lies, libels, and intrigues to discredit
the democratic leaders, and their infamous abuse of the Post-office and of
the Treasury for the same object, and, failing these means, their atrocious
plots to have destroyed by hireling soldiers and assassins, the illustrious
men and the sacred cause they could not otherwise overthrow.
The death of Robespierre was the greatest calamity that ever befel
the human race in the person of one man. The middle classes had no
sooner got him murdered by the Convention than they resolved them-
selves into packs ot blood-hounds to hunt down the democrats of France,
and under the names of “ Societies of Jesus” “ Societies of the SunJ &c.,
&c.,&c , (of what blasphemies are not these villains capable!) murdered
more than 100,000 of them in the South of France alone. War became a
necessity to them to drain France of its revolutionary population. So,
under the Directory and Buonaparte, they had not less than 3,(100,000
of Frenchmen destroyed by war alone, and its consequences. Since the
death of Robespierre in 1794, up to the present year, 1858, they have
robbed the industrious classes of France of at least 250,000,000?. per
annum, or, in the aggregate, of no less a sum than 16,000,000,000?.
In other words, they wrung out of their labour (through rents, profits,
usury, dividends, rates, taxes, commissions, brokerage, fees, &c.) at the
very least, sixteen thousand millions ojpounds sterling , over and above
what they ever gave them any value for, in service of any kind. Had
Robespierre succeeded in establishing his property institutions, these
millions of lives and millions of property would have been saved to the
workmen, whilst the middle-clas-es would be no worse off 5 for, his insti-
tutions would have enabled them to get more solid wealth and happiness,
by just and lawful means, from the universal development to be given ta
chemical and mechanical science, (as applicable to manufactures, hus-
bandry, and the arts), than they have been able to wring out of the
sweat and poverty of the working-classes, by all their homicidal and
liberticidal schemes.
Well may Lamartine say of such a man—“ There is a design in his
“ life, and this design is vast —the reign of reason through the medium
“of democracy. There is a momentum, and this momentum is divine.
“It was a thirst after truth and justice in the laws. There is an
“ action, and that action is meritorious; it is the struggle for life and
u death against lying, vice, and despotism. There is a devotion, and this
“ devotion is as constant, as absolute as an antique immolation. It
“was the sacrifice of himself—of his youth—his repose —his happi-
“ness—his ambition—his life—his memory —and his work”
True, every word but the last two; and well would it have been for
Lamartine’s future reputation had he been always as truthful. Robes-


pierre did make all these sacrifices, but the last two, which it was
neither in his own power to make, nor in the power of his enemies to
make for him. His memory and his work are not sacrificed. They
remain, and will live in the world as long as there is a human heart to
throb for liberty and thirst for justice—a human soul capable of noble
aspirations and sympathies—and a human conscience to loathe hypo-
crisy, perfidy, and murder. The very words I am now writing, and
the Elegy which follows, prove that his memory is not defunct, but
green and flourishing; and what I have but just recorded as to the
progress of his name and doctrine amongst the down-trodden races of
Europe, is ample proof that his work still goes on—the work of human
regeneration through the light and heat of his principles and doctrine,
silently permeating all who have brain to understand, and hearts to
feel. He made the greatest—the grandest struggle ever made on
earth —and the nearest to success—to rescue the human race from
its eternal enemies—accursed landlords, who rob God’s people of God’s
free gift to all the land—and the baser multitudinous villains who, as
capitalists, employers, and traffickers, have turned the producers of the
world’s riches into bondsmen and wages-slaves, through their nefarious
system of commerce.—Neither of these abominations could possibly
exist under Robespierre’s projected institutions on property and com-
merce, which were to make both “ a source of riches to the public, and
not to a few great houses only.
The memory of such a man become extinct! —his work , the
sublimest ever conceived on earth, perish with his memory ! It is an
insult to humanity—it is impiety towards God—to believe such a
thing possible. If its accomplishment were possible, it would have
been accomplished long ago—for, millions of money have been lavished,
millions of calumnies propagated, and millions of bayonets employed
in Europe to that end in the present century. Yet is his memory being
rehabilitated; his doctrine finding its way in despite of gold, spies, and
bayonets, and his work going on at this hour all over the world, even
in Australia and the remotest regions of America. To say nothing
of other men’s labours (with which I am less acquainted,) I could prove
on the testimony of thousands, that my own writings and speeches on
Robespierre, and his doctrines, have been read and heard by tens of
thousands of human beings now settled throughout every state in
America, and in every colony of Australia. Such a memory die ! —lt
would be to suppose God’s providence had for ever abandoned the
human race, and given them up, as past redemption, to land-usurpers
and counting-house wolves. No! his memory will live embalmed in
the grateful hearts of millions and millions unborn; who, in future
generations, will thank God for having sent upon earth a man capable
of undergoing such labours, struggles, pangs, dangers, and self-immo-
lation at last, with the beneficent design of bestowing freedom and
happiness on his fellow-creatures for all time to come. If the spirits
of the great dead were allowed to commune with mortals, Robespierre
might now say to us—“ 1 told you they would never let me complete
* 4 my work —that they would assassinate me when I attempted to found


“ just social institutions; I told you they bad done so in all past ages,
“ —that they had murdered every true reformer, whether king, prophet,
“philosopher, seer, legislator, apostle or statesman, that ever sought
“ the deliverance of his fellow-creatures from the demons of land-
“ monopoly, usury, and commercial fraud; and that I could not expect
“to form an exception. I told you, in the words of Christ —that the
“ seed must perish before it brings forth fruit of its kind. But I stole
“ a march on the murderers. I gave glimpses of the all-saving doctrine,
“ and laid down the basis of its future laws, before the murderers
“ penetrated my designs; and I fortified myself with an unrivalled moral
“ power and popularity, which gave the doctrine prestige with the
“ many, before the few saw any danger of its success, and which made
“ their murder of me a work of harder accomplishment, and more
u dangerous to the murderers, than all their other crimes put together.
“ This murder of a man, reputed in his time to be the most incorruptible,
“devoted, self-sacrificing, highly-gifted, highly-prized, and popular
“citizen in the state, can never be forgotten as an historical fact. All
“ that read of it hereafter will enquire into the cause, and seeing no
“ history satisfactorily account for it, will go back to the records of the
“ day, consult my own speeches, reports, manifestoes, Declaration of
“ Rights, Constitution of 1793, and the various projets de hi I brought
“ forth in the Constituent and in the Convention, and they will not fail
“to see that I was murdered for doctrine therein broached, which
“ pointed clearly to the new social laws* I announced to the convention,
“ that we should submit to its consideration, when the * friends of
“ liberty might get a first respite from the daggers of assassins
“These circumstances will cause the doctrine to be looked into; and
“ once understood, it will never be forgotten. Fear not then, my friends,
“ that my memory will pass away, or my work be left unfinished. I
“ told the Convention, on the eve of my death, when I saw my destruc-
“ tion resolved on, —that though they could take my life, they should
“ not make me retract a word I had uttered, nor renounce one iota of
“ the principles or doctrine I had promulged; and that with all the
“ efforts of wicked men to undo what I had done, and to blast my
“ memory with posterity, I should leave behind me a name that would
“ turn tyrants pale to the remotest posterity. Fear not, then, for my
“ work, nor for my memory. The necessities of society itself, aided by
“ the sacrifices of myself and others, will perfect my work in the reali-
“ zation of the social institutions, of which I was suffered to give but the
“ outline. And with respect to my memory, although perfectly indifferent
*' to posthumous fame, except in so far as it may accredit my doctrine,
“ and popularise my work, 1 may proudly exclaim in the lofty language
“of Ossian, ‘My fame shall remain, and my name shall grow and
“ flourish like the oak of Morven, which lifts its broad head to the storm,
“ and rejoices in the course of the wind.’”
Most of the present generation t have grown up with the idea that
Robespierre, Marat, St Just, Couthon, and their followers were violent
men, whose wild ambition, fanaticism, and blood-thirstiness, caused all
the troubles of the revolution. No delusion can be more complete.


They were, all of them, the very opposite of what history has painted
them. They were all upright, single-minded, kind-hearted, humane,
generous, and devoted men. They had no base ends uf their own to
serve, but served their country and their kind with the most perfect
disinterestedness, conscientiousness, and devotedness. Instead of violent
and aggressive, they were bearing and foi bearing, to a fault. Everything
that human foresight, human energy, and human patience could do,
was done by them to make the revolution pure and bloodless. Lamartine
says they were all tame at the outset of their career. Tame enough,
heaven knows, they were, and a goo I deal too tame, till tamemss
became almost a crime. They witnessed the most revoking atrocities
on the part of the bourgeoisie, and endured in their own persons, ttto
most outrageous insults, and cruel persecution, before they retaliated
even in words.
If, instead uf taking their opinions on trust from lying middle-class
historians, linpa tial enquirers will go buck to the records of the time,
the debates of the assemblies, the reported proceedings of the Jacobin,
Cordelier, and other clubs, to the writings and speeches of Marat and
Robespierre, and to the comments of their adversaries on these writings
and speeches —they will find these calumniated men always on the side
of peace, law, and order, as well as on the side of justice, mercy, tolera-
tion, humanity,and realciviliz ition—whilst their opponentsand ferocious
enemies will be as invariably found on the side of violence, injustice,
barefaced oppression, and the most revolting contempt of ail law and
decency. Real, for instance, the Illsioire Farlemeniaire de la Revo-
lution Franchise , a voluminous, but invaluable work, in which every-
thing necessary to enable the reader to form a just judgment will be
found. In particular, I would recommend vols. 25 to 35 inclusive,
which contain several of Robespiene's and St Just's most interesting
reports to the Convention, and speeches at the Jacobin club, as also
a great deal of information on the characters and habits of the prin-
cipal men of the Mountain and of the Committees who served the
Convention as instruments for compassing his death—Vols. 33 and 34
contain ail the particulars of bis death, and of the means taken by his
enemies to destroy all his papers, and all the documents of the day,
which would have revealed their crimes to France. The trials of Car-
rier, Joseph Lebon, Fouquier Tinville, and others also throw lijht’on
the principal men and parties of that period. Altogether, the Uistoire
Parlementaire is the best work to consult for getting a clear insight
into the motives and policy of the active men of the time.
Although Robespierre’s death was attended by every indignity and
atrocity that depraved natures can inflict upon superior being*, whose
greatness reproaches them, it does not appear that they embittered his
last moments. Mignet says, he looked with compassion on the crowds
he passed through, on his way to execution —even on the wretches that
hooted him—“ Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do”,
was, no doubt, the sentiment which prompted his pity. Thiers, Lamar-
tine, and moed other historians, admit that he exhibited perfect impas-
sibility during the last twenty hours of his existence, notwithstanding


the acute pain he must have suffered from his wound, and the brutal
outrages heaped on him by mobs, and underlings of the ruling power.
There is a reason for this, although historians affect nut to see it. He
was sick of men—weary of humanity—and but too eager (as he and
St Just had often expressed in their last days) to quit a scene where
life was but a weary burden to all! who had conscience, and could have
charms but for the selfish despoilers and enslavers of mankind.
Robespierre had seen so much of fiendish malice and horrid hypocrisy
in the arts employed to compass his destruction and posthumous infamy,
that death seemed to him but a heavenly messenger sent to release him
from the companionship of such monsters. His sufferings therefore
were not what might have been expected. What he did suffer was on
others’ account, not on his own. He suffered for the Duplays, his
loved ho^ts—for the betrayed people sti’l dear to him—above all, for
the non-completion of the great work which Providence had so mar-
vellously endowed him for. To leave that work unfinished was, un-
questionably, his greatest grief. Here, however, conscience came to
his relief. It whispered him that he had done his utmost-—more than
mortal man had ever done before—that he had made success easy and
certain for future reformers in God’s own good time—and that he must
not despair at the retardation of a work which might, after all, require
ages to consummate, as it had required ages to prepare the world for
its introduction. With such reflections, no doubt, Robespierre consoled
his last moments. They are in harmony with what is related of them.
His preference of death to solidarity with the monsters who had com-
passed it for the middle-classes, he had fully stated, the night before,
in his last discourse. So cruel and bitter had been his persecutions by
these monsters —(who not content with murdering his friends and pro-
tegeesi caused their blood to recoil upon himself, by making him
appear to the public and to the victims themselves, as their destroyer)
—so horrified was he at the aspect of such profound wickedness, that he
hailed death as his deliverer from such monsters; and shrinking from
the contemplation of their crimes, he fled, as it were, from life to take
refuge in the bosom of the Divinity. I end by re-asserting that his
birth was the greatest honour ever conferred upon Prance—his death,
the greatest calamity to France and the world that could have befallen
them in the person of one man.
Yours devotedly,
James B. O’Brien.
P.S.—As the enemies of real reform—especially the rich mercantile
class —will secretly do their best to prevent the sale of this little work,
and as nearly the whole publishing trade and newspaper press are,
more or less, at the mercy of the middle-classes, may 1 request the good
offices of the members of the National Reform League, and of all friends
of truth, who may read the foregoing, to counteract the manoeuvres of
these foes of our rights, to the best of their ability, by forming com-
mittees to promote its circulation and that of the “ Vision of Ilellf
&c., and other works to follow.—,
-J. B. O’B.


77m tribute to the memory of Robespierre is intended not only as an act of
tardy justice to the greatest Reformer and legislator the teorld has yet knotm,
but also to throw light on the events which produced the 9th Thermidor —and
which the histories, hitherto written, of the French Revolution have, purposely,
either falsified or wrapt in mystery, to subserve the policy of the class-interests,
in whose behoof Robespierre was murdered. Nowhere else will the true character
of his enemies and the real cause of his death, be found. Nowhere else (until
there be a great radical revolution in Europe) may the reader expect to find true
portraits of t/w Three Assemblies which made the Revolution—more especially
of the Convention, which murdered Robespierre and his friends, in order to effect
a counter-revolution for the middle-classes.
The words of this Elegy are supposed to be spoken by a small group of brave,
sorrowing workmen of the Faubourg St Antoine, in Paris, a few days after the
fatal 9 lh Thermidor, when they saw the last hopes of the Revolution extinguished
in the blood of & mosi illustrious chief and his devoted friends. They are repre-
seated in the act of plucking laurel, myrtle, and ivy berries, to strew the bier of
their murdered apostle. A few lines are copied, literally, from Milton's Lycidas;
as also one or two exquisite passages, which 1 found applicable to the H situation".
1 regret I could not find others, as I should gladly have borrowed more of the
inspirations of our subUmest poet (the glory of our English Commonwealth), to
render that homage to the Father of Social Democracy in France, which no other
pen than Milton's could so worthily fumislu 1 have made only a few verbal
alterations in Milton s text, (where the language was quaint, and the rhythm or
structure harsh and involved), and completed some Una he left unfinished.
J. B. O B.


AN ELEGY
ON THE
DEATH OF ROBESPIERRE.
i.
Yet once more, 0 ye laurels, and once more
Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere,
We come with brimful eyes, and hearts full sore,
To pluck your berries, rifle your sad store,
To strew the hearse of him, to Frenchmen dear,
A chief whose name will live for evermore,
The man of men, whom myriads will deplore ;
For, Maximilian’s dead! great Robespierre!
And nowhere, on this earth, hath left his peer.
Who would not weep for him who wept for all f
(Whose fate, with sorrow, ages will recall)
Who will not burn with vengeance for his fall ?
Slain in his prime ! —the man we most adore,
By traitors marr’d—now weltering in his gore! (1 —2)
We must not leave him mangled on his bier,
To feast, as food' for ribald jest and jeer,*
Vile knaves his every glance once shook with fear.
• Buonarroti records in his “ History of Baboeuf’s Conspiracy,”
that as Robespierre lay speechless, with his broken jaw bandaged up,
the blood oozing from his mouth, and seemingly unconscious of what
was passing around him, stretched on a table in the ante-room of the
Committee of Public Safety (whither he was conveyed on a stretcher),
the clerks of the office, and underlings of the committee, outraged his
name and person in the most atrocious manner—going the length of
spitting on him, and stabbing Lis flesh with the points of their pen-
knives. Lamartine says, “ The wretched man, lately the idol and
ruler of the republic, was overwhelmed with expressions of contempt,
invective, and abuse. Nothing was spared him, the officers of the
Convention pointing him out to the carious mob as a ferocious beast is
exposed in a menagerie.” Such was the treatment of the man at
whose feet they cowered but a few days before, calling him the Cato of
u


11.
He, whose inspiring voice, ('when France was rife
With all the elements of war and strife,)
Made millions rise, and crush with one same blow,
Th’ internal traitor, and th’ external foe;
Evok’d the force Democracies can wield,
Bade fourteen civic armies take the field;
And, through their might, triumphant all around,
Made every frontier, consecrated ground.
He who proclaimed those Bights,*as Heaven’scommand
Which on eternal justice take their stand ;
Baised into men the serfs of ages past,
Absolv’d from curse of privilege and caste,
That all God’s peoples, sprung from one same blood,
Might form one great united brotherhood : (3)
France, and comparing him to Orpheus civilizing the savages with his
lyre!—and who, but for his respect for law, and horror of bloodshed,
might have had those miscreants slaughtered like sheep only the
night before. The leaders of the Commune, and of the Jacobins, asked
but the signal of their doom from his lips. He refused the signal,
preferring to die himself rather than countenance a seeming usurpation
of power, though necessary for his own protection—and though (as
subsequent events proved) the last plank left to the republic.— See
Notes 1 and 2 after Elegy.
* Robespierre’s “ Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen/’
appended to this Elegy—the noblest, the sublimest, the most truly
philosophic and Christian document of its kind the world has yet seen.
—Had the Convention adopted this declaration as the basis of the con-
stitution of 1793, and made that constitution in strict conformity with
it, the liberties of France would have been founded upon a rock of
adamant, indestructible and imperishable. But the Convention struck
out all its more important articles—more especially those on property,
defining its rights and limitations—thus making all the other articles
utterly worthless, even if adopted in good faith. They gave France the
plum-pudding without the plums, the rump-steak pie without the
rump-steak, the play of Hamlet with the character of the Prince of
Denmark omitted. A constitution based upon “ Robespierre’s Declaration
of Rights”—and such as he would have made that of 1793 had he not
been overruled—would have given to France, and to all other countries
that might adopt it, a real golden age, superior to any dreamt of by
poets and sages of the past, or by any of our modern schools of socialism
—so called. Indeed, socialism and socialists would never have been
heard of. We should have had the thing itself —not mere names and
phrases.


He, whose great soul to those just laws gave birth,
Which, put in force, would make a heaven of earth |
He, on whose lips admiring senates hung,
Whose heart his fellows’ sufferings ever wrung,
(For pity grew there with increasing store,
In midst of factions’ strife, and cannons’ roar,)
Must not go down to dust, unwept, unsung,
By whom he bled to save, and shone among—
No ! we’ll not leave, to welter on his bier,
The great and good—our glorious Robespierre,
Without the meed of a melodious tear.
111.
Nor shall his murd’rers flourish by his fall,
Their salt is sown !—we’ve sworn their doom to fate,
The furies shall pursue them, each, and all,
Vengeance’ red hand shall smite them, soon or late;
Boom’d from this hour to infamies and pains,
Abhorrence everlasting is their lot,
No tear shall hallow their accurs’d remains,
Mercy to them will be, to be forgot:
Hate shall pursue them to their very names, (4)
All works that laud them shall be food for flames.
Hell’s blackest gloom shall be their funeral pall,
And woe to who their mem’ries would instal!
IV.
Begin, then, sisters of the sacred well,
That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring!
Begin ! and loudly, boldly, sweep the string,
For millions yearn to know what ye can sing;
Say, why such cruel destiny befel
The brilliant sage and chief ye lov’d so well.
Promulge to all the man of God-like parts,
Who liv’d and gave his life for human kind 8
Reveal, too, by what dark perfidious arts.
Through what atrocities, and errors blind*


Treason and gold so multiplied his foes,
While staking life to save the commonweal ■,
That when th’ assassins in Convention rose,
Whose treasons he alone did dare reveal.
The mighty athlete sank beneath their blows,
Just as their reign of blood he sought to close.*
V.
But ere his bleeding form resolves to dust,
Th’ Immortal Spirit pois’d on heaven-ward wing,
Let Poeans sound for him, and young Sf. Just,
Heaven’s hosts applauding as ye sweep the string;
Let your exulting strains, as loud ye sing,
O’er earth be wafted in harmonious wave,
That Godless men may know death had no sting
For him who liv’d for life beyond the grave,
Where to him still all kindred spirits cling,
Like brave Saint Just, who with him freely gave
All he held dear on earth our race to save.
To that blest world, while borne along from this,
Let strains extatic tell their coming bliss ;
* All historians agree that the “ Reign of Terror ” most have ended
with Robespierre’s triumph, as it did with his fall. Bat the; take care
not to add that Robespierre sought to end it with a regime of strict
justice for all, and with patriotic laws to ensure general and individual
prosperity and security; whereas his enemies’triumph ended it, only
by substituting another reign of terror infinitely worse than the first,
but of which only democrats and friends of the poor were the
victims. Of these, Mignet admits that not less than 100,000 were
murdered within a few months after Robespierre’s death, —making, as
that historian adds, “ The whole smith of France a new 2nd September''
All these were massacred in cold blood by the reactionists of the
middle-class party, without judge, jury, or trial of any kind. Calcu-
lating the effects mere names and titles have with the ignorant multitude,
these monsters, assuming the pompons titles of “Associations of Jesus
and of the Sun,” took advantage of Robespierre’s death, and of the
divisions it caused in the democratic ranks, to attempt, literally, the
extermination of every honest man in France that would not passively
subscribe to their usurpation of all power for their own class, and
connive at their rapine and treason against the commonweal.—Never
was France so infamously governed as it was by the middle classes
under the Directorial government they installed over the grave of
Robespierre.


And be these strains re-echo’d round and round,
Wherever martyr’d saints lie bleeding, bound—•
Let their full hearts in raptures sweet be drown’d
While bloody tyrants startle at the sound.
VI.
Ere yet th’ Estates, convoked in ’Eighty-nine,
Gave presage of the fierce impending storm,
A sad presentiment bade us divine
The direst fate for friends of true reform.
Had we not seen in records of the past,
All god-like benefactors of our race,
End their careers in cruel deaths at last,
Else, wear out life in exile and disgrace ? f
* The late M. Marrast, president of the Ex-National Assembly, has
often said to the author of this Elegy— Robespierre!—iletait un saint!
No saint, ever canonized by a Pope of Home, made a tithe of the
efforts made by him for the redemption of the human race from sin
and bondage. He bad all the purity and disinterestedness of the best
of them, without the ascetism, ignorance, and fanaticism which charac-
terized too many of the calendar saints.
f We donbt if there be a single recorded instance in the whole
history of civilized society, of any king, rnler, statesman, legislator,
prophet, philosopher, orator, or other public man, seeking honestly, and
with probabilities of success, the reign of justice, humanity, and fraternity
for his fellow-countrymen, that was not overwhelmed with calumny,
overpowered by factions, and ultimately either put to death, or forced
to fly for his life and bury himself in poverty and obscurity, to escape
the malice of the oppressors of his country. —But who were those
oppressors ?—The same everywhere—the same now as ever-—the idle
rich who prey on their industrious fellow-creatures, through the inven-
tions of rents, profits, interest of money, dividends, taxes, and so-forth
—all arising out of usurpations of the soil, and making money grow
money. The antient prophets and apostles suffered for causes not
essentially different from those which destroyed the Gracchi at Rome,
and Agis and Cleomenes, of Sparta. Romulus and Julius Cresar were
victims of the same spirit that beheaded Paul, and sawed Isaiah
asunder. Heraclides and Hippo, of Sicily, perished through landlordism
and profit-mongering, in no other sense that did John the Baptist under
Herod; St. Stephen by the Jewish rabble (let loose upon him by the
middle-class Pharisees), and Socrates by the hypocritical 44 property
classes of Athens—nay, the Saviour himself, whose crucifixion was
perpetrated by like influences on behalf of like interests. All honest
reformers, spiritual or temporal, must necessarily be foes to landlordism


Kings, prophets, tribunes, orators, —alike
Philosophers, apostles, legislators,
All —did the sword of persecution strike,
The moment they became regenerators.
Rome saw her Gracchi murder’d, and their cause,
The cause of Rome herself, subdued by treason ;
Vain was the boasted empire of her laws,
’Gainst men of spoil, who brook’d nor laws, nor reason.
Did not her founder, Romulus, himself, • (5)
Fall by Patrician hands that seized the soil—
The lands of Yeii—which in lieu of pelf,
He wish’d to be his conquering soldiers’ spoil 1
And mightier far —did not great Julius bleed,
’Mid all his incens’d power, pomp, triumphs, guards,
A victim of the Conscript Fathers’ greed,*
Who grudg’d his troops their lands—hard-earn’d
rewards.
and usury—though not to the persons of landlords and usurers. The
latter, however, have ever considered attacks upon their system, to be
attacks upon themselves: and, accordingly, they have crushed or mur-
dered every honest reformer whose influence has hitherto threatened to
supplant their own with the millions. And so it ever will be—until
the millions shall become wise enongh, and moral enough, to be able to
dispose summarily of landlordism and usury, without further preaching
or teaching.
* Any one who will take the trouble to read over a list of the laws
proposed by Julius Caesar, in any book of Roman antiquities (say
“ Adams’ Antiquities,”) will see by their titles, that they were all
essentially popular, and designed to protect the citizens from the
cupidity of land-monopolists, usurers, and dilapidalors of the public
revenue. In this we have the true secret of his murder by the Patri-
cian-conspirators, headed by Brutus, who, with all the stoic virtues
attributed to him, was a rank aristocrat in grain, and a usurer to boot;
for, according to the testimony of his friend Cicero, he used to charge
interest for his money at the rate of 48 per cent,, and gather it in, too,
with the sabre’s edge, when necessary.—The whole story of Cmsar’s
overthrow, as told by historians, is a tale fit only [for school-boys,
debating-clubs and the stage. The lives of him given by Suetonius
and Plutarcb, are wretchedly defective.


And so in Sicily, in Persia, Greece,
Where’er the just, the gen’rous, had gain’d power,
Their anguish ended but at their decease ;
And so hath Fate ordain’d it to this hour.
Dion’s and Dionysius’ factions join’d,
To murder Heraclides and his friends,*
Re-seiz’d the lands and wealth they had purloin’d
From them who had us’d both for nobler ends,
And gave up Sicily to feuds and fiends.
Persia once had (then was her golden age,)
The greatest of her sons for chief and master,
But men of blood destroy’d her gifted sage,
The glorious, the all-but Christian Zoroaster. (6)
Cleomenes and Agis, Sparta’s pride,
With all their fame, their virtues, their blood-royal;
For daring with their subjects’ rights to side,
And make with them Lycurgus’ laws abide,
Fell butcher’d by Aristocrats disloyal.
Banish’d was Aristides, nam’d the just,
Poison’d was Socrates, the good and wise;
Flung from the Tarpeian rock, or roll’d in dust,
Was every chief the Romans learn’d to prize,
Some, whom th’ Athenians would but ostracize.
* The secret of Heraclides’ murder is his having made the philosopher
Hippo his confidant and mentor, and adopted, at the same time, his
political philosophy, which taught, amongst other things, that poverty
and slavery were convertible terms meaning the same thing— alias,
that the poor must be always slaves, and the vast majority of every
people must necessarily be poor, and remain so, as long as they allowed
their territory, or laud of their country, to be the private property of the
few. The two factions of Dionysius and Dion, though at war with
each other —one representing the aristocratic, the other the middle-
class or citizen party—took fright at this doctrine, and forgetting their
own quarrel for the moment, united and made common cause to put it
down in their usual way— i.e,, by murder. They assassinated Hippo,
as well as Heraclides.


As fared these patriots in Rome and Greece,
So fared our prophets in the Holy Land ;
Likewise th’ Apostles after Christ’s decease,
And all preferring God’s to Sin’s command.
Most of them spear’d, or scourg’d, or ston’d to death,
Greatest of all—lsaiah sawn asunder;
But—since the Saviour had to yield life’s breath
At others’ suff’rings need we, can we, wonder ?
For when did knaves, who prey on others’ labor,
E’er shrink from murd’ring their victims’ friends ?
When did that wretch fear God, or love' his neighbour,
Who spurns the laws of both, for carnal ends ?
VIZ.
These, and a thousand such like facts before her,
Little had France to hope for from her ’States;
How could men save her, whose ambitions tore her,
To feed their rapine, lusts, and faction-hates
Even if they revolutionized the Fates ?
Vers’d in a world of falsehood, fear, and strife,
We saw the wicked everywhere prevail;
We fear’d in public, as in private life,
The good must, likewise, through their virtues fail.
The bad man scruples nought to raise himself,
All means to him are lawful for that end;
To gain his lustful objects, power and pelfj
He’ll coolly sacrifice both foe and friend—
Nay, he’ll be all things, or to be pretend.
Not so the good!—their pure and feeling hearts
Oft spare, through clemency, their deadliest foes.
Nor will they practise those politic arts,
Needed so oft to parry treason’s blows,
For safety ’gainst th’ assassin’s hidden darts,
On conscience, and that only, they repose.
Hence, in the broad-day fight, ’twixt Eight and Wrong,
Where both alike profess the public good,


Virtue must fall —the wicked prove the strong,
Victory, in short, must to the bad belong;
Since e’re the “ situation’s” understood,
They’ll eke out fraud with treason and with blood.
VIII.
’Twas so in Thermidor:—great Robespierre
(To save whom, millions forward would have rush’d),
Fell by a horde he scorn’d too much to fear,
And w T hom, a dozen times, he might have crushed;
Could he, like them, have conscience set aside,
Surpris’d his foes, and killed without remorse,
They must have fall’n, with all their guilt and pride,
And he were not, as now, a headless corse !
But so ’twill ever be, until the mass
Shall judge their rulers by the act , not word;
Look to their lives and see what laws they pass.
Not mind their phrases :—folly most absurd.
For, these the hypocrite will ever suit
To time and place, to circumstances, fashions,
“ All things to all,” —to reap the golden fruit,
Which fools bestow on knaves who pet their passions.
Wisdom alone the mass can free and bless,
With it no knave, nor tyrant, could enslave ’em,
Sole key to liberty and happiness,
Nor king, nor prophet can, without it, save ’em.
Once know the laws whereby they should be rul’d,
To freedom then, the road lies clear before ’em,
No more by knaves, with names and creeds, be-fool’d,
They’ll crush, as traitors, all who dare ignore ’em,
And make just laws the only rulers o’er ’em.
A people wise, and master of just laws,
For land, for credit, and for fair exchange
On rock of adamant hath bas’d its cause,
Beyond all revolutions’ utmost range.
* Whoever has read the well-known Seven Propositions of the Na-
tional Reform League, will know what is here meant by “ Just laws for
land, for credit, and for fair exchange.” Whoever has not, ought to


No despot from without will dare molest ’em,
His ti'oops would yield to liberty’s infection ;
Nor traitor from within, though he detest ’em,
Certain of death, as certain of detection,
The moment plots matured to insurrection.
Resistance to just laws reveals all traitors,
And makes all peoples just exterminators.
IX.
We saw, too, in th’ Elections for the ’States,
How Bourgeois, who for power were fierce aspirants,
Breath’d nought of what to our sad lot relates,
But what was ominous of future tyrants.
We mark’d the ’States, their tone, their looks, behaviour,
Three Orders, numb’ring just twelve hundred men,
Most of them such as crucified the Saviour,
Or, living now, would murder him again.
read them, and study their contents. There can be no freedom, nor
safety, much less prosperity, for any people, till they obtain just laws to
regulate landed tenures, credit, and commercial interchange. With
such laws there could not exist a bad Government, nor would oppression
in any form be possible. Without such laws there cannot be a good
Government, be its form, its administration, its institutes, or its fran-
chises, what they may. Land, and whatever else the Deity has made
for man’s use, must be expropriated by commutation, on equitable terms,
for the general good, and never again be made private property. Credit
must be accessible for every member of the community, on terms beneficial
for the individual, and just and safe for the public. And all commerce
must be gradually reduced to equitable exchange on the principle of
equal values for equal values, measured by a labor, or corn standard.
Hobespierre was projecting these reforms, and had even vaguely an-
nounced them, when conspiracies of long standing against his life, (but
the execution of which had been retarded, because bis existence was
still judged necessary to the maintenance of order amongst the poorer
classes), —broke out simultaneously, consolidating themselves into one
general conspiracy of which the nucleus was in the Convention and
Committees of Government, and which overthrew him on the night of
the memorable 9th Thermidor. His later discourses and reports shew
clearly that he had a vast plan of social reform preparing for France,
and only awaited a moment of calm and sunshine, to submit its details
to the Convention. Indeed it was that very circumstance which preci-
pitated his doom. The Committees, the Convention—the drones they
represented out of doors—-aKas proprietary classes, dreaded, as these


Proud Lords, Financiers, Prelates, Hommes de lot,
Contractors, Bourgeois—knaves of every tint,
Tax-farmers, Placemen, belching vice le roi,
And prowling Usurers that would skin a flint,
Whose God was gold; whose temple was the Mint.
Mayhap, not twenty of the whole twelve hundred,
Had ever earn’d an honest Louis d’or.
Indeed, to answer you, they must have blunder’d,
If asked, whence came their fortunes, and what for ?
In brief, such knaves as muster’d at Versailles,
(Convok’d by statecraft, under royal summons,)
Could not be match’d from here to New South Wales,
Save only by a British House of Commons.
Three hundred Nobles, and three hundred Priests,
Embodied Two Estates of France’s realm,
The rest, with few exceptions, rav’nous beasts,
Stood for the Third, and soon usurp’d the helm;
These latter knaves, self-styled the Third Estate,
Professed to represent th’ Industrial Class :
As well to wolves might sheep entrust their fate :
They fleeced us, and disfranchis’d us in mass.
All who paid not a certain direct tax,
They branded slaves —as citizens ignor’d—
Yet should we toil, and fight, and low’r cur backs,
To bear the weight of the whole plund’ring horde !
One hundred “ Citizens” had just one voice
In choosing rogues, fools legislators call,
But full nine-tenths were barr’d from e’en that choice,
For, these were held no “ citizens” at all!
classes dread still, all allusions to social reform. —How must they have
trembled, then, when the first citizen of France, and the then greatest
reputation in the world, was known to have taken the matter in band!
Nothing could have saved him, under such circumstances, from the land-
lord and profit-monger, short of a general insurrection of the people,—
a thing impossible at the moment, as the masses were for the most
part ignorant both of Robespierre’s benevolent projects on their behalf,
and of the plots formed, in and out of the Convention, for bis destruction,
to prevent their development and execution.


Tho same throughout! the Tribune and the Press,
Were both proscrib’d for men of our condition,
And lest our grievances should claim redress,
They maim’d our last sad right—that of Petition,
So that our plaints and prayers became sedition!
There’s not a Eight to human beings known,
By which men’s lives and fortunes are preserv’d,
That these foul knaves did not point-blank disown.
From God and nature’s laws alike they swerv’d.
Their Constitution, and their fell Decrees, 1
Numb’ring, in all, two thousand and some odd,
Worse than the works of Scribes and Pharisees,
Fill’d France with murm’ring and the wrath of God.
The sum and substance of their legislation,
As shown, in every law, by its contents,
Was, for the millions, utter confiscation.
To gorge the thieves of Profits, Tax, and Eents.
Suffice to say, in letter and in spirit,
Th’ Assembly serv’d Perdition’s Chief right well;
They gave the drones our bee-hives to inherit,
And for the bees, themselves, made Franco a hell.*
X.
Oh, Eobespierre !—we owe thy injur’d Shade,
This faint brief sketch of that unhallow’d crew,
’Gainst whom, for thirty moons, thy struggles made,
Were such, till then, as mortal never knew !
Alone! unfriended ! scorn’d ! and bullied down !
’Mid interruptions, insults, yells and jeers,
Thou battl’d’st Eiches, Power, Prestige, Eenown,
For who could give thee but their prayers and tears.
* See Note 7, headed “ States Generals and the Bourgeoisie,” and
my Life of Eobespierre, vol. i., pages 251 to 257 inclusive, and pages
510 to 522 inclusive.


Day after day, unconquer’d, at thy post,
Disputing inch by inch, and clause by clause,
Did’st thou confront that supercilious host;
And, true as Nature to her own good cause,
Oppose God’s justice to their impious laws.
The world’s wide annals yield no parallel
To thy vast works in the “ Constituent,”—
Like thee, immortal!—not the gates of hell
Shall e’er prevail against that monument.
Yet are they but a portion of the store
Of treasur’d wisdom thou hast giv’n to France !
No other statesman, known to Earth before,
Hath left the world the like inheritance.
1
There’s not a subject, interest, nor relation,
That can affect us in our social state,
Whereon thy genius, big with inspiration,
Hath not been clear as Truth, and fix’d as Fate —
Thy doctrine made for every age and nation,
Can ne’er be obsolete, nor out of date.
Yet (cruel destiny!) thy own reward
For these—the priceless gems—thou did’st bequeath,
Was first, as we shall see, to be abhor’d,
And then to die a malefactor’s death !
Thy fame aspers’d by foulest villains’ breath !
But let us our sad narrative resume,
While rend’ring this last homage at thy tomb.
XI.
As like breeds like—a “ Legislative” horde,
The spawn of the “ Constituent’s ” Constitution
Succeeded it: this, too, our rights ignor’d,
And fully match’d its parent in pollution.
The pseudo-patriots of this second gang,
Profess’d great rev’rence for the “ Sov’reign” crowd,
But ’stead of measures gave us pompous slang,
’Gainst kings, prerogatives, and courtiers proud.


To hear these orators, on either side,
Whom their own journals puff, and Saviours dub,
One might suppose they were their country’s pride,
When they were but a vain debating club.
For, not one measure did they even moot,
(Though largely with sweet phrases they caress’d us)
That could by possibility uproot,
The monstrous social evils which oppress’d us.
Without just laws on Credit, Money, Land,
’Twas vain to talk of bett’ring our condition,
Yet these were just what the Girondist band
And sham-republicans, call’d rank sedition !
Alternately, these hypocrites play’d off,
King against people—people against king ;
Our purest chiefs they never ceas’d to scoff,
Themselves, safe shelter’d under bourgeois’ wing t
To whom these parasites the hat would doff,
In hopes of what th’ Elections might them bring.
But us, who had no vote, the caitiffs spurn’d,
They pilloried our friends in all their journals,
’Gainst Marat and great Robespierre they burn’d
With fury, in their Weeklies and Diurnals.
These chiefs, they knew, above all bribes and fear,
Would stand by justice, or with justice fall;
Hence, “down with Marat!” “down with Robespierre 1”
Was the one passion uppermost with all.
XII.
But soon the nation, fir’d by these great men,
Against the fountain of so much pollution,
Menac’d the traitors’ in their licens’d den,
And loudly claim’d an honest Constitution
For them whose blood had made the Revolution,
Ah! now was come that crisis we foresaw—
War threaten’d from without, and blood within,
That working-men might only know, for law,
The will of Plutocrats embalm’d in sin ;
(For there's the source wherein all wars begin !)


Robbers, who rob God’s people of God’s earth,
To make us beasts of burden for their use;
Exploiteurs, who, ’mid plenty, give us dearth,
Making us goods and chattels from' our birth,
That trading thieves may fatten on abuse.
Now Europe’s despots, back’d by England’s gold,
(Urg’d by our traitors!) march their hordes on France,
When, lo! all Paris rises, young and old !
And by “ the 10 th of August” checks th’ advance;
Thus barring Louis from his last fell chance.
On that great day, the traitors’ plots we foil’d—
Pull’d down the throne—decreed the assembly’s fall.
We taught the robbers, who had France despoiled,
Forthwith to recognize the rights of all,
In a Convention they were forc’d to call.
XIII.
Alas! though Universal Sulfrage won,
Promis’d, at first, deliverance to bring;
We soon found out, our work was but begun—
We found we got the name, but not the thing !
The thoughtless multitude, by frauds misled,
And slyly work’d on by our middle classes,
Replac’d the old delinquents at our head,
Who, in the two Assemblies, quash’d the masses,
Spurn’d their complaints, and cudgel’d them like asses.
Excepting some two dozen upright men,
For whom the democrats, had won fit places,
The new Convention, muster’d in its den,
Seem’d but a transcript of the old black faces. (7)
Oh! the heart sickens, and the brain is craz’d
At thought of this Convention’s hideous deeds ;
All hopes that universal suffrage rais’d,
Now sleep in blood!—yet still the country bleeds.
A reign of hell I —republic falsely call’d,
Of Civic worth, and Christian virtues void;
All good proscrib’d ! red crime in pow’r install’d—
The fme republicans, by shams destroy’d.


Heav’ns! what an outrage on our race and age!
Chief after chief! our champions murder’d, all!
In vain we ransack Hist’ry’s darkest page
To match in crime, 0 Robespierre ! thy fall,
Now cov’ring France with one huge fun’ral pall.
Seven hundred traitors, at thy risk, oft sav’d
From fierce insurgent sections, basely league
With noted brigands, thou hadst nobly brav’d,
To save both law, and France, from worse than plague.
Reptiles, who crawl’d to thee, three days before,
Call’d thee their Cato—-prais’d thy lips of fire—•
Who liken’d thee to Orpheus—nay, what’s more,
To Orpheus taming wild beasts with his lyre.
These reptile traitors, in great France’s name,
League with a knot of miscreants steep’d in crime, (7a)
To rob her of that chief of spotless fame,
Whose works had rais’d her to the True Sublime.
How durst ye, villains, claim for France to act,
When nine in ten of all her virtuous sons
Would, had they but conceiv’d your fiendish pact,
Have stood by Henriot to point his guns ?
No representatives of France are ye!
But traitors foul and mercenary jobbers:
Ye kill’d our friends, but that ye might be free,
To fetter us for Lords and Bourgeois robbers.
Monsters ! we vow to foil your black intents;
France shall escape the doom ye would award her:
Ye fiends of Profits, and 'ye fiends of Rents, (8)
We swear eternal vengeance to your Order!
XIV.
Say, Muse of History, who taught’st our youth,
To look to thee with reverence for truth ;
What power sustained us through those dismal times,
So full of treasons, plots, and impious crimes,
When three Assemblies, faithless to their mission,
Did, reckless of our interests and volition,


Confiscate all our Rights without contrition,
And murder who would save us from perdition—
Assemblies of felonious knaves and jobbers,
That sold the worth of France to licens’d robbers ?
Who was the Man of faith, and godlike parts,
That planted courage in our sinking hearts—■
Taught us the pow’r of truth, with trust in God:
To burst our chains, and break the tyrant’s rod.
Fill’d us with hope, when all around was dark :
Kindled to flame what was but freedom’s spark;
Drove back despair to Slavery’s long night, )
And bath’d our souls in floods of living light, J-
’Till God was manifest, and Heav’n in sight? )
O, Robespierre, when Hist’ry’s Muse is free,
“ There is the man!” she’ll say, and point to thee.
XV.
Yes, truly great, in thee of human kind,
Did most concentre, those endowments ripe,
Of head and heart, and conscience, all combined,
That go to form the perfect human type.
For God the Father, gave thee wisdom rare ;
And God the Son, for human kind vast love ;
And God the Holy Ghost, that gift most fair—
Pure truth of Soul, which comes but from above.*
* All mystery about the Trinity disappears at once, if, instead of
listening to incomprehensible nonsense about “ Three Incomprebensibles
in One Incomprehensible, and One Incomprehensible in Three Incom-
prehensibles,” we simply regard the Deity from a three-fold point of view,
or in a three-fold relation to his human creation—First, as God, the
fountain of all power, wisdom, and knowledge, alias , God, the architect
of the visible or material creation.—Second, God, the fountain of all
love and all the pure affections, in which point of view we stand towards
him in the relation of children to their common father—and—Third,
as the fountain of all truth, conscience, or conviction, in which respects
he corresponds with what Christians call God the Holy Ghost. Without
considering God in this three-fold capacity, it is impossible to make
belief in the Deity the basis of any rational religion. A God with in-
finite power, but without love or regard for his creatures, would convey
only the idea of an infinite despot.—Such a God, even with love for his
creatures (but a love regardless of truth, justice, or their own deserts)
would give only the idea of an infinitely powerful, but capricious despot
E


These gifts it was, that gave thee sway o’er Franco,
With them, in vain, did fraudful art compete ;
They crush’d whate’er obstructed thy advance,
And laid the revolution at thy feet.
Actors, more showy, graced our public stage,
Through wealth’s prestige shot up in sudden blaze;
But soon discovered far behind the age,
Have ceas’d, long since, to fix the public gaze.
Other—more daring, Chiefs—we saw appear,
Who filled, in vulgar eyes, a larger space,
Yea, brighter seem’d, because th’ observer near,
Took no account of distance, time, nor place.
Men of the world, in whom the world beholds
Its own reflex, —but burnish’d, magnified,
Like natures, —only cast in larger moulds
Than the gross herds that swell’d their trains of pride.
How could blind wordlings know thy proper place;
Thy spiritual doctrine, how revere ?
Thy views so vast, how could small minds embrace ?
Thou mov’dst, for them, in too remote a sphere.
When did a part e’er comprehend the whole ?
Or the dark worldling, see things not of earth ?
Can carnal natures read th’ inspir’d soul?
Verily, not, —without a second birth.
That second birth must come, e’er heav’n reveals
Its true deliverers to a fallen race,
Whose distance from their sphere sublime conceals
—whom we might, or might not, worship in vain—as subordinates or
menials worship earthly tyrants. Hence the necessity of adoring God
in his third capacity—that of fountain, or origin of all good, according
to conscience, without which we coaid have no idea of a religions basis
for divine justice. Any man who takes the trouble to think, will find
that unless we acknowledge God in this three-fold capacity, we might
as well be Atheists as Theists, for not to believe in the existence of
God at all—amounts practically to the same thing—as to believe only
in an omnipotent inexplicable being, who creates creatures without love
or care for them, and endows them with consciousness of right and
wrong, and then is indifferent as to which they may practice.


The living fire divine, their souls embrace.
Baptismal fire of life, and light and grace.
That fire’s the giver of new birth to all
On whom its quick’ning sparks ’mid darkness fall;
Its beams, God’s messengers, its light, sole source
Whence Man’s regeneration runs its course.
XVI.
Behold two planets in those cloudless skies,
One east, one west, with Heaven’s wide span between;
And mark yon star, how close to one it lies,
So close that nought, ’twould seem, could intervene.
Now, those two bodies, planet and fixed star,
Which, seemingly companions, space absorbs,
Are, from each other, beyond distance, far,
And, altogether, diff’rent kinds of orbs.
The star than either planet looks less bright,
And smaller than the one it seems to kiss;
Yet ’tis a sun that floods whole worlds with light—■
Worlds which sweep round it in the black Abyss.
Those worlds are to that star, what to our sun
Yon planets are, which shine but by his rays;
Like them, within fixed, narrow bounds, they run,
And look to it for seasons, nights, and days.
Those planets that would seem, to our dull sight,
Lustres, hung wide apart, as heav’n’s broad swoop
Are earth’s near neighbours, dark, like it, as night,
And, with it, form but parts of one dull group.
Yea, Earth, Sun, Planets,—all that they embrace,
Though wide apart they seem, and distant far,
Make but a speck in that unbounded space,
Which yawns between us and yon flick’ring star.
XVII.
Thus in the little world of Man we find
Small faculties look large, and dull ones bright,
While those of luminous and massive mind
Distance will dwarf and dim to vulgar sight,
Which, like its worship’d idols, dark, confin’d,
Kens not th’ increate from the borrow’d light.


Likewise, as seen in planet and fix’d star,
Minds will oft seem alike and near in place,
While Beings, wholly different they are,
And objects totally distinct, embrace
Some near us—others, beyond distance, far
Dissever’d by unfathomable space.*
Thus was our Revolution born of men
Of shining surface, and proportions rude,
Enlarg’d, and blazon’d forth to vulgar ken,
Through mists of ignorance or judgment crude.
Convicted traitors now—but giants then
They rul’d us crouch’d, like wild beasts in a den,
Dazzling with borrow’d light that multitude,
To whom all obligations they eschew’d.
XVIII.
Such were our chiefs of every rank and faction,
That grasp’d at wealth and power since ’Eighty Nine,
The chiefs alike of movement and re-action,
Who knew not God, nor worship’d truth Divine;
Reform was in their eyes, a mere transaction
To settle ’mongst themselves the “ mine” and “ thine: ”
All beyond that was “ theory”, “ abstraction ”,
To “ entertain the lovers of moonshine.”
Their politics was pelf—their law self-will—
Their liberty free scope to kill and plunder—
Their sumrnum bonum was to feast and swill—
Their majesty, to make the poor crouch under.
Wretches !—they liv’d but for their lusts and maws,
Reserving for the men of soul and heart—
Who sought to plant God’s standard ou our laws—
The cup of bitters and th’ assassin’s dart.
* Robespierre’s nature and politics were as essentially different from
those of Danton, Hebert, and of the factions they represented, as the
increate light of a fixed star is different from the borrowed light of a
planet. Tueir distance, too, from the vulgar point of view, was in-
calcubly greater than those of Danton, Hebert, &c., whose ideas
were more on a level with those of the gross herd. Of this, however,
the said herd was unconscious; they believing that all persons who
voted in the same lists, and sat in the same part of the Chamber,
were of the same principles and politics.


Fatal necessity—oh! Robespierre! —
Cast thee amongst these carnal men of note,
Made thee, with them, in the same lists appear,
And seem with them to think, and act, and vote,
Yet was thy soul from their’s as far remote,
(Even when thy signature to their’s stood near),
As yon fix’d star—(our parable to quote)—
Lies from those planets, or our own earth’s sphere.
Such men were Bailly, Sieyes, Lafayette,
The Bourgeois chiefs, that group’d round Mirabeau,
The Gironde, Mountain, Hebert, and Chauraette,
Ev’n Danton, Camille, Brissot, Yergniaud,
All but the glorious few that round thee met,
Like smaller brilliants round a larger set,
Souls like thy own that heav’nly fire made glow,
With all the holier passions of Rousseau.
XIX.
Foremost, and first of these, shone great Marat,
Blazing, like Sirius, with true increate fire ;
Then bold Saint Just, Couthon, and young Lebas,
Who brav’d th’ assassins with indignant ire,
Conscious that freedom must with thee expire.
Thou crush’d, for life they knew no more desire,
They scorn’d to live, and died with true eclat,
Martyrs, at once, to Liberty and Law.
These, with thy friends, the trusted Jacobins,
And that brave Commune, link’d with thee in death,
Wash’d with their blood, our Revolution’s sins
Surrend’ring France’s rights, but with their breath.
Such were the men, whose truly glorious deeds
Redeem’d the horrors of our Revolution;
The men for whom the heart of France now bleeds,
Oppress’d by carnage, treason, and pollution.
These set apart, the rest seem’d born, design’d
To scourge us, and their destiny fulfill’d,
Not one memorial have they left behind,
But of the wrongs they did—the blood they spill’d.


Our Dantons, Talliens, Fouches, and such like,
Saw in convulsion but a bloody game,
At which, whoe’er the hardest blows could strike,
Might win a throne, a fortune, or a name.
XX.
Yes, Robespierre!—our Revolution owes
All that ennobled it to thee and thine;
Its crimes alone belong to thy fell foes,
Who spurn’d all justice, human and divine.
But for their treasons, France would now Rejoice
In Nature’s reign, vouchsaf’d her through thy laws,
The world’s oppress’d would wake up at thy voice,
And burst their chains amid a world’s applause.
The rich, made safe in all they now possess,
But barr’d from future rapines on the poor,
Would gladly in thy statutes acquiesce,
That they, and what they held, might rest secure
The Poor, likewise thy Institutes would bless,
Seeing they opened wdde to them the door
Of future acquisition, till distress
Should flee their homes, nor ever haunt them more.*
And thus, while all must gain, and none could lose,
By smooth transitions, scarcely-felt degrees,
The new and old would blend their forms and hues,
Till all were chang’d by Nature’s mild decrees;
Just as seen, melting in dissolving views,
The frowning fortress turns to groves of trees;
While as each picture with another blends,
None see where one begins—the other ends.
* Robespierre is the only legislator and statesman known to history
that sought a radical reformation of society for the millions, through just
fundamental laws on property, with analogous institutions to reach and
purify every department of the state, so that the poorest man in France
might get rich through his own industry if he those to work, and have
the whole armed power of society to guarantee to him the exclusive
ownership and enjoyment of his earnings and accumulations. But at
the same time he left to the rich all they had ; depriving them only of
the power of future robbery. To this end were directed articles 6,7,
8,9, 10, 11, and 12, of bis “ Declaration of Rights.”


Arrived at last, were that beatic Reign
So long foretold, of joy and peace on earth,
When Greed, Lust, War, with all their hideous train,
Would flee before a New Creation’s birth.
When swords to ploughshares turned, to sickles, spears,
Would glad all lands, all savage natures, tame;
And Earth, no more a wretched vale of tears,
Would ring with praises of the Maker’s name.
Then should we see for ever realized,
Isaiah’s visions, and the heav’n of sages ;
What Jesus taught, what Plato but surmis’d,
Would be Man’s destiny for countless ages ;
Philosophy would reign, but christianis’d,
And thine the brightest name in hist’ry’s pages.
XXI.
But, oh, the heavy change, now thou art gone ;
Now thou art gone, and never must return;
Thee, chieftain, thee, the poor, with looks so wan,
The bondsman and the labourer will mourn.
The outcasts of proud wealth, look’d down upon,
On whose drear souls thy revelations shone,
And all who with the love of country burn,
Commingling their sad echoes round thy urn.
No more will hearts beat high to hear thy voice:
The young, the brave, the gen’rous hang the head ;
With anguish rent, are they thou bad’st rejoice:
With thee liv’d hope; with thee now hope is dead.
As killing as the canker to the rose,
Or taint worm to the weanling flocks unshorn,
Or east wind to young plants when fierce it blows,
Or desert-sands to verdure newly born.
Death-chilling as the frost to gay-rob’d flowers,
(In summer’s dawn, when first the hawthorn Wows)
Whose life-warm fragrance, born of sun and showers,
Exhales, mid icy dews, their last perfumes.
Such, Robespierre, thy loss to freedom’s cause,
So sweetly link’d by thee with Heav’n’s own laws.


XXII.
Men of the Faubourgs ! think ye of the past!—
Join your condolence with our sorrowing muse,
Beat up the vales and bid them hither cast
Their bells and flow’rets of a thousand hues :
Ye valleys deep, where Echo lonely sighs,
To plaintive winds and woods, and gushing brooks,
On whose fresh lap the swart star sparely looks;
Throw hither all your quaint enamel’d eyes,
That on the green turf suck the honied showers,
And purple all the ground with vernal flowers:
Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies,
The tufted crow-tow, and pale jessamine,
The white-pink and the pansy freak’d with jet,
And spring’s first-born, the fragrant violet;
The musk-rose, and the well-attired woodbine—
With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head,
And every flower that sad embroid’ry wears ;
Bid Amaranthus all his beauties shed,
And daffodillies fill their cups with tears,
To strew the hearse where lies our sainted sage:
At once the pride and sorrow of our age;
Mayhap, the bursting heart may find relief
In these pbor outward offices of grief.
XXIII.
Immortal Citizen! Great heir of fame !
(Who liv’d and died to raise a fallen race ;)
Brave France will yet do justice to thy name.
And ’mongst her Worthies, give thee foremost place.
Shade of our lov’d— our venerated chief!
We hold this curs’d Convention in abhorrence;
Nought, while it reigns, can we presage but grief,
At seeing patriot blood still flow in torrents.
Full well we know the secret of thy death—
In striking thee they struck our bulwark down :
Thou and the million breath’d but with one breath:
Our lov’d Republic falls with thy renown.


Yea, thy great Works now with thyself entomb’d,
Our Ark of safety, as by thee design’d,
Thy murd’rers, from the outset, had pre-doom’d,
To sink with thee, in infamy enshrin’d.
But they shall rise again renew’d in prime,
Despite of treason black, and madness blind,
They’ll reign on earth, and live throughout all time,
Big with the future weal of human kind.
Fate hath them now, an embryo in Time’s womb,
Conceiv’d in Chaos—Order waits their birth:
But then they’ll flourish with immortal bloom,
Dispensing promis’d lands throughout the earth.
Nor art thou dead, but glorying in new life,
Benignant Spirit! now in realms of bliss:
Too good for earth—th’ assassins’ cruel knife,
But gave thee to a better world than this.
XXIV.
Weep no more, gallant Frenchmen, weep no more,
For, Robespierre, your sorrow, is not dead;
Sunk though he be beneath a tide of gore,
So sinks the day-star in the ocean bed,
But yet anon repairs his drooping head,
And tricks his beams, and with new spangl’d ore,
Flames in the fore-head of the morning sky;
Thus Robespierre sunk low, but mounted high,
Through the dear might of him who walked the waves.
Where other groves and other streams along,
With nectar pure his gory locks he laves,
And hears the in-expressive nuptial song.
In the blest kingdom, meek of joy and love,
There entertain him all the saints above,
With choral troops and sweet societies
That sing, and singing in their glory move,
And wipe the tear for ever from his eyes.
XXV.
Now, Robespierre, thy comrades weep no more,
Henceforth thou art ,our Genius evermore j


In thy large recompense, and wilt be good,*
To all that war, with heav’n, ’gainst men of blood—
Thy soul, no longer prison’d in thy clay,
Shall flame above us, like the orb of day ;
Pillar of light to guide us, and to bless,
We’ll hail thy beams throughout life’s wilderness ;
Sure, if like thee, we hold, by God’s command,
To win, at last, fair freedom’s promis’d land ;
Thy god-like works, thy life’s pure sacrifice,
Shall conquer, for the world, that priceless prize.
Thy spirit, ever present, shall be ours,
With it, we’ll combat tyranny’s fell powers:
Thy name our talisman, thy life our charm,
While vengeance for thy death shall nerve our arm.
Nor peace, nor truce, we’ll know with freedom’s foes,
Till the last tyrant sinks beneath our blows ;
Nor till God’s providence to earth recall’d,
Shall bless our race, from bondage disenthrall’d.
Yes, Robespierre, the foul ones of this earth
Shall read their condemnation in thy fame;
Despots shall rue the hour that gave thee .birth,
And blench before the terrors of thy name.
Meanwhile, thy cherish’d memory shall live.
Green as these laurels strewn upon thy bier,
And every festive board this toast shall give,
Embalming that sweet mem’ry with a tear :
XXVI.
We’ll toast a name—a name for ever dear
To all that thirst for justice, far and near;
A name that once made many a freeman cheer,
And many a gloomy despot quake with fear!
Of Heaven’s own righteous laws the friend sincere—
To crime and tyranny a foe severe—■
One whose resplendent merits must appear
Brighter and brighter every coming year ;
* The word good is used here in the sense of propitious or tutelary
'to it is often by Spencer, Milton, and the olden poets.


As time and progress shall make facts more clear,
And truths divine illume our hemisphere;
These will reveal that helmsman without peer,
Who taught what course republics ought to steer ;
Whose virtues only Vice thought 100 austere ;
Whose life was grand—whose death was sad and drear—
For, bloody treason triumphed o’er his bier !
We’ll, therefore, drink in silence, with a tear,
The Man who in God’s service knew no fear—
That Chief who lived and bled for all now here —
“ Th’ Immortal Memory of Robespierre !”*
NOTES IN ELUCIDATION OF THE ELEGY, AND OF THE
DISSERTATION WHICH PRECEDES IT.
[Note I.]
Composition and character of the Committees of Government
at the time of Robespierre''s death , with some account of
their principal accomplices in the Convention , fyc.,
There were two committees of government—the committee of public
safety, and the committee of general security. Their business was to
superintend the ministers of each department, and exercise a strict
surveillance upon all the administrations of the republic, over which
they had entire control —subject only to the future approval of the
Convention.
The principal committee, that of public safety, was the centre and
focus of government. Upon it devolved all the great questions of state
policy which affected the very existence of the republic, in respect of
its enemies at home and abroad. The other committee, that of general
security, was more occupied with matters of detail. Its functions
were more limited; applying themselves chiefly to the surveillance of
parties and matters of internal police. Each committee was theoreti-
cally composed of twelve members; but at times there were only nine, ten,
or eleven, owing to resignations, neglect of filling up vacancies, &c.
And as, owing to the frequent absence of members on important missions,
and to extreme pressure of business, they found themselves obliged to
* The last verse is purposely constructed with only the one rhyme,
to be more easily remembered, and to serve as a prefatory speech, in
proposing the memory of Robespierre at banquets, soirees, &c., cele-
brated by the friends of political and social reform.


lend each other their signatures in confidence—but a very small number
—often not more than three—were really present at a time, and so
formed a quorum. Saint Just complained, on the 9th Thermidor, in his
last report, (which the conspirators would not suffer him to read), that
latterly, Billaud Varennes, Barrere, and Collot d’ Herbois had mono-
polized the whole power to themselves, through the absence of the
other members; Couthon was absent from illness, St. Just with the
armies, Robespierre driven away by studied insults, and the other
members buried in their offices, attending to particular administrations.
At the time of Robespierre’s death, the members of the committee
of public safety, were Robespierre, Couthon, St. Just, Barrere, Billaud
Varennes, Collot d’ Herbois, Carnot, Robert Lindet, the two Prieurs,
(Prieur de la Marne, and Prieur de la Cote d’or), and St. Andre.
Those of the committe of general security were Vadier, Amar, Jagot,
Louis, (du bas Rhin) David, Lebas, Lavicompterie, Moise Bayle, Elie
Lacoste, and Dubarran.
Lamartine says u Almost all the members of the committee of general
security had an absolute respect for the opinions of Robespierre.”
This is not true. They co-operated with him only in so far as they
required his help to overthrow the old royalist regime: but they had no
sympathy whatever with, him in respect of the regime, or system, he
sought to put in its place; with the exception of Lebas and David, the
only two real friends he had on that committee. Of the remaining nine
members, Lavicompterie was perhaps the only one not absolutely and
personally hostile to him. All the rest wished for his destruction —more
especially Vadier, Dubarran, Amar, and Louis (du bas Rhin). These
co-operated zealously and indefatigably to that end with the hostile
members of the committee of public safety, and with the brigand-
terrorists of the Mountain. His system of virtue and clean hands,
was abhorrent to those wretches, who had literally covered themselves
with blood and corruption, and to whom the operations of the guillotine
was a standing theme for their sanguinary jests and pastime. They
attended the executions on the Place de la Revolution , as men go to a
theatre, a race-course, or a concert—for the sake of pleasure and
excitement. The conversations they were in the habit of indulging in
on those occasions, show them to have been thoroughly demoralized
miscreants. Robespierre regarded them with horror; and they regarded
him with mixed feelings of fear and hatred, lest he should open the
vials of public wrath on their impurities, as he did on the Bth Thermi-
dor, and as he would have done long before, but that he saw they were
secretly supported by his own treacherous colleagues of the committee
of public safety, and by Danton’a and Hebert’s sanguinary and corrupt
factions in the convention.
Of the members of the committee of puSlic safety, Robespierre,
Couthon, and St. Just, were the only three that sought an honest and
permanent republic for the nation at large—more especially for the
industrious and virtuous majority, least able to take care of themselves.
On that account, they got the name of Messieurs de la haute main, and
that of “ the politicals” from their colleagues in the two committees—


Billaud, Collot, and Barrere were called “ the Revolutionists” ; by which
was meant that they had no particular political creed, beyond what
might best serve their own political interests for the hour; which was
to conform to what they knew to be the secret policy of the Conven-
tions for the time being—violent and murderous towards the aristocracy
and royalists when the convention saw its dangers in this direction, but
still more violent and blood-thirsty towards the friends of democracy,
when the convention saw the regime of the middle-classes in greater
danger from that direction. Considering the revolution to have no
other end than that of deposing the aristocracy, in order to make the
middle-classes the predominant and all-absorbing power of the state,
these “ revolutionists ” (Barrere, Billaud, and Collot) were the main-
spring of all the sanguinary measures of the epoch. It was they
that directed all the pro-consulships, or commissionerships, in the depart-
ments ; which, through their agents, Barras and Freron, at Toulon,
Fouche at Nevers, (and afterwards at Lyons with Dubois Crance,
and Collot, himself) Tallien and Isabean, at Bourdeanx, Carrier, at
Nantes, Joseph Lebon in Alsace, &c, covered France with scaffolds,
blood, and ruins. These men could not endure the idea of Bobespierre
seeking to make the working-classes aspire to any higher destiny than
that of making themselves sanguinary instruments in the hands of the
middle-classes, (when the latter wanted rough work done for them in the
way of overthowing thrones, bastiles, and feudal institutes) —and then
subsiding into soulless slaves and drudges, after having done the middle-
classes’ bloody work for them. They wanted Bobespierre, Couthon,
and St. Just, to be, like themselves, base instruments of rapine, murder,
and atheism, for the aggrandisement of the counting-house vampires of
France, at the expense of both aristocracy and people. But finding they
had souls, hearts, and consciences above such an atrocious mission, they
resolved to murder them upon the first favourable opportunity. To do
that, they must have a majority both of the committees and of the conven-
tion itself—and they must choose a time when the mass of the people
divided, dispirited, and off their guard, would not be able to come
to the rescue of their friends till it was too late to save them; —and
when, also, Eobespierre’s moderating power in the republic was no
longer necessary to keep the masses in subjection to the authority of
government. Up to the 9th Thermidor, the committees and the con-
vention could not have risked a conflict with Bobespierre, without letting
loose upon themselves the royalists on the one hand, and the factions of
Hubert and the lower-classes of fanatics on the other. But after the
overthow of the factions of Danton and Hebert on the one hand, and
the decimation of the royalists and aristocrats on the other (both
accomplished through Robespierre’s moral ascendancy), they saw their
way towards destroying Robespierre himself, by arraying against him
the remnants of all the factions overthrown, and by making him appear
as the author of all the massacres rendered inevitable and perpetrated
by themselves. During Ihe six weeks preceding the 9th Thermidor,
they murdered in Paris alone, nearly 1,300 victims by the revolutionary
tribunal. Many of these were of Robespierre’s party; some personal


friends, like the family of Madame St. Amaranthe, with whom he bad
been in communication to stop the reign of terror. The Committees threw
all this blood, wickedly shed, on Robespierre, who had no more to do
with their operations than the man in the moon—he having abandoned
them in disgust and horror, when he saw they were massacreing innocent
victims out of doors, and sparing traitors and criminals of the blackest
die in the Convention itself; of the proofs of whose guilt their hands
were ihll. Barrere, Billand, and Collot were the prime movers in this
conspiracy to destroy the party of virtue by their own crimes; but the
remaining members of the committee of public safety were by no means
innocent. There is abundant evidence to show that Carnot, Lindet,
Cambon, and one of the Prieurs, if not both, were anxious to destroy
Robespierre, and worked secretly for that end with Billaud, Collot,
Barrere, and the majority of the other committee. Tfysse members, (who
got the name of gens d' examin , or mere administrators,) were complete
tools of the middle-classes—even more so than Billaud or Collot—but
too cautious to commit themselves either for or against Robespierre,
until the last moment, when success appeared no longer doubtful.
They ostensibly confined themselves to their bureaux or offices, but
knew, through Barrere & Co., all that was passing, and waited the
favourable moment to declare themselves against Robespierre. For this
purpose they connived at all Barrere’s tergiversations (he had belonged
in turns to all the factions of the republic), at all the sanguinary
excesses of Billaud and Collot in the departments, through their pleni-
potentiary commissioners, at all the arbitrary arrests and persecutions
of patriots by the committee of general security, and at all the horrible
crimes of the mountain terrorists —hoping to unite them all in one
grand onslaught on Robespierre, so as to break np the republic, and
hand over France once more to the murderous middle-classes, whose
instruments they were.
Thus, Robespierre had but two steadfast friends on each committee—
Conthon and St. Just on the committee of public safety, Lebas and David
on the other. All the rest, composing the great majority, were dead
against him; so that, but for his immense popularity and influence out
of doors, he would have been nemo and nil in the government, as bo
was virtually such, in the Convention itself. There never was a greater
mistake than to suppose (as most people do, from the misrepresentations
of history), that Robespierre was all-powerful both in the Convention
and on the Committees of government.—On the contrary, he had no
power at all over either; not even toleration, except in so far as his
moral ascendancy out of doors made them afraid of him—and rendered
it politic on their part to treat him openly with respect, in order to
cover themselves with the mantle of his popularity, while at the same
time, they throw upon him all the odium of their own acts. In other
words, they made use of his name and co-membership to consecrate
their own crimes in the eyes of France; while secretly, and in the
cabinet, they opposed and counteracted all his benevolent designs for
France, not allowing him to carry out a single glorious project of the
many he had conceived for the industrious classes. In these respects,


Carnot, Lindet, Cambon, St. Andre, and the two Prlenrs were not a
jot more favourable to him than were Biilaud, Collot, and Barrere, or
the majority of the other committee. They all envied him his reputa-
tion and popularity—they all undermined him by calumny and secret
agencies—they all worked, under-hand, against him in the Convention,
more especially with the suppleam , or newly-elected members. In a
word, they all sought his death, and cared not bow it was brought
about, provided it did not involve their own. Of this the proof is, that they
all concurred in the 9th Thermidor; and, to accomplish his destruction
on that day, made common cause with every faction in the Convention
they had helped him to pull down—even with all the infamous brigands of
the Dantonist and Hebertist factions, whom they knew to be steeped
in blood and crime—whom they knew to have conspired and plotted
the assassination of Robespierre within a few paces of his own domicile,
and whom, some of them have since openly confessed, in published
pamphlets, they would have sent to the guillotine for their brigandism
and murders in the provinces, but that their co-operation was necessary
to them in order to overthrow Robespierre and democracy. They all
wanted to expel the working-classes from their share of the government,
to oust them from the constitution and from the state, as aliens—and to
re-instal, in omnipotence, the middle-classes, who they expected would let
them enjoy in quiet the plunder and positions they had won in the
revolution, out of gratitude for their services in making them once
more the masters of France. This is the true solution of Robespierre’s
death. He was not overthrown (as history falsely represents) by the
“ Thermidorians”, nor even by a majority of the committees. He was
overthrown by a general combination of all the factions leagued together
in and out of the Convention—the committees and Mountain-terrorists
only taking the lead, partly through fear of Robespierre getting them
punished for their crimes, but chiefly with a view to purchase forgiveness
for them, from the Convention and the middle-classes—who, they well
knew, would not condone them on any terms short of murdering Robes-
pierre and his friends, and breaking up the democracy altogether.
Indeed, the Convention and the middle-classes would have had him
murdered long before, but that his moral influence was indispensable to
them in keeping the mass of the poorer classes from breaking out into
general insurrection, and revenging themselves by massacre and pillage
for the innumerable wrongs and sufferings caused to them by the
said middle-classes and by their three traitorous assemblies—the Consti-
tuent, the Legislative, and the Convention.
By getting the democratic constitution of 1793 decreed, on the one
hand, and by causing several beneficent measures of practical relief to
the poor to be ordained, on the other—such as the providing of gra-
tuitous education for the young—the bestowal of state annuities upon
the superannuated—and the voting of a part of the national domains,
and of two milliards (2,000,000,000 francs) to the “ defenders of the
country,” —to the brave volunteers of the army, who had sacrificed
their homes to save the country from invasion and dismemberment —by
these and similar means, Robespierre's party had kept the masses from


insurrection and vengeance. But he never suspected, until too late, that
the middle classes and their Convention would undo all this and even
murder him, and, soon after, tens of thousands of his party, in order to
escape the obligations he bound them to in his devotion to the people.
Yet all this did they do. The Convention disfranchised nine-tenths of the
voters who elected it, abolished the constitution of 1793 altogether, and put
an exclusive middle-class constitution in its place—and, to cap the climax
of its iniquities, broke its bond to the brave “ defenders of the country,”
giving them neither the lands nor the milliards, which Robespierre and
St Just had got decreed to them. In lieu of what it had voted for
democracy, for the soldiers, and for the poor, it installed in power and
place, the principal murderers of Robespierre, including even scoundrels
like Barras and Tallien, who had been in the plot to assassinate him near
his own door. It completed the ground-work of spoliation begun by the
Constituent; lavished the resources of the nation upon the most profligate
wretches, openly paraded a system of luxury, debauchery, and indecency,
which revolted every pure mind; making the ladies of France appear at
state balls and routs in dresses that scarcely concealed their nudity—
openly squandered the public money on kept mistresses and harlots,
(Barras, himself, taking the lead in this outrageous insult to France),
and carried on such an infamous traffic in the ecclesiastical lands and na-
tional domains, and in the forfeited estates of the noblesse, that hundreds
of thousands of middle-class villains were made rich at the expense of the
nation and the poor, by being enabled to purchase from the municipalities
(elected by themselves, and entrusted with the sale) the best portions of
these lands; only giving for them depreciated assignats , or rag-money,
whose real value was not worth a tenth, nor ofttimes, a fifteenth part of its
nominal value—nor of the estates so purchased with it, (owing to the
immense quanties in which it was issued for the purpose of depreciating
it), so that the plundering middle classes (who had agreed to pay the
purchase money, by instalments, covering several years)—might be able
to pay only in surface what they had agreed to pay in weight.
Such was the Convention !—such the murderers and successors of
Robespierre!—such the real character of the men whom the historian
Thiers, with unblushing audacity, avers to have saved France! —and
to whom we owe the principal historic portraitures of Robespierre!!!
There was hardly a man of them that did not deserve to have been
disemboweled alive and hurled into eternity amidst the execrations of
the whole nation. Barras was a compound of the brigand, sybarite
and sot, Freron, the companion of his orgies and murders at Toulon
and in the South, was no better. Rovere, Thuriot, Lecomptre, Legendre,
the two Bourdons, Fouche, Carrier, and the other members of the
conspiracy were all noted terrorists and infamous private characters.
Leonard Bourdon, who kept a boarding-school, resorted to the most
ignoble practices to get scholars, and was the first to seek to degrade
the national representation by wearing cynical costumes and speaking
with his hat on. This was the cowardly rascal that made Meda, the
gens d’arme, discharge his pistol at Robespierre, in the hope of killing
him lest the people should rescue him, or the Revolutionary Tribunal


acquit him and put his murderous and traitorous accusers in his place.
The other Bourdon was a still more execrable villain. At La Vendee
he practiced the most shameful orgies and cruelties with the traitor
Tunk—killing helpless prisoners, in sport and fury, with his own hand.
Robespierre, in the notes found in bis domicile, gives some details
which show him to have been a hideous wretch. Tallien committed
so many crimes that the Committees avowed, after Robespierre’s death,
that if he had 500 heads, they had evidence enough to make him
forfeit them all; but that it was necessary to save him and his brigand
associates, in order to have their assistance in overthrowing Robespierre.
Fouche, who, taken all in all, was perhaps the blackest miscreant the
revolution produced, dared not show himself at the Jacobin club, lest
the murders and other crimes with which Robespierre reproached him
might cause either his destruction by the indignant club, itself, or that
of the government, if it refused to send him before the Revolutionary
Tribunal. He and Collot d’Herbois literally massacred thousands of
men and women, even boys and girls, at Lyons with sword, bayonet,
pike, and showers of grapeshot. Carrier, another monster, and one of
Robespierre’s most ferocious enemies, was the notorious author of some
of the foulest and bloodiest scenes that stained the revolution. He
wantonly caused the destruction of thousands of men, women, and
children in La Vendee , whom he might, by a mild exercise of power,
have saved. He had the guillotine at work night and day under his
own windows, and made his name for ever infamous by his noyades , or
“ republican marriages”; which meant tying the sexes together in a
state of nudity, and drowning them in the Loire, by means of vessels
with false bottoms. The rest of Robespierre’s Mountainist enemies
were of the same stamp as those I have just mentioned, Legendre
was a brute—originally a common sailor, afterwards a butcher. In
this latter capacity he got rich, and, like all upstart middle-class pre-
tended reformers, was as anxious to keep down those below him, as he
was to pull down his betters in manners and education. Towards
Robespierre he practised the most servile and cringing adulation in
public, (even asked a body-guard for him and his colleagues), while,
privately, he was plotting to have him murdered for his devotion to
the working-classes, whom scoundrels of Legendre’s school would not
suffer to have any other share in the revolution than to fight, work,
starve, and huzza for the chiefs of the Bourgeosie “ patriots”. In
truth, the whole Convention hardly numbered 30 men out of 750,
whose patriotism was better tban Legendre’s; and not half-a-dozen
whose insolence, vanity, and brutal manners were so offensive.
The Right and the Plaine (where the Conservatives and the Gironde
sat) were no better than the mountain. They were only not so coarse
and brutal in their manners. They are as responsible for the acts of
the mountain and of the committees as if they committed them with
their own hands; for, without their authorisation and sanction, no such
acts could have taken place. It was their opposition to all real reform
that threw power into the hands of the mountain, and made real,
humane, enlightened reformers, like Robespierre, powerless to do good.
v


They formed, too, a large majority of the Convention. This placed
the composition of the committees and everything else at their disposal;
so that historians who pretend to acquit them of the crimes of the
revolution are manifest impostors. They do so only because the Right
and the Plaine represented the wealthier middle-classes, iii whose inte-
rests all the histories hitherto published have been got up. Besides
their full share in all the atrocities I have described, the conduct of
the Eight and of the Plaine on the 9th Thermidor must consign their
memories to the execration of all future ages, once the nations of the
earth shall have thrown off the yoke of the landlord and the profit-
monger—so that truth may hold up its head in the world. Twice did
they refuse to join the conspirators against Robespierre (fearing the
Jacobins and the Commune); but the third time, when they thought
Robespierre’s enemies to be stronger than his friends, they ratified the
unholy compact, and, at the instance of men covered with blood and
crimes of every sort, sent to the scaffold the man who had saved most
of themselves from the same fate —and who, even at the last moment,
might have bad them massacred on their benches by the forces of the
Commune and the Jacobins, had he not magnanimously preferred to
give up his own life rather than stain his memory with usurpation, and
expose the blood of his fellow-countrymen to flow in such a cause.
No! Posterity will never acquit these base and cowardly assassins;
nor make any distinction between one party, and another in the infa-
mous Convention. The reputed conduct of Barrere on the 9th Tber-
midor was typical of the Girondist majority. It is said he had two
written speeches in his pocket, one for, the other against, Robespierre—
ready to deliver either with equal zeal, according as the scales might
incline for, or against, the intended victim. In that spirit exactly did
the base Girondists act throughout their share of the revolution.
Even had Robespierre been a villain like themselves, instead of the
sublimes! public character that any age or nation can boast, the agonies
they made him needlessly suffer during the last twenty-four hours of his
life, must make their memories, for ever, odious. Of his last moments,
the Eistoire Parliamentaire says, (vol. xxxiv p. 94)—“ Such was the
“ end of Robespierre. His agony was still more cruel than has been
w related in the several reports given by his enemies of his last sufferings.
“ His colleagues of the committees came to insult him, to strike him,
u to spit in his face, while the clerks of the office, stabbed him with
“ their pen-knives. The man whose eloquence and probity was the
** boast of the entire newspaper press only the night before his fall—
“ the man whom Boissy D’Anglas used to call the Orpheus of France,
“ only one month before he entered into the conspiracy to destroy him
“ —this man was no longer anything but a vile miscreant.” !!!
On the day after Robespierre’s execution, almost the whole news-
paper press came out with a literary sketch and portrait of him, which
must have been a government concoction, and published “ by command ,”
as it was, line for line, the same in all. This was copied, under terror,
by the provincial press, which was almost exclusively, as it still is, in
the possession of the middle classes—and it is from that vile concoction


of mendacity (got up by Robespierre’s actual murderers, and spread by
organized terror throughout France and Europe), that most historians
have taken their portraitures of Robespierre.
But with all the precautions taken by the murderers—-though they
got this caricature portrait circulated all over the world—though they
destroyed the minutes of the Jacobin club on the eventful nights of the
Bth and 9th Thermidor, and published only as much of the Commune’s
minutes as suited their purpose—though they stole the hist presence-
list of the commune—though they suppressed all the newspapers
of Paris friendly to Robespierre, and allowed nothing to be published of
the proceedings of the Convention during the Bth and 9th, until the
11th, when their victory was secure—though they ransacked the papers
of Robespierre after his death, and, three several times, committed to the
flames what would criminate them in the eyes of France and the world
—though all the principal documents, not originally destroyed by
Courtois,—were afterwards pillaged and destroyed by Fouche and Buona-
parte—still is there direct and circumstantial evidence enough extant
to devote the whole of the conspirators, in and out of the Convention, to
the everlasting execrations of posterity.
[Note 2.]
ROBESPIERRE, NO SUICIDE.
Most historians represent Robespierre as having shot himself with
one of the pistols found on him, when arrested with the municipal
council, at the Hotel-de-Ville, on the memorable night of the 9th Ther-
midor. There is no truth in the statement. Robespierre was deliberately
shot by a gens-d’arme, named Meda, by order of Leonard Bourdon, who
commanded the detachment of the Conventional troops which invested
the Botel-de- Ville by order of the commandant-in-chief, Barras.
Meda did not know the person of Robespierre, but Bourdon pointed
him out in the municipal-council-chamber, dhd standing behind Meda,
directed the muzzle of Meda’s weapon towards Robespierre, saying,
“ That is he” The ball entered the left side of Robespierre’s face,
broke his jaw, and carried away several of his teeth, causing his
head to fall on the table, while blood gushed copiously from his mouth.
It was a deliberate act of intended murder; the assassins fearing, even
in their hour of triumph, that Robespierre’s voice, if once more heard
by the people, might open their eyes to the horrid conspiracy that was
being carried into effect against themselves and the republic. For, the
murder of Robespierre and his friends had long been projected by his
colleagues of the committees, and the heads of the Conventional factions
as a preliminary measure, absolutely indispensable, before they could
with safety to themselves, destroy the constitution of 1793, and trea-
sonably hand over the betrayed republic to the aristocracy and middle
classes, Meda’s bullet not having proved fatal, it became necessary for
the conspirators to have Robespierre and his friends outlawed by the
Convention to prevent their having a trial by the revolutionary tribunal,
which would not only have acquitted them, but brought all his accusers


to the block through the disclosures which must have taken place.
Indeed, independently of the conspiracy to murder Robespierre and
destroy the republic, most of them had committed such horrible crimes
as commissioners, or pro-consuls, in the provinces, that if the tribunal
did not condemn them, the indignant public would have massacred
them and extinguished the tribunal itself in the blood of its judges and
jurors. The 9th Thermidor, was altogether a coup-d'etat, which took
the public by surprise. Nothing of what did happen could have
happened had the French public known the designs of Robespierre’s
enemies. The latter would have been exterminated to a man. That
Robespierre did not shoot himself is abundantly proved by the fact
stated by Lamartine (see “ History of the Girondists,” vol. iii, p. 538,)
viz., that Robespierre’s pistols were found shut up in their cases, still
loaded, when taken from his person; and a more damning proof is,
that Meda was recommended to the Convention for* promotion on the
very night of his exploit, and ultimately reached the rank of colonel in
the French army, in which capacity he served under Bonaparte, in
the Russian campaign of 1812, and was amongst the myriads that
perished miserably in that memorable invasion.
[Note 3.]
Though Robespierre laboured harder than any other man in France
to prevent the anti-jacobin war of 1793, (Lamartine says he balanced
all France for one month, standing alone against all the other popular
leaders), yet no sooner did the European coalition leave the republic,
no other alternative than war or extinction, than he put forth an energy
and force of eloquence which electrified France and roused the whole
population in mass to volunteer for the defence of the country. It
was mainly owing to bis vehement appeals at the jacobin-club, in the
commune, and in the committee, that upwards of a million of citizens
flew to arms, while the women and old men rivalled the youthful
warriors, in the ardour yith which they volunteered their services in
digging salt-petre, making lint, and mounting guard in the fortified
towns, while the youth flew to the frontiers. The writings of Marat, as
also those of Camille, Loustalot, Hebert, and others, no doubt, contri-
buted largely towards producing this national enthusiasm, but no
voice had so much authority with the country as Robespierre’s.—These
improvised levies, it was, that saved France from invasion—perhaps
dismemberment, in 1793. The English, Prussians, Hanoverians,
Brunswickers, Spaniards, and other foreign troops, prepared to overrun
France, had to retreat before these raw but enthusiastic levies, and at
the time of Robespierre’s death, not a square yard of French territory
was in possession of the enemy. It was after that event (which
Mignet tells us the armies heard of with dismay) that victory deserted
the French standards. The troops lost their dan. French hearts no
longer beat with enthusiasm for a republic rent, mangled and betrayed
by the base and profligate government of the Directory, which ruled
only for men of rents, profits, and the stock-exchange. Hence issued
Bonaparte, the empire, and rivers of blood shed in a war of 22 years’


duration, carrying death and devastation all over Europe, and retarding
the epoch of Europe’s emancipation from organised despotisms of rich
over poor till the present time, and, it may be, for a century to come.
All this was the natural consequence of the 9th Thermidor.
[Note 4.]
As often remarked of the murderers of Julius Csasar, Socrates, and
other eminent men, all, or nearly all the wretches who had a principal
hand in Robespierre’s death, either died prematurely (some violently,)
or lived to rue their act in exile, misery, and contempt. Billaud Varennes
and Collot d’Herbois, the two most truculent members of the committee
of public safety, who directed the sanguinary proconsulships in the
provinces, and patronized the party of atheists and terrorists against
Robespierre, were transported to Cayenne by the very men to whose
guilty fears they sacrificed their chief, and died wretchedly, Collot raging
mad, and Billaud, after some years of wandering abroad in abject
poverty, asking, it is said, God’s pardon, for his share in the 9th Ther-
midor. Barrere, the most unprincipled man of the committee, shared
their sentence but escaped through aristocratic patronage and the supple-
ness of his character. He and Vadier died in Brussels, exiles and
outcasts from all parties, Barrere pleading as his excuse for his crime,
that Robespierre wished to establish the “ tyranny of Virtue ” (as
if virtue could be tyrannical) and Vadier reproaching himself with the
one sin of bis life—that of having mistaken in Robespierre—a citizen
for a tyrant. Tallien, after a few years of chequered fortune (during
which he was made prisoner by the English fleet, while sailing with
Bonaparte’s expedition to Egypt, and feted with great eclat by the
Corporation of London, in memory of his having struck the first blow
at the man whose reforms would have extinguished all rotten corpora-
tions on both sides of the Channel, and made the people their masters
instead of their plundered slaves) was ultimately reduced to beggary,
depending for a crust of bread upon the bounty of some miscreants, like
himself, who owed their fortunes to the OthThermidor. It is said that
Tallien, Barrere, and several other conventionalists owed what protection
they enjoyed under the first Bonaparte’s government, to the fact of their
being secret employes or spies of that government, whose policy it was
to subsidize the dangerous men of the mountain, and the agitators of the
Faubourgs as agents for popularizing the new order of things, and coun-
teracting real reformers of the Robespierre school. Legendre—the butcher
—another base conspirator—(one of Danton’s brigand school, but without
Danton’s energy or talent—who insulted Robespierre while he lay mu-
tilated in the ante-room of the committee, and who boasted of having
broken up the Jacobins, and closed their hall)—survived Robespierre
but three or four years, and died an object of contempt to all parties.
Carrier, famous, or rather infamous, for his noyades and massacres at
Nantes; who from the president’s chair on the 9th Thermidor,
called Robespierre “ base andcowardly,” and followed him to the scaffold,
heading a mob crying—“kill him,” “kill him,” was, a few months
later, guillotined for the crimes Robespierre reproached him with, by the


parties who had patronized him against Robespierre, as they had Fouche,
Tallien, Freron, and other terrorists. Several of the mountainists who
from ignorance or design joined the majority against Robespierre on the
9th Thermidor, were guillotined, and some committed suicide—-six of
them at one time and with one blade—to escape a similar fate; while
Amar Jagot, and Robespierre’s other enemies on the committee of
security, lived to be so universally execrated, that they dared not show
themselves in the streets of Paris.
[Note 5.J
The Patricians murdered Romulus with an eye to the lands of the
Veientes, which he wished to share amongst his shepherd-soldiers who
had helped him to conquer them; but which the Patricians appropriated
to themselves after his death. Their manner of apcounting for hia
death is characteristic of the perfidy and hypocricy of aristocrats.
Knowing the plundered soldiers would massacre them, if the secret of
the murder oozed out, more especially the motive of it; they suborned
a smooth-tongued hypocrite of their body (Julius Proculus) to assure
the excited people that he saw in a vision, their glorious chief, carried
off alive to heaven: a divine voice at the same time announcing to him
(Proculus), that he was to be forthwith enrolled amongst the Gods as
the Tutelar Divinity of Rome. This assurance, accompanied with a
grandiloquent prediction of the future greatness of Rome (to flatter
their vanity) had the desired effect on a simple and superstitious people.
It stopped enquiry into the murder, and the Patricians profited by the
occasion to instal, as Romulus’s successor, a saintly priest-king-hypocrite,
who pretended to have nightly conferences with the nymph Egeria, by
whose authority he instituted no end of superstitious rites and obser-
vances, which completely stultified and emasculated the bold and hardy
soldiers of Romulus, while the Patricians were cautiously disarming and
reducing them to slavery. The whole history of landlordism and of
commerce is little else than a record of flagitious murders, and frauds
like this, more or less complex, or disguised, according to the greater or
less gullibility of the people imposed upon. Some 700 years later, the
Patricians tried the same game after their murder of Julius Cmsar.
They pompously voted to him divine honours in a full senate, while they
were voting provinces to, and lavishing honours and places upon, hisassas-
sins. To the credit, however, of Roman intelligence, the trick did not
take as it did in respect of Romulus. Instead of blindly worshiping
the new god manufactured for them by his rapacious slayers, they set fire
to the houses of the conspirators, made the assassins fly the city to
save their lives, and subsequently, with the aid of Caesar’s veterans
(who knew the murderers wanted to despoil them of the lands which
Caesar’s laws had procured for them in Italy and elsewhere, as rewards
for military service), they either killed in battle, drove to suicide, or
otherwise disposed of, every perfidious aristocrat that had shared in the
bloody conspiracy. It is melancholy to reflect what few examples there
are in history of aristocratic guilt thus signally punished. Had the
Conventional traitors who voted Robespierre’s outlawry, (after drowning


his voice to prevent his revelation of their crimes,) been one and all
massacred that very hour, on their benches, by the indignant populace,
the 9th Thermidor, would have been the happiest day that ever dawned
on France, instead of the blackest and most disastrous in her annals.
The murder of Robespierre was virtually the murder of the Republic.
[Note 6.]
Zoroaster must have been one of the most eminent men of the
ancient world, since so many have taken the same name, that like
those of Bacchus, Hercules, and other heroes of legend, the name is
rather generic than special. No one can tell at what particular epoch
he flourished, but his fame stands great in the East to this day, as the
founder of a religious empire, cf which Persia was the nucleus. Many
of his maxims, precepts, and injunctions are still preserved, and they
are almost identical, in letter and spirit, with those of our Saviour on
the same topics. The following are a few out of a great number
handed down by tradition:—
67th.—“ Believers never utter a falsehood, although, through it, they
might attain to worldly eminence.
71st. —“ For fear of open and secret sin, abstain from bad sights and
thoughts; offer up thy grateful thanks to the Lord, the most just and
pure Honnuzd, the supreme and adorable God, who thus declared to his
prophet Lardusht (Zoroaster): Hold it not meet to do unto others
what thou wouldst not have done to thyself; do that unto the people,
which, when done to thyself, proves not disagreeable to thyself.
89th.—“It is incumbent on the professors of the true faith to be
liberal, generous, and munificent; for God hath declared, Paradise is
the abode of the liberal.”
Such are some of the rules prescribed by the religion of Zoroaster.
Sir William Jones’ Asiatic Researches, vol. ii. p. 48—49, says,
alluding to the religious empire of Zoroaster, “ This monarchy must
“ have been the oldest in the world, if we rely on the authorities
“ adduced, which to me appear unexceptionable and satisfactory; it
“ was that which Newton calls the oldest, and it may justly be called
“ the noblest of all religions.—A firm belief that one supreme God made
“ the world by bis power, and governs it by his providence, a pious fear,
“ love and adoration of him—a due reverence for parents and aged
“ persons—a fraternal affection for the whole human species, and a
“ compassionate tenderness for all things that live.—A system so pure
“ and sublime could hardly, among mortals, be of long duration.”
[Note 7.]
The States-General and the Bourgeosie.
While the States’*General was being elected, the middle-class orators
and journals of the day qualified as an enemy of the state, who wanted
to subvert society itself, every enlightened and conscientious man tbat
demanded the recognition, through representation, of the working-
classes in the projected constitution. According to his sister Charlotte,
and to the Autobiography, Robespierre fell under the vengeance of


the bourgeosie of his native city, Arras, for advocating the claims of
the small farmers and of the working-clashes to concur in electing the
delegates to the States’-General. They nearly destroyed his business,
or practice, as a barrister, and would have succeeded even in preventing
his election, but for the immense local popularity he had acquired by
his masterly addresses to the electors and non-electors of Artois—more
especially by his Manifesto: “To the Artoisan nation on the necessity
of reforming the States of Artois.” Robespierre had rendered the
bourgeosie many essential services in former struggles with the noblesse
and higher clergy; but they forgot all, and turned upon him like
bloodhounds for presuming to demand enfranchisement for the small
husbandmen, artisans, and labourers. The Eistoire Parlimentaire
thus describes the conduct of the Bourgeosie after the States met:—
“ After the 14th of July, there were seen to appear two peoples in the
Tiers Etat. The bourgeosie sought to constitute itsblf the governing
class. Then arose that system which the democratic writers of 1789
termed the despotisme bourgeois. This class enthroned itself in the
municipalities and in the districts;. and in addition to absorbing all the
parliamentary powers of the state, sought to clothe itself with the ex-
clusive privilege of being armed, by constituting itself, exclusively, the
whole of the national guards. We shall see it, at Paris, endeavour
to close the popular clubs; next try to silence and crush the press,
(except the portion devoted to itself), when it became hostile to its
pretensions. We shall see it again at a later period, openly protect the
privileges ursurped by the bourgeosie, and imperiously set aside the
claims and rights of the salaries , or working-classes. But with all
its affected fear of mob-violence, whenever the nobility or clergy
attempt to reclaim what the bourgeosie had stripped them of, we
shall find these same bourgeois as fierce as on the first day of the revo-
lution, and invoking against them the violence of the multitude.”
Eistoire de la Revolution Francaise. Preface , Vol. ii., page 2. It
appears from other passages of this great work, that all Robespierre’s
speeches during the first three months’ sittings of the States’-General,
were suppressed by the newspapers—all being at that epoch in the
hands of the Christ-crucifying middle-classes. It was only after the
taking of the Bastile in July, 1789, that a few popular newspapers
began to appear, and then we begin to find extracts of Robespierre’s
speeches. A true history of the revolution, giving in detail the crimes
of the commercial middle-class, with suitable reflections, would be the
most valuable work ever published. It would make the nations of the
earth resolve to perish, to a man, rather than suffer a middle-class
vampire in any country to have more rights, or influence, than an honest
man, who earns his bread by useful industry, and does not live by
swindling others out of their substance, as do landlords, profit-mongers,
usurers, and mercantile speculators, of every kind and denomination.
[Note 7a.]
The great majority of the Convention was composed of men who
had been members of the Legislative, or of the Constituent, its pre-


decessors. The new members were, however, no better than the old
In many respects they were worse—more ravenons—more sanguinary
—less under restraint of honour or conscience, because more immediately
connected with, or dependant on, the base middle-classes. Neither the
Constituent, nor the Legislative, with all their iniquities, turned up
such thorough-going miscreants as Fouch£, Tallien, Collot d’Herbois,
Billaud Varrennes, Carrier, and others of a similar stamp, who did the
bloody work of the Convention. The best criterion of this latter assembly
is its choice of men for the committees of Government, and for commis-
sioners to the departments, whom it clothed, on mission, with its own
plenipotentiary powers of life and death, over the districts they visited.
With the exception of Robespierre, Couthon, St Just, and a few of their
friends whom it appointed only to accredit and popularize its rule with
the oppressed classes, the rest were an infamous banditti—whom it after-
wards employed to murder Robespierre, and to decimate the democratic
party, as it had previously empowered them to decimate the aristocracy
and the royalists. The revelations of Senard (one of the agents of
Vadier Barrere, Billaud, & Co.) and the memoirs of the ex-juryman,
Villate, throw much light on the interior workings of the Committees,
—See also Histoire Parliameniaire , vols. 33 and 34, passim.
[Note B.]
Landlords and Profit-mongers.
All slavery in all countries called civilized,—is the work of landlords
and profit-mongers. These two classes, which have no right to form an
integral portion of society at all—have everywhere made themselves
masters of society, and are everywhere in a state of permanent conspiracy
against the rest of the community—allowing no man to hold his proper
rank or position in the world unless he makes common cause with them
in keeping the poor and the labouring class in ignorance, poverty, and
slavery. There is no age nor country in which they have not shown
themselves murderers, or assassins, the moment any large section of the
public began to see through their system of self-licensed rapine. They
have invariably either murdered the leaders and teachers of the creed
which menaced their usurpations, or else got up sham wars with neigh-
bouring states, (the belligerents being co-conspirators) under colour of
which, they procured the intervention of foreign arms in aid of their
own, to crush the new creed and its abettors before they had time to
take root. No one nation on earth has, up to the present time, been
permitted to learn, much less establish honest laws on land, credit,
currency, and exchange, so as to secure its permanent freedom and
happiness; owing to malignant combinations of these two classes, which
seem to exist for no other purpose than to keep the human race in eternal
chains and misery. Although Robespierre and his party were ostensibly
murdered by the Convention, it was the landlords and profit-mongers of
France that were really and substantially his murderers in chief—for, it
was in their interest the Convention murdered him r-well knowing
beforehand, that these classes wished for his death, in order to eject the


working-classes from the Constitution, and re-seize the whole powers of
the state for themselves, as they had done under the Constituent, The
9th Thermidor was as much a coup d ’ etat, as Louis Napoleon’s 2nd
December—and both for the same classes—for landlords and profit-
mongers, who never yet submitted to any laws not made exclusively by
themselves, or for themselves, at the cost of slavery to the masses. Real
liberty will never exist in the world, until these two murderous classes
are made to disappear from society under the operation of just laws on
land, credit, currency, and exchange. It is to such laws that Robespierre
points in articles 6,7, 8, and 9of his “ Declaration of Rights ”: and,
it is to their operation upon society he points in that magnificent passage
I have quoted from bis report of Nivose, An //., the parallel of which was
never before uttered by statesman. It was these articles and his speeches
at the jacobin club, (showing Robespierre’s determination, if he got the
power, property on a proper basis) thatdetermine'd the landlords and
profit-mongers of France to murder him the moment the state of parties
and divisions of the people gave them the chance of doing so with safety
to themselves. It is idle to attribute the evils of society to any other source,
but the ascendancy of these too accursed classes ; for, no other component
parts of society have any interest in oppressing mankind, or in debasing
humanity. Examine the other constituents of society, and you find
them all to be naturally friends and benefactors of their fellow creatures,
and their callings to be essential to the public welfare. All truly Chris-
tian ministers give full value for what they get:—so do physicians and
surgeons—so do engineers, architects, builders, draughtsmen, designers,
artists of every kind, sculptors, miniature and portrait painters, musicians,
composers, mechanics, and artisans of every description, whether en-
gaged on works of usefulness or ornament, professors and teachers
of science and helles lettres, more especially the higher class of scientific
men, to whom we owe inventions and discoveries, and the higher class
of philosophers, poets, historians, and critics, to whom we owe taste,
refinement, and a thousand sources of quiet enjoyment. In short every
man that contributes, either by the labour of his brain or of his hands,
to the wealth and enjoyments of society, is a valuable member of it, and
cannot possibly have an interest in keeping his fellow creatures in
ignorance and bondage. In virtue of their callings, they, and all other
persons employed in art and education, as in production, and distribution,
are naturally interested in just and good government, and in seeing
equal rights and equal laws exist for all. But not so, landlords and
profit-mongers. Their class-interests are diametrically opposed to the
well-being, independence, and happiness of society, of which they have
not a right even to form an integral part. We cannot do without
Christian pastors, physicians, engineers, architects, builders, professors,
artists, and able men devoted to the sciences, without relapsing into
barbarism, and savagery. But where is the earthly use of a landlord,
as a landlord?—of a profit-monger, as a profit-monger? All the
ingenuity in the world could not point out any legitimate use for these
classes. What functions do they perform that could not be better
performed without them than with them, and at less than a hundredth


part of the cost?—What business have they in society at all?—They
have no lawful business whatever. They are no more a necessary part of
the body politic, than are wens, tumours, or ulcers, necessary parts of
the natural human body. Their presence in it is only a proof of the
diseased state of the body politic; just as the presence of the others
attests an impure state of the blood, or functional disorganization.
Tlfey have no more legitimate right to obtrude themselves on society,
than a wolf or a tiger has to join and make one of a Christmas party.
They exist only for the impoverishment, corruption, enslavement, and
destruction of the human race. They are the sole authors of all the
calamities known to social existence; and the history of our race is little
else than a harrowing record of their wars, plots, conspiracies, inva-
sions, massacres, famines, conflagrations, and atrocities of every sort,
tofblot the image of God out of man, in order to turn him into a beast
of burden, or beast of prey, for their own use. It is only by just laws on
property B that the human race can be delivered from these two hellish
classes; and all reform is a farce which points not to that paramount
object.
REVOLUTION IN FRANCE,
ILLUSTRATED BY REFORM IN ENGLAND.
[From my “Life of Robespierre.”]
Fancy to yourself three hundred nobles and three hundred priests
(representing hardly one in a thousand of the population, and all, or
nearly all, actuated by the sole desire to secure a monopoly of govern-
ment to their own privileged orders); fancy these six hundred harpies
met in conclave with six hundred other harpies still more greedy of
power and plunder than themselves (in as much as their appetites had
been sharpened by long fasting); fancy the former six hundred labour-
ing to preserve to their respective orders the plunder they had already
got, and the latter six hnndred (those representing the Tiers Etat ,)
labouring to take it from them, or, at least, to go shares with them for
the general spoil;—then fancy to yourself the former band of harpies
affecting to consecrate their spoliations by hypocritical appeals to
“ order” u divine right” “ interests of religion &e.; while the latter
and greedier band worked for precisely similar ends, in the no less,
sacred names of a liberty f “ constitution “ rights of man” &c.
Let the reader just fancy to himself twelve hundred fellows of this
description meeting together to frame a constitution, and then except
from the number about a dozen, or perhaps a score, of conscientious
individuals, who refused to make common cause with the rest, on the
ground that legislation ought to be for the whole , not for a part, and
that the interests of justice and humanity were paramount to those of


faction and robbery—let the reader, I say, only picture to himself such
an assembly as I have just described, and he will then, I venture to
say, have a clearer idea of what the States-General really was, and of
the sort of Constitution it was capable of making, than he can possibly
derive from all the romances, called histories, that have hitherto
appeared on the subject. To extract measures of positive national
advantage from such a body was no more possible than it would
been to extract similar measures from one ot our own old rotten-borough
parliaments. The utmost that could be expected from it was a prudent
distribution of power and plunder between the middle orders, on the one
hand, and the territorial aristocracy and clergy on the other. The
Tiers Etat , which represented the middle orders, sought precisely such
organic changes (and for the like purposes,) as the “ Reform Act ” of
1831 effected for the middle classes of this country, whilst the noblesse
and clergy occupied the same relative position towards the then French
people which our boroughmongers stood in towards the British and Irish
people in 1830-1. The boroughmongers’ possessions being, for the
most part, real estate, or territorial property, they wished, like their
prototypes the French noblesse and clergy, to exclude from political
power the owners of mere personal estate, as well as those who had no
property at all. The dread of innovation, inspired by the first French
revolution, had enabled the boroughmongers to do this up to the period
of the second French revolution, (in 1830); but after the “three
glorious days ” a change of some sort became inevitable. The immense
increase of our commercial capital during the thirty or forty preceding
years, especially during the war, had given to the monied interests a
decided preponderance, in point of wealth, over the landed aristocracy.
It was therefore impossible to exclude these parties from political
power a moment longer than they chose to exclude themselves. Up to
1830, they bad chosen to exclude themselves, partly because their
wealth gave them an indirect power over parliament, which besides the
advantage of being secret and irresponsible, was almost equivalent in
effect to a direct power; but chiefly because their dread of innovation
was greater than their ambition to rule . Gladly enough would they
have broken up the boroughmongers’ monopoly forty years before, could
they have done so without the risk of having the proletarians or working
classes enfranchised along with themselves. But there was the rub I
The example of the French Revolution had taught them how difficult
it is to keep down the democratic spirit in times of innovation. In
1789, 1790, 1791, and during a part 1792, the French Revolution was
decidedly popular amongst the middle classes of England. A large
party was favourable to it in the House of Commons. The political
societies established in London, Manchester, Sheffield, &c., had pretty
nearly the same objects in view as had the Jacobin Club of Paris in its
early days ; while the immense circulation of Paine’s Rights of Man
furnishes additional evidence that the labours of the States-General or
Constituent Assembly were regarded by our middle classes of that
epoch with favour, if not with admiration. As long as the revolution
had promised to emancipate only the middle orders of France, so long,


I repeat, was that revolution popular in England. But no sooner was
the Bourgeois Constitution of 17111 set aside, and the republic pro-
claimed in 1792, than the tide of the middle-class opinion began to set
in against the revolution. The overthrow of the French monarchy on
the 10th of August, 1792—the meeting of the Convention in the
mouth following—and above all, the decreeing of the Democratic
Constitution of 1793, put an end to all sympathy, in this country, with
the French revolutionary party, and at the same time put an ex-
tinguisher upon parliamentary reform at home. From that epoch up
to 1830, our middle orders could never muster courage enough to
demand even a partial reform of the legislature, lest the extention of
political power to themselves might involve the enfranchisement of the
working classes. To this cause, and to this alone, are we to ascribe
the long submission of our commercial aristocracy to the borough-
mongers’ monopoly. It was their base, cowardly, selfish dread of
justice being done to the productive classes. After 1830, however,
such submission was no longer compatible with either their own safety,
or that of their accomplices, and quasi- rivals, the boronghmongers.
Without entering into the Corn Laws, Catholic Emancipation, and a
variety of other subordinate causes, there were two principal ones which
then rendered an organic change inevitable. These were Peel’s Currency
Act, and the Parisian Revolution of 1830. The less opulent or shifty
part of the middle classes had suffered so grievously from the apprecia-
tion of the Currency, and the people in genera) were so excited by the
example of the “ three glorious days,” that rather than have no reform
at all, the former were determined to join the latter in a strike for
universal suffrage. The boronghmongers had therefore only two courses
to choose between —either to divide their privilege of robbing and en-
enslaving the nation with the middle orders, or, by resisting all change,
to risk a radical revolution which would stop the robbery altogether. It
was an awkward alternative, but the boroughmongers were too wise in
their generation to hesitate long. “ Half a loaf,” said they, “is better
than no breadso they decided to make a liberal compromise with the
middle classes. In other words, they agreed to divide their usurped
monopoly with the latter, by admitting them as joint-proprietors or
partners, into the grand Bill-Broking Concern at Westminster. The
“ Reform ” Act was the deed of partnership, and from the date of its
execution, the profits of the concern were thenceforward (after a liberal
allowance to the managing trustees,) to be divided between the two
classes of shareholders, (the old and the new,) according to their
respective capabilities of taking care of themselves. To ensure the
stability of the house, it was stipulated that on no account should the
proprietary be enlarged by the admission of partners from the class out
of whose labours all the profits are derived. In respect of these the
instrument or deed was to be “ a final measure.” To preserve a friendly
feeling between the old proprietors and the new, it was further stipulated
that the profits of the Corn-Law robbery were to remain where they
were,.that is to say, with the old proprietors; in return for which, the
latter were to guarantee to the new partners the inviolability of “ public


credit/’ with its thirty millions of annual tax on the country. This
agreement was to prevent unseemly collisions between the parties, which
might endanger the firm; for a house divided against itself cannot stand.
And lest the profits of the concern, vast and incalculable as they were,
might be found insufficient to satiate the double rapacity of the new
•omers and the old, it was secretly arranged that the vested interests of
the poor should be confiscated: alias, their right to parochial relief taken
4way. By this arrangement, which has since been carried into partial
effect, it was calculated that the annual profits or plunder (the words
are synonymous,) of the shareholders would be augmented by a direct
gain of, at least, three millions out of the poor’s rates, and by an indirect
gain of, at least, ten times that amount out of workmen’s wages. The
calculation was this.—Our new workhouse system —said they, will
enable all tyrant capitalists to say to all working slaves, “ Henceforth
you shall not fix a price upon your labour; you must allow your wages
to be regulated by your hunger , and by the consciences of your employers .”
That point gained, the entire produce of the country will be our own,
save and except whatever offals and hogwash may be required to keep
the producers in working order. Such was the ultimate effect intended
by the new arrangement. Hitherto it has been but cautiously and
partially acted upon, for the self-chartered robbers fear to lose all in a
too hasty attempt to grasp too much; but, what with time and the
broken-down spirit of the country, there is every probability that they
will succeed, unless a radical revolution should, in the meantime, break
forth to sweep the whole cannibal crew to perdition. At any rate, the
arrangement in question has raised the managing trustees into high
credit with the shareholders in general, who regard it as a master-stroke
of business . There were many other stipulations of a similar tendency
entered into by the contracting parties, all in the true spirit of the “ bill,
the whole bill, and nothing but the bill;” but, besides that a volume
would not contain the whole, it is unnecessary to repeat them here.
Enough has been said to elucidate a measure which only the superlative
impudence of its concocters, presuming upon the superlative folly of the
people, could have dared to call an “ Act to amend the Representation
of England and Wales, &c. The “ reform act ” !—it is a monstrous
perversion of our language. It was neither more or less than a foul and
felonious conspiracy between our land-usurpers and money-jobbers to
perpetuate their own power of plundering and enslaving the nation with
impunity. A reform act I —it was an act of treason towards the
sovereign people, for which its authors and instigators deserved to suffer
death on the scaffold a thousand times more than ever did w/etched
paupers deserve to die of water-gruel and a broken heart in a liberal
workhouse.


DECLARATION
OF THE
RIGHTS OF MAN AND THE CITIZEN.
BY
MAXIMILIAN ROBESPIERRE.
The representatives of the French people, assembled as a National
Convention, acknowledge that all human laws which do not emanate
from the eternal laws of justice, are but criminal outrages of ignorance
and despotism against humanity! and convinced that the forgetfulnesa
and contempt of the natural rights of man are the sole causes of the
crimes and calamities of the world, have resolved to lay open, in a
solemn declaration, those sacred and inalienable rights ,• to the end, that
all citizens being always able to compare the act of the Government
with the design of all social institutions, may never suffer themselves
to' be oppressed and degraded by tyranny ; and that the people may
have perpetually before its eyes the bases of its liberty and happiness
—the magistrate, the rule of his duties—and the legislator, the object
of his mission—in consequence, the National Convention proclaims, in'
presence of the universe, and of the Supreme Legislator of the World,
the following Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen: —■
Art. 1. The end of all political associations is the maintenance of the
natural and imprescriptible rights of man, and the development of all
his faculties.
Art. 2. The principle rights of man are those of providing for the
preservation of his existence and liberty.
Art. 3. These rights ’belong to all men equally, whatever difference-
may be in their physical and moral force. Equality of rights is esta-
blished by Nature. Society, so far from invading it, constitutes its
security against the abuse of force, which would render it illusory.
Art. 4. Liberty is the power which belongs to a man of exercising all
his faculties at pleasure. It has justice for its rule, the rights of others
for its boundaries, nature for its origin, and the law for its safeguard.
Art. 5. The right of peaceably assembling—of manifesting opinions,
whether through the press, or by any other means—are so necessary
consequences of the principles of man’s liberty, that the necessity of
declaring them supposes either the presence or the recent remembrance
of despotism.


Art. G. Property is the right which each citizen has to enjoy and to
dispose of, at his pleasure, the portion of fortune or wealth that is
guaranteed to him by the law.
Art. 7. The right of property is limited, like all other rights, by the
obligation to respect the rights of others.
Art. 8. It can prejudice neither the safety, nor the liberty, nor the
existence, nor the property of our fellow-citizens.
Art. 9. All traffic that violates this principle is essentially illicit and
immoral.
Art. 10. Society is under obligation to provide subsistence for all its
members, either by procuring employment for them, or by ensuring the
means of existence to those that are incapable of labour.
Art. 11. The relief indispensible to those that are in want of neces-
saries is a debt due by the possessors of superfluities. It belongs to
the law to determine the manner in which tha debt should be
discharged.
Art. 12. Citizens, whose incomes do not exceed what is necessary
to their subsistence, are dispensed from contributing to the public
expenditure. The rest ought to contribute progressively , according to
the extent of their fortunes.
Art. 13. Society ought to favour, with all its power, the progress of
public reason, and place instruction within the reach of every citizen.
Art. 14. The people is the sovereign ; Government is its work and
its property; the public functionaries are its agents and officers; the
people may, when it pleases, revoke its mandatories.
Art. 15. The law is the free and solemn expression of the people’s
will.
Art. 16. The law ought to be equal for all.
Art. 17. The law can forbid only what is hurtful to society; it can
prescribe only what is useful.
Art. 18. Every law that violates the imprescriptible rights of man
is essentially unjust and tyrannical; it is no law at all.
Art. 19. In every free state the law ought, above all, to defend
public and individual liberty against the authority of those that-
govern. Every institution that does not suppose the people good, and
the magistrate corruptible, is vicious.
Art. 20. Nodari of the people can exercise the power of the whole
people ; but the wish it expresses ought to be respected, as a wish of
part of the people, which is to concur in forming the general will.
Each section of the sovereign • assembly ought to enjoy the right of
expressing its will with perfect liberty; it is essentially independent of
all constituted authorities, and competent to regulate its own policy
and deliberations.
Art. 21, All the citizens are equally admissible to all public
functions, without any other distinctions than those of virtue and
talents —without any other title than the confidence of the people.
Art. 22. All the citizens have an equal right to concur in the nomi-
nation of the delegates of the people, and in the formation of the law.
Art. 23. In order that these rights be not illusory, and rendered


chimerical, society ought to pay the public functionaries, and to provide
that the citizens who live by their labour may be able to assist at the
public assemblies to which the law calls them, without compromising
their means of existence, or that of their families.
Art. 24. Every citizen ought religiously to obey the magistrates and
agents of the Government, whilst they are the organs and executors of
the law.
Art. 25. But every act against the liberty, the safety, or against the
property of man, by whomsoever exercised, even in the name of the law
itself, if not comprehended within the cases determined by the law, and
within the forms it prescribes —every such act is arbitrary and nulL
The very respect dne to the law forbids submission to it, and if the
attempt be made to execute such act by violence, it is permitted to
repel force by force.
Art. 26. The right of presenting petitions to the depositaries of
public authority belongs to every individual. Those to whom they are
addressed ought to determine upon the points which constitute the
object of them; but they can never either interdict, or restrict, or
condemn the exercise of the right.
Art 27. Resistance to oppression is the consequence of the other
rights of man and of the citizen.
Art. 28. There is oppression against the social body whenever one
alone of its members is oppressed. There is oppression against every
member of it when the social body is oppressed.
Art. 29. When the Government violates the rights of the people,
insurrection is for the people, and for every portion of the people, the
most sacred of rights, and the most indispensable of duties.
Art. 30. When the social guarantee or compact fails to protect a
citizen, he resumes his natural right to defend personally all his rights.
Art. 31. In either of the two preceding cases, to subject to legal
forms the resistance to oppression, is the last refinement of tyranny.
Art. 32. Public functions cannot be considered as distinctions, nor
as recompenses, but as public duties.
Art. 33. The crimes of the delegates of the people ought to be
severely and promply punished. No one has the right of pretending
that he is more inviolable than other citizens.
Art. 34. The people has the right to know all the operations of its
delegates. It is the duty of the latter to render to the people a faithful
account of their behaviour, and to submit to its judgment with respect.
Art. 35. Men of all countries are brothers, and the people of each
ought to yield one another mutual aid, according to their ability, like
citizens of the same state.
Art. 36. He who oppresses one nation alone is the declared enemy
of all.
Art. 37. Those who make war on a people, to arrest the progress of
liberty, and to annihilate the rights of man, ought to be pursued every-
where, not as ordinary persons, but as assassins and brigand rebels.
Art 38. Kings, aristocrats, and tyrants of every description, are
slaves in revolt against the sovereign of the earth, which is the human
o


race, and against the legislator of the universe, which is Nature.—
O'Briens Translation of Buonarroiti’s History of Baboeufs Conspiracy
for Equality .
[From Robespierre’s Report , 18 th Pluviose.—An. 11.]
“ We desire an order of things, in which all the mean and cruel
passions shall be chained down ; all the beneficent and generous passions
awakened by the laws; in which ambition shall consist in the desire of
meriting glory and serving our country; in which distinctions shall
spring bat from equality itself; in which the citizen shall be subject to
the magistrate, the magistrate to the people, and the people to the
justice; in which the country shall ensure the prosperity of every
individual, and in which each individual shall enjoy, with pride, the
prosperity and glory of his country; in which every soul shall be
aggrandised by the continual intercommunication of .republican senti-
ments, and by the wish to merit the esteem of a great people; in which
the arts shall flourish as the decorations of the liberty that ennobles
them; and in which commerce will be a source of public riches, and not
of monstrous opulence to a few great houses only.”
“We desire to substitute in our country morality for egoism, probity for
honor, principles for usages, duties for conventionalities, the empire of rea-
son for the tyranny of fashion, contemptof vlceforcontemptof misfortune,
manly pride for insolence, greatness of soul for vanity, love of glory for
love of money, honesty for respectability, good people for good society,
merit for intrigue, genius for wit, truth for display, the charms of
happiness for the ennui of pleasure, the greatness of man for the littleness
of the great, a people magnanimous, powerful, and happy, for a people
amiable, frivolous, and miserable; in a word, we desire to substitute all
the virtues and all the miracles of the Republic for all the vices and all
the ridiculous fopperies of the Monarchy. We desire, in short, to fulfil
the vows of nature, to accomplish the destinies of humanity, to absolve
Providence from the long reign of crime and tyranny—that France,
heretofore illustrious amongst enslaved countries, may, by eclipsing all
the free states that ever existed, become a model for nations, the terror
of oppressors, the consolation of the oppressed, the ornament of the
world—and that, in sealing our work with our blood, we may, at least,
witness the breaking dawn of universal felicity.”— Robespierre.
“ What constitutes a Republic is neither the pomp of denominations,
nor victory, nor riches, nor transitory enthusiasm; it is the wisdom of
the laws, and, above all, probity of manners—it is the purity and stability
of the maxims of Government.”'— Robespierre.
41 The wealth of the country is in the hands of a great number of the
enemies of the revolution ; their wants place the labouring people in a
state of dependence on their enemies. Do you conceive that an empire
can exist, if its social and civil relations shall depend on those opposed
to its form of Government? They that make but half-Eevolutions only-
dig a tomb for themselves. The Revolution conducts ns to recognise
this principle, that whoever has shown himself the enemy of his country
can hold no property in it. We want still some master-strokes of genius
to save us.*'—;
‘St. Just {Robespierre's friend.)


ODE
TO
LOUIS NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.
BY
JAMES BRONTEEJKE O’BRIEN.
I.
Imperial puppet!—idol of an hour!
Drunk with the fumes of blood-begotten power;
Whose dungeons, scaifolds, and whose wars devour
Fair France’s manhood in its prime and flower;
Though millions at thy shrine now incense shower,
Not the less certain does that tempest lower,
At whose outburst thy craven head will cower,
And thou seek refuge in some fort or tower,
While Turks shall scoff and curse the fall’n “ Giaour ! ”
And Eugenie quit France without her dower.
11.
Yea!—the handwriting on the wall appears,
To scathe thy guilty soul with conscious fears.
Despite thy mouchards and thy cuirassiers.
In vain thy satellites would drown, by cheers,
The mother’s curse, the widow’s shrieks and tears,
Which, ever and anon, must greet thy ears,
’Till the blind Fury, with th’ abhorred sheers,
Is signalled to cut short thy crimeful years,
When thou wilt fall amid a nation’s jeers,
Thy limbs paraded upon pikes or spears !
111.
Pretend not, tyrant, England takes thy part;
Nor feels for those thy rod makes writhe and smart.
England’s base Gov’rnment is not England’s heart.


England abhors thy every act and art.
There’s not a nation on the world’s wide chart,
That sooner, as tyrannicides, would start,
To launch at thee the law’s avenging dart,
Or drag thee to a scaffold on a cart, —
For, none knows better what a fiend thou art.
Usurper! traitor! despot! Thug! upstart!
IV.
Talk not to us of “ allies ” and “ free nations ”
Names which but mask marauders in high stations —■
The lords of acres, gold, and Bourse—“ quptations,”
Proud squires and priests, and glutt’nous corporations,
Who thrive, like thee and thine, on usurpations;
Who eat up industry by spoliations,
Turn farms and vineyards into desolations,
And fill the world with sorrows and privations !
’Twixt them and us, we know, th’ exact relations—
Are those ’twixt wolves and sheep in new plantations,
Exposed to day and midnight depredations.
Thy “ allies ” are these old Abominations,
Whose law is bayonets, hulks, and transportations,
For all who thwart their plund'ring calculations,
Made to subserve their carnal inclinations,
Who get up wars as business-speculations,
Who read of battle-fields as recreations,
Who trade in blood, loans, debts, and defalcations,
State-stocks, embezzlements, and malversations,
Invasions, panics, famines, devastations,
Bombardments, massacres, and conflagrations,
With razzias, capturings, and confiscations,
And such black deeds as end with annexations :
Even Satan’s, thine, and Palmerston’s creations —
Fit objects of the world’s just execrations.
V.
As well might tumours on the head or nose,
Or ulcers on the legs, the hands, or toes,
Be call’d the limbs whereon the infection grows,
And whose bad blood they serve but to disclose ;


As well a running sore might we suppose
To be, itself, the body whence it flows,
And whose impurity it only shows,
As dub those Thugs “ the State ” who cause it woes.
Of God and man—of heaven and earth—the foes.
Thou, Bonaparte ! art head and front of those!
Their and thy crimes the world but too well knows.
Fame still divulges them wheree’er she goes,
France now attests them by her pangs and throes ;
But soon she’ll make them know by counter-blows,
Which, with God’s help, thy reign of blood shall close.
VI.
What Can thy boasted worth for France avail,
But to proscribe in mass, and in detail,
Worth born of ruin to the Commonweal,
Pearls, to fetch high prices seldom fail;
Hence, divers dive for them in coats of mail,
’Mid monster sharks that make the boldest quail;
Yet pearls are but diseases which assail,
And kill the oyster in its bi-valve jail;
Likewise, is ambergris high-priced for sale,
Though born of sickness in the South Sea whale,
Whose stomachs belch it forth when rank and stale.
Just so, the foul corruptions, which exhale
From putrid vice, make pests like thee prevail,
Whose life is death to all within thy pale,
Whose power is hail’d by all, who Satan hail,
That crime may rule, and honest worth bewail,
The reign of sin o’er human nature frail.
VII.
Thy monstrous claims the world with scorn denies;
England and France abjure thy impious lies.
Freedom, they know, is too sublime a prize
To be exchanged for dungeons, gags, and spies.
Hence shall both nations in their wrath arise,
(Provoked by virtue’s wrongs and orphans’ cries !)
To claim from Destiny thy prompt demise.
Woe, then, to senators that vote supplies
In aid of him who now heav’n’s law defies !


Woe to state-knaves who fain to idolize
The wretch whom, in their hearts, they must despise !
Even Palmerston will “ cut ” thee, if he’s wise.
Or hath the fear of God before his eyes—
Else, surely he’ll repent before he dies,
And lose his head, if your’s to save he tries.
VIII.
Though kings and slaughtering hordes thy empire own ;
Though bourgeois cringe to thee, in courtier tone,
With those mean arts to which their nature’s prone ;
Though millions still beneath thy sceptre groan,
Whom thou hast made the prey of knave and drone,
’Till thousands are reduced to skin and bone ;
Though heaven’s choice Spirits mourn in silence lone,
Whose only safety is to be unknown, —
For, their’s were treason, even to vent a moan.
Yet shall thy tide of fortune soon have flown,
Thy bastard dynasty be overthrown,
Thy forts and palaces in air be blown,
Thy scaffold raised beside thy blood-stained throne ;
So surely shalt thou reap as thou hast sown !
IX.
Not all thy legions, be they e’er so brave;
Not all thy allied fleets, that ride the wave ;
Not all the treasures fortune ever gave;
Nor all the gold thy parasites still crave ;
Not all the jesuit-wiles of thy conclave ;
Not all the force and fraud on earth will save,
From retribution just, the perjur’d knave,
Who first betray’d, and then made France'a slave.
Thy doom is fixed!—that doom a traitor’s grave;
It boots not, how, as Emperor, thou behave.
X.
And, oh ! when France shall rise at heaven’s command,
To sweep from power and place thy murd’rous band,
May her new chiefs be men who shall have plann’d
Just laws on Credit, Currency, and Land—


For fair exchange of wealth from hand to hand !
By such laws only can republics stand;
Without them, they are only ropes of sand.
By such laws only, as by magic wand,
Shall revolution’s gulf at once be spann’d,
The vessel of the state be ably mann’d,
The human soul to its full growth expand,
And the whole earth be made one “ Promis’d land.”
XI.
Then, but not sooner, will all sorrows end ;
Then shall we find in every man a friend;
Then will none fret, nor sigh for times to mend,
Since all may earn as much as they can spend;
No wretch to borrow, and no knave to lend,
For, even the poor will have their dividend.
In short, these social laws directly tend
Christ’s rule with man’s harmoniously to blend,
As God vouchsaf’d, when Jesus he did send,
In form of flesh, or thoughts t’vvards heaven to bend.
XII.
Oh, Bonaparte! you once confessed these laws ;
Yea, and wrote pamphlets, too, with some applause,
To prove yourself the friend of labour’s cause!
How durst you now, without remorse, or pause,
Treat all who preach such doctrine as outlaws,
Seal up their presses, and padlock their jaws,
Or shoot them down, as hoys shoot down jackdaws ?
Why have you fixed your Eagle’s beak and claws
On all who scorn’d to be your vile cat’s-paws ?—■
To clutch a crown bedizen’d with gewgaws,
To which your title is not worth three straws ;
That you, and your’s. might fill your rav’nous maws,
With the rank fruits of bloody coup d'eiats,
New codes of death without one saving clause!
XIII.
Wretch! ’tis high time thy peace with God to make,
Who yet thy soul may spare for Jesus’ sake.


Though robber, murd’rer, debauchee, and rake.
Oh ! to self-consciousness at last awake,
And mercy crave, ere justice overtake.
Let thy dark soul before His judgments quake ;
Let fear of hell thy sternest purpose shake ;
Thy thirst for power with thy own blood now slake ;
Its course let Justice on thy person take.
Give up that life thou did’st for empire stake,
And die at once for heaven’s and France’s sake.
Down, wretch ! this moment on thy bended knee,
And wait, in prayer, the hour of Fate’s decree.
F.S.
I hear thy Empress, “ Eugenie the fair,”
Has brought thee what thou call’st thy son and heir;
He may be thine, though that makes some folk stare,
Who know thy constitution’s wear and tear ;
But thine or not—that’s neither here nor there —
The thought which most should occupy thy care,
(If thy own fate thy offspring thou wouldst spare ;
If thou would’st guarantee his true welfare,
And the misfortune of his birth repair) ;
Is so to bring him up that he’ll beware
Of coup d’etats, and royalty’s false glare,
“ Save him from these”, should be thy constant pray’r,
Thy throne, as well as crimes he must forswear,
Or, else, thy doom is his, the fates declare,
Henceforth, all would-be monarchs of thy stock,
Must look, for their reversion, to the block.
March 31st, 1856.


O’BRIEN’S
SERMON
ON THE
DAY OF THE PUBLIC FAST AND HUMILIATION FOK
ENGLAND'S DISASTERS IN THE CRIMEA.
Dearly Beloved, you have heard, of late
How dire reverses have befall’n the State,
And that our Sov’reign, mindful of her station,
Has fixed this day, for fast! —humiliation !
Our Bishops, too, to soothe her royal care,
Have just prepar’d a godly form of pray’r,
Wherewith to-day, exactly at eleven,
They all besieg’d, for grace, the throne of heav’n ;
Our Lords and Commons have confirm’d the Act,
And made the pious fiction a “ great fact.”
Well, consid’ring how these great ones rule us,
How oft they starve, and how they always fool us,
’Twere surely right that such transcendant sinners,
Should go, at least one day, without their dinners;
But will they ? No ! despite of church and steeple,
They’ll do it not —but they will do the people!
Their sav’ry meals will reach them in due stages,
While workmen they’ll make fast for lack of wages;
Or stint their children’s bread to meagre slices,
And even for that, exact confounded prices.
Alas ! we’re fallen upon evil times,
When poor folk must needs fast for rich men’s crimes,
For, surely, friends, it is no fault of our’s,
That war has broken out amongst the Powers,
You did not make our treaties, creeds, nor laws,
Our wars—nor the calamities they cause;


You did not send huge ships, like Himelaya, '(
With stores of death, to ravage the Crimea, V
’Mid scenes of carnage, flames, and Diarrhoea ; )
You did not work our troops to death in trenches,
Nor poison them with Balaclava stenches;
You did not leave them without huts or clothes,
To die of frost-bites, chills, and pelting snows;
You did not slaughter Englishman and Turk,
With rations of green coffee and raw pork,
Nor torture them with regimental rules,
Whilst forc’d to drudge, like Commissariat mules,
In dragging shot through miles of putrid mud,
Bestrewn with carcasses in pools of blood!
Nor did you those unhallow’d contracts form,
Which gave our fleets to pestilence and storm :
In short you’re innocent, from first to last,
Of those misdeeds for which you’re bid to fast—
Misdeeds, which swept into unhonor’d graves,
Full forty out of sixty-thousand braves.
These are your rulers’ sins, as I have shown,
But, now, let me inform you of your own :
A wise, great man, said, once upon a time,
“ They who permit oppression share the crime,”
For kings, whate’er bad passions might beset them,
Could not oppress, did not their subjects let them ;
Freedom and right are only for the Braves,
Passive obedience is the curse of slaves.
Now that’s the people’s sin ! —your sin of sins!
Which makes you always lose, whoever wins:
A suicidal sin—the worst of any ;
To be aton’d—not by one fast, but many;
Yea, your besetting sin, for, while it lasts,
God wills your life shall be a life of fasts.
Of that sin, then, I pray you let me urge ye,
If ye would save yourselves, at once to purge ye,
Grovel no longer in the mire, like hogs,
Fling flunkeyism, like physic, to the dogs,
Withdraw your hearts, your trust, and your allegiance,
From all that dare enforce a blind obedience;


Probe to their source the cause of your afflictions,
Resent your wrongs and rulers’ derelictions, I
Insist your rights shall be no longer fictions; v
Think for yourselves, and act on your convictions ; )
Then will that justice, which is everlasting,
Exchange the poor man’s, for the rich man’s, fasting.
God will, thenceforward, manifest his love,
And give you plenty here, and heav’n above.


REVIEWS
A Vision of Hell, or, Peep into the Realms Below, alias
Lord Overgrown’s Dream, describing his Lordship's re-mion
with the late Sir Robert Peel in the regions below, his reception
therein , and what descriptions of persons he found there, being the
only true account hitherto published of the denizens of those regions ,
and of the qualifications which lead thereto. Holyoakb & Co.,
Fleet-street; and E. Truelove, Strand.
(From the Eeasoner.')
We cannot better describe this unique poem, or composition in verse,
than by adopting the following notice of it in Reynolds' Newspaper.
“This is the title of a new and very remarkable poem by Mr James Bronterre
O’Brien, advertised in our impression of last week. Through the medium of a
dream, it describes the re-union of a certain “ Lord Overgrown” with the late
Sir Robert Peel, in the regions below, his lordship’s reception therein, what
descriptions of persons he found there, and the qualifications, professional or
otherwise, which distinguish the denizens of those regions; the whole being a
withering satire and ferocious onslaught on the present state of society as it
prevails in this country. Under the pseudonym Overgrown is concealed, we
suspect, a certain noted millionaire banker, now a peer, whose career, and that
of his friend, Sir Robert, afford the author the opportunity of exposing the
iniquitous legislation of the last half century. The combination of wit, force,
and energy of expression, raciness of style, and rare facility of versification
which we formerly noticed in Mr o : Brien’s “ Odes to Louis Napoleon and Lord
Palmerston,” and in his “ Elegy on Robespierre,” is abundantly exemplified in
this new production of his pen, whose moral or purpose is best told in his own
words. “ The object of this light Poem is to turn the tables on those preachers
of * false doctrine, heresy, and schism,’ who abuse the Word of God, by using
hell as a sort of artillery on the side of unjust power, to terrify poverty and
ignorance into blind submission to arbitrary and wrongful rule. To this end
have we endeavoured to show from what sources hell must be presumed to
recruit its population if reason and revelation are to decide.
“ Our logic is this—God’s mercy may mitigate , but His justice will never let the
penalty exceed the offence. If, therefore, He have ordained eternal punishment
for any, it can only be for those enormous sinners, whose crimes are, by their
very nature, of an eternal character: such as the crimes of robbing a people of
their land or territory—of their free will and agency—of their self-government
< —of all means of moral and mental culture, &c., <fec.—so as to perpetuate their
degradation, corruption, and enslavement, to all future generations.
u The late Sir Robert Peel, and our imaginary Lord Overgrown, are types of
Ibis class of sinn.-rs ; not worse, mayhap, than thousands of their class; only
made more prominent by the accidents of station, wealth, and official power. It
is, by the class of land-usurpers, and money-changers, they represented, that
all nations are plunged into poverty, slavery, vice, corruption, sin and crime.
If, therefore, we are to have monuments for such men, let us, for the sake of
truth and humanity, aim at erecting a few of the right sort. This effusion is
one of my humble contributions to their fame in the monumental way. I have
erected a similar monument for Peel’s friend, Lord Palmerston; but their moat


enduring monument will be the statute book recording their acts and votes in
the present century. No other two statesmen that England lias given birth
to, influenced her councils and fortunes for so many years ; nor did so much
to jeopardize her best interests at home and abroad.—Peel, by his domestic
legislation, and Palmer-ton by his foreign policy—both tending to make land-
lordism and commercialism supreme over everybody and everything, and the
useful classes everywhere slaves to the useless and vicious.”
Odes to Lord Palmerston and Louis Napoleon.—Holyoako
& Co., Fleet-street; and E. Truelove, Strand.
“Mr O’Brien does not employ rhyme like a coral rattle, with its silver bells
for the amusement of grown-up babes, and sucklings. His verse is the vehicle
for withering exposures of exalted scoundrelism, the promulgation of sound
political principles, and the inculcation of all-saving truths. He has just
favoured the world with two Odes, addressed to the above named personages—
the most remarkable men of their age—which are characterised by that lucidity
of thought, energy of expression, and raciness of diction, of which Mr. o‘Brien
is so unrivalled a master. The Ode to Palmerston is an admirable portraiture
of that wily Statesman’s chameleon career. That to the French usurper is
one of the greatest “curiosities of literature," and prodigious achievements in
rhyme, of which the English language can boast.” —j
-Reynolds' Newspaper.
