

A FAITH FOR
THE FIRING LINE
E.A BURROUGHS




Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


A FAITH FOR THE FIRING LINE
/vat
.<&*> fy'&'lxHLr st*CAt t
d **/ wtf Ac isJGX /4'{fdx4,


By the same Author.
THE ETERNAL
GOAL:
Three letters to
The Times on the
Spiritual Issues of
the Present Situa-
tion.
Price 2d. net.
Longmans, Green & Co.
London & New York.
FAITH AND
POWER:
A College Sermon.
PROGRESSIVE
MEANINGS OF
SPIRITUAL LIFE.
Price 3d. each net.
Blackwell, Oxford.


A FAITH FOR THE
FIRING LINE
TWO ADDRESSES TO OFFICERS OF THE
BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE AT
ROUEN, TOGETHER WITH A SERMON
PREACHED IN THE CHAPEL OF THE
BRITISH HEADQUARTERS THERE, IN
APRIL 1915.
BY
E. A. BURROUGHS, M.A.
Fellow and Tutor of Hertford College, Oxford, and
Examining Chaplain to the Lord Bishop
of Liverpool
Eontion
NISBET 6? CO., LIMITED
22 BERNERS STREET, W.


First published in 1915
UNWIN BROTHERS, LTD.,
THE GRESHAM PRESS
WOKING AND LONDON


TO THE MEMORY OF
FOUR OFFICERS,
m. m p.,
lb. lb. m.,
IN LOSING WHOM
ONE AT LEAST OF THEIR FRIENDS
HAS LOST FAR MORE
THAN HE DARES YET TO MEASURE.




PREFACE
The publication of these addresses (in slightly
expanded form) is due partly to the kind wish
and appreciation of some of those who heard
them, partly to the fact that the author has long
sought in vain for some book of suitable length
and outlook which should say to his officer
friends—and nearly all a College Tutor’s friends
are sure to be officers now—the sort of things
which he would like to say to them himself. The
things which one man wants to say, of course,
are very likely not those which exactly occur
to any other. But it is possible that a few
may care to send to their officer friends a mes-
sage which has, at any rate, this advantage,
that it was largely written in Camp, with the
conditions of military life directly in the writer’s
view, and with his heart in the task as it could
hardly be in any other.


The two poems at the end are added as
expressing, in a way which fits peculiarly the
need of those who, either in person or by proxy,
are in the firing line these days, the human
response to the dominant note of the addresses.
E. A. B.
Oxford,
May xi, 1915.


CONTENTS
PAGE
FOREWORD : FAITH UNDER FIRE . . . xiii
By Field-Marshal Sir Evelyn Wood, V.C., G.C.B.
I. THE NEARNESS OF THE SPIRITUAL BACK-
GROUND . . . . .15
11. PRAYER, PROVIDENCE, AND INSPIRATION . 29
111. THE ANSWER OF DEATH AND THE SECRET OF
LIFE . . . . . .50
APPENDED:
PART OF “THE ETERNAL GOODNESS” . . 59
J. G. Whittier
“ LOSS AND GAIN ” . . . . 6l
G. Matheson




FAITH UNDER FIRE
A FOREWORD
BY FIELD-MARSHAL SIR EVELYN WOOD, V.C., G.C.B.
I accept the offered privilege of writing some few
introductory sentences to this booklet, because
during my long life spent in the two Fighting
Services I have realized personally and by study
of history the inestimable advantage of Faith in
the living, ever-present God, not only in helping
a man to risk the sacrifice of his own life for his
country, but also in assisting him to inspire those
under his command to imitate his example.
Francis Drake in 1580, when returning from a
voyage round the world in the last remaining
vessel of the squadron of five ships with which
he had left Plymouth three years earlier, struck
on a rock off the Isle of Celebes, near Borneo.
The Golden Hinde was ballasted with bricks of
gold worth a million sterling, but Drake, in his
autocratic manner, ordered that “ All Hands ”
should receive Holy Communion before setting
to work to lighten the ship.
John Churchill, afterwards Duke of Marl-
borough, before his astounding victory at Blen-
heim in 1704, in which he captured the French
Commander-in-Chief and nearly all his cannons
and equipment, had Divine Service performed at
the head of every regiment, before advancing to
the attack.
In the time of our forefathers Naval com-
manders always returned thanks to the Almighty


for a victory at a parade held for Divine Service.
Most of us have read Nelson’s beautiful, fervent
prayer, written on board the Victory off Cape
Trafalgar the morning of the day he was killed,
beseeching the Almighty to grant him success for
King and Country.
These three great, heroic, patriotic English-
men, with many faults of personal character,
were certainly uplifted by the conviction of the
ever-present God.
In forty years of peace, which ensued after
Waterloo, everything that makes for efficiency,
except the enduring courage of all Ranks, retro-
graded ; the practice of public worship prior to
battle died out, although there were some officers
of higher nature whose successful efforts came
out during the Crimean War, an epoch when
language of a coarseness now not tolerated
was commonly and publicly used in all ranks,
from the highest to the lowest. A young
officer named Hedley Vicars, 97th (2nd Royal
West Kent) Regiment, with whom I served in
i n the trenches, had excited earlier in the
campaign some comment, not always compli-
mentary, by his efforts to bring a sense of religion
to the men of his Company. When, however,
cholera fell on our camp in Bulgaria, Hedley
Vicars’ heroic self-sacrifice in nursing the dying
won all hearts, and when in making a counter-
attack, in March 1855, he was killed at the
head of his Company, there was no man more
sincerely mourned.
June 23, 1915.
EVELYN WOOD,
Field-Marshal.


I
THE NEARNESS OF THE SPIRITUAL
BACKGROUND
There is a paraphrase of the words which Our
Lord, on the Mount of Temptation, quoted to
“Not Dy rebuff the first suggestion of the
flread alone.” Tempter—that about turning stones
into bread—which I think comes home rather
better than the original to the modern mind.
It is this : “ Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every manifestation of God”—
or, as it would run in the less theological
language which I have designedly used in the
title of this address, “ Man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every emergence in his life of
its spiritual background.”
It is interesting to find exactly the same truth
uttered by so different a person as Mahomet in a
saying attributed to him : “If thou
hast two loaves, sell one of them,
A diet of
flowers.
and buy some flowers of the narcissus.”
That is to say, there is something in the
latter which will also “ feed ” you, and which


you can less well do without than you can do
without the extra mouthfuls of bread.
Of course there are some to whom “the flowers
of the narcissus ” may mean nothing and bring no
nutriment. We recall the lines of Wordsworth—
A primrose by the river’s brim
A yellow primrose was to him,
And it was nothing more ;
but the gentleman in question is spoken of with a
pitiful contempt, not with any commendation of
his common sense. He ought to have seen more
in it—he was the poorer, and the less truly
“ human/’ for not doing so. In more theo-
logical language, he was “unspiritual,” and lacked
“ the eye of faith.” But probably even he had
his “ spiritual ” side—some point at which he was
sensitive to the spiritual background of life ; and
anyhow all of us have, and know we have, our
special avenues by which, be it seldom or often,
the sense of the spiritual does break in on our
souls.
Art in all its forms provides one or more
avenues for most. Some of us know, for in-
Channels of
the spiritual;
(1) Art.
stance, what it is to feel, and not
merely to hear, music. It must have
been such a man who, writing from
one of the Y.M.C.A. huts some weeks back, after
a concert by a London concert-party such as has


just been visiting us, said in his letter home : “ I
have just come down from the trenches, and have
been listening to one of the best concerts I ever
attended. It makes one feel that perhaps there
is a good God after all.”
Nature, too, provides for many of us the same
sort of outlet or inlet, whichever we may call it.
For it is both : it is an inletting of
light and strength from somewhere
(2) Natural
beauty.
beyond ourselves, and it is also an outletting
of an imprisoned something within us, which,
if we do not check it, flies out to meet the
inspiration and feels itself uplifted by it. I could
illustrate this by two long talks I have had with
men in the camp this last week, both lads of
eighteen or nineteen, both ardent nature-lovers,
but one (an undergraduate) passing through an
acute “ scientific ” stage, and apparently unable
to think of the source of that real, objective,
recognized uplift as “God,” the other spon-
taneously admitting that the feeling, when it
came, at once made him almost cry out “ How
good God is ! ” It is like the well-known story of
Coleridge and Shelley, who visited Chamonix
about the same time. The one was inspired
to write his famous “ Hymn in the Vale of
Chamonix/' in which he says that everything
around seemed to him to utter the one word
“ God ” ; the other contented himself with enter-
2


ing in the visitors’ book, “ Percy Bysshe Shelley,
Atheist.”
Love, again, is a potent opener of the spiritual
eye to be conscious of the spiritual
background of life. Do you know
the lines of Coventry Patmore ?
An idle poet, here and there,
Looks round him: but for all the rest
The world, unfathomably fair,
Is duller than a witling’s jest.
Love wakes men: once a life-time each
They lift their heavy heads and look ;
And 10, what one sweet page can teach
They read with joy, then close the book.
And some give thanks, and some blaspheme,
And most forget: but, either way,
That, and the child’s unheeded dream,
Is all the light of all their day.
Or, as a friend of an undergraduate friend of
mine said to him soon after getting engaged,
“ By Jove, you know, there’s nothing that makes
a fellow feel religious like falling in love.”
And then, too, for many who perhaps lack the
art-instinct and whose way the inspiration of
(4) “One touch
of nature.”
love never comes there are avenues
into the spiritual opened by “ touches
of nature ” in ordinary life. So I remember
the tears in the eyes of a professed atheist as
she read the inscription on a child’s grave in


a Swiss churchyard. So Maeterlinck somewhere
says :
u The greatness of our life depends on so little !
. . . No solemn word has been spoken, and we
feel that nothing has been called forth ; and yet,
why has an ineffable face beckoned to us from
behind an old man’s tears ? why does a vast night,
starred with angels, extend over the smile of a
child ? . . . why do we suddenly hold our breath
for an instant, and say to ourselves, ‘ Here is the
house of God, and this is one of the approaches
of heaven ’ ? ”
And, finally, trouble is of old a great opener of
spiritual eyes, a great putter away of the super-
ficial and revealer >of the substance
and background of life. How many
(6) Trouble.
of us have been learning that, possibly for the
first time, certainly in a fresh degree, in the last
nine months ! I read in a paper the other day a
letter of a second-lieutenant who came through
Neuve Chapelle. After alluding to the horror of
it, he went on, “ I shall never regret, and I hope
that you will never regret, the step I have taken :
it has opened up for me new treasures in life
whose existence I knew not, and, if I am spared,
I feel that our life at home together will be more
happy and blessed even than it was before.” One
looks back to a period in one’s own experience
which, at the time, seemed needlessly and un


redeemedly dark—the darkest until this winter
came—and one feels the most absolute conviction
that, if it came to re-living one’s past, that is the
period which one would least wish to cut out of
it : it has meant so much to all the years since.
It is the same instinct, is it not, as drew from
Hezekiah, in the curious thanksgiving psalm
which he composed after recovering from the
illness which was to have been his last, the
admission, u O Lord, by these things men live ,
and in all these things is the life of my spirit : so
wilt thou recover me, and make me to live.”
Thus, as we consider all the various ways in
which various souls of men are made aware of
There are no
unsplrltual ”
men.
the spiritual background of their
existence, we are driven to feel that
into every life, however insensible
and prosaic outwardly, the spirtual is meant to
come, and does in fact come, though it be by
a back door. There are no unspiritual men in
the sense of men who have no contact with the
spiritual.
In faultless rhythm the ocean rolls,
A rapturous silence fills the skies,
And on this earth are lovely souls
Who softly look with aidful eyes.
Though dark, O God, Thy course and track,
I think Thou must at least have meant
That nought which lives should wholly lack
The things that are more excellent.


And so we come back to the words from which
we started, as a statement of a real experience
in our own life and that of all men—
“ Man shall not live by bread alone,
“Two worlds
are ours,”
but by every manifestation of God.” In Keble’s
words—
Two worlds are ours : 'tis only sin
Forbids us to descry
The mystic heaven and earth within
Clear as the sea and sky.
And is not that again only a paraphrase of our
Lord’s beatitude, “ Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God ” ?—purity of heart being
the condition of singleness of eye, sensitiveness
to the eternal background of life.
And then, corresponding to the two worlds
that belong to us, the two planes on which our
life appears to move, there is also
the fact of the two selves cor-
and two selves.
responding to them, the “ natural ” and the
“spiritual,” the “lower” and the “ higher.” This,
I think, is a mere fact given by experience, if
we face our experience simply and as it meets
us. The spiritual self may not often have its say ;
but, when it does, it has a strange way of making
it clear to us that it is the higher, and the intended
leader. It sits in judgment on the other, and,
though only for a passing hour, makes a man


utterly dissatisfied with what the leadership of
that other has too often made him.
But the problem, for most of us, is how to put
that higher self in control and keep it there.
The problem of The routine of most lives—not least,
control. surely, of the military life—and the
acquired bias of most wills, together with the
innate dread, which our public schools and uni-
versities have drilled into most of us, of being
ourselves , our true selves, for fear of being
thought peculiar—all these things combine to
make us acquiesce, unwillingly but increasingly,
in being determined by our lower selves : by
which I do not, of course, mean our animal selves,
but our u secular ” selves, the selves which figure
as “ members of society.” And yet now and then
the spiritual self stirs up a revolution against this
usurpation, and makes a stand for a while against
it; and, in our heart of hearts, we wish that the
tyranny might end.
But, somehow, the higher self seems to have
to depend on such remote allies, and such
The seeming
distance of the
spiritual.
intangible sources of supply, that its
permanent victory seems almost
beyond hoping for. In the midst
of our ordinary conditions, at any rate, the
spiritual world seems infinitely far away, the
“ spiritual background of life ” only another
name for the horizon—a background which


recedes before you. We perhaps say to our-
selves, “Yes, if I were on a Swiss mountain,
or listening to Beethoven, or talking to my
mother or my best friend, or back in the fields
where I played as a child, or even quite alone
somewhere —then it might be possible to effect
a contact and obtain the spiritual reinforcement
I need. But here—in camp, in an office, in the
trenches, in a life crammed with the merely
material and wasted with petty distraction —how
can I call up supplies from so far away ? ”
It is the fallacy, specious but easily detected,
which underlies such an attitude surely a
common attitude among men especially—to
which I want to suggest the answer to-night.
It lies in my title, “The Nearness of the Spiritual.”
The distance we feel is all in our own feelings ;
in technical language, it is subjective, not objec-
tive. The reason why I went at such length into
all those various avenues by which “the spiritual”
comes in upon us was just to accustom you
to the idea of its perpetual nearness, as some-
thing we can infer from the fact that it may
meet us at any moment, round any corner of the
road of life.
Heaven fades away before our eyes,
Heaven fades within our heart,
Because in thought our heaven and earth
Are cast too far apart.
