

.A. ZFIBJW
lettebs
FROM
QUEENSLAND FARMERS
AND OTHERS
DESCRIPTIVE OF
THEIR START,
THEIR TOIL,
THEIR PERSEVERANCE,
THEIR SUCCESS,
THEIR REWARD;
With other information as to
SOIL, CLIMATE,
AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS & CAPABILITIES
LONDON:
LAKE & SISON, PRINTERS, 3, WESTMINSTER, CHAMBERS, S.W.
And SUFFOLK LANE, E.O.




PREFACE.
mHE following “Few Letters from Queeensland Farmers” were
kindly written at my request—personally made to the writers —
during my recent tour through the different parts of the Colony. I
need hardly say that hundreds of a like character might have been
procured. My object in obtaining, and having printed, these few from
amongst those furnished me lay in the hope, that, finding their way
into the hands of working and small capitalists freeholders and tenant
farm rs—as well as capable, intelligent, though poorly paid, agricul-
tural labourers—they would impart and give much information that
was desired, and in such a manner —the personal and practical being
interwoven—as would cause not a few belonging to these classes to
think seriously of making a change—going out and “ doing likewise.”
Moreover, these are the classes above all others the Government are
at all times most desirous of attracting to the Colony, not only because
most needed, and best calculated to contribute to and advance our
prosperity, but because invariably making successful and satisfied
colonists.
Of late years many among the tenant farmers in this country,
under the burden of rent and taxes, bad seasons, and low prices, have
been forced to relinquish the occupation of their choice, and, doubtless,
many others are feeling themselves drifting but too surely toward the
same end. Others are helplessly held down by a millstone of mort-
gage there is little hope in their lifetime of redeeming. In both cases
there must be many among them who are anxious parents of growing
families, for whose future the outlook and prospect here yearly grows
more limited and gloomy. Then there are thousands of sterling and
hardy agricultural labourers in whose native fields there appears to be
less and less employment, Idleness has been a matter of necessity
with many of these during the past winter, a large majority of their
number in the best agricultural parts of this country being able to get
but two or three days’ work per week, and that at a miserably low rate
of wages. The past outlet too, for the surplus labour of this class has
been virtually closed. The manufacturing and populous centres are over-
flowing with superabundant labour they cannot employ; and the town
dweller threatens to become a competitor in rural spheres of labour.
Failing employment now and in future at his own occupation, the
agricultural worker must find some other outlet for his experience,
labour and skill—invaluable in new countries with limitless acres un-
tilled—and if aspiring after, or animated by hope of better things than
the life-long struggle for mere existence to which so many of his class
are doomed here, he must look to some other country than that in
which he happened to be born in which to realize them.


During the tour I made through the Colony—before alluded to—
nothing struck me so much, wherever I went, as the want of men who
would settle down, and till and cultivate some of our broad and waste acres,
men who would patiently and intelligently set to work to grow and
produce some of the many articles our growing town populations in-
creasingly require for daily consumption. Many of these articles have
to be imported from long distances though we have soil and climate
in every way adapted to their production.* Wherever men were
found exercising enterprise and labour in this direction, they were
reaping an abundant and substantial reward. The great want in the
Colony is undoubtedly men of this stamp, who, with a knowledge of
agriculture, combined with capability and willingness to work, will set
about the business determined to make it a success. To such, unlimited
scope and fair opportunity is offered in our wide domain. To those
of the rural classes, therefore, who are hard pressed and without much
prospect here —whether they be tenant farmers, bonded freeholders, or
starved-out labourers—there is hope on wider fields under the British
flag beyond the sea. To such I commend with every confidence the
perusal of these letters, not only as shewing “ what others have done
before ” in one of these “ nations yet to be,” but, feeling sure the spirit
of sturdy independence and freedom from care they breathe, will often
strike home, and, (stirring many a wishful pulse in men who have
grown well nigh hopeless and despairing,) will nerve them to bravely
make the effort required to strike out, and leaving the old land, man-
fully fight life’s battle in the new. Landing with high resolve and
dauntless pluck, the battle is half won. All that is needed to ensure
success is the exercise of the same qualities as those shewn by the
writers of these letters, which, if they do not record the accomplishment
of any great or brilliant achievement (as might be thought on this side
should attend Colonial exertion), there is yet much room for satis-
faction ; and, pioneers as they are—surrounded by as yet almost untried
resources, and infant beginnings—their is room in their future for un-
limited hopefulness, and for untold possibilities.
GEORGE RANDALL.
* Bee Table of Imports on last page.


A FEW LETTERS
FROM
QUEENSLAND FARMERS AND OTHERS.
[Copy.]
From William Perrin, Rosewood Gate, Queensland,
To Geo. Randall, Esq., Brisbane,
September Ist , 1885.
Sir, —As you are about to go to England to lecture on “Emigration,’’
I thought I would write a few lines for you to take home with you, and,
if you happen to go into my part of the old country, your reading this
might cause a desire of some of my countrymen to emigrate to this
sunny land of freedom. It is 24 years this month since I first put my
foot on its soil, and I never yet was sorry for doing so. Some men think
there is no place like England, but for men of bone and muscle, who
want more freedom, and who want a home of their own, why, “ come
out here here, for there’s room for millions yet.” When I first landed
I had only 10s. Qd. in my pocket, and like many of the new chums now,
I had a drop. I spent the 10s., but I have the sixpence yet. I then
hired myself to go 150 miles in the bush for £45 a year. Of this I only
did six months—my master let me off with that. I hired again at
another place for six months for £25. When I had completed this I
left the bush, but what was bush then is not bush now. Well, I went
to Ipswich and bought an allotment of land (quarter-acre) for £4O. I
then hired myself with a gentlemen in Ipswich for £75 a year, rations,
and a house to live in. When I had finished I bought two more allot-
ments of land for £7O. By this you will see that I saved my first two
years’ wages and spent it in land. I still kept out to hire for another
year, and then had my land fenced, and a slab house put upon it; then
I could boast of having a home of my own—that is more than my father
ever could. I then thought I would be a bit independent, and I began
to take contracts of any job that came to hand, and by this I was very
soon able to buy a small farm off the Government, near Ipswich (22
acres for £66), and had it fenced, the cost being £66 more. I will just
mention that, at this time, I could earn from 10s. to 11s. per day, and
I gave this up to try my hand at farming, and be my own master.
But bad times came as well as good, and we had very bad crops for
three years, but, bad as they were, we had plenty of beef and mutton
and bacon, and were not afraid to eat it, but were as happy as kings in
our little slab palace—there is no fear of wanting or starving here I


Well, when the new Land Act came out I thought I would sell out.
This I did, and then selected 120 acres of scrub land up here, and then
came the tug of war, for it wanted bone and muscle, endurance and
strength, all to work together to make a clearing and get on. And
that is the class of men we want out here, and they are bound to get
on if they have good health. We don’t want lazy men to come out
here, they send bad news home because they cannot pick up the money
in the streets. We want good farm labourers. I know a man that came
from the same village as myself, namely, Pitney, Somerset, who has
nine children, and is worth £2,000 worth of property, and he is only
one out of many thousands, but, sir, a man is no use here without a
wife; if he has one he will soon get a home. I have a good home. I
said I had only 10s. Gd. when I landed ; well, I don’t tell you how
much I have now in money, but lam not hard up for a few pounds. I
have 161 acres of rich scrub land (besides 11 allotments of land in
Ipswich and different places), about 50 head of cattle, 10 head of horses
some of them worth a good figure. We kill most of our own beef, or at
least three or four head a year, besides five or six fat pigs. We are not
afraid of the Bailiffs coming in the house, and we have no rent to pay
to any landlord, and I would not change with any farmer at home and
be bound to go home and live. Thousands have done better than me,
and they are in the same mind, for we value the freedom we enjoy
here. We love to talk of the old land and the dear friends we left be-
hind, but this is our home.
P.S.—No doubt you will be asked something about what we grow
out here : you can tell them we can grow anything they like to mention,
but mostly maize in this part. I have grown 75 bushels per acre, and
as low as 25, but the average is about 45. In this part we can grow
two crops a year, It varies very much in price. I have known it 2s.
a bushel, and 6s. Gd.; but the average is about 3s. Gd. We can grow
two crops of potatoes a year ; we plant in August and March. We
grow oats and cut it for hay—l have known as much as three-and-a-half
tons per acre, but two-and-a-half is the average crop, or 12 bags of grain
if it is threshed, but that is not often done. The Derbyshire farmer
you sent up here last week told me that we beat them hollow. As to
fruits they grow anyhow—and plenty of them. Land in the country
increases in value as well as in the towns. I know several farms that
were taken up only ten years ago, and cost only a few pounds, which
have been sold again for hundreds—one in particular, only 80 acres,
was sold last week for £BOO. This land is within half-a-mile of my
house. That is one way money is made out here. One more fact —
you must know beef is very cheap here : 1 know a gentlemen, who, some
time ago, valued his beef so highly that he sold two quarters of it for
Id. per pound, and gave the other away for killing the beast. I hope
this will encourage some of the labouring men to come out here, for
there is as good a chance now as there was 20 years ago —even better, I think.
W.P.


[Copy.]
Eoma, January 20th t 1885.
Mr. Geo. Eandale, Brisbane.
Dear Sirl landed in Queensland in the year 1868. I am a
native of Stockport, Cheshire, and came out with my mother and father
rand four brothers, I being the eldest—then 19 years of age. I was
apprenticed to a plumber and iron-worker after we came out. Just as
I had served my time the Gympie Gold Field broke out, and I, with
other young men, went to try and get some of the gold. I was married
■at this time and got along very well at digging, but I saw I could do
better at other work—such as rough carpenter work and after doing
this for a time, I thought I could do better by taking to the bush and
splitting slabs, palings, shingles, and doing anything else that came in
my way. I soon got tired of this knocking about, and determined to
try another job, and that was dairying, although I knew no more about
•a cow than a cow knew about me. I built a house for a gentlemen
wdio owned a herd of cattle, and, whilst building the house, I learned
to milk; I then took 12 cows at a rent of 80s. a week, doing very well
und keeping them six months. Then another gentlemen, who owned
a large dairy and was milking 40 cows, offered me £3 a week to manage
it, but, as I wanted to be master, I offered him £l6 per month for the
<>ows, which he took, and I did very well for some time. After I got a
few pounds together, my wife and myself thought it time that I should
settle down, so I went back to Brisbane, and returned to my trade. I
bought a house and land, and, some four years after that, I gained
possession of another house and land, so I thought I could improve my
position by selling all and removing to Eoma (317 miles from Brisbane)
and commencing there on my own account —which I did in 1874, I
■own the property where I carry on my business in the main street, and
I have a comfortable residence, a two-stalled stable and buggy shed,
and 80 acres of land, situate about a mile from town. Since building
these places, the Government have thrown open some land in the
neighbourhood so that people could select homesteads, up to 160 acres,
for 2s. 6 d. an acre ; I thought I would try my luck with one of these
farms, and have selected one about five miles from the town. I need
not tell you I am no farmer, but I could see people who had a little
money could get along very well with a farm; and, as my father in his
.old age has come to live with me, he helps to manage the farm (though
he is no farmer), and I still carry on my business. My land was heavily
timbered, so clearing was the first work, and that is rather expensive
if you have to pay for all the labour. At first we put in vines—for
grapes pay very well—also orange trees. We got in 7,000 vines, but
we had a drought that season and lost them. Not discouraged, I had
the land reploughed, and, with some more land by this time cleared,
•sowed about 30 acres with oats, rye, wheat, barley, and lucerne. The
return was £l3O, besides feeding eight horses and two cows all the
and eight acres of barley were lost because we could not cut it,


bo the £l3O was really the return for 20 acres. We sold our chaff at
£8 and £lO per ton. I have had this place a little over 18 months,
fenced it in (125 acres), built one dwelling house and began another,
cleared, and have under crop 40 acres (five of which are again planted
with vines), have built a hay-shed (18 by 40) a five-stalled stable,' and
carried out other improvements. I have had to buy horses, implements,
and everything to begin farming with, and pay for most of the labour
employed. I have sunk a well, convenient for irrigating the land in a
dry season, and my outlay so far has been about £SOO. If I had not
lost the 7,000 vines through the dry weather last season, they would
have returned me some hundreds of pounds. Grapes average about
two-and-a-half tons to the acre, and farmers sell them at 20s. per cwt.,
or 3d. per pound wholesale. It is early perhaps to say much yet; but,
bo far, I am satisfied with my outlay and its returns, which warrant
me in believing my venture will prove a profitable one, taking all seasons
together, and it would prove more so if I understood farming, and.
Were living and working on the land myself,
Yours &c.,
JOSEPH LISTER.
[The writer is an Alderman of the town from which he writes .]
[Copy.]
Roma, October 15th, 1884.
Mr. Geo, Randall,
Dear Sir, — I have great pleasure in sending you a few items of
of the West of Queensland so far as Roma. Mr. Bassett’s farm, for
instance, which I have taken great interest in for the last seven years—
taking charge of the place in 1877. At that time Mr, Bassett’s farm
and vineyard extended to something like 120 acres, about 110 of which
were put under oats, barley, wheat, potatoes, etc., the other ten acres-
wheat, grapevines, and orange trees —about 10,00 vines and 80 orange-
trees, which were all coming into bearing more or less. Now, at this
time, there are about 290 acres for cropping, and 60 acres under vines
and orange trees—6o,ooo grape vines and 300 orange trees, which are
all in good bearing. When I say this, I mean that each vine would
average, all round, eight pounds of grapes each, at 3d. per pound, that
is the lowest price yet realized, and 90 of the orange trees average 100
dozen to each tree, and, at the lowest price up to the present, 2s. per
dozen, the other trees give good returns. In 1880 we made 1,000
gallons of wines; the following year we made 2,000 ; in 1882, 3,000 ;
and last year 8,000 gallons. From the other land from 40 to 60 tons
of potatoes (price from £7 to £lO per ton), and from 80 to 180 tons of
hay (from £7 to £l2 per ton), and many other things. The expenses
of'working the farm and vineyard, implements, wages, etc., in all
amounts to something like £7OO yearly, but now that the place has all


got cleared and fenced and a good many out-buildings erected, the
-expenses need not be so much ; leaving it at that, you will soon see the
result. Now, sir, the style of men that we require for this country are
good farm-men and steady ; no drunken, lazy, useless, rubbish ; and, if
any men have got capital, they can either go in for farming on pur-
chased land that will grow anything from a cucumber and water melon
to grapes and wheat, or take up land for sheep and cattle grazing. I
shall not say anything about my son’s place, as you saw the vines,
trees, and crops. I shall leave you to account for 18 months’ work.
I must conclude, with kindest regards,
WM. HARLAND.
[Over 25 years in the colony—from Yorkshire, England .]
[Copy.]
Roma, October 11th, 1884.
Mr. Geo. Randall, Brisbane
My Dear Sir, —As requested by you, when in Roma, I now beg to
•give you particulars of the operations of that selector you visited near
Roma. His name is Paul Beck; he is a man about 45 years of age, a
native of Gelisia, in Prussia, and was in very comfortable circumstances
at one time in that country. He and his wife come to Roma in 1879,
and selected 131 acres of heavily timbered land on Bungil Creek!
After paying the first year’s rent (in advance), and survey fees, they
had £6 left. ■ They started clearing by themselves, and it was really
astonishing how these two people—man and wife—removed the giants
of the forest—tremendous gum trees, &c.— and all without the help of
oven a horse. Shortly after settling down on the selection, and in
order to earn sufficient to carry on, he took work for others, and I thus
found him one day _ working at a dam I was having constructed. In
■conversation I elicited the above facts, and at once bought the poor
fellow a horse, for which of course he paid me afterwards. The couple
worked away slowly, and, suffice it to say that, to-day, after after five-and-
half years, he has the freehold of his land, 131 acres—of which about 80
■are cultivated. Some of this is planted with about 6,000 bearing vines,
and over 100 fruit trees of various kinds. He estimates the vines to
produce about £3OO worth of grapes this season. The rest of the 20
acres is cultivated with potatoes and various cereals—most of the latter
•are grown for green fodder. He is also the possessor of about 15 horses
15 herd of cattle, dray spring cart, plough harness and other farm im-
pliments and utensils. His land is fenced all round with a two railed
fence, and his cultivation inside of it is also enclosed by a two railedfence
He owes no one a penny, and has £l6O cash in the bank. He has always
the first new potatoes, and though living five miles from town is always
if he has anything to sell—in town long before John the Chinaman is


about with his vegetables. This man is really a splendid example of what
industry and preservance will do, and the land he ownes is of not even
such quality as many thousands of acres obtainable in this neighbour-
hood. You are at liberty to make whatever use you wish of the above,,
and I hope it may tend to bring men of his stamp to this country; for,,
with industry and pluck, they are bound to succeed.
Wishing you every success, believe me very truly yours
H. M. HERTZBERG
[Mayor of Roma,]
[Copy.]
Maryborough, January, 1885.
George Randall, Esq.
Dear Sir, —In accordance with my promise I will give you some
of my experiences as a settler in Queensland. I feel, however, in
making the attempt, an hour or two’s hard work would be
easier and more in my line. But I must keep my promise. Well I
left Manchester with my wife and four children in September, 1863.
We sailed from Queenstown in the “ Fiery Star ” and here I may
mention, I was unfortunate enough to lose the whole of my stock of
bedding and changes of linen, and during the whole voyage, we had
neither blanket nor sheet to cover us, and where sometime in the
country before Ave could repair our loss. We made the passage out in
94 days, landing at Brisbane on December 24th. A day or two after
hearing that Maryborough was a go-ahead place, myself and some
shipmates took steamer and started for it. The day after, we arrived,
the married men of our party leaving their wives and children in the
depot—where they were fairly well treated—till we sent for them, a fort-
night later. Maryborough, at that time, was a very small place
compared to now, and very disheartening to a new chum, there being
no place, and no one to ask for a job. Now, there are hundreds of
employers engaged in all manner of occupations. Then the whole of
the settlement was well within the radius of half-a-mile, now it extends
over more miles than a man could travel, seeking employment, in a
month. After making enquiries we found that a sawmill had started a
few miles below the town, and that log timber was required for its
consumption. We at once procured the necessary working tools and
cooking utensils, hired a boat to take us up the river some 23 miles,
and our party of eight men commenced their business of lumberers.
At this we continued about four months, when the supply of log timber
being in excess of the demand, prices went down, and our party broke
up. I then spent three months working at the sawmill; when our
Parliament voted £2,000 for the repair of the road, or rather bush track,
to Gayndah. I obtained the position of overseer or ganger of the road
parties at Bs. per day, with rations; my family—now increased to five—


remaining in town. My eldest boy earned a few shillings per week as
errand boy, and my wife was not idle, so, by dint of hard work, careful-
ness, and saving, we managed during the twelve months I was on the
road to accumulate about £6O, with which I took up 45 acres of land
at the upset price of £1 per acre. It was situate about four miles from
town, and here I came to anchor, determined to realise, if possible, the
dream which impelled me to emigrate, namely, that I should be able to
make a freehold home for myself and family. I had now spent nearly
two years since breaking up my home in Manchester, and had encount-
ered hardships, and gone through adventures and experiences enough
to fill a book had I the ability to write one. I walked into my thick
standing scrub with my axe on my shoulder, a wife and five children at
my heels, and a few pounds in my pocket, and commenced a fierce
battle with nature, to form things after my own fashion ; and I succeeded,
after 16 years’ hard fighting and constant work, in the object I aimed
at. During the earlier part I worked a month or two on my own farm,
and a month or two for some one else for wages. I soon got my farm
cleared, well fenced, and divided into two paddocks—one, 23 acres, I
had under plough, the other 22 acres, in which was my homestead, barn,
stockyard and fruit orchard. I had four horses, two for plough, one for
spring cart, and one for buggy and saddle. I had 20 head of cattle, a
number of pigs and bees, and was in very fair circumstances, but about
this time my wife’s health began to fail. Occasionally I put two horses
in the spring cart, and went to the sea coast, about 28 miles distant,
and there we could camp and bathe for a week or two together. We
were, however, persuaded to come and live in town, so I let my farm to
a neighbour, and started a small business, and this change in my life
had the effect of making several of my sons tradesmen, to which they
were apprenticed. I must also here mention that my family had increased
to eight sons and two daughters. lam now in my fifty-fifth year, sur-
rounded by an industrious-family, all I may say grown up, and lam
proud to say not one of them having the slightest leaning towards that,
curse of so many —strong drink. I have been 21 years in this district
and I look back with pleasure on the road I have travelled, and have
never regretted for a moment my emigrating to Queensland. I can say
with confidence to all those able and willing to work, “Come here, and
you will greatly improve your position.” I never yet saw a man who,
tried in earnest to get on who did not succeed. The climate is a beau-
tiful one, with clear blue sky for ten months out of the twelve, and none,
of those drizzling wet days so unpleasant in England. Here it rains,
hard for a few hours and has done with it. The heat in summer is no.
no greater on the whole —though longer—and the winters are beautiful.
We get slight frosts, but I have never seen snow or ice, and, as an ag-
riculturist, I do not think growing crops are so liable to failure as they
are in England. Drought is our worst enemy, but I quite believe, when
farming is better understood, this will be remedied by irrigation, which
is quite practicable, and would make this one of the most fruitful coun-
tries in the world. There is nothing grown in England that will not grow


here, and there are few things grown in tropical countries that may not
be grown here to perfection. We have Orchards in this neighbourhood
growing all kinds of fruits. Most of the land in this district is under
sugar cane, a crop of which is taken off every year, but if this is continued
it proves very exhaustive. When land is under general cultivation, three
crops may be taken off during the year. Here land once cleared is
allowed to rest. Semi-tropical crops are grown during the summer, and
other crops during the winter: thus—a farmer may plant, on the Ist
August, potatoes, which he would finish cultivating early in October,
planting in the meantime, maize in every alternate row, which would be
about a foot high when the potatoes were ready for harvesting—a ready
market always awaiting them. The maize crop would be off not later
than the Ist March, when the ground would have a good clearing up
and be ready for oats, rye, barley, wheat, potatoes again, late maize,
field peas, European vegetables, and others. These could be cleared off
and the ground cleared up ready to commence again with a fresh rota-
tion Ist August, I assert that no better country need be for agriculture
if persevered in and attended to. Sugar growing has been largely car-
ried on here, and the planters have been employing black labour, the large
number of hands required for this industry furnishing the pretext for
their introduction. So many abuses, however, have sprung up in con-
nection with it, that the colony at large have declared against its
continuance, and, at the last general election, _ sent a government to
power pledged to put a stop to it, and make this beautiful country the
home of the white man. So now there is room and great need for any
number of men —agricultural labourers principally, and others who, like
myself, will work for a year or two for the best wages they can get, and
save their earnings, and then select and settle on farms of their own. I
would not advise a man to go dn land of his own at once, but spend a
year or two gaining experience in the most profitable way he can. You
may tell the real working men of England they need not fear or hesitate
to come out here, for I and many others who have fought the battle are
sure they will win. They have only to put their shoulders to the wheel
in earnest to gain a home and an independent position for themselves
and families. Those who do not mean to work had better stay at home. —
only those who work succeed.
Wishing you the greatest success in your mission,
X am, Dear Sir, Truly yours,
JAMES KERRIDGE, Senr.
[Copy.]
Woongarra SoRUB, Bundaburg, January Vith 1885.
My Dear Sir, —I promised to send you some information, and I
hope lam not too late. I have two selections—a homestead taken up
in 1873 of 85 acres, for which I paid £l4 7s. 6d. in five annual instal-


merits, and a conditional purchase of 100 acres for which I paid £66 in
ten animal instalments, a portion of the last-named I have just leased
(in the same state that I got it) on a seven years’ clearing lease for £1 10s.
per acre per annum. I have 93 acres of sugar cane, 17 acres of grass
paddock, and five acres standing scrub. The land I have under cane
has cost me fully £l2 per acre to get under crop, and the paddock £5
an acre to clear. The whole place may be put down as worth £SO per
acre at the least with the improvements at present on the place. At the
time I took up my selections I had £1 (after paying the first years’ rent
and survey fee) with which to start farming. Of course I had to take a
job occasionally at first to keep the pot boiling. The extent of this scrub
is about 80,000 acres, about two-thirds of it under cultivation—principally
with cane. The largest holding is 800 acres; the average 160 acres.
Half was thrown open for selection in 1867, the other half in 1871
at 2s. 6 d., 55., and 15s. per acre. Some of this land under crop has
changed hands at £BO per acre, and, unimproved, at £2O to £3O. An
■average year’s growth of cane (crushed on a farm) and juice yields £4O
per acre; in a good season, £SO to £BO. Working expenses (including
interest on plant, etc., and paying wages of 15s. to 20s, per week, with
rations) take about half. Cost of smallest crushing plant, £3OO to £4OO.
I have just been trying to get some more “new chums,” but I cannot
manage it just yet. I hope you will send plenty of the right sort, as I
expect to work two shifts next season, and I shall want over 20 hands
to do so. I got all my cane crushed at the Hummock mill, but I shall
have my own mill in working order next time, when I believe there will
be a heavy crop to put through, if Mackay does not watch it we shall
make more sugar than they will this season, for they appear to be com-
pletely wilting, because, they cannot do as they like with the whole colony
without the leave of any one. I see the present prospect of the sugar
market is likely to bring about Inter-colonial Free Trade, or reciprocity
as they are calling it. If it does that it will be a blessing in disguise.
Wishing you the greatest success in the old country.
I have the honour to remain, yours truly,
SAMUEL EOWE.
[Copy.]
The Grange, Burnett River,
Bundaberg, November 21st 1884.
Mr. Geo. Randall,
Sir, —having read one of your lectures on “ Emigration to
'Queensland,” I can confidently say you did not exaggerate in the least
in fact, as regards farm labourers getting £35 and £4O per annum,
and there is none to be had in this district at that price. I can assure
you that I am offering 255. per week (with rations), and cannot succeed
in getting labour. lam giving a lad £1 per week (with rations). lam
sure 300 men could get good employment in Bundaberg and district at


this moment, and many more will be wanted next season, Mr. Young
(a large sugar planter) is wanting families to work his plantation, and
will pay them all according to their ages. You did right in trying all
you could to send out country people— men and families from the
Lincolnshire villages who came here have all done well. I find the
colony gets better every year for the working man. When I landed in
this colony I worked ten hours a day for 55., but now a mechanic works
less hours and gets better paid. A short time ago I had a Government
contract, and was paying mechanics 11s. and 12s, a day, and labourers
Bs. a day of eight hours. I have a farm on the Burnett Eiver, and I
own several allottments in town. One a-llottment I paid £3OO for,
and before Ihad had it six months I was offered £SOO for it. The same
sort of thing is open to any working man coming here who will be
steady and persevering.
I am, Sir, yours respectfully,
GEORGE TYSON,
[2O years resident in the colony .]
[Copy.]
Woongaeea, Bundabeeg, November, 1884.
Me. Randall,
Dear Sir,—My opinion of Queensland as a field for emigrants, and
particularly to young men who have been engaged in agricultural pur-
suits, is that they can do well here, in fact, much better than they can
hope to in England :—and I earnestly trust that many of the young-
men before making a start in life will make up their minds to come
out here, because, whatever difficulties and disadvantages they may for
a short time have to labour under (till they get a little used to life out
here) they will ultimately succeed, and I am certain in after life they
will never regret having made up their minds to come to Queensland.
I am working as a labourer on a small sugar plantation, and have been
at this job over six months now —ever since I landed in the country.
The work need not frighten anybody, and I am well satisfied so far,,
and expect to be better satisfied by-and-by when I get a farm of my own.
Believe me, yours sincerely,
G. F. HALL.
[Late with Mr. J. Walton,
Dalton-moor Farm, Dalton-le-dale Sunderland, England.]
[Copy,]
Woongaeea Sceub, Bundabeeg, January, 18th, 1885.
Mr. Randall,
Dear Sir, —I send a few lines to tell you what I think of this-
great and promising colony, which I can say for myself is a good and


promising country. I have wished several times I had come out hem
some years before, for it seems to agree with my health very well, and
especially being near the coast, as we get a grand sea breeze, particu-
larly for us “new chums.” I am still with Mr. Rowe, but I am
thinking of leaving him before long to try and better myself; whether
I shall or not Ido not know. He is giving me, and the young man
he engaged with me, £1 a week each and rations, so I must consider
it good wages for this time of year. I have found out that that it is far
better than the old country for a working man. I have often thought
of what people said to me before I started away from home— saying the-
country was no good, but I would advise a few more to come out and try
it, and see for themselves. I expect someMarschapel friends out here this
year—they are also farm servants. I hope they will arrive safe, and
I think they will not regret coming, but, though it was hard to leave
Old England, after all I would not go back to stay, neither can I give
a bad account of this country, but I will say this a loafer had far
better stay at home than attempt to come here. I shall write to Mr.
White this month.
Yours truly,
GEORGE ISLE,
[Of Marschapel, Lincolnshire .]
[Copy.]
[ONE LINCOLNSHIRE EMIGRANT TO ANOTHER.]
August 1 9th, 1884.
My Dear Friend, —i tak the pleasure of riting thease few lines to-
you hoping thatthay will find you all in good helth as it leavs us ai
present thank God for it and we was very sorrey that you ad such bad
luck and that you ave berried 2 of yourlitl ons i only got to now wear
you was to day we thot that you and watson was atlaceby yet for we cold
never hear wither you had comd or not and clayton told me that you
was goin to, leave brisbane and going to Sidney but you may do as you*
like buti shold com up to bundabergto look round for i think that you
might do very well hear for thire is no shoemker hear and i think that,
you might doo wors then com to see wat you think it. both
clayton and mee thinks that you wood doo very well hear i now that,
hows rent is not so much as it is in brisbane clayton likes this place-
ar be for brisbane and i my self do not now anethink a bot aney other
place for i ave not been off 2 days since i landed and the misis and
the children sends thire best love to you all and my wife says that
you was o com and look for your self that you canot miss but lik and if,
you will rit to leet us now w r e will come and met you ai the stamer and.
we heve not heard aney think from lacey since we com but i do not
wante to go back yet John William is in sarvis and has been ever since


we landed lie as 15 shillings a weke and his tucker, e his a big lad he
is just as tall as i am he as don very well since he com he is worth 40
pounds now and wold not ad 40 pounds in 40 years in laceby we
bought half-an-acker of land and we got a hous on it and if you all
com you shall stop with us will git somwear so I must conclude with
best love to you all from your afection friend
G. J. CHAPMAN.
east bundaberg
mid i have never tasted Drink since i landed.
[Addressed to Me. Geo. Keal, Shoemaker, Peters Terrace, Brisbane .]
[A RECENT EMIGRANT’S OPINION.]
[Copy.]
Water Street Bundaberg, December 24 th, 1884.
George Randall, Esq.
My Dear Sir, —Yours of the 18th received, and contents noted.
I am greatly obliged for the interest you have manifested towards me
. . We could have gone to Gympie, but by the newspapers I saw things
were very dull there. Under these circumstances we decided to settle
down here. We all like Bundaberg very well, but as you say, it is
principally agricultural, and does not therefore offer many openings
for us, more especially myself. Ido not, however, intend to follow
mining myself, if I can do anything better, or put the boys to it.
Should I go either to Charters Towers or Gympie I might, perhaps,
find more openings in my late line of business than can be found here—
you, of course, ought to know better than I do, being at both places so
very recently. . . lam afraid you hardly know me sufficiently yet,
when you advise me not to get downhearted at a few reverses ; that I
will not do, nor will I ever reflect on one who I am sure advises me
for, and with the best intentions. You need, therefore, have no fear
■on that score. I had a very high opinion of Queensland from what I
heard you say of it, as a future home for working people before I saw
it; and lam bound to say that, after having seen the country, I have
a higher opinion of it still. I think it is a splendid country, and,
although I have not fallen into suitable employment, yet I am well
satisfied with the change we have made in coming. L came here chiefly on
account of my large family (eight) and my short experience has proved the
wisdom of the step. Three of them are now employed, but, being stran-
gers to the neighbourhood, they are only getting low wages as yet—one
of them a boy of 16, is getting 255. per week as a start, which is as
much as the whole of them would earn in England. These children never


earned a shilling until they came here, so that we shall soon feel com-
paratively comfortable. Write per return and say what you think
about my going to the Burram Coal Fields, to Gympie, or to Charters
Towers. The cost of one person going would not be much. I have
seen Mr. Rowland often; he is very kind. My second son works at
the “Star” office, but his wages are small—only 6s. per week. My
daughter is at her trade (millinery), only, of course, as an extra hand.
Mr O’Connell, the immigration officer here, is a splendid man, and
has been very kind to us indeed. I should like to find an opening as
an auctioneer, and then take up a piece of land, so as to have a pro-
perty of my own, though, of course, I know this will be a work of time.
We still continue to enjoy good health, and hope you do the same.
Wishing you every success in your good work, which I know you
undertake with the best of motives to our fellow-countrymen at home..
I am, Yours sincerely,
THOS. GLASSEY.
[Late of Bedlington, Northumberland .]
At a Conference of Agriculturalists held at Maryborough,
on September 20th, 1884, one speaker (Mr. D. Claeke)
said, with reference to—
SUGAR CULTIVATION.
He knew little or nothing about sugar-cane, except that some soils
had not the natural constituents in them to produce a good crop of
sugar, and would require more to be added to the ground than the crop
would be worth ; besides a rotation of crops would keep the land in
better heart. He knew something about dairy farming, pig raising;
and poultry, but would confine his remarks to general farming.
APPLES.
The most useful fruit, and the largest grown on earth, is the apple.
Any land that would grow wheat would grow apples. A great mistake
was made by the few who have planted apples in not planting the most
suitable varieties for this colony. Apples through America might be put
down at from 50 to 75 cents per bushel. After paying for trees and
planting, interest on all outlay, the annual return of an orchard from
ten to twelve vears old is from £2O to £25 per acre. The older the
the trees the better return. A gentleman in New South Wales kept
an exact account of an acre of apples for 20 years, and it paid him a


net profit of £IOO per year. When he went up to Warwick, Queens-
land, some eighteen years ago, he found there was very httle fruit in
the district. He sent to a respectable nurseryman in New South
Wales for 500 fruit trees, and them to the farmers at what fairly clear-
ed the expense, and he induced them to plant them. Every year,
while there, he continued that practice. Some few years ago we had
three very bad seasons in succession. Wheat was rusted, and farmers
were poorly off. He asked one man how he managed to live that year.
“Oh!” he said “I lived better this year than I did before. You re-
member some seven or eight years ago I got three dozen of apple trees
from you. I gathered some more. Last year the trees were laden
down with beautiful fruit. I sold them at my door for Is. per dozen. On
one tree I had some hundreds of dozens. They paid my household
expenses, and kept me out of debt.” Mr. Clarke read extracts written
by medical men showing that apples and fruit generally were not only
wholesome and nutritious, but kept fevers and other diseases at a dis-
tance. Labourers in the South of England were proved to be capable
of a harder day’s work on stewed apples than on beef and potatoes.
PEARS.
Pears are of next importance to apples in the fruit production of
the world. They require, perhaps, more knowledge of the different
varieties than do apples. Some varieties do best on quince stocks, fruit
at three-year old, but thetree does not last so long. Other varieties suc-
ceed best on their own stocks; pay better than apples.
ORANGES.
But the fruit, where there is soil suitable to grow it, that is in
Lest esteem, is the oranges—the extreme beauty of the tree and golden
fruit will always make it a favourite. Two-thirds of the earth’s surface
can grow wheat and apples ; but only a comparatively small portion can
grow oranges. The oldest orange tree known in the world is in France,
455 years of age. The oldest orangery, in America is in Los Angelos,
California, 96 years, planted by the Jesuits, at a place called the Mission
the trees bearing heavy crops every year. One orangery, the Wolfs
kil, the best so far in the State of California, 60 acres, returns its owner
an annual profit of £16,000 per annum, Trees in Spain have yielded
4,000 oranges per tree. There is one tree on the Sandwich Islands
that 12,000 have been taken off in one year. One grower in Los
Angelos, Co., says: “I have 309 seeding trees twelve year old; my
return last year was about 2,050 dollars, or £4 2s. per tree, equal to
£266 17s. 6d.” This was an exceptional good year, but he has no
doubt that wit ordinary care they would return over £2OO per acre.
One orangery in San Bernardino, Co., has 88 trees to the acre, or an
average of 23ft.; the average return is 2,000 oranges per tree. In
Sicily, in 1854 there were 11,000 acres of bearing orange trees, giving


3m annual profit of £6O per acre. In 1874 20 years after, there were
-55,000 acres of bearing orange trees, giving an annual profit of £7O
per acre. In Florida fifteen years ago, oranges were worth £2 per
1,000, and in 1879 they were worth £4 per 1,000. Florida produced
■500,000 barrels of oranges, by increased acreage under oranges more
thanshehad done before. In 1837 the first orange trees were planted
in South Australia, and orange orchards properly tilled they are
'worth £2OO per acre. Let us see what can be done in Maryborough;
for that we have not yet realized, but what has been done ? 3,440
-oranges have been taken off one tree (one crop), and sold at £l6
10s. wholesale, leaving 30s. for cases and labour, showing a net
profit of £l6, or 40 trees to the acre (£6OO per acre). The
grower that did that is now in the room. Some people fear that when
so much fruit is grown there will be no price for them, but oranges all
over the world are dearer to day than they were twenty years ago.
Statisticians in America say that if all the land in the world that will
grow oranges were planted with that fruit there would not be produced
more than one orange per day for every human being for the next
twenty years. The more fruit grown the more will be consumed.
PINEAPPLES.
He saw yesterday two acres of pineapples which were planted in
last. They were 6 feet by 3or 4£ feet. This gave 2,151
plants to the acre. There was a young pineapple on every one of them
which at 4d. each would give £25 17s. per acre, and at 6ri. £53 15s. 6«i.
Many of them would be sold at 9 d. or Is. Next year there would be
three pineapples on each; they might not be so large, but they were
•certain of sale at 3s. per dozen, equal to £BO 13s. 3 d. per acre.
BANANAS.
He was not aware of the exact value of an acre of bananas, but he
knew that most growers preferred them to pineapples.
STRAWBERRIES.
Strawberries will grow well, though a great mistake was generally
made in the selection of soil. Strawberries want fresh soil; scrub soil
is best. He had seen British Queen strawberries grown on the Gympie
line, and some were on view at the News office the other week, which
measured 2£ inches long by 1J inches, and weighed between two and
three ounces. The land wants to be well manured, deeply ploughed
no runners allowed for the first twelve months, and then only sufficient
to propagate with; one pint per plant is the general average. One
gentleman in Kent has 100 acres of strawberries. One day last year
he sent ten tons of strawberries to market. At two feet apart 10,890
plants will grow per acre, which at 3 cl. per plant would amount to
£136 ss. per acre. He dwelt longer on fruit on account of this district
Being eminently suited for fruit growing, while there was no place


where white men live in which fruit was so expensive. It was a luxury*
and working men cannot afford to use it as an article of food. It was
like eating money, giving l%d. or 2 d. for an apple, and 2s. per pound for
strawberries—and cannot get them at all.
VEGETABLE FARMING.
The next item on our list is vegetable farming. It was a crying
sin and shame on an intelligent agricultural community that 12,000-
population of Maryborough people here are fed daily with vegetables
grown nearly all day by Chinaman, at about a cost of £BO per day,,
torced with disgusting manures. The greater portion of all the vege-
tables in the early spring consumed in New York, Boston, and the
"W estern towns of America, are all grown in the Southern States and
sent by steamboats. Fruit and wholesome well-grown vegetables are
almost all that is necessary for food. He certainly could not compli-
ment the abortive attempt made in the district at growing Warnambool
and Tasmanian potatoes, while there is the '• Early Rose,” the “ Alpha;”
and the “Snow Flake” to select from, and that would give fourfold the-
yield and come in, in a third less time, and much more wholesome-
food.
MIXED FARMING.
Many people think wheat will not grow here. During the last
five years British India has woke up to the benefit of wheat-growing,
and finds she can grow wheat to supply the greater portion of the world.
He got five samples of wheat grown in different parts of India, one-
from Cawnpore, one of the dryest and hottest parts of India, and distri-
buted them over the colony to any who would apply for them. Some of'
the varieties were so hard the millers said they hurt their French Burr
stones, though no rust effected them. Some were red wheat, gave
heavy crops, but the people of Queensland were so fastidious in their-
taste that the flour was not white enough, and millers said if they
ground itpeople would not buy. Another variety was called “ Buddah,”
which was a very large round grain that would produce about fifty
bushels to the acre, but ordinary mills would not grind it. It was as
brown as rye, but sweet and wholesome. So far as rust in wheat is
concerned, he believed that would be got over. He had the result of'
a goodly number of experiments that had been made by scientists,
which information he would be happy to place at the disposal of the
district or colony.
LUCERNE.
It was 21 years since his friend Mr, Gillam, then of Warwick, and
now of Allora, brought 28 pounds of lucerne seed into the colony of
Queensland. Entreaty was brought to bear on him to throw the seed


•down the creek; that he was certain of losing his time and. labour •
men who knew what farming was, and that no person could teach them!
said it must be a failure. However, Mr. Gillam made up his mind to
sow it, and he sowed it in ground just suitable for it and had a grand
m-op, and the squatters all round came to see and offered £l6 per ton
for the haj, but after a year or two it fell to £l4, at which it remained
for some time. The seed was threshed out, and Mr. Gillam being a
very modest man, only asked 2s. 6d. per pound for it. He would have
got ss. just as easy. The late John Deuchar was the first to get some
seed and sow about 3 acres at Glengallan Bridge; on that three acres
he kept 46 stud rams all the year round. There is one acre of lucerne
at Toowoomba where the ground has been deeply drained and very
heavily manured, and in dry weather is occasionally irrigated, and the
has been enough taken off it to feed two horses and two cows all the
.year round. Many people make a mistake in trying to grasp too much
land. Ihe Germans near Toowoomba shewed about the best results
in the colony, and their average holding was only twenty acres. They
•concentrated their efforts, and nowhere in the colony was there grown
grander fruit or vegetable.
CASTOR OIL BEANS.
The growing of castor oil beans was also very profitable. The
■average weight raised in Northern California, where the plant is an
annual, is 1,500 pounds per acre. The oil mills gave £7O per ton for
it. Its management is very simple. Planted in rows eight to nine
feet apart to allow a wagon to go between the rows, two boys cut off
the stalks and throw them into the wagon. It is then brought to a level
piece of hard ground (called the popping ground,) emptied out, and laid
about two inches thick ; the sun shells it; it is then put through lans.
FIBRES,
There are few countries on earth, none for its number of inhabitants
use so much jute manufactured, as in Queensland. Every bag and sack
«very woo! pack and bale, is composed of jute. One farmer said if he only
got per pound it would pay him better than any other crop he
he . late r - M ’ p herson, near Brisbane, grew some of the
finest j ute that had ever been seen ; fibre ten feet long, and strong enough
to hoid the Great Eastern. ’ _ Hemp would grow to the greatest per-
fection in Queensland. Eamie is the finest, most valuable fibre on earth.
The Chinese and Japan silks, Canton goods, etc., are manufactured
from ramie well mixed with jute. One species of ramie has been in-
troduced which was unfortunate by a most inferior. He merely put
these subjects m a crude form to elicit discussion on the various classes
of agriculture in the district.


The following Table shews
mentioned that were imported into
Arrowroot
Barley
Bark
Bran and Pollard...
Beans and Peas
Butter
Cheese
Flour
Fruit (Green)
Hams and Bacon
Honey...
Hops
Hay and Chaff
Jams and Preserves
Maize
Malt
Oats
Onions
Potatoes
Bice
Wheat
Wine
the Quantity and Value of the
Queensland during the year 1883
54,103 pounds
594 bushels
1,166 tons
249,691 bushels
5,038 bushels
730,367 pounds
811,773 pounds
27,253 tons...
96,364 cases
524,509 pounds
40,048 pounds
140,425 pounds
2,476 tons...
2,483,138 pounds
44,569 bushels
62,563 bushels
41,532 bushels
910 tons.
6,095 tons
6,692,204 pounds
12,140 bushels
94,528 gallons
Articles
9,644
13,674
1,43 ft
43,821
26,327-
340,402.
40,18 ft
20,993.
1,37 ft
18,03 ft
11,711
60,844
7,415
19,08 ft
6,326
5,880*
24,770.
42,245
3,270*
50,116
£746,36T
SUCCESSFUL PALMING.
The “Queenslandeks,” Maryboro,’ correspondent writing in that Journal under-
date November 14th, 1885, states:—“Within the municipality are a group of
eighteen farms located between the racecourse and the river, on good black soil some-
of it rather inclined to swampiness. The areas are from 10 to 25 acres, on which,
the owners are making comfortable livelihoods, if not much more than that. Let,
me give a typical case. Six years ago a man with £3OO purchased a 25 acre farm..
He paid £8 per acre for the land, and with the remaining £lOO partly paid for a full
beginning of improvements. To day I find a property worth £1,500. The indus-
trious tiller never employed a coolie. He has gone on from year to year cultivating;
about 10 acres thoroughly. Adding cow to cow up to the capacity of his 15 acres,
under only natural grasses; placing half an acre under vines; growing maize,,
potatoes and lucerne; adding hive to hive of bees, and stall-feeding his cows at
night, the man has the handsome increment of £1,200 in six years. And there are
neighbour's of his in much the same position driving their buggies. These facts go.
far in disproving the alligation that farming in Queensland does not pay.”


3 1508 00247599 9


QUEENSLAND.
AUSTRALIA.
To Tenant Farmers, Freeholders, Small Capitalists & others.
This young and promising Colony is now offering Special Attractions for Settlement to
the above classes. A
NEW LAND ACT WITH MOST LIBERAL PROVISIONS
Has just come into force, under which Government
Xj JL. ItT 3D
Can be obtained in larger or smaller Freeholds up to 1,280 acres, on the easiest terms
Under the Homestead Clauses of the Act, up to 160 acre Freeholds
may be bought for
2/6 PER ACRE,
Payable as rent, extending over Five or Seven years.
Any person over 18 years of age may acquire this Land, for which Certificates of Title
are issued on completing the above payments, and certain conditions of improvement.
GRAZING FARMS UP TO 20,000 ACRES
May be had on a 30 years lease, the Annual Rent for which may be as low as
THREE FARTHINGS PER ACRE.
It is estimated that a capital of from £3,000 to £5,000 will be sufficient to enter on sheep
or cattle farming on a grazing area of this extent.
Bounty Passages) (By First Class
are offered J Including Et! 8 Mail Steamers.
I Sailing Fortnightly.
The Queensland Government contribute £lO per Adult towards passages,
making actual cost to eligible applicants £2l 10s. Second Cabin; £8 third. Those
eligible for this assistance, in addition to the above-named classes, will be Mechanics,
such as Blacksmiths, Carpenters, Wheelwrights, and others, the preference being given
to those from Country Towns and Villages.
FREE PASSAGES
are granted to SINGLE WOMEN, DOMESTIC SERVANTS, (who are in
great demand), and to a limited number of Genuine FARM LABOURERS.
Queensland is the North Eastern portion of the Australian Continent, and is twelve
times larger than England. Its present population numbers only about 320,000. It
has a healthy and enjoyable climate. Its resources are rich and varied. It is progress-
ing very rapidly, offering a rich reward to the enterprising, and a Freehold home for
the industrious.
For all further information as to Land Laws and Resources of the Colony, apply to
THE AGENT GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND,
1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London.
and for Official Handbook, and all particulars as to passage, apply to the authorised
Local Agent—
