

A FEW POEMS
BY
M.F.REID.
PURGA CREEK, QUEENSLAND.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
IPSWICH:
PRINTED AT THE “QUEENSLAND TIMES” OFFICE.
MDCCCLXXII.




A FEW POEMS
BY
W.F. REID
I’URGA CREEK, QUEENSLAND.
IPSWICH:
PEXNTED AT TUB “ QUEENSLAND TIMES” OEEICE.
mdcccixxii.




PREFACE.
A Eew Poems are the production of my own
brain; that is to say, every line of them is my
own, and is not diluted with anything borrowed
from another. As plagiarism is not uncommon,
this statement is made simply in self-defence.
WILLIAM FERGUSSON REID
Purga Creek.
August, 1872.




ODE TO THE MOON.
Thy pale beam? tremble on yon bill,
Fraught with a tender, faithful meaning,
With a fair heaven behind them still,
A witness to their earliest weaning.
A mute concern, a dee]) sereneness,
Shows earthward through the azure keenness.
Thy fair face glads me year by year,
Its sober smile o’ercomcs the darkness ;
Caprice doth not put forth its leer,
No frown appears in all its starkness.
Thy changeless mien, celestial seer,
Knows no quick lapse of sinile or tear.
Change is a mistress to the eye,
Strange sparkles hurry to its crystal surface,
Keen lightnings palpitate where love-glows lie,
And beauty’s face is as a smothered furnace.
Calm is the air of thy lone form
Though it hangs o’er a murky field of storm.
Thy profile may be altered, still
This doth not peril thy unbroken calmness,
Or shake the empire of a constant will,
Or make thy silver disc reverse of sameness.
Thy joyous, elevated, queenly mien
Proeeedeth from the unseen to the seen.
There is an answering of light,
As placid streaks betoke a twilight-dawning ,
A sentinel doth climb a sombre height
While others inthe guard-housetired are yawning.
And welcome vigilance we know it keeps
While drowsy Nature bows her head and sleeps.
An awful gulf doth loom below ;
But, buoyant rvith a certain grand elation,
Above it floats thy burnished snow
In consort with eaoh starry nation;
And, by the flush of-ghostly light,
I see thot day is wrestling with night.


There is a high'Cdmp'o safe ibUOyedi
Above the ebb and flow of life’s great river.
An atmosphere of calmness far and Vide,
Not in the gift of any' changeful' giver—
Celestial drapery, in deep repose,
Encircling one fair pilgrim where she goes.
Shut or awake may' beauty's bright eye he,
And may all kindling .glances ; he averted;
Thou keepest up.,thy pure hilarity
Though by all eyes awhile, deserted..
God’s eye is on thee .and; an,eyp of fire.
And thou canst smile though, retire*
The bosom of old ocean doth upheave
At thy bland coming, listless sorceress,
And flitting forms of beauty thou dost weave
That doth the upturned eyeball instant bless;
And glittering flakes are cast upon the wave
That cannot find an ambush or a grave.
The clouds do league thy march to, stay,
But bootless is their pillar’d stem menacing;,
Curling before the witchery of thy ray,
Their laegudred purple well thy progress tracing;
They break in mottled fragments and move down
Unto the dusky south rifled of every frown.
The thunder-cloud may build its gloom
In bulging masses right before thee;
Thy radiance straineth through this tomb,
And .shadows tell of cloistered glory ;
Anon thy keen rim cleaving through it all.
Doth wheel,beyond, mocking each vapoury thrall.
Far, far above the dismal piles
Of cloud, that-float so .black and massy,
Conquered yet by no subtle wiles,
Whose threatening aspect, grim-and hrassy,-
Loaves oil tire heart a chilling sense;
Thou elides! through the blue immense.


No picture-gallery of visions fair
Doth stand before thee silent, courting,
Thy royal road leads to no palace stair,
No angel-syren through thy realm disporting
Doth tempt thee from thy way, thou pilgrim rare,
Excursive mists float by thy silver in their hair.
Image of guileless gladness tempered mirth,
Thy revel’s with a monarch kind, though hidden,
Whose-disappearance presages thy birth,
Who-stabiles thee into life, uncalled, unhidden,
Who will not let the night obtain although
Its stealthy step hath sunk him fearful low.
Night hath no fairer gem than thou—
No lonelier guest, so meek and quiet—
Upon her swarthy, jewelled brow;
Smiling when storms are running riot;
Paving with sheen the solemn portico
Of that far home to which the blest do go.
The azure seems more deep unto the eye,
And summer-aspects grow amid the bleakness,
And heavenly tokens crowd the wondering sky,
And gather round thee hieroglyph of meekness :
Thy very , glittering on the casement low
Troubles the well of thought and bids it flow.
I miss the fixed, the ardent gaze,
Flooded with meaning deep and tender,
The music of low accents, the kind ways
That roughnesses did only serve to render—
The gracious presence and the precious form—
To me a refuge in an hour of storm.
The truant streak upon the old oak floor
Is a sweet visitant of hallowed meaning—
A token that there’s life for ages hoar
To those who vanish quite to human seeming,
And that high o’er the death-cold waves that beat,
There gleams the imprint of immortal feel.


Its pure pellucid beauty doth transgress ;
But, like an angel from a laden .altar,
It comes into your presence but to bless;
Modest, and yet intrusive, without: falter.
Within its sheen there is a lambent deep
Of holy meaning which might make us weep:
A meaning of pure innocence add peace.
Survey your heart,' ye hypocrite,: and ponder;
Let the quiet simmering of bad passions cease;
There is a silent sermon glistering yonder.'
God sees the lowest coil of every plan,
And can divorce the whitewash from the man.
Amid an archipelago of stars,
Whose dizzying vistas overwhelm the vision.
Thou glides! onward, and for tempest-jars
Thou hold’st them ever in unfeigned derision.
Thou stretchest thy good sceptre far abroad
While ravening billo’ws heave and earthquakes nod
Thy smile is grandly constantlet it be
Reflected back to thee within the river,
Within tire bosom of the affected sea,
That may repel its gentle onset never;
Though not a wave has;yet re-run its race,
Abides the resurrection of thy face.
Right through a chink in yon old ruined tower
We get a glimpse as of a piece of heaven,
And, nowise heedful of thy dawning hour,
Imagine somewhere skv is sudden riven.
o *
And that a loophole made by angel hands
Does duty as a lure to brighter lauds.
Oli! what a glorious sight the chequered face
Of nature when thy radiance is astream.
And what a coming forth of scenic grace
When forest-branches notch thy maiden gleaui;
'Tis as a torch bv artful witches waved, '
Ho w soon the gazer’s eye is quite enslaved.


And lovers love thee for the mist that bangs
Upon the skirts of mountain, fen, and forest ;
Is fraught with kisses and unvoiced harangues,
Whose burden is bv angels fitlv chorus’d
*■ o *.
A nuptial veil, half hiding half revealing,
And heightening beautv bv its slim concealing.
O O » * r?
A lasting exultation suits thy prowess;
For when earth’s shaggy locks are sore dishevelled.
And the rocks tremble at storm-furiousness,
And stately castle-piles are all but levelled,
Thou smil’st as calm, as sweetly, as before,
Unto the embrvo dav vet shining more and more.
* * O
Shine on, fair orb, and talk to men of peace.
Of grand serenity, of noble sameness,
And make them out of love with all caprice,
And lion-lusts which shrink from aught of tameness;
For, when thy noble face invests the town,
Pure Wisdom preaches minus bands and gown.
THE MORNING SKY.
The sky is a vast pleasing smile;
Fit bath for stainless seraphim,
Who hasten down from many an isle
Of bliss to catch the morning hymn.
It seems as if a paradise
Had sealed its empire overhead,
And burst to vision in a trice
The moment eastern clouds had fled.
The very mists, if mists there be,
Appear in swathes of golden dust,
IJncumbering the inverted sea
Of splendour never moved by gust.


The sun but gave his kiss of fire
And ravening beams leaped on the hack
Of yonder cloud-pile Night’s desire,
And tore it into shreds, alack !
The sky is a grand conqueror
That stoops o’er a prone enemy,
And smiles that he need fight no more
The mirk that at his feet doth lie.
THE SETTING SUN.
O glorious orb of heavenly light!
Thy goldeh smile is fading fast;
It is too gently sweet 1 to'last;
Thy earnest thon has humbled quite.
When thy first golden flickers ran,
Like children from a father’s side,
It seemed such brilliance would abide
Victorious as it had began.
When, blazing in thy noontide power,
Thou wrapped the earth in sheet of flame,
So deathless-like thou then became
We thought not of thy setting hour.
We dared not seek thy gorgeous face
Lost in a pool of burnished, fire;
Quick blinding overcame desire,
And now its aspect slow we trace.
But yet another morn shall see,
Though glimmering feebly in tile west ?
The gold spread grandly o’er thy breast,
From clouds and darkness shaken free.
So may it be when time expires,
Or wearily we plough our way
From manhood’s strength to strength’s decay.
May God restore our wonted fires.


*BOREAS.
Abroad upon a night like this
Is the strong and excursive gust
Above a roof of calm, I wis,
Like mind above the rage of lust.
Why art thou restless eager wind ?
Hast thou no Sabbath-time to keep ?
Does some mad demon goad behind
Until spread wings deliverance reap ?
Beat, beat against the window pane—
Strive for admission, vainly strive;
Sweet balmy calm doth hold its reign—
A calm that doth all moods survive.
The forest spreads its shaggy arms
To clasp thee in a death-embrace;
Unawed by fears, unlured by charms,
Thou still dost run thy goal-less race.
The stars they seem to wonder all
That thy audacity should try
To sow cold life beneath night’s pall,
As if it were a sin to die.
Thou canst not lave their golden feet;
Thy waves of air cannot surmount
The precincts of the heavenly street,
Whose God-lit lamps no man may count.
Rock, then, the clinging sailor boy,
And raise a moan above the dead,
And the quick, tender ear annoy,
Until thy strength is fully sped.
# Written on a Sabbath evening.


L’ORIENT.
The blue did brighten in the east
As the mist-stifled sun went down;
To ardent eyes, what a rich feast
Impended o’er the forest brown !
Like a great, fond, beseeching eye
It faced the last receding rays,
As scarce disposed to bid good-bye
To its grand suitor’s genial blaze.
But Time’s unclenched, resistless hand
Has waved the facing king back, back.
Until no flicker strikes the land,
Not even a beam doth gild the rack.
Why brightens like a splendid dream
The east’s great eye when all is o’er ?
But that it knows to-morrow’s gleam
Shall all its golden spoils restore.
WORLDS.
Worlds plunged into an ocean vast
As bright, as fathomless do glare;
The moving of no cloud-yoked blast
Drives funeral aspects to their lair.
Eye-mocking avenues, mist-hemmed,
Mist-canopied, diverging all,
By God’s own fingers richly gemmed,
Diverging from one puny ball,
Are haunted as by flaming ghosts,
For world-reflections gather there;
The gleaming of celestial hosts
Steps in a vast throne-reaching stair.
Fit peopling where God’s footsteps be;
No pavement need their weight upbear:
Triumphant on a waveless sea,
Triumphant on a sea of air.


Gilding of worlds unworn by age,
Fraught with the glory of their Sire,
Who doth His own grand eye engage
With them in all its wealth of fire.
No human eye may scan them, great—
At least such as beset that verge
Where Christ His saints doth coronate
Despite the swelling of grief’s dirge.
Harps ponderous, unvoiced, unstrung,
Untouched, except by God’s own hand,
Whose chorus has but once begun,
Unbroken and by words unspanned;
Commingling their ascriptive strains,
Which swell till stellar bounds o’erpassed,
They break where clank eternal chains,
Or where untarnished crowns are cast.
ODE TO WILLIAMSTOWN.*
Pair picture smiling by the sea 1
Thy shore so loud, thy air so free;
The green of thy adjacent fields,
So fresh, so bright, so cleanly rendered;
Unsheltered by dark forest-bields,
And by the sun’s full radiance splendour’d.
Thy meekly nestling cottage walls,
Mower-kissed, of alabaster whiteness,
In straggling groups serenely gleam,
Like stars in an untroubled dream,
So changeless in their snowy brightness.
Thy streets half-sinuous, half-straight,
With pathways all agleam with shells.
And flanked by many a garden gate,
With here and there sweet rural spells,
Echo the sea-song of the tar,
Or firmly bear the hurrying car.
* A town in Victoria, close to Melbourne.


Constricted by tbs narrowing point,
Beprauked with ensigns gay and buoyant;
Thy stalwart houses huddle dense
tip to the squat bluff tower,® whose flashing
Doth shake all darkness to the sense,
Defiant ’mid the storm’s wild dashing —•
A sentry with a plume of fire
Which challenges the waves’ dread ire.
Cj
Its lockless, square, and massy brow
Hangs grimly o’er the hurrying swells
That raven round it then and now.
Behold its ensigns streaming near;
The flagstaff, like a giant’s spear,
Where floats the British ensign red—
A flag no foeman’s sword may shred:
It hath brave men o’erpanoplied.
And, like a bright, victorious star,
Makes loopholes in the clouds of war.
In semicircle, leaning back,
Upon the upslope of the beach,
Crouching as ready for its prey,
There looms a threatening battery.
It hath a wide, a startling reach;
Prom out its gaps black muzzles stare
That can in thunder-sermons preach
Good manners to the rude corsair.
Like tethered hounds upon the spring
They peer forth from their roofless lair,
Heady their iron bolts to fling.
Huge piers force back the fretful sea
That vainly struggles to be free :
It prowls around the encroaching piles ;
But still the steady measured clank
Doth tell man can ignore its wiles-
And drive it from its pristine bank.
The engine’s scream, the hedging masts,
The hammer-din beneath the sheds,
Informs us Fortune kindly casts
Her eye on busy hands and heads.
* Lighthouse.


The churches with their solemn mien
Do hallow the inspiring scene;
Conspicuous their enfolding arms;
Their bells, untuned to war’s alarms,
Give out a slow-paced plaintive chiming;
The aisles and the old worshippers
To Memory, Love, how slow resigning.
Time hath not thrown a seamless pall
Upon these olden scenes : their face
Is summer’d with a mellower grace;
They glimmer each, they glimmer all;
And ringing still within my ear
The clash of words, the sudden cheer,
As villager with villager
Did tight o’er politics and beer.
I think I hear the witching strains
That hung the listening ear in chains,
When in the startled Institute*
The brave, the fair, made silence mute—
The fair whose artless native grace
Was sunshine to that starless place;
The lustre of whose modest eyes
Did seem a reflex dropped from heaven—•
So clear, so calm, so kind, so true,
They who admire must be forgiven;
If not, ’tis sin to scan the skies,
And, this confessed, who can be shriven ?
Darewell old town, expanding fast,
And graced with many a giant mast,
May Avealth and peace and mental light,
All interlocked, embrace thee quite;
And may thy rulers give thee scope
To clasp the summit of thy hope r
And may thy sons and daughters cling
To concord’s sacred marriage ring;
So heaven’s best sunshine shall be shed
Upon thy stout and rugged head.
* Mechanics’ Institute.


TO MISS GRACE C***, WILLIAMSTOWN.
Thy dark eyejs shine like sombre stars,
And though a cold remorseless sea
The way to thj good presence bars.
It cannot hinder thoughts of thee.
It is not clear, it is not cold,
That scenes appear to Fancy’s eye,
Bringing to mind the days of old,
And pleasures that hut live to die.
Between me and those visive spells,
That wake up a nigh-buried past,
A mist vet warm and radiant dwells,
e ?
Transfiguring while its stay doth last.
O O v
Let winters go and come again,
Let wintry chills oppress the heart,
Let frosts block up each window-pane,
To me ’tis summer where thou art.
To be with grace and purity,
A wish that well befits a saint,
And what an angel wont deny,
When breathed by me becomes a plaint.
Fair shrine of truth and faithfulness,
Lit up up by a pure virgin flame,
Whose presence nears one but to bless,
Remembered ever be thy name.
THE TRANSLATION.
The sun stood in a haze of gold
That clomb up from the wondering west,
And beauty’s calmer forms unrolled,
As if hy these its end was blessed.
The grass, bowed by the dying breeze,
Gave forth a requiem low and sweet,
And whispers soft ran through the trees,
Night could not stay her anxious feet.


A sleeping babe, whose clear blue eyes
Seem tinted by the azure deep.
Upon a snow-white pallet lies,
Hushed by the syren hush of sleep.
The room is neat and modest and low,
With a window crouching under the eaves,
Spreading the gold of the sun’s last glow,
Though ambushed by dark rose-leaves.
The curtains, like angel-wings, do fall
Round the little sleeper, so saintlike and still,
And the kind good Saviour, who’s over all,
Bends o’er him with a will.
Innocence imaged in stainless clay,
Though the eye’s soft lustre is somewhat sealed
The ear has riddance of our say,
Sleep to the prattler, what a shield.
The might of a resplendent dream
Stood self-revealed on his fair brow—
Visions celestial did they seem
To pass before him now.
Behold, a meek, a gentle shine,
Did swim before my startled eyes,
His face grew upwards into mine,
As like a star it would arise.
Anon his face grew cold and pale.
His hands moved till they were aelasp,
The narrows of the "earthly: jail
Oppressed him sore, for he did gasp.
Through a dim alcove, whose wierd shade
Stands' mo vele s s as a limned dream,
He glided, no farewell he hade,
Death hut a depth of sleep did seem.
Quiet as the dying of a leaf,
Or as the fading of a star,
Receding from the approach of grief
He entered on a heaven afar.


IN MEMORIAM.
The dust, so fair it seems,
’Tis like an image present in my dreams:
A smile still haunts the lips;
Eyes scarce shew an eclipse;
Love’s holy, heavenly grace
Is mirrored in her face;
Hands meekly folded on her breast;
Soul exiled, yet at rest —■
Exiled ! I cannot bear the thought.
What bars strange hands have wrought!
This form, this face, so prone, so cold,
Strong Memory strives to hold.
I press unto my soul,
If not unto my lips, the whole
Of form and face; never can veil
Of death the spirit’s lustre pale—
Meekly abiding the last dart
That never pierced a truer heart,
She fell on angel-wings to rise
Amid the glows of cloudless skies.
0 stainless spirit, haunt me ever !
Thy presence is a sweet j oy-giver;
Be ni)' companion evermore —
My welcomer on yon bright shore —
My intimate, my soul’s fond bride
When I shall reach yon sunny side.
IN MEMORY OE MR. JUSTICE WISE.*
True virtue liatli no exodus
From death to life, from life to death,
Above the minus and the plus
Of what is mortal, so Truth saith.
It doth not emigrate away
From the dark scenes of strife and toil,
But sheds a still, immortal ray
While Death takes up his spoil.
*One of the Judges of the Supreme Court, N.S.W.


Two lamps did shine close side by side—
The lamps of virtue and of life;
But one forever shall abide,
Its lustre’s not too rife.
A glimmer in the outer aisle
Of heaven’s great temple shines so clear,
That we can from our grief resile.
And stay the persistent tear.
The lamp of life wore; gently down,
But other light survived the clay;
Without a murmur or a frown
The good man passed away.
This light was as the light of stars —
Serene, delectable, and grand—
Shining so calm ’mid tempest-jars.
And gladdening a whole land.
We saw, locked in no new embrace,
Justice and Mercy, side by side;
The rigid logic of the case.
The swell of the heart-tide.
Parade the cypress, sons of toil !
He was a son of toil, I ween,
Who strove to gain you noble spoil,
And kept one altar clean.
Integrity of heart rent through
The veil of consecrated life :
Like him your duty nobly do,
Like him fall nobly in the strife.
Like him live nobly, let all stains
Wax dimmer as the light ye near
Of hoar eternity : world-gains,
What are thev to a faith sincere r
t


THE WRECK OF THE S.S. LONDON,
Foundered in the Bay of Biscay,
10th January, 1866.
The sea was wild, the wind was high,
But on the gallant vessel strode;
Upon her glared no friendly eye,
The Storm-King’s scouts were all abroad.
A little farther out, thought he.
Keeping his billows well in hand;
Decoy ye lulls —a wider sea—
Decoy her further out from land.
Great swells of wave did whiten round
The circle of the horizon,
And threatening glooms grew more profound;
But still the gallant ship sped on.
The wind, which blew a gale, now rose
And racked the grim and sullen sky;'
Terrific gusts began their blows.
And maddened waves did forward fly.
Thin clouds sped vanward in affright
High o’er the stark and reeling masts,
And a huge hank of cloudy night
Drew nearer, urged by hellish blasts.
The sea now gathered white with rage
At the black scowling of the storm ;’
Wave-pyramids the eye engage,
Showing to all their awful form.
A hollow roar came nigh and nigher,
Broad sheets of foam were whirled to drift,
Which smote the cheek as ’twere with fire,
For many a crest the blast did sift.
One swoop ! the demons of the air
Were searching her from truck to keel;
To leeward waves rose like a stair,
As over she did sudden heel.


Her long black hull, like timid mole.
Did burrow in their cliff-like slopes ;
Her iron ribs quivering with each roll,
A deafening rush among the ropes.
Crash went the topmasts, sudden snapped
As by a stroke of some huge sword,
Death then his summons rudely rapped,
The wrieck it can’t be hauled aboard.
Impending seas did gallery
The bulwarks round the vessel’s deck,
Their bulging summits dogged her way,
In mood, as they would instant break.
“ Put her about,”: the captain cries,
“Let us steer back to England’s shore” —
Not yet hroused the dread surmise
That she .would curt the waves no more.
Her battered stem swung slowly round,
While' ravening seas combined to stay
Her progress, as they out had found
The, secret that she was their prey.
Away she crept with drooping mien,
As in a reverie of doubt,
Held down by unfair freight, I ween.
And charged by headlong seas without.
An ugly ridge came racing swift,
And, raising high its ample crown,
Sprang on a hatch* set it adrift.
And then in volume thundered down.
In vain her fires burnt fierce and bright,
A dark insidious pool well’d up
That deftly stppped then’ glaring quite—
Their death at least was in the cup.
And silently this pool devoured
Each inch of space within the hold;
The faces of the firerqen lowered —
They felt its swathing clam and cold.


The Genius of the storm had set
His seal upon her gaping deck;
He had not triumphed deeper yet,
For hearts were stout amid the wreck.
The wolf-like seas prowled round her sides.
And, maddened at their oft repulse.
Made at her stern-posts—woe betides—
Cleft them like leaves; we know what else.
Calm and serene the captain stood- 1 —
Like star within a coil of clouds —
Bravely he had done what he could;
He chose to die beneath the shrouds.
Ruin above, beneath, around;
Already coffined, yet so calm;
The shattered deck to him firm ground.
But then stern duty shed a halm.
The waves, at intervals, that drew
Themselves far upward past his head,
Could not prevent prayers gliding through,
And straight to heaven their burden sped.
Her cabin was a place of peace,
God’s ministers were undismayed— l
The waves were ensigns of release—
By turns they read, by turns they prayed.
The cabin floor gave inch by inch,
It was as pasteboard ’neath their feet;
But yet none seemed inclined to flinch,
Or coming death to halfway meet.
Convened within a narrow church
You might have thought the throng to he;
The tempest’s howl, the heavy lujch,
Alone spoke boldly of the sea.
Beneath the davits ugly shreds,
Or tithes of boats swung to and fro—
Snapped were help’s best availing threads,
Two boats were left, none cared to go.


The ship seemed an encumbered raft,
She flushed so level with the deep;
Some swirls that showed themselves abaft
Gave token of a downward leap.
At last a boat pushed off, some few
Broke from the rigid group that stood
As if they their near doom foreknew
And deemed all flight-endeavour rude. >
And plunged into the eager sea—
Gleaming, expectant, on the strain;
Now angry that there yet should be
To the death-song such glad refrain.
The gunwales reached, all in the boat
Turned round to say a last good-bye;
“ God tpeed,” the captain cried—l wot
Tears started into many an eye.
Quick-whirling eddies swept around
The low brow, ot her Grouching stern,
That crouched as, iff or depths, profound
It had a strange instinctive yearn.,
Her stem, stood up, as if to frown
Defiance to her treacherous foe, 1
And then, between two walls, down, down,
Like a huge phantom she did go.’
THE WRECK OF THE A.S.N. COMPANY’S
STEAMER CAWARRA,
WRECKED CLOSE TO NOBBY’S, NEWCASTLE, N.S.W.
Gone ! gone! gone !
A tempest in ambush ahead ;
Gone 1 gone! gone 1
Bearing to-morrow’s dead.
The long black hull but a coffin,
The ocean a spoiler vast,
The Storm-King methinks took to laughing
As proudly and fleetly she passed.


Gone ! gone! gone!
Look well to the city,* 0 crew,
And to the white villas that glimmer anon]
Bid all an eternal adieu.
Bound, say they, for Rockhampton-
Young bride of an Austral sea,
Nothing before you daunting—
Not. so for eternity.
Gone ! gone! gone!
The deep it whitens fast
As daylight waxes weak and wan
Around the shuddering mast;
The temposft. comes down at a gallop.
Riding huge ridges of wave.
The steamer is tossed like a shallop, *
What more but a crash and a grave.
Gone ! gone! gone!
Dire portents seem to crowd.
As a dark cerecloth is o’erthrown,
Night-rampant, long, and loud.
Once light on the waves as a feather.
Now heavy beneath them as lead;
No rivet could hold her together,
.No life-boat could rescue, ’tis said :
Gone ! gone! gone!
Wen start at the drowning screech;
They quail at the sight of corpses strewn
Upon a rock-gored beach.
The waves that roll over her fragments
Roll over the widow’s torn heart;
Hope’s rainbow doth glimmer by segments.
Tears stubborn and pungent do start.
* Sydney.


CHARGE OF THE LIFE GUARDS AT
WATERLOO.
A thunder rose upon the plain,
Not like the cannon’s fitful roar,
More like the fearful hurricane
In fury carrying all before.
A thunder whose red lightning-forks
Were gleams flung forth from sword and helm,
As, like an avalanche of rocks,
On came the flower of England’s realm.
And many a foeman’s head is turned,
And many a spur is driven home.
And many a rood of ground is spurned,
And. on these noble horsemen clime.
And this red martial wave rolled on,
Its crest of spray white helmet plumes,
Within its breast this bloody day
The filling of a thousand tombs.
It broke on man, on horse, on gun,
And, shattered ranks and cloven mail
Show what each guardsman’s sword hath done
When caught in valour’s dreadful gale.
It thundered on, and wreck before,
And wreck behind, and wreck beneath,
Made dismal clamour in the wind,
And music in the ear of Death.
And ranks were swept as driftweed on
Before this wave of martial might,
And one grand face grew pale and wan
That erst with confidence was bright.


SPECULATION.
I see the sunshiny on thy head,
Thou awful mount of gloom and dread ;
On thy grand summit dim and tall
The aspect of a dazzling Wall
Of angels awes the burdened sense
With its portents of ilhistfiousness.
Beyond a mysterious rampart looms,
Stair-less and cope-less, fraught with dooms —
Scarred with abysses, and bestrode
By no one save the eternal God.
A solitute replete with meaning
Both drowse*athwart its stayed careening;
And a rugged majesty doth glare,
Upsprcading through a sea of air,
Prom out the pillar’d rampart proud,
Bordered by avalanche of cloud,
Baffled the heaving of desire—
A rampart and a wall of fire.
The mount is Speculation, which
Involves nae in its wondrous reach;
And the summit-splendour I behold
Is the light of truth, not the gleam of gold:
Aspiring spirit, higher bent,
Upon its summit stands content.
Impossibility looks out
Prom yon awful wall that looms about :
He who would venture from the top,
Where richest lodes of truth outcrop,
To escalade its mysterious height
But plunges, downward into night.
Foolhardy, seek not to explore,
But kneel and wonder and adore.
The level at the mountain’s base
Is immersed in light which no cloud may chase;
Uprushing on the mountain’s side
Keen narrowing tracks of light divide —
Truth-paths laid hare by the hungering soul
When it yearned for mysteries to unroll.
Behold deep gorge and sinuous trail
Worming so covlv to the vale,
<v? t *


And abstruse labyrinths whose coil
Entangles oft the genius royal,
And phantasms whose lacquered web
Holds captive till the life-blood ebb;
The impending, too, of leaden gloom—
Itself the favourite sign of doom—
Doth hint, by its impassive air,
The hope, the finding, the despair.
A host appears on each shining way
Whose minds are aroused by unearthly day;
They move with a calm majestic sweep,
Not a rustle is heard on the hoary steep ;
And they find strange pearls, whose vivid gleam
Leaks through the darkness to redeem.
Rank upon rank they still move along,
Uncheered by hosanna, ungreeted by song;
The lapsing of their mute battle-hour
Bringeth light to light and dower to dower,
Recluses in deep communion still,
Striding from world to world at will,
They search for with unsated eye
Those nooks most full of Deity.
Grand inklings slide into the mind
From a still cold world of truth enshrined,
And the yielding of each subtle vein—
So pregnant with the best of gain—
Is traced by a clear and fervid eye
Whose scanning spoileth mystery;
Its prying glance strikes deep and deeper.
And fiery minds unearth the sleeper,
And dizzying wheels of light do roll
At the awful strain of the giant soul,
And objects grow sickly and totter and wane,
As they do at the rush of a rushing train.
What though there hangs a heavy blind
On the musings of the eternal mind,
What though a stillness fixed and deep
Encloses all that sages reap ;
Within the ’ solitude unbroken
There lurks a converse all unspoken ;
A universe of choicest spoil
Coils round in many a viewless coil,


And presses in upon the brain,
Nurturing the knowing power amain,
Until the mind expandeth vast,
To Solon of the princeliest caste.
Magnates of truth, immortal hand,
Te heir an intellectual land;
A land whose rich soil and richer light,
Unwon by money is stormed by might;
Its kingly holdings endure for aye
And take up a firm eternal stay;
No blood streams before you, no raining of tears
To sodden the conquests of war-wasted years;
The widow’s shriek, curses, the lust for the fray,
And flaming piles light up the soldier’s dread way;
But yours is the triumph of angels, I ween—
Solid and hopeful and grandly serene —
The empire of truth and the empire of mind,
The prison to open, the chains to unbind,
The trust that pure justice and truth shall prevail
O’er the soldier’s good shabble and bosses of mail;
The skill to steer manhood in safety and peace,
And win for all peoples transcendent release.
HYMN.
Before Thy feet I humbly fall,
My Sun, my Life, my Hope, my All;
Thy presence is my bulwark still.
Though justly Thou my soul might’st spill.
Infinite goodness bending low.
Risking near me its stainless snow,
Has kissed me in great acts of peace.
And oped new vistas of release.
Wayward I was, and wayward now,
But Thou delivering paths didst plough;
Immutability unmoved,
Its aspect grand hath me reproved.


Thy very clouds are dear; their gloom
Tempers the bleakness of the tomb,
Brightens the sunshine of fair heaven ;
’Tis well that life ward they are driven.
Too bright the glare, the path I lose;
Its bounds are lost, gone are its dews;
And thus the world’s prosperity
Doth make ine wander far from Thee.
The placid blue of the glad sky
Doth fade from sight recoilingly,
As noon’s vibrating glows expand,
Making so snow-white sheets of sand.
But when gold flushes throng the west,
As hurrying to a distant breast,
The blue doth bgre its virgin cheek
Unto the night-air cold and bleak.
And thus the most of heaven broke through
When mammon’s sunshine most withdrew ;
And thus the most of heaven did shine,
The deeper life was in decline,
A cave of death profound and strong
Is hewn at will -by strokes' of wrong,
With outlet narrowing day by day,
Slendering apace hope’s welcome ray.
Thou only canst prevent this coil
Of stone; Thou only death canst foil;
And thus with anxious eye to Thee
I forward press imploringly.
Approach, O God, the rigid fence
Of hardness, stubborn and intense,
That stands around my torpid heart,
That deepening seams of sense may start.
Let no Avail mock Thy lightning’s play;
Let death to sin Thy life display;
Approach to raise, put forth to heal,
And Thv tremendous arm reveal.


A SABBATH DAWN.
Inspiring vision ! widen still
O’er city, hamlet, field* and sea;
Trail thy meek glory with a will
Until the morn hath ceased to be.
A slumber deep and still prolonged
Hath petrified the powers of toil:
Is weary Nature foully wronged
Because thou bidst her rest awhile ?
Thou stealest gently as a dream,
All light, all peace, all silent love;
Tor angel’s harp a fitting theme.
Helping the shades that slowly move.
’Tis as if pity for the night,
Whose hour of exile hath begun,
Did half-repress thy conquering might,
And mildly stay the eager sun.
The reach of blue that fills the east
Did slowly redden, space by space,
The light of yon lone star hath ceased.
It veils on high its radiant face.
At last a golden trickle, freed
From the dark brow that held it back,
Leaps plainward like an unbridled steed,
Paving with sheen one narrow track.
Abroad upon a slumbering world,
Close flanked by shadows,, yet so brave,
Its joyous earnest is unfurled,
To gloom an all-enshrouding grave.
Compeers as eager and as bright
Stream from the ascending disc, until
The fields are flooded with rich light,
And gilding decks the window-sill.


The drowsy clouds are mottled sore,
Thin flushes scarf their shaggy breasts,
Unseen when night had all the power,
They linger uninvited guests.
Around the forest’s skirts sweet gleams
Of beauty, flushed with rays of gold,
Come peering through the mist that streams
In lazy volumes from the wold.
The sky is listening to the earth,
The earth is listening to the sky.
Yet not a whisper findeth birth.
No rustle dares to live to die.
Rest sits no drooping captive now,
Her kindly reign is over all,
Enthroned on heaven’s refulgent brow,
O that she were not deemed a thrall!
THE SABBATH.
This is a blissful jubilee,
Combining with a birth a death—
An inmemoriam carved for me,
Informed by the Almighty’s breath.
The birth of all things from the void—
The resting when the work was done—
The opening of heaven’s portals wide —
The dying of the undying Son :
All this comes flashing on the mind
With a new brilliancy of light.
And leaves fresh streaks of hope behind
To cheer again the toiling wight.
The ruling of one pure command—
Example’s never-failing ray—
May guide me to the better land,
And step ,by step to sunless day.


There is a Bridegroom in the East,
He calls this day His own and mine;
And through His ample bleeding breast
I see the beams of duty shine.
In yon fair sky there is a Sun
Whose clouding once was human clay—
Whose glory has but once begun
To light a grand eternal way.
God laid His hand on time, and, lo!
A fragment split at His behest,
Swift as an arrow from the bow—
A fragment of the illustrious rest.
Like the two sea-walls that we read
Kept their grim lines from coast to coast —
Firm against Nature’s sorest need—
Until the tribes of Israel crossed -;
So two great acts of God appear :
The making the delivering span,
The amplitude of time’s dark sphere,
Until we cross o’er man by man.
Bright intersection ! brightening still
As you do move into the past ;
While you the cup of solace fill.
Remind us, of the First and Last.
FAIR IS THY BROW.
Fair is thy brow, O Sabbath 1
Bright is thy golden eye ;
Sweet is thy. breath of incense ;
Deep is thy lullaby.
The clouds they move more slowly;
The winds more gently play ;
The trees they speak, more lowly
Than they did all yesterday.*
* Written on a Sabbath evening.


Bail is thy brow, O Sabbath !
Kind is thy meek embrace,
Enfolding all, thyself no thrall,
A smile from face to face.
Even now thy guardian angel
J Doth spill his cup of bliss.
And whispers some evangel,
And throws a deathless kiss.
Eair is thy brow, O Sabbath !
No frowning see I there;
No stain, nb gash, no wrinkle ;
No lock of blood-steeped hair :
There Beauty lies adreaming,
And dreams take Beauty’s mien—
The glory of thy seeming
Is felt as well as seen.
Eair is thy brow, O Sabbath !
The smile of God is thine;
And gifts, like peerless jewels.
Around thee doth entwine,
That gleam as well as solace,
That heal as well as yield ;
Thou’rt where no earthly toil is;
Stand fast, celestial shield.
CONSCIENCE.
O conscience ! thou dumb worshipper
Of what of Heaven’s grand law doth dawn
Upon the mind; the lips may err,
But thy . conclusions all do own.
Within thy lonely room glad gleams,
Likeiguiding formless angels float;
Divine behests, didactic dreams,
By,thy i sway into duty wrought.
God’s writing thou canst spell, although
No savant drilled thee to discern;
Impulsive is thy every throe,
Shaping distinctions clear and stern.


Seared for awhile and paralyzed,
Lo, in thy broken sleep, I see
A brooding as if fore-apprised,
A lion struggling to be free.
Seared thou mayst be, but when the soul
Hangs over time’s precarious verge,
And redder looms the future’s scroll,
And fiery thunderbolts emerge,
And resurrected sins do haunt
Distracted Memory; then, O then,
Unveiling justice, as thy wont,
Pale Pear shall own thee —scourge of men.
THE ANGEL’S WHISPER TO THE DYING
CHRISTIAN.
Ho, soldier, lay thy armour down
(So whispers a celestial voice),
Kesign the cross, take up the crown.
No fighting now, straightway rejoice.
The banner waving o’er thy head,
Art thou afraid its pole will fall ?
That other hands will grasp instead ?
Obey thy captain’s bugle-call.
Away with helmet, sword, and shield,
These may not keep thee, warrior, now ;
More distant grows earth’s battlefield,
Already laurels touch thy brow.
Those stars around are holy eyes,
Those sounds ye hear are swells of praise;
Prom thy low pillow, to the skies,
Ascend a conqueror plumed with bays.
Behold the opening of yon gate,
The gliding down of spirits fair,
The presence of thy captain great,
The crown that thou must henceforth wear.


Mount up with me, the path is grand,
The sky is clear, the view is bright;
Mount upward to the better land,
And bid thy .weeping friends goodnight.
THE DIVINE SOVEREIGNTY.
Creation trembles at thy nod,
O sovereign, independent God !
And shall small moving specks of clay^
That scarce would tinge a world’s highway,
Though gifted with immortal fire,
Be hindrance to Thy least desire.
Dust may they he beneath Thy wheels
When Destiny its scroll unseals;
Mre-litter for a yawning hell
When loudly peals Time’s funeral knell;
This very ball they call a world
Is hut a speck by Thy hand hurled;
Infinite power, infinite skill,
Serve the fulfilling of Thy will;
Thy laws, upon the sea of life,
Unmolten by the fire of strife,
Do keep their still tremendous sway,
Yet they Thy will abject obey;
They are Thy vassals, and for man —
Vassal of vassals, who can’t tread,
A surface that they do not span—
To lift his proud presuming head,
To swell himself as he would vie
In freedom with the Deity;
To treat, with patronising air,
Offers of grace, as though they were
Appeasing gifts sent forth through fear
Addressed to some offended peer.
Grotesquely blasphemous such style ;
Grotesquely wicked, vain, and vile.
Knowest thou, O man! thy breath is God’s,
Thy mind, thy all, even the cold sods


That shall enwrap thy loathsome clay—
Even these are His, and His alway.
And can thy puny vision scan
The whole of His stupendgus plan ?
Even though He crush and tell not why.
The right is His who dare deny;
Even though He damn and show no cause.
Nor heed the challenging of laws,
Know that the standard of the right
Is what is pleasing in His sight.
THE IDOL.
The idol of the mass I see
Compounded is of yellow dust,
It would both heart and mind unfree.
And wield monopoly of trust.
Ho, worship each; ho, worship all;
The idol shines so very bright,
’Tis paradise to be in thrall,
Its slavery is quite charming, quite.
Take independence from the mind,
It hinders the true worship 1 so,
While purses are but thinly lined,
It hates all bending like a bow.
And worse than that, it does not trail
God’s image at the feet of men
Who from realm Lilliput do hail,
Made and unmade by touch of pen.
Lo one poor wight’s got too much soul
To beck and grimace with the rest,
He guessed that gold was not the whole
Worth having, and the truth he guessed.


He guessed that mind was God’s own coin—
The noblest riches could he given—
And honesty’s true upright line
The index of the gold of heaven.
He guessed that man was man although
The Form Divine was draped, in rags,
•And that the heart’s benignant glow
Would help to blunt some thorny jags.
And therefore in the poor man’s face
He smiled full kindly, deeming well
That poverty was no disgrace.
And that such deeds his wealth would swell.
He did not wrestle might and main
To drag from others, and to build
On neighbour’s loss dishonest gain,
Yet this deprived him of a shield.
For people thought his conduct strange,
They quick divined that he was mad,
Such tallness was not in the range
Of vision of the kind they had.
Caught as an Alp is caught was he,
In muttered thunder of rebuke.
The covetous could not help but see
Sore contrasts cradled in his look.
Rebuke of words by words may be
Both foiled and silenced, but the sign
That sets folk frowning those that see
May be impregnable, divine.
Alone moved on the obsequious crowd,
In truth alone, apart from God,
Weaving apace a tawdry shroud,
Their blessed hope a rich man’s nod.


HONESTY.
Honesty and truth shall win,
Let the cunning and the small
Think both to weakness close akin.
Such judgment must go to' the wall.
To be honest is to be weak—
So judge the double-dealing mob,
So reasons the small-minded sneak,
And so proclaims the heartless snob.
That honesty that will not stoop
To swell out hollow veils of show,
That will not try by sideling loop
To higher stand with so and so,
That honesty that suffering stands,
And cold oblivion, rather than
Evanish under knavish plans,
That honesty is rare in man.
Remember, an omniscient eye
Is a clear witness of its style.
And see’th actions to be high
That but provoke a passing smile.
Star, under canopy of clay,
White gem in roughest framing set,
The honest heart its virgin ray.
Though muffled, shall break outward yet.
THE HEART’S SO VERY HARD TO FILL.
The heart’s so very hard to fill,
Why is it so in this full world ?
Why is it hatred slaves the will ?
Because the great are not downhurled.
It is because a wall of ice
Doth stand ’twixt man and man, so that
The uppropping of distinctions nice
Is better loved than friendly chat.


The heart would keep its hit of sky
Right clear of any tyrant’s shade;
But then expect the proud go-hy,
And look to a good God for aid.
Some few expect their gold to buy
Of manhood the undoubted whole :
It is fine dust in which to lie,
But does not suit the manly soul.
The man that toils in dust and sweat
In a keen hurricane of heat
Must have some sympathy ; he must
Have something to keep nature sweet.
And having the disdainful glance,
And the dilated spurning form.
To break in on his woe-woven trance,
Straightway his brow begins to storm.
No wonder; for he has a soul
That roams immensity at will,
Which man could not perforce control —
A sun that strides o’er many a hill.
No wonder ; for he has a heart
Whose every throb sustains a war—
That hides even while it feels the smart,
And bides the shock of many a jar.
His heart, his mind, he can’t belie;
They whisper, unrepressed by glare.
That he stands equal in God’s eye
With those who sleekest coats do wear.
Up from thy grave, O brotherhood!
Unlock men’s hearts, make freemen free;
Let each be better understood.
That thousand strifes may hellward flee.


THE MAN OF WORTH.
The man of worth, the man of worth,
’Tis he alone that angels crown;
They see God-likeness in the earth •
That holds his high-born spirit down.
A whiteness deep within his breast,
Too deep for human eyes to scan,
Whose presence may he only guessed,
’Tis this that proves him noble man.
Let wealth depart, let all depart
That makes life pleasant to the vain.
His true nobility of heart
Will sun him through the wind and rain.
What need for petty trickery,
A noble heart will stand the light,
A noble life it all may see,
No profit reaps it from the night.
Let men with wondrous glibness prate
In classic tongues, let all the schools
Of Europe yield them mental freight,
What matter when they live like fools.
Happier and better far the man,
Though labourer turning o’er the sod,
If he but follows duty’s plan,
A learner at the feet of God.
CONTENTMENT.
Thy sky puts on its purple hood
And star by star is blotted out,
The clouds provokingly do flout
Their lustre yet —
No murmur breaks the solitude.


Behind these lustrous angels smile.
As if their radiance all was shed
Upon some mirror ocean-made,
Or rivulet,
And not upon a thunder-pile.
The eye of God is great and strong,
And cheers them‘with its joyous gaze,
And so unstricken by amaze
They boldly shine,
Nor heed the tempest’s hoarse war-song.
They strive not with a kingly will
That hinds omnipotence to force
Aught that impedes its trenchant course
To goal divine,
And therefore smile on scatheless still.
Poor puny worms their destiny
Porescan when skies begin to scow-1,
And billows rage and tempests howl,
Yet unresigned,
And with their God conclusions try.
This clever scheme, that petty plan,
How fare they when the Eternal frowns
And in a sea of ruin drowns
Such webs of mind,
Confounding so that schemer, Man.
And gorgeous visions pass away.
And bubbles break, and hopes collapse,
And failures come as thunder-claps,
Unearthing knaves,
When Doom steps in'with his stern “Nay.”
Conspiring tumults strike the knell
Of worldly hope and joy and peace,
They in an instant wholly cease.
As pent in graves,
And then within begins a heft.


A plunge from world to world, a curse
Hung like a mill-stone round the soul —
Grim parts of one infernal whole—
Eclipsing hope;
Prime mover hut an empty purse.
An empty mind, a hqjlow heart.
And thoughts in many a serpent coil.
That would a neighbour’s peace despoil,
But give them scope;
Sure these should keener anguish dart.
The righteous, like a soldier grand,
Moves on with a majestic tread.
Dismay within his bosom dead,
Smiling so calm
While tempests thunder through the land.
Omnipotence a refuge is—
A wall of fire without a gate,
Defying all the storms of hate—
A font of halm
To those whom the Almighty ranks as his.
A purpose treasured in the breast
Of Deity ere time was horn
Deceives fulfilment morn by morn
At Sorrow’s hands—
Grim servant to some good behest.
If through my grief the Eternal gains
The simple pleasure of His will,
I’ll bid my troubled heart he still
While run life’s sands.
And own the meetness of my pains.
A mountain of unworthiness,
And near the lurid clouds of wrath
Waiting the summons for to scathe
Whop Justice Wakes:
Pale Mercy wins her plea I wis.


Hearts beating under silk and lace,
Enshrined in soft and beauteous clay,
Show hideous when truth’s searching ray
Inventory takes
Of sins no human eye can trace.
The wondrous world of human life.
Whose saints are stars, whose sun is Christ,
That was at God’s own heart-blood priced,
Is recreant still,
And with appalling depths is rife.
Yet smiles are on yon countenance
Which dwarfs immensity and blinds
With radiance myriad eagle-minds,
And sends a thrill
Through spirits when they dare to glance.
Wide are the plains of victory,
And they are left by angel-throngs,
With all their wreaths and all their songs,
Eor some low cot
Where sufferers raise the suppliant cry.
A kind eye straineth through the fumes
Of sin that cloud this smouldering ball.
And it discerneth one and all,
Whate’er their lot,
That help may come when danger looms.
The clay-bespattered son of toil,
If he but owns an honest heart,
Is bound to play a kinglier part
On life’s broad stage,
Than fools who own whole leagues of soil.
God knights him, angels dub him peer
Of their high realm, and walk unseen
Beside him through this vale terrene,
Pleased to assuage
The griefs of one they hold so dear.


Whom God calls noble let no worm
Who borrows honour from the dead.
Or wrests it from the quick instead,
Presume to scorn,
Or spite him with a harmless squirm.
’Tis not the mere bedizenment
Of human clay that Honour crowns
When she doth take her mazy rounds.
But something foreign.
To wit, the fire which Heaven hath lent.
And fashion’s butterflies, who flit
Before a dreary vale of woe,
O how its blasts shall chill them so
When death come on,
And Destiny’s last word is writ.
The tumult in the gas-lit hall,
Where dancers dare a deepening frown
To hold them in their madness down
Ere morning dawn;
None see the writing on the wall.
0 envy not the damask cheek,
The haughty look, the gay attire,
Soon to be levelled with the mire,
And forced away,
When the death-angel down shall sweep.
The gewgaws of insensate fools
And life-long children, gleam they well;
One fiery breath vouchsafed by hell
Would blast for aye
Their flashing and the pride that rules.
As flakes within the yearning arms
Qf a strong blast bestrew the skies,
And fret the visage powderwise,
So life’s vain shows
Break up when danger’s trump alarms.


And what of balls and dress and stylo;
The innate beauty of the mind,
The worth that lustres humankind,
Immortal glows,
And gilds eternity’s grand pile.
Loom-work and tailor-craft can’t make
The rogue a gentleman, nor ells
Of silk can’t make mere gaudy belle#
True ladies; why ?
The life is prized for Honour’s sake.
The rudest frieze, even faded rags,
Can not efface that burning seal
Which stamps the poorest gentry real
In Heaven’s great eye,
Yet jeered when Mammon sweeps the flags.
God is the pilot on life’s sea,
And all the rotten hulls of pride
That float so gaily with the tide
Will soon he wreck;
So grumble not when riches flee.
Look up into his joyous face,
Invoke the prowess of his arm,
And passing tempests cannot harm,
Or, should they break,
They’ll waft thee to some grander place.
And thou, rich fool, can yellow dust
Hefine thy vulgar clay, or store
Thy puny mind, or make it soar;
Worms, like thyself,
Crowd round thee for some paltry crust.
Say, when a winding sheet of fire
Enshrouds a world, shall envying#
Have force to ply their subtle stings,
Shall love of pelf
With its poor victims then expire.


True virtue is a morning star
That shines when other lights on high
Have faded from the gazer’s eye —-
Inspiring joy
In breasts that hear the brunt of war.
Take comfort, humblest toiler, know
Thy worth, its grandeur will unfold
When dresses rare and heaps of gold—
Which oft annoy—
Have disappeared like flakes of snow.
A soldier in (plod’s ranks he thou,
Let Duty guide thee on the march,
And Victory, that cherub arch,
Will plant his crown
Of laurels on thy manly brow.
A king, a priest, whose lineage
Is from eternity, above
Those who in fashion’s circles move;
Let thy renown
Be graven deep in merit’s page.
A FRAGMENT.
Be true to truth, and then, 0 soul!
The echoes of thy snowy feet
Shall, when most adverse thunders roll,
Be fallings of an anthem sweet.


EVEN WHEN THE AIR IS AS A SEA.
Even when the air is as a sea
Storm-lashed and billowed, by wild gusts
The gnarled old oak doth shaken he,
So men who have outlived youth lusts,
But not outgrown their hardening trail,
Oft quake before some floating thought
That takes fierce life when swells the gale
Of music, and their hell burns hot.
Even when the air is as a sea —
But unprofaned by one cloud-keel—
It strikes the nostrils chillingly,
And would the merest drop congeal;
So he whose life-belying heart
Is as a corpse in shroud of snow,
Is known to have, despite deep art,
Eair Virtue’s mask without her glow.


INDEX.
ODE TO THE MOON 3
THE MORNING SKY ... > 7
THE SETTING SDN 8
BOREAS 9
L’OBIENT 10
WORLDS 10
ODE TO WILLIAMSTOWN ... 11
TO MISS GRACE C** # , WILLIAMSTOWN 14
THE TRANSLATION 14
IN ME MORI AM 16
IN MEMORY OF MR. JUSTICE WISE 16
THE WRECK OF THE S. S. LONDON 18
THE WRECK OF THE A.S.N. CO.’S STEAMER CAWARRA 21
CHARGE OF THE LIFE GUARDS AT WATERLOO ... 23
SPECULATION 24
HYMN 26
A SABBATH DAWN 28
THE SABBATH 29
FAIR IS THY BROW 80
CONSCIENCE 31
THE ANGEL’S WHISPER TO THE DYING CHRISTIAN ... 32
THE DITINE SOVEREIGNTY 33
THE IDOL 34
HONESTY 36
THE HEART’S SO VERY HARD TO FILL 36
THE MAN OF WORTH 38
CONTENTMENT 38
A FRAGMENT ... 44
EVEN WHEN THE AIR IS AS A SEA 45


