

FEW COPIES OF LETTERS,
AND SOME
REMARKS UPON SUNDRY DOCUMENTS
ON THE SUBJECT OF
female emigration.
BY THE
SUPERINTENDENT OF THE LAYTON EMIGRANT SHIP,
J-jj'ilucn:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM JONES, BRIDGE-STREET,
1836.




' A FEW COPIES OF LETTERS,
%C. fyc.
PREFACE.
To all whom it may concern, greeting :
I have several reasons for printing the following pages
1. —ALTHOUGH the question respecting 1 the expediency of con-
tinuing to send out young women, as a separate and distinct branch
of Emigration, has already been disposed of, and very properly, by
the local legislature of the Colony in recommending its total discon-
tinuance, the subject has yet to come under the consideration of the
home government. And although my evidence in the matter, the
result of experience, is in some measure before the public, and the
public voice has required the termination of the system, yet as it was
dispensed with, in form, by the Colonial Government in their Com-
mittee of Inquiry on the subject, and suppressed by the Emigration
Committee in London, (probably on account of its exposing too
much the defects of their management and the evils of the system
itself,) I take this means of bringing it under the notice of those who
have yet to review the subject, and who may perhaps be found to
constitute a more impartial, as well as more intelligent tribunal.
2. —I have a character to support —this has been unduly aspersed
on two occasions by the Committee, by means of their accredited
agent; and in some measure, and with as little reason and propri-
ety, in my humble opinion, by the Golonial Secretary, in his evi-
dence before the Committee of Inquiry.
3. —A justification of myself seems to be due to those excellent
persons with rvhose esteem I was favoured in England; to those
societies with which 1 acted, and which obtained for me the ac-
quaintance of their reverend and respected friends here ; to my own
family connexions, as high and as honourable at the least, in title,
in character, and in station, however eminent, as any in Australia ;
to my commercial friends ; and, lastly, I consider it due to those
noble and distinguished persons with whose introductions I was fa-
voured, when coming to this dreadfully demoralized and “ cruelly
mismanaged” Colony.
4. —As every person who accepts a public trust, however humble
and temporary, is amenable at the bar of public opinion, 1 with
deference, but confidence, appear before this bar, to give account of
myself, and of those things whereof 1 am accused.
5. —lt may be found a convenience to some who are still inquir-
ing upon the subject, to have brought into one vieu the testimonies


of various competent and disinterested parties, who have had the
opportunity of judging of the effects of Female Emigration.
0. And, finally, the public will perhaps be benefited by a farther
elucidation, or rather exposure of the system.
Gentle Reader, Farewell.
LETTER I.
i'rom the Superintendent of the Layton to the Chairman of the
Emigration Committee, transmitted January 20, 1834.
“ Through the blessing of God the ship arrived safe on the 17th
December, with the loss of two only of our number by death (Maria
Crawford and Martha Forrest by consumption.) The general health
on board has been good, and there have been four births, —three
by single women, and one belonging to a family on board. Nearly
the whole of the women have got into service.
“ it is with much pain that I transmit to the Committee a very
bad account of the conduct of the women generally. As a whole
they have very much disappointed the expectations which I had
formed of them : but the errors which they have committed, and
the gross misconduct of which numbers of them have been guilty,
appear to me to be mainly attributable to the total want of good
order and discipline on board the ship.
“ At a very early period of the voyage, it appeared quite clear
that it was not the intention of the Commander of the vessel to afford
that aid which he was bound by the charter party to give to the Su-
perintendent. The strongest friendly remonstrance was made, but
without effect; and the consequences were speedily such as were
foreseen, and of which he was forewarned. The women (of whom
there were not a few of the most depraved characters on board)
broke out into open rebellion ; the crew became mutinous; and ulti-
mately the ship became little better than a complete brothel; no re-
striction whatever being interposed on the intercourse of the crew
with the women. With two determined men at my disposal, I be-
lieve that I could have maintained order amongst the females, with
the observance of every needful regulation ; but I had not the com-
mand of one ; each and all consequently did as they listed.
“ It appears to me, therefore, that not only has the character of
the Committee been compromised, which was publicly pledged to the
appointment of proper persons for the.conduct of the ship, but also
that the terms of the charter-party have been grossly violated in two
particulars. These require, Ist. —That the officers and crew shall
be known to possess good moral character, and the utmost possible
exertion shall be used during the voyage in maintaining and pre-
serving on board the most perfect discipline, good order, and moral
conduct, and in preventing all unnecessary communication with the
female passengers who may embark in the said ship. 2nd. —The
Superintendent shall have the moral care, superintendence, and con-


trol of such female passengers as shall embark, and shall be respon-
sible for the same ; the Commanding Officer of the said ship ren-
dering to such Superintendent the assistance he may from time to
time require. My solemn declaration is, that the officers and men
are «of such as are publicly stated, and are here required—and that
the assistance I have from time to time desired, has not been renclerei
to me as Superintendent. , . , •
“ it is with extreme reluctance that I discharge the duty of makin
this statement, inasmuch as myself and family have experienced much
kindness from the officers and crew generally ; and notwithstanding
my differing, toto ccelo, from the master of the ship, as to the prin-
ciples of management, 1 have usually been able to maintain with him
a footing of entire civility. My preponderating feeling is not re-
sentment, but the deepest regret. , » •
“ It seems necessary to add, that the ship has been throughout in a
very improperly crowded state. Our number of passengers was
much beyond what is legal; and the quantity of salt taken on board
at low freight, produced the most serious inconvenience ; a consi-
derable quantity of luggage remained on deck during liah the
voyage, and much loss has been occasioned to myself and others.
During the whole of the voyage, the “between decks” was encum-
bered from one end to the other .
“In the appointment of Mr. ,as surgeon, a great error* ap-
pears to have been committed * * * * .
“ I have pleasure in adding, that there has subsisted a cordial in-
tercourse between Mr. Marshall’s son and myself; and lus opinions
in regard to the various occurrences on board, and the total want ot
proper discipline, have invariably coincided with my own, till within
a very few days of the termination of our voyage ; when after some
conversations with the commander of the ship, he stated to me his
intention to withhold a detailed account of these matters. A reso-
lution which I very much regret, as his account would probably be
found very strongly to corroborate my own.
“ I purpose to transmit to the Committee, by an early conveyance,
the journal which I have kept, or very large extracts from it. It
seems necessary to keep it for a time, as circumstances may probably
arise here, requiring a reference to it. . .
“ I shall also inclose a list of the females with their respective
characters and qualifications so far as I was able to ascertain them.
A copy of this document I have placed in the hands of the Colonial
Secretary. There appear to be about thirty or forty on the Govern-
ment list who have no claim for the bounty —being either above age,
below age, or married persons.
“ The Committee will probably excuse the liberty I take in com-
municating my own opinion respecting this mode of conducting
female Emigration ; and it is certainly a very decided one, that it
will never proceed satisfactorily for various reasons .
« Ist.—Though a much better appointment might probably be made
than the present, there cannot but be found at all times great


difficulty m obtaining commander, officers, and crew, the whole of
whom shall be men of ‘known moral character.’ 2d. A much
stricter investigation into female character and qualification will be
requisite. We had in the Layton not a few of the lowest chews
of depravity and very many others who considered themselves
übove useful labour. The women most in request here seem to be
w.ut are called ‘ maids of all-work,’ laundresses, and farm ser-
vants 3d. In a multifarious and large collection of men, women
and children, ail of the lower grades of society, unaccustomed to
order and control, and previously unknown to one another, there
will unavoidably, even under the most favourable circumstances be
found great difficulty in management, when there is no leo-al
authority to enforce discipline.
If it be asked, what better mode could be adopted? I should
f a T» that the sending out of suitable women in small parties of ten
twenty, or thirty, under commanders of ascertained good character’
would probably be found to effect the object desired, without in-
volving the inconveniences, or rather I should say the gross vices
attendant on the present plan. The contamination of the comm'
rahvely innocent, of which we have had in the Layton some depl,_
raule examples, is one of the worst effects connected with the preset
system. 1 11
“ It is too early for the women to form a just estimate of their
situation and prospects ; but the prevailing feeling seems to be that
of disappointment. By a memorandum of their engagements whidi
1 will send, it will be seen that the wages are not higher here thai
m Cngland.
“ The two women deceased have no friends to whom any thing
should be sent. Their effects consist of a few shillings and ame
derate quantity of wearing apparel, which I will dispose of, ami
remit die amount to the Committee, as prescribed.’’
The women broke out into open rebellion.”
So that at length the “ kind Captain,” who would allow no
tranit upon their licentiousness, dreading the loss of the shir
put thirteen of them into prison and irons. 15
“ The crew became mutinous.”
Tins prevailing and dangerous feeling of insubordination, which
has appeared in most, if not all, of Mr. Marshall’s ships, was
more particularly manifested on three different occasions, which
I have noticed in my journal now before the Committee. The
a J one tinie finding it necessary to present himself
with his drawn sword, and read the articles to his crew • at
another, to threaten them to run into the Cape of Good Hope
am ang some of them ; and on a third occasion, he was
knocked down by one of his men. Nor was the ship in danger


alone from the mutiny of the crew, but during the whole voy-
age incurred great risk of beiug set on fire by the mad conduct
of the women below ; some of them usually being drunk, with
whom lights were left burning at night, contrary to my desire.
Our escape from destruction, under all circumstances, has been
indeed most providential.
With two determined men, I could have maintained order.”
Most undoubtedly. I both could and would have done so. But
the Captain refused, and 1 could not insist upon the services of
any of those under his authority.
The whole of the officers and crew shall be known to possess good
moral character.”
To this the Committee were pledged; and I aver that they took
no pains whatever in the matter; but left the appointment to
the owner of the ship, who, however wealthy, is very far indeed
from making any pretensions to morality. A very little inquiry
would have convinced the Committee, if any thing can possibly
convince them in any matter contrary to their own preconceived
opinions and determination, that a more improper man could
not well have been appointed to command a ship full of women.
His conduct in regard to some of the women, —his conduct in
regard to some spirits put on board, —his conduct in regard to
swearing, impurity, drunkenness, and profaneness, which,
when not practised, were allowed, —and the loss of private pro-
perty in the ship which he commanded, —have afforded very
strong subsequent evidence of the extreme unsuitableness of the
appointment. Habitual profanity, according to the evidence
before the Committee, was a characteristic of the first mate ;
and Neptune and his spouse, who visited the ship near the
Equator, are evidence as to his beastly drunkenness ; a crime
which the Captain was bound to report to his owner. I need
not descend lower among mates and men—birds of a feather
with little exception.
The Superintendent shall be responsible for order, &c.”
How absurd to require that which is impossible ! —to insist upon
an end and deny the means ! The possible collision of opinion
between the Superintendent and Captain was foreseen by the
former, and a request made that a legal authority should be
obtained from the Colonial Office, similar to that which Naval
Surgeons Superintendent possess. The necessity for it was
acknowledged, but the inability to obtain and confer it was also
expressed. The disorder -flinch has prevailed in most of the
shipments of Emigrants to this distant Colony, will it is hoped
prove the propriety of some such appointment for the future.
The assistance I have required has not been rendered.”
A very minute detail of circumstances in my journal proves this to


the Committee. And they have the further formal written
testimony of their Agent's son, to the same effect, which, of
course, is suppressed.
“ Salt at low freight.”
To the Agents in Sydney for the Ships of the Emigration Com-
mittee.
“ In the appointment” &c.
I must refer the explanation of this matter to a very sage gentle-
man from the Colonial Office, who kissed the maids, and went
with them to the Downs. What he observed in regard to this
matter he swore that he would report.
“ Cordial intercourse between Mr. Marshall’s son and myself.”
Certainly, so long as he behaved himself properly ; but the yo line-
man altered sadly— &
“ Evil communications corrupt good manners.”*
“ His intention to withhold a detailed account.”
Because the Captain convinced him that it would be to the injury
of his father’s traffic ; and as the Superintendent would not be
induced to promise a similar suppression of facts, the youn»-
gentleman communicated to him the important discovery which
he had made, that “ the Committee were a parcel of old
women,” whilst the Captain on his part declared “ that he
did not care a d for them.”
Circumstances may arise requiring a reference.”
I had hoped that the Colonial Government would see the propriety
of instituting an inquiry into the state and conduct of the ship.
1 hey appear, as well as the London Committee, to have endea-
voured to conceal as much as possible the enormities occurring
in these Female Emigration Ships, till the Public would no
longer tolerate the continuance of them.
“ A list of the females with their respective characters.”
As the Committee were pleased to state that I possessed their
“ en h re confidence,” I made, in accordance therewith, the most
nnreserved communications to them ; most of these have conse-
quently been considered, and marked when so made, as “ pri-
* I re g re t that Mr. Marshall should have obliged me to refer to his son at
ali Enough may be seen in my journal to grieve the heart of any feeling and
right principled father. Mr. M. has been too long practising the arts of hypo-
crisy and deception, but he must cease the nonsense in which he indulges about
his son being the admiration of the wise and good, &c., and mis-stating my mo-
tives in what I have said. Let him not reduce me to the necessity of further
exposure, which I do not desire.


vate and confidential.” This list of characters however I will
give them leave to publish, if they think proper; as well as
some other edifying and convincing portions of my journal
referred to the last time I had the honour to address them
through the Press.
“ Between thirty and forty had no claim to the bounty.”
It is a doctrine held by some worthies here, as well as, apparently,
by the London Committee, and some commanders of ships that
could be named, that it is no harm to cheat the King.
“ This mode will never be likely to succeed.”
This was predicated of the Female Emigration scheme, before the
lono- and dark catalogue of crimes that have followed in its
train was seen or even apprehended. God forbid that any
scheme so pregnant with vice ever should succeed. How
strange that men professing benevolence to their fellow-crea-
tures should have so long persisted in it.
“ Stricter investigation into character is requisite.”
How this investigation was conducted by the Emigration Com-
mittee, me preesente, the courteous reader may see in a former
annotation of mine on one of the productions of the Committee s
champion, if it should fall in his way.
“The contamination of the comparatively innocent.”
Alas ! alas ! I could tell sad stories. Never mind, say the Com-
mittee, let us go on at any rate, —let us do evil that good may
come; —our worthy agent tells us that every body is delighted.
“ Wages not higher than in England.”
4ml clothing much dearer, therefore, cceteris paribus, they
change for the worse. A few girls by the Layton were engaged
at £5 per annum, some at £6, the majority at £7 & £B, and a
comparatively small number at a higher rate. But this consi-
deration of wages is a mere nothing compared with the danger
that is incurred by the few virtuous young women who come
hither of being drawn into irretrievable misery here, and
nlun-ed into ruin everlastingly, by the unprincipled scoundrels
who will surround them on every side after their landing in the
Colony.
LETTER 11.
From the Superintendent to the Colonial Secretary. Dated De-
cember 23d, 1833.
« Sj r The severe exertion to which I have been subjected, in
the endeavour to anticipate the arrival of the ship almost incessant
occupation by day and by night since reaching Sydney, together with
a slight accident which has occurred to me, prevented my going out
yesterday.


“ When I left England, two young men were engaged to accom-
pany me as clerks ; these the committee thought could not with pro-
priety come with me in the same ship. I therefore stated that it
would be impossible for me on arrival outwards, to give immediate
attention to any thing but the important commercial engagements
with which I stood connected, as 1 should be unaided.
. have consequently considered my duties as terminated on ar-
rival. All official documents have been transmitted through another
channel. I have on my part prepared a character list for the
assistance of those who may undertake the allocation of the
females ; and most respectfully intreat, that in the present state
ot my health and strength, my further attendance at the Lumber
1 ard may be dispensed with.
. . a^so hog fuither to request, that, if it be thought necessary to
institute an inquiry into the gross irregularities which have existed
on board, such may be made, whilst the ship is in port. I have kept
a minute account of every occurrence , for the information of the
Emigration Committee, of whom I have the happiness to possess the
entire confidence.
“ 1 have requested that Captain C will call with me at the
office, to explain an inaccuracy into which he had fallen.”
—►►+44-
I request that an inquiry rnay be made whilst the ship is in port.”
Ihe ship being becalmed to the southward, I went ashore, ac-
companied by the steward of the ship, my own son, and Mr.
Marshall’s, and undertook an extremely fatiguing and in some
respects, perilous journey, principally on foot, over the moun-
tains, and through the forests of Illawarra, in the endeavour to
anticipate its arrival in Sydney, that a little time might be
afforded to prepare for the accommodation of this swarm of
women. We first reached in woeful plight the hospitable resi-
dence of Captain Allman, at that time Police Superintendent of
the district, whose kindness we shall never forget, nor that of
his most amiable family to us strangers and weary travellers.
A breeze however sprung up, and the ship was in Sydney a
few hours,before us. I reached it in the harbour, in the night
of the 18tb December. After a short interval of rest, I waited
upon Mr. Secretary, and made my verbal report; and a day or
two afterwards, the same to the Governor, on presenting my
letters of introduction. I fully expected that these reports would
occasion an inquiry. It was, however not so. I therefore ad-
dressed to the former a short communication, including those
extracts from the charter-party, which are contained in Letter
I.—with a declaration that the terms had not been fulfilled. To
this 1 received the following reply :


LETTER 111.
From the Colonial Secretary to the Superintendent of the Layton.
Dated January 1, 1834.
<c gj rj With reference to your communication of the 20th ultimo,
inclosing extracts from the charter-party of the ship Layton, fur-
nished by the Emigration Committee, with a declaration ‘ that toe
terms therein contained have not been fulfilled ;
“ I am directed by His Excellency the Governor to request, that
you will explain under what circumstances any of the conditions of
the contract have been broken/ ’
My replication was as follows :
LETTER IV.
From the Superintendent of the Layton to the Colonial Secretary.
Si r , In conformity with the request of His Excellency which
you were pleased to transmit to me on the 3d instant, I beg to state ;
“ lst > That the first requirement contained in the first extract from
the charter-party has not been fulfilled, inasmuch as the ofncers
and crew 7 were not men of known moral character.
« 2d. The second requirement of the first extract has not been com-
plied with ; an almost unrestricted intercourse having existed
between the majority of the crew and a number of the women
during the voyage.
«3d The stipulation contained in the second extract, that due
assistance should be rendered to the Superintendent, as occasion
arose, in the care and control of the female passengers, has not
been fulfilled ; for want of such assistance, it was found impossible
to carry into effect those regulations which were laid down with
the approbation of the Committee for the conduct of the women
on board.
“ I have thought it my duty to originate this communication, be-
cause the responsibility for the due conduct of the Emigrants was
placed upon me, whilst all the power of maintaining regulations was
in the hands of others, and optional to be afforded ; and secondly
because I consider my character to be most seriously implicated, and
forfeited, unless it can he shewn that I have used every possible
effort to prevent that gross vice and perpetual disorder which existed
on hoard the ship. „,_ ~ .
“ Memoranda of facts proving the truth of the above statements,
are inserted in the journal, which, for the information of the Com-
mittee, I kept regularly during the voyage. This shall lie suo-
mitted to His Excellency’s inspection, if it be his desire.”


“ I have used every possible effort.”
What the nature of those efforts was, how persevering and unre-
mitted, first with the Captain, and, as a last resource, with the
male passengers in the ship, is evidenced by my journal; but
would be too long and tedious now to represent in detail, par-
ticularly at this late hour of the day of Female Emigration.
After this communication I heard no more about the matter.
The Captain was kept about a fortnight, paid his money, and
sent about his business. This worthy man again made his
appearance at Sydney in January of the present year, and very
opportunely comes also, at the same time, our Agent’s second
pamphlet from head-quarters in Birchin-lane ; on which occa-
sion I had the pleasure to address my congratulations to the
Editor of the Colonist, as follows :
LETTER V.
From the Superintendent of the Layton to the Editor of the Colonist.
Dated January 22, 1830.
“ Sir, —Permit me to congratulate you on the appearance of
another pamphlet by Mr. John Marshall, the very respectable Agent of
the Emigration Committee. From the writhing and contortions
which this gentleman exhibits, it appears that the chastisement
which has been inflicted, has been as severe as it undoubtedly was
deserved ; and, even if we had not better evidence in proof, it would
afford strong presumption that, in his official capacity, he is very
nearly defunct. For this, Sir, we are mainly indebted to you.
“ 1 would beg to remark on what appears to me, the very excep-
tionable manner in which the Committee attempt, not to meet, but
to waive the charges against them, by setting their mercenary agent
to bluster away, by permitting him to garble documents addressed to
themselves, and by putting into requisition all his laudatory talents
in their behalf. It is not the course which we should expect gen-
tlemen of respectability and intelligence to take : but my experience
of the world does not permit me to be much surprised at it, nor to
expect much from great names and silly titles, those empty baubles,
the false lustre of which is fast waning. Their day of glory is gone.
That prop will not long sustain a bad cause. I further observe that
the Committee (for I shall give them in part the credit of this pro-
duction, and I reply to it as theirs) have not disproved one fact
asserted, nor satisfactorily refuted one charge made against their
proceedings. Results have proved that they have not exercised due
care in selection, and the facts that have been made known in regard
to the arrangements for their voyages, more particularly the shame-
fully crowded state of some of their ships, are scarcely even alluded
to. They cannot be justified.


ic To meet the charge of the provisions in part being bad, the
testimony of the master of the Layton is now given. Why thh>
person chooses to assert one thing on board the ship, and the direct
contrary when he comes to apply to the broker tor Isis expected
gratuity, others may judge, or he may explain ; it is not for me to
say. The mate, also looking for reward, of course did as he was
told. His testimony is of no value. Ask the Emigrants around us ;
the consumers can tell the quality of the provisions which they eat.
“ In regard to the cause assigned by the master of the Layton , of
the want of proper order and subordination, both among the sailors
and the emigrants in the ship which he commanded, 1 assert that it
is false, that he knows it to he false, that Mr. Marshall knows it to
be false, that his son knows it to be false, and that the Committee,
who have received a very minute account of the occurrences of a
long voyage, also know it to be false, however it may suit these
parties respectively to endeavour to shift the blame to other shoul-
ders, to an independent, a disinterested, an unpaid party ; to one
who has no interest to serve by the concealment or the perversion of
the truth. How these gentlemen reconcile it with their consciences,
to give currency, under their to a false statement, is best
known to themselves. Let them, if they can, disprove one of those
facts minutely stated to them, which are the proper evidence of the
real cause, and by which the character and conduct of the master of
the ship will be found to be very seriously implicated. They have
not dared to impugn the veracity' of my statements ; and I have
yet more to tell which may perhaps come out by and bye.
“ Mr. Pirie says ‘He (Dr. Lang) never heard a word from my
mouth to the injury of your character perhaps not; nor do I
know that he has said so : but the writer of this has heard such, in
Mr. Pirie’s own counting-house. For the tenor of the remarks
then made, Mr. Pirie is referred to my last communication on this
subject; though now, in regard to the conduct of their Agent, all is
‘ entirely satisfactory.’
“ Such being the case, of course it does not become me to ani-
madvert upon the wholesale cheating by the broker, in sending ships
without wine on board, according to contract; in charging for some
sixty or seventy emigrants more than were sent in one of the ships ;
in applying for bounty for old maids, aged widows, married women
and babes ; or upon the government in paying such iniquitous de-
mands ; all the business of myself and the public, at present , is to
pay our quota, not to question the propriety of such proceedings.
The Committee collectively and individually declare, that the conduct
of their agent is 4 entirely satisfactory’ to them. Although cheating-
may be satisfactory to the Committee, assuredly integrity and faithful
representation are not.
c ‘ I find some remarks at the end of the pamphlet, by which Mr.
Marshall would insinuate that I have not acted honorably in my pe-
cuniary engagement with him. I think that it would be unseemly to
trouble the public with a detailed explanation of such matters. As


regards Mr. Marshall I use no measured language. I assert that
his statement is a lie, or rather a tissue of lies. To any respectable
person here who will take the trouble to look into the matter, I will
not only show that I have honorably fulfilled my engagement, for
which 1 believe credit will generally be given me, but I will pledge
my character to show that Mr. Marshall’s conduct in the matter has
been that of an extortioner and a cheat. To others at a distance, I
will, when it becomes necessary, refer to an individual in this place,
well known to Mr. Marshall, whose statements will at once set at rest
all this man’s calumnies in this respect. I may state, in respect to
the quantity of goods put on board by me, that I shipped less than
I originally stipulated for ; and that Mr. Marshall, whose first busi-
ness should have been to accommodate his passengers with convey-
ance for goods and luggage, according to their respective agreements,
endeavoured to cram goods in from any and every quarter, and ac-
tually shipped a considerable quantity of salt, and other articles, for
a mercantile house here which I could name, and which I have
reason to believe he took at less than half the charge for freight that
he made to me.
“ In conclusion, I would observe, that the perusal of the pamphlet
has not been without affording me some pleasure and satisfaction.
I am not entitled to the honor assigned me, of being considered a
friend and coadjutor of Dr. Lang ; for at the time it was thought re-
quisite by the editor of the Colonist to refer to me in some leading
articles, although I had heard of the benevolent exertions of the
doctor for years before, 1 had not the pleasure of the slightest per-
sonal acquaintance, nor had ever had any communication, direct or
i.idirect, with him ; but to have contributed with him or other, as I
trust I have done, in disregard of misrepresentation and insult, to
the destruction of this abominable, and pernicious scheme of female
emigration, which is filling our streets with prostitutes, and our houses
with dissension, overwhelming families with misery, and covering
the wretched creatures themselves, who are the occasion of it, with
shame, is indeed a just cause for feelings of satisfaction.
“ I again assert, that virtuous young women can never be got on
this plan, now that its evils have been unfolded, except a chance one
that may now and then be inveigled ; and that if they could, it would
probably be to their utter ruin. If the committee were possessed even
of common sagacity, they would themselves have learnt thus much
by this time.”
“ Silly titles.”
However suitable and proper they may perhaps be considered by
some in themselves, they become only ridiculous when substituted
for reason and argument, as by the agent in this case, to support
that which in itself is wrong. We are quite of opinion with brother
Jonathan in these matters; for we also in Australia, after mature


deliberation, have come to die conclusion, that the terms,
Excellent, Honorable, &c. &.C., have no meaning at all,
or a meaning sometimes very different from that which they
seem intended to convey; also that bits of ribbon or tinsel,
made like John White’s Blazing Star, do not m themselves
confer a valid title to real excellence or greatness, nor does even
a stamped button, stamp a man really respectable m character.
With letters it is different; as for instance, M. rl* o. . . .
p u. F. E. ; and some others current amongst us in
Australia. These render persons to whose names they are at-
tached, really distinguished above their fellows.
“ Results have proved that they have not exercised due care m
selection.’ ’
The fact is they do not select at all. According to their agree-
ment with their Agent, which will be seen in a subsequent
pa-re, he is to get the women together, and they to pass them.
Rarely if ever, so far as I have seen and heard, is any one
rejected. As specimens of what is called selection take the
following “ The health of the poor creature, who was much
deformed, had been long on the wane, and it is supposed that
the excitement of leaving her country, (to go on board e
Female Emigration Ship) acting upon a weakened constitution
propelled the blood too rapidly to the region of the heart, and
by that means caused her death (on board the steamer).
Globe, London Journal.
« Having only lost three by death (on board the David Scott) ;
one an-ed seventy five , who died of dysentery ; the second, a young
woman a-ed 21, who was far gone in consumption token she em-
barked. The third, a boy, who was in a dying state when he cm
balked * n nrT AT 1 Cnrvnrmfon rlon t
“ Dr. MARSHALL, Superintendent.”
‘ e The shamefully crowded state of some of their ships.
See former account of the Layton, which the hter ships; also
appear to have in some degree resembled m this, as oth
particulars. .
Two thousand guineas were paid by government for charter ot
t3'»,ij:£= s r‘i:i= zesjs
charter-party was for the entire use of the ship.
1 1 y « Dr- ECKFORD, Superintendent.”
“ In consequence of the ship having brought out raerchandis.


there was not sufficient room for the luggage of the emigrants. About
thirty tons of baggage by measurement, were obliged to be placed
on the main-deck, and much danger might have been incurred had
bad weather come on early in the voyage.
“ Dr. MARSHALL, Superintendent.”
“ Resolved—That Mr. John Marshall has discharged his trust to
the entire satisfaction of the Committee.
(Signed) “ EDWARD FOSTER, Chairman.”
“ The Master of the Layton .”
This person was now in port a second time, when these serious
charges were again preferred against him. He made no reply.
“ Wholesale cheating by the broker, in sending ships without wine on
board, according to contract.”
“ Two gallons of wine were to be put on board (the Duchess of
Northumberland) for the use of each female during the voyage, ac-
cording to a printed circular, which every emigrant is put in pos-
session of on her application for a passage to the Colony, which has
likewise the signature of the Agent for the above service, annexed
to it. No ivine however was put on board by the Agent ” —(Rum
was substituted in place of it) “ some stimulus being absolutely ne-
cessary for maintaining the health of the females in a tropical
climate.
“ Dr. ECKFORD, Superintendent.”
“ Resolved—That Mr. John Marshall has discharged his trust to
the entire satisfaction of the Committee.
(Signed) “ EDWARD FOSTER, Chairman.”
“ In charging for some sixty or seventy Emigrants more than were
sent in one of the ships.”
“ It appears that a sum of £370 has been paid through my office
for loans of £5 each to females who have never arrived.
“ C. D. RIDDELL, Colonial Treasurer.”
“ Resolved—That Mr. J. Marshall has discharged his trust to
the entire satisfaction of the Committee.
(Signed) “ EDWARD FOSTER, Chairman.
In applying for bounty for old maids, aged widows, married
women, children, and babes.”
All old maids are registered by the Committee, nine and twenty ;
elderly widows the same ; many wives of convicts and soldiers*
here and in Van Diemen’s Land, have been sent out by the
Colonial fund, under the care of this honorable Committee ;
and in regard to children, here follows an account of what ap-
peared in one ship only »


“ The females who have come out to us by the present oppor-
tunity (the Boadicea, to Hobart Town) are of unusually tender-
years to be thus launched upon the world. Contrary to the stipu-
lation, many of them are under fifteen, and above thirty we
learn, under twelve or fourteen. These will require to be kept
like our own orphans, and reared and educated for some years at
the public expense, until fit for service.— Hobart Town Courier.
“ We noticed last week, under the head of Shipping Intelligence,
the arrival of the Boadicea, with another freight of the unfortunate
victims of the Emigration Committee. This, from all we can learn,
is the worst cargo for the Colony, that Mr. Marshall ever sent out.
Of the 260, there are 160 below sixteen years of age ; and, dreadful
to relate, many of them were so young, so utterly helpless and use-
less in this Colony, that the Government found it necessary to send
some forty or fifty of them to the Orphan School, as a present
asylum.”— Hobart Town True Colonist.
“ Resolved That Mr. J. Marshall has discharged his trust to
the entire satisfaction of the Committee.
(Signed) “ EDWARD FOSTER, Chairman.”
« But to return to Mr. Marshall and the Boadicea. It is our un-
qualified opinion that in the present instance, Mr. Marshall and his
Committee are guilty of a gross double fraud ; first, upon the mi-
serable creatures whom they have sent to a country, where they are
without friends, and without any provision by law for their destitute
condition : and secondly, a fraud upon the people of this country,
whose funds they have wickedly appropriated to the conveying
hither of some 150 poor creatures, who are utterly helpless and use-
less in any country ; and then transferring their maintenance from
the poor-rates of Great Britain to the taxes of this impoverished
country. We do most seriously recommend to the inhabitants imme-
diately to raise a subscription, and form a Committee for the purpose
of reshipping to London every one of those poor useless creatures, that
Mr. Marshall, in the pursuit of his nefarious traffic, has thrown
upon this Colony ; and with them to forward a petition to Par-
liament, complaining of the infamous conduct of Mr. Marshall and
his Committee; and praying that a Committee of the House of
Commons maybe appointed to examine Mr. Marshall’s return cargo,
and report to the House what description of objects the people of
this Colony were receiving in exchange for their money.” — Hobart
Town True Colonist.
(e Resolved (by Mr. Marshall’s Committee) —That Mr. Marshall
has discharged his trust to the entire satisfaction of the Committee.
(Signed) “ EDWARD FOSTER, Chairman ”*


“ I have honorably fulfilled my engagement.”
Let Mr. Marshall prove the contrary if he can. 1 have paid Mr.
Marshall far more than his due, and I paid him punctually at
the time agreed, notwithstanding I ascertained that he had de-
frauded me. It was part of his scheme not to allow me to have
any account, until very late in the night before we sailed. In
the morning, between Greenwich and Gravesend, 1 paid him
part of his demand, and entered into an obligation for the re-
mainder of an unexamined account, which could only be paid
in Sydney, and which was so paid, and punctually too. He
has the audacity to state, that he became responsible to a custom
house agent for me, intimating thereby that I was not able to
pay him ; whereas he claimed the employment of such person
as his own privilege, which proved to me a source of much in-
convenience, as well as extra cost. No one will believe, that
with property in the ship amounting to many thousand pounds,
I should be unable to pay a custom house agent his charges ;
yet of such nature are Mr. Marshall’s representations.
“ A mercantile house here.”
The Agents for Mr. Marshall’s, or Mr. Marshall’s Committees’,
ships.
« This abominable and pernicious scheme of Female Emigration.”
Let us observe the opinions which others, confessedly able, expe-
rienced, and impartial persons, ivlto have witnessed its results,
have recorded of it.
« The acknowledged increase of vice of every descrip-
tion in this Colony, during the administration of the
present Governor, the frightful increase of drunkenness, of pro-
fligacy, of crime, is attributable in our opinion, in a great measure,
if not altogether, to the hundreds, and the hundreds more, of actual
prostitutes, as well as of females of doubtful character, whom Mr.
Marshall, of the female emigration system, has been the means of
forwarding to this Colony. For assuming that only one-half of the
female emigrants by Mr. Marshall’s ships have turned out bad (and
we are confident the proportion is much higher), the influence of
such a number of females turned loose, and without restraint of any
kind upon this community, in unhinging the whole framework of
society, and in demoralizing and ruining both for time and eternity,
all classes of the population, is incalculable. We trust at all events
that His Excellency the Governor will not be forgetful of this most
important fact, when replying 1o the charges preferred against him
on account of the influence and tendency of the Magistrates’ Act.
For nine-tenths of the virtuous husbands and parents of this Colony
will be ready to testify to the truth of our statements, as to the
actual influence and tendency of the Female Emigration system in
New South Wales .”


« One hundred and twenty, or rather more than one-third of the
whole of the females on board (the David Scott ) were women of
disreputable character, of easy virtue : while from forty to sixty of
that number (wo quote from the testimony of a most respectable
gentleman, who was a cabin passenger on board the David Scott)
were as infamous creatures as Great Britain could have matched out
of all the sinks of her metropolitan depravity and pollution. Ihe
voyage was as felicitous as could possibly have been expected under
such circumstances. By authority of the first officer, who, it would
appear, virtually assumed the command during the voyage, supported
by the crew, and encouraged doubtless by many of the females, the
ship was virtually proclaimed a common brothel before she left the
English land, and she continued to bear that respectable character
till she arrived within the heads of Port Jackson. In fact there vs ere
deeds of infamy transacted on board the David Scott during her
passage to the Colony with female emigrants, with the relation of
which we shall not pollute our pages. The conduct of a large por-
tion of this vessel’s importation since their arrival in New South
Wales has been quite in accordance with their behaviour during the
passage. We have been confidently assured by a really respectable
young woman who arrived by the David Scott, that there are no
fewer than sixty of her fellow voyagers at present on the streets of
Sydney. And these are the means that are adopted, under the
sanction of His Majesty’s Government, to improve the morals, and
to raise the character of this demoralized Colony ! What shall we
say of that system of procedure which in one short hour overwhelms
our colonial capital with a shoal of 120 prostitutes direct from
London ! In short, no man can deny, that since the establishment
of the present system of female emigration, dissipation and profligacy
of every description have been steadily and fearfully increasing in
the town of Sydney.—(This cargo of the David Scott, the Colonial
Secretary declares that he considers to be the best that has come out!)
“ There are no fewer than fifteen unmarried female emigrants
confined at present in the Lunatic Asylum, in consequence of mental
alienation, induced by disappointment. The temptations to which
female virtue is exposed in this colonial capital are such as would
make any man of the least reflection shrink back with horror from
the serious responsibility of either enabling or encouraging unpro-
tected females to cast themselves upon the world in a state of society
so overcharged with depravity.
“ Whatever difference of opinion there may be in England as to
the actual working of the system (of Female Emigration) and its
probable influence on the Colonies, there is happily none whatever
in New South Wales.
“ When we reflect on the actual operations of that (the Emigration)
Board, and on their fearfully calamitous results to this most unfor-
tunate Colony, when we contemplate the amazing increase of profli-
gacy, of dissipation, and of crime of every kind since the system of
Female Emigration commenced; when we think of the number of


young women of right principles and unblemished reputation, who
have been irretrievably ruined from being knowingly introduced by
Mr. John Marshall to the wretched society of the vilest of the vile ;
and especially when we reckon up the hearts that have been broken
in secret under this vile and villanoiis process of authorised demo-
ralization, we are almost overpowered ourselves with perfect sickness
of heart at the wickedness of men, and we think of the moral wel-
fare of our adopted country, when the probable consequences of such
a system suggests itself to our imagination, with a feeling almost
approaching to despair.” — Colonist.
“ This one acknowledged fact speaks volumes in regard to the
system ; that of the women by the Canton, not fewer than sixty
were domiciliated in houses of ill fame in Sydney, at the end of the
first week after their landing.” Gentlemen of the committee, hear,
observe, and reflect upon this fact.— Colonist.
“ In addition to the unhappy creatures in the lunatic asylum, it
should be known by the committee, and more generally by the public,
that several a short time since in misery of mind, attempted self-de-
struction. When so much vice and misery is the first, and the ine-
vitable result of their (the committee’s) proceedings, I cannot but
think that there is much sin in continuing them unchanged ; a gross
dereliction of their private duty as Christians, and of their public
duty as citizens and philanthropists.”— Letter in the Colonist.
“ From what we have observed, and from the records of the police,
we are convinced that these women have been the cause of a vast
increase of crime of various descriptions in the Colony ; particularly
in the way of petty thefts, and plundering of families by their men
servants ; and also of the extortions committed by the felon police by
means of perjury, under cloak of the numerous penal acts, which
are more an encouragement than a prevention of crime. For a very
great deal of the money earned by the convict constabidary in the
shape of penalties, is expended on these infamous women, many of
whom are notoriously living in a sort of mock splendor, under the
protection of ‘ convict constables and others, whom the laws of England
sent to this Colony to be coerced. It is a remarkable fact, that al-
though the streets are absolutely swarming with free prostitutes, it
was extremely difficult, nay almost impossible, for many respectable
families to get a free female servant, before the arrival of the Boadicea.
Although many of the females by the former arrivals have sunk to
the very lowest stages of infamy, a very great proportion of these
are women (or girls, if the Colonial Times will have it) whose minds
have been corrupted before ever they came to the Colony. A few,
and but a very few of them, may have fallen victims to the arts of the
profligate youths, which an extravagant system of government keeps
hanging in idleness about our public offices through the day, to
waste their midnight hours in debauchery, and their evenings in
plotting and contriving the seduction of innocent females. These
young blackguards, and Colonel Arthur’s miitt ary magistrates , have
been the destruction of all the virtuous girls of the emigration vie-


titus, who have fallen into courses of infamy and vice, ti e accuse
them (Mr. Marshall’s Emigration Committee) with gross injustice to
the people of this Colony. Ministers, and unfortunately the Par-
liament too, have recklessly permitted them to appropriate the funds
belonging to the colonists ; and these funds the committee have ap-
propriated to the manifest and probably, irreparable injury of the
people to whom these funds belong.”— Hobart Town True Colonist.
“ Allowing for the sake of argument, that the arrival of the females
is a benefit, though we dispute the alleged disparity of sexes in our
population (unless the unmarriageable prisoners, and the chain-
gangs are included), it will not compensate for one hundredth pait
of the burden.” — Hobart Town Courier.
“ A Board of Emigration having been appointed to supersede the
control of the Council over its own funds, it becomes the duty of
public journalists to state how this unexampled breach of promise (in
regard to the application of the land fund) will affect the community.
The proceeds (from the sale of lands) are sent out of the Colony, to
an Emigration Committee, some of ivhom are enriching themselves
by the moral degradation of the Colony which they profess to
benefit, and by the expenditure of £40,000, without control, a case
unparalleled in the history of British Colonies. It is a disagree-
able duty to state the truth (a truth the Government have not been
able to conceal) respecting the present condition of the great bulk of
the kidnapped creatures, ivho add pollution even to a society of
Convicts,
“ The late robbery at Hughes’ stores, has been the means of dis-
coveries that will be useful to the Police in their searches after
offenders and stolen goods; as they are also to the Public and the
Government to shew the effects of the present Female Emigration
System. Goodwin went in search of the young man (suspected of
the robbery) who was traced to about a dozen brothels. Goodwin
describes these brothels as being of the most infamous character ;
some of them consisting of one or two small rooms, inhabited by from
six to a dozen persons of either sex, the females being free girls by
the late arrivals in the loivest state of depravity, who were lying in
these confined rooms, feet to feet, with little covering, and in the
most disgusting state of filth. Gallows-hill, situated behind the
gaol, and taking its name from its overlooking the gallows yard, is
pre-eminent for these establishments, and to one of these Goodwin
traced the thief, who was acknowledged by the gang. This gang
was composed of three or four men, and as many free girls, as they
called themselves, huddled together in a small cabin, scarcely large
enough to hold them, and using the same bed, made on the floor,
indiscriminately. Their language was most revolting, and Goodwin
was glad to retreat from the scene. Goodwin visited several other
places of the same description, where the ‘ free girls’ were in the
some state of destitution and depravity. Again—
“By the James Pattison, from Cork, we have received 324 fe-
males. Much discussion has taken place on the impropriety of the


selections by former ships; and with all ivishes to approve of the
proceedings, it must still be admitted that in too many instances the
settlers have paid for the importation of concubines to the demireps
of the place, and for servants to many of the lowest class only of
convict householders. The public at large is not satisfied with such
selection. The landholders who pay for the land the high price that
imports these females, naturally expected that their interests should
not be neglected in the general selection ; but it appears that justice
has not been done to them in any of the female emigration ships.
Probably the Colony itself is not altogether excusable after their ar-
rival—there are persons styled gentlemen, and government of-
ficers, in the Colony, who could easily be named, whose consciences
will readily impeach them with guilt on this point. They are pro-
bably the most ready to blame the selections made, whilst they prac-
tise every seductive art to contaminate those against whom no cri-
minal imputation can be applied. It is beyond doubt that the hopes
of honorable marriage, craftily held out as allurements before em-
barkation, have influenced not a few females to try their fortunes in
our distant land. But it should be inculcated that the idea is fal-
lacious, except perhaps in a few instances. The marriages too readily
entered into in this Colony of the parties alluded to, are of that left
handed kind which degrade and ruin their victim. This has been
notoriously prevalent of late. We think the government should give
direction to the committee in England to stop these supplies of
females. ’ ’ — Sydney Herald.
“ The female emigrants per Canton are not wholly disposed of.
One hundred still remain unprovided for ; but they appear to be for
the most part a useless class of persons, and would no doubt be found
especially so in the interior amongst the smaller settlers.” — Sydney
Gazette.
“ The next question then is, the utility of female immigrants of
the kind and description, moral as well as physical, which have hi-
therto arrived in the Colony ; for although we trust those sent hither
hereafter, will not contain so great an admixture of loose women as
those hitherto sent, namely, about one fourth, nor so great a pro-
portion of helpless women as to household labour, as a third of the
remainder (which proportions we suppose to have distinguished
former arrivals), yet we must say we do not count upon any great
improvements in these respects. Good servants never, or rarely,
leave England. The women who come here are either orphans in
fact, or by their own misconduct, or that of their parents are vir-
tually so : at least by far the greater portion of them ; and very few r
of them have been bred to service. And let the colonists, who with
])r. Lang, are seeking a different class of young women, rest as-
sured that none but virtual orphans will ever encounter the risks
and dangers of going out friendless to a convict Colony.
“ Dr. Lang has set forth with a strength and feeling, which we are
sorry to say has made many converts, that the inviting young women
under five and twenty years of age, to come to so demoralized a


country as New South Wales, is an injustice to them, and a perver-
sion of the public money, and of the main object of female emi-
gration. ,
“ We admit that injustice has been done to numbers of females,
through the false, not to say wicked kidnapping representations of
that prince of religious hypocrisy, Mr. Marshall, and the innocent
but misguided sanction of that board of excellent and benevolent
men whom he has imposed upon, and made the tools of his hypocrisy.
We fear not Mr. Marshall’s anger in these remarks, for we are pre-
pared to prove our words in a court of justice.'"- Sydney Monitor.
“ Many of those females, by the Bussorah Merchant, have turned
out very bad, and many of them useless. One, a perfect idiot, has been
returned to London, at an expense of £7O, in charge of a young
woman who arrived by the Layton in such a crippled state as to be
totally unfit for service, and having an infant born on the passage.
By the Layton there teas also a very large proportion of ivomen of
bad character.
“ Taking all the women generally that have come out, they cer-
tainly are not of the description of women required ; a great pro-
portion being, or at least calling themselves governesses, nursery go-
vernesses, and ladies’ maids.
“ M'LEAY, Colonial Secretary.”
[To this it may be added, that there were lately offered to the
commander of the Augustus Ccesar, the John, and some other ships,
for convevance back to England, fourteen more of these unhappy
creatures who had actually lost their reason through disappointment
and misfortunes. How many more do we know have effected or
attempted self destruction, unable to support their miseries ! Think
of this, gentlemen of the committee ; here is food enough for re-
flection for you !]
“ But if, as has been stated, and I believe the statement to be
correct, instead of all the females being carefully selected, theie be
added, in order to fill up the ship, several dozens of known prosti-
tutes, as was the case in the David Scott, the consequence which
naturally follows, must be the demoralization of almost every single
young woman on board.
“ Generally speaking, the females have not answered the expec-
tations of the colonists as to moral character and qualifications as
servants ; I need not say how much the introduction of such females
as servants into respectable families has disgusted the colonists at
large, many of whom now prefer to have convict women, over whom
they can exercise some control.
“ C. D. RIDDELL, Colonial Treasurer.”
“ These latter are very bad, generally speaking, but many of them
are more expert servants than the free emigrants, as far as free
emigration can he judged of at present, and there is but little tiioJtil


difference between them ; at the present time they are the only ser-
vants that can be depended upon. If not hitherto contaminated,
they (the free girls) soon become so by renewing their acquaintance
with those of their shipmates ivho may be met in shoals in every street
of Sydney.
“ Many of the earlier arrivals were not selected with sufficiently
discriminating care ; numbers of them being, without doubt, town
girls.
W. M‘PHERSON, Collector of Revenue.”
“ From the experience I have had of the female emigrants sent
out by government, I have reason to believe their general influence
in the Colony has been decidedly and highly unfavorable.
“ Dr. LANG.”
“ From the general habits of the unmarried females on board the
David Scott, I consider them as unsuited to the wants of the
Colony. I have no hesitation in saying the present system does not
work well.
“ Dr. MARSHALL.”
“ To disclose a plain unvarnished tale respecting the Female
Emigrants by the Duchess of Northumberland, would be tedious.
“ Dr. ECKFORD, Superintendent.”
“ Virtuous young women can never be got out on this plan.”
“ Every person of reflection must see that very few females indeed
who are likely to contribute to the improvement of morals in this
Colony, will be induced to leave England for a convict country, ex-
cept under the protection of their parents or friends ; and if they do,
what can they expect in this Colony ? Is it not almost a miracle if,
without friends or protectors, they escape the snares that are laid for
them, the moment they set their foot on shore.”— Hobart Town True
Colonist.
A FEW REMARKS UPON SOME PORTION OF THE EVIDENCE TAKEN
BEFORE THE COLONIAL COMMITTEE ON EMIGRATION.
M'Leay, 1 “ The females by the Busso rah Merchant ap-
Colonial Secretary pear to have been particularly well taken care of.”
The Superintendent of this ship, the first sent out by the Emi-
gration Committee, was an old dependant of “my friend” Mr.
Forster, very prudently kept his mouth shut respecting the enor-
mities that occurred on board, sent flattering accounts home (which
the Times Journal declared it had evidence to prove, as we know in
the Colony that it was, false), and received one hundred pounds, as
a bonus, from the Colonial purse, after being paid in London by the
broker.


“ On inquiry it appeared that very little attention was paid to the
preservation of order amongst them (the ladies by the Layton) by
the Superintendent or any other person on board.”
1 take upon me to say that this statement is not true. Inquiry
was pressed—inquiry was refused —and in the absence of inquii v
(for it was impossible that any investigation, quorum pars magnafui ,
could have been made without my knowledge) it did not become the
Colonial Secretary to throw out this aspersion. The Colonial Secre-
tary has not relished the exposure of, and appears to have borne a
very unwilling testimony against, a system which he has strove hard
to support, as the favourite hobby of his particular friend, that
simple old gentleman, Mr. Forster, the Chairman or Chairwoman of
the Committee.
« The Superintendent having left the ship before her arrival in
port, there was latterly no control whatever over the women, and
some of those who had been allowed to land immediately after the
ship came to anchor, were picked up quite drunk in the streets of
Sydney, on the evening of their arrival.”
It is most ungenerous, to say the least of it, to make this represen-
tation, when the real cause of temporary absence was so well known
to the Colonial Secretary, as before explained. The Captain was ex-
pressly enjoined, and positively promised, not to allow one emigrant to
land before the arrival of the Superintendent, should he. first reach
Sydney. Like every other engagement it was utterly disregarded.
The reproof given to him by the Colonial Secretary, in presence of
the Superintendent, was equally ineffectual, and the “ virtuous
females” continued to come on shore and get drunk, every day and
every night, till they were finally conveyed by the constabulary to
the Lumber-yard appointed to receive them.
“ It is of the utmost importance that greater care in the selection
of them should be taken than appears to have been hitherto prac-
tised.”
There is no selection. How many have they rejected of all those
scraped together for them by the Agent ? According to his agree-
ment with them, it is his business to get the women, theirs to pass
them.
“ It appeared to me from the inquiries which I had made on this
subject, that the Committee had placed too much confidence in the
individual whom they employed as their ship broker and their agent
in procuring emigrants ; and I mentioned my opinion to this effect
to my friend, Mr. Forster, the Chairman, but neither he, nor the
other members of the Committee, seem to be disposed to allow that
any blame is attributable to their Agent. Be this as it may, I would
recommend that the person employed to provide a ship for the con-
veyance of emigrants on account of government, should not have any
thing to do with the selection of emigrants on any pretence whatever,’ *


C. D. Riddell, \ “ The females by the David * Scott have cost
Colonial Treasurer. \ this Colony £22 2s 6d each.” And yet the agent
in his agreement with the committee, says, “ The terms on which 1
propose to convey the females, are £l2 per head, from government.”
In a letter to his agent here, May 12, 1835, he says,—“ Every
contingent expense of advertising and travelling, is included in the
sum of £l7 per head, allowed by government.” I will further below
show this to be a false statement.
Though the committee will not allow that such an abuse exists, the
public are not blind to the facts of the case.
Dr. Marshall, ) “ They (the sailors) braved every command of
Superintendent ofj>the persons on board in authority, and boldly
David Scott. ) avowed their determination not to allow the women
to be interfered with in any way whatever.’’ They consequently
held an unrestrained intercourse with them during the voyage.”
As the moral character of the committee’s women, and of prisoners,
has been allowed to be very nearly on a par, (see a former page)
how can the committee be so simple as to expect that order should
be maintained amongst them, where there is no legal authority to
enforce it. More especially when captains are appointed) as in the
case of the Layton) who are determined not to allow order or re-
straint. Let them for a moment consider what would be the conse-
quence of sending a ship load of convict women to sea with sailors,
without any person on board with authority and means to restrain
them. Under such circumstances are the ships of the Committee.
“ In regard to the persons entrusted by the Committee with the
duties of superintendence during the voyage, if they were men of
repute, of experience, prudence, and established character, it is the
height of injustice lightly to endeavour to injure them, because their
reports of the Committee’s cargoes have been unfavourable ; a judg-
ment confirmed by the public voice. If they were not decidedly men
of such stamp, the Committee ought not to have employed them ;
and this would again prove them still more unfit for the work they
have undertaken. The more these matters are sifted and inves-
tigated, the more will the truth be elicited, to the praise of those who
do well, to the confusion of those who are in error, and wilfully
persist in it; whilst under all circumstances the public will assuredly
be the gainers.” —Letter in the Colonist.
Thomas \ “I am still of opinion that there is a great
Walker. \ opening and necessity for female emigrants.”
No doubt that this gentleman is of this opinion, being agent for
Mr. Marshall’s committee’s ships. But it is strange that the com-
mittee in this place should have been so absurd as to ask his opinion
on the subject. As reasonable would it have been to have asked
John Marshall himself. The latter thus writes to his agent:—
“ Pray then lend your powerful influence to inculcate a correct
view of this subject among your brother colonists. Without doubt


ere long we shall see the stream of female emigration flowing as
pure, (fl!) and producing results as satisfactory, (!!!) as the warmest
of the friends of the Colonies, and of the best interests of humanity,
can hope for or desire.” What a contrast does this language, m
which Mr. Marshall is quite an adept, afford to the glaring evils of
the system, to the real facts of the case !
EXTRACTS FROM JOHN MARSHALL’S AGREEMENT WITH THE
EMIGRATION COMMITTEE, DATED MAY 10, 1833.
“ I engage to provide a proper house, to be approved of by the
Committee (fourteen days before the ship shall sail from Gravesend)
for the reception of the young women ; the Committee to provide a
receptacle for those who are ready previously, at 7s. per week, pay-
able by themselves, and for which I am to be in no degree respon-
sible.”
“ The terms on which I propose to convey these females are £l2
per head from Government.”
“ By females decidedly eligible as Emigrants, but unable themselves
to pay any part of the passage-money here, a note for £lO each to
be given payable in the Colony; but such not to be taken, unless
the full number cannot be obtained who can get the whole of the
passage-money.’ ’
“ In cases where the application of legal measures may be deemed
necessary and proper to obtain payment, the local Government shall
previously sanction the same.”
“ All printing of advertisements and documents necessary to
give the most extended publicity to this undertaking to be done forth-
with, at the expense of the Colonial Department, as in the case of
the ship recently despatched ; and all letters and documents having
expense attached thereto, to and from all parts of the country,, to
which it may be deemed advisable to forward the same, or from which
letters may be received having reference thereto, shall pass free of
postage to and from the Colonial Office ; on this point indeed, Mr.
Hay has already given me his assurance that it shall be done.”
“ The name, influence, and cordial co-operation of the Emigration
Committee, shall be solely and exclusively given to me in further-
ance of this great object, as well by their personal aid and union, as
also by advertisements, or any other legitimate means, which may not
subject them to personal responsibility, or cast the onus of absolutely
providing the Emigrants on them."
“ I engage See.”
Dr. Marshall seems to have thought that the Agent invariably
paid this 7s. per week, himself.


“ The terms &c.”
According to the account of the Colonial Treasurer in a preceding
page, one lot at least seems to have cost the Colony nearly twice
this sum, and John Marshall elsewhere acknowledges to £l7 per
head.
“ By females decidedly eligible &c.”
£l2 bounty £lO note=£22. Here then we have the charge
twenty-two pounds per head.
“ AH printing &c.”
In a letter to his Agent this good man says ; “ Every contingent
expense of advertisements &c., is included in the sum of £l7
per head allowed by government.” Here we have another
version; and further, he informed the writer of this of One
hundred pounds paid to him by the Colonial Office, for adver-
tising on account of the Layton only. Very satisfactory—Very
satisfactory indeed !
“ The names, influence &c.”
So here the matter appears quite clear—The Committee will take
no trouble, no responsibility ! They will spend the money of
the Colonists, disregard every remonstrance made by them, and
support their Agent through thick and thin in spite of them.
Some would say, “ There’s something rotten in the state of
Denmark.” Tome it is almost inexplicable.
It was my intention to have added a few remarks on some points
adverted to in the last pamphlet of the Emigration Agent, to which
reference is made in Letter No. V. ; but after many inquiries amongst
government officers and merchants, I cannot obtain even the sight
of one*. What can have become of them it is difficult to imagine, as
we are informed that upwards of a cart load of them were introduced
into the Colony through the Colonial Office. Being thus unpro-
vided, I can only speak to a few particulars occurring to recollection
from the perusal of the valuable document at the time that it arrived
to illuminate the mind and rectify the ideas of the good people in the
southern hemisphere. Truly, gentlemen of the Committee, we are
your antipodes, not only geographically, but in this matter too.
A letter appears in the pamphlet which the master of the Layton
addressed to the Committee, in which it is asserted that the cause of
the disorder which prevailed in that ship, was the continual quarrels
that occurred between the Superintendent and the Surgeon; and
the first mate is made to aver to the truth of such statement. The
Committee in this case obtaining from the man a general declaration ;
whereas their business should have been to endeavour by his means
to invalidate my statements, by obtaining, if possible, a disproof of
* Since writing the above a copy has been handel to me: but on looking it
over, I do not find any point of importance that has not already been adverted to


those facts minutely and exactly detailed, which show the real
cause, and which positively criminate him. They were not
without the means of doing so, had it been possible; but of
course they made no such attempt; and with the truth unwel-
come truth, staring them in the face, I charge them with wilftil
deception in endeavouring to suppress and pervert it. What is
the real fact of the matter? That the Superintendent, so for from
perpetually quarrelling with the person bearing the office of Surgeon
did not so much as once address him during the whole voyage, (for
which course, when necessary, a very sufficient reason can be given)
except oil one occasion, when some extremely improper conduct
required it. As there was no necessary communication between the
one and the other in regard to their respective duties, no intercourse
whatever existed'; and so little order and propriety were maintained
even at the cabin table, that the Superintendent eventually entirely
withdrew from it with all his family.
The Agent, John Marshall, Esquire, professes to express his
surprise, that while all the accounts from yan Diemen’s Land are
so very agreeable, so many complaints should reach them from
Sydney. Mr. M. doubtless refers to public despatches ; but he has
sagacity enough to know, that despatches,from public functionaries do
not always “ disclose a plain unvarnished tale”—at least some persons
think so in New South Wales. Gentlemen in office, who are ot course
not the servants, but the masters of the* public, sometimes have views
of their own to promote ; sometimes they think it well to write that
which they think will be well received. Furthermore, there are
persons in authority who are very fond of having women of Mr.
Marshall’s sort about them, as is perfectly well known in Sydney.
“Be this as it may,” as a worthy gentleman lately said, 1 will
favour the Committee with one short extract which will prove that
the public press in Van Diemen’s Land is as unanimous as is the
public mind in condemning the system with which the Committee
have so long afflicted both Colonies. , „ ,
So much has been already said by all the press of the Colony
against this nefarious system, that anything which we could now
write would only be a repetition of what has been already said by
ourselves and by each of our contemporaries, who have all gone
greater lengths than we have in condemning the principle.
Hobart Town True Colonist.
It remains forme before I conclude, briefly to refer to an accusa-
tion that has been publicly made against me in this place, namely ;
that in the strong representations which 1 have made of the character
of the greater part of the Layton women, a character now confirmed
by public experience, and acknowledged by the public voice, 1 have
been “ actuated only by a desire to gratify my own feelings of ma-
lignant asperity,” and a wish to traduce my neighbours. Ihe party
preferring the charge, in this case directly doing that, which m the
latter particular, lam charged withjlesiring to do. I must however
disclaim the possession at any time of any such feelings towards the


unhappy creatures with whom for a time my lot was cast, unpleasantly
for myself, unhappily for my family, but perhaps in some measure
usefully for the public. My feelings in regard to the poor creatures
huv 7 e been and are those only of disgust and pitv. I entered upon
the office to which 1 was invited with the kindliest feelings towards
the young women; and it will perhaps be considered as some evidence
of it, that T laid out upwards of fifty pounds from my own purse for
their benefit, agreeable to a memorandum seen by Mr. Bracebrido-e
and some others of the committee; an expense which they would
willingly have in part refunded. This I declined; but with
their knowledge of a disposition which such a circumstance indicates,
I had a right to expect some other return than misrepresentation and
calumny. The person used as a cat’s paw (according to his own con-
fession) in making the accusation above alluded to, is a very ill-behaved
and discontented old man, who came out as a passenger with his fa-
mily amongst the rabble of the ship • and whose misconduct, while it
produced much discomfort to himself, was the occasion also of much of
the insubordination which existed on board. He should have been
the last to complain. lam quite willing to allow there were some
decent young women on board—his own children were amongst the
number. And a very few of the general cargo were really res-
pectable. • J
tc But enough has been said to convince every unprejudiced mind.”
I will therefore leave this subject. But as I know that many of my
friendsin England are desirous of learning what ismy opinion, after
some residence in the Colony, respecting Emigration generally,
and possibly also some other persons, strangers, into whose hands
this tract may come, I will take this opportunity of adding a few
words upon the subject. I would say that if a person of inde-
pendent principles, and of honorable intentions, of the middle
class of society, comes out engaged in commercial concerns, he
may expect within a month or two after his arrival, to be prose-
cuted by some vile scoundrel with whom he may unluckily have
had transactions in trade, because he will not submit to be
cheated ; that this suit commenced against him, will be deferred
for three or four successive sessions, and large additional ex-
penses thereby incurred ; that a Chairman of Quarter Sessions,
acting also as private counsel, and taking a fee from a knowii
scoundrel, will degrade his office, and debase his character by
descending to low abuse of the defendant, as the only chance,
with the assistance of perjury, of making wickedness trium-
phant; that after the Court' had granted a Special Jury of
respectable men, who unhesitatingly give a verdict in his favor,
a person styled Chief Justice will refuse justice in allowing the
expense of it. He may expect that some rascal of a servant
will rob him, and when expelled from his premises, if not paid
more than his due, will swear an assault against him—that he
will be hauled up to the Police Office, and be detained for three


or four days with his servant before he gets a hearing on the
charge ; that young men sitting on the bench as Magistrates
and Judges over their elders and betters, will, on manifestly
perjured testimony, and in defiance of evidence, convict and fine
him. He may expect to be summoned by the same or another
such villain, to the Court of Requests, and ordered by a Popish
Commissioner, to pay a second time, money which is proved
to have been paid. He may expect to be summoned three
or four times a year to leave his business, however important,
to go as juryman into an execrable law court to settle other
person’s disputes; and if he decline, through any scruples
of conscience about the shameless and wicked prostitution of
oaths, from any pressure of business, or from any reluctance to
be huddled in a jurybox with the vilest of characters, he may
expect to be fined for so doing. If part of his family and
servants should happen to be upon the water in the evening,
and accidentally come near a government vessel, he may expect
that a gun will be discharged at the boat, occasioning or
causing damage, with imminent danger of the loss of the lives of
all therein; and, if complaint is made to the proper authorities, that
it will be treated with contempt, if notinsult. If from respectability
of character a gentleman may have been appointed a Magistrate
by a former Governor, and presumes to use his office for the
detection and punishment of patronized villainy, ho may expect
to be arbitrarily dismissed from the bench, and some pliant youth,
or young “military coxcomb,” to be put in his place. Nay, even
if he should be a Member of Council, he is not safe if not subser-
vient. Such things might be stated as facts ; and these, and
other such annoyances are what persons of independent character
and conduct, not being hungry Irishmen, must expect, under
present circumstances, in this “ cruelly mismanaged” Co-
lony ; —a Colony, where the acquisition of money, from the
highest almost to the lowest, is the principal object of con-
cern ; a Colony, where the government, whilst making profes-
sions of desire to promote the welfare of the community, makes
also its boast of an increasing revenue, derived principally from
the destruction of our fellow creatures, and the promotion of every
kind of vice, of crimes of unparalleled number, and of unparalleled
enormity, arising in great measure from the encouragement given
to the consumption of ardent spirits, and the consequent almost
universal prevalence of drunkenness. The folly and wickedness
of such conduct can only be duly appreciated by those who un-
happily experience its effects. A conduct so unbecoming a
community professedly Christian, so dangerous in a population
where the majority forms but one mass of vice, a conduct of which
even our uncultivated neighbours, the New Zealanders, may
make us ashamed, for they have wisdom enough to prohibit the
poison ; to say nothing of the wise and temperate proceedings
of our once despised brother Jonathan.


This is a gloomy picture, but it is a picture from the life. There
is, however, hope at the bottom of this Pandora’s box of
evils. A strong phalanx of virtue and sound principles is, we
trust, forming in the Colony, which, with the assistance of the
Home Government, will, we hope and believe, quickly apply
remedies to the numerous evils of which we have to complain;
and then, with the abundant opening which undoubtedly exists
for the successful application of labour, of talent, and of capital,
this will quickly become as desirable a country, as any upon the
face of the earth. To the industrious and sober poor, it even
now affords the best of prospects. The commercial man also
will find business extending on every side; and to the man of
pastoral taste and habits, the field which it presents is both pro-
fitable and unbounded.
PRINTED BY W. JONES, BRIDGE-STREET,
