

/ fib 2%
A FEW CONCISE ARGUMENTS
IN FAVOUR OF THE
CHRISTIAN BELIEF.
(By DAVID BUCHANAN,) Barrister-at- law.
Reprinted from the “MAITLAND MERCURYSept. 3, 1885,
It may not be out of place, at this particular juncture,
to offer a few words on the above great subject, the
subject of subjects, and therefore I will strike into
it at once. The Christian belief, beautiful in its
simplicity and purity, and so cheering and consoling
in the breadth and all comprehensive efficacy of its
inimitable teachings is given us by direct revelation
from God as contained in the holy scriptures of
truth. In those priceless writings we derive a clear
knowledge of the nature and character of the Creator
of all things, of our relation to Him and of His
relation to us, of our duties here in all the relations
of life; besides matchless guidance and direction
through the dangers and temptations of the world,
and an assured and peaceful transport through the
dark valley and shadow of death, to the calm, still
happiness of the world beyond—the Christian’s hope
and reward. Without this revelation and heavenly
guide we know nothing, —and I put it, in all
seriousness, to the strongest of minds and freest of
free-thinkers, whether the Christian System is not
more rational, more true, more worthy of earnest
sincere belief than the wild barren speculations of
dark and narrow infidelity. A glance at the sur-
rounding miracles of creation, without any aid from
revelation, would teach the rational intelligent mind
that a vast and marvellous intelligence has been at
work. Everywhere do we see evidences of design,
and in the multifarious and diversified creation
around us overwhelming proofs of a great directing
mind, the Creator and Upholder of it all. In the
immeasurable vastness of this creation, the strongest,
the greatest, of scientific minds must bend to the
dust in revential awe —and when we reflect that we
can only see the merest infinitesmal part of it, how
enhanced is our wonder, and how irresistably are we
driven to the conclusion that the vast, intricate,
complex workmanship, visible to us, was created and
is upheld and governed by the one true, omniscient
and omnipresent God of Heaven and earth. Thomas
Carlyle, contemplating all this, breaks forth in the
following powerful and eloquent words : —“ So has
it been from the beginning, so will it be to the end—
generation after generation takes to itself the form
of a body and forth-issuing from Cimmerian night
on Heaven’s missions appears. What force and lire
is in each he expends—one grinding at the mill of
industry—one hunter-like climbing the giddy Alpine
heights of science ; one madly dashed in pieces on
the rocks of strife, in war with his fellows —and then
the heaven-sent is re-called; his earthly vesture falls
away, and soon even to sense becomes a vanished
shadow. Thus like some wild-flaming, wild-thunder-
ing train of heaven’s artillery, does this mysterious
mankind thunder and flame in long-drawn, quick-


succeeding grandeur through the unknown deep.
Thus, like a God-created fire-breathing spirit-host,
we emerge from the inane ; haste stormfully across
the astonished earth; then plunge again into the
inane. Earth’s mountains are levelled, and her
seas filled up, in our passage. Can the earth, which
is but dead and a vision, resist spirits which have
reality and are alive ? On the hardest adamant
some footprint of us is stamped in ; the last rear of
the host will read traces of the earliest van. But
whence ? 0 Heaven, whither ? Sense knows not;
Faith knows not; only that it is through mystery to
mystery, from God and to God —
“ We are such stuff,
As dreams are made of, and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep.”
Thomas Carlyle was about twenty-five years of age
when he wrote the above piece of profound and
wonderfully expressed philosophy. It will be
noticed that he there admits that both sense
and faith know that we come from Gcd, and that
when we leave here we go to Him.
The Christian, in looking round on all the
wonders of creation, views them as the work of a
stupendous creative intelligence utterly incompre-
hensible, in its vastness, to the clearest of minds.
This fact, one would think, is being constantly
thundered into the ears of all men by what they see
around them. The Christian has it farther
guaranteed to him by a direct instruction from God
Himself, conveyed to him in the holy scriptures.
The Free-thinker —or Infidel his proper name,
because I myself lay claim to be as free a thinker as
any man living—the Infidel, I say, sees all that the
Christian sees, but he thinks it was all brought about
by what he calls evolution—that is, that matter was
from all eternity, and that by its constant and
eternal tumbling about it created and governed,
and regulated and upheld, and still does regulate
and uphold all the marvels and miracles here spoken
of. Thus the doctrine of evolution asks us to believe
that matter created itself, gave itself motion, and
farther that this same dull, lifeless matter, by
merely rolling and tumbling about, performed more
incredible miracles than the wildest imagination
ever dreamt of. That by this tumbling process of
inert lifeless matter, animal life was slowly and
gradually evolved from it, and that such splendid
endowments of far reaching thought, as were
possessed by Bacon and Newton, Shakespeare and
Milton, were created and called into existence by
the same incredible process. Whoever or whatever
gave man his life and fine faculties must have had
such things in their possession, otherwise they could
not have been given. Those who believe in the
doctrine of evolution, or any of the other barren
doctrines of infidelity, must believe that matter gave
what it never had in its power to give, and that
dead lifeless matter created an infinite variety of
animal life, endowing it with an infinite variety of
splendid attributes, besides ruling and upholding,
after creating innumerable worlds, and regulating
them on principles far above the highest science of
the human mind to comprehend, or in the slightest


degree to understand. I put it to the plain sense of
the people, is such a monstrous belief as this for a
moment tenable ? If matter, or the great im-
measurable All, was left to itself for a single second,
without the governing or upholding power of its
great Creator, it would rush headlong into chaos and
confusion, and all would be one extended scene of
desolation and ruin. The Christian believes that an
All-seeing, All-knowing, and All-powerful God
created all things, and rules, and governs, and regu-
lates all creation. This is a rational belief, and it
is confirmed to us by revelation. The infidel thinks
there was no Creator, but that all was brought
about as I have above described. If there were the
very slightest truth in this, why do we not see this
doctrine of evolution in practice at this very moment ?
If evolution created man and beast and infinite
worlds, it must be doing so still? Let the upholders
of this doctrine show us a man not born but created
by evolution, and if evolution can create and has
created all things, the process must be going on
now, here, as well as all through the interminable
realms of space. It is much more absurd to suppose
that evolution created man and all things, than it
would be to suppose that evolution created all our
machinery, locomotives, furniture, and even our
clothing. Ido not pretend to the possession of any
higher faculty than the ordinary man, but that
faculty readily accepts the reasonableness of the
Christian theory of the Universe, and of existence,
and warmly embraces the high moral guidance of
the Christian teachings as absolutely insuring to
each individual life that accepts and practices them —
a serene, unclouded happiness, a calmness, and
peace of mind that has been well described as
“ passing all understanding.”
Let any man only bring himself under the
guidance of the Christian religion, and it will make
him an honest, charitable, good, and faithful man,
true in all the relations of life, respected even by
the worthless, and a source of comfort to himself
and all who come in contact with him, while in the
list trying hour of existence it will irradiate his
whole soul with a heavenly peace beyond the
power of free-thinking infidelity, even to imagine.
I would encroach too much on your space, if I
were to go into the great question of the bible
truth—any one who carefully reads it will find this
out for himself. I have always been marvellously
struck with the extraordinary story of the life,
character and death of our revered Saviour, Je'sus
Christ. Let the unbeliever account to me for that
story on any other hypothesis than that of his divine
character if he can. Again, does the amazing life
of the great apostle, Paul, not carry truth in every
line of it ? and, to the thinking man, is a most
genuine and striking proof of the truth of the entire
narrative.
The apostle Paul was no ordinary man ; he was
a man of great learning, of inflexible resolute pur-
pose. A .Tew of the Jews, and a Pharisee of the
Pharisees, holding high office in his sect, he was
the most relentless enemy and bitter opponent of
Jesus Christ and his religion, and was elevated to


jAFp
\ *
high position and trust in consequence of this. His
zeal was intense, and his work was to drag Christians
in chains to the tribunals of punishment. The
whole soul of Paul was wrapped up in this work,
and he pursued it with a zeal amounting to
fanaticism, gaining high honour, confidence, and
respect for so acting. While engaged in the extreme
heat and height of this work, he is intercepted by a
mysterious voice sounding in his ears, prostrating
him in the dust, and changing the whole course of
his life, thoughts, feelings, principles, and instincts.
Paul was no sentimental dreamer, but a stern reso -
lute man, and he tells us himself that the voice that
sounded in his ears was the voice of Jesus Christ
reproaching him with his cruelties, and calling upon
him to alteration and repentance; whatever it was
that happened to him, Paul rose from the ground
an entirely different man, and from that day to the
day of his cruel and ignominious death, years after-
wards, he became the most devoted enthusiastic
follower, and the most eloquent preacher of Christ’s
doctrine that the world has ever seen. Well did
Paul know that he had nothing, in a worldly sense,
to gain by this action. He descended from a posi-
tion of power and influence, where he was respected
and honoured, to encounter almost all the ills that
flesh is heir to —poverty, imprisonments, painful and
repeated floggings, brutal and savage insult,
wherever he went —no safety, no security, but a
constant apprehension of a cruel death. Does he
ever flinch under an ordeal of this description ? No,
not for a moment; but walks through it all, and on
to his cruel death with a cheerfulness and even
happiness unexampled in the world’s history. It is
touching in the extreme to read the last words of
the great apostle, as he closes his illustrious career
—“For I am now ready to be offered, and the time
of my departure is at hand ; I have fought a good
I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith ; henceforth, there is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous
judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me only,
but to all them also that love his appearing.” The
man w r ho can read this story without the very
circumstances of it carrying conviction, and
much more than conviction, to his very soul of
its absolute and literal truth, must be the
Victim of a mental defect, rendering him incapable
of either believing or disbelieving anything. Let
those who are touched by the common and very
shallow intidility that is abroad, only turn to their
bibles for guidance and enlightment, and they will
soon find that a clearer light shines there than the
false fire that so obscurely burns in the works of
Herbert Spencer and the like, works that whatever
intellectual expertness they may display, only
succeed in distracting and confusing the feeble
minded, without in the slightest degree serving the
great cause of truth and progress.
Clarcinnis, Itedmyre, 31st August, 1886.
BOORE & LONG, Printers k BookbiAders, 37 Market-st. Sydney,
