

F ~ XA.r
A FewJi-
p
Facts
Concerning the
, - (V ri
Hours Worked by Shop Assistants
In Sydney and Suburbs.
Issued by the Early Closing Association of
N.S.W.
Wm. Brooks & Co., Thk City Printers,
22 Bridge Strkkt.


Sydney, September, 1898.
Remarks
** The Executive Committee of the Early Closing Associa-
tion of New South Wales bemg desirous of plac : ng before the
public some facts concerning the hours worked by shop
assistants, it was thought it could not do better than publish
the two reports read by the hon, secs, of the Toynbee Guild
(Messrs. T. R. Bavin and P. F. Rowland, 8.A.,) at a recent
public meeting convened by the Guild for the purpose of dis-
cussing the “shop assistants grievances” and the best
method for relieving them. We take this opportunity to
thank those gentlemen for the time spent in gathering these
facts and for allowing us the use of their reports ; also the
Toynbee Guild for making the subject of the “ Early Closing
of Shops ” a real live question, one worthy to be championed
by men of learning and ability ; to the clergy for preaching
on the subject and in other ways bringing the matter before
their adherents ; to the press for publishing reports of our
meetings ; to the Members of Parliament who have spoken at
our meetings, also the large number who have given us a
written promise to assist in passing an Early Closing Bill;
and to the ladies of Sydney, amongst whom we may specially
mention Lady Darley and Mtjp Rose Scott, who have helped
us right nobly. /
We ask of all those who may chance to receive a copy of
this pamphlet a careful study of same, and would point out
that the facts herein contained have been collected by
gentlemen who are not shop assistants and in no way in-
terested in the business, excepting the desire they have to see
justice done to their suffering fellow creatures.
Should any reader after perusing these facts still feel
dub’ous as to their accuracy, we would respectfully urge them
to investigate the matter for themselves.
In conclusion, we ask our friends to help us in our
endeavours to put an end to this crying evil by shopping
early and using their influence with others to do the same,
and in this way preparing the public for the “ Early Closing
Bill,” which we devoutly hope will ere long find a place on
the Statute Book of this country.


HZISS/FqttZ
REPORT
MR. P. F. ROWLAND, B.A
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen, —
Before laying before you, as falls to my lot,
such facts concerning the hours in Sydney shops
as have been obtained by members of the Toynbee
Guild in an enquiry extending over some weeks, it is
advisable to say a word as to the spirit in which the
Guild approaches this question.
The Toynbee Guild is an association of university
men for the purpose of co-operation in social work,
consisting as it does of men of all shades of opinion,
it is in no danger of extreme or precipitate action.
There are two points, however, in which it is unani-
mous in its desire for the bettering of the social con-
ditions about us, and zeal for the diffusion of the know-
ledge of those conditions which alone can render their
amelioration possible.
It is in such a spirit then that we approach this
matter of the hours of labour in Sydney shops.
Now, whether we are in favour of legislation or not,
I think we are probably all agreed that the hours in
Sydney shops are on the whole very much too long.
I believe that this general theoretical conviction
will be transformed into practical dissatisfaction in
the rriind of anyone who devotes serious attention to
the following particulars, which have been arrived at
by no hasty generalisation, but by personal enquiries
<c> *-/ 7
<C~rf+~


in the chief city and suburban districts, in which I
have been aided by Mr. Main, the early closing
secretary, to whose kindness I am much indebted
and by several members of the Guild.
Sydney shops may be divided into three classes ;
(a) —Those which shut at 6 o’clock, with or
without a half holiday.
(3) —Those which shut at about'9 o’clock (on
Saturdays about 10.30 or 11 o’clock).
( c ) —Such shops as chemists, undertakers, re-
staurants, and fruiterers, where the hours
are even worse.
Now with class A, it is not proposed to meddle,
nor is it possible for an Early Closing Act to inter-
fere with class C, inasmuch as folk are apt to want
feeding, dosing and burying at all manner of incon-
venient hours.
It is the central class—class B—that early
closing legislation proposes to deal with.
The general conditions prevailing in these shops
are very clearly expressed in a letter received by the
secretaries of the Toynbee Guild in answer to their
letter to the Daily Telegraph :
“ I have had,” says the writer, who is a grocer’s
assistant in a central Sydney suburb, “ four years’
experience here, and am in a position to give you the
correct state of affairs. We begin our day’s labour
at 7.45 a.m., and four nights of the week we start to
close at 9 o’clock, and in doing so, the customers
generally become plentiful, and we are very fortunate
to get away before half past nine. Friday night we
remain open half an hour later, and Saturdays we
do not start to close until 11 o’clock, and can never
get away before a quarter past eleven, and very often
later than that. ... We get two hours off for
meals five days of the week, and one and a half hours
on Saturday.


Our working hours are thus, substrating the
hours off for meals :
For 4 days ... Ilf ( x 4 = 47)
Fridays ... ... ... ... 12J
Saturday 14
Total 73£ per week.
but of these hours we get 4 hours a week off. Sub-
tracting these, the total number of working hoars
comes out at 69| hours per week.
This is the exact number of hours worked in the
establishment in which I am employed, and we are
considered one of the early shops, quite a number
remaining open long after we are closed. My em-
ployer is a very reasonable man, but is compelled to
keep his business open in order to compete with those
who remain open as long as there is a customer to be
seen on the road.”
Now, it seems to me that this letter is more
valuable than much rhetoric. An employee at one
of the shops in Class A tells me—and I can well
believe it—that he feels thoroughly tired out after a
day’s work. His hours are approximately 42 a week.
What are we to say of those doomed to work in
the immeasurably larger number of shops in Class B,
of which the writer of this letter is representative
and where 69J working hours a week are the usual
thing ?
Lest it should be thought, however, either that
he is exaggerating or that the conditions in his trade
or in his locality are exceptionally bad, I proceed to
support his figures from other localities and other
trades.
Thus, an ironmonger’s in another suburb give
the following figures :
5 days of the week ... 8 a.m to 9,30 p.m.
Saturday ... 8 ~ 11 p.m.
Total, substracting hours off... m 70% working
hours per week.


4 days in the week ...
... 7 a.m. to 9 p.m,
Fridays .-
. ... 7 ,, 9.30 p.m.
Saturdays .„
... 7 ,, 11 p.m.
A boot shop, in yet another suburb, requires 66|
working hours a week.
Many newsagents shops in the city are open
every day from 8.15 a.m. to 9 p.m. with no hours off
for meals, these having to be eaten at the counter.
This yields a total of 76£ working hours a week.
My informant had been employed for three months, in
the course of which he had not received a single
holiday.
A master butcher, in a suburb from which I have
not yet taken an instance, informed me that he and
his men worked daily from 6.30 a.m. until 9 p.m.,
Saturdays from 6.30 until 11. One evening a week
each man is oft at 6, There are no hours off for
meals, which are hurriedly eaten in the back room as
they are ready. Subtracting an hour a day—a
liberal estimate—for the time thus occupied in sus-
taining life, we arrive at a total of exactly 80 working
hours a week.
The butcher in question, a very intelligent man,
said that he had done all he could to bring about
more reasonable hours. He had succeeded in per-
suading three of the other four butchers in the place
to close (as most Sydney butchers do) at 6. The
fourth, however, resolutely stood out, and none of
the others could afford to shut if he remained open.
He, like 99 employers out of every 100 one talks to,
professed himself strongly in favor of an early closing
measure which should close all shops alike.
An employee in a provision dealer’s in the same
locality gave me his hours as follows :
He obtained one day holiday in every three weeks.
Subtracting this, and 2 hours a day for meals, we
have left a total of over 70 working hours a week.
“ I assure you,” my informant said to me, “ I would
throw up the work altogether, even though I had to


starve for it, if I thought I should always have to
work these hours,”
Now these cases I have quoted are not unfortu
nately exceptional; they are examples of the
generally prevailing conditions.
The Class B of shops in whose interests legisla-
tion is proposed, may be roughly said to at present
employ their hands from 55 up to 80 or more work-
ing hours per week.
It is not of course always the longest houred
shops that are the worst. “It is not the long hours,”
writes one shopman, “ that I object to, but the late
hours.” A notorious Sydney establishment professes
to employ its hands only 58 hours a week, and, I
believe, does not actually employ them as a rule for
more than 63 or 64; but the crush of business is so
enormous, especially at night, the arrangements so
bad, and the atmosphere so poisonous, that over its
doors might well be written for the benefit of its
employees, “ All hope abandon ye that enter here,”
though I fear even that would fail to keep away the
lady in search of a bargain, la belle dame sans merci.
I have but to set before you facts ; argument I
leave to the more competent speakers that are to
follow me. I must say, however, that my enquiries
have firmly convinced me that the hours in Sydney
shops are much more excessive than most of us
realise, and that legislation is the only possible way
of dealing with a state of things which reduces a
large proportion of the population to moral degrada-
dation and physical ruin.
The objections I have met with are mainly these :
(1) There are so many people worse off than
shop assistants. Why aid them especially 1
(2) The matter can be better done by individual
than by governmental action.
(3) Compulsory early closing would be to the
detriment of suburban shops, whose present chance is
that they are open when the large town houses are
shut.


As to (1) It may be true that there are more
crying grievances to right than those of the shop
assistants. But there seems to me no case in which
the evil is so utterly unnecessary and so easily re-
moved by State action.
As to (2) We have the emphatic testimony of
every one who has worked for the cause. “We
find,” I was told over and over again, “that we are
utterly helpless without legislation.” The vast
majority of employers are undoubtedly' favourable to
early closing, but in every district are to be found
men who will never close their shops unless obliged
to by Government. A prominent Sydney shop
owner is known to have declared outright that he
would not close his shop early even if Jesus Christ
came down from Heaven and asked him to do it. I
cannot congratulate the gentleman in question on the
felicity of his imagery—his being about the last shop
one would think likely of celestial patronage —any
more than on the fervor of his religion, but I give the
statement as an instance of the spirit which only
legislation can check. And after all why fear neces-
sary legislation ? Is it because it is thought to imply
the tyranny of the majority ? Yet, even so, it is
surely preferable to the present state of things
under the golden British rule of go-as-you-please,
which in this case means, as you see, a tyranny of the
minority.
(3) As to the third objection, the possible harm
such a measure would do to suburban shops, I must
confess that this objection was admitted by a shop
manager with whom I had considerable talk, and who
was himself in favour of an Early Closing Bill. I
have, however, found other suburban shop-keepers
who do not regard legislation as likely to have this
effect. Alderman W. F. Latimer, in his interesting
letter, which has been read this evening, suggests,
as we have heard, that suburban shops should
remain open until half past six, instead of six ; and
if that would constitute any advantage, it would


readily be conceded by those interested in the move-
ment.
I cannot close this brief statement without a
hasty reference to the shops in class C, though I know
how difficult they are to deal with.
The hours in this class are really nothing short
of appalling. Thus a certain sweet shop in George-
street—and it is merely a type of its class—which is
open daily from 8 a.m, to li p.m., Sundays 10 a.m.
to 11 p.m., thus yielding a total, after subtracting
hours for meals, of no less than 87 hours a week.
I do not think that any self-respecting people
ought to be willing to tolerate, nay encourage, the
outrageous hours which the fruiterers (who for some
occult reason are, I believe without exception, com-
patriots of Dante) work in Sydney.
An assistant at one of these shops tells me his
hours are daily from 6.30 a.m. until 12 o’clock at
night, sometimes until 1 o’clock. Once a fortnight
he is off from 4 p.m. until 9. After substracting 14
hours a week for meals (which I do not at all think
he gets), this yields the amazing total of 106 hours a
week, or an average of over 15 working hours a day.
Hours similar to this obtain in every fruit shop
in this city; and the hours in many restaurants are
almost as bad.
I have now discharged my duty in bringing
before you the facts of the case. I might have multi-
plied instances, but there seemed no object in weary-
ing you with the repetition of figures virtually identi-
cal. That the figures I have given are really typical
anyone can very easily ascertain for himself.
In conclusion, I will say that in questioning
employers and employees on the subject, I made a
point of asking their opinion as to what form the
proposed legislation should take.
In accordance with their replies, I think that a
measure would be most generally accepted, which
closed all shops (except the exempted shops of
Class C), whether working employees or not, at


6 o’clock every evening, except Saturdays, when they
may remain open until 10 p.m., and Wednesday,
when they must all close at 1 o’clock.
The Early Closing Association suggest that the employers
(in any given district) should have the power to decide, by
majority, what day they would close at 1 p.m., and remain
open until 10 p.m.
Whatever day be selected for the half-holiday,
I am sure that it ought to be universal, and not one
in one municipality, another in another.
In favour of Saturday being the day for the half
holiday is the fact that several large firms already
close on that day, and that to make another day a
compulsory half-holiday would probably have the
effect of making those shops re-open on Saturday
afternoon.
As to the agrument that there is little amuse-
ment to be obtained on a Wednesday as compared
with a Saturday afternoon, there can be no doubt
that if Wednesday were made a universal half-holiday
in shops, the amusement of the large masses of people
thus set free would soon be catered for.
Finally, while not in favour of jeopardising the
success of any early closing measure by clauses in
favour of the exempted shops of class C, I do strongly
believe that some attempt should be made to amelior-
ate the abominable conditions therein obtaining, and
venture to suggest that it should be made illegal in
those shops exempted from the Early Closing Act for
anyone not the actual sole proprietors of the business
to work for more than 10 hours on any one day, or
70 in any one week, or on more than 26 Sundays in
the year.
I do not feel satisfied with this suggestion—the
regulation of individual hours being notoriously
difficult and capable of evasion—and I hope to hear
better proposals put forward this evening. But I
think that even its adoption would tend to minimise
the great evils under which a large class of our fellow
citizens are at present suffering.


REPORT
T. R. BAYIN.
It is my business to-night to discuss shortly the
legislative remedies that have been devised to secure
some leisure for employees in shops. As to the
general desirability of this class of legislation, I do
not propose to say much. I have no doubt that
everyone present will agree that if the lives of a very
large class of the community can be made happier and
healthier by legislation which does not unduly restrict
private liberty, and if this result can be obtained in
no other way than by legislation, that in such circum-
stances legislation is not only justifiable, but is
demanded.
I do not propose to dwell on the evil that is en
tailed by late shopping. That is sufficiently obvious
to anyone who takes the trouble to observe what is
going on around him. My present purpose is to point
out (1) that legislation for the early closing of shops
does not unduly restrict private liberty, and (2) that
the early closing of shops can only be effectually
secured by legislation.
As to the first proposition, I do not think that
this class of 'egislation unduly restricts the liberty, or
interferes with the convenience of either the public
generally, or the employers. As far as the general
public are concerned, it would seem fair to assume
that they could, without much difficulty, adjust their
requirements to meet the new conditions. Of course,


early closing legislation must be framed so as to
interfere as little as possible with the convenience of
the public, but even if some slight re arrangement of
domestic affairs were rendered necessary by it, this is
more than cancelled by the inestimable benefits that
would be conferred on the employees, and, through
them, on society generally.
Nor would early closing legislation apparently
interfere unduly with the convenience of employers.
This is amply proved by the fact that the large
majority of them have always proved willing to
adopt the system voluntarily. Its voluntary adoption
however, has generally been prevented by the refusal
of one or two grasping persons to fall in with the
desire of the majority, and consequently the generously
disposed employers have been forced, in self-defence,
to keep their shops open far longer than they would
otherwise have done. Ido not know of any case
where, on enquiry being made, the shop-keepers of any
district have not expressed themselves as heartily in
favour of early closing. Hence the most ardent cham-
pion of individualism need not oppose this legislation
on the ground that it unduly interferes with the liberty
of the employers.
The second proposition on which I would dwell
shortly is that universal and effective early closing
can only be brought about by legislation. If it were
possible to secure it without legislation, the main
arguments for early closing legislation would be gone.
But it has been proved again and again that voluntary
early closing proposals can be defeated by the selfish-
ness of an insignificant minority of grasping em-
ployers. Even if adopted, their successful working
may be hindered in the same way. After the experi-
ence of these attempts, there is no room for doubt
that that uniformity, universality, and completeness
which is essential to the success of early closing
proposals, can only be secured by the strong and far
reaching arm of the State.


Having now dealt very generally and cursorily
with the general principles on which this movement
can be defended, I propose to address myself to the
legislative remedies that have been adopted in some
of the Australian colonies. V ery little has been
done in England in the direction of securing
legislation of this kind. By the English Shop
Hours Act of 1892, the hours of labour of
young persons, who are defined as persons under
the age of 18 years, are limited to 72 hours in
one week (which is not, one would think, an extrava-
gance in the way of reforming legislation), but there
is no provision as to early closing. An attempt was
made in 1884, in Liverpool, after a test vote which
resulted in an overwhelming majority for the early
closing, had been taken among the shop-keepers. The
proposed act provided for the closing of all shops at
8 p.m. on all days except Saturday, and at 10 p.m. on
Saturday. The Bill, however, was defeated on a
technical point before the House of Commons had an
opportunity of voting upon it.
The tendency of late has been in the direction of
handing the enforcement of early closing legislation
over to local bodies, such as Municipal Councils. This
is shown in the Colonial Acts, which I proceed to
outline.
In Victoria, the legislation on this subject is
contained in the Factories and Shops Act of 1890,
amended by the Act of 1896. Under the earlier
Act, all shops with certain exceptions, were to close
at 7 o’clock every day except Saturday, and at 10 on
Saturday
But power was given to the Municipal Councils
to grant a licence, on petition signed by a majority
of shop-keepers of any class, to make by-laws allow-
ing shops of that class to remain open after the
hours prescribed, or requiring them to close before
such hours. The Council may also limit the number
of hours during which persons may be employed dur-


ing the day; and may close all shops during one
afternoon in each week, on petition of a majority of
shop-keepers.
By the Amending Act of 1896, the Governor in
Council is given power to make similar by-laws,
which, if made, override those of the Municipal
Councils. By the same Act, the whole of the city
municipalities are included in what is called the
Metropolitan District, and the Governor in Council is
given power to make by-laws with regard to the hours
of closing, weekly half-holidays, etc. This section
was introduced to overcome a difficulty that pre-
sented itself in the working of the earlier Act.
Where two municipalities were divided by a street, it
often happened that the hours of closing, or the
weekly half-holiday prescribed by the municipal
by-laws were different, and consequently the shop-
keepers on one side of the street had to be closed,
while those on the other side remained open.
In Victoria, therefore, the power of regulating
the hours of closing is practically in the hands of the
Municipal Councils. Through the kindness of Mr.
Clegg, Clerk in the Department of Labour, I have
been able to obtain the reports on the working of the
Act in the southern colony These reports show that
it is quite possible to regulate the hours of closing
without causing any of those dire consequences that
were always prophesied of legislation of this kind.
The employees, of course, have benefited immensely
by their operation. The employers, according to the
Inspectors, have shown, in the great majority of
cases, the greatest readiness to comply with the
requirements of the law ; and have shown their sin-
cerity in many cases by petitioning to be brought
under its operation, in cases where they were ex-
pressly exempted. There are, of course, difficulties to
contend with in the application of this legislation,
but on the whole the result in Victoria may be pro-
nounced distinctly encouraging.


In our own colony, the only attempt that has
yet been made to bring in an early closing measure is
that of Mr. Alfred Allen, in 1891. This Bill pro-
vided for the closing of all shops, with certain usual
exceptions, at 6 o’clock on each evening except
Saturday; and on Saturday at 10. This Bill, of
course never passed into law, and our existing
Factories and Shops Act does not attempt to deal
with this matter. The only provision regulating the
hours of shop employees is that which limits the
hours of labour of males under 16, and females under
18 to 52 in the week, or on any day except one on
which may be worked. Useful and necessary as
this provision is it goes a very little way towards
curing the evil we are fighting against, as the facts
that have been brought under our notice to-night
amply prove.
A Bill which was very similar in its provisions to
that of Mr. Allen was also introduced into the
Queensland Parliament last year, but it failed to
secure sufficient support to pass it into law. The
■provisions of this Bill are so similar to those of the
New South Wales Bill that it is unnecessary for me
to refer in detail to them. I therefore pass on to
describe shortly the New Zealand legislation on this
subject.
This is contained in the Shops and Shop
Assistants Act of 1894, This Act is similar to our
own in that it does not provide for regular hours of
closing, but merely enacts that women and young
persons shall not work for more than 52 hours per
week. It goes further, however, in providing for a
weekly half-holiday for all shop assistants. According
to the inspector’s report, however, the benefit of this
provision as far as men assistants are concerned is
almost entirely nullified by the fact that there is no
limitation on the hours of labour generally. Conse-
quently, in a great many cases, shops are kept open
longer on other days than they were formerly and
the male assistants work more hours a week than they


did before the half holiday was provided for. The
method of determining the half-holiday too is cumbrous
in the extreme. I need not go into the provisions of
the Act dealing with this subject as it is somewhat
foreign to our present purpose, but it is evident from
the reports of inspectors that these clauses are any-
thing but satisfactory.
It will be apparent from this necessarily imper-
fect sketch of the legislation on the subject of early
closing that in no colony except Victoria has a serious
and intelligent attempt been made to deal specifically
with the subject of early closing. Both in New
Zealand and in New South Wales the hours of labor
of females and young men are restricted, and if the
provisions of the Act are strictly adhered to a very
necessary and beneficial reform is secured. But there
is no reason why the benefits of such a reform should
be confined to women and young men. If it is
necessary and possible to prevent overwork in their
case, it is just as necessary to prevent it in the case of
men, even though their capacity for work may be
greater. If 52 hours a week is enough for a woman
or a youth, 70 hours is far too much for a full grown
man, and legislation is demanded as much in the one
case as in the other.
It is of course impossible for me to set forth a
complete scheme for legislation of this kind to night.
But there are one or two inferences that may be
fairly drawn from the experience of Victoria and the
other colonies—inferences that may be of considerable
help in framing the legislation we hope to see in this
colony. One is, that early closing legislation will
never be efficient and successful if it is attempted by
making all kinds of fancy exceptions and exemptions
to prevent the law from causing inconvenience to any-
one. There is no doubt that some inconvenience must
be caused, but we can set off against it the increased
health and happiness of numberless shop assistants
whose present condition of practical slavery is far


more dangerous to the community than the incon-
venience of a few can possibly be.
Another inference, drawn from the comparative
success of the Victorian legislation, is that the
application of these provisions is best left in the
hands of local bodies, such as the Municipal Council.
There are difficulties in this course, as I have already
indicated, but that these may be readily overcome is
proved by the experience of Victoria.
I have not attempted to deal, in this sketch, with
the question as to how shops that must be exempted
from the general provisions of an Early Closing Act,
such as chemists, fruiterers, &c., should be regulated.
This would have involved too wide an excursion into
details for a general sketch of this kind. I would
point out, however, that no Early Closing Act can be
complete without some provision being made for the
employees in shops of this class. They are generally
merely exempted from the requirements of legislation,
but this method, as is proved by the experience of the
other colonies, is anything but satisfactory.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
acknowledgements to Mr. Clegg, Clerk in Charge of
Dept, of Labour and Industry for his kindness in
providing me with copies of the Act in force in the
different colonies, and the reports on their working.
The Sydney hairdressers are agitating for shorter
hours. Many of them work from 84 to 89 hours
a week.
“ One hairdresser works at Milson’s Point and lives
at Annandale. When he leaves home in the morning
his children are asleep. When he gets home at night
they are again asleep, so that, as he works half Sunday,
he only has a chance to speak to them half a day a
week. “ Father is the man who stays here Sunday
afternoons.” —The Worker.




THE OFFICERS
OP THE
Early Closing Association of Mff.
fJrratbmt :
Alfred Allen, Esq., J.P, Sydney
lUvr-^irraibmta:
Octavius Jackson, Sydney;
A. Miller, Parramatta;
R. J. Morgan, Newcastle;
J. Fox, Bathurst ;
W. J. Chbeseman, Goulburn;
Joseph Barnard, Tamworth.
OPtntatrra :
Alderman W. W. Williams, Balmain;
O. W. Turner, Waverley.
Aub it ora ;
T. A. Lewis, Balmain ;
A. Moore, N. Sydney.
Don.
ITlinwtc g»rcre;
J. B. Atkinson
©rccutioe 01 ommittre:
Mrs. Stokes, Miss Beattie, and «Mrs. Granger,
Messrs. A. G. Foster, Wm. Lowe and H. Spencer.
Donations will be thankfully received and acknowledged
by the Hon. Secretary, \V. Main, 150 Albion-street, Surry
Hills.


following are the hours for the Closing of Shops
T | advocated by the Early Closing Association of
J I N.S.W., namely :
I 4 Days a Week at 6 p.m.
c 1 „ ~ ~ 10 p.m.
1 ~ ~ ~ 1 p.m.
~ ~ 1 p.m.
