

A FEW PLAIN FACTS
TO DISABUSE THE MINDS OF THOSE WHO MAY HAVE BEEN
MISLED BY
A LETTER
LATELY PUBLISHED BY
MR. ROBERT ROBISON,
DATED
KING’S BENCH PRISON, JUNE 25th, 1835:
SOME TIME SINCE DISMISSED
HIS MAJESTY’S SERVICE,
BY THE SENTENCE OF
A GENERAL COURT-MARTIAL,
AND LATELY FOUND GUILTY BY THE COURT OF KING'S BENCH, OF PUBLISHING
A GROSS AND SCANDALOUS
LIBEL.
London :
PRINTED BY JOHN M'GOWAN,
16, GREAT WINDMILL ST. HAYMARKET-
1835.




A FEW PLAIN FACTS.
General Darling hoped, that the publication of the Report of
the Judgment of the Court of King’s Bench, in the case of
Mr. Robert Robison, from the notes of Mr. Gurney, would
have silenced Mr. Robison, as it must have satisfied every unpreju-
diced person, that the calumnies which had been circulated against
General Darling, were unfounded, and that Mr. Robison was unwor-
thy of credit.
As to the leading points brought forward by Mr. Robison against
General Darling, indeed, the only two deserving refutation, viz. that
of Sudds and Thompson, and the Court-Martial held for the trial of
Captain Robison, it will be seen that they were both disposed of by
the Court of King’s Bench, in a manner highly satisfactory to Ge-
neral Darling; the Judges having declared, with respect to the for-
mer, “ On the whole of this matter, looking to what is proved before
“ us, we can see no reason for censuring the conduct of General Dar-
" ling. In a country where chained labourers are constantly seen at
“ work on the roads, such an employment of two soldiers convicted
“of a very dangerous offence, was not improper; and the chains —
“ taking the whole evidence together —are not proved to be unrea-
“ sonably heavy”—and with reference to the latter, that the Court
Martial was properly constituted; and in reviewing its proceedings,
particularly with reference to the eighth charge, on three counts of
which Captain Robison had been found guilty of conduct unbecom-
ing the character of an officer and a gentleman, that, they coincide in
opinion with the Court-Martial.
It cannot but appear extraordinary after Mr. Robison’s trial by a
Court-Martial, and having been adjudged by a jury of his brother
officers to be unworthy to be continued in the service; after the opinion
of the Court of King’s Bench, as above expressed, with reference to
the said Court-Martial—and after a full discussion on his case in
the House of Commons, in the month of July 1833 when his petition


was rejected by a majority ot nearly two to one, and the appeal
which he subsequently made to Lord Althorp, as the chief minister
of the Crown in the House of Commons, was stated by his lordship
to have failed in removing the impression made on his mind by the
debate, that Mr. Robison should have the hardihood—the effrontery
to intrude himself again on the House of Commons, without having
any fresh or new matter to bring forward (unless, indeed, he con-
siders his conviction of having published a gross and scandalous libel,
in addition to his other offences, as giving him more than ordinary
claim to attention) praying that, the House will inquire into his case,
and professing his ardent desire for an examination into it, and his
willingness to stand the decision of the House (in the event only, it
may be presumed, of its proving favourable to him) as if his case had
not been already inquired into and disposed of by His Majesty s
Government —by the House of Commons, and lastly, by the Court ot
King’s Bench! , ,
General Darling has no intention of lengthening unnecessarily the
remarks on Mr. Robison’s letter, which would be the consequence ot
following him through his artful but irrelevant rhapsodies; though
his friends, whether “ special pleaders” or not, may suppose that he
will gain something by the hypothetical mode which has been adop-
ted, and the vaunting, emphatic manner in which numerous asser-
tions, wholly destitute of truth, have been made. Those who are
hackneyed in practices of this nature, may not perhaps be aware
that they over-rate the value of such expedients, and that, the im-
position when exposed by a “ plain, unvarnished tale must lecoil with
redoubled force on themselves. . ..
It may be as well also, to point out that the letter bearing Mr.
Robison’s signature, is so artfully drawn up, that it would be im-
possible to reply to it fully, without repeating almost (he whole of
“ The Case,” to which it affects to be a reply, as the writer has found
it convenient in many instances, to suppress altogether the explana-
tions given by General Darling, while in others, they are brought
forward in such a mutilated state, as best answered his purpose.
p a „ e 3. —Mr. Robison would seemingly profess to think (hat he may,
“ without improper boasting,’ contrast his long and not undistin-
u £>uishecl” services with those of his Prosecutor; and then he talks of
his family having served with credit for three successive generations,
and his never having tarnished this hereditary honour “ during five
« and twenty years of arduous service.” Again (at page 15), “ after
« fighting his country’s battles with honour for fee- and-twenty years
" in the severest campaigns that a British army ever witnessed,’ (it
would have been more satisfactory had he stated u-here he fought)
« w hile his Prosecutor has never shed a drop of blood ; or, as far
as he knows (very prudently added), “ever faced an enemy except
“ on one occasion.”
Mr. Robison may rest satisfied that General Darling has no inten-
tion of imitating him in any respect. Men who have really fought
their country’s battles never gasconade. Mr. Robisons vaunting
would be some proof, if it were required, that he never has. As to
his “Jive-und-twenty years service,” during which period he so distin-
guished .himself, the troth, if necessary, can be easily shewn. He


entered the service, according to his own statement, in the year »
and he was dismissed by the sentence of a Court-Martial in »
being one-and-ticenty years, and not Jive and-twenty. It is tine in ee ,
that during the course of his “not undistinguished services, he be-
longed to no less than eight different Corps; and when he retired
had attained the rank of Captain, which commission he purchased .
It is also true, that the Court, by a misnomer, designated Mr. Ko-
bisou—a distinguished Officer; but he should not have allowed h m-
self to be led away by this apparent mistake. He might have known
it was merely in deference to common parlance, and not to any claim
of his to distinction as an Officer.
Mr. Robison should have paused —before he provoked exposure.
Is the brilliant record of the “ not undistinguished” services ot him-
self and , of which he so unhesitatingly boasts, to be lound
only in the Court-Martial Book ? Had he possessed the common
feelings of a man for the memory of a deceased relative, he would
have been spared the allusion, which is even now reluctantly mai.e,
to a General Order issued by His Majesty’s express command in
the year 1823. It has long been withheld, notwithstanding his un-
ceasing provocation, from a feeling which he has proved himself in-
accessible to»
Page 4.—Mr. Robison animadverts on the circumstance of General
Darling having proceeded against him by Indictment, though the
very document to which his letter is in reply, explains in the clearest
and most satisfactory manner the cause of his having done so. 1 hose
who have not had an opportunity of perusing the document in ques-
tion, will see the explanation above alluded to in the John Bull ot the
21st of June last.
p ao - e 5. —Mr. Robison then complains of General Darling having ’with-
held his Affidavit in reply, till within forty-eight hours of his being
brought up to receive the Judgment of the Court. Ihis circum-
stance also admits of easy explanation. —Mr. Robison’s Affidavit m
mitigation of punishment having been given in, the Court, on the
22d of January last, fixed the following Saturday, the 24th, as the
last day for filing affidavits on behalf of the Defendant; Mr. Robi-
son, therefore, could not have been allowed to file a second Affidavit,
even if General Darling’s had been sooner prepared and sent to him.
Mr. Robison repeatedly complains in his letter, that the affidavits
brought forward on his part were rejected by General Darling s desire,
being sworn a day or two after the period prescribed by the Court.
This is not the fact: General Darling on the contrary, urged that the
whole of the affidavits should be admitted without reference to their
dates; being aware they were of no importance to the case, being-
fas the Judges subsequently designated others which had been re-
ceived mere “ hearsay affidavits”) sworn by persons who could
have had no personal knowledge of the facts to which they deposed ;
some never having been in New South Wales, and others having left
the Colony before the events occurred ; and that, Mr. Robison would
endeavour by his complaints of their rejection, to turn that ciicam-
stance to bis advantage.
Page s. —Mr. Robison observes, that “General Darlings Affidavit
“ being confessedly in reply, it is of far more consequence to notice
« its negative than its positive character. What he does not. swear


« bears far more strongly against him than what he does swear can do
" 'l\wL f considered as the Libel and Mr. Robison’s Affidavit formed
a mass of falsehood, mis-statements, and distorted facts, that it.would
be better, in order to avoid replying at any unnecessary length that
General Darling’s affidavit, should not enter further than might be
indispensable into the case of Sudds and Thompson, as the papers on
that subject had been already laid before the House of Commons
or, on that of Captain Robisons Court-Martial, as it had been fully
discussed and disposed of by the House in the month of July,
the particulars of which cases, were of public notoriety, the silence
of General Darling’s affidavit on those points, is therefore not to be
construed as an admission on his part of the truth of Mr. Robison s
assertions, as they could easily have been refuted, many of them being
in fact, the grossest parts of the Libel.
Patre 6.—Mr. Robison alludes to the circumstance of his having been
refused a grant of land. It would appear by the military secretary s
reply to his letter, which he has quoted, that he applied for land, and
permission to return to England, at one and the same time, each and
both of which, he was fully aware, General Darling was prohibited
from granting, situated as Mr. Robison then was. He was conse-
quently informed, being on full-pay (though under arrest, awaiting
His Majesty’s decision on his Court-Martial) that he was not consi-
dered “as having a claim to land—and that it is not in his (the Lieu-
« tenant-General’s) power, to permit of your returning to England
“ under present circumstances.” , . , j- j
It is hardly necessary to add, as he in fact admits it, that he did not
repeat his application for land, after his dismissal from the service
was notified to him ; so that it is evident he must have made the
application at a time when he knew it could not be complied with, m
order, that he might afterwards have an opportunity of bringing tbe
refusal forward as a grievance, and an instance of oppression on the
part of General Darling. ... c , T a
Mr Robison then comments on the description of the Irons made
use of in the case of Sudds and Thompson ; but as he admits they
were the same kind as had been introduced in the time of Lieut-
enant-Governor Grose, which was all that General Darling had con-
tended for, it is unnecessary to pursue the matter further. As to the
purpose for which the Irons were originally introduced. General Dar-
ling does not profess to be so critically informed as Mr. Robison
would seem to be. He has shown by the affidavit of the store-keeper
of the Engineer’s department, who spoke from his personal knowledge,
that they were used at the period alluded to for “ women convicts,
“ who, at that time, were behaving so ill that it was found the only
“ means of keeping them in order—and further, that they weighed
“ about fourteen or fifteen pounds each.”
p aee 7, Mr. Robison’s letter then proceeds —“ I cannot resist adding
“ one more specimen of this artful insinuation of falsehood, under
*i words literally true; because the Court did not detect the false-
« hood, and on \he contrary, attached some importance to the state-
“ ment,
* See Appendix.


« General Darling’s affidavit has this averment : ‘ And this de-
“ ‘ ponent saith, that the Executive Council referred to at page 5, ol
“ ‘ the said pamphlet as aforesaid, was held on the 4th day of May,
“ ‘ 1829, for the purpose of examining into the truth or falsehood of
“ ‘ the charges contained in the letter of impeachment mentioned
“‘in the said pamphlet; and two lines after: And this deponent
“ ‘ saith, that he was not himself present during the proceedings oi
“ ‘ deliberations of such last-mentioned council.
“ Who would not infer from this, that General Darling meant to
“ deny my accusation of having presided at the Executive Council of
" Enquiry ? Such was the inference even of the Judges, and upon
“this inference they argued to my prejudice; but what will you
“ think, gentlemen, of the character of this swearing, when I explain
« to you, that I never charged him with presiding at the Enquiry of
“ 1829, but at the previous Enquiry of 1826, when he summoned the
“ Executive Council spontaneously, in anticipation of being charged
“ with the death of Sudds, and when all the circumstances of his death
“ were still recent ?
“ He does not venture to deny his presence then, and for a very
“ sufficient reason; it is averred not only in my affidavit, but in the
“ Parliamentary papers which now lie upon your table. By thus sub-
“ stituting, however, a denial of that, of which he never was accused,
“ for a denial of the (rue charge, he ingeniously contrived to impose
“ upon the Judges falsehood for truth, and he now attempts at the
“ bottom of (he 23rd page of the pamphlet, to which I am replying,
“ to make the same artifice avail with you!”
Page 31. —Again—“ They even went farther than this, for they ex-
“ pressly assigned as a reason for greater severity, that I had un-
“ truly charged the prosecutor with presiding at the Executive Coun-
“ cil of 1829, when I never made such a charge at all, but accused
“ him correctly of presiding at the Council of 1826, in which I am
“ borne out by the minutes of its proceedings laid upon your table,
“ and printed by your order.”
The matchless effrontery with which the above statements are
made, as Mr. Robison must be aware that their falseness can be
exposed without any difficulty, appears almost beyond belief, and
proves him to have relinquished all claim to character. It appears,
indeed, that his letter was written at the moment when he supposed
the motion of Mr. Maurice O’Connell was coming on, and he no doubt
hoped, that General Darling would not have an opportunity of reply-
ing and pointing out to the Members of the House of Commons, the
imposition which had been practised on them.
It will be seen above, that Mr. Robison asks very pertinently—
“ But what will you think, Gentlemen, of the character of this swear-
“ ing, when I explain to you that I never charged him (General Dar-
“ ling) with presiding at the Enquiry of 1829; but at the previous
“ Enquiry of 1826!”
He shall now be convicted from under his own hand, and it will at
once be seen, that he has been guilty of a series of the most bare-
faced falsehoods that man ever wrote or uttered.
The extract from that part of the libel written hy Mr. Rohison him-
self, respecting the Council in question, is as follows —“ A public


“ spirited and high-minded gentleman (Mr. W, Wentworth) a native
“ of the Colony, who was at the time practising as leading counsel
“ in the Supreme Court, addressed a letter of impeachment to the
“ Secretary of State for the Colonies, against General Darling, charg-
“ ing him with the murder of Sudds, (the further particulars of which
“ will be found on reference to parliamentary proceedings and papers
“ of the Bth of July, 1828, No. 586; Ist of July, 1830, and No. 620,
«of 2l)lh July, 1832.) General Darling immediately convoked the
“ Executive Council of the Colony, the greater part of whom were
“ dependants and creatures of his own, upon whom he had lavished
« free grants of thousands of acres of the best land, &c. They con-
« sisted of the Chief Justice Forbes, Colonial Secretary M'Leay,
“ Archdeacon Scott, (who was absent on the first investigation) and
“ Lieutenant-Governor, Colonel Stewart, 3rd regiment. This illegal
“ conclave met for the purpose of bolstering up his defence; and,
“ on which occasion, General Darling had the indecency and ille-
“ gality of himself presiding; thus, in all instances, when his con-
“ duct has been impeached, constituting himself Judge in his own
“ case; and another of his brothers in-law. Captain and Brevet-Lieu-
« tenant-Colonel Dumaresq, of the Veteran Companies, acted as the
“ Council’s Clerk, or Secretary.” These are Mr. Robison’s own
words.
Now observe —Mr. W T entworth’s letter is dated the Ist of March
1829 (but was not sent in to General Darling to be forwarded to
the Secretary of State, until the 18th of the following month) conse-
quently, when Mr. Robison charges General Darling with having con-
Council, to inquire into Mr. fVentworlh’s charges against him ,
as will be seen in the preceding extract, he could not have meant the
Council which assembled in December 1826, being nearly two years
and a half before Mr. Wentworth’s letter was written ! But, not fore-
seeing the shifts to which he is now reduced, he at once removed all
doubt as to the particular Council to which he alluded; and by an
infatuation with which those who endeavour to substitute falsehood
for truth, are not unfrequently afflicted, he pointedly mentions the ab-
sence of Archdeacon Scott at the “ frst investigation” (see Extract
above) that which took place in 1826, showing, that he alluded to the
Council of May 1829, there having been but two. Let him reflect on
this, —and he will discover, that there is a power which will not allow
the wiles of the wicked to prevail, however artfully conceived.
The above facts are all clearly explained at page 23, of the pam-
phlet to which Mr. Robison’s letter is in reply. But it was neces-
sary to make out a strong case for the House, and these facts were
therefore kept in the back ground. But this is not all —of the six
persons whom he has named as forming the Council (before which,
it may be as well to observe, he was himself under examination for
some time) two only were actually present; three of the six indivi-
duals mentioned by him, did not even belong to the Council at the
lime, and two of these, had left the Colony nearly two years before !
As to General Darling having presided at the Council in question, as
Mr. Robison has stated, the ‘General has sworn that he did not
preside —and Archdeacon Scott has sworn, that, being the senior
member, he presided in the absence of the Governor; General Darling


having declined attending, as the matter to be brought forward related
personally to himself.
Although it cannot be necessary after such an exposition as this, to
add another word, a few more points shall nevertheless be replied to,
however loathsome and disgusting the task, and difficult as it is,
from such a mass of falsehood as Mr. Robison s letter is made up of,
to select any one passage in preference to another.
Page 9.—lt will be perceived, that the illness of Sudds previously to his
undergoing the ceremony, which took place in the Barrack Square,
is strongly insisted on. It never has been doubted since the meet-
ing of the Council in December 1826, or intended to be disputed.
But on the contrary, it has been an object to show the fact, that he
died as mentioned in the Judgment of the Court, from “ natural
“causes.” As to punishment, he was subjected to none. Having Irons
on, the weight of his musket for twenty-eight hours, during almost the
whole of which time, it appears, he was in a quiescent state, being
unwell, could not have occasioned or accelerated his death. As to the
illness of Sudds, General Darling has sworn that he did not know
of it until after his death : and the Inspector of Hospitals, the Sur-
geon and the principal Gaoler, have all deposed, that no report was
made to the government of the circumstance.
With respect to the weight of the Irons, it will be sufficient to
repeat the observation of the Judges of the Court of King s Bench,
that “ they are not proved to be unreasonably heavy.” The discre-
pancy with respect to their weight is easily accounted for. The Affi-
davits of Archdeacon Scott, the Civil Engineer, and of the Overseer
of Blacksmiths, and other individuals who saw them weighed, and gave
evidence before the Council, state, that the heaviest set did not exceed
fourteen pounds, six ounces; while the affidavits brought forward by
Mr. Robison, being made by some men of his Company, who vrere
implicated in the proceedings which led to his Court-Martial, and
who had not weighed or seen the Irons weighed, but spoke from mere
conjecture, like Mr. Robison, guessed their weight at from thirty to
forty-eight pounds.
As to (he identity of the Irons, it is established by the affidavit of
Mr. Alexander Kinghorn, who, having been present when Mr. Robi-
son put them on at Emu Plains, and saw them afterwards when
under examination before the Executive Council, says, “ 1 know them
“ from a nail in one of the Basils.”
Page 13.—Mr. Robison very significantly begs attention to a “ little cir-
« cumstance,” to which he would fain attach great importance ; which
is neither more nor less than, that it was wished Mr. M‘lntyre, the Sur-
geon, should slate in his report on the dissection of Sudds, the ap-
pearance about the chest of the deceased, which he had informed the
Governor and the Colonial Secretary he had observed on that occa-
sion.
Mr. M‘Leay, the Colonial Secretary, made affidavit of what passed
at the time ; and the following is an extract from his affidavit:—viz.
“ Mr. MTntyre stated on the same occasion to the Governor and
“ in my presence, that, on opening the body of Sudds after death, he
•' Mr. M'lntyre, observed an inflammation or inflammatory appear-
“ ance extending from the chest upwards to the throat, where it was


« more extensive, and which he observed was termed “ Bronchites ,
" and also, that Sudds’ legs were swoln.
“ And in consequence of its beinp strongly recommended by the
“ Governor and myself to Mr. M'lntyre, that he should be parti-
“ cular in his statements, as it was required that he should put them
» in writing, Mr. M'lntyre said, that he had been very particular in
“ his observations on Sudds’ case.” .
Mr Robison in his letter, would very naturally have it believed,
that it was General Darling’s wish that Mr. M'lntyre should state in
his report what was not the fact.
Mr. Robison then adverts to a discrepancy in the date of an afti-
davit of Mr. M‘Leay’s, and that of the meeting of Council, at which
the said affidavit was given in. The passage is as follows,—viz.:
“ After the Report” (speaking of Mr. M'lntyre’s above alluded to)
“ had been signed, General Darling seems to have felt that the ab-
“ sence of all explanation of this suspicious interview would excite
•t attention ; he, therefore, forwarded with the Report to Lord Bath-
« urst, what he calls a Deposition of his Secretary,* delivered to the
« Executive Council, upon oath, on the 9th of December. General
« Darling’s Dispatch, enclosing this deposition, is dated on the 12th
"of December; but, on examining the Jurat of the alleged Deposi-
“ tion, it appears not to have been sworn until the* 15th.......
It is not believed, although the document in question is called a
“ Deposition,” that it was sworn to v/heu first given into the Coun-
cil The other witnesses who were examined, aftencards, made oath
before the principal magistrate of Sydney, to the correctness of the evi-
dence they had given ; and the same course was observed in the case
of Mr, M‘Leay. ~
In the same way General Darling’s dispatch of the 12th ol ue-
cember was prepared, though not immediately forwarded, enclosing
the Minute of Council of the 9th of that month. Mr. M'Leay s
Affidavit was put up with the Minute, without referring to the date.
There can be no doubt that the document was authentic. Ihe
Chief Justice and the Lieutenant-Governor were members and pre-
sent on the occasion, and it is a rule, that, on the meeting of Coun-
cil the Minute of proceedings of the previous day be read before
any other matter be entered upon; the affidavit in question must,
therefore, have been brought forward with the other documents at
the subsequent meeting: unless indeed, it be supposed, as Mr. Ro-
bison would seem to suspect and have it believed, that the Chief Jus-
tice and the Lieutenant-Governor conspired with the Governor and
the Colonial Secretary, in the fraud which he imputes to them; the
obiect of which, however, is not very perceptible.
Paee 17.—Mr. Robison attributes General Darlings conduct towards
him to vindictive feelings. The General has sworn, that he was not
actuated by any such feelings; but was compelled by his situation as
Governor to take the steps he did, in order to preserve the tranquillity
of the Colony, which was threatened by Mr. Robison’s factious and
turbulent proceedings; and also, as the Officer in Command, as a
necessary means of preserving the discipline of the Troops under
his charge.
* Mr. M‘Leay is the Colonial Secretary, and a Member qf Council.


Pa»elB. —As to the proceedings of his (Mr. Robisons) Court-Mar-
tial, the Court of King’s Bench has declared in reviewing the charges
—the Bth more particularly, that they coincide in opinion with the
Court. Mr. Robison on three several counts of that charge was found
guilty of dishonourable conduct.
Page 19. —One cannot sufficiently admire the facility with which Mr.
Robison veers about and changes his ground. He asserts one thing
to-day and the very opposite to-morrow. In his petition to the
House of Commons, presented by Dr. Lushington in the year lBo.>,
he pretty broadly insinuates, that the officers who composed his Court
Martial were influenced by the most unworthy motives. His present
advisers, however, have thought it as well that he should impute no-
thing improper to them. They were no doubt cajoled by the Go-
vernor, and “did not penetrate his drift.” Mr. Robison will per-
haps find they are not so easily imposed upon.
Page 20.—1 n speaking of the charge respecting the Mail Bag, brought
against him before the Court-Martial (no charge having been pre-
ferred before the Magistrates , though he has asserted the contrary),
Mr. Robison says—“l caused it to be opened under the following
“ circumstances, all of which are fully and minutely detailed in ray
“ affidavit. I was commanding at the station at Newcastle, where
•< there was NO Postmaster residing. r lhe Packet-boat arrived, and I
" ordered my Serjeant to open the Mail-bag, bring me my letters,
" and deliver the others to the parties to whom they were addressed.
“ This was done, and this was all that was done; * but for doing
“ this. General Darling ordered me officially to appear before a
« Bench of Magistrates, upon a charge of felony. The Benchde-
« clared that it was a ‘ most frivolous, scandalous, and vexatious
“ ‘ accusation, &c.’ ” This is totally false, as the “ Case ” shews, to
which his Letter is in reply. But it would not have answered his pur-
pose to notice General Darling’s explanation. It was necessary, as
has been already observed, to make out a strong case for the House .
observe “I was commanding at Newcastle, where there was no
“ Postmaster residing.” These assertions are also false. Ihe appoint-
ment of Commandant, which would have invested him with the con-
trol of all the Departments (Civil as well as Military) had been
discontinued before Mr. Robison’s time, and his authority did not
extend beyond the military command of his own Company.
As to there being no Postmaster at Newcastle, Mr. Robison may
possibly have forgotten when he made that assertion, the Pamphlet
which he published in 1831, entitled, “ The Case of Captain Robison,’
from which the following is an extract
» Extract of a Letter from Mr. D. F. Mackay, Superintendent of
« p u bfic Works and Deputy Postmaster at Newcastle, to the
« Honourable Alexander M‘Leay, Esq., Colonial Secretary. Dated
tt j7th March 1828*
“ A circumstance occurred, connected with the Post Office Depart-
“ ment, which I feel it my duty to bring under his Excellency the
» Governor’s notice, in order to prevent a recurrence of such unwar-
“ rantable conduct.—On the arrival of the Packet yesterday morning.
* Even this was enough! What would be said in the case of an Officer sta-
tioned at any of our out-ports, who should do only half as much .


n at 8 o’clock, Captain Robison of the Royal Veteran Corps went
“ on board, demanded the Mail-hag, took it to his quarters, and opened
“ it, notwithstanding its being sealed and addressed to me.
“ On a former occasion the same gentleman took the liberty of
“ opening and perusing rny official letters from the Colonial Office,
“ without any authority whatever from me.
“ Signed, D. F. Mackay,
“ Superintendent of Convicts, tyc."
Would not these two gross and palpable falsehoods alone—one of
them proved to be so from a publication of his own, be sufficient to
mark him as unworthy of credit, even without the assistance of his
statement respecting the composition of the Executive Council, before
which he was examined in the year 1829 (see above, pages 4,5,and 6),
and shew, that he has no less sedulously provoked than justly merited,
the punishment which has been inflicted on him :—first, by a jury of
his Brother Officers, which has expelled him from the Service; and
secondly, by the Court of King’s Bench, which has consigued him to
a prison P
It is unnecessary to make any further comment on the passage
under review, other than that —which applies more or less to every
passage of his letter, —that a full explanation is of the matter in
question in the paper to which his letter professes to be in reply ; but
which he has carefully suppressed and reasserted his former state-
ment.
Page 22.—Mr. Robison in one of those rhapsodies with which the letter
under his signature abounds, and which he would fain have believed is
the effect of intense feeling—of regard for his ruined reputation and in-
jured honour, then adverts to the charge of his reading a private letter
in breach of confidence, and publishing that letter in violation of his
pledge of honour !
The following Extracts from the Judgment of the Court of Kings
Bench afford the best and most authentic information on the sub-
ject of Mr. Robison’s proceedings in this case. Mr. Robison contends,
consistently enough with his usual attention to veracity, that he had
Lieutenant Sweeney’s permission to read the letter, which bore on
the top the words, “Strictly private and confidential with the con-
- tents of which Lieutenant Sweeney teas moreover himself unacquainted I
The judges aptly remark on this: “Suppose he had; would that
“justify the reading such a letter? We apprehend it would not,
“ But the affidavits do not prove that, in truth, such permission was
“given!” The Judges, after detailing the circumstances connected
with the receipt of the letter in question, then go on to say: “We do
“ not think that any person with correct feelings would differ from
“ our opinion, which coincides with that of the Court-Martial.’
And again—“ This note of Captain Sturt to Lieutenant Sweeney,
has been made one of the matters of charge preferred by the defend-
“ ant, and one of the justifications for the proceeding now before us.
“ Its contents were advice and remonstrance —advice and remon-
“ strance from the writer to Lieutenant Sweeney, warning him in
" strong, although obscure terms, against uniting his interest in oppo-
“ sition to the Governor.’’
It will be seen on reference to the extract from Mr. Mackay’s letter


above (first published by Mr. Robison himself) that Mr. Robisons
fancy for reading letters addressed to other persons, was not confined
to the case of Lieutenant Sweeney.
Page 26.—Mr. Robison proceeds —speaking of bis Court-Martial—
“ Gentlemen, I laboured then under the greatest disadvantages—l
“ was brow-beaten at every question I put, tending to my excnlpa-
“ lion ; every objection that 1 made was overruled, and every witness
“ was intimidated.”
It may therefore be as well to quote the comments of the Court-
Martial on Mr. Robison’s conduct, while under trial; as also, the
observations made by Sir Robert Grant, the Judge Advocate General,
on this point, in the debate which took place on the 11th July 1833.
The comments of the Court are as follow ;
“ The Court would here willingly conclude the long and arduous
“ investigation they have been engaged in, but feel it their duty to
« animadvert, in the severest terms, on the insolent and un-military
“ demeanour of the Prisoner, throughout this Trial, and his highly
“ disrespectful conduct to them both collectively and individually.
“ Anxious to afford every facility for the introduction of exculpa-
“ tory matter, they have permitted him to bring forward a mass of
“ correspondence and verbal Evidence, which now appears totally
“ irrelevant. ,
“ The indecorous pertinacity with which he has resisted the desire
“ of the Court, to confine his examination of the witnesses to the
“ charges before them, and his repealed endeavours to adduce Evi-
“ dence, the avowed object of which was to criminate other persons,
« cannot be more strongly shown than by a reference to the numerous
“ and intemperate protests he has thought fit to enter against their
“ decisions.”
The observations of the Judge Advocate General, are to the follow-
ing effect, as appear by the Mirror of Parliament:—
“ My Honourable and Learned Friend has told the House that the
“ Court-Martial sat from the 11th July to the 15th of September, two
“ whole months; but, he did not tell them that four-filths of that
“ time were taken up by the defendant in cross-examining bis wit-
“ nesses; and that this oppressive court gave him three weeks out of
“ those two months for the preparation of his defence,”
Page 27.—Mr. Robison states, that he had “ expressly charged General
“ Darling with having sent home the Minutes of the Court-Martial,
“in a garbled and untrue state.” But the General “so far from at-
« tempting to acquit himself of the serious charge of falsifying the
“ Minutes, he prudently abstains from saying even a word about
“ them.” General Darling can have no objection, that the decision
on the whole case, should rest on this “serious” and single point;
and it will be seen on what an important matter, Mr. Robison pro-
poses to engage the attention of the House of Commons!
Had Mr. Robison been better acquainted with the Mutiny Act,
than he appears to be, (the first book which he ought to have made
himself master of on entering the service) he would have known, that
the Minutes of Courts Martial are in the first instance signed by the
President of the Court, and the Judge Advocate, the latter of whom,
and not the officer in command, transmits them to the J udge Advocate
General in England. And further, he would probably have avoided


the commission of some of those acts, into which he has been so fatally
betrayed by his ignorance and intemperance.
Page 27.—The case of Thomas Budd, is then adverted to—no notice
is of course taken of the exposure of Mr. Robisons false statement
in his Petition presented to the House of Commons in the year 1833,
in the “ Case” to which his letter pretends to he in reply; but he at
once changes his ground and states the matter differently, affecting
great surprise that General Darling should have given Budd a grant
of land, —which he did in common with the other men of his com-
pany, as he was, in fact, ordered to do, by His Majesty’s Government.
Budd, having in answer to some impertinent and insidious en-
quiries of his comrades, probably instigated by Mr. Robison, said
he had been closetted with the Governor, and had received promises
of reward, in the event of his giving evidence against Captain Robi-
son—and Mr. Robison adds, that Budd, afterwards received a grant
of land! , , , , . c
To show Mr. Robison’s character fully, and what he is capable ot,
it will be necessary to state the matter with respect to Budd, as
brought forward in his Petition to the House in 1833, which is to the
following effect.
“ Because a material witness brought forward for the prosecution,
“ acknowledged, during cross-examination, that iie had been tarn-
« pered with by the prosecutor, General Darling, to induce him to give
“ evidence against your Petitioner, and that the Governor had made
« him promises of reward in the event of his giving evidence against
“ your Petitioner .
<< JJccfiusG, point of foot, emoluments and cidvcintoyeSy such us
“ were referred to by this witness, have been conferred upon him in
“ the Colony, by Governor Darling, since the proceedings of the Court
" Martial terminated, as your Petitioner offered (and still offers) to
" prove.”
Can any thing be more absurd or contradictory, than these two
paragraphs taken together? The object of the latter, is evidently to
convey an impression, that General Darling had been guilty of subor-
nation of perjury, by rewarding Budd, after the termination of the
Court-Martial for the false evidence he had given. But Mr. Robison
appears to have forgotten what he had stated in the former, and that,
instead of giving evidence against Captain Robison, for which he was
to have received the promised reward, Budd turned round upon the
General, and “acknowledged on cross-examination” (that is, accord-
ing to Mr. Robison’s account) that the General had tampered with
him ! No person will believe that any one would confer emoluments
and advantages on a man who had acted thus towaids him. _
Those who are desirous of fuller information on this point, will
find it on reference to the Mirror of Parliament, in the speeches de-
livered by Sir Robert Grant and Sir Henry Hardinge, in the debate
of the 11th of July 1833; the latter of whom, explains the circum-
stance of the grant of land made to Budd, having been Secretary at
War, when the order was given for it.
Mr. Robison further states, on speaking of the Court Martial, that
Budd was “ immediately discharged .” The Court Martial closed its
proceedings on the 15th of September, 1828, and it appears by Mr.


Robisons pamphlet published in 1831 (already referred to) to which
General Darling is indebted for much valuable information, that the
order for Budd’s discharge, was the 15th ol July 1829 just ten
months after the close of the Court-Martial. ~
It certainly is not easy to define what meaning Mr.Robison at-
taches to the word “ immediately." He says in another place, that
under a plea of doing away the Bathurst district, he was removed
from the command, and almost “ immediately after the district was
reformed and Major M'Pherson appointed to it. The order for dis-
continuing the district was the 3rd of April, 1827; that, lor reforming
it the 12th of November, 1828 ; being an interval of nineteen
months ! Again—he says, his Court-Martial had “ scarcely closed,
when the Judge-Advocate was promoted to the desirable postot Com-
mandant of the Mounted Police. The Court-Martial closed on the
15th of September, 1828, and Captain Forbes was appointed to the
Police on the 16th of October, 1830 —just two years and one month
after, and five months subsequently to Mr. Robison s quitting the
Page 36—In speaking of the grant of land at Elizabeth Bay, made to
Mr. M'Leay, the Colonial Secretary, Mr. Robison comments on the
circumstance of General Darling having sworn, that he was informed
and believes that the land in question had been offered by his prede-
cessor to Archdeacon Scott, who had refused the same—observing,
that nothing could have been more easy, than to have obtained infor-
mation from the Archdeacon on the subject,— and adding Archdea-
con Scott, for “ reasons best known to himself, carefully refrains from
“ swearing one syllable respecting this same grant ol land and the
“ General’s * belief and information,’ rest alone to obtain whatever
“ credit they deserve!!! ”
Mr. Robison will see, by what follows, that General Darling was
in possession of written information from Archdeacon Scott, at the
time when his affidavit was prepared, to the effect to which he. Ge-
neral Darling deposed. But, as it was a private note, written at the
moment when the Archdeacon was leaving London; the General did
not wish to publish it. Mr. Robison is now at liberty to enjoy
every benefit which his cause can derive from its publication:
“ My dear General, . ,
“ You are quite right—Elizabeth Bay I one morning visited
with Oxley—and at dinner said so to Sir T. 8., who told me, I might
have it—and as I understood, free from conditions or quit-rent~-for
I made a calculation and declined such a boon. It would have
ruined me as 1 fear it has poor M'Leay. ,
<‘ | wrote a letter to M'Leay stating this, when some hub-bub was
made in the Colony about his having it. In great haste, packing,
&c.
Your’s very truly,
(Signed) T. H. SCOTT.
April 19th, 1834, 7, Suffolk St.
In speaking on this subject, Mr. Robison observes, “ One of my
“ complaints against General Darling was his profligate grants to
" his dependants.” Why has Mr. Robison not specified these ‘ pio


“ fligate grants," and shown that they were objected to, and “ disal-
lowed?” according to official phraseology. He stigmatizes Chief
Justice Forbes, Colonial Secretary M'Leay, Archdeacon Scott, and
Lieutenant-Governor Stewart as being General Darling’s dependants,
and creatures, on whom he had lavished free grants of thousands of
acres of the best land. But Mr. Robison has not shown that General
Darling gave land to any of those gentlemen, even including the
grant to Mr. M'Leay, which he was not justified in giving.
It is hardly necessary to add, that General Darling did not, <f his
own authority, give any one individual connected with him an inch of
land in the Colony—and although he held the Government six years,
that no relative or connexion of his, holds an appointment under it.
Page 32. —Mr. Robison must certainly possess a very singular idea of
“ the even-handed justice” of the House of Commons, to which he so
emphatically appeals, when he calls on the Members as he to
“compel” General Darling “to come forward and acquit himself to
“ the satisfaction of the Country, of the heavy Crimes which he has
“ laid to his charge.” It might be presumed, that the contrary course
would be more consistent with “even-handed justice,” and that the
House of Commons, would rather require Mr. Robison to take the
usual steps for establishing what he has so boldly asserted. If
General Darling has realty been guilty of “ aggravated Manslaughter,
“ Perjury and Oppression,” he is amenable to the Laws of his
Country—and the Courts of Justice are open to Mr. Robison, the
proper Tribunals for the trial of offences of such a nature. Besides—
Mr. Robison must not be surprised, though naturally so tenacious of
his character and honour, if the House should pause, before it impli-
citly adopts the statement of a Man, who has been declared by a jury
of his brother Officers, unworthy to hold a Commission in His Majes-
ty’s Service —in which, the House of Commons has in fact, and the
Court of King’s Bench expressly coincided.
London , 25th July, 1835.


APPENDIX.
Extract of a Letter from one of General Darlings Legal advisers,—
which was received from the Country, when this paper was in the
press. —Dated 20fA July, 1835.
“ I will only add, that, whoever may be the author of it (the letter
«« ginned by Mr. Robison, dated King’s Bench Prison, 25th June,
“ 1835,) a more ingenious and plausible tissue of misrepresentations,
“ has seldom been offered to the world. It is clear, from the circum-
“ stances to which I have alluded, as well as irorn the open avowals
“ of this letter, that the real object of the proceedings now threatened
“ against you in the House of Commons, as well as of all that have
« hitherto been got up there or elsewhere, since your return to England,
•< i s to accomplish your ruin for the sole purpose of repairing the
“ broken fortunes of Mr. Robison—and that the paramount privileges
» and prerogatives of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom
“ of Great Britain and Ireland, are to be put in action for the single
•< purpose of deciding a question of personal character between two
“ private individuals, at the instance of one of them, who chooses to
“ assert, with unheard-of pertinacity, that justice has been refused to
« him, by all the ordinary Tribunals and constituted authorities of
“ the Country—and to suppose, that the blasting of your general
« character is an indispensable preliminary to the re-establishment of
“ his own —and that it is the duty of the House of Commons, to aid
“ him in this operation.
“ To talk of any mixed motive, or of any other object on the part
« 0 f Mr. Robison and his advisers, would now be a mockery ; and
“ this is so palpable, that I should think it an affront to any Member
" of the House of Commons, to suggest a single argument upon any
" public ground. .
“ I shall merely answer the point to which you have particularly
« requested my attention ; namely, the argument now insisted upon
« —that, whatever has not been denied by your affidavit, must be taken
“as admitted by you to be true. It may be proper to notice this, not
« with reference to any debate in the House of Commons, where
“ there is too much good feeling to allow of any apprehension for the
“ result: but with a view to your more complete exculpation in the
« eyes of your private friends and acquaintances, who must neces-
« S arily be* shocked by the outrageous reiteration of the unfounded
" imputations thus infamously persisted in. _
" In preparing your Affidavit in reply to Mr. Robison’s, my chief
« difficulty was, to decide what portions of the ample materials before
•t me wer g essential to your exculpation —and which of them riffght
« safely and properly be omitted, so as best to secure attention to the
•* most material points; for I felt, that you might as well attempt to
** protect yourself from the attacks of a nest of hornets, by destroying
" each individual insect, as to deny or explain each particular item
«of Mr. Robison’s Libel. I considered, that the question of the
“ Court-Martial, had been most thoroughly sifted and finally disposed
<C O J' by the debate and vote of the House of Commons on that subject
“ —and I had therefore proposed, to omit every thing, that had refer-
« ence to it. The passages which were introduced relating to it, were
" afterwards added by the desire of yourself or your friends, to whom


“ they appeared more material, than, for the reasons and under the
“ circumstances before stated, they did to me.
“ This is the explanation of the fact, that, although your affidavit
“ most expressly and completely contradicts some of the grossest im-
“ putations upon you respecting the Court Martial, it does not eny,
“ that Captain Sturt’s letter to Lieutenant Sweeney, was written with
“ your knowledge or privity; or state the fact, which you stated to
“ me, that you were extremely vexed at and entirely disapproved it.
“ I can most truly affirm, that my instructions were such as would
« have authorised and required me to insert in your affidavit, a con-
« tradiction of this point, as complete as of any of the innumerable
“ other falsehoods which the Court of Kings Bench declaied to
“ satisfactorily answered by you. . .
“ It is besides to be observed, that the affidavit to which the letter
<c more particularly refers as to this point was not admissable accoi -
{l Jng to the rule which the Court had previously laid down, and it
“ would have been very inconsistent on our part, if we had set an
“ example of infringing that rule by replying to such an affidavit.
“ As to your interference to reject the affidavits which were irre-
li gularly tendered to the Court, every one knows and the writer of
*< the letter (himself, I believe, an attorney,) knows perfectly well, that
« these points must always be left to the decision ot the Counsel, and
“ that you are no more answerable for them out of Court, than a
“ stranger would be.
•< Mr. Robison, or his friend, now pretends that his charges against
“ you for misconduct respecting the inquiry into Sudds case, related
“ solely to the proceedings before the Council held in 1826; but
“ any one reading Mr. Robison’s libel would be convinced, that he
“ intended to be understood as referring to the Council held in 1829.
« —With regard to the Council of 1826, it was a spontaneous pro-
« ceeding of the Governor for the purpose of collecting authentic Evi-
“ dence for the information of His Majesty’s Ministers, upon a sub-
ject on which unfounded statements had been published in the
« newspapers; and it could be no imputation upon you, that you pre-
“ sided at the Council on such an occasion—lt was different after-
“ wards, when charges were preferred against you personally, which
« were referred to the examination of the Council of 1829.
“ In an ordinary case, if proof were adduced of the falsehood of
“ fifty charges preferred against an individual by a declared enemy,
“ for avowedly selfish and malignant purposes, the conclusion of ordi-
« nary minds would be, that one or two other charges preferred by
“ the same person, at the same time, and for the same purpose, were
“ to be rejected as equally false and infamous, and such must neces-
« sarily be the conclusion of every unprejudiced person in this case.”
« The casual observation of Mr. Justice Littledale, censuring you
" for what appeared to him a partial and unfair statement of the
“ sentence of the Court-Martial on one of the charges against Mr.
“ Robison, is so fully and satisfactorily explained by your ‘ Remark’
*• annexed to Mr. Gurney’s printed report of the ‘ J udgment,’ that
“ I will not further notice it, and will conclude, &c. &c. &c.”
