

&rceo '' +
.■ /M<k ■
ISlim-KMKNT TO “THE AKUCS.” 20/7,99.]
A FEDERATED AUSTRALIA,
come weal cdme woe, Australians must
Bt lf then on the 27th of July
w will vote to join the Brothel hood.
Put foith ildyour strength for a grea
victory*
conference, assented to almost
by Parliament, and now submitted tor tt e
approval.
The federal movement is a people s move-
ment. In its inception it sprang Uum u ( '
people. It now remains for the P , -°P e
set their seal upon the great causa ini-
tiated by their authority, carried on A
for union.
INTRODUCTION. & S S
These pages are devoted to the Aus- cl . owned with their-foil accord,
tralian issue now before the \ letorian j n a p ;t s provisions the Commons o.
public. The contents fall under the two jpn is intensely democratic, the pouor o
divisions, “What are the people asked to U(J ple ia asserted in every P<urt, .**-
vote upon” and “Why they ought to no e gv-av of manhood suffrage is e\ci>NNn
“Yes.” Under the first heading come a acknowledged. No property
clear and accurate synopsis of th e Com- bi , rß the way to the ludlot-box ot o£
monwealth Bill, which is supplemented by the choice of to the j.coplc
an exposition by Dr. Quick of the amend- the people: shonU peop ,
meats made at the Premiers Conference, r aliiv the constitution ‘^^lnd
these being the proposals on which t . jt an( j it to changing conditions .
vote is to be actually taken. Under e expanding national hie. _
second heading come “Messages to he _ If theaUahmble. W
people” from prominent federalists, asele pW a’charter of national liberty far in na-
tion «£ “Argus” campaign notes, and also dm a ha s hereto-
the new piece written and composed as a fm , o lti. a W ,
triliau colonies close to each other -o-
M" Kfoat dCTdopmo.it
J(( UiU. tic enough to allow xoi tu.j
( ,f an over-widening freedom.
« -S'«s»
1 darics and barriers wlijcb have separated
I them from their tellow-coloniA and
r 1 \ may uic . , . 0 l„i For
H /MS V ‘^ g " f ' NomD-
'r* height of their splendid, opportunity.
July 15.
from the chief secretary
111 this, which is virtually the final stage
of the great movement for Australian £e e-
ratiou so far as Victorians are concerned,
I most earnestly appeal to you to accept
the Commonwealth Bill as. amended by the
Conference of Premiers.
On the 27th inst. you are called upon to
exercise the highest duty and the proudest
privilege ever entrusted to the people of
our race —the privilege of handing down to
posterity a constitution based upon the
popular will, and in every way adapted to
the progress and development ot a fiee
' ‘T,'. 1 Australians, whether claiming this as
their native or their adopted laud this
golden opportunity of sharing in the bntl
of nationhood is one that jnnot be
too dearly, nor
co n summ a ling the hopes and aspirations ot
FROM MR. 01 RITES.
Is it to be shoulder to shoulder for the
future? Surely yen', for we have .u ‘
in the great cause of union. No one doubts
that it is Australia's destiny-m that path
lies its quick fulfilment.
Has not the constitution which has been
framed been built up under your very eyes,
lias it not been moulded under the i
tiuence of a public opinion as tree and
critical as any young community could
t 'lU,s it not been approved by a united
Parliament and a united press?
Under such circumstances, is there any-
thing to fear?
Ho these Australian colonies desue
union? . , , 9
RIGHT BOX. sir GEORGE TURNER,
Premier of Victoria.
National Anthem by Professor MwhjJ-
Hall Last, not least, is a copy of the
‘ Certificate of Merit ” which the Govern-
ment of Victoria propose presenting t
every elector who records his Note at the
referendum poll. The whole should form
a popular memento of the historic national
event of the 27th July, 1899.
union: . , , 9
Does Victoria desire to federate
If so the terms of the amended Com-
monwealth Bill present no real difficulties
excepting to those who are m search of
th ffvou labour to win, defeat for you will
St Haley 0 u not made up. your minds that.
MESSAGES TO THE PEOPLE.
RIGHT HON. GEORGE REID
Premier of New South W ales.
from SIR GEORGE TURNER.
AVith full confidence I appeal to the elec-
tors of Victoria to ratify by their votes on
the 27th inst. the amendments in the Com-
monwealth Bill -made by the Premiers m
act as one people, standing shoulder to
shoulder in the defence of the empire and
° f The opportunity is now within your reach
of deciding, on the one hand, for * nation
NATIONAL library
OF AUSTRALIA
. • .1 •/* •


.commerce a e ' MJanslon °f trade and aefo/theirfives the " lost vittori °a^
=t * S*A?wta?«rag
Ausfraliarf mfityl a ° U “ certain “ a nner for a TwK^ th^ sfii “ e of lifV *
“ T h e an d ee ma “ Casting vith “"Purchased
"land?” 6 that shakes t! ‘e turrets of tile
**»• ’ ;Jii4“"KSrr.s
_ A°“ *J? firing the finishing touches to
FROM 1 1 If nrrrv t .?L Au ®traljan partnership. But—
m , ‘ OLHK. Britain’s myriad voices call
«r “o of the Convention Delegates ) t°? s be ' ''''elded each and all,
I called a new world inf/* Q •*. ' . Into one Imperial whole
ss ™sr *se**S £7 —T.
uttered in 1823, the very year when the <AwA^c^
infant colony of New South Wales acquired / _' C
Cut ltS fU ' St Cllalters of govern- Bendigo, 17th July.
Jahhof I f°r r t,lat in the Common-
v ealth of Australia that is to be she will
realise an ideal the brilliant Canning
never dreamt of-a new power i„ the
ancl nf n f| emi ;!r bere “ to redress the bal- /
+l. r f * t le ° ld ’ a ne ’ lv P° wer to guard /
(kcin on t ers °! f mpire in the Southern /
Ocean, to stretch forth the sceptre of | Oa
SSSte~~** •*•£•!&& Wl “
ConstituHon US 3 mr arou " d . the Federal iA
fullest energies on dT -4A
a tTth S let „T indissoluble 6 Comrnom JL
port' 1 f fo,,n d e d on “kXsle pmicqJe'o’i \
||m lSop^ Uid ’hLlf^ves e a.^ f *
he highest aspirations of these young com- |f|A jpi
fotnided 44 4°e 3 Sf
«a at VII
nioirr hon. c. o, kingstox
Premier of South Australia.
price, which it would be madness to nw
lee tint! treachery to ignore S '
tv lien the momentous day comes—the
breezes, and when the swelling cheera of
ment in A Tc p t,t (" de? Proclaim the establish-
ment ot the Commonwealth— then those
HON. J. E. DICKSOX,
Premier of Queensland.
FROM MR. EDMUND BARTON
Q.CL
(Leader of the Federal Convention.)
S-tVof’lTv Z’ U y ° U " 0t ali vote 011 tUe
Jith of July. Few South Wales and South
Australia have greatly outdone their deeds
follow It. 881 ’ a T d Tasmania 'fill doubtless
tollovv the good example
to^ d The tellef 4 a t 5T
«\?Wthe it^he l¥ “
es &^py^ f^ andis
should b e a fn the
1104 nd tb ® tl^
enS,and "
pe]ler.4d V 44tnsiand"; P iif° b n e U 1 bc dis ;
woitkl deanbith- w-th ris, , ;s ’ for be who
prepare for himself a hUy'LkoS
d°evXn y ° U Wb -
clearness a'ndlts'mighc PT ° Ve
US determined as ever M y °" t^
peoplef whose'heritaee v**!
tHL CONSTITUTION OF THE
COMMONWEALTH.
I * iIXCIPAL POINTS OF THE BILL
People P o7th b f e .° f the biH redtes «»t the
S g itL h. erating C ° lonies ’ dumbly
have Leed L T g ° f Almi e h ty God,
Federal r * nite 111 0,16 indissoluble
ofirsrrr 1 ' imder the
and Ireland and lgd T n ° f Great Britain
hereby established ” constitution
a Senate ed and al a P H iamen r t M
and Shan he H ° USe of Representatives,
mon S t U hT n a 0 f t ed 4° TOeet " ot ia ‘-
of the Commonwealth Should'
stance, the Commonwealth "me into «
istence on July 1 next, the first Federal
tinMe]bour “ ebef -
THE SENATE
th~r e a ol ° r F PPer HoUSe ’ ia '“hxdive,
7 ° CaC, ‘ State ’ exc «Pt Queens^
men! ofvfet" ° n ° elcctorate - The Parlia-
ment ot \ ictona may make laws prescril.
rtat stat neth °r d . choosin S *nators Lm
pLscribl a" f 10 Federal Parl iame„t
IJCscribcs a uniform method for all the
presentation* 184 'V™'' - -portionai re
4ay adont +1 "TV 6Slred ° Ur Parliament
-in, vzy.~ «
k T- e ? ,,al ,
of state rights t’ . a ,, S IS T the sal eguard
mem !fn Untll tlle Federal Parlia-
ment otherwise provides, there shall be
slmllT* 01 ' 8 f ° r each ori ginal state. There
d dates e for% Pr T r - y . qUalificati °n for can-
umates for Senatorial seats. Every elector
capable ot being elected to the House of
tt'Se Th lall1 al1 a,SO be for
the *; * ; e &cnate franchise shall be
clcctn. ,"n that ° f the other House. Each
elector shall vote only once.
and el the 01 ' S f all . be a!® o ted for six years,
and the continuity of the House is nro
4tfce tLtVdf fi th ng f the expira tion P of
shall be elected every gZ***** 0 *
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
shall 6 as U npnT ° f ,llen,bere of this House
■ 1 v as nearly as practicable, be twice the
"° f the -i...u >... ..
The franchise of the House of Represen-
tattves is manhood suffrage, “one man one
Rieetoral divisions shall be deter-
timed by the state Parliament. The dura-
tion of the House of Representatives ha 1
br three years. Each member of either
f .“at T, rCCeiVe Bn allowance of £4OO
v,Vo i r , h 6,s no bar to political ser-
iiee and distinction.
House ”4 el ßepr4en°ath-es 1 of^T^Tmembers*
the latter distributed thus:—
New South Wales .. 26
Victoria f
Queensland '
South Australia , . »
West Australia ....". V. ” ” .-
Tasmania _
PGWERS OF THE PARLIAMENT,
he legislative powers of the Federal
1 arbament are defined as follows:
5L The Parliament shall, subject to this
constitution, have cower to make laws for


the peace, order, and good government of
the Commonwealth, with respect to;—-
I. Trade and commerce with other
countries, and among the states.
11. Taxation; but so as not to discrimi-
nate between states or parts ot
states.
111. Bounties on the production or ex-
port of goods, but so that such boun-
ties shall be uniform throughout the
Commonwealth.
IV. Borrowing money on the public
credit of the Commonwealth.
V. Postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and
other like services.
VI. The naval and military defence ot
the Commonwealth and of the seve-
ral states, and the control of tbs
forces to execute and maintain the
laws of the Commonwealth.
RIGHT HON. SIR E. BRADDON,
Premier of Tasmania.
TIL Lighthouses, lightships, beacons,
and buoys. . . ,
Till. Astronomical and meteorological
observations.
IX. Quarantine. ,
X. Fisheries in Australian waters be-
yond territorial limits.
XL Census and statistics.
XII. Currency, coinage, and legal
tender. , , , , ,
XIII. Banking, other than state bank-
ing; also, state banking extending
bevond the limits of the state con-
cerned, the incorporation ot banks,
and the issue of paper money.
XIV. Insurance, other than state in-
surance; also, state insurance ex-
tending beyond the limits ot the
state concerned.
XV. Weights and measures.
XVI. Bills of exchange and promissory
notes. _ . ,
XT IT. Bankruptcy and insolvency.
XVIII. Copyrights, patents of inven-
tions and designs, and trade-marks.
XIX. Naturalisation and aliens,
XX. Foreign corporations, and trailing
or financial corporations formed
within the limits of the Common-
wealth.
XXlL*Divmrce and matrimonial
causes; and, in relation thereto,
parental rights, and the custody and
uuardianship of infants.
XXIII. Invalid and old-age pensions.
XXIV The service and execution
throughout the Commonwealth ot
the civil and criminal process, and
the judgments of the courts ot the
c\V The recognition throughout the
Commonwealth of the laws, the pub-
lic acts and records, and the judicial
The 8 people °o£ ‘any' race, other
than the aboriginal race in am state,
for whom it is deemed necessary to
make special lay s. • »
XXVII. Immigration and emigra
tion.
i EDEHAIED At StEAUA.
XXVIII. The influx of criminals.
XXIX. External affairs.
XXX. The relations of the Common-
wealth with the islands of the 1 aci-
fic.
XXXI. The acquisition of property on
just terms from any state or person
for any purpose in respect ot which
the Parliament has power to make
laws..
XXXII. The control of railways with
respect to transport for the naval
and military purposes of the t om-
monwcalth.
XXXIII. The acquisition, with the
" consent of a state, of any railways ot
the state, on terras arranged between
the Commonwealth and the state.
XXXIV. Railway construction and ex-
tension in any state, with the con-
sent of that state.
XXXV. Conciliation and arbitration
for the prevention and settlement ot
industrial disputes extending beyond
the limits of any one state.
FINANCIAL LEGISLATION.
It is provided that hills appropriating
revenue or moneys, or imposing taxation,
shall originate in the Lower House, and
may not be amended by the Senate. Ihe
Senate may not. amend any general bill so
as to increase a proposed charge or burden
on the people: hut that House may, at any
stage, return to the House of Representa-
tives any hill which it may not amend
with suggestions as. to the omission or
amendment of any items therein.
Except in regard to financial legislation
the Senate shall have equal power with the
House ot Representatives in respect ot all
proposed laws.
DEADLOCK PROVISIONS.
Clause 57 contains a plan for the settle-
ment of disagreements between the Houses.
If the House of Representatives passes a
bill, and the Senate rejects or shelves it, or
amends it in a way obnoxious to the Lower
House; and if, after an interval of three
months, this process is repeated in the same
or Hie next session, the Governor-General
mav simultaneously dissolve l*tfh Houses.
If. after such dissolution, the process is re-
peated a third time, a joint sitting of the
two Houses shall be held, and the matter
i„ depute shall be finally determined by
an absolute majority of the total number
of the members of the two Houses. Equal
representation of the states in the Senate
is balanced by this scheme, the equivalent
of which does not exist in any other fedeial
constitution. The people speak the last
and strongest word.
EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT.
The executive power of the Common-
wealth is exercised through a Federal Exe-
cutive Council. In other words, the fami-
liar British system of responsible govern-
ment is embodied in the Constitution. Ihe
number of Ministers shall not exceed seven
thev must hold scats in Parliament, and
their aggregate salaries shall not exceed
£12,000 a year.
Immediately the Commonwealth is estab-
lished, the state departments of Customs
and excise shall be transferred, to it; and
also, as soon as practicable, the state de-
partments of posts, telegraphs, and tele-
phones, naval and military defence, light-
houses, lightships, beaepr.s, and buoys, and
quarantine.
THE judicature.
The judicial power of the Commonwealth
shall lie vested in the High , Court of Aus-
tralia, and in such other courts as the Par-
liament may create or invest with federal
jurisdiction. The High Court shall hear
and determine appeals from all judgments,
&0., of its own justices, of any other rede-
nil Court, of the Supreme Court of any
state, and of the Inter-State Commission
(but as to questions of law only), and the
judgments of the High Court shall be final
and conclusive. Appeals to the Privy
mimm
Council are not absolutely disallowed, but
they are severely restricted, substantially
as in Canada.
FINANCE.
Collection and control of duties of Cus-
toms and excise, and control of the pay-
ment of bounties, shall pass to the Federal
Government.
The famous Braddon clause (87) provides
that, during a period of 10 years, not more
than one-fourth of the net revenue from
Customs and excise shall be applied to Com-
monwealth expenditure. The balance shall
be paid to the several states.
Within two years of the establishment
of the Commonwealth, uniform duties of
Customs, must be imposed. Until then the
Commonwealth shall credit each state with
revenues collected therein, deduct there-
from the cost of transferred departments,
and a share (calculated on the basis of po-
pulation) of other Commonwealth expendi-
ture, and pay the balance monthly to the
As soon as the uniform tariff is imposed,
commerce among the, states, whether by
means of internal carriage or ocean naviga-
tion, shall be absolutely free.
During the first five years of the opera-
tion of the uniform tariff, the bookkeeping
system shall he continued as before, and
the balances paid to the states. Atter-
wards. the surplus shall be distributed on
such basis as the Federal Parliament deems
A special concession is made to Western
Australia, and it is also provided that, for
a period of 10 years, the Federal Parliament
may grunt financial assistance to any neces-
sTtous state.
RIVERS AND RAILWAYS.
The Commonwealth may not abridge the
right of a state to the reasonable use of its
rivers for conservation or irrigation.
As to railways, the Federal Parliament
may forbid preference or discrimination
BIGHT HON. SIR JOHN FORREST,
Premier ot Western Australia.
which would be unjust and unreasonable
to another state, due regard being had,
however, to the financial responsibilities in-
curred by any state in the construction and
maintenance of its railways.
Whether preference or discrimination is
undue or unreasonable or unjust, shall be
adjudged by an Inter-State Commission
which shall be appointed by the Federal
Government. The Inter-State Commis-
sion may decide that a certain railway rate
is necessary for the development of the ter-
ritory of the state, but the rate must apply
(Continued on Page 6.)


FEDERATED AUSTRALIA,
AN AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL SONG, BY
PROFESSOR GEORGE W. L MARSHALL-HALL


Australia, Australia, band of the goWer; fl^ e l Wtofeaeh man is hi.
To thee our fathers boldly steered. the., fuulcss monarchy .
Argosies. , . ~-i «, ev . Though here and thei
Our fathers cast the lot for thee, , , “ fathers founded th
lived and died, ot - We’ll hand thee dow
And left to us their handiwork, a i < posterity.
pride. ’ ' Though- here and tli
Our fathers cast the lot for thee, hy thee tuo s , latlie „ founded
lived and died, ‘ , We’ll hand thee do
And left to us their handiwork, a hentance o posterity.
IIL Australia Australia, thou child of sun and sea,
:hou land of liberty, > ever y father’s son that lovet
imself a king,, each home a ’
re , as best they might, our We lift our hands to God on hrgh, an s.ear
r’one land by God! to all Oneland. one flag, one brotherhood, one gloriou,
1 ’ destiny.
, r they might our Wc lift our hands to God on high, and swear
,ere, as best the) e . t 0 stan(i ] )y thee,
thee, „ , w in.ji o ne flag, one brotherhood, one
wn one land, by God! to all One <%*&.*'


FE DK WAT 1C 11 A{ST R AI.IA.
(Continued from Page 3.)
equally to goods within the state and to
goods passing into the state from other-
states.
The Federal Parliament shall have power
to take over the public debts of the
states.
THE STATES.
The state constitutions will continue as
before, except in so far as they are ob-
viously limited by the constitution of the
Commonwealth.
-' ew ‘dates may be admitted on such
terms and conditions as the Federal Parlia-
ment may think fit.
The Federal Parliament may assume the
responsibility of governing territories which
are not states, and grant them some Parlia-
mentary representation. The Northern
1 erritory, British New Guinea, op Fiji, for
example, could be,thus brought within the
Commonwealth.
.-'fate boundaries cannot be altered by the
Federal Parliament, except with the con-
sent of the State Parliament, and the ap-
proval of a majority of the, electors of tlje
state voting on the' question. New states
cannot be formed unless the old states af-
fected consent thereto.
THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT.
Hie seat of the Federal Government must
be within New South Wales, but distant
not less than 100 miles from Sydney. The
federal territory shall contain an area of
not less than one hundred square miles, and
Grown lands therein must be transferred
Without payment.
'The Federal Parliament shall sit in Mel-
bourne until it meets at the seat of Govern-
ment.
AMENDMENT OF 1 THE CONSTI-
TUTION.
Any proposed amendment of the Federal
Constitution must first be passed by an ab-
solute majority of each House of Parlia-
ment, and then, not less than two nor more
than six months alter its passage, be sub-
mitted to the electors ifi each state. But
if a deadlock occurs between the Houses as
to any proposed amendment, either House
may have it remitted to the electors, and
if a majority of the electors and a majority
of the states approve the amendment it
ehall receive the Governor-General’s as-
sent
THE AMENDMENTS IN THE
COMMONWEALTH BILL.
By JOHN QUICK, LL.D.
The amendments proposed by the Con-
ference of Premiers to be made in the Con-
stitution of the Commonwealth, and
adopted as part of the bill by Parliament,
are to be submitted to the electors of Vic-
toria on 27th inst. They may be conven-
iently summarised, considered, and re-
viewed in the order of their importance.
THE JOINT SITTING.
Undoubtedly the most important modifi-
eatiou suggested is that in section 57, which
provides constitutional machinery for the
settlement of disagreements or “deadlocks”
between the two Federal Chambers. It will
be remembered that the section provides
several distinct and successive stages in
the procedure by which a disagreement may
be determined. The first stage is the re-
jection or failure by the Senate to pass a
bill proposed by the House of Representa-
tives; then succeeds an interval of three
months for consideration and possible com-
promi se . next, if there is no amicable
settlement, the House.again passes the bill,
with or without amendments;, if the Senate
rejects, or fails to pass it a second time, the
Governor-General may dissolve botli
Houses simultaneously; if, after the double
dissolution, the House of Representatives
agam passes the proposed law, and the
■Senate rejects it for a third time, the Go-
venior-General may convene a joint sitting
ot the whole of the members of the Senate
and of the House of Representatives. At
this joint sitting the members present may
deliberate and vote together upon the pro-
posed law, and upon amendments pre-
viously proposed thereto. Under the bill
as it originally stood the questions at issue
could not be decided by a simple majority
as ill the case of business done in the.
Houses sitting and acting separately; a
three-fifths majority of the members pre-
sent and voting was reouired in order to
carry the proposed law, with or without
previously suggested amendments. The
principal reasdn assigned for this difference
m the majority was that, as the House of
Representatives was twice as strong in
point of numbers as the Senate, it would
not be fair to the Senate to invite it to
take part in a- joint conference, in which
the Senate would be easily swapped and
out-voted by overwhelming numbers. Thus
suppose the Commonwealth consisted of
six states, the number of senators and
members of the House of Representatives
would be as follows:
Total
0 , Kepre- Members
Mate. Topula- scuta- Sena- f«r each
tion - tiv *’ s - tois. State,
hew South Wales 1,323,460 26 ij .»
Victoria 1,170,248 23 0 29
Queensland .... 484,700 o o 15 ,
South Australia . 303,044 7 6
West Australia.. 101,924 5 e jj
Tasmania 171,719 5 6 u
3,681,095 75 36 J j.j
The above apportionment of represent.-fi
lives is arrived at by dividing 72, twice the
number of senators, into the total popula-
tion of the six states, which yields 51,126;
this is called the quota; that is to’say, ac.’
cording to the existing population, there
will be one representative for each 51,128
persons in each state. New South Wales
receives an extra representative because
the remainder left, after dividing the quota
into its population, viz., 45,310, is greater
than half of the quota. Now, at a joint sit-
ting there would be a total of 111 members
entitled to be present, viz., 36 senators and
/o representatives; tliree-fifths of 111 is 67.
But it must be noticed that the section, as
it left the Convention, did not require a
three-fifths-majority of the total number
of the members of the Senate and House
ot Representatives; it merely required
three-fifths of the members actually pre-
sent at the joint sitting and voting on the
question.
It is proposed to strike out “three-fifths
of the members present and voting,” and
to insert instead thereof the words “an
absolute majority of the total number of
members of the Senate and House of Re-
presentatives,” thereby requiring that in
order to carry a proposal at the joint sit-
ting there must not be a three-fifths ma-
jority of those present and voting, but an
absolute majority of the total number of
members of the Federal Parliament. How
will this work out? Supposing the num-
ber of members be, as above. 111—a ma-
jority of that number means 56. There
will be no chance or possibility of that
statutory majority being reduced as long as
the two Houses have that numerical
strength. Opponents of a proposal will
not have to muster in full strength in
order to defeat a proposal; they may re-
frain from taking part in a division, know-
ing that whether they are present or
absent it will not affect the obligation im-
posed on the supporters of a proposition
to secure the arithmetical majority de-
manded by the constitution—
Three-fifths of 111 _
A majority of 111 " = ss
Supposing three were absent, the total
number of members would be 108—
Three-fifths of 108 _ 63
A majority of 108 = .5.5
It will be seen from these figures that, after
all, the change proposed is not a very
serious one. The House of Representa-
tives is twice the number of the Senators,
and whether the majority required be a
three-fifths majority or an absolute ma-
jority, the House, if it is united, will be
able to carry the day; if it is not united
then a majority of the House combining
with a minority of the Senate would be
strong enough to do so.
ALTERATION OF THE CONSTITU-
Next in point of importance is the pro-
posal to -alter the method by which an
amendment of the constitution may be
initiated.
Under the original section of the Consti-
tution it is an essential condition that
every proposed law for its alteration should
be passed by an absolute majority of each
House of the Federal Parliament. Then
follows the reference to the people, at
which a majority of all the electors voting
in a majority of the states is required m
order to carry the alteration. It is now'
proposed that, subject to certain condi-
tions, either House may propose an altera-
tion, and send it to the people of the states,
lias certainly increases the facility with
which alterations may be launched. The
argument on which the amendment is jus-
tified, is that the Senate might resist a con-
stitutional change. On the other hand, it
is contended that its resistance would not
be of prolonged duration if the people of
the majority of the states desired the
reform. The proposed amendment can do
110 harm, and it may please a few, and be
sufficient to reconcile them to the Consti-
tution. There was an apprehension fos-
tered by the late Attorney-General for
New South ales, viz., that under section
" an amendment of the Constitution
might be made by which the territorial in-
tegrity of existing states could be inter-
ered with; that New South Wales might
be deprived of Riverina, and that district
made part of Victoria. To prevent this
being done section 127, relating to amend-
ment of the Constitution, is to be modi-
fied, providing that no alteration of the
Constitution altering the limits of a state
shall become law unless the majority of
the electors voting in that state shall ap-
prove of the proposed law.
BOUNDARIES OF STATES.
The old section 122 provided that no
change should be made in the boundaries
ot a state except by the Federal Parlia-
ment, with the consent of the Parliament
of the state concerned. A new safeguard
isnow to be added, to the effect that, in
addition to the consent of the state Par-
liament, the proposed alteration must be
approved by a majority of the electors of
the state.
THE SITE OF THE CAPITAL.
. Tlle amendment first in interest if not
m importance, is that relating to the site
oithe future capital of the Commonwealth,
finder the bid as framed by the Conven-
tion it was provided that the seat of
government should be determined by the
i'edera! Parliament, and that it should he
within federal territory. The amendment
now proposed is that the seat of govern-
ment shall be in New South Wales, and
be distant not less than 100 miles from
fcydney, In all probability, if the matter


FEDERATED AC ST KAMA.
had b«en left in the hands of the Federal 10 yeafs after the Mteblißhnwnt of the ARGUS CAMPAIGN NOTES.
Parliament, the capital would have been Commonwealth. This, of course, is an mi
fixed somewhere in New South Wales; her provement. The Braddon clause is a soi
strong claim, founded on seniority and the of security that a certain amount ot re-
vast and suitable territory available for venue must be collected and a balance le t ~
such a purpose, would have told in her i„ order to indemnify the states against The twentieth century, with all
favour ’ loss through having transferred their Cus- glorious possibilities, ought to find Austra-
toms and excise revenue to the Common- j iang a un ; te d people. We federalists want
SENATORIAL ELECTORATES IN wealth. Such security will only be re- a glorious British past ,
QUEENSLAND. quired to give confidence and define federa prosperous present, and to look
The 7th section of the Constitution as al- ”f federaUhfstory 6 of forward to a noble imperial future. We
ready approved of enacts that the senators J() j7£ars may be assume d that that stage slia ji re j o i ee when the new dominion is
for each state shall be chosen by the people j iave passe d. formed, because our idea of the Empire is
of the state voting, until the Parliament FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO STATES. tba t of a noble mother surrounded by
otherwise provides, as one electorate. The The Braddon clause was intended as a equally noble daughters, of whom Australia
Conference of Premiers has recommended eru de security for the states, and a rough one
an addendum to the 7th section to the and ready way of appropriating a definite ‘ , g weaken and impoverish
effect that if Queensland be an original proportion of the Customs and excise re- eommunit y when they
state its Parliament may make laws di- venue -or "se. ; - on that a declare that there shall be no common
cSi mandate to the Parliament Australia, while, on the other hand, the pa-
VOTER’S CERTIFICATE : EVERY MAN WHO VOTES ON JULY 27 WILL RECEIVE A COPY.
. , -f .1 efafpej triotic Australian party seeks to build up
zttAtz&W'Z
«- - sr u , o “r=.^*r
THE BRADDON CLAUSE. trusted to work out a financial schemes to IoP * products , for the initia-
It is a great tribute to the labour and give effect, where reqmre , o the mam . tion 0 f the larger industries which must
research of the Convention to find that,, We -.chon come with the ability to reach the popula-
after all the uproar created in New South t!on> but in objectionable words. It says tion of a ’us l 'I is to be a
Wales over the financial scheme of the bill, that for a period of 10 years after the es- bariiers must disappear,
only one or two amendments of any prac- tablishment of the Commonwealth the 1 objections to union raised here,
tical value are suggested Section 87, it Lament may S-nt financial assistance to ’others, arc exact reproduc-
wi 11 be remembered, proviaed that of the “"thinks ” This mode of expression is tions of those r N Sed N the . unlon , ° £ "
net revenue of the Commonwealth from 1 t ive of eleemoynary aid, instead of land and England, to the union of the Ame-
duties of Customs and excise not more and j al indemnity for loss suffered Lean States, and to the union ot the Ca
than one-fourth shall be applied annua . in the interest of the Commonwealth, but dian provinces. ... , .
by the Commonwealth towards its expen- ~ object in view. It' every Victorian wishes to see Anstia
diture. It is now proposed that this it 1 made a nation, that wish should rouse
limitation shall only exist for a period of


_Jt ' _ federated U stkaua.
him to his duty, which is to cast his vote local Parliament to local enterpr
for Australia. the consent of the Australian Pari
Every man has influence with some other The federation is authorised to
man. Therefore, do not be content with for pensions to the aged and the c
him to his duty, which is to cast his vote local Parliament to local enterprises with one would for a moment entertain the idea
f° r Australia. the consent of the Australian Parliament. of going back to disunion.
ery man has influence with some other The federation is authorised to legislate By federating Australians will become
man. J hereto re, do not be content with for pensions to the aged and the crippled. a people aglow with national life. By
recording your own vote. Look to the Preferential railway rates such as arc federating every Australian will have equal
glory of a Umted Australia, and let the i CTie dbrSewSou h Wale’s aga nsf vfe «-h«nces with every other in pushing his in-
prospect inspire you to, urge at least one euea oj \e« couth Wales againstic- terest in every nart of the continent Rv
Other voter tn -eeord h;« vote tona > and by Victoria against New South r“ est y ■ 1 the contment -
Pe YA t i * tfl • u i Wales, are to be forbidden. But develop- federating V ictona secures a free market
till’the bill i V V fl n lf ; he , d mental rates, such as Victoria grants to fnr her manufactures and her produce all
till the bill is actually law. lou will look ri . , , , . ■ OV p>.
back with pride upon your work when the (rippsland coal, are to be permitted. A
Australian cause has been vindicated. )udle ’? l . body oi experts 13 Prided to , H * e bdl absolutely provides for majority
, out this arrangement. rule, and secures that the will.of the people
it is no section or the people we are -i r r . TJ ~ 1
asked to trust, but Australians as a whole, State debts may be federalised, so as to ' F ~ 6 ° ui>e | 01 eplt * e " a
all ranks and creeds fused into one, men lessen the interest charge. t. es has the power ot the purse. the
, t, 1 , 1 , ~ 'ii , . , Senate cannot originate any laws appro-
o our own race, flesh, and .flood, with the Keaporn.il,le government on the British pri ating revenue or money or imposing
like aims and aspira ions, with whom we system is a part ot tne constitution. taxation. The Senate cannot amend any
are to stand side by side in the day of federation implies no new taxes, for the taxation or money bills, but can only sug.
PARLIAMENT HOUSES, MELBOURNE, WHERE
THE FIRST LEGISLATURE WILL MEET.
tattle. If we can trust each other in war, state Treasurers i„ ■ ■
surely we can trust each other in peace “ reeene their pre- gest alterations for the consideration of the
peace. sent average revenue from Customs back Lower House.
I nless we federate, wo lose the bright from the federal Treasurer. Trust Australia. We see men of every
Hfe ’ .State railways can be transferred to the religious denomination and every political
: , 1 . gieat Possibilities and its en- f , , , .... school, the public foes ot a lifetime, work-
nobhng aspirations. We are thrown back federation if the state be willing. mg loyally together on the Australian plat-
S existence! ° f Petty tmd The -'stitution is the most "" L
democratic of all the federal constitutions . Trust Australia. The constitution offered
A people which ceases to advance falls of the world. It is the only constitution -OF acceptance has been framed by men
back - ' with two Houses based upon the direct l£v^V' b ° ney f
•1.1 _ 1 i- , tneir caieei played their country fal«e We
t ederation means more work and better ™e man one vote principle. It admits need not suspect them now. Great Britain
wages for our toilers, and higher values for women to the suffrage freely as the states relies not upon her constitution, but upon
our lands and properties. Such has been the determine. The constitution is not cast- the patriotism of her leaders and the corn-
result everywhere. iron, but is comparatively easily amended m° n sense and generous love of justice of
It is possible to federate and correct in- j tl mmnact e ' oluti6n > evcn Ihe patriotic Australian party seeks to
cideutal errors afterwards, but it is impos- compact. J>M|W upa community and to create a conn-
sib!e to work out a plan .at first which By federating the home market is quad- want to work'as
everyone: will pronounce perfect. rupled. The larger the home market the at peace, to speak as one people when we
Bounties to industries can be granted more solid and prosperous the industry. have aught to say, and to fight as one people
either by the Commonwealth or by the Every federation has prospered, and not pire or for dearth and home. 101
•++ + •
■ •+++++•
•+++•
• + •
• f + - - •
• + •
ted and published by Alfred Martin Ebsworth, at “The Argus" Office, Collins-street, Melbourne, for Wilson and Mackinnon, proprietors.
