

. . . .
’ A’FEW REMARKS
,1 * •
; * , . •
• •
_ON .THE WORK OF THE REV. E* K. EWING,
f • . i .
• >
•MOSES MD-COLENSO
• &
e « *
•and UPON THE rev. ALEXANDER MORRISON’S'. PAMPHLET, .
BISHOP COLEI? SO’S CRITICISMS ON THE. PENT A
v; : -.. ■■ e * Ak/ 1 ®. r
k TEUCH, AND BOOK OF JOSHUA,
7'o which is added dn ESSAY on the
shewing that the word ‘ MASON’ when properly interpreted means
§ [ i 3 :
. . , ■ !■;; n Xntjmnit. ■ ,
« u o r when tke Gentiles which have not the law, do by
»• r or Avneu • —7 ,
contained in- tlie law, these, having not the law area law unto themselves.
Which shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness, and their thoughts the -meanwhile’accusing, or else
excusing one another.” —Paul,
. *
' «
PRINTED*BY THE “‘ADVERTISER"” NEWSPAPER ObSIPANT,
• r~




■*
?$ot)avt Coton:
FEINTED BY THE “ADVERTISER” NEWSPAPER COMPANY.
1865.
•
•
, V
A FEW'REMARKS ,
ON THE WORK OF THE REV. E. K. EWING,
» '
“MOSES iND COLENSO;”
AND UPON THE REV, ALEXANDER MORRISON’S PAMPHLET,
“ BISHOP COLENSO’S CRITICISMS ON' THE PENTATEUCH,
AND BOOK OF JOSHUA, ANSWERED.”
To which is added an ESS A Y on the Origin of FREEMASONRY, shewing
that the word ‘ MASON’ when 'properly interpreted means ‘ DRUID.’
“ For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the thing contained
in the law, these having not the law are a law unto themselves. Which shew the
work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts the meanwhile accusing, or else excusing one another.” — Paul.
Romans—2c. 14 & 15v,




H33SS/F//S0
Q 1 nn .
PREFACE.
Ok the appearance of the first part of “The Pentateuch and Book of
Joshua, critically examined” by Bishop Colenso, considerable anxiety was
shewn by the teachers of the existing creeds, lest their followers should be
led away by it, from “ the faith once delivered to the Saints.”
This is quite natural, we all have or ought to have some influence to
exercise in the immediate circles in which we move. Our children espe-
cially look to us for advice and assistance ; they are ever endeavoring to
imitate our actions; and whatever the tendency these actions may have,
they will influence them more or less through life.
Of course, whatever creed we believe, —that we teach; whether it be one
formed by our own observation and reflection, or one taught us by others.
Many people have creeds of their own : all have who think for themselves.
But in too many instances people do not think at all on the subject, they
take for granted whatever is taught them by others; and when these
teachers are pecuniarily interested in the matter, the truth suffers to a con-
siderable extent.
It has ever been, and perhaps, ever will be, an object with all earnest
people, to teach others the same way of thinking as themselves ; and when
their creed is a progressive one, this is well enough. There are but few
however who think of progress in religious matters : Our Ministers of
religion are ever teaching the past; the six days creation ; the drowned
world; the fall of Adam ; and the rescue of his descendants by the death
of Jesus Christ ; (or as most of the Churches believe, the death of God
himself), his resurrection and ascension. To draw our rules of life from
the state of the present world around us, would be heresy. r To suspect
(as all thinking men must do), that the so called inspired history of the
past, is a mixture of the human and divine, is blasphemy. Thus the ‘pre-
sent is sacrificed at the shrine of the past; man’s progress, the promptings
of that beautiful law engraven on his heart, which is ever leading him
onward and upward, is kept in obeyance to the past, instead of the past being
regarded as the spiritual childhood of the present. But our divines cling
with unfaltering tenacity to the past. Why they should do so is perhaps
best known to themselves. One thing however is certain, that sooner or
later, man will be freed from all the old world superstitions. Numbers are
beginning to see, that progress in spiritual matters is as essential to man’s


well-being, as progress in other matters, to supply the increased demands
of his physical and intellectual wants.
It is really painful to see the straits to which our orthodox teachers are
driven, in defending the doctrines they consider essential to our salvation.
They will distort the simple Bible history into all kinds of shapes, for the
purpose of proving what they call sublime mysteries. They tell us indeed,
that religion is for the most part composed of mysteries and miracles. Now
mysteries and miracles are things altogether belonging to the past, and as
presented to us by the church, are altogether untenable, in this our day.
Now-a-days we must have facts that will bear handling, that at any rate
cannot be demonstrated false.
Thinking men are beginning to see that they are surrounded by universal
Jaws; and find themselves posessed of faculties to discover and understand
these laws ; and if our religious teachers do not fortify their position; they
will find these men formidable opponents. All history from the remotest
antiquity shows us that mystery and miracles have ever been sufficient to
exert a powerful influence over ignorance. But the march of progress has
ever witnessed the downfall of all institutions built on so unsubstantial a
foundation. True, there are many nations that are still in a state of mental
childhood, indeed there is perhaps no nation that considered as such, that can
be regarded as fully emancipated from this thraldom. But as it is the
atoms of a mass, that are successively acted upon, when the mass undergoes
any change, so in the affairs of man, some of the units composing nations
are the first to concive the onward impulse, and then by degrees ‘ the little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump.’
Already the genius of progress is making inroads vast and wide in the
domain of ignorance and credulity; in spite of the futile opposition of the
worshippers of the' past. It has demonstrated that the flat four-cornered
earth is a peculiarly shaped sphere, moving through space with immense
velocity. It has shown, that instead of being the one important object in
the universe, with the sun and stars created for the sole purpose of giving
light and heat to it, that the earth is but a mere unit, inconceivably small
in proportion to the rest of the universe. That instead of being only six
thousand years old it is perhaps as many millions. That man, even if one
of its youngest inhabitants, he is still vastly older than represented in the
bible ; and yet in the face of this and dozens of other differences equally
plain, we are told that the bible and science agree, while to question the
fact, is sufficient to ensure excommunication at the hands of our religious
teachers.
TJie genius of progress has already enabled us in a measure to control
the elements, and make them subservient to our use, we have almost anni-
hilated time and space; we have advanced far beyond the knowledge of our
forefathers in many things ; and what they implicitly believed to be true,
we, in hundreds of instances know to be untrue.
What a hindrance then to man’s progress must all those creeds be which
forbid enquiry and examination, and aim at exercising an absolute and un-
changeable sway over his mind. The past should be a help to man so far
as it can be applied to his present wants, but the present should ever be
his guide, Man is evidently amenable to the laws of nature, (as we call


certain self-evident laws of which all rational creatures are cognizant). If
any of these laws are broken we suffer pain as the penalty, as for instance,
if we bruise a finger we feel a pain, which is the punishment for the offence,
and at the same time a warning not to repeat it. If we neglect to eat,
hunger is the inevitable punishment. Thus pain brings into exercise man’s
reflective faculties, and modern research is bidding fair to prove that what-
ever excellencies man has attained to, has been attained through the exercise
of these faculties. This then will demonstrate beyond dispute the exis-
tence of the law of God, written on man’s heart. That law which evoked
the beautiful prayer offered to God, before putting into execution the lot
which had justly fallen upon Jonah for his disobedience.
The earliest form of worship that had any existence must have origi-
nated in reflection ; and though different forms of worship, may, and pro-
bably did arise simultaneously, reflection still originated them. It has been
argued by some writers that the inclination to recognise and worship God
is an innate idea, pervading all races of men in every age; but it is
capable of demonstration, that we enter the world without any thing of the
kind, if we had any such, it would be instinct, such as influence the lower
orders of creation. And further, if we had such an idea, or instinct, it
would lead us to polytheism or the worship of many Gods, (as by far the
largest portion of the world have ever done), and not to Deism or the wor-
ship of one God. The practice of man in the early ages, all worshiping
many Gods, is clearly to be traced to the crude exercise of the faculty of
reflection.
One race of people, living under favorable climatic influences; finding
that the earth brought forth spontaneously the necessaries of life, under the
influence of solar light and heat, would worship the Sun as the source of life.
Other races finding themselves exposed to adverse influences, such as storms
and epidemics, might conceive the idea of a spirit of evil, who ought to be
propitiated; and to the mingling of these and similar conceptions iflay be
ascribed all the various systems of idolatry that have covered the earth.
As man has progressed in intelligence he has felt the necessity of dis-
carding the errors which became apparent in his system of worship, and a
free and intelligent people would, ages before this, have arrived at the
truth, which as yet is apparent only to a comparative few; but superstition
presents such easy and sure means of governing a people, that the more in-
telligent in every age have availed themselves of its means to enslave the
masses. Whatever therefore tends to enlighten mankind, (and consequently
to render them happier,) is opposed to those whose welfare is endangered
by it.
Here we see the peculiar excellency of the Christianity of the New
Testament. Christianity inculcates the exercise of liberty ; liberty gives
free scope to man’s faculties, and by their exercise he becomes both wiser
and happier:
Happily for Great Britain and her dependencies, her government allows
liberty of speech on religious subjects : a century or two back it was not
so ;to question the religious dogmas of that period was full of danger,
whether under Catholic Mary or her Protestant Father and Sister.
It is well known that there are in England, numbers of different sects.


professing the Christian Religion, each propagating its creed in perfect
safety under the sacred banner of English Liberty. There is foremost
amongst them, the established Church, from which most of the others have
sprung, and though connected with, and supported by the state ; is yet left
to fight its doctrinal battles as best it may. Until very recently the inter-
nal machinery of this Church appears to have been working smoothly
enough, for a considerable period, and no doubt would have continued to
do so, had not scientific research awakened some of her sons to a sense of
duty; by exploding portions of her creed which had hitherto been
considered essential to her existence.
The controversy at present carried on by Dr. Colenso on the one hand,
and his opponents on the other, must necessarily tend to the progress of
enlightenment.
The Dr. takes the side of progress, and there are many who wish him
God speed, both in and out of his own Church ; and naturally enough he
has many opponents : as witness the Oxford declaration by which like the
Ephesian silversmiths of old when their craft was in danger, many seek to
maintain by scurrility doctrines they can no longer maintain by argument.
The advancement of science shows that many of the statements of the
Pentateuch are erroneous. That they are the work of some person or per-
sons with the limited ideas of nature current at the period when they were
written, is shown for the hundredth time by the bishop. On the appear-
ance of Part I, of his work, great anxiety was felt by real and nominal
believers in the sacred character of the Pentateuch; this anxiety was fore-
seen by the bishop, for he says. “ I know I shall cause pain to many.”
Yet the work is written in a most charitable spirit; not a harsh word stains
its pages : and not withstanding the abuse, the ridicule, and the reproach
showered upon its author, Numbers 11, 111, and IV., have since appeared,
all written in the same kindly and temperate spirit; while such epithets
as Infidel, Athiest, Deist, Child of the Devil, &c., are freely bestowed upon
him.
Two works have appeared in Australia, in answer to the first part of the
book of the bishop, one in Melbourne, the other in Launceston, Tasmania.
The last-named is the production of the Rev. R. K. Ewing, Minister of St.
Andrew’s Presbyterian Church in Launceston,
I am unacquainted with the tenets of this Church, but from what I can
gather from the work before me, they are not of recent date. This is ap-
parent from the manner in which this gentleman clings to old sayings and
doings. Here is a specimen of the impression he would have us believe is
left on his mind by the bishop. Page23l, line 12 :—“I solemnly impeach
Colenso of treason against the God of Heaven and Earth, of a lawless at-
tempt to introduce rebellion amongst His human subjects, by inciting them
to undervalue and despise the book in which alone the Most High, by his
servants, has given us the history of his moral Government among men.”
I have no hesitation in saying that all who read the book will deplore the
language here made use of, and by a teacher of religion, in the year of our
Lord 1864.
Happily indeed for the lovers of truth, the power has departed from a
class of which this rev. gentleman is a type, or short work they would


make of their opponents. No one can read the above, without reverting in
his mind to the rack and the faggot of bygone times, the spirit still re-
mains, even in these days of progress.
In commenting on Mr, Ewing’s work I labour under difficulties al-
together unknown to him; he has had the good fortune to receive a liberal
education ;of this I cannot boast. But while under the parental roof, I was
taught that punishment always follows the breaking of God’s laws, which
laws I could only learn from the Bible; that I was a poor weak creature ;
that I could do nothing of myself, not even think a good thought. This
was satisfactory enough until my boyish days were past; I then com-
menced to read, and to my surprise, I found that there was another side of
these questions ; it was this, —that it is dishonoring God to believe that he
is an unjust judge, reaping where he has not sown, or that he expects to
gather figs from thistles. That the discourses of Christ and his Apostles,
as expressed in the New Testament, uniformly appeal to man as a rational
creature, capable of judging between right and wrong. That even in ancient
times man was appealed to as possessing the faculty of discrimination;
“judge ye this day whom ye will serve;” “ come unto me all ye that labour
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest;” “ cannot ye of yourselves
judge;” “ why will ye die.” Now these appeals to man would be of no use,
if he was such a poor weak creature, that he could not even think a good
thought; they would be of no use whatever. And to suppose that man
could not think a good thought, and be capable of receiving one would be
nonsense. What then does man possess ; he is appealed to in the scriptures,
and throughout the universal word of God, the creation which we behold,
as being possessed of discriminating faculties, (and it must be borne in
mind that these appeals, refer to man’s spiritual and temporal welfare,) I
answer, reason and conscience, by which he can judge between right and
wrong, both in spiritual and temporal matters. For my own part I can
truly say, that from my boyhood, I have consulted my reason and con-
science, on all matters, temporal and spiritual, and I am satisfied with the
result. I have returned ten thousand thanks to the giver of these divine
gifts, and hope to do so for ever. These divine gifts Mr, Ewing ignores, he
says at Page 242 line 1 :—“ The reason and the conscience, merciful God,
what is left us then but to be shipwrecked and to die.” Here then are two
opposite creeds, friend Ewing affirms that with only reason and conscience
we shall die ; my firm belief is, that it is only by obeying the dictates of
reason and conscience that we shall live for ever.
Much more might be said on this subject which indeed is an inexhausti-
ble one, but my space will not permit. In the following pages I hope the
reader will weigh the arguments used on both sides, allowing prejudice to
have no voice in the decision. The attainment of truth should be the great
aim of all men.




LECTURE THE FIRST-
1. Mr. Ewing commences liis discourse, by stating that “ Bishop Colenso
denies the authorship of the five books of Moses, and the facts they
contain ; affirms that they are not historically true—denies the in-
spiration, and therefore the divine authority of the books in question,”
This statement is in part untrue. Colenso says, “ But the so-called
Mosic narrative, by whomsoever written, and though imparting to us
(as I fully believe it does), revelations of the Divine will and character,
cannot be regarded as historically true.” Here Colenso declares that
although he does not believe the Pentateuch to be historically true, he still
does believe that it contains revelations of the divine will and character.
What marvel is there in this ;do we not daily meet with books in which
the truest sentiments are enunciated, while both author and reader are
well aw r are that the book itself is mere fiction.
2. Hilkiah said, “ I have found the book of the law,”
so that it must previously have been lost, but the fact
of its having been lost, did not in any way affect the truthfulness
of the book in the eyes of the Jews ; and many of them might have con-
ceived the time and manner of the loss ; but though the facts were true,
yet the various conjectures could have no claim to be considered matters
of authentic history. It is by judging the correctness, or incorrectness of
the statements of facts, detailed in a book, that we can best arrive at satis-
factory conclusions as to its authenticity.
3. The Pentateuch commences with an account of the creation, first of
the earth, and then of the celestial bodies. To men, unacquainted
with astronomy, or the use of the telescope, the latter appear as mere
appendages to our globe, as such the authors of the Pentateuch evidently
considered them, and described their creation for this purpose. Nor is it
necessary in taking this rational view of the case, to accuse them of inten-
tional fraud, the object of the writers may have been, and probably
was, to benefit and instruct the world, and a man of a fervent disposition
might have at length really, and truly believed that the declarations he
made, were the result of supernatural inspiration.
4. Now if it can be proved beyond the possibility of a doubt, that any
of the events recorde d in the Pentateuch did not occur as there stated,
then the divine authority of the book may be questioned with regard to


these events, but no further; whatever part orparts of a book we find to
be true, as far as we are cognisant of the truth, we are bound as honest
trutheeekers to receive. This appears to be the view taken by Colenso*
He acknowledges the hand of God in the bible, but not in every part of
it. He appears to think, and with justice, that the finger of God may be
traced in the history of every nation under heaven ; and that his laws
operate the wide-world over, without distinction of race or colour.
5. This may appear a strange doctrine to those who believe that the
works of the Creator, are only visible in connexion with the Bible, and
prayer book ; but, however, this may be, truth-seekers should not shut
their eyes to the operation of nature’s universal law (notwithstanding the
perplexing, and narrow minded tenets, taught by Sectarianism).
6. At page 6, line 15, Friend Ewing says, “Bishop Colenso’a book
has been hailed with applause among free-thinkers, and sceptics of every
kind and degree. With complacency by many nominal Members of the
visible Church ; while by the masses of professing Christians, it is regarded
with anxiety and alarm, anxiety at the bare possibility of how it may affect
the sacred volume ; and alarm at its probable results on the minds of the
rising generation.”
7. As to ‘freethinkers’ receiving Colenso’s book, there can be no doubt—
buFthat his conclusions are the same as those arrived at by every thinking
mind. It may answer friend Ewing’s purpose well enough to scoff at
freethinkers ; but as they form a very intelligent class, (and are always
agreeable companions), they need care but little for friend Ewing’s opinion
of them. An honest unbeliever is far preferable to one who accepts as
truth everything presented to him without examination. The one, proves
all things, and holds fast only that which is good; the other is a poor
weak slave, of whom there is small hopes, and to whom reason and con-
science are blanks.
8. That ‘ nominal members of the Church’ receive Colenso’s book with
‘ complacency,’ is no great matter for wonder. They have misgivings
as to the truth of a great deal they hear from the pulpit,
and they remain in a state of doubt and anxiety, which prevents them
taking an active part in Church matters. They cannot stifle a secret
conviction that two and two does not make five ; and the consequence is
that when they find a teacher willing to discard the untrue they gladly give
ear to him.
9. There can be no doubt but that “ the great masses of professing
Christians, regard Colenso’s book with anxiety and alarm, anxiety at the
bare possibility of how itmayaffect the sacred volume —” I myself can enter
into the feelings of those who have been taught to receive the Bible as the
perfect word of God, from experience, well remembering the feelings
during may own transition, from the worship of the outward, to the
worship of the Eternal within.
10. “ Alarm at its probable result on the minds of the rising generation.”
There can be but little doubt, as to the result of Colenso’s work on the
minds of the rising-generation. Those who read it attentively, will see,
first, that the Pentateuch has no pretensions to historical accuracy, and next
that the theology of the Bible as taught in our Churches, is quite irre-
concilable with modern science,


11. Now friend Ewing is the spiritual teacher of a large number of
young people, and no doubt he will find no difficulty in making them
believe in the inspiration of the Bible, so long as they rely upon their
teacher, instead of carefully and cautiously examining for themselves. But
to what humiliating shifts must the teacher stoop to maintain his as-
cendency. Should one of his Congregation commence the study of
geology, and observe that the Bible describes the earth as being
suitable for man’s habitation on the sixth day of Creation; while in reality
it must have been in existence as many millions, or taking up the study
of astronomy, he learns the impossibility of the Sun and Moon standing
still at the command of Joshua, knowing further that if these luminaries
could have stood, it would have been nothing to the purpose, except
throwing the Moon out of her orbit (as she would have been left a
great distance behind by the earth); what pitiful evasions will they be,
to talk in the one case, of meaning,—not six days, but six periods of unknown
duration, or in the other, to talk of a special and tremendous miracle in
favor of an idolatrous and bloodthirsty tribe, to enable them to exterminate
whole races of people (who were only fighting for their hearths and homes),
that they might possess the country and property of their victims. And
this wondrous miracle, involving a number of other miracles, as we know
that it would have done. The influence of Colenso’s book on the minds of
the rising generation, will simply be to convince them of the truth of many
of his views. No doubt friend Ewing will pronounce such converts as
these unbelievers, and lost without hope of redemption.
12. Page 6, line 26 : —“ The small fusilade of scoffers, whether learned, or
unlearned, can neither obscure nor reach the wisdom of God, nor the love
of God, beaming on our fallen world in his book.” If friend Ewing will
permit me to add the words “of Creation,” to the above quotation I can
go with him fully in this matter, but while recognising and bowing to
whatever of good there is in God’s book, as friend Ewing calls it, and even
believing that most of the writers therein were actuated by pure and
worthy motives, we must not shut our eyes to the more legible writing of
the Almighty, displayed throughout Creation ; for this is the book of books,
which cannot be counterfeited or even obscured. Its pages can be read,
not merely by an elect few, but by every nation under heaven, and in every
age from the earliest to the present.
13. Page 11, line 12: —“ To take ground which I think no one can
question, the pulpit must be quite up to the reading, the intelligence, and
the questioning of the people.” Since friend Ewing admits this, and as the
writer of this is one of the people, he begs to submit to Mr. Ewing a few
questions. First, —we are well aware that the vast coal formations scattered
over the earth, were in course of formation incalculable ages before the
creation of man, while our discovery and daily use of them, clearly prove
a beneficent providence to have foreseen our need, and made provision for
the necessity ; —now on what grounds can friend Ewing pretend, that the
power that so wisely foresaw and provided for our physical wants, yet so
imperfectly framed our moral and spiritual nature, that immediately
man was created, he should go so far wrong as to incur a fearful
punishment; to require a special and direct revelation, and


a stupendous atonement, and even then, that an immense majority of the
human race should be utterly and eternally lost ?
14. Of course friend Ewing will tell us, that man fell through sin com-
mitted by his own free will, but even Mr. Ewing will find it difficult to
reconcile the doctrine of free will, with the over-ruling dispensations of
providence, recorded in the Bible. This incomprehensible doctrine can
never satisfy an earnest enquirer ; it is in vain to talk to such, of sacred
mysteries, beyond the scope of man’s intellect, and even contrary to its
teaching. In the first place, all creation teems with abundant examples,
of God’s care for, and fore-knowledge of the physical wants of his creatures,
we are surrounded with every necessary of life, and gifted with faculties to
acquire and develop them. Allowing for a moment, and for argument’s
sake, that while our temporal wants have been thus anticipated, and
provided for, our spiritual wants were unrecognised ; then would a
revelation have been required for our guidance. If this were the case,
surely the Creator’s will would have been revealed to all his children alike ;
but no, theologians tell us that the Jews were the favored race, the chosen
of heaven, the sole recipients of His spiritual bounty. This is the grand
objection of the iconoclasts, they say, and justly : —“lf the revelation we are
told of, be the work of the Creator of the universe, then will the revelation be
a universal one, made to all people, and for all time, if we think otherwise,
the conception is an ido’atrous one, and must be overthrown.”
15. 2nd. How will Mr, Ewing reconcile the statement of the apostle
Paul, in Romans; Chap. 11., 14, 15, (“When the Gentiles, which have
not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having
not the law, are a law unto themselves ; which show the work of the law
written in their hearts ; their consciences also bearing witness, and their
thoughts the meanwhile accusing or else excusing one another,”) with the
theory of a special revelation ?
16. The history of the prophet Jonah, affords an excellent illustration of
the difference between the law of God, written on man’s heart, and the
doctrine of revelation. Jonah had been commanded to go to Nineveh, and
prophesy its destruction. With a dislike for the duty, he attempts to
escape from it in so childish a manner, that the account of such an attempt
is sufficient to invalidate the story. However, according to the narrative,
Jonah took passage in a Gentile vessel, bound from Joppa to Tarsish.
The vessel was overtaken by a terrible storm. The sailors believing that
they were suffering fromthe crimes of some one on board, cast lots to
discover the guilty individual. The lot fell upon Jonah, who confessed
his guilt; but instead of at once throwing him over-board, the sailors in
the words of the narrative “ rowed hard to bring the vessel to land, but
they could not, for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them.
Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, ‘We beseech Thee, O Lord,
we beseech Thee, let us not perish for this man’s life, and lay not upon us
innocent blood, for Thou, O Lord, hast done as it pleased Thee.’ So they took
up Jonah and cast him into the sea, and the sea ceased from her raging.”
17. Any one who has read the history of the Jews, the people so
divinely favored, can at once pronounce, whether the promptings of
humanity, would have been as much regarded had the crew of the vessel


been Hebrews, as it was by the Gentiles, whose only guide was “ the law
of God written on their hearts.”
18. 3rd, How does Mr Ewing account for the many points of resem-
blance between the Jewish history of the world, and the accounts pre-
sented by the nations by whom the Jews were surrounded 1 We find
that these nations had their records, their traditions, their beliefs, and
their ceremonies before the Jews were a people, We. need no further
proof of the plagarism of the latter.
19. Compare the very name given to the Deity “ I am that I am,” with
the inscription on the pedestal of the veiled Isis of the Egyptians, “/ am
all that has been ; all that is ; and all that will be ; and no mortal hath
drawn aside my veil. ” See the resemblance also between the ark of the
covenant, and the sacred coffer in which the God Osiris was enclosed.
Plutarch tell us that the Thebans alone of all the Egyptians did not paint
their God ; “ because they worshiped a God whose form comes not under
the senses ; and cannot be represented. ”
20. It is the same in matters of history as of doctrine, it is hardly likely
during his eventual life, that Moses had time to have studied the cos-
mogony of the world ; and accordingly, although the account given in
Genesis, is said to be from his hand, yet there is abundance of evidence to
show that it was not in existence until the captivity. On the return from
the Babylonish captivity, the books of Chronicles were written ; and in the
genealogy at the commencement of these books, is the first mention of the
name Adam, out of Genesis.
21. In a book written by Henry Lord, Chaplain to the East India
Company, published at Surat in the year 1630, and dedicated to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, great attention is paid to the resemblance
between the history in Genesis and the Persian cosmogony. Amongst
other points of resemblance, are the names of the first man and woman,
which were Adamoh and Hevah.
22. The Assyrian colonies planted in Samaria, first introduced the doc-
trins of the Magi into Judea, and the priests and great men of the Jew s
educated at Babylon during the twenty years captivity, readily mingled
the ideas of the Chaldeans, in their theology, and from that time the
doctrines of the evil spirit, of the rebellious angels, the celestial combats,
the immortality of the soul (doctrines unknown to Moses, or rejected by
him, since he makes no mention of them), were parts of the Jewish belief.
23. That the existence of the soul was unknown before this time, is
proved, not only by the absence of all allusion to it in the earlier books of
the Bible, but by an express statement in the book of Ecclesiastes, Chap.
3, v. 18, “ who knoweth,” says Solomon, “ the spirit of a man that goeth
upwards ; I said in my heart concerning the estate of the sons of men,
that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they them-
selves are beasts. For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth
beasts ; even one thing befalleth them ; as the one dieth, so dietlb the other,
yea they have all one breath ; so that a man hath no pre eminence above a
beast."
24. Since then whatever revelation we have, is evidently developed from
the law within us, and not from direct inspiration, and skice the Bible is


in reality a selection from various creeds, we may see the amount of
authority to be attached to it.
25, It is said that we have no record of nations progressing without a
system of religion ; that this religion was revealed verbally to our first
parents, and that from this centre, all the varied forms of worship have
sprung.
26. If this were true, the same argument might be extended to prove
that the revelation was not of one God, but of multitudes of Gods, for the
worship of one Supreme Being, is only found among nations who have made
great progress in intellectual culture ?
27. Moreover there are not wanting modern scholars, who with great
show of reason, believe that the different races of men have sprung from
different centres ; and if this be the case, so many distinct revelations would
be required.
28. The number of declared revelations may well be cited to support this
view. The followers of each religion, each declare that their
religion is the only correct one j and will endure martyrdom in many cases,
in testimony of their sincerity. And more blood has been shed in the
name of religion, than from every other cause combined. The religious
history of the world is thus dark and gloomy enough, and some of the
religious systems represent the Creator as commanding and aiding in these
horrible scenes of slaughter. Far, far, be it from me to ascribe such deeds to
the agency of our heavenly Father. I bow with reverence before the
workings of his immutable laws, inscribed in the book of creation, where-
ever I recognise them, whether in the eruption of the volcano, the violence
of the earthquake, or in the slower, but equally stupendous and certain
changes going on around'us.
29. 4th. Can Mr. Ewing dispute the fact, that a verbal revelation given
in one age, is certain to undergo alterations in the succeeding ones. The
children of Israel, relieved from the presence of Moses their leader, only
for a few hours ; and although he was engaged in receiving a code of laws
from the Almighty, on Mount Sinai, at once relapsed into idolatry,
and worshipped the Golden Calf, while their very existence from day to
day was dependent upon a special miracle, the continuous supply of manna.
How then is it possible that the original revelation could be transmitted
from generation to generation, without alteration, from our first parents,
when we see that every religion has undergone complete changes in the
course of time 1
30. While there is no evidence to prove the existence of a special re-
revelation, the arguments against the existence of any such are
many and unanswerable. —Every work of the Creator is perfect, and
requires no cobbling, either by revelation or otherwise; all the evils that
afflict our race, have their origin, in infractions of the law of God, written
upon our hearts. We have only to observe this law, and we shall enjoy
as perfect happiness as humanity is capable of enjoying.
31. In remarkable contrast to these changes occurring in the so-called
revelations, is the unchangeable nature of the internal law. As its
teachings were thousands of years ago, so are they to-day. Its char-
acteristics are applicable to all people, and in every age, its teachings


being unchangeable, its existence ever palpable to our senses, its justice
its pacific, rational, and tolerant tendency, the beneficent results to our
race, which accrue from its observance, and its entire efficiency are as
apparent as ever.
32. According to the Bible, at one time it was a duty to resent in-
juries, to exact an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth ; afterwards this
doctrine of revenge became wicked, and we are now taught the other
extreme. “If a man smite thee on the one cheek, turn him the other
also.” Very different to this are the teachings of nature. Self-
defence is one of her laws, and no doctrines from without can interfere
with it, some of the most powerful Christian nations in the world, are
waging a frightful war, and the others were never so well prepared for it
as at this moment.
33. There has seldom or ever been a war undertaken (until recently), by a
Christian people, but the defence or furtherance of religion, has been one
of its avowed objects : and the extension of religion and civilization, has in
many instances, meant extermination. But although self-defence is a law
of our nature, aggression is as much opposed to this law, as is the law of
self-defence to the literal teachings of the founder of Christianity,
34. At page 12, line 13 :—Friend Ewing says, “whatever then tends to
place the Bible before men of intelligence, freed from their prejudices against
it, contributes to their conversion, if they be obedient to its teachings.” This
is what Colenso is doing. He is placing it in its true light, “ before men of
intelligence as for their prejudices against it, these arise for the most part
from its contradictious teachings, which will ever prevent thinking men
from receiving it as the literal word of God.
35. Page 13, line 9 : —“ In conversation and by the public prints you
must have heard much of Colenso’s infidelity.” How any one who has
read Colenso’s books, can fail to be struck with the tone of earnest piety
that pervades them, or having observed this, can still talk of his infidelity
is more than I can understand ; what should we think if the Chief J ustice
was to address a jury in this strain, on a person being brought before him
for trial. If he should say to the jury, from conversation, and from the
public prints, you must have heard much of the prisoner’s guilt. This is
what friend Ewing does, he lays a case before his readers, brings witnesses
for and against into court, lets them see the examination, (a very one-sided
one though), offers them a summary of the evidence, and tells them, that
as they are responsible for their own faith, they must individually decide on
the verdict. But before the evidence is adduced, friend Ewing takes for
granted, that Colenso is an infidel. This is not the only instance to be
met with, of Judge, Jury, and Witnesses, all being centered in one person.
36. Page 13, line 22 : —“ The march of armies and the crash of battle, are
often followed by bands of harpies, seeking either to live, or to enrich them-
selves, by the hardships of the brave, plundering the wounded, the dying, and
the dead. From the apostate Julian to Pain, from Pain to Bolingbroke, from
Bolingbroke to Gibbon, from Gibbon to Strauss, and from Strauss to
Colenso.” Had not friend Ewing connected Colenso with this band of
harpies, I would have passed by this rhapsody without notice, as it is,
however, I will give a picture of the other side. Friend Ewing claims to be


& member of the priesthood, one of God’s ambassadors, and this is how the
order was addressed, by Christ himself, merely premising, that as they were
in the days of Christ, so are they in the days of Colenso. Matt. XXIII,
13th and following verses, —“ But woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, for ye shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men !
for ye neither go in yourselves neither suffer ye them that are entering to go
in. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye devour widows'
houses, and for a pretence make long prayers, therefore ye shall receive the
greater damnation. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye
compass sea and land, to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye
make him two-fold more the child of hell than yourselves. Woe unto
you, ye blind guides, which say, whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is
nothing ; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a
debtor ! Ye fools, and blind ! whether is greater, the gold, or the temple
which sanctifieth the gold. And, whosever shall swear by the
altar, it is nothing, but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon
it, he is guilty. Ye fools, and blind ! for whether is greater, the gift, or the
altar which sanctifieth the gift.” Verse 23.—“ Woe unto you. Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye pay tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, and
have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith,
these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Ye blind
guides,which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. Woe unto you, Scribes
and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye make clean the outside of the cup, and of the
platter, but within, they are full of extortion and excess. Woe unto you.
Scribes and Pharisees ! hypocrites, for ye are like unto whited sepulchres,
which indeed appear beautiful outward, but within are full of dead men’s
bones, and all uncleanness. Even so, ye also outwardly appear righteous unto
men; but within ye arefull of hypocrisy, and iniquity.’ Verse 33, Ye^ ser-
pents, ye generation of vipers, how shall ye escape the damnation of hell. It
is true that this was specially addressed to the Jewish Priests, but those who
are best read in Church history, most readily admit, that it has ever been
equally applicable to the class, down to the present day. _
37. At Page 14, line 20 : —“The coarse abuse of Paine is rejected,” true,
and so should all coarse abuse be, the Jewish Priests rejected the coarse abuse
of Christ, and hung him on a tree > yet his name will live for ever ; and
in like manner so long as the name of liberty is reverenced, so long will the
name of Thomas Paine, be gratefully remembered. He hated tyrany, and
his life was spent in endeavoring to release men from its iron grasp. He was
a prominent member of the moderate party during the French revolution.
His influence through his writings, had much to do with the American war
of independence; he was an intimate friend of the virtuous doctor Franklin,
and died at an advanced age, possessed of competence, and of the_ respect
of all who had the good fortune to be acquainted with him. His great
theological opponent, the Bishop of Llandaff, styled him a Deist ; Mr.
Ewing calls him an infidel. Many of his sentiments were far in advance
of the age in which he lived. His lines on war are well calculated to
show his opinions on that subject. (See Appendix. *) . .
38. Page 15, line 6 :— “Philological and literary criticism, is foiling m
many quarters, I do believe, less with a desire to reach the truth , than to


invalidate if possible the truth of the Bible ” When Colenso first published
to the world the result of his philological enquiries, he believed that by so
doing, he would incur deposition, disgrace and ruin. This should be a
proof of the sincerity of his convictions. And such men as Sir Charles
Lyell, Dr. Darwin, Sir Roderick Murchison, among our own Countrymen,
together with the host of learned, and intelligent foreigners, who have
noticed, and commented upon the erroneous scientific dogmas laid down in
the Bible, can well afford to smile at the sweeping charge of Mr. Ewing.
If their discoveries are true, it is a duty they owe to society to diseminate
them, if on the other hand the Bible is true, they, together with Galileo,
Columbus, and many another, are in excusable error,
39. The briefest examination will show, that Bible science is not in
accordance with the knowledge we now possess j and however, the hack-
neyed explanation “that the inspired writers used expressions best calculated
to the understandings of their hearers,” may be urged, it is evident that
such an excuse only makes the matter worse. Of people who can accept
such evasions, it can only be said having eyes they see not, neither will
they understand. The question here is how does our knowledge of
Astronomy, Geology, and Ethnology, affect the historical accuracy of
the Bible ? The answer is, they utterly overturn it. And yet friend
Ewing says, the “ Bible will bear the closest scientific scrutiny j and this,
although many of the circumstances are contrary to God’s visible dealings
with man, that is, contrary to the operations of nature.
40. Neither will the Bible bear “ philological scrutiny,” it is
already crumbling to pieces under the test of modern criticism.
41. Line 16. —“ Colenso labors hard to turn an essential portion of the
Bible into a mere arithmetical puzzle.” This is a serious charge, but it
happens to be without foundation. It is an original idea of friend Ewing’s,
that pointing out mis-statements in a narrative, is turning it into a puzzle
of any kind.
42. Page 17, line 1 :—“ The Eden of Genesis, cannot be torn from the
Calvary of the gospel.” Here again in spite of friend Ewing s dictum, I
venture to affirm, that all thinking minds must separate the two. The
Eden of Genesis, represents God as creating a man, and putting him on a
trial, to which, He (the Maker), knew beforehand, that the man would
succumb. And for this offence, —not punishing alone the guilty man
(if he was guilty), but also myraids of his descendants. The Calvary of
the gospel, represents the same God becoming incarnate, and by a shameful
death, purchasing redemption for a fraction of the human race.
43. Page 30, line 28:—“ Superstition speculated on the credulity of the
world, and man became the dupe of the Priest.” This sentiment is real un-
qualified truth ; and a more faithful account of the rise and progress of priest-
craft, cannot be met with anywhere. However, honest and earnest, any of
the Jewish reformers, whether kings, prophets, or judges, their successors
while pretending to follow in their footsteps, contrived to make their in-
creased intelligence a means of acquiring a firmer influence over their
deluded countrymen. And when the deliverer Christ arose, and disputed
their authority, they quickly murdered him ] as they have thousands since
his time. But happily men are now learning to think for themselves j and


the “ dupes of superstition and priestcraft,” will become more and more
few, as truth is presented to them in a rational manner,
44. Page 31, Line 1 : —Christianity first appeals to our reason, and then
demands our faith. True it appeals to man as a rational being, capable of
judging and acting on evidence presented to him. Thus Jesus Christ
addressed the woman of Samaria, on the subject of worship. He told her
that the time had come when the true worshippers should worship the
father in spirit and in truth, for the father seeketh such to worship him.
This passage evidently points to individual worship ; worship based on the
reason and conscience, as Colenso says,to “which alone each man is ultimately
responsible.” To this friend Ewing says, after having first recognised the
reason and conscience,and that Christianity appeals to them. —“ The reason
and the conscience ; merciful God ; what is left us then but to be shipwrecked
and to die.”—Page 342.
45. Now what is the use of Christianity appealing to these faculties if
we do not possess them, but friend Ewing recognises their existence, and
says miserable comforters are ye all “P. 341, and enquires ” when on all
points and on any question did ever two human consciences mingle into a
perfect unison 1 And yet, does friend Ewing and those of his class, who
contend for the inspiration of the Bible, mingle into a perfect unison, in
their ideas of the meaning or application of the book ? Thousands of pages
might be filled with different interpretations of the Bible and no two of
them agree. Nay so great is their disagreement, that whenever any class
of them have had the power, they have been each of them ready to per-
secute to death, any who differed from them ; and they separate themselves
from each other, as if each sect believed that it alone constituted the elect
of the kingdom of heaven. Is not the Christian church divided into a
hundred sects, each founded on some interpretation, different from the others,
of the book whose teachings are so plain, that he who runs may read.
46. In short if it were possible to read the many absurd, and con-
tradictory theories, that have been promulgated by teachers, who, believing
in the Bible, have endeavored to interpret it, and contrast them with the
books written on natural religion, we should find, that while the advocates
of revealed religion have produced an unintelligible mass of contradic-
tion ; the works produced by “ reason and- conscience,” contain the most
sublime and intelligible views, of the attributes of the Creator, and of the
duties of mankind.
47. Line 8 :—“ Surely the war of words of which all history is
full; and the feuds, —personal, domestic, and national, by which all society
has been disturbed, are witnesses enough, that in vain, self-guided, and self-
taught, may we hope for aught different, in reference to those wondrous
truths of salvation, that lie between the human soul and God.”
48. This passage, like the preceding, is nothing but an insidious attempt
to interfere with our rational faculties ; and strangely enough, the very
illustrations that Mr. Ewing brings forward in support of his argument, are
far more applicable to the believers in inspiration, than to any other class.
The whole history of the Church, so abounds with instances, that it must
be evident to every one.
49. And from whence have been derived those marvellous discoveries,
of the last and present centuries, but from our application of the faculty of


fathers] And yet he says speaking of this same reason, “Miserable
comforters are ye all.” How will Friend Ewing reconcile his statement, that
reason and conscience are insufficient to find out nature’s God, when the same
faculties, undeniably give us the power of unravelling the laws of nature,
and making those laws subservient to our necessities ] Man’s reason already
enables him to control the elements; and I dare affirm, that, no man
can study the works of the Creator, without being filled with awe and
reverence at the stupendous power everywhere exhibited, within, and
around him ; or fail to render due homage to the beneficent Being, whose
Almighty foresight, “ hath done all things well.”
50. In the face of all this, Friend Ewing tells us, that if we fall back on
our reason and our conscience, nothing is left us but to be shipwrecked, and to
die. Surely this is a terrible offence, against the allwise Creator, to declare
that his choicest gifts to man, lead only to shipwreck, and to death.
Surely these gifts were bestowed on us to be exercised ; and we daily find
that the exercise of them brings its own reward j just as a neglect of them
brings its own punishment.
51, Here then is the pinch ; Friend Ewing must admit that, by the
exercise of our reason and our faculties, we can discover the laws of nature ;
that is of God ! but we cannot (he says), learn his will without a special
revelation. This is a monstrous doctrine, its folly is only equal to its
impiety.
Any one, however, who presumes to doubt the necessity, or the
existence of a special revelation, incurs an anathema. In like manner the
use of reason and conscience, are treated by Mr. Ewing, “ Miserable com-
forters are ye all.”
52. The following are the opinions of some of the most eminent divines of
the last century, on the use of reason. Bp. Gibson.—“ Those among us
who have laboured of late years to set up reason against revelation would
make it pass for an established truth, that if you will embrace revelation
you-must of coixrse quit your reason, which if it were true, would doubtless
be a strong prejudice against revelation. But so far is this from being
true, that it is universally acknowledged that revelation itself is to stand or
fall by the test of reason, or, in other words, according as reason finds the
evidences of its coming from God to be or not to be sufficient and con-
clusive, and the matter of it to contradict or not contradict the natural
notions which reasons gives us of the being and attributes of God.— Second
Pastoral Letter, 1730;
63. Prideaux (Humphrey, Dean of Norwich). —“Let what is written in all
the books of the New Testament be tried by that which is the touchstone
of all religions, I mean that religion of nature and reason which God has
written in the hearts of every one of us from the first creation ; and if it
varies from it in any one particular, if it prescribes any one thing which
may in the minutest circumstances thereof be contrary to
I will then acknowledge this to be an argument against us, strong enough
to overthrow the whole cause, and make all things else that can be said for
it totally ineffectual for its support.”— Letter to the Deists, 1748.
54. Tillotson, (Archbishop of Canterbury)—“All our reasonings about


revelation are necessarily gathered by our natural notions about religion,
and therefore he who sincerely desires to do the will of God is not apt to
be imposed on by vain pretences of divine revelation ; but if any doctrine
be proposed to him which is pretended to come from God, he measures it
by those sure and steady notions which he has of the divine nature and
perfections, he will consider the nature and tendency of it, or whether it
be a doctrine according to godliness, such as is agreeable to the divine
nature and perfections, and tends to make us like unto God ; if it be not,
though an angel should bring it, he would not receive it.”— Sermons , vol.
3 ,p. 485.
55. Rogers (John, D.D.) —“Our religion desires no other favor than a sober
and dispassionate examination, it submits its grounds and reasons to an
unprejudiced trial, and hopes to approve itself to the conviction of any
equitable enquirer.” —Sermons at BoyTs Lecture, Page 59, 1727.
Butler (Jos., Bishop of Durham). —“ Indeed, if in revelation there be
found any passages, the seeming meaning of which is contrary to natural
religion, we may most certainly conclude such seeming meaning not to be
the real one.” Ibid , ch. 8; “ I have argued upon the principles of the
fatalists, which I do not believe ; and have omitted a thing of the utmost
importance which I do believe ; the moral fitness, and unfitness of actions,
prior to all will whatever, which I apprehend as certainly to determine
the divine conduct, as speculative truth and falsehood necessarily determine
the divine judgment.”— Analogy , &c, pt. 2, ch. 1.
56. James Forster, a leading preacher among the Dissenters.—“ The
faculty of reason, which God hath implanted in mankind, however, it may
have been abused and neglected in times past, will, whenever they begin to
exercise it aright, enable them to judge of all these things. As by means
of this they were capable of discovering at first the Being, and perfections
of God, and that he governs the world with absolute wisdom, equity, and
goodness, and what those duties are which they owe to him and to one
another, they must be as capable, if they will divest themselves of pre-
judice, and reason impartially, of rectifying any mistakes they may have
fallen into about these important points. It matters not whether they
have hitherto thought right or wrong, nor indeed whether they have thought
at all; let them but begin to consider seriously, and examine carefully,
and impartially, and they must be able to find out all those truths, which
as reasonable creatures, they are capable of knowing, and of which affect
their duty and happiness,” —Truth and excellency oj the Christian Re-
velation., 1731,
57. Warburton says the image of God in which man was at first created,
lay in the faculty of reason only.— Works, 3, p. 620.
Locke.—“ Reason is natural revelation whereby the eternal Father of
light and fountain of all knowledge communicates to all mankind that
portion of truth which he has laid within the reach of their faculties ; re-
velation is natural reason enlarged by a new set of discoveries communi-
cated by God immediately, which reason vouches the truth of, by the
testimony and proofs it gives, that they come from God. So that he that
takes away reason to make w T ay for revelation, puts out the light of both,
and does much the same as if he would persuade a man to put out


his eyes the better to receive the remote light of an iuvisble star by a
telescope.”— Book, 4, ch. 19, p. 4.
58. Again Locke says.—“ Have the bulk of mankind no other guide but
accident and blind chance to conduct them to their happiness or misery ;
Are the current opinions and licensed guides of every country sufficient
evidence and security to every man to venture his great concernments on.
Or, can those be the certain and infallible oracles and standards of truth
which teach one thing in Christendom and another in Turkey. Or shall
a poor countryman be eternally happy for having the chance to be born
in Italy. Or a day laborer be unavoidably lost because he had the ill
luck to be born in England. How ready some men may be to say some of
these things, I will not here examine ; but this I am sure, that men must
allow one or other of these to be true, or else grant that God has furnished
men with faculties sufficient to direct them in the way they should take, if
they will but seriously employ them that way, when their ordinary vocations
allow them the leisure.” — Essay, Book 4, ch. 19, p, 3.
59. These are the viewsof some of the mostemiment theologians of their
day on the faculty of reason. With the exception of Locke, they all
occupied the highest positions as religious teachers in the Protestant Church,
some of them men of great ability. It appears to have been the Deistical
controversy which drove them to acknowledge the faculty of reason as the
judge in religious matters. —Tindalthe great champion of Deism says,—The
natural law of right and duty is so absolutly perfect that God could not
add anything to it. It is commensurate with all the real relations in which
man stands. To suppose that God has created artificial relations, and laid
upon man positive precepts, is to take away the very notion of morality.
The moral law is nothing but the condition of our actual being, apparent
alike to those of the meanest and of the highest capacity. It is inconsistent
with this to suppose that God has gone on to enact arbitrary statutes and
to declare them to man in an obscure and uncertain light.— Treatise,
Christianity as old as the Creation T or, the Gospel a republication of the
Religion of Nature, 1732.
The great aim of the Deists of last century was to show the inconsistency
of supposing that man needed a verbal revelation, seeing that he is the
offspring of infinite wisdom and power. They considered it inconsistent in
those believing that man required interfering with after leaving the hands
of his Creator that it is bringing the Creator down to the level of a
mechanic of finite power and wisdom, who having constructed a machine
found out afterwards that it would not go without further adjustment, such
belief as this they considered derogatory to God, and an insult to the divine
gift of reason.
Well might these assertions drive the eminent divines above named, to
acknowledge that man is possessed of reason and faculties. However, it
appears that our modern theologians have made considerable progress since
the last century, some of them can now say, with regard to man’s
faculties, miserable comforters are ye all. If this then be true, man is
progressing rapidly to perfection, for we find him in the last century
possessed of those miserable comforters, reason and conscience ; bu t in this


our day, it is discovered by Friend Ewing, and others, that these faculties
are all moonshine—that man is a very poor machine, and consequently
reflects no credit on his Maker—that he was so badly constructed, that he
went wrong from the very first. This is the belief of the majority in the
Christian Church of the present day.
It may be as well to remark here, that, the arguments of the Deists of
last century against a verbal revelation, are reproduced, but in
another form in the “ Essays and Reviews.” When the Christian Church
acknowledged reason to he man’s guide, the Deistical controversy ended.
The Deists were compelled to receive all that is reasonable in Christianity,
the Church having met them on their own ground. The controversy now
is, whether the Bible be a direct communication from God to man, or, that
it is man’s utterance through the law of God written on his heart. How
this will end, time alone will prove.
60. As regards the civilization and moral elevation of our race, for which
Friend Ewing claims such consideration for the Bible, it is true the Bible
has done much, but that the influence has been altogether for good, remains
to be seen. The old Romans, when they conquered a country, introduced
the arts of refinement and civilization ; fund the conquered people learned
to enjoy more of the blessings of life, under their sway, as, witness the
conquest of Britain, by Julias Caesar. How a conquered people fared when the
primary object of the conquerors has been the spread of Christianity, let
those tell who have read the story of the conquest of Mexico, or of Peru,
by the Spaniards, Under the sway of fanatical Musslemen, life and
property were secure, and the arts and sciences flourished. As during
their occupation of Grenada. How the heroic New Zealanders have
fared at the hands of Christian England we all know. The Aborigines
of our own Island Home have been equally, or perhaps, more benefited
by their intercourse with civilization. They were a poor race of people ;
enduring much hardship throughout their lives ; and we have rid them of
all the numerous ills that flesh is heir to, by exterminating them. And it
is the same the world over, wherever the Christian European sets his
foot—crime, disease, and often, extermination follow his steps. Nor do the
sublime teachings of Jesus, exert any counteracting influence. In theory
the doctrine of “ love your enemies, do good to them that hate you : and
pray for them that despitefully use you,” appears very beautiful, but I
question if the history of the world, affords a single instance of its practice
by any nation ; notwithstanding that it has been taught for nearly two
thousand years ; and the Christian Races of to-day, so far from even
pretending to act upon it, go far beyond even the law of Moses ; if injured,
they certainly retaliate, (if they can), and so far make their motto, “ an eye
for an eye, and a tooth fur a tooth,” but they go farther than this ; their
practise is;—
“ The good old rule ; the simple plan,
“ That they should get, who have the power ;
“ And they should keep who can. - ’
In proof of this, there is the British conquest of India, together with
the later intrusions into Japan and China. All our experience tend to
show, that those who preach the most in favor of Christian precepts, prac-
tice them the least.


But how comes it to pass that those Nations who are spreading the Gospel
far and wide, are practising to the very letter and even exceeding—“ an eye
for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.” What must be the effect produced on
the minds of heathen converts, on reading Christ’s sermon on the Mount,
and comparing it with the practices of Nations professing to be Christians.
The case of Rajah Eammohun Roy will show this. He’was a native of
Bengal. At the age of sixteen he composed a treatise in opposition to the
idolatrous system of Hindooism, and at the age of twenty-two, he begun the
study of the English language, and soon after he was appointed to an office
under the British Government. This gave him frequent opportunities of
conversing with English people. He was now led to study the Christian
Scriptures, and with the assistance of a Mr. Adam, a Baptist Missionary,
he learned Latin and Greek, to enable him to read the New Testament in
its original tongue ;he studied the Hebrew language also. He was delighted
to find the doctrine of one God, in both the Old and New Testament, and
which he had discovered in the ancient theological writings of his own
Country. He now adopted the precepts of Christ as the rule of his life.
He, in the course of two or three years, published several treatises, shewing
that Galvanism, Methodism, and all the other isms were built on a few
passages of the New Testament, and interpreted by sectarian commentators,
so as to throw the beautiful and simple Gospel of Jesus Christ into con-
fusion, and make it appear mysterious to those for whom it was intended
to be so plain, that, —“ a wayfaring man though a fool could not err,
therein.” He visited England ; and on his return to his native Country
he published several works, in which he shows that the “ English Nation
neither at home nor abroad attempt to practise the Gospel of Christ, but
quite the reverse, —that the Gospel in the hands of Great Britain, whether
intentionally or not, has proved beyond contradiction the stalking horse
not of civilization, but of extermination, —that it is a duty which the
higher developments of mankind are called on to perform by the Gospel,
to the lower developments.,—not to displace them by extermination , hut to
instruct them as brothers and sisters, capable of enjoyment in this world
and of that which is to come.” As might be expected these publications
brought down upon him a storm of abuse from the Missionaries. But
the Gospel of Christ in his hands put them all to shame, and the figure
they cut in the controversy is truly pitiable and deplorable.
61. Page 30, line 4 : —Attention is drawn to the question put to
Colenso, by the Zulu, which is said to have led to the conversion of the
Bishop. Friend Ewing is not the only one who has sneered at this ; it is
however, a wilful perversion of Colenso’s text; he mentions the circum-
stance as an instance of a difficulty be encountered ; but he nowhere states
it to be the cause of his subsequent proceedings. His mentioning the
occurrence, is simply a proof of his sincerity. The Zulu was assisting
him to translate the story of the Deluge, and Colenso was struck by the
effect produced by the narrative on an unprejudiced mind. And when
the new convert had the whole story set before him, of the whole human
race, —men, women, and children, together with infants at the breast; all
struggling for life, yet all doomed to destruction, well might he have
exclaimed, could this have been so ! Could he who so loved the world,


that he gave his only begotten son for it, he who is unchangeable, the same
yesterday, to-day and for ever, who sendeth rain alike, on the just and on
the unjust ; who careth for the sparrows, and even for the lillies of the
field, be the author of this fearful, useless and capricious destruction. I
say useless, for neither the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomoroh or "the
antediluvians, could have been more wicked than were the children of
Israel, at a later period, when every man did that which was right in his
own eyes, and every conceivable atrocity were openly practised by the
people claiming to be under the special guidance of Jehovah. Let Friend
Ewing, and other believers in this story say what they may, it is a positive
relief to the genuine, intelligent mind of man, to find this awful
story untrue. It frees us at once, from two painful sensations, that of
having hard, thoughts of the beneficent Creator of the Universe, on account
of the severity of the sentence, and that of sympathising in the horrid
tragedy of a drowning world.
62. Line 23 : —“ The Bible like a true pearl, can bear the closest scrutiny,
scientific, historical, or philological.” It is hard to believe Friend Ewing-
sincere in tnis assertion : if he be, then must his intelligence be greatly
overated ; however this may be, it is quite certain that every part of this
statement is untrue.
63. As I have already said, however honest and sincere the writers of
the Bible may have been, (and in most cases I see no cause to suspect their
intentions), their scientific ideas were glaringly erroneous. Any school-boy
would laugh in these days at such notions of astromony, geology, or
natural philosophy, as were held by these writers.
64. Nor is its historical accuracy a whit more trustworthy. Apart from
its history—or rather, its two different versions of the history of the world,
the only other historical matter it contains, is some fragment of the history
of the Jews, and the birth and death of Jesus Christ, together with a few
events occuring to the ancient Christians. And in these brief historical
sketches are several palpable contradictions.
65. That the Bible will not bear philological scrunity is abundantly
shewn, by the fact, that on philological grounds alone, it can be proved that
Moses could not have been the author of the Pentateuch in its present
form. r


LECTURE THE SECOND.
66. In the second lecture of Friend Ewing, much space is occupied, by
endeavoring to trace the Bible as far back as possible ; he says:—
Page 35, line 8 : —“ In a sense, to give you a chain of large links, as the
result of enquiry, instead of the small and scattered detail; out of which
for your better understanding, I have constructed them.” This may have
appeared to Friend Ewing, a necessary work ; and he may have con-
structed the chain of which he speaks, I can only say that I have met with
the same statements, long before the publication of Colenso’s work. But
whoever compiled the series of statements here made, might have been
better employed ; for it does not in any way affect the point at issue.
67. There is no priesthood in the world, without its sacred writings,
some parts of which cannot be disproved, in a direct manner. Thus the
miraculous events recorded in the Koran, were published to the Believers
during the lifetime of numbers of people, cotemporary with the Prophet;
men whose interest lay in disproving the narrations, if they had been able,
and how from that time to the present, {its defenders may ask), can there
have been any tampering with it. Thus the whole of Friend Ewing’s
labored arguments on this head may be as well applied to the Koran, or
the so-called inspired books of the Mormons, as they are to the Bible. It
is a case of unproven premises. Few of us but at one time or other
have met with well-authenticated ghost stories, or at any rate have read of
such, and yet, notwithstanding all the remarkable circumstances connected
with any such story, as the number and credibility of the witnesses, no
intelligent person attaches the slightest weight to such evidence, knowing
that the apparent credibility of the statements, is owing, simply, to our not
being in possession of all the facts of the case : and furthermore, the said
circumstances being contrary to the known and invariable laws of Nature,
is sufficient to condemn them without any other enquiry.
68. Surely such arguments can have no influence in the matter under
consideration ; or rather, they show an evident weakness, on the part of
those who find themselves compelled to resort to them.
69. The remainder of the lecture is devoted to the matter of the family
of Judah ; and here, any one may satisfy himself, whether Friend Ewing
has more grounds for his view of the matter, than Colenso has in
support of his. Genesis XLYI. 26. “All the souls that came
with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins besides


Jacob’s son’s wives, were threescore and six.’’ is *J*f
Friend Ewing says that this passage does not mean what it says, but
something quite different; and his mode of proving this, is by bringing
forward other passages which contradict it. And the fact of such contra-
dictions existing, ought to shield any one noticing them, from the
wholesale abuse showered upon Colenso on this head. Noris the
a new one ; centuries ago, it afforded matter for dispute, amongst the most
learned of the Jewish Rabbis.


LECTURE THE THIRD.
70. Friend Ewing commences his third lecture, by declaring that the
popularity of the Bishop’s book is owing, not to the position of the author,
but to (Page 60, line 16) “ the very wide-spread spirit of scepticism, among
the masses of the people, and the mere sectarianism and spiritual indif-
ference, influencing a large portion of the religious world.” This must be
a very humiliating admission, and confession. In these days of missionary
labors, of the diffusion of rational knowledge, after the Gospel has been
preached for nearly two thousand years, to have to acknowledge the
existence of “ a wide-spread spirit of scepticism,” in professedly Christian
nations, is a damaging admission, that tells heavily against the claims of
a verbal revelation.
71. The answers of Friend Ewing to many of the objections that follow,
is “ that in the Pentateuch, as in ordinary histories, the whole is sometimes
taken for a part, or a part for the whole.” To a certain extent this is the
case, but there must be limits to this allowance, otherwise there would bo
no understanding the commonest everyday recital. As in ordinary matters,
we have only our plain common sense to guide us in the meanings
of these figurative expressions, so we must bring the same plain
sense to the understanding the Mosaic narrative. Looking at the
question from this point of view, we find, that Moses was com-
manded by Jehovah to gather the congregation together to the door of
the tabernacle, to witness the consecration of Aaron and his sons. Now
whether this proclamation was merely a vague one ; a mere invitation to
the curious or not, it is pretty evident that, in so large a community, it
would draw together an immense concourse of people ; a multitude so
great, that it would be impossible for more than a mere fraction of them,
to witness the ceremony; and therefore the command or invitation was
useless. The impossibility, and therefore the untruth fulness of the state-
ment, is equally apparent, whether it was one thousand, or one million
people who were called to witness the consecration, as soon as we are con-
vinced that the lesser number could not have assembled in the Court, in
which we are told they did assemble.
72. Page 62, line 27 : —“ln writing professedly for the laity, and
arguing from the copy of the Bible, possessed by the ‘ common people,’
should not the Bishop quote just as the copy stands.” This is not the
only occasion on which Friend Ewing takes this objection, and it is one
that has been replied to by the Bishop himself; he tells us that he did not


confine himself to the authorised version, but grounded his criticisms on
the original Hebrew, It would occupy too much space for me to enter
upon the question, of how a divinely inspired and protected book could
have so many variations from the original, as every commentator tells us
that the Bible has. The question is, however, one worth examination.
73. Page 68, line 4: —“How stands the weight of evidence 1 On the
one hand Colenso’s denial and reasons ; on the other, the simple majesty of
Moses’ statements—supported by historical modern testimony.” This
quotation has reference to the possibility of the entire assembly of the
Israelites hearing Joshua read the law ; and the historical modern testi-
mony, is that of Dr Stanley, who tells us that two persons standing on the
summits of Mount Ebal and Gerizim, can hear one another without much
difficulty. It is fair to add that many other travellers have observed the
same thing, but it is hardly necessary to observe, that however it may be
possible to shout detached sentences loud enough to be audible, it is
altogether a different matter, to deliver a lengthy address standing in the
valley between the two hills, and audible to so vast an assemblage. Friend
Ewing’s implied arguments, that the law may have been read to relays,
or that it was not essential for the congregation to hear, is simply prepos-
terous, and at variance with the Mosaic narrative.
74. There is a quotation from the Bishop’s book, that Friend Ewing is
fond of repeating, page 67, line 21 : —“lt is painful to remark the
shifts to which so eminent an author has had recourse,” that may be well
applied to himself, and which speaks forcibly on this subject.
75. Page 71, line 15 :—“ln the quotation from Leviticus IV. 11, 12. A
part is employed to express the whole.” Notwithstanding Friend Ewing’s
assertions, and the contradiction involved, any one reading the passage for
himself will see that “ the anointed priest,” and him alone is appointed to
carry out the carcase, just as he is appointed to perform the other
ceremonies.


LECTURE THE FOURTH
76. The number of the people at the first muster compared with the
poll tax raised six months previously. Page 82, line 17. “Itis to be
borne in mind that the Lord had plagued the people because of the golden
calf. An event calculated to aid in preserving the balance of numbers, at
the two periods in question.” To suppose the possibility of an assemblage
like that of the children of Israel, to number exactly the same on two
separate occasions, with an interval of six months between, notwith-
standing the various births, and the numbers of the people who were des-
troyed by the plague, is too great a demand upon the credulity of any
rational person.
77. Page 84, line 1 : —“ Moses is not to be degraded to the position of a
mere compiler of a dictionary of date, or a catalogue of remarkable events.”
This is Mr. Ewing’s mode of dealing with the chapter in the Bishop’s book,
on the subject of the tents or booths, required by the Israelites, during
their wanderings, and a lamer evasion of the subject can no where be met
with.
78. Page 88, line 24:—“If we accept this meaning of the word,”
(chamash, to arrange, to sit in order,) “as a probable approach to the mind
of the sacred historian, then, the Bishop’s quibbles about how, and where
the arms were procured, for 600,000 warriors, vanish into thin air.”
There will be few thoughtful readers, willing to adopt this view. The
Israelites were very unlikely to have felt the panic imputed to them, by
Friend Ewing, at the pursuit of the Egyptians, when the memory of the
ten plagues was still fresh in their minds. Friend Ewing appeals to what
he considers parallel cases in modern history, but there is no parallel
between the cases cited, and the one under discussion. And according to
the sacred narrative, the children of Israel were armed at the time of their
battle with the Amalikites very shortly afterwards.


LECTURE THE FIFTH.
79. Page 105, Line 17 :—“ Looking then at the Passover with all its
solemn circumstance, and meaning,” &c. Without debating pro or con , the
questions of what notice the Israelites had, to prepare the first Passover ;
or, of how many partook of each lamb, we may pause to enquire, how “ the
Passover with all its solemn circumstance and meaning,” can be shown to
have any reference to, either the institution of the Lord’s Supper, or any
thing else in the far future, since the Jews who made the offerings, certainly
knew nothing of any future events that their sacrifices were meant to
typify. Instead of this they were evidently considered by them as meri-
torious or expiatory actions, and it is altogether inconceivable, that a nation
should offer millions of sacrifices during a period of nearly 1500 years, and
have no knowledge of the object for which those sacrifices were ordained.
81. St. Paul, honest and earnest as he unquestionably was, evidently
believed in the efficacy of the Mosaic law, if thoroughly observed, for he
says, Romans 11., 25, “ For circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep the
law.”
81, Page 109, line 19 : —“As I have already shown that the Jews had
at least ten days’ notice, or rather more, if we go back to the 11th chapter
of Exodus.” This has reference to the statement of Colenso, that it was im-
possible for the Israelites to have all received notice of the coming events,
to have procured the paschal lamb, to have killed, cooked and eaten it, and
started on their march, leaving nothing behind, in so few hours. The bible
narrative expressly says that it was so, and Friend Ewing in denying it,
places himself in the position of the man in his own illustration, who in the
face of the clearest evidence insisted, “ the fact’s not true.” (Page 109,
line I.)


LECTURE THE SIXTH-
82. The first part of this lecture is upon the sheep and cattle in the
desert, and how they were maintained, and Friend Ewing’s argument is,
that at that time, the Siniatic peninsula might have been a pleasant pasture.
Strange logic this, in the face of the numerous descriptive passages to be
found throughout the Bible. Moses in the song ascribed to him, Deute-
ronomy XXXIL, 10., says of it, “a desert land,” “ a waste howling wil-
derness.”
83. Friend Ewing, in speaking of the feeding of the flocks and herds
in the desert, says, they were not kept in or near the camp, but were
“ scattered on the mountains,” “ over a Country of perhaps thirty miles.”
(Page 123, lines 14, 17.) And in support of this view, coolly refers us to
Exodus XXXIL, 12. A passage which no amount of ingenuity can pos-
sibly distort, to mean or imply anything of the kind. And if, not merely
having the thirty miles of feeding ground, they had been spread over three
hundred miles, of what use would that have been in a land, that in spite
of Friend Ewing’s dreams of pleasant pastures, is spoken of by Moses as
a ‘‘howling wilderness.”


LECTURE THE SEVENTH.
84, Page 144, line 11 : —“When lie can demonstrate a perfect similarity
between the geography of London, and the abodes of the Jews, at the
period in question,—disclose indeed any grounds in common on which to
base an argument, like the one of statistics in this chapter, he will have
some show of reason on his side.” 1 confess, I cannot see the necessity of
establishing any such parallel in this case. We know that the ordinary
mortality of the people was not interrupted, since every soul (with two
exceptions) who came out of Egypt, died during the forty years’ wandering, a
rate of mortality greatly in excess of that assumed by Colenso. We may very
fairly presume therefore, that the rate of births will be equally in favor of
the Mosaic narrative. Admitting for argument’s sake, that in his estimate
of the number of children to be ascribed to each mother in Israel, Colenso
has erred by neglecting to take into consideration, the number of families,
in which the first-born was a daughter, and other like reasons, still after
making every allowance, and by adopting any rational mode of obtaining
an approximation to the number of children in each family, it will still be
found, that the average number will be far beyond the bounds of possi-
bility.
85. Page 150, line 3 “ This chapter then of Colenso s, appears to be
a waste of time —a squandering of ammunition, firing just at a dummy,
instead of, at a man.” Very far indeed from that appears to me to be the
tendency of this, the 15th Chapter of Colenso’s book. First, it shows
clearly, notwithstanding Friend Ewing’s learned history of the Bible, that
the sacred volume has, at some unknown period undergone an alteration, —
And next, as in duty bound, as an honest commentator, Colenso would have
imperfectly performed his work, had he omitted placing before his readers
a question that has’ already excited considerable discussion among the
learned. As for Friend Ewings constantly recurring taunt, that Colenso
does not bring forward new objections, any honest reader of the Bishop s
book will see, and be bound to believe, that they were new discoveries to
him, and that as soon as he had made them he straightway declared
them to the world. It is much to be regretted that so honest an example,
is so rarely, if ever followed. If instead of stifling their convictions, and
endeavoring to bolster up a worn out system, Ministers of the Chinch
were to honestly and fearlessly declare what they believe to be tiue, they


would be treading more closely in the steps of tbe founders of their
Religion, and the world would be the better for it.
86. Page 154, line 8: —“Chapter 16 is a kind of continuation, a
kaleidiscopical turning of the preceding one.” If this is all that Friend
Ewing’s powers of criticism will enable him to see in this chapter, it is
hard to refrain from taxing him with wilful blindness. In Genesis 15, 16,
Abraham is promised, “ But in the fourth generation they shall come
hither again.” Colenso points out what every one knows, and what
Friend Ewing reluctantly admits, that it did not happen as here promised,
but that it was at least, eight generations before they returned to the pro-
mised land. Plain men call this a palpable contradiction, but with a class
of men whose livelihood depends upon keeping people quiet in the implicit
belief of these things, it is only an exercise of faith.
Page 156, line 16 : —“Some men have a trick, both in declaiming, and
in arguing, of getting wide of the subject, than which nothing can be more
tedious and irritating to the hearer. It is very pleasant when the speaker
or the writer ‘ sticks to the text.’ ” The quotation I have just made
illustrates in a remarkable manner the old truism, that, “we are blind to
our own faults ; but we view those of our neighbors through a magnifying
glass.” I think it is hardly possible for any writer to “ stick to his text,”
more closely than Colenso does. It is to be wished that Friend Ewing
had in this respect, followed his example. So far from this, whole pages
are filled with irrelevant matter ; virulent abuse, unbecoming sneers, and
useless illustrations abound from one end of the book to the other, and
however they may display the writer’s elegance of diction, every reader
must lament, that Friend Ewing does not act on the plan he professes
to admire, and “ stick” more closely “ to the text.”


LECTURE THE EIGHTH.
87. Page 165, line 1 :—“ Colenso has put his objections in the strongest
light, with this drawback (one common enough in his book), assuming
averages—assuming indeed the very thing he has to prove.” This is a
very unfair kind of criticism, and says but little in favor of Friend Ewing’s
cause. If such a mode of reasoning were adopted, every statement made
in the heathen mythology, for example, would be equally proved to be true,
by the mere fact of being recorded, for an advocate for these things might
say in the language of Friend Ewing, “ all objections have this drawback,
they assume what it is necessary they should prove, they have no right to
make assumptions, because they are ignorant of the habits, the customs and
the nature of the people of those days,” &c. Such a course of argument
would be deservedly ridiculed in the one case, and cannot have any weight
in the other. When Friend Ewing can show us by an appeal to common
sense, that Colenso’s assumptions are irrational, then he may expect them
to be disregarded ; but so far from being the case, the numbers assumed
by Colenso, are always more favorable to the object under discussion, than
strict justice demands.
88. The greater part of this lecture labors to prove, that the numbers
of the children of Israel were as great as they are said to have been, first
because they had a divine promise that they should become as the sand on
the seashore for multitude ; and next, because if we take the number
of the largest family recorded, and adopt that as the average number
in each family, we shall get a number in excess of 2,000,000 at the
time of the Exodus. For the first argument, in a question involving the
authenticity of the Pentateuch it is utterly worthless, when unsupported,
and the second argument is simply ridiculous.
88. Page 175, line 14 :—“ To what extent the Hebrew population was
augmented by proselytes, and by marriage without their own people, we
know not.” Very true, but we do know that the Hebrews were slaves to
the Egyptians, and therefore, to suppose that the number of proselytes
could make any sensible difference is absurd.
89. Page 182, line 8: —“The last objection,—the reference to the
Levitical families—is built chiefly on the broad fallacy already spoken of.”
That is to say, that Levi’s children, instead of having four generations in


which to increase the one son to 2630, and another to 2750, and soon,
might have had seven or eight, or even ten. This mode of argument is the
same as the last —to take the largest increase spoken of, and adopt that as
the average. But, however the number of lineal decents may be reckoned,
the facts recorded, that one son of Levi, (Gershon) having himself only
two-sons, was yet the progenitor of 2630, in a period of 215 years, that
another son, whose own offspring numbered four, yet increased to 2750
in the same period of time, that another son, whose issue was two, had
3200 descendants, in the same time. ISTo amount of casuistry can remove
these statements from the narratives, or succeed in making them credible
as they stand. Any sensible, unprejudiced person will with equal readiness
endorse Colenso’s ideas, that the disproportion in the increase of the tribe
of Dan from one son, (64,400) and the tribe of Benjamin, from ten sons,
(35,400.) Making every allowance for the comparative sterility of some
families, and the surpassing fertility of others, the numbers still remain so
out of proportion to the case, that the result is still incredible


LECTURE THE NINTH.
89. Page 190, line 20 :—“We see then how a partial suspension of
sacrifice, and other services in the wilderness, was not regarded as a sinful
infraction of the law, as it was to be considered after the people were come
into the promised land,” Granting this readily enough, we still must
understand from the whole tenor of the Mosaic narrative, that wherever the
laws could be conformed to, the duty was imperative. Are we to suppose,
that the tabernacle, the altar, and all the various appliances, were made and
carried about from place to place, merely to have them in readiness, for the
the time when they should possess the promised land? What meant the
directions for carrying out the otfal from without the camp, if sacrifices
were omitted during this time, as well as the numerous instances of the
ceremony of sacrifice being performed ? In addition to this, we have
already seen that the offering of sacrifice was considered ameritorous work,
and so every one who possibly could would be desirous of observing the
law, and thus the number of priests, was altogether disproportioned to the
duties devolving on them. Nor does the fact, that some of the sacrifices,
such as those of the harvest festival, were not offered, affect the inference
to be drawn in this case. It is evident that the duties said to have been
performed by the priests, were more than they could possibly have done,
and this is all that Colenso contends for.
90. Page 194, line 2 :—“lt was in truth an endowment of the sacred
order,” Friend Ewing appears to feel warmly on this subject, speaking
of this liberal provision for Ministers of Eeligion he says, page 193, line 25.
“A noble provision of agency for the higher objects of human existence,
and laying an impressive mockery on the stinted and parsimonious allow-
ance of our modern utilitarianism.” And the results produced by this
“ noble provision,” were of a piece, with the extravagant provision too
often made in our own days. The whole history of the Jews, especially
as related in the book of Judges, bears ample evidence of the uselessness
of the provision, for from one end of the land to the other, “ every man
did that which was right in his own eyes.” And so in the present day,
the more ample the provision made for religious purposes the more
useless, or rather the more injurious does such a Ministry become.
91. Page 199, line 17 :—“Let it be borne in mind that the war on
Midian, was an executive event in the moral government of God upon


earth.” If anything had been wanting, after going so far through the
Pentateuch, to destroy its claims to inspiration, I affirm that the account
of the barbarous slaughter of the Midianites, the enslaving the virgins,
and the whole of the proceedings detailed in the 31st Chapter of
Numbers, is so revolting that it could not possibly be the work of a
God of Justice. The Almighty has given us the power of discriminating
between right and wrong, and there can be no greater impiety than
ascribing such terrible proceedings to the “ executive events of God’s
moral government upon earth.”


LECTURE THE TENTH.
92. Page 218, line 4 : —“Were any of tlie ministers to whom you
are in the habit of listening, to teach the views of Colenso and still
claim at your hands, credit for a reverence for the word of God—to look
for your continued support, as the Christian Minister, of a Christian
Church, &c.” This Friend Ewing must know to be untrue in the case
of Bishop Colenso, When the Bishop decided to publish his convictions
to the world, it was with the belief that the loss of his position would
follow as a necessary consequence. And we may well believe that it is
a desire to see the Church reformed, that is actuating him in his pro-
ceedings, just as much as Luther, and the other early Reformers were
actuated by the light that was in them.
93. Page 220, line 18 :—“ Morally—religiously—he admits that he
should resign, but believing that legally he may retain his office, he clings
to it.” This is so monstrous a perversion of the Bishop’s text, that I
cannot resist giving my readers the quotations from Bishop Colenso, on
which this shameful assumption is based. The Bishop says at his 12th
page, “For myself if I cannot find the means of doing away with my
present difficulties, I see not how I can retain my episcopal office, in the
discharge of which I must require from others a solemn declaration
that they unfeignedly believe all the canonical scriptures of the Old and
New Testaments, which with the evidence now before me, it is impossible
wholly to believe in.” And in a note at the bottom of the page, the Bishop
says, “ This was written before the recent decision of the Court of Arches,
by which of course, the above conclusion is materially affected.”
94. Now it will be remembered that the decision referred to was in
effect—as every one will remember, that it is not essential that a clergyman
of the Church of England shall implicitly believe in the absolute truthful-
ness, and inspiration of the whole Bible ; and of course the Bishop might
consistently enough, ordain any one to preach religion, without being com-
pelled to believe in these old world superstitions.
95. But what shall we say of Friend Ewing, who with the full knowledge
of all this, unblushingly informs, first a large congregation from his pulpit,
and afterwards, every one who may chance to read his book, —that Colenso
believing that legally he was able to do what he knew to be morally wrong,


and therefore intended to do it 1 Comment on such conduct,is unneces-
sary.
96. Page 221, line 21 : —“What then in the name of truth and consis-
tency, caii be the moral weight of the teachings of one who holds a position
so anomalous 1” It is exactly the same position Luther held in regard to
the teachings of the Church of Rome. And the moral weight, as well as
the result of his teachings, are now pretty well apparent.
97. But what shall we say of the moral weight to be attached to Friend
Ewing’s teachings, when from the very pulpit he can thus shamelessly
and unblushingly announce an untruth as we here see that he has
done ?
98. Page 224, line 11 : —“ Is there no distinction between the demon-
strations of science, and those advanced and spiritual feelings with which
God manifest in the flesh, has lighted up the darkness of the human soul.
I contend that the same God who fixed the immutable laws of science, also
gave us the faculty of demonstrating them, and from the whole Book of
Creation, the power to deduce our rules of life. In other words the
“ demonstrations of science” are never in opposition to the laws of God
written in our hearts, and therefore the idea of having to choose between
them is an absurdity.
99. Page 238, line 12 “ I challenge any believer in Colenso, to show
by fact or reason, that the advanced, and advancing state of Christendom,
is in no sense dependent on, or resultant from the teachings of the Bible.
Friend Ewing in this passage takes ground that he doubtless thinks cannot
be easily assailed ; no lawyer could have drawn up the challenge with more
loop holes for evasion than are here shown. But it is altogether unne-
cessary \ that Christianity has exerted a large influence on the world, none
can deny, that much of the good arising from it, has been derived indi-
rectly, out of evil as it were, is equally patent to every one.
100. I have now gone through Mr. Ewing’s Book, and conclude my
observations, by stating simply that in the great Book of Nature, we can
find many necessary rules for our guidance to happiness, both here
and hereafter: —
“ A glory gilds Creation’s page,
“ Its study's never done,
“ It gives a light to every age,
“It gives, but borrows none.”


MR. MORRISON’S PAMPHLET.
101. Having thus noticed the objections of Mr. Ewing to the book of
Bishop Colenso, I now turn to the arguments against the same work, that
are to be found in the pamphlet of the Reverend Mr. Morrison.
102. At page 5, line 17, he says, “ We are not to allow ‘ pity, which is
akin to love,’ to adopt hastily, or applaud indiscreetly, the expression of
these distressing difficulties.” It would have been well, had Mr. Morison
maintained throughout his book, the moderation, he appears to start with,
but the “ distressing difficulties” appear to have considerably disturbed the
equanimity with which he commenced his work. r ihe idea is somewhat
farfetched that pity could by any posible means, cause any one either to
adopt or applaud doctrines, contrary to one’s belief.
103. It is a singular way of refuting an opponent to declare, as Mr.
Morrison does, that Colenso’s objections are owing to the hardness of his
heart. Something more capable of demonstration than that will surely be
required from Mr. Morrison, before he can exert any influence in opposition
to the Bishop’s Book. # . .
104. Page 6, line 4 : —“ Slavery is the great evil in the estimation of
the Bishop, aud his moral sense is shocked by the idea—that God should
legislate, mediately or immediately, on the abomination ; grounding his
objection on the law relative to a refractory servant; and on the thirty
seven Midianite captives, given to the Lord as his portion.” The way in
which Mr. Morrison deals with this has at any rate the merit of novelty.
He quotes the words of Christ to the Jews, Matthew, XIX, 8, Moses,
because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your
wives.” Arguing that since as a matter of expediency the Jews were
allowed to do one thing radically wrong, they might have had the same
licence in other matters \ and supports this view by quoting from Ezekiel,
XX., 25, “ Wherefore I gave them statutes that were not good ; and law's
by which they should not live.” Any one w 7 ho will read the entire paragraph
from which this is taken, will see the ideas held by the writer, were of a
very different character from those held by all enlightened men of these
days, for w 7 e no longer look upon the Divine Architect of the Universe as
a capricious and changeable being. _
105. Friend Morison proceeds to justify the practice of slave holding
by a reference to Alison’s history of Europe, and then with singular incon-
sistency proceeds to declare that slavery never was, nor could have been
practised among the Jews, ....
106. Page 6, line 33: —“The Hebrew law of servitude is, however,
greatly misapprehended, and requires explanation. Nowr the explanations
of Mr. Morrison are—(p. 6,7.) First, slavery [was impossible from the
state of the laws observed by the Jews ; second, a poor man selling him-
self or his children was only a form of apprenticeship ; thirdly a debtor
or a thief working out his liabilities, was only fulfilling a civil contract ;
fourthly, that at any rate it could not be slavery, since at the year of
Jubilee all contracts W'ere ended, and lastly that the Jews could not have


been slave owners, since they bad no word in the language, expressing our
notions of slavery. These assumptions are so glaringly disengenuous, that
to answer them in detail would be a waste of time. One quotation from
the Mosaic law will be sufficient to show the real state of the case.
107. After stating that if an Israelite becomes a bond servant, he is not
to be ill-treated, and is to be released at the year of Jubilee, the passage
goes on to state, (Leviticus XXY, 45, 46.) “ Moreover of the children of
the strangers that do sojourn among yon, of them shall ye buy,—and they
shall be your possession. And ye shall take them for an inheritance for
your children after you , to inherit them for a possession, they shall be your
bondsmen for ever.”
108. Page 6, line 36 :— “Unquestionably excellent as our English
version is, we have to regret that the translators have not adhered to a
literal rendering of Hebrew terms on the one hand, and on the other that
they have failed to transpose the Hebrew idiom, into veritable English.”
It is remarkable, that a body of learned men such as were the seventy to
whom we owe our authorised version of the Bible, should have been so
strangely incompetent for the task, to which in consequence of their
learning and piety they were appointed.
109. Page 9, line 1 : —“ The difficulties in the Book of Creation, and in
the Bible are similar, and both give way before patient investigation.”
This is the ordinary style of claptrap, by which earnest enquirers after
truth are never satisfied. If it be true that the difficulties of the Bible
are removed by a patient investigatioh, why is such an outcry raised when-
ever any one commences to investigate.
110. Mr. Morrison next takes into consideration the difficulty about the
family of Judah, and having utterly failed to invalidate Colenso’s views on
the point, evades the matter by saying, (Page 9, line 24) “ the ‘ manifest
contradiction’ which Bishop Colenso would make out, only shows his own
defect of intelligence, concerning the design of the author, and the scope of
the narrative.”
111. Mr. Morrison says that Bishop Colenso knows “nothing critically of
Hebrew,” when he can consider it necessary for the whole congregation to
assemble to witness the consecration of the priests, or to hear the reading
of the law. In this latter case especially any one by reading the account
for themselves may see that even the women and children must have been
present.
112. Page 12, line 11 ; —“Would it be wonderful if the census of
England had been taken before the cholera, and six months after to find
that the births and deaths balanced each other.” In order to complete
the parallel, it would be necessary to consider, not merely the total numbers
balancing each other, but also the population of nearly every town and
village retaining the same peculiarity, and that as related in the case of the
ten tribes is an impossibility. But before advancing this absurdity, Mr.
Morrison professes to get rid of the impossibility by declaring (line 7). “It
is also an assumption, that there were two numberings in six months \ the
text gives no reason for such a supposition.” How any one who has
read the text, can make such an assertion, I am at a loss to imagine.


113. Page 13, line 15:—“That such a multitude, as upwards of
2,000,000 containing 600,000 fighting men could not have been held in
slavery, has its answer, when we look to India with its teeming millions,
held in subjection as bad as any Egyptian bondage by a handful of British.”
Without for a moment defending the British misrule in India 1 have no
hesitation in declaring that there is no analogy between the two cases. The
Hindoos are certainly far inferior to their tyrants in point of physical and
moral energy, while the frequently recurring rebellions among the other
tribes, militates strongly against Mr. Morrison’s attempted parallel ; added
to which the British have never dreamed of asserting any right to the
persons or labor of the inhabitants of India.
117. Page 14, line 7 : —“The people were preparing for this event”
(the Exodus) “ during at least a year, from the time when Moses came with
the message from Jehovah.” How far they were preparing for this event,
during at least a part of this time, may be seen by any one who will consult
the sth Chapter of Exodus, when it will be observed that so far from the
Israelites having time to prepare for their departure, they had an extra task
imposed upon them.
118. I say nothing here about the dissimulation practised by Moses, who
merely asked three days holiday for the people, when intending them to
decamp with everything they could lay their hands upon.
119. Page 14, line 44 : —“ The word * midbar ’ (wilderness) if the Bishop
had understood Hebrew would have taught him, that it refers to 'pasture
grounds, as opposed to cultivated lands.” If this statement were true,
what necessity was there for the miraculous supply of manna 1 Or what
was the meaning of the numerous allusions to the howling wilderness, &c. ?
120. Page 15, line 4: —“The present population of Palestine is
2,000,000, yet three-fourths of the laud is completely desolate.” This may
be the case,but Friend Morrison forgets that the Israelites were to “ increase
and multiply” excessively, and the country was then swarming with inha-
bitants.
121. Page 17, line 22 : —“lt is admitted that the whole of the periods
here referred to,” (the 450 years) “ are the most confused in Egyptian his-
tory, and that before any dogmatic assertion is allowed, w 7 e must wait the
deciphering of monuments, and papyri, and perhaps additional discoveries
of tombs and monuments, but in the absence of such, the above considera-
tions ought to have their due weight in connexion with the text.” That is
to say that Mr. Morrison admits an evident contradiction between the time
the Israelites spent in Egypt, (215 years), and the terms of the promise,
that they were to be in bondage, in a strange land for 450 years. There is
indeed no way of escaping this difficulty, and Mr. Morrison is quite ready
to declare (and indeed does do so) that St. Paul was in error in dating 4 the
period from the time of Abraham. But these differences of opinion must
always arise, in connection with any fallible work, to which the attribute of
perfection is sought to be ascribed.
122. Page 18, line 19 : —“ I think that'all the genealogies given in the
other historical books of the Bible, justify this view, even as the gene-
alogies of our Lord Jesus Christ do. ” The view 7 here spoken of is that the


genealogies of the Bible are utterly worthless for computing dates, since
oulj,, certain beads of certain families are given, and the reference to the
genealogies of Christ cannot be accounted for in any other manner, nor
even by this means can they be made to bear any resemblance to truth.
It will be found that according to St. Matthew, Joseph the nominal father
of Christ, was the fortieth in descent from Abraham, while according to St.
Luke, he was the 51th from Abraham ; and there is an air of exactitude
about both accounts sufficient to show that each Apostle believed himself
strictly correct. And it is worthy of notice, that if the two accounts were
identical in every respect, they would still be worthless, with regard to the
object for which they were written. That object was, to prove the fulfil-
ment of prophecy, by showing that Jesus Christ was the descendant of
David, Ac., but to do this, it should have been the genealogy of Mary, the
wife of Joseph that was required, since the Apostle tells us explicitly that
Joseph was not the father of the child.
123, Line 35 : —“The history in Genesis gives us no reason to conclude
that Jacob and his sons were less opulent than Abraham, who had 318
trained men born in his house ; especially since only two of these sons with
their adherents put the whole city of Shechem to the sword.” This piece
of special pleading is worthy of Mr. Morrison, who certainly will always
be able to sustain any argument he may please to undertake, since he can
find analagous cases, where no one else can discern any parallel. Because
.Abraham possessed many slaves, (Mr. Morrison has the good sense to refrain
from telling us how Abraham came by his wealth) his grandson and great
grand-children must have been equally wealthy. Now-a-days if a man’s
possessions are divided amongst several children, the shares of each indi-
vidual are as much smaller than the original patrimony, as there are per-
sons to share it. But whatever wealth Abraham may have possessed, we
know that Jacob was the founder of his own fortunes, since he was poor
enough when he fled from his home to escape the wrath of his brother. As
for the fact of two of his sons putting a city to the sword, Mr. Morrison
quietly ignores the fact that all the males had just been circumcised, and
therefore unable, through illness to offer any resistance.
124, Page 22, line 27 : —“lf the reader objects to my statements as
fancies, I would ask him what else are Colenso’s V’ The answer to this is
easy enough. Mr. Morrison’s “ fancies,” as he candidly admits them to be,
are mere baseless guesses, adopted for a special object, and unsupported by
the slightest shadow of an argument, while Colenso’s statements on the
subject, are so many inferences drawn from the sacred historian himself.
125, The rest of the answers to Colenso are in the same form as those
of Mr. Ewing ; and having already briefly noticed them, further comment
is unnecessary.
126. While professing to answer the objections raised by Colenso, the
book mainly consists of an attack on the man. The motives which led
Colenso to publish his views on the Pentateuch are of small importance,
the question is, does he prove them ? And how are the commonly received
notions of the whole Bible affected thereby 1 That the Bible has no claim
to direct inspiration is, I think, abundantly proved. It is true that Mr.


Morrison tells ns at the commencement of his pamphlet, that “ we are not to
applaud the statement of difficulties.” Why not 1 We must either approve
.or condemn. And since free inquiry is admissable, and even courted, it
becomes an actual duty, apart from any inclination, or otherwise. We are
taught to believe that the Scriptures are of divine origin, and so, necessarily
perfect, infallible in every respect, of undoubted authority, the writers
prompted to, and directed in the task by the Holy Spirit, who cannot err.
It in our examination we find that the internal evidence is contrary to these
claims, why should we allow them 1 Stripped of their artificial attributes,
the Bible will exert just as powerful an influence for real good, with a far
wider range, than when invested with imaginary and impossible qualities.
126. The wholesale charge of ignorance -of Hebrew so often made
against the Bishop, is one of which an uneducated person can hardly judge
correctly, I only know that I have never met with the charge in con-
nection with the other parts of the Bishop’s Book, and that these parts of
his criticisms being almost entirely of a philological nature require an inti-
mate knowledge of the Hebrew language. And the sweeping charge of
ignorance made by Mr. Morrison, militate equally against the legion of trans-
lators, who all differ from one another, and from the original. According
to Baron Bunsen, there are about 30,000 different versions of the Scriptures,
of which our authorised version is the most correct. Now it is apparent
that it is almost impossible for any translator to render the true spirit of a
lengthy narrative, from one language into another. But our version has
been destined to be adopted for a guide, by an incalculably greater number
of persons, than any other, or every other edition of the Bible; is it then
feasible, that the power that first dictated the work, and which has ever
since preserved it from destruction, would not have equally guarded it from
error in the hands of these translators. Accordingly we find there have
not been wanting, many divines who have shewn a considerable amount of
zeal and ability, who have maintained that the 70 were as much inspired
as the original writers.
127. “The difficulties of the Bible,” says Mr. Morrison, “ give way before
a patient investigation,” but it is perhaps owing to the rapid habits of
thought that he attributes to us, that he contents himself with making
these assertions, without endeavoring to prove them in any way. In addi-
tion to the many difficulties noticed by Colenso, which do not give way
before a patient investigation, in the Pentateuch, (and he has by no means
exhausted the number), I will briefly allude to one or two others to be
found in other parts of the Bible. In 1 Kings, XY., 33, we are told that
“In the third year of Asa, King of Judah, began Baasha, the son of
Ahijah to reign over all Israel, twenty and four years.” In 2 Chronicles,
XVI., 1, “ In the six and thirtieth year of Asa, Baasha, King of Israel, came
up against Israel.” Which according to-the Book of Kings was nine years
after his death. In 2 Kings, XII., 13, 14, “ Howbeit there were not
made for the House of the Lord —any vessels of gold and silver for the
House of the Lord, but they gave the money to the workmen that repaired
the House of the Lord,” In 2 Chronicles, XXIY., 14, it is distinctly state I
that the money in question was made - into vessels for the House of the


Lord. Also contrast the account of the invasion of Judah
by Sennacherib, given in the 2nd Book of Chronicles, with the account of
the same event, given in the Book of Isaiah, and important differences will-
be observed. These contradictions, and they are to be found throughout
the Bible are sufficient to prove to the commonest understanding
that the claims of the Bible to literal or historical accuracy, are altogether
unfounded.
128. By way of concluding his pamphlet,Friend Morrison brings a gene-
ral charge against Colenso, of challenging the real inspiration of the Bible,
and the historical veracity of the Pentateuch, and says, (Page 24), “ The
positive evidence of the historical worth of the Books of Moses and
Joshua, is cumulative and vast, in opposition to the objections raised by men
who will only see objections, and for whom there is not another side.”
Those who have read Colenso’s book, will know what his objections are,
some of them may seem trifling, and no doubt would not have been noticed
by him, had not the Bible been taught as the literal word of God. It is a
very serious matter to teach the rising generation, that the Bible is the
true and pure word of God. What must be the feelings of those who have
been so taught, when they become capable of judging for themselves, and
begin to observe the works of Creation ; here they find that, God, as appa-
rent from his works, is a Being of infinite wisdom and perfection; while in
the Bible, Tie is represented as continually changing to suit the wishes of
man ? I say, what must be the ultimate issue of this great question, on
the minds of intelligent people 1 ? Will it not be the rejection of the Bible alto-
gether 1 Yes ! and whose fault will it be ? Not Colenso’s, nor those
who think with him, but those who teach the Bible as the word of God.
But, can this not be arrested 1 Yes, by teaching the rising generation to re-
ceive the Bible as a history of bygone days, in which the. law of God written
on man's heart underlies the whole superstructure, and where this law ger-
minated, but did not become a full-grown tree ; and that this law underlies
the religious history of all Nations.
129. On this ground, the Bible and Science agree, both speak the same
beautiful language, that of progress. Thus the Bible becomes valuable to
us, as shewing us the gradual development of religion in man. It is idle
to talk about men only seeing objections, and to say, that for those who do
so there is not “ another side.” Does Colenso see only one side ? Does
he not admit that both the divine and the human are to be found in the
Bible 1 Of course he does ; and every impartial enquirer will come to the
same conclusion. It is to Friend Morrison, and not to Colenso and those
•who think with him, that the charge of “seeing one side only” applies ; the
pamphlet under examination, is a proof of this, consequently the arrow shot
at Colenso, returns to its own quiver.
130. He says “ unless we are worshippers of chance, we must acknow-
ledge the inspiration and truthfulness of the sacred writers.” Now I think
we may question both the inspiration, and the truthfulness of the writers
of the Pentateuch and book of Joshua, without being the worshippers of
chance. The revelations of geology have completely annihilated the doc-
trines of chance ; and at the same time they have shaken the faith of,


thousands in the account of the origin of our world, as stated in the Penta"
teuch. Geology shows us a regular progressive order, in the construction
of our globe, both in animate and inanimate matter ; and that its construc-
tion has not been the work of a few days, but has occupied a vast period
of time. Here then we have just cause to call in question the inspiration
of the writers of the books in question ; could they have been inspired
from the same fountain of wisdom which produced the earth we inhabit 1
If so, then the Pentateuch and the science of Geology, would speak the
same language. Strip the story of its supposed verbal inspiration, and it
then becomes intelligible. It shows man’s faculties brought into action by
observation and reflection, by which we have an account of Creation, such
as a simple mind—unaided by scientific research—would produce. Re-
garded as such, it might continue to be the admiration of ages yet to come;
but under the inspiration theory, it will cease to attract the admiration
and respect, which it otherwise would do, if accepted as the production of
one, or more, of our fellow-men, longing to know the origin of all things.
131. Page 24 : —“ The highest law of historical criticism is, that the
statements of a contemporary, and an actor in the events narrated, are of
the highest credibility ; if in other respects the man is of moral worth.
When Jesus, (in John YIL, 19,) says “ did not Moses give you the
law, and yet none of you keepeth the law.’* His testimony is in accord-
ance with the universal Jewish testimony , that the “ written law ” or five
books of Moses, were the writing of the Great Prophet.” Although the
testimony here produced, may be satisfactory to some minds ; it is not to
mine. It appears to me to be a downright impossibility for Moses to have
written as follows, Genesis, Chapter 1., 27, 28, verses—“ So God created
man in his own image ; in the image of God created he him : male and
female created he them ; and God said unto them be fruitful, and multiply,
and replenish the earth, and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish
of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that
moveth on the face of the earth.” The person who wrote this could not
say as is said in the second chapter, verse 5, “ and there was not a man to
till the ground and then proceed in the seventh verse, to give another
account of making man, and afterwards making woman out of one of his
ribs.
The same person could not write, as is written in the 29th verse of the
first chapter, “ Behold I (God) have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is on the face of the earth ; and every tree, in which is the fruit of
a tree yielding seed, to you it shall be for meat;” and afterwards say, as is
said in the second chapter, eighth verse, “And the Lord God planted a gar-
den eastward in Eden ; and there he put the man whom he had formed.”
Yerse 16, “And the Lord God took the man and put him in the gar-
den of Eden to dress and to keep it And the Lord God commanded the
man, saying, of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat But
of the tree of knowledge, of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in
the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die.”
Again one and the same person could not say, “ Thus the heavens and
the earth were finished, and all the host of them ; and on the seventh day


God ended his work which he had made and shortly after set the
Creator to work again, to plant a garden, to make man, and afterwards
woman. According to the first chapter, the man and woman, were made at
the same time. According to the second, they were made at different
times ; the man first, the woman afterwards. According to the first, they
were to have dominion over all the earth. According to the second, their
dominion was limited to a garden. Now does Friend Morrison really be-
lieve, that the well-instructed Moses,could write asishere stated! It appears
to me impossible, for a well informed man to believe the story to be the
production of one writer. Nay, an intelligent schoolboy would not believe
it, after having carefully perused the story.
132. The account of Noah’s flood could not possibly have been written
by the well informed Moses, The writer has told the story, as if the law
of Moses was given prior to the flood ; for he has made God to say to
Noah, Genesis VII. 2. “Of every clean beast thou shalt take unto thee
by sevens, the male, and his female ; and of the beasts that are not clean
by two, the male, and his female.” This is the Mosaic law, and could
only be said after that law was given, not before. It is according to the
Bible, more than six hundred years from the time the flood is said to have
happened, to the time of Moses ; consequently he could not be the writer
of the story of the flood, and at the same time the Jewish lawgiver, since
he received the law (according to the Bible) at the hands of the Almighty
on Mount Sinai, six hundred years after the flood. What is here said
needs no illustration. If the reader dare open his eyes and look for himself
he will see a great deal more than is stated here.
133. With regard to Friend Morrison’s quotation from John YIT. 19.
“ Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the law.”
This appears to be as applicable in our day, as it was in the days of Christ:
I can imagine I can hear him addressing those who call themselves
Christians, in these words, “ did not 1 give you the Gospel laiv, and yet
none of you keepeth it .” Suppose an intelligent person to have the Gospel
of Christ placed in his hands for the first time, and informed that it was
believed in by several Nations ; on his reading the sermon on the Mount,
and observing how it was practised by the immediate followers of Christ,
he would conclude that any Nation favored withsuch a sublime law as this,
and believing it to be true, must, internally, be in a happy state j but such
is not the case. Millions believe the Gospel of Christ, but do hundxeds
practise it ! There is no nation or people who practise the single law,
“ Whatsoever ye would, men should do unto you, do ye even so to them.
Where is the nation or people who if their “ enemies hunger feed them,”
or, “if they thirst give them drink!” They are not to be found, although
millions confess their belief in the Gospel of Christ. The fact is apparent
beyond dispute, that those who profess to believe the Gospel, practise
under the guise of Christianity many of the old laws. The
inference that an impartial observer would draw on this subject would
that either the Gospel laws were inapplicable to the existing state of
society, or that the much vaunted belief, was mere sounding a,
tinkling cymbal \ the want of a firm belief in the founder of Chxistianity.


This will apply equally to the Jews, and the fact of Christ being a Jew
strengthens this view of the case, for nearly all the accusations he made
were against the priests, who alone knew the history of the Pentateuch ;
and they were ambassadors between God and the people. It is all very
well for the Jewish priests to declare that the written law came by Moses,
and that they were appointed to expound it to the people ; but when we
have the authority of Christ, that they did not themselves observe the
law, we can only come to the conclusion that they taught it to the people
as a means of keeping them in subjection, they themselves not believing
the story. Thus the reverend gentleman’s assertion crumbles away before
the test of impartial criticism. True he may say that this kind of argu-
ment is an insidious attempt to injure both the law and the Gospel; it is
nothing of the kind. Portions of the law, said to be given by Moses, and
portions of the Gospel, are the law of God engraven in our hearts, and can
never be obliterated ; if not so, then we are not accountable beings, but
mere worshippers of whatever chance may throw in our way.
134. Page 25 : —“ Thehopeless disagreement of all those who have chal-
lenged the Mosaic origin (of the Pentateuch) as to when it could have been
written, is in favor of the very question they dispute.” Nothing ofthe kind. It
only proves that the period when it was written is uncertain ; if otherwise,
we must henceforth take for granted the truth of any subject, if the writers
thereon chance to disagree ; a very strange assertion this, but it shows to
what straits orthodoxy is driven.
135. Page 25 : —“ The incredible notion that a whole people should accept a
forgery palmed upon them, by an unknown author, in the way these critics
suppose, wouldbe a greater miracle than anything recorded in the Pentateuch.”
How Friend Morrison can state this, knowing, that this great miracle has been
performed upon this very people in another case, seems somewhat strange ;
but it shows how one of our religious teachers can attempt to throw dust
into people’s eyes, in the year of our Lord, 1863. Mr. Morrison knows well
that the Book of Enoch was received as authentic by the Jews in the days
of Christ, and that it is one of the many spurious productions of that
period.
According to Archbishop Laurence, Booh of Enoch , Brel. Dlss., p. 44, it
was composed within about fifty years immediately preceding the birth of
Christ. He says, “it may perhaps, be remarked as a singularity, that a
book, composed at less than one hundred—perhaps, at less than fifty years
—before St. Jude’s Epistle was written, should in so short a space of time
have so far imposed upon the public, as to be reputed by any the genuine
production of the Patriarch Enoch.”
Premising then, that this is the truth, it shows that the Jews could be
imposed upon by a book afterwards found to be spurious, so late as 50
years B. C. And in this spurious book is found the basis of the Hew Tes-
tament, thus proving beyond contradiction, that it was received as authentic
by Christ and his Apostles.
The following extract from Kalisch, Gen., p. 165, will give the reader
some idea of the nature and general contents of the Book of Enoch. “He
gives enthusiastic descriptions of the world of angels; he delineates their


respective rank and glory ; lie introduces men into the abode of these pure
spirits, and elevates them to their light, and peace and wisdom. He fur-
nishes the most elaborate and most detailed description of the future life in
such completeness, that no later time has heen able to enlarge them. He
gives a clear picture of the Sheol, its different divisions, and the prelimi-
liary judgment there held, of the hell (gehenna) where the wicked are
doomed to receive their punishment, of the place where the fallen angels
and contumacious powers of nature are fettered. lie describes in full outlines
the resurrection of the dead , and the Messianic judgment over the dead and
living. But one of the most remarkable features of the Book of Enoch, is
its very elaborate and clear description of the person and times of the Mes-
siah. It does not only comprise the scattered allusions of the Old Testa-
ment in one grand picture of unspeakable bliss, unalloyed virtue, and un-
limited knowledge ; it represents the Messiah, not only as the King, but as
the Judge of the World, who has the decision over everything on earth, and
in heaven.”
Few can read this, without coming to the conclusion, that, in it, the
whole groundwork of Christianity lays, and that Christ and his Apostles
must have believed the book to be a genuine production of the Patriarch
Enoch, so much so, that in numberless instances they use its very language.
And with regard to the fathers of the Church ; Kalisch adds the following
information (condensed from Archbishop Laurence, p. 166): —“ We may
add with regard to the history of this extraordinary book, that, when it
appeared, it was evidently received and read with eager interest; that it
was soon translated into Greek ; and from this language into the Ethiopian
dialect,- that most of the Fathers of the Church, down to the time of
Augustine and Jerome , used and quoted it \ that, however, from this period
it fell into almost entire oblivion The MSS., which Augustus Mai de-
posited in the library of the Vatican, remained unnoticed. But the
celebrated traveller, James Bruce, brought in 1773, three copies of the
Ethiopian version to Europe ; and since this time, translations and valuable
commentaries have been published This remarkable apocryphal produc-
tion, if we are not mistaken, will one day be employed as a most important
witness in the history of religious dogmas, deserves the most careful
study \ and it is accessible to the English reader in the editions of
Laurence , whose interesting ‘ Preliminary Dissertation’ commands especial
attention.”
How if Christ and his Apostles, and the Fathers of the Church, down
to Jerome s time, were so far mistaken as to receive as authentic a book
now known to be a fiction, (yet containing the most noble utterances) it is
quite as possible that the received ideas of the Pentateuch may be mistaken
likewise. How Friend Morrison’s incredible notion, “ that a whole people
should accept a forgery palmed upon them by an unknown author,” can be
shown to be a greater miracle, than the known facts relating to the Book
of Enoch, lamat a loss to discover. The reader must judge from the
evidence.
136. However, the subject is one of great importance to all true believers
in the Christian religion. A vital question arises, which strikes at the


root of Christianity, as at present taught in our churches; Now it is quite
evident that Christ believed Moses to be the Jewish law giver ; and if, as
our religious teachers assert, He is divine j then there can be no question
as to the truth —that the law came by Moses. But on the other hand,
supposing Him to be purely human, made in all points like his brethren,
He might be as easily mistaken with regard to Moses ; as the Jews were,
in the case of the Book of Enoch, I would here remark, that on carefully
reading the New Testament, there appears to be a very few passages ("some
five or six) that speak of Christ as a divine person, but with regard to his
perfect humanity, an unprejudiced reader (leaving out the blasphemous
story of the miraculous conception) would come to no other conclusion. It
is of no use for orthodox theologians to talk of the divine and the human,
if the one contradict the other, we must receive that which has the most
truth for its support,
137. Page 25 : —“ But says Colenso, Christ spoke of the law in submis-
sion to the prejudices of the people, i.e. he gave currency to a lie, knowing
it to be a lie.” I beg to differ with Colenso in this, the history of Christ
proves quite the reverse. Neither did he, as Mr. Morrison says “give cur-
rency to a lie, knowing it to be a lie.” Or was his intelligence lower than
that of his countrymen, but far higher, yet he knew not all things. He
was well versed in the law r s of his forefathers, and in many instances he
taught new laws, quite the opposite of theirs, and for which the Jews mur-
dered him. However, whatever information Christ possessed, he believed
Moses to be the Jewish lawgiver ; and modern research has already proved
the impossibility of Moses being the author of the Pentateuch in its present
form ; thus showing Christ’s information to be human, not divine. It is
theologians who have made Christ into a divine person. In the New
Testament, he is represented as being a brother, —made in all points like
unto ourselves, and suffering death for fearlessly raising his voice against
the priest-craft and tyranny of his day. Header, whoever you may be
examine the New Testament, note down the simple truths which nestle
under its leaves, compare them with modern views and practices of Chris-
tianity ; and unless you are blind, you cannot but see that if we could have
a second Christ, he would meet with the same reception as the first met
with, for opposing the priest-craft of his day.
138. Mr. Morrison says “in relation to the events of the Book of Genesis,
being antecedent to the life of Moses, the ground for confidence in the
compiler of the history rests, in some measure on contemporaiy testimony.
The discovery and deciphering of the monuments of Assyria and
Egypt, have given authentication to the historians of these countries ] and
enable us to compare both with Moses.” True, but the deciphering of
these monuments destroys the historical account of creation, as stated in
the Pentateuch.
Nott, says, “When Egypt first presents itself to our view, she stands forth
not in childhood, but with the maturity of manhood’s age, arrayed in the
time-worn habiliments of civilization. Her tombs, her temples, her
pyramids, her manners, customs, and arts, all betoken a full grown nation.
The sculptures of the IY Dynasty, the earliest extant, show that the arts


at that day, some 3,500 R C. [more than 1,000 years before the Usherlan
date of the Deluge] had already arrived at a perfection little inferior to
that of the XVIIIth Dynasty, which, until lately, was regarded as her
Augustan age.” —Types of Mankind, p 211.
“ Bas-reliefs, beautifully cut sepulchral architecture, and tlie engineering
of tlie pyramids,—reed pens, inks (red and black,) papyrus— paper, and
chemically prepared colours —these are grand evidences of the civilization
of Memphis 5,300 years ago, that every man with eyes to see can now
behold in noble folios, published by France, Tuscany and Prussia. — Ibid,
p. 237.”
According to the Bible chronology, man is some six thousand years old ;
and the above evidence shows him to have attained to a high state of
civilization 700 years after he was created; and besides this wonderful
progress in so short a space of time—“ the differences of physiognomy must
have become stamped on the different races,” during the same period ;
“ since we find on the most ancient monuments of Egypt the same negro
face, head, hair, form, and color fully developed, as we observe in our days.”
Colenso on the Pentateuch, p: 4, p. 274.
Here we find contemporary testimony fails to be of any service to those
who uphold the Pentateuch in its present form. The deciphering of the
Egyptian monuments assigns a far more remote antiquity to man (and
demonstrates truth beyond conjecture) than the Mosaic narrative. And
besides the high state of civilization attained by the ancient Egyptians, to
prove the antiquity of man, we have the different types of man inscribed
on their monuments ; and if, according to the Pentateuch, these different
types of man all emanated from one pair, he must have existed ages upon
ages, almost beyond calculation. Had the Pentateuch assigned the creation
of man to many centres ; theologians could make out a better case ; but
even then far from being tenable,
139. Line 26 : —“ The testimony of geology so far as this science has pro-
gressed, confirms epochs of creation and the recent formation of man as Moses
states them.” Although some resemblance appears between the account of
creation in the Pentateuch and Geology, it is but little. Geology shows
that the Creator has been at work from a period of time beyond our con-
ception—that the sun gave light and heat hundreds of thousands of years
ago, under which the forests grew, in those primeval swamps where the
coal beds were formed, and which are so useful to man. With regard to
the recent formation of man as Moses states.
Nott, in speaking of the different writers on Geology, states —“ These
authorities in support of the extreme age of the geological era to which
man belongs, though startling to the unscientific, are not simply the opinions
of a few; but such conclusions are substantially adopted by the leading
geologists everywhere. And, though antiquity so extreme for man s
existence on earth may shock some preconceived opinions, it is none the
less certain that the rapid accumulation of facts is fast familiarising the
minds of the scientific world to this conviction. The monuments of
Egypt have already carried us far beyond all chronologies heretofore
adopted, and, when these barriers are once overleaped, it is in vain for us to


aproximate, even to tlie epoch of man’s creation. This conclusion is not
based merely on the researches of such archaeologists as Lepsius, Bunsen,
Birch, Humbolt, &c, but on those also of such writers as Kenrick, Hinks,
Osborn, and we may add, of all theologians, who have really mastered the
monuments of Egypt, Nor do these monuments reveal to us only a single
race, at this early epoch, in full tide of civilization, but they exhibit faithful
portraits of the same African and Asaiatic races, in all their diversity,
which hold intercourse with Egypt at the present day.”—Types of Mankind,
p. 273—5.
It would appear from the above, that instead of Geology confirming the
epochs of creation, and the recent formation of man as Moses states them ;
that this science, and these statements are incompatible with the truth.
It was only while we were in complete ignorance of the science of Geology,
that we were content to adopt the views of the Mosaic narrrative, and al-
though the science is still in its infancy, the recent discoveries of the most
eminent geologists of Europe, prove beyond the possibility of a doubt (unless
we shut our eyes to plain facts) that the scripture narrative is not in ac-
cordance with the truth.
140. Page 26 Mr. Morison says—“ The Bishop’s criticism on Joshua
is not worth much notice ; because it is small in amount,” Not so very
small, or it would not have compelled the reverend gentleman to con-
clude his argument, with respect to Joshua’s causing the sun and moon to
stand still, in the following manner. “ Besides a miracle such as this,
sole of its kind, would not be unnoticed by the other Old and New Testa-
ment writers j yet there is not a passage which can be fairly considered as
even alluding to it; and hence, it is manifest that in the view of the inspired
writers, it was not regarded as a literal fact.” But it is recorded as a
literal fact, —witnessed, by at least, thousands of people. The same kind
of argument is brought against the miraculous Conception of Christ, viz :
that it is recorded by the Evangelists Mathew and Luke but never named
afterwards by any of the New Testament writers ] therefore it was not
regarded as a literal fact by them, nor, could it have been by the early
Christians. The known laws of Astronomy forbids belief in the one case,
and moral decency in the other.
141. Line 22 “It is manifest...that there are occasions which demand
a divine miraculous intervention to give authority to teachers and such
leaders as Joshua, approving them to be £ sent of God.’ ” How anything
of this kind can be said to be manifest, when it is notorious that the
learned and tiu» intelligent in every age, have believed differently, would
take a cleverer man than Friend Morrison to show; the ignorant and the
credulous have alone been the believers in such an absurd doctrine, as a
special interference of Providence in favor of particular individuals. There
is not a man in the world, possessed of a reflecting mind, but sees that
the Creator of the Universe is immutably just, and that this attribute pre-
vents the possibility of any such .. .
142. Page 27, line 30: —“Do not physical and moral causes he in
proximity with each other.” Certainly they do, but their operation is
widely different. The earthquake of Lisbon, or any other occurrence of a


like character, demonstrate the immutable law of God, by which He
governs the interior structure of our Globe. The famine of Ireland, or any
other national desolation, such as is caused by war, fevers, droughts, &c.
11 these are, to some extent within the scope of man’s faculties, and can
be controlled by him. War is the greatest of all calamities, but it can be
annihilated by man, and it would be to his advantage to do so. But so
long as ignorance exists, war and pestilence will continue their deadly strife
with mankind. It has ever been the practice of the rulers of mankind, to
teach the doctrine of “ Gods special interferance with man,” attributing to
Hun those dire afflictions which the human race have suffered from time
to time ; it is this doctrine which stands conspicuous in the Bible, and is
taught amongst the Christian sects of the present day, but it is the parent
of infidelity, and will be, so long as it is taught. In noble contrast to this,
stands Cicero s definition of the law of God, he says—“ The true law is
right reason conformable to the nature of things constant, eternal, diffused
through all, which calls us to duty by commanding—deters us from sin
by forbidding ; which never loses its influence with the good, nor ever
preserves it with the wicked. This law cannot be over-ruled by any other,
nor abrogated in whole or in part; nor can we be absolved from it either
by the senate or by the people ; nor are we to seek any other comment or
interpreter of it but itself ; nor can there be one law at Eome, and another
at Athens—one now and another hereafter ; but the same eternal immutable
law comprehends all Nations at all times, under one common master and
governor of all—God. He is the inventor, propounder, enacter of this law ;
and whoever will not obey it must first renounce himself, and throw off
the nature of man j by doing which, he will suffer the greatest punish-
ments, though he should escape all the other torments which are commonly
believed to be prepared for the wicked.”
143. Line 34. “What is God saying in America, ‘let my people
go, if thou wilt not let my people go, I will smite thee with my
plagues.’ ” This instance of Friend Morrison, is hardly a happy one for
his purpose, if, as he says, “the South Americans are suffering for
slavery,” since the North are suffering equally with them. Will Friend
Morrison venture to tell us that the unfortunate Poles, for example, are
suffering for national sins ? Common sense as well as common humanity
revolts from any such doctrine. How long will our religious teachers con-
tinue to teach, that man’s misdeeds are the direct act of the Creator ? Is
the Almighty to be charged with being the scapegoat for man’s sins 1
Those who can teach this blasphemous doctrine in these days of enlighten-
ment, are prepared to propagate anything, be it ever so derogatory to the
character of God.
144. Page 28, line 9 : —Our Bible is in analogy with the constitution
and course of nature. 2nd. Our Bible is mixed with the world’s history.
3rd. It has the evidence of prophecy. 4th. The divine authentication of
miracles.” This is no more than we might expect from Mr. Morrison, after
the equally unwarrantable assertions to be met with, in the earlier pages of
his pamphlet. It is pitiable to see a man, professing to feel that he has
been called to preach and expound the doctrines of the Gospel, descending


to such subterfuges to support his peculiar crochets, for it is not alone the
doctrines of the Church to which he belongs, and from which he derives
his livelihood, that are thus vehemently and unscrupulously defended, but
throughout his pamphlet are to be found glimpses of doctrines, that even
the members of his own Church would have the good sense to refuse to
endorse. Friend Morrison advances four credentials, which he says are
exclusively possessed by the Bible. Ist. “That the Bible is in analogy
with the constitution and course of nature.” This is so glaringly untrue
that it needs no remark ; for almost every new discovery of science renders
the Bible (taken literally) more and more irreconcilable with truth. 2nd.
“ The Bible is mixed with the world’s history,” &c. One feels impelled to
laugh heartily at this assurance which claims this as a credential for the
Bible, and tells us it is a feature distinct from all other religions in the
world ; so far from this being the case, there is not a religion in existence
but gives a history of the creation, and a prediction of the end of
the world ; and the sole infallible book, that of Nature, shows us
more and more as we learn to decipher its pages, that none of them ap-
proximate to truth. 3rd. “It has the evidence of prophecy.” But before
prophecy is adduced as evidence, it must be shown, first, that the event
prophesied, is out of the usual course of circumstances, and next that the
prophecy has been fulfilled. Now any of the prophecies of the old Testae
ment that can be adduced as fulfilled, are such as were inevitable, and
therefore required no gift of second sight to predict them, others are as
ambiguous as the old Delphic Oracles, and equally worthy of credence,
many are so mystical, that it is impossible to understand them, and others
have been directly falsified. 4th, “ The divine authentication of miracles.”
So far from the record of miracles, being the peculiar attribute of the Bible,
every other history of religion has the like, and none of them are wanting
believers, willing to attest their faith by the sacrifice of their lives.
145. Line 38: —“That the Bishop is one with the Infidel party is evi-
dent. For—lst. The Eev. James Martineau, in a discourse entitled “ The
Bible and the Child,” strongly protests against placing the Bible in the
hands of a child, and that only morsels, culled here and there may be given
them.” I venture to affirm, that there is not a father of a family in exis-
tence, who having read the Bible attentively, would place it in the hands
of his children, for them to read indiscriminately. Would it be prudent
for a parent, or guardian to read at the family altar, those obscene stories
that are to be met with in many parts of the Bible ? I should think not ;
such stories ought to have been obliterated from its pages ages past. 2nd.
“ Theodore Parker says,”—“ In passing judgment on these different religious
states, we are never to forget there is no monoply of religion (inspiration)
by any nation or age. (Colenso’s assertion). Each people has its prophets
and its saints ; and many a swarthy Indian who bowed down to wood
and stone —grimfaced Calmuck, who worshipped the great God of storms,
—many a Grecian peasant who did homage to Phoebus Apollo, when the
sun rose and went down ; yea, many a savage, his hands smeared all over
with human sacrifice, shall come from the east and west, and sit down in
the kingdom of God with Moses and Zoroaster, with Socrates and Jesus.”


In Theodore Parker, we have a man whose faith embraces all honest hearts
irrespective of race or color, or creed ; what a noble faith when compared
with the puny narrow minded belief of sectarains. Yet, Mr. Morrison can
brand this great, good, and out-spoken man, with the name “ Infidel.”
ahe following quotation is from one of Parker’s works, and will give the
reader some idea of his belief, and interpretation of the Bible.
. “ Take the Bible for what is true in it, and the first Chapter of Genesis
is a grand hymn of Creation, a worthy prelude of the sublime chants that
follow ; it sings the truth—The world was not always, is not the work
of but of the living God ; all things are good, made to be blest.”—
p. 245.
“ The sweet notes of David’s prayer; his mystic hymns of praise, so
full of ripling life—all these shall be sweet and elevating; but we shall
leave his pernicious curse to perish where it fell.”—p. 247.
“ The excellence of the Hebrew devotional hymns has never been sur-
passed. Heathenism, Christianity, with all their science, arts, literature,
bright, and many colored, have little that approach these They [the
Greeks] have no psalm of prayer and praise, like these Hebrews, the
devoutest of men, who saw God always before them, ready to take them
up when father and mother let them fall.” “ Some of the old prophets
were men of stalwart and robust character, set off by a masculine piety that
puts to shame our puny littleness of heart. They saw hope the plainest
when danger was most imminent, and never despaired. Fear of the people,
the rulers, the priests, could not awe them to silence, nor gold buy smooth
things from the prophet's tongue. . .What if they were stoned, imprisoned,
sawn asunder 1 It was a prophet’s reward. They did not prophesy smooth
things ; they gave the truth and took blows, not asking love for love.
Little need now be said of the New Testament, of the simple truth that
nestles in its leaves, its parables, epistles, where Paul lifts up his manly
voice, and John, or whoever wrote the words, pours out the mystic melody
of his faith. Why tell the deep words of J esus ? Have we exhausted
their meaning ? The world, has it outgrown love to God and man ? Call
the Bible master, we do not see the excellence it has. Take it as other
books, we have its beauty, truth, religion—not its deformities, fables and
theology. We shall not believe in ghosts, though Isaiah did ; nor in devils,
though Jesus teach there are such. We shall see the excellence of Paul in
his manly character, not in the miracles wrought by his apron ; the noble-
ness of Jesus in the doctrine he taught, and the life he lived, not in the
walk on the water, or the miraculous draught of fish.”—p. 248. “The Bible
if wisely used, is still a blessed teacher. Spite of the superstition and folly
of its worshippers, it has helped millions to that fountain where Moses and
Jesus, with the holy-hearted of all time, have stooped and been filled. We
see the mistakes of its writers ; for though noble and of great stature, they
saw not all things. We regret their follies ; but their words of truth are
still before us, to admonish, to encourage and to bless.” 3rd. “ The Infidel”
Secularists “ of whom Mr. Holyoke is a representative, have, amongst their
five leading dogmas, these—that there exists guarantees of morality in
human nature, in utility and intelligence. This corresponds to Colenso’s


u reason and conscience.” Exactly so, and proves that one could not exist
without the other. Can Mr. Morrison give proof of utility and intelligence
existing in man without morality 1 Does not all our experience of human
nature prove the contrary 1 The history of the human race from the earliest
period of which we know, shows clearly,—that as man has progressed in
intelligence, his moral faculties have become developed, thus proving
morality to be the offspring of utility and intelligence.
14G. Page 30, line 6 : —“ Like all infidels, Colenso offers us his own un-
authorized opinion, and his ‘ internal light’ to supply the place of what he
seeks to destroy.” This sentence alone is sufficient to show what manner of
man the writer of the pamplet we have been considering is. Although
claiming and receiving a livelihood, and a certain standing in society as a
preacher and expounder of the will of God, according to the Gospel of the
New Testament, he coolly and without hesitation, tells us that Colenso is an
infidel. Now without giving Mr. Morrison credit for abilities which his
pamphlet shows he does not possess, still in common with all who have read
the Bishop’s work, he must know that a strain of unaffected piety pervades
the whole work, and therefore the charge of infidelity can be nothing but a
wilful mistatement, equally unfounded with the statement that Colenso
“ offers us his own unauthorized opinion.” So far from this, every opinion that
the Bishop advances, he endeavors logically to prove, thereby setting a
worthy example to his opponents.
In conclusion, since these pamphlets were published, f Nos. 2, 3 and 4 of
the Bishop’s work have appeared. Those who have read them will be able
to form an opinion of his ability, and also to contrast it with the ability of
the two authors, on whose pamphlets I have been making these few remarks.


APPENDIX.
P a g e P ne 25 : —I have stated that—“ One race of people living under
favorable climatic influences, finding that the earth brought forth sponta-
neously the necessaries of life, under the influence of solar light and heat
would worship the Sun as the source of life.” It is considered by some
people that Free Masonry is connected with the ancient worship of the
Sun. The following essay on the subject is worth perusal, and although
its author has long since gone to that “ bourn” from whence no traveller
returns, it is none the less interesting, at least, to those who amuse them-
selves in discussing the Mysteries of Masonry
fmy on % frip: d! |m»Diitg.
It is always understood that Free Masons have a secret which they
carefully conceal; but from everything that can be collected from their own
accounts of Masonry, their real secret is no other than their origin, which
but few of them understand; and those who do, envelope it in mystery.
The Society of Masons is distinguished into three classes or degrees. Ist
The entered Apprentice. 2nd. The Fellow Craft. 3rd. The Master Mason!
The entered Apprentice knows but little more of Masonry, than the use of
signs and tokens, and certain steps and words by which Masons can recog-
nize each other, without being discovered by a person who is not a Mason.
The Fellow Craft is not much better instructed in Masonry than the
entered Apprentice. It is only in the Master Masons’ Lodge that whatever
knowledge remains of the origin of Masonry is preserved and concealed.
In 1730, Samuel Pritchard, member of a constitutional lodge in England
published a treatise entitled “ M asonry Dissected ;” and made oath before
the Lord Mayor of London that it was a true and genuine copy in every
particular. In his work he has given the catechism, or examination, in
question and answer, of the apprentice, the fellow craft, and the master
Mason. There was no difficulty in doing this, as it is mere form.
In his introduction, he says, “ the original institution of Masonry con-
sisted in the foundation of the liberal arts and sciences, but more
especially on geometry, for, at the building of the Tower of Babel, the art
and mystery of Masonry was first introduced, and from thence handed
down by Euclid, a worthy and excellent mathematician of the Egyptians ;
and he communicated it to Hiram, the master Mason concerned in building
Solomon’s Temple in Jerusalem.”


Besides the absurdity of deriving Masonry from the building of the
Tower of Babel, where according to the story, the confusion of languages
prevented builders understanding each other, and consequently of com-
municating any knowledge they had, there is a glaring contradiction in
point of chronology in the account he gives.
Solomon’s Temple was built and dedicated 1004 years before the
Christian era ; and Euclid, as may be seen in the tables of chronology,
lived 277 years before the same era. It was therefore impossible that
Euclid could communicate anything to Hiram, since Euclid did not live till
700 years after the time of Hiram.
In 1783, Captain George Smith, Inspector of the Eoyal Artillery Academy
of Woolwich, in England, and Provincial Grandmaster of Masonry for the
County of Kent, published a treatise entitled “ The Use and Abuse of Free
Masonry.” .
In his chapter of the antiquity of Masonry, he makes it to be coeval with
the Creation, “ when,” says he, “ the Sovereign Architect raised on Masonic
principles the beauteous globe, and commanded that master science
Geometry—to lay the planetary world, and to regulate by its laws the whole
stupendous system in just, unerring proportion, rolling around the central
sun.” “ But,” continues he, “I am not at liberty publicly to undraw the
curtain, and thereby to descant on this head ; it is sacred, and ever will
remain so \ those who are honored with the trust will not reveal it, and
those who are ignorant of it cannot betray it.” By this last part of the
phrase, Smith means the two inferior classes, the Fellow Craft and the
entered Apprentice, for he says in the next page of his work “It is not
every one that is barely initiated into Free Masonry that is entrusted with
the mysteries thereto belonging j they are not attainabje as things of course,
nor by every capacity,”
The learned, but unfortunate Doctor Dodd, Grand Chaplain of Masonry,
in bis oration at the dedication of Free Masons’ Hall, London, traces Masonry
throughout a variety of stages. “ Masons,” says he, “ are well informed
from their own private and interior records, that the building of Solomon s
Temple is an important era, from whence they derive many mysteries of their
art Now,” says he, “be it remembered that this great event took place
about 1000 years before the Christian Era, and consequently more than a
century before Homer, the first of the Grecian poets, wrote; and above
five centuries before Pythagoras brought from the East his sublime system
of truly Masonic instruction, to illuminate our western world. But remote
as this period is, we date not from thence the commencement of our art.
For though it might owe to the wise and glorious King of Israel some of its
many mystic forms and hieroglyphic ceremonies, yet certainly the art itself
is coeval with man—the great subject of it. We trace its footsteps in the
most distant, the most remote ages and nations of the world. We find it
amongst the first and most celebrated civilizers of the East, We deduce it
regularly from the first astronomers on the plains of Chaldea, to the wise
and mystic Kings and Priests of Egypt, the sages of Greece, and the philo-
these declarations of Masons of the highest order in the institu-


tion, we see that Masonry, without publicly declaring so, lays claim to
some divine communication from the Creator in a manner different from
and unconnected with the Bible ; and the natural result from this is, that
Masonry is derived from some very ancient religion wholly independent of
and unconnected with that book.
To come then at once to the point, Masonry (as I shall show from the
custom, ceremonies, hieroglyphics, and chronology of Masonry) is derived
from, and is the remains of, the religion of the ancient Druids, who like
the magi of Persia and the priests of Heliopolis in Egypt, were priests of
the sun, they paid worship to this great luminary, as the great visible agent
pf a great invisible first cause, whom they styled Time without Limits.
The Christian Religion and Masonry have one and the same common
origin ; the difference between their origins is that the Christian religion
is a parody on the worship of the sun, in which Christ stands in the place
of that luminary, and is paid the same adoration which was originally paid
to the sun.
In Masonry, many of the ceremonies of the Druids are preserved in their
original state, at least without any parody. With them the sun is still
the sun ; and his image, in the form of the sun, is the great emblematical
ornament of Masonic Lodges and Masonic dresses. It is the central figure
on their aprons, and they wear it also pendant on the breast in their
lodges and in their processions. It has the figure of a man, with the sun
for the head, as Christ is always represented.
At what period of antiquity, or in what nation this religion was first
established, is lost in the labyrinth of unrecorded times. It is generally
ascribed to the ancient Egyptians, the Babylonians, and the Chaldeans, and
reduced afterwards to a system regulated by the apparent progress of the
sun through the twelve signs of the Zodiac, by Zoroaster the lawgiver of
Persia, from whence Pythagoras brought it into Greece. It is to these
matters Dr. Dodd refers in the passage already quoted from his oration.
The worship of the sun as the great visible agent of a great invisible first
cause, Time without Limits, spread itself over a considerable part of Asia and
Africa, from thence to Greece and Rome, through all ancient Gaul, and
into Britain and Ireland. Smith in his chapter on the antiquity of
Masonry in Britain says that, “ notwithstanding the obscurity which enve-
lopes masonic hsitory in that country, various circumstances contribute to
prove that Free Masonry was introduced into Britain about 1030 years
before Christ.” It cannot be masonry in its present form, that Smith hero
alludes to. The Druids flourished in Britain at the period he speaks of, and
it is from them that masonry is descended, Smith has put the child in the
place of the parent.
It sometimes happens as well in writing as in conversation, that a person
lets slip an expression that serves to unravel what he intends to conceal; and
this is the case with Smith ; for in the same chapter he says, “ the Druids
when they committed anything to writing, used the Greek alphabet, and I
am bold,to assert that the most perfect remains of the Druids’ rites and
ceremonies are preserved in the customs and ceremonies of the Masons, that
are to be found existing among mankind. “My brethren,” says he, “may


be able to trace them with greater exactness than I am at liberty to explain
to the public,”
This is a confession from a Master Mason, without intending it to be so
understood by the public, that Masonry is the remains of the religion of the
Druids. The reason for Masons keeping this a secret I shall explain in the
course of this work.
As the study and contemplation of the Creator in the works of
the creation, of which the sun, as the great visible agent of that
Being, was the visible object of the adoration of the Druids. All their reli-
gious rites and ceremonies had reference to the apparent progress of the sun
through the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and his influence upon the earth. The
masons adopt the same practises. The roof of their temples or lodges is or-
namented with a sun, and the floor is a representation of the variegated face
of the earth, either by carpeting or mosaic work. The Freemasons’ Hall,
in Great Queen-street, Lincoln’s Inn-fields, London, is a magnificent building,
and cost upwards of £12,000 sterling. Smith, in speaking of this building,
says (page 152) “ the roof of this magnificent hall is, in all probability, the
highest piece of finished architecture in Europe. In the centre of this roof,
a most resplendent sun is represented in burnished gold, surrounded by the
twelve signs of the Zodiac, with their respective characters.”
After giving this description, he says, “ the emblematical meaning of the
sun is well known to enlightened and inquisitive Freemasons; and as the real
sun is situated in the centre of the -Universe, so the emblematical sun is the
centre of real Masonry. We all know that the sun is the fountain of light,
the source of the seasons, the cause of the vicissitudes of day and night, the
parent of vegetation, the friend of man; hence the scientific freemason only knows
the reason why the sun is placed in the centre of this beautiful hall.” _ The
Masons in order to protect themselves from the persecution of the Christian
Church, have always spoken in a mystical manner of the figure of the sun
in their lodges, or, like the astronomer Lalande, who is a Mason been silent
upon the subject. It is their secret, especially in Catholic Countries,
because the figure of the sun is the expressive criterion that denotes they
are descended from the Druids, and is a proof that that wise, elegant,
philosophical religion was the faith most opposite to the faith of the
Christian Church,
The Lodges of Masons, if built for the purpose, are constructed in a
manner to correspond with the apparent motion of the sun. They are
situated east and west. The master’s place is always in the east. In the
examination of an entered apprentice, the master among many other ques-
tions, asks him, — Q. How is the lodge situated? A. East and west.
Q. Why so. A. Because all Churches and Chapels are, or ought to be so.
This answer, which is mere catechismal form, is not an answer to the
question* It does no more than remove the question a point further, which,
is why ought all Churches and Chapels to be so ? But as the entered
apprentice is not initiated into the Druidical mysteries of Masonry, he is
not asked any question to which a direct answer would lead thereto. Q.
Where stands your master 1 A. In the east. Q. Why so 1 A. As the
sun rises in the east and opens the day, so the master stands in the East


(with his right hand upon his left breast, being a sign, and the square
about his neck) to open the lodge, and set his men to work. Q. Where
stands your wardens 1 A. In the west. What is their business 1 A, As the
sun sets in the west to close the day, so the wardens stand in the west
(with their right hands upon their left breasts, being a sign, and the level
and plumb rule about their necks) to close the lodges and dismiss the men
from labor, paying them their wages. Here the name of the sun is men-
tioned ; but it is proper to observe that, in this place, it has reference only
to labor, and not to any religious Druidical rite or ceremony, as it would
have with respect to the situation of lodges east and west. A Mason’s
lodge always has, or is supposed to have, three windows, which are called
fixed lights, to distinguish them from the moveable lights of the sun and
the moon. The master asks the entered apprentice,— Q. How are they
(the fixed lights) situated 1 A. East, west, and south. Q. What are their
uses 1 A. To light the men to and from their work. Q. Why are there
no lights in the north 1 A. Because the sun casts no rays from thence.
This among numerous other instances, (such as the ancient custom of
Christians building their Churches east and west, and not burying their
dead on the north side of a Church,) shows that the Christian Eeligion and
Masonry, have one and the same common origin, the ancient worship of the
sun.
The high festival of the Masons is on the day they call St. John’s Day ;
but every enlightened Master Mason must know that holding their festival
on this day has no reference to the person called St. John ; and that it is only
to disguise the true cause of holding it on this day, that they call the day
by that name. As there were Masons, or at least Druids, many centuries
before the time of St. John, the holding of their festival on this day must
refer to some cause totally unconnected with John. The case is, that the
day called St. John’s Day is the 24th of June, and is what is called mid-
summer day. The sun is then arrived at the summer solstice ; and with
respect to his meridional altitude, or height at high noon, appears for some
days to be of the same height. The astronomical longest day, like the
shortest day, is not every year, on account of leap-year being on the same
numerical day, and, therefore, the 24th of June is always taken for mid-
summer day ; and it is in honor of the sun, which has then arrived at his
greatest height in our hemisphere, and not anything with respect to St.
John, that this annual festival of the Masons, taken from the Druids, is
celebrated on midsummer day.
Customs will often outlive the remembrance of their origin, and this is
the case with respect to a custom still practised in Ireland, where the Druids
flourished at the time they flourished in Britain. On the eve of midsummer
day, the Irish light fires on the tops of the hills. (This is still practised in
Ireland.)' This can have no reference to St. John ; but it has emblematical
reference to the sun, which on that day is at his highest summer elevation,,
and might, in common language, be said to arrive at the top of the hill.
As to what Masons, and books of Masonry, tell us of Solomon’s Temple
at Jerusalem, it is in no wise improbable that some masonic ceremonies may
have been derived from the building of the temple ; for the worship of the


sun was in practice many centuries before that temple existed, or before
ths Israelites came out of Egypt. And we learn from the history of the
Jewish kings (2 Kings, 21 —23) that the worship of the sun was performed
by the Jews in that Temple. It is, however, much to be doubted if it was
'done with the same scientific purity and religious morality with which it
was performed by the Druids, who, by all accounts that historically remain
of them, were a wise, learned, and moral class of men. The Jews, on the
contrary, knew little or nothing of astronomy, and of science in general ; and
if a religion, founded on astronomy, fell into their hands, it would not be
understood by them. We do not read in the history of the Jews, whether
in the Bible or elsewhere, that they were the inventors or the improvers of
any sort of science. Even in the building of the temple, the Jews did not
know how to square and frame the timber for beginning and carrying on the
work, and Solomon was obliged to send to Hiram, King of Tyre (Sidon) to
procure workmen ; “ for thou knowest,” says Solomon to Hiram (1 Kings,
5—6) “ that there is not among us any that can skill to hew timber like
unto the Sidonians.” This temple was more properly Hiram’s Temple than
Solomon’s ; and if the masons derive anything from the building of it, they
owe it to the Sidonians, and not to the Jews. But to return to the worship
of the sun in this temple. It is said (2 Kings, 23, 5) “ And the King,
Josiah, put down all the idolatrous priests that burned incense unto the
sun, the moon, the planets, and to all the hosts of heaven,” And it is said
at the 11th verse, “and he took away the horses that the Kings of Judah
had given to The sun, at the entering of the house of the Lord,
burned the chariots of the sun with fire verse 13th, “and the high places
that were before Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mount of
corruption, which Solomon, the King of Israel, had builded for Ashtoreth,
the abomination of the Sidonians,” the very people that built the Temple,
“ did the king defile.”
Besides these things, the description that Josephus gives of the decora-
tions of this temple resembles on a large scale those of a Mason’s lodge.
He says, “that the distribution of the several parts of the temple of the Jews
represented all nature, particularly the parts most apparent of it, as the
sun, the moon, the planets, the zodiac, the earth, the elements ; and that
the system of the world was retraced there by numerous ingenious emblems.”
These, in all probability, are what Josiah, in his ignorance, calls the abomi-
nation of the Sidonians. Smith in speaking of a lodge, says, “when the
lodge is revealed to an entering Mason, it discovers to him a representation
of the world , in which, from the wonders of Nature, we are led to contem-
plate her great original, and to worship him from his mighty works ; and
we are thereby also moved to exercise those moral and social virtues which
become mankind as the servant of the great architect of the world.”
Everything, however, drawn from this temple, and applied to Masonry,
still refers to the worship of the sun, and, consequently to the religion of
the Druids.
Another circumstance, which shows that Masonry is derived from some
ancient system, prior to and unconnected with the Christian Religion, is
the chronology, or method of counting time, used by Masons in the records


of their lodges. They make no use of what is called the Christian era:
and tliey reckon their months numerically, as the Ancient Egyptians did
and as the Quakers do now. I have by me a record of a French lodge, at
the time the late Duke of Orleans, then Duke de Chartres, was grand
master of Masonry m France. It begins as follows The thirteenth day
of the sixth month of the year of the venerable lodge, five thousand seven
hundred and seventy three.” By what I observe in English books of
Masonry, the English Masons use the initials A. L., and noli Y. L. By
A. L. they mean, in the year of the lodge, as the Christians by A. D. mean,
in e year of the Lord. ‘But A. L., like Y. L., refers to the same chrono-
logical era ; that is, to the supposed time of creation. The account of the
creation, with which the book of Genesis opens, has been taken and mutilated
trom the Zend Avista of Zoroaster and is fixed as a preface to the Bible,
after the Jews returned from captivity in Babylon, and that the rabbins of
tfie Jews do not hold their account in Genesis to be a fact, but mere
allegory It may not be improper here to observe, that the law called the
aw of Moses could not have been in existence at the time of building this
temple. Here is the likeness of things in heaven above, and in the earth
beneath. And we read in 1 Kings, 6,7, that Solomon made cherubs and
cnerubim ; that he carved all the walls of the house round about with
cherubim and palm-trees, ond open flowers; and that he made a molten sea,
placed on twelve oxen, and_ the ledges of it were ornamented with lions,
oxen, and cherubim : all this is contrary to the law called the law of Moses,
. ~r e Sl f thousand years in the Zend Avista, is changed or interpreted into
six days in the account in Genesis, The Masons appear to have chosen the
same period, and, perhaps, to avoid the suspicion and persecution of the
Church, have adopted the era of the world, as the era of masonry. V. L. of
the Irench, and A, L. of the English Mason, answer to the A. M„ Anno
Munch, or year of the world.
Though the Masons have taken many of their ceremonies and hiero-
glyphics from the ancient Egyptians, it is certain that they have not taken
their chronoiogy from thence. If they had, the Church would soon have
sent them to the stake; as the chronology of the Egyptians, like that of the
Chinese, goes many thousand years beyond the bible chronology. The reli-
gion of the Druids, as before said was the same as the religion of the
Egyptians. The priests of Egypt were the professors and teachers of science
and were styled priests of Heliopolis that is, of the city of the sun. The
Druids in Europe, who were the same order of men, have their name from
the teutonic or ancient German language, the Germans being anciently
called Teutones. The word Druid signifies a wise man. In Persia they
were called Magi, which signifies the same thing. “ Egypt,” says Smith
“whence we derive many of our mysteries, hath always born a distinguished
rank in history, and was once celebrated above all others for its antiquities
learning, opulence, and fertility. In their system, their principal hero-gods
Osins and Isis, theologically represented the Supreme Being and universal’
nature ; and physically, the two great celestal luminaries, the sun and the
moon, by whose influence all nature was actuted. The experienced brethren
of the society,” says Smith in a note to this passage, “are well informed


what affinity these symbols bear to Masonry, and why they are used in all
masonic lodges.” In speaking of the apparel of the Masons in their lodges,
part of which, as see in their public processions, is a white leather apron,
he says, “ the Druids were apparelled in white at the time of their sacrifices
and solemn offices ; Egyptian priests of Osiris wore snow white garments ;
the Grecian and most other priests wore white garments. As Masons, we
regard tire principles of those who were the worshippers of the true God,
imitate their apparel, and assume the badge of innocence. The Egyptians,
continues Smith, “’in the earliest ages, constituted a great number of lodges,
but with assiduous care k#pt their secrets of Masonry from all strangers.
These secrets have been imperfectly handed down to us by tradition only,
and ought to be kept undiscovered to' the laborers, crafts-men, and
apprentices, till, by good behaviour and long study, they become better
acquainted in geometry and the liberal arts, and thereby qualified for Masters
and wardens, which is seldom or never the case with English Masons.”
Under the head of Free Masonry, written by the astronomer Lalande, in
the French Encyclopedia, I expected from his great knowledge in astronomy,
to have found much information on the origin of Masonry ; for what con-
nection can there be between any institution and the sun and twelve signs
of zodiac, if there be not something in that Institution, or its origin, that
has reference to astronomy 1 Everything used as an hieroglyphic has
reference to the subject and purpose for which it is used ; and we are not
to suppose the Freemasons, among whom are many very learned and
scientific men, to be such idiots as to make use ot astronomical signs without
some astronomical purpose. But I was much disappointed in my expecta-
tion from Lalande. In speaking of the origin of Masonry, he says “ The
origin of Masonry, like many others, is lost in the obscurity of time.” When
I came to this expression, I supposed Lalande a Mason, and on enquiry
found he was. This passing over served him from the embarrassment
which Masons are under respecting the disclosure of their origin, and which
they are sworn to conceal. There is a society of Masons in Dublin,
Ireland, who take the name of Druids. These Masons must be supposed
to have a reason for taking that name.
I come now to speak of the cause of the secrecy used by Masons. The
natural source of secrecy is fear. When any new religion overruns a
former religion, the professors of the new become tbe persecutors of the
old. We see this in all the instances that history brings before us. When
Hilkiah the priest and Shaphan the scribe, in the reign of king Josiah,
found, or pretended to find, the law called the law of Moses, a thousand
years after the time of Moses (and it does not appear from the 2 Kings,
22nd, 23rd, such law was ever practised or knoAvn before the time of
Josiah) he established that law as a national religion, and put all the priests
of the sun to death. When the Christian religion overran the Jewish reli-
gion the Jews were the continual subjects of persecution. This would
naturally and necessarily oblige such of them as remained attached to their
original religion to meet in secret, and under the strongest injunctions to
secrecy. Their safety depended upon it. A false brother might expose the
lives of many of them to destruction; and from the remains of the religion


of the Druids, thus preserved,, arose the institution, which, to avoid tn
name of Druid, took that of Mason, and practised under this new name;
the rites and ceremonies of Druids. *
For obvious reasons, the 'name of the author is not published. I have no
wish to offend the good, nor arm the hand,* or aid the tongue of-.the- bad.
Modern teachers of religion, are ever ready to rake up the ashes of the dead,
when it suits their purpose to do so. And the language they use v is not
always of a kindly nature, (as in the case of Baron Bunsen). However, I
will not arm them, but let the ashes of one worthy the name of man, lay
still in the silent grave. This essay would not bdVe been reproduced, but
for the appearance of a pamphlet addressed to the intellectual Masons of
Tasmania. How the writer will succeed with bis project, time will show,
but I feel persuaded that the “ intellectual Masons’' of Tasmania will not
endorse all that he says. Here is a sample : —“As to the sacred writings,
the masonic keys prove them to be true. The whole Bible, to the very
letter, is registered in heaven ; and there can be no disputing the heavenly
records.” If this most strange assertion had come from an accredited
Theologian, it is no more than might be expected, but from an inteledual
Mason, it seems almost incredible. Does the writer believe that the
account of the Midianite Captives, or the story of drunken Noah, or beastly
Lot and his daughters, or that of Samuel hewing Agag in pieces like a
block of wood, and David putting prisoners of war under harrows of iron,
or the blasphemous statement of the miraculous conception of Jesus Christ,
are registered in Heaven 1 It is a relief to the mind of man to believe
that these statements are not, and such belief prevents him from having
hard thoughts of his Creator. “ Take the Bible as other books, we have
its beauty, truth, religion—not its deformities, fables and theology. We
shall not believe in ghosts, though Isaiah did ; nor in devils though Jesus
teach there are such. We shall see the excellence of Paul in his manly
character, not in the miracles wrought by his apron ; the nobleness of Jesus
in the doctrine he taught, and the life he lived, not in the walk on the water,
or the miraculous draught of fish. The Bible if wisely used, is still a
blessed teacher. Spite of the superstition and folly of its worshippers.”—
Parker,
* Go man of blood ! true likeness of the first,
And strew your blasted head with homely dust ;
In ashes sit—in wretched sackcloth weep,
And with uupitied sorrows cease to sleep.
Go, haunt the tombs and single out a place,
Where earth itself shall suffer a disgrace.
Go, spell the letters on some moulding urn,
And ask if he who sleeps there can return.
Go count the numbers that in silence lie,
And learn by study what it is to die ;
For sure your heart, if any heart you own,
Conceits that man expires without a groan :
That he who lives, receives from you a grace,
Or death is nothing but a change of place ;
That peace is dull, that joy from sorrow springs,
And war the most desirable of things.
Else why these scenes that wound the feeling mind,
This sport of death—this cockpit of mankind ?


Why Bobs the widow In perpetual pain ?
Why cries the orphan “Oh ! my father s slain ?
Why hangs the sire'his paralytic head; #
And sobs with manly grief—“ My son is dead ?
Why drops the tear from off the sister’s cheek,
And sweetly tells the misery she would speak ?
Or why, in sorrow sunk, does pensive *John
To all the neighbors tell, “ Poor master’s gone ?
Oh ! could I painj the passion I can feel,
Or paint a horror that would wound like steel,
To thy unfeeling, unrelenting mind, _
I’d send a torture and relieve mankind.
You, that are husband, father brother, all
Ihe tender names which kindred learn to call;
Yet like an image carved in massy stone,
You bear the shape, but sentiment have none ;
Allied by dust and figure, not by mind, _
You only herd, but live not with mankind.
Since then no hopes to civilize remain,
And mild philosophy has preached in vain.
One prayer is left, which dreads no proud reply» -
That he who made you breathe, will make you die.




