

FORM
PRATER AND THANKSGIVING
ALMIGHTY GOD,
/ TO BE USED
By the Clergy of the Church of England in the Diocese cf Sydney
at Morning and Evening Prayer, on Sunday , the Sixth day
of July , 1856.
In order to record our grateful and devout acknowledgments to THE
DIVINE MAJESTY for the Restoration of Peace to Her Majesty
and Her Dominions.
SYDNEY, JULY, 1856.
FEINTED BY JOSEPH COOK & CO., “CHUECH PEESS,”
219, GEORGE STREET.




ivivtfT rs aoi
The Order for Morning Prayer.
|f The Service shall he the same with the usual Office for Holydays, except where it is in this
Office otherwise appointed.
|f Let him that ministereth begin with these sentences :• —
TO the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses though we have rebelled against Him ;
neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in His laws which He set
before us. Daniel ix. 9, 10.
It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed; because His compassions fail not.
Lam. iii. 22.
The Lord is Merciful and Gracious, Slow to anger and Plenteous in mercy. He hath not dealt
with us after our sins; nor rewarded us according to our wickedness. Psalm ciii. 8, 10.
If Instead of the Yenite exultemus ;
OGIVE thanks unto the Lord and call upon His name: tell the people what things He hath
done. Psalm cv. 1.
0 let your songs he of Him and praise Him; and let your talking he of ail His wondrous
works. Yer. 2.
The works of the Lord are great: sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.
Psalm cxi. 2.
His work is worthy to he praised and had in honour: and His righteousness endureth for
ever. Yer. 3. *
The Merciful and Gracious Lord hath so done His marvellous works: that they ought to he
had in remembrance. Yer. 4.
Let them give thanks whom the Lord hath redeemed: and delivered from the hand of the
enemy. Psalm cvii. 2.
Foolish men are plagued for their offence : and because of their wickedness. Psalm cvii. 17.
So when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble : he delivereth them out of their distress.
Yer. 19.
He sent His word and healed them : and they were saved from their destruction. Yer. 20.
0 that men would therefore praise the Lord for His goodness; and declare the wonders that
He doeth for the children of men ! Yer. 21.
Unto Thee 0 God do we give thanks: Yea unto Thee do we give thanks. Psalm Ixxv. 1.
Thy name also is so nigh : and that do Thy wondrous works declare. Yer. 2.


Not unto us, 0 Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy name give the praise: for Thy loving mercy,
and for Thy truth’s sake. Psalm cxv. 1.
As for our God, He is in heaven : He hath done whatsoever pleaseth Him. Yer. 3 .
The right hand of The Lord hath the pre-eminence ; The right hand of The Lord bringeth
mighty things to pass. Psalm cxviii. 16.
And so will we not go lack from Thee: 0 let us live, and we shall call upon Thy name.
Psalm Ixxx. 18.
0 what great troubles and adversities hast Thou showed me ! and yet didst Thou turn and
refresh me: yea and broughtest me from the deep of the earth again. Psalm Ixxi. 18.
Therefore will I praise Thee and thy faithfulness 0 God, playing upon an instrument of
musiclc: unto Thee will I sing upon the harp, 0 Thou, Holy One of Israel. Yer. 20.
My help cometh even from the Lord : who made heaven and earth. Psalm cxxi. 2.
Blessed he the Lord God, even the God of Israel: which only doeth wondrous things. Psalm
Ixxii. 18.
And blessed be the name of His Majesty for ever : and all the earth shall be filled with His
Majesty. Amen. Amen. Yer. 19.
Glory he to The Father, <^c.
Proper Psalms, xlvi. Ixxvi. Ixxxv.
First Lesson, 2 Samuel xxii.
IT Te Deum Laudamus.
Second Lesson, Romans xiii.
Jubilate.
lnstead of the first collect at Morning Prayer shall these two which follow he used.
GRANT, 0 Lord* we beseech Thee, that the course of this world may be so peaceably ordered
by Thy governance that Thy Church may joyfully serve Thee in all godly quietness;
through Jesus Christ Our Lord. Amen.
0 ALMIGHTY GOD, The Sovereign Commander of all the world, in Whose hand is power and
might which none is able to withstand; We bless and magnify Thy great and glorious
name for this happy Peace, the whole glory whereof we do ascribe to Thee, who art the only
giver of Peace. And we beseech Thee give us grace to improve this great mercy to Thy glory,
the advancement of Thy gospel, the honor of our Sovereign, and as much as in us lieth, to the
good of all mankind. And we beseech Thee give us such a sense of this great mercy as may
engage us to a true thankfulness, such as may appear in our lives by an humble, holy, and
obedient walking before Thee all our days, through Jesus Christ Our Lord, to whom with Ihee
and The Holy Spirit, as for all Thy mercies, so in particular for this Peace and Deliverance be
all glory and honour, world without end. Amen.


Then shall follow the Collect for the Fourth Sunday after Easter and the Second and Third
Collects at Morning Prayer and the Litany.
H After the General Thanksgiving shall he said the Thanksgiving for Peace and Deliverance
from our enemies.
To the end of Morning Prayer as usual.
The Communion Service.'
After the Prayer for the Queen “Almighty God, Whose Kingdom is everlasting,” instead of
the Collect for the Day, shall he read the two Collects used in the Morning Prayer “ Grant,
0 Lord, we beseech Thee,” and “ 0 Almighty God, The Sovereign Commander.”
The Epistle. Philippians IV. 4.
REJOICE in The Lord alway : and again I say, Eejoice. Let your moderation be known
unto all men. The Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing; hut in every thing by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God, and the
peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds, through Christ
Jesus. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report; if there he any virtue, and if there he any praise, think on these things. Those
things, which ye have both heard and learned and seen in me, do : and the God of peace shall
be with you.
% The Gospel. S. Luke XXI. 25.
AND there shall he signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars ; and upon the earth
distress of nations with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring ; men’s hearts failing
them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth : for the powers
of heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with
power and great glory. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up and lift up
your heads, for your redemption draweth nigh. And he spake to them a parable ; Behold the
fig tree and all the trees ; when they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own selves that
summer is now nigh at hand. So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know that
the kingdom of God is nigh at hand. Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass
away till all be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass away: but My words shall not pass away.


IT Then shall follow the Nicene Creed, and after that the Sermon.
In the Offertory shall these sentences he read :
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them : for this is the
law and the prophets.—S. Matt. vii. 12.
As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who
are of the household of faith.—Galatians vi. 10.
Blessed he the man that provideth for the sick and needy : The Lord shall deliver him in
the time of trouble.—Psalm xli. 1. »
H After the Prayer “For the whole state of Christ’s Church,” the following shall he used :
A Prayer for the Church and Nation.
0 GRACIOUS GOD, who art Kind to the unthankful and the evil, we humbly acknowledge
that we have not manifested a due sense of the numberless blessings, both temporal and
spixitual, which we and our fathers have received at Thy hands, and of the mighty deliverances
which Thy power has wrought on our behalf. Through our neglect of Thine ordinances and
misuse of Thy bounties, offences have been multiplied in the land ; and Thy Holy Name hath
been profaned among the heathen by our transgressions. Yet forsake us not utterly, 0 Lord,
Our Redeemer, but continue Thy loving kindness to Thy servants as in the days of old. Send
Thy heavenly blessing upon Our Sovereign Lady the Queen, and all that are in authority under
her, and direct all their proceedings to the advancement of true religion and piety, and to the
peace and prosperity of the realm and all her dominions. Pour forth the gifts of Thy Spirit on
all Pastors and Teachers of Thy flock, that they may be clothed with righteousness, and that
Thy word spoken by their mouths may never be spoken in vain. And to all orders and degrees
of men amongst us vouchsafe such a measure of Thy grace that righteousness may flourish in our
land, with abundance of peace ; and that, being reconciled to Thee, through Thy Son Jesus
Christ, and united with each other in charity, we may be an acceptable people in Thy sight, and
make known to the ends of the earth the riches of Thy mercy in Christ; to Whom, with Thee
and The Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory for ever. Amen .
A Prayer for Unity.
OGOD, The Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ, Our Only Saviour, The Prince of Peace ; Give
us grace seriously to lay to heart the great dangers we are in by our unhappy divisions. Take
away all hatred and prejudice, and whatsoever else may hinder us from godly union and concord:
that as there is but One Body and One Spirit, and One hope of our calling, One Lord, One
Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father of us all, so we may henceforth be all of one heart and
of one soul, united in one holy bond of Truth and Peace, of Faith and Charity, and may with
one mind and one mouth glorify Thee ; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


GRANT, we beseech Thee, Almighty God, that the words which we have heard this day with
our outward ears may, through Thy grace, be so grafted inwardly in our hearts, that they
may bring forth in us the fruit of good living, to the honour and praise of Thy name ; through
Jesus Christ Our Lord. Amen.
ALMIGHTY GOD, the Fountain of all wisdom, who knowest our necessities before we ask,
and our ignorance in asking; we beseech Thee to have compassion upon our infirmities, and
those things which, for our unworthiuess, we dare not, and for our blindness we cannot ask,
vouchsafe to give us for the worthiness of Thy Son Jesus Christ Our Lord. Amen.
THE Peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in the
knowledge and love of God, and of His Son Jesus Christ Our Lord; and the blessing of
God Almighty, The Father, The Son, and The Holy Ghost, be amongst you and remain with
you always. Amen.
The Order for Evening Prayer.
T The Service shall he the same with the usual order for Holy Days except where it is in this
office otherwise appointed.
Let him that ministereth begin with these sentences.
TO the Loed Our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against
Him, neither have we obeyed the voice of The Lord Our God, to walk in His laws which
He set before us. Daniel ix. 9, 10.
It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed; because His compassions fail not. Lam. iii. 22.
The Lord is Merciful and Gracious, Slow to anger and Plenteous in mercy. He hath not
dealt with us after our sins nor rewarded us according to our wickedness. Psalm ciii. 8,10.
The Hymn appointed to he used at Morning Prayer instead of “ Yenite Exultemus,” shall he
here used also before the Proper Psalms.
0 give thanks unto the Lord.
U Proper Psalms, XCI. XCYIII. CXXIV.
First Lesson, Isaiah XXYI.
Magnificat.
\ Second Lesson, Revelation XX,
Deus Misereatur.


TA fp
& I &u O
8 Evening Service.
*[[ Instead of the first Collect at Evening Prayer, the two Collects used at Morning Prayer
shall he read.
Grant, 0 Lord, we beseech Thee
0 Almighty God, The Sovereign Commander.
■
Then thd Collect for the Fourth Sunday after Easter and the Second and Third Collects for
Evening Prayer.
If After the Tfhanksgiving for Peace and deliverance from our enemies the Prayer for the
Church and Nation “ 0 Gracious God who art kind; ” the Prayer for Unity and so to the
end of Evening Prayer as usual.
