

ft&'
TO BE USED AT THE
INAUGURATION
OF THE
JANUARY 1, 1901.
S. D. Townsend i Co.. Printers, 28* PUt-st.. Sydney.
h - .■
A FORM OF PRAYER
(£ ommoiitoealt| of Australia,


jform of draper
/'A GOD, our help in ages past.
Our hope for years to come.
Our shelter from the stormy blast,
Before the hills in order stood
Or earth received her frame,
From everlasting Thou art God,
To endless years the same.
And our eternal home :
Under the shadow of Thy throne
Thy saints have dwelt secure :
O God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come ;
Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
And our defence is sure.
Be Thou our guard while life shall last,
And our eternal home. Amen.
Prayer tor the
Commonwealth
of Australia.
LORD GOD ALMIGHTY, high above all height, Whose life-time is
Eternity, we Thine unworthy servants give Thee most humble and
servants give Thee most humble and
hearty thanks for all Thy goodnesss and loving-kindness. We glorify
Thee in that Thou hast been pleased in Thy providence to unite Australia
in bonds of brotherly love and concord, and in one Commonwealth, under
our most gracious Sovereign Lady, Queen Victoria. We beseech Thee,
grant unto this union Thy grace and heavenly benediction ; that a strong
people may arise to hallow Thy name, to do justly, and to love mercy, and
to walk humbly before Thee in reverence and righteousness of life.
Furthermore, we pray Thee to make our Empire always a faithful and
fearless leader among the nations in all that is good ; and to bless our
Queen, and those who are put in authority under her—more especially in
this land. Let Thy wisdom be their guide, strengthen them in upright-
ness, direct and rule their hearts that they may govern according to Thy
Holy Will; and vouchsafe that all things may be so ordered and settled
upon the best and surest foundations that peace and happiness', truth and
justice, religion and piety, may be deepened and increased among us; and
that we, Thy people, may perpetually praise and magnify Thee from
generation to generation. Blessed be Thy Name for ever and ever,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Prater for the Governor-General.
A LMIGHTY GOD, who upholdest and governest all things in heaven
and earth, we humbly beseech Thee to send Thy blessing upon Thy
servant the Governor-General, and to grant unto him strength and wisdom
for the fulfilment of the duties of his high office. Preserve him by Thy.
Providence, and guide him by Thy good Spirit, that he may do all things
to the glory of Thy Holy Name, and to the welfare of this Country and
Commonwealth. We ask this in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord and
Saviour. Amen.


/"A UR FATHER, which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy name, Thy
kingdom come. Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven. Give
us this day onr daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive
them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; Bat
deliver us from evil: For Thine is the kingdom, The power, and the glory,
For ever and ever. Amen.
Te Deum Laudamus.
praise, 0 God ; we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.
All the earth doth worship thee: the Father everlasting.
To thee all Angels cry aloud: the Heavens, and all the Powers therein-
To thee Cherubim, and Seraphim: continually do cry.
Holy, Holy, Holy : Lord God of Sabaoth ;
Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty : of thy Glory.
The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee.
The goodly fellowship of the Prophets; praise thee.
The noble army of Martyrs : praise thee.
The holy Church throughout all the world; doth acknowledge thee;
The Father: of an infinite Majesty;
Thine honourable, true ; and only Son;
Also the Holy Ghost: the Comforter.
Thou art the King of Glory; O Christ.
Thou art the everlasting Son : of the Father.
When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man ; thou didst not abhor
the Virgin’s womb.
When thou hadst overcome the sharpness of death : thou didst open
the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers.
Thou sittest at the right hand of God : in the glory of the Father.
We believe that thou shalt come: to be our Judge.
We therefore pray thee, help thy servants : whom thou hast redeemed
with thy precious blood.
Make them to be numbered with thy Saints : in glory everlasting.
O Lord, save thy people: and bless thine heritage.
Govern them : and lift them up for ever.
Day by day : we magnify thee;
And we worship thy Name: ever world without end.
Vouchsafe, 0 Lord : to keep us this day without sin.
O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.
O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us : as our trust is in thee.
O Lord, in thee have I trusted ; let me never be confounded.


