

A FORM
U
TOB
His (&mt HTcrrg in sfnMuo Ik
By which the Colony has been recently blessed , and the long
continued drought removed.
To be used in the Diocese of Sydney
FRIDAY, IST lB7B.
The Service shall be the same with the usual Office for Holy
Days in all things, except where in this Office it is other-
wise appointed.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.
Sglineg ;
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.




eOi Pit. a i~>a.
FORM OF PRAYER.
% Morning Frayer shall begin with these Sentences.
IT is a good thing to give thanks nnto the Lord : and to sing praises unto Thy name
0 most Highest; to tell of Thy loving kindness early in the morning, and of Thy
truth in the night season. Fsalm xcii. 1,2.
TO the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against Him : neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in
His laws, which He set before us. Daniel ix. 9, 10.
Instead o/ Yenite exultemus shall this Hymn following be used.
OGIYE thanks unto the Lord, for He is gracious : and His mercy endureth for
ever. Psalm cvii. 1.
Let them give thanks whom the Lord hath redeemed : and delivered from the hand of
the enemy. Yer. 2.
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy : longsuffering and of great goodness.
Psalm ciii. 8.
He hath not dealt with us after our sins : nor rewarded us according to our wicked-
ness. Ver. 10.
Thou, Lord, hast made me glad through Thy works : and I will rejoice in giving
praise for the operations of Thy hands. Psalm xcii. 4.
It is the Lord that commandeth the waters: it is the glorious God that maketh the
thunder. Psalm xxix. 3.
The eyes of all wait upon Thee, 0 Lord : and Thou givest them their meat in
due season. Psalm cxlv. 15.
Thou openest Thine hand: and fittest all things living with plenteousness. Yer, 16,
Thy mercy, 0 Lord, reacheth unto the heavens : and Thy faithfulness unto
the clouds. Psalm xxxvi. 5. •
Thou , Lord , shall save both man and beast; How excellent is Thy mercy O God:
and the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings, v. 7.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning , is now , and ever shall be : world without end, Amen.
Proper Psalms, bcv, civ
Proper Lessons —First: Job xxxvii, 5 to end ; Second: The Acts xiv, 11—-18.


*([ After the appointed Thanksgiving for Bain the following shall he used.
OLOED GOD and Heavenly Father, we Thy unworthy servants draw near to Thee
with a thankful acknowledgement of Thy great mercies lately vouchsafed unto us.
Thou didst humble us by withholding rain and fruitful seasons, and we confess that all
the punishments which are threatened in Thy law might justly have fallen upon us by
reason of our manifold transgressions and hardness of heart. Yet seeing that it hath,
pleased Thee of Thy great goodness to relieve and comfort us by a seasonable and
blessed change of weather, we glorify Thy Holy name for this great mercy, and offer
unto Thy Divine Majesty our humble sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. It is Thy
gift that the rain doth fall, that the earth is fruitful, and the beasts of the field increase.
Vouchsafe, 0 Merciful Father, to continue these blessings to us Thy servants, and give
as grace to use them to Thy glory, the relief of the needy, and our own comfort, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Epistle , St. James v., 13—11).
The Gospel , St. Matthew v., 43—48.
% After the Nicene Creed shall follow the Sermon.
•|| In the Offertory the following Sentences shall he read:
LET your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven. St. Matthew v.
Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven ; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. St. Matthew vii.
Blessed be the man that provideth for the sick and needy; the Lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble. Psalm xli.
THE ORDER FOR EVENING PRAYER.
•ft The Hymn appointed Jor Morning Prayer instead of the Venite exultemus shall here
also he used before the Proper Psalms.
“0 Give thanks unto the Lord, &e.”
Proper Psalms —cxxxv., cxlvii.
Proper Lessons —First: Amos iv. Second ; The Acts xvii. 22—32.
The Thanksgiving prayer appointed for the Morning Service shall he used also after
the General Thanksgiving,
