

IP fpornj o|
WITH
THANKSGIVING TO ALMIGHTY GOD
ON
JUNE 19 and 20, 1887,
Lf . O V J I
Being the commemoration of the Jubilee of
Her Majesty’s happy reign.
Sydney:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 490, KENT STREET,
CLOSE TO THE CATHEDRAL.


FORM OF PRAYER.
*f After the First Collect at Morning and Evening Prayer
the following Collect of Thanksgiving may he used.
C . LMIGHTY GOD who rulest over all the kingdoms
of the World, and disposest of them according to
Thy good pleasure ; We yield Thee unfeigned
thanks, for that Thou wast pleased to place Thy servant
our Sovereign Lady, Queen VICTORIA upon the Throne
of this Realm. We bless Thy Holy Name for the mani-
fold and great mercies which Thou hast bestowed upon
her and upon us her subjects in prolonging her life during
the lengthened period of fifty years. We pray Thee in
Thy love to continue Thy goodness to her and to reward
her sevenfold into her bosom for all the benefits which
she has in so many ways conferred upon her people. Let
Thy wisdom be her guide, and let Thine arm strengthen
her ; let justice, truth, and holiness, let peace and love,
and all those virtues that adorn the Christian Profession,
flourish in her days ; direct all her counsels and endeavours
to Thy glory, and the welfare of her people ; and give us
grace to obey her cheerfully and willingly for conscience
sake ; that neither our sinful passions, nor our private
interests, may disappoint her cares for the public good ;
let her always possess the hearts of her people, that they
may never be wanting in honour to her Person, and duti-
ful submission to her Authority ; let her Reign be long and
prosperous, and crown her with immortality in the life
to come ; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen,


s-s-ir
The following Hymns may he sung :
Behold, 0 God, our shield ; and look upon the face of
Thine anointed. —Psalm Ixxxiv. 9.
KING of kings ; Thy blessing shed
T On our anointed Sovereign’s head ;
And, looking from Thy holy heaven,
Protect the crown Thyself hast given.
2 Her may we honour and obey,
Uphold her right and lawful sway :
Remembering that the powers that be
Are ministers ordain’d of Thee.
3 Her with Thy choicest mercies bless,
To all her counsels give success :
In war, in peace, Thine aid be seen,
Thy strength command —God save the Queen.
4 Anri oh ! when earthly thrones decay,
And earthly kingdoms fade away,
Grant her a throne in worlds on high,
A crown of immortality.
Let the people praise Thee, 0 God. —Psalm Ixvii. 3
fORD of heaven, and earth, and ocean,
Hear us from Thy bright abode,
While our hearts, with deep devotion,
Own their great and gracious God :
Now with joy we come before Thee,
Seek Thy face—Thy mercies sing ;
Lord of life, and light, and glory,
Guard Thy church, and guide our Queen.
2 Health, and every needful blessing,
Are Thy bounteous gifts alone ;
Comforts undeserved possessing,
Here we bend before Thy throne :


3 Thee, with humble adoration,
Lord, we praise for mercies past;
Still to this most favour’d nation
May those mercies ever last :
Britons, then, shall still before Theej
Songs of ceaseless praises sing:
Lord of life, and light, and glory,
Bless Thy people, bless our Queen.
PSA.LM CX.
Lord said unto my Lord : Sit thou on my right
I hand until f make thine enemies thy footstool.
V 2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of
Sion : be thou ruler, even in the midst among thine enemies.
3 In the day of thy power shall the people offer thee
freewill offerings with an holy worship : the dew of thy
birth is of the womb of the morning.
4 The Lord sware, and will not repent ; Thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.
5 The Lord upon thy right hand ; shall wound even
kings in the day of his wrath.
6 He shall judge among the heathen ; he shall fill the
places with the dead bodies : and smite in sunder the
heads over divers countries.
7 He shall drink of the brook in the way ; therefore
shall he lift up his head.
