

yt /f
* JQ
/ja
v 4
“HE WAS NOT', FOR GOD TOOK HIM."
FUNERAL SERMON,
BY THE
REV. JOHN FERGUSON,
OF THE
FIRST PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
INVERCARGILL
1886.




HE WAS NOT , FOR GOD TOOK HIM."
FUNERAL SERMON,
BY THE
REV. JOHN FERGUSON,
OF THE
FIRST PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
INVERCARGILL
1886.




Jn gtemoiiiam
Thomas Watson,
BORN
10th OCTOBER 1836;
DIED
7th NOVEMBER 1886.




The following sermon was preached in the
First Presbyterian Church, Invercargill, on
the 21st day of November, 1886, being the
Sabbath immediately succeeding Mr Watson s
funeral; and it is now published in response
to the earnestly expressed wish of numerous
friends.
“He being dead, yet speaketh.”


.
.


And he was not , for God tool: him. — Gen. V., 24,
Of Enoch it is written that he walked with God ; that he was
not found, because God had translated him ; that before he was
taken up he had this testimony, that he pleased God. He was
a man of integrity, a good man, and holy. Those among whom
he dwelt were blessed in him ; his life was in the highest sense
useful; and God declared His approbation of his faithful service,
and genuine holiness, by taking him away, so that he should not
taste death.
The community in no way anticipated so startling an event.
Men did not think as they went forth to their toil with the new
day, that it was to be marked by an act of God so memorable.
Busy and idle were borne along on the tide of daily interest ;
men bought and sold, toiled on in their appointed tasks, con-
tended in friendly rivalry, or in the more bitter strife of selfish
ambition, jealousy, and hatred ; they ate and drank, taught and
learned, married and gave in marriage ; and thus the day went
on as days were wont to go. But as the hours passed, a strange
rumour went abroad, that Enoch—the good Enoch—was not to
be found ; and then, yet still vaguely, that God had taken him
up. It seemed impossible to believe that this was true. “ Where
heard you this ?” “ Are you sure it is true ?” “ Who saw him
taken up?” “ Has a search been made for him ?” Thus men
questioned, in their unwillingness to believe.
At length there could be no doubt that he was really gone.
The feeling of surprise gave way to a painful sense of loss.
“ Shall we see him no more in our assemblies, and friendly
gatherings ?” “ Shall we see him walking in our streets and


highways no more ?” “ Will he never enter our homes again
and bless our hospitalities with his presence ? Shall we look
for him in vain on the holy days he loved so well ?” Even so,
they would see him again no more. Yet, even after many days
had passed, and no one dared openly doubt that he had been
taken away, it would not for the moment have surprised one, if
the form of Enoch had caught one’s eye in the crowd, or if
one had seen him coming out of his well-known dwelling, or
wandering as he used to do in some familiar retreat.
But indeed he was not, and the life of the community, with its
stir, tumult, and activity, must go on as of old, and without him.
It seemed, however, manifest to the poor judgment of men, that
his having been taken away was a loss to the community. A
man of integrity is of infinite value to any community ; and al-
though some will always take pleasure in sneering at, or speaking
scornfully of the good, yet people as a whole, will not fail to
recognise integrity of life—real goodness—feeling it to be a boon
and a precious possession to all. The holiness of Jesus was a
power in the land of Palestine. The common people felt strongly
that He was of God ; and to them His person was sacred because
of the sanctity of His life. The falling down of the arresting
officers when He declared himself as the Jesus whom they sought,
has been aptly taken as a type of the power of His holiness over
the minds of those who were witnesses of His life, or knew the
truth about it. Indeed, there can be no doubt about this, that
holiness is genuine power. And so we rightly judge, that Enoch,
who walked in closest fellowship with God, was esteemed and
valued by the mass of those among whom, as a brother and
fellow-citizen he dwelt.
To all he was a living example of the power and beauty of
practical piety. It was no secret that he believed in God, and
strove to live in His commandments. The truth shone through
his life. His piety was an unraistakeable fact ; and no one,
unblinded by prejudice, could fail to see that it was a thing of
real worth. He lived before men, and they, the daily witnesses
of his life and conduct, could hardly escape seeing this truth,
that a man of God is a man of integrity and love. His con-
sistent and courageous life encouraged the wavering to decide
for God, for doubtless there were many among his fellow-citizens
—as there are many in every community in which the Most High
has revealed himself—who oft times hesitated between sin and
holiness, between a life of carelessness or selfish indulgence, and
the way of uprightness j looking at him and noting how sted-


fastly he abode in all that was good, and how beautiful, simple,
and unaffected his manner of life was, they would be encouraged
to choose the right, and diligently strive to abide in it.
His example was a rebuke to the ungodly. At times the vile-
ness of their own conduct, would come out vividly enough in con-
trast with the purity and sweetness of his ; and their reflections
thus stirred up, could not altogether fail to lead some of them to
come to themselves and seek after a better life.
Of this, too, we may be sure, that many sought his counsel
in practical difficulties of daily doing, as well as in difficulties of
faith. The poor and lonely blessed him ;he was their benefactor ;
he visited them, and his hand was tender, wise, and liberal. The
young knew him well, delighted to put themselves in his way,
and looked up to his earnest face for a smile and a blessing.
His friends missed him, and they deemed his departure an irre-
parable loss to them. They knew Enoch best and loved him
most. The more delicate flowers of human virtue do not bloom
in the cold fierce light of common knowledge, but only in the
more genial atmosphere of friendship. Enoch had been their
honoured guest, his presence had been always a delight, and he
had ever been an earnest co-worker and trustworthy adviser, in
their common schemes and undertakings of practical good ; they
had brought their difficulties to him, and he in his own per-
plexities had drawn them into his confidence. “ How can we do
without him?” said they. And indeed what power could bring
together the jagged edges of the rent in their common friend-
ship ?
All true men fighting on God’s side missed Enoch. His
name was not obscure. His reputation went beyond the spheie
of his active life. Every man who stood up for the truth felt
that he had a friend and helper in Enoch. The weight of his
character, the sum of his labours, his prayers, and his generous
sympathy, ever availed them in the efforts they put forth on be-
half of that which was right and for the good of men.
Apart, however, from the loss which the world seemed to sus-
tain in the translation of Enoch, there was much questioning
among men as to what could be the meaning of this strange event,
as to what good reason there could be for it. The taking away of
Enoch was a mysterious thing in many ways, but this it was that
puzzled men—Why was he taken ? Why was the virtuous, the
upright, the holy, the good man taken ? Why was the useful
man, the daily benefactor taken ? There were many aged men,
infirm, past all work or usefulness in the community. Why was


not some one of them taken, and the strong, useful, active man
left ? There were many vicious men, burdens to society—evils
under which the community groaned—Why were not some of
them taken, and one so pure and noble left ? In vain were all
such questionings. God had taken Enoch away. In wisdom,
in love, in sovereign right, had He taken him.
God took him because He had need of him. Enoch was a
faithful servant here ; he had proved himself worthy, and God
t him away to work for Him elsewhere. His task on earth
was done, but not his work for God, There is no ceasing of the
activity of God ; all existence is in His energy. The unfolding
of His gloiy is never stayed. His works declare Him ; they do
shew forth His beauty, wisdom, power, and love. There is in
Him the hiding of power ; it is His glory to conceal a matter ;
it is also His glory to open up what He has hidden, and to shew
with increasing fulness, the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
and might which are in Him, The outgoing of His energy is
the declaring of His nature. In every intelligent being you have
the er jrgy of God ; but notably so in every faithful servant. The
servants of God in all their well doing, show forth His glory ;
they are in Him, and are therefore active in His energy—they
i/ork. They are in Him whether here or elsewhere, anc so al-
ways serve Him in the manifesting of His glory ; and the Great
Master calls His servants to be where they can best serve Him.
Enoch was faithful, the spirit of the Most High was in him, and
the truth was his delight. His activity was divine, for it was in
God; and all his labours, all his kindly counsels, all his wise
words, all his charitable deeds, and all the love he cherished to
wards his fellow-creatures, served to declare the mind, the law,
the nature of his God. But to reveal the divine glory, is the
work of heaven as well as of earth, and Enoch having proved
himself able and worthy, was needed by God above for the same
divine end—to tell forth the glories of His name.
Moreover, God took Enoch because He loved him. He pleased
God. Now love seeks to draw its objects nearer and nearer to
itself. Surely we seek to have those we love, in closest com-
munion with us. The arms of our love are not long, and swift,
and strong to push our loved away, but to draw them near. We
do not open our hands against them saying, “ Go from us,” but
we beckon them near and say, “ Come to us j” and we take them
into our eager arms, and draw them into our warm embrace. Is
it greatly different with the love of God ? We cannot conceive
it to be so ; for though we use a feeble human figure of speech


we have behind it a very precious and a very holy truth—namely,
that love, the love of God, desires to have its objects near. With
this thought in your mind, God wants to have His loved ones near
Him, read the farewell words of our d ar Master to His Disciples
as they are set forth in the 14th and 17th of John’s Gospel. It
is through communion with God, in contemplation of His great
goodness, in meditation, in prayer, and in varied spiritual activi-
ties, that love, both as corr'ng from Him to us, and as going from
our hearts to-Him, finds its proper of development. But sir
hinders fellowship ; the selfishness of men, the care of the world,
the wearness of the body, our ignore ice, and other infirmities of
life make the full disp’ay and enjoyment of love impossible here.
We cannot realise the Father’s love as we would ; we cannot main-
tain our own as we would, but in heaven fellowship is perfected
and so is love. There God’s children know, as they cannot pos-
sibly do here, how greatly He loves them. He draws His children
to a place where nothing hinders love; and so He would have
Enoch home with Himself.
Yet further, God in talcing away Enoch was dealing wisely
with the community. Some, perhaps many, would be inclined to
lean too much on that good man. Herein was danger ; for even
lovina: dependence is often subversive of healthy and vigorous
independence of judgment and action. There was doubtless much
undeveloped talent in the community ; men capable of taking a
leading part, men able to do tenfold better than they were doing,
who were yet ignorant of the power that was in them, because
they leaned on the godly and wise Enoch, as on an ever needful
prop. But they had to learn that God was their mainstay, at
the same time to be self-reliant, to strike out for themselves in
the work of God, to realise individual responsibility, Enoch was
taken away, but God remained. He was as near and as ready
to strengthen them, as He was to strengthen him. They could
take counsel of Him, as Enoch was wont to do ; for the secret
of his influence was open to them—-he walked with God. The
righteous God wanted a righteous people ; yea, mark you well,
He does not plant a community on this earth to rear one indi-
vidual for Himself; nor peoples to yield Him princes ; but He
gives notable servants, and trains for Himself able princes, that
the whole people may be holy to Him. In all His dealings
with men, the Most High seeks to educate for Himself a holy
nation.


Now, brethren, the death of a Christian may very properly be
called a translation ; and the sudden death of one who has lived
faithfully with God, may well be compared to the translation of
Enoch. The resurrection hope has robbed death of its terror.
Since our Saviour rose from His tomb, the light of heaven has
dispelled the gloom of the grave. The believer is victorious in
death, through Him who is the resurrection and the life. “ Thanks
be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.” We read with wonder the story of Elijah’s translation ;
we read of the chariot of fire, the horses of fire, and the whirl-
wind, and we cannot help saying, What a glorious departure ! We
may even contrast it with the agony in which the immortal soul in
death, breaks away from the weary body. But brethren, let it be
said with emphasis, the death of the true believer is more glorious
than the translation of Elijah. His departure is in the glory of
the risen Christ. The resurrection hope, is more than chariots
and horses of fire. Elijah escapes from death, the believer
triumphs over death, by faith he is victorious, and nothing on
earth can be more glorious, than such triumphant faith.
And then, too, what we have said of the translation of Enoch
with respect to the purpose and working of God, may be truly said
also of the translation through death, of every really good man,
especially when such an one is taken away in the midst of
strength and usefulness. When, therefore, we are stricken by
the loss of good men, suddenly called away, it may be, —instead of
suffering ourselves to grow fainthearted, instead of bitterly griev-
ing over our loss, instead of letting our tears blind our vision, so
that we cannot see the good hand of our heavenly Father, it is
better, it is wiser, to throw ourselves for comfort and for guid-
ance, on clearly defined principles of the Divine economy, as
well as on Christ, who ever remains our portion and theirs.
1. We are fellow-workers with God. He has many workers in
this world, and wherever it has pleased Him to manifest His
name ; and all these have their appointed places. But the
Master moves them from place to place as He will, for the work
is His. By His word He instituted it, by His energy He sustains
it. Yea, it is His will that the work be perfected, and to this
end He inspires and strengthens His servants. He knows the
place which each can best fill, and He knows when it is best to
call this worker or that, to higher duty elsewhere. Look at
yonder great house in course of erection. There are many work-
men engaged on it or about it. Some are plain labourers, others
are skilled artisans. Some are at the mortar heap, others at the


great brick pile ; some are unloading material from the waggons,
others are carrying their burden of brick or mortar, up the ladders
to the giddy height, where the skilled workman busily applies
himself to his task, where brick laid upon brick brings the build-
ing nearer and nearer to completion j other workmen are engaged
in the interior of the structure, where different kinds of work have
to be done, some of these workmen you can see, others you but catch
a glimpse of, and some there are, that you do not see at all. Each
workman is responsible for his own task ; yet all really work
together, atrd the energies, talents, and labours of all, contribute
to one end—the completion of the building. There is, however,
one man over all, in whose mind is already conceived the fully
perfected building, who also contrived the plan of it; one whose
genius directs all the workmen, controlling their tasks and
labours, and bringing them into unity ; one who has power to in-
crease the number of labourers or to diminish it; one in whose
knowledge they all are, whether visible to the eye of the observer
or not j one under whose command, are all the resources needed
for the completion of the great work he has in hand—the master
builder, without whom indeed, there would be the wildest confu-
sion, certain abortion or utter failure in the work. Now this
helps us to see how the upbuilding of the kingdom of Christ is
carried on. God is over all. He sees the beginning and the
end ; already the whole, is perfected in His mind. What He has
willed to do shall be done. All we who believe, are His work-
men ; to some of us He gives a humble task, sends us to the
mortar heap, or to carry the bricks ; to others He appoints duty
requiring more skill and capacity. The divine Master-Builder
has countless labourers; some only are visible to the human eye,
but all are right well known to Him. He brings new craftsmen
to the work, or takes away to unseen labours, some who have
borne the burden and heat of the day, or some who are in fulness
of strength, or even some who have hardly put their hand to the
task in this world. But we toil on in God ;we are fellow-workers
with Him ; we draw out of His fulness. The work is His, and
all His infinite resources are for the advantage of the Kingdom.
We cannot indeed fathom the wealth of His power ; we cannot
see the whole work in its progress, we cannot understand the
secret harmony in which so many workers toil on, nor the perfect
unity in which the result of their energetic toil is gathered up ; we
cannot see, even as in a vision, the completed structure, nor can
we form any adequate conception of its glory ; but this we know,
that the work will go on, that God Himself is the guarantee


for its success, that workers will be found for every form of
service needed in this world or another. Therefore, let not our
courage fail us, let not fear for the prosperity of Christ’s King-
dom beset us ; but let us rather labour on, full* of hope.
Workers may be taken away from us here, but the Great Worker
is with us ; the work is His, and its prosperity is sure. “Fellow-
workers with God,” there is strength, there is confidence, beyond
all words, in that truth.
2. God desires us to be always preparing for higher service.
But how are we to prepare ? My answer is this—Honest toil in
present duty, is the best preparation for higher service. Fill to
the full extent of your power, the little place in which you are just
now. God will find another task for you when you are ready for
it. Do not think that the horizon of your feeble vision bounds
the possibilities of your life, far less the Kingdom of Christ.
Aspire to the highest place, aspire to the noblest work you can
conceive ; yet not idly, as so many do ; not in discontentment with
your present work ; not in the neglect of it. You look, perhaps,
at the man who publicly teaches the way of Salvation, at the
preacher who stands up before hundreds of his fellow-creatures,
and declares to them the whole counsel of God, and you say,
“ That man has a position of influence ; he can do effective work ;
I do wish I had an opportunity like his, for I could then do some-
thing worth about.” My brother, have you not got
something to do for the Master even now ? Have you not that
little class in the Sabbath School ? Be assured your honest work
in that class is as effective within its limits, as the best public
efforts, aye, and as acceptable to God. Your work is as much
owned by God as the preacher’s, you yourself as much loved by
Him ; and He waits for fruit through your labour, as He waits
for fruit through the labours of the public teacher or other workers
in the Kingdom. What you have got to do, is simply to put the
best effort of your soul, into the work you are doing for Jesus,
however humble it may be, resisting ever the spirit of discontent,
and impatience, assuring yourself that if the results are not so
satisfactory as you thought they would be, it remains for you to
try to do the work even better, and to wait with confidence upon
the Spirit of grace. While you work, look up and venture to hope
that the Master has a more influential place for you ; but away,
away with the miserable conceit that your talents are too good,
your ability too great for the simple work you have to do; no
talents in this world are too jood, no ability too great to be given
for the Master’s use, in training even one immortal soul for Him.


Aspire then, but aspire in the perfect doing of present duty.
And, note this well, a life ordered in Christ, is better than a fortune
given for Christ, for no effort in work for Cod is in vain. \ ea, I
go further, and declare that all work honestly done is gain gain
for eternity, whether it be specific work in the Kingdom, or the
daily toil of our ordinary vocation. What we shall be, depends
largely upon what we are daily doing. To wisely develop or hus-
band our physical power, to wisely and faithfully cultivate our
intellectual capacity, even as we cultivate our spiritual, is not in
vain either for time or eternity. Go to yonder student who de-
votes himself with such eager attention to his studies, and say to
him, “ Why do you work so hard, what is the good of toiling
thus ? You are missing the pleasure of the world ; life is short,
death will soon be here.” What answer will you get ? “ I find
the greatest pleasure in my work ; my studies are not in vain ; I
work for eternity.” Even so. And the humble labourer work-
ing with his spade in the ditch there, if he puts his heart into his
work and does it honestly, has gain in his task even for eternity.
Our character is built up in our daily effort. All honest toil is
eternal gain. And emphatically true is all this, of special work
done in the Kingdom of Christ. What we do in His spirit,
with our whole heart, for His sake, cannot be lost ; it becomes the
ground of greater possibilities of service for Him. “ Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth : yea, saith the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labours ; for their works
follow with them.” (R.Y.) They rest indeed from earthly labours,
for weary and sorrowful enough these often are, but not from
heavenly service. Here they laboured and resisted sin ; from
such labour they now rest; yet do they serve God day and night
in His holy presence; and the works which follow them deter-
mine in some degiee, so we may well believe, the service to which
they are appointed in that world where no sin is, and where He
that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.
3. God wants us to be mindful ever ofth e greater blessedness of
those who die in Christ. To die is gain. So Paul said, not of
another just gone, but of himself. May we have faith given us
to speak his word in absolute sincerity of heart —to die is gain.
But grief is somewhat selfish ; we think of our own loss ; and
though the gain of the departed is great, our loss is near to us
and is keenly felt. We miss familiar forms from the street, we
miss some who were friends, and more than friends ; we discover
that while believing firmly that the absent live, it is on dear ones
present, that we can best pour out our affection ; and though we


may believe that those who are gone, love as still, yet we miss the
physical and natural evidence of their love ; we have it not as we
used to have it, in the warm tones of a living voice, iq the glow-
ing features, or in the tender touch of the band • we know that
something closely knit into our life has been taken from us, and
that we are bereaved ; sorrow is natural, and so are tears ; both
are Divine, and who shall forbid them ? Still God appeals to us
earnestly to remember that those called away have not lost, but
gained. They are with Christ, which is far better—better for
them and for the Kingdom too. This we grasp by faith, and if
we would hold it sincerely, our faith must be firm. But how can
we describe the blessedness of being with Christ ? There is
indeed unspeakable blessedness in His service here below ; in
striving to win souls for Him ; in giving our best effort to build
up His Kingdom ; in contributing to and witnessing the pros-
perity of His work ; in the joyous companionship of those who
struggle on in their lot, ever hopefully in Him, There is blessed-
ness in the bonds and privileges of friendship ; in our loved
kindred ; in our homes ; in love ; in toil and victory ; in the
gratitude and approbation of men. But “with the Lord” there is
blessedness, far, far exceeding this. And although we can but
feebly understand what is really meant, in the practical experience
of the redeemed, by seeing Christ and walking with Him in
white, and doing Him service where the river of the w. ter of life
is, where there is no night, no light of lamp, neither light of sun,
where the Lord God gives them light, and they reign for ever
and ever, yet we may be sure of this, that the highest conception
we can form of the blessedness of those whom God has taken
from us to be with Himself, comes very far short of what they do
enjoy. Yet a little while and we shall know the truth; till then
let our heart’s desire be to abide in Christ.
4. Further, it is clearly the will of God that we should he always
ready to answer llis call in death. He has warned us ag;dn and
again, that our call to leave this earthly scene may come in a
moment, when we least look for it. Every death, and especially
every sudden death, is the voice of God to those who are left,
saying, “Be ye also ready.” A solemn voice it is ; but, alas,
how often have we heard it, and straightway forgotten—how
often have we turned it away from us, as if addressed to men
generally, and not to us particularly as individuals ! God speaks
to you and to me ; He says, “be thou ready.” Forget not
this, turn not your heart from the Divine warning. Often have
we, when sorrowing under the shadow of death, whispered to


ourselves this question, Who next ? Those whom we did not
expect to be taken away from us so soon, have been taken ; and
now, Who next ? You look about you ; your eye glances over
the congregation. “ Maybe—” Maybe thyself, brother. Do
not turn to others in looking for the answer, that is a way we too
often fall into. Why not thou ? Why not I ? We have seen
the old and the young, the feeble and the strong, the babe of
days and the man of years, taken from us lately. Do not, then,
look to the old and to the feeble ; look to thyself, as the question
rises in thy'heart, Who next ? titand now in the light of thy
conscience, and ask thyself, “ Is there one less worthy to live
than I?” Ask this, and try to realize how much thou owest to
God in life, endowment, and circumstance : and think, too, what
poor use thou hast made of His goodness. Hast thou proved
thyself worthy of the gift of life ? Hast thou proved thyself
worthy of thy talents and estate in life? Ah, thou knowest well
that thou hast been an unprofitable servant. Is it not so, that
thou hast often quenched holy suggestions in thy soul, wasted
precious time, turned a deaf ear to solemn and needed warnings,
refused sound counsel, let opportunities of usefulness go by un-
embraced, neglected thy gifts, undervalued the riches of Christ in
the Gospel, followed selfish desire, and beheld tby fellow man
perishing, without stretching forth a hand to help him ? Is net
this so ? Does not thy conscience, 0 my brother, say there is
great truth in this ? Does not thy conscience whisper, that there
is no one less worthy to live than thou ? Truly thou canst not
say to God, “ I deserve to live, for I have made good use of the
life and many gifts thou hast given me.” Couldst thou not
rather, and in all honesty, say, “ I deserve to die, so badly have
I used Thy goodness.” With time wasted, life abused, gifts
neglected, fear thou lest God should say to thee, “ Even now thy
soul is required of thee.” Be warned, I beseech you, all ye who
are thus careless, and wait ye for the Master’s coming, in watch-
fulness, in prayer, and in diligent obedience.
It is in mercy to us that God keeps to Himself, as His own
secret, the hour of our death. He keeps His hand ou the ends
of the threads of our life. If He were to lift His hand for a
moment, to let us see what yet remains to us of life here, we
would be filled with astonishment and confusion. Some who
expected to have many years for usefulness and joy, or for schemes
of profit and self-pleasing, would find that the ends of their life-
threads had been but barely covered by that gracious hand, that
their days ou earth were almost done, while others, weak and


weary maybe, with this world’s strife, who had hoped that they
would soon be called away to rest, would see that years of con-
flict yet remained for them. Better, more merciful far, for
us it is, that God keeps His secret to Himself. If we live in
Christ we are ready to die.
But ye who are godless, careless, unbelieving, the call may
come to you as suddenly as to the best among us. If God takes
some away because they have proved themselves worthy to serve
Him elsewhere, He also takes away others because they are
cumberers of the ground, “ Be ye also ready”—thus God speaks
to you. And what hope have ye for death ? With what con-
solations do ye strengthen yourselves for eternity ? Dare ye meet
your God with a wasted life ? Do ye think of appearing before
Him, immortal souls, utterly at variance with His spirit ?Be
wise; while God’s favour is yet upon you, be wise. One there is,
mighty to save yon ; One who gave Himself for you ; One who
lives in the strength of God and experience of perfect man, wait-
ing to deliver you from guilty consciences and the power of sin
within you ; One who calls to you in the voice of tenderest love,
“ Come, oh, come now, and find rest for your souls ; ” yea, One
there is, who has conquered death, and will give you too, the vic-
tory, and eternal life. Flee your folly ; deny yourselves seek
out the will of God where he has revealed it, and follow it ; own
the Lord Jesus Christ as your own, your only Saviour and Mas-
ter ; rest upon Him with your whole heart; trust Him fully to do
for you, all that God must do for man ; n his salvation ; build
your entire hope on Him ; cleave to Him amid all temptation,
cleave to Him in obedience ; and when it pleases God to call you
away, ye shall have an abundant entrance into the heavenly
glory.
5. And finally, our responsibility is ever increasing. Noble men
are taken from us, but their example remains with us, and God
means it to be a stimulus to us, to live more earnestly. Read
the story of the heroes of faith, in the eleventh chapter of Hebrews,
and then marie the great lesson which the Holy Spirit wishes us
to learn—“ Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with
so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and
the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience
the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus.” These heroes
were of old, but heroes of faith are of modern days too ; for every-
one who bravely endures hardship for Christ Jesus, is indeed a
hero. Such men may be taken from us; but their life history is
our heritage. Being dead, they yet speak to us, They say ;


“ Be brave, fight the good fight, be eager, be earnest, and though
faint, yet pursue ; the years go quickly past, and little work is
done in the busiest life, compared with what the ardent soul
would like to do ; therefore cast aside every weight and run with
patience the appointed race.” Ours, brethren, is the advantage,
ours the responsibility, and ours the sin, if we fail to be moved
by such stimulating example. Ah, we underestimate the wealth
of moral power that there is in the memory of an earnest, God-
fearing man, and equally do we fail to realize the responsibility
that such an example as his lays upon us. We inherit the
good name of the noble and wise ; but we also succeed to the
posts of honour which they have been taken from. We remain,
and with us the work. It must be done ; the burden of the
Kingdom must be borne. And herein, too, is our responsibility
increased, for God calls upon us to bear, what we formerly bore
along with others more able than ourselves. Ko duubt helpers
are being daily raised up, but the burden of honour is ours.
We need then the stimulus of noble lives ; but let us not forget,
yea, let us mark it well, that me foundation of ail inspiring
example is in Christ. Stimulated by others, we must be in-
spired by Jesus.
And so, brethren, let us not look back, sorrowing over much ;
but looking back, let us take courage to go forward hopefully.
Let us look up to the living Jesus, and work wnile it is to-day.
Let us remember how Elisha took up the mantle of his master,
and went back to the work of God, and the spirit of Elijah, the
Spirit of the Lord God of Elijah, rested upon him. Let us re-
member how when the disciples at Olivet, were gazing up into
heaven after their Master, who had gone to his Father, they were
hurried away by two men in white apparel, “ Go back to prayer
and to patient waiting for the promise, and to work ; this same
Jesus will in like manner come again.” They went back, girded
themselves for duty, and the Holy Spirit fell upon them. And
so, when we sorrowingly think too much of those who are not,
because God has taken them, the Spirit says to us, and with all
tenderness He says it, “ Why stand ye looking alter those whom
He has taken, gird up your loins, go forward to faith, to prayer,
to work,” Let us go forward willingly to bear the yoke of Jesus,
assured that we shall be endued with power from on high ; ” and
when our appointed task is done, those who have gone before,
and we, shall all meet where Christ is, and where parting shall
be no more.


And brethren, well may we say of our departed brother, “ he
was not; for God took him.” Four months ago he left us, to
our great regret, to fill that honourable post in Melbourne, to
which his superiors had called him, carrying with him our good
wishes and our prayers ; and ten weeks later, he was followed by
his wife and part of their family. Our heartfelt desire was, that
our friend should come back to his own country, and to his own
people; and little thought we then, that we should see his face again
no more. It is now three weeks since we were startled by the
tidings, that he was seriously unwell. After that we heard more
definitely, that, although he had been very ill, he was in the fair way
of recovery ; and then there arrived, suddenly and unexpectedly,
the mournfully sad message, that he was dead. He had been re-
covering from his malady, all was going on well, doctors and
friends were hopeful, danger was thought to be past, when, sud-
denly, in a moment, without warning, without a word of goodbye,
a look or touch of farewell, he was not, for God had taken him.
And now what can we say, but Good is the will of the Lord ?
Yet let our prayers abound for the bereaved family.
Thomas Watson was born in Leith, on the 10th October,
1836, The youngest of nine, he was the longest lived. He was
educated at Watson’s Institution, Edinburgh. At fourteen he
entered an office in Leith, and when he had fulfilled bis terra, and
left that office in his eighteenth year, his indentures were re-
turned, endorsed to the effect that he had proved himself ener-
getic, upright, and trustworthy. Young men, mark that! And
what honest man is there in our community, who would not
willingly add his name to that endorsement, if called upon to
testify to the character of our departed friend ? After a year
spent in a mercantile office in Liverpool, he was offered an ap-
pointment in the Oriental Bank, Melbourne, which he accepted ;
and so faithfully did he serve the bank there for six years, that
his superiors sent him over to open a branch of the bank here.
This was in 1860 ; a year later the agency was transferred to
the Bank of New South Wales, and in 1862, he passed into the
Bank of New Zealand. Shortly after this, he married. Inver-
cargill was now his home, and continued to be so to the end.
Although offered more influential positions, with greater emolu-
ments, he clave to this place, for he loved its people, and would
not leave, till circumstances which he could not well resist, con-
strained him to accept the appointment to Melbourne, where, as
we have seen, his career came suddenly to an end.


It was in 1860 that this congregation came into organised being,
with the Eev. Mr Stobo as pastor. Mr Watson was present at
the ordination; his name was on the first communion roll, and
he was a member of our congregation when he died. When the
first deacons were ordained in 1861, he was one of their number ;
in 1866 he accepted the higher office of elder; and two years
later, he was made session clerk, —which office he faithfully
discharged till he left us. At one time he was congregational
treasurer, having taken office when the congregation was con-
siderably burdened by debt. He held that position for some
time, but on one memorable evening, he stood up in the
Deacons’ Court with a bank note in his hand, and saying
that this note having been placed to the credit of the Couit, he
now begged to resign bis position. But I cannot mention the
many ways in which he helped this congregation ; the simple
truth is, that he did everything that lay in his power, for its
prosperity, with the utmost willingness and joy.
In deeds of practical benevolence, too, he was most liberal—
giving freely and largely v, ben the cause was good. He believed
also in systematic giving ; bow often has he said to me, that
every Christian should set apart, year by year, such definite sum
as he felt himself in a position to give to God, spreading it over
those claims of the church or of the cause of Christ, that he
deemed most needful.
He was very rarely absent from the prayer meeting, and was
at all times ready, if occasion arose, to take a district meeting on
the Lord’s Day.
Mr Watson was frequently a member of the Presbytery, and
more than once, a member of bynod. He always took the warmest
interest in the Church of Otago and Southland —knew most of
the ministers by reputation, and not a few personally ; and in no
house in Invercargill, did our ministers receive a warmer wel-
come, than in his. He took careful note of the younger mini-
sters, and ever sought, in his kind, unobstrusive way, to en-
courage them as occasion offered. He was a strong supporter of
an educated ministry—but more indispensable to his mind, were
grace and good sense.
Among our Sabbath school workers, Mr Watson occupied the
place of eminence; he was concerned in the formation of the first
school in 1860. His fellow worker was Mr Calder, now of Mel-
bourne ; and surely it is strange, that after the lapse of twenty-six-
years, and after many years and great distance, had hindered
close fellowship, this same friend should introduce him to


Sabbath school work in St, Kilda, and visit him in his last ill-
ness ; his early friend was his true friend to the last, and the
counsellor and helper of his bereaved wife, in the hour of her sor-
row, Mr Watson was the first and only Superintendent of our
school, during six and twenty years ; and he had the happiness
of seeing the little school, begun in the Courthouse, become the
parent of a large and prosperous central school, with four
branches, where no less than seven hundred pupils are taught by
peventy teachers. The scholars honoured and respected their
Superintendent, and of the teachers it need only be said, that
they loved him. In methods of work, Mr Watson followed in
the old ways, but he sometimes doubted if he were not too con-
servative. It was his nature not to care for new notions, yet if
their usefulness were sufficiently demonstrated to him, he was not
slow to give them a trial. It was at his suggestion that our
Young Men’s Class was started six years ago.
In matters of faith, he loved the old paths best ; his teaching
was thoroughly Scriptural and evangelical, and he had a deep
conviction, that to store well the minds of children with spiritual
knowledge, was a most essential part of godly nurture. Next to
the Bible he placed the Shorter Catechism, whose admirable
system of doctrine he never ceased to praise.
Thus we see how busy he was in the vineyard of our Lord ;
but he was also a busy man in the work of the world. Our
bankers and business men will not admit their lot is an easy
one, and no one will venture to say that it is ; but this man,
though often weary with professional burdens, found time to do
much work for the Lord, and found profit and delight in the
doing of it. Often indeed do Christian men of business, excuse
themselves from specific work for the Master, because they are
much tried in their daily avocations ; and yet one more name has
now been added to a noble list—which they may well study—of
busy men finding recreation and strength in the work of the church.
But let those who would give themselves to Christian work, see
to it that their daily toil and their work for Jesus, is built on per-
sonal piety. It was so with our beloved brother ; so manifestly
genuine were his religious convictions, so steadfastly did he stand
up for his Master, so truthful, generous, and upright was he, so
charitable in his judgments, so willing to take the best view of
doubtful matters, that men of the world, even those most care-
less in regard to religious things, could not fail to respect him.
He was not one to make up his mind hastily, and I believe that
this was largely due to his desire, to hit the mark of what was


right. He did not speak much about his own religious views,
nor was there any need that he should do so, for his life was
more eloquent than speech. His experience was sacred to him-
self and to his more private circle ; to be loud, boastful, or osten-
tatious in profession of religion, was utterly impossible in himself,
and painful to him when met with in others.
It was not therefore easy to get a glimpse of his inner life.
The still waters of his faith ran deep. But to enable you to
judge of his deeper nature, I have Mrs Watson’s kind permission,
to read to you the following extract from the last letter she ever
received from her husband, and written five or six weeks before
his decease. He is speaking of their eldest daughter, who died
at the early age of sixteen : more than five years ago—“ Often I
feel as if I could almost see her, and talk with her too. How
sweet her memory is, and how like a translation her end was !
‘ She was not for God took her.’ Shall we murmur and grudge
such a jewel for our Redeemer’s crown ? Ho, she is better where
she is. And is she not there to welcome us ? Let that thought
ever cheer and strengthen us, and be a link to draw our affec-
tions upwards, where our beloved daughter is,—cleansed, purified,
in the precious blood which cleanseth from all sin. And may we
and all our beloved ones, at length through grace join her. in the
blessed realm above, after we have served our God and our
generation, in our appointed time and lot. In her, they (speak-
ing of their family) have now a very direct interest in the heavenly
world. We have given them all to him—surely He will bring
them all safe home.”
He, too, has now gone to the heavenly world, a good, faithful
and kind husband and father : his memory will be an unspeak-
able consolation to his life’s partner, while his noble example will
strengthen and guide his children, to walk even as he walked, —
with God.
To the hundreds of boys and girls, young men and women, who
have been under his care, his life and teaching will be a stimulus
and a help to life in Christ, or a testimony against them, if they
follow not in the good way which he showed them. He
fed the lambs ; he went before them; he called them by
name ; he calls them still, since God has taken him to be with
the Good Shepherd.
And so, farewell, thou noble servant of Jesus Christ! Thou
hast gone before us, and no angel in heaven will rejoice more
over sinners converted, than thou wilt over the salvation of
those thou didst teach and love so well on earth. Thou waitest


now to welcome us, as one by one we cross the river ; as one by
one we reach the golden gates ; as ®ne by one we enter in to
hear that voice thou hast already heard—say, •* Well done, good
and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”
PRINTED BY THE SOUTHLAND TIMES COMPANY, LIMITED.




*
26
