

FUNERAL ORATION
DELIVERED JANUARY 26, 1867,
m T 5 VA
CONGRKGATIONAL CHURCH,
K E W,
OH THE OCCASION OF THE INTERMENT OF THE LATE MSA CONNEBES
By'The>Rev. ]. R SUHDERLAMD;
" Pf«eaas-»Bis thesigh* oTtfec lord wfedeath t-f his cs:?L,,
' TK» »9MI «ad-jUafede«4» «&« ««.
MELBOURNE?
VEKUOSSOK & MOORE, 4S FUNDI'


PREFA CE.
The laie Mrs, Connebef. was • extensively known, and
deservedly respected,as an eminently active and -devoted
Christian lady . In whatever locality Divine Providence
cast her lot, like her Divine Master she “went, about doing
good! Mrr were her attentions confined exclusively to the
mitigation of suffering arising from sickness and want She
sought to bind up the broken in heart\ and to heal the
spiritiiaUy wounded ’ by leading them to the “Balm in
Gilead, and to the great Physician there! For more than
seven years was she thus employed in Keuu where her place
can perhaps. never he again, wholly supplied\ as fm are
favoured with the "leisure and the means she enjoyed, to engage
in acts of Christian usefulness. And her success as u d-Mother
in Israelf was as great as her labours were abundddt.
lies' Bible Classes for elder girls were nWmcrousiy Mtmdedi
md a goodly number of her late sekM&fs- drf-dm&'-'oecdpyiftg.
positions of influence both in the Church bmd in the world,
which,: under God, ' they attribute to the benefit they derived
Jrom her instructions md prayers.


In the year *863 she removed with her husband from
Kcw to Dunedin in New Zealand\ in which latter place
she was even more actively engaged in works of usefulness
than before, as the sphere of labour there presented to her
was more extensive. In 1865 disease made its appearance,
and a visit to England was deemed necessary, in order that
she might obtain medieal aid On her departure from
Dunedin, a beaut fed and touching address was presented to
her? accompanied with a still more . substantial proof of the
esteem and affection with which she was regarded* Numerous
other tesfimtndals also t from her classes and friends, poured
in upon her oh taking tier departure from their midst*
The medieal advice she obtained in .Englandproved eminently
successful, and after a sojourn there of nearly six months
she left it to return to this Colony, almost restored toa
state of convalescence, Mui sue had not been on hoard , the
vessel, which byre tier to tnese shores many weeks, before
other symptoms of a most unfavourable nature a fpmmd.
She mas again laid prostrate, and mthmsgh, m landing in
Melbourne, the best medical assistmee went promptly obtained,
she mm.rtmiess graductlly sunk beneath theravages of disease*
In perfect peace, stayed upon her God, msd mitk a hope full
of immortality* she entered into rest on the &sih/anuary**
deply mourned, by a large mds of Christian friends, «who
sorrowed most of all that they wmld see her fme m morel


Beloved in life, she was honoured in death. Her earthly
pilgrimage was dosed in Kew, the seen? of her former
labours, in which place her name had lost none of its
fragrance . A large concourse attended her remains to theit
last reading place. Ministers were present from East and
West Melbourne, Si Hilda, Windsor, Emerald Hill
Carlton, Brighton, Hew, Castkmaine, and other places, to
pay their last tribute of respect to their sister in Christ .
The service in the Church at Kew wees conducted by the
Revs,. A. Gasman , J Beer, W, R.Fletcher, A.Mi, f,:B.
Sunderland and J. Boy. It was then that the following
address was delivered, and is now published, at the r&fuest
of numerous friends desirous of preserving it as a memento
of her whose memory they desire to embalm in their hearts,
as one, of the gentlest, holiest, best gifts which heaven vouchsafed
to them while on ea rth .
Kew, 1867.


FUNERAL ORATION,
|Y Christian Friends, —Deeply aifeoting and solemn
are die circumstances under which we meet together
Ssaasaa bo-day. Our hearts are full of sympathy with him
who mourns the loss of a beloved wife. We linger over
the mortal remains of one who had endeared herself to all
who knew her, God had touched her form with outward
beauty. Her spiritual hie was also a clear manifestation
of the graces of holiness, ‘‘Precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of His saints.” Be calls His beloved
ones from the toils, the sorrows, and the -sufferings of the
present life, to the enjoyment of the light, glory, and per-
fections of the heavenly world. They dwell in peace—they
are made possessors of mansions in the skies^--they wear
the crown of righteousness-----they wave the palm of victory,
and they unite in the song, ‘‘Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honour, and glory, and blessing.” There can be no
doubt of the Joy and perfect happiness of her, whose body
we are this day to commit to the silent grave. She has
passed through much tribulation—she has washed her robe
and made it white in the Wood of the Lamb,


A .Fwm-ai Oration.
Let as. think of her for a. few moments, that we may
deepen our impressions of her worth, magnify the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which appeared so bhaatiftdly in, her
character, and resolve to emulate her devotion to the cause
of the Saviour of. mankind.
To have known Mas. Connebee was to have had the
acquaintance of an eminent Christian lady. She was so loving
in her spirit, so gentle In her manners, so anxious to do good,
so unselfish of her time to serve others, and so active in ail
benevolent enterprises, that she endeared herself to a large
number of Christian friends. The words applied to Dorcas
may be appropriated to our departed sister;—“This woman
was full of good works and almsdeeds which she did/’ Her
memory will long live in our minds. How sweet is the
savour of her name in Kew, How many could rise up in
this place and tell how she was beloved for her acts of
Christian kindness and sympathy. Her gentle heart, was
ever open to receive the timid confessions of the young
disciple, and her wisdom was ever ready to be employed in
guiding the inquiring mind to Jesus, Her delight was in
the work of . the Lord. She was a welcome visitor in the
chamber of afficdon, and in the abodes of the poor.
Need I say, what a faithful help-meet she was to pur
weeping Brother, who is now bowed down under the stroke
of God’s hand? “ Many daughters have done virtuously:”
but of her it may be said, “thou excellest them all.” Her
heart was large; her love was pure and constant ; her
devotion to her husband, and. her desire for his comfort and,
usefulness, no one can describe. We feel for him. His
loss no mortal tongue can tell. May the loving Saviour
sustain him. and. fill, him with sweet consolation in this the


hour of need. Christ puts his children m the furnace of
affliction. We are made perfect through suffering. Oh,
my friends, think of the furnace through which our sister
passed,---the intense anxiety, and pain of mind and body
she must have experienced ! Time would not allow us to
speak of the mental and physkai anguish of the past
twelve months. Bow much of fortitude, of hope, of trust
in her Saviour was called forth. How touching her love to
friends on this side of the globe. It was her ardent desire
to return to the scene of her labours, and join with her
husband in Christ’s work in Mew Zealand; but should it he
the Lord’s will that she should die and not live—to die
amongst her friends, here, was the wish of her heart
We had heard Of her sufferings at home, but when we
saw her, Just alter her arrival, death had put the marks of
his coming on her lime. There we could discern the
outward signs of a time of terrible conflict during the past
few months; nevertheless, there was a sweet calm of spirit, a
heavenly smile, which diffused its light over the countenance.
She was prepared to live or die—as the ■will of the Lord
might he.
A life so useful and so eminent in the of
Christian excellences must have a ; good influence upon
those who survive. It was well that it wao In hhr heart to
return to Dunedin, Many will be the ferrets of Christian
friends there, who had longed for her return, that they will
see her face no more; v yet* there is much that will add a
•Sacred feeing of resignation for this loss in the conviction,
that for her to die -was gain. Free from the pains of
the body, she now' lives in the eternal light of heavenly
love.


Our sorrow' and our sympathies now, are demanded, not
for the dead, but for the living. There is a blank left in her
husband’s heart which none but Clod can Ml, It is one of
the greatest consolations amid bereavements such as these,
to dwell upon the beauties of the Saviours love which shine
through the characters of those who have gone before ns to
the better laud.' Our sister has gone to her Father’s house.
She is at. home with Jesus. Would we call her back if we
might? Would we wish, to withdraw her from her present
bliss ? .-She, has ceased to suffer. May not her glorified
spirit become a guardiap angpl =to her husband and her
Mends? We are. in a world of deep mysteries. We are
prepared tor various uses. We are touched by spiritual and
unseen We look upon that coffin; it contains
predous remains. We will carefully and tenderly deposit it
in the grave. Gur sister is not there. We may ding to the
human garment, but the illustrious tenant has gone. She is
clothed now with immorfellife. She lives with all the
powers of a perfect and invigorated existence. It is human
to weep, -the fountain of our tears only convey the over-
flowings of our deepest feelings and affections. Our memory
dwells jwith upon the image of Jesus we have seen in
our friends. : We would fain retain them by our side, but we
cannot. : Friend after friend departs.
Let us hear the voice of God speaking to us by; this dis-
pensation of His providence. ; Let us meditate ; upon our
own mortality. Soon, it will be, sa*d- of some one of us—he
is dead—she is dead. Be wise therefore. Use life’s oppor-
tunities, so that .when you pass away it may be said, although
dead, ‘‘'yet he speaketh.” , Our sister speaks to us from the
place of the dead. What would be the beauty ,of that


heavenly .smile which plays upon her face if we could see it?
But do we not hear her say, “Be ye also ready, for in such
an hour as ye think not the Son of Man eometh.” • Could
we draw the thin veil which divides die heavenly world from
our’s, should we not behold her radiant form clothed in white,
in heaven’shappy throng, bending at the feet of her Saviour,
ami casting her crown before Him? Would you say to her
blissful spirit. Return to us? No; ; in the -language of
Hebeds Hymn, composed when he lost his beloved wife, ■=■
“Thou art gone to the grave! hut we will not deplore iliee,
Tho* sorrows and darkness encompass the tomb;
The Saviour has passed through its portals before thee.
And ?he lamp of His love is thy guide through the gloom.
Thou art'gone to the grave! we no longer behold thee.
Nor tread the rough path of the world by thy side;
But tbe wide arms of mercy are spread to unfold tbee,
And sinners may die, since the Sinless has died.
Tbon art gone to the grave! bat we will deplore thee,
Whose God was thy ransom, thy guardian mid guide,
He gave thee. He took thee, and He will restore thee;
A«d death has no stiug, for the Saviour has died.” '
Ret its learn the lessons of infinite love.' /Hear ye the
voice of the Son of God. How glotiohs Is the “ Gospel of
the blessed God,” which gives to us tbe hopes which gather
around the bed of the dying saints Let me die the death of
the righteous.
There is the voice of warning to the undecided and carekss
souls. When death coroes what value are the pleasures and
the honours of this world on which so many hearts are set.
There is encouragement for the believer in the death of
our sister. Behold, what grace and strength God gives in
the time of need. See how the graces .of patience and
resignation shine forth in the lives of His saints. Mark
how God regards the faithful ones. Precious in the sight of


the saints. •
“Jerasakm, the gkikus, :
Use joy 'of the elect
, : ..;• OS 4<i%t ms<i i'aiwz vkk*a
T&kt eager hmm expect*
the Lord.ds Aim death of Mm saints., We. sm sure of this,*-
that the death of our departed sister was precious. In life,,
In all its perils, God was with her; and in death, through all
Its gloom, she bad the Mi-assurance of God’s unchanging
tern.-- Tmmm JD-et m he in earnest ;;Let us live
■»>
nearer to God Let the power and influence of Christ’s
lore manliest, itself in us. I Let us be... stimulated by the
example of our sister to greater devotedness.We weep
over the dead. We pray tbat oufhatherin Heaven would
be gracious to his servant, who has lost his best earthly
friend. Her' love, her devotion to her husband made her
exemplary. Let the remembrance of what our sister was
be a legacy to her friends, and following her as she followed
Christ, let ns rejoice that the time will come when death
shall be swallowed up in victory,—when we shall all meet
again.,' Let-us keep in view in ail life’s changes the home of
H*eu now by faith I see thee.
W&i now ihy walls discern,
To thee mj thoughts are kindled,
*' AvA and pnM, and yearn..
And now we %ht the battle.
And then we wear the crown.
Of foil, md everlasting,
And passdonWaa renown,
O fend that aceat no sorrow!
, 0,sW& that Jcnow’st no atnfel
O princely bowers! O land of flowers I
<5 realm and home of life f*
With these visions kt «s fill oar souls, and then, when we
depart hence, it will be said of ns, asm all ages,—‘‘Freckles
in the sight of the' Ijytd is the death of His sai&ts.”
>'argßss«a and Moors Urifttsrs, i. 6
