

A J?’U LJ. ACCOUNT
OF THK
HOBART TOWN RIOTS
in Connection with
PASTOR CHINIQUY’S LECTURES,
TOGETHER WITH
(Eorrt'ijtondence fijom g. ®. Jtt. IBateon,
SUPPRESSED BY
THE LYT TEL T O JS T TIM ES.
©uiietim:




finsss/FSii
s**T. 77
THE HOBART TOWN RIOTS.
tHE pamphlet; which this introduces explains itself; and but
few words are needed by way of introduction. The Hobart
Tow r n riots, on the occasion of Pastor Chiniquy’s visit to
that city, were a very serious and expensive affair, profoundly
agitating the community in the midst of which they occurred,
and costing the colony, according to the Hobart Town Mercury,
nearly £2,000 to suppress. The serious character of the distur-
bances may be gathered from the following extract, taken from
the Adelaide Observer of July sth, 1879, It is contained in their
Hobart Town correspondent’s letter of June 27 :
During the current week Hobart Town —generally the quietest of quiet
towns —has been the scene of unparalleled displays of religious fanaticism.
Pastor Chiniquy has set the whole of our little world by the ears, and has,
by his denunciations of Roman Catholicism, aroused the dormant passions
of the adherents of that body to such an extent that serious breaches of
the peace have already occurred, while further rioting is looked upon as a
certainty. As I write we are “in the thick” of the disturbance. Numbers
of Protestants are entering the Town Hall Chambers to be sworn in as
special constables, for possible service this evening ; the artillery have been
ordered to take possession of the Domain Battery, near which place an
open-air meeting of Catholics is convened for this evening, and where it is
proposed to burn Chiniquy in effigy ; the City Council are sitting daily ;
the Government has been waited upon by deputations ; the whole volun-
teer force is summoned to parade at 7 o’clock (in readiness for eventuali-
ties).
The report of these riots, which wei’e quite as serious as those
that occurred on the West Coast some years ago in connexion
with Father Larkin’s inflammatory harangues, was entirely sup-
pressed by the Christchurch newspapers. Of course they may
have satisfactory reasons for keeping back important informa-
tion from their subscribers and readers ; but we think the public
will agree with us that no sufficient justification can be pleaded
for this suppression of news. The Lyttelton Times has pleaded,
practically, that it did not think the publication would do any
good ! That is, that the public of Christchurch, or that portion of
the public which support that journal, cannot be trusted to read
an important item of news. We are so inflammatory a people
that we require the Lyttelton Times to act as “ wet blankets” for
us. We are mistaken if the public of Christchurch do not tell
the Editor of that journal that they are as capable of controlling
their tempers, and acting like fair-minded Englishmen, as he him-
self is!
We gladly inrert the letter and speech of the Eev. H. C. M.
Watson, who first drew public attention to this deliberate at-
tempt to “ burke ” discussion. They will, perhaps, throw some
light upon the motives actuating the management of that journal.
It is certainly not an English proceeding to attack a gentleman
in unscrupulous terms, and then to refuse him the opportunity


to defend himself. The Proprietor of the Lyttelton Times is
credited with the desire to serve his country in Parliament; we
would therefore ask his opinion of the following questions for a
political placard :
Who suppressed important news because he did not think
the people could be trusted with the knowledge?
'Who attacked, in venomous terms, the character of a re-
spectable clergyman for drawing attention to the sup-
pression ?
Who refused to allow the clergyman so attacked to defend
himself ?
We make a present of these questions to some electioneering
committee during the coming election.
lo the Publisher of “ the Hobart Town Riots."
Sir, —As you have been good enough to offer to publish the
accompanying letter and speech in your pamphlet, I forward
them to you, with the following explanations :
That the Lyttelton Times , after publishing a scurrilous attack
upon me, refused to publish my reply ;
That, in my speech, I expressed no opinion upon either Father
Chiniquy, or his mission. In justice to Father Chiniquy, how-
ever, it is to be remembered that he is a priest of the Catholic
Church ; that he has been 25 years an eminent minister of the
Presbyterian branch of the Catholic Church ; and that he has
testimonials from men of good standing and reputation —as, for
instance, Dean Macartney, of Melbourne, “ whose praise is in all
the churches.” With respect to his mission, I believe widely
different opinions are held on the part of those who believe him
to be a good man. Uis work is one in which he stands or falls
to his own Master. I expressed no opinion upon it. My remarks
had reference solely to the suppression of important news on tho
part of the Christchurch newspapers. —I am, &c.,
IT. C. M. Watson.
To the Editor of the Lyttelton Times.
Sir, —As you have given currercy to a scurrilous attack upon
me, which appeared in the Star of Thursday, I trust you will
allow me, out of respect for your readers, to correct the mis-
statements which it contains. As the article professes to be a
stricture upon a little speech that I made at the Orange dinner
of July 12, I ask you to publish the speech as prepared for
delivery on that occasion. Ido not think it necessary to defend
either the opinion I then expressed, or my character for toler-
ance. I trust my character for tolerance, fairness, and goodwill
towards those that differ from me, is too well established to need
any defence against the attack of an anonymous writer.
H. C. M. Watson.
June 21st.
After a few words on the subject of the toast, I said :
“I am reminded to-night of the first occasion—six years ago
i J J
2


• when I was invited to the Orange dinner. I well remember how
carefully I considered the matter ; I had never attended such a
dinner before ; how I consulted a Homan Catholic friend who ad-
vised me to decline ; and that I did so. But next year another
invitation came ; and again I considered the matter with care;
•examined the rules of Orangeism ; saw nothing in them that need
prevent me accepting the invitation, and decided to accept it.
1 did so, and have not seen reason, since then, to regret having
• done so. But to-day I have been reading a speech of Lord
Dufferin’s in which Orange and similiar Institutions are con-
demned. With much of that speech I heartily agree. I agree
with him in condemning all bitterness and party strife. But
are these necessary consequences of Orangeisnf P Ido not think
they are. Let me put the matter in this way : I have friends
who are Homan Catholics ; I havefri mds who arc Unitarians ; I
have friends w r ho are atheists : well, all these friends, of each
class, know that, in many things of fundamental importance, I
am strongly opposed to them ; and that, if opportunity arose, I
should be found fighting against the opinions from which I differ.
But all would, I.hope, understand that I had no personal quarrel
with them. I should hope to continue our previous friendly inter-
course in spite of such differences of opinions. Bat, it may be
said, the case of the Homan Catholics is peculiar. They are so
excitable, and are easily aroused when their religious opinions
are attacked. I admit this. The treatment of Father Chiniquy
in Hobart Town proves this. My answer is, that in commenting
upon the faith of Homan Catholics, we should avoid the use of
all irritating expressions, and, as far as possible, all that may
tend to arouse the strong passions of our Homan Catholic
brethren ; and they must learn, as we have learnt, to listen to
criticisms, which are adverse to their religious faith. However, I
am not thinking so much of those opinions of the Homan Catholics
which 1, as a clergymen of the Protestant Church of England,
regard as erroneous. I think less of error than do some of my
Torethren ; and I believe that God is more merciful in regard to
error than we are one to another. But Homan Catholicism is not
only a religion, it is a political organisation, and the mostcompact
one the world has ever seen. Heceut events here and in Dunedin
illustrate this. Nearly every Homan Catholic vote (there are
some honorable exceptions, but they are few in number) could
be sent to the poll as a ‘block vote’ on certain questions —
that of Education, for examp'e. Now Orangeism is the counter-
poise of the ‘Catholic vote’ in politics. It has proved itself to
he so in other colonies, and will, I have no doubt, be so here
Before sitting down, allow me to remark upon the extraordinary
fact, that the newspapers of Christchurch have suppressed all
accounts of the riots in Hobart Town in connexion with Father
Chiniquy’s visit. They have created great excitement in that
city, and the Hobart Town papers are full of them, ret the
Christchurch papers contain not a word respecting them. This
fact, which may be capable of explanation, has been the talk of
3


the streets on the part of those who are acquainted with th&
Australian papers; and does seem to me to call for comment,
and to raise the question whether there is not room for another
paper which shall not be afraid to discuss all questions, religious
and social, in a tolerant and liberal spirit. I myself think there
is, and shall be glad, if such a paper is established, to give it
hearty support.”-
The following is taken from the Hobart Town Mercury of July
7th, 1879
|astoi[ <piniqitp gUrhml in gotmi[t Sown.
On Saturday, the 21st June, Pastor Chiniquy, having completed his labours,
in Launceston, without appar *,ntly having done much either of good or harm
came to Hobart Town by the Main Line Railway, arriving in the metropolis
in the evening. He was received by his expectant host, Rev. R. Maclaren
Webster, of the Chalmers Presbyterian Church. The Paster was found to
be an elderly man, by no means striking in appearance, bald-headed, and
with a lengthy under beard of a dull grey colour. His face is hard and
stern, and shows that he is a man of indomitable will, but when he smiles
his aspect becoming less forbidding than that which was at first conveyed.
Though well advanced in age, he bore his three score years and ten with
ease and vigour ; so that, though the labour and trouble comes to him as
promised by the inspired Psalmist, it is not from bodily infirmity, but from
his own seeking. The Pastor preached on the day after his arrival to large
congregations—in the morning at the Chalmers Church, and in the after-
noon at the Mellville-street Wesleyan Church. His style of oratory is plain,
but he has a great command over the English language, though this is a
quality he himself depreciates, apologising profusely for his bad accentua-
tion. A very strong foreign accent marks his speech, and gives it a quaint-
ness that is in itself a charm. He informed both his congregations that he
had come to the colonies for the benefit of his health. He disclaimed being
actuated by mercenary motives, and said that in prosecuting the mission he
had undertaken he was acting in accordance with the advice of friends in
the colonies, who were desirous that he should collect funds to be devoted
to the maintenance of a college at Illinois, and to enable two churches,
which had been burnt by the Roman Catholics, to be rebuilt. He also
stated that he was a rich man when he seceded from the Church of Rome,
but that he had since devoted every cent that he had to the work in which
he was engaged. He referred to the fact that no less than 800 priests—
-500 of whom were in France and 300 in the United States—had seceded
from the Church of Rome, and dwelt upon the necessity of converting and
bringing them into the Protestant Church, and educating them so as to
make them an agency for the reformation of other Romanists. He con-
trasted the form of worship in the Protestant churches with that of the
Church of Rome, the latter of which he characterised as idolatry, owing to
adoration being paid to a wafer, which the worshippers were taught to
believe was Christ. _ He pointed out that sinners, instead of being directed
to God through Christ, were taught that the Almighty was so angry with
them that their only hope was in goingto the feet of the Virgin Mary ; and
converse with bachelor priests on indelicate subjects. At Chalmers
Church, in the morning, the Pastor commenced by stating he had not come
to deliver a but for the purpose of having a Christian conversation,
a Christian meditation. He was too young in the faith, and had not been
walking in the light long enough to take upon himself to sermonise his
elders in Christianity. He was desirous of meditating with the congrega-
tion upon the great mercy and the eternal love of God. The Pastor then
gave an exposition of John xv., 15—“ Henceforth I call you not servants •
for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth : but I have called you


friends.” The rev. gentlemen used very simple language, displayed a very
slight French accent, evinced great argumentative power, and showed an
intense earnestness. He dwelt upon the novelty of, and the opposition
that was at first shown to, accepting the Saviour’s statement that he was
the friend of His enemies. All the labours of Christ were with a view to
the demonstration of the truism that He was the friend of His enemies, in
order to the salvation of mankind. How great was the joyousness ex-
perienced by the Saviour when it was realised by the sinner that he had a
friend in Christ.
In the afternoon the Pastor preached at the Wesleyan Church, Melville-
street, basing his discourse upon Hebrews ii., a portion of the 10th verse,
“ Captain of their salvation.” The address was an exposition of the duties,
responsibilities, privileges, and glories of the Christian. The rev. gentleman
expressed a fear that some of the soldiers composing the army of Christy
instead of being on the aggressive, were more inclined to come to terms of
peace with the enemy at any price. He pointed to the valour and achieve-
ments of the British nation in subduing other powers, contended that
whenever Great Britain had been engaged in a conflict in which Romanism
was involved, the British had gained a victory, and referred to the over-
throw of the modem giant of power, Napoleon, by the British at W aterloo.
He urged that Christians should be engaged in effecting the overthrow of
Rome, not by carnal weapons, but by a spiritual warfare, and at the same
time disclaimed being an enemy of Roman Catholics, whose honesty,
-earnestness, and fidelity he spoke of as being exemplary. He contended,
however, that with all these qualities they were a deluded class of re-
ligionists, and that it was the duty of Protestants to effect the opening of
their spiritual sight, so that they might be enabled to realise the blessedness
of the Christian religion. He alluded to the parable of the Rich Man and
Lazarus, and in its application showed that the Rich Man was represented
by Christians who were in possession of the bread of life, but neglected to
supply the spiritual wants of their Roman Catholic brethren, who stood in
the relation of Lazarus. These utterances are a fair, though very much
condensed, sample of the kind of doctrine propounded over and over again
by the Pastor. The Sunday passed away peacefully, with no token of the
storm that was so soon to break on the city.
MONDAY EVENINGr’S LECTUEE.
COMMENCEMENT OF THE DISTURBANCE.
The first of a series of lectures announced to be given during the week
at the Town Hall, by Pastor Chiniquy, was delivered on Monday evening
June 23, to a large audience, which filled the hall. Several clergymen oc -
cupied seats on the platform, and the chair was taken by the Rev. Dr
Nicolson, who, after two verses of a hymn had been sung, and a short
prayer offered by the Rev. J. Cope, introduced the lecturer, claiming for
him a hearing, as one who, having ascertained a great truth, felt it to be
his duty not to hide it, but to bring it forth for the benefit of mankind.
The appeal was received with applause. The credentials of the Pastor, in
the form of a recommendation from the French Board of Evangelists of the
French Protestant Church of Canada, was also read before the commence-
ment of the lecture. There were several attempts at interruption during
the delivery from a body of Roman Catholics who occupied places at the
end of the hall, having paid the entrance money. Especially at one point,
where the Pastor referred to the manner in which wafers used for the
Sacrifice of the Mass are made, and again when after referring to a certain
Bishop in America as a “ swindler and thief,” he added that this Bishop
was impeached by him, and, the enquiry instituted by the Pope, sustaining
the charge, he was deposed, and retired to Ireland, where he had the good
sense to die in a couple of years. At this statement, many persons near
the lecturer laughed and applauded, but the uproar that arose also was the
cause of a prolonged disturbance, calling for the interference of the chair-
man. The chairman succeeded in gaining quiet, and the lecture was con-
cluded, the people dispersing peacefully.


TUESDAY EVENING.
THE SECOND LECTUBE PBEYENTBD.
A letter, written by Henry Hunter, a leading Catholic, which appeared in
the Mercury of this day, was by many considered to have a great influence -
on the after behaviour of his fellow religionists. After expressing his sur-
prise at the Pastor and his friends being allowed the use of the Town Hall
for their orgies, “he publicly recorded his protest, not only as a Catholic,
but as a citizen and ratepayer, against such a violation of the trust and
confidence which we should place in the hands of our City Council.”
The Town Hall was the arena of an extraordinary and disgraceful scene.
It was given over to uproar and riot. Pastor Chiniquy was silenced by
brute force by an organised mob of Eoman Catholics. The storm might
have been seen brewing from the time the doors of the hall were opened.
Numbers of rough looking characters, armed with sticks, entered early and
formed a compact body in the back of the hall. But there was a deceitful
calm. The audience was as quiet as a Sunday congregation. The Pastor,
who was advertised to lecture on “ Rome, and Liberty of Conscience,” oc-
cupied the platform, supported by the Revs. J. Cope, B. Butchers, J. Scott,
and Webster. There was a hushed silence till Mr Webster rose to propose
that the chair should be taken by the Rev. J. Cope. This was the prelude
to angry, lawless fury. At once there rose a deep tempestuous swell like
the bursting of a thunderstorm. There was no mistaking its tone ; it was
that of roused and wrathful passion. Yells, groans, loud expletives, hisses,
and fierce shouts rent the air, accompanied by a deafening clatter of sticks
and boot heels, drowning every attempt at proceeding with the object of
the meeting. There was immediately a scene of the wildest confusion.
The greater part of the hall was filled with a respectable audience prin-
cipally woman, who were terrified at these demonstrations of violence.
All started to their feet. The ladies rushed towards the platform as if to
seek safety there ; the cushioned crimson seats were trampled under
muddy feet; the clergy besought order ; the'police, of whom there were at
first five or six, gathered round the rioters, and tried, but in the mildest
manner to quell the disturbance. But in vain. The clangour sounded
louder, hoarser, with all attempts to subdue it. Yolleys of epithets were
showered upon the Pastor, to the rallying cry of “ Tally-ho, Tally-ho,”
which resounded from the lusty throat of a stout and elderly Irishman.
The disturbers would not be quieted. All appeals from the platform were
met with derisive cheers. The Rev. Mr. Webster asked for fair play in vain ;
hoots and loud cries were the only response. The police were inactive.
The supporters of the meeting were indignant. “ Why don’t the police do
their duty ?” “ Send for more police !” “ Arrest them !” were the cries
heard on all sides. The Rev. B. Butchers, Mr. Russel Young, and Mr. C.
D. Haywood, went into the midst of the peace disturbers, to try and induce
them to stay their clamour. They might as well have tried to hold back
the billows of the ocean. The whooping chorus grew the louder. The
blood of the disturbers was hot and unappeasable. A disputation, a push,
and blows were struck, a melee ensued ; combatants and police interlocked
in confusion —a struggling, surging mass, grappling and fighting among
the forms in the body of the hall. It was a critical moment; a general
fracas seemed imminent. The Pastor sought shelter near the organ seat.
No arrests were made, and, by the intervention of some civilians aiding the
police, a momentary lull ensued ; then an attempt was made to go on
with the meeting. The rabble drowned all sounds in a tempest of malignant
cries of “ Turn him out,” “Three groans for the apostate priest,” “Three
cheers for the kicked-oub priest,” and unrestrained opprobrious and coarse
abuse. From time to time the ministers begged a fair hearing ; truth,
they said, would not suffer from speech ; let the Pastor be heard : those who
disag'ree with him might leave the hall. But the turbulent rioters would
not leave. Drawing bieath at intervals their ferocity was not to be turned
aside, and delusive moments of quiet were followed by still more tumul-
tuous outbreaks of passion. In the midst of this mob law a rumour went
round that the Mayor was coming-; the word passed that he had been sent
for, and it was hoped he would be able to restore something like order.


But he did not come ; and the Rev. Mr. Webster made another effort to
carry on the meeting. He begged the people to be seated. He said the
meeting must be carried out, and he asked the police (who had by this
time been reinforced) to do their duty. Shouts of defiance from the rioters
greeted him. They had, they said, paid for the hall, and it was an insult to
allow the Pastor to speak there ; they would not allow him. They would
hear anyone but him. “ Then,” said Mr Webster, “we will sing a hymn. ’
The mob then commenced singing “ God Save the Queen,” in bantering
style and tune, but all was quiet when the respectable portion of the
audience began singing “There is a fountain filled with blood,” which was
given out by Mr Webster. The rev. gentlemen asked once more that the
Pastor should be allowed to be heard. A voice : “If he does not say any-
thing offensive.” Mr. Butchers : “ Who is to be the judge of that?” Mr.
Webster said he would take care that nothing offensive was said, there was
no fear of that. A voice : “We were insulted last night.” Mr. Webster
said he had heard the Pastor’s address, and there was not a word in it
to which exception could be taken. (Derisive cries, and “ No, no.”) Mr
Webster appealed for fair play. A voice ; “ Any other gintleman but
Chiniquy.” Mr M‘Pherson (who was on the platform) vehemently : “ Why
don’t the police do their duty ? They are paid for it by the public. Why
don’t you take Fay in charge ?” (Fay, the person alluded to, had been a
prominent disturber throughout.) Mr. Webster ; “ No, no, we don’t want
any one taken in charge. You are an English audience. As such you
must love fair pla'y. Give the Pastor fair play ; let us hear his address.”
(Uproar.) A voice : “He is defaming our religion ; he is insulting us.’
Mr Webster said he would be the very last one to listen to an insult; he
would be the first person to protest against it. But he would hear every
man. He would listen with great delight to Cardinal Newman, for example,
if he were to come there to speak. (Applause.) He admired the Cardinal
for his high character, and he would listen to him most respectfully, and
he believed all his Protestant friends would do the same. A voice : “He
does not attack your religion.” (Cheers.) A voice : “ What is one man’s
food is another man’s poison.” (Cheers and laughter.) We will listen to
you all night, Mr Webster, but not to the Pastor. (Cheers.) We Webster
again asked for fair play. Mr Cronley : “He insulted the Church of
England and all the Church of England Protestants last night. He
ridiculed them for fasting. He says he does not fast. (Laughter.) He
only wants £SOO more. His house fell down since he came. He came
here to set us all fighting, and put the money in his pocket and clear out.”
(Cheers.) Mr Webster said statements of an extraordinary kind had
been made against the Pastor, and according to British fairness, he should
be allowed to reply. (Cheers.) Would they not allow him to speak in his
own defence?” (Interruption.) A voice : “He was not allowed to preach
in any Church of England.” Mr Webster said he had read a letter from the
Dean of Melbourne, in which the Pastor was highly spoken of, and he had
read accounts of very high honor done him, which he had forwarded to the
Mercury. A voice : “ Show us the letter. You will find when Chiniquy
has gone away that the letter is a forgery. (Laughter and Cheers.) Mr
Webster said he was not accustomed to such suspicions. A voice : “He is
a miserable remnant of a misspent life. He knows in his heart he’s
wrong.” Mr Butchers appealed for a hearing, but was met by renewed
uproar. Mr Webster : “ Policemen, do your duty ; we must have order.”
The police stirred not, though almost surrounding the ringleaders of the dis-
turbance. Mr Cope: “We have had enough of this. Protestants to the
front.” The call having been obeyed, a show of hands was called for by
Mr Butchers as to whether the meeting should go on or not, amid a great
outcry from the rowdies, who held up both hands. Mr Webster
declared the affirmative to be carried by five votes to one. The meeting
having, he said, by an immense majority decided to hear the Pastor, the
small minority must give way. Was this minority to prevent them going
on with the meeting ? (Cries of “ No,” and “ Turn them out.”) Mr
Butchers advised those who did not want to hear the Pastor to go out quietly.
(Tumult.) The majority who had come to hear the lecture were not to be
disappointed. They had taken the hall for the purpose. It was clear the


minority should retire. Those who wished to do so had a right to hear the
Pastor. (Cries of “ Put him out.”) Mr Webster said the disturbers were
creating a very bad impression against themselves. It was the very worst thing
for them to do. Mr Butchers invited fair discussion. Let them hear what
the Pastor had to say, and see whether it was true or false. Let the leaders
of the Romish Church come on to the platform and refute his statements.
Let three of these leaders be chosen as a booard of arbitration, and let their
ablest man in Hobart Town be brought against him. (Cheers and groans.)
And if the Pastor made one statement he could not prove, the Protestant
clergy would be the first to turn their backs against him. But he should
not be silenced by brutish force. Truth never suffered by free discussion.
Mr Butchers concluded by inviting Fay to address the meeting from the
platform, but the invitation was declined amid cheering and groaning.
Further efforts to obtain a peaceful hearing for the Pastor having been
made and proved utterly futile, and reference having been made to the fact
that those responsible for the continued uproar were a very small minority
of those present, and the apathy and supineness of the police having been
also animadverted upon, Mr Butchers stated that, whilst the sympathisers
with the Pastor were in the majority, they would not resort to force, as
their cause depended upon truth and could be supported by argument. Mr
Fay, after having made several unsuccessful attempts to speak, remarked
that the Pastor deceived the Roman Catholic Church, and he would in turn
also deceive the Protestants. There was a continuation of the disturbance,
and ocasionally persons in the front part of the hall were heard endeavouring
to induce the rowdy class to discontinue the interruptions. Mr Webster once
more endeavoured to conciliate the irate mob, and as a result of an inter-
view which was carried on, with occasional interruptions, with Mr Cronley,
it was agreed to submit to the arbitration of a representative member of
the Church of England the question as to whether it was the desire of the
majority of that meeting that Pastor Chiniquy should have a hearing. Mr
Webster announced Mr Barnard’s willingness to express his opinion as to
the subject, and one of the malcontents at the the same time expressed
a desire that Mr. Barnard should state his opinion concerning the Pastor,
Peace having been restored,
Me Barnard rose in the body of the hall, and said it was impossible not
to respond to a question of the character of that which had been submitted,
as to whether or not, in an assembly of Englishmen, any man should not
be heard who advocated temperately and properly the sentiments which he
professed. He (Mr Barnard) was present the previous evening, and heard
the Pastor’s address with pleasure, because that gentleman spoke tenderly,
kindly, and affectionately of the Church of Rome. (Applause, followed by
an uproar.) At the same time, he (Mr. Barnard) coincided with many of
the objections which the Pastor urged againt the Church of Rome, because
he (Mr. Barnard) belonged to the Protestant Church of England. He
should, however, have no sympathy with Pastor Chiniquy if he had in-
dulged in personalities, or spoken unkindly of any individual member of
the Church of Rome. It was the system, and not persons, that the Pastor
dealt with, and he (Mr. Barnard) would not have attended the second meet-
ing if an improper word had been uttered on the previous evening by
Pastor Chiniquy. He would say, however, that there was one expression
which he did not concur in, and that was the allusion that was made to the
decease of a Bishop of the Church of Rome, (Hear, hear.) He considered
that was an ill-timed joke. (A voice : Yes ; let the dead rest.) But they
must bear in mind that the Pastor was not an Englishman, but a French-
man ; and he was therefore not sufficiently acquainted with the English
language to fully understand the force of the words he might use. That
was certainly a mitigating circumstance. That to which he ■was referring
was the only violation of good taste which he noticed committed by the
Pastor. Ho (Mr. Barnard) very much regretted that all the people who
■were present would not join in listening to the Pastor, when they would
have an opportunity of refuting anything he might say. (Great applause
—which was the sig'nal for the renewal of the disturbance.)
After an interval,Mr. Cronley ironically remarked that the defence made
for the Pastor was, that in consequence of the bad language used by him.


he made a mistake, and said happily the Bishop died in Ireland. An en-
deavour was again made to proceed with the meeting, but it proved unsuc-
cessful, and Mr. Webster alluded to the want of honour shown by those
who had agreed to abide by the decision of Mr. Barnard. Mr. Webster also
stated that he had asked the Pastor plainly whether, in his allusion the
previous evening to the death of the Bishop, he had meant an insult; and
Pastor Chiniquy expressed his regret that such an interpretation should
have been placed upon what he said, and denied having used the words
with the intention of giving offence. They were therefore bound to accept
the Poster's denial. One of the malcontents then ejaculated : “If you
don’t mind we will buy Chiniquy back again.” Mr. Fay again rose, and
said that if any attempt was made to proceed with the meeting, it would
result in further disturbance taking place. They would not hear Chiniquy.
(Voice : “ Chuck Fay out,” and general uproar.) After the noise had again
subsided, Mr. Webster said he should like exceedingly, for his own sake, to
know the truth of the statements which had been made by Pastor Chiniquy
and he begged the band of dissatisfied persons to get some of their religious
superiors or guides to make the matter plain on their behalf, so that those
who entertain a different opinion should be enabled to realise the true state
of affairs. (Applause and disturbance.) Mr. Fay said if the meeting were
carried on, a large body of Catholics would feel insulted, more disturbance
would take place, and the Catholics would uphold their religion with the
last drop of their blood. Further interruption having ensued, Mr. Fay
again spoke, remarking that a large portion of the Catholic community had
assisted in the cost of the erection of that hall, and he appealed in the
name of the Queen to those present not to allow the meeting to proceed.
Mr. Webster pointed out that a committee had hired the hall, and were
therefore entitled to the use of it. It was unfair that the opposition ten-
dered by a small minority should prevent the hall being used for the pur-
pose for which it was hired. Mr. Fay said they would not allow any one to
preach there who had insulted their fathers, mothers, and clergy. (A voice :
“ and also insulted our sisters.”)
After some more time had been taken up by a repetition of the unseemly
proceedings which had taken place throughout the evening, Mr. Cope said
that the line of conduct pursued by those who attended the meeting for
the purpose of preventing the Pastor from speaking, would prove to be the
worst thing for them and the best, in one sense of the word, for those who
were debarred from hearing the Pastor. As chairman of the meeting, he
also felt it to be his duty to call upon the police to do their duty, and to
secure order. (Great applause, followed by interruption by the malcon-
tents.) It was incumbent upon him as chairman to call upon the police,
in the name of Her Majesty the Queen, to restore order. A hubbub again
took place, during which remarks were made concerning the police, which
were understood to indicate that the police were too careful of their own
personal safety to interfere. One of the obstructives remarked that Pastor
Chiniquy would be delighted to have all the colonists fighting, and he
would then clear out, taking care to pocket all the money he could. Mr.
Butchers said Pastor Chiniquy- was a poor man to-day for leaving the
Church of Rome. (A voice : “He got £350 at Launceston.”) The Pastor
had not received a penny in the Australian colonies, as the money collected
had been paid into the hands of a committee, and by them transmitted
direct to Canada. Eventually it was resolved, on the motion of Mr. Scott,
seconded by Mr. Napier, that all legitimate means, inclusive of an appeal to
the police, having been resorted to, and failed to enable the meeting to be
carried on. that it be dismissed. After the lapse of about ten minutes,
during which the rowdies sang, or attempted to sing the National Anthem,
■“John Brown,” and “We won’t go home till morning,” the audience
gradually dispersed at about half-past 9.
A number of the sympathisers of Pastor Chiniquy, amongst whom were
several representative colonists, then repaired to a room at the back of the
organ, with a view to devise means for preventing any interruption at the
meeting to be held next evening. A protest was entered against the dis-
graceful proceedings which had taken place in the Town Hall, and various
suggestions having been made and discussed, a committee was eventually


formed to wait upon His Worship the Mayor, at noon next day, with a view
to providing against a recurrence of the annoyance and interruption ex-
perienced that evening. It was also arranged that the subject of the
lecture to be delivered next evening should be the same as that announced
for the previous night, viz., “ Liberty of Conscience.” The Catholics also
made preparations for a determined resistance, and, as could be seen by our
advertising columns, a meeting of Catholic ratepayers was convened by
Fay to take place at the steps of the Town Hall next evening, a short time
before the doors would be opened for the lecture. Everything betokened
that a fierce contest would ensue, especially when the masterly inactivity
of the police was considered. A more helpless display of cowardice, imbe-
cility, and ignorance of duty, was never manifested on the part of the
police of Hobart Town, and that is saying a great deal. The ringleaders in
the disturbance were few in number, and the exercise of a little firm deter-
mination on the part of the dozen constables present would have maintained
peace without the necessity of an arrest. But the presence of the police,
and their inactivity, though jostled by the rowdies, countenanced distur-
bance rather than repressed it ; and when Superintendent Propsting pub-
licly declined interference, he admitted that the police were present where
they were useless, while, to allow them to be present, the city was left un-
protected. But it was evident that if Mr. Propsting knew his duty, the
men under him were ignorant of theirs. They were helpless spectators of
a disgraceful row, because he either did not know or would not do his duty.
The feeling on this head began to be very strong, and has since found
expression in a practical form.
WEDNESDAY, June 25, 1879
THE RIOTERS STILL VICTORIOUS.
The great topic of conversation in the city during the day was the
riotous proceedings at the Town Hall on the previous night, and the pros-
pect of a still more serious disturbance in the evening. Humours of a
most exaggerated character obtained circulation. That a large body of the
rural police were to be called in to assist in maintaining order ; that the
Roman Catholics had made arrangements to bring a number of Irishmen
from Launceston, Oatlands, and Huon ; that the Government intended
to order out the Artillery and Rifle Regiment; and that a most sanguinary
battle would take place, were statements which passed from mouth to mouth,
and created a sensation greater than had been realised here for a long time.
It is needless to say that great difference of opinion prevailed concerning the
entire proceedings in connection with the Chiniquy mission. Even Pro-
testants did not hesitate to declare that the Pastor had no right to intrude
into peaceful communities and arouse religious animosities, ; and there
was strong opinion that, at all events, he should have delivered his lectures
in Protestant churches, instead of using the Town Hall. On the other
hand, there were few citizens who did not condemn the disturbances of
Tuesday and last night ; and hold that it was monstrous that a few excited
individuals, backed up by a lot of larrikins, should have the power, without
scarcely any interposition on the part of the police, to prevent a large and
respectable audience from holding a public meeting and hearing a lecture.
It was to this point which the whole affair had now converged. It was
felt that if law and order could not be maintained, then it is quite time
there should be some alteration and improvements in the means that are
taken to maintain them. As the account below shows, there was no violent
disturbance at night. There was an immense crowd opposite the Town
Hall between seven and eight o’clock ; and the presence of a compact body
of men, with short and dangerous-looking sticks, which they whirled over
their heads with great vigour, as they cheered “ Quid Ireland ” and hooted
Chiniquy, was quite sufficient to demonstrate that had they met with much
opposition they would not have hesitated at using violence. But fortu-
nately the disturbance was confined to shouting and singing, except when
there was a rush into the Hall, and when it was known that the idea of
the Pastor lecturing that night had been abandoned, the crowd gradually
dispersed. It was, however, realised that as the Pastor’s friends were


determined that he should lecture in the Town Hall, the danger of a
serious riot had not passed, unless the rioters were convinced of the impro-
priety of their conduct, or were overawed by a demonstration of law and
order.
DEPUTATION TO THE MAYOR.
In connection with the disturbance at the Town Hall on Tuesday night
regarding Pastor Chiniquy’s lecture, a large and influential deputation
waited on the Mayor at noon. The deputation comprised Mr. T. T. Watt
(Chairman,) Collector of Customs ; Revs. R. Maclaren Webster, J. Scott,
B. Butchers, J. Cope, J. Cole ; J. Rothwell (deputy sheriff); and Messrs.
Hanson, Bobbie, McPherson, Mullen, Proctor, Marshall, and Ferguson. By
request of the Mayor, Alderman Watch orn and Addison (members of the
Police Committee) were present.
Mr. Watt introduced the deputation, which had been appointed at a
meeting - held after the disturbance at the Hall on the previous evening.
He said they had come to ask His Worship to devise means by which the -
committee, who had taken the Town Hall, could secure a peaceful and quiet
hearing of Pastor Chiniquy’s lectures in the building. It was the desire of
the deputation that everything should be done with the greatest order and
peace. At the same time he thought they were bound to see that they
were not trampled down by any mob in the Town Hall which had been
taken for a special purpose. The deputation came there to put the matter
before His Worship as the guardian of the public peace, as the Chief Magis-
trate of the city, to whom they owed all respect. He now left the matter
with the committee to more fully detail the disturbance which had taken
place, with the reiterated desire which he expressed on their behalf to act
with peace and order as law-abiding citizens.
The Mayor said he would be glad to hear what any other member of
the deputation had to say.
Mr. Cope, the Chairman of the meeting referred to, being called upon to
speak, said he thought the account furnished to them in the Mercury would
apprise His Worship and every one else of the character of the meeting,
and of the repeated efforts that the clergy made to obtain something like a
peaceable hearing, but which were made altogether in vain. So far as he
was able to gather of the feeling of those who desired to hear the Pastor
on that occasion, he thought it was this —that they sought to avoid any
recourse to measures that might be characterised as violent. (Hear, hear.)
He thought, however, that he could say that they were generally very deter-
mined upon maintaining their rights as English subjects, but when it was
not necessary to have recourse to means of that kind, they did not by any
means like to have such recourse. They would not let their privileges go
altogether, but in defence of them would, in the first instance, apply to
such means as it was possible to use in order to ensure in the ordinary way
a peaceful hearing for the Pastor who had come into the midst of them.
He, for one, had on the previous evening felt humiliated as a citizen of
Hobart Town at the scene displayed. He had never, in his life, witnessed
anything more disorderly. Not even in the midst of excitable political
gatherings in England, or anywhere else, had he seen anything worse than
what he had witnessed on that occasion. As to attempting to control the
rioters in the ordinary way, it was simply out of the question. The police
were called upon in the name of the Queen, but they might as well have
called upon so many dummies. He did not pretend to be acquainted with
the duties of the police, and the laws which applied to the force, but it
appeared to him that there was some very strange conduct on the part of
the constables present, for they might as well have had no policemen there
as the seven or eight who were present. They were just simply no use.
(Hear, hear.) No, he did not know whether they >vere worse than that.
(Hear, hear.) He thought, pei-haps, that if they had not been there at all,
other people would have taken the matter in hand with determination.
(Hear, hear.) As the Chief Magistrate in the city, the deputation had a
right to look to him in this ca-e for the exercise of any power or authority
which he had in the matter, so as to ensure the keeping of order, as they
so much desired. (Applause.)


The Rev. J. Scott would like to call the attention of the Mayor and
Aldermen present to the fact that Pastor Chiniquy was a distinguished
member of a large and important church in Canada. Through failing
health he was making a visit to the Australian colonies, and while here, in-
asmuch as his fame was world-wide, was carrying on what the deputation
as Christian Protestants believe to be a great and good work. They thought
they were perfectly justified in publicly listening to his instructions and
lectures. Well, the first evening, Monday evening, he, Mr. Scott, being
present at the lecture, was surprised that three individuals, at the most,
should have been allowed, with nearly double the number of policemen
present, to have made such an exhibition of disorder as they did. On
Tuesday night a much larger number of disturbers assembled, apparently
thoroughly organised, but still small comparatively in number. There was
a large police force present; he thought considerably more than Mr. Cope
had indicated. But no efforts were made by the police to deal with the
disturbers. No efforts were made to preserve the slightest order. He might
say that he was deputed from the platform to see the Superintendent of
Police, who was present, and he appealed to him to use some little exertion
to secure order. He (Mr. Scott) believed that the slighteat display of firm-
ness on the part of the Superintendent would have turned everything.
(Hear, hear.) But the officer in the coolest manner replied he was doing
his duty—they wished to be instructed on that point—and said he would
not interfere. (Hear, hear.) And he did not interfere. Scenes of violence
were witnessed ; sticks were raised, and gentlemen of position, magistrates,
and others were violently assulted in the Hall, and blood was even drawn,
but the police did not disperse the rioters. It was with great control and
patience, and a firm determination not to precipitate a conflict that held
back the large body of gentlemen who desired the meeting to go on, from
resorting to violence. They now appealed to His Worship to uphold their
rights—their right to assemble lawfully in a meeting designed for nothing
else but their instruction and edification. They thought they could appeal
to their past career in the community as an indication that they did not
desire strife ; but they desired freedom. Unfortunately, no doubt, religious
questions did, under some circumstances, evoke undue warmth of feeling, but
they were particularly anxious that nothing should be said, and he thought
nothing had been publicly said by the Pastor to wound any one's feelings.
The kindest terms had been used by the Pastor in all his addresses. Of
course facts were necessarily dealt with, and if the facts were offensive,
that was bad for the facts. The statements, if not true, could be disproved ;
but it was one of the privileges which they enjoyed that they should be
dealt with by arguments, and not by sticks. (Hear, hear) He very
heartily joined in the request which had been made to secure, if possible,
the protection of their rights as Christian citizens. (Applause.)
Mr. Napier described the disturbance which had taken place, and his
unavailing efforts to persuade the disturbers to be quiet, also the
inactivity of the police. He knew most of the rioters and hoped that
they would listen to him, but they would not desist. He spoke to the
police, but they said, “We can do nothing, even if there were fifty of us
we can do nothing.” He complained that there were only five or six
police in the Hall, instead of a large number, as on Monday evening. He
asked that a message should be sent to the Mayor, concerning the row,
believing it would prove more effectual if officially conveyed, but he was
refused. The police were quite apathetic, and merely said the blame for
the disturbance rested somewhere else, meaning the City Council, as he
.(Mr. Napier) believed.
Mr. Johnson reminded the Mayor how he had gone to see him during
the disturbance. His Worship was engaged at the time, but he was good
enough to send a message to the police head-quarters, summoning more
assistance, taking for granted that a sufficient force would be sent down to
•quell the noise. The reinforcement sent, however, had not the slightest
effect, for there was just as much disorder after the additional police
arrived as previously. It seemed, indeed, as if it would have been better
to have had no constables there at all: for the police not being for order.


were against it. The tumult did not arise from any unpleasant expres-
sions from the Pastor’s discourse, for the confusion began immediately
upon the election of the chairman, showing that it was a planned affair
right through.
The Rev. Mr. Webster was of opinion that the police must have acted
under orders. It was impossible to come to any other opinion. When he
called upon them to exert their authority they refused to do anything.
They allowed the disturbers to go on as they pleased.
Mr. McPherson said the police never moved when called upon by the
chairman in the name of the Queen; they never seemed to take any notice..
In fact, some of them were egging on the people to create the disturbance.
The ratepayers paid the police, and they were entitled to the protection of
the police. But they were useless ; he meant to say that they were mere
lumber in the way. They ought to have cleared the room of those who
caused the disturbance, or have kept order. The Superintendent should
have warned the people to keep quiet, or they would be arrested, and have
carried out his duty. But as it was, the citizens were quite unprotected,
so much so, that they might as well be without a police force as with it.
Of course a£s note would blind a good deal at the time. (Alderman
Watchorn : Order, order.) He was saying nothing he could not prove.
Mr Webster said if only the Mayor would promise to be present that
evening, his presence would be a guarantee of order. (Hear, hear.) A
collision might be prevented, although the other meeting which was called
rested entirely with the authorities. They had nothing to say about that
meeting, but they meant, if possible, to avoid coming into collision with it,
by entering the hall by the side door instead of the front door. They
would go round rather than come into collision with the opposite party,
and would carefully exclude anyone who was likely to make a disturbance
—those, for instance, who had done so on the previous evening. As far
as possible, they would do everything to prevent disorder, and it would be
very conducive to order if the Mayor would be present at the meeting,
even at its opening.
Mr. McPherson was of opinion that a Mayor was bound to be present
at every public meeting in the Town Hall during his mayoralty. (No,
no.) He might be i-ight or he might be wrong, but he thought it would
be an act of courtesy for the Mayor to be present.
Mr. Hanson characterised the presence of the police at the meeting as
a burlesque upon protection. It was quite a farce. He hoped the Mayor
would guarantee that Protestant police protection would be afforded that
night, if any were ganted at all.
Mr. Watt was perfectly satisfied that the whole of the disturbance
would have been quieted in five minutes if the Superintendent of the Police
had spoken to his men. No doubt of it. (Hear, hear.) But the Superin-
tendent leaned against the wall and looked on carelessly. 1 n fact, the presence
of the police incited the mob, for the police were there to watch that the Pro-
testants did not commit an assault upon the mob. That was his belief. (A
member: They were the cause of the row.) The Superintendent of the Police
was the whole and sole cause of the row. (Hear, hear.) He refused even to
speak. He would not advise. He would not speak to check the violence of the
mob. Had he spoken to the violent few, they would have been quelled,
but he refused to do so. Had he shown a firm disposition with the mob,
the civilians would have supported him.
Mr. Hanson said several of the poliemen seemed to be enjoying the
position as a rich treat. He noticed them doing so, as often as he looked
at them. They seemed so happy he was going to ask them to take a chair.
(Mr. McPhert-on: The Superintendent.)
Mr. Butchers said the streng h of the appeal of the deputation lay
in the fact that they and their friends had refrained from resorting to
physical force. From the preponderance of their numbers, and the spirit
which was manifested, he was perfectly justified in saying that they could
have organised a band of men who could have expelled the rioters, police
and all, through the back door, in a short time. But the feeling was


against using physical force, and every means of suasion was tried to
■obtain a hearing, or the departure of the disturbers. They were still in-
disposed to use physical force; but they felt they had a right to legal
protection as citizens, and they had therefore come as law-abiding subjects
to the properly constituted authorities seeking protection. The protection
had been manifestly inadequate on Tuesday night; they asked that it
should be adequate that (Wednesday) evening. They were informed
from various quarter's that an attempt was to be made on a very much
larger scale to take possession of the Town Hall. They felt fully assured that
unless some protection was afforded there might be bloodsheld, lor which
they were not responsible. They, in asking for protection, desired to be
absolved, in the event of bloodshed, from the responsibility.
The Mayor said, having heard the deputation, he wished to say that he
had listened with feelings of deep pain and regret to what had been stated
to him. He exceedingly regretted that during his term of office such a
scene as that described to him by the deputation and the Mercury of that
morning should have occurred. Whilst according the very greatest and
fullest liberty of conscience and religious opinion to every one, he thought
that it was right they should all respect the religious feelings to one
another. For his part, he did not beleive in any one creed or another; he
quietly stopped away from hearing it promulgated, and he just as sincerely
respected those who paid attention to their religious views, though they
differed from his own, as if they belonged to his own faith. He only asked
that the same freedom of conscience should be extended to him. Such, he
presumed, was the position the deputation took up that day. (Hear, hear.
“Decidedly.”) With reference to the police protection which had been
asked for, he would promise them that the request should at once
receive consideration, and for that purpose he had asked the members of
the Police Committee to be present. The matter would promptly have
the fullest and best attention —more on that point he would not say. He
could not refrain, however, from referring to one or two points dwelt
upon by the deputation, particularly to the references made to the police
by Mr. Webster and Mr. Johnson. When Mr. Johnson called upon him
on the previous evening, he had, of course, no idea that the disturbance
was anything such as had been described that morning in the paper, and
by the members of the deputation. As Mr. Johnson had stated, he
immediately sent for the officer in charge of the police at the Town Hall,
and also sent a peremptory message to the Superintendent to go at once
to the hall. [Mr. Johnson; You sent the messenger in a cab to save
time. ) Within a few minutes after the sergeant arrived from the hall,
and made the report —for which he would hold him responsible —that
everything was then quiet.(“ Oh, oh,” and various incredulous explana-
tions.) Hearing nothing more of the affair, he (the Mayor) naturally
imagined that whatever disturbance had occurred was then over, and,
trusting to the Superintendent being in the hall, he thought matters were
then going on quietly. He could not but express his deepest regret that
such disorder should have taken place ; but he was quite sure that, after
the explanation he had made, the deputation would hold him perfectly
vindicated in connection with the disgraceful affair. (Hear, hear.) He
could not say any more, but repeated his assurance that the grave subject
of the interview would have the fullest deliberation.
The Rev. Mr Wrbsteh; Will the Mayor give us any hope of his pre-
sence at the Town Hall this evening ?
The Rev. J. Scott : I don’t think I would press that.
The Mayor ; I don’t think it is fair to press it. It is unwise for you
to ask it, or to press it.
Mr. Hanson wished to know whether the Mayor could give a definite
answer to the deputation after he had consulted with the Police Coni-
n', i tee ?
The Mayor : Really, Ido not know what answer I can give. If the
deputation do not feel inclined to leave it to us—(Yes, yes.)
Mr. Watt asked for protection for the Pastor and for the clergy who


co-operated with him As for himself, he was able to protect himself.
-He only asked for protection for the rev. gentlemen.
The Mayor : In the position in which I am, lam bound to do that to
every man, irrespective of creed.
°n the motion of Mr. Watt, a vote of thanks was accorded to the
tten°withdrew OOUrte ° US reCeptlon he had S iven to the deputation, which
COMMITTEE MEETING.
The deputation then held a committee meeting. Mr Watt took the
itl I V and measur * s u of defence in case of again meeting with resistance
were discussed. Ihe committee were determined to assert the right of
free speech. They were not to be defeated. If the police were not strong
ICm f VeS “T, 1 - strong enough - Several P lails wer e
suggested, the most acceptable being a proposal to guard the side door
by which a select audience should enter, and keep the main door closed!
The gaudier doors would be easier defended, and not offer so much oppor-
tumty for a successful rush. No tickets would be sold, and the audi nee
would be passed individually by a committee, who would exclude all
suspicious persons. A quiet meeting would thus be secured. Suggestions
were made to have special constables sworn in. A rev. gentleman said
he had been promised the assistance of 200 young men if necessary. Let
a meeting of Protestants be called at 4 o’clock to enrol names in case of
the police again proving futile. The committee were met by a regular
organisation, let them organise also. If the Council fail to protect them
they must be prepared to protect themselves, and protect the pastor on
his return home. A committee, consisting of Eev. B. Butchers and Messrs
Napier, Hanson, and McPherson were elected to carry out the arrano-e-
-sitiorf ol ' meeting, so that it might be carried on against any oppo-
CITY COUNCIL.
A special meeting of tbe City Council was called by the Mayor on Wed-
nesday afternoon, at which he represented to the Aldermen the course
that had been taken by the deputation at an earlier hour, and his reply
Ihe Council endorsed the steps he had taken. A meetino- of the Police"
Committee was also held, and instructions were issued for a letter to be
written to Mr. Pay, informing him that no meeting would be allowed to
take place on the Town Hall steps, as advertised. This letter was accor-
dingly despatched. Instructions were also issued that, in case any
attempts were made to create a disturbance at the meetino-, the police
should do their duty by ejecting the disturbers, without respect of persons
the law advisers of the Council having given it as their opinion that the
police had authority to do so.
THE PROCEEDING AT NIGHT.
OUTSIDE THE HALL.
Outside the Hall from about six o’clock, when a crowd beo-an to
assemble, the scene was one of an extraordinary character. The°crowd
was very small at first, and stood about in groups, the one absorbing topic
occupying all the tongues. The front door of the hall was locked, and
the broad steps in front were occupied by a detachment of police under
bub-inspector M’Connell. The men were fourteen in number, and the
bub-inspector, having received instructions from the Council to keep the
steps clear, they succeeded in effecting this with some dififculty. The
door at the Library was only half-open, and was guarded by Messrs. Watt
Napier, and Bateman, who allowed no one who was not beyond suspicion
to pass them. The crowd was quiet at this time, being in reality princi-
paliy composed of sightseers, and not those most concerned in the dispute.
Hr. L. Swarbreck Hall—(a long letter from whom had appeared in the
Mercury ihQ next morning, commenting adversely on the Pastor, but
deprecating the violent action of the roiters)—took up a position near the
steps, his object deing, as he said, to take a part in the meetino- if the
promoters succeeded in holding it—his part being, however, to tryto per-


suade the Catholics to disperse quietly, and to adjourn to St. Peter’s Hall
to discuss the matter among themselves. About seven, o’clock a diversion
was created by the rush of the evening, which proved irresistible, because
it was early and unexpected, and no special means had been taken to pre-
vent it. The police were, indeed, with masterly strategy posted at the
closed front door, while the open portal of the library was the weakest
point in the armour, and, as it proved, a gift to the enemy. At seven
o’clock the party of Catholics who had made themselves so prominent in
the hall on the previous evening, marched to the building in a body, mar-
shalled by Mr. Coyle, a baker at Sandy Bay. They were in a compact
array, and were received with some cheering by the crowd, to which they
responded, and apparently remained quiet for a short time. They were,
however, moving silently in a body towards the library door, and on
reaching it the door at once flew open, the custodians were flung back,
espionage was at an end, and the malcontents of the previous evening, with
many others, poured through the little hall, and up the library stairs, in
a tumultuous and noisy stream. Constable Scully, who was stationed on
the stairs, was nearly meeting with a very severe accident, as he was
forced up against the banisters, and nearly fell over, being only saved by
Mr. Molloy, who caught him by his coat. The mob outside continued to
increase until the roads and pathways were one dense mass of people, and
the police having left the Town Hall steps, they were also crowded, and
became the centre of attraction. His Worship the Mayor made his way
through the crowd, and from the steps begged them in the name of the
Queen to desist, and to disperse quietly. Dr. Hall also addressed the
crowd, speaking especially to those of his own religion, and telling them
that violence was not a proper means to adopt to put down this man who
was preaching against them. He said that violence was not a means that
the Catholic Church dared adopt. He had sent a letter to the Mercury
upon the subject, and to that effect, and it would be published in next
mornino-’s paper if there was no disorder, but if there was disorder it
would not be allowed to appear. He bad also arranged with the Mayor
to receive a deputation of Catholics next day at two o’clock with regard to
holding a public meeting on the question, whether the Town Hall should
be letter this purpose. The Mayor, speaking again, said that he had
seen Mr. Fay, and had told him the meeting of Catholics he had called
upon the Town Hall steps at a quarter to seven o’clock was illegal, and
accordingly Fay had promised to do all he could to prevent it being held.
The crowd heard the speeches quietly and good humouredly, only inter-
rupting them by cheers and counter cheers, and banter of a very forcible,
but still good-natured character. The assemblage outside must have
numbered from 4,000 to 5,000 people, among whom were many women,
though the outskirts of the crowd was chiefly the scene of their
presence. About eight o’clock, when the lights in the hall were turned
out the struggling on the steps was intense, as the doors had been opened
for'a short sime to give egress to the people after the meeting was
declared at an end. The doors were closed again, and a considerable
section of the crowd took to perambulating the town. Fay, and others of
the disaffected had at an earlier part of the evening, after the rush at the
library, tried to get into the hall by a back way, but failed to gain admis-
sion, and were warned off the premises by the police. The peripatetic
parties visited the Mayor’s house, honouring him with a good deal of
cheering, and, at the Chalmers Church and the houses of the Rev. Messrs.
Webster and Butcher, the demonstration took the form of volleys of groans,
and calls for ‘-Chiniquy'’ to come out and talk to them. Up till ten
o’clock the streets, especially near the Town Hall, were cr nvded by an
excited mob, whose object, however, having subsided, their passions also
soothed down.
INSIDE THE HALE.
There was a feeling of fancied security within the hall, which was early
lighted up. The main door, stairs, and inner door were carefully and
strongly guarded. The hall was rapidly filling with respectable people.


although it was three-quarters of d’a hour before the time of commencing.
Many ladies, chaperoned by male friends, had come, and were mostly
seated on the platform. Wild shouts as of baffled rage sounded from
below, but soon a heavy crash and quick rush were heard. The persons
who led the disturbance on the previous evening had rushed the side doors
of the building in the street, ascended the library stairs, and were falling
furiously upon the door of the ante-room like a powerful battering-ram.
The door soon burst open under the infuriated strokes; the panels had been
broken, the lock snapped, and there poured into the hall a savage mob
with a wild yell of exultation —lawless violence had triumphed. They
broke into the hall fiercely, menacing and flourishing murderous-looking
sticks, and formed a solid phalanx in the corner they had occupied on the
previous occasion. They came on so suddenly and unexpectedly that the
coup de main was complete. It was unresisted; it was startling—so
abruptly had it come, that the assailants had fairly gained the hall before
a move was made to check them. Then a general rush was made towards
the intruders by the gentlemen in the hall, who called on the police to
help them, but not a hand was lifted —not a man was touched. The
forms were cleared, prep iratory to the forcible ejection of the gang, who
threatened an active resistance. Peaceful measures were first tried. Mr.
Bateman sought to persuade the mob to retire. Next, the Eev. B.
Butchers entreated them to go peaceably away. The hall, he said, was
private ; no charge was made for admission, therefore the promoters had
a right to choose their audience. Those who forced an entrance must
leave, or take the consequences. A chorus :“ We will take the conse-
quences.” Mr. Butchers: “ The Superintendent of Police has been told
that the hall must be cleared. We leave the police to do their duty.” A
voice: “ You won’t get us out; you will have to quarter us first.”
Superintendent Propsting here came forward, and. taking off his hat,
kindly, if not tenderly, begged the crowd to disperse. Would they give
him a hearing? (“Yes, yes,” and cheers for the Superintendent.) The
Superintendent said that was a public meeting, and those present could
exercise the right of choice whether they would go out or remain in. If
they remained there they would have to be quiet; and if they would not
be quiet, would they have the kindness to retire ? He did not want to do
anything unpleasant. He was a peaceable man, and did not like harsh
measures. But he had received orders from the Council to keep order,
and as a personal favour, would they allow him to do so. He had known
them for years ; thfcy were old friends of his; he loved them all—(cheers
and laughter)—would they be orderly ? (A. voice : As long as we are not
insulted.) The gentlemen on the platform would take care of that. Only
let them give fair play. For his sake let them do so. (A voice: “For
your sake we will be quiet as long as we can. ) Mr. O’Shea, who ap-
peared to be the ringleader of the intruders, said ho would keep order as
far as he could, since the Superintendent had asked it. Let them go on
with the meeting. He called ,for cheers for the Superintendent, which
was heartily responded to by Mr. O’Shea’s following. The committee at
this stage held an impromptu meeting at the grand staircase, to consider
the position. Various opinions were expressed as to whether it would be
advisable to produce the Pastor on the platform to deliver his lecture,
considering that the malcontents were present in the hall. Ihe general
opinion seemed to be that it would not be safe to do so. At the request
of the committee, the Superintendent of Police attended before them, and
Mr. Webster asked him if he would go to the men again and see if he
could induce them to withdraw from the hall. Mr. Propsting replied
that he would be glad to do anything the committee desired, but that the
men had already promised him to be quiet at the meeting if they were not
insulted. Mr Scott asked him if he could not by the influence and display
of his authority in a legal way, get them out of the hall, into which they
had forced their presence, as the meeting could not be'held unless they
went away. Mr. Webster said that if they wc uld not go. their names
should be taken down as far as was possible. His fronds felt they could
not ask the Pastor to go on that night. Mr. Webster and the rest of the


committee, with the Superintendent, then re-entered the hall, and climbed
over the forms to the Irish corner. Mr. Webster addressed the malcon-
tents. He would himself place trust in their promise to be quiet, but the
other friends did not feel justified in asking the Pastor to appear while
they remained. He therefore asked them to retire, and let the meeting be
held. He would himself trust in their word, but a large body of the
committee thought differently, and so the matter was carried the other
way. Mr. Propsting then, in conciliatory tones, asked the men to retire,
if only out of the respect they had for him (a burst of applause), and for
the long time they had all known each other. It only wanted a few to
begin, and to say, “ Lads we’ll go,” and they would all go, and leave the
rest of the people in peace. Mr. O’Shea, to whom Mr Propsting addressed
himself as one of the foremost of the body, seemed inclined to give way,
and Mr. Propsting drew him aside, and began to argue with him and Mr;
Gleeson privately. A voice called out, “We won’t go because one man
gives way. Get the opinion of the majority of the Catholics.” Mr. John
Gleeson, addressing Mr. Webster, said they had come to kick up no row
unless they were insulted. The dispute then became conversational.
Renewed and patient efforts were made by Mr. Webster and Mr. Scott
in the interest of law and order, and these gentlemen, by personal converse,
tried to pacify the disturbers. They were listened to civilly, but the mob
was implacable. They would not stand by and allow the Pastor to vilify
their wives, mothers, and sisters, as they said he had done by word of
mouth and in his publications. It was not in flesh and blood to stand it.
Why did not the Pastor stop away P They were at peace before he
came, but he had set them all fighting. He nad “ brought the divil on
his back.” (Laughter.) As for the meeting being private, it had been
advertised at sixpence per head admission, which they had offered to pay.
As it was not taken they had come in, and they meant to stop there. To refuse
admission now was said, in effect, to be a transparent device of the enemy,
which could not hoodwink them. The hall ought never to have been let
to throw a firebrand into their midst. The hall was the common property
of the citizens ; they all paid taxes to build and maintain it; and the
Catholics were not going to hear their religion attacked in it. Let the
Pastor go to a church, if he must speak. Such was the stand taken by the
mob, and all efforts to induce them to vacate the hall were met by replies,
the same in substance as the above, in one form or another. The Pastor
did not appear at all. It was understood that he was waiting somewhere
about the building. At last, after an hour and a half had been fruitlessly
spent in trying to quell the disorder, actual and prospective, Mr. Butchers
said he was very sorry, but the Pastor would not come down to meet them
that night. Immediately afterwards a motion was moved by Mr. Scott,
and seconded by Mr. Watt, that the meeting be declared dissolved.
Numbers did not vote for or against the resolution, and the hands held up
appeared to be pretty even on each side ; but the motion was declared
carried, to the openly-expressed disgust of the “noes,” -who thought they
were in a sufficient majority to make short work of trundling the mal-
contents out of the hall, and said so very plainly. The passing of the
resolution was the signal for victorious cheers from the turbulent Irishmen,
given in the name of the Queen. The National Anthem was sung, being
started by those on the platform. Three cheers for Ireland followed. Mr.
Josiah Watson, from the platform, scorned the action which had been
taken, as being an unworthy and degraded one, and damaging to the
interests of society. The Rev. W. 0. Robinson said the English law would
be found sufficient to secure their rights. He would say no more-
(Applause.)
The meeting then dispersed. The committee met and decided that
Pastor Chiniquy should not lecture to-night, and that due notice should be
given of his next lecture.
The disturbers marched out of the hall through the court-yard, forming
in procession, and shouting with glee at having put a stop to the meeting.


ROWDYISM TRIUMPHANT
The people of Hobart Town thus stood in the humiliating position of
having to feel conscious that a small body of riotously disposed persons,
disregarding the advice of the more prominent and respectable members
of their own body, and defying the authorities, had been able to carry to a
successful issue an evidently foregone conclusion to prevent a public
meeting being held, the purpose of which was obnoxious to them The
question at issue could not be limited any longer by anvone to the Wo
saownm letting the Town Hall toe the litnref. tL la^mttagh
the property of the city, was as much a speculation as was the erection of
Sd W it was first opened, been a source of revenue,
n o.io 11 b i 1 ? tf01 ’ t^ e v f no " s sorts of purposes to which such a building is
y -f PP h f/i, a “d n asto . r { Cill “w’ s lan goage acquired no more signi-
ficance if used there than if used in the humblest building in the city, nor
•could his remarks, if otherwise offensive, be a whit more so because used
in the public hall of the city, where ere now many a religious denomina-
tion and political body has been roundly abused. It was felc on all hands
that steps must he taken to uphold the law, and the hands of the Chiniquy
committee were consequently strengthened by the co-operation and advice
ot many who would otherwise have held aloof from them. No meeting
was announced for the following night. °
THURSDAY, June 2G, 1879,
_ PREPARATION FOR THE STRUGGLE.
This was a day of truce as regards the actual struggle, though it was
occupied in many schemes for the furtherance of their ends by both parties,
.though the city presented a peaceable appearance, there was a good deal
ot quiet excitement concerning the Chiniquy disturbances, and public feel-
mg n r w l &Vy i Hgk - , The Vlolent Proceedings of the mob, both on Tuesday
and W ednesday nights, were looked upon as a disgrace to the city, and
there was a very general and strong feeling, greatly intensified since
Wednesday, that prompt and vigorous measures were absolutely necessary
it tranqudiity was to be restored, and law and order maintained. No less
strong was the feeling that the Superintendent of Police had shown his
incapability to fulfil the duties devolving upon him. Had he taken a firm
stand on Tuesday night, the tumult then would have been quelled, and the
subsequent/action of the Catholic mob, discountenanced by the respec-
table portion of that community, would have been more decorous and
peaceable m their future behaviour. We had all through these proceed-
ings carefully guarded ourselves against expressing any ooinion in our
columns on the theological aspect of the question. Put we had no hesita-
tion despite the misrepresentation, and almost threats, of certain supporters
of the violent opposition to Pastor Chiniquy, for this sort of argument
began to be used, in urging more moderate conduct on their part, and
discountenancing anything that must lead to a determined stand against
the mob law which ha 9» been triumphant this week. The law must be
r!] ; « a j lts mfractlon mus t bring down just punishment on the heads
of the offenders. The municipal authorities had so far shown themselves
incapable of grappling with the difficulty. The Mayor has been placed in
an awkward position. The City Council at first trusted probably to the
disturbance blowing ov r, and were unwilling to think that the lives and
property of the citizens were imperilled. The committee, however, waited
now on the Government, and the response they received was a promise of
support, backed up by action that showed they were in earnest. The
Council also took steps to prevent a disturbance, and the lovers of law and
order saw at last that there was a probability of their wishes beino- carried
out. °
DEPUTATION TO THE ACTING COLONIAL SECRETARY.
Pastor Chiniquy’s committee waited upon the Acting Colonial Secretary
(Hon. Vv. L ( rowther) in the morning, Mr. Reibey being absent from
town, and presented the following- memorial for protection, which had
been drawn up on the previous evening .- —


Hobart Town, June 25, 1879.
To tbe Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
Sir, —We have the honour to bring under your notice the following
facts: —
1. Pastor Chiniquy having visited Tasmania for the purpose of holding
public religious services, arrived in Hobart Town on Saturday last, the 21st
instant, via Launceston, where he had successfully held a series of such
services. . ....
2. On Sunday last, the 22nd instant, he began his ministrations in this-
city, and held, services on that day by preaching to crowded congregations
at Chalmers and the Wesleyan chuches respectively, with great acceptance.
3. The committee appointed to carry out arrangements in connection
with the Pastor’s visit, duly engaged the Town Hall of this city, for the
delivery by him ©f a series of lectures in furtherance of the object of hi&
visit. .
4. On Monday last, the first of such lectures was delivered in the hall,
during which attempts were made by a portion of the audience to create
a disturbance, with, we believe, a premeditated resolve to break up the
meeting and fustrate the delivery of the lectures, but ultimately peace
was restored, and the meeting, which was presided over by Dr. Nicholson,
was brought to a successful termination. •
5. Yesterday, the second of such meetings was commenced at the hall,
but immediately upon the nomination of the Rev. J. Cope as chairman,
the attempts of the previous evening were repeated, and increased to such
a degree, that the meeting had to be abandoned.
6. To-day a deputation from the committee, in order to prevent a
recurrence of such conduct, waited upon His Worship the Mayor, and
solicited him, as the Chief Magistrate of the city, to afford such police pro-
tection as might obviate the recurrence of such lawless conduct and gross
outrage as the meeting of yesterday night had been subjected to, and His
Worship was pleased to promise that such protection should be afforded.
7. This evening, however, before the appointed hour for holding the
meeting, a great body of men surrounded the hall, and ultimately effected
an entrance by breaking open the doors, and took possession of the hall,
and although every attempt was made to induce them either to leave or
conduct themselves orderly, the same proved utterly futile, so that the
proposed meeting had to be entirely abandoned, and this, too, although a
.body of police with their Superintendent were present.
8. The police force having thus proved ineffectual for securing that
order which is necessary for the conduct of such meetings, and since we
have a profound conviction that if such proceedings be allowed they will
be subversive of all law and the principles of a good Government, we have
no alternative but to appeal to you to direct that such police protection be
afforded as shall be sufficient for the prevention of violence and bloodshed
likely to arise if such lawless conduct be not restrained.
"We have therefore the honour to ask that you will be good enough to
instruct the Inspector of Police to make such awangenu nts as he may
deem necessary for the peaceable carrying on of future meetings.
We have the honour, &c.
(The memoral was signed by Messrs. William Fisher, Thos. T. Watt,
G A. Napier, G. T. Johnson, Ohas. Dowdell, Johnson Bros and Co., Alex.
McGregor, C. A. Piesse, Ikin (3), J. B. Mather, H. A. Mather, J. Both well,
and the Revs. R. Maclaren Webster, B. Butchers, James Scott, W. C.
Robinson, and D. B. Tinning, and also by twenty other per ous.)
The meeting was kept private, but, as a result, the following letter was
sent by the Acting Colonial Secretary to the Mayor during the day;
Colonial Secretary’s Office, June 26, 18/9.
His Worship the Mayor,
Sir, —I have the honour to forward for your perusal a letter from a
number of citizens referring to the late disorderly proceedings at 1 h town
Hall, and requesting that the Inspector of Police may be instructed “to
make such airangements ” as he may deem necessary lor the peaceful
carrying out of future meetings.


As the maintenance of public order within the city bounderies devolves
upon the Municipal authorities, in the first instance, L have to request
that you will be good enough to inform me whether you deem the powers
contained in the 41st section of the 29 Yic., No. 9, afford you the necessary
means to ensure the maintenance of the public peace, or whether you con-
sider it necessary to apply for the aid of the Inspector of Police, as pro-
vided for under the 25th section.
I have to request that you will favour me with your reply with as little
delay as possible. —I have the honour, &c.,
William Lodewyk Crowthee,
For the Colonial Secretary, absent.
THE USE OF THE TOWN HALL,
The citizens’ letter to the Acting Colonial Secretary was sent to the
Mayor, asking him whether he deemed the powers contained in the Act
referred to sufficient to ensure the maintenance of peace. The correspon-
dence was laid by the Mayor before the special meeting of the City Council
in the afternoon, and a resolution arrived at, that in the present excited
state of public feeling the Pastor’s committee should be asked to forego the
use of the hall. The Mayor and Aldermen Addison and Harcourt waited
upon a meeting of the committee, which was held privately, and preferred
the request. The committee, after deliberation, decided that they could
not, without serious injury, forego their right to the hall, and they must
assert the right of liberty of speech ; having tried forbearance, they were
now determined to stand upon their civil and legal rights.
CITY COUNCIL.
A special meeting of the City Council was held at half-past three o’clock
in the afternoon, at which there were present:—His Worship the Mayor
(Mr. W. H. Burgess), and Aldermen Addison, Daly, Espie, Harcourt,
Maher, Pike, and Wachorn.
The Mayor stated that the reason he had called that special meeting
that afternoon was more particularly to consider a letter which had been
received that afternoon from the Government, and also to lay before the
Council the views of a deputation which had just waited upon him in his
room, and at the reception of which most of the Aldermen were present.
It, of course, all arose out of the disorderly proceedings which had taken
place during the last few days. The deputation which waited upon him
was introduced by Mr. Henry Hunter and Dr. Hall, and was composed of
a large number of ratepayers, who attended to respectfully protest against
the further letting of the Town Hall to the committee who had already
paid for it and secured it for the lectures of Mr. Chiniquy. The matter
now rested with the Council, and it was for them to consider whether they
had the power, and also whether they would or would not rescind what had
been done with regard to the letting of the hall. It was for the conside-
ration of those questions, with a view to some determination being arrived
at, that he had called that special meeting. He would suggest that, first
of all, the letter from the Government be read and disposed of, and after-
wards that the views put forward by the deputation should receive con-
sideration.
The letter from the Government and the petition were then read, and the
Council at great length debated their position and their power to maintain
the peace of the city. At the conclusion of the discussion,
Alderman Addison moved that a reply be forwarded to the Government
to the effect that, with the powers under the Act 29, Yic., No. 9, the Council
respectfully submitted that they were prepared to maintain order. He
did not think it would be right to transfer the control of the police to the
Government.
Alderman Dally seconded the motion.
Alderman Harcourt said, respecting what had been stated by Alderman
Watchorn, with regard to the bursting open of the Town Hall doors, he
had been told that a greater demonstration could not have been made of
the incapacity of the police. (Hear, hear.) He moved, as an amendment
that the police*_be handed over to the Government to deal with this case.


Alderman Watchoen seconded the amendment.) _ _
The amendment was then put and negatived, when a division was
called for and taken, with the following result:—Ayes (3)—Aldermen
Harcourt, Watchorn, and Espie. Noes (4)—Aldermen Daly, Maher,
Addison, and Pike. . . , ,
The motion that this Council is prepared to maintain peace and order
was then put and carried. ,
In accordance with this resolution of the Council the following adver-
tisement was inserted in the next momilig’s papers : —ln furtherance ot
the maintenance of good order in the city of Hobart Town, with reference
to the late disorderly and unlawful proceedings at the Town Hall, tne
Mayor of Hobart Town, as Chief Magistrate of the City, calls upon persons
desirous of filling the offices of special constables (from the date or ap-
pointment, and until such time as their services will be no longer required)
to present themselves at the Town Hall this day (Friday), the 27th of June
instant, between the hours of 9 a.m and 2 pm,
W. H. Burgess, Mayor of the City of Hobart Town.
PROCEEDINGS OE THE CATHOLICS.
While the law and order party were actively concerting a plan of cam-
paign their opponents were not idle. In the evening a meeting ot Cat o-
licstook place in St. Joseph’s schoolroom, and much indignation prevailed.
The failure of the Catholic deputation to the Mayor to obtain a cancella-
tion of the Pastor’s engagement of the Town Hall had, together with the
embittering effect of the continuance of the struggle, intensified the feel-
ings of most of those present, and they were resolved to uphold the position
they had taken up, despite the remonstrances of several leading laymen ot
their own faith. A monster meeting in the Domain on the following
evening was determined upon, and the burning of the Pastor in effigy was
part of the programme for the occasion, while, to make a big and e ectiye
demonstration, it was decided to summon friends from the country to aid
the cause. The purpose of the meeting was not stated, but it was believed
that it was to form a rendezvous before (he assault on the Town Hall.
Late at night, however, the Bishop, who had been apparently inactive up
to this time, forbade the meeting by the following pastoral, inserted
n the next morning’s paper :
To the Catholics of Hobart Town. „
Seeing that your efforts to prevent the City Council letting the Town
Hall for the purposes to which it had been devoted during this week have
failed and being informed that further demonstrations on your part, in
that direction, will be resisted by the force of law leading probably to
rioting and bloodshed, I most earnestly request that you will have the
good sense to abstain from making any further attempts to vindicate, on
the present occasion, your rights as citizens and ratepayers, and to absent
yourselves from the precincts of the Town Hall this evening. yon y
object in thus appealing to you is to prevent injury to persons and pro-
perty, and to induce you to show your respect for yourselves as Catholics
and loyal citizens, ~ TT ,
Hobarton, June 27, 1879. Daniel Mtjephv, Bishop of Hobarton.
FRIDAY, June 27, 1879.
COLLAPSE OP THE RIOTING.
Friday broke with matters still undecided. The authorities were deter-
mined, and took steps to put down the law-breaking, whilst the action of
the Catholics was doubtful. Happily, at the last moment, they listened
to reason, and so the dreaded collision, with its bmodshed and possible loss
of life, was prevented. This gratifying result is, no doubt, attributable to
a larc-e extent to the commendable action taken by the bishop and clergy.
The latter, during the day, were busy persuading all < £ t , ] e “
flock with whom they came in contact not to go near the Town Ha, at
nio-ht; and the bishop, recognising the terrible results which were certain
to°follov a collision between his people and the defence force, and knowm g
the influence which he possessed, went to the meeting of Catholics in t e


Domain at six o’clock, and implored those assembled to disperse quietly,
and not commit any breach of the peace. Receiving no countenance
whatever, therefore, from their spiritual authorities, the men were, but
evidently unwillingly, mollified, and acted upon the good advice thus ten-
dered. The excitement, which was very great in the early part of the
evening, moderated as soon as the decision of the Catholics became known;
and the lecture, the second of the course, took place in the. Town Hall
without interruption.
MAIN LINE RAILWAY.
Amongst the many rumours flying about were some concerning the
Main Line Railway, and the action of the manager, and, for the purpose
of obtaining reliable information on the subject, a member of our staff
waited upon the manager, Mr. Grant, who, with his usual courtesy, wil-
lingly replied to all questions. He stated that Fay and Roper, two Homan
Catholics who have taken a very active part in the disturbances, had
waited on him on the previous morning, and asked whether he would
bring down a large , number of Roman Catholics from Launceston and
some of the roadside stations, and what he would charge to do so. He
replied that he would convey as many as they liked; that if they would
guarantee not less than ten persons from each of the stations named, he
would order the issue to them of return tickets at single fares, to last till
next day; and that if Messrs. Fay and Roper would give him a definite
answer before 3 o’clock, he would at once telegraph to the stationmasters
to provide for the additional passengers. Nothing farther, however, was
heard from the two men, up to 4 o’clock at least, so that the contemplated
arrangements for bringing reinforcements from the north, and other places
along the line, must have been abandoned. In reply to another question,
Mr Grant stated that he had not issued an order to the workmen on the
line to abstain from taking part in the disturbances; the men, he said,
could do as they liked; it was none of his business, for he was perfectly
neutral in the matter. He went even further than this, however. He
said that if any of the employes had asked him for permission to come to
Hobart Town, he should not have enquired what they were coming for,
but would have acceded to the request, and, in accordance with his usual
custom, give them free passes. Mr. Grant, in fact, seemed to think that
if he had assisted to bring several hundred Catholics to join in defying the
law, and creating tumult and disorder—perhaps even worse —no responsi-
bility or blame would rest upon him. It was, as he said, the object of the
company to make as much money as possible. How a gentleman of Mr.
Grant’s intelligence and position could hold such extraordinary views at
such a critical juncture was simply inexplicable. As the manager of a
company largely subsidised by the Government, it was his duty to have
shown a firm determination to resist any steps that were taken to use the
railway or its employes for the purpose of creating a breach of the peace.
Instead of that, he looked upon the matter from a monetary point of view,
and was quite prepared to have afforded special facilities for bringing the
whole Roman Catholic population from the North, though at the same
time knowing that the object of getting them here was to aggravate the
disturbances which had taken place.
SWEARING IN SPECIAL CONSTABLES.
The call by the Mayor for special constables in the papers was largely
responded to. A good deal of interest was excited, and the Town Hall
from an early hour presented groups of men eagerly discussing the appeal
which had been made, and the circumstances which led to it. The left-
hand committee-room of the hall was set apart for receiving applications,
and Mr. W. Mason, City Inspector, was placed in charge. Forms of
application and the oath to be subscribed were upon the table. In the
Mayor’s private parlour were Mr. Swan, Inspector of Police, and Aldermen
Addison, Seabrook, and Watchorn. Here the swearing-in took place.
There were plenty of applicants, and they were taken without the slighest
scrutiny or selection. Anyone who presented himself was received with-
out question or identification. The specials were mostly of the labouring


class, and some seemed to be of the genus loafer, who would hardly have
been given a character by the police. The swearing-in was done by
Alderman Addison, who, seeing the motley material before him, suggested
that the police should pass the applicants, but this was not done. The
enrolling went on from nine o’clock till two. Some noted Roman Catho-
lics came to see how things were going on, but they were verv orderly. At
two o’clock the “specials ” assembled by order at the Artillery I rill Yard.
Formed in line they did not seem a very promising defence force, there
being [among them many striplings, besides a number whoso honesty
of purpose was openly doubted, and their presence protested against. It
was seen that the enrolling had been badly managed, owing to no regard
being paid to the resolution of Pastor Chiniquy’s committee, that no man
should be enrolled who was not recommended* by a member of the com-
mittee. C.D. C. Quod ling inspected the force, and then dismissed them
until four o’clock, when they would receive their badges and batons. He
did this with a view of weeding out the specials under the supervision of
the committee. It was evident that Mr. Quodling was disappointed with
the class of men as a whole who had presented themsilv s, and did not
believe that many of them could be depended upon either for strength or
fidelity to quell any probable disturbance. Some of the most respectable
of the men told the inspector that they could not leave their work to
attend at the hour named, and it was arranged they should meet Mr.
Quodling at his office on leaving business. Another and more effectual
step had, however, been taken by the Mayor and Alderman Addison, under
the direction of Inspector Swan, who, throughout the day, was unremitting
in his zeal and attention as the adviser of his Worship as to the measures
to be taken in the present emergency. The roll of ratepayers was looked
over, and 150 citizens selected from it, who were immediately summoned
to serve as special constables by a form as follows:
"We, William Henry Burgess, Mayor of the city of Hobart Town, and
John Elliott Addison, one of the Aldermen of the said city, hereby give
you notice that, in accordance with the provisions of the 41st section of
The Police regulation Act, 1865, we have This Day bi precept under our
hands appointed you to act as a Special Constable from the date of appoint-
ment, and until such time as your services will no longer be required, for
the preservation of the Public Peac°, and for the protection of the inhabi-
tants, and the Security of Property within the Municipality of Hobart
Town. And we hereby require and summon you to attend before us, or
one of us, this day at the Town Hall, Hobart Town, at four o’clock in the
afternoon, for the purpose of taking the oath required by law in that
behalf. Herein Fail Not. Dated this 27th day of June, 1879.” (Staned
by the Mayor and Alderman J. E. Addison.)
The ratepayers served with the summons attended accordingly, and
were duly sworn in by Alderman Harcourt, in his Worship’s private room.
The form of oath used was the same as that taken by the members of the
regular police force, namely :
1 do swear that I will well and truly serve our Sovereign Lady the
Queen in the office of special constable for the City of Hobart Town, with-
out favour or affection, malice or ill-will; and that I will to the best of my
power cause the peace to be kept and preserved, and prevent ali offences
against persons and properties of her Majesty’s subjects ; and that, while
I continue to hold the said office, I will, to the best of my ability, skill,
and knowledge, discharge all the duties thereof faithfully according to law!
So help me God.”
At the half-past four o’clock muster in the Drill-shed 250 special con-
stables assembled. The city police and a large contingent of the rural
police marched on to the ground. Some delay occurred in getting the
lists of enrolments to call the roll of specials, but this was at last 'done.
Badges—a white band round the left arm—and constables’ batons were
issued to the force, which was compactly marshalled preparatory to the
defence of the Town Hall. The proceedings excited a good deal of interest
both at the Drill-yard and at the Town Hall, which throughout the day
was the scene of the liveliest activity. The specials, as well as the regu.


lar police, under the control of Mr. Superintendent Propsting, but
Inspector Swan and C D. C. Quodlmg took a far more prominent partin
making arrangements for the operations of the evening, although all three
officers had long private interviews with the Mayor upon this
subject. The force was marched in detachments to ‘the Town Hall
shortly after six o clock, where they were told off for service as
£ain b ?n n els ,® W ' iere ; aad ’ t T^ e . 11 lectu , re concluded, were marched back
gam in a body to the Drill-yard. Before the special constables
dispersed the Mayor thanked them, in the name of the Queen
for their ready response to the call to assist in maintaining law and order, and
intimate that those who wish to do so could obtain the money to which
they were entitled, on application at the Town Hall next day. Cheering
OundHm*for the Queen, the Mayor, Inspector Swan, and CDC
yuodling, after which, the men left for their homes.
THE VOLUNTEERS CALLED OUT.
Haying received information leading to the belief that a riot of a most
and d „“gerous character would take place, the Government,
v , y f the afternoo , n > decided upon obtaining the assistance of the
and acc °rdmgly steps were at once taken for that purpose.
Colonel St. Hill communicated with the captains, and they in turn inti-
mated to as many of the members of the force as possible, that there
would be a parade at the Barracks at 5 o’clock. The following “ Order bv
the Commandant was also issued:— y
“ TT,-«e. <r Staff Clffice, Hobart Town, June 27, 1879.
• n • 18 jCellency the Governor having, m pursuance of the powers vested
in hnn under clause 22nd of “The Volunteer Act, 1879,” been uleased to
call out the Southern portion of the Volunteer Force for actual Military
If Commandant desires to call the attention of all members
thereby affected to the fact of their being under “ The Mutiny Act” and
Articles of War, until released from such Actual Military Service by Pro-
clamation of the Governor. Lieutenant-Colonel St. Hill therefore desires
to impress upon those under his command the necessity which exists for
all attending the parade ordered for this evening, and warns them that
absence from the same without leave will constitute a crime under “The
Mutiny Act, punishable by not less than 28 days’ imprisonment. By order,
“ E - M - Tudor Boddam, Captain and Staff Officer.’’
It was known early in the afternoon that a proclamation calling out the
Volunteers for active service was intended, and accordingly a Gazette
Extraordinary was published, and was as follows
The Volunteer Act, 1878.
By ?? E f e Pency Frederick Alotsius Weld, Esquire, Companion of
the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and St George
Governor and Commander-in-Chief in and over the Colony of
lasmama and its Dependencies. J
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas by "The Volunteer Act, 1878 ” (42 Victoria No. 12, Section 22).
it is declared that the Governor may, at any time, by Proclamation pub-
lished in the Gazette, call out for actual Military Service any Volunteer
Corps, or any part thereof : And whereas it is expedient to call out for actual
Military Service the several Batteries of the Southern Tasmanian Volunteer
m stationed in Hobart Town, in Tasmania, and the several Companies
ot the Tasmanian Volunteer Rifle Regiment, also stationed in Hobart Town
: therefore I, Frederick Aloysius Weld, Esquire, Companion
ot the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St. George, Governor
®?7, Co m “ an der-in-Chief as aforesaid, do, in pursuance of the provisions
of . The V olunteer Act, 1878,” hereby, by this proclamation, call out for
actual Military Service the several Batteries of the Southern Tasmanian
Volunteer Artillery stationed in Hobart Town aforesaid, and the several
Companies of the Volunteer Rifle Regiment stationed in Hobart Town
aforesaid.


Given under my hand at Hobart Town, in Tasmania this twenty-
seventh day of June, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine.
FEED. A. WELD, Governor.
By His Excellency’s Command,
William Lodewtk Ceowther, for the Colonial Secretary, absent.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, 27th June, 1879.
The Twenty-second Section of “The Volunteer Act, 1878,” (42 Victoria,
Ho. 12), is published hereunder for the information of Volunteers and the
Public: —
Actual Military Service.
22. The Governor may, at any time, by Proclamation published in the
Gazette call out for actual military service any Volunteer Corps, or any
part thereof ; and every Officer and Volunteer belonging to any Corps so
called out shall be bound to assemble at such place as the Governor may
direct, and shall remain on actual Military Service until released by the
Governor’s authority, notified by Proclamation and published in the Gazette.
By His Excellency’s Command,
William Lodewyk Ceowther, Premier.
In accordance with these orders, issued for the first time since their for-
mation, the Volunteer Force turned out for active service, and they did so
with admirable promptitude. The Artillery paraded in the drill-yard at 4
p.m., and marched to the Barracks with their band, their strength being
about 140. Detachments were told off to convey two 32-pounder and two
12-pounder howitzer guns to the Barracks, and they were served with three
rounds of canister shot for each gun. Captain Crowther was in command
of the batteries, which were amalgamated, and each man was served with
five rounds of ball cartridge. The Eifle Regiment, under the command of
Captains O’Boyle, Smith, Davies, and Marsden, with Lieutenants Smith,
Freeman. Reed, Addison, and Betts, were also each served with five rounds
of ball cartridge. Major Sir James Wilson and Captain Boddam were also
present. The Artillery were exercised in field-gun and company drill, and
the Rifles in battalion drill, till shortly after 6 p.m. Col. St. Hill then ar-
rived, and took command of the whole force, and after putting them
through several evolutions, the Volunteers were formed together and ad-
dressed by the Colonel. He stated that it was the first time the Volunteers
were called out under the Mutiny Act and Articles of War, and he im-
pressed upon them the necessity of implicitly obeying orders. Any dere-
liction on their part he would have punished under the Mutiny Act. They
were not to load without orders, which would come from him, as he was
responsible for all their movements that night. At 6.30 p.m. four detach-
ments of the Artillery, with the 12-pounder guns, under the command of
Captain Evans and Lieutenant Stone, were told off to be kept in reserve in
the Barracks, Avith a section of the Rifles and the two bands, and the
remainder of the force were marched from the Barracks, along Davey-
street, into the yard at the rear of the Government Buildings. On arrival
there the gates were locked.- The Volunteers Avere then formed into com-
panies, and orders were given to pile arms. When that Avas completed, the
Colonel gave the word to stand clear, and break off, telling them they Avere
not to leave the square, but to be in readiness to fall in when the bugle
sounded. The men were given permission to amuse themselves, which
they did in various Avays. At 7 o’clock, Col. St Hill took two of the
buglers, and stationed them in the precincts of the ToAvn Hall, to give an
alarm in case of a disturbance. About half-an-hour afterwards, the men
were supplied Avith provisions. Hot being called upon for service, through
the happy turn that events eventually took, they Avere, about half-past 9
o’clock, inarched back to the Barracks, Avhere a meal was provided. The
bands having played a few tunes, the Colonel Commandant addressed the
force, stating that they Avere to continue liable to the provisions of the
Mutiny Act, and might be called out between that time and Monday. If
required to muster, two guns Avould be fired in succession from the Queen’s
Battery, and they would have to assemble at the Barracks in uniform
within an hour. If not called out before that time, there would be a full
parade on Monday, at 7.30 p.m. He congratulated them upon the prompt-


ness with which they had come forward, and the manner they had behaved
themselves under command. He was glad their services had not been
needed, but was sure that if they had been required they would hare acted
in a manner creditable to themselves. The following was the state of the
parade : —Artillery—l2o rank and file, 6 officers, 14 non-comissioned officers,
and 40 band. Rifles —206 rank and file, 14 officers, 18 non-commissioned
officers, 21 band. The total number was 439.
PEOCEEDINHS OF THE CATHOLICS.
All the influence of the clergy of the Roman Catholic Church resident
in the city was at last used to prevent the meeting in the Domain. The
Bishop’s pastoral also had great effect, and in addition the Very Rev. Father
Dunne, the Rev. P. R. Hennebry, the Rev. W. J. Beechinor, and Father
O’Reilly visited members of their Church with untiring zeal and assiduity
during the day, to prevail upon them to remain in their homes in the even-
ing, and not even attend the meeting which was convened to be held in
the Domain. The influence of the rev. gentlemen had good effect, and
large numbers promised to comply with the well-advised and commendable
counsel given them. Not satisfied with their painstaking, laborious, and
laudable endeavours in this direction, the Bishop, with self-denying sacri-
fice, and his clergy, resolved to attend the meeting and exhort those present
to retire peaceably to their homes, and not go near the Town Hall. Accor-
dingly, before 6 o’clock, the Bishop drove to the Domain in his carriage,
accompanied by the Revs. Dunne, Beechinor, O’Reilly, Dr. Hall, and Mr.
Hunter, leading laymen. It was a cold, threatening night, but the Revs.
Hennebry, of St. Joseph’s, and G-illeran, of New Norfolk, had already come
to suppress the slightest signs of tnmult. None of the crowd, however,
had then arrived, it being not yet 6 o’clock, the advertised time ; but soon
a large assemblage surrounded the Bishop’s carriag-e, and heartily cheered
his Lordship. The throng kept swelling, and in order that what was said
might influence all who were likely to come the Bishop kindly consented
to wait a while before he commenced his address. In the mean time,
printed copies of his Lordship’s exhortation were circulated. The crowd
passed the time in making joking allusions to the calling out of the volun-
teers and the army of special constables ; also, with peculiar Irish humour,
the Pastor was ridiculed with cutting irony, a volatile sense of the ludi-
crous, for the moment, getting the better of resentment. The Pastor was
sarcastically advised to go to the “ ould country,” and shouts of laughter
greeted the allusions to the gentle reception he would get there. At half-
past G there were over 400 people present. Dr. Hall, standing on the step
of the Bishop’s carriage, addressed the meeting as follows: —Fellow Catho-
lics, —I am very glad that our Bishop’s influence upon you has enabled you
to come to a sensible resolution to-night, and you may depend upon it that
in acting in a peaceful spirit you will win one of the greatest triumphs
over those who initiated this abominable attack upon our religion that
could possibly be made. (Cheers.) If you go home and do as they did in
Launceston, pray for your enemies, you will achieve a glorious moral vic-
tory. Use no violence. You can trust me to meet all that man’s assertions
by arguments which are invincible, whatever blasphemous nonsense he
may utter. Here is our Bishop come down in this inclement weather, and
I also, though an old man of seventy-three, for the sake of peace. Can I
not see you go home peaceably to-night ? (“ No, no,” and “ Yes, yes.")
Avoid giving any occasion for offence. (Cries of “We won’t go home.”)
Do so, and you may depend upon it that a reaction will take place among
the respectable people of every denomination in the city and elsewhere, to
their credit, and in the strongest manner would redound to the disgrace of
those who have brought that unfortunate wretched man here. (Cheers.)
The Bishop will speak to you ; and you, I am sure, will listen to him, as
good Catholics, in peace and quietness. (Cheers.)
Bishop Murphy, rising in his carriage to speak, was interrupted for
some minutes by hearty cheers. He said —My dear friends, I have come to
you here to-night for the purpose of giving you a few words of advice as
to the course you ought to follow —(cheers)—under the very great excite-
ment into which you have been thrown during the last few days. I must
confess you had reason for this excitement. (Cheers.) I felt it myself


most intensely—(cheers)—and I could not but feel with you for having
felt it. (Cheers.) You received extraordinary provocation—(cheers)—
yours feelings were outraged. (Cheers.) As Catholics and as men we saw
our religion vilified in words that we never before heard in this place.
(Cheers.) Is it any wonder, therefore, that you got excited. (“ No, no.”)
The provocation was extraordinary and intense. You have lived for years
in Hobart Town in peace and harmony with all denominations. (Cheers.)
Why is it that people should throw a firebrand amongst us—(“ Chiniquy is
a devil.”) —to create a flame ? Yes, you are very right. (“ Right, right,”
and cheers.) Well, my dear friends, I heard it was the object of this
meeting to go to the Town Hall to night—(“ Yes,” and “no”)—and to
offer some violence there. (“ Yes, yes, that is the object,” and “ No, no.”)
Now, just hear me for a few moments. (Cheers.) You have already
vindicated your rights as citizens. (“ We have only half vindicated them.”)
You have vindicated your right to respect for your religious feelings. Even
upon your greatest enemies you have made an impression in your favour.
But if to-night you attempt any violence at the Town Hall, the effect of
the movement which has been made in Hobart Town during the last few
days will be completely destroyed. (Cheers. “We won’t,” and “Yes, we
will.”) Now, I say to you, you have obtained a victory—do not spoil it by
any imprudence of your own. Therefore, I have come here to-night to
beg of you not to assemble at or approach the walls of the Town Hall this
evening, because I fear that there will be some bloodshed. (“ We are pre-
pared for that.”) Life will be placed in jeopardy. (“The sooner the
better.”) The authorities are prepared to use force against you if violence
is offered. (“ We are prepared also.”) Force will be used, as I am told.
(“ We are prepared to stand before force.”) It would be very miserable to
hear in the morning that some person had been maimed, or perhaps shot.
(“ We will die for our religion.” Mr. Hunter: “ Fes, but do not die for
Chiniquy.” Laughter.) You would all regret that you had used force.
(“We are prepared to die for our religion.” “You would be dying for the
devil.” Laughter.) You have all heard of the famous Irish liberator,
Daniel O’Connell. (“ Yes, yes,” and cheers for Daniel O’Connell.) Perhaps
some of you have seen him, and heard his grand eloquence, as I have done.
Well, Daniel O’Connell had gone through agitation in Ireland for years,
for the political and general amelioration of his country ; but he always
held that no political or general amelioration of the people was worth the
shedding of one drop of blood. And during the whole of his efforts for
the improvement of Ireland, not a drop of blood was shed. And he had
this to say before he met his God, that no one had lost life or limb, or had
even been maimed in any way whatever, because of the efforts he made in
promoting the political improvement of his country. And the victory that
he won had not been surpassed in the world. (Cheers.) I now beg, I im-
plore you not to go near the Town Hall to-night. I ask you as your pastor,
I ask you as your friend, having an interest in you, in your wives and
families. I appeal to you, for the sake of your God, not to go near the
Town Hall to-night. (Chefers.) I thank you for that cheer. I know that
you will go to your homes quietly. (Cheers were given for the Bishop and
clergy, and groans for Chiniquy.)
Some demur was made by a few malcontents to 'foregoing altogether a
visit to the Town Hall, but it was the disposition of the great majority to
yield to his Lordship’s request, and go quietly away. Still cries were heard
abusing Pastor Chiniquy, and expressing a desire to put him out of the hall.
Mr. Hunter urged the assemblage to disperse. He might tell them, for
their comfort, that he had it on the authority of the Police Magistrate,
that, whether the hall was let for a longer period or not, Pastor Chiniquy
would not be allowed to lecture again in the hall. Let them, therefore, go
peaceably home.
A Voice ; Will your Lordship allow us to follow your Lordship’s carriage 1
The Bishop : My advice to you is to disperse quietly.
A Voice : If you will let us go as far as Harrington-street, we will dis-
perse there.
The Bishop consented, and the assemblage forming four deep, marched in
procession behind his Lordship’s carriage, which passed down into Liver-


pooi-strect at a walking pace. All along the route cheers were given for
the Eishop and ciergy, and groans for the Pastor, with much heartiness
at Harnngton-street, renewed demonstrations of applause and de'
nsmn were given. After a few words from the Bishop, in which he con-
gratulated the people upon the way they were about to fulfil their promise
his Lordship said good-night, and drove off. The crowd dispersed after
giving cheers for the Queen, clergy, and Ireland. P ’ tter
OUTSIDE THE TOWN HALL.
The animated scene that had been kept up throughout the day was
calmed down to moderation as dusk set in. The crowds of gossipers many
of whom looked as if they had recently arrived from the country district?
and whose tongue was most unmistakeably Hibernian, lounged during the
day in twos and threes upon the footpaths opposite the hall, scanning the
proceedings in connection with the swearing-in of the special constables'
and evidently considerably impressed by the manifest determination on the
pait or the authorities to put down anything like disorder. As dusk came
on, Pastor Chmiquy arrived at the Town Hall, and the Municipal business
tor the organising of a defence force having come to an end, the lars-e
doors were closed, and the Library door, as on the previous evening re-
mained the only one by which ingress and egress could be gained, and’this
was jealously watched. The street about 6 o’clock was entirely deserted
save for the presence of a few children on the steps of the hall who
played to and fro with a kind of unwonted excitement, but with
certainly no signs of more than ordinary care and trouble. Crowds of
people in twos, threes, and quartettes, also began to pass at the same hour
all hurrying quickly Domain-wards, the general behaviour being of the
same character as when the ordinary spectators of an artillery drill are
t , he y ard - From that hour a crowd began to collect in front of
the hall, the street being perfectly dark. Amongst the first arrivals were
a large number of females, who, with a curious disregard for the welfare
of their offspring, had brought infants in arms, and tiny children of both
to be crushed in the crowd, and pushed to and fro. At a quarter
past G the first detachment of special constables arrived from the Drill-
yard, under the command of Superintendent Pedder, of Bellerive and took
up a position in line upon the steps of the Town Hall, their white arm •
badge distinguishing them from the rest of the crowd. Other detachments
followed, and took up positions at the back gates, which were closed at the
Library door and at the Courc-house door, other officers of the territorial
and municipal police marshalling each section. A strong body of the
police was posted on the hall steps, and in the yard at the rear of the
building. At harlf-past G o’clock, the lamps were lighted in front of the
hall, and the front door being also opened; the audience were admitted, a
slight crush of enthusiastics, afraid to be crowded out, having to be resisted
by the specials and police. The ingress was, as a whole, conducted quietly,
and in order, but notwithstanding this, the crowd in the street continued
to grow in size, until at least 4,000 people crowded Macquarie-street, ex-
tending beyond the Telegraph Office, which appeared to be the favourite
station of the more cautious of the curious ones. Order was maintained
throughout. No call was made for the interposition of authority, save on the
part of those who had to keep the entrance clear. Some amusement was of
course sought by the younger members of the crowd, but even this only
reached the mild form of larrikinism, in which those concerned amused
themselves by mildly ill-treating one another, and generally annoying the
quieter portion of those present by rushing madly in and out after° each
other. The proceedings, indeed, became so tame that the crowd had
diminished to half its size, when, at about half-past 9 o’clock, the people
poured out of the hall. Quietly they were allowed to emerge, only a few
jocular remarks from irrepressible spirits marking their exit. The specials
were then formed into order, marched to the Drill-yard, and dismissed, and
the police also retired. No one long remained after this, and the sharp
shower of rain that fell about ten minutes afterwards was hardly required
to restore the place to its wonted state of quiet.


THE LECTURE.
The main entrance doors of the Town Hall were opened at half-past 6
o’clock, when a stream of persons gradually flowed into the building, and
up the grand staircase, at the foot of which were a number of the Pastor’s
committee. In the hall there had previously been stationed ten members
of the Municipal police force, in charge of Sergeant Loring, who was
acting in conjunction with Sub-Inspector Pitman. The constables were
distributed over the hall, and the side door, which was broken open on
June 25, had been barricaded in such a manner that any attempt to have
forced an entrance would be thoroughly ineffectual. There was an unin-
interrupted stream of auditors, who were soon seated without the slightest
difficulty. Various members of the Pastor’s committee were engaged in
preventing the possibility of any confusion arising. Soon after 7 o’clock,
the hall was densely crowded, there being amongst those occupying seats,
both on the platform and in the body of the hall, a large proportion .of
ladies. Conspicuous on the platform were the ministers of various Protes-
tant denominations—the Church of England excepted—while during the
evening there were present the Mayor, the Police Magistrate, the Inspector
of Police, the Superintendent of Police, the Chief District Constable, and
other functionaries. At a quarter-past 7 o’clock, and before the building
was full. Pastor Chiniquy, accompanied by several members of the committee,
appeared on the platform, and was welcomed with prolonged cheering. On
the motion of the Rev. Mr. Tinning, of Richmond, seconded by the Rev,
Mr. Webster, the Rev. James Scott was voted to the chair. The meeting
having been opened with praise and prayer,
The Chairman, in formally introducing the Pastor, said he was already
well known as one who had come a long way in pursuit of health, but he
was also ready to spend and be spent in the service of his Master. He (Mr.
Scott) deprecated any undue demonstrations of applause, as being opposed
to the spirit in which that meeting was to be conducted, the desire being
that the meeting should be of a peaceable and religious character. He
then called upon the Pastor to proceed with his lecture on “ Liberty of
Conscience.
Pastor Chiniquy, on rising, was greeted with great applause, and the
lecture, which lasted about an hour and a half, was listened to with the
utmost attention, devotional exercises concluding the meeting, after which
the audience quietly dispersed.
SATURDAY, June 28, 1879.
THE EFFECT OF THE DISTURBANCES.
After a storm, a calm. When the excitement in the city had subsided
in to peace, a general feeling of relief had pervaded the entire community.
Additional facts which had become known proved conclusively that any
collision between the Catholics and the defence force provided by the
authorities would have led to the most fearful results. Many of the would-
be rioters had become possessed of fire-arms, and some of them did not
hesitate to declare afterwards what they were prepared to have done had
they carried out their intention of forcing their way into the Town Hall.
It was principally the knowledge that numbers had been busy purchasing-
fire-arms and ammunition which impressed upon the Government the
necessity of calling out the Volunteers, and the wisdom of this step is now
generally acknowledged, even by those who at first were disposed to look
upon it as an extreme measure not needed. Whether the more hot-blooded
of the disaffected would have done all that they threatened is just a little
doubtful. More than one gentleman who took an active part in organising
defensive measures received anonymous letters threatening their lives and
property, but these Avere probably more to intimidate the recipients than
anything else. Besides the special constables and the Volunteers, there
Avas in the hall on the previous evening an organised band of betAveen 70
and 80 Orangemen, prepared to act in defence of Pastor Chiniquy, and no
doubt the knoAvledge that these bitter opponents of Roman Catholicism
were acting in concert intensified the hostile feeling on the other side.
Remembering all these circumstances, Ave cannot be too thankful that no


disturbance did take place, and that energy and determination on one side
and prudence on the other, were exercised with such a satisfactory result!
The vicinity of the Town Hall during the morning' looked busy, for nearly
two hundred of the special constables of the previous night visited the
Corporation officials, and received their pay, a sum of six shillings each •
the services of these men, therefore, cost about £6O. The Chiniquy com!
mittee decided not to use the Town Hall again, although fully entitled,
and having permission to do so, besides being guaranteed by the Mayor and
the Government every assistance in maintaining order and liberty of
speech. The action of the committee commended itself to the public as
very judicious.
THE CHINIQUY COMMITTEE.
In response to a request made at the close of the lecture in the Town
Hall on June 27, the committee mustered in great force at ten o’clock next
morning. The Chairman brought under the notice of the committee a
statement made in the Domain by Mr. Henry Hunter, “ that he had it on
the authority of the Police Magistrate, that Pastor Chiniquy would not be
allowed to lecture again in the Town Hall.” A deputation from the com-
mittee waited upon the Mayor to ascertain whether such a statement had
been made with his sanction.
The committee received the following reply-:
Hobart Town, June 28, 1879,
Sir,—ln reply to your enquiry, I beg to acquaint you that the statement
of the Police Magistrate, as reported by Mr. Hunter at the Domain meeting
last evening, was not a correct one, and was unauthorised by me ; and,
moreover, that the authorities are prepared to uphold order in the event of
another meeting taking place, as exemplified yesterday. I have the honor
to be, sir, your obedient servant,
W. H. Burgess, Mayor.
T. T. Watt, Esq., Chairman of Deputation.
To this the Secretary was directed to send the following reply:—
Hobart Town, June 28, 1879,
To His Worship the Mayor,
Sir, —I have the honour, in reply to your letter, to forward the following
resolution of the committee : —“ That this meeting receives the official
reply now read, and tenders its thanks to his Worship the Mayor for the
promptness and courtesy with which he had acceded to the wishes of the
committee. I have the honour to be, sir, your obedient servant.
W. C. Robinson, Secretary.
The Rev. Mr. Butchers introduced the subject of holding a farewell
meeting to Pastor Chiniquy, which was very fully discussed in its various
phases, and ultimately the following resolution was arrived at :—“ That
having had, through the energetic and effective co-operation of the Govern-
ment and the Civic authorities, the right secured to us of meeting in the
Town Hall, and having the assurance of the Mayor that adequate protection
against interruption shall be afforded whenever further meetings in con-
nection with Pastor Chiniquy’s mission be held, this committee resolves to
forego its right to the use of the Town Hall on Monday evening next, and
to hold, in some other suitable building, a farewell meeting- to Pastor
Chiniquy, at which an address, signed by the chairman and members of the
committee,, expressive of confidence in that gentleman, be presented, and
addresses given.”
A deputation waited upon his Worship the Mayor with the above resolu-
tion, asking, in the name of the committee, whether, in the event of a fare-
well meeting being held in any other place than the Town Hall, the same
police protection would be afforded as if the meeting were held in the hall.
His Worship returned a favourable reply, assuring the committee that he
would do all in his power to preserve order as he had done on the previous
evening, and thanked the committee for their consideration of the public,
welfare in the resolution they had submitted to him. The deputation,
having reported the answer of the Mayor, the resolution was adopted.


Mr. Tarleton having intimated a desire to have an interview with the
committee, relative to Mr. Hunter’s statement in the Domain, as reported
in the Mercury , was warmly welcomed. He said the statement was
wholly unjustifiable; there was no substantial ground for Mr. Hunter
saying what he did. It was a perversion of a conversation in which he
(Mr. Tarleton) remarked that he thought it was probable that, if quiet was
preserved on Friday evening, Pastor Chiniquy’s committee might see that
it would be for the general good to forego their right to hold another
meeting at the Town Hall. He could not state this officially, but it was
his opinion.
The committee thanked Mr. Tarleton for this voluntary explanation, and
for permission to give it publicity through the press.
The Secretary was instructed to send letters conveying the warmest
thanks of the committee to the Executive Government, making special
mention of the valuable services rendered by Mr. Swan ; to his Worship the
Mayor and Municipal Council, for the prompt and efficient help they had
afforded ; and to the Mercury , which had so nobly sustained the committee
in their endeavour to secure the rights of the citizens.
It was recommended that the Wesleyan Church, being the most commo-
dious in Hobart Town, should be the place of meeting on Monday evening,
if the trustees were willing ; and some of the committee were appointed to
consult the trustees, and if the application should be favourably enter-
tained, they were directed to arrange for holding the meeting. Thanks to
the Chairman terminated the proceedings.
This permission was willingly and unconditionally granted, and arrange-
ments were made accordingly.
SUNDAY SEEYICES.
Pastor Chiniquy was present on June 29 at the morning service at the
Memoral Church, where he delivered an address. The opening portion of
the proceedings were conducted by the pastor of the church, the Rev. W.
C. Robinson, the 10th chapter of St. Luke, containing the parable of the
Good Samaritan, and the complaint of Martha, being the portion of Scrip-
ture read as a lesson, and to which Pastor Chiniquy often referred during
the course of a very long sermon. The church was crowded by an immense
audience, including several Roman Catholics ; hut, as the service was held
in a place of worship, there was not a murmur of dissent of any kind to
the somewhat severe strictures passed upon their faith and its teachers.
The Pastor dwelt upon the importance of the question asked by the lawyer
and of the easy way of salvation indicted in the reply, urging his hearers in
the face of approaching death to accept it. The fact that the future life
must be either one of suffering or happiness was also urged, and the address,
which was listened to with unbroken attention, was in the main of this
character, illustrated by anecdote. He urged strongly upon the congrega-
tion that they should do all they could, both by prayer and action, for the
conversion of Roman Catholics, and, at the end of his address, made an
appeal on behalf of a college for ministers whose teaching should have that
object, and of a home to which priests could go when, like himself, they
found themselves unhappy in their communion. Such a mission as his
could only be preached by priests, as Roman Catholics would listen to no
one else. In the afternoon, Pastor Chiniquy preached at Chalmers Church,
his subject being “ Jesus, the Gift of God and in the evening at St. John’s
Presbyterian Church, Macquarie Street, from the words, All Scripture is
come of inspiration of God. ” The sermon dwelt upon the power of the G ospel
as a helper, comforter, and guide to heaven. The Pastor exhorted his
hearers to read the Bible and follow its precepts. He at great length also
referred to his conversion to Protestanism, through the means of the Eible.
He was attentively listened to throughout. Collections were made for the
Pastor’s mission after each'of the services.


MONDAY, June 30, 1870.
FAREWELL LECTURE.
The Wesleyan Chapel, Melville Street, was crowded by an immense
audience in the evening, on the occasion of the farewell lecture of Pastor
Chiniquy, entitled, “ Danger ahead in England and the Colonies from
Romanism.” A platform had been erected around the pulpit, and upon this,
about half-past 7 o’clock, the committee took their seats, among those pre-
sent being the Revs. W. C. Robinson. J. Scott, B. Butchers, McLean, Tin -
ning, Cole, Cope, R. Mclaren Webster, Messrs. W. Fisher, Ireland, Watt, R.
Mather, J, Watson, McArdell, Napier, G-. T. Johnston, Bateman, Rothwell,
T. Mullen, W. Webber.
On the motion of Mr. Watt, seconded by Mr. W. Fisher, the Rev, W. C.
Robinson took the chair : and after the hymn “ Hold the Fort ” had been
suug, the Rev. J. Scott offered up prayer.
Rev. W. C. Robinson said it was most important that there should be the
fullest and most cordial understanding between the chairman of a meeting
and the audience as to the character of the meeting over which he presided.
The position which, as Protestants, they had all taken up, and that for
which the committee had been contending for the past few days, was
“ freedom of speech.” This was nothing new to them. It was no innova-
tion. They all remembered, perhaps, that, when children, their mothers
taught them that liberty of speech as well as the rights of conscience were
the heritage of every British subject. (Hear, hear.) And their fathers
had told them at what a tremendous price these privileges were purchased.
He thought they would not be worthy of their noble ancestors, that they
would not be faithful to the trust committed to them, not faithful to the
past, nor faithful to the future generations, were they to treat lightly, or in
any degree permit that glorious privilege to be taken away from them.
(Applause.) The chairman then made an explanation with respect to
the misunderstanding that had been created with regard to the use of the
chapel, stating that it was unanimously lent by the committee without
conditions of any kind. (Applause.) Lest, however, anyone had been
misled by the announcement to the contrary, anyone who wished to retire
could have their money returned at the doors. (Applause.) Before anybody
did so he wished to explain that by liberty of speech they did not mean
liberty of abuse. (Hear.) They felt, however, the duty of giving utterance
to the truth they had received, even though it might be sometimes offen-
sive. Though the truth were, however, offensive, it need not be said in an
offensive manner, but in the spirit of love, taking Christ’s example of
meekness and gentleness. (Hear, hear.) Mr. Robinson concluded by
advising the exercise of peace and gentleness towards the Roman Catholics,
who had consciousness, and a religious feeling of their own.
The Rev. Mr. Butchers said he had an exceedingly painful duty to per-
form that night. They were of course aware that during the last two or
three days a Pastoral had been issued by the Roman Catholic Bishop
relating to the recent disgraceful disturbances, and it was laid upon him,
by Pastor Chiniquy’s committee, to enter a very earnest and a very solemn
protest against the spirit and sentiment of that Pastoral letter. It would
be altogether against the dignity of the committee of the Pastor, and alto-
gether beneath the dignity of such an influential and representative meet-
ing as that, to have taken any notice of any individual utterances of Bishop
Murphy, his clergy, or any other gentlemen in the city. But it was not
beneath the dignity of that, or any other assembly, to take notice of the
calm, deliberate, and official utterance of the highest ecclesiastical dignity
of the Roman Catholic Church in the city and in Tasmania. More especi-
ally was this the case, when the sentiment or principle contained in that
official utterance was such as to be subversive of civil and religious liberty,
and it was on that ground that the protest he was about to read, and which
he imagined would be endorsed by that meeting, had been drawn up.
This meeting, having heard read Bishop Murphy’s Pastoral letter to his
flock (printed in a previous column), desires to record its most earnest and
solemn protest against it, on the following grounds, viz. -


J'irst. —Because it begins with a statement which is at variance with
truth, inasmuch as it is beyond dispute that while an organised band of
Roman Catholics, by lawless violence, on three successive nights, prevented
Pastor Chiniquy, his committee, and the citizens generally from using the
hall, after it had been let by the Town Hall Committee, and that also a
large and influential deputation of Roman Catholics waited upon the Mayor
and City Council for the avowed purpose of inducing them to break
through their contract with Pastor Chiniquy’s committee, no “efforts”
whatever were made by Roman Catholics to prevent “ the City Council
from letting the Town Hall for the purposes to which it has been devoted
during the week.”
■Secondly.—Because Bishop Murphy docs not in his Pastoral letter express
the slightest regret or indignation on account of “ efforts ” which the Mayor
of Hobart Town officially and justly designates the “ late disorderly and
unlawful proceedings at the Town Hall.” _
Thirdly.—Because the Bishop, in affirming that “ further demonstrations
on the part of his flock “ in that direction will be resisted by force of law,
leading probably to rioting and bloodshed,” ignores entirely the notorious
fact that serious “ rioting ” had already taken place, and that “ bloodshed ”
had only been averted by the Christian forbearance of the law-abiding and
lawful occupants of the hall: and most unjustifiably throws the entire
responsibility of prospective “ rioting and bloodshed, not on his riotous
flock, but on the civil authorities, who were determined to repress such
lawless “ efforts ” by the “ force of law.”
Fourthly. —Because, in earnestly requesting his flock to “ have the good
sense to abstain from making any further attempts to vindicate ’ their
rights as citizens and ratepayers,” Bishop Murphy, so far from condemning
and reproving the “late disorderly and unlawful proceedings,” officially
justifies, sanctions, and applauds them.
Fifthly.—Because, in stating that his “ only object ” in thus appealing
to his flock “ is to prevent injury to persons and property, and to induce
you to show your respect for yourselves as Catholics and loyal citizens,”
Bishop Murphy entirely and disloyally ignores the supreme obligations
which he and his flock are under, not only of respecting persons, property,
and themselves, but also the laws of the land, and their legitimate
administrators.
Sixthly.—Because, in expressly limited his request to the “ present occa-
sion,” Bishop Murphy does not only not forbid, but directly invites similar
“ disorderly and unlawful proceedings ” at some future and more favorable
season. .
DCwoviit _
Lastly.—Because, in the opinion of this meeting, the Bishop s Pastoral
letter was anything but calculated to allay lawless passions.
After reading the protest, Mr. Butchers said if the meeting endorsed it,
they would manifest it by rising to their feet.
The meeting rose almost unanimously.
Mr. Butchers (corrected by the chairman) said he feared, in a little
natural warmth, he had called for the expression of feeling a little too soon.
He believed Mr. Watt had to second the adoption of the protest.
Mr. Watt seconded its adoption.
The question that the protest be endorsed by the meeting being again
put, a show of hands was called for, when only one was held up in the
negative.
The Rev. Mr. Webster said he had the honour to be deputed to read an
address to Pastor Chiniquy, which was to be presented to him by his com-
mittee. There was, he ventured to say, some appropriateness in the choice
of him (Mr. Webster) for that duty—for that privilege— as he counted it.
That was not the first occasion he had met the Pastor; he became acquainted
with the rev. gentleman many years ago, when he was invited by the
leading men of the Free Church of Scotland to take part in the celebra-
tion of the twelfth anniversary of the Church. He (Mr. Webster) woi 11
never forget the extraordinary and profound impression the Pastor’s
appearance created in Edinburgh at the time; the impression remained
fresh in his memory. Little did he at that time think that it would be his


honour and privilege to meet the Pastor again in this far-off “ Island of the
a * . to have him as his S uest . and to stand beside him on the platform,
and to listen to his brave, fearless utterances respecting the Roman Catholic
yj urch, which he had abandoned &r ever. The address, which he would
read, referred to the Pastor’s private, as well as his public deportment. Of
im private deportment, he (Mr. Webster) had perhaps had more opportunity
or judging than any other person, for he was proud to say he had behaved
m a way befitting a Christian minister. He had endeared himself to him
his family, and his friends, and they would have very tender memories of
him when he had gone. More than that he could, but would not say in a
mee^'m B’> and h® would conclude by reading the address as follows-
The address stated that, prior to his departure from Hobart Town, after
the exciting and historical disturbances of the past week, the committee
were desirous of recording a very sincere, earnest, and emphatic opinion
respecting his character, so far as known to them; and while they were not
prepared to fully endorse every word he had spoken and written, or the
precise course of action he had always adopted, for that would be to worship
ad^ e ’ which they were sure would neither be in accordance
with his principles nor theirs, nevertheless they did, in the most hearty and
emphatic manner, affirm their well-founded belief that, according to the
best of their knowledge, he had, in abandoning the Church of Rome, and
in prosecuting his noble and .self-denying mission during the past twenty
years, been actuated by a sincere desire to glorify God in his own life, and
in the salvation of his perishing fellow-men. They did not forget that he
came (into their midst sufficiently accredited by his sacrifices, sufferings,
as wed as ky the indisputable fact of his being a minister of
the Canadian Presbyterian Church, bearing trustworthy credentials com-
mending him to the confidence and respect of Christian men, wherever the
providence of God might direct his steps. They desired further to say that
x, a j an opportunity of testing his facts, proofs, and arguments,
they had always found them Trustworthy, and they here expressed their
most decided opinion that if his facts can be disproved, his quotations
shown to be garbled or false, and his arguments inconclusive, it is impera-
tively incumbent upon his opponents, in the best interests of morality, to
discharge this public duty. They further desired to testify that during his
present visit, and amidst the extraordinary irritation and excitement that
has prevailed, he had uniformly manifested both in his public and private
deportment a spirit of moderation and Christian charity towards those from
whose connection he had severed himself such as to command their admi-
ration and esteem, and they desired now to take an affectionate farewell of
him, commending him and his noble mission to the grace of that God who
had so marvellously enlightened, guided, protected, and blessed him during
his past life and work, and who, they fervently prayed, would continue the
same mercy towards him to the end.
(Signed by the Committee.)
THE VOLUNTEERS.
The Artillery Corps and Rifle Regiment paraded in the barracks at night.
There wus a very large muster, nearly every member being present, with all
the officers. The members of the Ministry, with the exception of the
Minister of Lands and Works (Mr. O’Reiley), were also on the ground.
Several men who had been warned to attend the parade on Friday, but
absented themselves, were then placed under arrest, after which Colonel St.
Hill read the following :
“ The Governor and Commander-in-Chief requests the Commandant to
make known to the officers and men of the Artillery and Rifle Corps now
called out on service, his high appreciation of the spirit of military duty
and dicipline which has animated them in so promptly coming forward to
the support of the civil authority, in obedience to the Govemer’s proclama-
tion of the 28th June. By His Excellency’s Command,
“W. H. St. Hill, Lt.-Col., Commandant.”
“Government House, July 1, 1879.”
The brigade was then marched through the streets, the Artillery dragging
tAvo howitzers, and the bands playing alternately. The route was down


Macquarrie-street, and along Elizabeth-strect to the city boundary, where
the men piled arms and broke off for a while. On re-forming, the force
returned to the barracks, where Colonel St. Hill expressed his regret that,
in consequence of the misbehaviour of the men under arrest, he was unable
to recommend the Governor to revoke the proclamation placing the force
under the Mutiny Act. He, at the same time, felt pleased at the manner
in which they had come forward on Friday, and said that no doubt a pro-
clamation releasing them from their present position would soon be issued.
The brigade having been dismissed, the Colonel and officers retired into the
brigade office, where the cases of the men under arrest were inquired into.
There were six of them —four of the men were dismissed with a caution ;
the other two were ordered to form the subject of a court martial.
THE CITY COUNCIL AND THE POLICE.
At the ordinary meeting of the City Council in the afternoon, Alderman
Seabrook gave notice of motion for the next ordinary meeting as follows; —
11 That this Council has no confidence in the present supervision of the
city police.” He said it was a very painful motion, and he regretted very
much to have to submit it.
The Mayor asked whether the motion referred to the Police Committee
or the Police Superintendent ?
Alderman Seabrook; : To Superintendent Propsting.
The Mayor suggested the motion had better be amended to that effect.
Alderman Seabrook amended the motion by substituting the words
cl the present superintendent,” for “the present supervision.
TUESDAY, July 1, 1879.
CONFERENCE OF PROTESTANTS.
A conference of Protestants was held at the Chalmers Hall in the even-
ing, Captain Win. Fisher being in the chair. Pastor Chiniquy delivered
an address, the leading thought of which was, Paul as a Soldier of Christ.
The Pastor urged upon all present that they had a mission, not only as
individuals, but as a community, that mission being to conquer the world,
and to bring it into the service of God. They were to fight with the weapons
given them —truth, justice, and charity. If Protestants had been true to
this in the past, they would have conquered the world long ago, but instead,
they have been asleep. He spoke of the early successes of Christianity in
the first 30 years, and again in the days of Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, since
when there had been comparatively a time of rest. He knew that rest was
necessary to human nature, and that, perhaps, it had been ordered by
Providence that it should prevail in regard to religion also. But now the
bugle was sounding again, the trumpet was calling them to deal the enemy
a new blow. They had slept long enough, and must now wake, as Lazarus
awoke from the tomb to new life and action. They must wake to new and
stronger opposition to Rome, which was also getting ready for a new war-
fare against Protestantism. Rome was tolerated too much in the present
day, and ought to be treated as an idolater. At the conclusion of the
address, which was listened to with great attention, several ministers and
others addressed those present.
CITY COUNCIL.
At a special meeting of the Council in the afternoon, the following
business connected with the disturbances was transacted :
The Rev. W. C. Robinson, Secretary to Pastor Chiniquy’s committee, for-
warded the following correspondence :
To His Worship the Mayor, and the Aldermen of Hobart Town.
Gentlemenl have the honour, on behalf of the Committee who engaged
the Town Hall for the delivery of lectures by Pastor Chiniquy, to convey
to you their unanimous and most hearty thanks for the very considerate
manner in which their representations have been received by you, and for
the promptness, thoroughness, and energy with which, under circumstances
of great irritation and peril, you have successfully made provision for
securing to the citizens the British right of unfettered speech, and for
protection from the dangers to which, in the exercise of that right, they


have been exposed. I have the honour to be. gentlemen, your obedient
servant, W. C. Robinson, Secretary.
To His Worship the Mayor. Sir, —I have the honour to forward, by
direction of Pastor Chiniquy’s committee, the following resolution :
Resolved unanimously, “ That after the lamentable display of incapacity
on the part of Superintendent Propsting during the riots on Monday,
Tuesday, and Wednesday evenings, this committee, solely in the interests of
the public morality and safety, most earnestly request the City Council to
remove him from his present position as Superintendent of Police. I have
the honour to be, sir, your obedient servant, W. C. Robinson.”
Alderman Addison asked whether the last letter had come as a petition
or as a letter ?
The Mayor ;As a letter. It is only signed by one person. We receive
it as correspondence.
Alderman Watchorn doubted whether the committee had any right to
dictate to the Council what they should do with an officer.
The Mayor : This is a suggestion, not dictation —“ they most earnestly
request,” See.
Alderman Watchorn submitted to the ruling of the Mayor, but he had
grave doubt whether the letter could be received.
The Mayor : There can be no doubt whether it can be received.
CLOSING SCENES.
The other few days of the stay of Pastor Chiniquy in the city were
devoted to sight-seeing and to the organisation of a Protestant Association,
whose object is the defence and a fostering of Protestantism. The Pastor
visited all the points of interest about the city, expressing with all the
enthusiasm of the Frenchman his admiration of it. Nowhere was he
molested in any way or treated with disrespect. Last scene of all was the
departure of the Pastor by the steamer Tasman on Saturday afternoon, ni
route for Queensland, where he will next appear. He was seen off by a
number of friends, who gave him a parting cheer. So falls the curtain on
a short but dark chapter in Tasmanian history. Much of its incident can-
not be forgotten, but much may be forgiven on both sides. Only in this
way can tranquillity be restored and our too-lightly valued peace regained.
37


Iftitionihcto |ittorncij-®fineral of |I nu upland.
The following petition has been sent to the Attorney
General:—
“To the Hon.'Robert Stout, Esq., Attorney General of New
Zealand.
The petition of John Graham, bookseller, Dunedin, humbly
showeth.—
“ Whereas your Petitioner has for some time past sold a
large quantity of books called the “ Fruits of Philosophy,” and
other books of the same moral tendency ; and whereas the said
books have been read by a large number of the intelligent people
of New Zealand ; and whereas the said people have derived great
advantage from reading them
“ And whereas a large number have not yet read them, to
their great loss
“ And whereas it is absolutely necessary that they should
read them
“ And whereas the sale has for some time past been gradually
falling off, even although your petitioner has reduced the price
from 3s 6d to 2s, to the great loss of your petitioner and the
public generally, which is greatly to be deplored.
“ Your petitioner therefore humbly prays that you will at
once enter a Crown prosecution against him, on the ground that
such books are obscene and immoral, so as to extend your peti-
tioner’s trade, and thus benefit the people of New Zealand
generally, and your petitioner in particular.
“And your petitioner, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
“ Signed
“JOHN GRAHAM.”
“Dunedin, Bth Feb., 1879.”
“ A.C. 540
“ P. 79 No. 143 1 79
“ New Zealand Constabulary,
“(Commissioner’s Office),
“Wellington, 25th February, 1878.
“ Sir, —
“ Tour petition of the 13 instant, addressed to the Hon. the
Attorney-General, has been handed over to this Department, with
instructions to inform you that your request cannot be acceded
to. “ I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
“H. E. READER,
“ Under Secretary.
“Mr. John Graham, Bookseller, Dunedin.”


GRAHAM of Claverhouse wishes
io inform his numerous Friends that
he has the following Books :
The Generative System (by Dr. Beaney)
Plain Home Talk (Dr. GK B. Foote)
Sexual Sins (Gardner)
Sexual Phisiology (Dr. Trail)
Elements of Social Science (Truelove)
The Generative System, in health and disease (Dr. Paterson)
Philosophy of Marriage (Dr. Campbell)
Matrimony (Fowler)
The Relations of the Sexes (Mrs. Duffy)
Aristotle’s Works
Payne’s Age of Reason
Cobbett’s Legacy to the Parsons
Decameron of Boccacio
Mysteries of a Convent. Maria Monk
History of the Inquisition
Newgate Calendar
Roy’s Works. Smith’s Works
Canty Jock. Cottagers of Glenburnie. Mausie Wau<di.
Geordie Purdie in London
Lectures on Syphilis (by Lane)
Manual on the Venereal Diseases (by Hill and Moore)
Manual for Midwives and Nurses (by Churchill)
Dialogues of Devils (by McGown)
Dr. Coffin’s Treatise on the Generative System
Dr. Coffin’s Guide to Health. His Lectures,
Smedley’s Hydropathy. Mrs. Smedley’s Manual
Horse Taming (by Rarey)
The Family Doctor. Buchan’s Family Medicine.
Payne’s Works. Voltaire. Mills. Owens.
The Queen v. Bradlaugh and Besant
Mistakes of Moses. Facts of Moses
Debate between Bright and Green
Roberts y. Hine—Are we Israelites P
Roberts t. Bradlaugh. Thomas v. Jew
Wandering Jew. Mysteries of Paris. The Scottish Chiefs
Black Angel. Valentine Vox. Handy Andy
The Priest in Absolution
Smedley’s Hydropathy. Combe’s Phrenology. Fowler’s
Constitution of Man (by Combe)
And many more too numerous to mention.
Newspapers and Journals of every description, Ac., Ac. Books
lent and second-hand Books bought and sold.
JOHN GRAHAM, Booksellee, Dunedin.


' - -
Old England’s in a dreadful state.
No food or clothing scarce have they,
Wherever we may go ;
No fire within their grates.
Thousands of honest working men,
And many hundred families,
Are brought to grief and woe.
i To the workhouse they have gone;
There never was such sad distress,
For shelter for their little ones,
In England before;
From this cold winter storm.
Then why should not the rich begin
To help the starving poor.
Some have money plenty.
And still they crave for more ;
Chorus.
And will not lend a helping hand,
What will become of England,
To assist the starving poor.
They pass him by just like a dog.
If things go on this way ?
And on him cast a frown;
Thousands of honest working men
And that’s the way the working men
Are starving day by day !
Of England are kept down.
They cannot get employment,
Eor bread their children crave ;
And hundreds they have died of want
And now lie in the grave.
There’s great distress in Lancashire,
For many miles around;
The masters have done all they can,
To crush them to the ground !
In many a humble dwelling,
Distress does now prevail.
Their money is so powerful,
That it destruction buys;
Thank God! it cannot purchase life,
For there’s many a family starving,
In England and Wales!
Or none but poor would die !
In a land w'here there is plenty,
Of wealth and golden store;
I think it’s time there’s something
Let us hope our rulers will
Assist the starving poor ;
done,
And set the wheel of trade in motion,
To help the starring poor.
Which has been done before.
There is plenty of land in England,
We read that the Welsh miners,
Are in a dreadful state ;
Preserved for the game ;
And if they would cultivate it,
The trade would mend again.
f Sib 1 !
A. NEW SONG
AVEITTEN ON THE
PRESENT STATE OF OLD ENGLAND,


waw ©files.
MONEY NEGOCIATED
IN SUMS FROM
£5O and Upwards
£lOO,OOO
IN STOCK.


(The following letter has been refused insertion in all the news-
papers. We have a free Press remember.)
TO THE EDITOIi.
<^IK, —Through the duluess of trade and the tightness of
the Banks, lam now driven to my wits’ end. I have
sold a great quantity of books, but yet that does not place
me in a healthy financial position, even although I have
been settled in your midst for the last 28 years. I now
solicit the citizens and people of Otago to raise as much
money as will enable me to visit the Sydney Exhibition and
the King of the Cannibal Islands. 1 should also like a
letter from the Lord Mayor to the Queen, in order that I
may get knighted, or better, make me a Baronet, come back
by the California route, and visit the hot springs in Auck-
land, in order that 1 may improve my health, and afterwards
come back to Dunedin, in order that I may die there, as I
love its people and its institutions.
And, Sir, I will be obliged to part with my book-stall.
which can be done by floating a joint-stock company or by
« consultation,” so that the directors, or the winning member
may have an opportunity of placing Mr. ,1. G. S. Grant at
the head of the concern.
I remain,
Your affectionate Servant,
JOHN GRAHAM,
Oat Exporter to Hokitika, First Rector of the High School ,
and Founder of the Eight Hours System.
