

FUNERAL SERMON
ON OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF
MR. ARTHUR GRAVELY:
WITH THE
SERVICE AT THE GR.V'J
BY THE
REV. DR. ROSS,
SYDNEY.
(COPIED PROM MR. .1. H, PALMER’S SHORTHAND NOTES.)
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY KEMP AND FAIRFAX,
GEORGE STREET,
1852.




FUNERAL SERMON,
ON OCCASION OP THE DEATH OF
MR. ARTHUR GRAVELY:
WITH THE
SERVICE AT THE GRAVE.
BY THE
REV. HR. ROSS,
SYDNEY.
(COPIED FROM MR. J. H. PALMER’S SHORTHAND NOTES.)
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY KEMP AMD FAIRFAX,
GEORGE STREET.
1852.




THE FUNERAX SERVICE.
2kd NOVEMBER, 1852.
After reading the 90th Psalm and part of
1 Cor. xv.. Dr. Ross thus addressed those
present: —
Friends, —Here lies all that was mortal of
Arthur Gravely ; wrapped in a shroud; con-
fined in a coffin. Here, in this grave, is to
be his final resting place. We shall see him
no more, hear him no more, meet him no
more in the social circle, in the place of
business, or in the house of God, until the
morning of the resurrection. Till then we
bid him a long, a mournful farewell.
He occupies this tomb at a much earlier
period than he expected, than we expected.
We knew that he must die, but we thought
not he would die so soon. He was in the
very spring-time of life; full of activity;
a stranger to serious disease, until the last
fatal attack ; and he no doubt calculated, as


we all calculated, upon his residing among us
many years. But how disappointed are all
our hopes, how baffled are all our calcula-
tions ! Death, at the bidding of its Monarch,
entered his dwelling; with rude hand it
seized him while lying on his bed, and now
has laid him at our feet. Oh ! who can calcu-
late upon life with such evidence of its
uncertainty lying before us ? Who ought
to lay himself down on his nightly couch,
without the consciousness of being' prepared
to meet his God, if called upon to do so,
before morning.
Our departed brother’s life was one of ac-
tivity. He was not only “ diligent in busi-
ness he was also “ fervent in spirit, serving
the Lord,” The reality of his piety, the
vitality of his religious principle was attested,
not so much by the profession he made, or
the language which from time to time he
used, as by the uniform tenor of his conduct,
and the general consistency of his character.
He lived the Christian ; his heart loved the
Saviour ; and under the influence of that love
he was constrained to the performance of
many “ good works.” Although, therefore,


no dying expressions escaped his lips as to
his hopes for eternity ; —they could not, for
he was unconscious from the first moment of
his illness ; —we believe that, having lived the
Christian he died the Christian, And oh!
my brethren, of what incalculable value to
be able to say of any one that he has died the
Christian’s death. Because he thus died,
while standing over his remains we “ sorrow
not as those that have no hope.” Because
he thus died, we can not only look down into
his tomb, but through it, and beyond it, to
regions brighter and fairer than music ever
sang, or fancy ever painted. Because he thus
died, we can commit his body to this its final
resting place—confident in the belief that
now, at this moment, his triumphant spirit re-
joices in the presence of God and the Lamb ;
and that, even if permitted, he would not re-
turn from that glorious abode to pay one visit
to the loved ones he has left behind. Oh!
blessed inheritance ! what hopes can be com-
pared with these! what possession can equal
a title to a “ mansion in the skies ?”
If we could say that Arthur Gravely
had been a rich man only, a prosperous


man, a man who carried along with him the
respect of his neighbours and friends, —if we
could say this and no more, how miserable
would our feelings at this moment be. Oh,
what can wealth do ! Oh, what can fame
and reputation do by the side of the grave ?
They could not, had he possessed all the riches
of this world, have re-animated this body;
they could not have accompanied his spirit to
the eternal world; they could not have com-
manded the gates of the Celestial City to be
opened for his admission. No, there they
must lie, while the spirit, poor, unfriended,
and unsaved, would have sunk by the weight
of its own guilt into regions of unutterable
woe. Wealth and honour may be useful to
a man while he lives, they are of no use to
him after he is dead. Would you calculate
the value of riches ? bring them to the side
of the grave; and then you will be able to
form a correct estimate. Would you decide
the course which henceforth you ought to
pursue ? say what is your desire, what your
most earnest wish that you may be when
men shall follow in your funeral procession,
and friends deposit your remains in the tomb.
Oh! there is nothing, comparatively speaking,


worth living for but God, and Christ, and
Heaven. With these, all things are yours ;
with these you may die peacefully ; with
these you may enter into eternity joyfully ;
and with these you may love, and praise, and
be happy for ever.
[The Coffin was lowered .]
We commit this body to the dust, in the
belief that there will be a general resur-
rection from the dead, and that then all who
sleep in the dust shall awake and come forth ;
they that have done good to the resurrection
of life ; and they that have done evil to the
resurrection of condemnation.
“I am the resurrection and the life. He
that believeth in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live ; and whosoever liveth and
believeth in me shall never die.”
“ I heard a voice from heaven saying unto
me. Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord from henceforth: yea, saith the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labours, and
their works do follow them.’'


“ Spirit—leave thy house of clay !
Lingering dust—resign thy breath !
Spirit—cast thy chains away !
Dust —be thou dissolved in death !
Thus the Almighty Saviour speaks,
When the faithful Christian dies !
Thus—the bonds of life he breaks,
And the ransomed captive flies.
“ Prisoner —long detained below !
Prisoner —now with freedom blest!
Welcome —from a world of woe !
Welcome—to a land of rest!”
Thus the choir of angels sing,
As they bear the soul on high !
While with hallelujahs ring
All the regions of the sky !
Grave - the guardian of our dust!
Grave—the treasury of the skies !
Every atom of thy trust,
Rests in hope again to rise.
Hark ! the judgment-trumpet calls !
“ Soul - rebuild thy house of clay ;
Immortality thy walls,
And eternity thy day !”
The Rev. L. E. Threlkeld engaged in
prayer, and the Benediction was pronounced
by the Rev. Dr, Ross.


SERMON.
“He being dead, yet speaketh .” — Heb.
xi. 4.
This was said of Abel, the son of Adam,
and the brother of Cain. He had been dead
upwards of four thousand years, and yet the
Apostle ascribes to him one of the functions
of a living man —that of speaking. He had
continued to speak from the period of his
death to the time when the A postle wrote,
nor has he yet ceased. Wherever his history
is known, wherever his faith is proclaimed,
there, in accents loud and emphatic, he
addresses the children of men, and until
time shall be no more, will he continue
to speak to the men of all ages and of all
languages. It would be a curious calculation,
could we make it—but it is impossible—the
thing cannot be done—“ How many minds
have heard Abel speaking, since the day that


his blood cried to God from the ground, and
what the number and what the kind, of im-
pressions that have been made upon those
minds by what he has said ?” There can be
no doubt that they have been varied and nu-
merous —that what he has spoken has entered
into the formation of the most diversified
characters, and combining with other causes,
has produced mental and moral results of the
most important kind. We are apt to view the
brief history of Abel as that of a solitary,
melancholy fact —removed to a vast distance
from us —standing up like some striking
object calculated to draw our attention, and
to excite our wonder; but as if it were
altogether disconnected with, and had no
influence over the present. In this, however,
we are mistaken. There is no Christian
child —there is no child who has received a
Christian education —whose mind has not
been affected, whose heart has not been
touched, whose character has not received
an impulse either of a stronger or of a weaker-
kind, from the history of Abel; and were it
possible for us to collect together the whole
amount of impression that has been made
upon the millions of individuals of the human


race to whom his history has been made
known, we should be astonished by its
magnitude, its variety, and its importance.
But it is not Abel alone who, from among
the dead, speaks to the living. All the dead
thus speak. They may not speak with so
loud a voice, or to so large an audience.
The loudness of the voice and the size of
their audience, depend upon the position
which they occupied when on earth, the
circumstances in which they were placed,
the character they sustained, and the influence
they exercised. Some of the dead speak
in whispers only ; others with a voice
which commands the attention of the world.
It is not the good only who speak from the
tomb; the bad also speak, and by the language
which they employ produce daily impres-
sions and exercise a daily influence over the
myriads of living men whose place of resi-
is still upon our globe. The character of
each generation is formed in a great measure
by the utterances of those who have gone
before. What the men of the present day
are —how they think, and feel, and act —is
to a great extent to be traced to what the


men were who formerly lived, and thought,
and felt, and acted. Each succeeding
age takes its form, its shape, and its
color, in a great measure from the age which
preceded it. My brethren, how solemn is
this thought ! how powerfully ought it to
operate upon our minds. We have been
most seriously affected by those who have
preceded us in the journey of life, and we
shall seriously affect those who are to succeed
us. It is not only whilst we live that we become
a curse or a blessing to our fellow-creatures ;
in a most important sense we do so after we
are dead. When that solemn event shall
have occurred, and when our remains shall
have been collected together in the grave,
then, even then, will the principles which we
cherished —the conduct we pursued—
the example we exhibited—the influence
we exerted —go far to give currency
to truth or falsehood, and encouragement to
holiness or vice, for years and years which
are yet to follow.
Arthur Gravely —the busy andingenious
tradesman, the respected member of this
Church, the indefatigable secretary of our


Sunday schools, respected by all who knew
him, beloved by not a few—has died, but
“he being dead, yet speaketh.” He speaks
with a voice to which from him we have
been unaccustomed; its sounds are strange
and unearthly ; its utterances are solemn;
he speaks to us from the tomb, and we are
met this night to hear what he has to say.
But is he dead ? It is difficult to realise the
fact. Has he gone from us never to return ?
Has he left his business never to resume it ?
Has he parted with his wife and children,
never to bestow again upon them one
token of his affection ? Will he enter
these walls no more ? No more join with
us in public worship, in social religious
service, in Christian enterprise ? The heart
almost rebels against the idea. And yet it
is so ? Asa flower he has been cut down.
As a shadow he has fled away. All that
could be left of him on earth is to be found
in the grave-yard, while his spirit has gone
to the God who gave it.
There are several circumstances, my
brethren, connected with his removal from
us, which separate it from the number of


ordinary deaths, and which have therefore
excited so much surprise and called forth so
much sympathy.
For instance, he was not an old, worn-out,
man ; he had not been wasted with disease ;
he had not been subject to long illness ; he
had not for weeks been laid upon the bed
of sickness; we had not been accustomed
to inquire day after day of his friends as
to the progress of his disease —as to how
he did. Had it been so, we should have
been in some measure prepared for the event.
But how remarkable, how astounding the
suddenness of it ! It fell like a thunderbolt
amongst us; it awoke many that were
slumbering ; it caused others to spring upon
their feet and to look around them with some-
thing like terror and astonishment. A few
hours before he had been walking our streets ;
he had been engaged in the transactions of
business ; he had held cheerful conversation
with many of his friends ; with some he
expected to meet again on the morrow : but
when the morrow came, he was found lying
in the clutches of Death ; that last enemy
had seized him, and smitten him, and laid


him low ; and although every effort was made
to rescue him from his grasp, the tyrant at
last succeeded—after keeping him in a state
of unconsciousness for nearly thirty hours—
in taking him away to that world from whence
he cannot return. At mid-day last sabbath
he died. He knew not that he was dying;
he was utterly unconscious of the process
that was going on in him after the fatal
shaft had pierced him. He could, therefore,
say nothing by which to enable us to judge
of the state of his mind. Had he been able
to speak, no doubt his language would have
been the expression of Christian feeling—the
expression of Christian hope. With what
surprise must he have found himself in
Heaven, without the consciousness of having
passed through the dark valley of the shadow
of death ! With what surprise must he have
found himself transported from thesfe regions
of wretchedness, of trial, and sorrow to
Heavenly happiness —to light and eternal
day! No doubt to him sudden death was
sudden glory. “Oh let me die the death of
the righteous, and let my last end be like
his.”
And then again, he was not an idle, selfish.


useless man. He was not one of those
people who live for themselves, and care
little about the weal or the woe of their
fellow-creatures. He was not a cuxnberer
of the ground. He was not unable or un-
willing to exert himself for the benefit of
others as well as his own. He was not one
who was disposed to sit down and say, “ Take
thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry,” while
there was anything for him to do. On the
contrary, “ whatsoever his hand found to do,
he did it with all his might.” He was a
person of most active habits. Wherever he
was he seemed to be busy. He was busy
at home ; he was busy in the shop ; he was
busy in the Sunday School; he was busy
even with his friends when released from the
cares and anxieties of business. And yet he
was not what we call a busy-body ; he was
not frivolously busy; he never made him-
self busy in doing anything whereby others
might be injured. Generally he sought to
promote, by means of his activity, the plea-
sure, the comfort, and the advantage of
others. In labouring for the interests of
religion, particularly in connection with the
Sunday School, he was quite at home ;in


that he delighted; he grudged no sacrifice
of time or labour, by which its efficiency
might be increased. For several years he
acted as its Secretary; and though often
disheartened and sometimes left almost alone,
still he struggled on, and in spite of all
difficulties persevered in his efforts to advance
the spiritual and eternal welfare of the young.
Had I been asked which of my flock I was
best prepared to part with, Arthur Gravely
was not the one upon whom I should have
fixed.
I may observe, as another cause of the ex-
citement which his death has produced, that
he was a person universally respected.
He filled, and filled worthily, an important
place in our community. He was not one
of those who, when they go, are never
missed. He was not one of those about
whom the world cares very little whether
they live or die. He was not one of those
whose absence is left unmarked whose
disappearance leaves behind it no blank,
over whom no tears are shed, excepting, it
may be, by their nearest relatives. His
position was very different. Few men in


private life have ever gained, by real and
unobtrusive excellence, more respect from
men of all classes than our beloved brother
did; and for few men in private life have
more tears been shed. There was about
him a simplicity of character, an honesty,
a sincerity, an openness, a kindness, which
could not but attract. Scarcely anything
could put him out of temper. He had gained
a wonderful command over himself. He
was also willing to assist any one whom he
could assist, and he spared no trouble to give
such assistance. He sought to do good. He
sought to promote happiness ; —and the con-
sequence is that few men have commanded
more general respect in the transactions of
business, or in the intercourse of social life.
I have known him since my arrival in the
colony, which was shortly after his own, and
during that period his character has been un-
changed, excepting in the way of improve-
ment —Christian improvement—and he has
ever commanded my sincerest esteem. I
believe it would be difficult to meet with any
person who ever saw him seriously out of
temper. I believe it would be difficult to
find any one who ever heard him performing


the office of an evil speaker. Oh, such men are
rare in this world of pride, and passion, and
selfishness; and when they are taken from
us we cannot but mourn over their loss !
I may be permitted further to observe
that had he been a single man —had he lived
alone—had he been placed in such a position
that no one was dependent upon him for
support and comfort and protection ; —still
his sudden and early death would have made
us mourn. But our tears flow fast when we
think of the wife of his affections —now a
widow, from whom he has been torn away —
of the children of his anxiety and his care,
whom he has left behind him fatherless.
For upwards of ten years he enjoyed all the
felicity of domestic life with one who was
devotedly attached to him, and to whom he
proved the kindest, the tenderest, and the
most considerate of husbands. Three
children called him father —one of them un-
conscious of the loss he has sustained. He
was a fond, an anxious parent, strongly
attached to his children. He had followed
two others previously to the grave. His
body lies beside them now, and his spirit,


1 trust, has met them in glory. To the
remaining children he clung with an
affection all the stronger. In spite
of the tears, and the agonies, and the
prayers of a wife, a mother, Death has torn
him away from her and her children, and
left them solitary, desolate, forsaken.
And yet not forsaken, not alone. There is a
God, our God, who hath said that he will
be “ the husband of the widow,” that he will
be “ the father of the fatherless.”
These varied circumstances combined give
an unwonted interest to the removal of our
beloved brother from among us In so far
as we have used the language of praise, it
has not been done for the purpose of
unduly exalting the creature, or of ascribing
to him a merit which he would be the first
to disclaim ; but we have done it for the pur-
pose of exalting the grace of that Saviour
who made him what he was ; of stimulating
you to follow his example ; and of inducing
you to listen with more eager attention to
the voice with which from the tomb he now
speaks to you. To whom does he speak, and
what does he say ?


In the first place he speaks to men of
business. He addresses you, my hearers,
who are engaged in the varied pursuits of
life. His language is : —“ Amidst the
pressure of your daily occupations neglect
not preparation for eternity. The gains of
this world, however great, will not com-
pensate for the loss of the soul. Oh,
there are richer treasures than earth can
ever furnish ; there are nobler joys than
time can ever yield. Aspire after the pos-
session of those treasures. Seek to partici-
pate in those joys. They are worth all
the sacrifice of time, of profit, or of worldly
pleasure, that you may be called upon to
make in order to secure them. “ Give
all diligence to make your calling and
your election sure.” “ Seek first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness,
and then everything else you need will be
added unto you.” What is the world to me
now, had I accumulated the largest amount
of its wealth—had I reached its highest
honors ? I have done with it, and that for
ever. What I did possess I have left on
your side of the grave. Nothing have I
brought with me hither but my naked spirit;


and oh, had I not been washed in the blood
of Jesus, and clothed with the robe of his
righteousness, 1 must have sunk unpitied
and accursed into the pit of everlasting woe.
Blessed be God that while I was enabled to
be “ diligent in business,” I was also enabled
to be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord —to
“ fight the good fight of faith, and tc lay
hold on eternal life.” And now I wear the
crown which the Saviour has purchased for
me ; and now amidst the redeemed I sing
the praises of his love. Oh, heaven —the
heaven I now enjoy, will infinitely more than
repay you for all the effort, and self-denial,
and sacrifice, you can possibly make in order
to reach it. True are the words of the inspired
writer, “ Wisdom,” meaning vital religion,
“is the principal thing, therefore get
wisdom, and with all thy getting get
understanding.”
Thus, men of business, he speaks to you, —
How solemn his voice ! How true his words!
How worthy of your attention ! I know the
excuse which many are prepared to make
for refusing to follow his advice. I can fancy
that some of you are saying, “ I have no time


at present to attend to such matters.” I can
fancy that others are saying, “ There will
be opportunity enough to become religious
before I die.” Is it so ? Can you look upon
the coffin and stand by the grave of Arthur
Gravely and endeavour to justify such
excuses ? He had as little time as you to seek
salvation, yet he sought it, and found it.
You may die as suddenly as he did, and what
then will become of your delusive expec-
tations ? “Be wise to-day, ’tis madness to
defer.”
My hearers, it would be no difficult matter
to exercise your imgination for a moment,
and to suppose that instead of Ms being
smitten by death, you had been smitten—
you who have no time to attend to religion
—that you had been smitten. It is not
difficult to endeavour to realize what your
position in eternity at this moment would
have been, had you thus been smitten—had
you been sent there instead of Mm,. If you
have not had time to become religious, oh,
do you not perceive that in that world into
which death would have hurled you, you
must have been shut up in the prison-house


of rayless, hopeless, despair ? Do you not
see, my brethren, enough in these circum-
stances to urge you to flee from the wrath
to come, and to secure that eternal life which
has been purchased and offered to you by
Jesus the Son of God.
In the second place , he speaks to the
Church with which he was associated, of
which he was a member. It is rather a
remarkable circumstance that on the last
Sabbath of his life, and on the last
occasion on which he visited the Sunday
School, he entered into conversation with
one of the female teachers, and in the course
of that conversation deeply lamented the
deadness and the lethargy that had crept
over us; the low state of spiritual feeling
that seemed to exist amongst us; and at the
same time stated his fear that some striking—
some solemn event would take place
in order to arouse in order to quicken us.
Little did he then think that the blow
would fall upon himself, and that through
him the shock would be communicated to
his fellow-members. You cannot sup-
pose, my brethren, that the views which he


entertained, and which he expressed only a
fortnight ago whilst living amidst this
lethargy, and as he himself acknowledged,
affected by it—we cannot for a moment sup-
pose that those views have been altered now
that he is surrounded by “ the excellent
glorynow that he sees with clearer per-
ceptions ; now that his heart is warmed by a
more enkindling love; now that he has
reached the perfection of his spirit. He,
therefore, now speaks in a manner in which
he never spoke to us before, and from a
position which gives him authority so to
speak, lie speaks to his fellow-members—
yes, they are still his fellow-members; they
are united with him, and he is united with
them, by a bond which even death cannot
dissolve : the members of the Church of
Christ are all saved by the same mighty
Redeemer; are all washed in the same blood ;
are all clothed with the same robes ; are all
justified by the same Spirit; and are all
destined for the same home at last. The only
difference between him and them is that he
has gone before them; that he is worshipping
with the Church above, whilst they are
worshipping in the Church below ; —waiting,


hoping, expecting, however, to be united by
and by to him; to occupy a place on the
same seat; to engage in the same services,
and to join in singing the same celestial songs.
But while he has been for a season exalted
above them, he with all the earnestness of
a glorified spirit thus addresses them,
“ Brethren and sisters, be not slothful,
— c be not weary in well doing
let not a love of ease, or a love of
pleasure induce you to neglect the service
of your Saviour. Present not an ambiguous
character to the world. Let it not puzzle
men to find out whether you are Chris-
tians or not. Oh, show that your hearts
are Christ’s; that His service is your
delight; and that His approbation is your
happiness. Live as brethren— c Bear one
another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of
Christ.’ Let no root of bitterness spring up
amongst you, so that any should be troubled
and defiled, but as one redeemed
brotherhood live in peace and heartily
co-operate with each other, f in every good
word and work;’ and thus God will be
honoured ; the cause of Christ promoted,
extended, sustained; and your own souls


kept in a healthy and happy state. Oh,
did you but know the interest with which
redeemed spirits look down upon you —
could you but even faintly realize the glory
which the Saviour hath prepared for
you; —could you but walk one hour these
heavenly streets, and converse but one hour
with the angels, and listen but one hour to
the songs of the blessed—the joys of earth
would become comparatively tasteless ; you
would determine henceforth to live nearer to
God than you have ever done; your con-
versation would be more in heaven, from
whence you expect the coming of your
Saviour, who is to ‘ change your vile body,
and to make it like unto His glorious body,’
and you would keep your garments pure
and unstained as you journey onward. Oh
could you but see how, in these happy
regions, all love Jesus, and with what
eagerness they strive to honour and serve
Him, you would commence with new energy
every work of faith, and every labour of
love.”
My brethren, refuse not to hear the voice
that speaketh the voice of a brother


from heaven. Let there be great searchings
of heart amongst us, and let us “repent
and do our first works,” and let
us return to God with weeping and with
supplication, and with confession, and let our
prayer be: “Oh Lord, revive thy work
among us, in the midst of the years make
known; in wrath remember mercy.” Oh,
my brethren, let us be anxious that when
we die, none of us enter eternity with the
epithet false — indolent —worldly Christian
branded on his forehead.
But again he speaks. And in the third
place, he speaks to the children of the
School he loved, and amongst *whom
he laboured. You know, my young
friends, the pains he took with you —
the anxiety he felt for you —and the labour
to which he submitted on your account.
And why did he take those pains, and feel
that anxiety, and submit to such labour ? It
was because he loved you, and wished you to
be acquainted with Jesus, and to become
the lambs of his flock, and to be eternally
saved by him. He looked upon you not as
creatures of earth, but as immortal creatures ;


he knew the danger you were in of being
lost, and the many temptations to which you
were exposed from the world, from Satan,
and from the corruptions of your own hearts ;
and he was desirous that you should be
delivered from that danger and made for
ever happy. And do you think he has
altered his views, that he has altered
his feelings, now that he has ascended
to glory ? Oh, no ; were he to come back
again, my dear children —were he to enter
into your school again—what a difference
would you see! He would be not less in-
terested, not less active, but more zealous,
more active, more anxious, for you
than ever. From the tomb he speaks, and
what do you think he says? “My dear
children, you saw my coffin; you beheld it
when it was loweredinto thegrave; and when
you left the burying-ground you thought,
‘ Ah, we shall never see him again in this
world; we shall never meet him in the
Sabbath Schooland then when you heard
how suddenly death came upon me, and
how without my expecting it he separated
me from my beloved wife and children, and
carried me without notice or warning into


this Avorld where my spirit now dwells, I have
no doubt you were sorry for me, and you
wept over me. But weep not for me.
It was Jesus who did it all. It was Jesus
who prepared the grave. It was Jesus who
sent the summons. It was Jesus who com-
manded that I should leave this earth. And
He did it to make me happy. Yes, before He
did it, he had given a command to a band of
bright angels to meet me on the other
side. I hey were waiting to receive
me; and they did receive me; and
they bore me aloft on their swift wings;
and they ushered me into the gates of the
new Jerusalem ; and there my Saviour took
me out of their hands and presented me be-
fore the Throne of His Father and my Fa-
ther, f without spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing.’ Dear children, if you could now but
see me, how you would wish to be with me !
Oh, could you now but behold the splendour
of Heaven, you would be anxious to reach it,
and to become the inhabitants of it. Love
the Saviour—Oh, love the Saviour—and He
will be with you when you die. Oh, love
the Saviour, and He will make you happy
when you die. Oh, love the Saviour, and


He will bring you to Heaven. Oh, love the
Saviour, and then you and I shall soon
meet together in this glorious world never
more to be separated.”
These are kind words —these are encou-
raging words, dear children—let them be
engraven upon your hearts ; and let it be
the prayer of your souls, that you may ere
long see him in glory.
But whilst addressing the children of the
Sabbath School, he does not forget the
teachers with whom he was associated in
conducting it. Were he to speak to you, how
strong would be his language, how earnest
his advice. I have no doubt he would
endeavour to point out in words such as he
never used before, the honour of being
admitted to be fellow-workers with God, in
the great process of preparing young minds
for the reception of the Gospel and for the
happiness of Heaven. I have no doubt he
would urge upon you to be steadfast and
unmoveable in this work. I have no doubt
he would urge you to study and to prayer s
that you might be well qualified for per-


forming the duties of your responsible
office. I have no doubt that he would im-
press upon your minds that the great object
of the labours of the Sunday School ought
to be the salvation of the souls of the
children. My brethren, fancy that you
listen to him, and when you think how
he has been removed from among you,
may the Spirit of God seal powerfully upon
your heart every utterance of his voice.
He has seen wonderful sights since he left
you, although it was only eight days ago.
In order to encourage you, he might be
able to tell you of the high estimation in
which a faithful Sunday School teacher is
held in Heaven, and how when he leaves
his little charge, he is welcomed with songs
of joy there. He might tell you that since
he has entered into the abode of blessedness
he has met with some old teachers—some
who were once engaged with him on earth,
and who, in the heavenly world, gather
round them little circles of those who were
their pupils here. He perhaps could now
tell of this scholar and that scholar —the
poor or the sickly child, who used to sit
upon these forms, but who is now bright


with heavenly glory—who is now energetic
with heavenly power—who is now fit to
be the companion and associate of angels.
Oh, my brethren, you who are engaged in
teaching our youth the way to heaven, be
encouraged by the voice that comes down to
you from Heaven, and persevere while Provi-
dence enables you to persevere, in feeding
the lambs, in doing the Saviour’s work.
There are Sunday School teachers who are
not in heaven—it may be that he misses some
whom he expected to find there. What
a fearful state ! A Sunday School teacher
perish ! and that, perhaps, whilst some of
the children whom he was leading along
the road have actually arrived at the hea-
venly mansions ! May there be much
trembling in the hearts of those who have
reason to fear that they have not yet given
their hearts to God.
I can scarcely trust myself with the last
address which he would deliver. I can
scarcely allow myself to speak what I think
he says to her who was the object of
his tenderest affections—the companion of
his joys and of his sorrows—his bosom


friend. I can only fancy I hear him say,
“ Weep not for me, but weep for yourself
and for your children ; —and yet why weep?
why weep ? Has not God promised to be
your husband and your friend ? Has not
God promised to be the father of your babes ?
Trust him, confide in him, make him your
protector and your counsellor. A heavy
charge is now committed into your hands.
You have now to do my duty as well as your
own , in reference to the pledges of our af-
fection, They are to be trained up for glory,
for heaven. But he will not leave you to
do it alone—God will be with you —God will
assist you—and, then a few short years —they
will quickly pass —and we shall be re-united,
we and our children together—a happy
family, all sitting side by side in one of the
mansions of the new Jerusalem,”
“ Oh, could you see the happy place
Where perfect peace I find,
You'd grieve, not that I’ve gone before,
But that you’re left behind,”
With such consolations let the grief of
the widow be chastened. With such hopes
let her soul be cheered. And as you


and your little ones travel along the vale
of mortality, frequently look up to that
bright world where he now is, and as he
beckons you on, renew with confidence your
Christian journey, and run with patience
your Christian race. Your sorrow will by
and by be turned into joy. Your tears will
soon be wiped away, and then the days of
your mourning shall be ended.
Are there any present who have re-
fused to listen to this voice—the voice of him
that has been speaking from the tomb ?
Are there any who have remained untouched
and unaffected by the solemn event which
has brought so many together this evening ?
on whose hearts no impressions have been
made, and in whose bosoms no sympathy has
been awakened ! This cannot be the case,
surely, with any child of God—with any
genuine Christian ! On the contrary, have
not all such been led to great searchings of
heart, to deep prostration of soul before God,
to humble confession of sin ? And does
there not ascend from many an anxious spirit
the prayer, “ Lord make me to know my end,
and the measure of ray days what it is ; that


I may know how frail I am.” And is not
the determination formed to live more for eter ■
aity than for time; more for heaven than for
earth ; and in a new and more vigorous
manner to glorify God in body and in Spirit,
which are his ?
Still all who hear me are not the children
of God ; and amongst those who are not his
children, there may be some who have re-
fused to listen to the voice of the dead. I
c all upon such to listen to the voice of the
living—of him who now speaks to them in
the name of God. I point to the grave of
our brother, and in the name of your
Maker—in the name of Him who died on
Calvary—and in the name of all the dead—l
cry, prepare to meet your God. I point to
the spot where he so suddenly fell under the
blow of the’King of Terrors, and I cry, “ De-
lay not to secure immortal life.” “ Now is
the accepted time , now is the day of salva-
tion.”
“ Haste ! Haste ! He lies in wait, He’s at the door—
Insidious Death ! Should his strong hand arrest,
No composition sets the prisoner free.”


I point to the place of wretchedness and
woe, where the wicked weep, and wail, and
gnash their teeth, and from which our beloved
brother, by the grace of God, was so merci-
fully delivered; and I cry. Flee, “ fleefrom
the wrath to come” Oh! “ who among you
can dwell with the devouring jire ? Who
among you can dwell with everlasting burn-
ings ?” I point to that bright world where his
brow is now wreathed with unfading laurel —
where angels are his associates and
where his joys are pure, overflowing, and
everlasting —and I cry, “ Lay hold on eternal
life” Oh, “It is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners,” even the
chief! Reject him —you die. Embrace him
—and the smile of Heaven is yours, and the
favour of God is yours, and the joys of
eternity are yours.


AFTER THE SERMON
THE FOLLOWING HYMN WAS SUNG:
Thou art gone to the grave ! but we will not deplore
thee,
Though sorrows and darkness encompass the tomb.
The Saviour has passed through its portal before thee,
And the lamp of his love is thy guide through the
gloom.
Thou art gone to the grave! we no longer behold
thee,
Nor tread the rough path of the world by thy side;
But the wide arms of Mercy are spread to enfold thee,
And sinners may hope, since the Sinless has died.
Thou art gone to the grave ! and, its mansion forsaking,
Perhaps thy weak spirit in fear lingered long :
But the sunshine of Paradise beamed on thy waking,
And the sound which thou heardst, was the seraphim’
Thou art gone to the grave! but ’twere wrong to deplore
thee,
For God was thy ransom, thy guardian, and guide.
He gave thee, He took' thee, and He will restore thee;
And death has no sting, since the Saviour has died.
Kemp and Fairfax, Printers, Lower Georgc-street, Sydney.








