



GEORGE RARINGTON.


A Genuine
Copy of a LETTER,
FROM THE NOTED
George Barrington
TO A
Gentleman in the County of York.
FROM THE
Cape of Good-Hope,
On his paffage to
Botany-Bay.
Taken from the Doncafter Journal, of
Saturday, November 5, 1791.


A
Genuine Copy of a Letter
FROM
The noted George Barrington.
Cape of Good-Hope , July \Ji, 179 1.
IMR Sir, r :
¥ ANTICIPATE* the furprife you muff feel at
the receipt of a letter from this part of the
Globe, but I am inclined to hope it will prove an agteeable
furprife I have reafjn to conclude, that my old friend
Report, with its ufual accuracy—its particular attention
to every matter which concerns me, has pionounced me to-
tally loft, or, to ufe a fea-phrafe, that I am by this tim tfafe
in Davy ’Jones's locker. A time, therefore, that brings you
authentic intelligence to the contrary, may not be quite un-
acceptable.—You have favoured me with feme fliare in your
efteem 5 and you will do me the juftice to believe, that I
cannot be/infenfrble to your merit. And I affine you, Dear
Sir, that about this time twelvemonth, 1 had flattered myfelf
ftrongly with the agreeable hope of renewing feme of thofe
convivial hours I have had the pleafure of palling with you,
—But,—How uncertain are all human exptflatious 1 How
foon are the brighteft profpsfls clouded ! and what fudden,
furprifing revolutions will fometimes happen, in the affairs
of nations, as well as individuals lf ever there was a
man


man who feemed deftined to encounter difficulties, and td
Itmggle with difappointments—hat man is myi'df. At the
very moment I was going to Doncalter, fume unlooked-for
circnmftances frndraied my intention ; fo I commiffioned an
acquaintance, who was pwffing that way, to call on you with;
my refpefts, and tire cafh you were fo kind as to advance
fome time before, on my account. He affined me he would
not fail; and 1 hope he has been punftual.
A month had fcarcely elapfed afterwards, when the un-
fmtunate affair took place which has compelled me fo be a
(ircum-navigalor Perhaps I tmrwyiong to call it unjortu -
nate\ peihaps all is belt that happens.'—But I leave you to
judge, Sir, what I mult feel, when we weighed anchor at
Spithead,—and our fails fwelled with that wind which was
to waft me, lor ever, peihaps, from every thing that was
dear to man I—God knows what a number of pamful cir-
cumftances 1 had then to combat; but furely they were
luflicrent to difmay the (touted heart.—lt I was not penny-*
lets, I was at lead next door to it; not being pod ff-d of
a dozen guineas, including cadi, neceffnies, and property
of every kind.—What a dock for fo valt a voyage ! What
a piovifion—lo carry me iiom one end of the world to the
other—and to lay a foundation for future fubfidence !
, \ was at the fame time in fo impaired a date of health,
as to damn the probability that i fhould futvive a mont n
in fo condor tfefs a condition! Thefe, however, were
the lead of my affl ft.ons; yet was then I found what
the heart was capable of end unrig—what amazing vefouices
it could d;ike out, to fupport itfelf under the word embar-
raffmentsl Till that hour I never thoroughly knew that the
mind was indeed a kingdom in itfelf; —it told me that life,
at the bed, was nothing more than a voyage or a journey,
—and, however tough to fome, or fmooth to others the
road might prove, it"mud dill have an end;—and, where
was the difference then ?
The


The world imagined I had done it feme injury ; hot how-
ever it might have been magn fied by the tongue of Detracti-
on, the balance between us, in that refp“&, was tnoie equal
than was generally fuppofed, for I alfo had met Tome inju-
ries, and thofe of as haifh a nature as any 1 ever infl fled
But complaint was childifh; and, I knew, it was by manly
fortitude, not petulent repining, that great difficulties were
to be fui mounted. The ills I had done, or the ills I had
received, were come to a crifis. My own mifconduft [
might regret, and time, poffibly, might repair; but I
could not recal it. And the injuries I had received, in the
ccurfe of my life, had always proceeded from peifons who
were not worth caftmg a thought upon. So I banifhed
from my mind every id'e vexatious idea, and every emotion
of refentment and ill-nature. You, virtuous Europeans!
1 hope, will not be lefs generous than a poor banifhed finner
you will pardon me, I truft, the many ruffianly deeds I have
done, —the many friends I have betrayed,—the many houles
I have fired,— -the many murders I have committed, —and
the many treafons I brave coirfpired againft my (overeign and
the nation.. To be ferious, fur, I left England, and
Europe, without a fpaik of malevolence in my mind againft
any creature whatever; wilhing every good heart as much
happinels as it could v >fh itfelf, and every bad one to become
better; perfectly refigned to whatever might happen; and
not without hope in the kindntfs of Providence. With this
temper I committed myflr to the winds and waves—and
with this temper, I hope, I (hall defeend to the grave ; and I
am very eafy about where that rrave may happen,—whe-
ther in Europe— “in New South Wales— or in the hofbmof
the ocean. To my thinking, it is of little confequence wheie
the refiduum lies, ft the fprrit afeends to Heaven.
VVe have now been three months and two days at Tea,
without putting into, or almoft without feeing any land, till
we arrived heie. It has pleafed God to preferve mem a won-
derful manner, under fuch complicated afflsCbon as I had to
ftruggle


ftmggle with ; and our voyage, fo far, has exceeded mv fau-
guine expectations. I find myfelf now, at the Cape of
Good-Hope, in much better health than when I left En-
gland, and in (tillable in as compofed, if not as
chearful fpiiits as ever I was in my life.
The gout and iheumatifm. with that dreadful diforder,
the (curvy, which too often makes fuch cruel havoc at fea,
I never had a touch of, and (till, thank heaven, am as
gieat a ftianger to them as ever, as far as relates to mv-
feif. I have had no illnefs of any fort fince we failed, not
even an hour of the ufual fea-ficknefs; and I know you
will feel pleafure from hearing, that it has pleafed God to
raife me up valuable friends, even in this remote region.
Our fhip is moored at prefent in a fine bay, com-
pletely (helteied on all Tides, by hills and moun-
tains of various figures, forming a finglar and very
romantic view.—Here we take in water, vegetables,
and every other refrefhment To agreeable to people
who have been a long time at fea, and efpecially
to thofe who have been ufed to the comforts of
what is wfually called good living.—Here is tole-
rable beef, and as fine well-fed mutton as ever I
Taw in England. A very large fheep, which we
have laid in for the ufe of our mefs, coft four dol-
lars. As for fuch vegetables as carrots, cabba-
ges and onions, they are not to be excelled in any
part of the world ; and the fame may be faid of
the fruits, particularly Tweet oranges, and pear as
fine, and by many degrees the largeft 1 ever Taw
before, yet it is now the very depth of what they
call winter; though, from the beautiful verdure
of the cultivated Tpots, and the mildnefs of the
ambient air, an Englifhman would be apt to con-
clude


dude, it was fpring entering into rummer.—
I have drank your health in r. bumper of choice
wine, and you were fometimes remembered during
the voyage, over a can of grog. You will (caicely
believe. Sir, that arrack, fo much eftetmed in Eu-
rope, can be laid in here for half-a-dollar per gal-
lon ; (itch, however, is the cordial fad—There are
in the bay with ur-, two flops (which have been at
Port Jackfon with people—have fince touched at
China—and are nowon their return to England,)
the Lady Juliana and the Neptune, which afford
us an excellent opportunity of writing home. But,
why fnould 1 fay home? What is England —or
Ireland, —or Scotland, tome now? Though I
wifit their profpeiity as much as the ricnc.it of their
inhabitants, yet, that is my country where 1 can
find content, and content is confined to no parti-
cular country, it may be excluded from a palace,
it rnay be found in a wildernefs* Thank heaven,
X am net much influenced by local prejudices.
The nearer we approach the deftined Land,
where, in procefs of time, every man is to fit under
the Jhade of his ovon vine and his ov:n fig-tree ; the
more favourable the account becomes; —hut J Hiall
fufpend my opinion till I can judge from my own
obfervation. There is no doubt but the country
is very romantic, and the air faluhrious; and thefe
are material points. It is expefted that in lefs
than two months we fhall arrive there.
You find. Dear Sir, that though in a flate of
captivity, I am ftili pofLfled of two of life’s great-
eft-


eft: bleflings,—health and a tranquil mind, Sweet
hope, like a faithful, generous companion, has
conftantly attended me, in all my troubles, and
ftiil continues unlhaken by my fide. And why
Ihould I defpair, who am yet in the prime of years.
The united efforts of falfehood, malice, and ran-
cour, have not been able to deprive me of life or
health, —of the efteem and good wifties of the libe-
ral part of the world, —or even of that firmnefr of
mind, which the fmiles of fortune can not give and
her frowns can not take away.—l have the iatis-
faftion to know, that my heart never was by any
means fo black as fome blacker hearts have fug-
gefted ; —and as for my life, it is in the care of
Providence. De j th is the grand ultimatum of the
wealth and the poverty —the pleafure and the pain
of the world ‘his muft happen to every one;
and they who live longeft, will perhaps have meft
reafon to fay, that ’tis “ All vanity and vexation of
“ fpirit.” How many did 1 leave behind, in
Europe, in ample pofiefllon of beauty—youth—
health —and fplendour, who have fince experienced
by the gripe of death, how vain a thing life is!
I fincerely hope, Dear Sir, that you, and the
whole of your amiable family are hearty and well.
If wifhes had power, mine would not be wanting
to make you as happy as your own defire.
But you have one of the greateft pofTcffions it)
the world—a worthy "heart; —with it a man can
not be very unhappy in the rougheft ftorm of ad-
verfuy;


’ -Tity ; and without it, you may depend, that
lutes, titles, and fuccels, can impart but an empty
fatisradlioM. '
If f live till New-Year’s Day, I will drink your
health at the Antipodes, though it be but in the
crsftal element.
I have fouvetimes done it in a more exhilarating,
though not, perhaps, in a more fafe or wholefome
beverage. Farewel Dear .'.ir, ? Whatever cli-
mate or circumftances 1 may be in, I fhail not ceafe
to be, —with ftacere regard and efteem,
Your obliged and moP obedient Servant,
GEO.RARINGTON.
PS I updcrftand it was rcpo r ‘ H in the papers,
that when 1 came on board, my hair was cut
off, and my clothes taken away. But nothing
of the kind happened to me. I was permitted
to retain both; and continue to this hou' to
meet every indulgence that can foften mv fi-
tuation. My refpe&s and w armfcft wllhes
wait on all fronds.
