

*
A GLOSSARY
Terms Used in Mining Geology
* » 'G I S'
.
BY
F. DANVERS POWER, F.G.S.
' I
Published by the
Australasian Institute of Mining Engineers.
Price,
3s.
JUehulu': ‘ ‘ C
SANDS & McDOUGALL, PRINTERS, KING WILLIAM STREET. S°
■- •. - • )K ..„
bAJN i)b MCI U \j* ALL, IKIiNXLKb, IvijNU \> ILLIAM bl KIEI .
1895. X
J
•**■ : ' ** ■ r- e tarflS#*




A GLOSSARY
Terms Used in Mining Geology.
« A
By F. DANVERS POWER, F.G.S.
Published bt the
Australasian Institute of Mining Engineers.
‘ v i v *
Paper Covers, 72 Pages, Demy Bvo.
Price, 3s.
Copies supplied by URIAH DUDLEY, Secretary,
Broken Hill, N.S.W., Australia.
rI f HIS work fills a long-felt want by those connected with mining. It places
on record in a concise but clear manner the correct meanings of technical
words which appear in descriptions of mineral deposits, thus serving as a
standard work of reference to miners, geologists, investors, legal managers and
others whose duties bring them in contact with such terms. This work will go
a long way to annul the confusion so frequently brought about by the loose use
of such words. In order to increase the value and interest of the work, the
author has added, in many cases, the derivations of- the words.
I tllUl Ilclg ti VIVI . HI HlfHI J LUiijCo j UllO Llvt XV Ci 11U1AO U X Ullv VV Ul
July, 1895. -
——
■
Authors alone are responsible for the statements in their respective papers.
All Rights of Publication and Translation are Reserved.
:
Sands and McDougall, Printers, King' William Street.




* * "eiwote
TERMS USED IN MINING GEOLOGY.
BT F. DANVERS POWER, E.G.S.
When perusing articles which treat of mining geology, and when
talking with miners on the field, one is at times unable to follow
the exact thoughts intended to he expressed, owing to the introduction
of occasional technical words, the meanings of which are not
thoroughly understood either by the speaker or by the hearer, or
possibly by both; and laymen at times accuse their technical
brethren of attempting to confuse them by employing unusual words
in their conversations and writings. Technical words are necessary
adjuncts to all arts and sciences. They creep into our language,
frequently unnoticed by those who employ them, as being more concise
and convenient than longer sentences to explain frequently recurring
expressions. In many cases these words give the finest shades of
meaning, such as agglomerate and conglomerate , but in others they are
extremely ambiguous, for instance black sand, which in some places
means ilmenite, in others, chromite, tourmaline, cassiterite, in fact,
any black mineral occurring in the form of sand. Then, again, much
confusion is caused by the same rock or mineral having different
names, e.g., fluorspar, which is known as cand, cann, cauk, kawk,
blue-John, Derbyshire spar, &c. The multiplicity of local names is
of course chiefly found among the more common minerals, which are
widely distributed. ISome people have a propensity for using words
the meanings of which they understand as little as they do how to
pronounce them. We have heard such persons speak of vuqhs as
“ bugs,” and oxides as “ox hides,” and to show that there was no
mistake in their intentions, we have seen these and other words
written in the same way as they were pronounced. Then, again,
some persons, relying more on examples than definitions, get a very
vague idea as to what the true meaning of a term may be. The word
diorite is an example in point, which we have frequently heard applied
to any dyke rock that the miner was unable to recognise as granite ;
in fact, he uses the word in a general sense, just as the field geologist
provisionally employs the word “ greenstone ” for certain rocks, until
he has an opportunity of thoroughly investigating their character.


Owing to the loose and slovenly way of using technical words
connected with mining, they are apt to lose the sharp defined meaning
they at first possessed, and in some cases drift away altogether from
their original signification.
tlhaft; we are becoming more cosmopolitan every day, and
cheap travelling is made so easy that men need not he confined to the
neighbourhood of their native villages all their lives, it is as well to
weed out words of hut local value when there are others in more
general use to express the same thing. Still as these and obsolete
terms are met with in old writings, they are inserted here, not with the
object of propagating them, but to assist those who may happen to
come across them and who, on account of their rarity, cannot readily
ascertain their correct meaning. Such words, together with others
that are considered objectionable or unnecessary, have been printed in
smaller type as a sign that they might with advantage be dropped out
of our vocabulary. If our language be not rich enough to provide
convenient words for our purpose, so that we find it necessary to
encroach on the domains of others, it is as well, since Greek has lent
us so many words for geological purposes, to give preference to that
rather than Latin, and when we have words expressing the same idea
derived from both of these languages, e.g., dendritic and arborescent,
we would sooner adopt the former and strike out the latter. Many
vernacular words have obtained such a hold on geology that they bid
fair to remain, as they have a right to do on account of priority, but
as our knowledge increases new words become necessary to express
new ideas; in such cases the words should certainly spring from
Greek or Latin roots, as these languages are universally understood
in civilized countries.
Eoots are modified by the presence of prefixes or suffixes, so tha
the radical idea is expressed in a new relation. The more commoi
Greek nrefixes are as follows ;
a, signifying absence ; as in azoic, amorphous
afi(j)i, around, about; as amphigene.
dvd , upwards ; as anoge ne.
dvTt', against; as anticline.
Sid, through ; as
tW, upon ; as epige ne.
eV, in ; as ewhydrous.
i'vcov, within ; as endova orph.
t’f, without; as eo-ogene.


etro, within ; as esogene.
/cara, downwards ; as mZogene.
yitera, change ; as weZamorphic.
fidvos', single ;as monocWne.
napd, beside ; as parage nesis, J* il» RCNOLE*
Trep/, around ; as jpeWmorph.
7t/jo, before; as protogene.
vTrep , above ; as hpyerphovic.
vito, under; as hypogene.
The Greek suffixes generally used are :
-yeviv, signifying occurrence; as in amphi qene.
-yvw(Ti9, knowledge ; as oryctognosy.
-7 ovi], generation ; as geo yony.
■l J Be, appearance ;as amygdaloZcZ,
-7£e, belonging to ; as pleochroZm.
-tKo 9, belonging to ;as auistropfc.
-iTtjs', belonging to ; as anamesfZe.
-icXdiv, fracture ; as diacZa«e.
-Xdyos, discourse ; as geology.
-vdpo<t, a law ; as astro nomy.
-oil 9, character ;as amorphous.
-(TKovreno, to view ; as micro scope.
-wSe, hither; geode.
To distinguish the names of rocks and minerals at a glance,
especially when represented by the same word, Dana suggests the
termination “ yte ” for rocks, e.g., dolomyte, and “ ite ” for minerals,
e.g., dolomZZe. The termination -irgs was used among the Greeks,
and was passed on from them to the Romans for the names of stones,
so it is only fitting, that we should adopt it.
J. D. Dana, in his “ System of Mineralogy,” p. 32, writes : —“ln
forming names from the Greek or Latin, the termination ite is added
to the genitive form after dropping the vowel or vowels of the last
syllable and any following letters. Thus yeXas- makes peXavos in
the genitive, and gives the name melanite. The Greek language is
the most approved source of names. In compounding Greek words
the same elision of the Greek genitive is made for the first word,
provided the second word begins with a vowel, if not the letter o is
inserted. Thus for irvp , genitive 7rvpd<s, and op6d<s, comes pyror-
thite ; and from the same and comes pyroxene.”
In long compound words a svllable is sometimes dropped,
a 2


From the Latin prefix—
ad (to), we get ac, ag, al, Ac., as in accretion, agglomerate, alluvial, &c.
con (together with), we get com, con, cor, &c., as in compression,
conglomerate, corrugate, &c.
contra (against), as in contra-\o<ie.
de (downwards), as in denudation.
dis (apart), as in disintegrate.
e or ex (out of), as in eruption, exhalation.
in (in), we get im, in, &c., as in impregnate, indigenous.
per (through), as in percolate.
pres (before), as in precipitate.
pro (instead of), as in prospecting,
re (back again), as in refraction.
se (apart), as in segregate.
sub (under), as in senate.
super (above), as in superficial.
ultra (beyond), as in aiiramarine.
un (not), as in anconformable.
Among the Latin suffixes we find—
-able (fit to be), as in seperaZde.
-al, -an, -ent, -lar, -tive, -ine (all signifying belonging to), in such words
as littoraZ, aeoliaw, iridescerci, tabular, na tive, serpentine.
-ate (to make), percolate.
-ferous (to produce), as auri/eroas.
-ous, -ose (full of), as arenaceows, vadose.
-tion, -ture (signifying a state of being), as in accretion, texture.
It is not our intention to go deeply into the etymology of words
used in connection with mining geology. In many cases it is impos-
sible to establish the original source of a word. Some have been
handed down to us through other languages, such as “chalybeate”
through the Latin chalybs, steel, from the Greek x«A,cO, named from
the Chalybes, a people of Pontus, who made steel; and “ incrustation”
through the French incruster, from the Latin incrusto. In many
cases the root from which a word is derived is given, but it is not
always easy to trace the original, some writers crediting a related
word in another language which has really sprung from a root
common to both of them. Others, again, confuse two words of a
similar sound which really have no connection, and attempt to prove
that they were derived from the same source. When known, the


name o£ the first man who used a word for the purpose which we
define it, is given; and also, when possible, the locality where the word
was first employed.
We do not wish to perpetuate the existence of unnecessary new
words, but since such exist, and other persons may not hold the same
opinions as we do on individual words, they are inserted here.
In manufacturing new words to suit our advancing knowledge
they should be wholly derived from the same language. Names half
Greek and half Latin are objectionable, but words half Latin or Greek
and the other half a modern language are worse. It is allowable to add
the suffix ite to the names of persons, places, or chemical constituents,
but to add it to some common word is not to be countenanced.
The nomenclature of geological terms is very varied, and may be
on account of—
Origin —as igneous, aqueous.
Locality —Syenite, Iceland spar, Caen stone,
Persons —W itherite.
Use —Potstone, pipe-clay, steam coal.
Composition —Nickeliferous, siderolite.
Weight —Heavy spar, barysphere.
Form —Sphere ore, oolitic, hollow lode, saddle reef.
Smell —Horn coal, stink stone.
Motion —Slide, throw, heave.
Colour —White mundic, canary ore, yellow ochre, ultramarine, blue
John, ruby silver, grey stone, smoky quartz, black Jack.
False names —lrish diamonds, oriental amethyst.
Literal Translation from another language—as iron hat.
Provincial names —Farewell rock, caple, peach.
We draw on many foreign languages for our words, especially on
German, in which language the best treatises on ore deposits were
originally written. For examples we may mention :
Arabic —Alkali.
Chinese —Kaolin.
French —Debris, moraine.
German —Meerschaum, blende, stockwork.
Greek— Pyrites.
Italian —Lagoon, lava, tufa, breccia.
La tin —F oli a ted.
Persian —Bezoar stone.
Spanish —Bonanza, pecos, hervidero.


In compiling this list of technical words the works of others have
been referred to, such as :
R. B, Smyth’s “ G-old Mining in Victoria,” (Melbourne, 1869).
D. Page’s “Handbook of Geological Terms,” (Edinburgh, 1865).
G. H. Kinaham’s “ A Handy Book of Rock Names,” (London, 1878).
T. Oldham’s “ Geological Glossary,” (London, 1879).
R. W. Raymond’s “ A Glossary of Mining and Metallurgical Terms.”
(T. Am.I.M.E, Vol. IX., 1881).
R. Hunt’s “ British Mining,” (London, 1884).
D. C. Davies’ “ Metalliferous Minerals and Mining,” (London, 1892).
Besides various dictionaries and scientific papers too numerous to
mention specially.
We have taken rather a broad view of our subject, and do not
consider the study of valuable mineral deposits confined to their mere
extraction only. We require to know about their source, why they
should be deposited in one place or form in preference to another.
These and other questions carry us back to the early history of the
earth, and trespasses in the province of physics and chemistry. This
accounts for the presence of certain words that at first sight might be
considered outside the scope of this paper. We have gone still
further, and have included words indicative of the properties of certain
rocks and minerals, besides names given to materials, e.g., coal classified
according to size after extraction. It is a difficult thing to know
where to draw the line in selecting words, as it is purely arbitrary,
and no two persons are likely to agree on this point. As a rule we
have given the vernacular names of rocks and minerals, and in the
case of common rocks their scientific names also, but in other cases
enquirers are referred to geological and mineralogical text books.
Not only have local mining terms been taken into consideration, but
also scientific ones that the more advanced student in mining geology
may come across in his investigations. Some words, owing to their
misuse, may locally have a different construction placed upon them
than was originally intended; in such cases mere etymology is often
worse than useless as a guide to the present meaning of a word.
Prof. Le Neve Foster, in the preface to his work on “ Ore and Stone
Mining,” expresses his views on local terms in the following words :
“ As far as possible I have set my face against the indiscriminate
use of the local slang of any particular district. Mining is quite
difficult enough without introducing unnecessary technical terms, and


if words which are generally understood by English-speaking nations
will express our ideas clearly, it is far better to employ them than to
fall back upon provincialisms which vary from one district to another.
On the other hand, certain expressions may sometimes recommend
themselves, by reason of their pithiness, for adoption into our
tongue.”
The spelling, more especially, of provincial words is apt to vary.
Letters may or may not be doubled as in fluccan or flucau; or one
letter may be substituted for another, such as calliard and galliard ;
also words derived from the Greek or German commencing with “ k ”
are frequently changed to “ c ” in English.
The following abbreviations are made use of in the Glossary :
Am. —American. It. —Italian. N.Z. —New Zealand.
N.Z. —New Zealand.
Ar. —Arabic. KilJc. —Kilkenny. O.E. —Old English.
A.S —Anglo-Saxon. L. —Latin. Penn.— Pennsylvania.
Aus. —Australian. Lane. —Lancashire. Pers Persian.
Cal. —California. Lein. —Leinster. Scot —Scottish.
Con. —Connaught. Log. —Locality. Sp. —Spanish.
Corn. —Cornish. 3lis. —Missouri. Siued. —Swedish.
Herb. —'Derbyshire. Mun. —Munster. Tas. —Tasmania.
_i Eng. —English. Newc. —Newcastle. Tenn. —Tennessee.
Fr.— French. N. of E.— North of W. —Welsh.
Q-er, —G-erman. England. TV. A. —Westralia.
Clc. —Greek. Not. —Nottingham- York. —Yorkshire.
Ir. —Irish. shire.
Accretion
(L. accretio, to increase)—lncreased by the external
addition of new matter. Used only with reference
to the growth of inorganic bodies; plants and
animals increase by assimilating additional matters.
Accumulated pipe Ig p-
vein j A
Acinose ’ (L. acinus, the stones of grapes)—Granulated like
seeds ; applied to mineral texture.
Actinism (Gk. d/ms, a ray) —Rbt. Hunt. A term used to
distinguish the chemical powers of a sunbeam.
Adamantine spar Corundum.
Aeolian (Gk. A&\os, Aeolos, the god of the winds) —De-
posits formed by winds.
Aerial (L. aer, air) —Relating to the air or atmosphere.
Sub-aerial is applied to phenomena occurring under
the atmosphere, as different to sub-aqueous which
takes place under water.


Writes
Aerolites
Aerosiderites
Aetiology
Aetite
After damp
Carbonic anhydride.
Agaric mineral
Agglomerate
Air-saddle
Alive
Alkali
Allotropic
Alluvial
(L. aes, copper)—A word suggested by M. E.
"W adswortb. See MetalUtes.
(Gk. aijp, air + \/oos, stone) —Meteoric masses
which have fallen to the earth through the air,
consisting for the most part of silicates interspersed
with particles of metallic matter.
(Gk. ayp, air + iron)' —A meteorite con-
sisting chiefly of iron, generally nickeliferous, with
particles of phosphide of iron, carbon, and hydro-
carbons.
(Gk. a’m'a, cause + X 0709, reason) —An enquiry
into the physical cause of any class of phenomenon.
(Gk. aerost, an eagle). —A nodule consisting of a
hard shell of hydrated oxide of iron, within which
the yellow oxide becomes progressively softer
towards the centre, which is sometimes quite empty.
(Gk. nryupucdv, a sort of tree fungus)—Applied to
a soft, light, pulverulent hydrated silicate of mag-
nesium found in Tuscany, from which floating
bricks can be made.
(L. agglomerare, to form into a ball) —Accumula-
tions of fragments of rock, which have been rounded
by friction in volcanoes, not in water.
The upper portion of an anticlinal curve when it
has been removed by denudation.
(Corn.) —The productive part of a lode is said to
be alive.
(Ar. al, the + qalaj, to roast) —In its restricted and
common sense, the term is applied only to hydrate
of potassium, hydrate of soda, hydrate of lithium,
and hydrate of ammonia. They are soluble in
water, have the power of neutralizing acids and
forming salts with them, the property of corroding
organic substances, and of turning red litmus blue.
In a more general sense the term ife applied to the
hydrates of the so-called alkaline earth’s —baryta,
strontia and lime.
(Gk. aXXos, other + t poVos, direction) —Applied
to certain elements that are capable of existing in
two or more conditions in which they possess
different physical and chemical properties, e.g.,
carbon.
(L. ad, together + luere, to wash) —Matter recently
washed together by the ordinary action of water is
said to be alluvial, while the soil or land thus
formed is spoken of as alluvium.


Amazon stone
Amorphous
A green variety of orthoclase.
Amphigene
Amygdaloid
Anamesite
Andesite
Anhydrous
Anistropic
Anogene
Anthracite
Anticline
Anticliuora
Aphanitic
Aqueous rocks
(Gk. a, absence + yopfo/, form) —Having no
definite crystalline structure or form.
(Gr. dptpi, on both sides + ylvopat, I am born). —
When one mineral both coats and lines another
mineral.
(Gk. d/Avr'jcaXov, an almond).—A term applied to
certain igneous rocks containing small almond-
shaped vesicular cavities due to the expansion of
gases in them while still in a soft condition, which
are either partially or entirely filled with other
minerals. The kernels are known as amygdules.
Leonhard (Gk. avd, upon + yeaos, middle) —A
variety of basalt, the texture of which is so fine
that the separate crystals cannot be distinguished
by the naked eye.
(Loc., Andes) —A rock composed of plagioclastic
felspar—andesine or oligoclase—horn blende, augite,
and sometimes quartz and magnetite.
Gk. dv, not + vSwp, water) —Without water in
its composition.
(Gk. livirso 9, unequal + Tpdjros, turn, direction) —
Not having the same properties in all directions
with regard to light; characteristic of all minerals
except those of the isometic system.
Haidinger (Gr. til'd, upwards + 7 dvw, to occur) —
Applied to metamorphic action which has proceeded
from the exterior towards the interior under the
influence of air and water.
(Gk. uud coal) —A non-bituminous coal.
(Gk. ttvTl, on opposite sides + KX/ueiv, to incline).
A saddle back ; applied to strata when bent like the
roof of a house, the opposite sides dipping in
different directions from one common axis; in
contradistinction to syncline.
(Gk. dv-TL, on opposite sides 4- icXiveiv, to incline
+ o/>o9, a mountain) —A finished mountain formed
out of a geanticlinal in which a catastrophe of dis-
placement and upturning has taken place.
(Gk. dcpat'j 9, invisible) —Applied to a fine grain
diorite, the component ingredients of which cannot
be determined except with the help of a microscope.
(L. aqua, water) —Rocks that have been deposited
in water, whether as a sediment carried along or
held in suspension, or precipitated chemically ; in
contradistinction to igneous rocks.


Arborescent
Archaean
Arenaceous
Argentiferous
Argillaceous
Arkose
Arsenical pyrites
Ash mineral
Mispickel.
(Mis.) —Cerussite.
Asphalt rock
Asparagus stone
Asterism
A greenish-yellow variety of apatite.
Atmosphere
Attle
Auriferous
(L. aurum, gold.)—Containing gold.
Ayrstone
Azoic
Azure-stone
Back
the beds.
L. arboreus, pertaining to a tree) —Applied to
minerals when assuming a tree-like form, more
especially when fairly massive ; if so thin as to
resemble the painting of a tree they are generally
termed dendrites.
(Gk. apxnios, from the beginning)—Precambriau
rocks consisting of primitive schists.
(L. arena , sand) —Pocks composed of sand, or con-
taining sand together with other ingredients.
(L. argentum , silver) —Containing silver.
(L. argilla, white clay)—Containing clay, whether
soft or hard.
(Fr.) —A rock found in different formations com-
posed of disintegrated granite.
(Grk. d<r(f)a\7os) —A Californian term for asphaltic
sandstone.
(Gk. a star) —An optical property exhibited
by some crystallized minerals, which show a star-
shaped luminous figure when viewed by reflected
light, e g., asterated sapphire, or by transmitted
light as some kinds of phlogopite.
(Gk. vapor + a^aipa , a sphere)—The gases
and vapours surrounding the earth.
(Corn.) —The barren or worthless mineral sub-
stances extracted from a lode.
(Loc. Ayr, in Scotland) —A soft whetstone used
for sharpening or polishing.
(Gk. a, without + life) —A term applied to
the oldest strata of the globe, e.g., crystalline
schists, in which no trace of life has been found.
Lapis Lazuti.
1. The ground in a mine between a level and the
next workings above or the surface. 2. A curved
branch vein that joins the main vein with both its
ends. 3. (Bendigo, Aus.) The division between
two adjacent parallel beds which has been a plane
of movement, frequently accompanied by veins.
4. Or sline : that joint which bounds a block of rock
which cuts the horizontal one transversely and runs
parallel with the strike of the beds; cutters cross


Balk (Newc.) —A hitch producing a nip.
Balland (Derb.) —Pulverulent lead ore.
Ball porphyry A variety of quartz porphyry in whk
(Tenn.) —Boulders of phosphate rock.
(Mis.) —Baryte.
Ball-tiff
Band
(Newc.) —Stone interstratified with coal.
Banded-vein
Sandstone
Banket
Barysphere
Basalt
Base-metals
Metals not classed as precious ones.
Basin
Bass or batt
Basset edge
Bastard
Batt
See Bass.
Bean ore
Beans
A coarse-grained pisolitic iron ore.
(Newc.) —Small coals.
% Bearing
See Strike.
!, or Balais-ruby (Corruption of Badakshan, a locality in Afghan,
where it is found) —A variety of spinel ; rubicelle.
A variety of quartz porphyry in which balls of felsite
are developed.
A vein made up of layers of different minerals
parallel with the walls. A combed vein.
(White Cliff, N.S.W.) —Flat bauds of a usually
harder nature than the adjoining strata, containing
more or less opal, but found either just above or
below the workable seams of opal.
(S. African, Boer for almond rock) —Auriferous
conglomerate.
1. A hard ridge of rock. 2. A ridge of sand or rock
crossing the bed of a stream.
(G-k. /Sapvs, heavy + acpatpa, a sphere) —The
heavier kernel of the earth enclosed within the
lithosphere in the same Aray that the latter is encased
by the atmosphere.
A rock composed of augite, triclinic felspar, mag-
netite, or titaniferous iron, or both ; also at times
olioine, nepheline, leucite, monoclinic felspar,
hauyne, noscan, and mica.
1. Any disposition of strata downwards towards a
common central point or line. 2. Any area in
which the streams of a district unite to one common
drainage.
A highly carbonaceous shale or impure coal.
The outcrop or surface edge of any inclined
stratum.
A word applied to indefinite intermediate rocks, e.g.,
bastard-sandstone, bastard-slate, &c. In Canada,
Picrolite is called “bastard-asbestos.”


Bedded-vein
Bedding
Bedding-planes
Bed-rock
Bed-way
Bettle stone
Bellies
See Septaric.
Widenings in a vein.
(Corn.) —Stannite.
(Com.) —See Alive.
Bellmetal ore
Ben’
Bench
Bend
B ere site
Bezoar-mineral
Bezoar-stones
Bind, or bend
Binder
Bing-ore
(Herb.) —Lead ore in lumps.
Bitter-spar
Bituminous
Bituminous lime-
stone
mineux.
Originally the term bed meant the surface junction
of two different strata, and seam the line of separa-
tion between them ; now it means a deposit laid
down in a horizontal position contemporaneously
with the rocks about it, being older than that above
and younger than that below. The word is applied
to the thinner subdivisions of a stratum, and its
use is confined to sedimentary rocks : igneous rocks
when horizontal are called sheeis. Gfer., Lager.
A vein running parallel with the strata in which it
occurs, both in strike and dip. Ger., Lagergang.
Stratification, or referring to the arrangement of
the strata in layers.
Horizontal planes formed by the deposition of sedi-
mentary rocks.
The compact rock underlying loose and incoherent
strata.
An appearance of stratification or parallel marking
in granite.
1. A terrace on the side of a river or lake, having
at one time formed its bank. 2. One of two or
more divisions of a coal seam, separated by slate, &c.
See Lind.
(Loc., Beresof, near Katharinenburg, Russia) —
Pyritous highly silicious granite, containing gold.
An oxide of antimony, or antimonic acid.
(Pers., pad, expelling + zahr , poison)— l. A name
for certain calculi or concretions found in the
stomach or intestines of some animals. 2. A term
occasionally employed to designate those stony con-
cretions which are usually composed of several
crusts, one with another, and having these crusts
closely cohering without any internal cavity.
(Herb.) —Tough argillaceous or clayey shales, e.g. r
stone-bind, rock-bind.
(Cork) —Beds of grit in shale, slate, or clay.
A large grain, distinctly crystallized variety of
dolomite.
(L. bituminosus)' —Containing mineral pitch or tar.
(Eng.) —Asphaltic limestone. Er., Calcaire bitu-


Black-amber
Jet, when found associated with amber.
Black-band
Argillaceous siderite, containing sufficient bitum-
inous matter to enable it to be roasted without
artificial addition of fuel.
Black-coal
Bituminous coal.
Black copper ore.
Melaconite.
Black-damp
Carbonic anhydride.
Black-jack
In vein mining applied to the dark variety of zinc
blende, but in alluvial often used for any black
heavy pebbles, e.g., cassiterite, wolfram, ilmenite,
chromite, spinel, tourmaline, &c.
Black-lead
Graphite.
Black-sand
Heavy grains of various minerals which have a dark
colour, and are found accompanying gold in alluvial
deposits, e.g., chromite, ilmenite, cassiterite, tour-
maline, &c.
Black-tellurium
Nagyagite.
Black tin
(Corn.) —Cas si ter ite.
Blanch
A piece of lead ore isolated in hard rock.
Blanket
A layer of vein material spread out over a mineral
deposit.
Bleas
A black shale.
Blende
(Ger. hlenden, to dazzle) —When not otherwise
qualified it means the natural sulphide of zinc.
Other minerals having a similar lustre to zinc
blende are also called blendes, e.g., antimony-
blende, ruby-blende, pitch-blende, horn-blende,
cadmium-blende, mangan-blende.
Blind-coal
Anthracite and other kinds of coal that burn without
flame and light.
Blind-vein
A vein that does not continue to the surface.
Blistered copper ore A reniform variety of chalco-pyrite.
Block-reef (Aus.) —A reef that shows frequent contractions
and bulges. A wavy vein.
Block ore (Am.) —A local term in Wisconsin for large cubical
crystals of galena.
Blood-stone Heliotrope, a dark green variety of jasper with
small spots of red hematite.
-j3l ow A bunch or enlargement of a vein.
Blowers (Newc.)— Puffs or jets of carburetted hydrogen gas
blown out from fissures in coal.
Blue asbestos Crocidolite.
Blue carbonate of 1 zur ite.
copper /
Blue elvan (Corn.) Greenstone.


Blue iron earth
Blue-John
Blue-lead
Blue-peach
Bluestone
Blue-vitriol
Bog
Bog-butter
Boghead coal
Bog-head mineral
Bog-iron ore
Bog-manganese
Bohemian garnet
Bonanza
Bone
Bone coal
Bonney
Bony coal
Book or leaf clay
Bord
Bort
Boss
Botch
Botryoidal
Bottom
Bottom stone
Boulders
A variety of vivian ite
(Derb.) —Fluorite.
Chalcanthrite.
Butyrellite.
See Torbanite.
Torbanite.
Wad.
Byrope.
(Corn.) —An isolated body of ore.
Opaque black diamonds.
Worthless opal.
See Bed-rock.
See Fire-clay.
diameter.
The bluish auriferous gravel and cement deposits
found in ancient river channels.
(Corn.) —A slate-blue very fine grained schorl-rock.
1. (Aus.) Basalt. 2. Sulphate of copper. 3. Lapis-
lazuli.
(Celtic for soft) —Wet spongy morass, chiefly com-
posed of decayed vegetable matter.
A porous ferruginous deposit, chiefly hydrated
oxide of iron found at the bottom of many bogs
and peat morasses.
(Sp. from L. bonus, good) —A large mass of rich
ore in a mine. Ger., Nesterfbrmige JErzmittel.
The slaty matter intercalated in coal seams.
See Splint coal.
Coal with which impurities are so intermingled that
it is impossible to break up the coal in such small
pieces as to separate the impurities.
Clay deposited in thin leaf-like laminae.
The face of coal parallel with or along natural
fissures.
(Fr. bosse, a swelling, knob, or protuberance) A
knob or protuberance of rock.
(Gk. /3drpv9, a bunch of grapes + olco 9, a swelling)
—Certain concretionary forms resembling a bunch
of grapes.
(Sax.) —Any rounded or waterworn blocks of stone,
which would not from their large size be regarded
as pebbles, say those of more than one foot in


Bovey coal
Bowse or bonze
Branches
Brash
Brass balls
Brass binder
Brasses
Brassil or Brazil
Brat
Break
Breccia
Brecciated vein
Bristol diamonds
Brizalian emerald
Brizalian ruby
Brizalian sapphire
Broken coal
Brooch
Brood
Brown coal
A local name for the lignite raised near Bovey
Tracey, in Devonshire.
(Derb.) —Lead ore as cut from the lode.
Small veius connected with larger ones and which
occupy any position except bedding planes.
Gravel.
(Mun.) —Nodulax pyrites.
(Cork) —A thin pyritous grit.
Iron pyrites in coal.
Iron pyrites.
A thin seam of coal mixed with pyrites or carbonate
of lime.
(Aus.) —A small fault.
(It. breccia, a breach) —A conglomerate of angular
fragments cemented together.
(It. brecciar, fragments of stone) —Veins filled with
fragments of rock cemented together.
Irish diamonds. A fine transparent variety or
crystallized quartz.
A green variety of tourmaline.
A, light rose-red spinel; or a topaz approaching a
red colour.
A blue variety of tourmaline.
That size which passes through a 4 inch ring and
over 2f inches to 2\ inches.
(Corn.) —A mixture of various ores.
(Corn.) —The heavier kinds of waste in tin and
copper ores.
A name given to lignite that has lost its woody
structure. It is formed from a higher order of
vegetation than black coal.
Brown hematite Limonite and other hydrous oxides of iron.
Brown iron ore Limonite and other hydrous iron oxides.
Brown spar Siderite, and sometimes ferruginous dolomite
Brown stone (Aus.) —Decomposed iron pyrites. (Mun.) —Grit
and sandstone.
Brown umber A. brown earthy variety of limonite.
Bryle,broyl or broil (Corn.) —The traces of a vein in the loose matter on
or near the surface.
Buck quartz (Aus.)— Non-auriferous quartz.
Buckwheat coal Coal under f inch diameter, the smallest size of coal
made. It generally includes the dirt or culm.


Buddagh (Lein.) —A highly carbonaceous, soft, muddy-look-
ing fire-clay.
Buhr or burr stone A spongy silicious rock used for millstones.
Bull’s eyes Nodules of iron pyrites in roofing slate.
Nodules of iron pyrites in roofing slate.
Bunch Detached irregular patches of ore in a vein.
Bunchy reef A succession of blows following a certain course.
Burk A. hard knot or lump in a vein.
A. hard knot or lump in a vein.
Bury (Kilk.) —Shale.
Caen-stone
(Loc., Caen, in Normandy)—A fine-grained cream-
coloured magnesian limestone belonging to the
Jurassic formation.
(Glk. Kaivov, new + £iorj, life)—The tertiary or third
great geological period occurring next above the
Mesozoic.
Cainozoic
Caking or coking 1 Coal which cakes or cokes together while burn-
coal ) ing.
Cal (Corn.) —A hard gossan; sometimes applied to
wolfram.
Calcareous (L. calx, limestone) —Containing a considerable
quantity of lime.
Calcspar Calcite.
Callen or Kallen (St. Just) —Signifying irony; especially used where
a lode is rich in soft iron ochre.
Calliard or Galliard (N. of E.) —A hard smooth flinty grit.
Callys (Corn.) —Killas.
Cambrian Sedgwick. (Loc., old name for Wales) —The oldest
formation of the Palaeozoic period.
Canary-ore A yellow earthy argentiferous lead ore, generally
pyromorphite, bindheimite or massicot more or less
impure.
Canary-stone A somewhat rare yellow variety of carnelian.
Cand (Corn.) —Fluorspar.
Cann (Corn.) —Fluorspar.
Cannel coal A compact jet-like coal, yielding a bright flame like
a candle.
Canny (Corn.) —Applied to lodes containing carbonate of
lime and fluorspar.
Canon A deep gorge or ravine between high and steep
banks worn by water-courses.
Cap or cap-rock Barren vein matter supposed to overlie ore.
Capel (Corn.) —Hard quartzose slate or selvage forming
the walls of veins.


Capel-lode (Corn.) —A lode composed of hard unpromising
felspathic substances containing minute particles of
chlorite.
Capillary pyrites Millerite (Gler. Haarhies ) or Marcasite.
Carbona (Corn.) —Irregular impregnations of cassiterite off-
shooting from the lode.
Carbonaceous (L. carlo, coal) —Hocks containing fossil carbon.
Carbonate of
bismuth Bismutite.
copper (blue) Azurite. J, .
„ (green) Malachite. *
iron Siderite.
lead Cerussite.
lime Calcite, aragonite.
Carbonates A common term for ores containing a considerable
proportion of carbonate of lead. They are some-
times earthy or ochreous (soft-carbonates), some-
times granular and comparatively free from iron
(sand-carbonates), and sometimes compact (hard-
carbonates) .
Carboniferous (L. carbo, coal) —1. Containing carbon. 2. A
formation noted for its coal deposits occurring
below the Dyas in the Palaeozoic period.
Carbonites (L. carlo, coal) —Wadsworth. See Thermites.
Carbuncle (L. carlo, a live coal) —An almandine cut en cabochon.
Case A small fissure admitting water into the workings
A small fissure admitting water into the workings.
Casing Clayey material found between a vein and its walls :
selvage. Gler. G-angthonschiefer.
Castaways Sterile veinstone.
Catalysis (Glk. KaTaXvai?, an unloosing)—The influence by
which certain substances, without undergoing any
change in themselves, resolve certain other sub-
stances into new compounds by means of contact.
Catogene (Glk. kcitw down + gevw, to occur) —Transmutations
which have taken place in the interior of the earth
with exclusion of atmospheric air. See Hypogene
and compare with Anogene.
Cat’s-brain Sandstones traversed in every direction by little
branching veins of calcite.
Cat’s-eye Oriental cat’s-eye is chrysoberyl. False cat’s-eye is
quartz enclosing fibres of asbestos.
Cat’s-heads (Lein.) —Nodules of hard grit in shale,
Cauk or Cawk Barytes.
Caunter-lode (Corn.) —A diagonal lode connecting two larger
lodes.
Cave (L, cavus, hollow) —A subterraneous chamber.


Cellular pyrites
Cement
Center-country
Ceramites
Chacing
Chalcites
Chalk
Chalybeate
Chamber deposit
Chambered lode
Champion lode
Chatoyancy
Chats
Check
Cheek
Cheeses
Chemistry
Chemites
Chert
Chestnut
Cherry coal
Chimney
Marcasite.
1. A fault. 2. A pinch in a vein.
A hard impure flinty rock.
(L. ccementum, pieces or chips of marble from which
mortar was made) —Auriferous conglomerate.
(Aus.) —The rock between the legs of a saddle reef.
(Gk. Kepafios, potter’s clay)—A term used by M.
E. Wadsworth to include all mineral fictile or
ceramic materials.
Eollowing a vein by its range or direction.
(Gk., cement) —A term used by M. E.
Wadsworth to include limes, mortars, cements, &c.,
used as building materials.
(L. calx , lime) —An earthy variety of limestone.
(Gk. xd\u0, steel) —Applied to waters containing
iron in solution.
A cave filled with mineral matter. Ger. Hoehlen-
fulhmgen.
So called when a portion of the wall of a lode is
fissured and filled with ore.
The main or principal lode of a district.
(Fr. chat, a cat) —Having a changeable lustre or
colour like that of a cat’s eye in the dark.
(N of E.) —Small pieces of stone with ore.
(N. of E.) —The wall of a vein ; upcheek is the
hanging wall, down check the footwall.
Ironstones with symmetrical cracks caused by con-
traction, mostly filled with carbonate of lime.
(Gk. x r lf iei ' a ’ chemistry)—That branch of science
which treats of the composition of substances, and
of the changes which they undergo in consequence
of alterations in the constitution of the molecules,
which depend upon variations of the number, kind,
or mode of arrangement of the constituent atoms.
Chemical, produced by the forces and operations of
chemistry.
(Gk. xiM* 1 ’ chemistry) —A word employed by M.
E. Wadsworth to embrace all mineral chemical
materials.
Coal that passes through a H inch—l inch ring,
and over a f inch —i inch ring.
A soft, friable, thinly-laminated, non-caking bi-
tuminous coal.
1. A chimney of ore is a column of ore occurring
in a vein. 2. (Am.) A Virginian term for limestone
pinnacles bounding zinc ore deposits.


China-clay
Chlorides
Kaolin.
Choke damp
Chorology
Carbonic anhydride.
Chromate of lead
Chromatites
Crocoisite.
Chunk mineral
Chute
Cinnamon-stone
Claggy
Essonite ; a variety of garnet.
Clastic
Clasolite
Clay
Clay-band
See Clay-ironstone.
Clay-iron stone
Clay-stone
Cleat
The master joint in coal seams.
Cleavage
Clinkstone
Clod
Phonolite.
(York) —An earthy variety of coal
Clunch
Coal
Coal-balls
A common term for ores containing chloride of
silver.
(Gk. x<npo9, place + X0'709, discourse) —The science
of describing localities with reference to the dis-
tribution of minerals.
(Gk. xp/ia, the complexion) —A term used by M.
E. Wadsworth to include mineral colouring matter,
paints, pigments, &c.
(Am.) —In Wisconsin, applied to masses of galena
as broken out of the mine.
(Fr. chute , fall, dropping)—Shoot of ore. Ger.,
Erzfall.
(Newc.) —Adhesive, e.g., when coal is tightly j oined
to the roof.
(Gk. /cXauToV, broken in pieces) —Composed of
detrital materials.
(Gk. /cXao-roX, broken in pieces + \l6o 9, a stone) —
A rock composed of broken pieces of existing rocks.
When pure, a hydrated silicate of alumina.
An impure earthy carbonate of iron ; sph aero si derite.
An earthy felspathic rock occurring in veins, softer
than felspar, and having the appearance of in-
durated clay.
The fissile structure in any fine-grained rock, e.g.,
clay slate, that renders it capable of being split into
thin plates, and this in a direction independent of
its bedding or stratification.
An English provincial term for any tough coarse
clay.
A solid opaque black or brown substance occurring
as beds or seams in the earth: formed by the
carbonization of vegetable matter from former
epochs of the world’s history.
(Lane.) —Calcareo-carbonaceous nodules, formed by
the infiltration of water carrying carbonate of lime
from the shells of an overlying shale, down into the
bed of woody fragments where it segregates.


Coal-clay See Fire-clay.
Coal-pipes (JMewc.) —Very thin irregular layers of coal.
Coal-seat See Fire-clay.
Coarse or coose A name given to a vein or the material from it when
it is not rich, the metal being only thinly dissemi-
nated through it.
Cocarde-ore See Sphere-ore.
Cockade-ore Cockscomb pyrite, a form of marcasite.
Cockle (Corn.) —Black tourmaline or schorl.
Cockschute (W.) —Hard silicious beds passing into conglo-
merates in the coal measures of South Wales.
Cockscomb pyrites A variety of marcasite. Her., Kammkies.
Cogwheel mineral (Am.) See Block ore.
Coking coal See Caking coal.
Colloid (Gk. KoXXa, glue + oid ) —Characterised by a jelly-
like appearance.
Colour Minute traces or individual specks of gold.
Combed or ) Lodes built up of plates of different minerals
comby-lode ) running parallel with the walls ; the minerals are
generally arranged with the longer axis of their
crystals at right angles to the walls.
Composition (L. compono, to put together)—The chemical consti-
tution of a rock or mineral.
Compound-vein A vein composed of several minerals.
Compression-vein (L. con , together with + presms, pressure)—A
dislocation vein caused by compression.
Concretion (L. con , together + crescere, to grow)—A nodule
formed by the aggregation —not crystallization—of
mineral matter from without round some centre.
A cavity filled by a deposit on its walls is known as
a secretion.
Conglomerate (L. con , together + glomerare , to gather into round
heaps)—Consolidated gravel.
Contact-lode (L. con , together + tango , to touch) —A lode at or
near the junction of two dissimilar rocks of
different mineralogical characteristics. Ger., Con-
taktgdnge.
Contemporaneous (L. con, together + tempus, time) —That which
takes nlace at the same time as anvthino' else
takes place at the same time as anything else.
Contorted (L. con, together + torguere, to twist) —Applied to
strata that have been crumpled and twisted to-
gether.
Contraction-vein (L. con, together + tracto, to drag about) —A vein
formed by the filling of a space caused by the
drying or cooling of the surrounding rock.


Contra-lode (L. contra , against). See Cross-course.
Copi Gypsum, generally weathered.
Copperas (L. cupri rosa, copper rose) —Ferrous sulphate, iron
vitriol, green vitriol, melanterite.
Coprites (Gk. /coVpos, dung)—A term used by M. E. Wads-
worth to include all mineral fertilizers or manure.
Coprolite (Gk. koV/jos, dung + Xi'Oos, a stone) —Petrified
excrements of animals.
Corbond An irregular mass or dropper from a lode.
Cornstone A sandstone containing calcareous concretions.
Corrugated (L. cor, together + rug are, to wrinkle) —Having a
crumpled or wrinkled surface.
Cosmical (Gk. Koagucd s, of the world) —Relating to the
universe.
Cosmites (Gk. a decoration) —A term used by M. E.
Wadsworth to designate mineral decorative materials,
ornamental stones and gems.
Costeaning or| (Corn, cothas, dropped + stean , tin) —Discovering
costeening ) ore deposits by pits or open cuts.
Cotton-ball borax Ulexite.
Cotton-stone A variety of mesolite.
Counter A cross-vein.
Country Sometimes called country rock. The rocks bounding
an ore deposit.
Course 1. The horizontal direction or strike of a vein.
2. A course of ore is a more or less horizontal
tabular mass of ore of unusual extent and richness.
When the lode consists either entirely or for the
most part of ore it is called a course of ore.
Courses Applied in geology to thin regular strata superim-
posed on one another like courses of bricks in a
building.
Crag (Celtic, craggan, a shell) —Shelly sandstone.
Crater (Gk. tcpartjp, a cup or bowl) —The mouth or orifice
of a volcano, so called from its cup or bowl shape.
Cream (Ir.) —A rusty impure meerschaum.
Creep Any slow movement of mining ground.
Crenitic (Gk. Kpyvrj, a fountain or spring) —The action of
springs in bringing up mineral matters from below,
forming crystalline rocks.
Cretaceous (L. creta, chalk) —The upper formation of the
Mesozoic period.
Crevice 1. A small fissure. 2. See Openings.
Crop The edge of any inclined stratum when it comes to
the surface ; outcrop.


Cross-course A vein intersecting another of greater geological
age, which it frequently displaces from its original
course. If metalliferous it is generally termed a
contra-lode ; when filled with quartz, a cross-course ;
and when filled with & cross-Jlucan ; or different
parts of a vein so filled are designated thus.
Cross-course-spar (Corn.) —Quartz which has a fibrous striated or
radiated appearance, generally showing joints at
right angles to the crystals, disposed horizontally
and normally to the walls of the cross-course.
Cross flucan See Cross-course.
Cross-veins (N. of E.) —Veins running approximately north
and south, which cut the rake veins nearly at right
angles.
Crow-coal Certain earthy coals which contain very little
bitumen and a large percentage of indestructible
ash.
Crown formation (Aus.) —A term used in Bendigo for the outcrops
of saddle reefs crowning the hills, from which
points the reefs dip in opposite directions.
Crow-stone (N. of E.) —A hard smooth flinty grit.
Crush A squeeze accompanied with more violent motion
than usual.
Crushed vein or ) Zones full of interstitial spaces, which can hardly
zone 3 be called open cavities, caused by compression.
Crust (L. crusta, the shell, peel, or skin with which any-
thing is covered) —Applied to the solid surface of
the earth.
Crustification The structure of minerals that have filled a cavity
by successive linings : corresponding to the stratifi-
cation of sedimentary rocks.
Cryptoclastic (Gk. KpvTnds, hidden + icXaaTds, broken in pieces)—
Compact, the component grains being too minute
to be seen by the naked eye.
Crystal (Gk. KpvaraXXos, clear ice) —A solid of definite
geometrical form which mineral (or sometimes
organic) matter has assumed.
Crystalloid (Gk. icpvaTaXXos, crystal + oid ) —A body which,
when in solution, diffuses readily through animal
membranes, and is generally capable of being
crystallized.
Cube ore Phamacosiderite.
Cubic nitre Nitratite.
Culm (W. cwlm, a knot) —An impure shaly kind of coal
or anthracite shale.
Cuneiform (L. cuneus, a wedge + forma , likeness) —Wedge-
shaped.


Cupriferous (L. cuprum, copper)—Copper bearing.
Current bedding See False heddinq.
Cutters The joint of a block of rock that cuts through or
crosses the strata.
b )am P Gases, e.g., choke-damp , carbonic anhydride ; and
fire-damp , light carburetted hydrogen.
Dant (Newc.) —Mineral charcoal; soft, inferior coal.
Dark red silver ore Pyrargyrite.
Dauk, dawk, or douk (A.S. deaggan, to knead) —Tough, compact, sandy
clay found in cross-courses.
Dead lode, or | UU p ro( j U ctiye lode,
dead ground ) 1
Deads Mine waste ; barren unproductive material.
Debris (Fr. for waste) —An accumulation of loose material
arising from the waste of rocks.
Delta (Grk. A, D) —A tract of land at the mouth of a river
of a triangular form like the Greek capital letter.
Dendritic (Grk. devdpiov, a tree) —Applied to minerals that
assume a tree-like form.
Denudation (L. de, down + vudus, naked) —Laying bare: the
removal of overlying masses so as to expose those
underneath.
Derby-spar Fluorite.
Detritus (L. de, down + terere, to rub) —Accumulations
from the waste or disintegration of exposed rock
surfaces.
Devil’s dice Cubes of limonite pseudomorph after iron pyrites.
Devonian (Loc. Devon, in England) —Murchison and Sedg-
wick. A Palaeozoic formation next above the
Silurian.
Diabase (Grk. did/Bams, a passage)—A crystalline-granular
admixture of triclinic felspar and augite, with more
or less magnetite and titaniferous iron.
Diaclase (Grk. oA, double + K \dw, fracture) —Daubree.
Ordinary joints.
Diagenesis (Grk. did, right through + yevtv, to be born) —
Gil mb el. The molecular re-arrangement of sedi-
ments which form crystals of various mineral
species developed in the midst of an originally
amorphous sediment.
Dialysis (Grk. did, through + Xw, to loose) —The separation
of different substances in solution as crystalloids
and colloids by means of their unequal diffusion,
especially through natural or artificial membranes.


Diamagnetic (Grk. Sid, apart + Mdgvrjs, Magnesia)—A substance
which, when freely suspended in the field of the
magnetic force, is repelled by either pole of the
magnet, and takes a position at right angles to the
magnetic force.
Diamond-spar Corundum.
Diamond-tin Large bright crystals of cassiterite.
Dice mineral (Am.) —A local Wisconsin term for small cubical
galena.
Dicey-lode (Corn.) —A lode possessing many horizontal joints.
Dichroism (Grk. £/<?, double + complexion)—A property
possessed by many double refracting crystals of
exhibiting two different colours when viewed in
different directions, e.g., tourmaline.
Differentitation (L. differ re, to differ) —Any change whereby some-
thing homogeneous is made heterogeneous, or like
things are made unlike in structure or composition.
Dig (Corn.) —See Gouge.
Diluvium or diluvial (L. dis, asunder + luere, to wash) —An obsolete
name for old alluvial deposits supposed to be the
result of violent action.
Dimorphism (Grk. twice + goptprj, form) —The property
some substances possess of crystallizing in two
different forms, e.g , marcasite and iron pyrites,
aragonite and calcite.
Diorite (Grk. to separate) —A crystalline granular
admixture of triclinic felspar and hornblende,
generally quartzless.
Dip The greatest downward inclination of a rock or of a
shoot of ore expressed in degrees. When a rock dips
to the south it is called a south dip and a north rise.
Disintegration (L. dis, asunder + integer, whole) —The breaking
asunder of any whole or solid matter due to chemi-
cal and physical forces.
Dislocation (L. dis, asunder + locus, place or position)—A
general term for any displacement of rocks on
either side of a crack.
Displacement vein A vein that occupies a faulting plane
Divisional planes (L. dis, asunder + vid, to separate)—The lines of
separation which traverse rock masses and divide
them into blocks. ( a ) Congenital (Ju.con, together
+ to beget), formed at the same time as the
rocks themselves, e.g., stratification, bedding planes.
(b) Resultant (L. resulto) , like joints caused by
consolidation and contraction, (c) Accidental (L.
ad, to + cado, to fall), e.g., fissures, faults, veins,
(d) Superinduced (L. super, above + in, in + duco,
to bring), accompanied by a change in the internal
structure of the rocks themselves, e.g., cleavage.


Ooab (Con.)—A dark sandy clay found in the neighbour-
hood of many Irish bogs.
Doggers (N. of E.) — Modules of ironstone.
Dog-tooth-spar Acute scalenohedron crystals of cal cite projecting
from a compact mass.
Eolerite (Grk. £o\epds. deceitful^—A distinotlv orvata.l iino-
(Grk, SoXepo?, deceitful) —A distinctly crystalline-
granular variety of basalt.
Dolomite (Named after M. Dolomieu) —Magnesian lime-
stone.
Dotts or dott-holes Small openings in a vein.
Double-refract-) 0 T 7 7
ing spar j See
Douk or donk (Derb.) Flucan.
Down-throw See Throw.
Dradge lode (Corn.) —Applied to lodes or the portions of lodes
in which the ore occurs disseminated through the
vein in crystalline or granular form.
Drift Very loose, crumbly alluvial deposits, which may
have been driven forward by glacial action.
Drift coal Coal formed from accumulated drift wood and
masses of vegetable matter.
Droppers k (Corn.) —Veins that dip from a lode; in contra-
distinction to feeders, that dip into a lode.
Druse (Grk, Bpdaos, dew) —A small cavity in a rock lined
with crystals.
Dry bone 1. Smithsonite ; carbonate of zinc. 2. (Mis.) —
Cerussite.
Dry coal See Splint coal.
Dumb fault A wash-out cau
A wash-out caused by a current of water denuding
a portion of a bed during the general period of its
deposition.
Dyas (Grk. Svci?, two) —Also known as the Permian. The
youngest member of the Palaeozoic period.
Dying-out Applied to veins that gradually get narrower and
narrower until they cease entirely.
Dyke, or dike (Scot., a wall or fence) —A vertically injected sheet
of eruptive origin.
Dynamic (Grk. dvvajuis, power) —Relating to force.
Eagle stones
See TEtite.
Earthy lead ore
Efflorescence
A variety of cerussite.
(L. effloresco, to spring forth) —The deposit left
behind on the surface by water which rises by
capillary attraction and is afterwards evaporated.
Coal broken to pass through a 2% inch to 2f inch
ring, and over 2\ inch to 2 inch.
Egg-coal


Elbow
Electricity
Eluvium
Elvan
Emerald copper
Emerald nickel
Emery stone
End
Endomorph
Endogenous
Endosmotic
Enhydrous
Entoolitic
Eocene
Eolian
Epigene
Epoch
Epsom-salt
Erosion
Eruption
Zaratite.
A variety of corundum.
Epsomite.
A sharp bend in the ordinary course of a lode, from
which the latter soon recovers.
(Gk. rj\eKTf)ov, amber) —A name denoting the cause
of an important class of phenomena of attraction
and repulsion, chemical decomposition, etc., or
collectively these phenomena themselves. The true
nature of electricity is not yet understood.
(L. e, out of + lucre, to wash) —Trautschold. At-
mospheric accumulations in situ, or at least only
shifted by wind, in distinction to alluvium, which
requires the operation of water.
(Celtic, el, rock + van, white) —A Cornish term for
a variety of quartz porphyry composed of a crystal-
line-granular mixture of quartz and orthoclase.
Dioptase.
The direction of the lesser joint planes in coal,
generally at right angles to the cleats
(Grk. evtov, within + popfa/, form) —-A mineral
enclosed within another.
(Grk. evhov, within + yeVo?, descent) —Increasing by
internal growth.
(Grk. evSov, within + wapos, a thrusting)—The
flow of water or solutions through the invisible
pores of a rock inward to fissures.
(Gk. ev, with + vcwp, water) —containing water
chemically combined ; in opposition to Anhydrous.
(Gk. evhov, within + thov, an egg + Xldos, a stone) —
Giimbel. Oolitic structure formed by filling small
globular spaces after the manner of a secretion, in
opposition to extoolitic.
(Gk. yws, dawn + life) —The lowest formation
of the Caiuozoic period.
(Gk. A lo\os, Aeolos, the god of the winds) —De-
posits arranged by the wind.
Gk. eirl, on + <y*fy veaOat, to grow)—Surface action.
(Gk, 67roxy, a check or stop) —Literally a stop or
fixed period of time, but in geology used synony-
mously with age or era.
(L. e, out of + rodere, to gnaw)—The act of
gradually wearing away.
(L. e, out of + rumpere, to break) —A violent
breaking out of enclosed matters.


Escarpment
Escars or Esker
Esogene
Estuarine
Eurite
Exhalation
Exogene
Exotic
Extoolitic
Exudation-vein
Face
See Bord.
Fahlband
Faikes, or Fakes
Fairy stones
(Scot.) —Fissile sandy shales.
False bedding
False bottom
False topaz
Famp
(Er. escarp e, steep) The precipitous side of any
hill or rock.
(Ir.) —Long, often flat-topped, ridges of gravel.
(Gk. 6?, within 7 lvopai, I am born) —When one
mineral lines the inside of another hollow mineral.
Compare exogene.
(L. cestuare, to be tossed) —Formed in an estuary
or a channel extending inland from the sea.
(Gk. evpoew, to flow well) —Daubuisson. A com-
pact or granular felspathic rock, occasionally show-
ing glistening specks of quartz in the mass.
(L. ex, out of + Jialare , to breathe) —Any vapour
or gaseous matter arising from substances or
surfaces exposed to the atmosphere.
(Gk. without + 7 lvog.au, I am born) —When
one mineral coats another on the outside, so as to
assume its form. Compare esogene.
(Gk. ikos, outside) —That which has been
introduced from other regions.
(Gk. ef, out of + uoov, an egg + Xldos, a stone) —
Giimbel. An oolitic structure built up round a
core from within outwards ; in fact a small con-
cretion, in opposition to entoolitic.
(L. ex, out of + sudo, to sweat or drip)—See
Segregated-vein.
(Ger. Fahl, dun-coloured + Band, a band) —Zones
of crystalline schists impregnated with metallic
sulphides, which influence the richness of lodes
passing through them. The rich zones are called
ore hands (Erzbander), and the poor or barren ones
rock hands (Felsbander).
(Scot.) —Fantastically-shaped calcareous or ferru-
ginous concretions formed in alluvial clays.
Current bedding. Laminations in sandstone
parallel to each other for a short distance, but
oblique to the general stratification; caused by
frequent changes in the currents by which the
sediment was carried along and deposited.
In alluvial mining a stratum on which pay dirt lies,
but which has other bottoms below it.
Citrine, a yellow variety of quartz.
(N. of E.) —Thin, soft, tough silicious beds of shale.


Farewell rock (W.) —A name given to the mill stone-grit, because
once reached you may bid farewell to the finding of
any workable beds of coal below.
Fault 1. A displacement of strata accompanied by a
fracture of the rock. See Heave , Hitch, Shift,
Slide, Slip, Throw, and Trouble. 2. (Not,) —A
highly gypsiferous rock occurring between big
balls or nodules of gypsum.
Fault rock The jumble of rock caused by the friction of the
two walls of a fault rubbing against each other.
Feather edge (N.Z.) —The passage from a false to a true bottom.
Feather ore A variety of Berthierite.
Feeders 1. Veins that dip into a lode. 2. A spring or stream
of water. 3. A blow of gas.
Fekes (Scot.) —Shale and slate.
Felstone,or Felsite (Q-er. Fels, a rock) —A finely crystalline-granular
admixture of orthoclase and quartz, which in com-
pact varieties cannot be detected by the naked eye
or with a lense.
Ferruginous (L. ferrugo, iron rust) —Eelating to iron.
Filiform (L. filum, a thread + forma, form) —Applied to
minerals that appear in thread-like forms.
Fire-blende Pyrostilpinite.
Fire-clay A silicate of alumnia that will stand intense heat;
it is almost entirely free from alkalies or lime.
Also known as bottom-stone, buddagh, clunch, coal-
clay, coal-seat, fake, seat, seat-clay, seat-earth, seat-
stone, soft-seat, spavin, underbed, under-clay, and
undercliff.
Fire-damp Light carburetted hydrogen.
Fissure (L. -fissure, a cleft)—A crai
(L .fissure, a cleft) —A crack or open crevice in
rocks.
Fissure vein A vein occupying what was once an open fissure.
Flagstone, or flags A sandstone which separates into thin layers across
its bedding planes. If caused by joints or cleavage
they are called slabs.
Flange Applied to a vein when it widens.
Flat (Derb.) —A horizontal ore deposit occupying a
bedding plane in limestone.
Flat lodes Those lodes which vary in inclination from the
horizontal to 45°
Flat wall (St. Just, Corn.)—See Footwall.
Flexible silver ore Sternbergite.
Flinders diamonds (Tas.) —Topaz.


Floater, or float- ) Detached blocks of lode matter associated with
mineral or ore ) gravel resting on the surface of the rock under the
soil; distinguished from shoad stones by being
further from their source, and more waterworn.
Float gold Grold in small thin scales or fine particles buoyed
up with air that float on water.
Floating reef (Aus.) —Masses of bed-rock found displaced and
lying amongst alluvial detritus.
Floating spurs (Aus.) —Short-lived flat quartz veins.
Float stone A cellular variety of quartz that floats on water.
Floor 1. The bottom of an ore bed. 2. (Corn.) Horizon-
tal veins corresponding with the bedding planes of
strata ; they are segration lodes, and are not caused
by displacement.
Floran tin (Corn.) —Tin ore scarcely visible in the stone.
Flos-ferri A corailoidal variety of aragonite.
Flucan, fluccan, h
flookan, or > (Corn.) —A soft clayey substance. Casing.
Hooking )
Flucanny lode A lode having flucan on one or both walls, and
sometimes in the centre.
Fluorspar Fluorite.
Flying reef A broken, discontinuous, irregular vein.
Foliated (L. folium , a leaf) —Consisting of plates or fine
layers.
Foliated tellurium ISTagyagite.
Footwall The lower side or boundary of a lode, opposite the
Tianqing wall.
Forest marble See Landscape marble.
Formation (L. formatis , a plan)—Any assemblage of rocks
which have some characteristic in common, whether
of origin, age, or composition.
Fortification marble See Landscape marble.
Fossil (L. fossilis, dug out)—l. Native fossils or minerals.
2. Extraneous fossils, or the bodies of plants and
animals accidentally buried in the earth.
Fossil ore Fossiliferous red hematite
Fossil paper See Mountain paper.
Foundation (lr.) Gravel.
Free burning coal See Splint coal.
Freestone A sandstone or limestone which can be cut into
blocks in any direction without a marked tendency
to split in any one place more than in another.


French chalk
A fine granular variety o£ talc.
Fuller’s earth
G-abbro
(Corn.) —A hard rusty gossan
See Calliard.
Galliard
Gangue
Gannister
Gash vein
G-eanticlinal
Gem
Geneva ruby
Geode
Artificial ruby.
Geology
Geognosy
Geogony
Certain soft unctuous clays employed in the fulling
of woollens.
A rock composed of a triclinic felspar (generally
labradorite) and dial 1 age. When altered, the felspar
is represented by sassurite, and the diallage by
hypersthene or smaragdite.
(Ger. Oang, a vein) —Veinstone. The matrix in
which the ore occurs.
(N. of B.) —A local name for a fine close-grained
silicious clay that occurs under certain coal beds in
Derbyshire, Yorkshire, and the North of England.
A fissure vein which is confined to a particular
rock or bed, and which does not extend to the
adjoining rocks.
(Gk. 7 rj, the earth + ami, on opposite sides + rcKlverv,
to incline) —Dome-shaped bendings, not only of the
strata or formation, but of the earth’s crust covered
with its strata, which may be folded or not folded.
(L. gemma, a precious stone) — 1. Popularly speak-
ing a general term for any precious or semi-precious
stone, especially when cut or polished for orna-
mental purposes. 2. Archseologically, the term is
restricted to engraved stones, e.g., intaglios and
cameos. 3 In the mineralogical sense, one of the
orders of minerals used by |Mohs, distinguished by
their hardness —enough to scratch quartz—, trans-
parency, non-metallic lustre, but generally brilliant
and beautiful.
(Gk. 7 ewSr/s, earthy) —Originally applied to nodules
of indurated clay or ironstone, with a core of soft
earthy ochre or a loose kernel; now applied to all
rounded nodules having internal cavities, whether
empty, nucleated, or lined with crystals.
(Gk. 7 rj, the earth + XO7OS, doctrine) —Embraces
all that is known of the constitution and history of
our planet.
(Gk. 7 rj, the earth + 7 vCbmn, knowledge)—Absolute
knowledge of the earth; in contradistinction to
geology , which embraces both facts and our reason-
ings.
(Gk. 7/), the earth + 7 ovrj, birth)—The abstract
speculation regarding the original formation of the
earth.


Geography
Geosynclinal
Geotectonic
Geyser
Giant granite
Girdle
Pegmatite.
Glacier
Glance
Glass tiff
Glauber’s salt
Glist
Mirabilite.
(Corn.) —Mica.
Gneiss
Gossan
Gossany lode
Gouge
A lode filled with gossan.
Grain tin
Granite
(Corn.) —Crystalline tin ore.
Granitite
Granoid, or ")
granitoid )
(Gk. 7 fj, the earth + gpacfreiv, to describe) —A
description of the earth including its physical
structure and characteristics, natural products,
political divisions, and the people by whom it is
inhabited.
(Gk. 7 rj, the earth + avv, with + kKlvqlv, to in-
cline)—Basin-shaped bendings, not simply of the
strata or formation, but of the earth’s crust covered
with its strata, folded or not folded.
(Gk. r pi , the earth + tcVt wv, a builder) —Struc-
tural geology.
(Literally “rager” or “roarer”) —An Icelandic
term for the intermittent boiling springs or
fountains in that island.
(Newc.) —1. A thin stratum of coal. 2. Thin beds
of a hard compact kind of limestone.
(L. glades, ice) —Accumulations of ice and snow
which collect and creep down valleys and ravines.
(Ger. Olanz, lustre)— A pplied to minerals having a
metallic lustre, e.g., bismuth-glance (bismuthite),
cobalt-glance (cobaltite),copper-glance (chalcocite),
glanee-coal (anthracite), glance-spar, iron-glance
(specular hematite), lead-glance (galena), molybden-
glance (molybdenite), nickel-glance (gersdorffite).
(Mis.) —Calcite.
A crystalline schist composed of quartz, felspar, and
mica.
(Corn.) —Hydrated per-oxide of iron, often quart-
zose, found capping lodes that contain ferruginous
minerals.
(Am.) —A soft clay seam beside a vein, cross-
course, or slide ; so called because it can be gouged
or scooped out.
(L. granum , a grain)—A crystalline aggregate of
quartz, felspar, and mica. Varieties are formed by
the omission of one of these minerals, or by the
addition of accessory ones.
Pose. A compact finely crystalline aggregate of
orthoclase, quartz, and mica, occurring in veins.
(L. granum , a grain) —Composed of crystalline
grains.


Granulite A schistose rock composed of felspar (orthoclase
and microclene) and quartz, and contains as a rule
small garnets; schorl and a little mica are of
common occurrence.
Graphic granite (Gk. 7 pacfiw, to write + L. granum, a grain) —A
Grapholites
Grate coal
Gravel
Greasy quartz
Green carbonate
copper
Green copperas
Green earth
Green lead ore
Green stone
Green vitriol
Grey antimony
Grey beds
Grey cobalt ore
Grey copper ore
Grey ore
Grey stone
Greisen
Grit
Growan lode
Grubbin
Guano
Guides
Gutter
variety of pegmatite having a pattern that bears a
rough resemblance to Hebrew characters.
(Grk. 7 pa(prj, drawing + Xt'6o ?, a stone) —A word
used by M. E. Wadsworth to include all mineral,
graphic, or illustrative materials.
See Broken coal.
Accumulations of loose waterworn fragments when
the pebbles range from the size of peas to that of
hens’ eggs.
See Milk quartz.
Malachite.
Melanterite.
Glauconite.
Pyromorphite.
A provisional term applied to all green-looking
igneous rocks that are not capable of being readily
determined on the field, e.g., diabase and diorite.
Melanterite.
Antimonite.
(N, of E.)—A stratum formed by a mixture of
shale and sand.
Smaltite.
Tetrahedrite and chalcocite.
(Corn.) —Chalcocite.
Scrope. Trachydolerite.
A crystalline aggregate of quartz and mica.
Any hard sandstone in which the component grains
are less rounded or sharper than in ordinary sand-
stone.
(Corn, growan, a grain)—A lode is so termed when
it is filled with partly decomposed fragments of
granite.
A kind of ironstone.
A Peruvian term for a manure formed by the
droppings of sea-fowl intermingled with other
animal remains. It is also applied to the droppings
of bats accumulated in caves.
(Corn.) —Cross-veins in the St. Just district.
(Aus.) —The lowest portion of a lead.


Hade The inclination of a fault or vein referred to the
vertical; the dip refers to the horizontal.
Hair-salt Epsomite or native sulphate of magnesia.
Halvans (Corn.) —Ore much mixed with impurities.
Hanging wall The upper side boundary of a lode, opposite the
footwall.
Hard carbonates See Carbonates.
Hard coal See Splint coal.
Hard pan Boulder clay or till; the unstratilied stony clays of
the drift formation.
Hard rock phos- ) (Am.) —A term used in Florida to designate a hard
phate) massive close-textured homogeneous light grey
phosphate, showing larger or smaller irregular
cavities, which are usually lined with secondary
mammillary incrustations of phosphate of lime.
Hawk’s eye
Hazle
A blue variety of crocidolite from South Africa.
(N. of E.) —Hard grit.
Heads
(Aus.) —Small faults.
Headings
1. Coarse gravel or drift overlying the washdirt.
3. That portion of a vein which is above a level,
The horizontal displacement of a lode by a fault,
in contradistinction to a slide or throw.
Heave
Heavy spar
Heavy tiff
Barytes.
(Mis.) —Barytes.
Hepatic pyrites
Hervidero
(Grk. i'/TTUfj, liver + Trap, fire) —Marcasite.
(Sp. hervir, to boil) —'Mud volcanoes in Central
America.
(Scot.) —A fault, the throw of which is of less
extent than the thickness of the bed in which it
occurs.
Hitch
Hogback
A sharp anticlinal
A vughy lode.
Hollow lode
Homceomorphism
(Grk. upioio'i, like + popcpt], form) —A near simi-
larity of crystalline forms between unlike chemical
compounds.
(A.S. hoen) —Whet-slate, whet-stone, oil-stone, rag-
stone. Used for sharpening tools.
Hone
Honey stone
Horizon
Mellite.
(Grk. bpi£w, to divide) —See Zone ; the stratigraphi-
cal position of a bed or series of beds of rock.
(W.) —A coal that emits when burning an odor
like that of burnt horn.
Horn coal
Horn silver
Horn stone
Cerargyrite.
A cryptocrystalline variety of quartz.


Horse Country rock completely enclosed by two branches
of a vein.
Horseflesh copper ore Erubescite.
Horses’teeth (Corn.) —A
(Corn.) —A quarryman’s term for white elongated
crystals of felspar, which gives the granite its
porphyritic character.
House of water (Corn.) —A cavity or space filled with water.
Hulk (Corn.) —Selvage.
Hungry Poor, or bari’en of ore; applied to veins when not
likely to be profitable.
Hydrothermal (Gk. 6'Bwp, water + Oeppos, hot) —Pertaining to hot
water, especially with respect to its action in dis-
solving, re-depositing, and otherwise producing
mineral changes within the crust of the globe.
Hygroscopic (Gk. vBwp, water + cncoTretv, to ascertain) —Having
the property of readily imbibing moisture from the
atmosphere.
Hyperphoric (Gk, inrepcfrepw, to carry over) —Change in a rock
by the introduction of a new mineral into, or the
removal wholly or in part of an old mineral from,
the original rock mass, e.g., dolomitization of
limestone.
Hypogeue (Gk. vtto, under + <yeviv, to occur) —Lyell. Applied
to crystalline rocks that have not assumed their
present form at the surface.
Hypostatic (Gk. vtto<ttuto?, to sustain) —The incrustation of
mineral matter on the surface of a pre-existing
mineral.
Hysterogenites (Gk. vat epos, later + 7 eVos, descent) —Deposits
of debris.
Hysteromorphous (Gk. v<nepos, later + popcjm), form) —Applied to
secondary deposits due to surface agencies.
Iceland spar (Loc., Iceland) —A transparent double-refracting
variety of calcite.
Icespar Sanidine, a white transparent variety of orthoclase.
Idiogenous (Gk. lSio s, one’s own + 7 eVos, descent) —Deposits
contemporaneous in origin with the rocks in which
they occur, i.e., primary deposits which are con-
stituents of the rocks in which they occur.
Idiomorphic (Gk, 1810 s, one’s own + /<op0?), form) —A term
used to indicate that a mineral forming part of a
rock mass has the crystalline faces that belong to it
as a species, and that it does not owe its form to
the other minerals with which it is associated.


Igneous
Ignites
Impregnation
Incretion
Incrustation
Indicator
Indigenous
Indigo copper
Indurated
Infusorial earth
Ingenite
Inlier
Inorganic
Inspissated
Intrusive
Irestone
Iridescent
Irish diamonds
Iron-froth
Iron-glance
Iron-hat
Iron-spar
Iron-stone
A fine spongy variety of hematite.
A variety of hematite, specular-iron
See Gossan.
Siderite or chalybite.
(L. ignis, fire) —Applied to all agencies, operations,
and results that appear to be connected with sub-
terranean heat.
(L. ignis, fire) —A word used by M. E. Wadsworth
to include all mineral pyrotechnic materials.
(L. im, in + prcegnans, pregnant) —Ore dissemi-
nated through rock having no sharply defined
limits.
(L. in, within + crescere, to grow.) See Secretion.
(L. in, in + crustare , to cover with a crust) —A
crust or coating on the surface of any substance.
(Ballarat, A us.) —A thin seam of slate and pyrites
in and near which the quartz reefs are gold bearing.
The three principal Ballarat indicators are known
by the names of the “ Queen,” “ Pencil Mark,” and
“ Black Seam.”
(L. in, in + gignere, to beget)—Produced in
particular country or place. Compare exotic.
Covellite.
(L. indurare , to harden) —Rocks that have been
hardened by lieat.
Tripolite. A silicious deposit formed chiefly of the
fragments of diatoms.
(L. in, in + genitus, bearing) —See Subnetfe.
An older deposit exposed by the removal of a
portion of an overlying stratum, so that it lies
within a girdle of the surface rock.
(L. in, not + organum, a member) —Without life
or organs for the purpose of growth and nutrition.
(L. inspissare, to thicken)—Thickened as by evapo-
ration and oxidation, e.g., the pitch resulting from
petroleum after long exposure.
(L. in, in + trudo, to thrust) —Applied to rocks
that thrust their way through existing strata.
(Corn.) —Hard clay-slate, horn-stone, horn-blende.
(L. iris, the rainbow) —Exhibiting a play of different
colours like that of a rainbow.
Bristol diamonds. Fine transparent variety of
crystallized quartz.
Any iron ore ; generally applied to impure oxides
of iron. (Corn.) —Green-stone.


Isle ofWight diamond A fine transparent variety of quartz.
Isoclinal
Isogeotlierms
Isomerism
Isomorph
Isotherms
Isotropic
Jaum
Jet
A joint of clay running across a vein.
A compact black variety of lignite.
(N.S.W.) —Black tourmaline.
Jetstone
Jewel
Jeweller’s shop
Joints
Joint veins
Jouph-holes
Jurassic
(Derb.) —Hollows in a vein.
Kaims, or Kames
Kal
(Scot.) —See Dskers.
(Corn.) —See Cal.
See Callen.
Kallen
Kand, or Cand
Kann
(Corn.) —Fluorspar.
(Corn.) —Fluorspar.
(Gk. f«ros, equal + kXlvgiv, to incline) —When a
series of strata are folded and inverted in such a
way that its reduplicated members appear to dip
regularly in one direction.
(Gk. itToi, equal + 77, the earth + Oeppy, heat)
—Lines connecting equal earth temperatures.
(Gk. tiros, equal + /tepos, part)—Two or more
different bodies which are composed of the same
elements and of the same proportions of these
elements are said to be isomeric. See also meta-
meric and polymeric.
(Gk. tiros, equal to, the same as, like + popcplj, form)
—A similarity of crystalline form between sub-
stances of a dissimilar though analagous composition,
e.g., barytes and strontianite. •
(Gk. tiros, equal + Oeppp, heat) —Lines of equal
heat.
(Gk. tiros, equal to + rpoVos, a turn or direction)
—Having the same properties in all directions.
A jewel is a gem after it has been mounted.
(Aus.) —A very rich patch of gold in either a reef
or an alluvial formation.
Partings in rocks in which the throw' is not ap-
parent without close observation, confined to one
bed of rocks that divides it into more or less
regular blocks. Joints may be classed as : 1, strike
joints, master joints, or backs; 2, dip-joints or
cutters ; 3, diagonal joints. See Divisional planes.
Small veins confined to one bed of rocks that give
no signs of displacement, or at least so slight that
they cannot be noticed.
(Loc., Jura Mountains, in Switzerland) —The
formation below the cretaceous, and above the
triassic of the mesozoic period.


Kaolin (Chinese Kau-ling, high ridge : the name of a hill
where the mineral is obtained) —Porcelain clay.
Kaple See Capel.
Katogene, or \ (Grk. Kara, downwards + 7 evw, to occur) —Hardin-
Catogene ) ger. Transmutations which have taken place
in the interior of the earth with exclusion of the
atmosphere.
Kawk
Kelve
(Corn.) —Fluorspar.
(Lein.) —Carbonaceous shale.
Kevil
(Derb.) —A vein-stone consisting of a mixture of
carbonate of lime and other minerals.
Kidney iron ore
Kidneys
Keniform concretions of hematite.
(Tenn.) —Boulders of phosphate rock.
Jade
Kidney stone
Killas
(Corn.) —Clay-slate. G-er. Thonschiefer.
Kimmeridge coal
A bituminous shale or impure coal which occurs in
the Kimmeridge clays.
A lode that from indications is likely to prove
productive.
Kindly lode
King’s-yellow
Kinoully
Sulphide of arsenic.
(Corn.) —Loose crumbly ground.
Knob
See Boss. An irregular mass of approximately
equal length and breadth.
Laccolite
(Grk. \aKKO9, a cistern + \ldo 9, a stone) —A len-
ticular sheet of eruptive rock which has spread
between beds radially from its conduct, and is not
an overflow.
Lacustrine
(L. lacus, a lake) —Applied to accumulations in
lakes or marshes of fresh water, e.g., peat.
Laggan or Logging-
stones
Rocking stones ; great weather-worn masses of rock
so nicely balanced on a small basis that they rock
with the application of a slight force.
Lagoon
(It. laguna , a pond) —Generally applied to shallow
salt water lakes or sheets of water cut off, or nearly
so, from the sea by intervening strips of beach or
river deposit. Also applied to the waters enclosed
by circular coral reefs, as well as to the lake-like
sheets that frequently occur in tidal and periodically
inundated deltas.
Lake
(L. lacus, a lake) —A general term for any inland
body of water, fresh or salt, not connected with the
ocean or any of its branches.
Lake ore
See Bog iron ore.


Land asphalt An inferior asphalt containing various impurities,
and lacking cementing qualities; from places out-
side of the Trinidad asphalt lake.
Land pebbles (Am.) —A Florida term for certain phosphatic
pebbles, as distinguished from Biver pelhle phos-
phates.
Landscape-marble An argillaceous limestone presenting when polished
representations of trees, rivers, and fortifications,
caused by the infiltration of oxide of iron. Also
known as forest, river, or fortification-marble,
according to its markings.
Laterite (L. later, a brick) —A compound of clay and oxide
of iron, often arising from the decomposition of
volcanic rock.
Lava fit, lavdre, to wash) —A general term for all rock
matter that flows in a molten state from volcanoes.
Lead 1. A well-defined bed of pay dirt. 2. (Nova Scotia)
Quartz veins.
Leaders Veins that dip into a lode. Compare droppers.
Lead-glance Galena.
Leadings (Aus.)— Barren drift overlying pay dirt.
Lead-spar Cerussite.
Lean Applied to poor ores.
Leap (Derb.) —A slide, or vertical displacement of a lode.
Leath (Corn.) —A water-course.
Leather-jacket (Aus.) —A Ballarat name for clay occurring in
cross-courses.
Ledge (Am.) —A lode.
Ledger,or ledger wall (N. of E.) —The footwall of a vein.
Legs The two sides or wings of a saddle-reef or anti-
cline.
Lenticular vein A vein made up of a series of lenses. Ger. Linsen-
stocke.
Leptoclase (Gk. Actt-to'?, small + tcXcuno?, broken in pieces) —
Daubree. Minor fractures.
Lias (Eng. layers) —The lower beds of the jurassic
formation.
Licks (Am.) —The swampy areas surrounding saline
springs, the soil of which, being impregnated with
salt or covered with saline incrustations, is licked by
the wild cattle for the sake of the salt.
Light red’silver ore Proustite.
Lignite (L. lignum, wood) —A woody variety of brown coal.


Likely A belt of country or a lode is said to be likely when
there are indications of valuable minerals ; opposed
to hungry.
Limestone Essentially carbonate of lime, but may contain
more or less silica, magnesia, and iron.
Linked veins Becker. A group of more or less parallel over-
lapping veins. See Flying reef. Grer. Gangzuge.
Linnets (Derb.) —Oxidized lead ores.
Lithoclase (Grk. \i6o 9, a stone + icXaarov, broken in pieces)—
Daubree. Divisional planes due to rupture.
Lithographic stone(Grk. \l6os, a stone + 7 pd<puo, to write) —A very
even-grained, compact, fine limestone, usually buff
or drab-coloured, employed in lithography.
Lithology
(Grk. \l9o ?, a stone + X0'709, doctrine) —The
physical and stratigraphical relations of rocks.
Lithosphere
(Grk. \i9ov, a stone + ncfxupa, a sphere)—The crust
of the earth: a designation corresponding with
atmosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere, harysphere, &c,,
which are applied to other spherical shells, coatings,
or envelopes of the earth. The lithosphere comes
between the biosphere and barysphere.
(L. lit oralis, pertaining to the sea shore) —Formed
on the sea shore.
Littoral
Liver ore
A liver-brown variety of cuprite : also applied to a
variety of cinnabar.
Loadstone
Loam
Magnetite.
A soft friable mixture of sand and clay.
A small bit; or a rich deposit of gold.
Lob of gold
Loch or loch-holes
Lode
Large cavities in veins in which spars are found.
Ledge or vein. Any vein that appears likely to
produce a metallic burden.
See Ore-channel.
Lode country
Lubricites
(L. lubricus, slippery)—A word used by M. E.
Wadsworth to include all mineral lubricants or
anti-friction materials.
Lump coal
Applied to the largest lumps of coal as they come
from the mine.
Lustre
(L. lustro, to make light)—The appearance of the
surface of a mineral as affected by or dependent
upon peculiarities of its reflecting qualities.
Lydian stone
Basanite or touchstone. A crypto-crystalline
variety of quartz containing more or less clayey
and carbonaceous matter.


Macroscopic
Magnetic iron ore
Magnetic pyrites
Magnetism
Main lode
Make
Make of stone
Maltha
Mammillary
Manganese spar
Marble
Marl
Massive rocks
Master lode
Master joint
Matrix
Matrix-rock
Meadow ore ,
Measures
Meerschaum
Megascopic
Mesitine spar
Mesozoic
Magnetite.
Pyrrhotite.
Champion lode.
When a vein widens out.
(Aus.) —A shoot of ore.
See Champion lode.
Bog iron ore.
A general name for stratified rocks.
Mesitite.
palaeozoic.
(Grk, unicpd large + (tkottcw , to view) —External
characters, e.g., size, form, and arrangement of
component particles of minerals readily perceptible
to the naked eye.
(Grk, Mdr/vr]9, Magnesia in Thessaly) —The cause of
the attractive power of the magnet.
(Grk. /ua\6a, a mixture of wax and pitch for caulking
‘ships)—The pitch resulting from the drying up of
petroleum when it has reached the surface of the
ground.
(L. mamilla , a breast, pap, or teat) —The smooth
rounded appearance in the form of breasts peculiar
to certain minerals, e.g., malachite and limonite.
Rhodonite.
(L. marmor, marble) —All limestones admitting of
a polish, whether crystalline or uncrystalline.
Other stones used for artistic purposes, e.g.,
alabaster, aragonite, gypsum, serpentine, porphyry,
labradorite, basalt, ana other rocks are frequently
so mis-named.
(A.S.) —Any soft admixture of clay and lime.
Those rocks which have no stratification or lamina-
tion, e.g., granite, syenite, diorite, &c.
A term given to those larger and more persistent
planes of division which pass with regularity and
parallelism through a mass of beds.
(L. matrix , the parent stem) —The rock or earthy
mineral containing a metallic ore or precious stone.
(Am.) —See Land pebble phosphate.
(Ger. Meer, the sea + Scbaum, froth) —Sepiolite, an
hydrated silicate of magnesia.
(Grk. neyas, great + (TKOTreuo , to view)- —See Macro-
scopic.
(Gk. pi (to?, the middle + £wr'/, life) —The second
great geological period; that which follows the


Metal
Metal-stone
Metallites
Bind or clunch ; a species of shale,
Metameric
Metamorphic
Metasomatosis
Metataxis
Metatropy
Meteorite
Micaceous iron ore
Mica schist
A variety of hematite.
Microscopic
Milk quartz
Mine
Mine rock
(Gk. fiefaXXou, a mine, metal, or mineral) —A class
of elementary bodies characterised by their peculiar
lustre and, generally speaking, great specific
gravity.
(Gk. fieraWov, a mine) —A word used by M. E.
Wadsworth to embrace all ores or metalliferous
material.
(Gk. /nerd, change of + //epos, a part)—Having
the same elements united in the same proportions
by weight, and with the same molecular weights,
but with a different structure or arrangement of
the ultimate parts.
(Gk. yuera, change + /xopcp-rj, form) —A term used
to express a change in the mineralogical or chemical
composition and internal structure of rocks pro-
duced by the operation of heat, heated water or
vapour, pressure, &c.
(Gk. yuera, change + <rw/uu, body) —The trans-
formation of one rock or mineral into another by
the removal or substitution of some only of the
elements present in the original, e.g., siderite
converted into lirnonite.
(Gk. y«.eTffi, change + rdgi 9, an arranging or dis-
position) —A change of order of the constituents of
a rock mass, e.g., slaty, cleavage, and foliation.
(Gk. ytteTffl, change of + tpoVo?, habit) —A change
in the physical characters of rock masses while
there is no essential chemical change either in the
rock mass or in its constituents, e.g., the vitrification
and devitrification of rocks, such as obsidian and
tachvlite.
(Gk. /LLCTeiVf)OV, things in the air) —Meteoric masses
of metallic or other substances that have fallen to
the earth through the air.
A laminated aggregate of quartz and mica, fre-
quently containing grains of garnets.
(Gk. fjuicpds', small + (tkottgiv , to look at) —When
the structure of minerals is so minute that it is only
satisfactorily observable if highly magnified.
Vitreous quartz of a milk-like colour and of some-
what greasy lustre : also called greasy quartz.
(L. minera) —An artificial opening or workings for
the purpose of extracting valuable minerals. A
mine is not the substance, it is only the mode of
getting the substance.
A more or less altered rock found in ore channels.


Mine tin
Mineral
Mineral blossom
Mineral blue
Mineral caoutchouc
Mineral charcoal
Mineral oil
Mineral pitch
Mineral tar
Mineralize
Mineralogy
Miocene
Miroir
Mocha stone
Mock lead
Monocline
Moonstone
Moor-band pan
Moraine
More, or Morr
Morphology
Moss agate
Mother of coal
Azurite,
Elaterite.
Petroleum.
Asphaltum.
A viscid variety of petroleum.
A general name for cassiterite which occurs
disseminated through or in veins traversing granite
and slaty rocks.
(L. minera, a mine) —1. A natural homogeneous
inorganic substance. 2. In miners’ parlance, ore.
(Mis.) —Drusy quartz.
A pulverulent lustreless substance showing distinct
vegetable structure, and containing a high per-
centage of carbon, with little hydrogen and oxygen ;
occurring in thin layers in bituminous coal.
The element or elements that combine with a metal
to form it into a mineral, e.g., sulphur in iron
pyrites, oxygen in hematite.
(Arabic min ard, out of the earth + Gk. XoV/os,
doctrine) —The science of minerals.
(Gk. /xetivv, less + Kau'dij new) —A formation
occurring in the cainozoic period, older than the
pliocene but younger than the oligocene.
See Slickenside.
(Loc., Mocha , in Arabia) —Moss agate.
1. Zinc-blende. 2. Wolfram.
(Gk. one + tcKdvtiv, to incline) —Applied
to strata that dip for an indefinite or unknown
depth in one direction, and which do not apparently
form sides of ascertained anticline or syncline.
A variety of adular felspar.
A hard ferruginous crust which forms at the bottom
of boggy places above a stiff and tolerable imper-
vious subsoil.
(Er. moraine, border) —The mounds of stony detritus
which occur along the bases and edges of glaciers.
(Corn.) —A quantity of ore in a particular part of
a lode.
(Gk. ;io/>O//, form + X0'709, reason) —The science
of the outer form and internal structure generally
applied to organic bodies.
A variety of agate showing moss-like markings.
Fine silky laminae of carbon or mineral charcoal
which occur embedded in the seams of ordinary coal.


Mountain
Mountain blue
Mountain cork
Mountain flax
Mountain green
Mountain leather
Mountain limestone
Mountain meal
Mountain paper
Mountain tallow
Mountain wood
Mouse-eaten quartz
Mud stone
Muller’s glass
Mullock
Mullock reefs
Mundic
Nail-head spar
jST ative
(L. mons) —Any portion of the earth’s crust rising
considerably above the surrounding surface.
Usually applied to heights of more than 2,000 feet,
but the limit is indefinite, the word being used in a
comparative sense.
Azurite,
A variety of asbestos,
A mianthus.
Malachite.
A variety of asbestos
(Eng.)—A limestone from the lower part of the
carboniferous age.
Infusorial earth.
A thin variety of mountain cork
Hatch ettite.
A variety of asbestos.
Quartz full of holes once occupied by sulphides,
now decomposed and gone.
A fine, usually more or less sandy, argillaceous rock,
having no fissile character, and somewhat harder
than any form of clay. It readily decomposes to
its original primitive state of mud on exposure to
the atmosphere. (Murchison).
Hyalite, a variety of opal.
(Aus.) —Debris of country rock occupying a fissure
that now constitutes a vein.
Reefs in which the matrix of the ore consists of
country rock, frequently decomposed eruptive
dykes.
(Corn.) —Iron pyrites. White mundic is mispickel.
Prisms of calcite capped with faces of an obtuse
rhombohedron.
Applied to a pure or nearly pure mineral, in con-
tradistinction to an artificial product, e.g., native
gold, native silver, native copper, &c.
Native Prussian blue Vivianite.
Nebulae (L. nebula , a cloud) —A luminious patch in the
heavens far beyond the limits of the solar system.
When condensed supposed to form stare.
Neck The filled conduct of a volcano.
Needle ore Aikinite.
Needle spar Aragonite.
Needle stone Natrolite and scolecite.


Neptunian
Nests
Small chamber deposits
Niccohferous, or ) J . . . . ,
> Containing nickel.
JNickeliterous J
Nickel vitriol
Nigger-head
Morenosite.
Nipped
Nittings
Noble
The refuse of good ore.
Noble metals
Nodule, or Noddle
Normal fold
Nugget
Nuts
Ochre
Oil-stone
See Hone.
Oligocene
Oolitic
layers.
(L. Nepfunits , Neptune, the Roman god of the sea)
—A term applied to stratified or water-formed strata
as opposed to plutonic or igneous rocks.
(White Cliffs, N.S.W.) —Oval or spherical masses
of more or less opal-impregnated kaolin of all sizes,
from I lb. to 1 cwt., generally formed round a
centre of opalized wood.
Pinched: applied to veins when they become
narrower than usual.
A term used in mineralogy to express superiority
or purity, e.g., noble opal, noble tourmaline, noble
serpentine, &c.
Those metals which exhibit no tendency to oxidize
in the air. e.g., gold, silver, and platinum, to which
are sometimes added aluminium, iridium, mercury,
osmium, palladium, rhodium, rhubidium, and
ruthenium.
(L. nodus , a knot) —Any concretion of rock matter
aggregated round a central nucleus, e.g., flints,
nodules of ironstone, &c.
An anticline or syncline with equal dips on each
side ; in contradistinction to an overthrow fold.
(A.S.) —A large rounded piece of native metal.
Small coal.
(Grk. (expo's, pale)—Natural earths coloured by
various oxides of metals, often used for coarse
pigments, as yellow, red, green, blue, brown, or
black-ochres. In mineralogy the term is applied to
certain earthy pulverulent oxides of the metals,
e.g., antimony-ochre, bismuth-ochre, chrom-ochre,
molybdic-ochre, tantalic-ochre, tungstic-ochre, &c.
(G-k. OX/7 09, few + life) —A formation
occurring in the tertiary period, above the eocene
but below the miocene.
(Gk. wdv, an egg + X/009, a stone) —A stone
made up of rounded grains resembling the eggs or
roe of a fish, each grain occurring in concentric


Ooze, or Oaze
Openings
(A.S. wos, juice) —A soft, slimy, sticky mud.
(Am.) —In Wisconsin applied to cavern-like en-
largements along the course of veins. Also termed
crevices or vugs.
Opens
Ore
Large caverns.
1. In a mineralogical sense, any metallic mineral.
2. In a technological sense, any mineral or mineral
compound from which metals or metallic combina-
tions can be obtained in an economic manner, thus
including the gangue or matrix, as well as the ore
proper. Sometimes applied to other minerals
which are specially mined, e.g., apatite, barytes, &c.
Ore bands
Zones of rock rich in ore, occurring in belts of
fahlbander. (ErzbanderJ.
Ore beds
Metalliferous aggregations occurring between rocks
of sedimentary origin.
Ore body
Generally a solid and fairly continuous mass of ore,
which may include low grade and waste as well as
pay ore , but is individualized by form or character
from adjoining parts of the deposit.
Ore channel
The space between the walls or boundaries of a lode
which is occupied by ores and veinstones.
Ore district
A combination of several ore deposits into one
common whole or system.
Organic
(Gk. opyavucds, a member or instrument) Applied
to plants and animals as being supplied with certain
organs for the purpose of growth and nutrition.
Minerals are inorganic ; they increase from external
additions, and not through the instrumentality of
any peculiar organs.
Oriental
(L. oriens, the east) —Frequently used in the same
sense as “precious” when applied to minerals,
from an old idea that gems came principally from
the East, e.g., Oriental amethyst, Oriental chryso-
lite, Oriental emerald, Oriental topaz, all of which
are varieties of sapphire.
Oriental agate
Understood to be all the most beautiful and
translucent sorts of agate.
Oriental amethyst Strictly speaking a variety of sapphire, but the
term is applied to any amethyst of exceptional
beauty.
Orography, ) (Gk. dpos, a mountain + 7 pafaiv, to write) —A
or Orology j science which treats of mountains.
Oryctognosy (Gk. dpoKTo's, dug out + yvuxris, knowledge)—
The description and systematic arrangement of
minerals.


Outcrop
Outliers
Overburden
Overflow asphalt
Overlap
Overthrow fold
Oxide
Paint gold
Palaeozoic
Paper coal
Paraclase
Parage nesis
Paramagnetic
Paramorphism
Parrot coal
Partings
Pavement, or Sole The lower strata of a seam of coal.
That portion of a rock or mineral appearing at the
surface, or immediately under the soil and surface
debris. The line of outcrop does not correspond
with the strike unless the surface is horizontal or
the deposit vertical.
The portion of any stratified group which lies
detached from the main body, the intervening
portion having been removed by denudation.
The worthless material that caps or overlies alluvial
deposits of gold, tin, or other valuable mineral.
See Land asphalt.
When a layer of upper rocks, owing to their greater
extension, conceal the edges of those on which they
rest, they are said to overlap.
Anticlinal and synclinal folds that lean to one side
so that each succeeding one overlies that which
precedes it. \
(Ok. 6gv*, sharp, acid) —A compound of the
element oxygen with another element or elements.
A very thin coating of gold on minerals.
(Grk. 7 raXatos, old + £wrj, life)—The primary group
of geological formations in which organic remains
have been determined.
A variety of brown coal deposited in thin layers
like sheets of paper.
(Grk. 7 rapd, besides + /cXcutto?, broken in pieces)—
Tlaubree. Paults.
(Grk. Trnpd, besides + (yeVeo-t?, birth) —The associa-
tion of mineral species with each other with
reference to the order and mode of their formation.
(Grk. t rapd, besides + MO7l/1/9, Magnesia) —Opposed
to din magnetic. Applied to substances such as iron
which, when freely suspended between two magnetic
poles, arranges itself in the line between them.
(Grk. t -apd, alteration + popfyi], sort, kind)—
Those changes within a rock mass, essentially of a
chemical nature, in which the original minerals
have had their chemical composition more or less
altered, while new minerals are formed within the
mass.
(Scot.)—Caunel coal, so named because it flies to
pieces with a crackling or chattering noise when
suddenly placed in the fire.
Clay slate in a lode. Any thin subordinate layer
between two main beds or bands of ore.


Pay dirt
Pay ore
Pay streak
Peach
(Corn,) —Chlorite.
Peachy lode
Pea-coal
Peacock
Pecos ore
Pea-ore
Pearl-spar
Pearl stone
Peat
Pegmatite
Pelagic
Pelite
Pelitic
Pencil mark
That portion of an alluvial deposit which contains
gold in payable quantities.
Those parts of an ore body which are both rich
enough and large enough to work with profit.
The band in a vein which carries the profitable or
pay ore.
(Corn.) —A lode filled with a greenish-coloured
chlorite, of peachy lustre and loose cellular texture.
Coal that will pass through a sieve with -f —£ inch
mesh, and over a sieve with f —i inch mesh.
Applied to minerals which exhibit iridescent colours
like the changing hues of a peacock’s feathers, e.g.,
peacock copper ore , a name given to iridescent
copper pyrites.
(Sp. pecoso, freckled) —1. (Am.) A gossan contain-
ing lead and silver. 2. (Tas.) A yellowish earthy
mixture of oxides of iron, lead, and antimony
containing silver ; mostly massicot.
Pounded grains of hydrated peroxide of iron, or
silicate of iron, commonly found in cavities of
Jurassic limestone. Oer. Bohn-erz.
Dolomite occurring in rhombohedrons having a
pearly lustre.
A rock consisting of an enamel-like matrix, con-
taining round grains, several of which are
constructed of concentric layers.
Vegetable matter more or less decomposed and
chemically altered; found throughout temperate
climates in boggy places.
Two veins crossing each other obliquely.
(Ok. TTTjypa, anything fastened together) A
coarsely crystalline segregation of quartz, felspar,
and mica, together with other minerals found
associated with granite.
(Grk. t rekayfov, of the sea) —Marine, oceanic; pro-
duced and formed in the deep sea. Opposed to
littoral which, belongs to the sea shore, and estuarine
to that formed in an estuary.
(Ok. 7rtj\o s 1 , clay) —Clastic rocks made up of the
finest particles, e.g., slate.
(Ok. ttj/Xo's, mud) —Muddy, having a texture like
dried mud.
(Ballarat, Aus.) —A thin bed of darkish slate about
the thickness of the lead of a carpenter’s pencil,
which runs parallel with the indicator.


Percolate
Periclinal
Perimorph
Permeable
Permian
Petaloidal
Petering
Petrifaction
Petrography
Petroleum
Petrology
Petro-silex
Pharmacites
Phyllite
Physics
Physiography
Physiology
(Loc., Perm, in Kussia) —See Dyas.
(L. per , through. + colare, to filter) —To pass or
strain through a porous mass.
(Gk. 7 rep/, around + K:\iveiv , to incline) —Dipping
on all sides from an elevated centre.
(Gk. -rrepi, around + poptfu), form) —A mineral
which encloses another, or endomorph.
(L. permeare, to pass through) —Applied to bodies
that admit of the passage of water.
(Gk. TreraXov, a leaf + shape) —Applied to
the structure seen in minerals which split up into
pieces with a smooth polished concave-convex sur-
face which fit into one another somewhat like the
petals of an unopened flower bud. This structure
is often seen in mineral veins of all kinds, and in
their walls also when there is a slickenside or miroir.
The pinching out of a vein.
(L. petra, a rock + facere, to make) —An organism
converted into stone.
(Gk. Trerpa, a rock + 7 pdcpeiv, to write) —The
study of rocks.
(L. petra, a rock + oleum, oil) —Pock oil.
(Gk. 7 Terpa, a rock + A.d<yos, discourse) —The science
of rocks.
(L. petra , a rock + silex, flint) —A flint-like com-
pact variety of felsite, occurring in the form of a
rock mass, not in detached nodules like chert;
hornstone. (Brongniart).
(Gk. (puppaKov, a drug) —A word used by M. E.
Wadsworth to include all minerals employed in
medicine.
(Gk. (fivXXou , a leaf) —Certain hard fissile argil-
laceous masses, composed primarily of compact
clay, with minute flakes of mica, fine granules of
quartz, and frequently cubes and concretions of
pyrites.
(Gk. (pvaL'i, nature) —That branch of science which
treats of the laws and properties of matter, and the
forces acting upon it; especially that department of
natural science which treats of the causes that
modify the general properties of bodies, e.g., gravi-
tation, heat, light, magnetism, electricity, &c.
(Gk. odo-i9, nature + 7 pdfaiv, to write; —Physical
geography : a description of the natural features of
the earth.
(Gk. (piuTL? , nature + XO7OS, discourse) The
reason of physical things.


Pinch
Pindy
Pink ash coal
Pipe
Pipe clay
Pipe opal
Pipe ore
Pipe vein
Pisiform
Pisolite
Pitch
Pitch-blende
Pitchstone
Pit coal
Placer
Plate, or Shiver
Plateaux
Plate shale
Pleistocene
Uranite.
The soft part of a lode.
(N. of E.)— Shale.
When the walls of a lode approach each other
nearer than usual, thus contracting the width of
the lode, the lode-is said to pinch, but when the
walls come together the lode is said to pinch out.
(Cork) —A carbonaceous shale.
(Penn.) —Anthracite, which burns with a pink ash.
An elongated shaped body of ore in limestone,
having an incline varying from nearly horizontal to
nearly vertical.
A white clay nearly pure and free from iron.
1. (White Cliffs, N.S.W.) Opalized belemnites.
2. (Queensland) Long narrow cavities filled with
opal.
Limonite occurring in vertical pillars, sometimes of
conical sometimes of hour-glass form, embedded in
clay. Probably formed by the union of stalactites
and stalagmites in caves.
Sometimes called an accumulated pipe vein to dis-
tinguish it from a pipe. A crusted cylindrical body
of rock, more or less vertical, formed by the inter-
section of two or more veins, which has become the
receptacle for extraneous minerals.
(L. pi sum, a pea + forma, form) —In small concre-
tions the size and form of peas.
(Ok. pea + \lOo<s, stone) —Calcareous or
ferruginous concretions the size of peas, which
together form a limestone or ironstone.
1. The dip of a shoot of ore along its course.
2. (Am.) —In Wisconsin sometimes applied to
runs of ore in limestone.
A dark glassy or pitchy igneous rock.
Or stone coal, i.e., coal obtained in mining, as dis-
tinguished from charcoal.
(Sp. placer, a place near the bank of a river where
gold dust is found) —A place where superficial
detritus is washed for gold or other valuable
minerals, Oer. Trummerlager.
(Er. plateau, table land) —See Table land.
(N. of E.) A hard argillaceous bed.
(Ok. 7r\ci(no9, most + Kaivds:, new, recent) —The
oldest formation of the quaternary period.


Pleochroism
Plicated
Pliocene
Plumbago
Plumbiferous
or Plumbeous
Plumose mica
Plush copper
Plutonic
Pluvial
Pneumatolitic
Pocket
Podar
Poliarization
Polymeric
Porcelain clay
Porcelain jasper
Porodite
Porphyritic
Portland cement
A variety of muscovite mica.
Chalcotrichite.
Kaolin.
Burnt clay.
(Gk. TrXewv, more + complexion) —The
property of coloured double refracting minerals
whereby light, penetrating in different directions,
shows different colours.
(L. plicare, to fold) —Folded together as in highly
inclined and contorted strata.
(Gk. TrXeiwv, more + kcuvos, new, recent) —The
youngest formation of the caiuozoic period.
(L .plumbum, lead) —Graphite.
| (L. plumbum , lead) —Containing lead.
(Gk. IWovtujv, Pluto, the son of Saturn, and Rhea,
the god of the nether world) —Igneous rocks that
have been formed and have consolidated at some
depth below the surface, in contradistinction to
volcanic rocks, that have flowed out above the
ground from volcanic orifices.
(L. pluviatis, of rain) —Appertaining to rain.
(Gk. Trvevfjia, blast + X/oos, a stone) —Deposits from
solution or vapour, especially such as attend the
cooling of an igneous intrusion.
A small chamber deposit. When a vein carries ore
in isolated masses with much dead ground between
it is said to be pockety. Ger. Butzen.
(Corn.) —An old name for copper ore.
That change in the character of reflected or trans-
mitted light which diminishes its power of being
further reflected or transmitted.
(Gk. ttoXvs, many + pcepo?, part) —Having the
same elements united in the same proportions by
weight, but with different molecular weights.
(Gk. Tropo?, a way of achieving + tri/s, belonging to)
—Rocks that have solidified from a gelatinous
state, e.g., opal.
(Gk. 7 rop(j)vpa, purple) —Applied to rocks composed
of a compact or finely crystalline ground mass
through which distinct larger crystals are dispersed.
A cement made from carbonate of lime and river
mud.
1. (N. of E.) Very thin beds of shale dividing
limestone strata horizontally. 2. (W.) Unproduc-
tive portions of a slate quarry.


Poststone
A fine grained sandstone.
Potato stone
Pothole
Potstone
Powdered ore
Precious
Precious metals
Precipitate
See Nohle metals.
Prian
Prill
(Corn.) —A soft white lithomage.
(Corn.) —The best ore after cobbing.
Primitive, or
I
primary
Prospecting
Protogene
Pryan lode
Psammitic
Psephitic
Pseudomorph
Pudding stone
Conglomerate.
A potato-like geode of quartz, having a central
cavity lined with crystals.
A circular hole formed in the rocky beds of rivers
by the grinding action of stones whirled round by
the water in what was once a natural depression of
the rock
Compact steatite capable of being fashioned into
pots and vases.
When ore is disseminated with vein stuff it is
designated powdered ore.
A term used by mineralogists to imply the finest
variety of gems or minerals, e.g., precious garnet,
precious beryl, &c. Strictly speaking the only
precious stones are the diamond, ruby, sapphire,
and emerald.
(L. pros, before + caput , head) —When a chemical
change takes place in a solution so that a solid is
thrown down ; in opposition to the settling of sub-
stances held in suspension mechanically, which is
called a sediment.
(L. primus, first) —A terili used by the earlier
geologists to include the older crystalline rocks
supposed to have been formed at the beginning of
the earth’s existence.
(Jj. pro, forward + specio, to look) —Searching for
new deposits ; also preliminary explorations to test
the value of deposits.
(Gk. 7 rp6, before + yeW, to occur) —Applied to
granite composed of quartz, felspar, and talc,
formerly supposed to be the oldest formed rock.
A lode filled with sand and heterogeneous materials
loosely cemented together with a mixture of clay.
(G-k. ppos, sand)—Clastic rocks made up of
particles the size of sand, e.g., sandstone.
(Gk. Yr/)0O9, a pebble) —Clastic rocks made up of
small stones, e.g., conglomerate and breccia.
(Gk. ylrevSr/s, false + form) —Applied to
minerals that occur in a crystalline system to which
they do not belong; or, in other words, a mineral
that has assumed the external form of another that
it has replaced.


Pumice
Purple copper ore
Putty stones
Pyramidal garnet
Pyrites
Pyroelectric
Pyrolites
Pyrogenous
Pyro schists
Quaquaversal
Quarry
Quarter point veins
Quartzose
Quaternary
(N.Z.) —Selvage : clay.
(It. pomice, akin to, + spuma, froth) —A vesicular
volcanic glass. '
Erubescite.
(Am.) —Soft pieces of decomposed rock found in
placer deposits.
Idocrase.
(Gk. 7rdp, fire) —The harder compounds of metals,
iron, cobalt, nickel, &c., with sulphur, arsenic, and
antimony, e.g., arsenical pyrites, capillary pyrites,
copper pyrites, iron pyrites, magnetic pyrites,
nickel pyrites, radiated pyrites, tin pyrites, &c.
(Gk. vrvp, fire + rjXcKTpov, amber) Electricity
developed by a decided change of temperature.
(Gk, 7rvp, fire + Xido?, a stone) —A term employed
by M. E. Wadsworth to comprise all mineral re-
fractory or fire-resisting materials.
(Gk. Trap, fire + 7 eVos, descent) —Produced by
fire : igneous.
(Gk. vrvp, fire + ffx i(T7 ° 9 > divisable) —Hydro-car-
bonaceous shales which yield volatile hydro-carbons
by distillation.
(L. quaqua, wheresoever + verto, to turn) —A dome-
like elevation of beds with dips radiating in every
direction from its summit.
An open excavation when the works are visible at
the surface ; usually for the extraction of building
stone, slate, or limestone.
(N. of E.) —Small veins having an intermediate
bearing between rake and cross veins.
Containing quartz as a principal ingredient.
(L.. quaternarius, containing four) —The latest
geological period or fourth great division.
Quere, Queery, or ) (Corn.) —A small cavity or fissure. When a lode
Qweear j or roc k; i s full 0 f these the ground can be worked
with crowbars instead of blasting.
Quick Veins are said to be quick when productive, and
dead when non-productive.
Quick-ground Ground in a loose incoherent state ; soft watery
strata, e.g., running sand.
Rabbau (Corn.) —A dry yellowish gossan.
Radiated pyrites Marcasite.
Raehill Small loose stones that are usually found on the top
of a rock, passing as the depth increases into beds.


Eaffain
Raggings
Ragstone
Rake vein
Random
Rapids
Rattles
Red-ash coal
Red copper ore
Red iron froth
Red iron ore
Red manganese
Red ochre
Red oxide of zinc
Red rab
Red silver
Red vitriol
Reddle
Reedy coal
Reef
Reef wash
Refraction
Refractory
Reniform
Resin-jack
Resin-tiff
(Corn.) —Poor ore.
Small pieces of ore attached to veinstone.
(Eng.)—Any hard coarse-teitured rock. See Hone.
(Derb.) —A vein, generally highly inclined, which
cuts indifferently through all strata. The term
may be applied equally well to gash veins without
appreciable displacement, or to slip veins with dis-
placement.
The direction of a rake vein.
Those portions of a river’s course where the current
moves with greater rapidity than the ordinary flow,
generally obstructed with rocks.
(Devon.) —See Scree.
(Penn.) —Anthracite yielding a red ash.
Cuprite.
A variety of hematite.
Hematite.
Rhodonite.
An earthy variety of hematite,
Zincite.
(Corn.) —Red killas.
Proustite and pyrargyrite.
Bieberite.
A red argillaceous ore of iron ; also red chalk.
Coal having alternate layers of splint and bright
coal.
(A.S.) —1. An Australian term for a vein of quartz.
2. In alluvial mining the reef is the bed-rock.
The wash found at the side of a river, having once
formed its bank.
(L. re, back + frango, to break) —When a ray of
light passing from one medium to another of
different density suffers a change of direction.
A term applied to ores that are difficult to treat by
ordinary processes.
(L. renes, the kidneys + forma, form) —Applied to
the rounded imitative kidney-like shape some
minerals assume, such as a variety of hematite
known as kidney iron ore.
See Rosin-jack.
(Am.) —Light coloured zincblende.
Reticulated veins (L. reticulatus, made like a net) —Veins which cross
each other, forming a network. Her. Netzg'dnge.


Eeversed fault
Rhabdomancy
Eholites
Rhombspar
Eib
Ribbon rock
Rider
Right running veins
Eim rock
Ring ore
Eise
River marble
River pebble
Eock
Rock asphalt
Eock band
Rock butter
Rock cork
Rock crystals
Rock milk, or
Rock meal
Rock oil
Eock salt
Rock soap
Rock wood
Eocking stone
Roe stone
Dolomite.
Lines of ore in veins.
Petroleum.
Halite.
A silicate of alumina.
A variety of asbestos.
See Laggan stone.
In contradistinction to a normal fault. The lost
lode or bed in this case is not sought on the side
of the greater angle, as one portion of the faulted
bed lies directly above the other.
(Grk. pdfldos, a rod + gamc/a, prophecy)—Divina-
tion by rod or wand when searching for minerals.
(G-k. porj, a flux + X/009, a stone)—A word em-
ployed by M. E. Wadsworth to designate smelting
materials or fluxes.
(Cal.) —Laminated quartz.
A large body of rock enclosed by a vein. See
Horse.
(N. of E.) —Rake veins running approximately east
and west, which are found to be the most productive
in those parts.
(Am.) —The reef of Australian alluvial mines.
Fragments of gangue covered with regular deposits
of other minerals. See Sphere ore.
The upward inclination of a rock in the opposite
direction to the dip.
See Landscape marhle.
(Am.) —A term applied in Florida to a certain class
of phosphatic pebbles or concretions found in rivers,
as distinguished from land pebble phosphates.
Any natural solid deposit of mineral that is an
ingredient or forms a part of the earth.
(Am.) —Asphaltic limestone. Ger. Asphalt kalk-
stein or asphaltstein.
The poor or barren zones of rock in a belt of
fahlbands. G-er. Felsbdnder.
A soft yellowish admixture of alum, alumina, and
oxide of iron oozing out of rocks that contain alum.
A variety of asbestos.
Transparent crystals of quartz.
Soft pulverulent forms of calcite found in caves or
as an efflorescence.
Fine grained oolites, which resemble the roe of a fish,


Eoof
Eosin-jack
Eosin tin
Rotch
Eotten-stone
Eubble
Ruby copper ore
Ruby silver (dark)
Ruby silver (light)
Rucks
Ruin marble
Run of ore
Rute
Saddle back
Saddle reef
Saline
Salites
Salse
Saltpan
Sand
Satin spar
Saxonian chrysolite
Seal
Scarped
Scar
Cuprite.
Pyrargyrite.
Proustite.
Seams of pyrites in roofing slates.
See Landscape marble.
See Shoot of ore.
See Serin.
See Anticline.
Shallow lakes of brackish water.
A pale wine-yellow topaz.
(A.S.) —A bluff or precipice of rock.
The upper boundary o£ an ore bed or seam.
A yellow variety of sphalerite.
A reddish or yellowish variety of casaiterite.
Triable sandstone.
A siliceo-aluminous compound resulting from the
decomposition of silicious limestone by the percola-
tion of carbonated water.
All accumulations of loose angular fragments not
waterworn or rounded like gravel.
A true saddle reef is a bedded vein that has the form
of an anticlinal ; an inverted saddle has the form of
a synclinal. A false saddle may be caused by the
junction of two veins having the same course but
opposite underlies.
1. Marshes; the shrunken remains of former large
lakes. 2. A salt spring or well.
(L. sal , salt) —A term employed by M. E. Wadsworth
to include all salts and saline materials.
(Er.) —Eruptions of hot acidulated mud from small
orifices, generally in volcanic districts, and often
accompanied by steam and gases at high tempera-
ture.
(A.S.) —Any aggregation of small rounded grains
of mineral.
A finely fibrous silky variety of aragonite or of
gypsum.
(Corn.) —A portion of earth or rock which separ-
ates or falls from the main body.
(Er. escarper, to cut steeper) —Having a steep face:
worn or cut away so as to present a steep
precipitous face.


Schiefer spar
A variety of calcite occurring in very thin plates or
scales.
Schiller spar
Schists
Bastite.
(Gk. divisible) Rocks possessing a
foliated structure due to their component minerals
occurring in layers, which split up into irregular
plates, e.g., mica schist.
Schorl
(Ger. Schorl ) —A black variety of tourmaline.
Scovany lode
Tin ore mingled with quartz and chlorite, free from
gossan.
Scree
(Scot.) —The fragments of disintegrated rocks ac-
cumulated at the foot of cliffs in great piles. See
Talus.
Serin
(Derb.) —See Skrin.
Scrowl
(Corn.) —A thin, sometimes calcareous, sometimes
silicious substance attached to the wall of a lode.
Seam A bed of coal. Strictly speaking the line of separ-
ation between two strata, but loosely applied to
subordinate beds.
Seat-clay Fire-clay.
Seat-earth See Fire-clay.
Seat-rock,or hard seat (Mun.) —The nearest bed of clunch, grit, or sand-
stone under a coal seam.
Seat-stone See Fire-clay.
Secretion (L. se, aside + crescere, to grow) —The gradual
growth of minerals on the walls of cavities.
Sediment (L. sedere, to settle) —The material which subsides
from a liquid in which it is held mechanically in
suspension.
Seepage Liquids oozing or percolating gently from rocks.
Ger. SicJcenwdsser.
Segregated vein (L. se, aside + yrex, a flock or herd) —A moi’e or
less tabular space in which ores have separated out.
Ger. Ausscheidungsgdnge.
Segregations (L. se, aside + grex, a flock or herd) Aggregations
of ores in a cavity having an irregular form but
defined limits.
Seismology (Gk. aeiagd'i, an earthquake + \6yo<s, reason) —
The science of earthquakes.
Selvage Casing: the band of clayey matter between a lode
and its walls. Ger. Saalbdnder, Fr. Salhandes.
Separable tin A term applied to small acute pyramids of cassi-
terite.


Septaric (L. septum, a barrier or wall) —Nodules which have
contracted more in the centre than on the outside,
thus forming cracks or divisions often filled with
calcite, iron oxide, or quartz.
Serpentine (L. serpens, a snake) —A hydrous silicate of
magnesia, the product of alteration of pre-existing
minerals.
Shadd (Corn.) —Smooth round stones found on the surface
containing tin ore, and indicating the presence of a
vein.
Shake L. A cavern, usually in limestone, in which spars
are found. 2. A crack in a block of stone.
Shale (Ger. schalen, to peel or shell off) —Applied to all
argillaceous strata that exhibit a fissile structure
splitting with the bedding, as distinguished from
slate, which cleaves in parallel planes independently
of the bedding.
Shattered zone Applied to a belt of country in which the rock is
cracked in all directions, resulting in a network of
small veins.
Sheet 1. See Flat. 2. A bed of igneous rock caused by
an overflow.
Sheet mineral (Am.) —In Wisconsin applied to large sheets of
galena.
Shelf (Corn.) —The solid rock or bed rock, especially
under alluvial tin deposits.
Shoad stones, or ) (Ger. scJiutten, to shed or discharge)—Fragments
Shoad ore _) of ore shed from a vein, seldom waterworn, found
on the slope of hills just under the surface. Com-
pare Floater.
Shoot of ore (A.S. scdtian, to dart) —A band of ore at a steep
inclination in a lode; in contradistinction to a
course of ore, which is flatter. Ger. Erzfall, Fr.
Chute.
Short See Gash vein.
Shift See Fault.
Shingle Loose, imperfectly rounded, waterworn stones,
larger than gravel but smaller than boulders.
Shiver or plate A hard argillaceous bed of shale.
Shrinkage vein See Contraction vein.
Siberian ruby Eubellite : a red variety of tourmaline found in
Siberia.
Sicker, or Sigger (Corn, from Ger . sickern, to trickle or drop)—To
percolate, trickle, or ooze, as water through a crack.
Siddle The inclination of a seam of coal.
Side (N. of E.) —The wall of a vein.


Siderite- or \ A rich indigo-blue coloured variety of quartz that
Sapphire-quartz/ occurs in impure limestone.
Siderolites
(Gik. al'cr/pos, iron + X/OOS, a stone) —A metallic
meteorite consisting for the most part of nickeli-
ferous iron with interspersed particles of silicates.
Sigmoid-fold. (Grk. a ligature + elSo?, species)—A col-
lapsed fold: when the sides of an anticline or
syncline are crushed together.
Silicate (L. silex, a flint) —I. Minerals in which the bases
are combined with silica. 2. In Missouri, calamine
and smithsonite.
Sill (N. of E.) —A stratum of any kind of sandstone rock.
Silt Eine impalpable mud.
Silurian (Named after the Silures, an ancient tribe inhabit-
ing the neighbourhood of Shropshire) —A geological
formation occurring between the Cambrian and
Devonian.
Simple veins Yeins composed of one mineral.
Sink See Swallow holes.
Sinter (Grer. sintern, to petrify) —Deposits from mineral
waters laid down on the surface, of a closer grain
than tufa, e.g., calc-sinter and silicious-sinter.
Skew An irregular discontinuous vein striking out from
the principal vein in an uncertain direction, lying
in a very slanting and irregular position.
Skrin, or Serin (Derb.) —Cross fissures in limestone, sometimes
containing small quantities of ore.
Slab, or Slabstone Cleaved or finely parallel jointed rocks, which split
into tabular plates from Ito 4 inches thick. Slabs
are seldom so strong as flags.
Slack Small coal; coal dirt.
Slate (Fr. eclat , chip, splinter) —An argillaceous rock
which splits up into thin plates along planes of
cleavage. Gler. Thonschiefer.
Slate coal Coal which has pieces of slate of greater or less
size attached to it, which can be separated by
breaking the coal into smaller pieces and subjecting
it to preparation.
Sleek Mud deposited by water in a mine.
Slickensides The smooth, polished, and sometime striated surface
on the walls of veins, or on the joints found in vein
material, produced by friction.
Slide A simple break in strata, along which the beds on
one side have been displaced vertically, but are
still close against the other side of the fracture.
Slig, or Sliggeen (Ir.) —Shale.


Sline back
Slip vein
Slocking stone
Slovan
A promising stone of ore.
Slug
Smithy ore
Smoky quartz
Smudge coal
Smut
Snakestone
Soak
Soapstone
Soft phosphate
Soft seat
Soil
Solfatara
Spar
Sparry iron-ore
Sparry lode
heavy spar.
A freshet.
Spate
That joint which bounds a block of rock which cuts
the horizontal one transversely. See Cutters.
See Slide.
A displacement vein, i.e., one occurring along a line
of fault.
The cropping out or back of a lode; generally
applied to the appearance of a lode in a marshy
place.
A lump of metal or valuable mineral, e.g.,cassiterite
or cerargyrite.
(N. of E.) —A soft variety of hematite, much used
for forming bottoms of puddling furnaces.
A smoky brown-coloured crystalline variety of
quartz. Cairngorm.
Coal partly deprived of its bitumen, and converted
into a sort of natural coke.
Bad soft coal containing much earthy matter.
A spotted whetstone from Ayr. See Ayrstone.
(W.A.) —A natural receptacle for conserving water
drained off rocky mounds.
A compact variety of steatite ; often incorrectly
applied to unctuous clays and marls.
(Am.) —A term used in Florida which is applied
arbitrarily to anything phosphatic that is not dis-
tinctly hard rock.
(Mun.) —Fire-clay found under coal seams.
(L. solum , bottom, soil) —The superficial earthy
covering of our planet, composed of disintegrated
rock matter and decomposed organic substances.
The lower stratum of a seam of coal.
(It. solfo, brimstone) —A volcanic orifice from which
sulphurous vapours, mud, and steam are ejected.
A mineralogical term applied to those crystals or
minerals which break up into rhombs, cubes, plates,
prisms, &c., with smooth cleavage faces, e.g.,
adamantine-spar, bitter-spar, brown-spar, calc-spar,
crosscourse-spar, l)erby-spar, dogtooth-spar, double-
refracting-spar, fel-spar, fluor-spar, heavy-spar,
Icelaud-spar, mesitine-spar, lead-spar, pearl-spar,
satin-spar, schiefer-spar, sugar-spar, tabular-spar,
&c. In Cornwall generally applied to quartz.
Crystals of chalybite.
Lodes filled with spars, e.g., fluor-spar, calc-spar, or


Spathic or spathose (L. spatha, a blade) —Applied to minerals having
Spathic iron ore
Spathose iron
Spavin
Spear pyrites
Specular
Specular iron
Spelter
Spew
Sphere ore
Spherulitic ore
Spliced
Splint, or splent )
coal )
Spoon end
Spore coal
Spring
Spur
Squat
Squeeze
Stalactite
Stalagmite
an even lamellar or flatly foliated structure
Siderite.
Siderite.
(York) A muddy-looking highly carbonaceous
fire-clay found under coal.
A variety of crystallized marcasite. Ger. Speerkies.
(L. speculum, a mirror) —Mirror-like, e.g., specular
iron ore.
A bright naturally polished variety of hematite.
(Ger. Spiauter, zinc) —The commercial name for
zinc.
The cauliflower-like blow or outcrop of a lode that
is spread about past the proper limits of the defined
vein deeper down.
Fragments of rock encrusted with ores.
(L. splicerule, a little sphere)—A globule of ore
having a radiated structure.
(Ger. splissen, to split) —Applied to veins when
they die out and are overlapped at that point by
another parallel one.
(Scot ) —A hard laminated variety of bituminous
coal, intermediate in texture between cannel and
common pit coal, which splits up into large flaggy
laminae with angular ends called splints.
The edge of a coal basin when the coal seam spoons,
i.e , rises to the surface after growing thinner as it
approaches its termination.
Coal formed out of the spores of lycopods.
(A.S. a fountain, a leap) —A general name for any
discharge of water from the earth ; they may be
surface or deep-seated springs, hot or cold, pure
water or mineralized.
(Aus.)—l. A branch leaving a vein but not return-
ing to it. 2. Irregular cross-veins of quartz ; when
forming a network they are called a make of spurs,
or spur formation.
(Corn.)—l. A small bunch of ore in a vein. 2. Tin
ore mixed with spar.
See Pinch.
(Gk. araXaicroi, dropping)—lcicle-like incrustations
hanging down from cavities.
(Gk. <rr uXar/pa, a drop) —Of a similar nature to
stalactites, but formed on the floor of a cavity
beneath them by the deposition of solid matter held
in solution by the dropping water.


Stanniferous
Star-stone
(L. stannum , tin) —Containing tin.
Steam coal
Steel-jack
Stent
Sphalerite.
Hubble, waste-
Step fault
Step reef or vein
Stinkstone
Stock
(Ger.) —See Chamber.
Stockwork
Stonebind
Stone coal
A variety of sandstone.
Anthracite.
Stove coal
Stratification
Stratum
Stream tin
Streeks
Cassiterite in waterworn pebbles.
See Flats.
Strike
String
Stringers
Strong lode
A variety of ruby that exhibits a bright opalescent
star of six rays in the direction of the principal axis.
Any coal that can be advantageously used for the
generation of steam.
A series of graduating parallel faults forming steps.
1. Reefs made up of short parallel pieces, one in
advance of the other en echelon. 2. A vein actually
cutting through the strata of country rock in some
portions of its course, and running parallel with
the bedding in others.
1. A fetid limestone. 2, [Tenn.] —Boulders of
phosphate rock.
(Ger. StocJcwerk ) —A network of small veins occur-
ring so close together that in mining them the veins
and country rock cannot conveniently be separated,
so they are worked together.
Large stove coal passes through 2£ inch—2 inch and
over 1|- inch—inch mesh, while small stove passes
through 1-|- inch—inch and over inch—l inch
mesh.
(L. stratum , spread out) —The structure of sedi-
mentary rocks caused by their being spread out in
layers or strata one above the other.
(L. stratum, spread out) —When rocks occur in
layers one above the other, each layer is called a
stratum (pi. strata). Ger. Flotze.
The horizontal direction of a vein or inclined rock,
i.e., the angle it makes with the meridian ; it is
therefore at right angles to the direction of the dip
or underlay.
A small narrow branch of a metalliferous vein.
Yeinlets which die out to a point and are confined
to one bed of rocks. Ger. Adern.
A large persistent lode. At Alstonmoor applied to
lodes lying in a fault plane in which the difference
of level between similar strata is considerable.


Structure
Stuff
Sub-aerial
Sub-aqueous
Subnate
Subsidence
Substitution vein
Subterranean
Sugar spar
Sugary quartz
Sulphide
Sulphur
Sulphurets
Sun stone
Sun veins
Superficial
Swad
Swallow holes, or )
Sinks )
Swamp ore
Sweep, or Back
Swine stone
Swither
Ore associated with gangue.
(Corn.) —Friable granular quartz.
Avanturine felspar.
See Bog iron ore.
lode.
(L. struere, to build, fabricate) —The condition or
form in which mineral masses are arranged, such as
columnar, laminated, massive, tabular, &c.
(L. sub, under + aer, air) —That which takes place
under our atmosphere.
(L. sub, under + aqua, water) —Applied to pheno-
mena which take place under water.
(L. sub, under + natus, born) —Applied to rocks
formed within or below the crust. (Forbes).
(L. sub, under + sedere, to rest or settle) —A sink-
ing or settling down of part of the earth’s surface.
(L. sub, under + statuere, to put or place) —A vein
which replaces the original rock, and does not
simply occupy a vacant space.
(L. sub, under + terra, the ground)—Under the
earth : concealed beneath the surface.
A granular and somewhat friable and massive
variety of quartz.
A term applied to all unoxidized ores in which the
metals are combined with sulphur only; generally
found below water level.
A term sometimes applied to pyrites.
See Sulphide.
(N. of E.) — Sun is synonymous with south, so sun
veins are south veins, i.e., veins discovered on the
south side of a hill.
(L. super, above + facies, the face) —-Near or on the
external surface.
(Newc.) —A thin layer or stone or refuse coal at
the bottom of the seam.
Vertical cavities formed by solution along lines of
joints in limestone country, which serve to drain
off water.
A branch of a vein that takes a bend and re-unites
further on.
A variety of marble that gives off a fetid odour when
broken or rubbed.
(Am.) —A term used in the Wisconsin lead region
to denote a crevice or crack branching from a main


Syenite
Synchronal
Synclase
Syncline
Synclinorum
System
Table lands
Tabular spar
Tailing out
Talus
Tectonites
Terrace
Terraue
Tertiary
Texture
Wollastonite.
See Dying out.
(Loc., Syene, in Egypt)—A rock composed of
orthoclase and hornblende ; the latter is sometimes
replaced by augite or mica, and the rock occasion-
ally contains sphene and quartz.
(Gk. avv, together + pos, place) Occurring
at the same time.
(Gk. avv , with + /cXacrTos, broken in pieces)—
Eaubree. Minor divisional planes produced by
some intense mechanical or molecular motion;
generally by contraction as in cooling and drying.
(Gk. avv , with + icXcveiv, to incline) —Applied
to strata bent in the form of a trough ; opposed to
anticline. A concave fold.
(Gk. avv, with + icX/veiv, to incline + opos, a
mountain) —A finished mountain, formed out of a
geosynclinal which ended in a catastrophe of dis-
placement and upturning.
(Gk. avv , together + iarrjfu, to stand) —In geology
this word is applied to any series of groups of
strata which have such a general connection,
sequence, or relation, as indicates that they all
belong to one great period or sequence of events,
e.g., silurian system.
(L. tabula , a board or plank) —Plateaux, or elevated
regions of flat or undulating country rising to heights
of 1,000 feet and more above the level of the sea.
(L. talus, the ankle) —The sloping mounds of
detritus accumulated at the base of cliffs and
precipices, being derived from their weathered and
washed surfaces. See Scree.
(Gk. Te'/t-T ov, a craftsman) —A term used by M. E.
Wadsworth to include all mineral construction
material for buildings or roads.
(L. terra, the earth) —Any shelf or bank of land
having an uniformly flat or level surface.
(L. terra, the earth) —Used in the same sense as
Formation, but restricted to the minor divisions of
rocks.
(L. tertiarius containing a third part) —Caiuozoic :
that geological period which occurs above the
mesozoic and below the quaternary.
(L. texere, to weave) —The condition in which the
component particles are arranged, e.g., compact,
crystalline, porous, &c.


Thermites
Thread
Throw
Thrust fault
Tickholes
A creep due to weight from above.
(Derb.) —Drusey cavities.
(Mis.) —Barytes, calcite.
Tiger’s eye
Tile ore
(Scot.) —Stiff unstratified clay.
Stannite or hell metal ore.
Tin pyrites
Tinstone
Tin-witts
Titauiferous
Toad’s-eye tin
Toadstone, or
Todstone
Topography
Torbanite
Touchstone
Trachyte
Track
Trap rock
Travertine
(Gk. Oepjuos, heat) —A term used by M. E. Wads-
worth to include mineral f uels or burning materials.
An extremely small vein, even thinner than a
string.
The vertical displacement of a faulted bed, e.g.,
up-throw and down-throw, in contradistinction to
heave.
A brown variety of crocidolite from South Africa.
Earthy ferruginous cuprite.
Gangue enclosing minute grains of cassiterite.
(Corn.) —The produce of the first dressing of tin
ores, containing besides tinstone other heavy
minerals, e.g., wolfram and metallic sulphides.
Containing titanium.
A variety of wood tin occurring in small spherical
particles embedded in a mass of darker or lighter
colour.
(Ger. todte-stein) —Barren stone. A Derbyshire
term for trap rock occurring in mountain limestone.
(Gk. TdTro?, a place x to write)—A par-
ticular account of any locality, in contradistinction
to geography.
(Loc., Torban Hill, in Scotland)— A dark brown
variety of cannel coal.
Lydian stone or basanite : a black flinty slate.
(Gk. t pdyy<i, rough) —A rock consisting essentially
of sauidine with more or less triclinic felspar,
usually with hornblende, biotite, and magnetite,
and sometimes with augite, apatite, tridymite,
titaniferous iron, and more rarely hauyne, nosean,
sphene, leucite, and olivine.
(Aus.) —A Bendigo term applied to veins when the
walls come together: when followed the veins
widen out again.
(Swed. trappa, a stair) —All igneous rocks that are
not strictly granitic or decidedly volcanic, e.g.,
greenstone and basalt. The term is too indefinite
for modern geological language.
(It. travertino, a kind of white spongy stone)
Calcareous tufa.


Trend
Triamorph
Trias
Tribolites
Trichroism
Tripestone
Trouble
Trough
Trough fault
Trona
True vein
Tufa
Tuff
Turbary
Turf
Turkey stone, or
Turkey slate
Turtle stones
Twitch
Typhonic
Ultramarine
The course of a vein.
(Gk. r pi9, throe + /uopcfirf, form) —Minerals having
the same chemical composition, but crystallizing in
three different forms, e.g., quartz (rhombohedral),
tridymite (hexagonal), and asmanite (rhombic).
(Gk. t/was, three) —The lowest formation of the
mesozoic period.
(Gk. t/)//309, a rubbing + X/oov, a stone) —A term
employed by M. E. Wadsworth to include mineral
abrasives or attrition materials.
(Gr. t pis, three + %/jwv, complexion) —A. property
possessed by certain minerals (which crystallize in
systems that have all three axis of different lengths)
of exhibiting three different colours when viewed in
different directions.
A contorted concretionary variety of anhydrite.
(Newc.) —A fault.
Generally used as synonymous with basin or
syucline.
A wedge-shaped fault, or strictly speaking a mass
of rock let down between two faults, not necessarily
of equal throw.
(Of Egyptian or North African origin)—A crude
carbonate of soda.
One cutting across the strike or dip of the country
rock.
[lt. tujfo, a dripping or immersion] —Any porous or
vesicular mass, e.g., calcareous tufa, which often
coats leaves, twigs, &c.
[lt. tufo, a kind of porous ground]—Volcanic ashes.
A peat bog or turf field.
See Peat. Varieties are known as white- brown-
black- or stone-gas- or candle turf.
A whetslate or honestone.
Large nodular concretions found in certain clays
and marls which have a rough resemblance to
turtles.
[N. of E ] —A pinch in a vein.
[Gk. Typhon, a giant]—Applied to breccias
which have been formed of rocks broken, up by
some great force.
[L. ultra, beyond + mare, the sea] —Lapis-lazuli.
Unconformability [O.E. un, not + L. cum , with + forma, form]—
When one set of strata is laid on the upturned
edges of another set.


Under bed
Under clay
Under cliff
Underlay, or )
Underlie j
Undulate
Uniclinal
Unkindly lode
Un stratified
Upthrow
Yadose
Yalley
Yein
Yeinlets
Vein-skirts
Yein stone
Vein stuff
Velvet copper ore
See Fire-clay.
Fire-clay found beneath coal seams.
See Fire-clay.
The downward inclination of a lode reckoned from
the perpendicular, expressed in the proportion of
one in so much ; while the dip is reckoned from the
horizontal, and is generally expressed in degrees.
[L. undulatus, wary]—Beds which are bent into
alternate elevations and depressions.
[L. unus, one + Grk. ic\lveiv, to incline] —-1. One
bend of the strata, either synclinal or anticlinal,
unaccompanied by the other 2. When both legs
of folded strata dip in the same general direction.
One which does not look promising.
Rocks, like granite, which do not occur in beds or
strata.
See Throw.
[L. vadum, a shallow place in water] —The shallow
underground circulation of water, bounded below
by the water level.
Low land bounded by hills or mountains.
[L. vena ] —1. See Lode or A more or less
tabular aggregation of mineral matter, deposited
subsequently to the rocks in which it occurs. Yeins
are of variable length, depth, and width, the latter
being comparatively small with reference to the
former. Q-er. Gauge. 2. [W] —Any set of slate
beds worked as a whole, but it need not necessarily
furnish salable roofing material for its entire
thickness.
Small veins. G-er. Adern. See Stringers.
[Derb.] —The walls of a lode.
The gangue or non-metalliferous portion of a lode.
See Vein stone. The matrix or gangue of a vein.
Lettsomite.
Verd-antique-marble A variety of green serpentine, with patches and
■veins of white calcspar ; capable of a fine polish.
Vermillion Cinnabar.
Vesicular [L. vesicula, a little blister] —Having small bladder-
like cavities.
Vitreous copper Chalcocite.
Vitreous silver Argentite,


Vitriol The sulphate of a metal, e.g., blue or copper
vitriol (chalcanthite), green or iron vitriol (melan-
terite), red vitriol (bieberite), white or zinc vitriol
(goslarite), nickel vitriol (morenosite), uranium
vitriol (johannite).
Vitrites [L. vitrum, glass]—A word used by M.E. Wadsworth
to include vitrifying material or glass, Ac.
Volcanic [L. Vulcanus, the god of fire] —Igneous action
apparent at the surface of the earth. In contra-
distinction to plutonic, or that taking place at
great depths in the interior.
Vugh,Vug,or Vugg A cavity in a lode.
Vughy lodes Lodes in which vughs or drusy cavities are of
frequent occurrence.
Vulcanism [L. Vulcanus , Vulcan, the god of fire] —A general
term used to embrace all those telluric forces which
are to be ascribed to the constant action and re-
action of the interior of the earth upon its external
surface, e.g., thermal springs, gas and mud volcanoes,
volcanoes proper, &c.
Wall The side of a lode. The overhanging side is known
as the hanging wall, and the lower lying one as the
foot wall.
Warp The fine mud or silt held in suspension by rivers,
which is deposited when the waters become stag-
nant.
Washdirt The auriferous gravel, sand, clay, or cement in
which the greatest proportion of gold is found.
Wash out See Dumb fault.
Water level The level at which water is naturally removed from
a deposit. This fluctuates slightly with the
seasons, and varies in different localities.
Watershed The height of land or divide from which the natural
drainage of a district flows in opposite directions.
Wavy vein A vein that makes and pinches at short intervals.
Weak veins [N. of E.] —Veins so-called when the strata on
either side are but slightly displaced.
Weathering The washing or wearing away of rock surfaces by
exposure to the weather.
Wheal [Corn. KueV\ —A corruption of the old Cornish
word for mine.
Wheel ore Bournonite.
r f ver J arc *- fine-grained silicious slate.
Whinstone, or \ [Scot.] —Greenstone, basalt, or any hard unstrati-
Whinsill f fled rock.
£ 2


White antimony
White arsenic
White ash coal
White cobalt
White garnet
White iron pyrites
White lead ore
White mundic
White olivine
White rock
White stone
White tin
White vitriol
Whits, or Witts
Wild lead
Wings
Wolfram
Wood arseniate
of copper
Wood coal
Wood hematite
Wood-iron
Wood-opal
Wood-tin
Wythern
Xenogenous
Yalentenite.
Arseuolite.
Smaltite.
Leucite.
Marcasite.
Cerussite.
Mis picket.
Eorsterite.
Goslarite.
See Tin-witts.
Zinc-blende.
Olivenite.
Lignite.
An opalized wood.
[W.] —A vein or lode.
[Penn.] —Anthracite that gives a white ash when
burnt.
A dolerite of nearly white colour associated with
coals in Staffordshire and elsewhere. (Jukes).
Eurite.
Metallic tin after smelting, in contradistinction to
black tin or cassiterite.
The sides or slopes of an anticline. See Legs.
[Ger. wolfrig, wolfish] —Tungstate of iron and
manganese.
A fine radiated variety of hematite, exhibiting
alternate bands of brown or yellow of varied tints.
A fibrous variety of chalybite.
Cassiterite of a brown colour of various shades,
botryoidal and reniform in shape, and fibrous in
structure.
[Gk. gevo s', strange + yeVo?, descent] —Applied
to deposits formed of minerals that are foreign to
the rocks in which they occur, i.e., of later origin.
They may be divided into (o) such as penetrates
pre-existing cavities —spaces of discission or spaces
of dissolution—, and (S) metamorphic or metaso-
matic deposits, which made room for themselves by
the expulsion of an earlier material. Confined by
some as applying only to subterraneous aqueous
deposits, but by others igneous dykes are also
included.


Yellow ochre A soft earthy variety of limonite.
Y Ydlowcopperore ( [Oom.]-Chalcopyrite.
Zighyr, or Zigger A slow stream of water issuing from a crack.
Zone [Grk. a girdle] —In geology used in the
same sense as horizon , to indicate a certain geologi-
cal position without reference to the local attitude
or dip of the rock.






T4Pf
Bi&u o
(: *■ I A 20fe>
Ki CO
t *
V


J. J. MNDUL


