

Angabunga River Plantations
Limited
A GOING CONCERN
in
British New Guinea
A Sound and Plain Proposition
to Investors




Angabunga River Plantations Limited.
CAPITAL £30,000
Divided into 300,000 shares of 2/- each.
Simtora:
sir Joseph H. Carruthers, K.C.M.G., Royal Chambers, Sydney.
William Rigg, “Warrane,” Stanmore.
Chairman of Directors, Clyde Engineering Co. Ltd.
Director, North Coast S.S. Co.
John McLeod Bolton, Merchant, Royal Exchange, Sydney.
lankfra:
Bank of North Queensland, Limited.
#olintur:
Wm. Arnott, 94 Pitt Street, Sydney.
;
L. C. Johnson, c/r Wynyard and George Streets, Sydney.


Skerch showing position
of Company's Property
and disrance from Port Moresby


PORT MORESBY, PAPUA.




Angabunga River Plantations Limited.
THIS COMPANY was formed for the purpose of acquiring 10,000 acres of Plantation Lands, under
exceptionally liberal leasehold terms, for 99 years, in the most populous part of PAPUA, and
in an exceptionally rich district, with a great natural Harbour (HALL SOUND) and a fine,
navigable river—the St. Joseph or Angabunga River.
The first issue of shares was immediately subscribed for by the present shareholders. The Vendors
took no cash, but accepted shares for their interests, SO GREAT IS THEIR FAITH IN THE
PROPERTY. Moreover, they subscribed for the whole of the first issue of contributing shares at par,
viz., two shillings per share.
A competent Manager, has been appointed, also an overseer, and work has been taken in hand
for the erection of store, equipment of same, erection of buildings, clearing and plantation work. Up
to date. Six Thousand Pounds has been subscribed by the present shareholders in acquiring the land
and in carrying on plantation and other work.
THE COMPANY
was registered on the 23rd August, 1910, in Sydney, and no time was lost in starting active operations.


THE POLICY
of the Company has been to only issue shares as the Capital is required for work to be done.
The first issue has been taken up at 2/- per share by the vendor shareholders immediately on the
issue of same, and the expenditure of the sum thereby raised has gone, or is going, in the direction of
bringing the land into actual use as a PLANTATION.
Prom time to time further issues will be made, but as the work done brings the PLANTATION
nearer to the profit-making and a dividend-paying stage, an adequate and fair premium will be charged
on each issue, increasing as the PLANTATION grows.
LEADING CAPITALISTS and FINANCIERS in Australia have taken large interests in the
Company, and the advices from England are, that once the Plantation is brought up to the stage that it
is a going and working concern, there will be little, if any, difficulty in a re-sale or re-flotation, with great
profit to the original shareholders.
NEGOTIATIONS
are proceeding for the introduction of a further amount of CAPITAL from England and the Continent
into the Company, as well as from Australia, on fair terms, in order to enlarge the operations of the
Plantation, (Vide proposals on page 26 et seq.)
This is a legitimate Company, formed without any booming, and shares are held by KEEN AND
INFLUENTIAL BUSINESS MEN.
The second issue is now available, and applications therefor can be made to—
L. C. JOHNSON, Mutual Life Buildings, corner Wynyard and George Streets, Sydney,
Secretary.


A STREET IN SAMARAI-THE NEAREST PORT OF PAPUA TO AUSTRALIA.


PAPUA, the first of the adjoining Pacific possessions formerly known as BRITISH NEW GUINEA
to come under the control of the COMMONWEALTH, is of especial interest to AUSTRALIA.
It lies in the tropics, and is 300 miles, or less than one day’s steam, from the principal ports of
Northern Queensland, such as COOKTOWN and THURSDAY ISLAND.
The climate is warm and tropical, as any place nine or ten degrees south of the equator is bound
to be, but being an island, it is milder than many parts of Australia, and it has the advantage of an
even temperature, ranging from 70 deg. to 90 deg. Fahr. in summer, with an annual rainfall of 50 to
200 inches.
Its soil is extremely rich, and its vegetation luxuriant, due to the rainfall and heat combined
Except for the native gardens near the villages, the land is in a virgin state, and only requires the
employment of a little CAPITAL to develop the production of Rubber, Coffee, Hemp and other fibres,
Copra (dried kernel of the cocoanut), Cotton, Vanilla, Tobacco, Sugar, and similar tropical commercial
growths.
MONEY
is to be made, and RAPIDLY, by the cultivation of such plants. NO OTHER PLACE in any quarter
of the Globe, safely governed, is so well served with steamers and mails, and within such easy reach
of the great markets.
Government Nurseries have been established for some years in order to supply planters with plants
and seeds at cost price.
Enormous quantities of Para Rubber Trees have been distributed and are vigorously growing on
the various Plantations.


PARA RUBBER AT GALLEY REACH.


PAPUA IS ONE OF THE FEW NATURAL HOMES OF THE RUBBER TREE; many of
the native forests contain a good deal of wild rubber called “ Kapa Kapa,” which grows to an enormous
size. The natives tap these trees for rubber, and in some cases obtain fifteen or sixteen pounds of rubber
from one tree. It requires, however, seven years to grow before tapping, and is not nearly so valu-
able as the imported and cultivated Para Rubber, which is usually ready for tapping in six years.
THE SUITABILITY OF PAPUA FOR THE PARA RUBBER has been conclusively demon-
strated, and scores of thousands of trees of varying ages can be seen in proof of this.
A leading Plantation in PAPUA (8000 acres) was recently visited by an official of the Common-
wealth Government, and the subjoined is an extract from a part of his report:—
“Only 600 acres had been cleared and planted with Para Rubber Trees, all doing well, and
likely to make an impressive show in a few months more. The trees had been only planted ten months,
and had in fourteen months, from the time of sowing the seed in the nursery, attained a height of fourteen
feet, which is something very like a record.
“ One planter, who has had considerable experience in various parts of Asia, is very enthusiastic
on the subject of the soil, and declares that it is far better than Ceylon. This was his opinion, not as a
mere garden experiment, but from a practical standpoint of 72,000 trees planted on 600 acres of land.
“In the nursery, the rubber planted from seed grows close together in dense beds of young
shoots; these are taken up after a few weeks, and planted out in hedges. When they are tall enough
and strong enough to stand alone in the open (about fourteen months after planting) the plants are set
in carefully lined and measured rows, 120 to the acre. The principal labour is now over; nothing remains
to be done for the next four years but weeding, and this can be greatly reduced by the introduction of
leguminous plants, which destroy all weeds and are themselves useful. After six years the trees are ready
for tapping, the labourers collecting the gum that has dropped from the openings once in every twenty-
four hours.”


COCOANUT PLANTATION, EASTERN DIVISION.


RUBBER YIELDS ENORMOUS PROFITS, at even 5/- a pound. The trees should yield at
the rate of TWO HUNDRED PER CENT. OR MORE on the first outlay, once in full bearing; but
even allowing that rubber may, through increased production, sink to much less than its present price,
the profits are still enormous.
It is estimated by experts that when rubber falls as low as 3/- a pound it will become available for
use in street paving, and the DEMAND WILL THEN BE LIMITLESS.
COPRA
is the dried kernel of the cocoanut, and represents one of the LARGEST TRADES of the Tropical
World. It possesses advantages of its own to the planter, although the profits are neither so large nor
so quick as those offered by rubber.
One special advantage is the long life of the tree. A cocoanut tree takes six or seven years to
come into bearing, but once started it will go on producing for EIGHTY YEARS. The oil made from
Copra is in enormous demand the world over, chiefly for SOAP MAKING, and its special properties are
not shared by any other oil known to commerce. The price obtained for COPRA is about £l2 per ton
in PAPUA; 200 acres, when in full bearing, should produce FROM £BOO TO £2OOO A YEAR, and the
expenses of working same would not amount to more than £2OO or £3OO per year.
There is no necessity for the planter to be idle, while waiting for his rubber and cocoanut trees
to bear, as there is plenty of money to be made by CATCH CROPS of SISAL HEMP, SUGAR and
BANANAS.
SISAL HEMP
is a quick producer, although the plant is short-lived. The annual return for this commodity is about
£7/10/- per acre. A quarter of a million plants have been sold to settlers in PAPUA by the Government
Nurseries during the last twelve mouths.


SISAI HEMP, KAPA KAPA.


SUGAR AND BANANAS
are already large items of production by the Papuans, and the country is so suitable for sugar, that the
cane-fields of Northern Australia are being almost entirely planted with NEW GUINEA CANE, which
experts declare to be the BEST IN THE WORLD.
OVER ONE HUNDRED VARIETIES of Sugar Cane have been identified in NEW GUINEA.
Sugar and Bananas as catch crops will yield £2O per acre, and the annual outlay for lab:ur will absorb
about a third of that sum.
COCOA
is a very profitable industry, more especially as it is cultivated in conjunction with other and larger
economic trees, which provide the necessary shade from the sun and strong winds.
COFFEE
is also grown with splendid results. It takes three years for the trees to bear, and produces on an
average of a quarter of a ton per acre, and is sold in PORT MORESBY to wholesale dealers at £6O per
ten.
BESIDES the staple industries of the Island already mentioned, there are others equally paying,
which have not been sufficiently exploited, such as:
VANILLA, COTTON, TOBACCO, PEPPER, TAPIOCA, MAIZE, RAMIE and MURVA
FIBRE, CTTRONELLA and LEMON GRASS, SARSAPARILLA, IPECACUANHA,
CAYENNE PEPPER, GROUND NUTS, SWEET POTATOES, YAMS,
MANILLA HEMP, GINGER and ARROWROOT.
LABOUR
is plentiful in PAPUA; the natives are good workers on the whole, and of fine physique, and can be
lured under the Government Regulations for £6 PER ANNUM with food and clothing, estimated at
another £6 PER ANNUM.


When it is considered that Australia prohibits on its land the employment of cheap native labour,
and that almost alongside of it, under BRITISH RULE, is PAPUA, with rich lands and a teeming native
population available for employment, the conviction is carried home that a great market will always
exist in Australia and elsewhere for the products of PAPUA, won under the easier conditions there
prevailing.
THE COMPANY’S PROPERTY,
consisting of 10,000 acres, is situated on the ST. JOSEPH’S RIVER, HAUL SOUND, CENTRAL
DIVISION, TERRITORY OF PAPUA, and is held under lease for 99 years free of rent for the first
10 years, and thereafter at a rental of 5 per cent, on the unimproved value. It is estimated that this
will not exceed sixpence per acre. It is one of the few leases issued with no rental for 10 years
THE FOLLOWING EXTRACTS FROM REPORTS OF WELL-KNOWN EXPERTS GIVE SOME
IDEA OF THE VALUE OF THE COMPANY’S PROPERTY.
“ During the last ten years I have visited PAPUA on five different occasions, and have spent two
years on those-visits.
“In June, 1908, I went to Papua representing a Syndicate for the purpose of exploiting the Cedar
Industry, and also to select suitable land for the growing of PARA RUBBER and other tropical pro-
ducts. As there was some difficulty in getting about on my previous visit to PAPUA, I took a handy
oil-launch with me, which enabled me to traverse a large section of country.
“ I went up many rivers on the West Coast, viewing the land, and found the access was the chief
trouble in most places. Having got information that 22,000 acres were open for selection on the St.
•Joseph’s River, sixty miles west of Port Moresby, I called upon the Resident Magistrate of Yule Island:


he gave me a tracing from the office map, and went with me to point out the land. I asked (as it would
take some time to make a thorough inspection) him to send one of the Native Police with me, who could
speak a little English, to interpret for me in my intercourse with the natives of the district.
“ I engaged ten native boys to carry our swags, tucker, &c., also to cut tracks through the scrub,
and other necessary work.
“The land in question was purchased by the Government from natives some fifteen years ago,
and surveyed ten years ago. It was part of the original land selected by the Great English Company,
which got a concession of 250,000 acres, but which, owing to an outcry in Australia, the British Govern-
ment reduced to 30,000 acres.
“This Company having all BRITISH NEW GUINEA (PAPUA) to select from, on the advice of their
explorers made their definite choice of the area in question on the St. Joseph’s River. Owing to latter
events, the BRITISH COMPANY did not proceed with any work, and subsequently the land reverted
to the Government.
. “ I was fortunate in meeting Mr. Tooth, who surveyed the land, and got a lot of useful informa-
tion from him regarding the land in question. I visited some of the Mission Stations, and the Fathers
gave me a lot of valuable information, and informed me that the rain records showed an average of 80
inches per annum, and that the land was not subject to floods and was unsurpassed for fertility.
“ They informed me that out of a plantation of some 400 acres of cocoanuts at Moua they paid
all expenses of the Mission by sale of Copra.
“ The ficus rigo, or native rubber, grows (including this block of land) all over the district, and
is tapped by the natives and sold to traders. The land is principally scrub, with belts of timber, sufficient
to supply timber for building purposes, also firewood for sugar mills, &c. There is no doubt as to the
fertility of the soil. i


" In viewing the land from the river, the banks are from fourteen to sixteen feet, with a number
of creeks intersecting, being favourable for drainage, and irrigation if required. Means of access is by
river from HALL SOUND. There are splendid formed roads on both sides of the river running through
the land, and the creeks are bridged and kept in order by the natives of the various villages, in which the
roads run through, under penalty of a fine.
“ The roads extend back for a matter of thirty miles, till they reach the foot-hills, and a motor car
or bike could be taken the full distance; in fact, it is the only road I know of in PAPUA, with the excep-
tion of twelve miles of road at the back of PORT MORESBY.
“ The natives are under Government control, as the district is patrolled by the Magistrate and
Police every month. The population within a radius of ten miles is over 7000, all agriculturalists.
“INAWAIA is a prosperous native village. The district is famous for the growing of BANANAS,
SUGAR-CANE and all kinds of native produce.
"On my return to Yule Island, I applied for the whole 22,000 acres. That application went to
Port Moresby, and after a lapse of two and a half months, I was told by the Minister for Lands that I
was granted 5000 acres, as the land was too rich and valuable to grant in larger areas.
“ I furnished them with a sketch as to what part of the 22,000 acres I wished to select. I returned
to Sydney, and advised my Syndicate as to what I had done, and Mr. G. 11. Rigg applied for, and
obtained, another 5000 acres adjoining mine. The land was granted on that application, therefore we hold
10,000 acres of what I consider the best land in BRITISH NEW GUINEA.
“ I will now give you a few details in regard to the land: —
“ACCESS.—Six miles by road or river to Hall Sound, river navigable for craft up to six feet; at
the back of one block is Oreke Creek, navigable for punts.


“HALL SOUND is under the lee of Yule Island, a large island on which is established the GREAT
FRENCH MISSION STATION.
“ HALL SOUND by the Admiralty Chart has safe anchorage for vessels over 30 feet in draught. It is
the best Port in NEW GUINEA by nature, and the Ocean-going Steamers call there regularly.
“ LABOUR. —The supply of Labour is abundant on the St. Joseph’s River, the natives are skilled
agriculturalists, and understand rubber, as they have tapped the native rubber trees and marketed
the produce for years. They are also under good control, the Mission having done good work,
and the Missioners are only too willing to assist in any legitimate plantation undertaking.
“AS TO MY EXPERIENCE, I beg to say that I have, during the last forty years, traversed
Australia and New Guinea (PAPUA) as much as any living man, and in all my experience in travelling,
I have seen no finer land than what I have selected in PAPUA, and with the splendid rainfall, cheap
water carriage, and labour it possesses potentialities exceeding any other lands under BRITISH or
CIVILISED rule in the Southern Hemisphere.
“(Signed) A. JOHNSTON.”
(Mr. Johnston is a well-known Contractor in Australia, having constructed some of the greatest
railways in the various States, under contract with the State Governments.)


THE ANGABUNQA PLANTATION AREA.
GENERAL REPORT upon 10,000 Acres of Land at HALL SOUND, in the Territory of PAPUA.
By JOHN RICHMOND, Authorised Surveyor, and formerly Chief Surveyor to
to the Government of Papua.
During the past ten years of my professional experiences in BRITISH NEW GUINEA, holding
the offices of CHIEF GOVERNMENT SURVEYOR AND MEMBER OF EXECUTIVE COUNCIL,
I have had many opportunities of becoming well acquainted with the part of the country now referred
to, and I know this locality to be particularly well suited for the production of SUGAR-CANE, COCOA-
NUTS, RUBBER TREES, MURVA or BOW-STRING HEMP, TOBACCO, COCOA, MAIZE,
MANIOC, BANANAS, YAMS, SWEET POTATOES, and other tropical plants.
“ The land referred to fronts the St. Joseph’s River, and is accessible by boats along the St.
Joseph’s River from the sea coast at HALL SOUND, where at the present time the large steamers of
BURNS, PHILP & CO. regularly call, and where the Yule Island Catholic Mission is established. There
is also good level ground between the land referred to and the sea coast, therefore communication
between the proposed plantation and the steamer anchorage is very good and convenient.
“ THE SOIL on the proposed plantation is of the richest quality and of good depth. Its remark-
able productive powers have been proved on the adjacent Freehold Estate of BURNS, PHILP & CO.,
and by the numerous Native Gardens in the locality.
“THE RAINFALL is regular, and abundant for all plantation purposes, and neither droughts
noi hurricanes are experienced in this locality
“ SUGAR-CANE of excellent quality and great size is grown regularly by the natives for their
own use, and the samples tested in Queensland have proved very rich in sugar.


“ COCOANUT TREES mature very rapidly, and bear with great profusion.
“ THE NATIVE RUBBER TREES have long been made use of by traders and natives, in
collecting and preparing the rubber for sale. The rubber produced from the native trees is of excellent
quality.
“ THE NATIVE POPULATION for many miles around the locality of the proposed Plantation
is very numerous and well-conducted, and an abundant supply of labour will be easily available, provided
that those in charge of the Plantation thoroughly understand the treatment and handling of bodies of
native labourers of this class—and I may here emphasise the fact, that upon the proper payment, treat-
ment, and care of the native labourer, will the success of the plantation greatly depend.
“THE NATURAL CONDITIONS of the country with regard to the health of both European
and Native employees will considerably improve when the country is cleared and proper measures taken
to cope with the causes of general tropical disorders.
“In general terms I can confidently state that the proposed plantation land is a first-class property,
having a good access either by land or water from the steamer anchorage, with excellent soil and natural
conditions for the production of any suitable tropical agriculture.
“It is also very convenient for local native labour, and the cost of clearing the land will be
moderate, because the scrub, although dense, is not heavy timber.
“ It would be difficult to find in PAPUA a property combining so many advantages for tropical
agriculture.
“( Signed) JOHN RICHMOND,
“Authorised Surveyor.
“ 9th October, 1909.”
(Mr. Richmond has been engaged, as the local adviser to the Company in New Guinea, and he
is now residing at Port Moresby.)


REPORT BY MR. FOWLER (a leading and well-known Resident of Papua).
“ I reside at HALL SOUND, BRITISH NEW GUINEA (PAPUA), and have been there for the
past eleven years. I know the St. Joseph’s River country well, and especially land selected by Johnson
and Rigg, and the adjacent Freehold Block.
“ The land is good RUBBER LAND, and I base my opinion on seeing PARA RUBBER TREES
glowing in the neighbourhood. As a matter of fact, I have trees growing on my own place, 1500 acres,
and also on the Government Nursery, Yule Island.
“THE LAND is rich alluvial land, well adapted for RUBBER, COCOANUTS, SUGAR,
TOBACCO, and other tropical production. It is in the wet belt. There are 7000 natives in the MEKEO
district, in which this land is situated, good workers, and never recruited, making them so much the
better.
“ LABOUR is abundant for plantation purposes. I certainly think this land is equal to any
land in NEW GUINEA, especially for rubber purposes.
“ THE DISTRICT is full of FICUS RIGO OR NATIVE RUBBER TREES, and the natives
tap these trees, and have been getting 5/6 per pound in Sydney for it before present boom prices.
“lam a local rubber buyer, and have bought up to 500 lbs. from the natives in one year. On
one block of 500 acres of my own there are over 300 native rubber trees, some very large. I estimate
they average lOlbs. of rubber to each tree with proper tapping.
“ These have never been planted, but are bush or self grown.
“ (Signed) JAMES G. FOWLER.”


COPY OF LETTER written by MR. WM. WHITTEN, Member of the Executive Council of PAPUA,
to MR. A. JOHNSTON, “ Riverside,” Marrickville.
“ Dear Mr. Johnston, —
“ I am very pleased to give my assurance to any friends of yours, who are considering the invest-
ment of capital in a Plantation on the St. Joseph River in this Territory, that I believe there is no
better part of PAPUA for this purpose than the part indicated.
“ The Mekeo District, which is the name that portion of the Country is best known by, has long
been considered one of the best agricultural districts. Sir William MacGregor recognised this, when he
made his Acclimatisation Garden there, and one of the first plants that grew most successfully in this
garden was THEOBROMA COCOA. I believe he made an official report of this.
“ Another proof of the richness of the soil of the district is that it is celebrated for producing the
finest and most prolific crops of bananas.
“ A great advantage to any company working on the St. Joseph is that it has a very numerous
native population, so that native labour there will be plentiful and cheap. It seems to be a law of
nature here that the largest populations are always found where the land is best and gardens easiest
made.
“ You will have also in HALL SOUND a first-class Harbour, near your property, that will be of
great importance after the export of produce from the plantations commences.
“ HALL SOUND is a perfectly safe harbour for a vessel of any size.
“ Yours faithfully,
“(Signed) WM. WHITTEN.”


EXTRACTS FROM HON. WALTER H. GORS’ REPORT ON LAND AT
ST. JOSEPH’S RIVER, PAPUA.
“When the Hall Sound Company was being formed we looked round for land that would be up
to our special requirements.
“ We wanted rich land on a fresh-water river, running into or adjoining a good harbour, with a
reliable rainfall, close to and easily accessible from the seat of Government and surrounded by a large
native population, which could be drawn upon for casual labour.
“We were the first in the field, and after inspecting the whole of the southern coast-line, decided
that Hall Sound was the most suitable place for our operations, and out of the 100,000 acres in that
district selected by experts for us, we selected 5000 acres of what we considered the pick and made same
our headquarters. We secured the 5000 acres, and then gave up operations, as the Government could nob-
grant us the balance of the land.
“ The block is midway between two large villages, with miles of frontage to the Government road
and to the St. Joseph’s River. It is mostly alluvial soil, with large patches of sandy loam near the river,
and all very rich in humus. It is covered with IRIMO and other valuable large and straight-stemmed
timbers, except where plantations and gardens have been made by the natives, and this should shortly
prove a very valuable asset, and is easily workable, being on a large river running into a splendid
harbour.
“ There should be some thousands of bearing cocoanut trees on the block, the largest proportion
being already on the land when we bought it. It is, moreover, a specially ideal spot for rubber growing,
owing to the exceeding richness of the soil and the heavy rainfall. Sugar-cane, bananas, pineapples,
taro, oranges, lemons, &c., can be seen growing luxuriantly upon it, and for Cocoa, Liberian Coffee, and
many other tropical economical plants requiring rich soil and rainfall it cannot be surpassed. It is also
specially suited for tobacco leaf for cigar wrappers.


“Almost any of the land is suitable for the above, but the hundreds of acres of already cleared
land would probably be put under cultivation first, and if Para Rubber is planted, from what I know of
the growing capabilities of the soil I should say that the trees will show a record in growth and should
be tapable for a small yield of rubber in three years.
“ For sisal hemp it cannot be recommended, as the growth would be too rank to give a good fibre.
“(Signed) WALTER H. GORS.”
REPORT BY Mr. C. R. BALDWIN TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
I have lived at Port Moresby for 20 years and carry on the oldest business there as storekeeper,
Shipping and Insurance Agent. I was one of the first explorers of Papua in all its rivers, and I claim
to know the country well.
I know the St. Joseph’s or Angabunga River Country, having been there scores of times ; in fact
T lived on it for 12 months when I had a staff of men engaged cutting sandalwood.
I know the Company’s land; it is level land with slight rises and it is free from floods, save those
that may be exceptional. The soil is very rich and will grow anything. It is splendid land for cocoanuts.
I have no experience of rubber growing, but a great deal of native rubber comes from this locality. In
my opinion the St. Joseph River land is of the best in New Guinea. The native gardens prove this, and
I have seen in these gardens the finest bananas possible, good tobacco, abundance of yams, etc., etc. The
natives are thoroughly civilised owing to the Mission influence. The population along the valley of St.
Joseph’s is very large, owing probably to the abundance of food and the prolific production of their
gardens.
“(Signed) CHAS. R. BALDWIN.”
6th June, 1911.


In addition to the foregoing reports, the Company obtained and has in its possession most
favorable reports from many others who were experienced in Papuan plantation work.
No Australian has a better knowledge of the possibilities of Papua for tropical agriculture than
Sir Rupert Clarke, Bart., who has invested very largely in plantations about 30 miles away from Hall
Sound. Be says, under date 28th April, 1910, in a letter addressed to Sir Joseph Carruthers:—
“ Regarding our conversation a few mouths ago about rubber-growing in New Guinea, I still
hold my opinion that it is a suitable place for rubber cultivation, and my last report from
the plantation in which I am interested bears this out. The report is as follows:
“‘The rubber everywhere on the Estate is looking well and growing vigorously. Very many
trees in the oldest portion are now 12 inches in circumference at the ground, with a height
of from 20 to 25 feet. There is no disease, and everywhere the growth is excellent.’
“ I think this bears out what I told you, namely, that I considered the climate and soil of New
Guinea eminently suitable for the growth of this product, provided it is planted in a
district that has a suitable rainfall.’ ’
On Yule Island is established the important Catholic Mission Station, the leading Mission of New
Guinea. Yule Island is in Hall Sound, opposite the entrance to St. Joseph’s River and within a few
miles of Angabunga Plantation. These missionaries have done a splendid work in civilising the natives
in the surrounding districts, and they have their large chapels in many of the native villages.
No men know better the character of the soil of Papua and its value. The unsolicited testimony
of members of the Mission who have come into contact with the officials of the Company is to the effect
“ that the land acquired by the Company is exceptionally rich and fertile.’’


ACTIVE OPERATIONS OF 1909 and 1910.
Since the Company began its active operations it has opened up a trading station, systematically
started clearing operations, and is planting rapidly with Cocoanuts, Bananas, and other crops. The very
best of seed has been procured, and this season it is estimated that 500 acres of cocoanuts alone will
have been planted.
The work of rubber plantation has also been initiated, but greater care has to be taken in the
nursery stage of the plants than with cocoanuts, so that the actual planting out operations are only just
being entered upon.
Bananas are being cultivated, and this branch of plantation work will be undertaken on a large
scale, as it will give an immediate profit.
Arrangements are being made for the carriage of the banana crops to Australia by the splendidly
equipped fleet of boats which call at Hall Sound, which is one of the safest and deepest natural harbours
in the Southern Hemisphere.
The Manager, has sixty native labourers at work, and under his direction and with the advice and
supervision of Mr. Richmond, there will no doubt be a splendid showing for the year’s work just closing.
PROPOSALS TO INCREASE CAPITAL.
It is proposed to find capital at the rate of £3OOO a year for the next five years in order to bring
the plantation into bearing and profit making.
To raise this amount of £15,000, an issue of 150,000 shares at 2/1 each has been authorised by the
Board of Directors. The premium of one penny per share only, has been fixed in order to cover any
possible charges for brokerage, &c., and because the present Shareholders have bought at par, but
necessarily have been out of interest for one year.


These 150,000 shares will be issued payable as follows:
. 7d. per share on application, realising £4,375.
sd. per share in June, 1912, realising £3,125.
sd. per share in June, 1913, realising £3,125.
sd. per share in June, 1914, realising £3,125.
3d. per share in June, 1915, realising £1,875.
The balance of the shares, viz., 48,000, will (in case funds are required) be offered at par to Share-
holders pro rata; or to the public at a premium to be fixed by the Directors, subject to approval of a
meeting of the Shareholders.
It is proposed to allow Shareholders in England to be represented specially on the Board of
Directors by at least one Director nominated by them, with the right to a greater representation in
proportion to their holding.
It is expected at the expiry of five years to have 1,000 acres of plantation in bearing and yielding
at least £lO per acre. This yield in the seventh year should reach £2O per acre or more from either
Rubber or Copra.
The present Company is not to be regarded as more than a “ Pioneer’’ Company.
The area held—lo,ooo acres of exceptionally fertile land fronting navigable waters —is so large
that it cannot be worked by one Company alone without a very large capital.
It is intended, therefore, to float off nine Sub-Companies, each to work 1,000 acres, under arrange-
ments for management, &c., with the Pioneer or Parent Company, “ The Angabunga River Plantations
Limited.”


In each of these Sub-Companies there will be reserved reasonable interests to the Parent Company,
which will be profitable as the plantations are developed.
With the example of work actually accomplished by the Pioneer Company on 1,000 acres of its
lands, there should be no difficulty in disposing of the acres above referred to on reasonable terms, more
especially if the administration and management of the local affairs is undertaken at a fair charge by
the Angabunga River Plantations Limited and its staff.
No attempt is being made to give estimates of future balance-sheets and profits on this pamphlet.
Mere figures upon which to build up a balance-sheet of the future cannot be given with any pre-
tensions to an accuracy that requires experience and the test of time.
The facts on which an investor may rely, however, are these, in a brief summary;—
1. —The land is 10,000 acres in extent, with cheap water carriage, requiring not one mile of railway or
road.
2. —No rent is payable until 1919, and then only 5 per cent, on the unimproved capital value.
3. —The Lease is for 99 years.
4. —The land is rich tropical land, with an abundant rainfall and with a large and Christianised native
population around it.
5. —Native labour is cheap and available.
6. —Steamships up to 4,000 tons call regularly at Hall Sound, a splendid harbour within a few miles of
the land.


7. —The whole area is eminently adapted for Rubber and Cocoanut planting, as well as for the cultivation
of most tropical products.
8. —The cost of bringing similar land in Papua into actual bearing is about £l3 per acre and the time is
five years after planting such crops as Rubber and Cocoanuts.
9. —The earnings from Rubber or Copra much exceed £2O per acre when in full production and with the
lowest prices for the product of the last ten years.
10. —There has been no loading of the Company with profits, or charges to the Vendors or promoters.
11. —The present Shareholders in the Company were the owners of the land prior to incorporation, and
they have not taken any cash whatever to themselves, but have put their money into the Company
and subscribed for their shares, and with the proceeds have paid for the land and carried on the
Company's work to date.
12. —There have not hitherto been any shares offered for public subscription, the present Shareholders
having determined not to offer any until the plantation work had been actively entered upon.




SYDNEY:
F. CLARK, Printer and Stationer,
1-3 Rowe Street,
Telephone 2813 Central.


REPORT
BY
MR. JOHN RICHMOND


TRADING STATION, ARURE, YULE ISLAND.


Report by Mr. John Richmond.
12tll August, 191 K
1 arrived from New Guinea yesterday week. 1 went to Yule Island about a month ago-
The manager, Mr. Harbord, and the boys have cleared a trading station about 5 acres, and have
erected and completed one house. They also have the material for a store and further buildings
on the ground. I produce photographs taken by one of the Catholic missionaries, showing the
property and the work done at Yule Island. The property at Yule Island is held under a trading
license, and the site was selected by Mr. Harbord after consultation with the missionaries.
The advantages are that it is the most convenient and nearest to the St. Joseph's River, to
the landing of the steamers, and also for trading. It is a gateway of the West, and is in a very
central position. All canoes and all travellers must go by that way. It is a very good central
trading station. There is deep water right up to the beach, and it is a perfectly safe anchorage at
any time. The water is about 5 fathoms deep at about 300 yards out from the beach. You will
see by the photographs that some planting work has been (lone, comprising bananas, vegetables,
foodstuffs, etc.
A nursery has been started there for cocoanuts, which have been planted to the number
of about 3,000 picked seed nuts, and the balance are at Inawai. They were all selected by Mr.
Harbord, and 1 saw them. Thev were verv good nuts and were fit for planting out before I
left.
The soil at Yule Island is not particularly good, the site not being selected for plantation
purposes. Nevertheless, it can be used for growing foodstuffs and for nurseries, and will be a
very valuable asset to the Company. It commands a view of the entrance to St. Joseph's River,
which is about three miles across the I lay-. 1 have not been recently at the Company's plantation
at Inawai. I did not feel it necessary to pay a visit there as I knew the place so well, and I ascer-
tained from Mr. Harbord and Mr. Johnson the work which actually was done.
One of the photographs shows one of the buildings which has been erected by the Company
to house the natives. There are others similar to this which have also been erected for tbe accom-
modation of the overseer and natives.


ARURE-ASSISTANTS SICK QUARTERS AND OVERSEER'S HOUSE.


It will be seen that a considerable area has been cleared in the vicinity of the houses, and
6 acres have been laid down in the gardens and nursery. There were also to acres felled and piled
read}' for hurtling, which have probably been burned by now. There is a great deal of timber on
the land, and the work of clearing naturally is considerable. The richness of the soil is denoted
hy the growth of the timber. All that part of the country is notoriously rich and has a reputation
all over N'ew Guinea.
It will be seen from the photographs that a large number of boys are engaged. Owing to
Mr. Harbord’s experience with boys in Ceylon, he knows how to look after them. When others
were losing boys by sickness all our boys were kept in good health, and the consecpience is that
we can get labour very readily, as the place has a good reputation for health. The Company has
always been able to obtain all the labour they wanted, and within reasonable limits they could
get all that they wanted.
There is another trading station at Yule Island. There is a man named Oberleuter who
has a very successful trading station, but the one established by Harbord would be worth about
ten times as much. Oberleuter takes things very easily, hut Harbord made every effort to make
the station a centre, with the idea of getting a Post Office there when things grow. The natives
bring copra, rubber and all kinds of things to Yule Island for trading purposes. The Company
has done a little trading, but not much. Their time has been taken up in preparation, and they
could not do more than they have in the time.
Other Companies, especially the I British Xew Guinea Development Co., all along what is
called “the Gulf,” as fast as they can are establishing trading stations. These would not inter-
fere with the one at Yule Island, because Yule Island station is situated at a natural gateway for
navigation along the west coast of Xew Guinea. All vessels have to go through Hall Sound,
and the station fronts Hall Sound.
The value of this trading station is that opposite to it is the densely populated area of
the St. Joseph’s River, where, within a short distance, there are at least twelve populous villages,
averaging a population of about 1.000 natives each.
The Roman Catholic Mission at the Island is one of the oldest and largest stations in New
•Guinea. The missionaries render every assistance by their advice and counsel.


MANAGER AND BOYS AT INAWAI.


MANAGER'S HOUSE AT INAWAI AND NATIVE GARDEN.


Qotmv
Tier ton
......
ffl .1
* - -£1Q
M
£
£
19X7
y
• O
tons
1$6
1 u
130
1913
• l8
m
463
5C4
540
1919
- 48
«
1243
1344
1440
1920
- 105
ft
2730
2940
3lp0
1921
* 205
ft
mo
5740
6l5^
MOASUMQA aim BLAHtATIQja MSIIIB*
10 Castle reagh. Street, Sydney*
' 1 "S
sth November, 1917*
Extract from Circular to Shareholders dated October 4th 191?:-
The Manager's estimate on the lowest possible basis of production
of Copra up to the year 1921 1* as follows:-
, i2iz nWi 121 a lasa laai*
6 tens lo tons 43 tons 10p tons 2oj> tons*
The prioe of copra locally is now above £26 with a rising tendency
in view of the world's Increasing detrand - such is the opinion of tjw
well • informed. Over seas prioe is In the nelghbourßood of £5O por
ton due to absence c* shipping facilities.
Taking the Manager's estimate of production during the years as
shown, and comparative prices of £26 £23 dr £3O per ton, the
anticipated revenue from Copra for the period is interesting as shown
by the following table:-
