

C'j ■
I V !% i
l, -W
. ,
Grandfather's Letters
r ts Grandson




Jntroductory
HARLES HOWARD WALCH EDGINTON,
to whom the following letters were written,
was my first-born grandchild, his mother
being my daughter Emma Beatrice, the wife
of Frederick Arthur Edginton, residing in
Launceston. Of course, I have many other
grandchildren, all dear to me, but Charles
Howard was the eldest, and it was as he grew up, first
into a school boy in a junior school and then advanced to
the higher classes of the Launceston Church Grammar
School that I commenced to write to him. I was strongly
moved to do so as the best means in my power of
influencing the dear boy, and as life was opening up before
him I felt that he needed to be shown that however excellent
and necessary were the lessons he was being taught at
school, that their value consisted not really in the exam-
inations he was able to pass, looked upon as an end, but
in preparing him to take the first step in the life that was
before him and into which he was growing. From that I
tried to lead him to see —and I spoke from my own
experience—how absolutely necessary it was to start early
in life with principles of conduct —to listen to the dictates
and pleadings of conscience. Then came the time, when
he was asked to join the Rector’s Confirmation Preparation
Class and this gave me the opportunity of writing to him,
pointing out how momentous was the step he was about to
take and how much it should mean to him.
From about his fifteenth year Charles Howard began
to develop rapidly, both physically and mentally. His
growth in stature and in bodily strength led him to take a
keen delight in all manly sports, and this re-acted on his
mental powers, awakening in him a keen desire to be doing
something —to put what he had learnt into practice. It was
in this spirit, in his sixteenth year, that he availed himself
of the opportunity of entering into his father’s office. I
was consulted on this step and strongly urged him to do
so, pointing out, that as I had found in my own case, so
he would find in his, that considering the excellent ground-
ing he had already received he would now find that the
world was his best school, and circumstances and oppor-
tunities his best school-master. He threw himself with zest
into his work, and in a short time fitted himself for


promotion, which was promised him, when death stepped
in, and the promise of earthly promotion was fulfilled in
a larger and nobler sphere. Then came to pass the promise
that is written, ‘Thou hast been faithful in a few things,
I will set thee over many things.’
I cannot conclude these brief ‘ Introductory ’ words
without taking this opportunity of giving expression to the
deep debt of gratitude we all owe to the ’Rev. J. S. Bryers,
Rector of St. John’s, Launceston, for his loving and faithful
ministrations to Charles Howard Edginton during his last
illness.
After his death, in looking through his chest of drawers,
his mother, much to her surprise, discovered several packets
of letters, arranged according to date, all neatly folded and
tied up. Among them were some packets containing the
letters I had written to him —with the exception of those
written to him during 1908, which somehow had gone
astray —and it is these letters that his father and mother
have asked me to have printed. At first I shrank
from the wider publicity that printing would confer on
them. They were written, many of them, in the brief
intervals of business, just as I had time, or the spirit moved
me, so they claim no literary grace or finish; but, I said to
myself, ‘they may prove helpful to some schoolboy,’ so I
have consented.
Charles E. Walch.


Letters written to rny Grandson
Wellington Bridge,
Hobart,
29th November, 1906.
My Dear Grandson,
How much you have improved in letter writing, for the one I
have just received is a far better one than I could have written at your age.
A good knowledge of arithmetic, and quickness and accuracy in figures will
be of great advantage to you as you grow up, so learn, and at the same time
practice all you can.
You are quite right in praising up your strawberries, for they beat
anything I ever saw. Four of them I find quite enough at one sitting.
Granny does like them so much and can eat ever so many more than I can.
She would enjoy picking them for herself.
So you cut more than you can eat —however did you come to do it ?
I can only advise you not to do it again. I quite agree with you that Auntie
Muriel’s ‘Aspasergs’ —only I would spell it ‘Asparagus’—is splendid. We
had some for dinner to-day, and there was enough for seven of us. I gave
your message to Auntie Carie, but when you break up in ‘ three weeks and
five days,’ Auntie Carie will be well on her way to India. You had better
write to her soon and ask her to bring you something back from India—say
an elephant, an alligator, and some monkeys, of course all alive.
We have had Betty Simon —pronounced Seemon —staying with us
for some days. She is a girl of about ten, and is a granddaughter of Sir
Philip Fysh. She is a bright, jolly girl, and would make an excellent com-
panion for you.
Whatever do you do with such a quantity of milk ? It is a long
time since I have seen a whole bucket full, and besides that, I am sure that it
is much richer milk than we get here. I should like to have my own cow. I
have sent a small parcel to Birchall’s containing pencils and more rubbers for
you; I sent two of each, as if I sent one it might not be the one you would
like.’ I asked Mr. Birchall to send it on to your father.
It began raining last evening and rained all night. Just what was
wanted here, both for crops and fruit trees. Plenty of cherries in the shops
at fourpence a pound.
Good-bye and love to all,
Your loving Grandfather.
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Cananore,
Hobart,
27 th January, 1907
Well, Charlie, how are you ? Tired of holidays I’m sure and longing
for the day to arrive when you will be advanced to the Grammar School.
Why, I was never at a Grammar School, indeed, I was only a year older than
you are when I left school for good, and all that I know I picked up after-
wards by studying and reading—sometimes in railway trains, sometimes in
voyaging from London to here, and often late into the night—in fact, every
one learns a great deal more after leaving school than while he is there.


But the great value of school is to put you in the way of learning—to give
you a start —and then it all depends upon yourself whether you carry
it on or not.
A very wise man once said, that anyone who made two blades of
grass grow, where only one grew before, had done a great thing—then what
great things you are doing in growing those beautiful vegetables. How I
should like to hear you say when I am sitting down to dinner, ‘ Grandfather
I grew those peas, beans, and lettuces,’ and then how nice they would taste
because you grew them. Auntie Muriel does send us down every week a
sack of vegetables, and to-day we had some of her peas for dinner. She also
sent us some beetroot which we will boil for dinner.
While I am writing this—Sunday evening—it is raining hard, and
looks as if it would last all night, but not longer I hope, for Tuesday will be
Regatta Day, and a general holiday, and if the ground is wet what a terrible
state of mud it will be in. Monday, all the tents and booths will have to be
put up. I never go out now, but there was a time when I went out at 6
o’clock in the morning into the Domain and helped to put up the tent myself,
and then Grandmother and your Mother and Aunties came out after break-
fast and we had a grand day.
My love and many kisses for Audrey. Do you know Charlie that
sometimes I wish you were a kinder brother to your sister. You are a boy
and growing up into a big boy, and your pride and delight ought to be to
love your sister dearly and do all you can to show that love. You don’t
think how happy you would make your father and mother if they saw you
kind and loving to Audrey.
And now good-bye my dear boy, for your Grandmother is saying to
me ‘ time for bed.’
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Cananore,
Hobart,
18th February, 1907
My Dear Charlie,
You know that Sunday evening is the time set apart for writing
letters; then I think I hear you say, ‘ Why didn’t grandfather write to me
the last two Sunday evenings’? Well, the reason is that I was in bed the
last two Sundays for I had a bad cold, and Oh! such a cough, that it kept
me awake for hours. The first Sunday, then the Monday, then the Tuesday—
that is, 3 whole days I was in bed —Didn’t I read a lot, and then when I was
tired of reading, Auntie Kitty read to me, Well, it wasn’t half bad. Then
I had compresses on my throat and chest, and ever so much medicine to take.
When Wednesday morning came I was much better and knowing there was
a lot of work awaiting me, I got up and went to business, and stuck to it till
Saturday. The second Sunday—that was yesterday—l again stayed in bed,
but got up fresh this morning for work. What a blessed thing it is to feel
well! Then work is a pleasure, no hardship to learn lessons, and play is a
joy indeed. How kind and thoughtful we ought to be to those who are not
well. Why our blessed Lord Jesus Christ told us ‘to bear one another’s
infirmities,’ which means, put yourself in the place of those who are weak
and sick, and feel for them.
Now, boys don’t think at all that often in iheir schooldays they do
things—wrong things—bad things—which when they grow up to be men they
will be very, very sorry for, for it will make them sick and weak and take
away the joy of life. Charlie, I would like you every morning to say in your
prayers, ‘Heavenly Father keep me this day from sin,’ —which means, ‘keep
me clean in what I do and what I say—keep me from doing anything I would
be ashamed to tell father or mother.’ I don’t know anything so helpful to a


boy and that will make him strong to say NO, than to think at the time,
‘Would I like father and mother to know this ?’ Say boldly to the boy who
would ask you to do wrong, ‘ I cannot do this thing and sin against my father,
mother, and sister.’ Be bold and speak out, for compared with those who
love you at home, why should you care what the whole world says?
How glad lam Charlie to hear you speak so well of your school. I
can see it has already made you more ot a man. This beginning to be a man
shows itself in a great many ways—some of them perhaps little ways—a
straw can show which way the wind blows. Eating the good fruit provided
for you is one of the little ways. Not a mamby-pamby sickly child who can t
eat this, and can’t eat that, but a healthy growing boy with a healthy appetite,
which will make his body strong.
Your loving Grandfather.
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Cananore,
Hobart,
21 st April, 1907
My Dear Grandson,
How very much both your writing and the style of your letters have
improved since you have been at the Grammar School, why, if you go on
improving it won’t be long before you will be of use to your father.
The 24th April will be next Wednesday, and I will be thinking of
you on that day and wishing you success; and yet I won’t be very sorry if
you do not win, for it is not good to win at anything too easily. That will
make one conceited, whether man or boy, and that leads one to believe he
can win without hard work and preparation, which is a mistake. If you lose
this year, then make up your mind that you will win next year. There was
a. wise and noble old Roman whose name was Cato, and he had a friend
named Sempronius who was ‘ down ’ because he feared they would not win
the battle and to him Cato replied
‘’Tis not in mortals to command success, but we can do better,
Sempronius, we can deserve it.’
It doubles the worth of a win if you know that you deserve it and
helps you to bear it if you lose. Certainly, that cat of yours is wiser than
some boys I know, for having learnt the lesson, she won’t do it again, but
runs out of the way of danger. One warning was quite enough for her, but
boys need to be told over and over again.
I hope ‘General ’ will turn out worthy of his name, and prove himself
to be a staid old ‘ boss ’ that can be trusted.
Pat is staying with us for a couple of days, and to-morrow goes back
to the Forest. Both he and Rupert are very glad the hop-picking is over,
for, as you know, that gave them no end of trouble in looking after the men,
women and children.
We never heard from Auntie Carie by the last mail, so can’t tell
where she is or when to expect her back. We think she must still be at
‘ Penang.’ Look at your atlas to see where ‘ Penang ’ is. ■
I wish you had been down at our wharves last week to see the
three biggest steamers that ever came out to Australia, berthed near one
another to take in apples, any one of them could easily have taken the
‘ Loongana ’ on deck.
Audrey is full of life. I don’t think we can ever let her go home.
Love to all,
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.


In my Bedroom,
Cananore,
23rd June , 1907
My Dear Charlie,
Because it is a cold, wet day, and I have a cold, Granny and Auntie
Dora would not let me get up, except to sit by the fire where I am now
writing.
Mrs. Garrett —or as you call her, Cousin Maggie—brought us your
School Report to-day, and it is about that I am going to write, and I don’t
forget that it is your first Report from the Grammar School, and I fully
expect that each succeeding Report will be better and better. At first you
would naturally feel nervous among so many boys and it would take some
time to get used to the school, its masters and their ways. I make every
allowance for all this, but next Report must be better, and I know that you
can do better. I will take some of the subjects:—
English, Spelling, and Reading, I class these three subjects together.
I don’t know exactly what is meant by ‘English ’ —l suppose it includes ‘ Liter-
ature and Composition.’ Well, I don’t think any boy of your age can know
much about this. Then as to spelling, not much of that can be taught in
school. It comes largely from reading, seeing the words and thus learning
through the eye; when once you see how a word is spelt you ought to re-
member Try to do this.
Reading. Very nervous. If you are not accustomed to reading aloud,
this is certain to be the case, and it can only be overcome by practice at
home. You should certainly make it a practice to read aloud to Father and
Mother every day. Then you will become accustomed to your own voice,
and this will take away your nervousness. Never mind mistakes. But good
reading—and I want you to become as good as your mother—means more
than pronouncing the words correctly. You may do that and still be a bad
reader. You must understand, and this will be shown by the tone of your
voice. If you have to read conversation, two persons talking together, those
who are listening should know which of the two is speaking, without you
mentioning names, and so in every word,—joy, sorrow, anger, &c.
‘ Learn to read well, all other graces
Will follow in their proper places.’
Writing. Do your best to become a good writer. You will find it
a great help in life. Many a boy has had a good position offered him and
could not fill it, because he could not write well. Ask your father if two
boys applied to him to become clerks in his office and they were both equally
good and clever, but one wrote well and the other badly, which would he
take ?
Arithmetic. I am glad to see that you hold so good a place in class,
and better still, that you are a ‘ good worker,’ Everything that I have said
about writing holds good as to arithmetic, only more so, Good in writing
and arithmetic will help a boy in starting life wonderfully.
Geography. You have done well here, and I look for you soon to be
head of your class in this subject. You first learn the names of places, &c., and
where they are—but that is only the beginning—you must go on to learn
about the people who live in the countries, what the countries produce, &c.,
and then Geography includes the sea as well as the land. Indeed it all is
very interesting, and all the more interesting as you go on to learn more.
History. I began to learn History when I was 24 years old —for you
must know that I left school before I was 12 —and I taught myself through
reading History books. It was the year 1854 when I had an office in London.
The train took about three-quarters of an hour to come in, and another three-
quarters to go out. I subscribed to a Library, and instead of taking out
novels, I took out ‘ Allison’s History of Europe,’ in 20 vols.; then 1 Prescott’s
Histories of Mexico and Peru,’ and others, and read the best part of them
when in the train. Since then, when I have had time, I have read many and
many Histories of England—of the great deeds that the British have accom-


plished. Talk about wonderful things! Nothing in the whole world comes
up in interest and wonder to the glory of your own country, The British Empire.
French. As to learning other languages than your own, I don’t think
Latin will be of much use to you, because you are not likely to become a
Doctor, Lawyer, &c. But the Modern—live—Languages, such as French, and
German, will certainly be of use. I know a little of French, and how and
where do you think I first learnt what Ido know ? Why from a Frenchman,
who was the cook of the ship of which I was second mate. I taught him to
speak English, and he taught me to speak French. Then when I came out
from England in 1858, 1 took with me, besides other books, a French grammar,
and a French dictionary, and a French story-book, and every day I taught
myself French. Of course I don’t know much French, but the little Ido
know has been of use to me. Therefore, stick to your French, and come out
top of your class.
And now, dear Charlie, I have reserved the best to the last. General
Conduct, Excellent! To get such a character in the first half-yearly report
makes me feel proud of you. To begin well is half the battle won. God
bless you, my boy. Don’t disappoint those who love you so well.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Wellington Bridge,
Hobart,
nth August, 1907.
My Dear Charlie,
What a long time it is since you wrote to me—at least it seems
to me to be long, for I am always looking out for a letter from you,
telling me about your school-life and the friends you have made among
the boys. Do you know, Charlie, that school days should be the happiest
years of a boy’s life, and be the brightest to look back upon when you are
grown up; and yours is just the school in which to form friendships which
should last a lifetime.
When I was reading an English newspaper I came across a
story, ' The Small Boy of Siena,’ and I said to myself, ‘ I will cut this
out and send it to Charlie.’ So here it is. It tells you of something that
you have not yet thought about, but you are old enough now to know and
think about. The lesson of the story is that confession is good—that is,
telling when you have done wrong and foolish things—when you confess
to the RIGHT person. Confess to Father and Mother, and confess to your
Heavenly Father, and you will find such help and comfort —help not to do it
again, and comfort to know that you are forgiven. No man on this earth—
call him by whatever name you like —has any right to come between you
and God, and say to you, ‘You must confess to me, for it is only through
me that God will help you.’ That is wrong and false. Stand up for the
freedom wherewith God has made you free.
Grandmother has been away for nearly five weeks at Glenora,
looking after Uncle Rupert and Auntie Muriel, for both have been ill, and
she had to take full charge of the house. I have known lots of people in
my life, and seen what they can do, but I will back your Grandmother
against them all as the kindest, wisest, and most helpful person in all Tas-
mania, and I ought to know. Charlie, you must be very loving and kind
to her as you grow older, for she is worthy of all the love you can
give her.
Auntie Carie is having a fine time of it at Taiping. Where is
Taiping? Look at a map of the Malay Peninsula, and you will see that at the
end of it is Singapore. Follow it up towards Burmah, and you will find
a good way up, Penang, an island, and inland Perak. Now Taiping is the
capital of Perak, and Perak is a country from which a lot of tin is got


and sent to England; also, India rubber for tyres of cycles, motor cars,
&c. You should get Aunt Carle to tell you all about the country, which
will be much better than reading about it in a book, for who knows
whether you might not go there some day.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Wellington Bridge,
Hobart,
29th September, 1907.
My Dear Charlie,
I haven’t forgot that this is your mother’s birthday, and I hope
you have not forgotten to give her a present, as well as ever so many
kisses. Never forget that no one has more than one mother, and that to a
son she is more than all the other women put together. ‘ Mother first, and
the rest nowhere,’ to use a sporting phrase. Then, to-morrow will be
Audrey’s birthday. I wonder what you have given her for a birthday
present. I don’t know of anything that will make a boy more manly than
having a sister to take care of, and I hope as you both grow older that
you will feel how peculiarly she is in your keeping, and may she always be
proud to say that you are her brother.
And now about your letter. It was ‘a nice Jong one,’ as you say,
and I see it took you more than an hour to write it. I really mean it
when I say, that I never read a better letter, better worded, and better
written by a boy of your age. If you go on improving at this rate, it will
not be very long before you will be able to help your father in his office.
It was a very happy thought of yours to give me that practice sum
in full, for it reminded me of my schooldays when I had to do just such
sums; but what I liked best was your explanation of how and why you did
it, which showed me that your master must be an excellent teacher. For
there are teachers and teachers—the good will explain why, and thus fix it in
your memory, the bad will show you ‘ how ’ without any explanation.
I say that was rather hard of you on the ‘ gloomy boy and country
bumpkin.’ I suppose you ‘town boys’ look down upon ‘country bump-
kins’; and yet I have known some C.B.’s who would walk round town
boys, who think themselves so superior. Look out that you don’t get
caught some day.
Oh, it is good to have Auntie Carie back again after being away
for 10 months! She has so much to tell of the different places she has
seen in India, Ceylon, and the Malay Peninsula—of the persons she has
met and seen, Cingalese, Indians, Malays, Chinese, &c.—of the voyages and
journeys by land and sea; really, it has been a wonderful life. Ask your
mother if she would like such a trip.
There are five of us writing away as hard as we can on this Sunday
evening, and when I told them what I thought of your letter, they all said,
‘ Tell Charlie, we are all of the same opinion—it is a capital letter.’ I hope
your father will have fine weather for the Show, and not like what it was
last year. I think the bad weather is past, and this week will be fine.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Cananore,
Hobart,
27th October , 1907.
My Dear Charlie,
It was good of you to write me a nice long letter all about your-
self and your school life. lam sure, from the way you write, that when


I see you I will find a great deal of difference in you. I don’t mean only
that your body will have grown bigger, but that your mind will also have
grown larger, through your mixing with other boys, the teaching of the
school, and the discipline of school life. I want you to remember, Charlie,
that all this is the beginning of the real education of life, preparing you, by-
and-bye to take your proper place, and do a man’s work, when you will
have to decide, to act, and to take responsibility on yourself. At present you
are only a child. Your life is principally a life of obedience. You are
told what you are to do and what you are not to do. But you will not
always be a child. God never intended this. Listen to these words of one
of the world’s greatest men: —
‘ When I was a child, I spake as a child, I thought as a child;
Now that I have become a man, I have put away childish things.’
And the sort of man you will become depends largely as to hpw you
learn now; for there are some men who are, and always will be, fools,
and little better than children all their lives.
My dear Charlie there is otie Book in the world which has more
wisdom in it—that is, teaching boys and men how to live —than all the
other books in the world put together. It tells of many bad and foolish
things that men have done, and how they had to suffer for it, as a warning
to us—it tells also of the good things they have done and of their reward,
as an encouragement to us. It gives the best and soundest advice, and no
man has followed that advice without being the better for so doing. To
say that such a Book is worth its weight in gold is a poor way of judging
its value. Why thousands and tens of thousands of persons have proved
this Book to be worth more than all the gold in the world.
There was once a merchant man —this was in the Eastern countries,
long before there were railways, when merchants travelled on foot or on the
backs of camels, who set out to buy goodly pearls. He bought many beau-
tiful pearls, but in his travels he heard that there was ‘one Pearl of great
price,’ and he felt that he must have that; so from country to country he
travelled, often weary and foot-sore, but that Pearl he must have, and at
length he was rewarded, and to get it he gave up all the other beautiful
pearls he had collected and got the Pearl of Great Price. And what do you
think it was ? It was that Book I told you of. It told him of the One God.
It told him that God was his Father. It taught him to live that he might
inherit the Kingdom of God, and ‘ evermore he called it The Pearl of Great
Price.’
Three thousand years ago there was a very wise man who asked
a question and himself gave the answer, and ever since that time to this
very day, no more important question has been asked, and certainly no
better answer has been ever given.
Question. ‘ Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way ?’
Answer. ‘By taking heed thereto according to Thy Word.’
This is the meaning of the question— ‘ The Way ’ is the‘Way of
Life ’ —the way I live—the daily road I walk —How shall I keep my life clean f
For just as your hands get dirty from handling dirty things, so will your mind
get soiled from thinking nasty thoughts, doing dirty actions, seeing or reading
wrong and nasty books. How, then, can you keep your life clean ? This
is the answer —‘The Law of God is His Word.' Read that Word and
obey it. Take heed how you walk. There are stones in the road; see that
you don’t fall over them. Back again to The Book, and it will be ‘ a lamp
to your feet and a light to your path,’ and by that light you will see your
dangers and avoid them.
Now, Charlie, I wouldn’t write to every boy like this, but I do love
you so that I want you, while you are young, to ‘Cleanse your way.’
Oh, this will keep you from bringing sorrow to Father and Mother, and
all who love you. Courage, manliness, how can you best show this? By
saying No when asked to do what you know is wrong.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.


NOTE.— Unfortunately, the packet containing the Letters for igoB
have been lost.
Wellington Bridge,
Hobart,
6th March, Igog.
My Dear Charlie,
This morning, while at breakfast, your letter’descriptive of your
Camp life, came to hand, and I thank you for it, as it is good and lively
reading. I send you with this what you asked for. Being Saturday, and
closing at I p.m., we are very busy, so will answer your letter another day.
We have had terrible weather all this week, which has knocked me
up, but I must not give way as I have so much to do.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Cananore,
Hobart,
10th May, igog.
My Dear Howard,
I hope you really believe that I am as good as my word, and
that 5/- will be yours some day. It will go by your mother when she re-
turns. I have been busy all this evening writing to the number of persons
who wrote and wired to me their birthday greetings, and you are amongst
them.
I do indeed wish I could come to Launceston and see the ‘ Old
House,’ No. 8, but this cannot be, for I am the old man, walking with a stick
and a decided limp.
Grandmother will, of course, come soon, for she wants to see how
you have all settled down. Your mother and Auntie Kitty are having a
good old time of it, going to Hillcrest to see Aunt Jane, and Minna and
Brenda. They are coming to dinner and tea at Cananore, and besides there
are all their old friends.
I see that you have ‘ fun ’ at School, which is certainly good, for it
brightens you all up.
Everybody is saying to me, ‘go to bed —go to bed,’ so I must obey.’
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Wellington Bridge,
Hobart,
28th May, igog.
My Dear Charlie,
Your postscript in your letter to Auntie Dora reminded me that I
had not rejlied to your letter. You must not be too hard on me for not
replying at once, as I am busy all day and feel considerably tired when I get
home in the evening.
I see that you are a ‘ dab ’ at marbles, which recalls my youthful
days in 1841, when I was at school at Exeter, eleven years old. I never
played marbles after I arrived in Tasmania. As a Cadet I believe in you
doing your best to become the crack shot of the corps. What is worth


doing, is worth doing well, and I really believe that you will see the time
when you will have to defend your country. The world is still a long way
off from the blessed time of universal peace, and the nations are fearfully
jealous of England and her possessions.
Our Arbor and Empire Day was a great success. The day was
fine, and we had in the Domain 600 State School children, each of whom
planted a tree. Flags were flying, the boys’ bands were playing patriotic
tunes, speeches were made, and, to crown all, buns and apples were dis-
tributed to all the children. My gift was 600 Memorial Cards specially printed
for the occasion, which the children would retain as a memorial of the occa-
sion. You will see in the pages of the Courier pictures of the children,
which includes my addressing the children, and if you look closely you
will see Audrey standing near me. Of course, you will at once recognise
me in the group of the Queen’s Domain Committee.
The last news from Muriel is comforting, for Charles Rupert was
decidedly better, and the danger of bronchitis was over.
Grandmother has a bad cold, and has gone to bed. 1 wish she
would stay in bed for two or three days, but who would be able to make
her do so ?
Audrey is very well, and is looking forward to her children’s party
with very great pleasure—quite excited about it. I believe it is to be next
Thursday.
Aunties Carie and Dora are very jolly. To-morrow will be Auntie
Carie’s birthday.
We send our love to all at 8 Lyttleton Street, and also to the loved
ones at ‘Aberdour.’
Your affectionate Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
7th June, igog.
My Dear Grandson,
Having a quiet half hour on this Sunday evening, when Mother,
and Aunties Carie and Dora, are either writing or reading, and Audrey is in
bed, sound asleep, I cannot do better than write to you.
What about your new heme? The house I know is an o’d one, but
the home is new, and I trust, my dear boy, that as far as you can, you wiU
endeavour to make it a beautiful home. Much as one would like to live in a
grand house, with garden and lawn and trees, those things will not of them-
selves make a ‘home.’ It is loving and true hearts that make a home, and
if you believe this, then do your part to make it such. I should say—and
I have seen and learnt a lot during my long life—that unselfishness is a
principal ingredient in the making of a beautiful home. Forget self and
think of others. To those younger than yourself be kindly, don’t tease, be
ready to help them in every way. I don’t want to lay down ‘rules’ as to
what you are to do. I want you to understand and act on ‘principles.’
‘Principle’ is the root —love, gentleness, and all good actions are the fruit.
Make the tree right, and the fruit will come right.
And oh, my boy, surely you are getting old enough to think a bit —
to think of Father and Mother, what they are to you, and what you ought to
be to them. Give them your loving obedience. They have not. a thought or
purpose that is not for your welfare, and oh! how they think and talk to-
gether about you. They are always planning about your future. What a
help you will be to them—what a comfort and joy to your Sister and
Mother. How proud they are at your getting big and strong, and doing so
well at school. What are you going to give them in return for all their love
to you and the home they have provided for you ? I have said give them
‘ your loving ’ obedience —not one without the other, but both together.
You don’t know —you can’t know yet, for you have not thought about it—


what a father’s and mother’s love means. There is nothing like it in the
world. So again I ask, what are you going to give them ?
Holidays are drawing near —when and how are you going to spend
them? Audrey had a splendid children’s treat on Thursday afternoon. I
don’t know how many came —I believe something like 14 —but I know the
table was crowded with good things, some of which Auntie Dora made, and
the rest were bought. A large cake —one that you could ‘ cut and come
again,’ and the room was darkened and lit up by about 20 coloured wax
tapers fixed around the table. Many were little children, not more than two
years old. Their mothers came with them, and they* certainly enjoyed the
sight.
Grandmama has still a bad cold, and sets all a bad example, for she
will not stay in bed, and, of course, I cannot make her. Auntie Muriel is
not very well, and she wants Auntie Carie to go up to her, and I think she
will next Wednesday.
Auntie Dora says Auntie Kitty has not sent her the piece of blue
silk that you chose for your ties, and thanks you very much for the letter
you wrote her.
The weather is beautifully fine —quite warm during the middle of
he day. My love to all the dear ones at ‘Hailsham ’ and ‘Aberdour,’
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS, E. WALCH.
Cananore,
17th June, 1909.
My Dear Charlie,
I will give this letter to your Grandmother, so that you will get it
before the post is delivered. I wonder if your Father and Mother re-
member that the 18th June is the 93rd anniversary of the celebrated Battle
of Waterloo, which was fought and won by Britons on the 18th June, 1815.
I am reading all about it for the twentieth time, so know all the officers,
from Wellington on the one side, and Napoleon on the other. I really think
that your schoolmasters should tell you all about the great victories of
Waterloo and Trafalgar, as their anniversaries come round. Children born
and brought up in the Colonies need to be reminded of the wonderful
history and noble deeds of their forefathers ; especially should you, who are
now a full-blown Cadet, know all about those stirring times. Your Mother
told me that you looked every inch a soldier. Your Great-Great Grand-
father, your Great Grandfather, your Grand Uncles, and your Uncle were
all of them officers in the British Army.
Aren’t those Indian Jugglers wonderful fellows! I have heard my
Father and Mother and others tell of what they have seen in India. There
is that wonderful mango trick, where a man brings on to the ground in
front of the house a basket and a mango stone. You can plainly see every-
thing he does. The mango stone is placed on the ground and covered with
the basket. He pours some water on the seed, and after saying a lot of
words he lifts off the basket, and you see a young mango tree. Again he
covers it over, and again he shows you a tree with blossoms. He does this
once more, and there is a full grown tree with fruit.
But more wonderful than this is the man that comes in the midst
of a circle of people with a long rope in his hands. He stands in the
midst, and there is perfect silence while he prays and throws up his arms
appealing to some invisible spirit. Then he throws up the rope, keeping the
end in his hand. The rope falls down. Again and again he does the same,
and at last the rope stands straight up quite stiff, held up by some invisible
hand, and the man climbs up it and vanishes.
What do you say to this ?
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.


Cananore,
Hobart,
28th November, 1909.
My Dear Howard,
Well, what are the coming generation going to do about writing,
when they begin using the typewriter while so young. It looks to me as if
soon writing will become one of the lost arts. I suppose it is all right, but
as for me I am too old to learn now.
You have, indeed, given a clear and spirited account of the boat
race, about good enough to appear in the newspaper from the pen of a
reporter. I only took part in one boat race in my life. It was when the
ship, of which I was second mate, was loading teak in Maulmain, with two
other vessels in port. I was steersman of our boat, and we came in.second.
Mind, they were heavy ships’ boats, quite unlike what are used now for racing
purposes.
I suppose you have read about and seen pictures of the great annual
boat race between the Old Universities, Oxford and Cambridge, which is
rowed on the Thames. There are crowds there, if you like it, tens and tens
of thousands of people lining both sides of the river for miles.
Don’t you wish it were always Spring, for that’s the season for
strawberries, and there is only one thing that I prefer to strawberries and
cream, and that is raspberries and cream. Aren’t you glad that the two
don’t come in together, for when one is done you can have the other.
Auntie Carie will leave us on the 28th January to be married in
the Malay States, and Auntie Dora will go with her, not however to be
married, but only to see that Auntie Carie is properly married.
Now, I call this letter very badly written ; don’t you agree with me ?
My excuse is that the pen is bad, and I ought to be in bed.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WATCH.
Cananore,
Hobart,
12th February, 1910.
My Dear Grandson,
Certainly I owe you one, if not two, letters, and as I am always
telling others, ‘ pay your debts,’ I ought to set an example in paying my
debts.
The uppermost thing in my mind just at present is the coldness of
the weather—indeed, summer seems never to have come this year. Day
after day the weather sets in from the southward, which you know, is our
cold quarter, and usually brings with it some showers and plenty of cloud.
From the Huon, the district of apple orchards, the cry is for more sunshine
to ripen and colour the fruit, making it fit for shipment to London; for
the first fruit steamer loads here on Friday. She is the Osterly, one of the
Orient line of steamers of 12,000 tons. Just think what a splendid harbour
Hobart has, when such a vessel, without the slightest trouble can come
alongside our new pier and load a full cargo till she draws 32 feet. This
season we will have 21 big steamers loading apples !
Viscount Kitchener of Khartoum honoured us —of course I mean
Hobart—with a visit. I did not see him, either on his arrival at the Rail-
way station or at the reception in the evening ; for it is impossible for me,
with my bad leg, to stand for even five minutes. However, your Grand-
mother saw him on both occasions, and shook hands with him at the evening
reception. Of course, you saw him. I see from the books that Lord
Kitchener is 60 years of age, but your Grandmother says he did not look
more than 45!


The two Miss Calverts, who have been at Cananore for five
weeks, go by train, leaving at 5.50 this afternoon for Oatlands, where they
will stay with their brother, but for how long I cannot say—all depends.
We have done our best to make them feel quite at home, and they express
themselves as very grateful.
Have you ever looked at a map—a good sized one —to see the way
your Aunties Carie and Dora are voyaging ? If not, you ought to. After
leaving Sydney, the next port at which they touch is Brisbane, then Towns-
ville, and striking across the Strait they call at Port Moresby (New Guinea),
then Thursday Island, the northernmost port of the Commonwealth, and
from thence to the Aroa Islands, Macassar, in the Island of Celebes, and half
a dozen places in Batavia and Java, changing steamer for Singapore.
Our last news of them was a cable from Thursday Island, which we
received on Wednesday, telling us they were all well and thoroughly enjoying
the voyage. Who knows but some day you may take this voyage, and be the
guest of Auntie Carie in her home at Yam Seng Estate. Wouldn’t that be
jolly? I only wish I could pay her a visit, but this poor leg of mine won’t
let me leave home.
When the Calverts leave us, which will be in half-an-hour, Grand-
mother and I will be left quite alone !
My love to all —Father, Mother, yourself, Audrey, and Freddie, and
when you see them, also to Auntie Kitty, Uncle Ted and Geof., and any other
enquiring friends.
Your affectionate Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Wellington Bridge,
Hobart,
29th Arpil, 1910
My Dear Howard,
And so on the first May you will be another year older, and thus the
years succeed one another. God bless you, my boy, and when each birth-
day comes round may it find you stronger, not only physically with plenty
of muscle and big bones, but that nobler and everlasting strength which
will make you strong to resist evil—to say to the tempter, in whatever shape
he approaches you, ‘ Get thee behind me.’ I want you to be strong enough
and have pluck enough to say outright, so that everyone can hear you, I
cannot —I will not, do this evil thing, because I have promised Father and
Mother. A boy growing up into manhood, who is afraid to say that, is
the veriest cur upon earth, and I greatly fear for his future. My boy, I
want to be as proud of you in all the years to come as I am to-day.
I asked Grandmother, ‘ What shall we give Howard as a birthday
gift ?’ ‘Oh !’ she said, ‘ Give him something that he can spend; he is sure
to want something.' So here is a pound note from us both.
We are going to give your Mother and the children a grand time
of it, and as many more as can come —the more the merrier.
Love to Father and Auntie Kitty and Uncle Ted.
Your affectionate Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH


Cananore,
Hobart,
19th June, 1910.
My Dear Howard,
You really do deserve a letter from me, for you have written more
than one which I have never answered. My excuse for this is that my
evenings are terribly short, as I have to go to bed so early in order to give
as much rest as I can to my poor legs, and on Sundays I often stay in
bed all day.
Now, my principal reason for writing this letter is to talk to you
very earnestly, and at the same time very simply, about your joining the
Confirmation Class in preparation for being confirmed.
What is Confirmation, and why should you be Confirmed ? When
you were a babe, helpless and unconscious, your Father and Mother, as re-
sponsible in the sight of God for you, and acting in your stead, brought
you to God’s minister, and promised to bring you up from your earliest
days as a child of Jesus Christ’s, in whose name you were baptised.
Now you have arrived at the age, when having passed out of child-
hood into youth, you are to take upon yourself that which your parents
promised on your behalf. In this respect you have become ‘of age,’ which
entails responsibility. The importance of this first step into responsible
life it would be impossible to exaggerate, and it is the purpose of the Con-
firmation Class to instruct you, so that you may clearly comprehend what
it is to be Confirmed. You know good from evil, and it is with you to
decide; for your Confirmation vow pledges you that from henceforth,
deliberately and with full knowledge of what you are doing, you will be
faithful to the Lord Jesus Christ and obey bis command, ‘ Follow Me.’
Now, Howard, my son, you are old enough to know that a pledge
—an outward thing—is valueless unless it is accompanied with the inward
purpose and determination to fulfil that pledge. It is now your part, having
taken the first step, ‘to follow on,’ in order to know the will of the Lord
Christ. Now, no one has ever known Him all at once or entirely. I am 80
years old, and still I am learning of Him. So don’t you be discouraged
because you know so little of Him now. ‘ That knowledge will grow from
more to more,’ just as you endeavour to do what you do know. It is for you
to read and pray and work, and then, assuredly as there is a God in heaven,
Who is Our Father, you will know of His will.
Most certainly after you have taken the pledge to be Christ’s there
should be some visible change in conduct. It can take the form of being a
more loving son and brother —a giving up of what you know to be evil habits,
which have such a tendency of ‘ growing ’ and becoming fixed. In .them-
selves these may seem little things, but they are the beginnings. Woe to the
person who despises these ‘ little things.’ It would only be a fool who would
expect a very little child to walk like a grown up person. Commencing with
feeble and tottering steps the child learns day by day to walk. By trying to
walk it improves day after day, little by little, till it can walk without stum-
bling. So it is with everyone who tries to follow the Master and endeavours
to walk in His steps. But it is for you to make the start, and Confirmation
is intended to help >ou to do so.
But I must stop here, not because I have nothing more to say, but
because I hear you say, ‘ Oh, Grandfather is preaching. ’ Well, there are
worse things than ‘preaching,’ if a man knows what he is ‘preaching’ about.
But lam only talking out of my experience to my grandson— So to 16— and
80 ought to have something to say that is worth listening to.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.


Cananore,
Hobart,
August Ist, 1910.
My Dear Howard,
It was very good indeed of you to write me those good letters about
your doings during your holidays at Ulverstone, and had I been able I would
have answered them at once. ‘ Better late than never,’ says the old proverb,
which is quite true in this instance.
Game, in the form of kangaroos, wallabys, opossums, pigeons,
wattle birds, &c., are nothing like so plentiful now as when I was a boy,
shooting at the Broadmarsh and roaming over the Dromedary ranges. The only
game that has increased are rabbits; it was quite a rare thing to see one in
the old days. How about snakes? Would you include them among ‘ game V
In some parts, I suppose, they are as plentiful as ever. The worst place
for snakes that ever I was in was Maria Island. Whenever we camped,
during our ‘Rover’ trips at Oyster Bay, we always killed about half-a-
dozen black and diamond, some of them a good size—s feet. One had 46
live ones, 6 inches long, inside.
Garnet spent his holidays with his Mother at Swansea, and had a
fine time there. He returned here a week ago, but could not go back to
school as his eyes had to be attended to by Dr. Miller, who pronounced it
a case of ‘ Stigmatism,’ which needed prompt attention and the wearing of
special glasses. He returned to school yesterday, but must not do any work
for a week. He does look so strange in his glasses.
And so at the beginning of next year you are to go to the
Woolgrowers’ Association to learn business ways before you learn to be a
farmer. lam sure the knowledge of business matters will prove a good
foundation for anything afterwards, if you determine to learn. Your Father
can give you the opportunity, but it rests with you to make the best use
of the opportunity. We all want to see of what stuff you are made, and
that will be your chance.
I have had a nasty ‘set back’ during the past three weeks, and
have only been three times to business, but I am now so much better that
to-morrow the doctor permits me to go to business for two hours as a
beginning.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WATCH.
Hobart,
18th December, 1910.
My Dear Howard,
Let me have the year’s Nos. of Chums and the Cloth Case. I will
see that your instructions are carried out by the binder.
Those boating trips are very enjoyable when the weather is fine and
your companions are the right sort. My boat trips, with about five or six
others, are among the happiest holidays I have ever had, and it is nice to
talk over those times when we meet. You know I kept them up for
very many years, often with the Rev. George Clarke as our ‘ boss.’ I sup-
pose you have read my account of one of those holiday trips, entitled ‘The
Seven Rovers’; you will find it in the second part of ‘My Life,’ and you
will find it not bad reading. As for your holiday with Muriel and Rupert,
you are indeed to be envied, for it is not one boy in fifty that will have such
a splendid time. lam sure that I need not tell you that it largely depends
upon yourself whether such a holiday is a success or not. You make the


best ot everything, and be nice to others, and everyone will be nice to you.
All through life, wherever you are, you will find this to be perfectly true,
for I have proved it.
Auntie Dora has just told me that I was wrong to say, ‘Muriel
and Rupert.’ I should have said, ‘ Auntie Muriel and Uncle Rupert.’
I suppose you will be enjoying yourself so much at Glenora that
you will give us but a very short time to have the pleasure of your company
at Cananore, but mind, you must not return home without coming here, for
it is such a long time since I saw you, and I hear that you have outgrown
the ‘boy’ stage, and become a young man. Of course, that means your
schooldays are drawing to a close, but mind, not your learning days. The
great value of the years at school is not so much what you have learnt —for
the best and cleverest of schoolboys has learnt but little—but has it pre-
pared you to go on learning ? In some ways, there is a great likeness between
building a ‘house’ and budding a ‘life.’ Schooldays are laying the founda-
tion, but what would a ‘house’ be if the foundation were all ? So with ‘ life.’
It is yours to go on building till your ‘life’ stands forth a noble edifice,
seen and known and honoured of all.
Very sorry to hear that your Father is not well; only something,
I trust, that will soon be over. It is not nice to be ill, even for a few
days; and never forget, that a sick person needs all your patience and
love and devotion, especially when that person is a near and dear one.
We all wish you the happiest Christmas and New Year of your
life.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Cananore,
Hobart,
30th July, 1911.
My Dear Howard,
I do wish to hear that you have left the hospital and are at home
once more, which, I am sure, is your wish also. Typhoid is bad enough
in itself, but the trouble often is what it leaves behind, so that you have
to be careful of yourself for some time.
When you do return to, business, I see that you will be promoted
to responsible duties, and so you will have the opportunity of proving of
what stuff you are made. It will be putting your first step on the
ladder of working life, which, I trust, will prove to be a ladder of success.
Good, true, reliable, and competent men are more needed now than ever
they were, and there are positions awaiting such all the world over, —for
commerce is ‘far-flung ’ over the world as it never was before, and
‘ There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune ’;
But remember that the tide ebbs as well as flows, so that it behoves the
man to be always ready, by improving his opportunities day by day, to
be ready for the ‘ flood,’ or the ‘ ebb ’ will leave him high and dry. The
world is full of such wrecks on the shores of the sea of life.
Grandmother is having a day in bed, as she has one of her attacks
of sickness, and taking only soda and milk, and is even sick on that. She
must stop in bed for some days ; so I have to tell the family news in
this letter.
Muriel returned to Glenora yesterday, taking Charles Rupert with
her. Poor little chap, he was bad for three days from the effects of the
chloroform given him when he had the operation for the ‘ post-nasal.’ So
sick and miserable. However, the doctor said yesterday he could go


home, as he was very much better, and if it turned out to be measles, why
Muriel had Esther’s nurse there, who could look after both..
I wonder who will be the next one we will have to enliven us
here. First, there was Audrey—oh, it did make a difference when she left.
Then, there was Muriel and Charles Rupert—both made things ‘ hum ’
when here.
We are having delightful weather. The sun has just set as I am
writing, and the whole sky is flooded with gold—quite Spring day !
We are told that positively there will be a Carters’ and Drivers’
Strike to-morrow (Monday) morning, when not a cart of any description
will be seen in the streets. Well, I will wait and see if that be true. If
it takes place it will give everyone an opportunity of showing of what
stuff they are made, —for everyone must do his or her part in bringing in
provisions—bread, meat, groceries, &c. Luckily, we have a good stock of
wood and coal in.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Cananore,
Hobart,
3rd September , igil.
My Dear Howard,
It is a good sight for sore eyes—to quote a proverb—to see your
handwriting once again, and to get such a long, cheery letter from you.
Isn’t it lovely to change the hospital for home, and to have your dear
ones about you once again. Now what you have to do, is to get strong
again as soon as you can. That is, little by little. Every day to go one
better. * Slow and sure ’ should be your motto, and then all will come
right. I am very glad you are reading ‘The Story of My Life, for I want
you specially to know something of your Great Grandfather and Grand-
mother, just to let you see from what a grand stock you came —a far
grander stock than if they had been mere lords or dukes.
‘ Happy he with such an ancestry,
Faith is in his blood, and trust in all things high
Comes easy to him ; and though he trip and fall,
He shall not blind his soul with clay.’
Who is the poet that wrote these lines? I have only altered two or three
words.
Another thing you will gather from the story as you read on,
and that is, that I was never afraid of work, and always tried to do my
best, whether at sea, or when I was my own master in London, whatever
work I undertook in my business or for the public good. I don’t know
whether you have seen the enclosed about me. Anyhow, it will do you no
harm to read it again, and you can keep it to show others.
The beautiful Spring weather we are having should be very helpful
in promoting your recovery. The sun is a great health restorer. Get as
much of him as you can.
I suppose you get through a lot of reading now. I will get to-
gether a parcel of magazines and books for you, but not for you alone, you
must share them with Father and Mother.
We are a small household, only three of us now, so the home is
very quiet. We greatly miss Auntie Kitty and little Mary, they were so jolly,
and have not forgotten how much we enjoyed Audrey’s visit. Though I
am so old, I still love to have my grandchildren about me. The next
grandchild to pay us a visit will be Esther She is so bright and intelligent.
Last Wednesday the Governor opened a hall at Glenora. Auntie Muriel and
Esther were there, when Sir Philip Fysh took Esther by the hand, telling


her he was taking her to the Governor. ‘ Here’s another Shoobridge,’ said
Sir Philip, and the Governor kissed her. ‘But where is the Governor?’
said Esther. ‘Why, lam the Governor,’ said His Excellency. Then, lookng
up at him, Esther said, ‘ I have had the measles,’ and all the people laughed.
‘ Not badly, I hope,’ said the Governor. ‘ I had the spots all over me,’
she replied, and again everyone laughed. The Governor told Sir Philip that
she was a remarkably fine and pretty child.
Your bad leg is different from mine. Yours will soon be well.
Mine can never improve—it’s nearly worn out.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Hobart,
7th November, 1911.
My Beloved Grandson,
You are my eldest Grandson, and I will for the future always think
of you and call you Charles; for it is my name, and somehow it brings you
nearer to me. Well do I remember when you first came to Hobart from
Sydney, and I nursed you on the deck of the steamer when your
Mother and Grandmother were so sick—,«?a-sick I mean —that they couldn’t
get up.
I am so very, very sorry to hear that you are so ill, but bear it
bravely and cheerfully as you can, for this will be a great comfort to your
Father and Mother.
Would you like me to come and see you ? If so, just tell your
Mother, and I will do my best to come soon, and bring Grandmother with
me, for i could not travel without her.
This is a very short note, and very badly written, but I had only a
few minutes to write it in.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Wellington Bridge,
Hobart,
gth November, 1911
My Dear Grandson,
I am writing this at my office, so I will not see Grandmother and
Audrey and Freddie until I go home at 6 o’clock. Esther is with us now
while her Mother is in Melbourne, so I hope the little ones will have a
good time together; at any rate, you may be sure Granny and Dora and
I will do our best to make them happy.
That wasn’t a bad bit of poetry—l mean that hymn that I sent
you yesterday. It is 50 years since I wrote it, on my passage from Eng-
land, when I had only two fellow passengers, and found plenty of time to
read and study. Ever since I wrote that hymn I have tried to live up to
it, trusting in Him Who has cared for me all through my life. I have often
failed I know in doing this, but He has never failed me. But how blessed
it is to know that if the purpose of our life is right, He will and does forgive
the failures, so that we can always have a clean sheet on which to begin again
to write the story oi our lives.
Do you know, my dear boy, that there is one thing that our
Heavenly Father alone can do, and we cannot. He can and does utterly


forget when He forgives—that is, wipe clean out of His Book of Re-
membrance all the past failures. His forgiveness is a complete blotting
out, never to be recalled. It is clean gone for ever. How do I know
this? In two ways—from my own blessed experience, and from what
Jesus Christ, His Beloved Son, has told us.
When I was teaching my 300 and 400 children, over and over
again I used to speak to them about those blessed words of the Lord
Jesus. You will find them in Matt. 7—xl. What an insight into the
very heart of our Heavenly Father ! And all good things He will give
us for the asking. No earning—no merit on our part. ‘ Ask and ye shall
receive.’ God is the greatest giver in heaven and earth.
And now my time is ended. I commend you, dear, dear boy, into
the loving care of Him Who died for us and gave Himself for us.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.
Wellington Bridge,
Hobart,
10th November, 1911.
My Dear Grandson,
Old as I am, I have not outgrown my love for young folks of all
ages—say, from two to twenty, for they all in their different ways appeal
to me. For instance, at home just now I have Audrey, Esther, and
Freddie. Esther and Freddie are about the same age, and so they won’t
give in to one another. What one has the other must have, and Freddie
doesn’t see why he should give way to a mere girl—that will come after-
wards when he gets to your age and learns what you have learnt. Some-
where —could you tell me where, and who said it ? —we are told, ‘lt is
more blessed to give than to receive.’ Of course, this does not mean only
money, as so many people think, but it means love and kindness and other
kindred qualities, and for this reason: that the receiver not only is
benefitted, but the giver blesses himself and the receiver. Take the greatest
example of all time—our Lord Jesus Christ. He never had a penny to
give, and yet He gave more than all. He gave His life, His love. He has
blessed millions on millions, and will ever continue to do so, and as for Him-
self, the Giver—unto Him all power has been given in heaven and earth,
and He is set down at the right hand of God—Love and Self Sacrifice
triumphant.
Grandmother was very tired last evening, so I sent her to bed
early, and she had a splendid night’s rest and is all right to-day.
Auntie Dora has taken out the children to the sea beach this after-
noon, where they will paddle in the water and dig in the sand. I never in
my life enjoyed myself so much as when I had my fortnight’s annual holi-
day down the river, camping close to the sea beach, and going out fishing
during the day. The most enjoyable part of the day was early morning,
when I used to rouse the others up, and walking in single file, with the
towels over our shoulders, we marched down to the bathing-place and had
our swim, and then finished with a sun bath, chasing one another along the
sandy shore. What an appetite this gave us for our breakfast, usually fish
we had caught the day before. lam sure I owe my present health largely
to these outings, and it cost so much less than trips to Melbourne and
Sydney,
I hear that Auntie Muriel will arrive in Launceston to-morrow.
Give her my love, and ask her what she thought of Melba’s singing, and
if she can’t sing just as well—at least, I think she does.
If love and care can make any one well you ought to be up and
about soon; for more loving hearts than I can mention are working for


you, and, above all, praying to God, if it be His will, to make you well.
Your part is to take all this love into your heart, and ‘ put a cheerful
courage on.’
Your loving Grandfather,
nth November, igil.
My Dear Grandson,
This is Saturday afternoon, and, being a half-holiday, I have
brought home with me a lot of work for the next Intelligencer, because I
can do my writing so much better in the quiet of home, with no one to
interrupt me, for every one is out.
I don’t know what weather you are having, but here it blew a
heavy westerly gale all last night, and is much the same to-day, which
makes me fear that Auntie Muriel must have had rather a bad time of it
crossing the Strait. Uncle Rupert went to Launceston by the night train
to meet her and bring her back home.
Your father is very good in sending us a wire every day, telling
us how you are getting on. Both yesterday’s and to-day’s wires told us
that both doctor and nurse are so pleased with your improvement. A
little better to-day, a little better to-morrow, and so on day after day is all
that we can expect. You are grand in the way you are bearing up, and thus
helping everyone—the doctor, the nurse, Father, Mother, Aunties, and, I
must not forget to add, Mr. Bryers, to whom I am exceedingly grateful for
all his love and goodness to you. I know that you must be very weary,
for you are very weak, and that arm of yours must be very painful. But
bear up, my boy, for it is wonderful how much the patient can assist in
his own recovery.
That was a very nice letter that Uncle Charles Symonds wrote you.
I think he is one of the nicest and kindest-hearted men I have ever come
across. I write to him or to Auntie Carie every mail. When you are
far away from home, among strangers in a strange land, it is downright
refreshing to get home letters. They are as refreshing to the thirsty soul
as a drink of cold water is to the body in a dry and thirsty land.
I remember once, when I was a boy of about 14, going with a
party to the top of Mount Dromedary—it is the highest point in the range
of mountains near Bridgewater. The road was rough and steep, and the
way was long. The sun was hot, and everything was dry —very dry. But
I would not give up. I was determined to reach the top. I did reach the
top, but so tired and faint that I threw myself down. I could hardly
speak; my throat was so dry, and my mouth so parched. We had drank
all the water we took with us during the climb. I offered the man who
had carried most of our provisions all the money I had—half-a-crown—to
go down the hill and fetch me a drink of water. After weary waiting,
which I thought would never end, he returned with a pannikin half full of
warm and dirty water. I remember it well, though it is nearly 70 years
since; it was the sweetest, the most refreshing, life-giving drink I ever had.
I hope my long letters do not tire you. Love to all.
Your loving Grandfather,
CHAS. E. WALCH.


POSTSCRIPT.
The following is extracted from a letter writterf by Mr. Rupert O.
Shoobridge to Howard’s father and mother, and I certainly think it
should find a place in this series of ‘ Letters,’ as it gives an estimate
of Howard’s character by one who knew him well :
‘ Howard’s death was an awful shock to me. I little
thought that on Saturday I saw him for the last time. I knew
that he was ill, dangerously ill, but could not bring myself to
realize that he was sick unto death when I saw him. For
I loved that boy, and shall feel his loss almost as if it were one
of my own who had gone. Generous by nature, of an affection-
ate disposition, and above all pure in mind and body, although
of an age when it is thought by most boys the right thing to
copy the bad habits of their elders, yet I have never known
Howard do or say anything that he would be ashamed of if his
mother were present Believe me, by the death of
Howard you have lost one who was in every way worthy to be
called your son, and I have lost a friend.’
* * * * * *
I cannot permit these ‘Letters’ to go forth without recording
how much we as a family, and Howard’s father and mother especially,
owe to the late Rev. Henry Jones, the Presbyterian minister of
Launceston, and to his wife and family, for the loving influence of
their home, which surrounded Howard during many years of his early
life ; indeed, being close neighbours, their’s was a second home to him
******
The following Memorial Tablet, the gift of the masters and
scholars of the Launceston Church Grammar School, will be placed
in the School Chapel, St. John’s Church, Launceston.
Here he gave his love,
Here he owned a home!


,r


*'r
v**r .v, ' - ‘W? '^o.
far- ... ■/'>'?' ■'. •’’
Wy/fip ' SH v * '
■ - .: , . ~ V ■ ,: V A -.. • ; ■> • -v ■ -•' v:—,. ~■
*s; vv * a *.^;cr- v: : ;^.;
.'■y*. '.- 1 Jr l ; -S ■ ' y.y A- ’ '■' '. ' , . ■' .’ -v .v v " . / ... ' " -v... 1 - . ■i'
-
>i 'V< : fe 'y*. .v.jl/A, y .■ < 'it.;* fe fes. r>... tyL.'J'y '•■■, y*>,yy'y : -y ! y?fe ,
8 y V-feJfey vX .y .. i ».* , Wssg f- wsp&K-, ■ - fx! ,=: «
iimm mjwmm. J •&.
nf ■ > - : -■- ' y .- V, Vv/c,, fe ~: ■. ' : ;y ~ m ", ,V ' y• . ",,.■. .T,-■ »
b ( m
•‘i vSK :S%SI S
- v-.C/: a ‘ ,' ■
"'■ y’fefefe ,®;-* yfe.- y.y ix-x , -,V: fey yfe >.,-; ■-■•>,■ ~fe
_ ,u "yy-y *y *if y f i Vv'yy 1 ■■■ ''.- * y. * \ t■. iv:.■/ y• <■ ■ , / '* -y.y -1 .y ■ *.
0 mLxMf
' f ; r> :v- rjp. V V ' C 1 1 ,
•*& *k- | -;V i g a y -v
<\’ x . £■■ /<■'■•/ ’/P*.- "> - c M,- -' ■ ■*■ ■ \'"v' ■'-■•“ y‘/«, -.v ~ . ,f V '"\^'J
•V y.> - v ■•---?•. , 'vA*f ' ,;'y . .-- • ; '
v-yfl W'-
;. • VAr." v J..:. A ,y ■;- * • JtA '• ~ ,'.
.■•'•'!■■ .'■£’ ■■'y"”', - .. y., J'’y>’,'A c - '•■. ■-;.'■<£> ’ , . '■' yy' ’_!■'; Vy s ‘ S ; ' -t'js.'-'
y y;, :;:, ■■ - .■ -yyr ,:,rf -y .•>, , v-y-- ;-J' ; y-
> •' "-■ •. . 'W-■.£'•' -'.
v: x -< Wf x # '
V t */.*& ' • S& ' i S ■* •' >'!;// Sp • *’
-
i*£vssh. ■ v''-'-v : ■.••-</ ; •■. . v-v ;-,% ? «aS£;4idaßa«. •■••vr «*a*' .■ f
' - - r v
fey ftfe:V, 1 fe y-y.:' .y>y„ :fe
yfe! < y ; - 5
.;,yrfe;r-y
24
