

A Greater Heaven
OR
From Pulpit
to Paradise
A CHRISTMAS EVE STORY


To
ftyyy,
ffie Gomplimcnfa of ff)e Reason
Jrom
Cottar. iLisrWVa/w
December, 1905


A
GREATER HEAVEN
OR
FROM PULPIT TO
PARADISE.
A CHRISTMAS EVE STORY
WILLIAM COOPER.
Buchlairt:
Printed by Geddis & Blomfleld, Observer Office, Auckland


A Greater Haven: or From
Pulpit to paradise
—-‘■'Vscrw—'
A CHRISTMAS EVE STORY.
n- AR up in the North where the kauri
QgagaLy And lift their broad shoulders right
into the skies,
Where the parson bird listens, with
. horrified air,
1 i Bushmen’s tnik) as tliey
labour and swear :
In the North, where no earthquakes
mMli tremble and roar,
Alarming the saints and disturbing
Where, setting at nought Dick
Seddon’s dark wiles,
The country still prospers, the sun always smiles ;
Away in the North, where the mills scream and
hum,
And the digger delves deep for the bright amber
gum ;
Where the morepork calls nightly, and asks for his
meat,
And the hands at the mills take their “painkiller”
neat:


In the North, where the bell-bird still pours out his
song
Of sweet liquid music, in notes clear and strong ;
Where the mantis devout, with no arms to spare,
Lifts two of its forelegs in long, silent prayer :
In the North, where the pohutukawa trees grow,
And fringe the steep cliffs with a bright crimson
glow ;
Where the Maori bug winds his malodorous way,
Where the roads are all tracks, and the tracks are all
clay:
Far northward, where only the doctors fall ill—
And that is from having no patients to kill;
Where liars are scanty —for lawyers are rare,
Where none but the valiant can vanquish the fair :
In the North, where all favour of Government fails,
Where Railway Leagues groan at the few leagues of
rails;
Where the pioneer settler, though patient, is sick,
And would like a fair shot—from a hedge—at great
Dick,
There’s a town that is built on the slopes of a hill,
With a neat little kirk, not far from a mill,
And close to the kirk the manse may be seen,
With its cockle-shell paths and its summer-house
green.
* * * *
Near the close of the year, on a Saturday night,
His pen in his hand, his lamp still alight,
In his study the minister sat, in repose,
His sermon before him, just brought to a close.
The Reverend John Calvin McDongall McKay
Had watched o’er his flock with a vigilant eye ;
When occasional doubts were sometimes expressed,
They were rigidly, sternly and quickly suppressed.


But lately a stranger, seductive and young,
With a bright, happy face and a silvery tongue,
Had erected a tent within sight of the kirk,
And commenced a most deadly heretical work !
The stranger was earnest, persuasive and bold,
And soon many lapsed from the minister’s fold ;
The latter watched, anxious, indignant and sore,
His own flock wane small as the stranger’s waxed
more.
He wondered one night, as homeward he went,
After listening outside the stranger’s large tent,
How any could be so deceived and misled
As to give the least credence to what was there
said.
The stranger derided confessions and creeds,
And denounced the exalting of faith over deeds.
None knew of a church, or could point to a sect
Whose creed was infallibly true and correct.
He denied that God, who was Father of all,
Would be partial to some, restricting his call
From the sorrows of earth to the realms of the blest
To a small, select few—excluding the rest.
He admitted that men were oft grievously wrong ;
That so many were weak, and so few of them
strong;
And affirmed that there were none who, strive as they
might,
Were ever so pure, and so spotlessly white—
As to give them a claim, which none could deny,
To a harp and a crown, and a throne in the sky;
While millions and billions of souls down below
Were writhing in torture, or wailing in woe.


Some other gross errors, the minister found,
Had entered his kirk, and were gaining much
ground.
So, to check this sad raid, he decided to make
A great effort, and cause the backsliders to quake !
His task was complete, his work was now done ;
To-morrow would see his great victory won !
It was now Christmas Eve, and on Christmas Day
The foe would be smitten with shame and dismay I
He felt proud of his work —an argument great
On “Calling,” “Election,” “Foreknowledge” and
“ Fate.”
He wrestled with error, stood firm on his ground,
For his logic, though cruel, was incisive and sound.
His thoughts centred now on the great day of doom,
With its thunders, its lightnings, its earthquakes and
gloom ;
Its hordes of poor sinners, eternally scorned,
While he —and some others—with crowns were
adorned!
He felt so convinced of his being conveyed,
By angels escorted, where joys never fade
That he cried out aloud, “ Come now and me take I”
He heard a strange rush at the window—a shake !
Then, stepping inside in full view of the light,
Came an orthodox angel, in orthodox white ;
The Reverend John Calvin McDongall McKay
Rose, trembling, with something like fear in his eye.
While the minister stood, and in wonderment stared,
The angel smiled blandly, then gravely declared :
“ Your request has been heard, has been duly ap-
proved,
And to Heaven from earth you are now to be moved.”


The Reverend John Calvin McDougall McKay,
Like most other saints who oft wish to die,
Was strangely reluctant, when put to the test,
And viewed with alarm this sudden behest.
He would like to suggest, say twelve months’ delay,
When, duly prepared, on some bright sunny day,
Krorn the roof of his kirk he might take his long
flight,
With becoming eclat his flock all in sight.
All calls from a distance demanded much thought ;
By his sudden removal much harm might be
wrought.
He felt perfectly sure, if he now were to leave,
That scoffers would triumph, the godly would grieve
There was much of his work just lately begun ;
There was more of it, too, scarce more than half
done
And now he began to think and reflect,
There were debts to the kirk, which he ought to
collect.
The angel was courteous, though slightly amused ;
The request for delay was politely refused.
Producing an outfit resembling his own,
He showed him just how to put the things on.
The Reverend John Calvin McDougall McKay,
With a very long face and heart-rending sigh,
Proceeded to take off his coat and his vest;
His shirt, and his trousers —in fact, all the rest.
Then donning the raiment, so dazzlingly white,
He fixed on the left wing, and lastly, the right.
He took a high jump, his volition to try,
And on flapping his pinions, he found he could fly I


When he glanced at a mirror which hung on the
wall
And saw his reflection, white, graceful and tall;
Though yearning no more for translation hence,
His transfiguration, he thought was “ immense !”
On the sill of the window, outside of the room—
Both preening their feathers, ere entering the
gloom—
A few moments later, two angels appeared ;
One smiling and happy—and one rather scared.
Then spreading their wings to a favouring wind,
The hills of New Zealand were soon left behind.
By the time they lost sight of the land and the
seas,
Both angels were flying with swiftness and ease.
As they winged their long flight from the Earth to
the stars,
They lingered near Venus, and passed close to Mars ;
So close, that in fact, they could easily trace
The dykes and canals which are scored on his face.
As they sped on their journey through limitless space,
The minister’s spirits had risen apace.
His fears had all vanished ; now, tireless and strong,
His speed still increased, though the journey was
long.
At length the horizon in front was ablaze
With a glory and splendour which dazzled the
gaze.
The minister shaded his eyes from the light,
And soon, his companion and he stayed their flight.
“ Behold !” cried the angel, “ Behold! Lift your
eyes!
For there, straight before us, the Better Land lies 1”
Obeying, with promptness, the angel’s behest,
He looked, and beheld the Abode of the Blest.


In that neat little kirk, now so far away,
He would often descant, on a calm Sabbath day,
On the glories with which all they would be crowned
Who elect to be saved, in the faith remained sound.
But the glories transcendant of this blessed place,
So joyous with life, with beauty and grace ;
A region so bright, so dazzlingly fair,
No mind could conceive, no tongue could declare
In short, the good and the great of all climes,
From primitive days down to modernmost times,
Had, in some way not clear to McDougall McKay,
Discovered the road from the earth to the sky.
And as to the mansions and palaces grand,
They are really not wanted, so why should they
stand
In a clime that is perfect, where none wound or steal,
But all are united in one common weal ?
He hovered aloft, hearing music and song,
The laughter and mirth of a great joyous throng
Of people from Jupiter, Saturn and Mars,
From Venus, the Earth, and all the fixed stars.
He gazed, in a transport of silent delight,
At the wonders and glories which ravished his
sight;
Forgetting his sermon, his kirk, and his creed,
From all earthly cares he forever was freed.
At length his companion his ecstasy broke,
And the angel again to the minister spoke :
“ They beckon us down, so let us descend ;
If I do not mistake, I see now a friend.”


He smiled, and the minister, anxious to meet
Some friend whom he prized, was soon on his feet.
They met, and the minister, raising his eyes,
Cried: “What! Are yon here? Well, this is a
surprise !”
The angel laughed merrily—e’en angels joke—
For the person to whom the minister spoke
Was the man who so lately had done such sad work
Far up in the North, in that neat little kirk.
It had happened that on the very same night
When McDougall McKay had taken his flight,
The stranger had also been summoned away
By a writ from that Court which brooks no delay.
The stranger remarked : “ Both you and your guide
I saw as I traversed the firmament wide ;
You might have seen me, also, equally well,
If Venus had not held you under her spell !
But while you were gazing at her lovely face,
I pressed on my journey through infinite space;
And swerving not either to left or to right,
I arrived here some time before you came in sight.”
The minister blushed, but could not withstand
The warm, friendly grasp of the stranger's right
hand ;
For his heart had begun to expand with a glow,
Which caused him to look upon none as a foe.
The expression the minister’s countenance wore
Was one of continual surprise, for he more
And more again marvelled at those whom he met —
Each surprise was eclipsed by a greater one yet.


Of course, he met Paul, somewhat little, but lithe,
With bald-headed Peter, bluff, hearty, and blithe ;
And Barnabas, portly, majestic, and tall,
And agile Zaccheus, the kindly, but small.
He walked about freely, conversing in turns
With Homer, with Shakespeare, with Milton and
Burns.
There, gathered together in one little knot,
Were Tennyson, Dante, Lord Byron and Scott.
And here, in a bower, hard by a great rock,
Were Socrates, Plato, Lord Bacon and Locke.
He noticed that Solomon, also, was there,
Still wearing a somewhat superior air.
On the bank of a river, which sparkled and foamed,
Charles Wesley, George Whitfield, and Spurgeon all
roamed.
The latter, though happy, appeared rather odd,
For he still “ smoked cigars to the glory of God!”
There, talking to Moses, exchanging their views
About evolution, creation, and Jews,
Were Huxley, Charles Darwin, John Tyndall, and,
late,
A fifth, Herbert Spencer, had joined the debate.
He met Bishop Latimer, Quaker George Fox,
Confucius, Buddha, and stern old John Knox ;
Martin Luther and Channing, Spinoza, Montaigne,
Pope Leo the Thirteenth, Kant, Newton and Paine.
But then there were others who, during their lives,
Had treated their friends, their fees, or their
wives,
With rancour so great, such rudeness and scorn,
That hope for their bliss seemed small and for-
lorn.


There, in the cool shade of a wide-spreading tree,
Just as happy as souls of such natures could be,
Thersites he saw, and Thomas Carlyle,
Diogenes, Shimei—all trying to smile
They each had just learned how the others to please
A delicate task, not accomplished with ease.
And the minister thought what he saw on each face,
Though meant for a smile, was but a grimace !
But his wonder was great as it was undisguised
At failing to meet some of those he most prized ;
Of whose happy fate he had felt quite as sure
As he had that his own future bliss was secure.
Where were Duncan McTavish and Andrew McQuirk
Both elders and pillars of his little kirk?
Both of whom were now dead some twelve months, or
more,
And should have been here quite a long time before.
He was pained beyond words, his grief was acute,
For their soundness of doctrine no one could dis-
pute ;
And both of them, too, he could well recollect,
Had been perfectly certain of being elect.
And yet, though he wandered all over the place,
Of his two missing friends he could not find a trace.
It was painful, indeed, to reflect on their fate,
So he thought he would try to be hopeful, and wait.
But that which astonished the minister most
Was the fact that he saw an innumerable host
Of those who on earth had been vilest and worst
Of the vile and the evil with whom we are cursed.


It was true that to some their surroundings seemed
strange—
It was true that in all there was manifest change;
But how had they reached this most beautiful place
Without “calling,” “foreknowledge,” “election” or
“ grace ?”
How was it that all these unsanctified crowds
Had passed from the earth to the sky, through the
clouds;
Had caught Peter napping, or thrown off his guard,
And had entered the gates, which should have been
barred ?
“ The gates !” cried the minister, struck by a thought,
“ I entered no gates, though doubtless I ought;
But where are the gates, the towers and the walls ?
And where are the palaces, mansions and halls ?”
He looked north and south, to west and to east;
As he gazed all around him, his wonder increased.
Though his vision was clear, his eyes bright and
keen,
Not a gate, not a mansion or wall could be seen !
Surprised and bewildered, he turned to his guide,
Who, courteous and affable, stood a is side ;
“As you stay with us here and more knowledge
gain
What puzzles you now will soon become plain.”
Thus speaking, the angel his discourse pursued,
When, after a pause, their walk they renewed :
“The city you speak of,” his guide then declared,
“ For a few select saints, and no sinners, prepared ;
“ With its portals of pearls and its pavement of gold,
Where the saved were penned up, like the sheep in a
fold,
Behind the high ramparts, designed to keep back
All foes, and preserve those within from attack,


“ Was a phantasy born of a small, narrow mind.
As the nations on earth grow wiser, you’ll find
A broader and better belief will pervade
The world o’er, and all the old fables will fade.
“But, surely,” the minister said, with some doubt,
“ There are some of the worst it were well to keep
out
Of this happy place ! If you do not, I fear
They will often cause trouble to some of us here.”
“Fear not,” said the angel. “ Dismiss your alarm.
Not one of them could, if they would, do you
harm ;
And, e’en if they could, they have not the will
To injure, molest, or do any ill.
“ It seems hard,” he continued, “ that down on the
earth,
To the day of his death, from the time of his birth,
Man’s path should be intricate, doubtful and dark—
So often without a reliable mark
“ On the road he should take, the way he should go.
To lead him to bliss, or save him from woe.
E'en the worst choose the wrong: instead of the
right,
From want of more knowledge, and lack of true
light.
“ But when, on the Earth, he takes his last breath,
And has passed through the Yale of the Shadow of
Death,
There is only one road, and that is quite plain,
And though many stumble, again and again,
“ Yet even the weakest all know that at length,
Their weakness will change into firmness and
strength.
From ignorance, error, and doubt they will rise,
By step after step, to their home in the skies.”


“ But this is no Heaven for the vile and the low
No Hell could be worse, and this they soon know.
You will find that the wicked, the cruel, and tho
base,
Are the last to desire to dwell in the place.
“If they venture to come, they are welcome to
stay,
But they soon disappear, and wander away,
Returning, long after, they join this great throng,
Now knowing the right, and abhorring the wrong.
“And so, through the ages, Redemption goes on,
And the lost and the erring are saved, one by one.
Some day, when the Earth her last journey has
made,
And the last man the last debt to Nature has paid,
“ Loud peans of joy will rend the clear air,
For all of Humanity’s race will be there ;
Rejoicing, triumphant, the anthem will swell;
4 Now all are in heaven and none are in hell!' ”
* * * *
The Reverend John Calvin McDougall McKay
Awoke from his dream with a start and a sigh.
He looked roundabout, with a wondering glance—
He was still in his room, in his neat little manse !
Yes, it was but a dream, yet it altered the man.
Without caring again his great discourse to scan,
Its first, and its second, its third and fourth
heads,
He took up his sermon and tore it to shreds !
A notable thing occurred the next day,
When having no sermon, so nothing to say,
He called on the stranger, approved of his work,
And the stranger —he preached in that neat little
kirk !


And now, if you go to that town in the North,
Where John Calvin McDougall McKay still holds
forth
You will find that the faces which used to be
sour,
Or, to speak more correctly, suppose we say “ dour,”
Are brightened and gladdened, as if with a gleam
Of the joys which the minister saw in his dream ;
For the people rejoice that their minds are now
freed
From the thraldom and gloom of a dark, narrow
creed.
And the Reverend John Calvin McDougall McKay
Says with confident air, and a light in his eye :
“ Hon lest to prepare for the next world of Miss,
Is to do what you can to make heaven of this /”
WILLIAM COOPER.
Avondale South,
Auckland, New Zealand,
December, 1905.
