

A GUIDE
TO
FEMALE IMMIGRANTS
IN SEARCH OF A HOME.
BY
SIR GEORGE STEPHEN.
"Truth is great and strongest."—r ESDRAS IV. 41
MELBOURNE:
A. J. SMITH, 35 SWANSTON STREET.
MDCCCLXX.


Mt HEAE GIELS,
Ip your only road, to a distant home foil of comfort
and prosperity, lay through a dark Talley abounding
in snakes and other noxious animals, with precipices at
■every turn, and pitfalls and quagmires at every hundred
yards, would you not gladly accept a guide to show you
the only path you could tread with perfect safety ? This
is the object of the following pages. Hor am lan inex-
perienced guide, for I have resided in this colony for
fifteen years, and know it well; and my numerous con-
tributions to Mr. Knight’s well-known series, the “ Guide
to Service,” entitle me to claim equal knowledge of the
moral duties that domestic service, whatever may be its
nature, peremptorily requires. Instruction in the far more
important point of religious duty is not within my sphere.
I leave it to your minister; but you must not infer because,
being a layman, I am wholly silent upon it, that I regard it


of less importance than lie does. A very long life of busy
occupation in every class of society has taught me the
difficult lesson that real happiness is not attainable on
earth, except in the industrious and contented discharge
of duty with perseverance, humility, cheerfulness, and kind-
ness of heart; but there is no solid foundation to he laid
for the daily practice of these qualities except Christian
principle.
GEORGE STEPHEN.
Cauliteld, B th December, 1870.




A GUIDE TO FEMALE IMMIGRANTS.
CHAPTER I.
It is probable that the great majority, if not all the young
women that emigrate to this colony, have come in the expec-
tation of supporting themselves by domestic service until
established by marriage; yet but a very small portion of
them have ever been in service at home, and scarcely any
have been educated with that view, so far as one may judge
by their conduct as domestics here : nor do they appear to
be sensible of the personal qualifications requisite to form a
valuable servant, whether here or in England; hence a few
words upon the duty of the domestic servant, in whatever
capacity she may engage herself, may be an appropriate
welcome on arrival
I have found in many instances in this colony, that the
word “servant” itself is misinterpreted, and is assumed
erroneously, to be degrading. This is a foolish mistake;
whether the person employed is called “ servant ” or “ help,”
or by any other name, the duties she has to perform are
precisely the same, and the manner in which they are per-
formed ought to be equally satisfactory. ISTor do her rights
and privileges differ in any degree, nor can they be affected
by any change of expression. “ Servant” is a term not
limited to station or rank, but simply expresses an office of
which the duty is to work for a third party; thus Ministers
of State are often called the Eoyal servants; or, to take a
jet higher example, ministers of religion of whatever class


or sacerdotal rank, are designated tie servants of God;
while our Saviour Himself stooped down to wasi tie feet
of TTia disciples! Domestic servants therefore, need not
take umbrage at tie name, for it amounts to no more tian
assistant of anotter in Ms daily work.
Tiis explanation of tie term will assist up in determining
wiat are ttose moral Qualities tiat are indispensaile to
render a domestic servant valuable. Ido not propose to
write a sermon, tiougi on tiis bead alone a- volume of"
sermons migit be written. I shall confine myself to a few
points on wMci all girls possessed of common sense most
be easily convinced.
I bare been informed by several ladies wbo have occa-
sionally gone to tie Immigrant Depot in search for
servants, that they have at times found it necessary to.
submit to examination themselves before tie young women
will condescend to answer a question, and examination, too,,
not very respectfully conducted. Dor reasons hereafter-
stated such precaution is very right, but in common decency
such examination, though it should precede any actual
engagement, ought to be postponed to the lady’s, and at all
times should he respectful, both in terms and manner, and
not such as this; “ “What sort of a house do you live in,
ma’am P Are you married ? Does your husband live with
you? What holidays shall I have?’’ Yet I have been
assured that ladies have been thus catechised by young
women at the Depot, and the catechism has been wound up
with a half-muttered, “ You won’t do for me. I’ll answer
no questions” !!! I have heard of more than one ease in
which farther treaty was broken off by the stipulation oft
the girl that she should not be called or treated as a
“ servant,” but a “ help” or an “ aid ”!
It will he found in a subsequent page that all prelimi-
nary inquiries respecting food and proper accommodation-
are superfluous in a contract of domestic service, though
indispensable as regards the moral character of the house-
hold ; but such questions as may be expedient to ascertain
it will never he truthfully answered by those who have
reason to he ashamed of it; they must he addressed to third
parties, and even to them with delicacy.


It is apparent that the spirit of pride which revolts even
at the name, must he thoroughly- subdued. I have met
with instances since I have been in the colony, of silly
young women who, when seeking for employment in
domestic service, have actually stipulated that they should
he addressed as “ Miss Smith,” or “ Miss Brown,” or
whatever their name might be. Is it possible to conceive
a more absurd request than this ? for it amounts to saying,
“ I am as much a lady as yourself, and only ‘ condescend’
to wash your linen or boil your potatoes! ” Such a tone,
however respectful it may be in utterance, is virtually a
disclaimer of suhmissiveness, and that is directly incon-
sistent with seeking an employment of which submissive-
ness is the acknowledged and necessary characteristic.
Domestic service implies being an inmate of the family in
which the employment is sought; and what employer of
any respectability will receive into his house, and as a part
of his family, a stranger who enters it on condition of
being received not as a subordinate, but as an equal ? The
submission of a servant to a master is not tbe submission
of a slave to his owner, nor can it be so regarded with
prudence or safety, by any master, however despotic his
temper may he; yet, in some respects it certainly is an
unqualified submission, for it is the duty of the servant
implicitly to obey the orders of the master or the mistress
in every particular connected with their domestic duty,
without hesitation or remonstrance, where obedience
does not involve moral misconduct, or where it would not
entail some injury to the employer, known to the servant,
though unknown to him ■ in which case, hesitation, and
even remonstrance, if respectful, would become a duty.
Whatever the emigrant may have heard of colonial
equality, it may be taken as a fact that the employer still
expects from his domestic servant, whether male or female,
a cheerfully submissive discharge of duty.
Steadiness of conduct must he another characteristic of
man or woman who seeks to be esteemed a valuable
domestic servant.
By steadiness of conduct is meant acting on fixed principle.
It implies a constant adherence to certain rules which we


Lave established in onr own minds for our guidance in oup
daily conduct. These rules may be correct or incorrect,
according to the education we have received. Where they
are correct, they are necessarily founded upon religious
principle; and if so founded, a steady adherence to
them gives firmness and decision of character for this
simple reason, that daily experience proves their value. It
follows from this that steadiness of conduct is laudable op
otherwise, according to the object in view. A man may be
steady in a course of self-indulgence or of self-denial; he
may carry either to excess; but still it is certain that the
first would be a steadiness of conduct to be reprobated,
and the second a steadiness of conduct to be commended.
It is steadiness of the latter class that is of infinite im-
portance to the character of the domestic servant.
So disgraceful is the imputation of “ unsteadiness ” held
to be, that many years ago a servant girl brought an action
against a London banker, wbose wife, in whose service she
had been, called her “ unsteady ” in giving her character.
He had to pay dearly for the indiscretion, the damages and
costs amounting to £ 6OO. This cause of Wyatt v. Cocks
is well known. I was myself engaged in it, and cannot be
mistaken as to the facts.
There are circumstances connected with, the position of
a young female emigrant on her arrival in this colony, of
peculiar temptation. She will probably find herself almost
as soon as she arrives, sought for as a servant in a domestic
capacity, and possibly to £ll some situation partaking of
public duty, as servant in an hotel or public-house. She
will be tempted by the promise of liberal payment and a
comfortable home, and with the assurance that she will
have the opportunity of joining in all the gaiety and
pleasures of the place. Or the allurement may be of a
different kind; she may be invited to an engagement in
the country with every promise of comfortable position,
liberal payment, and land treatment; while in both cases
the real object is carefully concealed from view, and she has
no knowledge or means of knowledge to guide her even to
a suspicion of it. Steadiness of conduct, if founded upon
correct principle, will lead her to distrust such offers, until


she has made inquiry about the parties from those around,
her, who hare the opportunity of obtaining information.
I have thus stated a case not unlikely to be the first in
•which the female immigrant will find herself on her arrival,
to make my expression “ steadiness of conduct ” more
intelligible. Young women cannot be told too plainly that
here, no more than in England, perhaps I might say still
less than in England, can they hope for respectable
establishment in marriage till they have sustained as well
as acquired a reputation that may entitle them to he
regarded as useful, as well as faithful wives ; hut with that
reputation their ultimate establishment by marriage may
be regarded as certain.
To protect herself against the snares that beset her from
her arrival, her prudent course will be to obtain a place in
somefamily ofacknowledgedrespectability known to society;
.and this is not difficult in a community so small, that every-
body is more or less known by name and occupation;
whatever may be the occupation, respectable people will
assuredly inquire as to “steadiness of conduct,” with as much
anxiety as about sobriety or honesty, and will attach equal
value to it if they perceive it realised hy the young woman
whom they engage. But how is it to he shown in the domestic
behaviour of a nurse, or a cook, or a housemaid ? One or
two rules of a negative character will explain my meaning.
Avoid all familiarity with the members of the family, even
with the ladies with whom your duty requires yon to
associate more or less intimately; and still more be cautious
to avoid the vulgar habit, too common with young female ser-
vants, of jesting and flirting with tradesmen and their hoys,
who supply the daily wants of the family. It seems hard to
require another matter to he avoided, of apparently an
innocent character, yet, in prudence, I would say, avoid
.also all temptation to ask for holidays, or to accept invita-
tions to plays, concerts, dances, or public entertainments of
any kind, for, in your position, such invitations must neces-
sarily come from strangers, or very recent acquaintances,
of whose moral character yon can know little or nothing
however kind or amiable they may appear.
A young woman cannot he too guarded against making


acquaintance with strangers, wherever she may he situated,
but more especially in this colony. If she is fortunate
enough to find herself established in a respectable family,
she may be assured that she will not be denied any legiti-
mate amusement that she may derive from parochial
parties, school feasts, or otherwise, that may occur in the
neighbourhood; but, on the other hand, girls who are
anxious to go to a dance, or to a race, or to some pic-nie
party, with strangers of whom they know nest to nothing,
are at once set down as unsteady girls, whom it is desirable
to discharge as soon as possible. I believe it to be the
case, and it grieves me that it should be so, but X know
not how it can he otherwise, that young women often lose
character, undeservedly, and are gradually reduced to the
lowest degradation of the sex, by their abrupt discharge for
these follies of light amusement* But while society is con-
stituted as it is, no thoughtful parent can prudently retain,
as a member of his family, an unsteady, giddy-headed girl
of adult age.
Yes, but I do know Bessy, for she came in the same ship,
and was the steadiest girl on hoard, and so was her sister Mary.
I am sore they would lead me into nothing wrong."
Such was the reply in one ease, and the invitation to a
dance was accepted. All three, if I am rightly informed-
have fallen.
To remind of the necessity of common honesty
is obviously superfluous, yet “ steadiness of conduct ,r
will properly include another caution against a habit that
closely borders on dishonesty. A steady servant will
habitually avoid wasteful, and therefore, extravagant habits.
The contract between the domestic servant- and the employer
is very rarely reduced to writing, but has been estab-
lished by long custom to be substantially this: —The employer
undertakes to provide board and lodging and to pay a
certain amount of wages, in return for which the servant
undertakes to devote all her time and ability to his service
in the capacity for which she is hired, so long as she
continues an inmate of his house. This contract has been,
construed by the highest judicial authority in England, to
involve certain obligations on either side. On the part of


the employer, tlie provision must be good and reasonably
sufficient, the orders reasonable both in matter and
manner, and the household management regular and moral.
On the part of the servant, the contract implies a promise
not only to render prompt and cheerful obedience to all
such orders, but in all respects to conform to the house-
hold rules and discipline, and he studiously careful of the
furniture or effects entrusted to her use or her care.
Either party may put an end to the contract at any time,
on giving reasonable notice (which in England custom has-
settled to be a month as a general rule), and without any
notice at all in the case of any flagrant breach of contract
on either side. It is competent to the master to discharge
the servant, and to the servant to quit the service at any
time, but in the absence of notice, and of reasonable and
peremptory cause, the penalty is the payment or forfeiture
of a month’s wages.
Such being the contract of service, it obviously leads to-
this among other consequences, that the servant is bound
by it to take all reasonable care of her employer’s property
entrusted to her care, even for her use, rather than for pro-
tection ; her time is his property; the coals and fuel in daily
consumption, the garden and kitchen utensils, the brooms
and brushes, mops and pails, and every article of furniture
she sees about her are all his property, and in this colony,
so remote from the place of manufacture, very expensive to
purchase or replace. A servant of steady conduct will
bear this constantly in mind. If she is the cook she will
economise as much as possible in the use of fire and
candles ; if she is a housemaid she will be careful of her
brooms and brushes, throwing none away till actually ex-
hausted ; if in the absence of a man-servant she has to wait
at table, a common ease in this colony, she will he careful
about the glass and crockery and all the service of the table,
that it is not broken or mislaid “ a long time ago.”
There is another point on which I would caution young-
women who have emigrated to this colony with a view to-
engagement in service, and it is closely connected with
steamness of conduct. It is becoming propriety of dress.
This may seem a needless caution to those who for the


most part, land without- a shilling in their pockets and only
a scanty wardrobe of the remains of their outfit; but the
common practice is to expend their first instalment of
wages in articles of dress, that may be becoming enough to
the person, but are utterly unbecoming the position. As
soon as the ladies of the family see the new servant thug
attired, especially if they are old enough to remember the
custom scarcely yet out of date, that compelled all female
servants to wear white aprons and muslin caps, they exclaim
that “she is an impudent, unsteady girl,” and this amounts
to speedy notice of discharge; nor is this altogether so unrea-
sonable as it sounds : where duty requires personal attend-
ance in the parlour or the drawingroom, the dress ought, of
course, to be neat and clean, but it should not appear to
have been assumed in secret rivalry of tbeladies; andifitbe
such, either in fashion or in quality, it is not an unfair
inference that it is so assumed to draw the attention of the
other sex. Ho person, whatever may be the sex, rank, or
occupation, should dress beyond it, or inconsistently with
it. I can remember the time when any gentleman pre-
suming to wear a black silk handkerchief round his neck
without the apology of bearing a naval or military commis-
sion, would have been unmercifully ridiculed anywhere, and
absolutely excluded from the dress circles of the theatres,
or even a dress party at a private bouse. Even school-boys
of fifteen were expected to dress if they appeared at their
father’s dinner-table. Such particularity has long since
gone out of fashion, but general propriety of dress is still
regarded as indispensable in every class.
I have yet another remark to make on some qualities
generally expected in a valuable servant. Every domestic
servant, especially women-servants, are necessarily, more or
less, admitted into family confidence ; it is indeed a happy
family that has no secrets to conceal, but it is a happiness
enjoyed by few, and let the servant be otherwise as valuable
as she may, if she offends in betraying confidence her
immediate discharge is inevitable.
There are two kinds of domestic secrets, from which it
is almost impossible to exclude a person residing in the
family; there are secrets connected with the general


relation of tlie members of the family to each other; and
occasionally there are personal matters connected with one
or other individual of the family, and which, in the case of
ladies, are known to a female attendant, and probably tone
one else. In the first class may be mentioned family dis-
putes, family obligations, and family economy; it also not
unfrequently happens that in the unguarded conversation
of the table, especially with persons of warm and irritable
character, opinions are expressed respecting third parties
which might cause quarrels of a serious nature if they
were repeated out of doors. In the. other class of domestic
secrets may be mentioned personal infirmities, or habits,
that require the constant assistance of the lady’s maid.
"What would he thought of a domestic who blabbed about
such matters to others, or who, on leaving the room, if her
presence had caused an interruption of conversation,
listened at the door as soon as -she had closed it ? Tet, I
am sorry to say, that I have help'd of such incidents in this
colony, though I never did in England; and I have
personally heard of matters from third parties, of which
they never could have been informed except by some-
breach of domestic confidence by a servant.
The stranger just arrived, whatever may be the intended
object of coming to the colony, and more especially one
who is about to seek an engagement as a domestic servant,
ought to be apprised that the opportunities here, though
more abundant in proportion to the applications, are,
numerically, very few compared with England.
The number of families requiring a domestic establish-
ment in London alone is, according to one estimate, 28,890,
and, according to another, 28,792.
These estimates exclude all shops or trading establish-
ments of any kind ; they are confined to private residences
of the upper class of society. In Melbourne and its
suburbs, including buildings of whatever description,
whether private residences, warehouses, offices, stores or
shops, it has been calculated that there are but 25,850 and
that only 669 of these are occupied by the official or profes-
sional classes: there may, possibly, be 300 more occupied
by families in circumstances independent of all trading or


professional duties. It sliould be added, however, that
these calculations are founded on statistics of two years
■date.
It should also be understood that the social intercourse
and manners of the colonists, whatever may be their
class in life, are rarely of that refined character which is
usually found among the higher classes of English society;
there are many exceptions to this rule, but according to
the common proverb, the rule is proved by these excep-
tions. It is well known that in England the tone and
manner towards the domestic servant, unless that servant
has been many years in the family, are rather bordering on
reserve than on familiarity; in the colony, however, though
there are very few instances to be found of that long service
that causes the domestic to be recognised as an actual
member of the family, her intercourse with her employers
is more frequently of the familiar than of the reserved
character; and tins renders the caution I have given on
the subject of secrecy of more than usual importance.
There are, of course, many situations in which the very
nature of the service imposes a degree of familiarity par-
taking almost of personal friendship: as where the mistress
of the family is compelled by straitened circumstances to
share largely in the domestic labour; yet, even in such
cases, it is not prudent on the part of the domestic to
forget, either in her manner or in her conversation, that
there is, hy all social rule, a considerable distance between
her and her employer, both in position and authority ; and
therefore her wisest course is to act on the reserve, even if
the employer unhappily forget that distance: it will save
her from much temptation to violate that principle of
honourable secrecy against which she has just been
cautioned, and also make her more secure of the respect
of those to whom she is engaged.
It would be unjust to close these remarks without
admitting that the deplorable state of domestic servitude
in the colony is not entirely due to the errors of the young
women who arrive here as immigrants. The ladies who
employ them are themselves very often much to blame
for they are contented in most cases to receive females


into their houses as servants without personal inquiry
into their previous character; they ask for a reference,
and are contented either with a vague letter, expressing
general satisfaction, or perhaps with the name of their
last employer, without actual inquiry into conduct, and
especially what led to her discharge. This is a most
serious error, and in some instances has, to my personal
knowledge, led to most serious results. Even where the
hiring begins at the Immigrant Depot, common prudence
will dictate inquiry as regards the conduct on the voyage,
as well as close scrutiny into a young woman’s previous
career; but if it so happens that she has been even six
months in the colony already, and in employment, it is of
great importance to see the last employer and investigate
the girl’s conduct while with her, and particularly what led to
her discharge. In this respect the keepers of the registry
offices are also in fault; they do not learn from reliable
authority —and generally indeed only from the girl herself
—the cause of leaving the last service, but on payment of
half-a-erown or five shillings they insert the name in their
hooks of registration, as a matter of course. In this way
many ignorant girls who have left their service because they
are utterly inexperienced in the employment they seek, and,
I am sorry to add, many too, of disgraceful reputation, have
found places in respectable families, greatly to the annoy-
ance of the employer, and sometimes even to the moral
injury cf members of the family in which they have found
employment. This fact is too notorious in the colony to
require proof, but that proof will be easily forthcoming if it
were found necessary.
Nor is this the only error of too many ladies ; but my
mission is not to them, and I only mention this because it
is so injurious to society. I need scarcely add that, if
character ought to be a matter of inquiry at the last place,
so the answer to such inquiries ought to he frank and
honest. It has been decided by the English courts of law
that such communications are privileged, when truthful,
and may not he contested by the servant.


CHAPTER II.
Thebe is another object, however, which many, if not ail
the young women who emigrate here, have in view. They
hope to be established in marriage—a very legitimate
expectation, but one which cannot be realised safely with-
out the utmost caution: for, important as extreme caution
in such cases is at home, it is doubly important here.
They may possibly be flattered with offers of marriage
from men far above them in station and in wealth, where,
however, they may, if they accept them, prove to be only
the second, or third, or fourth living wives of the same-
man. In the very first year of my arrival in the colony,
so many instances of this fell within my observation, that
I then suggested to Sir Charles Hotham, and to Mr.
Haines, chiefly on this account, the importance of regis-
tering the name and family of every emigrant on embarka-
tion. Had it been done, it would have prevented much
mischief, as well as much litigation of various kinds ; but,
unfortunately, the suggestion was not adopted, lest it
should check the disposition to emigrate. From the want
of such a system, many have come here under false names,
absconding, in fact, from families they have left at home,-
and have even married in such false names. When they
have thus broken the law, and set conscience at defiance,
they have not been slow in repeating the offence. It is,
undoubtedly, among the lowest class that this offence has-
been frequent; but, if I am not wrong in believing the
statements of many, the offence is by no means limited to-
that class.
Almost every daily paper reports cases of deserted
children, and too often of murdered infants. There were not
less than three such murders mentioned in yesterday’s
Argus, and, so far as one may judge from the circumstances,
all the poor victims were illegitimate.
It was recently stated, on what appeared to he good
authority, that in the small town of Melbourne, not larger


than a second-rate manufacturing town in England, there are
not less than eight hundred unfortunate women daily
perambulating the principal streets ; not to mention others
of the class who haunt the theatres and other places of
public entertainment. There is little or no doubt that the
supply of this profligate market is substantially found
among the female immigrants ; and what is the result in
too many instances F The poor girl who may have arrived
only a year or two ago,innocent, self-respecting, and full of
reasonable hope, finds herself deceived, seduced, ruined, and
abandoned, and now seeks the bottom of the Xarra as her
only resource from starvation and ill-usage, being more
ready to face Grod, while in the actual commission of a
crime, than to be the daily victim and scorn of men !
But even where the marriage is legitimate and the
alliance equal, and apparently desirable, the danger is
terrific. Were Ito state what lam about to add on my
own authority only, I should be discredited ; the facts are
too horrible to be believed except upon authentic record,
and though they are not given in detail, with name and
circumstance, in the following quotation from the Argus
(of the 14th September, 1870), everybody in the habit of
reading the daily papers knows that all the cases mentioned
in this able article have occurred, and been reported at frill
length in the police reports of the last few months; and
this horrid catalogue of crime has enumerated only the cases
that have come to light in consequence of legal proceedings.
They are probably but few compared with the number
that are as yet undiscovered by the vigilance of the police.
“We can. imagine an intelligent Chinaman writing home to
his intelligent countrymen, informing them of the manners
and customs of the southern barbarians among whom he has
come to dwell in this wise : They use their women very badly,
and frequently kill them by beating them to death or choking
them. The other day I saw a man hanged, who, in the
process of pounding his wife’s life out of her, broke nearly all
her ribs. Another man, who recently underwent the
suspensory process, had hammered his wife into a gelatinous
mass, bo that those who had known her could not recognise
her when she was dead. A few days ago a woman was taken
to the Hospital in a dying state, in consequence of her


husband having compressed her neck so forcibly as to deprive
her of the power of speech. In oases where they do not Kit
their women they are to be credited with doing their best
to this end. At the police courts in the suburbs there is
hardly a day in which men are not brought up for beat-
ing women. A week or two since a cabdriver went to
a respectable woman’s house, and after knocking her
down, danced among her furniture, breaking it %
many pieces. Some time ago a girl was found in the
river with her face battered by a man’s boot heel ■ and a little
before that a woman was found in a swamp strangled, with
the mark of a man’s leathern belt on her breast. When they
do not HU or beat women, these barbarians behave to their
women very scurvily. A few weeks ago a draper’s fascinator
who had brought a poor girl to shame, tried to get out of his
responsibility by swearing that the girl was disreputable before
he knew her. The intelligent Chinaman would probably go
on to say that, to him, this brutality of men towards women
was very shocking, but that to the barbarians generally it did
not appear other than ordinary. Perhaps he might go on
further to endeavour to account for this absence of a chivalrous
feeling towards woman by mentioning that, in private, he had
observed a habit of half-offensive familiarity to be shown by
many young men towards snch young women as they might
be on terms of intimacy with, and that to their sisters young
men are almost uniformly bearish. In a philosophic spirit of
inquiry he might probably trace back the beginnings of ex-
treme brutality to a condition of slangy oif-handedness, and he
might observe that the old feeling of high-bred courtesy, of
which he had read as being once the rule in determining the
relations of Englishmen towards women, had become extinct.
“ Being only a Chinaman, and naturally narrow-minded,
though intelligent and acquainted with the English language,
this modem ‘ Citizen of the World ’ would, it is likely enough,
only he laughed at if his letters were ever made public.
Statisticians would probably teU him that the number of mur-
ders in a given year is much as in any other year, and that the
number of women mnrdered averages pretty much the same one
year with another. So also he might say that woman bearing
and woman seducing will be found, on reference to statistics, not
materially to have increased, and that prominent examples of
each of these crimes necessarily occupy the public mind largely
for a time, and, therefore, have the effect- of determining °the
estimate of a people’s character. But when the statistician
had proved to his own satisfaction that the intelligent China-
man had formed his conclusions upon insufficient data, a good
many intelligent Victorians, would nevertheless, be very likely
to agree with tbe Chinaman that a spirit of ferocity seems to
he abroad, and that mens womanly tenderness for women hag


'been replaced by a feeling ■winch is the opposite of ennobling
to those who are cursed with it, This feeling of savagery will
be admitted to be of infinite degrees, ranging from slangy
chaff to rib-pounding ; but of the nature of the feeling there
can be little question, A costermonger breaks a woman’s
skull with an iron pot, or ruptures her liver by jumping upon
her hody. A gentleman (of the period) Mils a woman not
less effectually, by circulating reports of her unchastily, in all
probability because he has the most sufficient reason for know-
ing her to be pure both in mind and character.
“It may be urged that all women are not saints, and that some
costermongers’ wives have foul tongues and irritating manners,
but it hardly follows that the latter should be beaten to
death and the former traduced. Costermongers, splitters, and
diggers may have rough outsides and uncourtly manners, but
that need not prevent them having ohivaMc hearts, and if a
gentleman is something more than a gentleman of the period,
he will prefer to stand between a woman and her slander,
even though she should have been indiscreet enough to give
some colour of truth to it. If the intelligent Chinaman, after
patiently listening to all the arguments in alleged disproof of
his conclusions, should persist in saying that, with all onr
boasted social advancement we are not making progress in our
treatment of women, he will not he far from the truth.”
Within a week from this article appearing in the Argus,
the following sketch of the life of a married woman, who
committed suicide in the Yana two days ago, appeared in
the Age of September 20;—
“ Up to a late hour last night no trace had heen discovered
of the body of the woman who committed suicide in such a
determined manner from Prince’s-bridge on Sunday night. In
consequence of her sending a message to Mr. Allan a good
deal of unpleasantness has been caused by a rumour getting
abroad to the effect that she had been living under his protec-
tion. Such, however, is not the case, the real facts, being as
follows: —The name of the deceased woman was Webster, the
wife of David Webster, who is at present connected in some
way with the Pish Market, Plindere-street. The deceased had
a daughter, but the young woman was married some three or
four years ago to a billiard-marker at the CaK de Paris, who
subsequently deserted the girl, and went to England, whither
he was followed by his wife, who is stated to have died there
two years ago. About six years ago the deceased woman was
living with her husband in Melbourne, but owing to gross ill-
usage she left him, and went under the protection of a man
employed at Malmsbury as an engineer, and she passed by his
name in that locality. After a time this man went to Hew


Zealand, and Mrs. Webster then went to live with another mm
but received remittances, it is believed, until very recently, from
her Mahnsbuiy protector. Latterly she had led a very
unsettled life, and gave way to intemperate habits. About
sixteen years ago Mr. Allan adopted a child of hers, who is
now living with Mr. Allan in the house occupied by him and
his wife; and Mrs. Webster was in the habit of occasionally
visiting Mr. Allan on account of the child, and was always
loudly received. For the last eight years, however, Mr. Atlor.
has known little or nothing of her, only seeing her occasionally
in the shop as a casual customer, or passing the door. It may
be mentioned that the reason of the lonely life latterly led by
the deceased was owing to the fact that the man with whom she-
last lived had left her and married a young girl, and Mrs.
Webster had therefore to find another home. Why she should
have made the statement that she was Mrs. Allan must of
course, remain a mystery. Mr. Allan was at home with his
wife when the mad act was committed, and the only reason-
able supposition is that, suffering under delirium produced by
drink, Mr. Allan’s name, as the protector of her child, was
uppermost in her thoughts."
And in the same paper is the following report of a case
that was heard in the Divorce Court on the previous day;—
Stafford v. Stafford. —An application for dissolution of
marriage, on the grounds of adultery, cruelty, and desertion,
Mr. Higinbotham and Dr, Dobson for Arabella Stafford, the
petitioner ; no appearance for the respondent. The petitioner
is twenly-nine years of age, and the respondent about thirty-
five. They were married in 1858, the respondent being at the
time a clerk in the Customs at Geelong, with a salary of £6OO
a year. Very shortly after marriage, the petitioner became
aware of his intemperate habits, and detected him in an act of
adultery only about a twelvemonth afterwards. This she for-
gave him. Before they had been married eighteen months,
however, the respondent lost his situation through his
irregularities, but afterwards he obtained another as a clerk at
M’Cnlloch and Co.’s, the carriers, in Melbourne. This situation
he also lost through his intemperance, and then he went to New
Zealand. There he was appointed as a clerk in the Bank of
New Zealand, at a salary of £5OO a year. He wrote to
inform his wife that she might come over if she liked, and she
went: hut her friends in Melbourne had to pay her passage.
They lived together in New Zealand for about three years,
during which time the petitioner was frequently ill-treated by
the respondent, who became more and mere intemperate.
At length he absconded, through deficiencies in his
leaving her without a penny. With the aid of a sub


scription raised for her, she opened a hoarding-house,
by which she maintained herself and two children,
which were the issue of her marriage with the respondent.
After she had lived in this manner for a year and a half, she
received a letter from the respondent, dated from Rockhamp-
ton, in Queensland, asking her to come over to him, and
stating that he had reformed. She parted with her business
and went at once. On arriving at Rockhampton she found
that her husband had not reformed, but was worse than ever.
He became also more violent in his conduct than he had been
before, and on one occasion actually came to her bedside with
a razor in his hand, and threatened to cut her throat. She
screamed and ran out upon the verandah. The respondent
then went to the children’s bedroom, threatening violence to
them; hut an Irish servant-girl, who lived with her, rushed into
the room, and threw Stafford over upon a box, declaring that
if he laid a finger on the children she would till him although
she was hanged for it. At another time Stafford held a loaded
revolver to petitioner’s head, and said he meant to shoot her.
These and other acts of violence on her husband’s part made
the petitioner resolve on leaving him, which she did, and came
with the two children to her friends in Melbourne. The
petitioner stated she had since heard that her husband left
Rockhampton for San Francisco, with a Mrs. Whita as man
and wife ; and this fact was confirmed by the evidence taken
on commission of the United States consul in Sew South
"Wales, and other witnesses there. Further evidence taken on
commission proved adulterous intercourse, on the part of the
respondent, with a woman of the town in Rockhampton.
After hearing the evidence, their Honours, without calling upon
counsel to speak, unanimously granted the decree sought.”
This again is followed up on tlie 21st of October
by the following attractive picture of colonial unions :
“ Here is another phase in our social life. Ellen Hall, a slip
of a girl abont eighteen years old, summoned Henry Row at
the Fitzroy court yesterday for the maintenance of an illegiti-
mate child, and obtained an order against him for ss, a week.
She naively confessed to the Bench that ‘it was not the
prisoner who seduced her,’ although he was the father of her
child. The strange part of the business is that Row and the girl
had been living together in the house of Row’s sister, with the
understanding that they were to be married some day. The
sister, however, got tired of keeping them, inasmuch as she
was paid nothing for it, and turned them out, whereupon Row
left his companion to shift for herself.”
In what way is not described, but may be easily imagined.
Tice, child murder, and the Tarra supply the gap.


It was tie perusal of these very cases, as they appeared
from time to time in our daily papers, that led me to -write
these pages; for it seemed to me that when thus collected
they convey a lesson of caution so terribly impressive that
the most giedy and thoughtless girl that ever landed in the
colony would scarcely fail of being seriously affected hy
them. But, still, she may say, “What am I, a friendless
stranger, what am I to do in my helpless and forlorn posi-
tion ? ” The question is natural and reasonable.
The minister of religion will give more valuable advice.
I only speak as an experienced man of the world, whom
that experience has taught that God never fails to help
those who, with all honesty, diligence, and propriety,
endeavour to help themselves.
In this view, my first caution will be to repudiate all
approaches to intimacy of acquaintance with the other see,
whether young or not, for at least a year after landing, till
time has given full opportunity of learning their position
and general character. Most of those above twenty years
of age have emigrated from home: some spontaneously,
others by the compulsion of family distress, and very many
tempted by trading or agricultural or professional specula-
tion. Whatever may have been the usual motive, it is most
certain that many have also come because it was not
thought prudent by their friends, possibly not safe, that
they should remain where they were already too well-known,
a voluntary exile being at all events preferable to convict
transportation. Even where the motive is laudable, it cannot
he denied that emigration to the other end of the world
for permanent residence, argues a bold and enterprising
spirit, too often allied to rashness and wild independence
of social and domestic obligations —being the very class of
which prudent women are and ought to he the moat
diatrusmil.
I will not repeat the advice I have already given on the
point of steadiness of character, except to add that gaiety
of dress and fondness of amusement are failings that with
such men usually indicate an easy victim, while they as
comm only put a steady man on his guard against an. expen-
sive and perhaps unworthy wife. But the safest course for


a young woman to take is to accept tie first offer of a
place in any respectable family, an A to remain there at all
eventß, and at whatever personal inconvenience, till she
has acquired some knowledge of colonial habits. Honest
and sober men of the working class are-more accustomed
to seek a wife among domestic servants than young women
recently arrived are apt to suspect. It is curious to
observe how promptly they tail in love with a cheerful,
good-humoured girl who can both dress a mutton-chop and
dam a stocking, or how soon they fall out of it again if she
asks them to take her to the play.
Another great advantage of a “respectable place” is
this—that the employer may safely bo consulted on any
matrimonial overtures, and will assuredly advise against
accepting them, if he is aware of any substantial objection.
Some years ago one of my servants, unknown to me,
married a man who had deserted his wife and two children
at Liverpool, as I would have told her had she consulted
me. Within three months he also deserted her, and
married a third I By this time he has probably married a
dozen. I forget the rascal’s name, or I would publish it.
I have reserved for this place some remarks that would
have appeared in an earlier page, but that they bear closely
on the present topic. If a situation otherwise eligible offers
itself soon after an immigrant’s arrival, she is very unwise
to reject it because the wages do not come up to her expec-
tations, Some years ago the wages paid to domestics were
extravagantly high; but at that Lime money was far more
abundant and the general community much more prosperous
than it is now, or than it has been for six or seven years
past. This Is not the place to investigate the cause ox the
decline, hnt it is notorious that in the higher and middle
classes, an they are usually called even here, thousands axe
reduced to insolvency, and many to such destitution that
they cannot afford to keep a servant on any terms ; while
all, even those who are still wealthy, have been sufferers.
The newcomer must, therefore, not be surprised to find
that some demur is made by very respectable people about
tbe wages sbe has been advised to demand. Indeed the
employer who will at once concede a salary beyond the


ordinary rate may too often be suspected of sinister inten-
tions, for marketable vice always pays well for a month,
or two ! But though she may be disappointed to the extent
of a few pounds, the immigrant just arrived will find that
she has ample compensation in the colonial information she
will safely acquire in the first twelvemonth's residence in a
respectable family, and in the protection they will afford
her, if consulted, when perplexed by the addresses of a
suitor : in fact, men of bad character do not often approach
a woman whom they see under such protection.
But I have no wish to be prolix on such a subject, I
will only add that, as we all know, there is a point in such
affairs beyond which all inquiry is stopped by a kiss.
Before that point is arrived at, a sensible girl may casually
ask of the man himself in a careless indifferent manner, as
if from mere curiosity, questions about his occupation
and habits of life. The tone and consistency of his answers
will often guide her to his real character. The style of his
conversation may help her yet more to a just conclusion.
An unseemly jest is offensive to any respectable woman ;
an indecent word in her presence is a blackguardly and
cowardly insult ; a boastful, bragging tone indicates a self-
conceited fool, and uncalled for vehemence of language or
gesture shows a power of self-infuriation, utterly opposed
to all quiet and peace in domestic life. With these hints
even an inexperienced girl of 18 or 20 may form a judg-
ment for herself of the eligibility of a suitor, unless she is
herself in such a desperate hurry or so self-conceited as to
frame false excuses for him, such as “ Oh, he is very young,
I have no doubt I shall be able to reform him.” In such a
case one may as well speak to the winds as to her. °


CHAPTER III.
I hate written as much, as I suppose any immigrant will
bare the patience to read, and would close my remarks, but
that a little explanation of the character of the colony may
he useful to newcomers of either sex.
Whatever may he the station in life, hut little of the
refinement that is found more or less in every class in
England is to he found here; distinction of class is almost
unknown, and scarcely recognised, except between the
wealthy and the poor, for wealth is the idol that all worship,
though of late years very few acquire it. Hence a spirit
-of selfishness is everywhere prevailing, and to obtain an
advantage over competitors, everything is sacrificed. In
professions, the rules of etiquette that govern English pro-
priety are laid aside, even by those who ought, by their high
station in office, to enforce them; the just principles of
■credit and honour of trade are too often despised to the
extent of violating common honesty. Meanness exhibits
itself in all directions, because ability and respectability
have failed to obtain their merited reward in permanent
success; and promotion, whether official or professional,
is given or promised, even before a vacancy occurs, to
patronage and intrigue, too often exerted in favour of
inexperience and pretension instead of men of merit.
Consequently, “ the right man is rarely seen in the right
place,-” jealousy and distrust everywhere prevail; and in
many instances, both professional and commercial, half-
educated and vulgar people have raised themselves above
their natural position by acting in this discreditable
manner, so that now they are able to exercise authority as
masters, though they began life as servants. Upstarts are
apt to exercise domestic authority, thus recently acquired,
in a peremptory manner; they will ring the bell twice
before there has been time to answer its first summons ;
every order will be given in a tyrannical tone of command;
every duty will be exacted in half the time requisite to
perform it. Tet the prudent immigrant, whether male or


female, will disregard all tins, at least till they have had
time to gain a character, and learn their own position.
The same selfishness of principle dictates the demand of
excessive labour in return for high wages, and the rather,
because the heavy cost, as compared with home of all the
luxuries of life, and even of house-rent, if every item is
taken into account in minute detail, is nearly double
what it would be in England. To a certain extent the
demand is just, for nobody can afford in this colony to
lead a lazy life before wealth is actually acquired • when,
therefore, high wages are paid, and expensive maintenance
added, the employer is justified in expecting corresponding
diligence in labour. But even where his expectations
are unreasonable, it is inexpedient to quarrel with them
unless really prejudicial to health, for it is probable that
the nest service may he found equally objectionable, and
here there is no resource for poverty, sickness, age, or
infirmity, except in charitable institutions; of these there
are several, and well supported, but no access to them of
legal right as there is at home, to those who are reduced
to destitution; and few immigrants have friends or
relations on whose assistance they can rely when thrown
out of employment.
Another peculiarity of the colony is closely connected
with this: the cost of articles required for daily use
largely exceeds their price at home, and this adds materially
to the vigilant duty of the domestic, in whatever capacity,
to lose nothing by mislaying it or by careless and needless
violence. I lately had occasion to purchase a kitchen
utensil, either a boiler or a saucepan, or something of
that kind, which was wanted for my house in the country ;
my housekeeper had forgotten to describe the size
of it; hut she had informed me what would be the pro-
bable price. I went to one of the principal ironmongers’
shops on my arrival in Melbourne, to make the purchase.
He, of course, inquired the size, when I told him that I
could only guide him by the price I was to give,
which was 4s. 6d. Upon this, he immediately produced
the article which seemed to correspond with what I under-
stood to be wanted, but on my mentioning that it largely


exceeded the price, he replied—“ That is the English price,
sir, hut everything here is fifty per cent, above it;” and
true enough, I found it was just what we wanted, though
it cost half as much again as we expected. Another
instance is yet more instructive: —A friend of mine bought
as part of Ms outfit a dozen pairs of shoes, for which he paid
in England nine shillings a pair. After a time, of course, they
became worn, and he took a pair of them to a well-known
shop in Melbourne to be resoled, for which he was charged
eighteen shillings, though when new they had only cost
half the money! This over-charging is, no doubt, very
impolitic on the part of the tradesman, and it is some proof
of it, that the same party sent all the rest of the eleven
pairs to England to be repaired, and they were sMpped
back again, with half a dozen new pair at the same price of
9s. a pair, while the English repairing of the others was
only three shillings a pair ! I could multiply such cases,
hut it is needless. And wbat is, perhaps, even more
inconvenient than this, is the fact that few colonial articles,
whether imported or manufactured in the colony, are
found to be equally durable and strong, though so much
more expensive than at home ; and it is for a very obvious
reason; as regards the imported articles, the exporter for
the general market sends the refuse of his warehouse or
manufactory: “ old shopkeepers,” as they are often called,
because they are unmarketable at home, “hut anything
will do for the colony.” The colonial manufacturer is not
only, as a rule, less expert, but his materials, especially his
wood, are of inferior quality, while his time is of more
value; and it is for this reason that I hold the duty of
carefulness of furniture and effects to be even more
peremptory here than it is at home.
There is yet another feature of colonial society that
ought to he developed. Colonists are apt to speak and
think very boastfully of themselves, as if they were
subjects of an independent republic of immense political
importance, rather than a handful of adventurers, for the
most part without a shilling of their own, and with little
more than the education of a charity-school boy. Into
such points it is not necessary to enter further than to say.


-that eren here, at the end of the world, the immigrant
ought to be more proud of being a subject of the empire
■of Great Britain than of the most formidable republic
that the world contains; and is vested with larger legal
lights in the first character than in the last. But this
borders on politics. It is far more important for him to
understand the truth, than to discuss his political position,
and the truth is simply this: that we are a very small
community indeed, scarcely equal in numbers to any first-
ratemanufaeturiug town in England—a sort of toy-shop state
bulli on the model of life, to amuse naughty children and
keep the house quiet; aa an indulgent parent constructs a
•doll’s house as like tho family mansion as possible, for the
•exclusive benefit of the nursery, where the nurslings may
silently rehearse the follies as well as the duties of the world.
How, it is obvious in such a case, indeed, we know it from
.actual experience, that every man and woman raised but
two or three steps above the foot of the ladder, becomes
more or less the subject of observation; and if only a few
rounds from the bottom, of critical remark as well as
observation. It ia, therefore, very dangerous to gossip or
tattle out of doors about any subject whatever connected
with proceedings in the family in which an immigrant may
be occupied; it may lead to quarrels of a serious and even
public character; for where the domestics are given to
gossip with the butcher’s or baker’s boy, or any stranger
that may ring the door-bell, it is impossible to conceal
such matter's from the public when they chance to assume
a tone, or to disclose circumstances which have any bearing
upon other members of the community.
I have heard of a parliamentary seat being lost by such a
casual discovery prematurely made of a candidate’s inten-
tions ; and in more chan one instance of a sound mercantile
speculation being defeated by the merchant's thoughtless
discussion of it with his wife in a servant’s presence: these
incidents occurred in London; they are ten times more
probable in such a small community as this. “Well, I
think I would go as far as £SOO for that field,” was said
by me one day, meaning only to express my opinion of its
value; but the very words were repeated to the owner, and


again, by him to the party with, whom, unknown to me, he-
was in treaty, and they enabled him to obtain the exorbi-
tant price for which he was haggling.
The general character of colonial servants stands so low
that any young woman who habitually follows the rules,
which I hare given in these pages, may reckon securely on
retaining her place as long as she likes to stay, subject
to one more caution: not to engage herself either as a
coot, or a laundress, or a nurse, if she has no experience
of the duties. A master is enraged to find hia daily
dinner spoilt, and a mistress is equally incensed to find
the linen tom and damaged every washing-day, or a
mother to hear her children screaming and squalling
all day long, their hands and faces always dirty, their
noses always dripping, and in a word, never fit to he
seen. A steady aervanfc-of-all-work, however, if docile and
active and observant, will soon learn to qualify herself for
any such duty. I add “if observant,” for we have occa-
sionally had domestics in this colony, both men and
women,
“ Witt eyes ttat scarcely serve at most
To guard their owner from, a post”
Let me guard myself against a possible misconstruction r
while I regard the emigration of young women, of what-
ever age, without their natural protectors, without a home
to receive them, without means to provide one, without
even a safe introduction to a respectable friend, as a most
dangerous step, leading directly to ruin; yet, with these
advantages, to any girl of really good principles and steady
conduct, the colony affords as safe a residence as home,
and far better prospects, as well as far more of immediate
comfort. The climate is excellent. And while it cannot
be denied that the moral tone of the colony is very low,
and scenes of profligate violence not unfrequent, yet it is
equally true that there exists a kind and generous
sympathy with the new arrival from home. Religion has
been confounded with learned scepticism, and political
liberty with vulgarity and rudeness; and this, too, by
lecturers and writers who ought to have better taste, if not


higher principle, than to avow themselves the disciples of
Voltaire and Tom Paine; yet the opportunities of moral
and religious instruction in Melbourne and its suburbs, as
■well as in all the principal towns, are abundant. The
luxuries of life are indeed few, and not easily accessible ;
hut food is good and cheap, while ordinary dress is not
more expensive than in England, though too often, like
most imported articles, whether animate or inanimate, of
very inferior quality, but commanding any price -when,
found to be good and durable. This is especially true in
the article of wives.
Some friends, to whom these pages have been submitted,
have suggested that much of the mischief arises from the
want of a Registry Office, conducted on sound and honest
principles. If it be so, it admits of an easy remedy.
Charity would repay itself by establishing such an office ;
and if there were combined with it a temporary refuge for
female servants out of place, half the evils of which we now
complain would he prevented; especially if fifty or a hun-
dred ladies of influence would pledge themselves to give a
preference to such an institution in their inquiries for
domestics. Systematic inquiry into the antecedents of
every female registering her name would, of course, be the
fundamental principle of such au institution; but it is
most certain that those who obtained certificates of charac-
ter from its managers would never fail of obtaining safe
and respectable situations.
WALKER, HAY AND CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOURKE-STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.


