

A HANDBOOK
FOR
AUSTRALIAN BREWERS
J. C. MACCARTIE.


A HANDBOOK FOR
AUSTRALIAN BREWERS.


A HANDBOOK
FOR
AUSTRALIAN BREWERS.
BY J. C. MACCARTIE.
MELBOURNE:
LAWRENCE & O'FARRELL,.
“Australian Brewers’ Journal," 23 Elizabeth Street.


PREFACE.
In this little Work I have endeavoured
to point out certain defects in Colonial
Brewing, and to suggest means by which
these might be remedied.
I reproduce in these pages portions of
several Articles and “Notes” which I have
written from time to time for the Austra-
lian Brewers' journal.
Dunedin Brewery,
Dunedin, N.Z.,
26 th March , 1884.


CONTENTS.
Chapter I. —Water.
„ ll. —Barley and Malt.
„ lll.— Hops, Sugars and Chemicals
„ IV. —The Brewery and Plant.
„ V.— Mashing.
„ Vl. —Boiling and Cooling.
„ Vll. —Fermentation.
„ Vlll.— Racking, Storing and
Bottling.


ERRATA.
On page 17, line 27, for “when” read “where.”
On page 18, line 8, for “10.10” read “1010.”
On page 28, line 17, for “true” read “two.”
On page 36, line 22, for “condence” read “condense.”
On page 48, line 25, strike out the word “and.”
On page 55, second line from bottom, for “marked” read
“mashed."
On page 63, line 20, for “fermentation” read “fermenta-
tions.”


A HAND-BOOK
FOR
AUSTRALIAN BREWERS.
BY J. C. MACCARTIE.
CHAPTER I.
WATER.
In selecting a site for a brewery, care should be
taken to secure a plentiful supply of pure water,
for without good water, and plenty of it, good
beer cannot be produced, let other materials be
what they will.
Water for brewing purposes must be free from
organic contamination, animal or vegetable.
Animal organic matter is much the more
dangerous of the two. It is usually communicated
to brewing and drinking waters by sewers, and
gives off ammonia on heating, which is detected
by the analyst in the distillate of the water in
the form of “ free ” ammonia.
B


Much “free” ammonia in conjunction with
chlorine is a certain indication of sewage con-
tamination.
Vegetable organic matter can be removed to a
certain extent by boiling, or at least so “ cooked ”
that its power of inducing putrefactive change is
much lessened, but its absence is still desirable.
This type of organic matter is nitrogenous in
character and oxidises slowly into ammonia. By
Wanklyris process this oxidation is effected
rapidly, and the ammonia given off is the
“ albuminoid ” ammonia of the analyist
When as much as ten parts of albuminoid
ammonia is found in a million parts of water,
we may safely say it is unwise to use such a
water for brewing puposes.
In the analysis given below of Dunedin Town
water, it will be seen that albuminoid ammonia
was found to the extent of 'l5 parts per million,
but this water contained a considerable amount
of suspended matter, and would probably be
much improved by filtration.
It is well to filter waters that like many colonial
town supplies are obtained from surface springs
and brooks, as they generally contain vegetable
organic matter, but it must be borne in mind that
all the filtering in the world will not purify a
water loaded with impurities in the first instance.


In the use of filters too, great care must be
exercised. Dr. Frankland has recently shown
that many of the filters now used are worse than
useless, as they frequently contaminate the water
instead of purifying it.
This arises from the fact that the filtering
medium consists of some animal substance, such
as bone charcoal, which after a time becomes
saturated with the impurities derived from the
water, and forms fresh chemical combinations
with them, which contaminate the water passing
through.
Animal charcoal can be made pure again by
burning, and then for a time constitutes an excel-
lent filter, but perhaps the most reliable filters
are those supplied by the “Silicated Carbon”
Company.
Every modern brewer knows that an absolutely
pure water—that is one containing no salts in
solution—is not so well suited for brewing pur-
poses as one rich in certain salts, but I fear most
brewers would be puzzled if asked to explain
why this is so. Till quite recently it was thought
that the salts contained in hard waters exerted
their influence in brewing, by lessening the quan-
tity of albuminous matter extracted from malt;
but this theory has been entirely disproved by
two English chemists, who found in the course of
B 2


their investigations, that hard waters actually-
extracted more albumen from malt than those
absolutely soft.
The theory has been advanced that hard waters
supply to yeast its mineral food, and thus exert
their influence in the fermentation stage, and in
proof of this it is. shown that the ash of yeast
contains lime and magnesia; but we know that
the essential salt of yeast ash—potassium phos-
phate, is derived from malt, and why not the lime
and magnesia also? both these salts being con-
tained in malt.
A sufficiently plausible theory has lately been
advanced that hard water salts assist in pep-
tonising or digesting crude albuminous matter,
thus rendering it capable of acting as yeast food.
Though it is difficult to explain the action of
hard water salts in brewing, we yet know them
to be beneficial, having the example of Burton
before us. Burton beers are unrivalled, and we
know that Burton brewers possess no special
knowledge, therefore the cause of their success
must lie in the water they use.
The following are analyses* of the waters in
* In these analyses the acids are combined with the bases
according to the judgment of the analyst, and the results
may or may not be correct.
* From these analyses we can form no opinion as to the
purity— i.e. , freedom from organic matter—of Burton water.


Allsopp’s.
Bass’s.
Grains per
gallon.
Grains per
gallon.
Chloride of Sodium 1012
Carbonate of Lime..
993
Sulphate of Potash.. 7 65
Sulphate of Lime ..
5440
Sulphate of Lime .. 18 96
Chloride of Calcium
13-28
Sulphate of Magnesia 9 95
Sulphate of Magnesia
083
Carbonate of Lime.. 15 51
Carbonate of Magnesia 170
Total Solids
7844
Carbonate of Iron .. 0 60
Silica 0 79
Total Solids .. 65 28
(I)
Spring near Dunedin.
Total solids ..
Grains per
gallon.
.. 1295
Grains
per gallon.
Iron oxide .. .. Traces
Soluble solids..
.. 9 80
Alumina
Traces
Insoluble solids
•• 3‘I5
Lime ..
115
Mineral solids
.. 910
Magnesia
1 04
Organic residue
• ■ 385
Hardness—Total ..
569
Chlorine
.. 210
„ Temporary
176
as. Chloride of Sodium 3 46
,, Permanent
3-85
Nitric acid
.. 07
Farts per
million
Nitrous acid ..
.. Nil
Ammonia—Free
*01
Silica ..
■ ■ 2 '47
,, Albuminoid
•066
use at the great breweries of Messrs. Bass and
Allsopp, of Burton-on-Trent: —
It will be seen from these analyses that Burton
waters hold an enormous quantity of salts in
solution. In this respect they differ widely from
colonial waters, which are, as a rule, soft, con-
taining not more than 6 or 8 grains per gallon of
total solids. Here are two analyses of Dunedin
(New Zealand) waters:—


(2.) Dunedin Town Supply.
Total solids
Grains per
gallon.
.. 6.06
Grains per
gallon.
Alumina .. .. Traces
Chlorine
.. 1-05
Hardness—Total
2*27
as. Chloride of Sodium i '7a
,, Temporary
73
Nitric acid
.. Nil
,, Permanent
i-54
Nitrous acid
.. Nil
Parts per
million.
Silica ..
. .. 19
Ammonia—Free
*OI
Iron oxide
.. Traces
,, Albuminoid
•15
On comparing the above analyses with those
of the Burton waters, we see that the total solids
are only 13 and 6 grains per gallon as against 65
and 78.
I have never had opportunity of analysing
Australian waters, but I have been informed that
they, like those of New Zealand, are mostly very
soft.
Thus, at the very outset, we see that colonial
brewers are handicapped, for there can be no
doubt that beers brewed from soft waters are
much more likely to “fret” in casks, throw down
deposits and undergo acetous change, than those
brewed from hard waters.
Having no naturally hard waters, colonial
brewers are forced to resort to artificial harden-
ing; and we find them adding sulphate of lime,
sulphate of magnesia and salt to their brewing
waters, so as to bring them as near the Burton
standard as possible; but though, on analysis,
such waters may appear to be exactly similar


to those in use at Burton, yet the beers brewed
from them are very different to the Burton
products.
It must not be supposed, however, that no
benefit is experienced from the use of these
salts; on the contrary, they are of very great
service.
Colonial waters readily take up sulphate of
lime to the extent of 90 or 100 grains per gallon,
but such excessive hardening is unnecessary, 30
or 40 grains, with 8 or 10 grains of magnesic
sulphate, and 10 of salt, being quite sufficient.
A good plan of hardening water is to allow it
to pass through a small tank containing small
lumps of gypsum, but many brewers prefer to
employ powdered gypsum in the hot-liquor tank.
In some colonial breweries the practice prevails
of putting gypsum in the grist-case. This is an
absurd practice. It is advisable to follow nature
as closely as possible in these matters, and nature
places sulphate of lime in the water, not in the
malt.
Small lumps of gypsum have been found
amongst limestone and other rocks in various
parts of the colonies; but, so far as I am aware,
it does not exist in any quantity in Australasia,
so we are obliged to get our supplies of this use-
ful salt from England.


Carbonated waters are found in many parts of
the colonies, but they possess no advantages fof
brewing purposes, as they become soft on boiling,
the carbonic acid being expelled and the lime
precipitated.
It not uncommon for our analysts to recom-
mend the addition of chalk and limestone to
brewing waters for the purpose of hardening
them, but they might as well recommend the
addition of powdered bricks for the same
purpose.
I may mention here a plan of hardening that
has been tried over and over again with but little
success—that of adding sulphuric acid to waters
rich in carbonates in the hope of converting these
salts into sulphates, the result being invariably
that crude sulphuric acid was present in the
finished beer.
It is well to run the water to be used for brew-
ing direct into the hot-liquor tank from the spring
or well, and to boil it vigorously for at least an
hour before cooling to the mashing temperature.
This boiling eliminates some organic matter in
the form of ammonia, kills any germs of disease
that may exist in the water, and, if iron be pre-
sent, oxidises and precipitates it in some degree.
The hot-liquor tank should be made of wrought
or cast iron, of sufficient capacity to contain all


the water required for brewing, and should be
boiled by means of a steam coil or direct fire
heat—the former preferable.
The cleaning of this vessel is much neglected
in many breweries, once a month being thought
quite sufficient to give it a “swill out.” In my
opinion it ought to be cleaned twice a week,
more especially if the water in use is not very
pure.


CHAPTER II.
BARLEY AND MALT.
Barley is the only cereal employed for brewing
purposes in Australasia, and it is invariably
malted before being used, raw grain not being
much in favour.
English malt was at one time entirely used,
and there is still a slight prejudice in its favour,
though why malt made from barley, grown in a
fine climate like that of Victoria, should not be
as good as, or better than English, it is difficult
to imagine.
New Zealand barley at one time enjoyed a
very high reputation, and was favourably spoken
of even in England; but of late years it has gone
off sadly, and now is, for the most part, a thin
steely grain, difficult to work on the floors, and
when made into malt, stubborn in the mash-tun,
yielding but little extract and that of inferior
character. Some good samples of New Zealand
barley are occasionally seen, but they are few and
far between, and in general character the grain
is much below that of Tasmania or Australia.
The best malting barley in the world is in my
opinion that grown in California. Four or five


years ago in England, Californian barley was
much liked as being a sound grain (though
somewhat light), and one that malted easily.
The malt being strong in diastatic power, was
regarded as being particularly suitable for work-
ing off with heavy English malts, but rather too
light to use by itself. Californian barleys, how-
ever, have much improved since then, they are
now heavy rather than light, but are still sound
and mellow.
Several parcels of Californian barley have
lately been imported into Australia and New
Zealand, and if I mistake not the importations
will increase.
At the end of the chapter on “ Mashing,” I give
the results of some experiments, undertaken to
test the extract yield of malts made from New
Zealand, English, Cape, and Californian barleys
respectively, and from these some idea may be
formed of the value of the latter as a malting
grain. Some samples of Californian, malted in
Dunedin, worked beautifully on the floors, grow-
ing with astonishing regularity, and when finished
being all malt, not half raw grain, as is the case
with many colonial samples.
Malting barley should be heavy, plump, thin-
skinned, and bright coloured; should break
easily between the teeth, be friable, not flinty,


and should be free from broken grains and
blackened ends.
Broken grains, due to hasty threshing, are
much too common in the Colonies, and as a
natural consequence mouldy malt is frequently
seen. Many samples of barley sold to maltsters
have been threshed direct from the sheaf, never
having been in stack at all. This is a mistake.
Malting barley should be lodged in stack for
a month or two to allow of moisture being
“ sweated ” off. While in stack it is probable
that some alteration of the constituents of the
grain takes place, mellowing, and rendering it
more fit for malting purposes. Barley that has
not been stacked is undoubtedly improved by
kiln-drying at temperatures ranging from ioo°
to 120° (R), and after-storing in large heaps for
a fortnight or so.
Colonial farmers rarely think it worth their
while to screen malting barleys before offering
them for sale ; and in consequence we frequently
find 10 / or 12 °/ 0 of small corns in samples that
are otherwise good. These small corns ought to
be removed by the maltster before steeping, as
they never grow regularly ; and even if made into
malt yield but very little extract in the mash-tun.
During steeping the water ought to be changed
constantly (especially when dealing with unsound


grain and soft water), as the matter dissolved
from barley in the steep decomposes rapidly and
communicates disease to the grain.
If a drop of steep-liquor that has been suffered
to stand a little time, be examined under the
microscope, it will be found to be swarming with
putrefactive and other germs. In the Colonies
sufficient attention is not paid to the quality and
temperature of water used for steeping. Water
for steeping purposes should be as pure as that
used for mashing, and the temperature ought, if
possible, to be kept under 55° (R), as any warmth
at this stage facilitates the growth of mould and
other harmful organisms. Bi-sulphite of lime
and salicylic acid are sometimes used in the steep
liquor for the purpose of preventing the growth
of mould.
The presence of chlorides (usually found in
the form of common salt) in steep water un-
doubtedly retards germination on the floors, and
cripples, to some extent, the power of diastase.
Now, many Colonial waters contain considerable
quantities of common salt; and I have observed
that barleys steeped in such waters grow some-
what slowly on the floors, and that the resulting
malts are of low diastatic power in the mash-tun.
It iswell to secure a water as free from chlorides
as possible for steeping purposes.


When removed from the steep, the saturated
grain is heaped up on the floor to a considerable
depth, and suffered to remain thus for twenty-
four hours or more. During this heaping oxygen
is absorbed, carbonic acid and water given off,
and sufficient heat generated to give the young
plant a start. The temperature most favourable
to growth of acrospire is about yo° (F.); but the
grain must not be suffered to remain long at this
high temperature lest acidity be formed and the
growth become too rapid. Temperature and
growth are checked by spreading out on the floor
to a depth of three inches or so.
The malting-rooms should be well ventilated
to allow of removal of carbonic acid, given off
during the growth of the acrospire, and free access
of oxygen.
The chemical changes that take place while
germination is progressing are numerous, the
more important being the formation of diastase
or soluble albuminous matter, from insoluble
albuminous matter, the change of starch from a
raw to a soluble state, and the elimination of
much nitrogenous matter in the forms of rootlet
and acrospire.
It was at one time supposed that sugar was
produced from starch on the growing-floors, but
this theory has long been disproved.


Besides diastase several other soluble ferments
are formed during malting. One of them is said
to have the power of so modifying albuminous
matter in the after process of brewing that it be-
comes capable of penetrating the walls of the
yeast cell, thus supplying it with nitrogenous food.
During malting a minute quantity of lactic
acid is formed,this constituting the normal acidity
of wort.
The germinating grain on the floor ought to be
kept at a low temperature (50° Fahr. if possible),
after which it may be suffered to rise a degree a
day till the acrospire gets “over the shoulder” of
the grain, when the malt must be placed on the
kiln. Before approaching the subject of kiln
drying, I will say a few words on the construc-
tion and arrangements of growing-floors and
kilns, as these matters are of extreme importance.
Most colonial maltsters seem to have a decided
preference for having their growing floors in the
basement of their malt houses, it being easier to
obtain a low temperature there, they say, than
at a higher elevation. This is doubtless correct,
but I think the following disadvantages out-
weigh this one advantage. (1.) Proper ventila-
tion on the groud floor is not easily obtained.
(2.) If the floor is not well laid on a suitable
foundation, impurities are apt to “sweat” through


from the earth. (3.) The malt has to be lifted
from the floor to the kiln, and in its soft state
naturally gets much knocked about, while manual
labour is doubled or trebled, a weighty considera-
tion in the colonies.
If the walls of malt-houses were made suffi-
ciently thick, temperatures could be easily con-
trolled on high floors, ventilation would be better,
and the kiln could be loaded by one man in the
same time as spent in turning a floor.
The erection of two-floor kilns by several
colonial firms is a step that ought to be followed
by everyone who makes malt. To anyone who
has used these kilns, their advantages in the way*
of saving fuel and producing a superior malt are
so obvious that it becomes matter of surprise that
they are not more generally adopted.
Pale-malt kilns should have a capacity of 24
square feet or thereabouts for every quarter of
malt to be dried. To return to the subject of
drying: if the kiln has a strong draught the malt
may be spread pretty thickly, if a weak draught,
thinly. Pale malt cannot bo- thoroughly dried
and cured in less than 3 days. Temperature for
the first day ought to be ioo° to 120° Fahr., for
the second 140° to 160° Fahr., and on the tjiird
day may be suffered to rise to 190° or 200° Fahr.
without danger of browning if properly attended


to. The higher the final heat the better, so long
as the malt is not coloured too much, for under
the influence of great heat raw starch becomes
soluble (and there is as a rule only too much
raw starch in colonial malts) and a portion of the
albuminous matter of the grain is peptonised.
During kiln-drying certain compounds are
formed which are directly preservative in their
effect. These compounds are entirely absent
from malts dried by steam-heat or indirect fire-
heat. Besides this, malt dried over a fire of coke
or malting coal becomes saturated with the pro-
ducts of combustion, likewise preservative in
their influence.
Malt should be screened immediately after
drying, and stored away in bins as nearly air-
tight as possible, there to mature and mellow in
bulk.
In the colonies it is the general practice to bin
the malt without first removing the combes, and
this is, I think, a great mistake, for the combes
absorb moisture with astonishing rapidity, and
communicate it to the malt. Besides this, once
the combes have become slack, it is nearly
impossible to separate them from the malt by
screening, and in consequence they get carried
forward to the mash-tun, when a certain amount
of the very putrescible matter of which they are
c


composed, is taken into solution in the wort, and
probably finds its way to the finished beer.
To satisfy myself that the constituents of malt-
combes are to a certain extent soluble, I some
time ago made a mash with some combes and
water at 166 0 Fahr. This mash I allowed to
stand for two hours and then filtered. The fil-
trate, a brown opaque liquid, weighed 10.10
specific gravity or 3.6 saccharometer lbs., there-
fore a sufficient amount of matter was dissolved
from the combes to give a dry extract of 9.3 lbs.
per barrel. At the end of a week the filtrate,
which had been set aside on began to
give off a disgusting odour, and was found, when
examined with the microscope, to swarm with
minute organisms.
A good way of proving the putrescibility of
malt-combes is to saturate a heap of them with
water, and then suffer them to heat. In a very
short time an odour will be given off that will
render it desirable to bring the investigation to
an abrupt close.
Malt fresh from the kiln should not be used
for brewing, as its albuminoids do not coagulate
readily on boiling, and are not in a fit state for
feeding yeast, which may account for the fact
that worts obtained from a new malt rarely carry
a good yeasty head. Beers brewed from new


malt, too, are frequently cloudy, and show a
strong disposition to fret in cask and throw
down deposits.
Malt is in the best condition for brewing when
it has been stored in bulk in large air-tight bins,
and suffered to mellow for three or four months.
If malt is stored in small bulk, or in an ex-
posed situation, it absorbs moisture and becomes
slack, and slack malt is always unsound, as it
contains an excess of lactic acid.
Re-drying slack malt does not restore it to its
original soundness, but improves it in so far as
it renders it easier to crush in the mill.
To determine exactly the character of malt it
is necessary to examine it by chemical means
(to determine its yield of extract, moisture and
acidity percentages, and the quantity of maltose,
dextrine and albuminous matter present in the
extract), and this, of course, can only be done by
those who possess a laboratory. A very good
idea, however, may be formed of the general
character of malt by physical examination— i.e.,
biting to test crispness, noting how far the
acrospire has proceeded under the husk, etc.;
and some information as to its diastatic power
may be obtained by making a mash with a little
of the malt, crushed, and water at 162° R, and
observing the time it takes to convert all the
c 2


starch in the mash. With a good malt, if the
mash be kept at 140° F., the conversion of starch
is completed in half-an-hour, but with steely malt
it frequently takes over an hour to effect complete
conversion.
The presence of starch is detected by means
of iodine solution, as explained in the chapter on
mashing.
Steely— i. e., hard and gritty malt, is very
common in the Colonies : it is sometimes the
result of too rapid drying on the kiln, but more
often merely bears the character of the barfey
from which it is made. Barley grown on rich
virgin soils is generally of a flinty nature ; and
no matter how carefully worked on the floors,
the malt made from such grain is invariably
steely.
Steely malt is very week in diastatic power,
hence it is well to use with it in brewing a small
percentage of well grown mellow malt, which
will supply deficiency of diastase.
From various causes colonial barleys some-
times grow very irregularly on the floors; and
we find in the finished malt some grains overshot
and some undergrown. The percentage of these
latter in a sample of malt can be determined,
according to some writers, by placing 100 grains
in a glass of water, when the undergrown grains


sink to the bottom. This test may be a valuable
one, but for my own part I have never succeeded
in arriving at a satisfactory result with it, fre-
quently finding the bulk of the grains that sunk
as well malted as those that floated.


CHAPTER III.
HOPS, SUGARS AND CHEMICALS.
Hops have been so long used in brewing that
they have at length come to be thought as essen-
tial an ingredient of beer as malt or water. This
view is of course favoured by interested growers
and merchants who vehemently protest against
the use of a single ounce of any other bitter, and
make such astounding statements and sugges-
tions that we should be only mildly surprised if
they insisted on our dropping the use of malt
altogether and brewing entirely from water and
hops.
Good beer was produced in England before
the introduction of hops in the reign of Henry
the Eighth, and we learn from an old book on
brewing that a malt liquor called “ Mum,” in the
brewing of which no hops were used, was pro-
duced in the eighteenth century, “and always
kept two years before being tapped.” Modern
beer is, however, totally different from that
brewed in the olden time, and could not be pro-
duced without the use of hops in some proportion.


We therefore concede the fact that hops are
necessary in brewing, but at the same time there
cannot be the slightest objection to the use of a
moderate amount of other wholesome bitter and
tonic substances.
Colonial brewers are, however, not much given
to the use of hop substitutes, and even in seasons
of scarcity can proudly boast “ we never use hop
substitutes, we always use hops in our brewings,”
but I fancy they would be taken aback if asked
in reference to the latter statement, how many ?
This under-hopping is a weak point in colonial
brewing. Light gravity ales hopped or lb.
per bushel cannot possibly possess much stability
or superiority of flavour, and yet these are the
proportions most frequently used in colonial
running ales. In stock and fine ales, too, the
quantity of hops used is much too low. It is very
unusual in the Colonies to find a brewer using
more than I lbs. of hops per bushel in his fine
ales, and yet the English beers with which he has
to compete, are many of them hopped 2 lbs. per
bushel and over.
Under-hopping is quite inexcusable in the
Colonies, where excellent hops are grown, and
sold usually at cheap rates. I am inclined to
think that the high prices of last year have done
a great deal of good by teaching our brewers to


better appreciate the hops grown at their doors
so to speak. At one time colonial hops were
thought very little of indeed, just because they
were. “ colonial ,” while rubbishy English hops,
dubbed “Kent Goldings” by the shippers, fetched
fabulous prices. Many brewers at that time
thought that a good beer could not possibly be
produced without the use of a large proportion
of English or Continental hops; but last year’s
scarcity brought them to think differently, for in
many breweries colonial hops were alone used in
all classes of ales, and no falling-off in stability
or flavour could be detected.
There cannot be the slightest doubt that
Australian, Tasmanian or New Zealand hops are
in every way superior to the rubbish imported
under the name of English and Continental hops,
and we may safely expect that in the course of a
year or two, when more attention is paid to their
cultivation and saving, our hops will command
a good price in the English market.
Of all imported hops I prefer the Californian,
which for mixing with our own slightly weak-
flavoured hops in the proportion of one-third, or
one-fourth, are simply invaluable. Next to this I
esteem Bavarian hops, and last of all, English,
which it must be borne in mind are very different
from the excellent hops used by home brewers.


When buying hops it is well to select those
that are heaviest, as it is the farina (“condition”)
that gives weight, and -those samples which lose
a part of it from fine weather, over-ripeness in
picking, or turning on the kiln, will considerably
diminish in weight. Hops should feel clammy
when rubbed on the palm of the hand, should be
uniform in colour without brown or green spots
on the leaves, and full of hard seeds and farina.
The brighter the colour the better the sample.
Mould may be discovered by the sprig of the
flower being partly bare of leaf.
Hops give to modern beer its tonic and keeping
qualities and assist clarification. The principal
constituents yielded during boiling in the copper
are hop-oil, bitter principle, resinous matter and
tannic acid. These bodies are all contained in
the farina—the yellow powder that covers the
seeds at the base of the flowers—and are dissolved
under the influence of malt extract during boiling.
The leaves of the hop flower as well as the
farina contain a bitter principle, which prolonged
boiling will extract; this bitter is harsh and
unpleasant, so its solution is avoided as much as
possible.
The constituents of hops oxidise rapidly (this
accounting for the worthlessness of old hops)
when exposed to the air, so to prevent oxidation


as much as possible hops are pressed very tightly
and stored in dark dry rooms, through which no
air currents pass. A writer in a Melbourne paper
recently stated that pressing hops tightly injured
their quality, as they deteriorated more rapidly
when treated so than when loosely packed. This
statement is entirely incorrect, and might do
much mischief if believed in. The constituents
of loosely packed hops to which the air can have
free access must of necessity oxidise more rapidly
than those from which air is in a great measure
excluded by tight pressing.
When wort is submitted to fermentative action
malt extract is split up, and the hop constituents
become dissolved by the alcohol formed, any
slight quantity not so dissolving entering into
combination with the yeast, which thus acquires
its bitter taste. The oil of hops is directly pre-
servative, while the tannin gives stability to beer
by coagulating much albuminous matter, and is
said to be the agent which renders efficient the
action of finings. To the latter statement, how-
ever, exception can be taken on the following
grounds:—
(r.) Hops in all contain only 3 or 4 per cent,
of tannin, and much of this combines with malt
albumen in the copper, so little or none can
remain to coagulate finings.


(2.) A wort that has never been hopped can
be fined with gelatine, as was proved to my
satisfaction some time ago. A bucket full of
wort taken from the mash tun was fermented,
and, after being allowed to settle for a few days,
a portion was fined in a long glass. The rousing
in of the finings caused the fermentation to start
again, and for two days the sample remained
cloudy. Then, however, the fermentation ceased,
and the finings began to go down (not up), though
they did not “cut” well, and in a short time the
sample was perfectly bright, the finings and
impurities remaining in a close mass at the
bottom.
(3.) A beer that has only been hopped three-
quarters of a pound to the bushel (6 lb. per
quarter) will frequently fine more rapidly and
altogether better than one hopped twice as
highly; and, what is more, will take finings twice
(once in the “cleansers” and once in the travel-
ling casks) with the greatest facility. Now, were
tannin the active agent in coagulating finings,
this could not be, for the little tannin contained
in a finished beer, in which so small a quantity of
hops was used, would be all used up in coagulat-
ing the first finings added.
(4.) Spent hops which do not contain any
tannin assist the action of fining; but this may


be brought about by the action of some con-
stituent of the spent hops which possesses the
power of precipitating or "causing the solution
of the suspended matter in beer.
Sugars. —The use of cane sugar, which has
been almost entirely given up in England, still
largely prevails in the Colonies, where “crystals”
and other sugars are employed in the production
of all classes of ales.
It is easy to prove that it is unwise to use cane
sugar. Every brewer knows, or ought" to know,
that cane sugar is not fermentable—that is, not
capable of being split up into alcohol and carbon
dioxide by the action of yeast until it has first
undergone inversion— i.e., taken up a molecule
of water and changed from a sugar having the
formula C l 4 H 22 0,, into true sugars having the
formula c 6 H I3 o e — and in practical brewing this
inversion can only be brought about by the
plasma of the yeast cells, which suffers much in
consequence.
Yeast having to invert large quantities of cane
sugar brewing after brewing soon loses strength;
the cells become granulated through loss of
plasma, and languid fermentations and cloudy
beer result.
Practical brewers are very well aware that the
continued use of cane sugar weakens their yeast,


so they occasionally make an “all-malt” brewing
to revive it, and rest quite satisfied that the yeast
from this brewing will be quite restored to its
former strength; but here they are a little in
error, for yeast weakened by sugar use will not
be restored by one “all-malt” brewing any more
than a starving man will be made stout and
strong again by one good meal.
Yeast that has been inverting cane sugar in
brewing after brewing for weeks needs a lot of
reviving.
Besides having an ill-effect on yeast, the use of
large quantities of cane sugar affects the flavour
of beer, making it “thin,” sweet and mawkish.
The sugar mainly used in the colonies is the
variety known as “Brewers’ Crystals,” which is
undoubtedly a wonderfully pure sugar, as will be
seen by the following analysis:—
Brewers’ Crystals.
Actual sugar .. .. .. 98 8 per cent.
Ash .. .. .. .. ’52 ~
Moisture.. ’SO
Total 9982
Invert sugars, the best of all brewing sugars,
are little used in the Colonies, their price being
excessive, but starch sugars in the shape of
glucose are imported in some quantity. Com


mercial glucose or grape sugar is usually made
from the starch of various cereals, the starch
being inverted by means of sulphuric acid and
water. Pure glucose, chemically termed dextrose,
has the formula C 6 H Ja O e , and is directly fer-
mentable, but commercial glucose contains other
bodies besides dextrose, as will be seen from the
following analysis:—
Commercial Glucose.
Dextrose .. .. .. .. 75 66 per cent.
Dextrin .. .. .. .. 510 ~
Water .. .... .. 15 50 ~
Ash .. .. .. .. 1.00
Acidity (expressed as S 0 3 ) .. - n ~
Carbohydrates, &c. .. .. 260 ~
Total.. .. .. 99.97 ~
It may be asked “ why use any kind of sugar ?
Why not use the cheaper material—malt, alone?”
The answer is not far to seek. Colonial malts
all contain large quantities of albuminous matter
—due no doubt to the fact that the barleys from
which they are made are grown on what is
virtually virgin soil—and if such malts were used
alone in brewing, albuminous matter would be
present in the wort in great excess.
Therefore we use sugar in brewing to reduce
percentage of albuminous matter in wort, and
thus obtain a more stable resulting beer than if
we used malt alone.


Another advantage that attaches to the use of
sugar is that of being able to brew long lengths
without employing a large mash tun; and this is
of much importance in breweries where a great
deal of beer is turned out with a small plant.
Chemicals— I mentioned in the chapter on
water, that many brewers added sulphate of lime
and sulphate of magnesia to their brewing waters,
so will not touch on these salts again. A salt
much used in brewing is chloride of sodium
(common salt). That common salt is strongly
preservative, there cannot be a doubt; but I
think the important action it has in brewing has
been hitherto entirely overlooked.
The following lines taken from the English
Lancet in my opinion throw some light on the
subject, for what applies to the nutrition of the
human body, in many respects also applies to the
nutrition of yeast:—
“Common salt is of immense importance in
the processes ministering to the nutrition of the
body, for not only is it the chief salt in the gastric
juice and essential for the formation of bile, and
may hence be reasonably regarded as of high
value in digestion, but it is an important agent
in promoting the processes of diffusion, and
therefore of absorption. Direct experiment has
shown that it promotes the decomposition of


albumen in the body, acting probably by in-
creasing the activity of the transmission of fluids
from cell to cell. Nothing can demonstrate its
value better than the fact that if albumen without
salt is introduced into the intestines of an animal,
no portion of it is absorbed, while it all quickly
disappears if salt be added.”
Now malt, as we know, contains much crude
albumen, which the salt used in the brewing
water assists to decompose and render suitable
for yeast food. It probably acts in the same way
when used with wheaten flour as “ dressing ” for
fermentations, digesting the crude nitrogenous
matter of the flour, which then becomes capable
of nourishing yeast.
The use of salt in brewing cannot be too
strongly recommended, but care should be taken
that it is not used in excess, lest it should affect
the flavour of the beer.
Bisulphite of lime, “the brewer’s friend” as
it is called, is a valuable preservative which acts
by absorbing oxygen, thus preventing oxidation
of alcohol into acetic acid, depriving the germs
of disease of the oxygen necessary to their
existence, &c.
It is said that when bisulphite of lime is added
to beer, the sulphurous acid absorbs oxygen from
the beer, and becomes sulphuric acid, which


combines with the lime to form sulphate of lime;
but this theory will not bear strict investigation.
Bisulphite of lime is used with great advantage
by many brewers in the mash tun, in the propor-
tion of half-a-pint or so to the quarter of malt,
and also in the finished beer. In this latter
matter though, colonial brewers have to exercise
great care, for all soft-water beers contain some
type of albuminous matter, which possesses the
power of reducing sulphites, and producing sul-
phuretted hydrogen; this giving a very ob-
jectionable smell to beer.
This smell would not be tolerated in “Colonial,”
though it is relished in imported English ale,
being in fact the much admired “bouquet” of
that excellent beverage.
For painting on the surfaces of wooden vessels
to prevent acidity, and for preserving finings, &c.,
bisulphite of lime is simply invaluable, and no
brewery should be without it.
“ Salicylic acid,” another very valuable preser-
vative, acts by poisoning the diseased ferments
which infect yeast and beer. It also acts as a
poison to yeast if employed in sufficient quantity.
Being tasteless and inodorous, salicylic acid is
very suitable for use in Colonial finished beer.
It temporarily “flattens” beer to which it is
added, but this is no disadvantage if the beer has
D


to go long distances, or stand some time before
being tapped.
Dry sulphite of lime is said to possess all th
valuable preservative qualities of bisulphite of
lime without the strong taste and smell which
detract from the value of the latter; but, so far,
it has not made much headway as a preservative.
Chloride of lime is very valuable as a disin-
fectant and deodoriser, and when used with
ordinary lime is an excellent purifier of old or
stinking casks.
When chloride of lime is used to cleanse casks
or other wooden vessels, it communicates -its*
strong flavour to the wood; hence it is well to
paint the surfaces of the vessels on which the
chloride of lime has been used with bisulphite of
lime, which induces a chemical reaction, resulting
in the formation of two harmless salts.


CHAPTER IV.
THE BREWERY AND PLANT.
The fact that colonial beer is, as a rule, fairly
good, is not due in any measure to the breweries
in which it is made.
There are few really well-construcred breweries
in the large towns of Australasia, and those in the
country are perfect curiosities, being constructed
for the most part of wood, with a corrugated
iron roof, and arranged inside with a lofty
disregard for convenience of working and the
principles of brewing. I reproduce here part of
an article on “ Brewing Arrangements,” written
by me for the Australian Brewers' Journal: —
“ I will here attempt a slight description of the
working parts of a brewery of the old style.
On entering the venerable structure our first
feeling is one of astonishment that so much dirt
could be got into so small a space; our second
mild wonder that good beer could ever be pro-
duced in such an evil-smelling place; and our
third, as we proceed through the upper rooms,
admiration for the wonderful ingenuity displayed
D 2


by the designer in placing beams, pipes, etc., at
proper levels for intercepting the human head.
We ascend a nearly perpendicular greasy stair,
step over a yawning trap door, squeeze between
a revolving shaft and scalding steam pipe, and
find ourselves in the mash-room or brew-room
proper. Here, in a very limited space, stand the
hot liquor tank, grist bin, mash-tun, and boiling
vessel. In order to keep the grist bin as dry as
possible, it is placed where it has the full benefit
of the steam from the mash tun and boiling
vessel. The mash tun (which is very wide and
shallow, so as to expose the greatest possible
surface to the air for cooling purposes), drains
through a couple of one-and-a-half-inch iron
pipes into the boiling vessel—a wooden vat boiled
by means of a steam coil—which, in its turn
commands the refrigerator, those ‘ useless super-
fluities,’ hop-back and cooler being dispensed
with. The refrigerator stands in the tun-room,
and when in use steams against the roof from
whence the ‘ condence ’ falls into the tuns, carry-
ing with it any amount of dirt. The tuns are
not by any means sound, and are too deep ; and
the fermenting room is on a par with the rest of
the building, dirty, low-roofed, badly ventilated,
and exposed to every change of temperature.
The cellars again are dark and low-roofed, with


indifferent ventilation and drainage, and smell
like a guano store, the reason for this latter being
that they are floored with bricks set in cement
which cement wears away in time and allows
yeast and other putrescible matter to lodge in the
spaces between the bricks and there decay. In a
brewery I know of, one of these brick floors was
picked up and one of concrete substituted, and
during the whole operation the smell was some-
thing awful, being appreciable everywhere around
and clinging to the bricks for months after they
had been stacked in the open air.
“To ascend the stairs of our ancient brewery
once again, we find an inadequate supply of
water for cleansing and cooling purposes, worts
carried through rough iron pipes, a coffee crusher
in lieu of a malt mill, rickety elevators, &c.; and
in the brewing-room proper, an insufficiency of
suitable instruments, one small thermometer
(blank scale), and a battered Dring and Page
brass saccharometer (which probably weighs
2 lbs. or so wrong), being the ‘scientific’ in-
struments with which the brewing is carried
out.
“To ascertain with the greatest possible accu-
racy the heat of the liquor as it enters the mashing
machine, the thermometer is placed fifteen feet
away from that point in the heating tank,


and the saccharometer (to insure regularity of
weights) is kept sticky with wort in a dirty cloth-
lined case.
“ This description may appear to some slightly
exaggerated, but as a matter of fact there are
many real places that are not an atom cleaner or
better arranged than the imaginary brewery I
have endeavoured to describe.
“ In such buildings, and with such appliances,
successful brewing cannot go on regularly, nor
large extracts be obtained, and so year after year
gross waste of material goes on ; beer is pro-
duced that at the best is not very good, the name
of Colonial beer is injured, while the importation
of English ale goes on merrily, reducing not a
barrel in quantity, and English brewers and
merchants thrive and grow wealthy on money
that ought never to go out of the Colonies, for
though we cannot exactly produce ‘Burton’
beer, we can at least, with proper appliances,
produce a sound, healthy beverage that ought to
satisfy anyone who knows what good beer is.”
In the article quoted above, I endeavoured to
give some idea of the construction and arrange-
ment of the old style of Colonial brewery, which
is now happily disappearing, its place being
taken by more modern structures of stone and
brick.


These modern breweries are in every way
better than their predecessors ; but there is still
much room for improvement in the construction
of buildings and arrangement of plant Many
of the imperfections of the old are copied into
the new breweries, this arising from the fact that
in these matters Colonial brewers are somewhat
prone to follow each other, like sheep over a
stile ; and we but rarely find one seeking a fresh
departure in construction, and boldly striking out
for himself.
The principal defects of construction are seen
in low-roofed, badly-ventilated cellars and fer-
menting-rooms, wooden floors instead of stone
or concrete, absence of dry isolated store-rooms,
&c.; and defects of arrangement, in grist bins
and hot liquor tanks placed cheek-by-jowl,
refrigerators and malt mills ditto ditto, furnaces
close to cellars, difficulties of access to certain
vessels, taps placed out of reach, &c., &c.
Many of these defects arise solely from the
fact that Colonial breweries are as a rule built
on the gravitating system, which necessitates the
placing of vessels close to each other, and renders
it extremely difficult to isolate malt and storage
rooms from those containing the brewing vessels.
Gravitation breweries are all very well on a
small scale, but when the concern is large the


extra hoisting of material entailed and the
cramping of space necessary to the system
render it the most inconvenient of any; and yet
Colonial brewers seem to believe in it most
thoroughly, for we find them, even where land is
cheap, erecting immensely high towers with no
other object apparently than to avoid pumping
their wort even once.
There cannot be the slightest objection to
pumping the wort before boiling, or even after, if
pumps and pipes are kept thoroughly clean;
and if this system be adopted proper arrange-
ment of vessels and isolation of certain rooms
can be easily attained. 1
Whatever the system adopted may be, the
brewery should be built solidly of stone or brick
—with thick walls and slated roof to insure regu-
larity of temperature—and rooms should be
made large and lofty, with suitable ventilating
arrangements. As a material for the floors of
rooms where water is much used wood is entirely
unsuitable, and should be rejected, concrete or
asphalte being substituted wherever practicable.
One grave objection there is to asphalte and
concrete floors, namely, that they are very heavy,
and so render very strong walls necessary.
With regard to the supporting of these floors,
if brick arches be employed an immense strain is


brought to bear against the side walls instead of
upon them; hence it is better, perhaps, to use
iron pillars and girders as supports, when the
strain upon the walls will be downward. As a
material for cellar floors concrete is unrivalled,
and should always be employed. Too much
cannot be said against brick or stone paved
cellar floors, as it is impossible to keep such
floors sweet and clean.
The cellars, like all the rooms, should be large
and lofty, well drained, and with a plentiful
supply of water laid on. The stairs leading
from the cellars to the upper rooms should be
constructed of iron, stone or concrete, and the
fermenting-room floor should be of the latter
material. For all floors above this, however,
concrete would be too heavy a material, so wood
must of necessity be employed. Wooden floors
could be kept sound for a very great length of
time if they were caulked and constructed with
a slope to scuppers at the sides exactly like the
deck of a ship.
Thick walls should be built between the store-
rooms and the brewery proper, so as to prevent
damage to malt or hops by steam; and care
should be taken to prevent the dust from malt
mill or furnaces from depositing in the brewing
vessels.


I shall speak of the various vessels and
machines that make up a brewery plant in the
chapters that bear on their use, but will here say
a few words on what I may term the “conveni-
ences” of brewing. These are easily handled
taps, floats showing exact quantity in various
vessels, suitable thermometers, saccharometers,
dipping rules, &c. To make my meaning clear,
I will explain the use of these things in a modern
brewery. In this case the hot liquor tank stands
on the floor above the mash tun, so that it would
be very inconvenient if the person in charge of
the brewing operations had to run up 'and down
stairs every time he wanted to regulate the tem-
perature of mashing or sparging liquor, or read
off the number of barrels used. To obviate this
difficulty a thermometer is screwed into the hot
liquor pipe twelve inches from where it joins the
mashing machine; a few inches behind this
thermometer a half-inch cold water pipe, fitted
with a tap, is let in, so that if the liquor be too
hot for mashing or sparging it can be cooled to
the degree required in an instant of time; it can
also be raised in a very brief space by turning on
an adjacent steam-tap which supplies the coil in
tank. Close by is a board with the contents of
the tank marked on, barrel by barrel (a leaden
weight attached to a float acting as the indi


cator), so that a person standing by the mashing
machine can regulate temperatures and quantities
with the greatest exactness without leaving the
spot. The mash tun drains into the copper by
three pipes, the taps of which are easily regulated
and in the centre pipe is screwed a thermometer
similar to that in use in the hot liquor pipe.
The copper is fitted with a steam coil as well
as a furnace, so that temperatures can be regu-
lated to a nicety, and “dextrinous” or “sugary”
beers produced at will.
In the fermenting-room thermometers are
screwed into the sides of the tuns, showing the
temperature at a glance and without trouble, and
there are a sufficiency of saccharometers, sample
glasses, dip rules, &c., in each department.
These may seem matters of small importance
to some, but they are, nevertheless, of the greatest
importance, as without them heats are taken too
high or too low, mashes made too thin or too
thick, wort temperatures in copper suffered to
fall below the limit of safety, or raised to boiling
point before the proper time, irregular gravities
obtained, and, in fact, the whole brewing process
becomes pretty well a matter of guess work.
Without proper appliances, we may produce
(with a great waste of material) an article that
will pass muster very well for a time, but sooner


or later things are certain to go wrong, and
enough money is lost to pay for a good plant
several times over.
A French chef de cuisine would not be ex-
pected to turn out a grand nine-course dinner
with no better appliances than a colonial oven
and a “tin billy”; yet frequently brewers are
expected to produce an article equal, if not
superior, to Bass’s “ten guinea ale” with a plant
that a vinegar-maker would despise.
I will now go a step beyond the beaten track
of practical brewing, whether I find favour or
not, and state that a necessary adjunct to any
complete modern brewery is a small laboratory
fitted up with suitable apparatus for analysing
all brewing materials.
It is all very well for practical men to say, “I
can get along without doing analysis myself, for
I can get all my materials analysed more cor-
rectly than I could do them by Mr. So-and-So
the public analyst.” Now, Mr. So-and-£>o may
be a very able man and a skilled analyst, but he
has his hands full doing a thousand and one
analyses of coal, iron ore, sophisticated liquors,
adulterated food, &c., so only has time to do the
usual text-book analysis (for which he charges
the usual fee), whereas a brewer wants a
thoroughly exhaustive analysis.


In concluding this chapter, I would advise,
any one about to build a new brewery to employ
a good architect and a good practical engineer,
to whom he can communicate his ideas, for it is
scarcely possible for one man, however able he
may be, to be brewer, architect and engineer all
in one.


CHAPTER V.
MASHING.
MALT is prepared for mashing by grinding or
crushing to the size of coarse meal. In England,
crushing is done by specially-constructed malt-
mills fitted with large smooth-faced rollers, and
screens for removing the dust and combings, but
in the colonies, especially in the smaller breweries,
the “crusher” is often a sort of coffee-mill, which,
having no screens attached, does not remove the
dust or combings, which are, therefore, carried
forward to the mash tun, where they are bound
to exert an evil influence, as I explained in the
chapter on malt.
It is time these inferior machines were re-
moved, and properly-constructed malt-mills
substituted. Of these latter, undoubtedly the
best are those known as the “double-roll” mills,
as they crush every pickle, small or large (a
great desideratum in the colonies; where malts
are frequently very irregular in size of grain),
and besides thoroughly free the malt from dust
and combings.
Authorities on the subject are divided in


opinion as to the Speed at which malt-rolls
should be driven, some thinking 150 revolutions
per minute to be quite fast enough, and others
that 300 per minute is the proper speed. I have
seen rolls driven at a speed of 375 revolutions
per minute without injury to malt or machinery.
A great deal of heat is generated during crushing,
more especially if the rolls be run fast; therefore,
it is well to allow the crushed malt to stand for
18 or 20 hours before mashing to allow this heat
to pass off and the grist to mellow.
The bin in which the grist is stored should be
of sufficient size to contain all the malt required
for brewing, and be perfectly steam-proof.
Wood lined with zinc makes a very good grist
bin, but the most durable and best material for
this purpose is sheet iron.
The operation of mashing is performed in
colonial breweries by means of an outside mixer,
inside rakes being used only in one or two
instances. Some brewers still mash with the
old-fashioned oars, this accounting for the extra-
ordinary width of their mash tuns. The outside
mixers do their work well enough, and in the
colonies, where raw grain is rarely used, they are
probably all that is needed. Of all the mashing
machines used, “Steel’s” is undoubtedly the best,
but the machine known as the “Cascade” masher,


much used in the colonies, and, I believe, a piracy-
on an English patent (Wilson’s), is also very
good.
Colonial mash tuns are almost invariably
made of wood, and fitted with cast-iron false
bottoms.
If cast iron mash tuns are employed, care
should be taken to coat them outside with some
non-conductor of heat—such as asbestos cement
or felt packing.
The principal or only fault of colonial mash
tuns is that of having too great a diameter in
proportion to the depth. Thus we frequently
see mash tuns 10 or 12 feet in diameter and only
or 3 feet deep. In these wide and shallow
tuns, a greater surface being exposed to the air,
it is impossible to prevent cooling of the mash,
and so to strike a sufficiently high initial heat
brewers have to employ mashing liquor several
degrees hotter than should be. It is a mistake
to suppose that a better extract is obtained in
these tuns than in those deeper and narrower,
therefore it is difficult to see what their advan-
tages are. I can see no objection to making a
mash tun of 10 feet diameter and 5 deep.
I fear that many a man, who fancies himself a
brewer, would be “ stumped ” if asked to explain
the chemical action that takes place in his mash


tun, or his reason for using the liquor heats he
makes such a mystery of. The chemical action
may be explained thus—all malts contain a
soluble albuminoid body (diastase), fumed from
insoluble albuminoids during germination on the
floors, which possesses the power of converting
starch into sugar in the presence of water.
We mash our malt at the most favourable
temperature for effecting a complete solution of
diastase, which then converts the soluble starch
of the grain into maltose, and an intermediate
body, dextrine. It is said that at a favourable
temperature diastase is capable of converting
two thousand times its own weight of starch into
sugar.
Various experiments made in England proved
that diastase was most powerful at a temperature
of 140° (F.) or thereabouts, that is to say, it
converted the starch into dextrine very readily
at that temperature, the further conversion into
maltose, however, taking place more rapidly at
160 0 or 165° (F.)
In testing colonial malts in the laboratory I
have invariably[found that at an initial tempera-
ture of 140° (F.) the conversion of starch was
slow in the extreme, rarely being completely
effected under an hour, whereas, at 150° (F.) all
the starch disappeared in forty minutes.
E


Practically, I have found that if a low initial
heat be struck in the mash tun the wort runs
cloudy from the taps, and does not taste very
sweet, which led me to imagine that the albumi-
noid bodies contained in colonial malt are not
readily taken into solution at low temperatures,
and that the proportion of dextrine to maltose
in the wort is too high.
In dealing with the class of malt ordinarily
used here (Dunedin), I have found a final initial
of 150° (F.) to give the best results.
In experimental mashes of Californian barley-
malt, the starch was found to disappear in 40
minutes, even if the mash were kept at 140° (F.)
all the time.
At a temperature of 170° (F.) the power of
diastase is greatly weakened, and at 180° (F.)
completely destroyed, so that if very high initial
temperatures be taken conversion will be lessened,
and much soluble starch be present in the
wort, a most undesirable result. When high
sparging heats are employed, starch is frequently
found in the last runnings from the mash; this
is starch hitherto insoluble dissolved under the
influence of great heat.
The presence of starch in a wort is determined
by means of a solution of iodine. If, on adding
a drop of the solution to the wort, a blue coloura


tion results, starch is present It must be under-
stood that when “initial” heat is spoken of, the
heat of the mash when all mixed, is meant, not
the heat of the liquor.
Colonial brewers, unluckily for themselves, do
not pay nearly so much attention to initial as to
heat of mashing liquor. Heat of mashing liquor
is to some of them the most important thing in
brewing; and we find them making a mark at a
certain heat on their solitary blank scale ther-
mometer, and sticking to that mark in summer
and winter, with new malt and old malt, thick
mash and thin mash, with a loyalty and good
faith unusual in this age of scepticism and doubt.
Colonial brewers do not trouble themselves
much about obtaining “dextrinous” wort, as the
beer most in demand is one new, bright, and
sweet, obtained from “sugary” wort. When
brewing higher class ales that have to undergo
secondary fermentation in cask before being sent
out, they unwittingly obtain properly balanced
proportions of dextrine and maltose, by using
good, well-grown malt. Perhaps our brewers
are saved a good deal of trouble by having no
inducement to strain after dextrinous beers, as
very frequently means for obtaining these (such
as using undervegetated grain, and crippling
diastatic power by high heats) are adopted,
E 2


which result in the production of a very unstable
article; This lack of stability arises from the
fact that beers obtained by the means mentioned
above contain low types of albuminous matter,
which give them a “ fulness ” often mistaken for
that imparted by dextrine.
In England, with the “ single flow ” system of
mash, two barrels of liquor to every quarter of
malt is considered the best quantity to use. In
the Colonies I am much afraid that many brewers
have not the remotest idea whether they mash
with one, two, or three barrels per quarter. To
such I would suggest that they employ the means
mentioned at the end of the last chapter for
determining the quantity of liquor they use for
mashing and sparging.
It is usual to allow the mash to stand for two
hours before setting taps—not because the con-
version of starch into sugar takes this time, but
to allow the wort to brighten. During this
standing great care should be taken not to allow
temperature of mash to reduce much, lest acidity
be formed; therefore it is essential that the mash
tun should not be exposed to draughts.
Those who use underbacks should see that
they are fitted with a steam coil, with which to
keep up temperature of wort, for should this fall
below 130° (F.) acid formation is almost certain to


result In some breweries it is customary to
sparge with the lids of the mash tun off, and in
these cases there is a great risk of acidity attack-
ing the surface of the goods unless the sparger
be kept going all the time.
In my opinion it is safer to keep the mash tun
covered up till all the wort is in the copper.
The value of malt is determined by the amount
of extract it yields in the mash tun; therefore, it
is important that we should be able to calculate
out this amount. Through inaccuracies in work-
ing out extracts the most astonishing results are
sometimes arrived at. Thus a certain brewer
declared some time since that he had often
obtained 13 lbs. per bushel from his malt, which
multiplied by 8 gives 104 lbs. per quarter. Now
in England, where barleys are heavier and modes
of working more perfect than in Australasia,
84 lbs. per quarter is considered a very good
extract. If 13 lbs. per bushel were obtained, 88
per cent of the total weight of the grain would
have to be extracted, and this is of course a
physical impossibility, as the husk, acrospire and
other insoluble portions make up at least 30 per
cent, of the grain. The error mentioned above
probably arose from the fact that through employ-
ing casks of which 9 out of 10 were too small,
the brewer, to use an Irishism, “racked more


beer than he-brewed,” then added 6 per cent, for
waste in fermentation, worked out his calculation
and arrived at the gratifying result stated.
For the correct working out of extract yield,
the fermenting tuns require to be gauged most
accurately, and the quantity and gravity of wort
determined when it is all gathered in the tun
and before fermentation has commenced. The
“dip” should be taken with a rule marked in
inches and tenths, such as supplied to the Excise
officials in England, and the gravity in pounds
per barrel determined by means of a glass sae-
charometer, which will be found to be much
more accurate than the brass instruments so
generally used in the Colonies.
The saccharometer ought to be marked in
pounds and tenths.
When the quantity in tun and the gravity have
been determined, we proceed by the following
simple rule.
Multiply quantity in barrels (36 gals.) by
pounds of gravity, and divide result by quarters
of malt used. The answer will be the extract
per quarter.
If the extract per bushel be desired, divide the
extract per quarter by 8, or in the first instance
divide by the number of bushels used instead of
the number of quarters.


For example:—
Quarters of malt used in brewing - -14
Number of barrels in tun - - 45.5
Gravity ------- 22.4
45-5
22.4
1820
910
910
14)1019.20(72.8
98
39
28
112
112
Extract per quarter—72.B.
This divided by Bgives the extract per bushel:—
8)72.8
g.i = Extract per bushel.
If glucose or invert saccharine be used in the
brewing they are added to the malt, one hun-
dredweight being equal to 4 bushels of malt.
One hundred pounds of pure cane sugar would
be about equal to four bushels of malt.
The following are some extracts obtained in
the laboratory, 50 grams of malt being taken in
each case, marked at the same temperatures and
washed to a litre.


Extract per Quarter.
Californian barley malt - 90.72
English - - - - 84.37
New Zealand „ ~ - - - 79.00
Cape of Good Hope barley malt - - 74.21
Of these malts, undoubtedly the best was the,
Californian. The “Cape” was also a fine sound
malt, though the .extract yield was small, owing
to the enormous percentage of husk.
I may state that I have never obtained more
than 79 lbs. per quarter extract in the brewery
from Colonial malt, and when I hear of extracts
of 85 and 90 being obtained in everyday brewing
I am inclined to doubt the accuracy of the work-
ing out.
Even if the malt employed were very good,
large extracts would not be obtained in Colonial
breweries, where, as a rule, the worts are all
boiled in one length, and the goods in conse-
quence not thoroughly exhausted.
Were a strong ale and a weak ale brewed ffom
the same mash, and excessive sparging resorted
to, as is the case in almost every English
brewery, very much higher extracts would be
obtained, though whether the extra amount of
extract so obtained would be of any value is
another question.


CHAPTER VI.
BOILING AND COOLING
MOST colonial breweries, as I said before, are
built on the gravitation system, therefore the
worts are run direct from the mash tun into the
boiling vessel.
Some brewers run their taps very rapidly,
draining their mash in an hour and a half or two
hours; but Ido not think this is a good practice,
as the worts are certain to be turbid when run so
fast, and there is considerable risk of unaltered
starch being present.
In the Colonies, fire coppers are the exception,
not the rule, most brewers boiling their wort in a
wooden vat by means of a steam coil, or in one
or two instances by blowing naked steam direct
into the wort.
This latter practice cannot be too strongly
condemned, as steam, unless derived from an
exceptionally pure source, invariably contains
volatile organic impurities; and, besides, the
condensation of steam in the wort renders it
impossible to obtain regular lengths or gravities.
There are also objections to boiling by means of


a coil. Firstly, the wort below the coils is never
boiled; secondly, steam heat is not nearly search-
ing enough to thoroughly cook the wort; and
thirdly, it is very difficult to keep up sufficient
steam in the boiler to ensure a regular boil.
The best arrangement for steam-boiling is
that of a jacketed copper, by means of which all
the wort can be boiled; but the other objections
to steam coils apply to this also.
The leading authorities on brewing matters
are now almost unanimously agreed that boiling
by fire is far and away the best method, as
giving beer extra stability, and perhaps in some
degree improving its flavour.
It is true that when boiling by fire we cannot
raise the temperature of our wort above 21 2° (F.),
but in circulating, every drop is brought in
contact with the intensely hot sides and bottom
of the copper, and the influence of this heat is
decidedly beneficial, rendering the wort less liable
to change by altering the character of some of its
unstable constituents.
Those who desire to combine the advantages
of steam with those of fire-boiling fit their
coppers with a coil as well as with a furnace,
and thus are able to regulate temperatures so as
to obtain “dextrinous” or “sugary” beers when
filling up the copper, and afterwards obtain a


good searching boil. The advice has been given
by some writers to keep wort obtained from
undergrown malt for some time in the copper
at a temperature of i6o° (F.), or thereabouts, to
foster the action of diastase, and complete the
conversion of starch into sugar.
If this course be pursued, the dextrine of the
wort, as well as the starch (if there ever is any of
the latter present), is converted into maltose,
and a “sugary” wort obtained which gives a thin
mawkish beer.
During boiling we extract the valuable quali-
ties of the hop, precipitate a portion of the
albuminous matter, alter in some measure the
character of the remainder, and aerate the
wort.
With a soft-water wort, if the boiling be con-
tinued too long, the hops become disintegrated,
and a harsh unpleasant bitter is extracted.
For ordinary Colonial running beers a hoil of
one and three-quarter hours would, I should say,
be quite sufficient, but for more highly-hopped
and stronger ales a boil of two hours would be
necessary.
The greater portion of the volatile oil of the
hop escapes during boiling, going off in the
steam. Many ways of preventing this escape
have been tried, but none successfully.


In boiling, a portion of the albuminous matter
of wort is coagulated merely under the influence
of ebullition and aeration ; but another portion
combines with the hop tannin and precipitates in
the form of tannate-of-albumen.
It is stated in some modern books on brewing
that we expel air from the wort during boiling,
but this is quite incorrect. During the frothing
and bubbling of ebullition, aeration takes place;
and to this, as stated above, is due in some
measure the coagulation of albuminous matter,
Aeration of wort is greatly increased by the
use of “ Fountains,” or dome-shaped lids, having
a man-hole in the centre through which the wort
boils up; but that excessive aeration is an un-
mixed benefit is very doubtful.
When glucose or starch saccharines are used,
they should be placed in a net or bag suspended
in the wort, as they dissolve very slowly, and if
suffered to settle in a mass on the bottom of the
copper would cause this to burn through. Cane
sugar is easily dissolved in the copper or on the
cooler.
Much fuel is consumed in wort boiling, as a
large fierce fire is necessary to give a searching
boil; therefore, it is well to get all the heat
possible from the fire, and economise fuel by
carrying the flues round the copper a couple of


times. If care be exercised when the copper is
being filled no danger of burning arises from this.
Where a hop-back is used, when the wort has
boiled the desired time, a large tap or valve is
opened and the contents of the copper suffered
to rush into the hop-back, ebullition being kept
up all the time to prevent the hops from settling
on the bottom of the copper.
The hop-back is usually a square-shaped vessel,
of no great depth, made of wood or iron, and
fitted with a perforated false bottom of iron
plates or copper sieve, which intercepts the hops
and allows the wort to be drawn off quite bright
to the cooler.
In England every brewery has its hop-back,
and nearly every brewery its cooler, but in
Australasia we look in vain for these vessels.
The explanation of their absence probably lies
in the fact that the early Colonial brewers not
being over-burdened with money only used such
plant as they deemed absolutely necessary for
the production of a beer that would sell. Saving
of labour and quick returns were everything to
them, quality of beer a secondary consideration.
Nowadays things have altered, quality of beer
has become a primary consideration, but still
Colonial brewers stick to their groove; keep up the
old style of plant; and do without hop-backs and


coolers; thus saving a good deal of trouble and
some extra plant, but effecting this saving at
the expense of the quality and stability of their
beers. It requires but a very slight knowledge
of brewing chemistry to bear out this statement.
As before stated, malt contains a large per-
centage of albuminous matter, of which the
greater part is dissolved in the mash tun and
taken into solution in the wort. When the
decoction system of mashing, as practised by
German brewers, is carried out, and the greater
part of the goods boiled, much albumen is got
rid of by coagulation during this boiling in the
mash tun ; but with the infusion system, the only
one practised in the colonies, no coagulation of
albumen takes place till the wort is raised to the
boiling point in the copper or “ boiler,” and even
then the quantity thrown out is not great unless
the vessel be boiled by fire and a considerable
quantity of hops used. Were all types of malt
albumen coagulable by boiling, there might be
no necessity for hop-back or cooler; but, as a
matter of fact, one albuminous body, present in
every malt in considerable quantity, usually
termed “ Glutine,” cannot be thrown out of solu-
tion by any amount of boiling, and only deposits
when the temperature of the wort falls to about
70° C. (158° F.) ; so that in breweries where the


above-mentioned vessels are not used, the entire
quantity of glutine dissolved from the malt, with
the exception of a very small amount deposited
on the refrigerator, is carried forward to the
fermenting tun. Here a considerable portion is
assimilated by the yeast, but yet an excess is
present in the beer, where it remains, ever ready
to undergo putrefactive change, induce acetous
fermentation in the fluid, or precipitate and form
the “lumpy ” deposit that so annoys Colonial
bottlers.
In breweries, where hop-backs and coolers are
not used, the yeast has to do double work, bring
about alcoholic fermentation and assimilate—eat
up, as it were, great quantities of albuminous
matter. This latter fact accounts for the enor-
mous reproduction of yeast that takes place
during fermentation in Colonial breweries. A
very remarkable change was brought about in
the fermentation of a certain brewery when a
hop-back and cooler were introduced (the pre-
vious system being the usual one of refrigerating
direct from the copper). The heads on ferment-
ing worts fell off in size to an alarming degree,
and the quantity of yeast formed was not half
what it had been; but the resulting beers turned
out clean and bright, and though not so full on
the palate at first, yet drank better when matured,


kept longer, and when bottled did not throw down
one-fourth as much deposit as the beers brewed
under the old system.
Freeing the wort from albuminous matter is
not the only service rendered by hop-back and
cooler, as they are the means by which thorough
aeration at high temperatures takes place, this
being of service in the fermentation stage; and
they also allow of gradual cooling taking place,
which is an advantage, I think, as cooling from
200° to 58° (F.) in the space of four seconds
cannot but have an injurious effect.
When a hop-back is used the hops can be
pressed with great facility, and a saving effected
of 36 gallons of wort for every 80 lbs. of hops
used.
In England the hop-back is a very expensive
vessel on account of its false bottom of per-
forated plates, but this can be avoided altogether
by employing a row of semi-circular copper
sieves placed against the side of the vessel, that
is if it be built of wood; if of iron, plates ought
to be employed, as copper in conjunction with
iron in the slightly acid wort might induce
harmful electric action.
The hop-back must be of sufficient capacity to
contain the whole of the brewing, but a cooler
of one-fourth that size will be found quite


capable of intercepting an immense amount of
harmful matter.
Every colonial brewery has .its refrigerator,
generally a “piracy” on Baudelot’s or some other
patent.
In some of these piracies we find copper pipes
screwed into iron sides, which might induce
electric action, as explained above.
There are many different varieties of refrigera-
tor sold (each one being, of course, according to
its maker, “the best in the market”), so a pur-
chaser has plenty to choose from. One important
point should be determined before purchasing a
refrigerator, namely, whether it will stand high
pressure or not. Some otherwise good machines
burst under a pressure of 12 or 14 lbs., and so are
of little use where a pump or a town water supply
obtained from a high level is used.
After each brewing, the refrigerator should be
scoured with sand, or yeast and ashes, and it is
well to cleanse the insides of the tubes occa-
sionally by brushing; or if this is not possible,
by filling the tubes with a strong solution of
caustic potash or soda.
p


CHAPTER VII.
FERMENTATION.
In England fermenting tuns are made square or
round indifferently, but in the Colonies “ rounds”
are most in favour; why, it is difficult to say,
unless it be that our coopers are better trades-
men than our carpenters.
If carefully constructed, a square can be made
as tight as a round, and then is in every way
equal to the latter.
In temperate climates wort is usually pitched
at 58° or 60° (R), but in Australia during hot
weather it is quite impossible to get wort down
to this temperature unless artificial cooling by
means of ice-machines be resorted to; I do not
think that the use of artificial cold would be wise
unless it were consistently carried out, and the
beer stored in ice in the hotelkeeper’s cellar, as
beer pitched say at 58° and never in the brewery
suffered to rise above 70° or 72 0 R, and then sent
out to the consumer, whose cellar stands at
100° P., would be certain to “fret” and become
undrinkable in a day or two. Perhaps the wisest
thing to do in hot weather is to let the heat of


the fermentation rise unchecked, rack the beer as
soon as possible, send it out and get it consumed
before it has time to go bad, for go bad it certainly
will, as high temperatures foster the growth of
diseased ferments.
English brewers would stare aghast at the idea
of pitching their wort at 70° or 72 0 F. and letting
it rise before fermentation was finished to 90° or
92° F., yet these heats are of common occurrence
in Australian breweries.
Beers fermented at these high temperatures and
racked, fined, sent out and drunk in a week or ten
days, cannot possibly possess much “character,”
and could never satisfy the palates of those accus-
tomed to drink more matured beers. Hence the
large importations of English ale.
These fast fermentations do well enough for
light-running ales which are rapidly consumed,
but for high-class ales slower fermentation is
necessary, therefore it is well to brew the latter
in winter and store them away till summer, when
even if they do “fret” in the consumer’s cellar, no
harm will result, winter-brewed ales always having
sufficient stability to withstand a “fret” without
going sour. The reason of this lies in the fact
that being brewed in cold weather and fermented
at low temperatures they are free from diseased
germs.
F 2


Yeast is usually added to the wort when there
is six or eight inches in depth of the latter in the
tun. The quantity added varies much, some
brewers using only lb. per barrel, and others 2
or more pounds per barrel. Experience in this
matter is the best guide.
If too little yeast is used the fermentations
soon become weak and languid, while if too
much is used they become too rapid, and it is
not easy to work the yeast out of the beer.
Pitching yeast should be examined with the
microscope before using, and if it is found to be
weak—that is, if the cells are marked with black
spots or granulations, or elongated and irregular
in shape, it should be strengthened by supplying
it with suitable food. A good way of accom-
plishing this is to pitch it in an open head hogs-
head with strong wort taken from the mash tun,
boiled, to coagulate the albuminous matter, and
strained. A handful of salt added to this wort
facilitates the absorption of nitrogenous matter
by the yeast cells.
If, on examination with the microscope, many
diseased ferments are seen to be present in the
yeast, it ought to be rejected, and a change ob-
tained; but if only 3 or 4 to the field a little
salicylic acid dissolved in wort and added to the
yeast will purify it sufficiently.


Salicylic acid acts as a poison to the diseased
ferments, and also to the yeast if used in excess.
When fermentation has started in the tun and
what is known as the “cauliflower” head is on, it
will generally be found that the head is rather
dirty. This should be skimmed off, and if more
dirt be thrown up this should be skimmed off
also.
It is said that for every degree of heat a fer-
mentation rises a pound of gravity disappears,
but this rule does not always prevail.
In temperate climates—such as New Zealand
and Tasmania—l do not think temperatures
should be suffered to rise above 70° F., more
especially in the case of stock ales, as in most
hotelkeepers’ cellars the temperature is much
below this, and there is in consequence little
danger of violent secondary fermentation.
With regard to the gravity at which to cleanse,
experience will be the best guide, different
yeasts, &c., requiring different gravities.
It is most usual in the Colonies to cleanse in
the old-fashioned butts, unions or pontoons not
being much in vogue.
The mode of working the fermentations in the
cellar is different in different breweries. Some
brewers “top” the new beer every hour from the
troughs or yeast tubs till the beer from these


becomes quite thick, when they pass it through
the yeast press, and continue topping with the
clear pressings until near the finish. Others
again top only three or four hours from the
troughs or tubs, and then broach a butt of the
fermenting ale. Besides these there are many
different modes of working, all of which vary in
some small particular.
The system that most commends itself to me
is that of topping every hour or half-hour, ac-
cording as the fermentation requires it, from the
troughs or tubs, till the beer in these becomes
thick and yeasty, when a butt is broached, and
the topping continued from this whenever neces-
sary till fermentation has almost ceased, when
clear beer from some former brewing is used.
The trough beer is then drawn off, placed in
a clean butt, and fermented with a few gallons
of new wort taken from the next brewing that
comes down, and then allowed to settle in the
usual way. On fining this beer will go perfectly
bright, and will be found very suitable for mixing.
The system of dressing in the cleaners is
not a good one, the yeast at this stage not
being present in sufficient quantity to assimilate
nitrogenous food, and in consequence flour re-
mains in the beer, where it may form a cloud
and induce disease.


Too much care cannot be taken to keep
cellars, butts and troughs sweet and clean.
The at one time mysterious action of fermen-
tation has been clearly explained by the great
French chemist Pasteur. The explanation may
be briefly given thus:—Yeast is a living organism
whose cells possess the power of resolving the
sugar which penetrates their walls into alcohol,
carbonic acid, and very small quantities of
glycerin and succinic acid- The combined
oxygen of the sugar is seized on by the yeast
for its own respiration, and alcohol and carbon
dioxide given off. Besides the combined oxygen
of the sugar the yeast consumes much free
oxygen held in solution in the wort. If this
free oxygen were present in great excess the
yeast would use it entirely in preference to the
oxygen of the sugar, and would therefore not
induce alcoholic fermentation, though it would
flourish with great vigour as a plant, hence the
danger of excessive aeration by rousing during
fermentation.
Were yeast used to ferment a wort made from
sugar of any kind alone, it would in a very
short time become so we&kened that .its power
as a ferment would ceasfe. The reason for this
is that sugar contains no nitrogenous matter,
and nifrogenous matter is necessary to yeast


as a food. In ordinary wort yeast obtains its
nitrogenous food from the albuminous bodies
derived from the malt, but it must not be
imagined that all albuminoids are capable of
acting as yeast food. Those of slimy appearance
when coagulated, are from their very nature
incapable of penetrating the porous walls of the
yeast cells, and therefore cannot act as yeast
food, while the peptonised bodies formed under
the influence of digestion, natural or artificial,
readily penetrate into the interior of the yeast
cells. The diastase or soluble albumen of malt,
though its power of altering starch is destroyed
by boiling, is yet of further value in brewing,
as it is readily absorbed by the yeast cells, for
which it is suitable nourishment.
Yeast requires certain mineral foods too for
its proper development, as will be seen from the
following statements of a French Chemist, M.
Mayer, who arrived at these conclusions after
exhaustive experiments.
“ Preparations of iron employed in very small
quantities seem to have no influence on yeast; in
larger proportions they afe Injurious.
“Potassium phosphate shows a preponderating
favourable influence. It may be employed in a
liquid medium in a high percentage without its
fertilising influence being destroyed, while for


plants of a higher order so great a concentration
would become a serious cause of pathological
disturbance. Potassium phosphate is not only
favourable but indispensable. In fact, if from
a medium formed of sugar candy, ammonium
nitrate, traces of yeast, and a mixture of acid
potassium phosphate—magnesium sulphate and
tricalcic phosphate, a medium which ferments
with considerable activity—we omit the acid
potassium phosphate, fermentation and the de-
velopment of yeast are not produced.”
From this we see that potassium and phosphoric
acid are indispensable elements, and these two
salts are present in all malts. M. Mayer, goes
on to state that lime and sodium may be omitted
without any great inconvenience, but that mag-
nesium is very useful, if not indispensable.
The subject of yeast feeding is of extreme
importance to brewers, as without a healthy,
well-nourished yeast, they cannot hope to obtain
well flavoured, sound beers. The following
analyses by Schlossberger, showing the actual
composition of yeast, may be of interest:—
SUREACE YEASI.
Results- 'f£ ar ! X,n - -
The ashes having. dr ° gen ‘ ‘ 6 6
, . , ° Nitrogen - - 12.1
been removed.
V Oxygen - - 31.4
Ashes - 2.5 100.0


SEDIMENTARY YEAST.
Carbon - 48.0
Hydrogen - - - 6.5
Nitrogen - - - 9.8
Oxygen - - - 35.7
Ashes - 3.5 100.0
Other chemists have published analyses which
show considerable percentages of sulphur in
addition to the elements given above.
Ash of surface yeast, contains according to
Misterlich:—
Phosphoric Acid - - - 53.9
Potash - 39.1
Magnesia - 6.0
Lime - - - - 1.0
Silica - -traces
100.0
I will say a few words on fermenting rooms
before concluding this chapter.
As wort is somewhat liable to contract disease
before fermentation starts, it is of the utmost
importance that the atmosphere of the fermenting
room should be pure and cool. To obtain an
absolutely pure atmosphere, that is one entirely
free from floating organic dust and germs, is
practically impossible (these matters only de-
positing when air currents and other disturbing
causes are excluded) but sufficient purity may


be attained by building the rooms in the first
instance large and lofty, and so arranging the
ventilation system, that all stale air is carried off
without a draught being created.
In summer time, the diseased germs of the
atmosphere, fostered by heat, spring into fullest
activity, and are wafted about in millions by
every air current, therefore at this season it
behoves brewers to be particularly careful in
guarding their wort and beer from contamination,
and one means to this end is exclusion of air
currents coming from any infected quarter, such
as a shed where sour beer is stored, an open
drain where putrefying yeast may lodge, &c.
&c.
I would remind those who have seen fully
developed acetous, lactic, putrefactive and other
organisms under the microscope, that these do
not convey the slightest idea of the nature or
size of the atmospheric germs from which they
spring, being to the latter as the oak tree to the
acorn. The germs of the atmosphere which
impregnate wort, beer, meat and living bodies
with disease are so minute, that they elude the
highest power of the most perfect microscope
yet invented, and are only distinguishable as
a dusty cloud when a strong ray of light is
thrown across their track.


To keep fermenting rooms cool and clean it is
necessary to use water copiously, therefore, as
stated before, the floors of such rooms should be
constructed of concrete or asphalt rather than of
wood.
It was thought at one time that light had an
ill effect upon fermentation, but this theory is not
now much believed in, and light is freely ad-
mitted to fermenting rooms, care being however
taken to avoid a glare by the use of ground or
stained glass.


CHAPTER VIII.
RACKING, STORING, AND BOTTLING.
No fixed rule can be laid down as to the time
beer should be allowed to remain in the cleansers
before racking, as beers become fit for racking
rapidly or slowly, according to the season,
character of material, &c. &c. When sound,
carefully-brewed beer commences to throw a
white, creamy head from the bung-hole of the
cleanser, it may be said to be ready for
racking; such a beer when examined in a glass
will be fairly clear, and will go perfectly bright
on the addition of a small quantity of finings.
In hard-water centres brewers commonly rack
their beers without first fining in the cleansers,
having every confidence in the stable nature of
their extract, but colonial brewers using soft
waters would be unwise to follow such an example,
as unless soft-water beers are thoroughly clean
they are extremely liable to “fret” in cask if kept
for any length.of time. Of course with quick-
draught light ales, consumed a week after brew-
ing, racking brightness is not of very much im-
portance, but it is undoubtedly safer to fine all


stock or strong ales before rackihg and again
when sending out, using a moderate quantity of
finings in each case.
Healthy beers usually “throw the finings” from
the bung-hole of the cleanser an hour or two
after they have been added, and are then quite
bright; but in some cases, owing to cold or other
causes, the finings sink to the bottom instead of
rising to the top. If cold weather be the cause,
a good practical remedy is to raise the tempera-
ture of the cellar after fining a brewing, by means
of a coke fire or steara- pipe; a rise in tempera-
ture of one or two degrees will be quite sufficient
to cause the finings to work out well.
There is naturally much less waste when the
finings are thrown out than when they are not, as
in the former case the beer racks bright to the
last drop in the cleansers. When beer persistently
refuses to go bright when fined, it is a bad sign,
as it shows that some foreign matter (such as the
plasma of the yeast cells—very minute cells—or
albuminous matter) is held in a state of semi-
solution in the liquid, and so cannot be removed
by finings or filter-paper.
If beer in this state were rendered either
slightly acid or slightly alkaline, it would have
its power of taking matter into solution much
increased, and would quickly drop bright, but


unfortunately, in practical brewing this could not
be done without affecting the flavour of the beer.
Several substances can be used for fining beer,
but the only one much in favour is gelatine,
obtained from fish sounds. Ordinary finings are
made by soaking isinglass in water rendered
strongly acid by the addition of tartaric acid or
sulphurous acid, or in old beer. The latter was
at one time universally used for “cutting” isin-
glass, but it was found that the introduction of
old beer finings into new beer frequently turned
the latter acid, so tartaric acid and sulphurous
acid were substituted for the old beer. Of these
the former is more generally used, as it is in-
odorous, but when finings are required to keep
for a long time, sulphurous acid is used. A small
quantity of bisulphite of lime added to tartaric
acid finings preserves them for a long time.
When the isinglass has soaked sufficiently long
and has assumed a jelly-like appearance, it is
brushed through a fine sieve, diluted with pure
water, and then is ready for use. Finings act
more readily in beer when thoroughly aerated,
therefore it is well to whisk them vigorously in a
bucket with some beer just before using. Hops,
especially those which have been boiled, exert
a great influence in causing beer to drop bright,
but their action is as yet unexplained.


The addition of a small quantity of good dry
hops to beer not only assists clarification, but
imparts a pleasant flavour to it. The proper time
for dry hopping is immediately after racking (or
the hops may be put into the casks before they
are filled) as it takes some time for the bouquet
of the hops to be absorbed.
For dry hopping Colonial hops scarcely possess
enough flavour, therefore for high-class ales it is
well to use stronger flavoured hops, such as
Californians or Bavarians.
In summer, or when beer has to go long
distances, it is often advisable td add a little
bisulphite of lime in casks, y or y pint per
hogshead, or more if no smell results.
It is customary in the Colonies to store all
stock beers in cask; this keeps plant idle, much
space is occupied, and a certain percentage of
beer is lost through musty or stinking casks.
A better mode of storing, especially if the ales
are wanted for summer use, is in vats.
An erroneous idea prevails amongst some
brewers, that ales for vatting must be brewed
of great strength, 30 lbs. being deemed the
lowest gravity consistent with safety. This
arises, I imagine, from the fact that in those parts
of England (principally the South and South-
west), where such ales are much in vogue, it is


usual to brew them of very high original gravity.
That it is quite possible, however, to keep ales
of ordinary strength in vats for 12 or 18 months,
has been demonstrated over and over again by
practical brewers in England, and Australian
brewers ought not to be slow in following such
a lead, as it is the very thing they want to
overcome the difficulties caused by the great
heat of their climate in summer. The use of
vats would enable them to supply their cus-
tomers, when the demand was greatest, with a
sound, cool, sparkling beer, infinitely superior
to any “summer brewed,” and slightly “aged” in
flavour, and thus pleasing to those who have
been accustomed to drink imported English ale.
Ales for vatting can be brewed of as low a
gravity as 24 lbs. (that is, if a good malt be
used and little or no sugar), and hopped 10,
12, or 14 lbs. per quarter {l%, 1%, or lbs. per
bushel) according to trade requirements. They
can be fermented and cleansed in the ordinary
way, but the final gravity should not be suffered
to come so low as in the case of ordinary beers,
6 lbs. being quite low enough for a 24-lb. beer.
The ale should be allowed to drop fairly
bright in the cleansing casks, then pumped to
vat, 1 lb. per barrel of best hops and half or
G


quarter pint bisulphite of lime per barrel added,
and then the trap-door in the head of the vat
firmly fixed down, and the entire top covered
to a depth of several inches with sand or clay.
For a month or two the ale will remain cloudy,
in three months it will begin to brighten, and
in five or six months will be brilliant, sparkling,
sound, and more palatable than ale stored in
cask.
It is essential that the vats should stand
in a cool cellar, where the temperature can be
kept below 6o° F. in summer, as any warmth
might induce violent secondary fermentation,
and prolong it beyond the limits of safety,
besides favouring the growth of diseased fer-
ments
Vats of any size can be constructed in a
precisely similar manner to fermenting rounds,
(only that they need a head in like that of a
cask), oak, cedar, or New Zealand kauri being
suitable materials.
For stock ales none but the best and newest
casks should be used, as if even a single stave
be .affected with mould or acidity, it will during
the lengthy storage injure the beer.
Stock ales should of course be stored in a
cool cellar, but it is not desirable that they should


remain quiescent all the time; on the contrary,
it is well that they should undergo gradual
secondary fermentation before being sent out.
To bring this about, most brewers resort to
rolling the casks. Despite all the care and pains
a brewer bestows upon his beer, it frequently
is supplied to the public in an unsatisfactory
condition, owing to the ignorance or carelessness
of the hotelkeeper who retails it. Indeed very
few Colonial hotelkeepers trouble themselves at
all about the condition of their beer. They
tap a cask, find it “cloudy” or “turned,” and
promptly send it back to the wealthy (?) brewer
who supplied it; he receives it humbly, not to
say gratefully, and forthwith sends a cask of
his best brew to take its place.
The commercial side of brewing in the Colo-
nies cannot with any truth be said to be its
bright side, for competition is so keen, and
brewers are so jealous of each other, and so
unpractical, that trade is pushed at any cost, and
disreputable hotelkeepers, who ought to be
“wound up” instead of suffered, to continue in
business, are trusted to any amount and humbly
solicited for orders.
It is high time that the large brewing firms
made an arrangement amongst themselves to


resolutely “weed out” these people, and never
to let an hotel of their own to a man with no
means.
It is high time, too, that brewers (in New
Zealand at all events) should come to some
agreement to check the present rapid decline
in prices of beers, as at the present rate of
backward progression I calculate that in six
years from now brewers will be selling beer at
ten shillings a hogshead less than cost price,
and paying working expenses out of the vast
sums of capital with which they are at present
endowed.
To return to the subject proper, ales for bottling
should be brewed from good material, of medium
gravity, well hopped, pale in colour, and above
all should be fairly old. They should be brewed
only in winter or spring, and made to undergo
secondary fermentation during storage.
The store in which ales are bottled should
/be solidly built, so that regularity of temperature
can be maintained all the year round. With
regard to instructions for bottling, I cannot do
better than reproduce those of Messrs. Bass and
Co., the great English brewers:—
“Pale ale should not be bottled during the
summer months, nor after hot weather has set in,


even though the temperature should afterwards
become cool.
“ The ale should be placed bung upwards in a
cool well-ventilated store about 50° to 55 0 Fah-
renheit temperature.
“If the ale should get into a brisk state of
fermentation, a porous cane or oak spile should
be inserted in the bung till the excessive fermen-
tation has subsided, when a tight close peg should
be substituted.
“ Ale should never be allowed to become flat.
“It should be bright and sparkling when
bottled, but not fermenting; the bottles to be
corked directly they are filled.
“ In bottling, a tap with a tube reaching towards
the bottom of the bottle should be used.
“ When corked, the bottles to be piled standing
upright, and not lying on their sides.
“ When the ale becomes ripe, a sediment will
be deposited in the bottles. In uncorking, be
careful not to disturb it, but empty the contents
of the bottle into a jug, keeping back the sedi-
ment.
“ A more convenient filler of bottles than the
tap recommended is the syphon arrangement
made by several firms, by which four or six bottles
or even more can be filled at once.”


More sediment is found in colonial bottled ales
than in imported ales, and this is I think largely
due to deficient plant (see page 59) and in some
measure to want of knowledge of bottling.
It goes without saying that bottled ales or
stouts should not be sent out until they are in
brisk condition.
THE END.


NOTES.
Note to Page 28.
The change from a sugar having the formula
C l 2 h, j 2 o„ into two sugars having the formula
C t H l2 o e would be correctly expressed thus—
-2C l 3 H 33 °H + 2H 3 ° =
Cane Sugar. Water.
Oj2
Dextrose. Laevulose.
Note to Pages 29 and 30.
In these analyses the results are given as they
worked out, but in all probability the percentage
of ash is in each case too small, as a very
powerful blow-pipe was used in burning off.
Note to Second Paragraph on Page 49.
Dubrunfant states that diastase is capable of
converting from 150,000 to 200,000 times its own
weight of starch, and Dr. Roberts, of Manchester,
England, found that Ptyaliti or salivary diastase
easily converted 40,000 times its own weight of
starch.


Albumin.
Fownes gives the following formula for this
substance as being approximately correct;—
chn o s
72 112 IS 22
From this some idea of its complex and change-
able nature may be formed.
Brewer’s Microscope.
An excellent microscope for brewers’ use is sup-
plied by Messrs. Swift, of Tottenham Court Road,
London, for about £io. This low price ought to
enable every brewer to purchase a microscope.
Thermometers.
In colonial malt-houses these instruments are
little used, maltsters being much inclined to trust
to their hands to inform them as to the tempera-
ture of grain on floor and kiln, than which a more
illusive test could not be found.
The thermometer is as indispensable in the
malt-house as in the brewery, and the sooner it
is universally used there the better.
M'Carron, Bird and Co., Printers, Melbourne.


LAWRENCE & O’FARRELL
PROPRIETORS AND PUBLISHERS OF
The Australian Brewers' Journal ,
Mineral Water ,
Wine and Spirit Trade Review ,
IMPORTERS OF
ALL CLASSES OF MACHINERY & OTHER GOODS
FOR THE
BREWING, MALTING, & /ERATED WATER TRADES.
We make the introduction of Novelties in Machinery,
&c., to the Australian Trade a Specialty, and are
open to act as Agents to English and other Manu-
facturers.
CORRESPONDENCE INVITED.
3 ELIZABETH ST., MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA.
