

oern « p. i
asm* “ '
* 7
[Price 2d.: post free 4 cl.
NEW SERIES.]
THE AUTHOR RESERVES THE RIGHT Off TRANSLATION,
I O'


ADVERTISEMENTS.
EMIGRATION NOTICE.
E. J. MONNERY & CO.,
OUTFITTERS AND CABIN FURNITURE MAKERS,
165, PENCHUBCH STREET, LONDON, E.C.,
Offer unusual facilites to persons proceeding abroad in the selection of proper and
useful articles for the voyage, and residence in the Colonies, at prices that defy
competition. Show Rooms for
CABIN FURNITURE AND SEA BEDDING.
A Large Assortment of Clothing, Shirts, Hosiery, Overland Trunks,
Sea Chests, Canteens, Cabin Lamps, Emigrant Stoves, Tents, Iron
Bedsteads, and Mess Utensils.
ILLUSTRATED PRICE LISTS EREE on Receipt of Stamp.
OUTFITS FROM 10s. 6d. UPWARDS, see List.
A SINGLE ARTICLE AT WHOLESALE PRICES.
MONNERY’S, 165, Fenchurch St., E.C.
“James’s Powder is a Febrifuge.”—Punch, No. 1004, page 223.
“ I wish your James’ Powders were always used.”— Dr. Twecdie, of the London
Fever Hospital, to Messrs, Neichery.
THEREFORE ALWAYS ASK FOR
NEWBERY’S
THE GENUINE DR JAMES’S POWDER
For the Certain Cure of Fevers, Colds, acute and chronic Rheumatism, .Ague, the
Inflammation caused by Teething, Ssc.
45, ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD, LONDON.
The same as Prepared & Sold by NEWBERY & SONS since the year A.D. 1746.
HO MEDICINE CHEST IS COMPLETE WITHOUT IT.
THE immense sale, and unprecedented success of
this highly celebrated and invaluable Medicine
during the last 117 years, proves incontestibly that,
in the method of preparing, it has not deteriorated in
its efficacy in curing Fevers, Ague, Rheumatism,
chronic and acute; relieving cold, by opening the pores
of the body, and heightening the tone cf the system
when depressed by the variations of climate.
Every one knows that the ailing called l> acold ” is
the source of many disorders j and, if imprudently
treated, may bring on consumption. Upon the first
attack, if five grains be taken at bed-time, perspiration will bo induced, tne pores will be gently
opened, and permanent relief and freedom of breathing obtained.
NEWBERY’S DR. JAMES’ POWDER owes its high position to the unvarying accuracy which
has characterised its administration from the commencement, and the extreme exactness with
which it has always been manufactured, since Dr. James’ decease, solely by NEWBERY and
SONS, who possess the only formula op the process of m anufacture in Dr. James’ autography.
Ask particularly for NEW BERY’S genuine DR. JAMES’S POWDER,
ESTABLISHED A.D. 1746.
!3old iti Packets at 2s. 9d., and in Bottles at 4s. fid. and l^s.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
LONDON CHARTERED BANK OF AUSTRALIA.
INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER, 1852,
PAID UP CAPITAL, ONE MILLION.
RESERVE FUND £65,000.
LONDON OFFICE, 17, CANNON STREET, CITY.
COX.OJSTIA.3L ESTABLISH.MEN-TS.
VICTORIA. ARARAT. MARYBOROUGH,
MELBOURNE. BALLARAT.
GEELONG. DUNOLLY.
sub-branches.
BARKLY. RED BANK.
INGLEWOOD. TALBOT, ( late Back Creek,
MOONAMBEL, {late Mountain Creek.) Amherst district.)
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY.
The Court of Directors of this Bank grant LETTERS of CREDIT, payable on demand,
and BILLS of EXCHANGE, upon all the Branches of the Bank, on the most favourable terms.
Approved Drafts on Parties in the Australian Colonies are purchased at the current rate of
Exchange of the day, and Bills are likewise forwarded for collection.
N.B.—LETTERS of CREDIT and BILLS of EXCHANGE may also be obtained of
Messrs. Barnett, Hoare & Co., 62, Lombard Street, E.C.
By Order of the Court,
JAMES STRAOSAN, Secretary.
F RAMP TON’S PILL OF HEALTH.
Price Is. 1 \d. and 2s. 9d. per Box.
This excellent Family Pill is a medicine of long-tried efficacy for purifying the blood, so very
essential for the foundation of good health, and correcting all Disorders of the Stomach and
Bowels. Two or three doses will convince the afflicted of its salutary effects. The stomach will
speedily regain its strength; a healthy action of the liver, bowels, and kidneys will rapidly take
place; and renewed health will be the quick result of taking this medicine, according to the
directions accompanying each box.
PERSONS OF A FULL HABIT, who are subject to headache, giddiness, drowsiness, and sing-
ing in the ears, arising from too great a flow of blood to the head, should never be without them,
as many dangerous symptoms will be entirely carried off by their timely use.
For FEMALES, these Pills are truly excellent, removing all obstructions, the distressing
headache so very prevalent with the sex, depression of spirits, dulness of sight, nervous affections,
blotches, pimples, and sallowness of the skin, and give a healthy, juvenile bloom to the complexion.
To MOTHERS they are confidently recommended as the best medicine that can be taken ; and
for children ol all ages.they are unequalled.
These Pills unite the recommendation of a mild operation with the most successful effect; and
for elderly people, or where an occasional aperient is required, nothing can be better adapted.
Her Majesty’s Commissioners have authorised the name and address of “ THOMAS PEOUT,
No. 229, Strand, London,” to be impressed upon the Government stamp affixed to each box of the
genuine medicine. Sold by all medicine vendors. Emigrants would do well to provide them-
selves with a stock of this valuable medicine.
BLAIR’S GOUT AND RHEUMATIC PILLS.
Price Is. 1 \d. and 2s. 9 d. per Box.
This preparation is one of the benefits which the science of modern chemistry has conferred
upon mankind ; for during the first twenty years of the present century to speak of a cure for the
Gout was considered a romance; but now the efficacy and safety of this medicine is so fully
demonstrated, by unsolicited testimonials from persons in every rank of life, that public opinion
■proclaims this as one of the most important discoveries of the present age.
These Pills require no restraint of diet or confinement during their use, and are certain to pre-
vent the disease attacking any vital part.
Sold by all medicine vendors. Observe, “Thomas Prout, 229, Strand, London,” on the
Government Stamp.
Emigrants would do well to provide themselveswith a stock of this valuable medicine.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE BANK OF VICTORIA,
AUSTRALIA-
INCORPORATED BY ACT OF COUNCIL.
CAPITAL, £1,000,000; If 20.000 SHARES 0E £5O EACH.
PAID HP, £600,000.
ESTABLISHED OCTOBER, 1852.
DIRECTORS.
THE HON. HY. MILLER, M.L.0., Chairman I The Hon WM. HIGHETT, M.L.C.,Dcp.Chair-
GERMAIN NICHOLSON, Esq.. J.P. J. D. PINNOCK, Esq.
THE HON. WILLIAM NICHOLSON. J. PINNEY BEAR, Esq.
AUDITORS— WILLIAM HULL, Esq., J.P.; E. P. S. STURT, Esq., P.M.
GENERAL MANAGER.— JOHN MATHESON, Esq. SOLICITOR.— H. J. CHAMBERS, Esq.
HEAD OFFICE.
JOHN MATHESON, General Manager. ( R. SHANN, Accountant.
E. Q. HARRISON, Inspector of Branches.
LONDON OFFICE, 3, Threadneedle-street.—Directors.
EDMUND WESTSY, Esq.; RICHARD GIBBS, Esq.; ROBERT SUTHERLAND, Esq.
HUGH L. TAYLOR, Manager.
Bankers-LONDON and WESTMINSTER BANK.
GEELONG BRANCH.—LocaI Directors. —The Hon. J. F. STRACHAN, M.L.C.; ANDREW B.
WHITE, Esq.; R. B. RONALD, Esq.; VINCENT W. GIBLIN, Manager.
BELFAST BRANCH.—LocaI Director.- GEORGE STEWART, Esq., P.M.; WILLIAM
YOUNG, Manager.
SANDHURST BRANCH.—LocaI Director.— LACHLAN McLACHLAN, Esq., P.M.;
GEORGE YALLENTINE, Manager.
CASTLEMAINE BRANCH.— THOMAS YOUNG, Manager.
BALLARAT BRANCH.—LocaI Birectors.— JAMES ODDIE, Esq., J.P.; JAMES STEWART.
Esq., M.D.; WILLIAM ROBERTSON, Manager.
AVOOA BRANCH—LESLIE OQILBY, Manager.
MARYBOROUGH BRANCH.— MURDOCH McLEOD, Manager.
RAGLAN BRANCH JAMES MANSON, Manager.
WARRNAMBOOL BRANCH—ROBERT B. PATERSON, Manager.
PORT ALBERT BRANCH— W. H. PARR, Manager.
BEECHWORXH BRANCH— A. K. SHEPPARD, Manager.
PORTLAND BRANCH —Local Director. — Jas. BLAIR, Esq., P.M.; F. C. OSWALD, Manager
HAMILTON BRANCH. —D. WILLIAMSON, Manager.
SALE BRANCH— C. R. SIBBALD, Manager.
AGENCIES.— INDIA AND CHINA, Agra and United Service Bank—NEW SOUTH WALES’
the Australian Joint Stock Bank and Commercial Banking Company.—ADELAIDE, the South
Australian Banking Company.—TASMANIA, the Bank of Van Diemen’s Land.—NEW ZEA-
LAND, Bank of New Zealand.
The London Board of Directors grant Letters of Credit and Drafts on the Head Office, Branches
and Agencies of the Bank in Victoria, They also purchase approved Bills of Exchange, send
Bills for Collection, and transact every kind of Banking business between this country and the
Australian Colonies.-3, THREADNEEDLE STREET, E.C.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
HARPER TWELVETREES’
DOMESTIC MACHINBEY
AND OTHER
MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES.
HARPER TWELVETREES’
MACHINE
PROTECTED BY HER MAJESTY’S ROYAL LETTERS PATENT,
Is the perfection of simplicity, as well as the PERFECTION of CHEAPNESS, and can be
worked by a child, or a Lady may become her own Laundress. It will wash as many clothes in
a few hours as a woman can wash in two days by the old method of hand rubbing, besides doing
the work better with half the soap and fuel. All who have tried it admit that it is the cleanest,
most simple, speedy, effective, and economical Machine ever invented —and it is the very thing
long wanted for the Working Classes. 215., 455., 555. and 755. Carriage Free to most Railway
Stations. Washing Machines, with Wringing and Mangling Apparatus combined, £4 10s.,
£5 10s., £7. India Rubber Clothes Wringer, 20s. 30s. Universal Mangle, 305., 405., 505., 605., 70s.
Economical Cinder Sifters, 305., 40s. Rotary Boot Cleaning Apparatus, 425. Rotary Knife and
Fork Cleaner, 21s. Patent Chums, 155,, 205., 30s. Portable Riddling Machine, for Coals, Gravel,
Lime, &c., 50s. Economising Gas Cap, saves 30 per cent, Post Free for 6 stamps. Perpetual
Self-acting Mouse Trap, always set and always baited, Is. 6d. Ditto Rat Trap, catches a dozen
in one night and requires no attention, 7s. 6d. Also a Portable Sawing Machine, invaluable to
Joiners, Machinists, Model Makers, Cabinet Makers, Engineers, &c., will save its cost in a
month. Full particulars respecting the above may be obtained by sending a Postage Stamp to
Harper Twelvetrees, Bromley-by-Bow, London.
HARPER TWELVETREES’
GLYCERINE SOAP POWDER
Is the most popular invention of modem times, and is the only Washing Powder in the World
which has secured universal approbation, and triumphantly won its way into every home. It is
a complete Luxury for Washing,—is perfectly saponaceous,—and possesses remarkable cleansing
and nourishing properties. It STRENGTHENS, IMPROVES, and FEEDS the Fabric, and is
perfectly harmless to the hands and skin. A WEEK’S WASHING for a small family may be
accomplished in a lew hours; saving one-half of Soap, two-thirds of time, and three-fourths of
labour. A Penny Packet will make a POUND of capital SCOURING SOAP, and the Packet may
be SCALDED SCORES of times without destroying its saponaceous and detergent qualities.
Ask for BRIGGS’ AUSTRALIAN STARCH where you purchase Harper Twelvetrees’
Soap Powder. One Pound is equal to Two Pounds of any other. Sold by Grocers and Druggists
everywhere.
ASK ALSO FOR
Harper Twelvetrees’ Indigo Thumb Blue, Laundry Ball
Blue, Soluble Powder Blue, and Liquid Indigo Blue, Harper
Twelvetrees’ Baking and Pastry Powder, Eggs and Butter
Powder, Harper Twelvetrees’ Government Blacking, and
Harper Twelvetrees’ Mice Killer; and a variety of Domestic
Articles, which may be obtained at most of the shops where
«HARPER TWELVETBEES’ Glycerine Soap Powder,” or
« HARPER TWELVETREES’ Washing Machines ” are sold.
PATENTEE:
HARPER TWELVETREES, Bromley-by-Bow,
Manufacturer of Washing Machines, Wringers, Mangles, and a variety of Domestic
Machines; for particulars of which, send for Catalogue.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
The ORIGINAL and
* ONLY RECIPE for the
Manufacture of “ CHLO-
RODYNE ” was confided
by DR. BROWN, the
sole Inventor and Dis-
coverer, to J. T. DAVEN-
PORT.
This wonderful remedy relieves pains of all kinds, soothes the system, produces
tranquil sleep without the unpleasant effects of opium, arrests purging, griping, and
cramps, and saves the lives of thousands attacked by Dysentery, Cholera, Diarrhoea,
Ague, Fever, &c.
A few drops given at any time will prevent attacks of disease, and no traveller
should think of being without a bottle.
From W. Vesalius Pettigrew, M.D.—“ I have no hesitation in stating that I have never met
with any medicine so efficacious as an anti-spasmodic and sedative. I have used it in Consump-
tion, Asthma, Diarrhoea, and other diseases, and am perfectly satisfied with the results.”
From Dr. M'Millan, of New Galway, Scotland.—” I consider it the most valuable medicine
known.”
Dr. M‘Gregor Croft, late Army Staff, says—“lt is a most invaluable medicine.”
Dr. Gibbon, Army Medical Staff, Calcutta.—“ Two doses completely cured me of Diarrhoea.”
G. Hayward, Esq., Surgeon, Stow-on-the-Wold.—“ I am now using Collis Browne’s Chloro-
dyne with marvellous effects in allaying inveterate sickness in pregnancy.”
From C. V, Ridout, Esq., Surgeon, Egham.—“As an astringent in severe Diarrhoea, and an
anti-spasmodic in Colic with Cramps in the Abdomen, the relief is instantaneous. Asa sedative
in Neuralgia and Tic-Doloreux its effects were very remarkable. In Uterine Affections I have
found it extremely valuable.”
Sold only in Bottles at 2s, 9d. and 4s. 6 d.,
BV THE SOLE AGENT AND MANUFACTUBEK,
T. DA.VENI^ORT,
23, GREAT RUSSELL STREET,
BLOOMSBURY SQUARE, LONDON,
Or sent, carriage free, on receipt of Stamps or Post Office Order, and with Pro-
fessional Testimonials enclosed. None genuine without the words “DR. J.
COLLIS BROWNE’S CHLORODYNE ” engraved on the Government Stamp
on each Bottle as above.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
BANKING COMPANY,
INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER, 1847.
No. 54, OLD BROAD ST., LONDON. £.O.
Capital, £500,000. Reserve Fund, £lOO,OOO.
DIRECTORS.
EDWARD DIYETT, Esq., M.P., Chairman.
C. CHIPPINDALE, Esq.
C. J. HEATH, Esq.
W. W. KER, Esq.
J. H. LECKIE, Esq.
G. MARTEN, Esq.
F. ROB ARTS, Esq.
J. B. WHITE, Esq.
F. C. WILKINS, Esq.
AUDITORS.
J. S. WELLS, Esq.
| C. CHIPPINDALE, Esq.
BANKERS.
Messrs, CURRIE & Co,
LONDON & WESTMINSTER
BANK.
SOLICITORS.
Messrs. THOMAS & HOLLAMS.
BRANCHES.
ADELAIDE.
GAWLER.
KADINA.
PORT ADELAIDE.
ROBE.
WALLAROO.
Letters of Credit and Bills issued upon the Banks in South Australia.
Approved Drafts negotiated and sent for collection.
Every description of Banking business is also conducted direct with
Victoria, New South Wales, and the other Australian Colonies, through
the Company’s Agents.
For Terms of Exchange and further particulars, apply at the Com-
pany’a Offices.
WILLIAM PURDY,
Manager.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
COUGHS, ASTHMA, and INCIPIENT
CONSUMPTION are effectually cured by
KEATING’S COUCH LOZENGES.
Judged by the immense demand, this Universal
Remedy now stands the first in public favour and
confidence ; this result has been acquired by the
test of fifty years’ experience. These Lozenges
may be found on sale in every British Colony, and
throughout India and China they have been highly
esteemed wherever introduced. For Coughs,
Asthma,- and all affections of the Throat and
Chest, they are the most agreeable and efficacious
remedy. '
Prepured and Sold in Boxes, Is. lid., and lins,
2s 9d., 4s. 6d., and 10s. 6d. each, by Thomas Keat-
ing, Chemist, &c., 79, St. Paul’s Churchyard, Lon-
don. Retail by all Druggists and Patent Medicine
Vendors in the World.
N.B.—To prevent spurious imitations, please to
’observe that the words “ Keating s Cough Lo-
zenges ” are engraven on the Government Stamp of
each Box, without which none are genuine.
CHILDREN’S WORM TABLETS
(KEATING’S).
THE GREAT REMEDY for these
DISORDERS in Children can now bo ad-
ministered in the form of a Purely Vegetable
Sweetmeat, at once agreeable and effective.
Prepared and Sold in Tins, Is. Igd. and 2s. 9d.
each, by Thomas Keating, Chemist, &c., 79, St.
Paul’s Churchyard, London, E.C., and Retail by
all Druggists and Patent Medicine Vendors in the
World.
Observe the words “Keating’s Worm Tablets”
are engraven on the Government Stamp of each
Tin, without which none are genuine.
KEATING’S PERSIAN INSECT
POWDER,
UNRIVALLED in EXTERMINA-
TING Mosquitoes, Fleas, Bugs, Flies,
Beetles, Cockroaches, and every description of
Insect infesting Animals and Poultry ; protects
Clothes, &c., from Moths. Only injurious to
Insect Life. See that the name of Thomas
Keating, 79, St. Paul’s Churchyard, is on every
Packet.
RHEUMATISM, CHILBLAINS, &c.
COLES’S ALGA MARINA is the
only really Concentrated Essence of the
Sea-Weed. It is daily increasing in celebrity as a
remedy for all kinds of Rheumatism, whether
Acute or Chronic, immediately relieving the pain,
and speedily curing the disease. It is the best
remedy for Spinal Affections, Contractions, Weak-
ness of the Limbs, Scrofulous Swellings, and all
those affections for which the Soa-side is recom-
mended, and is also an admirable application for
Chilblains.
The Public should he careful to obtain the
Original Preparation, by asking for “ Coles's Alga
Marina,” each bottle of which is enveloped in a
Pamphlet, containing numerous Cases and Testi-
monials, without which none is genuine. Sold in
Bottles, 2s. 9d, 4s. 6d., and lls. each, by T,
Keating, 79, St. Paul’s Churchyard, London; and
by all Chemists.
Observe in the Genuine Alga Marina the name
“James Coles ” is engraven on the label.
DR. ROBERTS’S
CELEBRATED OINTMENT
CALLED THE
POOR MAN’S FRIEND,
Is confidently recommended to the public
as an unfailing remedy for wounds of every
description, a certain cure for ulcerated sore
iegs (if of twenty years’ standing), outs, burns,
scalds, bruises, chi.blains, scorbutic eruptions,
and pimples on the face, sore and inflamed
eyes, sore heads, cancerous humours, &c., and
is a specific tor those afflicting eruptions that
sometimes follow vaccination. Sold in pots,
at Is. IJd., 2s. 9d., 11s. and 225. each. Also,
his PILULJE ANXISGItOPHULvE, confirmed
by more than sixty years’ experience to be one
of the best alterative medicines ever com-
pounded for purifying the blood and assisting
nature in all her operations; hence they are
useful in sgrofula, scorbutic complaints, glan-
dular swellings, particularly those of the neck,
&c. They are efficacious also in rheumatism,
and form a mild and superior family aperient
that may be taken at all times, without con-
finement or change of diet. Sold in boxes at
Is. 2s. 9d., 4s. 6d., lls., and 225. each.
OBSERVE.—No Medicine sold under the
above names can possibly be genuine unless
“Beach and Barnicott, late Dr. Roberts, Brid-
port,” is engraved and printed on the stamp
affixed to each package.
Sold wholesale by the Proprietors, BEACH
AND BARNICOTT, at their Dispensary,
Bridport, and by the London houses; and re-
tail by all respectable Medicine Vendors in the
United Kingdom, the Colonies, &c.
KAYE’S WQRSDELL’S PILLS.
KAYE’S WORSDELL’S PILLS.
KAYE’S WORSOELL’S PILLS*
KAYE’S WORSDELL’S PILLS.
KAYE'S WORSDELL’S PILLS have
become so celebrated, because they go at
once to the root of disease, purify the vital
fluid, and enable all the organs of the human
system to perform their functions in a healthy
and vigorous manner. They are carefully
compounded on sound principles, and, being
entirely free from mercurial, antimonial, and
other mineral or dangerous substances, maybe
safely taken by persons of the most delicate
constitution. They are, indeed,
HEALTHFUL AND HARMLESS,
and are applicable to every class of diseases in
the human frame.
Country Householders, Emigrants, Colonists,
and others, who desire speedy restoration and
constant health, should never be without
KAYE’S WORSDELL’S PILLS.
There is no ill that flesh is heir to which
these Pills will not prevent or cure, if taken
with perseverance.
Prepared solely by John Kaye, Esq., of
Prospect Hall, Woodford, Essex. Sold by all
Chemists and other dealers in Patent Medi-
cines, at Is. IJ., 2s 9d., and 4s. 6d. Whole-
sale Depot, 22, Bread-street, London.




Australians t New Zealand* (dvtetie* Office*, N Clements Zoned evibard' Sl' t 7,ondojv. (Fuilished Weekfa.J
Adams & (lee, MtholAiddle SflE. C.


HANDBOOK
TO THE COLONY
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
F. ALGAR.
,:jl. 11 ■-= . ■■■■*■'—= ■"■="»
LONDON :
* Australian and New Zealand Gazette ” Office,
11, CLEMENT’S LANE, LOMBARD STREET, E.C.


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The colony of South Australia was established under the auspices of a rather
anomalous body, entitled the “ South Australian Colonisation Commission,”
which in 1834 received from the Imperial Government the immense tract
of land comprised within its limits, upon the understanding that its settlement
was to be proceeded with under the principles of the Wakefield theory
of colonisation. With this view several parties were despatched, and on the
28th of December, 1836, the colony was proclaimed by Captain Hindmarsh,
li.N., the first governor.
The arrangements originally made by the commissioners appear to have
been very defective, and their knowledge of the country over which they
held sway extremely scanty ; but after grievous disappointments, much
quarrelling, and great alternations of good and bad fortune, chiefly caused by
the depressions which ensued from too sanguine expectations, and the
speculations which they have always brought about, the energy and patient
industry of the original settlers and their immediate successors triumphed
over all their difficulties, and laid the permanent foundation of one of the
most promising provinces of the British Crown. The principles of the
Wakefield system were soon broken through, for the colonist quickly re-
cognised the undoubted fact that theories, be they never so elaborate, were of
little avail, without energy, patience, and hard work. It is therefore needless
to enter into the merits of Mr. Wakefield’s system, which at one time excited
a vast amount of interest.
The boundaries of South Australia are as follow:—On the north, the
26th degree of south latitude; on the east, the colony of Victoria; on the west,
the 132nd degree of east longitude; on the south, the Southern Ocean. The
coast line of the southern boundary, owing to the irregularity of the shore,
exceeds 1,600 miles in extent. In its course it traverses Spencer’s Gulf
and St. Vincent’s Gulf, rounding Yorke’s Peninsula and Cape Jervis, running
eastward to the Murray mouth, and then south-east till it meets the boundary
in latitude 38 degrees. The western boundary is only about one-fourth of the
extent of the southern line, the northern about one-third, and the eastern one-
half. The province contains about 300,000 square miles, or nearly 200,000,000
acres. The progress of discovery having led to the conviction that a tract of
good pastoral country exists in the western portion of the province, and
extends outside its western boundary into a sort of no-man’s land, lying
between South and Western Australia, steps have been taken by the Govern-
ment to annex the tract to South Australia. The district in question lies
between the 129th and 132nd parallels of east longitude, and naturally belongs
to this colony. From its geographical position, whatever use could be made
of it by anyone, all the commercial advantage of its occupation would neces-
sarily fall to South Australia.
Captain Hindmarsh was recalled in 1838, as the infant community was
still struggling into existence. Under his successor emigrants began to
arrive in considerable numbers, when an extraordinary speculative mania broke
out, under the influence of which paper townships became plentiful, and the
colonists deluded themselves with the idea that their land orders and scrip con-
stituted a fabulous amount of real wealth. The bubble soon burst, and Captain
Gawler was quickly recalled, leaving a deficiency of £300,000, in ther evenue
to his successor, Capt. now Sir George Grey, the present governor of New


Zealand, who by his vigorous exertions re-established the position of ths
colony, which the discovery of the Burra Burra Copper Mine materially aided;
and the colony advanced slowly, but steadily, until the discoveiy of the gold-
diggings in the neighbouring colonies of New South Wales and Victoria.
The attractions of the gold fields at first threatened South Australia with
total ruin. Half of the male adults rushed to them, leaving the copper mines,
the sheep stations, and the farms all but deserted : every industrial occupa-
tion was paralysed. But the Legislature, under the auspices of Sir Henry
Young, soon recovered its energies ; and the successful attempt of Mr. lolmer,
one of the most enterprising of South Australia’s sons—in opening a prac-
ticable route between Adelaide and Mount Alexander, brought a large portion
of the gold from Victoria, and some from New South Wales, into the coffers ot
the South Australian merchants, and, no doubt, was the cause of the great
increase in its exports. A reaction quickly followed on the first rush to tho
wold diggings, in favour of copper. Many who had been unsuccessful, or who
preferred their more comfortable homes in the colony, returned to woik at, the
copper mines, which had been stopped for more than a year. Land like a iso
rose in value; and, as high prices were to be obtained, agriculture—the staple
industry of the colony—found remunerative markets for its produce m the
ott The C go°vemorship of Sir Bichard Macdonnell, which commenced in 18.35,
and lasted until early in 1862, constitutes a new epoch in the history of South
Australia, which, during the last six years, has been one of steady industrial
and political progress. The introduction of the now Constitution has been
the most remarkable event, and the change thus produced is to be seen ovtr
the whole face of the country. Boads have been improved, and budges
formed, so as quite to change the character ot inland travelling foi hundreds
of miles from Adelaide ; surveys for railways have been carried on to a large
extent; the railway of 8J miles to the port, in one direction, and the Noithein
Line to Kapunda (52 miles) in another direction, have been opened; telegraph
lines throughout the country have been established, as well as with (Sydney
and Melbourne; the city of Adelaide has been supplied with water; a large
extent of country has been surveyed, for purchase in sections ; the coast has
been lighted where necessary; numerous buildings for public purposes have
been constructed by the Executive, including a new Hospital, Pailiament
House, Government House, Government Offices, Mounted 1 olice Barjacks, and
the Institute, with its free library. The Murray has been navigated as far as
Albury, and the first steamer taken a considerable distance up the Darling
by Captain Cadell. The new mining district of Wallaroo, on Yorke’s Peninsula,
has been opened. The Far North has been explored by Mr. Stuart, Me.
Goyder, Major Freeling, Mr. Babbage, Sir Bichard Macdonnell, Major Win -
burton, Mr. McKinlay, and others. During this period the exploration of tho
interior received a remarkable impetus ; and the first and last-named gentlemen
have succeeded in pushing their discoveries to the northern coast ol the
continent.
DESCBIPTION OF THE COUNTBY.
Adelaide, the capital of the colony, consists of two portions—North and
South South Adelaide is laid out in a series of streets at right angles; tho
principal north and south streets (from 99 io 132 feet wide) being nearly one
mile in length, and the east and wi st streets (from 66 to 132 feet wide) from
a mile and a quarter to a mile and three quarters. South Adelaide contains
all the Government offices, and all the principal wholesale and retail marts
and stores of the city. Between North and South Adelaide the river I'orrens
winds its course, and both the divisions of the city arc surrounded by public
reserves, called “park lands,” which the ten aces face. The river is spanned


by a massive iron bridge. Around the city are numerous suburbs; the most
populous and important is that in the eastern vicinity, consisting of a cluster
of townships, including Kensington, Norwood, Magill, Stepney, &c. In the
extreme south-eastern corner of the plains—or, rather, at the foot of the hills,
—is Glen Osmond, one of the most lovely spots in the colony, where the first
mine (lead) was discovered and worked. Southward there are the districts of
Mitcham, Unley, Edward’s Town, &c , and the marine township of Glenelg,
New Glenelg, and St. Leonard’s—three miles to the south of which is Brighton.
To the immediate west of Adelaide are the populous suburbs of Thebarton,
Hindmarsh, and Bowden; north-east and north are Walkerville, Payneham,
Islington, and Enfield.
The Mount Lofty range of hills begins to rise about four miles to the east of
the City, and for many miles its slopes are dotted with the villas of the
wealthier citizens, where they have the advantage of cool breezes and beautiful
views, both of sea and land. Among the Mount Lofty Hills, the Onkaparinga,
the Sturt, the Torrens, the Para, and numerous small tributary streams take
their rise. Here are grown, in the highest perfection, those English fruits and
vegetables which fail to thrive on the hotter and more arid soil of the plains.
From one of the gorges Adelaide derives its supply of excellent waters. Be-
tween the hills and the sea are the great Adelaide Plains, cultivated for
miles in every direction, and upon which great quantities of wheat and other
crops are annually raised. Hot winds and want of rain are occasionally felt,
but wheat, oats, barley, and other crops are most successfully cultivated, and
plums, peaches, nectarines, vines, olives, oranges, and other fruits common to
climates in which these flourish, thrive here luxuriantly. Pine-apples and
strictly tropical fruits require protection; whilst strawberries, cherries, goose-
berries, raspberries, and the like, only come to perfection in exceptional
seasons, and are supplied from the hills ; where, in a cooler climate, and amid
more abundant moisture, they reach the highest excellence, so that scarcely
any country can excel South Australia in the quality and variety of its culti-
vated fruits. To the east of the Adelaide Plains there is a tract of hilly
country, extending for about twenty miles to the “ scrubby ” country, on the
banks of the Murray, along a large part of its course. A considerable portion
of this tract is extremely fertile, and yields large quantities of wheat and other
agricultural and horticultural produce. Many inland towns have arisen in
the hill district, the principal ones being Mount Barker, Strathalbyn, Nairne,
Hahndorf, and others; the last-named is chiefly occupied by Germans, con-
siderable numbers of whom have established thriving communities of their own
in several parts of the country.
The eastern, north-eastern, and south-eastern districts include a large extent
of highly productive land. Mount Barker, Gumeracha, Strathalbyn, and Mac-
clesfield are the centres of prosperous agricultural communities. In a southern
direction, Morphett Vale, Willunga, Noarlunga, and Yankalilla are also
eminently productive. The chief ports, besides Port Adelaide, are Port Lincoln,
Glenelg, Port Augusta, Port Wakefield, Port Elliot, and Guichen Bay, &c.
Between Port Elliot and the Goolway, an excellent tramway, worked by horses,
Is in operation for a distance of seven miles, and it is shortly to be extended to
the vastly superior anchorage of Victor Harlborn.
On tracing the course of the Murray upwards from the sca-mouth to the
Great North West Bend, the settled districts will be easily found by drawing
a line north-west from the Bend to the head of Spencer’s Gulf. Within the
limits bounded by the Gulf, the Murray, and the line drawn, the most important
mercantile and agricultural districts will be found, lo the north and north-
west of the above line the country is either unexplored or occupied by squatters.
To the east and south of the Murray, extending to the Victorian coast-line, is a
large extent of valuable country, occupied by sheep-farmers and stockholders.
The principal port of the colony is Port Adelaide. The port and metropolis
are seven miles apart, but connected by the City and Port Railway. Port


Adelaide is a creek pencctly sheltered from the sea, but the depth of the
harbour at this part being insufficient for large vessels, measures are in progress
for deepening it. A steam dredge is also at work upon the bar, and when this
work is completed vessels of any tonnage will be able to enter in safety, and to
load and unload in perfectly still water, remaining afloat at all times of tide.
Wharves, warehouses, a patent slip, and every convenience for shippers exist
at the port, which is being continually improved under direction of a Trust
appointed by the Legislature, and invested with ample funds for the purpose.
Lines of rail are laid down from the principal wharves to the terminus of the
City and Port Railway.
The river Murray is the great natural artery of southern and siuth-eastern
Australia, draining portions of the three colonies of New South Wales, Victoria,
and South Australia. Its outlet is within the limits of the latter province, and
its stream, from the mouth to its point of intersection with the boundary,
measures 493 miles. Before entering the South Australian territory the
Murray flows through the colonies of Victoria and New South Wales for more
than 1,500 miles. The sea-mouth of the Murray is dangerous, owing to the
shifting sands and the heavy ocean surf; but of late many vessels have safely
entered. The other chief rivers are the Torrens, on which the metropolis stands,
and the Gawler, but both become very shallow in the summer.
The diversity of climate presented by the hills and plains, and northern and
southern districts, is remarkable in several ways. Seasons favourable for the
hills are less so for the plains, and vice versa. On the lower slopes of the Gawler
Ranges and on the Adelaide Plains the hay harvest commences in October,
and the wheat harvest in November, and in the neighbourhood of the Bremer
the seasons are much the same. About Morphett Vale the harvest commences
about a fortnight later, and about Mount Barker and on the Light, and other
places, at least a month later. In the Clare neighbourhood the harvest season
is much the same as near Adelaide.
The country occupied for pastoral purposes now extends from the south-
eastern angle of the colony almost to its northern frontier, and to the westward
for some distance inland from Fowler’s Bay and Streaky Bay, near the head
of the great Australian Bight. In the vast area lying between these distant
points, however, there is still much country unsettled and unknown, A map
of the runs of the colony shows them adjoining one another for some hundreds
of miles, then gradually separated by belts of unoccupied country, and then, on
the outskirts of settlement, outlined here and there on the map like islands in
an ocean. For many years the prevailing idea was that all the country lying
north-east from Spencer’s Gulf was worthless. This idea was fostered by the
account given by the intrepid explorers Mr, Eyre and Captain Sturt, who,
if there was any barren tract, were certain to fall in with it; but the recent
explorations of Mr, Stuart and others show that large and well-watered tracts
of country exist, both here and in the extreme north, eminently suitable for
pastoral occupation.
Culinary vegetables thrive admirably,—such as potatoes, cabbages, carrots,
parsnips, turnips, peas, beans, cauliflowers, lettuces, cucumbers, and pumpkins.
An abundance and variety of fruits are cultivated, and many attain a greater
perfection than in Europe. Much attention is being bestowed on the vine, and
wine making. The colony is not subject to droughts, which so often disappoint
the hopes of the Australian agriculturist, although it is liable to the blighting
influence of the “ hot winds.” The climate is admirably suited to horses and
cattle, which appear to thrive better even than sheep in this colony, and of
both the former the agriculturists possess a very fair breed, which is being con-
tinually improved from importations of thorough-bred stock direct from
England, or from the other colonies. The sheep are of the colonial merino breed.
Domestic poultry of all descriptions thrive admirably with very little attention.
The supply of fish is poor, although many fine kinds are abundant; but there
are several kinds of smaller game to be obtained.


The indigenous animals, with few exceptions, consist of numerous species
of kangaroos, or the various oppossum type, both families being marsupial.
The dingo, or native dog, somewhat resembles the fox in its appearance and
predatory habits. The feline tribe is represented by several species of yellow-
spotted cats, which pretty nearly complete the list of Australian quadrupeds.
Other remarkable animals are the duck-billed water-mole, or Platypus
Anatinus, which has occasioned much discussion amongst naturalists, and the
Echidna , also with a bill-formed mouth, and spines like those of a hedgehog.
There are several species of snakes —some venomous, but the majority harm-
less. Lizards are more plentiful; and a large species of ignuana affords the
natives a delicate food. The birds are equally singular with the beasts, there
being white eagles and black swans. The Mcenura Superha is the most
singular and beautiful of the bird of paradise tribe. Ducks, pigeons, cockatoos,
parrots, and parroquets are innumerable, and of great variety and beauty.
The mountain eagle is a magnificent creature ; and the emu, after the ostrich,
the tallest bird that exists.
POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS, &c.
The new Constitution was proclaimed in October, 1856; but the first
Legislature elected under its provisions did not meet until March, 1857. The
administration of the affairs of the colony is vested in the Governor (Sir
Domenic Daly), appointed by the Crown and the Colonial Parliament, which
consists of a Legislative Council and a House of Assembly. The former
is composed of eighteen members, six of whom retire every four years, their
successors being then elected for twelve years. This body cannot be dissolved
by the Crown. It is elected by the whole colony voting as one district; and
the qualifications of an elector to the Council is as follows: he must be twenty-
one years of age; a natural born or naturalised subject of Her Majesty; and
have been on the electoral roll six months, besides having a freehold of 50 1.
value, or a leasehold of 20/. annual value, or occupying a dwelling-house of 2 51.
annual value. The qualification for a Member of Council is merely that he
must be thirty years of age; a natural born or naturalised subject, and a
resident in the province for three years. The president is elected by tho
Council.
The House of Assembly consists of thirty-six members, elected for three
years, by seventeen districts, but liable to dissolution by the Governor. The
qualification for an elector is having been on the electoral roll for six months,
and being twenty-one years of age ; and the qualification for a member is the
same.
All appointments to the public service are vested in the Governor and
Executive Council, or Ministry, with whom also rests the power of dismissal.
Judges, however, can only be removed by the Sovereign, on the address of both
Houses. All money-bills must originate in the House of Assembly; and any
appropriation of the revenue, or of any taxes, must be first recommended by
the Governor to the Assembly. J udgi s, and ministers of religion, are ineligible
for election as members, as well as aliens who have not resided five years in
the colony. A Civil List of 13,500/. per annum is reserved to Her Majesty.
Elections of members of both Houses are conducted by ballot.
Tne administration of justice is very efficiently provided by the Supreme
Court. Local courts are established, with stipendiary or special magistrates,
in every district, for the trial of petty cases of larceny and assault, and civil
suits, up to the value of 30/., except such as affect titles. A system of local
government is carried out by means of district councils, and all the chief towns
possess municipal corporations. There is also an Insolvency Court and Admi-
ralty Court, under the Supreme Court.


1855.
1861.
Stone, brick, &c. .
9,101
17,192
Wood
4,709
8,045
Slab and mud
3,087
2,667
16,897
27,904
POPULATION, SOCIETY, &c.
According to the last census, taken on the Bth of April, 1861, the total was
126,830 souls, against 85,189 on the 31st of March, 1855. In 1840 the number
was 14,610 ; in 1845, 22,390 ; and in 1850, 63,700.
With regard to the distribution of the people, it is a matter for congratula-
tion, as indicative of future progress, that 85 per cent, of the population
are country residents. The rapid settlement of an energetic people upon the
agricultural lands of the province, employed directly or indirectly in its culti-
vation, and the opening up of new sources of mineral and pastoral wealth in
the outer districts, cannot fail to produce a fitting reward to their industry and
enterprise, and to advance the general prosperity.
In reference to the question of “sex,” of all the Australian colonies South
Australia shows the least disproportion in the number of the sexes—the males
numbering 65,048, and the females 61,782. This near approach to equalisa-
tion, maintained throughout the marriageable ages, has been brought about by
extensively-assisted female immigration. The proportion of males to females is
of all ages 51*29 per cent. At the early age (under five) it is slightly in favour
of the males, viz., *l9 per cent. In childhood —five to fourteen years—the
numbers more closely approximate, the difference being only *O6 per cent. In
the next period—fifteen to twenty, and even up to twenty-five years of age—
the females predominate; but of the whole adult population the males exceed
by 2*Bl per cent. —a considerable improvement upon the census of 1855, when
the excess of adult males was nearly 5 per cent.
In 1861 each inhabited dwelling had on the average s*l inmates, against
5*04 in 1855, showing that the addition to the population has been met by
a corresponding increase in house accommodation, and that of a superior class,
as exhibited in the following return of the dwellings of each description :
An increase of substantial buildings in the city was to be expected, but the
extent to which improvements of this nature have been effected in the country
districts is very great.
The number of persons incapable from sickness of following their usual
vocations was I*o3 per cent, of the whole population. The deaf, dumb, and
blind formed 10 per cent, of this number, and the crippled and maimed *O7 per
cent. In reference to the aborigines, an attempt has been made to ascertain
their numbers and condition, and the following table shows the result:—
Children. Total.
Males. Females. Wales. Females.
457 . 393 . 2,642 . 2,404
There are a considerable number of German settlers, who have established
prosperous communities in several districts, and from their energy and industry
constitute a most valuable class of the population. ,
"■ As in the other colonies, no dominant church is recognised by the State :
but the religious and educational interests of the community are very well
provided by the different bodies themselves, especially the Church of England,
which is regulated by the Bishop of Adelaide and a Synod, The religious
statistics of the colony, so far as division into sects is concerned, are given
below:
Church of England, 43,587; Roman Catholics, 15,594 ; Wesleyan Methodists, 14,322;
German Lutherans, 11,235 ; Independents, 6,268; Church of Scotland, 4,821; Bible
Christians, 4,216; Free Church of Scotland, 4,137; Primitive Methodists, 8,672;


Baptists, 3,424; Christians, 1,658; United Presbyterians, 1,572; other Denomina-
tions, 573; Unitarians, 493; Hebrews, 360; Moravians, 217; New Church, 192;
Society of Friends, 124 ; Mohammedans and Pagans, 112; not specified, 1,390.
►'"Taking the total of 126,830, we find that 48,013 were persons born in tE?
colony, 687 in Victoria, 507 in New South Wales, 1,415 in other British posses-
sions, 44,843 in England and Wales, 7-649 in Scotland, 12,694 in Ireland, 123
in France, 8,863 in Germany, 40 in China, and 163 in other foreign countries.
Besides these there are 281 persons who were born at sea, and 39 whose places
of birth are unspecified.
The system of education was established by Government in 1852; it com-
prises a Central Board of Education, consisting of seven members, with a
Secretary and Inspector of Schools. District councils are authorised to act
as District Boards of Education, in their respective localities, and they corre-
spond with the Central Board. School-houses are erected partly at the expense
of the Government, wherever the residents locally interested subscribe one-
half of the cost.
Teachers being approved by the Board, after examination are licensed to
teach in specified localities, on a memorial in their favour being received from
persons desirous of securing their services. They are then entitled to a stipend
varying from £4O to £BO per annum, according to the estimated efficiency of
their schools and the numbers of scholars attending them. The stipend is
additional to the school-fees, which, for teaching the ordinary branches of an
English education—namely, reading, writing, arithmetic, grammar, geography,
and history—are limited, as a maximum, to one shilling per week (or in that
proportion per month or quarter), but leaving the teachers at liberty to make
an extra charge for any other subject. Orphans and other children, certified
to be destitute of the means of education, hare their school-fees paid by the
Government at the rate of sixpence per week. The Scriptures are read daily
in the schools, verbal explanations being allowed ; but no religious instruction
of a denominational character is permitted during school-hours, licensed
teachers are supplied at cost price with books and other requisites, from the
d pot kept by the Central Board.
The number of schools in connection with the Board at the close of 1861,
was 219; the number of scholars, males, 5,811; females, 4,900; total, 10,711
—showing an increase on the preceding year of 868, and an average for each
school of nearly fifty. The estimated cost of public education, including aid
to Mechanics’ Institutes, and other educational objects, for the year ending
June 30th, 1862, was £16,816.
The number of scholars at all the schools of the province, according to the
census taken in April, 1861, was 15,344 ; or, one for every eight and a half of
the population. This does not include those under private instruction in
families, the number of which, owing to the scattered character of the country
population precluding the children from reaching school, is very considerable.
The colonists are well supplied with all the means of social and domestic
enjoyment, and Adelaide is far better off in this respect than most English
cities of far greater wealth and population ; amongst which must be mentioned
the South Australian Institute. The Adelaide Philosophical Society and the
South Australian Society of Arts are now incorporated with the Institute.
The Adelaide Observatory was established in 1860, and between the Public
Hospital and the Lunatic Asylum is situated the Botanical Garden. An
Acclimatisation Society has just been formed. The chief fete days are, —Her
Majesty’s birthday, when the Governor generally gives a ball to the elite
of the colonists, and the anniversary, which is always celebrated with much
rejoicing. The local amusements, concerts, balls, pic-nics, archery meetings,
and volunteer reviews are sedulously cultivated amidst the sterner duties of
colonial life. In their political, as well as in their social relations, and in the
fulfilment of all the duties which befit a civilised as well as an enterprising


and industrious community, the South Australians may be cited as a model
amongst the colonists—noble offshoots of the great Anglo-Saxon race.
On the 28th of December, 1836, a small but adventurous band gathered
round Governor Hindmarsh when he first proclaimed the colony; and no
one can review the progress made, during the six-and-twenty years which have
since elapsed, without feelings of astonishment and admiration.
It was a gigantic task for that brave handful to attempt, and it must appear
sometimes as almost superhuman to contemplate, with so little strength and
such slender appliances, the founding of a metropolis amidst the forest of the
Adelaide plains, and the opening of roads and highways through the surround-
ing wastes and solitudes to various districts of fertility lying many a mile
beyond. The emigrant of the present day, with substantial comforts and
countless means of enjoyment, may profitably revert to the early days of tents
and mud huts, when the fathers and founders of what is now a nation
celebrated their first Christmas holidays under the shades of forests long since
cleared away to make room for civilised life. It must indeed be a strange
contrast in the experience of those old colonists, who now see around them
most of the works and monuments illustrative of European wealth and refine-
ment, where five-and-twenty years ago the black fellow flourished undisturbed
amidst the emus and kangaroos of his ancestral hunting grounds. The second
quarter of South Australia’s first century has now commenced, and let us hope
that the good foundation already laid may be wisely built upon, so that those
of us who celebrate the jubilee of the Hindmarsh proclamation may be able to
say that the first five-and-twenty years occupy an honourable place in the
annals of the country, but the second five-and-twenty a place still more
honourable.
EE VENUE, COMMEECE, &c.
The total revenue for the year 1861 was £558,586 125., against £483,827
2s. 3d. for the previous year; thus making the increase in favour of the year
£119,759 9s. 9d. The items of the year’s revenue are as follow :
Sales of Crown lands, £200,449 Is. 4d.; Customs, £126,464 10s. 2d.; Marine Board,
£1,445 2s. lid.; rents, £48,539 19s. lid. ; assessments, £20,725 3s. lOd.; licenses,
£14,511 75.; postages, £16,496 2s. 4d.; fines, fees, and forfeitures, £14,972 14s. 7d.;
sales of Government property, £1,522 Os. 3d.; reimbursements in aid, £8,450 165.;
miscellaneous receipts, £3,829 18s. 6d.; interest, exchange, &c., £1,195 13s. 5d.;
special receipts, immigration, £613 7s. 4d.; railways, £84,444 7s. 7d.; Port Elliot and
Goolwa 't ramway, £1,956 15s. 7d.; telegraphs, £7,289 Bs. Bd.; Adelaide water-
rates, £5,700 2s. 7d.
The expenditure for the year 1861 was £482,951 6s. 9d., against £492,656
os. 2d. in the previous year. The items of this expenditure are as follow :
Civil list, schedule A, parts 1 and 2, Act No. 2of 1855-6, £14,800; establish-
ments, viz.: —Salaries, fixed, £67,377 Is. 4d.; do. provisional and temporary, £80,444
Is.; allowances, £3,992 19s. 6d.; contingencies, £95,601 13s. lOd.; pensions, retired
allowances, &c., including schedule B, Act No. 2 of 1855-6, £11,329 2s. Id.; public
works, buildings, and improvements, £104,510 19s. 6d.; miscellaneous services,
£46,805 16s. ; interest on and redemption of loans for public works, £50,854 18s.;
interest, exchange, &c., £1,163 17s. 6d.; immigration, £6,070 17s.
The public debt of the colony on the 31 st December, 1861, was £850,500, on
which £12,000 was redeemable on the following day.
The material progress of South Australia during the past ten years will
be best judged of by an examination into the following returns. In that
period the various productions of the colony shipped to other countries, after
supplying its own requirements, have amounted in value to over twelve and a
quarter millions sterling. Of this sum the agricultural interest has contributed


over four and a half millions, the pastoral nearly four millions, and the mining
interest three and a third millions, the balance being made up of miscellaneous
products, raw or manufactured. The following figures give the total exports
of colonial produce for the years mentioned :—ln 1852, £736,809 ; 1856,
£1,398,367; 1861, £1,838,639; total in five years, 1862-56, £4,248,236;
ditto, 1857-61, £8,016,355 ; average of five years, 1852-56, £849,647; ditto,
1857-61, £1,603,271. The articles exported during the years referred to are
described as follow :
Years. Breadstuff's. Wool. Minerals. Miscellaneous.
1852 . . £212,566 . . £115,877 . . £374,778 . . £33,678
1856 . . 556,871 . . 412,163 . . 408,042 . . 21,791
1861 . . 712,789 . . 623,007 . . 452,172 . . 50,671
Mr. Boothby, the Chief Commissioner of the census of 1861, states that the
results of his labours show that:—
During the last five years the exports of each of the great staples amounted
to double the shipments of the previous quinquennial period ending with the year
1856. The average yearly shipments of the first years, 1852-56, were valued
at £849,647, and of the second, 1857-61, at £1,603,271 ; the actual exportation
in the last year amounting to £1,838,639 declared value.
The total value of cereal produce shipped in 1861 was £712,789, against £199,102
in 1860. The quantity of breadstuff's represented in this return is, flour 33,011 tons,
against 21,166 tons in the previous years; and wheat 674,160 bushels, against
238,984 bushels—the total in flour being 47,992 tons in 1861, against 26,476 tons in
1860. With regard to the consumers of these cereal exports, it is shown by the
returns that whilst the largest customers have hitherto been the neighbouring
colonies of New South Wales and Victoria, other countries are now commencing
to receive supplies from South Australia, Amongst these are named New Zealand,
Mauritius, the Cape, and Queensland, which colonies together have taken 1,921 tons
of flour and 68,280 bushels of wheat. To Great Britain 344 tons of flour were
shipped; to New South Wales, 9,605 tons of flour and 245,704 bushels of wheat; to
Victoria, 20,676 tons of flour and 355,516 bushels of wheat; and 415 tons, or nearly
four times the previous year’s shipments, were sent to Western Australia.
The quantity of wool exported in 1861 was 13,164,391 lbs., against 11,731,371 lbs,
in 1860, the value being £623,007 for 1861, against £576,368 for 1860. Thus
the increase for the last year was 1,433,020 lbs. in weight and £49,639 in value. But
it must be borne in mind that a portion of the wool exported from South Australia is
not the produce of the colony, but is brought down the Murray from New South
Wales and Victoria. Deducting the quantity thus transmitted, it appears that the
South Australian clip for 1861 amounted to 11,299,291 lbs.
The quantities shipped at the several ports of the colony during 1861 were as
follow :—Port Adelaide, 6,662,020 lbs. : Port Wakefield, 2,285,269 lbs.; Port Kobe,
876,660 lbs.; Port Augusta, 3,335,442 lbs.; Port Macdonnell, 5,000 lbs. The great
bulk of the shipments went direct to England.
In reference to mines, the returns show that during the last ten years there
have been exported minerals to the value of £3,351,800, of which nearly two-thirds
in quantity have been produced within the last five years. From 1852 to 1856 the
average yearly shipments were at the rate of £241,990. Since 1856 to the end
of 1861 the yearly export has averaged £428,369 in value, and last year it reached to
£452,172. It appears that the greater part of the ore raised is smelted in the colony,
and that the export of manufactured copper has much more than doubled since 1856.
The following extract shows the places to which our mining exports of last year were
shipped :—“ Of the 61,047 cwts. of pure copper exported in 1861, 18,171 cwts. were
shipped direct to Great Britain; 37,096 cwts. to Victoria, probably for the same
destination ; 4,780 cwts. to India; and 1,000 cwts. to other countries. In addition,
thereto, 3,008 tons of copper ore were shipped for England direct; and 4,709 tons by
way of Melbourne. The exports of lead and lead ore have fallen off, whilst the ship-
ment of regulus has nearly doubled.”
In miscellaneous articles the exports of 1861 were not equal to those of 1860.
There was a decrease in horses, hides, bark, fruit, onions, plants and seeds, and wine ;
of the atter 22,726 gallons were exported, against 3,435 in 1860. Amongst the


Imported. Re-exported,
Consumed.
£1,976,018 . . . £248,498
£1,727,520
The official returns distinguish the imports into those received from Great
Britain, British possessions, and foreign states respectively.
This arrangement
enables us to present the following table :—
Great Britain. British Possessions.
Foreign States.
£1,104,252 . . . £753,285
£118,481
The following comparative statement shows a considerable increase in the
import trade during the periods specified; or the total value of goods imported,
re-exported, and consumed in the colony during the years 1860 and 1861
was: —
Consumed.
Imported. Re-exported.
1853 . . . £1,869,921 £150,445
£1,719,476
1855 . . . 1,370,957 31(5,400
1,054,557
1857 . . N . 1,582,629 181,133
1860 . . . 1,639,591 207,300
1,401,496
1,432,210
1,727,520
1861 . . . 1,976,013 248,498
miscellaneous articles of export in which an increase for the year is shown, we find the
following ;—Leather, tallow, butter, eggs, and hay.
The total vafue of the imports during the year 1861, together with the value
of the goods re-exported and of those consumed in the colony, are given in the
following table :
The value of the exports of colonial produce iu the above years was :
1853. 1856. 1857- 1860. 1861.
£731,693 £666,293 £1,686,212 £1,576,326 £1,838,639
AGRICULTURE AND SHEEP FARMING.
South Australia has three great staples—pastoral produce, agricultural
produce, and mineral produce. Daring the past ten years—that is to say,
from the commencement of the gold epoch—that colony, though having no
gold of its own, has exported produce to the value of twelve and a quarter
millions sterling, after retaining enough for its own use. In contributing to
this amount agriculture has taken the lead, having furnished over four and
a half millions of it; pastoral produce furnished nearly four millions ; and the
mines yielded about three and a half millions. The export trade does not yield
a fair comparison of the relative value of these three branches of industry,
because none of the mineral produce is consumed in the colony, while the
farmers and squatters, besides exporting, have to feed the population with
bread and meat.
All Crown lands in the colony of South Australia, except such reserves as
may be made by the Government for public purposes, are open to purchase at
the upset price of £1 per acre for country sections. All Crown lands are
submitted, in the first instance, by public auction, but lots that pass the
hammer without a bidding may afterwards be selected privately at the upset
price.
From Mr. Boothby’s report, we find that during 1861 the acreage alienated
was 147,354, against 129,262 acres in 1860, making the total extent of land
sold to be 2,380,713 acres. Of the above, 98,816 acres were country sections,
which reached at public auction an average price of £1 4s. 7d. per acre, the
average size of the lots being 87 acres. In the previous year the average price
was £1 3s. per acre, and the average size of the lots of country land 95 acres.
Country sections which had previously passed the hammer, were taken up to
the extent of 43,081 acres by private contract, at an average advance on the
upset price of J 2-10 d. per acre. There were also in 186 J, 284 acres of town


land, comprising 570 lots, disposed of at auction at the fate of £45 16s. per
acre —an advance of £4 7s. lid, on the average of the previous year.
More than two-thirds of the total area of land now alienated the Crown
has passed into private hands since 1851. The increase of occupation during
the same period is as f0110w5:—36,831 square miles have been leased for pastoral
purposes on a fourteen years’ tenure ; of this area, 6,641 square miles have been
resumed by the Crown, leaving the area actually leased at the end of 1861, to
be 30,190 square miles. In addition to the foregoing, several thousand square
miles are held in possession by discoverers of new pastoral country and others
claiming leases under the regulations, for which they were being issued. The
number of annual leases for pastoral land within hundreds at the end of 1861,
was 75, of an area of 2,939 square miles; against 53 leases, for 1.5J0 square
miles, issued in 1860. The total rent payable under the above-mentioned leases
now amounts to £21,458; and by adding the assessment on stock —nearly
£21,000 —the total income from this source amounts to about £43,000. Since
1853, £47,692 14s. has been paid to lessees as compensation for improvements
effected on their runs when resumed for sale, the above sum having been added
to the upset price. In most cases the leaseholders have become the purchasers
of the land and improvements. “The stockholders in 1855 numbered 237,
against 392 in 1861—an increase of 65 per cent., and their station employes
have increased from 1,338 to 3,099, or nearly 132 per cent. The proportion to
the whole population in 1855. of persons engaged in squatting, was I'So per
cent., against 2*75 per cent, in 1861. In addition to the above, nine females
returned themselves as stockholders, and 394 females as emplo} r ed on stations
as hut-keepers, station-servants, &c.”
With reference to the yield of the various crops, the general state of agricul-
ture, vine-growing, and sheep-farming, Mr. Boothby’s report furnishes us with
the following interesting information :
The extent of enclosed land in March, 1862, is returned as 1,874,827 acres, against
1,579,992 acres in the previous season, or an increase of 19 per cent. Land fenced in,
but not cultivated, amounted to 1,388,160 acres, and exceeded the enclosed pasturage
of the previous year by 236,984 acres. The extensive enclosure of sheep-runs is
worthy of remark. More than 900 square miles of pasturage is now enclosed in the
south-eastern district alone. The number of acres of land under cultivation in the
season 1861-2 was 486,667, against 428,816 acres in the previous season —an augmen-
tation of 57,851 acres.
Of the total land cultivated. 310,636 acres, or 64 per cent., was under wheat,
against 273,672 acres, or 65 per cent., in the previous season. The yield amounted
to only 3,410,756 bushels, against 3,576,593 bushels in the previous season. A defici-
ency, therefore, exists of two bushels per acre, had the yield been equal to the year
previous, although 39,964 acres additional were sown with wheat.
From careful inquiries, I am led to believe that the main cause of the low average
of its aggregate yield is that much land is sown with wheat which is not of the
description best adapted for it, owing to the small freeholders and farmers being com-
pelled, whatever the situation or the nature of the soil, to cultivate the crop raised
with the least labour, and capable of being gathered by machine. Fallowing the land
is reported to be very much in favour as an efficient remedy, and, as the returns show,
has greatly increased in practice, 85,112 acres being in fallow, against 67,696 acres in
1861. The folding of sheep on farms has also become more general, and its advantages
are felt in the increased productiveness of the land fertilised by this process and in the
addition to the ordinary profits of the homestead. More than two-thirds of the crop
was reaped by machine.
Proceeding from the culture of wheat, which is almost the sole reliance of our
farmers, being two-thirds of the whole cultivation, the next crop to be noticed is that
of hay, forming 13 per cent, of the total tillage. 62,874 acres, principally wheaten or
oaten hay, were grown, against 55,818 acres in the previous season, the produce
amounting to 78,886 tons and 71,241 tons in the respective years. The average yield
was, in both seasons, 25 cwt. to the acre. About one-tenth more land was planted
with potatoes than in the previous year, 2,612 acres producing 7,726 tons in 1861-2,
against 2,348 acres, yielding 7,112 tons, the average produce being 59 cwt., or 14 cwt.


less than in the year before. The average under barley was 10,637, against 11,336
acres in 1861, and the crop appears to have suffered equally with other cereals, the
produce being only 168,137 bushels, against 189,163 in the previous year. If barley
suitable for the. maltster can be grown here, it appears strange that £16,541 should
have been sent out of the colony last year for 6,625 quarters of malt, an article that
can be produced with ordinary care. The crop of oats yielded 33,160 bushels off 1,638
acres, against 52,989 bushels off 2,273 acres in the previous season, which was, how-
ever, much more favourable for the safe gathering of this cereal. For green forage
the following descriptions were sown during the past season—l,oss acres cereals,
chiefly barley, 10 acres of maize, 43 acres of sorghum, 1,279 acres of lucerne, and 838
acres laid down under permanent artificial grasses, chiefly rye, and 434 acres of “ other
crops.”
Orchards and gardens are returned as of an area of 5,563 acres, a decrease of 494
acres on the last returns, which, from the cause previously stated, were probably more
exact. The acreage in gardens under vine culture is, as far as practicable, distinguished
from other garden land, and entered under the head of vines. The profitable disposal
of orchard and garden produce is one of such general interest that it may not be out
of place to remark that £25,000 was last year sent out of the colony for dried and
other fruits only, irrespective of any amount for jam, preserves, or bottled fruits, the
colonia, manufacture of winch articles has already attained both magnitude and
success.
Vine culture has attained considerable importance in South Australia. The acreage
under vines in March, 1862, is returned as 3,918, against 3,180 acres in the previous
year—an augmentation of 738 acres, or nearly one-fourth in a single twelvemonth.
The number of vines in bearing was 2,301,574, and 2,386,141 not in bearing—the
figures for the previous season being 1,874,751 and 1,948,510. Since 1856 the area of
the vineyards has increased more than fivefold. The wine returned as made is that
produced in the season 1860-1, amounting to 312,021 gallons, an increase of no less
than 129,934 gallons, or 70 per cent, on the quantity made in the previous year, viz.
182,087 gallons, and more than three times the quantity produced four seasons ago.
The weight of grapes sold or otherwise disposed of by the grower than in the manu-
facture of wine was 23,229 cwt., against 23,398 cwt. in 1860-1. As indicating the
rapid increase in the number of South Australian wine-makers, it may be stated that
129 wine-presses were returned as in use, against 75 in the previous year, and 61 in
1859. Twenty-seven licenses for stills for distilling spirit from the juice of the grape
were issued up to the close of the year.
The subject of irrigation has excited considerable attention among vignerons and
gardeners, and those who have erected machines for raising water for this purpose
bear testimony to the value of the outlay in the increased fertility of the soil. Several
sheep farmers are reported to have erected dams and reservoirs for the collection of
rain-water with complete success, whose example many settlers are reported as
following.
The live stock returns show an addition to the number of all kinds of stock except
horned cattle. There is an increase of 3,198 horses, making a total of 62,597. The
shipment of South Australian horses to India and other ports during the past three
years has attained some importance—about five hundred being the average number
exported in each year. The decrease in horned cattle is 12,831. The total number
in the colony is stated to be 265,434 head.
Sheep and lambs together number 3,038,356, against 2,824,811 in the previous
year, showing an increase of 213,545. The number of pigs has increased by 9,539,
there now being 69,286 in the colony ; notwithstanding, the imports of bacon, hams,
Ac., amounted during the past year to over £7,000. Poultry of all kinds number
327,709, against 315,728 returned in the previous year. It may not generally be
known that during the past four years the export of eggs alone has brought into
the colony no less a sum than £21,000.
MINERALS.
The mineral export of South Australia, which consists mainly of copper,
was valued last year at £452,172. The average of the preceding five years
was £428,369. The discovery of the new mines on Yorke’s Peninsula has
given a new stimulus to this branch of industry, and the export in future years


is likely to increase. Most of the ore is smelted in the colony, the smelting
works creating a steady demand for New South Wales coal.
The deposits of copper through the colony are most extensive, and the cele-
brated Burra-Burra mines afford an instance of success unrivalled in any part
of the world. Commencing with a very humble beginning, its shares, origi-
nally £5, have risen to a value almost fabulous, and, for a long series of years,
the dividends average £lB per share, being sometimes as high as £4O, and not
less than £lO.
On the 29th of September, 1845, the first blast was made in the rock of rich
copper ore which projected on the surface; and from that day the operations,
which were then commenced with ten miners, a smith, and a captain, have been
continued almost without intermission, to the extent of yielding direct employ-
ment on the works to upwards of 1,100 individuals, and, indirectly, to many
thousands of persons. The annual yield of ore, for many years past, has
averaged from 10,000 to 13,000 tons, of from 22 to 23 per cent, of copper—in
round numbers, about 2,500 tons of metallic copper, worth to the colony, at the
least, £225,000 per annum. The direct expenditure of the concern within the
province since its commencement amounts to £1,640,000, of which upwards of
£1,000,000 has been expended in wages alone. The gross profit stands at
£836,000, of which £677,600 has been divided among the shareholders,
£147,840 added to the capital stock, and £10,560 remains undivided.
The Kapunda mine stood next in importance to the Burra before the dis-
coveries lately made on Yorke’s Peninsula. The first ore from this mine was
raised on January 8, 1844, and in December, 1849, the first smelting-furnace
commenced work. With regard to the total produce of this mine, it is said :
“ The entire quantity of ore raised from the commencement to the close of the
year 1861 was 35,280 tons of 21 cwt., and of an average produce of just
20 per cent. The quantity raised during the past year was 3,306 tons, of an
average of 18*150 per cent. All the ores raised are now reduced to fine copper
before shipment.
The discoveries of copper on Yorke’a Peninsula, and energetic working of the
mines there, have caused a great increase in the production of minerals. It is
now only about two years since the first mineral leases were taken out at Wal-
laroo, but already a population of 5,000 souls is located on the mines or at the
considerable townships of Kadina and Port Wallaroo. Immense quantities of
ore are being steadily raised; large smelting works have been erected, and are
n operation at the latter place. A tramway is completed from some of the
mines to the port, and abundant evidence furnished that a great part of the
peninsula consists of a vast copper field, and that the present workings will
probably, ere long, bear but a small proportion to the new discoveries.
The Great Northern mines, in the far north, were commenced in June, 1860,
and have been prosecuted with considerable vigour and success. The opex-a-
tionshave hitherto been carried on without the aid of machinery, but it is now
found requisite to erect the necessary appliances, which tend greatly to increase
the produce of the mines. The character of the ores hitherto sent away has
been that of the usual carbonates and grey ores, giving a high produce,
say from 27 to 30, and some as high as 40 per cent.; but the present deep levels
are turning out sulphuret ores.
The other chief mines are those of Strathalbyn, the Bremer, and Kanmantoo,
from which silvei 1 , copper, and lead are being obtained in increasing quantities,
and on which extensive machinery is in course of erection.
To the northward of Port Augusta, numerous mineral discoveries have also
been made, and, at some of the claims, ore in considerable quantity is being
raised. The distance, however, of most of the mines from a shipping place,
and the arid nature of the country, cause great difficulties in the transport of
ore ; and it is to be hoped that the development of the mines will result in the
construction of a tramway from Port Augusta, so essential to the remunerative
working of most of them.


With regard to mineral leases and applications for leases, the returns show
an extraordinary number of applications—viz., 1,002 claims for altogether
78,911 acres. A large proportion of these claims have not been proceeded
with. Eighty-one leases were issued during the year 1861 for an area of
5,847 acres, at a yearly rental of £2,923 10s. At the end of 1861 the total
number of leases then current was 116, and the extent of land leased 7,899
acres. There were besides a large number of claims on which the first year’s
rent had been paid, for which leases were in course of preparation or the period
allowed for right of search had not expired.
IMMIGRATION.
The new regulations with regard to the introduction of immigrants relate to
three distinct classes of immigrants—First, persons nominated and paid for
by their friends in this colony; secondly, persons applying on their own account
in England, and paid in like manner ; and thirdly, free immigrants selected by
the agent in London, and paid for wholly by the Government here. To this
may be added a fourth class, consisting of immigrants introduced at the ex-
pense of individual settlers, their passage being eventually repaid by the
Government. It is important to observe that under whichsoever of these four
categories the immigrants may be classed, only the same description of persons
are eligible. The following are classes admissible:—
“ I. Married agricultural labourers, shepherds, herdsmen, and copper miners, not
exceeding forty-five years of age.
“ 11. Single men, or widowers without children under sixteen, of any o the above
classes, not exceeding forty years of age.
“ lIL Single female domestic servants, or widows without children under sixteen
not exceeding thirty-five years of age.
“ IV. Married mechanics (when required in the colony), such as masons, bricklayers
blacksmiths and farriers, wheelwrights, sawyers, carpenters, &c., also gardeners, noJ
exceeding forty-five years of age.
“ V. Single men of class 4 (when required), not exceeding forty years of age.
“ VI. The wives and children of married emigrants.”
The payments in aid of passages are, £4 for adult males, £3 for adult women, and
half price for boys and girls respectively. On payment of these sums at the Crown
Lands and Immigration Office—(for persons nominated in this colony), or at the Emi-
gration Agent’s, Copthall-court, London (for persons paying there) —a certificate will
be issued, having twelve months’ currency, which will be transferable in the event of
the person for whom, it was obtained declining to come out. But though the certifi-
cate is transferable, the embarkation order, given after the applicants have been in
spected, is not transferable.
To prevent persons brought out at the public expense from quitting the colony
immediately on arrival, it is provided that every emigrant, before sailing, shall sign a
bond to the South Australian Government for the sum of £2O. Should he remain
two years in the colony, the bond will be cancelled; but should he leave or attempt,
to leave before, it will be enforced against him. The qualifications of candidates for
free or assisted passages are thus stated :
“ Eligible Candidates. —The candidates must be in the habit of working for wages
at one of the callings mentioned above, and must be going out with the intention of
working for hire in that calling. They must be sober, industrious, of good moral
character, in good health, free from all mental and bodily defects, within the ages
specified, appear physically to be capable of labour, and have been vaccinated or had
the small-pox.
“ Ineligible Candidates. —Passages cannot be granted to persons intending to pro-
ceed to the other Australian colonies ; to persons in the habitual receipt of parish
relief; to parents without all their children under sixteen then in Britain; to children
under sixteen without their parents ; to husbands without their wives, or wives with-
out their husbands (unless, in the last three instances, the parents, husband, or wife be
in tliis colony); to single women who have had illegitimate children ; or to persons
who have not arranged with their creditors.”


Beer, porter, ale, cider, and perry
6d. per gall.
2d. per lb.
Coffee and chicory....
Hops
2d. per lb.
Spirits, or strong witers of all
torts, not exceeding the strength
of proof by Sykes’s hydrometer;
proportion for any greater or less
strength of proof.
Spirits, cordials, or strong waters,
10s. per gall.
sweetened or mixed with any
article, so that the degree of
strength thereof cannot be ex-
actly ascertained by Sykes’s
hydiometer
10s. per. gall.
Sugar—Refined and candy . .
6s. per cwt.
Muscovado
3s. per cwt.
Molasses
Tea
2d.
per lb.
Tabacoo—Manufactured and un-
manufactured
2s.
ptr lb.
Cigars
4s.
per lb.
Snuff
2s.
per lb.
THE VOYAGE.
There not being a large passenger traffic to this colony vessels do not leave
England for Adelaide so frequently as to the more populous colonies. The
ships which sail direct are those of Messrs. Budden, Bevanj and Tozer, 2, Jeffrey’s-
square, Bt. Mary-Axe, but being generally of small tonnage, and engaged in the
freight business, are not in every respect adapted for any great number of pas-
sengers. The majority of persons who do not object to the trouble of tranship-
ment of themselves and luggage at Melbourne, proceed in the larger and more
completely found ships sailing from London or Liverpool indeed, apart
from the inconvenience referred to, the speed is greater, and the comfort of a
large and well appointed ship amply repays any extra trouble which may be
incurred at Melbourne. The through booking rates are in this respect a great
convenience and economy. The rates from London to Adelaide, via Melbourne,
by the ships of Messrs. Houlder Brothers & Co. (who book through) are—First
Cabin, 45 guineas; second cabin, 30 guineas; and Third, 18 guineas. The
through fares from Liverpool, via Melbourne, by the Black-Ball Line of Messrs.
James Baines & Co. are—First Cabin, £5O; Second, £3O. Third, £l9. Pas-
sengers are forwarded to Adelaide, per steamer, which leaves Melbourne weekly,
and performs the voyage in from 50 to 60 hours
Passengers may now ensure their baggage and effects, and make their policies
payable, either in Melbourne, Sydney, or in New Zealand, through Messrs.
Bowley and Bristow, 25, Laurence Pountney-lane, Cannon-street, the agents
for the New Zealand*lnsurance Company, of Auckland.
The necessary articles required for an outfit may be learnt by obtaining from
Messrs. Monnery& Co., of Fenchurch-street, a printed list, with prices attached.
The principal Banking establishment is the South Australian Banking Com-
pany, whose head office is at 54, Old Broad-street, London. This bank issues
fetters of credit upon Adelaide, Port Adelaide, Gawler, Robe, Kudina, and
Wallaroo. This bank was established in 1847, and is the oldest, and most im-
portant public institution of the colony. There are also branch agencies of
several other banks of Victoria and New South Wales.
The oldest and most important newspapers of the colony are the South Aus-
tralian Register , issued daily, and the Adelaide Observer, weekly, there are also,
the South Australian Advertiser, daily, and the Chronicle, weekly. These
journals are filed at Mr. Algar’s Colonial Newspaper-office, 11, Clement's Lane,
Lombard-street, London.
TARIFF OF
SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
Import Duties.
Sheepwash 2d. per lb.
Wine containg more than 30 per
cent, of alcohol, of a specific
gravity of -825 at the tempera-
ture of 60° of Fahrenheit’s ther-
mometer for every gallon in pro-
portion to strength . . 10s per gall.
Wine not containing more than SO
per cent, of alcohol, of a specific
gravity of ’825 at the tempera-
ture of 60* of Fahrenheit’s ther-
mometer ... . . .2s per gall.
The Australian and New Zealand Gazette , a journal devoted to colonial
interests, is published in London, at 11, Clement’s E.C., every Saturday morn-
ing. A u Mail edition” is published a day after the arrival of the mail.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE BEST REMEDY FOR INDIGESTION.
CAMOMILE PILLS
Are confidently recommended as a simple but certain remedy for Indigestion.
They act as a powerful tonic and gentle aperient; are mild in their operation; safe
under any circumstances; and thousands of persons can now bear testimony to the
benefits to be derived from their use.—Sold in Bottles at Is. l|d., 2s. 9d., and 11s.
each, in every town in the kingdom.
CAUTION ! —Be sure to ask for “ NORTON’S PILLS,” and do not be persuaded
to purchase the various imitations.
NOTICE to PASSEI&EEiS-AUSTMLIA & NEW ZEALAND
Before you decide upon your
CYVZBXIsT ZFXJXXIsTITXJXXE -A-XsTID OUTFIT,
Compare the Prices and Quality of
JOHN SHEPHERD’S Warehouse, 90, Bishopsgate Street, Within,
With other Houses, where can be seen a large assortment of Cabin Furniture,
Trunks, Iron Bedsteads, Sea Chests , Sea Bedding , and Military Furniture.
CABINS FITTED IN HALF-AN-HOUR’S NOTICE.
First-class Cabins fitted with every requisite, including Bedding, from il 18s. to 47 4s.
Second-class ditto, from 1 1 ss, to 2 1 is. Third-class ditto, from ll to U Bs.
All Furniture, Bedding, &c., supplied at the wholesale prices, and the cabins fitted and the
goods shipped free of charge. .. _
Packing cases, Sd per foot; Berths fixed, 6s. 6d.; Cabin Lamps, ss. 6d.; Cocoa-nut Fibre
Mattresses, 7s. 6d.; and every requisite equally low.
Baggage warehoused free of charge, and shipped without trouble to Passengers.
Passages or freight engaged without charge to the passenger or shipowners.
JOHN SHEPHERD, 90, BISHOPSGATE -STREET WITHIN, LONDON.
ESTABLISHED 1778.
FURNITURE FOR EXPORT
Made Portable for Close Packing, by which 33 per cent, is saved in
Freight.
RICHARD
LOADER AND CO.,
MANUFACTORY, 23 and
24, PAVEMENT, FINSBURY,
N.
TO* ANY PORT IN ENGLAND.
LONDON
DELIVERED FREE
DIXON’S
ANTIBILIODS PILLS.
This mild aperient medicine has stood the
test of upwards of 60 years, during which period
its efficacy has been most satisfactorily proved
in all cases of disordered stomach, dyspepsia,
biliary derangement, affections of the liver,
bowels, or as well as in the most ob-
stinate cases of piles, and is patron istd by the
faculty generally.—Ptepared and sold whole-
sale by the proprietor, Storrington, Sussex;
and retail by all respectable' chemists and
medicine vendors in the United Kingdom, in
Boxes, at Is. lid., 2s. 9d., 4s. 6d., Us., and
225. each. Observe that none are genuine but
those with GEORGE DIXON on the Govern-
ment stamp.
NEWS FROM AUCKLAND.
rpHE NEW ZEALANDER, published
I at Auckland every Wednesday and Saturday,
enjoys a circulation nearly double that of any
other journal in the Province.
A Monthly Summary, carefully prepared, and
containing a faithful analysis of the political,
social, commercial, maritime, and military intel-
ligence of the month, is published on the eve of the
departure of the Australian and European Mail.
Subscription to the Summary, 6s. per annum ; to
the New Zealander, 10s. per quarter. English
advertisements have long been inserted in the New
Zealander, and their number continues to increase.
Mr. F. Algar, of 11, Clement’s-lane, E.C., and
Mr. G. Street, of 30, Cornhill, E.C., London, are
agents for the New Zealander. Every informa-
tion may be obtained of either of those gentlemen.
New Zealander Office, Auckland,


fTlHE splendid Ships of this Line are fitted and provided wi h everything that caa
to the comfort and well-being of Passengers of all Classes. They are des-
’OMruSbsa patched with great punctuality, and carry experienced Surgeons.
THE RATES OF PASSAGE ARE AS FOLLOWS
Chief Cabin Accommodation in the Saloon ... ... ... ... £60 per Adult.
Ditto, ditto, Lower Deck ... ... ... ... .... £45 ,,
ADVERTISEMENTS.
NEW ZEALAND LINE OF PACKETS.
S 'S^ b “ i all enclosed Berth jg» ”
Ditto, open Berths for Single Men... ... ... ... £l6 ~
Children under one year free; under Twelve years, to pay half Passage Money.
SHIP’S REGULATIONS.
Cabin Passengers are allowed 40 cubic feet of Luggage in the Hold of the Vessel, free of
charge. Two Stewards, or more, are appointed for attendance.
The Ship is provided with all requisites for the Table, as to Plate, Linen, &c., but each
Passenger provides for his own Cabin all that he deems necessary for his use.
Second Cabin and Steerage Passengers are required to supply themselves with all utensils
and Bedding, &c., but enclosed Cabins and Berths are fitted and provided for them. The articles
enumerated as absolutely necessary are a water-keg and drinking-mug, a tea and table-spoon,
a metal p!ate, a knife and fork, and a hook pot for boiling water or coffee.
The allowance for Baggage is 20 cubit feet, and ail over this quantity must be paid for at the
current rate of Freight.
A Steward is appointed for the Second Cabin, and the provisions for all classes of passengers
are cooked for them.
All Baggage that is required for the Cabin, or will be wanted during the Voyage, must be
marked accordingly, or it may be shipped in the Vessel’s Hold, and not easily found again until
arrival out. The packages should not be made larger, if possible, than about 3 feet in length by
2 feet and 2 feet.
Luggage from the country should be addressed, in addition to the name of the owner, per
Ship “ ,” London Docks, care of Messrs. POWELL & Co., 61, Comhill, London, E.C., so
that it may be properly warehoused at the docks on arrival.
POWELL & Co. effect Insurances on Baggage and Passage Money. No Passage will be
understood to have been engaged until a deposit of one-half of the amount has been paid to the
undersigned. For Freight, Passage, and further information, apply to
POWELL & Co., 61, CORNHILL, LONDON.
The best known remedy for the Cure of Diarrhoea, Spasms, Wind,
AND THOSE ALARMING DISORDERS OF THE
gtomach and Bowels, to which Children of all ages are so liable, is
(QELL’B) DALBY'S CARMINATIVE.
The same as sold by NEWBERY AND SONS
since the year A.D., 1787.
THE
AND
■RUE.
ORIGINAL
Ninety years of success have proved it invaluable also for the cure of Cholera, Griping, and
the Colic in grown persons. The public is cautioned against the imitations, which arc sold at the
same price, Is. 9d.
ASK FOR CELL'S DALBY’S CARMINATIVE.
Sold by all the chief Medicine Vendors in the World.
FRANCIS IN" IB W BEE "ST «Sb SONS.
(.Established a.d., 1746), 45, St. Paul’s Churchyard, London.


Geelong
Ballarat
Castlemaine....
Sandhurst
Sydney
Brisbane
Port Adelaide .
;"' | South Austral ia
ADVERTISEMENTS.
UNION BANK OF AUSTRALIA
38, OLD BROAD STREET, LONDON, E.O.
PAID-UP CAPITAL, £1,000,000. RESERVE FUND, £200,000.
DIR ECTOR S
ROBERT BROOKS, Esq., H.B. JAMES JOHN CUMMINS,Esq. CHARLES E. MANGLES, Esq.
HENRY BUCKLE, Esq. FRED. G. DALGETY, Esq JAMES B. SMITH, Esq.
ROBERT CAMPBELL, Esq. JOHN BLOXAM ELIN,Esq. WILLIAM WILSON, Esq.
ROBERT CARTER, Esq. ST. LEGER R. GLYN,
AGENTS.
The National Provincial Bank of England. Dublin
The London and County Bank, Belfas
Liverpool.—The Bank of Liverpool. The Ni
Glouoester,&o. —The Gloucestrshire Banking Co. The Co
„ The County of Gloucester Bank The Ui
Plymouth —The Devon & Cornwall Banking Co. The Ci
Bristol, —Messrs. Baillie, Baillie, Cave & Co. The Be
~ Messrs. Miles & Co. The Cl
Portsmouth,—Messrs Grant, Gilman & Long. do:
Penzance.—Messrs. Bolitho, Sons & Co. The Ch
Cambridge, &c.—Messrs Foster & Co Manila
Birmingham.—Messrs. Lloyds & Co. SanFrt
~ Town & District Bank. Valpar
The Bank of Ireland.
', Esq. THOMAS YOUNG, Esq.
I I Oi
Dublin,—The Royal Bank of Ireland.
Belfast. —The Northern Banking Company.
The National Bank of Scotland.
The Commercial Bank of Scotland.
The Union Bank of Scotland.
The City of Glasgow Bank.
The Bank of British North America.
The Chartered Mercantile Bank of India, Lon-
don, and China
The Chartered Bank of India, Australia & China
Manila Messrs. Russell and Sturgis
San Francisco.—Messrs. Hellmann, Brothers, Co.
Valparaiso.—Messrs. Frdk. Huth, Gruningfe Co,
COLONIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS;
Melbourne.,
Hobart Town ...» I Tasmania (Van
Launceston f Diemen’s Land)
Auckland V
Wellington
Napier {Hawke’s Bay) ......
Christchurch '(Canterbury j .' [ New Zealand
Lyttelton (Canterbury)
Dunedin (Otago)
Invercargill (Southland) ....
The Directors of this Bank grant Letters of Credit, or Bills at 3 or 30 Days’ Sight, upon their
Branches, at the customarv rates, on the money being deposited. They alto negotiate, or send
for collection, Bills on the Colonies, the terms for which may be obtained on application at their
office. H. W. D. SAUNDERS, Secretary.
BANK OF AUSTRALASIA,
(Incorporated by Royal Charter, 1836),
4, THREADNEEDLE STREET, LONDON,
PAID-UP CAPITAL, £900,000, with power to increase to £1,200,000.
GUARANTEE FUND, £200,000.
LETTERS OF CREDIT (payable on demand) and BILLS of EXCHANGE are
GRANTED on the undermentioned Branch Establishments, on favourable terms: —
Sydney Melbourne Castlemaine Portland
Maitland Williamstown Beechworth Hobart Town
Newcastle Geelong Belfast (Port Fairy) Launceston
Brisbane Ballarat Warmambool Adelaide
Ipswich Sandhurst
Bills drawn on Australia are also forwarded for collection.
Applications to be made at the office of the Corporation, 4, Threadneedle street,
London. By order of the Court, WILLIAM MILLIKEN, Secretary.
BAILEY’S CONCENTRATED FLUID EXTRACT.
PREPARED with great care, and strongly recommended by the Faculty for re-
moving Bile, Acidities, and Indigestion, restoring Appetite, preserving a moderate state of the Bowels,
and dissolving uric acid in Gravel and Gout; also as an easy remedy for Sea Sickness, and for the febrile
affection incident to childhood it is invaluable. On the value of Magnesia as a remedial agent it is un-
necessary to enlarge; but this Fluid Preparation is the most valued by the Profession, as it entirely avoids
the possibility of those dangerous concretions usually resulting from the use of the article in powder.
Prepared by William Bailey and Son, Horseley Fields Chemical Works, Wolverhampton. In
bottles, Is. and 2s. Cd. each, with Patent Glass Stoppers, particularly adapted for Exportation, as it will
keep good for any length of time and in every climate ; also put up in Half-gallon and Gallon bottles, for
the use of Hospitals, Dispensaries, and Compounding Prescriptions, at ss. and 9s. each.
THE ACIDULATED SYRUP, in bottles, Is. each.
Sold by all respectable Medicine Vendors throughout the WA'ld. Agents wanted everywhere.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE NATIONAL COLONIAL
EMIGRATION
SOCIETY,
Formed by the Amalgamation of the National Female Emigration So
Colonial Emigration Society, Birmingham.
President—The Eight Hon. Lord LYTTELTON.
Society, London, with th®
COMMITTEE.
Mr. F. Algar. Mr. Alfred Denison.
Sir Richard Graves Maodon-
uell, C.B.
Mr. John B irry. Rear-Admiral Hoa. Joseph
Capt. C. H. Bagot. Denman.
Mr. Matthew H. Marsh, M.P.
Mr. Arthur Mills, M.P.
Mr. Joseph Mosenthall.
Mr. W. Newmaroh, P. R,B.
Mr. Lewellyn Nash.
Mr. Wm. Scholelield, M.P.
Mr. J. S. Storr.
Mr. Henry Barnett. Mr. C. H. Ebden.
Mr. H. H. Browne. Mr. A. L. Elder.
Mr. Paul Bailer. Sir Walter Farquhar, Bart.'
Col. Campbell. Mr. Leonard Harper.
Mr. W. A. Brodrlbb. Mr. Henry Hoaro, Jan.
Mr. Hugh Childers, M.P. Mr. Arthur Hodgson.
Sir Daniel Cooper, Bart. Mr. Edward T, Holland.
Mr. Henry Cunningham. Mr. J. B. Harlbert, M.A.,
Rev. Richard Croft. L.L.D.
Rev. A. B. Suter.
Mr. A. M. Weir.
Mr. Edmund Westby.
Mr, J, A. Youl.
Mr. F, G. Dalgety. Capt. Kennedy.
LADIES’ COMMITTEE.
The Lady John Manners. Miss A. Bashby.
Lady Hulse. Mrs. Fox.
Lady Wake. Mrs. Campbell Robertson.
Mrs. H. Barnett. Mrs. Tarbutt.
Mrs, Evan Thomas.
Mrs. Sydney A. Townsend,
Mrs. Whittam.
Secretary—Mr. JOHN BATE
CENTRAL OFFICES-44, CHARING CROSS, LONDON, S.W.
OBJECTS OF THE SOCIETY.
To disseminate information on the subject of emigration generally.—To afford advice and
assistance to intended emigrants, and to facilitate arrangements for their passage to the colo-
nies.—To obtain the co-operation and support of the Imperial and Colonial Governments.—To
invite the aid of local committees in the large towns of the United Kingdom and in the colonies.
—To provide effectual protection for female emigrants at home, and<iit the ports of debarkation.
The Society does not urge the merits of any particular colony, but seeks to co-operate with Her
Majesty’s Emigration Commissioners, and all existing colonial agencies in the furtherance of a
great national work, rendered more especially Important at the present time of unprecedented
distress in the manufacturing districts.
Subscriptions and donations will he received by the Secretary, at the Offices of the Society; or
by Messrs. Hoare, 37, Fleet-street, E.C.; or Messrs. Herribs, Farquhar, and Co., 16, St.
James’s-street, S.W.
BRITISH COLLEGE OF HEALTH, NEW ROAD,
LONDON,
Morison’s Vegetable Universal Medicine
IS the only medicine that strikes at the root of all diseases. This has been proved
by an experience of thirty years, during which time upwards of 400,000 cases of cure
have been effected. The Hygeian Agents throughout the world are unanimous upon
the Hygeian System of Medicine introduced by
JAMES MORISON, THE HYGEIST,
Who not only taught the public how to cure their own ailments, but also rescued
the world from the dangers of false medical doctrines. The Monument lately raised
to his memory, by a penny subscription, sufficiently attests the importance of his
discoveries.


advertisements.
"BLACK BALL” LINE,
BRITISH k AUSTRALIA! BX-ROTAL MAIL PACKETS.
“ EAGLE ” LINE OP PACKETS.
This Lino of Celebrated Steam and Clipper Ships is the only one that has had the distinguished
honour of a Visit from HEB MAJESTY THE QUEEN, who was most graciously pleased to say
that she had no idea there were such magnificent Ships in her Merchant Service.
Great Britain
Champion of the Seas
Lightning
Ocean Chief
Montmorency
Commodore Perry
Cairngorm
Eliz. Ann Bright
Netherhy
Maryborough
Erin go Bragh
Marcianus
City of Manchester
Marco Polo
Donald Mac Kay
British Trident
Great Tasmania
Gipsy Bride
City of Melbourne
James Booth
Blanche Moore
Hannah More
David M’lyer
Stornoway
Hope
Solway
Young Australia
Spirit of the North
The above Fleet is competed of the LARGEST, FINEST, and FASTEST SHIPS in the
WOELD, and were built by the most celebrated Builders of the day, including Donald Mackay,
Donald Mackay,
of Boston. They are proverbial for the elegance of their Saloon Cabins, excellent ventilation,
and superior accommodation throughout, being unequalled by any line of Ships afloat. They
are also commanded by gentlemen of the highest reputation and ability, and the provisions are
of the best quality that can be procured.
PEOM LIVBEPOOL,
On the sth & 15th of every Month,
FOB MELBOURNE,
FORWARDING PASSENGEES TO
GEELONG, SYDNEY, ADKLUDE, HOBART TOWN AND LAUNCESTON,
AT A THROUGH RATE.
RATES OF PASSAGE MONEY.
SALOON CABIN, including MELBOURNE | SYDNEY & LAUNCESTON ADELAIDE
Bed, Bedding & Linen £45 0 0 50 0 0 50 0 0 50 0 0
Do. (Large Booms) 50 0 0 155 0 0 55 0 0 55 0 0
FAMILY BOOMS BY AGREEMENT.
In the SALOON CABIN everything necessary will be provided by the Ship ; a liberal table with
plenty of live stock; Beds, Bedding, Linen, Plate, and all other requisites.
SECOND CABIN | £25 0 0 |3O 0 0 I 30 0 0 I 30 0 0
SECOND CABIN Passengers are found in Cutlery, Glass, and Crockery, but not Bedding.
INTERMEDIATE I £l7 0 0 120 0 0 I 20 0 0 I 20 0 0
STEEEAGE I 15 0 0 |lB 0 0 1 18 0 0 119 0 0
All Passengers in the INTERMEDIATE and STEEEAGE will have to provide themselves
with Bed and Bedding, a Knife and Fork each, 1 Table Spoon, 1 Tea Spoon, 1 Tin Plate, Drink-
ing Can, 1 Tin Quart and Pint Pot, 1 Slop Pail, and a Keg or Can for holding water. The whole
can be had for 20s. at Mr. GEORGE PEEOIVAL’S Stores, 23, Bath Street, Liverpool.
COOKS PROVIDED FOR ALL CLASSES OF PASSENGERS.
For further particulars apply to the authorised Agents of the “ BLACK BALL ”
and “ EAGLE ” Line of Packets ; to T. M. MACKAY & Co., 1, Lcadenhall street,
London, or to
GIBBS, BRIGHT & Co., Merchants, 1, North John Street, and
JAMES BAINES & Co., Tower Buildings, Water Street, Liverpool.


ADVERTISEMENTS,
|B
HOPLDER BROTHERS & COMPANY’S
REGULAR LISES
AUSTRALIAN PACKETS,
DISPATCHED FOR
SYDNEY, QUEENSLAND, NEW ZEALAND,
And the various Ports of NEW SOUTH WALES, on the
11th & 25th of Every Month.
MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, HOBART TOWN,
LAUNCESTON, PORTLAND BAY,
OK THE
7th & 21st of Every Month.
The Vessels of these Lines are especially built and selected for
the comfort and accommodation of all Classes of Passengers, and the
utmost care is taken to ensure a safe and pleasant voyage. The Lines
comprise, among others, the celebrated Vessels
“ SPRAY OF THE OCEAN,” “ NOXIRMAHAL,” “ CREST OF THE WAVE,”
“RIFLEMAN,” “CANAAN,” “ISLES OF THE SOUTH,”
“WHINFELL,” “ LOCHIEL,” “JAPANESE,”
“VERULAM,” “AGRA,” “ SEBASTIAN CABOT,”
“ AKBAR,” “SHAND,” “GLENDOWER,”
“AUSTRAL” “GOLDEN HORN” “SARAH NEUMANN.”
‘GOLDEN HORN” “SABAH NEUMANN.
*
For plans of cabins, dietary scales, and all information, apply to
HOULDER BROTHERS & CO.,
146, LEADENHALL STREET, E.C.
