

A HANDBOOK
FOR THE
NEW AUSTRALIAN




1. WELCOME TO AUSTRALIA
You arc about to settle in Australia. Australia is pleased to
welcome you, and hopes you will make a success of your new life
There is every prospect that you will.
In Australia you will find plenty of sunshine, plenty of freedom
to enjoy the sports and amusements you were accustomed to, and
all types of iriendly societies, clubs and organisations catering for
your personal needs. This book has been prepared to give you an
overall picture of the Commonwealth and of the State in which
you will reside, along with information which will put you in
touch with persons who can help you settle down quickly and
happily.
The Commonwealth and the State Governments, and the people
of Australia all welcome you as a citizen of our growing nation.
Every Australian recognises the need for a larger population, so
that Australia can take her rightful place in the Pacific, so that
she can expand her primary and secondary industries, and make
foil use of her natural resources. We welcome you because you
will he helping us Advance Australia Fair.
In Australia, you will find many things different from what you
knew in other lands. You will find this country of nearly 3,000,000
square miles a land of great distances and of expanding frontiers.
You will find different climatic conditions, different customs —but
you will find, too. a young, virile, progressive people who are proud
of their land, and of its progress, and are living free, healthy and
happy lives under bright, sunny skies.
If you want help of any sort—in getting a job, going on the
land, joining a friendly society, or a sporting club—do not hesitate
to ask. The titles and addresses of the organisations most able to
help you are listed in this book. Also ready to help you are your
fellow citizens, the Australian people.
In each of the six States you will find both Commonwealth
and State Immigration Officers, whose job it is to help you settle
in Australia. Turn to them for advice and help whenever you
need it, and it will be given freely and gladly.
Once again, welcome. We are glad to have you with u?


A View of Lounceston. (Photo: Frank Hurley.)


2. ON ARRIVAL
person arriving in Australia to make a permanent home
will receive advice and assistance, if he needs it, while settling in.
The Commonwealth and State Immigration Authorities are interested
in all new settlers, whether they are brought to the country under
an official migration scheme, or make their own arrangements to
come to Australia.
The Commonwealth (or Federal) Government of Australia is
the authority on all international aspects of migration, including
passports, landing permits and the status of people from overseas
while they are in Australia.
By agreement with the Commonwealth, each State Government
has also undertaken to control important functions concerning immi
gration, mainly relating to the personal settlement of new arrivals
within a particular State.
The Commonwealth and State Immigration Authorities work in
close co-operation, their officials providing facilities for the newcomer
to settle down quickly. Helpful advice is obtainable from them
on any question affecting life in the Commonwealth.
The addresses of Commonwealth and State Migration Officers
in this State are given at the end of this chapter.
Coming Ashore
To prevent the smuggling of prohibited goods and the landing
of dutiable goods without payment of duty, passengers disembarking
at any port in Australia must fill in a form given them by the
purser of their ship. Women travelling with their husbands, and
children under 18 are not required to fill in the form, which must
give full particulars of any goods the passenger has, with a
declaration that the information is true in every respect.
Regulations under the Customs Act provide that any person
making an untrue declaration is liable to a penalty of £IOO, in
addition to which the goods are liable to forfeiture. This form
must be completed and returned to the ship’s purser prior to arrival
at the first port of call in the Commonwealth. At the port of
disembarkation, the purser hands the form to the Customs officials
When a passenger lands, his luggage is dealt with by a Customs
officer at the wharf, and can be taken away by the passenger, provided
the dutiable articles do not exceed a total of £lO for duty and
sales tax. Where the amount exceeds £lO, a Customs entry may


i>c demanded, and this calls tor the services ot a Customs agent it.
many instances. Travellers’ samples may require entry under a
special section of the Customs Act.
Many passengers have, in addition to their light baggage, house
hold furniture and effects which they have brought on the ship
under cover of a bill of lading. All goods covered by such a bill
must be entered at the Customs House, and this also requires the
services of a Customs Agent.
Under its agreements with the United Kingdom Government, the
Commonwealth Government has the duty of selecting suitable
migrants in Britain and bringing them to Australia. It also helps
them to secure jobs in keeping with their qualifications through the
Commonwealth Employment Service, provides a substantial amount
Cowards the cost of the reception hostels in the States, and m
manv other ways looks after the welfare of new arrivals.
The States have agreed with the Commonwealth Government to
receive new settlers, provide them with temporary transit accommoda-
tion on arrival, arrange transport to a job or destination within the
State, and later see generally to their welfare.
RECEPTION (N TASMANIA
Tasmanian-bound settlers will normally disembark at Melbourne
(Victoria) or will reach that city by train from other States. If
necessary, accommodation will be arranged by the Commonwealth
Government until transport to Tasmania is available.
Steamers depart from Melbourne for Tasmania up to three
times weekly for the 12 to 16 hours overnight journey to Laun-
ceston, Burnie or Devonport all northern ports. New settlers
will normally travel to Tasmania by ship. If they choose, however,
they may make their own arrangements and pay their own passage
from any point of arrival on the mainland to Tasmania. Provided
they inform the Commonwealth Migration Officer at the point of
departure of their plans, they may apply to the Commonwealth
authority on arrival in Tasmania for a refund equivalent to a
second class fare for the journey as far as the first Tasmanian place
of arrival.
At any of the four Tasmanian ports Launceston, Burnie,
Devonport or Hobart officials of the State Immigration Depart-
ment will board the ship to welcome the party, and to help with
baggage and facilitate disembarkation.
The State Government will transport new settlers and their
baggage from the first point of arrival to their final destination
free of charge. Meals will be provided on the journey. If necessary,
accommodation will be provided free for those who are unable to
reach their final destination on the day of arrival. A charge for
accommodation will be made after the first seven days.


Nominator* will be advised ol the transport arrangements for
their nominees so that they may meet them on arrival.
The Tasmanian Migration Officer ts full) equipped to assist
new settlers to become established and thev ire invited to seek hi=
help or advice at any time
Churches and welfare organisations throughout Ta'mania arc
xi'Operating fully with the State authorities to make ncwcom. m
feel at home in their new country.
The names and address of these bodies may be obtained from
uiy office of the Tasmanian Tourist and Immigration Department
Mew settlers are invited by this Department to have mail addressed
to them care of any of the following offices:-
Hobart: (Head office and State Migration Officer) corner
Macquarie and Murray Streets.
Launceston: Comer Paterson and St John Streets,
Burnie: 41 Stewart Street
Devonport: 21 Wilson Street
lu addition, the Tasmanian Government has offices on the
mainland in the following cities:
Melbourne: 254 Collins Street.
Sydney; Challis House, 4 Martin Place.
Adelaide: 62a King William Street
Brisbane. 194 196 Adelaide Street
New Settlers from Britain headed for Tasmania.


Among important safeguards in the Constitution is the guarantee
of full freedom of religious worship. The Australian High Court
is the interpreter of the Constitution, and its decision in any dispute
between a State and the Commonwealth is binding upon both parties
Commonwealth Parliament
The Commonwealth Parliament consists of the House ut Repre-
sentatives and the Senate. Both are elected by universal franchise
All Australian men and women over 21 have a vote, and voting
is not merely a right but is a legal responsibility. Failure to vote
at a general election is punishable by a line of £2 unless a valid
excuse can be provided.
British subjects from other countries are entitled to the full
franchise after having resided in the Commonwealth tor six months
At that stage, enrolment is compulsory for any person who has
lived in one electoral division or sub-division for a month or more.
Applications for enrolment arc made at electoral offices or through,
post offices.
Non-British persons who settle in Australia may attain the
right to vote, as well as other fall privileges of Australian citizenship,
by becoming naturalised British subjects. Full information regarding
qualifications for naturalisation is given in Chapter 4.
Elections for the House of Representatives are held every three
years. The six States are divided on a population basis into 7 5
electorates, each of which returns one member. New South Wales
has 28 members, Victoria 20, Queensland 10, South Australia
six, and Tasmania and Western Australia have five each.
The Northern Territory, comprising 523,620 square miles of
Central and Northern Australia, is controlled by the Commonwealth,
Government, and has one member who may speak on any subject
but can vote only on matters affecting the Territory. The Australian
Capital Territory, Canberra, has no representation in Parliament.
The Senate has 36 members—six from each State. The election
of Senators is based on the principle of equal representation for
each State, regardless of area or population. Senators are elected
for terms of six years, and half the Senate retires at the end of
each third year, the elections being held concurrently with those
for the House of Representatives.
Early in 1948 the Government decided to introduce a Bill to
increase the membership of the House of Representatives to 122
and of the Senate to 60.
Members of the Commonwealth Parliament must he British
subjects by birth or by naturalisation for five years, and must have,
lived in the country for at least three years.


3. GOVERNMENT
of Australia arc members of a democracy in wind,
every man and woman eligible to vote has a share in the ultimate
control of the country.
Australia is one of the sell-governing Dominions oi the British.
Commonwealth, and in the conduct of her affairs the King receives
the advice of Australian Ministers, just as he receives the advice
of British Ministers in British affairs. On the advice of the Aus
tralian Government, the King appoints a Governor-General to be
his direct representative. In each State a Governor represents the
King.
When the British Parliament passed the Act establishing the
Constitution of Australia in 1900, the Federal Parliament came
into being. In framing its Constitution, Australia was guided to
some extent by the experience of the United States of America, and
its machinery of government stands between that of the United
Kingdom and that of the U.S.A. The Commonwealth lias the
British system of responsible government under which Cabinet hold-
office only so long as it retains the confidence of Parliament.
The Constitution can be altered only by the people themselves
Their will is ascertained by referendum, an affirmative vote by a
majority of the people and a majority of the States being neccssarv
to effect a change.
Legislative powers are divided between the Commonwealth Gov
eminent and the six State Governments. The Commonwealth ha-
power to make laws concerning such things as taxation on a common
national basis, defence, external affairs, trade and commerce with
other countries and between the States, immigration, customs and
excise, posts, telegraphs and telephones, navigation, currency, copy
right and trade marks, naturalisation, social services, age and invalid
pensions and industrial matters which extend beyond the boundaries
of the States.
In general, the States have control over their own affairs in such
matters as education, the administration of justice, health, housing,
agriculture, railways and internal transport, and trade and industry.
Cities, towns and rural districts are governed by municipal and
shire bodies, which attend to matters of local government, and arc
responsible to the State Government. Services like electricity and
water supply are handled by similar bodies.


Taxat'on of Income
In Australia the taxes imposed on income derived by individual'
are (a) social services contribution and (b) income tax. Both arc
imposed by the Commonwealth Government, and no further levy
is imposed by the individual States on income.
The two levies are assessed concurrently on the basis of income
derived during the 12 months ending June 20th. Both arc on a
graduated scale. The rates of tax on income in an property are
'lightly higher than those on income from personal exertion.
Overseas people who settle in Australia are, from the date ol
their arrival in the country, treated ior taxation purposes as
Australian residents. Tax is not payable on income derived prior
to arrival in Australia.
Pay-as-you-carn taxation is the Australian method. Tax instal
ment deductions are made from employees’ weekly' earnings and
credited against the annual tax assessed after the return of income
for the year has been lodged. If the instalments exceed the tax
assessed, the excess is refunded to the employee.
An unmarried person becomes liable to social services contribution
when his income exceeds £lO4 a year. A person with a dependent
wife becomes liable when his income exceeds £2OO a year Liability
for income tax arises where the annual income exceeds £250.
Rebates of tax are allowed for the taxpayer’s wife and children
under 16 years, and certain other classes of dependants. The
allowance of these rebates is subject to the dependants being resident
in Australia, and wholly maintained by the taxpayer. Rebates ol
tax are also allowed for certain items of personal expenditure,
such as medical and dental bills, and life assurance premiums.
Other Taxes
Sales tax is levied on the wholesale value ol goods manufactured
in Australia and goods imported into Australia. It was heavy
during war-time, but reductions were made later. Sales tax is
payable by manufacturers, wholesale merchants and importers. Per-
sons who contemplate engaging in the sale of goods in Australia
should obtain advice as to sales tax liability from the Commissioner
of Taxation, Canberra. Australian Capita! Territory. There is
also an entertainment tax payable for admission lo theatres, picture
shows and other entertainments. This is usually added to the
price of admission by the theatre management.
Newcomers to Australia should acquaint themselves with othei
obligations of citizenship, such as the compulsory registration ol
births, marriages and deaths, notification of changes of address to
Ihe electoral authorities, and with the systems of food and clothing
rationing, and control of retail prices. The immigration authorities
will advise where enquiries on these matter? should be made.


TASMANIA'S SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT
The Tasmanian Parliament consists of two houses, a Legisla
tive Council (or Upper House) of 18 members who are elected for
six years, and a House of Assembly (or Lower House) of 30 members
who are elected for five years.
To be eligible to vote in both the Federal Parliament and
House of Assembly election, persons must be either natural-born
or naturalised British subjects 21 years of age or over who have
lived in Tasmania for six months. Voting in the State elections is
compulsory. *
To vote at the Legislative Council elections, a person must be
a natural-born or naturalised British subject 21 years of age or over
who has lived in Tasmania for not less than one year and who has
one of the following qualifications:—
Holds a freehold estate of £lO per annum; occupies a
property valued at at least £26 per annum, holds a degree
of any university in the British Dominions or an Associate
of Arts, Tasmania; is a legal practitioner on the Roll of
the Supreme Court; a legally qualified medical practitioner,
an officiating Minister of Religion, an officer or retired
officer of H.M. Army or Navy not on actual service; is a
retired officer of the Tasmanian Volunteer Force or a
soldier, sailor, airman or nurse who has been on active
service in either World War I or 11.
Enrolment of persons qualified to be electors of the Legislative
Council is compulsory.
Municipal Government
Local government authorities in Tasmania consist of two city
and 47 municipal councils. The City of Hobart is governed by a
Lord Mayor and 10 Aldermen; Launceston is governed by a Mayor
and eight Aldermen. The municipalities are governed by a Warden
and Councillors.
The cities operate under their own Acts of the State Parlia
ment, and the Municipal Councils under the Local Government
Act of 1906.
The Council Clerk of each municipality is an executive officer
As such he is called upon to advise the council on all subjects.
Tasmania has a Municipal Association. This body meets once
a year and consists of two representatives from each of the 47
councils. It elects an Executive Committee which meets regularly
to deal with problems which confront local governments.
It is mainly on the recommendation of the Municipal Associ-
ation or Executive Committee that most amendments to Local
Government legislation are made by the State Parliament.


Municipal Franchise
City elections are conducted by the Town Clerks in Hobart
and Launceston. The municipal elections are managed by the
Council Clerks.
The scale of municipal votes is assessed on the occupancy or
ownership of lands or buildings in the area, and their annual value.
For example, in the City of Hobart, the entitlement to votes is as
follows:
Land or building valued at —
Under £5O I vote
£5O or over but under £lOO . . 2 votes
£lOO or over but under £l5O .. 3 votes
£l5O and over . • 4 votes
Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages
A birth in Tasmania should be registered at the District
Registry Office within 60 days, not counting the day of birth. No
charge is made for registering the' birth within 60 days but after
that time a fee of 5/' is made.' In addition, the parents or occupiers
of the house in which the baby was born become liable for a fine
of up to £lO.
Notice of death should be registered within eight days and
should contain date of death, name, age, sex and profession of
the deceased, where he died, where he was born and, if born
outside the Commonwealth ;1 Australia, the number of years
residence in Australia. The notice should also be accompanied by
a medical certificate which may be demanded free of charge where
a medical man has been in attendance. A simple notification of
death may be sent with a medical certificate but full particulars
must be supplied within 32 days of the death.
The fee for a marriage licence in Tasmania is £2/10/' unless
seven days notice is given, when the charge is reduced to £l.
Franklin Square, Hobart.


4. IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP
Australia's immigration programme provides for the intro
duction each year of the maximum number of new citizens who
can be absorbed into the nation’s economic and social life.
Broadly, the Government’s policy is that every able-bodied person
who is qualified for admission to Australia under the immigration
laws and is willing and able to play a useful part in the economic
life of the country of his adoption is a worthwhile immigrant, and
should be given the opportunity to*share, as soon as possible, all
the normal rights and responsibilities of citizenship enjoyed by other
permanent residents.
United Kingdom - Commonwealth Agreements
The United Kingdom and Commonwealth Governments have
jointly instituted two schemes, the first for the granting of free
passages from the British Isles to United Kingdom ex-service personnel
and their wives and children who wish to settle in Australia, and
are accepted as suitable for settlement; the second for assisted
passages from the United Kingdom for British subjects normally
resident in the United Kingdom who are not eligible under the
free passage scheme.
In view of the housing shortage in Australia, priority under the
free and assisted passages schemes is given to prospective migrants
who have nominators in Australia prepared and in a position to
provide accommodation for them on their arrival in this country.
Any British subject resident in Australia may nominate relatives
or friends who are British subjects, and are eligible under either
scheme.
In accordance with the procedure agreed upon between the
Commonwealth and the States, it is necessary' for all nominations
to be submitted to the State Immigration Authorities who will
indicate, when forwarding them to the Commonwealth Authorities,
what priority of passage they consider should be given to each
nominee. Forms of application should be completed and lodged
with the State Immigration Authority in the State in which the
nominator resides.
Others Welcomed
Other British subjects of European origin are free to come to
Australia as permanent residents provided they are of good character,
in sound health, and hold valid British passports. Full information
is available to them from any of the overseas representatives of the.
Australian Government, and from British consuls where the Aus-
tralian Government has no representative.


A scheme providing tor the Australian Government to subsidise
the fares to Australia of ex-service personnel of the Empire and the
Unted States of America and their dependants who are of European
descent was announced in June, 1947.
Information about the scheme of subsidised fares is obtainable
from Commonwealth and State Immigration Authorities in Aus-
tralia, and overseas from Australian Government representatives
nr British consuls.
If a resident of Australia wishes to bring a relative or friend
who is not a British subject to this country, he should write to
the Commonwealth Migration Officer of the State in which he
resides, asking to be supplied with a form of application. The
completed application form should be returned to the Common-
wealth Migration Officer and, if the application is approved, a
landing permit authorising admission of his nominees will be for-
warded to the applicant.
Naturalisation
Before a person can be granted a certificate of naturalisation, he
must satisfy the Minister for Immigration that:—
(i) he has resided in Australia for at least 12 months before
the date of the application, and in addition for a period
of four years in the eight years preceding the application,
either in Australia or some other part of the British Empire;
(ii) he has an adequate knowledge of the English language:
(iii) he is a person of good character;
(iv) he intends, if his naturalisation is approved, to continue to
reside in Australia or some other part of the British
Commonwealth.
The grant of a certificate of naturalisation by the Australian
Government confers on the grantee the rights and privileges to
which a natural bom Australian is entitled. For instance, he can
exercise the franchise and become eligible for social service benefits
and pensions. A person who is naturalised in Australia is recognised
as a British subject throughout the British Commonwealth.
Applications for naturalisation should be made to the Common-
wealth Migration Officer or the Deputy-Director, Commonwealth
Investigation Branch, in the State in which the applicant resides.
NEW SETTLER'S LEGAL STATUS IN TASMANIA
Newcomers who settle in Tasmania irrespective of their
nationality may acquire land and personal property of every
description in the same manner as any natural-born or naturalised
British subject. A settler may acquire Crown (Government) land
with the consent of the State Minister for Lands.
The Tasmanian Aliens Act of 1913 sets out the few limitations
imposed on persons other than British subjects. New settlers should


read this Act before investing in Tasmanian real estate or businesses.
Foreign-born settlers are entitled to trial by jury in the same
way as natural-born or naturalised British subjects.
Voting
Non-British settlers will not be permitted to vote in Parlia-
mentary or Municipal elections until they become naturalised British
subjects, when enrolment for this purpose becomes compulsory.
The Professions
Legal practitioners from other countries will not be permitted
to practise in Tasmania until they have degrees or certificates
recognised by the State authorities.
No person can be registered for the medical profession in
Tasmania unless his degree or diploma has been recognised by the
State.
Persons who are registered pharmacists or dentists in other
countries should consult either the Pharmaceutical Society of
Tasmania or the Tasmanian Dental Board on their eligibility to
practise in the State. The addresses of these bodies may be found
in the telephone book.
Hobart Harbour with Mt. Wellington in the background.
(Photo: Brown and Dureau.)


5. EMPLOYMENT
the end of 1947 there were more people in employment in
Australia than ever before in her history. Despite this, the demand
for labour is still growing, and the range of employment opportunities
widening. The reason is that employment expanded greatly during
the war, and the expansion is continuing as new industries are
established and others develop.
Continuous surveys are being made throughout Australia by
the Commonwealth Employment Service to discover the nature and
extent of occupational opportunities in all industries and professions.
These surveys are also supplying data to facilitate the finding of
jobs for new arrivals needing employment on reaching Australia,
The surveys show that in all States there are large numbers of
vacancies immediately available for workers in a wide variety of
occupations
Commonwealth Employment Service
When a new settler arrives in Australia, the Federal
Government’s Commonwealth Employment Service will help him
to find a position suiting his qualifications and his own wishes.
The C.E.S. is administered by a Director of Employment, with
a Deputy-Director in each capital city. In each State there is a
network of District Employment Offices in the suburbs of cities
and in the larger provincial centres. There are also special offices
designed to cater for particular classes of workers, such as higher
appointments offices for professional, scientific, technical, managerial
and executive personnel; disabled persons’ offices to attend to the
special placement problems of the physically handicapped and office?
for building workers, watersiders, engineering and electrical
tradesmen, and others. A vocational guidance service is also
available. Agents of the C.E.S. are located in about 500 other
centres where the establishment of a full-time office would not be
justified.
The facilities of the C.E.S. are free. There is no compulsion to
make use of the Service and no labour controls of any kind operate
in Australia.
New settlers who have jobs to go to, or wish to find jobs
themselves, may do so without consulting the C.E.S. If they wish
to make use of the C.E.S. later to change or improve their positions,
may do so with the full co-operation of the Service.


Hydro-Electric Power Station at Tarraleah. (Photo: B. Sheppard)


Trade Unions
The trade union movement in Australia is highly developed
and most workers join the union appropriate to their employment.
In many occupations it is virtually necessary to be a member of the
union. In some cases, compulsory unionism is the rule.
Wages and conditions of employment are, generally, governed
by awards and industrial agreements made or registered with the
various tribunals that function in Australia. These often provide
for preference to unionists and for differential rates to be paid to
union members.
The unions constantly strive to improve the conditions of their
members. Some unions operate employment bureaux to help members
obtain employment.
Standard hours in industry were fixed by the Commonwealth
Arbitration Court at 40 a week from January, 1948, and the general
trend > among unions is to work a five-day week of 40 hours. Some
awards make special provisions for shorter normal working hours
Most of the major industrial awards throughout the Commonwealth
provide for a fortnight’s annual leave with pay and from eight to
ten paid public holidays a year. Many awards make provision for
a limited number of days of paid sick leave.
Wage Rates
Minimum rates for most wage occupations are fixed by awards
or by determinations of arbitration tribunals and wages boards. The
method usually adopted by the main instrumentality the Com-
monwealth Tribunal is to determine a basic wage for the district
as the lowest rate payable to an unskilled worker. For occupations
requiring skill of any sort, margins are added, varying in size
according to the degree of skill required
There are very few occupations for which some margin is not
added. The basic wage, but not the margin for skill, is varied each
quarter in accordance with movements in costs of living as revealed
by a special index based on commodity prices prepared for that
purpose. A similar practice is adopted by most of the State
arbitration tribunals although in respect of three States the
Commonwealth basic wage is adopted in lieu of determining
separate State basic wages.
Before the war, female wage rates were usually between 54 and
00 per cent, of the male rate, but, with more and more women
entering industry in recent years, these rates have been substantially
increased. In many cases they are equal to the male rate. In certain
specified vital industries, a minimum rate of 75 per cent, of the
male rate is prescribed for females. Largely as a result of this and


of the relaxation of wage-pegging, this percentage has tended to
become the standard for all industries in which higher rates for
females do not operate.
In Australia’s modern factories working conditions are good.
Cafeterias with low-priced meals, modem wash-rooms, rest-rooms for
female workers, separate locker systems, and recreational facilities are
provided in most big plants. The workers’ compensation laws in the
various States are described as among the most liberal in the world,
and the Commonwealth Government provides unemployment and
sickness' benefits on a generous scale.
INDUSTRY IN TASMANIA
A large percentage of Tasmania’s population of 257,117 is
engaged in primary (agricultural) production. Recently, however,
the value of factory production reached £18,000,000 yearly and,
because of a variety of advantages enjoyed by the State, factory
production is steadily increasing.
Due to Tasmania’s high agricultural productivity, settlers
during the 1800’s were concerned only with the development of
industries such as flour mills, breweries, tanneries and shipbuilding
yards which produced for local needs. But as population increased
and raw materials became available, more secondary industries were
developed.
To-day, Tasmanian factories are producing goods ranging from
preserved fruits and jams to newsprint and fine writing paper, ?inc
and other metals, organic fertilisers, clothing and footwear. Many
of these items are exported.
The huge hydro-electric resources of Tasmania, recently
estimated at more than 1,750,000 horsepower, have played an
important part in the State’s industrial development. Because of
the topographical features of the State, cheap electric power can
be brought to almost any district. Co-ordinating the development
of the electric power and ensuring that it is used most effectively
is the Tasmanian Hydro-Electric Commission which was set up in
1929.
Industrial Conditions
Industrial legislation in Tasmania is administered by State,
Commonwealth and Local Governments. The principal State
authority is the Department of Labour and Industry which
administers industrial legislation.
Wages Boards determine wages and general working conditions
in Tasmania, except for workers in rural industries and those
covered by Commonwealth awards. Sixty-nine Tasmanian industries
come under determinations of the Wages Boards, and include
manufacturing industries and wholesale and retail trades.


The Wages Boards work to settle industrial disputes. In fixing
wages they are guided by the Commonwealth Statistician’s figures.
The Department of Labour and Industry administers other
important acts including the Workers’ Compensation Act, which
provides compensation for workers injured in the course of their
employment, the Shops Act which provides for the regulation and
closing of shops, the Inspection of Machinery Act, and the Ladies
Hairdressers and Beauty Culturists Act which provides for the
registration of persons carrying on these trades.
It is suggested that all industrial projects which a newcomer
might consider launching be referred to the Department of Labour
and Industry for advice while in the planning stage. The submission
of plans will obviate any delay or alteration in actual buildings
upon application for registration. The Department’s address is:
29 Elizabeth Street, Hobart.
Wages in Tasmania
The minimum weekly wages for Hobart in some of the more
important trades were (in February, 1948) —
Bootmaking—
Males—
Pattern Cutting ..£7lO 0
Clicking £7 2 0
Stuff Cutting .... £7 2 0
Making £7 2 0
Females Brom 72/9 to 79/-
according to classification.
Carters and Drivers—
Drivers, one horse . . £6 10 0
Motors, to 25 cwt. . . £6 8 6
Motors, 25 cwt. to 3
tons £6 14 6
Motors, 3 to 6 tons . £6 19 0
Stablemen £5 15 6
Building Trades—
Carpenters, construction—
Permanent . . . . £7 9 6
Temporary .. . . £8 2 3
Fibrous Plasterers . . £7 9 6
Labourers £7 2 4
Plumbers £8 15 0
Clerical Workers—
Male
Female
Rates vary accord'
ing to industry in
which employees
work.
Typists, Machine Operators
Not covered by a Determina-
tion.
Clerks—According to industry-
in which employees work.
Clothing Trades—
Cutters £7 9 0
Fitters-up £6 19 0
Machinists £6 19 0
Pressers-off £6 19 0
Females—
Cutters £7 1 3
Machinists , . . . £4 7 0
Shop Trades—
Grocer (Retail)
Male £6 18 6


Female £4 14 6
Boot repairers, Male
and Female .. . . 16 15 0
Furniture Dealers—
Male £7 10 0
Female £4 3 0
Drapery Salesman . . £7 0 0
Drapery Saleswoman, £4 5 0
Furniture Trades—
Cabinet Makers .... £7 9 9
Polishers £7 9 9
Wood Turners .... £6 18 6
Upholsterers £7 3 6
Other Machinists ..£614 9
Upholstress £3 14 9
Hospital Employees—
Males —
Porters £6 1 0
Ward Cleaners . . £6 1 0
Females—
Cook (2nd) .. .. £4 8 7)
Head Housemaid . . £4 8 7-J
Wardsmaids . . . . £4 8 7f
Engineering, Etc.—
Angle-iron Smith ..£B6 6
Brass-finisher (Trades-
man) £8 2 0
Smith £8 3 6
Machinist, First
Class £8 2 0
Motor Mechanic . . £8 2 0
Pattern-maker . . ..£Bl5 0
Tool-maker £8 15 0
Electrical Trades—
Electrician-m-Charge
of Installation, etc. £8 2 0
Shiftman or Tester. .£866
Electrical Mechanic .£B2O
Linesman £7 10 0
Hotels! Etc.—
Barman £7 9 0
Kitchenman £5 13 0
Waiter £5 13 0
Waitress (2nd) . . £4 6 9
Laundrymaid £4 2 6
Cafes—
Pantry or Kitchenman £5 13 0
Waiter £5 13 0
Waitress £3 13 0
Porter, etc £5 13 0
Laundress £4 2 6
All apprentices in proclaimed trades are controlled by an
Apprenticeship Commission, except in matters concerning wages
and working conditions. Apprentices working in non-proclaimed
trades are under the direct control of the Department of Labour
and Industry.
Unions of employers in Tasmania do not have to register with
any industrial authority. However, the various unions and associa-
tions have voluntarily submitted a list of their officials to the
Department of Labour and Industry, and enquiries about these
associations may be made there.
No State basic wage is declared in Tasmania, but the minimum
rates are specified in each industry by Wages Boards. The minimum
wage for females varies according to the industry, but is not less
than 52 per cent, of the male wage in any industry. In many
industries women receive 75 per cent of the male wage


Special Qualifications Required
Special qualifications are required in Tasmania for the
following:—
Engine-drivers Certificate issued after examination conducted
by Machinery Officers of the Department of Labour and
Industry.
Electrical Wiremen Licence issued after examination con-
ducted by officers of the Hydro-Electric Department,
Plumbers Certificate of the Sewerage Board in the Muni-
cipality is generally required.
Broadcasting Technician Must be passed by the Postmaster-
General's Department.
Ladies’ Hairdressers, Manicurists, Chiropodists, Beauty Cultur-
ists Licence issued by the Chief Inspector of Factories on
the advice of an Advisory Committee.
Cinematograph Operators Licence issued after examination con-
ducted by officers of the Public Health Department.
Chemists Required to pass examination conducted by the
Pharmacy Board.
Employees’ amenities in Tasmanian factories are generally of a
high standard. Most factories provide canteens where meals or
light refreshments are served at a nominal charge to employees.
Some factories also serve free morning tea or cocoa to workers.
Apart from sick leave benefits provided for in industrial
awards, some factories have separate sickness and accident funds
based on equal contributions by employer and employee.
Paid annual leave is granted by all factories to their
employees. This normally amounts to 10 days, and is in addition
to the usual statutory paid holidays (see end of chapter 6).
Amenities vary from factory to factory, but the trend is
continually towards improvement. Nearly all factories in Tasmania
have sports clubs, usually with their own grounds on or near the
factory premises. Inter-factory cricket, football, basketball and
tennis matches are played on a roster system.
Factories also have their own social clubs, musical and dramatic
societies, and youth clubs. Many have their own libraries, and
rooms for playing billiards, table tennis, badminton, etc.
One factory of a well-known manufacturing firm at Claremont
has its own golf links, ranked among the finest in Australia for
greens and view. This same factory also possesses two cricket
pitches, a hockey pitch, football ground, swimming pool, and tennis-
courts for the recreation of employees.
Superannuation funds, long service leave, dental treatment
schemes, attendant trained nurses, and specially-built houses on
factory estates for employees and their families are among the
many benefits which some factory owners are already extending to
their workers, and which are spreading, by their example, throughout
the industrial world in Tasmania.


Employees' Amenities in Tasmanian Factories: A Model Factory at Claremont,
which produces chocolates and allied goods, and (below) Homes on the
Factory Estate for Employees


6. ESTABLISHING A BUSINESS
THE expansion of Australia’s secondary industries, and the growth
of export markets as well as increased local consumption resulting
from population growth, provide opportunities for success in many
branches of business and factory production.
In the growing cities and towns of Australia there are openings
for new branches of commerce, the development of new types of
services and manufacturing businesses in which there is a steadily
growing demand for the smaller scale production plant’s products,
just as there is scope for the big factory.
Those who may become businessmen and employers in Australia
will find well developed systems of commerce, exchange, marketing
and communications. Whether they come to the Commonwealth
as experienced executives with established business connections, or
as migrants feeling their way, they will find well organised and
widely represented associations of commercial men and employers
willing to advise them. They are also offered the services of
Government organisations in some fields, and in all cases they will
have the ready advice of Commonwealth or State Immigration
Authorities as to where to make inquiries.
Those considering going into business who prefer to learn local
conditions first as an employee, which is highly desirable, will have
the assistance of the Commonwealth Employment Service in seeking
such employment.
There are Chambers of Commerce, Employers' Federation
branches, Chambers of Manufactures, Retailers’ Associations, bodies
of chartered accountants, bank managers, and other business men
who have extensive knowledge of all classes of industry and trade.
The business man will have no trouble in arranging a meeting
with any of these organisations if he wants advice or information.
Working Conditions
A shopkeeper or manufacturer should have a good working
knowledge of Australian sales tax, wages tax, price-fixing regulations
and industrial laws concerning wages, hours of trading, and of
employment, overtime, workers’ compensation, holidays, and so on.
The industrial rights of Australian workers, whether they be shop
assistants or process workers in factories, are carefully prescribed,
and there are laws to be obeyed regarding trading hours, shop and
factory hygiene, etc.


Working conditions in most Australian industries are good.
Anyone engaging in business in the Commowealth will receive every
encouragement from the Commonwealth and State Governments.
In this connection the Secondary Industries Commission, set up in
1943, and its offshoot the Division of Industrial Development of
Department of Post-War Reconstruction, play an important part
in fostering new industries. These bodies were appointed by the
Commonwealth Government to attend to the transition from
wartime to peacetime production, and have done splendid work
in assisting to stabilise industry in all parts of the country. The
newcomer seeking advice about establishing any industry or business
will find ready help from the Secondary Industries Commission.
OPPORTUNITIES IN TASMANIA
Primary (agricultural) industries are at present the most import-
ant factor in Tasmania’s economy, but there are many secondary
(manufacturing, etc.) industries of great importance. The number
of these industries is increasing rapidly, and newcomers who hope
to establish their own business or factory will receive every encour-
agement from the State Government.
The “Island State” offers important advantages to the manu-
facturer, among which are; —
Electric power in all the settled areas at low rates;
A wide choice of sites suitable for many types of industry in
areas well served with communications and in close proximity
to good seaports which are regularly used by interstate and
overseas ships;
Uninterrupted supplies of industrial coal from local mines, some
of which are operated by the factory users.
The configuration and rainfall of Tasmania have resulted in
the formation of a number of high altitude lakes on the central
plateau. From these, many rivers of considerable volume make a
swift-flowing descent to the plains, and are ideal for the develop-
ment of hydro-electric energy in almost every part of the island.
Harnessing Water Power
The Hydro-Electric Commission was set up as a corporate body
in 1929 to control the development of these tremendous waterpower
resources so that the best possible use might be made of them.
The Commission to date has located 1,750,000 horse power.
In addition to the schemes already in operation or in process of
development, 10 others, scattered throughout the State, have been
planned.


Developments To Date
Before 1934, development was confined to the Great Lake
Scheme. This lake, situated practically in the centre of the island,
is 3,383 feet above sea level and is 50 square miles in area. A
multiple arch dam, consisting of 27 arches each of 40 feet span,
constructed at the southern end of the lake, made possible the
generation of 130,600 horsepower.
A second scheme was started in 1934. By harnessing the River
Derwent at a short distance from where it leaves Lake St. Clair,
the engineers provided another 105,000 horsepower. The present
available power, 235,600 horsepower, is distributed to all the prim
cipal settled areas of the State by means of main and secondary
overhead transmission lines.
Other schemes which are under construction will shortly be
delivering power.
The retail supply charges in all areas served by the Commission
are as follows:
Nett price per unit
Lighting 2d. to 4d.
Domestic Power . 0.7 d. to Id.
Water Heating .. . 0.35 d.
Motive Power . 0.4 d. to IJd.
For the supply of power in bulk for industrial purposes the
rate in general operation is £lO per horsepower per annum for
the first 1,000 horsepower of maximum demand, and £3/15/' per
horsepower per annum for each additional horsepower per annum
of maximum demand.
For industries which operate continuously, such as electro-
chemical and electro-metallurgical industries, Tasmania possesses
exceptional potentialities for the supply of cheap power.
Big Users of Power
The Electrolytic Zinc Company of Australia Ltd., with an
authorised capital of £3,000,000, has huge works at Risdon, where
it uses one-third of the power sold by the Commission. Among
other big users is Australian Newsprint Mills Ltd., which is taking
steps to raise its output from 30,000 tons to 80,000 tons a year.
There is a host of smaller users who help to build the total value
of Tasmanian manufactures to almost £10,000,000 a year. When
it is remembered that the State has a population of only 257,117
persons, and that for more than two-thirds of its history little,
if any, attention was given to anything but the primary industries
this figure is remarkable.


Attracted by the certainty of an assured and growing power
supply that is not subject to interruptions, industrialists have plans
for plants in Tasmania which will greatly increase the State’s output
of manufactured goods.
Chambers of Commerce
Most important of the private organisations to which the new-
comer who wishes to start his own business may look for advice and
help are the Chambers of Commerce which have been established in
the cities of Hobart, Launceston, Burnie and Devonport.
The main functions of these organisations are to watch over
and protect the general interests of commerce; to collect information
on all matters of interest to the business community; to use every
means within their power for the removal and redress of grievances,
and for the promotion of trade of the State; to form a code of
practice whereby the transactions of business may be simplified and
facilitated; to arbitrate on all matters submitted by disputants,
the decisions of such references being recorded for future guidance.
The Chambers are non-political, but where legislation affecting
commercial interests is proposed by any government, local authority,
corporation or promoter, the Chambers promote, support or oppose
it as they see fit.
In addition, inquiries received from business houses and trade
sources throughout the world are circulated to interested members.
The Chambers of Commerce, which have volunteered all possible
help and advice to newcomers, are located at the following addresses:
Hobart Chamber of Commerce,
Secretary, Mr. D. D. Willis,
82 Collins Street,
Hobart.
Launceston Chamber of Commerce,
Secretary, Mr. W. O, Layh.
Paterson Street,
Launceston.
Burnie Chamber of Commerce,
Wilmot Street,
Burnie.
Devonport Chamber of Commerce,
44 Rooke Street,
Devonport.
Stamp Duties
When dealing with land in Tasmania, no conveyance, transfer,
lease or mortgage can be completed unless it is stamped in accordance
with the Tasmanian stamp duty laws within 30 days.


New settlers are advised to familiarise themselves with these
laws before transacting any land deals. Full details may be had
from the Tasmanian Department of Treasury, Hobart.
Shop Hours and Holidays
Shop trading hours in Tasmania are governed by both the
Shops Act of 1925 and Wages Board determinations.
Most business houses in Hobart open’ Monday to Friday, from
9.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m.
In Launceston, trading hours are from 9.05 a.m. to 5.30 p.m,,
Monday to Friday, and from 9.05 a.m. to 12 noon on Saturdays,
Butchers’ shops in both Hobart and Launceston close at 5.00
p.m. Monday to Thursday inclusive, and at 6.00 p.m. on Friday.
In all cities and towns there are no fixed hours for exempted
shops like fruiterers, confectioners and others who sell perishable
goods.
Restaurants usually open beyond the normal trading hours, and
there are a few which cater during Saturdays and Sundays.
Hotels selling alcoholic liquors are open from 10.00 a.m, to
10.00 p.m. Monday to Saturday throughout the State.
In addition to annual holidays granted to till workers under
their various awards, the following Public Holiday' arc observed
in Tasmania: —
New Years’ Day When New Year’s Day tails on the Sunday,
the following day is observed as a public holiday.
Australia Day This holiday is observed on January 26, it
such day falls on a Monday; in every other case the Monday
next after such 26th day, (In Southern Tasmania, Australia
Day has become identified with Hobart Regatta Day. the
date of which is fixed by the Governor.)
Eight Hours Day The first Monday in March.
Good Friday.
The day after Good Friday.
Easter Monday.
The first Monday in November.
Christmas Day When Christmas Day falls on a Sunday, the
following Monday and Tuesday are observed as holidays
and when Boxing Day falls on a Sunday the following
Monday is observed.
Boxing Day (the day after Christmas Day).
Under Section 10 of the Tasmanian Bank Holidays Act, 1919,
the State Governor may vary the date on which any of the above
mentioned holidays is to be observed. Such variations may apply
to the whole or any part of Tasmania. This power, however, is
seldom used, except in the case of Australia Day.


Additional public holidays observed in Tasmania are:—
King’s Birthday Usually observed on the second
or third Monday in June of
each year.
Hobart Cup Meeting . . . . Two half-days from 12 noon,
Hobart Agricultural Show . Southern Tasmania.
Launceston Cup Meeting . . Two half-days from 12 noon,
Launceston Agricultural Show Northern Tasmania.
Country Agricultural Shows. Half day or whole day in muni-
Country Sports Meetings . . cipalities and adjacent muni-
cipalities concerned.
Old Colonial Architecture characterises this Inn at Westbury on the
Launceston-Deloraine Highway.


7. TRANSPORT
a means ot covering her vast distances, Australia has developed
an integrated system of road, rail, sea and air transport. Tin
Commonwealth covers nearly ?,000,000 square miles, and has ovci
12,000 miles of coastline, so that transport is of great importance
in her commercial, industrial and private life.
Together with the railway networks, widespread air and road
services are in operation throughout the Commonwealth. Coastal
shipping services operate around the long coastline.
The newcomer in any State who wishes to avail himself ot
transport facilities will receive every assistance from the tourist
bureaux and other agencies located in the capital cities and elsewhere
State Governments, through their local bodies, attend to the
construction and maintenance of roads and highways There are
about 500,000 miles of roads in Australia, more than 120,000 of
which are of tar, bitumen, concrete or macadam The balance
are country, linking roads. With the growth of motor travel, the
standard of roads is constantly improving, and the main highways
connecting the States arc well built More than 5.000 miles of
strategic roads were built for defence purposes during the war.
and these will play a big part in Australia’s future internal develop-
ment
Control of Traffic
Traffic laws in the various States are substantially the same, but
there are local differences with which the motorist will need to
acquaint himself. The law is hard on the offending motorist, such
breaches as drunken driving resulting in the automatic cancellation
of a licence before the imposition of any further penalty. Every
driver of a car and rider of a motor-cycle has to be registered, and
the vehicles have to be registered as well. The newcomer should
become well acquainted with the traffic laws of the State in which
he settles, in his own interests as well as those of the general public.
Rules of the Road
The following simple general rules of the road apply throughout
the Commonwealth. They make for safety and convenience:—
Keep your vehicle as near to the left-hand side of the road
as practicable.
When overtaking a vehicle driving in the same direction,
overtake it on the right-hand side


Keep to the left-hand side ot the road when approaching any
horse or vehicle travelling in the opposite direction.
Always bring your car to a standstill close to and parallel
with the left-hand side of the road.
Do not cut corners when turning to the right.
Move over to the left to allow faster moving vehicles to pass.
Do not park across gateways or lanes, and so allow clear
access to them.
At intersections, the car on the right has the right of way.
Stop before entering a major road.
Watch all traffic lights, and obey them.
Obey the directions of traffic and other police at all times.
Keep to the left (except when overtaking) of a single line
painted on the road.
NEVER travel on the right of a double line on the road.
You must slow down or stop when requested or signalled
to do so by a person in charge of horses or other animals which
may become frightened at your approach.
Do not overtake on the brow of a hill, or where visibility
is less than 700 feet clear.
Always carry certificate of competency to drive with you.
Report an accident in which you are involved to the nearest
police station as soon as possible, but not later than 24 hours.
Give name and address to owner of property, person or
vehicle concerned in an accident and render assistance to injured.
Driving Signals
Illustrated are the traffic hand signals used throughout the
Commonwealth. They are the only hand signals required to he
given by motorists; the use of other signals may lead to a following
driver misunderstanding your intentions and possibly colliding with
you. The driver of a vehicle which has the steering gear on the
left, will give the signals by means of an approved mechanical
device fastened on the right-hand side of the vehicle.
Left:
I am going to stop.
Right:
I am going to turn
to the right.


TASMANIA'S ROAD LAWS
All inland transport in Tasmania, except the tram and bus
-rvices of municipalities, is controlled by the Transport Commission.
Revenue collected from motor registration fees and taxes is used
to meet road and traffic control expenditure.
Every motor vehicle and trailer used on a public road must be
registered. The fee is £l/10/' a year for each vehicle and £1 for
motor-cycles. In addition to registration fees, motor tax calculated
on a basis of 2/5 per power weight unit for cars and 1/8 per power
weight unit for trucks has to be paid. Power weight is a combination
Caravanning in typical Tasmanian Country.


of unloaded weight of the vehicle and the horsepower. Every
T 6 lbs. constitutes a weight unit.
Licensing
Any vehicle used for the carriage of goods or passengers for
hire or goods for sale, must be licensed annually under separate
classifications, as follows:
Cart, van or carrier (goods vehicles), £2 motor, £1 horse-drawn.
Cab, coach or omnibus (passenger vehicles), 6/- per passenger
for motor, 10/- for horse-drawn.
Hire car (motor), 6/- per passenger for one area, £lO for a
State licence.
The State is divided into separate licensing areas. Licences
for two or more areas, or for the whole State, are issued at increased
fees. A vehicle licensed for a particular area may be operated
outside it under a permit.
Vehicles used for primary producers for the carriage of their
own produce (other than wool) are not subject to licensing.
Applicants for driving licences must give a practical demonstra-
tion of their ability to operate and drive a motor vehicle. The
fee for a driving licence is 10/- a year. A free permit is granted
to tourists and visiting motorists subject to the car being registered
in another State and the driver holding a current driving licence.
New number plates must be obtained each year. They cost
1/6 a pair, including postage.
Third Party Insurance
Third party insurance against accidental injury or death is
compulsory. Policies are limited to £2,000 in the case of any one
person, and £20,000 for any one accident. The cost is £1 a year
for private cars, and £l/7/- for commercial vehicles.
An interesting provision of the traffic regulations is that motor
horns may not be sounded in a city or town between 8.0 a.m.
and 8,0 p.m. except in the case of an emergency-.
Regulations under the Traffic Act, covering details of what is
required of the motorist, may be obtained from the Government
Printer, Hobart.
The Royal Autocar Club of Tasmania has its head office at 20
Murray Street, Hobart, and branches at Launceston and Queenstown.
The Club’s official garages will be found in towns throughout the
State, and help and advice is always readily available to the visitor
or newcomer to Tasmania.


Apple Blossom Time in a Huon Orchord. (Photo: Frnk Hu r ley)


8. HOUSING
THERE can he few more important questions for the newcomer
from overseas than those surrounding his prospects of getting a
home.
Australia has tackled post-war housing as a national problem.
Co-operation between the Commonwealth and State Governments
has resulted in housing schemes designed to bring about speedy
improvement in the position which existed in 1945-46, when home
building was resumed.
Factors limiting Australia’s housing progress included shortage
of materials and of trained workers, but in each State housing
projects were quickly in course of development. These projects
« , ere all planned on a high standard. In the growth of cities
here, as elsewhere, some congested areas of sub-standard housing
have developed, but the recent trend of home building has been
towards more spacious suburban development, with homes set in
adequate allotments. Both Federal and State plans make provision
for the clearance of congested areas, and the elimination of sub-
standard homes.
More than a third of the houses and flats in the Commonwealth
arc built of brick, a big proportion of those in suburbs and country
towns being set in tree-lined streets, and more than half the
dwellings arc occupied by owners or people buying them on
instalments Minimum standards of the size of building allotments
arc decided by the States.
Governments and Housing
The Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement lays the
foundation for a housing scheme unique in Australia. It aims to
improve the standard of housing, and provides for slum clearance
and town planning.
Under the agreement, the Commonwealth advances money to
the States for home building. The States design, build, and own
the houses, and the Federal Government agrees to bear three-fifths
of all losses, and the State concerned, two-fifths. Such losses are
likely to occur under the system of granting rental rebates to
families which cannot afford the assessed “economic rent” of the
home.
This system provides for rental rebates based on the principle
that families whose income equals only the basic wage should not


Weekly family
income.
Rental
re
hate.
Rent payable.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
2
10
0
1
2
0
0
8
0
2
i?
0
1
1
6
0
8
6
3
0
0
1
0
0
0
10
0
3
10
0
0
17
6
0
12
6
4
0
0
0
15
0
0
15
0
4
10
0
0
12
6
0
17
6
5
0
0
0
10
0
1
0
0
5
5
0
0
9
0
1
1
0
5
10
0
0
7
0
1
3
0
5
15
0
0
5
6
1
4
6
6
0
0
0
4
0
1
6
0
6
5
0
0
2
0
1
8
0
6
10
0
0
0
6
1
9
6
6
15
0
1
10
0
pay more than one-fifth of that income in rent, regardless of the
economic rent of the dwelling. As the family income rises above or
falls below the basic wage, so docs the rebate diminish or increase.
The family income is defined as that of the household, not merely
that of the bread-winner. Thus, a relative bringing money into
the house would be considered in fixing the rent. In no case is the
rental rebate such that the actual rent payable is allowed to fall
below 8/- a week. The following table shows the manner in
which rental rebates operate. For convenience, the basic wage
has been shown at a flat rate of £5/5/- a week (though it is a
few shillings higher in some places), and the economic rent of a
three-bedroom house is taken as £l/10/- a week:—
Allocation of Houses
Houses erected under the agreement are allocated on the basis
of need, determined from time to time between the Commonwealth
and the States. At present (1948) priorities are given to families
living in houses condemned by local authorities; families inadequately
housed in boarding houses or other overcrowded places; families
living far from employment or those separated by inability to obtain
homes near their work. In most of the States, persons eligible for
homes are admitted to a ballot on a priority basis, and some States
allot homes on a points system, based on relative needs.
Newcomers are not eligible for homes until they have been
resident in Australia for six months.


State Government Schemes
All States have legislation for the encouragement of home
ownership, by means of rent-purchase schemes, with small deposits,
easy repayment terms, and reasonable interest rates. Most of them
require that an applicant, to be eligible for an advance for building
or purchase, must not be the owner of a dwelling in the State, and
must require the house for the use of himself and his family. There
are income limits for eligibility to apply for loans under these
schemes, from £4OO upwards.
Other Facilities
The Commonwealth Bank makes credit fonder loans at low
rate of interest for building or buying a home over a period of
years. The borrower decides how many years he will take to repay
the loan, and the Bank works out the amount of interest and
principal to be covered by each monthly payment. This system
operates in all States, advances being made for the erection of
houses, or the purchase of newly-erected ones, provided the borrower
occupies the house as a dwelling for himself and his family.
The maximum amount of any loan the Commonwealth Bank may
make under its Credit Foncier scheme is £1,750 where the subject
dwelling is of brick or similar construction, or brick veneer; £1,500
in the case of weatherboard dwellings; and £1,350 in the case of
asbestos cement (fibro) or homes of similar construction.
No loan may exceed 85 per cent, of the Bank’s valuation of the
security. The interest rate has been fixed at 3f per cent, a year,
and loans are repayable by equal monthly instalments of principal
and interest over periods up to 33 years. The applicant must own,
or have an option to buy, the land on which the house is built.
Full details of this system are available from branches of the
Commonwealth Bank throughout Australia.
Building Societies
A big part in financing home building in Australia has been
played by co-operative building and housing societies, modelled on
the English system. Members joining societies take out shares,
usually of a nominal value of about £55, in sufficient numbers to
cover the amount of building loan required. There is usually a
small entrance fee, of from 1/6 to 2/6 a share, to cover administrative
expenses. The shareholders then enter for ballots, and the life of
most societies is 22 § years, the loans made to members being repaid
by regular monthly instalments of principal and interest over that
period. The societies usually borrow in bulk on the security of
the collective shareholders, and lend to their members on the
security of the house and land.


Life Assurance Loans
A good deal of home building is financed through the major
life assurance offices. These companies and societies will advance
money for the building of a home, purchase of a dwelling, or
alterations or taking over of a mortgage. A feature of this type
of home finance is that arrangements may be made, by means of an
endowment policy, to leave a family with a home free of debt. If
the borrower dies during the period of the loan, either the whole
or part of the loan still owing is immediately repaid out of the
proceeds of a life policy.
Practically all life assurance policies are entitled to bonus
additions to the amount assured, which are allotted out of the
profit earned. The loan transaction, therefore, becomes one of a
mutual or co-operative profit-sharing nature. In respect of that
portion of the borrower’s loan payments which constitute the life
assurance premiums, the borrower is entitled to claim a concessional
rebate of income tax, which means that his net outlay is corre-
spondingly reduced.
Life assurance offices usually prefer the repayment period to
correspond with the earning portion of a borrower’s life, and the
younger the borrower the smaller will be the monthly payments.
In the main schemes operated by these societies, security is required,
either in the form of an endowment policy, or a life policy assuring
an amount equal to the whole or half of the debt, depending on
the life expectation of the borrower.
Details are readily available from leading life assurance offices.
Private Building
Much home building is done by private contract, and those
able to finance the work may prefer to act in this way, and maintain
individual control over the job. There are, however, controls over
both building and materials which the newcomer should inquire
about carefully, and he would be well advised to seek the advice
of a reputable estate agent, as well as securing the services of
a good architect.
Tenancy Control
During the war, the Commonwealth Government introduced
rental regulations under the National Security Act, and subsequently
the Premiers of the States agreed that, so long as there was a
housing shortage, some form of rent control should continue.
Following the relinquishing of rent control by the Common-
wealth, each of the State Governments has set up administrative
machinery to maintain rent and tenancy supervision.


HOUSING IN TASMANIA
Up to the end of 1947, the shortage of houses in Tasmania
had not been overcome. The Tasmanian Government, however, in
cooperation with the Commonwealth Government, was operating
a large-scale building programme.
In addition to normal production of houses by private builders,
the Tasmanian Government builds up-to-date houses through its
housing authority, the Agricultural Bank of Tasmania.
The Agricultural Bank’s houses are allotted on a tenancy basis,
the average rental being about 30/- a week. The State Parliament,
however, encourages home-ownership, and, provided a tenant carries
out the terms of his tenancy agreement, the Bank has the power
to sell the houses to tenants. The houses are sold either with or
without a deposit on extended terms by weekly payment.
The payments are based on the amount required to repay the
capital cost over a period of 40 years, together with interest, rates,
taxes and insurance. The weekly payment in most cases compares
more than favourably with the rentals paid for similar types of
houses outside this scheme.
Because of the shortage of good-standard homes, the houses
erected by the Agricultural Bank are allotted according to need.
Wrest Point Riviera Hotel, Sandy Boy, Hobart.


Preference is given to persons living in sub-standard and over-
crowded places. A proportion of the houses is set aside for
Australian ex-servicemen who do not compete with civilians for
their allotment.
The Agricultural Bank also has the power to make advances
to eligible persons to purchase land and construct their own homes
according to their individual taste. There are several conditions
applying to these loans, and full information on the subject can be
obtained from the Bank, which has offices at Macquarie Street,
Hobart, and 90 Cameron Street, Launceston. Housing loans may
also be obtained from the Commonwealth Bank, Hobart; the Hobart
Savings Bank, Murray Street, Hobart; and the Launceston Bank for
Savings, St. John Street, Launceston.
Building Societies
Housing operations of building societies in Tasmania are usually
conducted on long-range contracts for loans on approved securities.
Loans of up to 80 per cent, of the valuation of the security by the
Society are made at low interest rates.
Details are available from the various societies. The main ones
in Tasmania are:—
Equitable Building Society, 59 Cameron Street, Launceston.
The Permanent Building Society, 71 St. John Street,
Launceston.
The Launceston Savings, Investment & Building Society,
19 Paterson Street, Launceston.
Australian Mutual Provident Society (Tasmanian Branch),
cr. Elisabeth and Collins Streets, Hobart.
The National Mutual Life Association of Australasia Ltd.,
119 Macquarie Street, Hobart.
The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd., 18-20
Elisabeth Street, Hobart.
Sites for a Home
In the Hobart suburbs there is a brisk demand for building
allotments, and prices range from £4OO in the Sandy Bay area to
£lOO in the outer settlements.
In the northern city of Launceston, prices are lower, but there is
also a keen demand. Other towns showing substantial housing
development with consequent demands for building sites are Burnie
and Devonport in the north-west, and New Norfolk in the Derwent
River Valley. In other provincial centres, land may be obtained
without undue difficulty.


9. HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
LL people arriving in Australia from overseas, provided that
they can satisfy the Social Services Administration that they have
come to settle in the Commonwealth as permanent residents, arc
eligible to apply for social service benefits provided by the Com-
monwealth Government, such as maternity allowances, child endow-
ment and unemployment and sickness benefits.
In the case of invalid and widows’ pensions, the applicant must
have resided continuously in Australia for five years, and for age
pensions for a period of 20 years.
The benefits to which permanent residents are entitled include:—
Maternity Allowance
Every mother in Australia, irrespective of income, is entitled
to a maternity allowance of £1? for the first child born to her,
£l6 if she has one or two other children under 16, and £l7/10/-
where there are three or more such children. Where more than one
child is born at a birth, an additional allowance of £5 is paid in
respect of each additional child born at that birth.
New settlers coming to Australia under the British free and
assisted passages schemes, and other British permanent settlers, will
receive the allowance for a child born during a voyage to the
Commonwealth or at any time after arrival in Australia. In the
case of non-British permanent settlers, unless one of the parents
has lived in Australia for 12 months preceding the birth of the
child, the actual payment is not made until the mother has lived
in Australia for a year.
Child Endowment
The rate of child endowment is 10/- a week in respect of each
child under the age of 16 in excess of one, and is payable to the
person having the custody, care and control of such children.
Migrants may claim child endowment as soon as they arrive in
Australia. Payment will be made immediately if the Social Service
authorities are satisfied that the claimant and the child in respect
of whom the claim is made intend to live permanently in Australia
Otherwise payment will be deferred for 12 months.
British migrants reaching Australia under the free and assisted
passages schemes are eligible for child endowment payments from
the date of their arrival in Australia.


Unemployment and Sickness Benefits
All males over 16 and under 65, and females over 16 and
under 60, are entitled, subject to an income test, to receive unem'
ployment and sickness benefits if their earnings have been temporarily
interrupted as a result of unemployment, sickness or accident. The
weekly payment for adults and married minors is £l/5/', with an
additional payment of £1 for a wife and 5/- in respect of an
unendowed child, making a total benefit of £2/10/' a week during
the period of unemployment or sickness.
Lower rates are provided for unmarried minors—15/' a week
for a youth or girl between 16 and 18, and £1 weekly between
18 and 21.
A waiting period of seven days is required before benefits begin
to accrue, either for unemployment or sickness.
Invalid Pensions
Invalid pensions are payable at a rate of up to £2/2/6 a
week, subject to the application of a means test and a qualification
of five years’ continuous residence. The pension is granted only to
persons who have become permanently incapacitated for work, or
blind while in Australia, or during a temporary absence from Aus'
tralia, and is not payable to certain categories of persons specified
under the Act (e.g., persons who are not British subjects). Addh
tional allowances, on a reduced scale, may be paid in respect of the
wife and unendowed child of a pensioner.
Age Pensions
Subject to a means test, men aged 65 and women aged 60 who
are of good character and have resided in Australia for at least
20 years may apply for age pensions of up to £2/2/6 a week.
As in the case of invalid pensions, certain categories of residents
are not qualified.
Widows 1 Pensions
A widow who is maintaining one or more children under 16
is entitled to apply for a pension of up to £2/7/6 a week. A
widow aged 50 or over who is not maintaining a child under the


age of 16 may be eligible for a pension of up to £l, 17/- a week.
These pensions are subject to a residential qualification of five
years immediately preceding the date of the claim, and also to a
means test.
Subject to the same five-year qualification, a widow under 50
not maintaining a child may, if left in necessitous circumstances
at the time of her husband’s death, receive an allowance at the
rate of £2/2/6 a week for not more than six months immediately
following her husband’s death.
Hospitals
Australia is well supplied with public and private hospitals,
and particular care is given to mothers and children. The sunny
climate and open spaces have bred a hardy race of children, and
both Australia and New Zealand are proud of the fact that for
years they have shown the lowest infantile mortality rates in the
world. Pre-natal clinics and baby health centres are numerous,
and a national system of checking the health of school children
prevails.
Some of the city hospitals are among the most modern and
well-equipped to be found anywhere. The Commonwealth and
State Governments work in close co-operation to maintain national
health standards.
Each State looks after its own hospital system, but under the
hospitals benefits scheme, the Commonwealth Government assists
them by subsidies enabling persons occupying beds in public wards
to have free treatment without a means test. The Federal Govern-
ment also pays the States 8/- a day for each patient in the private
wards of public hospitals, and those in certain approved private
hospitals, which makes a considerable difference in the size of
hospital bills. Every permanent resident of Australia is entitled
to these benefits.
National Fitness
The Commonwealth grants £72,500 a year to the States for
national fitness activities, apart from the grants that the States
themselves make. This money is allotted to universities for the
training of specialists in physical education, to State Education
Departments for extension of the health programmes in schools,
and to State National Fitness Councils for the building up of
community activities for better general living conditions. Grants
to the National Fitness Councils total £35,000 a year. In addition,
a national drive against tuberculosis, on much broader lines than
those now in operation, has been planned in detail.


HEALTH SERVICES IN TASMANIA
Tasmania has a cool and healthy climate with a mean maximum
temperature of about 63 deg., and there is a marked absence of
extremes of heat, which has a beneficial effect on children’s health.
This is reflected in the infantile mortality rate, which was, in 1945,
only 27.5 per 1,000 births.
Antenatal clinics in Hobart and Launceston are popular. In
other areas there are mobile clinics, and advice is given to expectant
mothers at child welfare centres. There are 61 of these centres in
town and country, where mothers are assisted, babies weighed, test
feedings given and diets corrected.
The next link in looking after the health of children is the
school medical and dental service,, which provides for the examination
of all school children at regular intervals, with advice on treatment
where needed, A follow-up system ensures that parents carry out
the treatment recommended.
An important feature of Tasmania’s health precautions is the
State-wide X-ray photographing of the chests of all people between
the ages of 14 and 25. This ensures the detection of early and
unsuspected cases of tuberculosis, for which immediate treatment
is prescribed. The tests are carried out by a mobile miniature
X-ray unit which travels to all parts of the State.
Royal Hobart Hospital. (Photo: "Pix" Magazine.)


Hospitals
The hospital and medical services of the State are closely allied.
Major base hospitals of modern design are located in Hobart and
Launceston, and are elaborately equipped for all branches of surgical
and medical work. Members of the staffs are highly qualified.
Minor base hospitals are at Latrobe, Wynyard and Queenstown,
and there are cottage hospitals of from 10 to 20 beds at Zeehan,
Campbelltown, St. Mary’s, New Norfolk, Scottsdale, Beaconsfield
and King Island.
The smaller country areas are served by 23 Bush Nursing Centres,
the majority of which can accommodate from two to five midwifery
cases and provide emergency beds for surgical and medical cases.
General hospitals throughout the State are free to all patients.
Revenue for upkeep is obtained from State grants, plus subsidies
received from the Commonwealth Government under the Hospitals
Benefit Agreement. Out-patient services at all hospitals are free
to all.’
Medical Service
Some years ago, a Government medical service was instituted
to provide free treatment for people in remote country areas.
This has now been extended to centres of larger population, 16
municipalities being associated with it. In addition to free medical
attention, extensive preventive work is carried out, especially in
immunisation against diphtheria and whooping-cough.
Medical officers associated with this service also conduct ante-
natal and post-natal clinics, assist with school medical inspections,
and act as local health officers. They work in close co-operation
with the district hospitals
A number of specialists are attached to the Health Department
and visit various centres at regular intervals. They consult with
local practitioners and hospital staffs, and, in serious cases, carry
out treatment on the spot, or order the removal of patients to base
hospitals. The specialists include a part-time plastic surgeon, an
orthopaedic surgeon, a psychiatrist,. and an officer for tubercular
cases.
Plans are in hand for a wide extension of this service in con-
junction with a scheme for many more hospitals, so as to provide
maternity wards in every district with a population of 3,000 or more.


Adequate facilities for midwifery cases are available at all large
centres, and there is accommodation for infectious disease cases at
Hobart, Launceston and Latrobe.
The following are leading Government or subsidised institutions:
Lachlan Park Hospital (mental cases).
Millbrook Home, New Norfolk (psychopathic cases).
St. John’s Park, Hobart (for invalids and the aged).
Home for Invalids, Launceston (for invalids and the aged).
Tasmanian Sanatorium, Hobart (for tuberculosis).
Crippled Children’s Homes at Hobart and St. Leonards, near
Launceston (for after-treatment of infantile paralysis).
Mothercraft Home, New Town (for care of premature
babies).
There are 22 private hospitals in the State, ranging from two-
bed maternity hospitals, to those for the accommodation of up to
150 patients. These latter are conducted by religious bodies.
Government House, Hobart.


10. CHURCHES AND WELFARE BODIES
WHEREVER he may settle in Australia, the new arrival will
find a warm welcome among the churches, friendly societies and
other community organisations. , Two main bodies look after the
interests of ex-service men and women- the Returned Sailors, Sol-
diers and Airmen’s Imperial League of Australia and the Legion
of Ex-Servicemen and Women. Both have branches and sub-
branches throughout the Commonwealth and offer membership to
Imperial ex-service personnel.
Friendly societies offer substantial benefits to members, as well
as opportunities for social life. There are many youth and other
clubs and organisations making the care of new settlers their
concern.
Absolute freedom of worship is written into the Australian
Constitution, and a number of the churches have expressed active
interest and participation in the Government’s immigration pro-
gramme. In leading churches there are social and welfare bodies
which welcome new members, and the churches are prominent in
furthering social welfare movements for the good of the community.
SOCIAL ACTIVITIES IN TASMANIA
Principal churches and places of Divine Worship in Hobart
are: —
Church of England — St. David’s Cathedral,
Cnr. Macquarie Murray Streets.
St. George’s,
Battery Point.
Holy Trinity,
Warwick Street.
Roman Catholic St. Mary’s Cathedral,
Church — Harrington Street.
St. Joseph’s,
Macquarie Street.
St. Francis Xavier,
Adelaide Street.
Presbyterian Church — St. Andrew’s Scotch Church,
Bathurst Street.
Chalmers Church,
Bathurst Street.


Methodist Church — Wesley Church,
Melville Street,
Methodist Church,
Davey Street.
Congregational Memorial Church,
Church— Brisbane Street,
Baptist Church— Baptist Church,
286 Elizabeth Street.
Salvation Army— Liverpool Street and Newdegate Street
Independent— Pitt Street,
Disciples of Christ— Collins Street and Hill Street.
Latter Day Saints— Strahan Street.
Society of Friends— Meeting House,
14? Murray Street.
Seventh Day
Adventists— Warwick Street.
Christian Science— First Church of Christ Scientist,
67 Brisbane Street.
Jewish Synagogue — Argyle Street.
Council of Churches — Tasmanian Council of Churches,
Secretary, 124 A Collins Street.
In Launceston, principal places of Divine Worship are;—
Church of England— St. John’s,
St. John Street.
Trinity,
Cnr. George and Cameron Streets.
St. Paul’s,
Cleveland Street.
Roman Catholic Church of the Apostles,
Church— Margaret Street,
St. Finn Barr’s,
Inveresk.
Presbyterian Church— St. Andrew’s,
St. John Street.
Chalmers Church,
Frederick Street.
Baptist Church— Tabernacle,
Cimitiere Street.
Methodist Church— Paterson Street, Frederick Street,
Margaret Street.
Congregational Christ Church,
Church— Frederick Street.
Church of Christ— Margaret Street and Invermay.


Salvation Army
Barracks— Elizabeth Street.
Catholic Apostolic
Church— Margaret Street.
Christadelphians— Albert Hall,
Tamar Street.
Theosophical Society— 54 Elizabeth Street.
Seventh Day
Adventists— Maitland Street.
Friendly Societies
Friendly societies in Tasmania maintain a close alliance with
established bodies of the same kind in the United Kingdom. The
newcomer to Tasmania may get in touch with the officials of these
bodies to secure for himself and his family the benefits they offer.
In addition, these bodies provide for the recreation of members by
organising social functions of all kinds. All newcomers will be
assured of a fraternal welcome. The main friendly societies, whose
addresses may be found in the district telephone books of Tas-
mania, are:—
The Ancient Order of Foresters.
The Protestant Alliance Friendly Society of Australasia.
The Independent Order of Oddfellows, M.U.
United Ancient Order of Druids.
St. John’s Friendly Society, Launceston.
Loyal Orange Institution.
Independent Order of Oddfellows (under Grand Lodge of
Australasia).
Hibernian Australasian Catholic Benefit Society,
Independent Order of Rechabites, S.U.
Australian Natives’ Association.
The benefits of these societies include free medical attention and
medicine for members and their families, a sick pay allowance for
members, and a funeral allowance for members and their wives.
Co-operation
The two principal religious bodies in Tasmania, the Council
of Churches and the Roman Catholic Church, are co-operating in
every way possible with the Commonwealth and State Governments
in matters concerning the welfare of new settlers.


While their primary object is to attend to the spiritual guidance
of their followers, the social aspect is by no means forgotten. There
are many types of clubs available, both sporting and social, and
newcomers who are interested can obtain full information by writing
to any of the following:—
Church of England The Diocesan Youth Organisation,
Clubs — Diocesan Registry,
25 Murray Street,
Hobart.
Roman Catholic Rev. Father John Ryan,
Clubs — 72 Adelaide Street,
South Hobart.
Catholic Games Club,
Secretary, Thelma Jones,
53a Pedder Street,
New Town,
Presbyterian — Presbyterian Fellowship Club . . . Any
further information can be obtained
from Presbyterian Ministers.
Seventh Day S.D.A. Youth Movement,
Adventists’ Clubs — Secretary, L. H. Hay,
361 Argyle Street,
North Hobart.
Salvation Army — Salvation Army Youth,
Brig. L. Stranks,
192 Liverpool Street,
Hobart.
Church of Christ Information can be obtained from any
Clubs — C. of C. Minister.
Methodist Clubs — Methodist Youth Fellowship,
State Secretary,
Rev. Walter Peck,
22 Princes Street,
Sandy Bay,
Baptist — Baptist Young People,
Secretary,
Mr. C. M. Daglish,
2 Sloane Street,
Battery Point.
Congregational — Congregational Youth,
Secretary,
Mr. D. Gibbings,
Claremont.


Most of the above organisations have branches throughout the
"itate, and the Secretary or Minister will be pleased to tell you
which is nearest to your final stopping place
Y.M.C.A.
The Young Men’s Christian Association is situated at 5 5 Argyle
Street, Hobart. Facilities include gymnasium, billiard room, dining
room, cafeteria, reading and writing rooms, and accommodation for
66 guests.
This organisation has another small establishment in Launceston
at 42 Brisbane Street. Here about 15 guests can be accommodated,
and there are reading and writing lounges.
Y.W.C.A.
The Young Women’s Christian Association has club rooms at
105 Liverpool Street, Hobart, and at 84 Charles Street, Launceston
C.W.A.
The Country Women’s Association was formed in Tasmania in
1936. It has a membership of about 5,000 spread throughout the
State. The principal object of the association is to watch over
the health and general welfare of country women and children. It
is in many ways similar to the Women’s Institute of Great Britain
The C.W.A. has offices at:-
29 Murray Street,
Hobart.
115 High Street,
Launceston.
C/o Mrs. A. A. Game,
Box 13, Post Office,
Wynyard (Burnie District)
Mrs H R. Thomas,
North Devon,
Latrobe (Devonport District).
Girls' Friendly Society
The Girls’ Friendly Society has a hostel at 51 Davey Street,
Hobart, and provides accommodation (when possible) for young
women up to the age of 25 years.


Ex-Service Bodies
The membership of the Returned Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen's
Imperial League of Australia, which is affiliated with the British
Empire Service League, London, is open to all Empire ex-service
personnel who served in a theatre of war.
The League helps care for the dependants of those killed on
active service, helps distressed ex-servicemen and maintains memorial
halls, clubs and bureaux for the use of its members.
The R.S.S. & A.I.L.A. has offices at 147 Macquarie Street,
Hobart; 49 Paterson Street, Launceston; Rooke Street, Devonport;
and Wilmot Street, Burnie, Other branches are scattered through-
out the State.
New settlers may apply for membership and their credentials will
he investigated in the same way as those of Australians.
The Australian Flying Corps and Royal Australian Air Force
Association has offices at 61 Davey Street, Hobart. The Associa-
tion’s secretary in Launceston may be reached through correspondence
to Box 83, P. 0., Launceston. Branches are also located at Burnie,
Devonport, and New Norfolk. Membership to the Association is
open to allied male ex-airmen at the discretion of the Committee.
The Australian Legion of Ex-Servicemen and Women, whose
membership is open to all Allied ex-servicemen and women at the
discretion of the Committee, has offices at the “Continental,” Mac-
quarie Street, Hobart, and 33 The Quadrant, Launceston. The
Legion also has branches throughout the State.
National Fitness
The National Fitness Council is an Australia-wide organisation.
Its aim is to stimulate the formation of youth clubs through the
provision of trained leaders whose services can be relied upon for
help with programmes or special activities. It aims, through these
clubs, to improve health and recreation facilities for young people.
In Tasmania, offices of the Council are situated at: —
Hobart Amateur House, cnr. Collins & Molle Streets.
Launceston —47 Cameron Street.
Burnie Town Hall Buildings.
Devonport Council Chambers.
Huonville Council Chambers,
Further details of the Council’s work may be obtained from the-
National Fitness Council Secretary at any of the above addresses.


11. RECREATION AND SPORT
With long hours ol sunshine throughout the year, plenty or
space and natural facilities for outdoor sport and recreation, Aus-
tralians are keen on sport of all kinds, as players as well as spectators
in the various competitive fields. New settlers will find clubs for
their favorite games which are easy to join, and plenty of oppor-
tunities to indulge in those sports.
Cricket and tennis are among the leading summer games. The
Test matches against England have made Australian cricketers famous,
and many fine cricketers compete in interstate and club games
throughout the Commonwealth. As in England, cricket has also
its enthusiasts in the remotest outback towns, and the newcomer, if
he wishes to play, will find a welcome from clubs always on the
lookout for good players.
There are tennis clubs in practically every city, suburb and
country town, with subscriptions averaging from .'O'- to £2 a
year. There are also many private courts.
Football is played in the winter at all the schools, and the big
matches of the four codes draw huge crowds at week-ends. The
Australian National Code (known familiarly as “Australian Rules")
is the principal game in four States—Victoria, South Australia,
Western Australia and Tasmania —and attracts crowds of up to
96,000. It is a fast, spectacular game, with 18 players a side, the
experts showing remarkable skill. Soccer has a good hold in many
places, and Rugby League (Northern Rules in England) is the
most popular in New South Wales and Queensland. League teams
from England pay periodical visits, and these are returned by
representative Australian combinations. Rugby Union has many
followers and Australian teams exchange visits with teams from the
United Kingdom, New Zealand and South Africa.
Golf and bowls are popular everywhere, and both are cheap
to play. For golfers there are many public links, where a round
of 18 holes costs only 3/-: and both cities and country towns have
excellent bowling greens.
During the long summer months, surfing and swimming are
among the most popular sports. In country districts there are
swimming baths and plenty of pools along the rivers.
Yachting and sailing on the harbours of the capital cities are
also popular, and sailing races provide closely contested and exciting
spectator sport.


Horse-racing is among Australia's major sports. With pre-
dominant strains of classic English and Continental horses. Aus
tralia’s bloodstock is highly rated. The standard of horsemanship
is very high, and racing is strictly controlled by bodies modelled
on the traditions of the English turf. All the cities and larger
country towns have well-planned racecourses with every conveni-
ence, and the turf on which Australian horses race is kept in perfect
condition. Crowds in the principal cities sometimes approach the
100,000 mark, and race meetings arc held regularly on Saturdays
and on many public holidays.
The highlight of the Australian racing season is the Melbourne
Cup with stakes worth £IO,OOO, for which Melbourne declares a
public holiday on the first Tuesday in November, and to which
interstate visitors flock.
In addition to steeplechasing, hurdle and flat racing, trotting
has many devotees in several States, notably in Western and South
Australia, where day and night meetings are held.
Each country town of any size has its racecourse. Picnic races,
providing a holiday for farmers and city folk on bush tracks, are
always well attended. The Australian love of a good horse is
also shown at the big annual Royal Shows in the capital cities, and
at the smaller country shows, where competition is always keen
in high jumps, trotting events and buck-jumping displays.
Greyhound racing has many followers in each State, and has
reached a high standard on city and country courses, where night
meetings are often held.
Hockey and lacrosse are winter sports that have many followers,
and on the ranges of the Southern Alps in New South Wales and
Victoria, and on Tasmania’s mountain slopes, skiing and other
snow sports attract many visitors. Model hostels and chalets cater
for the comfort of snow sport enthusiasts, and some splendid ski
runs are available.
Athletics, cycle racing, basket-ball, ice and roller skating are
other sports indulged in, and in all States there is ample opportunity
for sport for women. Among indoor games, table tennis, chess
and bridge arc played all over the Commonwealth,
For the fisherman, Australia offers plenty of variety, from angling
for rainbow and brown trout in the mountain streams of most
States, to deep sea fishing for marlin, swordfish and giant sharks.
All around the coast, in the harbours, bays and estuaries and off
the beaches, the fisherman will find plenty of edible fish that will
give good sport the year round. In the country the rivers and
lakes are stocked with fresh-water fish.
Gun sport is varied. Rabbits and hares abound, and duck,
snipe and quail are to be found in season. In many districts the
kangaroos and wallabies become a pest to the farmer at certain


-cason- because <>l their depredations among Ins crops, and pemm-
are granted to shoot them. For the more adventurous, there is
buffalo and crocodile shooting in the iar north
Theatres
Every town of any site has its picture theatres, showing British
and American releases and, from time to time, Australian produc-
tions. There are also live artist shows touring the cities and large:
towns. Attendances at theatrical performances exceed 4,000,000 a
year, and for the movies they reach over 140,000,000 a year. In
the cities and big provincial towns there are repertory societies which
present classic old-time plays and current successes. There are also
amateur operatic societies.
Symphony orchestras and musical societies provide regular
orchestral concerts and recitals. The Australian Broadcasting Com-
mission, in conjunction with several of the State Gsvernments, offer-
orchestral concerts of high standard, and world-famous conductor-
and artists pay regular visits to Australia.
The radio programmes, on both the national and commercial
stations, provide a wide selection of drama, music, talks, variety
fare, news and commentaries. Many radio serials are founded on
aspects of Australian life. In addition to orchestras and musical
societies, each city and many towns have brass bands of good
calibre, and band festivals and eisteddfods are highly developed
throughout the country.
There are numerous cultural movements, such as film centres,
recorded music clubs, debating clubs, and societies and discussion
groups devoted to sectional interests. All these are ready to
welcome the newcomer. Dancing is a popular pastime in city and
country.
Well-stocked circulating libraries and reading rooms are to be
found in both city and country, and there are art galleries containing
representative collections of Australian and overseas painting and
sculpture, and museums with interesting collections of Australian
aboriginal weapons and utensils.
RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES IN TASMANIA
Tasmania is a tourist and health resort of great beauty ano
scenic variety. It has a mild, temperate climate and a high average
of sunshine. To some extent, Tasmania is reminiscent of the United
Kingdom, but the Island State is more fortunate in that its average
annual hours of sunshine are more than double those of the “Old
Country.”


Tasmanians, like their fellow Australians on the mainland, are a
sport'lovmg people, and all sports have a large number of followers.
In all parts of the State, cricket, football, horse-racing, hockey,
basketball, tennis, swimming, sailing, golf, cycling and other sports
have thousands of devotees throughout the year.
Cricket, which is played throughout the summer months, is
governed by the Tasmanian Cricket Association. There are fine
playing fields of world standard at Hobart and Launceston.
The Australian National Code of football is the main winter
sport for thousands of players and the game attracts many thousands
of spectators. The Tasmanian Australian National Football League
has offices at 153 Macquarie Street, Hobart.
Major tennis clubs are the Tasmanian Lawn Tennis Association,
S 2 Collins Street, Hobart (this Association has 45 clubs affiliated
with it); the Northern Tasmanian Lawn Tennis Association, 29
Paterson Street, Launceston, and the Catholic Lawn Tennis
Association, Hobart,
Tasmania is famous for yacht racing. The leading sailing club
is the Royal Yacht Club of Tasmania. Motor yachtsmen have
handed themselves into the Motor Yacht Club of Tasmania. Both
these organisations have their headquarters in Hobart. Annual
regattas of these clubs draw huge crowds in the summertime.
Addresses of the principal sporting clubs in Tasmania are; —
Swimming—Tasmanian Amateur Swimming Association,
Secretary, J. W. Harrison,
3 Shoobridge Street, Glebe, Hobart.
Rowing Tasmanian Rowing Council,
Secretary. A. Creswell,
104 Elizabeth Street, Hobart.
Golf— Southern Tasmanian Golf Union,
Secretary, J. L. Low,
33 Fitzroy Place, Hobart.
There arc excellent golf courses at Kingston, 12 miles by regular
bus service from Hobart; Rosny, reached by ferry boat from
Hobart; and Claremont, reached by regular train service from the
city.
Bowls — Southern Tasmanian Bowling Association,
Secretary, Robert Lee,
Hobart.
Northern Tasmanian Bowling Association,
(headquarters in Launceston).


Racing laaiuniMi Racing Glut-,
Secretary, H. T. Hey,
109 Collins Street, Hobart.
Brighton Jockey Club,
Secretary, H. T. Hey,
2* Murray Street, Hobart.
Hobart Turf Club,
Secretary, J. A. Edwards,
109 Collins Street, Hobart.
Tasmanian Amateur Jockey Club,
Secretary, H. C. Ikin,
30 Murray Street, Hobart.
Southern Tasmanian Trotting Club,
Secretary, F. Dowling,
Collins Street, Hobart
Tasmanian Turf Club.
Secretary, B. G. Osborne.
29 Paterson Street, Launceston
Northern Tasmanian Trotting Association,
Secretary, W. C. S. Oliver.
91 York Street, Launceston,
Greyhound Hobart Greyhound Racing Club,
Racing— ■ Secretary, M. A. Morgan.
T. £f G. Building, Hobart.
Launceston Greyhound Racing Club,
Secretary. H. Sturges,
Course —
White City,
Mowbray,
Launceston
Theatres
Principal legitimate theatres in Tasmania are situated in Hobart
(Theatre Royal) and Launceston (National Theatre).
There are many first-run motion picture houses in both Laun-
ceston and Hobart, and most smaller towns have at least one picture
theatre.
The main picture theatres in Hobart are:-
AVALON 52 Melville Street.
HIS MAJESTY'S 168 Liverpool Street
PRINCE OF WALES —B3 Macquarie Street


STRAKI.) Jot Liverpool Street
STATE - 375 Elizabeth Street.
VARIETY 59 Elizabeth Street.
In Launceston, the train theatres are;—
PLAZA George Street.
PRINCESS Brisbane Street.
THE MAJESTIC Brisbane Street
STAR Invermay Road
Museums, Libraries and Galleries
The main Tasmanian Museum, Art Gallery and State Library
is situated in Argylc Street, Hobart, Its i anilities may be used
by all.
In Launceston, there is a Public Library on the corner of
Cameron and St. John Streets. Launceston Museum is in Welling
ton Street.
Beaches and Swimming Facilities
For many miles around Hobart there are excellent beaches and
swimming facilities.
SANDY BAY within easy tram distance of the city.
BELLERIVE reached by ferrv boat from Hobart.
KINGSTON 10 miles from Hobart by regular bus service.
The two most popular swimming resorts near Launceston are
The FIRST BASIN, Cataract Gorge, and ST LEONARDS.
There are many thousands of excellent swimming places around
the coast and river swimming is also popular.
Yachting on the River Derwent. (Photo: mercury )


12. RURAL LIFE
Country life in Australia to-day is lived on a much more
spacious and comfortable scale than it was in the years when the
pioneers had to carve a home in virgin forest.
The decentralisation of industries, the spread of amenities and
the much better class of homes to be found in rural areas mean
that most country dwellers are in touch with a chain of thriving
market towns in all States The vast improvement in communica-
tions, with good roads, aeroplanes operating over a wide network,
and the spread of electricity to country areas, have added con-
siderably to the convenience and comfort of country life.
Except in the far outback, where the large sheep and cattle
stations are remote from the towns, country people have many
opportunities for social life and recreation. Most of the Common-
wealth’s rural population is concentrated in the wide coastal belt,
and communication between cities, towns and small townships is
frequent and comparatively easy. Passenger, postal and goods services
are well developed, except in the remotest parts.
Farm life has been made much easier by the increasing use
of modern mechanical methods and services, like electric light and
power, radio, etc. Australia’s radio systems cover the whole
country, providing educational facilities for the children, special
programmes for the man on the land, frequent news services and
opportunities for all to hear the best musical programmes.
Health services, too, including the Flying Doctor Service to remote
areas, have been extended to practically all parts of the Common-
wealth. Special educational facilities are also available at numerous
agricultural colleges.
The evolution of home building, from the early days of the
settler’s slab hut, has done much to lighten the burden of the
housewife, and in any part of the country, except the most remote,
there is a neighbourly bond between country dwellers that provides
a constant and friendly contact.
There are no longer great open spaces in Australia awaiting
occupation by the pioneer. Australia’s frontiers have been pushed
back to the edge of the central desert. There is still plenty of
room, however, in the rural community for those who have the
training, the initiative and the industry to make a place for themselves
Rural Workers
Those who contemplate taking up rural life in Australia will
find that conditions for country workers have improved considerably


in recent years. Mainly as a result of negotiations between unions
representing various classes of employees and the organisations
representing primary producers, Arbitration Court awards have fixed
wages and conditions in many rural industries. Annual holidays
on full pay and prescribed standards of living accommodation are
among notable reforms in some awards. The dairying industry
in the coastal districts is an example.
Anyone with agricultural experience, or with the desire to learn,
and who is not afraid of hard work, will have little difficulty in
getting work in country areas, and this will provide ample oppor-
tunities of studying Australian farming methods.
Agricultural experts agree that one of the best schools for the
farm learner is to take a job on a combined dairying and pig-
raising farm, where such crops as oats, lucerne, potatoes, and other
produce are grown. The experience gained here will provide a
sound working basis for subsequent farming. Many successful
farmers have started life with little or no capital. After having
gained experience as farm workers, many have entered into a
share-farming agreement, under which the owner of the land provides
the plant, seed, fertiliser, etc., and the share farmer the labour,
the profits being divided as agreed. It is not possible here to give
advice that would meet the conditions of all such propositions, and
the new settler who is considering share farming should seek the
advice of experts who know the district as to rainfall, soil, markets
and other factors, before entering into commitments.
In all States there are Agricultural Departments looking after
the farmer’s interests with practical advice and help, and the
specialists and other officers of these Departments will be able to
advise on all phases of rural life, while the Departments issue
booklets and leaflets dealing with most farm problems.
Australian farming to-day is highly specialised and mechanised.
Most land in the best agricultural districts is privately owned and
prices have become fairly stabilised.
Fruit Growing
The new arrival interested in fruit-growing will find that fruits
which are grown under glass or with careful nurturing in the harsher
climate of many Northern Hemisphere countries flourish in Aus-
tralia without special attention. The Commonwealth grows every
kind of fruit, from the pineapples, bananas, pawpaws, and mangoes
of the north, to apples, pears, plums and cherries in the south.
Cultivation is highly skilled, and in most parts frosts are not severe
enough to affect the growing of vines, oranges, lemons, peaches,
tomatoes and melons in the open.
Australia has a large fruit export trade, and the successful
orchardist must be an expert in his business. On an orchard the new


arrival has a good opportunity to learn Australian methods. Pruning
and spraying are necessarily matters for the expert, but the man
who keeps his eyes open will gain useful knowledge in fruit
cultivation.
Land Purchase
Most of Australia’s best farming land is in private hands, but
there are always properties on the market which may be bought
straight .out or on reasonable terms. The State Government
exercises control over land sales in the matter of valuation and
fair price, which effectively curbs inflationary prices. The buying
of a property by a new arrival is a matter for discussion with the
authorities in Government departments, and with those who know
a district. Advice will be found readily.
In each State advances are made by financial institutions con-
trolled by the Government to enable settlers to purchase stock or
implements and make such improvements as fencing and clearing.
Conditions vary in the different States; security is required, but
the terms and rates of interest are generally easy, and State officials
will give information about such transactions. These arrangements
are designed to help a man to augment his working capital and
allow him to make a start on his own account.
Pastoral Areas
Stretching across vast areas of Australia’s hinterland are the plains
and wilder country where huge herds of sheep and cattle feed on
the natural grasses. Most sheep and cattle stations are very large,
some leaseholds in the Northern Territory covering thousands ol
square miles. The world’s largest Merino stud, in New South
Wales, covers 520,000 acres, and grazes a maximum of 120,000
sheep.
Both sheep and cattle farming in the Australian style mean
rough, hard work, with months spent in the outback, far from
the amenities of cities and towns. For the man who likes to be in
the saddle and to live a life of freedom, work on the big stations
offers a variety of experiences. Cattle drovers are a hardy race
of rough-riders, and sheep mustering requires toughness, skill and
horsemanship. Taking up such a life is a matter for the newcomer
to consider and discuss with those familiar with the conditions
before deciding to embark upon it.


FARMING IN TASMANIA
Tasmania's agricultural and horticultural industries cover an
extensive range of primary products, and offer the rural worker a
varied choice of employment.
There is no industrial award covering general farm workers.
Rates of pay and conditions of work vary in different parts of the
State, and the question of wages is a matter of mutual agreement
between employer and employee. On mixed farms the usual rate
for an adult is from £3 to £5 a week. If a cottage is provided, a
deduction of from 10/- to 15/- a week is made. This amount
usually covers rent, lighting, milk and facilities for obtaining fire'
wood free of cost. Casual workers, as a rule, receive from 16/-
to £1 a day.
Dairy Award
On dairy farms, permanent employees are covered by the Dairy
Industry Award. This provides for a minimum rate of pay at
the ruling Commonwealth basic wage, plus additional rates for
specified work. Early in 1947, the basic wage was £5/1/- a
week. For general dairy hands the additional rate is 5/-; for
milkers and carters, 16/6; for tractor drivers, £1; and for leading
hands, £l/5/' a week. The female award is based on two-thirds
of the minimum male rate. Employees under the age of 20 are
paid on a ratc-for-age basis.
The working week prescribed by the award is 56 hours, and
the daily spread of hours is fixed. On dairy farms engaged in
other than whole milk production, the spread varies from 12 to
14 hours, according to the month, and on farms engaged in whole
milk production for city supply, the spread is 14 hours a day
throughout the year. Employees required to work outside the daily
spread of hours, or in excess of 56 hours a week, receive overtime
at the rate of l/56th of the weekly wage, plus 6d. an hour. After
12 months’ continuous employment, the employee is entitled to
14 consecutive days’ holiday on full pay.
Other Rural Work
Fruit industry awards do not apply in Tasmania, and wages
are a matter for mutual arrangement. Rates of pay for picking
berry fruits (raspberries, strawberries and currants) vary with the
ruling prices for the fruits. The rates for this work, which is
largely undertaken by families, run from 12/- to 16/- per 100 lbs.
Hut accommodation is provided, usually with milk and vegetables.


and the season lasts from early December to the end of February
Shearing is covered by the Federal Pastoral Award, which
prescribes various rates and conditions of employment. Farm hands
engaged in shearing during the season receive the same rates as
those permanently engaged in the industry.
The Hop Industry Award covers all operations on hop farms
which are numerous, as Tasmania supplies nearly all the hops used
throughout Australia. The minimum wage is the country basic
rate of £5/1/', and the additional “margins” for skill are: Ground
foreman, £l/10/- a week; hop drier, £1; assistant drier, 15/-; tally
clerk, 15/'. Picking is paid for on a piece-work basis of 10/6
per 100 lbs. of green hops. Accommodation for pickers is provided
by the grower.
Rural employers have to comply with the requirements of the
Workers’ Compensation Act, which provides the same benefits for
rural workers as those in secondary industries.
Gaining Experience
Even though a new settler may have had considerable experience
in farming or fruit-growing, he is advised to obtain practical
experience in the type of production in which he intends to engage
before investing his capital in property in Tasmania
Farm Scene in Tasmania's West Vale District, near Devonport.


Residence in the State for one or two years will enable him Vo
gain a clearer conception of conditions, and to become familiar with
the fundamentals of sound farming practice under the climatic and
soil conditions of the State. For this purpose he should seek
employment on a farm or orchard, and seek the assistance and advice
of the local District Agricultural Officer.
It is usual for a farmer who requires help to apply to the
district office of the Commonwealth Employment Service, or to
advertise in the newspapers. People seeking rural employment
should apply through the Employment Service, or approach em-
ployers direct. The demand for rural labour is seasonal, but, generally
speaking, reliable workers have little difficulty in securing permanent
employment.
Share Farming
Share farming is confined to the dairying industry, but the
number of properties operating under the system is limited. Share
systems vary. Under one system, the owner provides the land,
buildings and machinery, and the share farmer provides the stock
and labour. The profits are equally divided between the parties.
In another system, the owner provides everything, including land,
buildings, machinery and stock, while the share farmer provides
all the labour, the division of proceeds being-by mutual arrangement.
A share farmer must be thoroughly experienced, and it is
usually found that, as the share farmer has to provide the labour
for milking, it has become largely a family occupation.
Acquiring Property
Land, particularly in favoured districts in Tasmania, is at a
premium. There is practically no Crown land available for selection
which is capable of economic development, and the settler would
have to depend largely on privately-owned land coming on to the
market. Pastoral, farming and horticultural properties are rarely
available on a rental basis. The purchase of a developed or par-
tially developed property —in whole or part —is practically the
only course open.
To assist in the purchase of properties, the Agricultural Bank
of Tasmania is empowered under the State Advances Act to make
loans to persons engaged in agriculture. Advances up to a maximum
of £5,000 may be made to persons engaged in agricultural, dairying,
grazing or horticultural pursuits, to pay the balance of purchase
money, or any existing liabilities on the property, or to provide for
improvements. The interest rate is 4\ per cent., and the security


acquired is a mortgage over the property, .Advances are limited
to an amount equal to 70 per cent, of the Board’s valuation of the
property. The Bank also makes available short-term advances for
the purchase of stock, plant, seed and fertiliser. Financial help
may also be obtained through the trading banks and finance
companies.
Types of Farms
The growing of apples and pears is confined largely to the
valleys of the Huon, Derwent and Tamar Rivers, and to the Tasman
Peninsula. The average apple orchard covers from 15 to 20 acres,
with a small acreage of pears. It may also have from five to 20
acres of cultivation or pasture, and about 100 acres of bushland.
The orchard, cultivation and pasture usually occupy the valley
floors and lower slopes, the bushland occupying the steeper slopes
and high country.
Included in the areas of intensive cultivation are the berry
fruit gardens. These are usually located at altitudes of from 500
to 1,500 ft. Production is confined to the districts of the Huon,
D’Entrecasteaux Channel and Derwent Valley. Berry fruit holdings
vary from five to 15 acres, and usually have an area of gracing
or bushland.
Students interest themselves in Gardening at a State School in Tasmania's
North-West.


Apricot growing is centralised in the south-eastern districts at
low altitudes along the seaboard. It is usually associated with
other branches of farming, and the area on any one farm would
probably range from five to 15 acres. In the south-east, and north
and south midlands, mixed farming properties range from 200
to 2,000 acres. Production includes cereals, pulse, cereal hay-
growing, fat lamb raising, and grazing of sheep and cattle. In
the north-east, and along the nofth-west coast, mixed farming pro-
perties generally range from 100 to 250 acres, with dairying, pigs,
potatoes, cereals, pulse growing and fat lamb raising. The Upper
Derwent Valley, the midlands and the east coast are mainly devoted
to larger grazing properties, ranging from 2,000 to 10,000 acres
and more. These properties normally use high land on the central
plateau for summer relief grazing.
Markets
Tasmania’s wool, fat lambs, pigs, skins, apples, processed fruits,
eggs, pears and dairy products are marketed overseas. Potatoes,
cereals, seeds, hops, vegetables, and beef are disposed of on markets
in other States. The gross value of rural production for 1945-46
was just on £12,000,000
Climate
A considerable portion of Tasmania’s yearly rainfall occurs
outside the winter months. The central plateau and the mountain
ranges of the west and extreme north-east exert the greatest
influence on the rainfall. In the west, rainfall ranges from 60 in.
on the coast to 144 in. at Lake Margaret. The shadowing effect
of these mountain ranges is seen in the greatly reduced falls of
the agricultural areas in the east, where some districts record an
average of less than 20 in. In the orcharding areas it varies from
30 to 40 in. In the mixed farming and grazing districts of the
midlands, and in the south-east, from 18 to 30 in. is an average,
and in the dairying districts of the north-east and north-west coast,
from 30 to 50 in.
Because the country is hilly, flooding is confined to the narrow
river valleys, and does not last long. Stock owners in these places
are usually able to guard against losses. Prolonged periods of
dry weather are rare.


The mean average temperature in Hobart, the capital city, is
62 deg. F. in summer, and 45 deg. in winter. Temperatures at
other seaboard situations vary little from these. There are slight
increases in northern coastal areas. The incidence of frost varies
within fairly wide limits, and in certain favoured east coast districts
it is a rare occurrence. At elevations exceeding 800 ft., frosts
may be experienced during any season, but severe ones do not
usually occur between mid-November and late February. On the
grazing areas of the central plateau, snow may cover the ground in
mid-winter for up to six weeks, and in other elevated areas in the
midlands, light falls may be experienced.
Stock
Popular dairy cattle breeds are Jersey, Ayrshire, Milking Short-
horn, Friesian and Guernsey, and in beef cattle, Angus, Hereford,
Shorthorn, and Devon. Sheep consist largely of Merino, Corriedale,
Polwarth, Comeback and Crossbreds. Pure Merino represent about
14 per cent, of the total. British breeds are represented by English
Leicester, Romney Marsh, Southdown, Ryland, Dorset Horn, and
Suffolk. Pigs favoured by Tasmanian producers are the Berkshire,
Tam worth, Large White and Middle White. The prominent draught
horse is the Clydesdale. Old-established studs of all breeds of live-
stock are to be found throughout the State
Crops
Wheat, barley, oats and field peas are the mam crops in the
mixed farming areas. Large crops of potatoes are grown in the
south midlands, the north-east, and on the north-west coast, in
association with field peas and oats, and, to a lesser extent, wheat
and vegetables. In the Devonport district, the growing of green
peas for canning is a firmly established and rapidly expanding
industry. Stock husbandry is the basis of the Stated farming
practice, and fodder crops occupy a prominent place These include
oats, rye, rape, chou moellier, kale and turnips.
Farmers' Clubs
There are a number of Young Farmers’ Clubs in Tasmania,
and plans have been made for this movement to play a much larger
part in agricultural education. Students, on leaving school, can
join the club movement. An increasing number of young people
are already taking advantage of this means of increasing their
agricultural knowledge on both the practical and scientific sides


Country Social Life
Sport and social functions play an important part in lite in
rural areas, and there is keen competition in cricket, football, tennis,
golf, badminton and other popular games. Many districts arc
planning memorial sports grounds to give additional facilities for
recreation, and there are picture theatres practically everywhere.
Dances are held regularly at community centres, and country
racing clubs organise regular meetings.
Few parts of the State are without a daily mail service, or
newspaper deliveries. Telephone and postal facilities are available
in all districts.
Fishing in Tasmanian waters is good. The lakes and rivers
are stocked with trout, and edible fish abound in coastal waters.
Rural educational facilities are of a high order. A large number
of area schools have been built to provide comprehensive education
in the country districts, and many more will be established in the
coming years.
These area schools in Tasmania have set an example of rural
education which has been widely followed all over the world.
There are also private denominational schools in botli the north
and south which provide board for country pupils.
Most country districts are served with electric light and power
by the State Hydro-Electric Commission. Power is widely used
on farms for the operation of cream separators, milking machines,
pumps, saw benches, shearing machines and other farm plant.
Arrangements are being made for distribution of electricity to
more remote areas.
Information on all matters relating to agricultural and horticul-
tural production in Tasmania may be obtained from —
The Secretary for Agriculture,
Department of Agriculture,
Box 673 E, G.P.0.,
Hobart
Homestead at St. Helen's, East Coast, Tasmania.


13. EDUCATION
E DUCATION is tree and compulsory throughout Australia from
the age of six, until 14 years (15 in New South Wales and 16 in
Tasmania) Each State controls its own system of education, which
is provided in primary, secondary and technical schools and
universities.
For children in remote areas, who cannot attend school, education
by correspondence lessons is available. Radio sessions and visual
education through the cinema also play a big part in school lessons.
There are nursery and kindergarten schools where small children
learn the rudiments of education, and these are of a high standard
in the cities and provincial towns.
Voluntary bodies, known as Parents and Citizens' Associations,
look after the needs of school children in their districts in such
matters as the provision of lunches, additions to libraries and
equipment, care of playing areas and similar amenities.
Since the war, technical education has made rapid strides in all
States, and facilities are available for thorough training in many
trades and professions. Each State has a university, to which
admission of suitable students is facilitated by a system of scholarships
from the secondary schools, and for some years the accommodation
at all universities has been severely taxed by the number of young
people seeking higher education.
Where technical and university training is justified for ex-
service personnel, or for students whose parents are unable to
finance such education, the Commonwealth ■ Government provides
assistance through a Universities Commission, by way of subsidies,
not only to the universities and technical colleges, but also to the
individual student.
The State education authorities provide primary and secondary
as well as various types of pre-vocational schools, such as junior
technical schools, domestic science schools, district rural schools and
agricultural high schools.
In addition, there are hundreds of private schools of high standard,
many of them administered by school councils under the auspices
of the various religious denominations. Many of these are boarding-
schools, run on the lines of the British Public Schools, for both
boys and girls, but, in the main, these have more day pupils than
boarders.


Each State Government conducts agricultural colleges, where
students receive practical instruction and scientific training in all
phases of rural activity. Commercial education is provided at
many of the secondary, high and technical schools, and there are
many private business colleges.
Generally, the education systems of the States differ little in
character, and are generous in their provision of “free places,"
scholarships and bursaries, which enable children of intelligence
and industry to secure a university education without undue hardship.
Workers’ Educational Associations exist in each State for the
provision of adult education in city and country, and these activities
are often linked up with those of the extension lectures of the
universities. Discussion groups, study classes and lectures on
varied subjects, in addition to summer schools and other phases of
adult education, will provide the new settler with ample facilities for
further study. Evening and continuation classes at technical colleges
and the universities present other opportunities.
Students' Orchestra at a Hobart School


EDUCATION IN TASMANIA
Education in Tasmania is free, compulsory and secular for
children between the ages of six and 16 years, who live within
three miles of a school. Children of years or over are enrolled
in Infant Schools twice a year —in January or July. However,
unless a child lives within a radius of half-a-mile from a school,
it need not be enrolled until it is seven years old.
In infant and primary schools, children up to the age of nine
years are classified by age and not according to standards of
scholastic achievement. Thus, in infant school, children of the
SJ-7 age group would normally be found in Grade lA. Children
of the age range in Grade 11. Primary schools in Tasmania
provide education up to the sixth grade, after which the child
attends either a high, technical or “modern"’ school. Later, if he
passes the necessary examinations, he may go on to the University
Pre-School and Kindergarten Education
The Education Department sponsors six Pre-Schools, or Nursery
Schools, which are managed by teachers who have had two years'
training in the Tasmanian Teachers’ College and two years of
specialised training at the Kew Kindergarten Centre in Victoria.
These pre-schools are situated at: Glenorchy, Boyer, Geeveston,
Ulverstone, Butler’s Gorge, and Scottsdale. Others are soon to
be opened at Smithton, Goulburn Street, King Island, Queenstown
and Burnie. The children attend these schools for half-days only
There are five “Free Kindergartens” in Tasmania conducted by
the Free Kindergarten Union of Australia. These are registered
with the Education Department. The Tasmanian Government sub-
sidises them on a pound for pound basis. Children attend for half
days only. Two of these kindergartens are in Hobart, one is at
New Town, and two are in Launceston.
Working with the Kindergarten Union, but financed by local
committees, are some Play Groups. These are located at Mt. Stuart,
Sandy Bay, Bellerive, Kingston and Launceston.
In addition to these pre-schools, a Commonwealth Government
pre-school child centre, known as the Lady Gowrie Child Centre,
operates in Hobart. Lady Gowrie Centres were established by the
Commonwealth Government in each State capital city in 1939.
Originally it was intended that these Centres should be demon-
stration pre-school establishments. Medical, nsychological and social
statistics collected in the centres have been made available to com-
munities. At these centres the children are provided with milk,
fruit drinks, and a midday meal. They have morning and afternoon
sessions.


At least 12 Infant Schools in the State have kindergartens
attached. The ages of children attending these schools range from
four to six years. The kindergartens are under the direction of
teachers who have completed a two-year course of training at the
Tasmanian Teachers’ College, the second year of which is devoted
to training in the teaching of infants. The children attend for
three hours in the morning and one hour in the afternoon.
School Education
Children normally move from the Infant to the Primary School
at the age of eight years. A modern course of study is provided
and, although importance is given to such subjects as reading,
writing, and arithmetic, attention is also given to subjects like
music, art, nature study, civics, health and physical education.
Boys receive instruction in craft and manual activities while girls
do courses in needlework and domestic arts.
Methods of teaching are modern, and most schools are fitted
with the latest educational aids. Radio broadcasts to schools are
used, and the Education Department has a well-stocked film library.
Wall maps and other visual aids are also used widely.
Library facilities are available for all schools through a Central
Schools Library from which books may be borrowed as required.
Schools are also encouraged to set up their own libraries, and all
purchases within certain financial limits are helped by the Education
Department.
School buildings are generally spacious and attractive. Play-
grounds in country schools are usually extensive. Where city
schools do not have enough space, nearby sports grounds are used
to the full.
Area Schools
For the last 10 years, the Education Department has been con
solidating primary schools. Wherever possible, small schools have
been abolished and the children have been given free transport to
the nearest large school. Some of these consolidated schools have
developed into Tasmania’s world-known Area Schools.
At present 16 Area Schools have been established, and the
formation of more is under consideration. The schools are located
in country districts where land is available for agricultural
experiments.


The Area Schools’ curriculum has a rural bias. The lower
grades follow the Education Department’s curriculum for the regular
primary schools. From the age of 12 years and upwards, the boys
are taught agricultural subjects which include agricultural science,
animal husbandry, blacksmithmg, elementary mechanics and craft
work in sheet metal, leather and concrete.
Girls of the same age are taught domestic arts, cookery, needle-
work, housewifery, and home management, laundry work, as well
as various other crafts.
The course for the 12-year-olds is planned for four years, and
is designed to follow on from a six-year primary school course.
Secondary Schools
Having reached a satisfactory standard in the sixth grade of the
Primary School, children wanting to go on to High or Technical
Schools are selected on either the recommendation of the Head
Teacher, the results of a general ability test, or the evidence of the
child’s scholastic career as shown on the individual record card
which is kept of all children.
Candidates for admission to a High School must be under the
age of 14 years on the first day of the year they are admitted.
Commercial High School, Hobart. (Photo: Beattie's Studio)


Pupils of the 12'16 year age group who, lor various reasons, do
not want to go to a High or Technical School, are sent to what are
known as Modern Schools. In these a broad, general education aimed
as social and cultural relations and the development of citizenship
is given.
Separate Modern Schools are to be built in the near future
In the meantime, the students receive their Modern School teaching
in the existing Primary School buildings.
Technical Schools
There are technical schools at Hobart, Launceston, Queenstown.
Burnie, Devonport, Rosebury and Zeehan. Of these, the schools
at Hobart, Launceston and Queenstown have junior technical schools
in addition to the normal senior sections.
Children from grades six and seven in primary State schools
who are selected by their headmasters and recommended by the
education officer may be admitted to the junior technical schools
if they are under the age of 14 years at the time of admittance.
Pupils from nomState schools may also enter the junior technical
schools if they can prove that they are qualified.
In the first two years in these schools, the syllabus provides an
introduction to basic knowledge, ideas and techniques. Each boy
is tested to enable him to select any one of four courses offered
in the third and fourth year. In addition to technical and basic
subjects, such as English, provision is made for the cultural education
of the child. Physical education is compulsory and each school
makes provision for religious instruction and organised group
activities.
At the end of the third year, each child is permitted to choose
a group of subjects he will follow in his fourth and final year,
which fall in any one of the mechanical, building or electrical
trade groups. The basic subjects of education are carried on in
this year also. This course is designed to qualify students for
the Tasmanian Schools’ Board Certificate, which is required by
the Apprenticeship Commission for part acceptance as an apprentice
to certain trades.
The Senior Technical Schools provide day and night training
in most of the trades in all required subjects.
Full details of these schools can be obtained by writing to; —
The Director,
Hobart Technical College,
Hobart,
Tasmania.


Agricultural Schools
Agricultural school courses in Tasmania can be divided into three
groups:
• Available to boys in Primary Schools;
• Available to hoys in Secondary Schools,
o Available to adults.
In the primary schools the aim of agricultural education is to
interest the child in rural life. The most advanced work in this
direction is being done by the Area Schools, dealt with earlier in
this Chapter. An effort has been made to base the course of study
of the type of farming carried on in particular districts where the
schools are situated. Broad lines of study are; soil management,
pastures, farm machinery, livestock care, dairying and meat produc-
tion, timber and forest supplies, and government control and service
Three courses are available, according to districts.
An advanced agricultural course is available for secondary school
pupils at the Scottsdale District High School The four years' course
covers practical field work as well as regular classroom study.
For adults, complete courses in farming and farm management
are available at the Cressy Research Farm, which is controlled by
the Department of Agriculture. At present the majority of the
trainees are ex-servicemen who are being trained under the Com-
monwealth Government’s Reconstruction Training Scheme, Empire
ex-servicemen are also eligible for this training
Correspondence Schools
In order to give children who live too far from schools a complete
education, the Tasmanian Education Department established a Corres-
pondence School in 1919
The staff of this school numbers 16 teachers and one liaison
officer who visits the homes of the pupils and supervises the work.
Every two weeks, exercises are sent by the teachers to the pupils
who complete the work, and return it post free to the teachers
for correction and suggestions. All tuition is free and most of the
books are provided.
Persons of any age enrol at the school. The age of the j>4o
persons enrolled with the school in 1947 ranged from 5 years to
50. The curriculum of the schools covers work from the infant
school to Matriculation standard.


University Education
To enter the University of Tasmania a person must have passed
the Matriculation Examination in English and at least five other
subjects, including a foreign language and mathematics.
Persons may he admitted as matriculated students if they possess
sufficient educational qualifications, e.g., ex-students of other recog
nised universities.
Many scholarships, awarded on the results of the matriculation
examination, are available.
Complete information about courses available at the University
may be obtained by writing to the University at Hobart, Tasmania,
for a copy of the “Calendar of the University of Tasmania.”
Adult Education
There is no State-wide adult education scheme in Tasmania
However, facilities are provided by the State Library of Tasmania,
Hobart, and the Tasmanian Branch of the United Nations
Association.
Information may be had about the facilities available at these
centres by writing to the Library in Hobart, or to the Association
at 140 Collins Street. Hobart.
In addition to these two bodies, the Workers’ Educational
Association provides discussion groups, play reading circles, music-
appreciation groups, lectures on topical subjects, debates, tutorial
classes and a library.
Membership of this Association is open to all on the payment
of an annual fee of 5/-.
For details, write to; —
The Secretary,
Workers’ Educational Association,
134 Macquarie Street,
Hobart;
or
71 John Street, Launceston.
There are branches of the Association at Burnie, Deloraine, and
Queenstown.


14. FOR THE HOUSEWIFE
THE housewife settling with a family in Australia will find man>
points of difference from other lands, but none to which she cannot
soon adapt herself. Household life, basically, is on the same plan a;
that in Britain or the United States, but there are some variations
The Australian climate takes some getting used to. Long hour#
of sunshine, after the succession of grey skies encountered in parts
of the Northern Hemisphere, make a welcome change, but what
the Australiaivborn resident calls “a nice summer day” will, in
many parts of the Commonwealth, prove trying at first to people
who come from colder climates. Those with young children should
heed the warnings of their Australian friends about danger front
the sun, especially on the beaches, where adequate protection from
sunburn is necessary. However, the newcomer will soon learn to
adopt local precautions.
Throughout the Commonwealth, in city and country, there arc
many women’s organisations which will give the new arrival all
the help and advice possible. Such bodies as the National Council
of Women, the Housewives’ Associations in each State, the
Y.W.C.A., church and professional women’s clubs, and other groups,
such as mothers’ clubs, are well organised to protect women’s interests
One of the leading bodies of this kind is the Country Women’s
Association of Australia, which corresponds with the Women’s
Institutes in Britain, with branches in all States. That it is anxious
to identify itself with the welfare of all who settle here, is evidenced
by the following message issued by the National President, Mrs
Bertha Mac Smith, of New South Wales:—
"It is my privilege, as well as my pleasure, to send greetings, on
behalf of the Country Women’s Association, to you who have
come from other lands to make your home in Australia. As President
of the C.W.A.A., I welcome you particularly to the countryside
of Australia, which, to country women, is the real Australia.
“Don’t expect to like everything that is so new to you, at once
It will all be so different, and you may have feelings of disappoint-
ment. You may have expected greater opportunities than are at
first visible, but remember that, in Australia, as in every other
country, there is no easy road to success.
“There are branches of the Country Women’s Association scat-
tered all over Australia, where we are waiting to welcome you with
the wish that God may grant you happiness and prosperity in
the land of your adoption.”


Australian Cookery
Cookery in Australia ;s b.i-cd ou English methods but gam-
variety from a plentiful supply of tropical fruits. Catering also
presents fewer problems, because green vegetables and fresh fruit-
ire available all the year round,
Australians arc noted meat eaters, and country people often cat
three meat meals a day, with the emphasis on beef-steak, lamb chops
md roast beef, mutton and lamb. Fish is generally plentiful, and
fairly cheap in all the cities, which lie close to the coast and in
the larger towns. Australian rock oysters are a noted delicacy, and
ire not confined to a particular season, while other popular sea
delicacies are Tasmanian scallops —a shell-fish that may be fried in
batter, curried, or served with white sauce—and a plentiful supply
if crayfish, which make refreshing salads in hot weather. Prawns
ire another appetising dish, and the Murray cod is among the most
lelicate of freshwater fish.
There is a good supply of fruit in all parts of the Common
wealth Citrus fruits are always available, and most of the tropical
fruits, such as pineapple, pawpaw, mango, custard apple, rock melon
(or cantcloupe), banana and passion fruit are best eaten raw. There
ire many ways in which they can be combined, cooked or raw,
m attractive salads and desserts
General Post Office, Hobart


15. POSTS, TELEGRAPHS
In a country as vast as Australia, postal, telegraphic and telephone
communications play a vital part in linking together a widely-scattered
community.
The Commonwealth Government controls the services of the
Post Office in Australia which began its official history in 1809,
when the first State postal service for letters was established.
Post Office activities to-day embrace posts, telegraphs, telephones
(including overseas services), and radio. Business is conducted
through 10,000 offices and more than 70,000 people are employed
The annual financial turnover of the Commonwealth Postmaster-
General’s Department is £412,000,000. Assets and plant are valued
at £88,000,000.
At every post office, information on all the services rendered
by this public utility is available for the new arrival in Australia
Money Orders are obtainable at post offices. For those payable
in most overseas countries the charge is 4d. for each £1 up to £6, and
3d. for each additional £1 with a minimum charge of 9d. For orders
payable in Australia the charge is 6d. for each £f, or fraction of that
sum. Postal notes ranging in value from 1/- to £1 are obtainable.
Postage rates to places in Australia and the British Empire is
2\d. f-Jd, being war postage) an ounce. For air mail within
Australia the rate is sfd. a half ounce. The parcels rates begin at
6d. a pound. Full details are obtainable at any pest office.
Telegrams may be sent to any place in Australia for less than
Id. a word, and the charge for a lettergram of 30 words at night is
only |d. a word. Overseas telegrams, phonograms, reply-paid and
collect telegrams, and telegraph money orders are part of the service
Radio-telegrams may bo sent to ships at sea at rates varying from
6d. to lid. a word.
Half-yearly Rental for telephones ranges from £3/2/6 in the
largest cities to £l/12/6 in small country towns.
Redirection of Mail
Before leaving one address for another, new arrivals are advised
to arrange for the redirection of their mail. If the address previously
used was a hotel, club or boarding house, the request for redirection


should be made Co the manager or proprietor of the establishment, a?
veil as to the postmaster.
Radio Services
The wireless branch of the Postmaster-General s Department is
concerned with the administration of the Australian Broadcasting
Act which governs broadcasting in the Commonwealth.
The Australian broadcasting system is comprised of —
The National Service, the technical side of which is the
responsibility of the Postmaster-General’s Department, programmes
being provided by the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
The Commercial Service, consisting of radio stations oper
ated by private companies under licence from the Postmaster
General.
Before any wireless transmitting or receiving equipment is used,
a licence must be obtained from the Postmaster-General’s Depart-
ment. Applications for all licences, other than a broadcast listener's
licence, should be made to the Superintendent of Wireless Branch
■n the State concerned.
Broadcast Listeners’ Licences are issued at all money order
offices. They must be held in respect of equipment capable of
being used in any place for the reception of broadcast programmes.
The occupier of any premises where such apparatus is installed
without a licence is liable to prosecution.
The fee for a broadcast listener’s licence is—
For the first receiver in possession of any person in
any one building £1 0 0
For each additional receiver in excess of one in
any one building 10 0
Persons operating a wireless receiver installed in a
motor vehicle are also required to possess a licence.
For a receiver operated outside a radius of 250
miles from a National Broadcasting station, the relative
fees are reduced to 14/- and 7/- respectively.
Licences for Blind Persons.—Broadcast listeners’ licences may
be granted, free of charge, to any person over the age of 16 on
production of satisfactory evidence that he or she possesses no
useful vision.


Interference with Reception. If reception of broadcast pro
grammes is marred by extraneous noises, listeners may seek the aid
of the. Wireless Branch which will assist in tracing the cause of
the trouble and of suppressing it. Details should be reported to
the Superintendent. Wireless Branch, in the State concerned.
Staff Appointments
Appointment to the permanent staff of the Department is usually
through competitive examination. The positions for which examina-
tions arc held from time to time are those of junior postal officer,
postal officer, tcchnician-in-training; hneman-in-training; clerk; cadet
engineer, cadet draftsman and cadet radio inspector. For females,
examinations arc held for the positions of telephonist, typist, mach
inist, assistant, phonogram operator.
Engineers are recruited from three sources—cadet engineers who
have satisfactorily completed their course; permanent officers who
pass a qualifying examination; and university graduates in engineering.
University graduates are, at times, recruited without examination to
the position of clerk, the number of appointments being determined
according to the number of successful candidates available from the
usual examination source, and the number of vacancies to be filled
Further information concerning employment in the Post Office
may be had from the Commonwealth Public Service Inspector in
the capital city of the State concerned
Other Services
The Post Office carries out many other services for the various
Government Departments and the Commonwealth Bank. Savings
bank business is conducted at most suburban and country post offices,
and the Department bandies payment of pensions, child endowment
and other allowances, sale of savings stamps and certificates, issue of
petrol rationing coupons, collection of war service homes and
repatriation advances, sale of taxation stamps, issue of electoral
papers, and receipt of subscriptions to Commonwealth loans, besides
other activities for the benefit of the public.
Hobart Sky-line.


Murray Street, Hobart. (Photo: "Pix" Magazine.)


1. Parliament House.
2. Government Tourist Bureau,
and State Immigration Office.
3. St. David's Cathedral.
4. St. Mary's Cathedral.
3. Town Hall.
6. General Post Office.
7. Public Library.
8. Museum and Art Gallery.
9. War Memorial.
10. City Hall.
11. Melville Street Church.
12. Theatre Royal.
13. General Hospital.
14. Police Station.
15. St. Andrew’s Church.
16. Criminal Court.
17. University.
18. Government House.
19. Commonwealth Immigration Office.


Issued under the authority of the Australian Minister
for Immigration (Hon. Arthur A, Caiwell, M.H.R.), and
printed in Australia by The Mercury Press, Hobart.
