

Western
AND ITS
By HAROLD G. PARSONS,
Barrister-at- Law.
A HANDBOOK
GOLD-FIELDS.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY,
Australia
London, Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane.
1894.




A HANDBOOK
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
AND ITS GOLD-FIELDS.
Being a
Guide to the Resources (Agricultural, Mineral, and
Miscellaneous) of the Colony; and a Collection
of Hints to the Intending Immigrant.
By HAROLD G. PARSONS,
Barrister-at-Law,
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY,
London, Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide and Brisbane.


Butler & Tanner,
The Sklwood Printing Works,
Frojie, and London.






A Z- 77
PREFACE.
This book is very hastily compiled, but its facts and its
figures may be relied on as accurate ; and I feel that it is
to the interest both of the Colony and of the British pub-
lic that I should waste no time over literary elegancies —
which (besides) would be quite out of place in a Guide-
book.
I have to acknowledge the kind assistance of many
Government officials here, particularly of Mr. Fraser,
the Registrar-General, upon whose Year-books, together
with the Reports of the Government Geologist and of the
Agricultural Commission, I have been mainly dependent
for my information. The Blue-books, and the official
returns of the several Departments, have been very
obligingly placed at my disposal by the heads of those
Departments, as well as by several members of the
Assembly. I have particularly to thank Mr. Prinsep, the
chief of the Survey Office, for his courtesy in supplying
me with the latest maps and geographical returns. Mr,
A. Canning, an Associate of the Supreme Court, has been
good enough to revise my materials, and to correct some
of the errors due to my want of local experience.
I can make no claim to originality. There is a great
deal to be said, at this moment, about Western Australia ;
and I have attempted—not to say it (for I have written
very little of this book), but—to lay it before the English
public.
Weld Club, Perth,
Western Australia.
August IGthj 1893.
M3sS*>/ F/3&SO


CONTENTS.
Introductory 5
Perth 9
Other Towns 25
Pastoral and Agricultural 28
Wine-Growing 45
Forest Resources ......... 48
Geology .50
Mineral Wealth 58
Yilgarn Goldfield 71
Kimberley Goldfield 77
Murchison Goldfield 'B3
Coolgardie Goldfield 100
Western Interior ......... 108
Route to Coolgardie 114
Imports and Exports 118
Population, Etc. ... ...... 124
Cost of Living, Etc. 125
Immigration 130
Miscellaneous 131


INTRODUCTORY.
In Guide-books, Year-books, Blue-books, and other hiblia
abiblia with which the British public has generally no
concern, it is written, “ Terra Australis Incognita was
first visited by the Portuguese under Menezes, in the year
1527, when exploring the Indian Seas; ” and again, “The
Swan River Settlement was founded in 1829, by Captain
and Lieutenant-Governor Stirling.” But these state-
ments are as uninteresting, and therefore, for practical
purposes, as untrue, as another favourite tale of the roman-
tic pedant; to wit, that Dampier landed at Cossack (a
township which, naturally, in Dampier’s time, had no ex-
istence), and discovered the Pilbarra Goldfields, After
all, Arab dhows, or at least Chinese junks, must have
visited Cossack before Menezes; and the thousand
settlers who followed their oikistcs Stirling had as little
to do with the founding of Western Australia as the Por-
tuguese, the Arabs, the Chinese, or, for that matter, those
singularly unenterprising aborigines who, in inquiries of
this kind, are of course to be neglected. 'For in effect,
Western Australia, though it has lately been re-discovered
by Sir John Forrest, and given Responsible Government
by the House of Lords; though it maintains telephones,
a tariff, and an Agent-General; though it exports sandal-
wood, oyster-shells, and blocks for wood-pavement;
though its railways be built (or building) by land-grant
Companies, and its stamps long since familiar to the
British schoolboy; nevertheless, Western Australia, I say,


remains to be founded, Victoria began with Bendigo
and Ballarat, Western Australia must begin with Cool-
gardie—or not at all.
The Cinderella amongst colonies, as the silver-tongued
journalist is permitted to call her (“ the Cinderella
amongst colonies, which has at last found her fairy god-
mother ”), —“ W. A. " (in the local phrase)—is both un-
like Gaul in many other respects, and particularly because
she is divided into six parts. Two of these, Kimberley
and the North-West Division, are beyond the scope of
this work. They are not “ white men’s country; ” though
the pearl-shell fisheries and the mines of Kimberley may
yet make many white men’s fortunes. Two others, the
Eucla Division and the Gascoyne, concern ns very little ;
the Gascoyne (being the centre of the western coast-line,
with a fair allowance of Muter land) chiefly because it
contains the Murchison Goldfields; the Eucla Division, a
mere sandy country along the Australian Bight, only be-
cause here, as we shall see, from Esperance Bay, is a
possible route to Coolgardie. It is with the two remain-
ing parts —one, in a manner of speaking, desert, the other
comparatively settled —the one interesting chiefly to
diggers, the other to agriculturists—that I now, for the
benefit and information of intending immigrants, propose
to deal.
The Eastern Division —that great expanse, still blank
on most maps, which will be thought of by the English
reader as the Great Australian Desert—is the whole in-
terior of the Colony, surrounded, on the N., N.W., W.,
S. W., and S., by the five other, or coastal, districts. Hero
the gold finds have been made.
The S.W., or settled, Division is a long strip of
territory (on an average about 100 miles wide, but broader
at its southern extremity), which stretches from the Mur-


chison River on the north to the Southern Ocean at
Albany. It is an undulating country, nearly the size of
France, heavily timbered, almost throughout, with jarrah,
the Australian mahogany. The sea-coast is flat and
sandy, but behind the sandhills we have a land of disin-
tegrated iron-stained granite rocks, with now an open
plain covered with shrubs and gorgeous flowering plants;
now the rare clearing along the line of railway ; now,
again, a forest of gigantic karri trees; but always, sur-
rounding, dominating, and drowning all, the everlasting
jarrah. Within the bounds of this district the settle-
ment and the enterprise of the Colony have so far been
concentrated. Here is Perth, the capital, with its port of
Fremantle. Hero is Albany, and the railway connecting
it with Perth. Here are the coastal settlements of Bun-
bury and Busselton, Greraldton (the port for the Murchison),
the thriving agricultural townships of Northam and York,
and all the villages which are clustering round the south-
ern railways. It is only when you leave the railroad at
York, and push on into the Eastern Division towards the
Yilgarn Fields and Coolgardie, that you must prepare
yourself for hardship and difficulty, desert and thirst and
adventur-e. And yet the difficulties are none so insuper-
able ; while the fortune that rewards them—well, for the
fortune, we shall see.




PERTH,
And the Surrounding District.
The new-comer in Western Australia must land either
at Albany or at Fremantle. In either case he will be
wise if he come direct to Perth—there to settle, or at
least to make preparations for his ultimate destination.
“Perth, the capital of the Colony,” says the Year-hook
for 1891, “(latitude 81° 57' 24" S. and longitude 115° 52'
42" E.), is pleasantly and picturesquely situated on the
banks of the Swan River, about 12 miles in a north-
easterly direction from the port of Fremantle, which is in
latitude 82° 03' and longitude 115° 45'.”
The estimated population of Perth on Dec. 31st, 1891,
was 10,040,
“ALBANY is situated on the north side of Princess
Royal Harbour, King George’s Sound, about 254 miles by
road, and 352 miles by rail from Perth. The harbour is
the finest in the southern portion of the Colony, and
is the port of call for the mail steamers between Europe
and Australia; it is now being fortified, with the in-
tention of making it an Imperial naval coaling depot.
The town has grown rapidly since the opening of the
Great Southern Railway, which connects it with Perth.”
“ FREMANTLE is the chief port of the Colony, and
is situated at the mouth of the Swan River, about 12
miles W.S.W. of Perth, with which it is connected by
road, railway, river, telegraph and telephone. Extensive


harbour improvements are now in course of being carried
out.” Pop. 7,000,
“ Perth,” as a local handbook puts it, “ is One of the
most beautifully situated cities in Australia. It slopes
gently down to the edge of the lovely Swan River, and of
this river the people of Perth are almost as proud as are
those of Sydney of their harbour. Along the base of the
city is a fine recreation ground, much of which has been
reclaimed from the river, and it is intended to widely ex-
tend it by the process of reclamation. Here the leading
cricket and football clubs of the city indiilge in those
games, which form so large and important a portion of
our lives under these sunny Australian skies,” etc. . . .
“ A mimic fleet is moored in the river facing the ground.
These are the boats belonging to the members of that
select and sportsmanlike institution, the Royal Perth
Yacht Club. . . . The regattas on the river are as
picturesque as they are often exciting,” etc. ... 11 Close
by the Recreation Ground are the Botanical Gardens,
prettily situated and well laid out grounds.” k.t.X. . . .
“ On the top of the picturesque hill with the unromantic
name of Mount Eliza, which overhangs the river, are the
Rifle Butts; also a People’s Park ” (not yet laid out).
. . <£ The public and other chief buildings of the
city are far from unimposing. Government House is in-
deed one of the handsomest and most beautifully situated
gubernatorial residences in Australia, its minarets or
towers giving it a picturesque, not to say imposing ap-
pearance. The front of the house faces towards St.
George’s Terrace a handsome thoroughfare, resembling
the Continental boulevards, being broad and bordered on
each side by leafy lilac trees, which are gratefully green
and refreshing to the eye. In this thoroughfare are
situated the Public Offices, including the Post Office,


a large block of buildings, erected at a cost of nearly
£80,000; the St. George’s (Anglican) Cathedral —a hand-
some Gothic structure, recently erected at a cost of
£17,000 ; and the banks and insurance offices. Prominent
among the latter . . . ” and so on. u The main busi-
ness street of the city is called Hay Street, and its con-
tinuation, Howick Street. This thoroughfare, though
somewhat narrow, is about two miles in length, and
contains several handsome shops and places of business.
One of its principal buildings is the Town Hall, adjoin-
ing which is the building in which the Legislative
Assembly temporarily transacts its business.” But why
continue these bald categories, which are (for different
reasons) perfectly useless both to those who have and to
those who have not lived in Perth ? Let us take two
more paragraphs from our guidebook friend, and have
done. “ Social entertainments are frequent, and Perth is
fortunate, at the time of writing, in having a Governor who
sets an example of hospitality to the community ; we refer
to Sir W. C. F. Robinson. Balls, paper-chases, kangaroo
hunts, and picnics down the beautiful river or up among
the Darling hills, are of frequent occurrence, and these
are most enjoyable. Nearly all the chief public officials
live in Perth, and owing to the large number of repre-
sentatives of old English families that settled in the
Colony in its early days, the tone of society is distinctly
good.”
Finally (for the purpose of comparisoti), u Albany, which
has a population of 2,700, has a fine harbour (King
George’s Sound), and is at present the first calling point
in Australia of the mail steamers from England and the
East. In addition to the P. &0. and Orient Companies,
the Messageries Maritimes steamers also call at King
George’s Sound. Albany is a very picturesquely situated


town, and lias a very energetic and thriving population.
It has an excellent Town Hall, and its streets are wide
and well laid out, while steps are being taken to light it
with the electric light. It is the depot of the Great
Southern Railway, which is the property of the W.A.
Land Company, and this fact has largely conduced to its
growth and prosperity of late years. The Land Company,
in addition to the railway station at Albany, have built a
fine jetty, 700 feet long. Albany is to be one of the
fortified ports of Australia, owing to its importance as
a coaling station and a point d'appni , and, at the time
of writing, the fortification works are being constructed.
It is a favourite health and summer resort, owing to the
exceptional mildness and geniality of its climate.”
So much for the customary guidebook-isms, w T hich I
am glad to get done for me at second hand. With Albany
as a sanatorium or a coaling station we are not concerned.
For the rest, it has changed very little since I first knew
it, as a chance wayfarer by the P. & 0., twelve years
ago. It still is, as it has always been, the sleepiest of
all sleepy towns, with untrodden sandy streets, a long
parade facing the glistering Sound, two jarrah-wood
jetties, and half a dozen public-houses dozing in the sun.
Presently the farmers in the back country will begin to
ship their produce. Then it is clear that Albany must
awake. But at present, even the hundreds of diggers who
are arriving weekly from the eastern colonies have had
no perceptible effect upon business. They have not even
sent up the price of pickaxes. And they bring their own
swags.
Very much the same is to be said of Fremantle : with
the difference that the streets, in this case, were once
macadamized; that there are many more hotels, and
that there is always a steady (though not a boisterously


evident) trade going on with the ports up coast to the
north.
Perth is certainly a spacious and (in its way) a hand-
some township, which reminds one of many other half-
forgotten corners of Great Britain which have had their
day, or are biding their time. It is like what Durban
was before the Zulu war ; but not so hopeless. It is like
Eureka and Areata, the lumber settlements of North
California ; but not so picturesque, nor, it may be added,
quite so appallingly remote from the tracks of commerce.
The buildings—Government House, the Town Hall, the
disused Pensioners’ Barracks, and the rest —built in the
old days, by convict labour, of large, honest-looking
bricks, show a good deal of old-world taste; and even
those erected in later times are better, because less pre-
tentious, than the superfluous piles of the eastward
colonies. The town is really in Hay Street, with St.
George’s Terrace next, and parallel thereto: the one for
business, the other for show. Where these two are
crossed (at right angles, of course) by the street which
runs up from the railway station and down the slope
again to the river, stand the Town Hall and the Govern-
ment Offices. At the points of intersection gather the
loafers —diggers on the look-out for a mate, farmers in the
intervals of business (market days, stupidly enough, are
not yet invented in W.A.), and all the ne’er-do-weels of a
lazy population. The whole of this block, in fact, is the
club of the lower classes; even as, at the bottom or river
end of the street, the Weld, pleasantest and most ex-
clusive of several well-known clubs in the Colonies,
receives the squatters, the bureaucrats, and the ever-
increasing body of globe-trotters.
Houses and shops are mainly of the same solid brick,
of the simplest architecture which can be applied to two


stories, and with the ordinary Australian corrugated
iron verandah. Fortunately, however, many of them
avoid the everlasting tin roof, substituting jarrah-wood
shingles, which have most of the advantages, including,
at a distance, the appearance of slate. Also, instead of
the unsightly split posts-and-rails which disfigure even
the St. Kilda Road in Melbourne, you have everywhere
neat palings, still of jarrah, round the unoccupied allot-
ments ; so that the east end of St. George’s Terrace, which
does duty for the suburbs of Perth, has none of the dis-
hevelled and bush-like appearance of most of the outskirts
of Australian towns. Indeed, after nightfall, it might
almost pass for, say, a road in Park-town, at Oxford.
Living in Perth is cheap, and, on the whole, moderately
good. The hotels are rough, but clean, and you may live
in the best of them for thirty shillings a week, though the
new-arrived digger must pay, in his humble coffee-house,
at least a pound. The waiters at the club, and many
of the cooks and servants, both in hotels and in private
houses, are Chinese ; so the cooking is always at least fair.
The variety of Orientals (by the way) who settle in the
Colony is extraordinary. Not to speak of the medley of
native divers —Malays and the like —who work the pearl
fisheries of the north, you shall find Hindoo hawkers and
Afghan camel-drivers in our remotest back-blocks ; while
in Perth itself there are, besides the Chinese market-
gardeners and laundry-men, several stores kept by Indian
firms, and, in particular, quite a number of small Cingalese
traders in moonstones, stuffs, and cheap jewellery. Such
is one result of the pax Britannica , under which the
whole border lino of the Indian Ocean, from Zanzibar
even unto Perth, is becoming a field for the enterprise of
Her Majesty’s Indian subjects.
The singular want of enterprise of the West Australians


themselves is evident even in their diet. You must
drink Dublin stout and Scotch whisky and eat Nor-
mandy pippins at the hotels, though the natives never
tire of boasting the merits of their local fruit and wine.
Both wine and fruit, indeed, are excellent, and to be ob-
tained by him that cares for them. The former particu-
larly—though, like most Australian wines, it is hopelessly
unlike claret —is quite good enough for the unprejudiced
person who (failing claret) is content to fortify his laxity
by remembering the vintage of the Mediterranean, the
tastes of Theocritus, of Horace, and of the Middle Ages —
Falernian, Malmsey, and, for that matter, the good rezino
which Greeks of the present day are too stupid, or too
wise, to give to the foreigner. Olives, too, are grown
here, of a quite remarkable quality, though nobody eats
them. The mutton, for its part, is admirable. And who
shall sing the delicate flavour of the vegetables, grown on
a soil of pure sand (for choice), with the mere aid of sun
and water, and no manure! After all, a man of discern-
ment may be as comfortable in Perth as ever that eternal
Mr. Stevenson in his Samoa; for nf we have no dusky,
flower-garlanded South Sea Island souhrettes, in com-
pensation we have no tribes of cannibals in our back
gardens. But what are mutton, olives, and wine to a
generation which prefers its potato-pie and its Bass P
Potatoes, by the bye, which are in N.S.W. £5 a ton
f.0.b ., and for which in New Zealand they are glad to
get 255. a ton on the wharf, are sold at Busselton, down
the coast here, for £8; and most of the farmers are too
lazy to grow them. But this is of a piece with the wdiolo
character of W.A., which, with thousands of acres of
excellent wheat land lying uncropped, has always been
in the habit of importing a large proportion of its wheat
supply from Adelaide.


The chief amusements in Perth are, for the elect, a
fortnightly paper-chase, and for the commons the bell-
man and the Salvation Army. [That there should be a
bell-man only shows —what I shall several times have to
repeat —that West Australia is not in Australia at all.]
There are concerts, of course. To your true Colonial,
dissipation spells Offenbach, with the stalls at five
shillings. But in the eastern colonies times are changed.
Comic opera is too costly, and the harmless citizen
solaces himself with a concert, or rather with three con-
certs a week, at the Town Hall, which is the-real reason
why life in Melbourne has become intolerable. In Perth,
where times have never changed, the concerts are under-
taken by amateurs, and the nearest approach to a play is
—theatricals at Government House. The outside world
spends its unsophisticated leisure in leaning against a
post, a bar-counter, or the rails on the football ground.
Por West Australia is not a horsey country; though to
say so to a West Australian is to make an enemy
for life. The streets of Perth are not as the streets of
Sale or Maffra, In the Gippsland towns the local youth
is for ever cantering round the street corners. In Perth
he congregates at the crossing of the ways, and gazes
down four empty vistas of sand.
The Timor, the local pony, an overgrown Exmoor, is
useless for most purposes, his merits being staying
power and an extraordinarily complaisant digestion. He
sells for about thirty shillings, but nobody rides him.
The side walks, at present, are full of strangers; but
the carriages of Perth, in which ladies go shopping,
number about tw T o low phaetons and a dog-cart.
There is a circulating library, at which I have heard
inquiries for Balzac, Dumas, and Pierre Loti. But that
is because the proprietor has laid in a stock of cheap


translations; and his other literature has never risen
above Harrison Ainsworth. As for Mr. Barrie, his very
name is unknown.
On the whole, Perth, to a civilized Briton, is very
much what Amei’ica was to Poe, —a savage country
lighted by gas. But there is always one comfort: it is
no worse than New York ; and it is considerably better
than the rest of Australia. It is a shock, indeed, at one
of the still-recurring concerts, .to pass from the good-
natured imbecilities round to the face of the'Governor—
informed, cultivated, in touch with the ruling English
caste. But at all events we have here no turbulent
democracy. Every one, of course, is socially-democratic, on
the surface. You must “ shout” for all comers, and drink
with the barman. But of the G 2,000 inhabitants of the
Colony, less than half are enfranchised citizens; and
there are constituencies, up north, of twenty voters.
Parliament sits, at most, two months in the year ; and.
during that time, only on certain days in the week. The
members, unlike other Australian legislators, are un-
paid ; and those of them who represent country districts
insist on spending the week-end at home. There is no
Opposition; the collective wisdom occupies itself -with
criticising, and backing, Sir John Forrest’s efforts to
build railways, encourage land settlement, and generally
make the best of the slowest of all possible colonies. The
Premier’s brother, by the way, is Mayor of Perth ; and
for the other public offices, are they not filled by those
intelligent oligarchs, the Six Families of W.A. ? But
we shall best arrive at the real “ note ” of the place by
observing the bitterness with which it fills the demo-
cratic or latter-day visitor from the other colonies.
One Mr. P. P. J. Rowe lately contributed two articles
dealing with Western Australia to The Voice ) an Adelaide


paper. “In no province of the group,” he says with
virtuous indignation, “is ‘ society ’ hedged round with
more rigid exclusiveness than in the ‘benighted ’ West,
where the cry is more ‘ Who are you ? ’ than 1 What are
you?’ The little coterie that rules society in the
western Colony apes the British more than the Australian
society code, and its petty tyrannies are sometimes
amusingly extravagant to those outside the pale of the
‘six families’ and their .multitudinous ‘ connections ’ of
lesser light. There are several really first-class fami-
lies, whose antecedents are of what is known as ‘ the
veiy best’ in the old country, but the majority of the
heads of society belonged to the respectable English or
Scotch or Irish middle class, with a dash of the alleged
‘ lower orders ’ thrown in here and there, as was the case
with the early history of society in other parts of
Australia. . . . From all which it will appear that, as
■far as social order or caste is concerned, life in West
Australia runs in a similar channel to that of the social
world of the other provinces. It is as difficult, if not
more so, to obtain a foothold in the ‘ Weld Club ’ of
Perth as it is to become a member of the Adelaide Club,
This exclusiveness is carried even into the amateur musical
and theatrical life of the place, and no person lower in the
social scale than a bank clerk or a bank clerk’s sister is
allowed to cater for the public amusement in the Perth
Musical Union and the Perth Amateur Operatic Society.
The vulgar public are allowed to patronise the entertain-
ments, but no recruits are taken from the ranks except a
heavy forfeit be paid, and the aspirant, if it be a lady,
enamelled by strange devices.
“The wealth of many of the leading families was
acquired in the good old days when money among the
masses was scarce, and the ‘ truck ’ system reigned


supreme over fanner and artisan and labourer alike —the
days when honest labour of nearly every description was
under the thumb of the truck shopkeeper, and men
received their hard-earned wages in shoddy goods. It
was only during the last few years that this infamous
system of barter was generally exchanged for the actual
wage system, and even now in some parts of the Colony
it defrauds the labourer of his hire, and enriches the
usurious shopkeeper. By means of this vile traffic some
of what were once the best farms in West Australia came
into the possession of many of the storekeepers, some
of whom are now dignified by the title of merchants.
Farmer customers were deliberately encouraged in the
purchase of luxuries and useless articles, and when the
end came, their lands and labour and goods and chattels
passed into the hands of the indulgent robber, who
retained the lands idle for speculative purposes. Hun-
dreds of thousands of tons of sandalwood passed by means
of the truck system of labour into the same hands, and
were exported at boom prices to the idol-makers and
worshippers of China. Until recent years the bulk of the
shopkeeping business of the community was transacted
by, and through the old identities, who monopolised the
money power of the Colony. Of late, things have changed,
and business men from Eastern Australia, are gradually
gaining ground in every town and settlement.”
Local politics come in for strong censure, and in the
wholesale denunciation the Press is included, and feeling
reference in made to papers which have failed. “ The
fiscal policy of the country,” says Mr. Rowe, “ is a bastard
form of protection, but the near approach of a fiscal war
will probably split up the dull and flabby harmony
hitherto existing between the members of the Ministry
and their various hangers-on—a harmony which has as


its basis the discouragement of land settlement and land
taxation. • At the present time in West Australia a pro-
posal to tax unoccupied and unimproved land would be
received in Parliament with about as much sympathy as
would the proposals of the Nihilists in St. Petersburg by
the Czar. The wail of the landocrat is heard throughout
the land, and his cry is for ‘ population? to further add
to his unearned increment and glut the labour market.
The idea of levying'an income or even absentee tax would
be simply laughed at in Parliament, and a proposal for
the payment of members would receive the support of
about three Assembly members, and the rest would boil
over with patriotic indignation at such an attempt to
democratise ‘ our Colony.’ Members representing vast
landed and propertied interests prefer to draw thousands
indirectly from the State by virtue of their immunity
from land taxation, to drawing a few paltry hundreds
from the Treasury counter. ... To persons of genteel
occupations and to manual labourers who have no capital
upon which to subsist for a time, West Australia is about
the worst place they could fix their minds upon. On
account of the distance and the rates of fares, it is a
veritable man-trap to those who would have little diffi-
culty in migrating in other parts of Australia, whilst the
cost of living is out of all proportion higher in West
Australia than in any other province.
“ The progressive policy of South Australia and New
Zealand is only mentioned by the party in power in
Western Australia with horror and loathing, and referred
to by the Government Press as infernal ‘ paternal State
despotism.’ But, notwithstanding, Western Australia
for other reasons deserves to be called the ‘ coming
Colony.’
“ The rapidly increasing population inflowing from


Eastern Australia is making itself visibly felt in the
metropolitan centres of the Colony, in associations and
trades unions, and no doubt with an extended franchise
and a wider scope of Parliamentary selection, the ‘other
side ’ element would be powerful enough to change the
whole aspect of the political life of the place. Several
democratic or liberal weekly journals have been frozen
out by the conservative party, which hitherto held the
monopoly of the advertising power in their hands, and
used it either as a lever to corrupt, or a weapon to alto-
gether efface straightforward journalism. But the time
is rapidly coming when the demand for a fearless daily
paper in the metropolis must be supplied ; but the supply
both in brains and capital must come from an outside
source, so that no compromises need be made with the
local prejudices, purposely festered by the two subsidized
dailies to exclude competition. In conclusion, I may
state that as regards Imperial politics, the leaning of the
dominant party in West Australia is towards Imperial
federation. In fact, the ’ old identities are much more
English than Australian in sympathy, and always refer
to the rest of the group as ‘ the Colonies,’ after the
British fashion. All the ‘leading people, doncherknow,’
are always in readiness to squeak out a bar of the English
National Anthem in order to drown any cry for Austra-
lian national aspirations, which are looked upon as in
‘ bad form,’ either in public or private. The ghost of
Downing Street still sits in high places in the western
land of the swan.”
The italics are mine. They go to show, at all events, the
state of Mr. Rowe’s mind. The general impression of his
report will not be unpleasant to the Englishman. Its
facts are fairly accurate. Western Australia is poor,
and till lately was so poor that barter was the only means


of trade ; she is governed by a discreet oligarchy; and
with the influx of new settlers it is possible that, some
time, an Opposition may show itself. On the other hand,
living is not expensive ; and the facilities for settling on
the land are many, and, with a Homestead Bill in pro-
spect, are likely to be more. It is true, however, that
professional men and clerks are not wanted in the Colony;
that diggers and prospectors will be wise to land with
not less than £SO in their pockets; and that a capital of,
say, £1 per acre is required by the intending farmer (see
chapters on Agriculture, Immigration, and the Mines).
One thing is universally admitted: that “ new chums”
from England are more cordially received by all classes
than arrivals from the eastern colonies. Public senti-
ment, here, jumps with the feeling in California, where
Englishmen and Australians are more popular than
Yankees. For the rest, the Colony, the Premier said
lately (July, 1893), in a speech to his constituents, was
never more prosperous. Crops, stock, and vegetables have
had everything in their favour; new mineral finds are
being made every day, and land values are steadily
rising. No “ boom ”isto be expected or feared; but the
small investors of Melbourne and Sydney, forced to dis-
trust the banks, are buying up land lots in Perth ; and the
Earl of Carnarvon, and other British capitalists, have
made heavy purchases in Hay Street and St, George’s
Terrace.
“ The rateable value of property in Perth increased
from £26,000 per annum in 1880, to £67,000 in 1887, and
£82,000 in 1890. A new valuation has been ordered by
the City Council, and, having regard to the low rate of
past valuations, and the increase of population which is
Hkely to follow from the establishment of a Responsible
Government in the Colony, the valuable discoveries of


gold which have recently been made, and the initiation
of a vigorous policy of public works, it may be expected-
that within five years the rateable value of the city
property will not be less than £120,000 per annum, and
may reach £150,000.”
Public Institutions.
The Royal Agricultural Society of Western Aus-
tralia.
Royal Perth Yacht Club
Weld Club.
Metropolitan Cricket Club.
West Australian Cricketing Association
West Australian Rifle Association.
Metropolitan Rifle Volunteers; Perth Artillery
Volunteers ; Fremantle Rifle Volunteers ; Fre-
mantle Artillery Volunteers.
Metropolitan Fire Brigade.
Freemasons (five lodges}.
Fremantle Club.
West Australian Turf Club.
Perth Musical Union. .
Perth Amateur Operatic Society.
Western Liedertafel.
Fremantle Musical Association,
Perth Horticultural Society.
West Australian Dog and Poultry Society.
Perth Working Men’s Club.
Perth Working Men’s Institute.
Public Library, Perth.
Perth Museum.
The Perth Benefit Building, Investment and Loan
Society is established under the Friendly Societies Act,


1863, for the purpose of raising, by weekly or monthly
subscriptions, a fund with which to make advances to
members of the value of their share or shares, either on
loan, or to enable them to erect, repair, or purchase houses
or other freehold or leasehold estate to be mortgaged to
the Society for the purpose of securing the weekly or
monthly repayments.
There are in all about twenty Friendly Societies in the
Colony, with about four thousand members.
. Charitable Institutions.—There are eleven Hospi-
tals and two casualty wards distributed amongst the
principal towns of the Colony. Perth has two Poor
Houses, in which old and infirm paupers are supported
by the State. These in 1891 numbered 169. Other
paupers receive out-door relief. It is calculated that
during 1891 the daily average of paupers was 414. There
is a Lunatic Asylum at Fremantle, containing 145 in-
mates. The State also subsidizes Native Institutions for
aboriginal and half-caste children, of whom 37 were
provided for during 1891, and there are also Roman
Catholic and Church of England Orphanages, which
during 1891 contained 197 inmates.
There has been some talk, as in the other colonies,
of an “unemployed” question ; but with artisans, labourers,
and miners in great demand all over the Colony, and land
going begging to boot, there is small chance of this
“ difficulty ” becoming serious.
Literary Institutions; —All over the colonies, and
in Western Australia with the rest, there are Mechanics’
Institutes, which are allowed a small annual grant
for their upkeep by the Government, in all the prin-
cipal towns. These are well supplied with both books
and newspapers. Members who wish to make use of the
Circulating Libraries in connection with these Institutes


pay a small annual subscription, but all visitors are
allowed free use of the periodical literature. These
institutions are the real clubs of the lower classes and
the country districts.
OTHER PRINCIPAL TOWNS OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
■GERALDTON is the outlet, through its port,
Champion Bay, for a very large pastoral, agricultural, and
mining district, and is the nearest point to the Murchi-
son Coldfield. It has a population of about 1,200, and
is about 290 miles from Perth. It is at present reached
either by road or sea, the steamers of the Adelaide Steam-
ship Company frequently plying between Fremantle and
Champion Bay. It has two excellent hotels, a club, a
masonic hall, and some important places of business. It
is connected with the Northampton lead and copper mines
by railway. Tlie Midland Railway, which is open from
Geraldton for some 150 miles southwards, and from the
Guildford end to Gingin, a distance of 40 miles, will, when
completed, join with the rich and extensive gold-finds on
the Murchison in materially increasing the prosperity of
the district.
BEVERLEY is a small township on the Avon, about
110 miles from Perth. Here the Eastern (Government)
Railway joins the Great Southern Line, belonging to the
West Australian Land Company. Round Beverley, says
the Year-book , there is excellent agricultural land.
BUNBURY is a seaport on the western coast, about
107 miles south of Perth. It is reached by sea, and also
by rail from Perth. There is excellent land near Bun-
bury, and an abundant rainfall. It is the port for the


tinfields, and very fair coal has been discovered about
thirty miles distant, on the Collie River.
BUSSELTON, southwards from Bunbury, was, till
lately, purely an agricultural and pastoral centre; but
during the last four j r ears it has had a growing export
trade in tin.
GINGIN is a small agricultural township on the
Midland Railway, about 50 miles north of Perth, and the
centre of a rich agi’icultural district.
GUILDFORD is situated in the centre of a thriving
agricultural district, at the junction of the Swan and
Helena Rivers, about nine miles east from Perth. Here
the railway starts for Geraldton.
KATANNING is a now township on the Great
Southern Railway, situated half-way between Albany
and Beverley. There is excellent agricultural land in its
vicinity, which is being largely taken up.
NEWCASTLE is a small agricultural town on the
Avon River, about 50 miles east of Perth. Round. New-
castle there is some of the finest land in the Colony,
especially adapted for the growth of cereals, vegetables,
fruit, and wine.
NORTHAM is a thriving little township situated
about 18 miles south of Newcastle, on a branch lino of
the Eastern Railway. It is the centre of an excellent
agricultural district, and is the starting-point of the
railway to the Yilgarn Goldfields, now under construction.
(The first section of 72 miles will probably be opened
forthwith.)
ONSLOW, situated at the mouth of the Ashburton
River, is the port of a rich and extensive pastoral district.
Gold has also been discovered on the Upper Ashburton
River.
PINJARRAH is situated about 54 miles south of


Perth, on the banka of the Murray River, on the main
road between Perth and Banbury. The district is admir-
ably adapted for agriculture, and especially fruit growing;
and when transport is cheapened and facilitated, as it
shortly will be, by the' advantage of railway communica-
tion with the capital, this industry should prove highly
remunerative. There are already in the district several
fruit-preserving manufactories, where excellent goods are
turned out, and where fish preserving is also carried on.
ROEBOURNE is the chief town of the North
District, where a large proportion of the principal sheep
stations of the Colony are located. Recently, also, gold
discoveries in the neighbourhood, at Pilbarra and Nulla-
gine, have given an impetus to the trade and prosper! t}' of
this district, counterbalancing perhaps, to a certain extent,
the heavy losses incurred during the terrible drought of
1801.
VASSE is a small seaport town, about 30 miles south
from Bunbury. Here, also, as throughout the south-
western portion of the Colony, there is some very ex-
cellent agricultural land, which it only requires the
extension of the Bunbury railroad to develop. The cli-
mate is cool, the rainfall abundant and regular, and all
English fruits, such as apples, pears, cherries, plums,
gooseberries, raspberries, etc., thrive luxuriantly.
YORK is at present the largest agricultural centre of
the Colony. It is situated in the valley of the Avon,
about 60 miles from Perth, where the railway to Albany
reaches the extreme easterly point of its bend. Here, at
present, is the starting point of the line of coaches for the
Yilgarn Goldfields and Coolgardie.
The cost of living in these towns is not expensive, and
the taxation by the municipal authorities is moderate;
while they are, as a rule, very well kept.


PASTORAL AND AGRICULTURAL.
The Land Regulations, which came into force March 2,
1887, were amended by an Act which passed January 18,
1893. A Homestead Bill, on Canadian lines, is contem-
plated ; but it is impossible at present to foresee its con-
ditions.
The Colony, as we have seen, is divided, for the purposes
ot the Regulations, into six divisions: the Gascoyne,
N.W., Kimberley, Eucla, Eastern, and South-West.
Crown Lands are managed by the Commissioner of
Crown Lands. The total area of the Colony is 678,400,000
acres, out of which 5,179,147 acres had been alienated up
to the end of 1891, thus leaving 673,220,853 acres avail-
able for occupation.
By the terms of their contract with the Government,
the West Australian Land Company has a subsidy of
12.000 acres selected east and west of the Great Southern
Railway within a belt 40 miles on each side of it; con-
sequently (the distance between Albany and Beverley,
the Company’s railway terminus, being 242 miles) nearly
300.000 acres are in the hands of this corporation, and
are for sale on fairly easy terms. The thriving settlements
of Gledhow, Eastwood, Mt. Barker, Tenterden, Cranbrook,
Broomehill, Katanning, Wagin, Narrogin, and Pingelly,
are all on the Company’s line of railway; and an Agri-
cultural Area containing some splendid (Government)
land has been thrown open for selection at Katanning.
The concessions granted to the Midland Railway Com-
pany amount to 3,360,000 acres; and the property of
this Company, also, contains most valuable agricultural,
pastoral, and mineral lands.


CROWN LANDS.
The quantity of land held under Conditional Purchase
from the Crown at the end of 1891 was 461,224 acres;
and for pastoral purposes 105,131,075 acres.
Crops and Stock. —Most of the Eui’opean grains,
fruits, and vegetables can be cultivated and brought to a
high state of perfection in the southern part of the Colony.
The soil in parts is sandy, but this sand when irrigated
is highly productive. There is a large extent of light
friable soil suitable for all kinds of crops. The climate,
as regards agriculture, is favourable, although at times
subject to bad seasons. The shortest day is in June, and
midsummer comes in December; with August commences
the spring, and the winter begins in April.
Sheep, horses, and cattle thrive well throughout the
Colony, more especially in the northern parts, where the
pasturage is extensive and very nourishing.
Town and suburban lands are sold by public auction at
an upset price fixed by the Governor in Council.
Other lands may be obtained—(l), (for agricultural pur-
poses) by purchase, with deferred or immediate payment;
(2), (pastoral lands) by lease.
The following particulars are taken from the Govern-
ment Year-book , and corrected up to 1893.
THE SOUTH-WEST DIVISION.
This Division contains 67,000 square miles, and com-
prises, as regards climate, the most temperate part of
Western Australia. It was the portion of the Colony
first settled, and in it about four-fifths out of the whole
population reside.
The south-western corner is heavily timbered, and is
well watered and capable of supporting a largo popula-


tion. It is generally an undulating country, and, with
the exception of the Darling Range and a few other small
ones, has no extensive mountain ranges.
Numerous rivers enter the coast within this Division,
but they are all very short, and merely drain the country
within 100 miles of the coast.
The work and expense of clearing the land has proved
very laborious and very great; but, when onoo the ground
is properly prepared, a good crop can be depended upon.
In its natural state it takes about ten acres to keep
a sheep, but with clearing and improving it will keep a
sheep to two acres, and in choice places a sheep to one
acre.
The climate is very gool, and the rainfall varies from
19 inches in the northern and 15 inches in the eastern,
to 48 and 32 inches respectively in the south-western and
southern portions of the Division.
The average temperature in the north is about GG 3 , to
the eastward GB°, on the west coast G3°, and on the south
coast 58°.
The rent required by the Crown per 1,000 acres is £1
per annum.
There are four modes of obtaining land by conditional
purchase in the South-West Division .
1, By deferred payment with residence, within agri-
cultural areas. '
2. By deferred payment with residence, outside agri-
cultural areas.
3. By deferred payment, without residence, either
within or outside of agricultural areas.
4. By direct payment, without residence, either
within or outside of agricultural areas.
Agricultural areas of not less than 2,000 acres may be


set apart by the Governor in Council—the maximum area
to bo held by any one person is 1,000 acres, and the mini-
mum 100 acres ; the price is fixed by the Governor in
Council, at not less than ten shillings an acre, which is
the present price, payable in 20 yearly instalments of Gd.
an acre, or sooner if the occupier choose. Upon the ap-
proval of any application, a license is granted for five
years. Within six months the licensee must reside on
some portion of the land, and fence in the same with a
good substantial fence during the term of his license. If
these conditions are fulfilled, a lease is granted to him for
15 years. After the lease has expired, or at any time
daring the currency of the lease, provided the fence is in
good order and that improvements have been made equal
to the full purchase money, and further provided the
full purchase money has been paid, a Crown grant will be
given.
Outside agricultural areas land may be purchased on
deferred payment with residence, by free selection,
otherwise subject to all the conditions required within
agricultural areas, as stated in the preceding paragraph.
Under the third mode of purchase, the applicant is
subject to all the conditions imposed under No. 1, except
residence, but he has to pay double the price, or £1 per
acre, in 20 yearly instalments of one shilling per acre.
By the fourth mode, land to the extent'of 1,000 acres
and not less than 100 within an agricultural area, and
not exceeding 5,000 acres outside an agricultural area,
may be applied for at a price (at present 10s. an acre) to be
fixed by the Government. Within three years the land
must be fenced, and within five years ss. an acre spent on
improvements.
[lmprovements are to consist of wells of fresh water,
tanks, reservoirs, fences, sheds, buildings erected for farm,


shearing, or station purposes (not being dwelling-houses),
cultivation, clearing, grubbing, draining, ring-barking,
etc.]
For garden purposes small areas of not less than 5 acres
nor more than 20 acres (except in special cases), at 20s.
per acre, may be purchased on the condition that within
three years the land shall be fenced and one-tenth planted
with vines, fruit trees, or vegetables.
Pastoral lands are granted on lease, which gives no
right to the soil or to the timber, except for fencing or
other improvements on the lands leased, and the lands may
be reserved, sold, or otherwise disposed of by the Crown
during the lease.
The following are the terms of pastoral leases in the
several Divisions; all leases expire on the 31st December,
1907. The rental named is for every thousand acres.
South-West. —ln blocks of not less than 3,000 acres, at
20s.
Gascoyne. —Not less than 20,000 acres, 10s. per annum.
Eucla. —2o,ooo acres: 10s. for that portion of the
Division situated to the west of Point Culver; east of
Point Culver, ss. per annum.
North-West and Kimberley. —so,ooo acres if on a water
frontage ; otherwise 20,000 acres: 10s. per annum.
Eastern Division. —20,000 acres : 2s. Qd. per thousand
acres for first 7 years; ss. for the remainder of lease.
THE GASCOYNE DIVISION.
This Division contains an area of 133,000 square miles.
The country is, in its present state, only suitable for
pastoral purposes, and has been proved to be healthy for
all kinds of stock. It is fairly well watered, and is
capable of much improvement by fencing the land and


conserving and sinking for water. It is generally a
very flat country.
Included in this Division is the rich Murchison Gold-
field.
The climate is good, though the heat is great in the
summer.
The Murchison and Gascoyne Rivers, and their tribu-
taries, drain this important Division,
THE NORTH-WEST DIVISION.
The North-West Division contains 81,000 square miles.
It is a rich pastoral Division, consisting of well-grassed
plains intersected by bold ranges and hills covered with
triodia. It is capable in the best portions of carrying a
sheep to two acres.
It is fairly well watered, and stock thrive and increase
satisfactorily. The Pilbarra Goldfield is within this
Division.
THE KIMBERLEY DIVISION.
The Kimberley Division contains an area of 144,000
square miles.
Sheep and cattle, especially the latter, thrive well in
this Division, and in the future it is likely'to be a gieat
source of a meat supply for export or otherwise.
The climate is fairly good, though trying, on account
of the heat. The land on the alluvial plains is very rich,
and, with irrigation, suitable for tropical culture.
Land rents are similar to those in the North-West
Division.


THE EUCLA DIVISION.
This Division contains 59,000 square miles, and is
almost unoccupied. That portion eastward of Point Culver
is vei’y badly watered, and, with the exception of a few
places along the coast, it is altogether destitute of per-
manent water.
The country between the Fitzgerald River and Point
Culver is fairly watered and fairly grassed.
The country north of Eucla is an elevated plateau,
splendidly grassed and well suited for stock if permanent
water could be obtained.
With the exception of a small fringe along the coast
this Division is unoccupied, and, unless water is conserved,
must remain so.
THE EASTERN DIVISION.
This immense Division contains 576,000 square miles,
and comprises the interior of Western Australia.
Very few persons live in the Division, and these are
for the most part on the Yilgarn Goldfields.
There are no rivers within this Division.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Holders of 200 acres or less in fee simple may obtain
leave to cut down timber on unimproved Crown lands for
domestic uses, for buildings, and for fences, etc.
A miner’s right, entitling him to mine for gold, costs
20s. a year. For mining leases, etc., see Regulations.
The Land Titles Act, known as the Torrens Act, affords
an eas}’’ and cheap registration of titles and other facilities
for dealing with land. All Crown grants are issued
under its provisions.


Report of Lands and Surveys Department for
1892.
Leases and Licenses under the Regulations
of 1887.
Conditional Purchases
“ Although there is a falling off under the sub-head of
Pastoral Leases, owing principally, no doubt, to the de-
pression in the northern part of the Colony caused by the
late drought, the large increase in the area of land taken
up under the Conditional Purchase clauses of the Regula-
tions may be looked upon as the most gratifying feature
of the past year’s business to which I have to draw atten-
tion, evidencing, as it does, the increased settlement of the
land for Agricultural purposes.
“ The total area taken up during 1891 under the sevei'al
Conditional Purchase clauses of the Regulations was
85,800 acres, and the area held on 31st December, 1891,
was 241,TG3 acres ; during 1892 an area of 122,937 acres
of fresh land was taken up under 539 separate licenses,
and at the end of the year 1,5G3 licenses, comprising
34G,G61 acres, were in existence, showing that a very
small percentage of those previously held were abandoned
during the year.
“ The most marked increase was under Clause 4G of the
Regulations, the figures being 11G licenses, comprising
32,512 acres, as compared with 32 licenses, comprising
7,050 acres, for 1891.
“ All land under Clause 4G, as well as some of that under
other clauses, is within the different Agricultural Areas
that have been declared, so it speaks well for the system
of survey before selection.
“ The actual quantity of land so selected during the year


was as follows : —Under the Residence Clause, 32,512
acres ; and under the Non-Residence Clause, 2,980 acres,
or 35,492 acres in all.”
Homesteads Bill.—The provisions of the new Home-
steads Bill are not yet (August, 1893) settled. But its
main feature will be to offer (without superseding the
above Lands Regulations) a free gift of IGO acres of land
to any hond-fide settler, under certain conditions, not very
onerous, of enclosure and cultivation.
DESCRIPTION OF THE
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS OF
THE COLONY.
In the Final Report of the Commission of Agriculture,
published in 1891, there is much information which is of
the utmost value to the intending farmer. The country
round Beverley, York, Northam, and Newcastle is undu-
lating, and covered alternately with timber, known as
raspberry jam, York gum, a little wattle, and mimosa
shrubs, having belts of ironstone and granite, with consider-
able tracts of more or less rich chocolate and clay soils—
friable and easy of general farm treatment. As in most
countries, the character of the soil changes somewhat on
the banks of the water-courses. These districts are
watered generally hy the Avon, brooks, and by wells at
varying depths of 20 ft. to 70 ft. The average rainfall of
Beverley is 14’OG in.; York, 17 - 43 in.; Northam, 15-21 in.;
Newcastle, 18-79 in.; and the cost of clearing in these dis-
tracts is very similar, as their character is somewhat the
same, and ranges from 255. per acre up to £3 and £4,


The districts of Guildford, the Swan, and Gingin em-
brace a belt of country differing materially from the
above ; the agricultural lands of Guildford and the Swan,
including the Canning, consist principally of rich river
deposits extending along flats on either side of the river
Swan, from below Guildford, until it becomes lost in the
Darling Range. .The extreme fertility of the flats is ap-
parent to the most casual observer. Back from the river
on the banks there is a formation of reddish friable loam,
gradually merging, as it extends into the plains, into a
yellow clay and sandy grit: the timber on the rivers and
lowlands being flooded gum and wattle, on the uplands
red gum, jarrah, and wando ; in many parts the wando
prevails. At Gingin the character alters slightly, having
ridges mixed with rich soil, sandy loams, and limestone
formations with ti-tree swampy flats, as the country ex-
tends towards the Moore River. These districts are
watered by the Swan, the Helena, Ellen Brook, Gingin
Brook, etc., and water is obtained by sinking at from 25
ft. to GO ft. The rainfall at Guildford and Swan is 32 - 37
and 28 - 20 in. respectively ;at Gingin, 30 53 in. The
average cost of clearing varies from £2 per acre to £G
and £7.
The districts of Wandering, Murradcng, the Williams
and the Arthur Rivers contain country in many respects
similar to that around and near Northam'; more open in
its character, and more undulating; at periods of the year
heavily grassed with silver grass. The soil is of a reddish
chocolate colour and very friable on the ridges, alternating
into clayey flats and grit. The timber generally is raspberry
jam, wattles, York gum, white gum, and bastard oak; the
country round and about Wandering and Murradong being
perhaps more thickly wooded than on the Williams and
Arthur Rivers, and much richer in character and general


fertility. These districts are watered by the Arthur,
Williams, Beaufort, and Bannister; and by sinkings at
depths varying from 30 to 50 ft. The rainfall of the Wil-
liams is 22’81 in.; of Wandering, 28 - 5 G in. ; and the
average cost of clearing is from £8 to £5 per acre.
The Upper Blackwood, Jayes, Bridgetown, and Preston
River, differ in character in every respect from any of
the above enumerated areas. The character of the country
and soil are subject to different climatic conditions alto-
gether. The districts named are more or less similar in
character, having many features in common, and therefore
a general description will embrace features common to
each. They consist generally of very hilly country,
covered with heavy timber; the agricultural land grow-
ing principally the red gum and flooded gum, and more or
less covered with a heavy growth of blackboy. The soil
varies very materially, at times belts or ridges of red-
dish chocolate soil are to be met with, and at others strong
dark soil deepening into rich black loam as it extends
into the valleys below ; all yielding, under fencing, clear-
ing and ring-barking, heavy crops of grass. These dis-
tricts are well watered by brooklets, springs, and shallow
sinking. The agricultural country on the banks or the
flats of the Preston River differs only in character from the
fact of having rather a larger stretch of level country along
the banks of the river-, and being perhaps more uniform in
the general character of its soil. The average rainfall is
—Jayes, 26‘95 in.; Bridgetown, 35’78; and the average
cost of clearing from £3 to £l5 per acre.
The districts of Bunbury and Vasse are alike in some
respects, but differ materially in others; both are sea-
port towns, and both the seat of considerable dairying
operations. The Vasse may be described as a belt of rich
swamp deposit placed behind the sea hills, and running


in a narrow belt along the coast, from 10 to 15 miles on
either side of the port, with ridges of limestone formation
skirted by clay flats, and with low-lying sand and clay
plains, covered generally by shrubs, w r attle, and tuart on
the poorer land, and on the rich land growing flooded gum,
tuart, and ti-tree.
Near Greenough, in the locality of the Upper Irwin, are
two distinct belts of almost level formation, which may be
classed among the richest agricultural land in all Aus-
tralia. The existence of these belts, says the Report, is
a startling and novel feature in our geography. Water is
obtained after cutting through the lower limestone at 40
to 70 ft.; and cost of clearing, £2 to £4 per acre. Rainfall
at Northampton, 2P09 in.
The district of Dongara is again different in character,
the soil being a rich stiff loam along the banks of the Irwin.
Wheat-growing will be found profitable, says the
Commission, in the districts of Greenough, Dongara, and
Upper Irwin, in the north ; and the Victoria Plains, New-
castle, Northam, York, Beverley, and south along the
Great Southern Railway as far as Eticup. This last belt
of country, in the opinion of the Commission, .has a great
future before it. Its large extent, the low cost of
clearing, its climatic conditions, and general facilities for
export, point to a rapid and extensive settlement.
On the other hand, the Commission strongly opposes a
system of wheat or corn growing as an only product.
Wheat should be the primary factor in the farmer’s busi-
ness ; but the production of oats, barley, and hay should be
attended to. Towards the south dairying can be profit-
ably carried on during the whole year, and in the/northern
areas during at least three or four months. No farm
should be without a few sheep; and attention to garden
produce should not be lost sight of.


Farmers should pay particular attention, in the dis-
tricts south of the Irwin, to having a few heavy mares,
and so supply the Colony with draught stock. Throughout
this belt the climate and soil is entirely in favour of the
horse; and with care and attention to young stock, animals
can be produced equal to those bred in any part of the
world.
Area for Fruits.—All the belt of country known as
the Darling Range, say from Bindoon to Bunbury, and
thence to the Blackwood, might be described as one vast
area for fruit-growing. The hill slopes and valleys of this
district, its alternations of soil, its diverse aspects, single
it out as specially adapted for wine-making, fruit-preserv-
ing and fruit-drying. The variety of fruits includes
oranges, lemons, peaches, plums, apricots, pears, quinces,
figs, apples, medlars, cherries, English and Cape goose-
berries, citrons, currants, guavas, mulberries, nectarines,
loquats, limes, nuts, filberts, almonds, raspberries, shad-
docks, bananas. “With such a range of fruit, and growing
each variety in suitable localities, West Australia will
some day compete against the world in these productions.”..
Wine-making should occupy the attention of a large
section of those settling this area of the Colony.
Dairy Area. —“ The area over which dairying, as an
industry, can be followed out with profit, is all the coast
line from the Moore River down south as far as Cape
Leeuwin, extending as far back as the Darling Range.
Taking the belt more particularly from Wanneroo to the
Vasse, the profitable production of butter is simply a
matter of attention and intelligence ; the area is emi-
nently adapted for it all the year round, combined with
the production of such commodities as bacon, hams, eggs,
poultry, potatoes, onions, etc.
“ The coast system of dairying and farming would differ


in some essential respects from that to be followed out on
the stiffer lands below the range. All along the coast,
from its general immunity from frost, potatoes should be
a staple commodity. This applies more particularly to
the large belt of estuary land, and rich formation of vege-
table deposit, running more or less all down the line
mentioned. The cost of clearing is heavy, ranging from
£5 to £2O per acre for heavy ti-tree clearing, but the
yield being heavy and fairly certain, the potato crop
should at all times be able to compete with importations :
there is a very extensive area in every way adapted for
this produce, and population on such a rich deposit will
cheapen production and increase the supply as well as the
demand. The Commission strongly recommend this
branch of farming, together with the production of vege-
tables and dairy produce for the Perth and Fremantle
markets, to the attention of intending settlers, the moment
a quick and ready means of transit is afforded to the
market by a Southern Railway.
“ Bunbury, the Vasse, and their surroundings, seem the
natural locality for dairy farming, and as the Colony pro-
gresses it will, doubtless, form the staple product of these
districts. At the present moment individuals are doing
as much as individuals can with the means and labour at
their command. Something like 1,000 to 1,200 cows are
being dairied ; but at present the cost of production, in-
cluding the heavy cost of transit, cripples the industry.
It is a hopeful and cheerful tribute to the intelligence of
the dairymen of the south, to find how quickly devices in
labour-saving machinery are introduced. The De Laval
Separator, butter workers, and improved churns are now
generally used.
“ The mean temperature of the whole area is about 62°.
The rainfall is from 28 inches in the districts of Wanneroo,


Perth, Guildford, and Canning; while Banbury and Vasse
has an average rainfall of 33 to 40 inches. The establish-
ment of dairies is only a matter of population, and the
Commission can see the germs of a future high-class
system for this industry in the intelligence displayed by
some of those already engaged in the profitable working
of their holdings, in Guildford and in the south. A sys-
tem of dairying should always be combined with the pro-
duction of hams, bacon, and eggs; while general farming
for the growth of the necessary fodder is absolutely essen-
tial to good butter-making.”
The Commission also draws attention to the necessity
for growing root-crops, and to possible excellences of
Colonial cheese.
Guanos.—“ Touching the important question of fer-
tilisation comes that of guanos, and the Commission feel it
their duty to draw marked attention to the matter, Along
the coast at Sharks Bay, the Abrolhos, and surrounding
islands,” they remark, “we have large deposits of guano.
It seems almost as though nature, in a wise adjustment
of things, had placed it there for future use on the soils
of the mainland; for Western Australia, with her large
areas of clay lands in her wet and cold areas, has abso-
lute necessity for the use of this valuable manure on her
soils.”
Report , giving a Description of the Country between Perth
and Bmibury , by the Hon. John Forrest , C.M.G.,
Commissioner of Crown Lands , May, 1888 (non: Sir
John Forrest , Premier of the Colony).
1. “I have the honour to report,” etc.
2 and 3. “ One million acres arable; 000,000 fee


simple; 400,000 Crown lands, which, with means of
communication, can he turned to account.
4. “ The rainfall over the country between Perth and
Bunbury averages about 35 inches a year, and rain falls
on about 100 days in the year. The months of May,
June, July, and August are the wet months, and the
average rainfall is about 24 inches, or about 6 inches
per month. December, January, February, and March
are the dry months, and the average rainfall is about
3 inches, or about '75 inch per month. April, September,
October, and November produce about 8 inches, or an
average of 2 inches per month. The average temperature
is about Gs°, the highest being 76° in January, and the
lowest, 55° in July.
5. “ A glance at these figures will show that this
country is gifted by nature with a magnificent climate
and a plentiful rainfall, and having a fairly productive
soil it is capable of supporting a large peasant population
in the future. I do not mean to say that it is a country
in which fortunes are to be easily or quickly made, for I
do not believe that such will be the case; but Ido mean
to say that this is a country in which a large number of
people will be able to make a livelihood, will be able to
acquire a freehold property, and be able to support in
reasonable comfort themselves and their families.
G. “Between Perth and Bunbury about fourteen running
streams are crossed, and they may all be termed per-
manent streams, although some may stop running for a
short time in dry seasons. Water is plentiful, and may
always be obtained by sinking a few feet.
7. “ The soil upon this area is very varied. In the
valleys of the numerous water-courses rich alluvium is
found, in other places sandy and sandy-gravelly soil is
found interspersed with good loamy land. All along the


Darling Range the country is suitable for vines and
fruit trees; and apples, pears, apricots, nectarines,
peaches, grapes, figs, plums, mulberries, oranges, lemons,
citrons, strawberries, loquats, pomegranates, olives,
melons, etc., etc., thrive well and bear abundantly. At
present the absence of a market, and the damage done to
fruit by carriage, renders it unprofitable to grow it,
except for personal use.
8. “ One of the chief reasons why this country has not
been turned to better account in the past is, I think,
owing to thei’e being so many outlets for the energies of
the people, in the prosecution of the timber industry,
pastoral pursuits in the Northern Districts, pearl-shell
fisheries, etc., that there have not been sufficient people
left to conduct the cultivation of the soil. As a conse-
quence, cultivation and farming employments, being the
least tempting and requiring the greatest amount of
manual labour, have had the least attention. There has
been, too, a laudable ambition in the young men to strike
out in a more profitable field, where not a mere living was
to be looked for, but a position of affluence; and as such
a position was not to be easily attained in cultivating
the land, it has been abandoned in favour of other more
tempting pursuits.
9, “ Until, however, the population of the Colony in-
creases, and consequently a larger local market is estab-
lished, there is little hope that the country between
Perth and Bunbury will be largely utilised. As can,
however, be easily understood, a railway running through
a country well watered, with many springs and water-
courses issuing from the Darling Range, would greatly
encourage the occupation and cultivation of the lands
along such railway, and it must be borne in mind that
occupiers of land in this locality will have great ad-


vantages over those in the portions of the Colony less
favoured by nature, inasmuch as they can grow so many
things that are necessary for their own use. In the
country along the Darling Range everything required by
the small farmer, except tea, sugar, and clothing, can
easily be grown on the land; and, if it is difficult to
make a fortune, it is not difficult to produce wheat, cattle,
sheep, fowls, eggs, butter, vegetables, and fruit, all very
necessary to ordinary comfort.
10. “ In order, however, to enable small farmers to live
in reasonable comfort, it will require industry and
econom}'-; but with these qualifications I think a re-
spectable livelihood may with certainty be realised.
11. “I have not, in this Report, dealt with the present
population, the present production of the District, or with
the financial aspect of railway construction, as I do not
understand that His Excellency desires me to report on
those matters. If, however, I have omitted anything
that is required, I will be glad to report further at any
time.
“JOHN FORREST,
“ Commissioner of Crown Lands.”
Note. —The railway to Bunbury has, since this Report,
been built.
WINE-GROWING.
The Report of the Commission on Agriculture (quoted
above) states that all the belt of country known as the
Darling Range, from Bindoon and Chittering, down past
Narrogen and Pinjarrah, as far as Bunbury, and from
thence to the Blackwood, may be described as one huge
area for fruit-growing. The slopes of this range, facing


the Indian Ocean, have been often likened to the Pacific
slope of California.
Mr. Thomas Hardy, the leading viticulturist of South
Australia, and an authority in vine-growing and wine-
making of the highest standing, has recently visited West
Australia, and has given his views as to the capabilities
of the Colony in a letter to the West Australian.
<l I have had the opportunity,” he says, “ of seeing a
good many vineyards, and vines of all ages up to sixty
years, and planted in a great variety of soils and situa-
tions. I have also seen and tasted wines made in various
localities, and have come to the conclusion that with the
fine climate and rainfall you have here, and the great
variety of soils and situations available for the vine, there
is no reason why West Australia should not become a
worthy rival to South Australia, Victoria, and New South
Wales in the production of wine for both home consump-
tion and export to England and elsewhere. To bring this
about it will require several things to be done. It will
require that not every grape-grower should be a wine-
maker, but that a few persons in suitable places should
purchase the grapes grown by the farmer and make them
into wine. These men, in their own interest, would be
able to give every information to growers as to the best
land to plant, and the kinds best to grow on it.” Mr.
Hardy also gives other very valuable advice and in-
formation on the subject; and on his return to Adelaide,
publicly referred to the capabilities of Western Australia
as a wine-producing country in the highest terms. “It
may with safety be averred,” says Mr. Francis Hart, in
his Guide-book to Western Australia (Perth, 1891), “ that
there is no industry in the Colony which offers so many
openings for a man of small capital and some experience
as vine culture.”


Tho following may be taken as a rough estimate of the
cost of preparing and planting ten acres. The cost of the
land and of clearing it (if any) may be easily arrived at
from the particulars given elsewhere.
First Year. —Ploughing, £l5 ; raising cuttings, £7 10s.;
planting, £lO ; cultivating and training, £lO ; total, £42.
Second Year. —Cultivating and training, £l5 ; filling up
misses and pruning, £3 ; total, £lB.
Third Year. —£2o. Total expenses for three years, £BO.
Fourth Year. —A yield of 1,000 lbs. of grapes per acre,
at 1 \d. per lb., gives £62 10s., less expenses, £4O
balance, £22 10s.
Fifth Year. —2,500 lbs. per acre, at Ik?, a lb., less £5O
expenses ; balance, £lO6 ss.
Sixth Year. —4,500 lbs. per acre, at 1 \d. a lb., less £65
expenses, gives £216 ss. profit.
For the seventh and subsequent years the vines should
be in full bearing, and should yield 6,000 lbs. per acre,
which, merely sold to the wine-maker at a penny-half-
penny a pound (less £75 expenses), gives an income of
£3OO a year.
[The variety of fruit grown in tho Colony is stated else-
where. During last season about £4,000 worth of fruit
trees were planted between Albany and Victoria Plains.
Trial shipments have been made to England; and a large
export trade will ere long, it is hoped, be opened up.
Samples of olive oil, manufactured in the Colony, received
very favourable notice at the Indian and Colonial Ex-
hibition. Fremantle is five days’ steaming nearer London
than the eastern colonies.]
Wine to the extent of about 200,000 gallons is at
present made in the Colony, the whole of which is locally
consumed.


FOREST RESOURCES.
Quite apart from the export of sandalwood, of which
Western Australia holds almost a monopoly, timber is fast
becoming a source of great wealth to the Colony. “ The
forest regions of extra-tropic West Australia,” writes
Baron Sir Ferdinand yon Mueller, K.C.M.G., in his Report
on the Forest Resources of Western Australia , “ are equal
to the whole territory of Great Britain; and it is singu-
larly fortunate for the Colony that over this vast extent
of wooded country, a species of eucalyptus (the jarrah)
prevails, which for the durability of its timber is unsur-
passed by any kind of tree in any portion of the globe.”
It is furthermore of particular advantage that this
timber is obtainable through at least five degrees of geo-
graphic latitude (31° to 85° S.), and within so short a
distance of shipping places, as to render it easily acces-
sible to foreign traffic.
“ The jarrah, sometimes erroneously called mahogany,”
wrote the late Sir Frederick Weld, “ a tree of the euca-
lyptus tribe, covers immense tracts of land in the S.W. por-
tion of Western Australia; its timber is extraordinary
durable, and as it resists the white ant and the Teredo
navalis, it is admirably adapted for railway sleepers, and
for piles for bridges and harbour works. This timber,
when properly selected and seasoned, has stood the
severest tests, and no term has yet been discovered to its
durability. It is believed that with increased facilities
for transport, the trade in jarrah may be indefinitely
increased.”
Piles of this wood, which have been driven into the bed
of the river Swan, or into the sea-bottom at Fremantle,
have been taken up after forty years, and found to be cap-


able of being Trench polished. It is used in South Aus-
tralia in preference to iron piles for jetty and bridge
building ; it is in extensive demand for railway sleepers,
fence posts, and all kinds of underground structures, and
for shingles ; it is capable of being split into great
lengths, and tree-nails are made with it; together with
karri, it is fast coming into use for ship-building, and in
London it is used for paving streets. Among the places
to which it has lately been exported are, Port Adelaide,
Melbourne (for Harbour Trust works), Natal (harbour
works), and London (paving, and bridge, and harbour
works).
The chief jarrah stations of the Colony —at Jarrahdale,
and the Canning Saw-mills, near Guildford —are connected
with the ports of Rockingham and Fremantle by rail-
way ; and karri timber is supplied on an extensive scale
by the Karridale Timber Mills, the Torbay Mills, and
the Quindalup Saw-mills ; all of which have their lines of
rail or tramway. Widths of timber of 12 feet can be
obtained from the karri; the maximum height of which,
says Baron von Mueller, is certainly not over-estimated
at 400 feet.
The areas occupied by the principal eucalypti are—
White gum, 10,000 square miles.
Jarrah, 14,000 „ ~
Karri, 2,300 „ ' „
Tuart, 500 „ ~
Red gum, 800 ~ „
York gum, 2,400 „ „
The blackboy, or grass-tree, a very widely dispersed
bush shrub, exudes a dark resinous gum in great quanti-
ties, which should possess a considerable mercantile
value. “ The trunks of these grass-trees,” says Mr. Hart,


“ burn brilliantly, and are valuable for fuel and for making
gas of a highly illuminating quality.” Charcoal may be
found ready for use almost everywhere in the bush; but
men employed in burning charcoal make an excellent
living.
NATIVE ANIMALS, BIRDS, ETC.
The principal native animals are kangaroos, brush,
rock, and red kangaroos, wallabies, taramars, and kangaroo
rats. Opossums and dingoes are very numerous. The
principal birds are the emu, the wild turkey, leipoas,
cockatoos, parrots, bronzewing pigeons, quail, magpies,
wattlebirds, laughing jackasses, ci’ows, eagles, ospreys,
and various hawks, shrikes, owls, etc., small birds of the
finch family, swans (from which the Colony took its original
name), duck, wild geese, pelicans, cormorants, and cranes.
The export of sealskins from Albany for the twelve
months ending June 31st, 1891, amounted to £1,400; for
1892, to £3O0 —as against nearly £28,000 worth of
kangaroo-skins.
GEOLOGY, MINES, & MINERAL
RESOURCES.
“ Very little had been done in the way of a systematic
Geological Survey up to 1887;” says Mr. Harry Page
Woodward, F.G.S., F.R.G.S., the Government Geologist,


in his first Annual Report for 1888-9 ; u but when the
enormous area of the country and the fact that geologists
have only been engaged for short periods are taken into
consideration, both the quantity as well as the quality of
the work done by them is highly creditable.”
The first geologist employed was Dr. F. Von Sommer,
who, during the years from 1847 to 1851, examined the
Victoria, Toodyay, and York Districts, and the country
between the latter and Mount Barren, He made geo-
logical maps and reports of these districts, but unfortu-
nately they have not been published.
About the same time two very promising and pains-
taking amateur geologists developed in the Colony itself,
viz., Mr. A. T. Gregory, C.M.G., late Surveyor-General,
Queensland, and the late Mr. F. T. Gregory, who “ lack-
ing all special training and being in those days almost
entirely cut off from the scientific world, and taking up
geology merely as a secondary consideration to help in
the surveying and exploring on which they were em-
ployed,” “did such good work,” says Mr. Woodward,
“ that no professional geologist would be ashamed to
own it.” “ Indeed, so accurate is their geological map
of the Colony,” ho continues, “ that their mapping will
be retained provisionally for those portions not yet re-
examined.” This map was published in London in
1860.
The Surveyor-General of that time, Captain Roe, who
seems to have been an enthusiastic geologist, made a good
many useful notes on his travels, and to him the preserva-
tion of the reports of these early explorers is entirely
due.
Mr. H. Y. L. Brown, F.G.S., some time Government
Geologist of South Australia, was engaged here in 1870
and 1871. He examined and mapped in detail and re-


ported on a strip of country about 50 miles wide, from
the Murchison River to the South Coast. He also issued a
special report and map of the lodes of the Champion Bay
and Northampton Districts.
In 1882 the late Mr. E. T. Hardman, F.R.G.S.L, -was
appointed Government Geologist. Ho examined and
reported on the Kimberley District, and published two
coloured geological maps.
For a great many years the country has been largely
indebted to the Rev. C. G. Nicolay, M.A., for his inde-
fatigable services in testing and reporting on samples for
any one who was in the least doubt as to what he had
found. He also started the Geological Reference Museum
at Fremantle, where after long years of continual hard
work he has accumulated a very good typical collection
of the rocks and minerals of this country. Moreover, his
work has not been confined to the Museum and Laboratory,
for on several occasions he made long and tedious journeys
to settle important questions as to the value of reported
mineral discoveries.
Another enthusiastic worker is Mr. H, E. Victor, C.E.,
who for years has interested himself in collecting speci-
mens and observing the geological formation of the
country. He prepared the collection, drew up the cata-
logue, and wrote the geological sketch of the country,
which were sent to the Paris Exhibition of 1878.
The Department of the Surveyor-General has done
much in elucidating the geology of this immense country.
The Hon. John Forrest, F.G.S., F.R.G.S., and his staff
have developed and carried out the plan, which seems to
have been originally started by Captain Roe, of having
collections made by the surveyors.
The late Mr. W. Knight made a large and very interest-
ing collection of minerals and rocks, which probably


formed the nucleus of the present collection in the Geo-
logical Museum ; Messrs. Maitland Brown, Shenton, and
others have made collections which have been sent to
London at various times; Captain Mitchell, of North-
ampton, has made collections of the minerals of his neigh-
bourhood ; and Messrs. C. Moore, F.G.S., W. H. Huddle-
ston, M.A., F.G.S , A. H. Foord, F.G.S., the Rev. W. B.
Clarke, and Dr. H. Woodward, F.R.S., have written
valuable papers on the Fossils and Geology of the Colony.
But, above all, the Reports of the Government Geologist,
Mr. H. P. Woodward, from which the above information
has been taken, are, and must remain the chief source of
our knowledge of West Australia’s mineral wealth.
Extracts from Reports by the Government Geologist.
GEOGRAPHICAL CONFIGURATION.
Report 1888 9.
“Western Australia occupies about one-third of the
whole continent of Australia, having an area of 1,000,000
square miles, nine times the size of England, Scotland,
and Ireland together.
“The coast is rising rapidly, which accounts for the
low alluvial sandy plains occurring between the sea and
the ranges. These plains vary from a few hundred yards
to twenty miles in width, and are interspersed with
numerous salt inlets, lakes, and swamps.
“The country has only been settled for about 200 miles
inland, and from the information gained by explorers the
interior appears to bo a vast sandy tableland from 1,000
to 2,000 feet above the sea level, with here and there


large areas of depression in which are situated immense
salt clay pans, surrounded by low broken ranges of grani-
tic and other crystalline rocks.
“ Mountains, —The mountains are not remarkable for
their height, though many of them, rising abruptly from
plains little above sea level, present a rather striking ap-
pearance. The principal ranges in the south-west are
the Darling, Roe, and Blackwood Ranges. The Darling
Range is the most important, extending almost due north
and south for about 300 miles, at a distance of 18 to 20
miles from the sea, towards.which it presents a steep face;
and although it has no peaks over 1,500 feet in height, yet
it has a more imposing appearance than the Roe Range,
which runs parallel to it, but further east, of which the
highest peak, Mt. William, reaches 3,000 ft. above sea
level. The other range, the Blackwood, has the greatest
average elevation, although it does not anywhere attain a
greater height than 2,000 ft.
11 Lakes. —The maps show a great number of lakes in
the interior, which tends to give a very incorrect idea of
the country, as, except after heavy rains when they may
be covered with a few inches of water, they are perfectly
dry. They are in reality immense salt clay pans or
marshes.
“ Climate. —The climate cannot be spoken of as a
whole, owing to the enormous extent of the Colony. In
the north there is a true tropical climate. About the
Gascoyne and Murchison Rivers there is an intermediate
state of things ; heavy summer rains, and a good healthy
dry climate for the rest of the year ; while in the south-
west, the settled portion, the seasons may be divided into
wet and dry, the former lasting from April to October,
and the latter November to March ; during this, the
summer, thunderstorms may occur, but are most uncertain.


The annual rainfall on the coast, from Fremantle to
Albany, is about 40 inches, which 50 miles inland,
amongst the ranges, does not exceed 20 inches ; whilst in
the interior, over 200 miles from the coast, no reliance
can be placed upon it, as thunderstorms of a local cha-
racter are all the squatters have to depend iipon.
11 The temperature of Perth rarely exceeds 100° in
summer or falls below 35° in winter, whilst in the north
the temperature is very high in summer before the wet
season sets in.
“ Soil.— ln this Colony there are as good and as great
a variety of soils as in any part of the world. Unfortu-
nately only small portions are as yet under cultivation,
for large tracts of the best land are either so heavily
timbered or are held by persons who do not cultivate,
and these facts have tended to give the place a bad
name.
“ Cereals are grown as far north at lat. 29°, and on the
hills to the east of Perth nothing is thought of a crop of
40 bushels to the acre.”
GEOLOGY.
Report 1888-9.
“ Hitherto it has generally been imagined that the forma-
tions to be found in Western Australia were limited in
number, and that the rocks for the most part were either
granite or sand ; bat that this was quite erroneous will
be seen by examining the table of strata given below,
showing the various formations now known, which will
probably be much extended when all the country has
been thoroughly examined.


Table
of Geological
gs
e
o>
Recent
(Holocene).
o
M
g
c§
Pleistocene .
Pliocene.
.§ Miocene.
Eocene.
I
r
Cretaceous.
-
Jurassic,
I
O
•8 S
si
§ I
u
It
o S
s
5
Ph
Carboniferous.
Devonian.
Silurian and
Met amorphic N
I
1
Arclicean
( Metamorphic)
Igneous
Rocks.
Fokmations ( Sedimentary ).
Alluvium of lake basins and river
valleys, river gravels, estuarine
deposits, gypsum and salt beds,
sand dunes, sand plains, raised
beaches and shell marls and
gravels, and brick earth.
/ Ancient river gravels and lake beds.
I Lower estuarine deposits, shelly
] limestones and sandstones of the
( coast.
j Ferruginous sandstones and vario-
la gated clays.
Not known.
Coralline and chalky limestones
with flints, calcareous and ferru-
, ginous sandstones and grits.
Chalky limestones with flints, sand,
ferruginous sandstones and lime-
stones, ferruginous nodular clay-
, stones, sands, clays and mudstones.
/Oolites Oolitic limestone, clay
I ironstone, ferruginous sandstone,
•I grits and conglomerates.
I Lias ; —Ferruginous and variegated
I limestones, clays and ironstones.
/ Sandstones, grits, conglomerates
and ironstone, limestones, mud-
-{ stones, micaceous clays and shales,
Avith iron pyrites, gypsum, and
I coal seams.
/ Shales, indurated slates, limestones,
\ coarse grits, and conglomerates.
( Clay-slate, limestones, marble, dolo-
j mite, sandstones, quartzites, and
( conglomerates.
I Slates, schists, serpentine, quart-
J zite, gneiss, granitoid, and garnet
(, rocks.
Volcanic. Basalt, dolerite.
Plutonic. Felstone, diorite (greenstone),
syenite, granite, porphyry,
amygdaloid.


Recent and Tertiary Rocks.
“ Alluvium of Lake Basins. —All over the interior on
the great table-land, there are a series of what are
called lakes, though they are in reality nothing more than
large salt flats or boggy clay pans, almost on a dead level,
which drain into one another, and eventually, if the
season has been wet enough, discharge themselves into
the upper courses of some of the numerous rivers which
cut through and drain the range that forms the western
boundary of the great plateau; but this rarely happens, as
they present such an enormous area for evaporation. One
consequence following this is that these large flats nearly
every year receive a fine covering of clay upon which the
salts contained in the water crystallize out to be redis-
solved and added to from time time, till in some places,
which may be a little lower than the rest, or where
some obstruction occurs to the flow of the water, very
large deposits of salt are formed. These lakes are sur-
rounded by red clay flats, which also contain a great
deal of salt, —in fact, the whole interior is salt; and
although such large quantities of rain have fallen since
the last submergence as to destroy all traces of the
marine deposits that must have been left, yet as the water
does not find any outlet to the sea, but is lost by evapora-
tion from the clay pans, the country remains almost as
salt as when first elevated from the sea.
“On the north coast there are some extensive alluvial
deposits, not always in the river valleys themselves, but
sometimes following the sea coast, and in other places
what was once the bed of a river. They are not as a
rule of any great thickness, as outcrops of rock are fre-
quent. It was in one of these large plains that the
great gold-bearing reefs of Mallina were found.


u Sand Plains.— These are the characteristic feature
of Western Axistralia. They extend from one end of
the Colony to the other, and though produced in several
ways are equally objectionable and useless. The great
sand plains of the interior are often twenty to thirty
miles across, but containing in places a good deal of clay
and iron which cement the grains of sand together, and
there being a fair rainfall they are covered with hardy
vegetation, and during the two spring months are per-
fectly gorgeous with flowers —with such a blaze of blos-
som as could hardly bo equalled anywhere in the world.
Consequently they are not nearly so bad as the great
tracts of sand of the south-west of Queensland and a
large portion of the Northern Territory. They result
from the disintegration of the desert sandstone, which
forms the table-land of the interior of Australia.”
MINERAL WEALTH.
“ Until quite recently this Colony was considered to be
destitute of mineral deposits of any value, with the sole
exception of the rich deposits of lead and copper in the
Northampton district, that had been found and worked in
its early days. Beyond these nothing appeared to exist
of sufficient value to be worth working. Now it is
known that this is a rich mineral-bearing country from
north to south, and every day news of fresh discoveries
of gold and other valuable metals is coming in. There
are, however, two great obstacles standing in the way of
these discoveries being immediately turned to account,
viz.:—want of capital, and the construction that has been
put on the Mining Regulations. Of these the first will


be removed as soon as the outside mining world is
assured of the genuineness of these finds, and that there
is really a good field for investment here; and the second
as soon as the Government strictly enforces all its regu-
lations, as up to the present it'has been too lenient, and
of this advantage has been taken, to the detriment of the
real interests of the Colony, both in the floating of com-
panies, and by the holding of areas without fulfilling the
labour conditions.
“Gold.— Gold is said to have been first found in this
Colony in 1688 by the buccaneer, Dampier, after whom
the north-west coast was named. He spent a good deal of
time in that year in searching for the precious metal, and
that he met with success seems to be confirmed by the
fact that on some of the old Dutch charts this coast
is marked ‘Provincia Aurifera,’ and also that in 1888,
just 200 years later, rich alluvial fields have been found
in the same locality with gold almost on the surface.
<l Por a considerable time after the foundation of this
Colony, it was thought that gold would never be found
here, but in 1868 small quantities wore discovered in
the alluvium Peterwangy Hill at the head of the
Irwin River, This caused a good deal of excitement ;
but as the gold was in too minute a quantity to pay, this
discovery, unfortunately, did more harm .than good, for it
brought a number of miners from the eastern colonies,
who were so bitterly disappointed that, on returning
home, they gave this place so bad a name that even at
the present day it is difficult to persuade the people in
those colonies that there is any gold here at all.
“ The gold was found in the alluvium on the north side
of the hill, where the spurs are capped with large
deposits of red clay, sand, pipe-clay, and nodular ferru-
ginous clay-stones, and judging from its highly water-


worn appearance and the fact that the mineral veins of this
locality are not auriferous, it has probably been derived
from some old stream bed which passed across this country
in a different course and at a higher level than the present
rivers. Nothing certain oan, however, be stated on this
point until the district has been examined in detail and
all the old water-courses mapped. The rocks here are
mostly granitic with diorite dykes and occasional quartz
reefs of a highly crystalline character; but a few miles
lower down the river, also further to the eastward, the
country assumes a promising aspect for gold, the rocks
being schistose and containing many nice-looking quartz
and ironstone lodes, though none have been proved to bo
auriferous.
“At about the same period gold was found by Mr.
Hassell, at Kendenup, in a quartz reef that contained
much iron pyrites. A company was floated and machinery
erected, but as the mine could not be made to pay it was
abandoned, and this was due either to the manager not
having followed the shoot of gold-bearing stone, or else,
and more probably, to his not being able to extract the
gold by the ordinary process, for nearly all stone contain-
ing so much pyrites requires special treatment; and, more-
over, 5 tons sent to Victoria, where a speciality is made
of such stone, yielded a very good return ; consequently
there is not the least doubt that gold does exist in this
reef in payable quantities, and now that gold-saving pro-
cesses have reached such a high state of perfection, it is
to be hoped that another trial will be made. The rocks
in this neighbourhood are schistose, contain many quartz
reefs and diorite dykes, both carrying large quantities of
iron pyrites, most of which carries more or less gold.
“The next specimens of gold found were in quartz, at
Bindoon, and a company was immediately started which


commenced work on a quartz reef containing a great deal
of pyrites, by sinking two shafts, close together, on a reef
at the top of a hill, for which it is difficult to assign
a reason, as this was not the reef in which the gold
lead been found, although it was afterwards proved to
contain small quantities. The general appearance of this
locality is very promising, but it has not had a fair trial,
as the reefs near to which the gold was found have never
been prospected. The rocks are slate and schistose, with
quartz reefs and diorite dykes, both containing large
quantities of pyrites which ought to be tested for gold.
“ The gullies have not yet been prospected for alluvial
gold, but so many rich specimens have from time to time
been picked up here, that it is natural to infer that the
stream beds would pay for working.
[ £l All along the western face of the Darling Range,
south of Perth, there are series of immense quartz reefs
carrying large quantities of auriferous pyidtes. A sample
of some tons sent away by Messrs. Dalgety & Blackwood
yielded about 16 dwts. of gold to the ton.
“ Taking into consideration the natural facilities for
working these reefs, which are situated on the steep face
of the hills and often cut through by gullies which flow
in gorges 200 ft. and 300 ft. deep, the water supply,
timber, fuel, and good road communication, these lodes
should be a source of immense profit to any enterprising
company that start working them.”—From the West
Australian Year-hook, 1891.]
“ Then, in spite of the fact that colours of gold have
been found nearly all over the Colony, all idea of gold-
mining was for some years abandoned, until in 1885,
when the late Mr. Hardman published his report on the
Kimberley district, stating that he had obtained good
prospects, and marking on his map certain tracts of


country, which, from their great similarity to the Vic-
torian gold-bearing country, he believed would pi’ove
auriferous. His prognostications proved to be correct,
and some rich patches of alluvial gold were struck, which
caused a rush of miners from the other colonies; but
as these patches, though rich, were of no great extent,
and all in shallow ground, they were soon worked out,
and many unfortunate men who had come all the way
from Victoria, and made the long journey under a tropical
sun from Wyndham or Derby to the fields, had to return
poorer than they came, and thus another blow was given
to the gold-mining industry of this Colony.
“ These alluvial diggings, however, led to the discovery
of some very rich reefs, which bid fair to become a source
of permanent employment in the district, and to pay
those who have invested in them well.
THE YILGARN FIELDS.
“ At the end of 1887 gold was found by Mr. Anstey on
the Yilgarn Hills, about 200 miles east of Perth, which
led to that region being largely prospected, and to the dis-
covery of a belt of country, extending for about'Bo miles
in a southerly direction, rich in gold-bearing quartz reefs.
Many companies are now at work in the different divi-
sions of this field ; namely, Golden Valley in the north,
Southern Cross next, and Parker’s Find to the south.
7 v
The great difficulty at present to successful working is
the scarcity of water. The rocks on this line of country
are more or less indurated slates and schists, with here
and there dykes of granite and other intrusive rocks.
The reefs are, as a rule, large, and extend to a great
length on the surface, but they are not well defined, and
seldom have walls on both sides, one side generally split-


ting up into a large number of leaders, most of which
are rich in gold. The stone itself is solid and of a quartz-
ite nature ; it contains a little carbonate of iron, both iron
and copper pyrites, manganese, and chlorite, but not in
sufficient quantities to interfere with the extraction of
the gold. The stone, as a rule, is very rich, often con-
taining as much as six ounces of gold to the ton, and the
trial crushings that have been made prove that there is,
at any rate in one or two claims, a great mass of stone
carrying about two ounces to the ton.
“ Gold is also found in this field in a great dyke-like
mass of a greenish colour—probably a decomposed serpen-
tine.
“ Some rich deposits of alluvial gold have also been
found ; but, owing to the scarcity of water, little of the
ground has as yet been tested.
“ There cannot be the slightest doubt that this field
presents one of the finest surface indications yet met in
Australia. Unfortunately at the present time it is almost
at a standstill for want of capital to develop it, a difficulty
that will be removed as soon as a railway is constructed
to the field, for then many persons from the other colonies
would visit it, who are now deterred by the two hundred
miles of bush travelling.
“ Gold has also been found in a small reef in the Won-
gan Hill, but not in sufficient quantity to pay.
“ In 1888 some very rich reefs were found to the east-
ward of Roebourne Bay, and many of them were opened
up ; but, owing to the discovery of alluvial diggings in
the neighbourhood, only one or two are now being tested,
and these are proving to be of great value. The stone is
a milky quartz with occasionally a bluish tinge, contain-
ing a large quantity of antimony associated with the gold.
The reefs run cast and west, and are the only known


metalliferous lodes in the Colony running in this direc-
tion. The rocks are slates, often calcareous, with hard
ridges of handed quartzite and large dyke masses of
amygdaloid standing up out of the plain. There ai’e also
some very rich deposits of alluvial gold extending over
three hundred miles of country, and following the coast
to the east and west. Up to the present most of the
finds have been in shallow ground, but now richer deposits
of gold are being found in the deeper alluvial deposits,
and these are often associated with cementing deposits,
similar to those occurring in the other colonies.
“Judging from the large quantities of gold already sent
away from this district it must be a very rich gold-bear-
ing tract of country, and when the alluvial gold ceases to
be the all-absorbing attraction, the reefs will be sure to
receive attention.
“ Gold has also been found at Mulga Mulga to the north
of Austin’s Lake, but is not being worked at present,
owing to the want of money for that purpose. It also
occurs on the Greenough, not far from Yewin Station, and,
lately, rich discoveries have been reported on the Ash-
burton, while all along the face of the Darling Range
there are large reefs full of pyrites, most of which carry
more or less gold, and some are very rich.”
OTHER MINERALS.
“ Lead. —The first discovery of lead in this Colony was
made in the Victoria district in 1840, or shortly after
that date, and several very rich lodes between Geraldton
and the Murchison were worked by English Companies.
“ The ores in these lodes consist chiefly of galena (sul-
phide of lead) and cerussite (carbonate of lead), associated
with quartz, calcite barytes, and blende (sulphide of zinc).


The galena occurs massive and crystalline ; as a rule it
contains very little silver, but when it does it is generally
granular in structure. In the mines in which cerussite
occurs a great deal of trouble has been experienced
through the workmen suffering from lead poisoning, so
much so that work often had to be stopped.
“ The lodes are most frequently of great size, containing
huge masses of galena almost -free from gangue, and all
of these that were accessible have been worked out; for,
when the price of lead fell, the companies found that it
did not pay to work the poorer parts, so they simply
picked out the and abandoned the mines.
<! Copper.— The earliest discovery of copper occurred in
the Northampton district, and many mines were worked
with much profit until the great fall that took place in
the value of this metal. The ore near the surface consists
of malachite and azurite (green and blue carbonates of
copper), but in depth it is invariably copper pyrites (sul-
phide of iron and copper), the 1 yellow ore ’ of the miners.
The lodes run in the same direction as the lead, and in
fact the latter often changes into copper in depth.
“ These lodes have been worked in much the same manner
as the lead, and similarly there are many fine lodes as
yet unworked, and these would pay well to mine at the
present time.
“A little to the south of the Irwin River there are
several rich lodes of carbonate of copper, which have not yet
been worked, as the expense of cartage was too great; but
now that copper is higher in price it is to be hoped that
mines will be started in them, especially as they are close
to the projected line of railway from Perth to Geraldton.
“ To the east of Roebourne there is one of the largest
and richest copper lodes in the Colony, but there is not
much chance of its being worked while so rrtuch gold is


being found in that neighbourhood, and, to the south of
that town, there are also several copper lodes that were
worked some years ago. In one of these the copper occurs
as a brown ore; it is a mixture of carbonate and oxide of
copper with oxide of iron, and gold is often visible in it.
“ Copper also occurs in the Wongan Hills, the Darling
Range, the Grlenelg Range, as well as in several other
places.
“ Tin.— ln the latter part of 1888 Mr. Stinton found some
stream tin near Bridgetown, on the Blackwood River,
which led to the discovery of very rich deposits, extending
over an area of about one hundred square miles ; but no
lodes have been found up to the present, although they
cannot be far distant, as some of the samples are very
little worn, and so cannot have travelled far. The tin-
fields, if properly worked, will produce much wealth; but
at present very little is being done, owing to the fact
that the land is all taken up in large areas by companies
that have been floated without sufficient capital to develop
them.
“The lodes will probably prove to be small granitic veins,
which may occur as a net-work in the decomposed schis-
tose rocks, with the cassiterite (tin-stone, oxide of tin)
running throughout them.
“ Stream tin has also been found on the goldfields at
Roebourne, but has not as yet been worked.
“ Iron. —This is essentially an iron country, for one
cannot travel a mile in the parts where the older rocks
appear at the surface, without encountering a lode.
“It occurs fn many forms, but the chief ai’e magnetite
and hematite (black and red oxides), which occur in im-
mense lodes and would be of enoxunous value if cheap
labour were abundant, Thei'e is enough to supply the
whole world, should the present sources be woi’ked out.


“ From the large quantity of iron in this Colony, it is
almost impossible to work with any degree of accuracy
with a magnetic compass.
“Antimony.— Thei'e are some very good lodes of stibnite
(sulphide of antimony) in the Roebourne district, and
their value in most cases is greatly increased by the
quantity of gold they contain. They have not been
worked yet, having often been put down as small lead
lodes.
■ “ Zinc.— Blende occurs in the Geraldton district, associ-
ated with galena, but not in sufficient quantity to be
worth working. Lately a large lode has been found a
little to the south of Perth, and the samples sent in are
very pure.
“ Manganese. —Manganese has been found in many
places in the Colony, and some of the lodes are very good
both in size and quality, but none have been worked.
“ Mica. —Very good mica has been found at Bindoon and
also on the Blackwood River, but though of considerable
size and splitting well, the specimens were too much iron-
stained to have any market value formerly; but now that
a use has been found for discoloured mica, it will pay
very well for working, and it is certain to be far less
stained, if not quite clear, when quarried below the depth
to which it has been weathered.
“ Asbestus. —Poor specimens of asbestus have been
found in several localities, but nothing good enough to be
marketable.
“ Kaolin ( China-clay and Pipe-clay). — Throughout the
Darling Range, and in most of the granitic country, largo
and very pure deposits of kaolin occur, many of which
are pure enough to be used as whitewash. These deposits
will be of great value for china making, when the popu-
lation increases.


1
2
3
rAVater ...
... 15-20
... 10-87
... 11-70
Volatile
.. < Gases, etc.
... 82-46
... 31-47
... 21-83
(.Sulphur ...
... 2-23
... 2-23
... 2-99
Coke
(Fixed Carbon
... 45-03
... 52-87
... 54-17
" \Ash
...• 5-08
... 2-56
... 9-31
100-00
100-00
100-00
“ Coal. —There are some seams of inferior coal on the
Irwin River, and though the seams are from three to six
feet in thickness, and the coal is of true Carboniferous
age, yet none have at present proved to have a marketable
value. This coal would be very useful for many purposes
in a populous country; but here, where wood is so abun-
dant and always close at hand, there is no demand for any,
except a first-class steam coal.
“The Carboniferous formation certainly extends for three
hundred miles to the north of the Irwin, and probably all
the w'ay to Kimberley, so that there is a very large dis-
trict yet untested in which superior coal seams may be
found.
“Coal has recently been found at Wyndhara ; but though
the sample sent down was of very fair quality, the size
and extent of the seams have not yet been tested. Should
it prove to be a good steam coal it will be of great value,
as it occurs close to one of the best harbours of the
Colony.
“ Lignite. —On the Collie River, near Bunbury, there
are several seams of a very superior lignite, probably of
Mesozoic age. The following are the results of three assays
by Mr. Bernard H. Woodward: No. 1 being of the first
specimen obtained, which was in the bed of the river
itself; No. 2 from a depth of 17 ft. close by, and No. 3
from a similar depth in a shaft five miles distant.


“ The ash of Nos. 1 and 2 is very pale yellowish white,
and of No. 3 red.
“None of the lignites cake, nor do some coals, and, un-
fortunately, both the Irwin and Wyndham are non-caking,
and so lose much of their value, through not being avail-
able for gas-making.
“ There are several seams of lignite of a highly lustrous
character on the Fly Brook, near Augusta, at the south-
west corner of the Colony. It contains so much water
and is so friable that it will not stand much handling, for
in fact it breaks up in drying, and consequently is of little
value.
“There is another deposit of lignite near the Vasse;
but, up to the present time, the specimens that have been
raised are of a very poor quality.
“ Brown coals occur all along the south coast, and there
are some large deposits near Albany, and on the Fitz-
gerald River, which have been tested, but proved of too
poor a quality to have any practical application.
“ Graphite. —Graphite was found in some ferruginous
lodes in the Champion Bay district, and was tested some
years ago, but proved to contain too much iron to be of
any commercial value.
“ Some fair deposits also occur between the Warren and
the Blackwood Rivers, in the south-west, whore several
claims have been taken up, though as yet-very little work
has been done.
“ Some years ago a deposit of graphite was worked at
Ivendenup, and the samples sent away were stated to be of
very fair quality ; but, owing to the distance from a port,
the mine was abandoned. Now that the railway passes
so close, another attempt should be made to utilise this
deposit, and would most likely meet with success.”


Compare the following from the Animal General
Report for 1890.
MINERAL RESOURCES OF THE
NORTHAMPTON DISTRICT.
“ This North and North-west Division of the Colony is
very rich in minerals.
“ Gold has been found near Austin’s Lake at the head
of the Murchison, at Yum, on the Ashburton, the Nicol,
at Roebourne, Mallina, Peeawah, the Turner, Egina, Pil-
barra, the Coongan, the Nullagine, and the 40-Mile.
“ Silver has been found in small quantities associated
with the lead ores of the Northampton and Roebourne
districts.
“ Copper occurs in large quantities in the Northampton
district, near Mullewah, near Murgoo, up the Murchison,
near Roebourne, and at Whim Well, at which last-men-
tioned place there is an immense lode.
“ Lead occurs in large quantities in the Northampton
district, and some small lodes have been found near Roe-
bourne.
“ Antimony, rich in gold, occurs at Mallina and Pcea-
wah in the Roebourne district.
“ Tin has been found at Pilbarra, the Western Shaw,
and small traces throughout the north-west.
“ Iron in large quantities, and of good quality, through-
out the district.
“Zinc in small quantities in the Northampton dis-
trict.
“ Coal has not yet been found of any commercial value;
but as in this portion of the Colony the Carboniferous
rocks are so largely developed, it is highly probable that
it will be found.


“ Granite is found in the Northampton district and on
the Gascoyne River.
“ Mica has been found near the Shaw and on the Gas-
coyne,
“Kaolin occurs in large quantities at the Nullagine.”
“ Sufficient evidence,” Mr. Woodward concludes, “has
now been brought forward to show that this is decidedly
a mineral country, and when we take into consideration
the vast size of the Colony and the small number of in-
habitants, and consequently the small amount of prospect-
ing that can possibly have been done up to the present,
there cannot be any doubt but that many more, and per-
haps far richer deposits of valuable minerals may be
found; but as we have already discovered more than we
can at present use, what is now needed is the incoming
of enterprising people with money from other parts of the
world to assist in developing this known mineral wealth.
It is often asked by persons in other places, why, if we
have such wonderfully rich deposits, we do not work them
all ourselves instead of offering them to others; and to
this the answer is, that as there are not sufficient people
here with money to work more than one or two mines
efficiently, while at the present time they are trying to
develop a hundred, and as a natural consequence failures
are occurring on every side.”
THE YILGARN HILLS.
The Yilgarn Hills are a low range of hills about 250
miles east of Perth, on the western side of a series of salt
lakes, of which Lake Deborah is the southernmost.
They are from two to three miles in width from east to
west, whilst the general direction of the range is north
and south. The western face is somewhat steeper than
the eastern, which gradually descends towards the lakes,


from which it is separated by a plain, from four to six
miles in width, of red clay strewn with ironstone and
quartz.
[“The rocks are mica schist, mica slate, and flaggy
quartzites, with many diorite and quartz veins: their
general strike is north and south, with an easterly dip.
They have been tilted up from the west by a large mass
of intrusive granite, which forms a rough western face to
the hills in the northern part, while in the southern it is
only seen appearing above the surface of the plain in large
rounded masses. The quartz reefs follow the strike of
the rocks, but vary greatly in character, those of the
white quartz not being as a rule in such large masses, nor
so well defined as the more ferruginous ones.” ]
In 1887 Mr. Glass, of Mugakine, while making a tank
near his house, found a large speck of gold, which caused
him to start prospecting, but although he sank several
holes he never had the good fortune to find any more.
However, the discovery drew attention to this district,
and led to a party being organized and fitted out by the
Settlers’ Association, with assistance from the Govern-
ment, to thoroughly prospect the district to the eastward
of Newcastle and Northam. This party was placed under
the leadership of Mr. Colreavy, who worked over all the
country between Newcastle and the Yilgarn Hills, a dis-
tance of some 200 miles; and although his first journey
was not crowned with success, yet he thought so highly
of the country further east that immediately afterwards
he set out to prospect it on his own account.
While this latter party was still on the field, a sensation
was caused by the sudden return from Yilgarn of Mr.
Anstey, with some surprisingly rich specimens of gold, in
quartz. This gentleman had gone in the same direction
as Mr. Colreavy, with the intention of making an extensive


prospecting and exploring tour. The excitement in con-
sequence of this find was for some time very great. It
was soon found, however, that the discovery was not as
valuable as had been at first supposed, as further prospect-
ing showed that, although the surface indications were
surprisingly rich, the gold at a very slight depth pinched
out. Fortunately, just at this time, Mr. Colreavy, who
was prospecting Golden Valley, ten miles further south,
struck a small reef, which carried gold throughout the
stone. This caused a rush, and several small gold-bearing
reefs were found. Prospecting was continued still fur-
ther, and Mr. Riseley, the manager of a prospecting party
equipped by a company calling themselves the “ Phoenix”
Company, was so fortunate as to discover a rich series of
reefs about thirty miles to the south of Golden Valley.
These he named Southern Cross, from the fact of having
made use of that constellation as a guide while travelling
by night to the spot.
In December, 1888, a Mr. Parker, guided by a native in
the same direction for forty miles further south, discovered
other reefs, which are now known as Parker’s Range.
The Yilgarn Goldfield, with an area of 13,000 square
miles, was proclaimed in November, 1888. Several com-
panies were at once established, and are now at work in
the different divisions of the field, at Golden Valle}',
Southern Cross, and Parker’s Find. There is a prosperous
township at Southern Cross, and the affairs of the field
are administered by a Warden (who, however, has just been
transferred to Coolgardie). A telegraph line has been
opened, and the railway from Northam, as we shall see,
is in course of construction. The Government Geologist,
and a large number of mining experts who have visited
Southern Cross, prophesy that it will become one of the
richest fields in Australia, as the reefs extend in all


directions, all are gold-bearing, and they improve with
depth; while the water difficulty has been temporarily
solved by conservation and condensation, pending the
finding of an artesian well by the Government borers.
The extent of gold-bearing country has now proved to
run in a north and south line of over eighty miles, and
although the fields are separated by patches where no gold
has yet been found, these are gradually getting lessened
by intermediate discoveries. The line starts at the north,
with Golden Valley, then there is about twenty-five miles
of forest and sandstone ridges to Hope’s Hill, then five
miles to Southern Cross, five miles to Blackburn’s,
twenty to Jacoletti’s, fifteen to Parker’s, and five to
Uphill’s. The forest country between these different
finds is mostly very promising, being often strewn with
quartz; but as the reefs do not often outcrop, prospect-
ing would be rather expensive; and, besides, in the
already-known parts of the district there are a great
many more reefs taken up than there is, at present,
money to work.
“ This belt,” wrote Mr. Woodwai’d in 1891, “ seems to
form the western limit of the gold-bearing country ; but
how far it extends to the eastwai'd is impossible to say,
until that country is examined.” North, this belt is met
with near Mount Kenneth and Austin’s Lake; and south
on the south coast at the Phillips and Fitzgerald Rivers.
To judge from the extent of the field, says our authority,
and from the appearance of the mines at work, there is
every reason to predict that this will be both an extensive,
rich, and permanent goldfield. Bxxt the bar to the develop-
ment of the fields is want of capital. “Asit is not here,”
Mr. Woodward very justly remarks, “it must come from
outside. And people bi'ed in this Colony do not know the
insurmountable obstacle 180 miles of bush ti’avelling is to


tons.
ozs.
dwts.
grs.
Fraser’s .
8,458
9,164
6
12
£82,727
Central
7,491
6,542
9
4
£23,716
Fraser’s South .
4,806
5,279
14
0
£19,536
No. 1 Central Extended
. 507
729
7
11
£2,576
a man used to a civilized life, who wants to see the mines
himself before putting his money into them.”
Fortunately, this insurmountable obstacle is being sur-
mounted. Seventy-two miles of the railway are already
open, and in the meantime an excellent line of coaches
(fare £5) has been established from York. Up to the
end of July, 1892, from the discovery of the field, the
four chief Southern Cross mines had made crushings as
follows: —
Ore Milled. Total Gold Yield. Value.
Appended is the latest return for this field obtainable
at the Registrar-General’s office (August 7, 1893),
Return of Stone crushed and the Yield of Gold for the
Yilgarn Goldfield during 1892, and also to the end
of the same year since the Lease or Claim was first
worked.
Year 1892.
Number
of
Stamps. Ore Total Yield Value of Total
milled. of Gold. Yield of Gold.
Ore
milled.
tons. ozs. dwts. grs. £ s. d.
145 15,447 31,679 7 20 51,094 17 10
From the
Government
Year
‘-hook.
The Southern Cross Township has a population of about
800, and is the head centre of the Government. The
Since Claim was first worked j
TO END OF 1892.
-Total Yield Value of Total
of Gold. Yield of Gold.
ozs. dwts. grs. £ s. d.
33,562 3 12 121,266 10 4


Warden, who also acts as Resident Magistrate, has his
office here. There are also police barracks and stables.
There is fair hotel accommodation, and the prices at the
stores are reasonable. There is a weekly mail service
from York. Wagon freights vary from £IG upwards.
The coach takes about four days each way between York
and Southern Cross. The wagons take twenty-one days
to and from Southern Cross, and twenty-four days to and
from Parker’s Range.
During the year 1890, according to the Warden’s
Report, over £lO,OOO was paid for cartage to this gold-
field. An enormously greater sum, which at present there
are no means of estimating, must have been spent during*
1893.
Passenger fares by the several lines of coaches now
running to the field are :
York to Southern Cross ... £5
Do. Parker’s Range ... £6
Southern Gross to York ... £4
Parker’s Range do. ... £5
Return fare, available for one month. £8
Each passenger is allowed to take between 28 and 32 lbs.
of luggage; over that quantity 4 d. per lb. is charged.
The cost of cartage to the field of general goods, from
York and Northam, the usual starting points, varies con-
siderably, according to the season and state of the roads,
from £l7 10s. to £25 per ton.
(Note.— During the wet weather in July, 1893, the roads having
been terribly cut up, haulage reached for a time the enormous price
of £47 per ton )
Wages vary on the different mines:—Miners, (dry)from
11s. B d. to 11s. 10 d., (wet) 12s. Gel. to 13s. 4(Z.; Mul-
lockers, 11s. B d. ; Truckers, 10s. lOcZ. to 1 Is. 8 cl. ; Horse


Drivers, Bs. to 10s. lOd.; Amalgamators, 165.8 d .; Battery-
Feeders, 10s. to 12s. 6d. ; Carpenters, 12s. 6d. to 13s. 4 d. ;
Engine Drivers, 12s. Gd. ; Bracemen, 10s. lOd.; Black-
smiths, 12s. to 13s. 4d.; Surfacemen, 10s. lOd.
The rainfall at Southern Cross during 1892, from
January to the end of August, was 12 - 30 inches (on
one days); the rainfall in Perth for the same period being
27-44 inches, or only 0-36 over the average for the last
fifteen years. 1893 has been a very wet year.
(For the Coolgardie Fields, etc., see the special chapter on
Coolgardie.)
THE KIMBERLEY GOLDFIELD.
(Proclaimed May , 1886.)
This goldfield, having a proclaimed area of 47,000 square
miles, is situated in the north-eastern corner of the Colony.
Its principal diggings and mines are near the eastern
boundary of the Colony, about 212 miles by the telegraph
line from Wyndham on Cambridge Gulf, and 304 miles
from Derby on King’s Sound, in the broken country at
the head of the Elvire and Mary Rivers, the main tribu-
taries of the Ord and Fitzroy Rivers.
This goldfield was discovered in the year 1882 by the
late Mr. E. T. Hardman, then Government Geologist, who,
in 1884, reported on and issued a map of the district,
showing the places where gold was likely to be found.
These, in every case, proved to be correct; but as most of
the alluvial deposits were very thin, no time was lost in
sinking, so that a single miner was able in a short time to
work out a large quantity of ground, which, unfortunately,
led diggers in other parts of the world to believe that the
diggings were much more extensive than they really were,
from the large returns of gold that passed through the
Customs’ hands in a short time.


The official centre on the field is at Hall’s Creek, which
is connected with Perth, via Derby, by a telegraph line.
There is also a line to the port of Wyndham, but this is
not yet in working order.
The Adelaide S.S. Co.’s steamer Rob Roy , which runs
between Cossack and Port Darwin, calls at Derby and
Wyndham about every three weeks ; thus connecting this
district with the southern portion of this Colony, the
eastern colonies and Singapore, via Cossack, and the
north-eastern colonies, via Port Darwin.
The road is now fairly good between Wyndham and the
field, a distance of about 250 miles, and is well watered,
the longest dry stage being forty miles; but this can bo
avoided with pack-horses, whilst water could be easily
obtained on the main road at the depth of a few feet,
either in the bed of the Bow River, Mistake or Turkey
Creek; but no wells have been sunk, as this is the
first dry season experienced since this district has been
settled.
Considering the extent of this field in length (150
miles), over which gold has been found, the size, well-
defined character of the lodes, their richness, and length
that they carry gold at the surface, the comparative
cheapness with which they can be worked, and the good
supply of wood and water, there is every reason to predict
that this field will eventually become one of the important
reefing districts of Australia. At the present it is suffer-
ing from a dreadful reaction, as, being the first goldfield
discovered here, it was thought a good deal more of than
it was really worth; people with a little money rushed
madly into speculations of which they knew nothing, and
generally ended by losing all they had. Large numbers
of speculators in the other colonies were equally un-
fortunate, and Kimberley being so far away, reliable


information was very difficult to obtain, and many of the
reports were utterly false.
There can be no immediate future for this field, as most
of the richest areas are in the hands of working'miners,
or storekeepers, into whose debt they have run; but to
whoever they belong they have the same idea that their
fortune is in the particular area in which they are in-
terested, and, therefore, would want much too large a
sum to transfer their interest to any one with capital
sufficient to work it, as it is quite out of the question for
any one to pay fancy prices for untested claims in this
far-away field, although they will, probably, be good
steady dividend-paying mines if properly worked. As
most of the rich reefs on the field are still held, it follows
that the field cannot go ahead by the aid of outside capital
until all the stone which is rich enough to work as at
present is exhausted, or till all those interested are so
deeply in debt that they will be glad to take anything to
get clear of it.
In conclusion, it is absolutely impossible to estimate the
quantit} l, of gold raised from this field, as at the start of
the field there was an export duty on gold ; most of it
was smuggled out of the Colony, but it must have been
very large, as all the diggers agree that this field was the
richest discovered in this Colony, before Coolgardie.
The Climate. —The climate of this district is hot and
unhealthy near the coast, but is very pleasant for the
greater part of the year on the higher land of the interior,
where the nights are mostly cool; and in winter there are
sharp frosts. This district is subject to tropical rains,
which, aided by light winter showers, keep the creeks and
rivers running most of the year.
. Water Supply. —This is a well-watered district, this
being the first dry season known ; but even now water


can be obtained along the road between Wyndham and
Hall’s Ci’eek in pools which, occur every 15 miles, or at
the outside 20 miles ; the only exception being one long
stage of about 40 miles, but in that water could be ob-
tained in Turkey or Mistake Creek at a shallow depth.
Most of the traffic, however, follows the telegraph line,
where water can be obtained half-way, but this track is
too rough for anything but pack-horses.
This is one of the best-watered districts in Western
Australia, and on the field good water in almost any
quantity can be obtained anywhere by sinking; so it is
not the least use mentioning any particular localities, for
the water-level of the country is, roughly, from 25 to 50
ft. below the level of the creek beds ; and from this it
will bo easy to calculate the depth at which water will be
obtained on the higher ground.
In the northern portions of this district (near Wynd-
ham) it is very different. The water supply is derived
entirely from local sources, which are being severely tried
this season, and many so-called springs have failed com-
pletely.
In this country the rocks are horizontally bedded, the
water supply being obtained either on the top of or a
little way into the shale beds, beneath which the whole
subterranean drainage from the interior passes. There-
fore, if a bore were put through these beds a large supply
would be encountered, which would rise to the sea-level,
if it did not rise a good height above the surface; in fact,
this is an artesian area.
The Soil. —The country that is of any use to pastoral-
ists is where there are large alluvial flats or the large
u Pindan ” plains, both of which, in a good season, grow
grass most luxuriantly, it not being at all uncommon
to see it 10 or 15 feet in height; this latter, of course, is of


very little use ; but for feed the large alluvial plains,
covered with Mitchell and other grasses, are not to be
surpassed in any part of the world.
The stone crushed up to the end of last year was as
follows: —
McNeil’s, 40 tons of stone
Reform, 8 tons 3 cwt. .
Jubilee, 8 tons 18 cwt. .
Lady Margaret, G 4 tons
Comet, 10 tons 14 cwt..
No. 1 North Lady Broome,
60 tons
Mt, Bradley, 414 tons
Rising Sun, (about) 500 tons
Golden Crown, (about)
1,000 tons.
No. 1 North Lady Mar-
garet, 14 tons 10 cwt.
No. 5 North Lady Mar-
garet, 6 tons 10 cwt.
Faugh-a-Ballagh, 6 tons
Gladstone, 6 tons
Jackson’s, 78 tons
Star of Kimberley, 1 ton
351 ozs. 14 dwts,
11 ozs.
2 ozs. 2 dwts. 22 grains.
212 ozs. 7 dwts. 19 grains.
134 ozs.
4 ozs. 3 dwts.
406 ozs. 9 dwts
437 ozs.
900 ozs.
12 ozs. 3 dwts. 12 grains.
9 ozs. 6 dwts.
6 ozs. 5 dwts.
3 ozs. 17 dwts.
56 ozs. 18 dwts.
16 dwts.
But this gold is mostly of a low value, idealizing at the
Mint in Melbourne about £3 11s, 6d. per oz. This is
partly due to the fact that the copper plates on the tables
are scraped down with knives so as not to lose any gold,
but mostly to the addition of copper to inci’ease the bulk,
as gi'anulated gold is the currency on the field; and as
only £3 7s. Gd. is allowed for it, they reduce the standard,
which is x’eally, if pi’operly treated, very high.
These returns, which are mostly authentic, clearly


prove that the reefs worked are payable; and it will be
seen at a glance that in only a few instances, where small
quantities of stone were crushed, was it picked. The
larger crushings, taken as a whole, would return about
1 oz. to the ton of stone, which should pay handsomely.
THE PILBARRA GOLDFIELD.
{Proclaimed July, 1889.)
Proclaimed area , 32,000 Square Miles.
The Pilbarra Goldfield is situated in that portion of the
Colony known as “ The North-West,” that is, the district
lying between the coast on the north, the Fortescuo
River on the south, and the De Grey River and War-
burton’s Great Sandy Table-land on the east. It is a
most promising mineral area. The general features are a
large low alluvial plain which follows the coast, broken
here and there by rocky hills, whilst to the south and
east rises a high tableland.
Several large rivers have their sources on the northern
edge of this plateau, and cutting deep gorges through the
upper horizontally bedded rocks, expose the underlying
crystalline rocks, across the strike of which they have
cut their channels. These water-courses trend towards
the north and north-west in deep gorges cut through the
limestone and quartzite rocks, then through flats bounded
by rough sandstone ranges, and on by deep ravines
through rough broken hills of schists, slates, sandstones,
quartzites, conglomerates, and amygdaloids, containing
trap dykes, into large alluvial plains, with here and there
bold massive hills of amygdaloid and small peaks of
quartz, granite, and ironstone, around which soft calca-
reous slates often rise to the surface, but never form hills
much above the level of the plain. These plains extend


to the sea-coast, where they are fringed by mangrove
swamps, except where trap rocks extrude and form a bold
rocky coast. The amygdaloids in many places are split
up into rough blocks, which become red or black on the
surface, and then present the appearance of a huge heap
of stones, without a trace of soil or vegetation. They con-
tain vast numbers of agates, calcite crystals, and other
enclosures, so that it would be well worth prospecting the
streams running through them for precious stones.
This field is one of the most promising in the Colony.
And there is, moreover, no difficulty about water here.
THE MURCHISON GOLDFIELD.
Proclaimed area , 32,000 Square Miles.
This field is situated on the Upper Murchison River.
The principal auriferous belt is situated at the eastern
side of the proclaimed area, about 200 miles from the coast.
It runs in a north and south direction from West Mt.
Magnet to Austin’s Lake, then in a north-easterly
direction to Lake Anneen and Yagahong. Other rich
patches and belts exist further east, and a few patches
have also been discovered nearer the coast.
This field was discovered in the year 1891, by Messrs..
Macpherson and Peterkin, who found a very rich patch of
stone near Lake Anneen, which is now being worked as
the Nannine Mine. (It is true that gold was discovered
at two places on this field previous to this, viz. Mulga
Mulga and Yuin; but in neither case did it prove to be in
payable quantities.) A large number of men at once pror
ceeded there, and many leases were taken up.
The caps of the reefs were worked by the diggers, who
crushed the stone by hand, and as it was very rich,
made a very handsome thing out of it. The samples of


stone sent to Perth are as rich as anything that has yet
been discovered in any part of the world, not in the light
of specimens, but for richness of stone throughout, as they
can be broken in any direction, when the fresh surface
will be seen to be studded with fine gold.
A number of reefs are reported to carry gold, in large
quantities, for a considerable distance along their outcrops,
which is rather unusual, as these rich patches are gene-
rally only local; but how these shoots run in depth is not
yet proved, but to judge from the class of stone and the
length of the rich outcrops they should be rich in depth.
The richest stone is a granular quartz, containing a
good deal of carbonate of iron, with gold all through it;
whilst the most showy specimens occur in the white stone
when often large pieces of gold are met with. The gold in
this stone is all true reef gold, not the semi-alluvial gold
often met with in the cracks and faces of the reef caps;
therefore, there is every reason to hope that this rich
stone will go down, and consequently the reefing field
will be very rich.
A quantity of alluvial gold has been found about the
surface, but here, as on the other goldfields in this Colony,
there are no defined gutters or leaders, and the reefs do
not seem to have been denuded to any extent, so have not
yet parted with their gold.
This field is on the same line of country as the Yilgarn
Goldfield, and in a direct line between it and the Ash-
burton, so that this belt having been proved auriferous in
three places in a distance of about 700 miles, it is highly
pi'obable that other rich discoveries will be made.
Geographical Features. —The geographical features
of the portion of the field on which gold has been dis-
covered are not very striking, being only the ruined re-
mains of a vast high sandy tableland, presenting to-day


a broken surface consisting of salt marshes or lakes,
fringed by salt, sand, clay, gypsum flats, from which rise
low rough hills of metamorphic rocks or white cliffs, on
the top of which are sandy plains, the remains of the
ancient tableland. There are no well-defined rivers, but
the few creeks discharge themselves into the salt flats,
where the water evaporates, except after excessively
heavy rains, when they overflow into the rivers which run
towards the coast. The hills are mostly small and low,
consisting, for the most part, of ridges of hard meta-
morphic rocks, near which the rich finds of gold have
been made. These are often capped by the same horizon-
tally bedded formation exposed in the cliffs at the edges
of the broken tablelands, which are generally covered by
dense thickets of low scrub.
Water, —The field, as a whole, is well watered, and, as
a rule, the water is good, the only exception being near
the salt lakes; but even there, if a well is sunk a short
distance away, the water is found to be fresh.
At the island in Austin’s Lake there is nothing but
salt water, and at the Cue over 100 feet in depth had to
be sunk to obtain a not too good water.
In most of the mines good water has been struck at
considerably under 100 feet; and if a supply is to be
found at all, it will be found along these lines of fissure.
There is no immediate prospect of the water q-uestion
standing in the way of the development of this field, as
it has of so many others in this Colony; but the timber
question will be far more serious, particularly at the
south end of the field, where there is nothing but mulgar.
Extent.— The gold-bearing belt, as far as at present
worked, extends in a north and south direction for a
distance of about 100 miles, but it will probably be found
to extend in patches all the way south by Boodano and


Mt. Kenneth to the Yilgarn Goldfield, as it is on the same
belt which runs south to the Mt. Barren Range on the
south coast.
To the north-west it is either suddenly cut off or
thrown to the eastward by the change in the strike of
the country, which here runs north-east and east; the
rocks, too, lose their auriferous character, being replaced
by hard crystalline and granite rocks.
It is highly probable that this belt will be found to run
in the direction of Windich Springs; but it is difficult to
trace, owing to the auriferous rock being mostly covered
by the desert sandstone formation.
To the eastward rich patches of auriferous country
seem to be met with wherever the more modern formation
has been removed ; and from Sir John Forrest’s descrip-
tion of the country there is every probability of gold being
found all the way to the South Australian boundary
along the lines of depression where the old rocks out-
crop.
To the westward there is little prospect of the field
extending, as it lies immediately to the eastward of the
main belt of intrusive granite, which is about 100 miles
wide, in which, however, there are one or two little
patches of likely-looking country. On the western side
of this belt, at Yuin, gold has also been found, but this is
on the same line of country as Kendinup, the Darling
Range, Bindoon, the Wongan Hills, and Peterwangy; and
although it may be a very nice little patch, an extent of
rich gold-bearing country is not likely to be discovei’ed.
Conclusion. —This field, taken as a whole, is exceed-
ingly rich, and will, in all probability, be found to extend
for a great distance to the eastward; but there is no
prospect of it extending far to the westward, owing to the
belt of granite country.


Water is abundant, and at shallow depths, as the
Murchison district is celebrated for this.
Extract from a Report from the Government Geolo-
gist to the Honourable the Commissioner of Lands.
Ist. Extent of Auriferous Country.— The auriferous
country may be said to extend from the Yilgarn Goldfield
at the south, being bounded on the west by Mount
Churchman. Mounts Farmer and Charles, Telegortherra ;
on the north-east by the Weld Range, and Mount Leake;
whilst to the eastward it probably extends in patches to
the boundary of the Colony. The gi’anite belt, about 100
miles wide on the west of the points named, might as w r ell
be left out of the goldfield, as sxnall patches like Yuin
should be placed under the Government Resident at
Gex'aldton. The auriferous belt probably trends to the
north-east x’ound the Robinson Range,
(a) As axx allxxvial field, xuclx patches will be found
from time to time over this large area, but a large
population ai’e not at all likely to remain stationary,
as the ground, being very shallow, is quickly worked
over; even if fresh patches are found amongst the
old diggings, they would not keep xnany men long.
The only chance of it becoming a more permanent
alluvial field, is the discovery of gold in the deep
ground; but of this, at present, there is no prospect,
as there is not sufficient encoux'agement under the
regxxlations for men to prospect this class of country.
(. h ) Deep leads probably exist in the made ground
along this axxx’iferous belt, and there are some nice
patches to the north-east of the Cue, which should be
prospected.
(c) There is no watex*, except what is obtaixxed


from shallow wells in the lakes, that can be used for
alluvial purposes, except immediately after rain.
(i d ) This field, as a reefing district, is very pro-
mising ; most of the reefs opened up are true veins,
and have every indication of going down carrying
the gold. Many reefs are extremely rich, but in
every case they are not true veins. These the pro-
spectors should work as long as it pa}'3 them, for it
is no good prematurely launching too many companies
upon the market.
There are many reefs which are not so showy, that
are now being worked, but which will probably prove
permanent.
Report from the Warden, Murchison Goldfield , to
the Under Secretary for Lands.
Herewith I forward, for the Minister’s information, a
general report on the Murchison Goldfield for 1892.
1. I have endeavoured to convey as much information
as possible, but have been handicapped through not
having been on the goldfield during the year under review.
2. I trust the Minister will x’emember I have been only
six weeks here, and kindly overlook any shortcomings in
my Report.
3. It was in the middle of the year 1891 that the
precious metal was discovered .on the northern shore of
Lake Annean, and it was only in September of that year
that the district was proclaimed, under the title of “ The
Murchison Goldfield,” containing an area of 32,000 square
miles.
It will therefore be seen at once that it can, as yet, be
considered to be only in its veriest infancy, being but
some fifteen months in existence. Notwithstanding this,


the extraordinary richness of the alluvial patches, and of
the surface stone which have been discovered within its
boundaries, soon induced a large number of diggers, and
others, to visit the field and try their luck. The number
of these during the year cannot have averaged less than
GOO, and probably reached a total of double that number
during the early part of the year. Rich alluvial finds of
gold, lying beyond the northern boundaries of the pro-
claimed area having been discovered, led away a large
number of the diggers from this, so that now our popula-
tion does not exceed some four hundred people, all told.
5. Owing to the locale of the first gold discovered, at
Lake Annean, the Warden’s Court and Office have always
been situated there. Subsequent discoveries, however,
now make it apparent that this is by no means the most
central position. These discoveries have extended along
the eastern and southern boundaries. Thus, gold has
been discovered, and workings are now being carried on,
at Abbot’s Find, 45 miles north; at Gardiner’s Find (Yaga-
hong), 20 miles east; at Cue, 50 miles south-west; at the
Island and the Mainland, in Lake Austin, 70 miles south-
west ; at Mount Magnet, 100 miles south-west; and at
Yalgoo, some 200 miles west-south-west from the working
at Lake Annean.
6. At all these centres many properties, containing
rich gold-bearing stone, are being worked, which in
every case appears to be payable, and, in some instances,
to be exceptionally rich. No reasonable doubt can be
entertained as to the permanency of many of these reefs
for, at all events, several years to come.
Crushings on the Murchison Goldfield.
Says the Murchison Miner of the 14th July, 1893: —
“ The following are the crushings reported for the past


half-year. Through an inadvertency, the tonnage of the
Consolidated Company has not been supplied, but will be
furnished our readers in a future issue. With the ex-
ception of the Nannine and the Day Dawn properties, the
yields have all been obtained by the dolly, the best only
of the stone being culled, and the balance left religiously
until a public crusher is on the fields. For the quarter
ending March: —
Nannine Company's Battery.
ozs. dvvts. grs.
Caledonian Extended . . . 61 1 17
Nannine ..... 846 4 0
Mount Hall ..... 127 6 0
Robinson Royalist. . . . 456 0 0
Consolidated Company's Battery.
ozs. dvvts. grs.
Queen of the Lake . . . 145 0 0
Caledonian ..... 194 0 0
The Victory . . . . . 50 0 0
Dollied.
ozs. dvvts. grs.
Chicago...... 100 0 0
Lady Mary P. C. . . . . 41 0 0
Harp of Erin . . \ . 3 4 0
Thompson’s Reef . . . . 19 17 0
Emperor Lease , . . . 27 0 0
Daly’s Reef ..... 794 2 0
Last Chance ..... 380 0 0
Gilbert’s Mainland . . . 1,112 18 0
Mount Vranzan . . . . 17 0 0
Just in Time. . . . . 20 14 0


For the quarter ending June 30th, the following
turns are now in:—•
Nannine Company's Battery.
tons cwts. qrs. ozs.dwts.grs,
Caledonian Extended 13 10 0 71 3 10
Consolidated Company's Battery.
ozs. dwts. grs
Queen of the Lake.... 363 0 0
Caledonian . . . . . 20 0 0
Robinson-Murchison . . . 5 0 0
Connelly-Murchison . . , 55 0 0
Brilliant . . . . . 48 6 0
Day Dawn Battery.
ozs. dwts. grs.
Day Dawn . . . 256 tons 375 0 0
Dollied Stone.
ozs. dwts. grs.
The Lily 40 0 0
Lady Mary P. C 18 0 0
Harp of Erin. . . . . 6 2 0
Golden Gate . . . . . 24 0 0
Emperor . . . . . 84 O' 0
Thompson’s Reef . . . . 18 18 0
Just in Time . . . . . 5 0 0
Last Chance ..... 126 0 0
Mainland Reef . . . . 75 0 0
Daly’s Reef 31 0 0
Golconda ..... 300 0 0
Golconda Extended . . . 20 0 0
Evening Star. . . . . 80 0 0


THE ASHBURTON GOLDFIELD.
(.Proclaimed December, 1890.) '
This field embraces an area of 8.200 square miles.
Top Camp.
About 15 miles east of the eastern end of the Capricorn
Range, gold was first found at a place called the “ Top
Camp,” in some deep creeks on the southern side of the
river Ashburton. The wash was of no great depth, and
the gold was highly water-worn, and in large, flat, bar-
shaped pieces, found in the ledges of the clay slate
bottom; the largest of these weighed about six pounds.
Over 10,000 ounces have been taken from these workings.
No reefs carrying gold have, as yet, been discovered in
this locality.
Ashburton Fields Annual General Report , 1890.
The gold on this field is very pure, and free from
quartz and ironstone. All the larger pieces were of a
flat bar shape, owing to their having been formed be-
tween the slate ledges by the slow accumulation of fine
gold, which, by the gradual accretion, due to the deposi-
tion of the minute quantities of gold held in solution by
the water, has formed into one piece, taking the shape of
the cavity or ledge. The largest nugget yet found
weighed about 6 lbs., and it is estimated that from 9,000
to 10,000 ozs. have been taken from these diggings. The
run of gold in the main gully extended for over one mile
in length ; but most of the gullies, north and south, for a
distance of about five miles along this line have proved
rich.
Whence this gold was derived it is impossible to say,


without duly mapping and prospecting the area, but it is
highly probable that it results from slow accumulation
from poor quartz and ironstone reefs, though in some
cases it may have been washed from older “ leads,” and
conglomerate beds, which, if they existed, must have
followed the present courses of the creeks, for no traces
of such beds are now to be seen. The deepest sinkings
on this field are from two to three feet.
All these gullies will pay to work again and again
after each heavy shower of rain, as their beds are so small
and deep that they will act as ground sluices, re-sorting
all the dirt which has been imperfectly treated by the
process of dry blowing.
In the large plains of the Ashburton there are sure to
be some very rich deposits of gold found ; but as the
prospecting will be most expensive work, no one will
undertake it, unless he be granted a protection area,
until the course of the leads has been ascertained.
Taken as a whole, this is a most promising tract of
country, and will, without doubt, prove a rich and lasting
goldfield ; but it is highly probable that before this is
proved, that every one may leave the field under the
impression that all the gold is worked out when they
have scratched all they can from the slate bars of the
small gullies in the ranges, but there will still remain
that which will yield the best returns, viz., tin? deep
ground as yet untouched.
This field, as far as it has been worked, has produced
the most gold in the shortest time of any field in the
Colony, for about 15,000 ounces have been raised in about
six months.
The total export of gold from Western Australia has
risen, owing chiefly to the development of the Murchison
and the Yilgarn Fields, from 3,000 ounces in 1888, to 30,000


ounces (or £115,000) in 1891. In 1893, 3,000 ounces,
more or less, have been coming down from the Yilgarn
Goldfield by every gold-escort. (For latest returns pro-
curable, vide infra.)
THE GREENBUSHES TINFIELD.
Area , 50 Square Miles.
In the latter part of the year 1888, Mr. Stinton, whilst
kangaroo hunting, found a small quantity of stream tin
in a gully near the Blackwood River, not far from the
main road, about nine miles from Bridgetown, and fifty-
three from Bunbury. A large number of leases were at
once taken up ; but as the old regulations did not contain
any labour clauses, very little work was done.
The field is situated at the highest part of the range,
on the north-east side of the Blackwood River, between
two of its branches. Fx'om the high peak in the middle
of the field the leads and gutters radiate; but, as a rule,
they are better formed on the southern and western
sides.
Although there is very little surface water on the field,
except immediately after rain, there is no scarcity of it,
as springs break out in several places, and it can always
be obtained by sinking at a slight depth. This is very
remarkable, as the country is so high, and it seems to
indicate that the deposits of drift are much more exten-
sive than is at present believed. There is a good rainfall
here (36 inches), which, falling on the swamps, is held
for a long time, only gradually sinking away into the
solid rocks below, and if the trees were killed, the water
supply would be considerably increased. The deepest
shafts sunk on high ground have always struck water at
from 50 ft. to 70 ft. During the greater part of the year,


the want of water is the great obstacle in the way of
working; but if properly worked, dirt should be raised
during the dry season, and washed during the wet.
The formation of the district is crystalline schist,
gneissic, and granite rock, with numerous dykes of
diorite, granite, and veins of tourmaline, the surface
being mostly covered with nodular clay-stones (gravel),
sand, and ferruginous sandstones, the ferruginous sand-
stones capping all the ridges, whilst the sand, is found
in all the swampy hollows often associated with a poor,
earthy brown coal of recent formation. All the rocks
strike in a north and south direction.
The tin wash of the field varies greatly in thickness,
richness, and quantity, running from 3 oz, to 15 lbs. to
the dish, and in thickness from 6 inches to 20 feet; the
low percentage washes being in larger quantities, and, as
a rule, much freer than those of the higher percentage.
Most of the areas are now worked on the tribute system,
the dirt being stacked during the summer, and washed in
the winter. The whole of the surface of this field is
covered with a modern formation, beneath which the
leads run, so considerable prospecting will be necessary.
No lodes have yet been found, but, from the crystalline
and unwater-worn character of the tin, they must exist.
These will probably be in the form of sfock-ivorks, or, in
the way tin occurs in some of the principal continental
mines, where they are found as a network of thin veins
or strings of crystals interlacing through a decomposed
granitic dyke, all of which are usually found sufficiently
rich to work. The field is as yet only in its infancy, and
is comparatively undeveloped, but will, probably, when
more leads are opened up, support a large mining popula-
tion, especially if worked in claims, as it is undoubtedly
what is called 11 a poor man’s field.” At the present time


only about twelve areas are being worked, and, up to the
end of 1891, over 57G tons of tin had been exported.
The nearest port is Bunbury, which is connected by
rail with the capital, and from which a railway runs 18
miles to the foot of the range, when a good, but hilly, road
connects it with the field. The field has telegraph
communication, and a mail coach calls twice a week.
Areas on this field should be worked by their owners,
as companies will never pay. There is a handsome thing
for any one who will work his own claim. This is proved
beyond a doubt by all the companies closing up whilst
private individuals are doing well, even when they have
to pay a large tribute to the lessee of the area. One
working miner is said at the present time (August, 1893)
to be clearing £3O a week from his claim.
The total value of the tin produced in Australia, up to
the end of 1891, was £20,000,000. It is only during the
past two years that Western Australia has begun to
conti’ibute her share to the annual export.
THE COLLIE RIVER COAL.
About the end of the year 1889, when coal was attract-
ing considerable attention in this Colony, Mr. David Hay,
of Bunbury, became possessed of information which led
him to believe that coal existed in the bed of the Collie
River, at no great distance Rom Bunbury ; for this, he
set out to prospect with a party of men, and was re-
warded by the discovery of some fragments of coal on the
rocky bars, at the lower end of a pool: as no sign of an
outcrop occurred above, it was naturally inferred that
the seam w T as to be found in the bed of the water-hole,
and as a dark patch could be seen from the bank, some
men were sent into the water to dive, who brought up


good samples of coal. Mr. Hay and his whole party then
went in and collected coal in this way, until some hun-
dred-weight or so was raised. This was the first sample
taken into Bunbury, which was burnt publicly on the
occasion of the visit of His Excellency Sir Frederick
Broome.
There is not the least doubt but that this will be an
extensive and important field in the future, but its pre-
sent development is hindered by many things—lst, the
great lack in this Colony of capital, and secondly, a mar-
ket for the coal when raised, as the quantity that will be
used in the Colony for many years to come will be too
small to make a mine pay.
THE WELD RANGE.
Wilgie Myah. —ln the Weld Range, in the Murchison
district, is situated the celebrated Wilgie Myah, which
is certainly, says the Government Geologist, one of the
most striking things that is to be seen in this Colony.
It is probably one of the lai’gest iron lodes in the
world, consisting almost entirely of haematite, which at
the surface and in the cavities assumes the botryoidal
form, which has given rise to the idea that it is a lava
flood.
It is situated on the east side of the Weld Range, and
runs east and west, dipping north, following the main
strike of the rock.
In these lodes there are soft bands, often clayey. These
the kangaroos scratch out, forming caves, and it is pro-
bably in this way that the natives first made the dis-
covery that this lode could be easily worked by following
these beds.
It has now been opened up, as a huge pit or quarry, to


a depth of about 100 feet. This is entered near the top
of a hill (about 70 or 80 feet above the plain) by a hole
about 50 feet across; then a steep descent commences
over the talus in a south-easterly direction. At the
bottom it spreads crtit to about 50 yai’ds wide, with the
roof some 50 feet above, and numerous cave-like galleries
running into the face in all directions.
The Wilgie is worked by cutting round a mass of it,
then wedging it off. This work, although very primitive,
is very interesting, as these natives work with their
wooden tools much in the same way that the ancient
miners did in Great Britain with stone hammers. There
are also rude attempts at staging, to allow the miners to
work up into the roof, when veins of sufficiently good
quality run that way.
In contemplating this pit, one is struck by the vastness
of the work, and when we consider the small quantity of
Wilgie that can be required, it must have been worked
for centuries. Of course it was worked on a much larger
scale before the white invasion of Western Australia, and
was probably traded great distances.
As far as the lode itself is concerned, it is most magni-
ficent iron ore, and, considering its size, will, without
doubt, be of great value in the future.
It has been generally supposed that cinnabar existed
here, associated with volcanic rocks; but there is nothing
of the sort, the Wilgie itself being red haematite and red
and yellow ochre.
GOLD OUTPUT.
The total export of gold from Western Australia in-
creased from £13,000 in 1888 to nearly £60,000 in 1889,
and £115,000 in 1891. The return of gold, the produce
of the Colony, entered for export to Melbourne during the


quarter ending June 30, 1893, gave 23,121 ozs., value
£87,860. Of this, 12,003 ozs. (value £45,614) came from
Yilgarn, and 6,153 ozs. (£23,383) from the Murchison.
Extract from the Lands and Surveys Report for
1892.
“ Gold-mining lias made satisfactory progress during
the jmar. The total revenue received from this source
was £5,402, being an increase of £1,281 on the receipts of
1891.
“The quantity of gold entered at the Customs for export
during the year was 59,548 ozs., valued at £215,862, being
29,237 ozs., valued at £102,196, more than the exports of
1891 (see Return No. 21). As stated in my last Report,
there is no doubt a considerable quantity of gold leaves
the Colony without passing through the Customs’ books.”
Return XXl. — Output of Gold for the Year 1892.
1,207
19,492
13,098
58,871
86,664
115,182
ozs. dwts. grs.
1,088 16 22
12,893 10 0
24,356 9 12
21,209 9 18
59,548 6 4
4,873
Jan., 1892, to
June, 1892
(6 months)
1892
April 1, 1893, to
June 30, 1893
(3 months)
Australia
8,498
15,492
22,806
30,311
29,053
23,121
110,161
87,860


COOLGARDIE.
On September 17, 1892, two prospectors, Messrs. Bayley
and Ford, reported to the Warden of the Yilgarn Fields
their discovery of payable gold at Coolgardie, a place
situated about one hundred miles east from Southern
Cross and about sixteen miles N.E. from a place, marked
on Hunts track to Hampton Plains, called Gnarlbine.
Bayley offered his reward claim to a Perth syndicate ;
but while their agent was attempting, by chaffering with
Bayley, to secure for himself some part of the sum which
he was commissioned to pay, Mr. Sylvester Browne, a well-
known mining expert (and a brother of the novelist, “ Rolf
Boldrewood ”), arrived, and forthwith bought the mine
for £6,000 and a one-fourth share. Mr. Browne is said to
have had no more than £lOO in his possession at the time
of the purchase, and to have recovered the balance of the
£6,000 from the mine itself. At all events, he at once set
to work, and with a modest equipment of tools, valued at
£l, which mainly consisted of two hammers and an im-
provised mortar, “ dollied ’’out the gold. From one heap
of quartz, the height oP a table, he is said to have taken
in this way 3,000 ounces, and a second crushing of
nearly equal value came from 4| tons of stone. The
first consignment of gold and specimens, which reached
Perth in the early months of 1893, and was exhibited in
the Union Bank, was followed by another 3,000 ounces,
which Mr. Browne brought down himself, and took to
Melbourne in July. The exhibition of these last speci-
mens in a jeweller’s window in Collins Street was fol-
lowed by a great rush from the eastern colonies to
Western Australia.
Some 15,000 ounces have, so far, been taken from
Bayley’s Reef, ■which only seems to improve in appearance


the deeper it gets. And by August, 1893, there were
about 3,000 men at and about Coolgardie; perhaps 500 on
the road, and new arrivals reaching the Colony at the rate
of several hundreds a week. Alluvial gold was found in
various parts of the district; but much difficult}' was ex-
perienced from the outset in obtaining water even for
drinking, and for washing earth none was obtainable.
Consequently, the gold obtained was all got by specking,
dry-blowing, or in nuggets out of the reefs. Many men,
even under these difficulties, obtained large amounts of
gold in a short time. Several fresh rushes broke out,
notably a very rich one, called Hannen’s Find, some sixty
miles to the north-eastward ; and before the end of August,
1893, it became necessary to transfer the Warden from
Southern Cross to Coolgardie. Heavy rains began to fall
before the winter (the English summer) months were over;
and though several new routes to the fields were at once
blazed out —men finding their way from Northam, from
Broomehill, and other points on the railway between
Perth and Albany, and even direct from Esperance Bay
(a small port far east of Albany, and almost due south
from Coolgardie itself) —yet on all of these roads the
travelling became heavy, and teams were bogged in all
directions. The pressure was relieved to some extent by
the use of bullock-teams, camels, and pack-horses; but
nevertheless the price of provisions naturally rose. ' Flour
sold at from 50s. to 60s. the 50-lb. bag, and other things
in proportion. However, 72 miles of the railway from
Northam towards Southern Cross is now available, and
the construction of the remainder will be hurried on by
the Government. Boring parties are at work, and the
construction of capacious dams and reservoirs will, it is
hoped, render it unnecessary to suspend operations during
the dry w r eather. Prospecting parties—-some of them


equipped for nine months’ stay in the wilds—are out ex-
ploring the -country in all directions, and it is believed
that the whole district between Coolgardie and the Mur-
chison will prove to be auriferous, containing, probably,
many Bayley’s Binds.
“ There are several well-formed reefs, showing gold,
about five miles further south,” says the Government
Geologist, “ and another patch twenty-five miles to the
northward. The available land for prospecting in the
immediate neighbourhood of Coolgardie is limited, as this
belt lies between the granite country and the freehold
land of the Hampton Plains Company ; but during the
winter we shall probably hear of new discoveries to the
north-east and south-eastward, as there are some hundreds
of men out prospecting. When we consider the quantity
of gold taken from Coolgardie, it is highly probable that
some of these reefs will make very good payable mines.”
The output of gold from the Colony, as will be seen
from the statistics I give elsewhere, has been doubling
itself continually of late; and this last discovery has had
the effect of making the returns from West Australia (a
Colony, it must be remembered, in which gold was, till
recently, not believed to exist) twice as large as were the
returns from South Africa seven years after the gold
fever first set in there. Full particulars as to the route
from York (the fare to which from Perth is only a few
shillings) to Coolgardie are appended. It now only re-
mains to hope—first, that the efforts of the Government
to provide a safe water-supply for the multitudes which
in a few months’ time will be congregated round Mount
Burgess, will be vigorous and successful; and, secondly,
that a fair proportion of the adventurers who come to dig
will remain to settle in the Colony, and to prosper on its
lands.


So shall another fair province he added to the Empire.
[Note. —It will be a serious check to the at present bright
prospects of the Colony if work in the interior is-stopped, owing
to the miners being forced to come down for want of water.
Diggers in most parts of Australia, it is true, are accustomed to
“ knock off” for six weeks at Christmas, but last year the opera-
tions beyond Yilgarn were suspended for months. And it is about
Christmas time that the rush should naturally be in full swing.
However, the exertions of the Government in pushing on the
railway and in building tanks will probably avert this evil.]
THE WESTERN INTERIOR OF
AUSTRALIA.
The Eastern Division of Western Australia, or what is
known as the Great Victoria Desert, had till recently a
very had name. Southwards from the upper waters of
the Fitzroy River, it is still practically unexplored; and
Col. Warhurton’s report, in 1873, stigmatized the whole
country as desert. The middle of the Colony, between
parallels 24° and 27° South, was explored to some extent
hy J. Forrest in 1874, and hy Ernest Giles in 1876.
Much of this portion of the interior was found to consist
of plains covered with spinifex, and very indifferently
watered. Further south, and extending to the sSaboard
of the Great Australian Bight, “ desert country is seen
on every side ” ; and Giles’s report of 1875 described this
district as being totally destitute of water for a distance
of over 300 miles.
But explorers, especially in dry districts, are compelled
to push on as fast as possible, and to keep to one direct
track. Moreover, they are necessarily chosen rather for
their capacities as bushmen than for any special mining,


agricultural, or pastoral knowledge. Consequently, there
is generally another side to their reports. The country
where Burke and Wills perished of thirst and starvation
is now covered with prosperous stations, and the very
districts which, a few years back, Sir John Forrest (with
his brother) and Mr. Giles were travelling half-famished
and hard put to it for water, are now filled with a teeming
population of miners.
“ The question of the future habitability of the western
interior, or what is known as the Australian Desert, is
(wrote the Sydney Morning Herald in 1892) one which
scarcely seems worth debating during this generation,
there being so much land awaiting reclamation nearer
to civilized settlement. Still, when the constant dispersal
of the world’s pioneers in search of new fields to conquer
keeps increasing, it may not be amiss to consider what
possible future lies in store for what is generally, and
with some show of reason, looked upon as hopelessly
unavailable territory. The subjugation of the terrible
Sahara, first commenced by the Romans, has now been
steadily proceeding for some years, and in America the
transformation of tracts of desert country into fruit-pro-
ducing areas is a well-known fact, the deserts in both
these continents differing in characteristics from each other
as much as they do from the Australian interior. But in
both cases water has been the factor which has wrought
the change, and it is on the continuance of the artesian
water across the continent that the practicability of re-
claiming the Australian desert depends. The distinctive
and peculiar feature of the Australian desert is well
known. The parts which have received this unenviable
title are covered with a growth of resinous, prickly grass,
called spinifex(7Vtodi‘a irritans ), Sometimes the country
is treeless, but generally sparsely timbered with a few


stunted trees. Where there is scrub it is nearly always
mulga. Spinifex is of many kinds; a less formidable
variety is often found gx-owing in company with edible
vines and bushes, and both cattle and sheep find pasturage
there. But the spinifex of the Western desert is, as a
rule, uncompromisingly hostile, and the country it grows
on otherwise unproductive. The worst description affects
the stony, rocky ridges, and this country, save for
mineral working, is not likely ever to be wanted for
centuries to come. But the average of unavailable laud
thus outcast would not amount to more than unavailable
laud does, as a rule, in any other part of Australia. On
the flats, plains and downs the spinifex is smaller and
softer. At a hasty glance the first opinion would naturally
be that soil which in its natural state is only capable of
growing spinifex could riot be relied on to produce useful
or edible plants. In truth, however, it is the climate
more than the soil which is responsible for the presence
of the objectionable plant. Spinifex is the only growth
which can live through one rainless year after another,
and still thrive. It can grow on a thin coating of soil on
a bare rock, and the fiercer the drought the more it seems
to prosper. Hence it has occupied the interior, not be-
cause like many other noxious weeds it spreads and
encroaches, but simply because it is the only vegetable
life possible under the circumstances. The proof t)f this
is, that where the conditions are less unfavourable a more
generous growth at once takes its place; where the sur-
face formation induces a concentration of what little
soakage exists, good grass is found. Nor is spinifex a
tenacious plant; its roots are but little below the surface,
and a common rake will uproot it. On the flats and level
country a considerable depth of soil is often to be found
covered with a layer of red sand, and in many parts there


is loose brown earth, similar to the western downs of
Queensland. Should the future march of the drill still
continue steadily west, and the water prove suitable
for irrigation, as great a transformation will in time be
worked as has been done in Africa and America.
“Another question then arises. The surface of the
Western interior is covered with natural reservoirs.
Shallow lake-beds, blind creeks,"and huge clay pans are
everywhere to be met with ; needless to say, as a rule dry
and cracked with heat. Would the filling up of these,
and the establishment of their permanency, have any
effect on the climate, if even only to the extent of render-
ing the nights dewy and moist, instead of sultry and dry ?
Take that vast mud-flat which is so misleadingly por-
trayed on the maps as ‘Lake Amadeus’; would not the
presence of water there exert some influence on the
atmosphere, even though it became —as it certainly would
—salt after a short period? The unfailing regularity of
the climate, which now is the bane of the place, would
under the circumstances, induced by a copious supply
of artesian water, become a benefit. The monotony of
almost eternal sunshine, instead of being, as now, a
destructive agent, would then be a fostering influence,
AVhen the ways of tillage most suitable to the country
were understood, the interior desert might in time surpass
the coast districts in the production of certain crops.
Already the attempt to introduce the date palm has been
fairly successful, and it is found that it will thrive as well
on the margin of a salt or brackish lake as on the shore
of a fresh one. In regarding the Western interior, then,
as given over to spinifex and desolation for ever, we are
probably making a mistake. The spinifex is there
simply because the extreme aridity of the climate denies
moisture and sustenance to any other form of life. It is as


the cactus of the American desert. The soil is there, and
wherever the transition from sandstone to limestone takes
place, or the brown granite predominates, the earth, in
any other part of Australia, would teem with vegetation.
The fats of scrub land has been determined now for many
years, and in due course the mulga thickets of the desert
will fall before the advance of settlement and the demand
for new country. The accomplishment of this work
belongs to the coming century; but the rush and hurry
of events is now so swift that the time may come sooner
than expected. Slowly, but surely, the advance guard
of gold prospectors is working up from the south-west
corner of the continent, and it seems highly probable that
the gold-fields in the interior may one day be of a startling
nature. From the camp of the wandering miner to the
permanent habitation of the settler is but a natural
sequence. To any one who has confronted the solitude
and gaunt sterility of the interior desert as it now is, the
prospect of a transformation to fertility may seem but a
dream of the imagination ; but it has been done in other
countries in the past and in the present, and there is no
reason why it should not take place in due course in
Australia.”
Such was the tone in which an Australian paper was
able to write of the “ West Australian Desert,” including,
of course, this very district of Coolgardie, but a few
months ago.
“ Slowly, but surely,” the prospectors were working
up; and fertility was a “ dream of the imagination.”
Let us now read the Report of Mr. Renon, the In-
spector of Water Supply, to the Under Secretary for
Lands, presented July 10th, 1893 (which should be com-
pared, by the bye, with the itinerary of the route to Cool-
gardie, given elsewhere).


“ Although the goldfield at Coolgardie has not yet been
discovered twelve months, the population now there must
be fully 2,000 people, and steadily increasing; and as
every week brings us fresh reports of good discoveries, it
is self-evident that the field will be permanent, and that
before long the traffic on this road will be so great that
the conservation of water on a much larger scale than
the present system of small wells will be an absolute
necessity. It is encouraging to think that while we have
such a rich field in the heart of the Colony, it is sur-
rounded by land quite capable {if cultivated) of supplying
a large population ivith the necessaries of life without
depending entirely upon importation. It is a matter to
be deeply regretted that almost the whole of the supplies
now used in this field are obtained from other colonies ;
but, of course, at the beginning of these rushes it could
hardly be otherwise, as the country was comparatively
unknown, and supposed to be a barren wilderness ; instead
of which there is a large quantity of good agricultural
and pastoral land now lying idle, which, if brought under
cultivation, would compare favourably with the soil in
one of the best wheat-growing districts in Victoria;
viz., the Goulburn Valley. This, combined with what will
most probably be one of the richest goldfields in Australia,
convinces me that to cope with the population and traffic
which is bound to follow the discovery of such a com-
bination of rich auriferous and agricultural land, it will
be absolutely necessary to do more than sink shafts and
bore holes around the granite rocks, with only a remote
possibility of striking water. Too much of that kind of
work has already been done, and a considerable amount
of money wasted which might have been saved, or turned
to more profitable use, had more judgment been exercised
in selecting places for sinking shafts where water would


be likely to exist. The supplies obtained are from wells
sunk in pockets, or immense narama holes around the
main rocks, filled with an alluvium of decomposed granite.
When the supply in these pockets is exhausted, the wells
naturally give out, and are useless until the pocket is
refilled by the rains. These wells are also very expensive
to make, as they have to be steined up from top to bottom
to keep the walls standing. In dealing with the question
of water supply in this district, it will be necessary for
the Government to consider not only the wants of miners
seeking their fortune, but to grasp the opportunity that
is offered by a large influx of population, to enhance the
value of and promote permanent settlement on the soil,
by making a systematic search for natural -water-courses,
basins, and depressions which (if found) will not only
facilitate the conservation of water and reduce the
expenditure necessary for that conservation, but will
induce the people to settle on a land which offers such
splendid opportunities to capital and labour alike. There
is not the slightest doubt that settlement cannot be per-
manently successful without an assured supply of water
sufficient for the domestic requirements of selectors and
their stock. As the district, as far as our limited know-
ledge goes, is destitute of natural water-courses, this can
only be done by artificial means. I should recommend a
proper system of tanks and dams being started along the
road to Coolgardie, at distances of about every fifteen miles
apart. Their aggregate dimensions should be sufficiently
large to ensure the storing of a supply somewhat in excess
of that necessary to cover the maximum period in which
rain does not fall. In the selection of these sites ad-
vantage should be taken, where possible, of local surround-
ings, such as lakes, lagoons, and other natural depressions ;
care should also be taken in choosing sites where the


ground holds well and is not liable to loss by percolation;
in many instances sites could no doubt be obtained where
tanks could be filled by draining from local catchments,
and it should be distinctly borne in mind 1 that none of
the local rainfall that can be saved, shoiild be allowed to
go to waste.’ As the Land Settlement Bill is certainly
one that will affect the natural welfare of the Colony, I
cannot resist saying that a guaranteed water supply in
connection with the new Bill would be one of the greatest
incentives to settlers to occupy the land. Furthermore,
it is the intention of the Government to alienate the land,
and as there is an insufficient supply of water, not only
for domestic requirements, but for stock, it could hardly
bo expected that agriculturists and others would risk
their capital in a district where climatic influences are
only moderately favourable, and even if each settler
spent, say £IOO, in conserving water for his own use, it
is very doubtful whether the supply would last. But if
tanks and dams were constructed on the areas proposed
to be so alienated at such distances apart that would
ensure a settler being within two or three miles from
water, a substantial inducement would be offered to, and
I am sure would be gladly availed of by, bond fide farmers,
who no doubt would be willing to pay a small tax to
defray interest on the outlay, maintenance, etc,, of the
necessary works. As the Water Supply Department here
is purely in its infancy, it would be impossible, without
further surveys and examinations on the ground, to
suggest the best means to develop the agricultural in-
terests of the Colony. The supply of water necessary to
keep open the various roads in the Colony is in itself
a very important matter; but once that is done, the
ultimate settlement on the soil, which naturally follows
the influx of a large population, and which can only be


done in the drier districts by an assured water supply, is
a matter to which the Government should give the earliest
consideration. In conclusion, I would recommend ten-
ders being called for excavating tanks at the following
places along the road, with capacities of from 22,000 to
30.000 cubic yards:—l2,ooo yards, Yellowdine Rock,
19| miles from Cross ; 12,000 yards, Karalee, 31| miles
from Cross ; 12,000 yards, Koorarawalyee, 42f miles from
Cross ; 12,000 yards, Borrabbin, 60| miles from Cross
12.000 yards, Woolgangee, 76 \ miles from Cross; 12,000
yards, Cane Swamp, half-way between Woolgangee and
Bullabulling Rock, on new deviation; 12,000 yards,
Bullabulling Rock, about 15 miles from Coolgardie;
30.000 yards, Coolgardie township. By this means an
ample supply of water will be conserved when the tanks
are filled, which will keep the road open for traffic during
the driest summer. I strongly recommend these works
being started as soon as possible.
“ I have the honour to be, your obedient servant, etc.,
“ Perth, July 10th, 1893.”
So much for the alleged desert.
Finally , compare with this Report the following letter
to the Perth Daily News of August 12 th, 1893.
THE EASTERN GOLDFIELDS *
IN RELATION TO AGRICULTURE.
{By our Coolgardie Correspondent.)
There is no more pleasing prospect, no greater aid to
permanence, and no better factor towards the endurance
of the gold-bearing country lying to the east, than the rich
nature of the soil that surrounds it. In whatever direc-
tion you travel, the same good-looking chocolate soil meets


the eye —soil that would pi'oduce with the smallest amount
of trouble almost anything it is possible to grow in a cli-
mate such as this; and that would seem merely requires
tickling with the hoe to make it laugh with the harvest.
At this early season of the year there is abundance of feed
in the vicinity, but only the most convenient patches are
taken advantage of. Every one agrees that it is splendid
agricultural land, but its value is minimised, and its
worth entirely condemned by a great many, on account of
the absence of permanent water, and the fear from the
constantly reiterated, if somewhat groundless opinion,
that this tract of country is subject to periodical and
severe droughts. On all hands and at every point we are
met with the water difficulty, and what Nature has made
comparatively easy in some respects she has counteracted
with this very serious drawback. One thing is certain,
however, if this land is taken up for agricultural purposes
there are few other hardships in store for the selector.
The land, unlike most land of equal richness, is generally
very easy to clear, and what might be saved in compari-
son with other places in this respect could go towards the
conservation of water. To conserve water we must, of
course, have a rainfall adequate for the purpose, and since
the country has been openedjxp, no one can say that suffi-
cient has not been forthcoming for this purpose. The
huge masses of granite which so frequently and exten-
sively outcrop form splendid natural watersheds, surround-
ing which water is obtainable with very little difficult}",
and for many months of the year is found in abundance
on the surface. lam not alone referring to the country
in the vicinity of the fields, but to the extensive belts of
forest lands to be met with on the tracts leading to them.
The great waste and barren areas which are encountered
during the early days of the trip along these tracks grow


less and less as you push on to the east, and the soil be-
comes better and more extensive as the field is approached.
From Coolgardie to Hannan’s Rush the soil along the
track maintains its rich aspect, and is pronounced fine
wheat-growing country. Bordering on both the above
places are the rolling plains of Hampton, and it is to the
syndicate owning this vast tract of country that we may
look, rather than to the Government of the Colony for a
movement in the direction of settlement upon the land.
Years ago thousands of acres of the syndicate’s land were
taken up by a number of our southern farmers for the
purpose of sheep-raising. These formed themselves into
a party and visited the plains, and were so highly pleased,
after this long and tedious journey, with the aspect of the
country, that they, in the height of their enthusiasm, took
up large blocks, paying the first year’s instalment in ad-
vance ; but on more mature reflection, taking into con-
sideration the extreme remoteness of the place and the
difficulties of transit and communication between centres
of population, they never took possession of their holdings’
and allowed their claims to lapse. Now, however, the out-
look is different. A centre of population is at hand, and
is constantly increasing, and, moreover, is sure to be per-
manent. We may therefore hope that the Hampton Plains
syndicate will move in the direction of settlement, not-
withstanding their disheartening experience of years ago.
I met a representative of the company on my way to Han-
nan’s Rush, when the field first bi’oke out, and he seemed
quite cheerful at the prospects in store for his employers.
Syndicates with their head-quarters so far removed from
the base of their operations are slow to move, or appear
to be so to those on the spot; but it is only too much to be
feared that they will beat the local Government in offer-
ing inducements to settlers. The first to commence


operations in agriculture or stock-raising in the neigh-
bourhood of the fields will have a splendid market for
their produce at hand, and one successful crop would re-
pay their outlay, with prices so high, and the probability
of their remaining so for some time to come.
THE ROUTE TO COOLGARDIE.
The railway survey shows the distance from Northam
to Southern Cross as 160 miles. The first section, to
Nalyoring (72 miles), is already open for light traffic; and
the lately-found track from Northam, which passengers
by train would pick up at this point, is being largely
used this month by drays, which thus escape the heavy
ruts of the route further south.
The coaches (the fare by which is £5 for the trip to
Southern Cross, and 4 d. a lb. for luggage) start from York,
a flourishing agricultural township on the Great Southern
Railway, about 15 miles south of Northam. The road
from York, which has been cut by the Government at a
cost of, say, £25 per mile, is 40 feet wide, and, as the
country is remarkably level all the way, and,there are no
creeks, was at first very practicable. Unfortunately the
trees, instead of being cut down, were torn up, roots and
all, by machinery—a practice very common in Australia.
This exposed the light soil to being cut up by drays, and
particularly by sandal-wood teams, travelling, as is their
custom, in single file. The heavy rains have ended by
making the track almost impassable, and it is now pro-
posed to remedy the evil by laying down ti-tree or other
scrub.
The first stopping-place is Youndegin, 38 miles east
of York The country up to here is a fertile chocolate
soil, covered with raspberry-jam trees, silver grass, and


cockspur. Here and there is a clearing which gives
pasturage to a few sheep. Onwards to Tamin (52 miles
from York), where there is a water-catchment excavated
at the foot of a granite rise, is sandy, forest country,
covered with eucalypts and black-boys, or grass-trees.
At Mooranopping (70 miles), beside a splendid well, be-
tween two high granite kopjes , is an orchard of three acres,
containing grapes, peaches, figs, and apples the last
cultivated spot, by the bye, to be found on the track. The
proprietor of this orchard, who exhibited a sample of
currants at the Colinderies, has also 100 acres under
wheat, which yields him 14 bushels per acre. The
average rainfall is 13 inches. One of the wheat-paddocks
is enclosed by a dog-leg fence of sandal-wood, which is
being kept, waiting fpr a rise. Chaff grown here fetches
£9 a ton fx’om the passing teamsters.
At Tootagin (104 miles from York), at the foot of
another, but higher, hill of granite, is a capacious tank
excavated by the Government. Forest country from here
on to Merredin, the Carrying Company’s Depot, where is
a dam (built by the explorer Hunt when opening up the
Hampton Plains pastoral country east of Coolgardie) and
McAlister’s Well, still at the foot of the same immensity
of granite which overshadows Tootagin.
Shortly after the next station, Burracoppin (130 miles),
begins the Boodelin Forest, rich soil of pulverized loam
covered with the ash of burnt morral tx-ees and their roots.
Near Boodelin is some water, at Yorkrakine, and an at-
tempted clearance of 100 acx'es. The rest of the x’oad is
sandy and unwatex-ed, and a salt-paxi is crossed just before
reaching the towixship of Southern Cross.
The whole route is watered by the soakages at the foot
of the graxxite rises, and the natural place for sinkixxg is
always indicated by a growth of wattles. The natural


rock-bed catchments, which will one day give a permanent
supply, must be bored for. There is a gi’eat deal of
forest timber in patches: jam trees, stunted and full-
grown ; the gimlet gum (named after the gimlet twist of
its upper branches), with its red, smooth bark streamers
flaunting in the wind; and, more common than either, the
everlasting morral, the roots of which, if they had not
been dragged out by the Government, would never have
been cut by the tires of coach or waggon. When at last
these trees fall from age or in a bush fire, they burn out
to a white ash from the topmost branches to the furthest
root tips, and fertilize the soil. The larger tree-trunks
beside the road have been decorated by the natives with
drawings of their weapons, and with figures of animals,
birds, and lizards, cut in the bark. There are a few
kangaroos to bo seen on the way, and many parrots, mag-
pies, and bronze-wing pigeons near the soakages.
Leaving the township, the track runs still eastwards,
bending to the north-east only at Woolgangie, when
three-quarters of the journey is finished.
Under Morliniug Rock, 29 miles from Southern Cross,
is one well. The country, for 10 miles before reaching
this rock, is good agricultural and grass land, covered
with open morral and salmon-gum forest. At Karalee
Rock (32 miles from the Cross) are two -wells, one of
G feet diameter, sunk 49 feet, and a small dam in the bed
of a creek. There are many patches of good soil between
here and Koorarawalyee, the next station, 10 miles on.
Here several trial sinkings have been made, and w'ater
struck at 39 feet. Onwards to Boorabbin Rock (Go| miles
from S. C.) the track runs over a large sand plain, covered
with low scrub and spinifex. This is the worst stage of
the road to Coolgardie, being totally destitute of both
grass and water, Hunt’s Well, at Boorabbin, has 4f feet


of water. From here the soil is poor for 5 miles, after
which forest country is entered, and the soil is generally
good, sometimes very fertile. Water on the way is found in
three wells, at 17,15, and 10 feet. The ti’a veiling is heavy
through the rich forest country, but relieved by occasional
sand plains. At Woolgangee Dams miles from S.
Cross) there is water in many shafts at 10 feet. The soil
on from here is good. Yerdi (811 miles); Hunt’s old well
here has a fair amount of water, besides what is held in
four trial shafts. Fair country on for 10 miles, and then
good soil to Gnarlbine Rock (101 miles from S. C.), where
there are five permanent wells. From Gnarlbine, N.E, to
Coolgardie, is 16 miles; but by a new track from Wool-
gangee straight to Coolgardie, the whole distance from
Southern Cross is reduced to 121 miles. At Coolgardie
there are tanks to hold 525,000 gallons. A bore f mile
S.W. of the township has so far only reached 130 feet,
and, of course, is not yet successful. Mount Burgess, in
sight to the northward, is an isolated hill rising gradually
till its summit, a mile from its base, is 600 feet from the
plain. It was described by Lefroy and Hunt in their
expedition of 1863. 22 miles S.E. from Coolgardie is a
well at the Horse Rocks, which are reached through some
rich forest country, splendidly grassed, “ The grass in
this country,” says Mr. Surveyor Noel Brazier in his Re-
port (Feb. 23rd, 1893), “is certainly the best I have seen
in the Colony. We were several days looking for Slate
Well (30 miles to the eastward), which ultimately was
found, completely surrounded by scrub, in the bed of a
small creek flowing through a wide samphire flat into
Lake Lefi’oy.” The latitude of Slate Well is about 31°
6' 37' S., and longitude 121° 41' E. “Splendid stations,”
says Mr. Brazier, “ could be made out here, as the creek
seems naturally adapted to the formation of tanks. The


creek traverses a wide samphire flat, bounded on either
side by rich forest land, with an abundance of succulent
grass/’
It is worth remembering that A. C. Gregory, the ex-
plorer, turned back in 1846 not far from Southern Cross ;
even as Captain Sturt, in the forties, gave up a little
short of Broken Hill.
The coach takes four days to reach Southern Cross.
Swags are carried either by dray or by camel for about £l.
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS OF
THE COLONY.
For the past five years these are as follows :
Years. 1888. 1889. 1890. I 1891. 1893.
live years.
££££££
Imports . 786,250 818,127 874,447 1,280,0931,391,109 5,150,026
Exports . 680,345 761,391 671,813 799,466, 882,148 3,795,163
Grand
Totals 1,466,5951,579,518 1,546,260 2,079,559j2,273, 257 8,945,189
This is an interesting table, showing at a glance the
progress made in the Colony. The external trade for the
past five years is £8,945,198. For the year under review
the total is £193,698, giving an increase to imports of
£111,086 over the figures for
crease of £82,000.
1891, and to exports an in-
The Colony’s chief export is wool; and although the
wool-clip for 1892 was affected considerably by losses
in sheep sustained during the drought in 1891, yet its
value figures at the very respectable amount of £326,703,
Timber was exported to the value of £78,419, showing a


decrease of nearly £IO,OOO. Bat the falling off here is
due to increased demand for local requirements. _ The
demands on the timber companies during the year for
railways and other works in the Colony,” says the Collector
of Customs, “ were very heavy.”
Gold.— A comparison of these exports for the past
five years will be of unmis'takable interest to those con-
cerned in the mining future of Western Austi’alia.
Dating from 1888, these exports are as follows :
Years. | 1888.
1389. 1390. 1891. 1892. fiveye^rs.
Weight in
ozs. . 3,498
15,492 22,806 80,811 59,548 131,650
Valui . £13,099
£58,871 £80,664 £115,182 £226,284 £500,100
The increase for 1892 is £111,102.
(For the 1893 returns see elseichere.)
“ This increase,” says the Customs’ Report, “ is pre-
eminently satisfactory, as, only a few years back, the
existence of gold deposits in this Colony was a matter
of pure speculation. Now there can be little doubt as
to the bright future in store for this country, when, in
the infancy of mining, she is enabled to win from her
goldfields, in five years, over half a million in value. The
country is being prospected throughout its length and
breadth, and important discoveries are continually being
added to those already made ; and it is reasonable to sup-
pose that the increase in gold exported next year (pro-
vided it is all entered at the Customs) will be at least a
hundred percent., and within two years this export should
alone reach half a million sterling value per annum. It
will be noticed that even now it is nearly a quarter of a


million. All that appears necessary to develop the
hidden wealth of the Colony is a combination of capital
and labour, with an abundant water supply.”
The export of pearl shell is valued at £79,259, and of
pearls at £40,000; of sandalwood at £42,870; of skins at
£36,657 ; and of guano at £4,389,
Horses to the value of £2,450 were sent to Singapore,
Java, and Mauritius. No systematic attempt has yet been
made to breed suitable re-mounts for the Indian market.
The other exports of the Colony are inconsiderable.
The import list is a complete revelation of that want
of enterprise, or want of ordinary industry, which has so
far been the curse of West Australia.
With a population of The imports stood at
In 1890 46,290 . . . £874,447
„ 1891 53,285 . . . £1,280,093
„ 1892 58,674 . . . £1,891,109
\Thepopulation in June , 1893, teas 62,000. In August,
1893, it is estimated at 65,000. The imports at this date
are, of course, not yet to he ascertained.]
Of this sum, £75,661 was for agricultural produce
(grain, hay, chaff, potatoes, onions, and fruit); as against
£45,951 for 1891. And £46,045 for dairy produce (butter,
cheese, eggs, and preserved milk); as against £37,568 for
1891.
“ No doubt in the past,” says the Customs’ Eeport for
1893, “agriculturists have been labouring under great
disadvantages in being inadequately provided with rail-
way communication to market centres, and have thus been
considerably handicapped in competing with foreign
markets in raising crops for consumption in the Colony,
owing chiefly to the then heavy cost of transit from their
farms; and, under the circumstances, the poor encourage-


merit afforded them in clearing and fencing the areas
necessary for the same. Lately, however, a vigorous
railway policy has brought many of the outlying districts
of the Colony within touch of populated centres, and has
encouraged farmers and agriculturists to bring larger
areas under cultivation and introduce capital into the
working and improvements of their properties. The con-
nection of Fremantle with Albany by the ‘ iron horse ’
has resulted in the settlement of an industrial class along
the line, and large tracts of land which a few years ago
were unproductive areas are now either smiling cornfields
or evidencing in one way or another the agency of the
plough, the spade, and the hoe.
“Notwithstanding the improved outlook in this direction,
the agriculturists during the year have been unsuccess-
ful in reducing the importation of grain, fruit, and vege-
tables into the Colony. [No doubt the large influx of new
settlers has had its effect in this respect —and the work
of the new-comers upon the land has not yet had time to
make itself felt.] Reports, however, continually arriving
from the country predict in an unmistakable manner the
bright outlook in store for those engaged in the cultiva-
tion of the soil. At no period in the history of Western
Australia have agricultural interests been more closely
studied than at the present time, and efforts are being made
everywhere to encourage them and promote settlement.
“As regards dairy and domestic produce, it may be
especially noted how excessive the items enumerated in
the foregoing table appear. It is to be hoped that the
time is not far distant when these items will be found
figuring in the export trade of the Colony. Dairy and
poultry farms along the railway lines, within easy dis-
tance of markets, should be a source of much profit to
those expending capital in this direction. Locally pro-


duced butter has always found preferential sales in the
Colony, but the supply is by no means equal to the de-
mand. With dairies established for a sufficient length of
time in the manner indicated, there appears no doubt that
the foreign article will be gradually eliminated from our
markets, and a healthy trade established in this local line
of produce.”
The following table refers solely to such items of trade
as have increased in a specially marked manner, in addi-
tion to the agricultural, dairy, and domestic produce
already enumerated:
Articles.
1891. 1893.
Agricultural Machinery .... 8,480
Apparel and Drapery .... 165,524
Apothecaries' Wares .... 14,286
Bacon, Hams, and Tongues, Salt Beef,
and Preserved Meat .... 18,918
Beer, Wines, and Spirits .... 92,104
Books (printed) 7,457
Boots and Shoes 26,414
Bran and Pollard . . . - . . 7,014
Cigars, Cigarettes, and Snuff . . . 6,958
Coal 12,078
Earthen and China Ware .... 4,627
Flour 19,113
Furniture 9,196
Government Stores, Stationery, etc. , 13,752
Horses 29,750
Jams, Jellies, and Preserves . . . 9,874
Lard 423
Leather and Skins 2,293
Matches . 2,720
Oils 12,636
Plants, Seeds, and Bulbs .... 2,335
Soap (all kinds) 1,793
Stationery 5,952
Steam Engines 6,209
Tallow 366
Timber 15,877
Tobacco Pipes 1,283
Tools . . 5,577
11,519
186,080
19,802
81,488
115,805
8 446
34,719
14,135
14,533
13,840
48,328
11,000
26,652
50,680
11.755
3,160
8,619
13,972
8,278
2.793
22,373
2,298


1890.
1891.
1892.
£27,846.
£19,113.
£48,323.
Plour. —For the past three y ears the value of importa-
tions has been as follows:
The erection of several roller flour mills in different
parts of the Colony considerably reduced the importation
during 1891, and there was every reason to anticipate a
still further reduction in 1892. But the reverse has been
the case, as the increase was 2,921 tons, valued at £29,210.
This extraordinary increase is again due to the unexpected
growth of the population. The new consumers have not
yet had time to join the ranks of producers.
Horses. —A remarkable increase, principally due to the
importation of draught horses, for which there is a great
demand —the natural outcome of the prosecution of public
works, the discovery of goldfields, greater activity at the
timber-mills, and improvements to properties in the
agricultural districts.
Plants, Seeds, and Bulbs. —These importations are
steadily on the increase, and large quantities of imported
fruit trees and vine cuttings have been planted through-
out the Colon}’-. This is a satisfactory evidence of the
interest now being taken in agricultural pursuits. As a
fruit-growing country, Western Australia has a great
future.
Timber.— There has been a healthy demand for all
kinds of soft wood, in consequence of the many works and
buildings projected. The - increase here is not excessive,
considering that this description is not grown.
Potatoes. —The importation of potatoes, for the time
at all events, has now ceased.
There are six breweries at present in the Colony. The
beer, however, produced, though its quality is steadily


improving, is scarcely yet able to hold its own with that
imported. At present beer is imported at the rate of
about 6 gallons per head of population.
Excellent saddlery is now locally manufactured.
POPULATION AND VITAL STATISTICS.
The estimated population of the Colony, on 31st March,
1893, was 59,718 ; and on 30th June, 1893, 61,210.
Throughout July and August arrivals were at the rate
of many hundreds weekly, the gold rush to Coolgardie
from the eastern colonies having set in. About the
middle of August the population was estimated at 66,000 ;
and if the present rate of increase is only maintained, the
Colony will contain a hundred thousand persons by the
end of the year, and perhaps double that number within
fifteen months.
There were 554 births and 236 deaths registered during
the quarter ending June 30, 1893.
Of the total population, about 9,000 reside in Perth;
about 7,000 in Eremantle; and the other towns with a
population of over 500 are Albany, Geraldton, York, New-
castle, Guildford, and Bunbury. There are about 3,000
miners in the Coolgardie district; perhaps 500 at Southern
Cross; and say 1,5000 n or around the Murchison; but these
numbers, it will be understood, are only approximate, and
are increasing daily. Some 600 men, for instance, are
reported, at the time of writing (August, 1893), to be on
the road between Southern Cross and Coolgardie.
The proportion of males to females in Western
Australia was, at the census of 1891, as three to two. In
the West Kimberley district there were only 14'38 females
to every hundred males.


Among the 49,782 inhabitants at the time of the census,
nearly 28,000 were native-born, 3,250 from the other
colonies, 9,634 English, 3,499 Irish, and 1,211 Scotch.
The highest temperature recorded during the June
quarter, 1893, at the Perth Observatoiy, was 81°, and the
lowest 35°, The rainfall for the quarter was 14 - 53
inches.
The maximum temperature for 1892 was 109°, the
minimum 35° ; the total rainfall for the year 3T23 inches;
and the total number of rainy days, 122.
The difference of time between Perth and London is
7 h. 44 m. Thus, when the clock at Perth shows
10.15 a.m., the clock in London would point to 2.31 a.m.
WORK AND WAGES, COST OF LIVING,
ETC.
The cost of living in the towns is moderate for those
who rent houses and employ servants. Board and lodging
at the best hotels may be arranged for at 30s. per week ;
at the cheap coffee-houses, for about £l, or Is. a meal.
The average rent of a three-roomed house in town is 7s. to
10s., in the country ss. per week ; of a five-roomed house
in town 125., and in the country 9s. Single persons in
boarding-houses pay anything from say 15s. to 255. a week,
and up to 30s. in northern towns or on the Yilgarn Gold-
fields.
At the fields, however, it is usual to live in tents. Life
at Coolgardie under canvas may be estimated to cost for
each man, without indulgence in the luxury of a cook,
from 40s. to 50s. per week.
Farm labourers are usually boarded and lodged, and
single men are preferred to married men with families.
Farm hands work from sunrise to sunset in the season.


Horned Cattle
• 11
. 3 \d, to
0
0
4i
Horses .
. each .
£8 to 30
0
0
Sheep
* 11
. 10s. to
0
15
0
Goats
• 11
.
1
0
0
Swine .
. per lb.
0
0
0
Milk .
. per gall.
.
0
2
0
Batter, Fresh
. per lb.
.
0
2
0
„ Salt .
• it
. Is. to
0
1
3
Cheese .
• 11
. 9 d. to
0
1
0
Beef
• 11
6 d. to
0
0
7
Bacon .
• 11
. Is. to
0
1
4
Mutton .
• 11
. id. to
0
0
5
Pork
• .
0
0
9
Eice
• n
. 2 \d. to
0
0
3
Coffee
• 11
0
1
0
Tea
• j?
. Is. 6 d. to
0
2
6
Salt
• 13
0
0
1
Sugar
• 11
. 2 to
0
0
31
Wine, Imported
. per gall.
. £1 and
upward
,, Colonial
• 11
. 4s. and
11
Brandy .
• ii
£1 10s. to
1
10
0
Beer, Imported
• ii
draught
4s.; bottled
0
6
6
„ Colonial
• ii
.
0
3
0
Tobacco.
. per lb.
.
0
4
6
Navvies work 8 liours a day; printers’ work-hours vary ;
most other tradesmen work 9 hours, at present.
The retail price of provisions at Perth is roughly as
follows:
Potatoes . . per stone £0 10
Wheaten Flour . per bag of 200 lbs. . £1 4s. to 1 6 0
Wheat . . . per imperial bushel os. to 0 6 0
Wheaten Bread . per lb.
2 d. to 0 0 8
At the goldfields, prices of course are higher. Tea (very
Lad tea), for instance, is 35.; flour, 50s, to GOs. per 50-lb.
bag, at Coolgardie ; beef and mutton, 9 d. to Is.; and sugar,
rice, oatmeal, and stores in general, Is. per pound. Water
has also often to be paid for by those who have not been


wise enough, or long enough on the spot, to construct their
own tanks.
Clothing is from 10 to 20 per cent, dearer than in
England, but for the labourer and average working man
less is required; owing to the climate, lighkclothing being
worn in the summer months.
The following are the average i-ates of wages for
labour:—
Per day.
Bakers . , . . . . Bs. to 10s,
Blacksmiths . . , , . Bs. to 10s.
Boat-builders . . . . Bs. to 10s.
Brewers . . . . . 6s. to Bs.
Carpenters . . , . . Bs. to 10s.
Coach-builders , . . 7s. to 10s.
Gardeners . . . , ss. 6d. to 6s. Gd.
General labourers. . . . 6s, to 7s.
Masons and Bricklayers . . Bs. to 11s.
Miners ...... 10s. to 12s.
Navvies 7s. to 9s.
Painters . . . . . 7s. to 10s.
Plasterers . . . . . 9s. to 13s.
Plumbers . . . . . Bs. to 10s.
Printers . . . . , 6s. to 10s.
Saddlers . . . . . 7s. to 10s.
Sawyers and Lumbermen , . 6s. to 10s,
Stevedores and Wharf-labourers . 6s. to IBs.
Shipwrights...... 10s.
Shoemakers (by the piece) say . 6s. to 9s.
Tailors (piece) . . . . 6s. to 9s.
Tanners ..... 6s.
Tinsmiths ..... Bs.
Wheelwrights .... 7s.
Watch-makers .... 9s. to 10s.


Farm labourers (according to Government Yearbook),
£lB to £5O per annum, ss. to 7s. per day; domestic
servants, £IG to £5O per annum. Or (by the report of an
independent observer): Per month —Housemaids, etc.,
30s. to 405.; cooks, 30s. to 505.; farm labourers, plough-
men, and station hands, 40s. to 80s. Per year —Shepherds,
stock-riders, generally useful men on stations, £3O to £45 ;
married couples, servants on farms and stations, £5O to
£7O.
Clerks, accountants, and shop-assistants find employment
at fair wages.
At the northern goldfields, which have been largely
deserted for the Yilgarn and Coolgardie, miners are in
demand at £4 a week, and labourers and artisans at from
£4 to £6 ; engineers, £B.
There is a particularly good opening for market-
gardeners, fruit-growers, and farmers with a capital of
£l5O and upwards; but they will be wise to begin by
banking their money, and to gain some acquaintance with
Colonial habits before taking up land. In a few agricul-
tural districts there is a growing demand for handy farm
hands, who are willing to put up with bush-life, at from
£2 to £4 a month and board.
Navvies. —There is at present a considerable demand
for navvies, owing to the pressure on the Government to
complete the railway to the Yilgarn Goldfields and the
re-commencement of the construction of tlie Midland Rail-
way.
To sum up, wages are good, the cost of living is
moderate, and work is plentiful. No colony offers
greater advantages to the miner, the industrious farm
hand, or the small capitalist, who is not afraid to rough it
at the outset.


SHIPPING FACILITIES.
The following are the principal European Companies
connected with the Colony, and their present passage
rates, given as accurately as possible.
P. & 0. Company, —mail steamers, —calling fortnightly
at Albany. Between Albany (King George's Sound ) and
London: First saloon, £6O to £7O; second saloon, £3O to
£37; return tickets, £65 to £ll5.
Orient S.S. Co. (alternate weeks to P. & 0.) : First
saloon to Albany, £55, £63, £7O; second saloon to Albany,
£3O to £37.
Messageries Maritimes, monthly, from Marseilles to
Albany : single, £2O to £65 {yin compels ); return, £34 to
£ll5.
West Australian S.N. Co., and Ocean Steamship
Co, These Companies’ vessels carry on a monthly service
between Fremantle and Singapore, where they connect
with Holt’s Ocean Line, which leaves there for London
twice a week (Fremantle to Singapore, 20 days; Singa-
pore to London, 35 days). Fare, 40 guineas saloon; 24
guineas second cabin.
Direct line of steamers, London to Fremantle. „ (Six
cargo steamers despatched each year by C. Bethell & Co.,
and Trinder, Anderson & Co., via the Cape. 42 to 50
days.) Saloon, 35 guineas ; steerage, 14 to 16 guineas.
Direct sailing line (same firms), about 90 days. Sail
monthly.
[The sailing run from New York to Fremantle takes
about 100 days. There are no regular traders.]


IMMIGRATION.
Immigration is controlled by a Board at Perth, and by
the Agent General’s office at 15, Queen Victoria Street,
Westminster, London.
Free Passages are only granted to female servants. For
information apply to the Agent General.
Assisted Passages are at present granted to such persons
(farmers, etc.) as are likely to be useful in the country
districts. They must be possessed of some small capital
(about £lOO for single men, £l5O for married couples, and
£5O for each child over twelve), which must be deposited
with the Agent General, to be repaid immediately after
their arrival in the Colony. On these conditions, each
adult is granted £lO towards his passage money, with £5
for each child under twelve.
Nominated Passages. —Assisted passages are granted to
emigrants nominated to the Immigration Board in Perth
by persons residing in the Colony, provided that they
belong to the classes of—
(1) Farmers, agricultural labourers, vine-dressers, or
gardeners (and are under forty-five); or,
(2) Single female domestic servants, or widows,
under thirty-five.
Nominated passengers or emigrants pay £7 10s. for
their fare by sailing ship, and half-price for children
under twelve.
[The lowest railway fare from Albany to Fremantle is
£2 2s.]
Note. —The fifty female servants who arrived last
March were all hired at once,


NEWSPAPERS.
There are fourteen newspapers in the Colony, including
the Government Gazette. Perth has a morning (the
West Australian) and an evening (the Daily News ) news-
paper ; one bi-weekly, the Inquirer; and one weekly
publication, the Western Mail.
FACTORIES.
The following list gives the names and numbers of the
principal factories in the Colony:—Aerated water, 9 ;
boot, 5 ; breweries, 6; brick, 6 ; coach, 11; fish preserv-
ing, 3; flour mills (steam), 26; flour mills (water), 3;
foundries, 7 ; furniture, 8 ; gas works, 3; salt factory,
1; soap factories, 2; saw mills (steam), 29; tanneries, 4;
tobacco, 1 ; biscuit, 1; confectionery, 3; sandalwood and
eucalyptus oil, 1. There are also 12 printing offices in
the Colony.
EDUCATION.
1. Establishment of System.— The statute in force
relating to Public Instruction in Western Australia is the
Elementary Education Act o/1871.
2. General Features, —The system is compulsory.
The school fees are fixed upon a sliding scale, varying
from one shilling to twopence per week, according to the
means of the parents. Children whose parents ar£ unable
to pay the prescribed fees are admitted upon the “ free
list.”
The teaching in the Government Schools is strictly
secular. Half an hour before the commencement of secular
instruction is, however, devoted to the reading of the
Bible (without comment) to those children whose parents
do not object to their attendance.


Total number
of Churches and
buildings used for
divine worship.
83
25
42
10
4
The Assisted Schools are sectarian, and in them the
tenets of the religious denominations to which they belong
are taught during this half-hour. With this exception,
the same regulations as to secular instruction prevail
equally in both.
Higher Education. —Western Australia has no Uni-
versity. Under a special Act in 1876 a High School was
endowed out of the general revenue by the grant of an
annual sum equal to double the amount of the school
fees, provided such contribution does not exceed £5OO.
The fees for day boys are about £l2 per annum , and for
boarders about £6O without extras. The High School is
fast taking its place as one of the leading public schools
in Australia.
RELIGION.
The general revenue of the Colony contributed in
1892 the sum of £3,543 for the maintenance of ministers
of religion, which was apportioned to each denomination
according to the numbers at the census of 1891, the
proportion received by each having been as follows:
Church of England, £2,004; Church of Rome, £l,OOB ;
Wesleyans, £368 ; and Presbyterians, £l6l.
Statement shoiving the Number of Churches and other
Buildings used for Public Worship , Clergy ) and
Attendance :—
Denomination.
Number of
Ministers.
Church of England.
Church of Eome. .
Wesleyans. . . .
Approximate
Average
Attendance.
4,850
Congregationalists .
Presbyterians. . .
3,860


There is, perhaps, little more to be said. It will have
been seen, from the above heterogeneous collection of notes,
that the Colony offers to the intending emigrant at least as
bright prospects as any other part of the world. The re-
cent gold discoveries are prodigious, but not so prodigious
as those which may be confidently expected in the near
future. The increase of population which is following
them reminds one of the early days of Victoria; and if
one tithe of that population remains with us, to settle on
the land, we may expect as rapid a growth of prosperity
as the neighbouring colony experienced after 1852, with
the difference that we shall have profited by Victoria’s
mistakes. The soil of Western Australia is fertile, her
climate superb, her territory vast, and her resources, per-
haps, scarcely to be equalled in the world. All that is
needed now is population, and capital, to develop them.
The old settler here looks with some distrust on this un-
controlled influx of new citizens, many of whom may be
expected to arrive insufficiently provided with means; and
many, again—especially those from Adelaide and the east-
ward colonies—are instinct with New Australian, or sub-
versive and socialistic, ideas. He is afraid, in a word,
that he will not only be outvoted by the new-comers, but
will also have to support them. He may take courage.
The contingent which is expected from England will
supply the necessary political stability, and even our Vic-
torians and South Australians have learned something
from the experience of the last few years. No population
is so energetic as that which follows a gold-rush; for the
new arrivals are prepared, not for agitation, but for work.
Never was there a better illustration of the virtues of
strong government. Sir John Forrest has been in power,
under the newly granted Constitution, only for a few
years. He, with his colleagues, has been allowed un-


challenged control of affairs. As a consequence, railways
have been built, land thrown open for settlement, a new
spirit of hope and energy gradually instilled into the
people, and the long-forgotten and stranded Crown Colony
finds—not only gold (that was bound to be discovered the
moment any one woke up enough to look for it), but —her
self-confidence, and becomes a county with a great
future.
All things work together for him that refuses to wait.
Mr. Rhodes has done a great deal for South Africa, but
Mr. Rhodes’ methods have only to be followed by the pre-
sent Administration, and Western Australia, without a
Kaffir difficulty, without a Boer difficulty, and without
the dead weight of an unfortunate past, will do as much
better than South Africa as, let us say, Coolgardie is
better than Mashonaland. Happy the country that has
no history! The deep slumbers of Western Australia
have not been broken by even an incident; but now she
is awake. Australia’s depression is “ Westralia’s ” oppor-
tunity ; and the pick of Victoria, of New South Wales, and
of Queensland, disgusted at the miseries into wdiich the
too great haste to be rich of the elder colonies has plunged
them, is hurrying round, not only to gather up the nuggets
of the new Eldorado, but to stock her stations and to till
her fields.
The race, after all, has not been to those who started
first; and the visionary terrors of the supposed desert,
which have so long been a moral, as well as a physical,
barrier between this Colony and the rest of the continent,
have only saved her for better things.


Australian |lublltations
Crown B vo, handsome cloth, 2s. 6 d.
TWIXT SHADOW AND SHINE. An Australian Story of Christmas. By
the late Miaous Clarke, Author of “ For the Term of His Natural Life,”
Crown Bvo, picture hoards, 2s.
NORA CREINA. By Mrs. Hungerfoed, Author of “Molly Bawn.”
Crown Bro, picture hoards, 2s.
MY DANISH SWEETHEART. By W. Clark Russell.
Crown B vo, handsome cloth, portrait, 3s. 6d.
A LIVING STATUE. By Guilia Majeroni.
Crown B vo, picture hoards, 2s,
AUNT JOHNNIE. By John Strange Winter.
Crown Bvo, picture hoards, 2s,
THE SORCERESS. By Mrs. Oliphant.
Crown Bvo, picture hoards, 2s.
COUNTESS PHARAMOND. A Sequel to “ Sheba.” By “Rita.”
Crown B vo, picture boards, 2s.
MAKING HIS PILE. By James Justin MacOartib.
Crown Bvo, handsome cloth, portrait, 3s. 6d.
FROM LIFE. Theatrical Reminiscences. By Wtbert Reeve.
Crown Bvo, handsome cloth, 3s. 6d.
THE RISE OF THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL KINGS. By James Mouat.
Crown 800, picture hoards, 2s.
JEM PETERKIN’S DAUGHTER. By W. B. Churchward.
Crown B vo, picture hoards, 2s 4 .
A RACING RUBBER. By Hawlet Smart. [ln preparation.
W. STEPHEN HAYWARD’S NOVELS.
Crown Bvo, picture hoards, 2s,
1. Love Against the World.
2. Hunted to Death.
3. Perils of a Pretty Girl.
4. Ethel Grey.
5. Caroline.
6. Maude Luton.
7. The Three Red Men.
8. John Hazel’s Vengeance.
MARY CECIL
Crown Bvo,
1. Old Myddleton’s Money.
2. Hidden Perils.
3. Victor and Vanquished.
4. The Arundel Motto.
5. The Squire’s Legacy.
Nora’s Love Test..
7. For Her Dear Sake.
9. Barbara Home.
10. The Secret Seven.
11. The Woman in Red.
12. The Stolen Will.
13. The Black Flag.
14. Diana’s Defender.
15. Colonel's Daughter.
16. Left to the World.
HAY’S NOVELS.
picture hoards, 2s.
8. Brenda Yorke.
9. Dorothy’s Venture.
10. Missing.
11. Under the Will.
12. Bid Me Discourse.
13. Lester's Secret.
14. Among the Ruins.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY, Melbourne, Sidney, Adelaide and
Brisbane. Aud all Booksellers.


Geo. ROBERTSON & Co.,
BOOKSELLERS,
MANUFACTURING STATIONERS.
iTfeaoasines anb flewspapevs
(IN ALL LANGUAGES)
Supplied by Every Mail, or Posted Direct from
Europe or America.
Melbourne:
384-390, LITTLE COLLINS STREET.
S£bne\>:
361, GEORGE STREET.
Hbelaibe: Brisbane:
FREEMAN STREET. QUEEN STREET.




