

HANDY-BOOK
ON
THE MANAGEMENT
OF
MINING COMPANIES
IN VICTORIA
BY
HENRY J. ARMSTRONG


THE LAW BOOK CO.
~! va<iYala~ia, Lid.
'■it MEI.EOUP.Xi .
THIi LAW BOOK' Co.
of Australasia, Ltd.,






A
HANDY-BOOK
ON
THE MANAGEMENT
OF
MINING COMPANIES
IN VICTORIA,
BY
HENRY J. ARMSTRONG.
iHclbounu ani) :
CHARLES F. MAXWELL,
Law, Bookseller and Publisher.
LONDON : W. MAXWELL * SON, 8 BELL YARD.
1888.




PREFACE.
A small book like the present, explaining the duties
powers, and liabilities of the officers and members of a
mining company in plain language, stripped of the redun-
dant verbiage of a legal work, will, I believe, be found
useful by the mining public of Victoria. This is not a law
book. It is simply, as its title shows, a handy book on the
management of mining companies, and as such will, I think,
be more acceptable than an ordinary annotated edition
of the statutes relating to mining companies.
I have therefore taken care to avoid the formidable
appearance of cited cases in the pages, as they are not sup-
posed to be within the range of the average mining layman ;
yet outside of the Act I have made no statement, so far as
legal questions are concerned, that is not backed up by a
decision of the higher courts, or by the obiter dicta of one or
other of the judges.
However, as this handy-book may occasionally be of use
to the profession in dealing with general matters relating to
the management of mining companies, I have inserted a
Table of Cases, &c., for reference to the principal decisions
or matters mentioned in the text.
Experience has shown that the system of book-keeping
explained in this volume, old fashioned as it is, is the only
thorough and reliable one in dealing with the accounts of a
mining company, as well as the simplest and most easily
acquired.
Kyneton, 19 Dec. 1888




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER. PAGE
I. Introduction ... ... i
11. The Claim ... ... ... 3
111. The Formation of the Company |... 12
IV The Incorporation ... ... 16
V The Manager ... ... .... 19
VI. The Directors ... ... •• 24
VII. The Shareholders ... ... 30
VIII. The Share Register ... ... 34
IX. Transfer of Shares ... ... 4°
X. Calls ... ... ... 44
XL Forfeiture and sale of Shares ... 48
XII. Ordinary and Special Meetings ... 54
XIII. Extraordinary Meetings ... ... 60
XIV. The Accounts ... ... ... 64
XV. Contracts ... ... ... 69
XVI. Increase of Capital ... ... 72
XVII. Mortgages ... ... ... 76
XVIII. Prepayment Companies ... ... 78
XIX. The No Liability System ... .. 81
XX. Winding up, &c. ... ... ... 84
Table of Cases ... ... ... 89
Appendix I. Forms of Notices ... ... 91
J( 11. The Books of the Company .. 101
n 111. Rules and Regulations .. Ix 6




Melbourne :
Harston, Partridge and Co., Printers and Lithographers,
452 & 454 Chancery Lane.




THE MANAGEMENT
OF
MINING COMPANIES IN VICTORIA
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTION.
The management of mining companies is a matter the
knowledge of which, though simple and easily acquired, is
too often looked upon as a subsidiary kind of business
which does not require many qualifications or much business
ability to perform. And no doubt this is true, provided
that the management is carried on in a systematic manner.
But it is not always that it is so. As a general rule
directors and shareholders are only imperfectly acquainted
with their powers, their duties and their liabilities; and it
sometimes happens that the manager himself is but little
better informed. It too often happens that the manager of
a company is appointed, not on account of any business or
administrative ability he may possess, but with a friendly
desire to give a helping hand to a man who perhaps may
have only the smallest qualification for the position, or with
a still more impolitic motive of getting the work done
cheaply


A small omission in an advertisement, failing by an
oversight to give a notice within the required time, a trifling
neglect in complying with the company’s rules, or an error
in publishing the nature of the business to be transacted
at a special or extraordinary meeting of the company may
result in a law suit which may possibly have the effect of
finally extinguishing the company.
No great knowledge of accounts is required in a manager
beyond what every boy is taught at school, but it frequently
happens that he commences his books on a false and incorrect
principle, and so his accounts get more entangled as the
business of the company progresses. In very few instances
does he obtain any assistance from the auditors ; generally
speaking, an audit as usually made affords no check at all
except on the actual receipts and expenditure of the company.
This is not the fault of the auditors ; it lies with the share-
holders and the directors, who in most cases decline to
pay a sufficiently high fee for making a thorough audit, it is
seldom indeed, except a special audit is called for, that we
hear of an audit of the share register, or an inquiry into
the capital account. In fact, only in very rare instances,
and among the most experienced managers, is a capital
account kept at all; or if kept, yet it is not kept in such a
manner as to admit of any check upon the amount of capital
called up and expended. And if there is nothing in a
manager’s books to explain the disappearance of capital, no
scrutiny or enquiry can possibly be made beyond the verbal
statement of the manager himself. I need scarcely say this
must be unsatisfactory both to the manager and to the
company.
The manager of a mining company is an officer created by
the Act, and forms the most necessary factor in the manage-
ment of the company. It is needless to say, then, that he
should be thoroughly acquainted with his duties, and should


have the Act and the rules of his company at his fingers
ends. His duties and liabilities are defined by the Act and
exemplified by the rules, but a certain discretion is allowed
him in deciding on the manner in which he shall perform
many of those duties. He is commanded to “ keep true
accounts of the affairs and transactions of the company,”
and to keep a share register, but no definite system is laid
down for his guidance. He is permitted, within certain
limits, to strike out a course for himself. He is the most
responsible member of the management, and is above the
authority of the directors. He is appointed by the company,
and is responsible only to the company for the discharge of
his duties.
The directors also form an important element in the
management of the company. Their powers and duties are
to a certain extent defined by the Act, but it is usual to
extend those powers and duties, or rather to make practical
orders for carrying them into effect, in drawing up the
rules ; taking care, however, that the rules are not incon-
sistent with the Act. Very few directors know much about
the Act ; they are guided chiefly by the rules of their
company, which they regard as quite sufficient for all
practical purposes, and they decline to travel beyond the
four corners of the company’s regulations. I need not say
that the most thorough knowledge of the rules, without
having first mastered the Act, is only a superficial knowledge
lacking the foundation necessary to enable a director to
fully understand and perform his duties. The fault of
directors is that they leave too much to their manager, and
it often happens that the manager is placed in the anomalous
position of having to manage the board of directors as well
as the company.
A shareholder, except when in a truculent mood, or when
he hesitates whether or not he shall seek legal advice,
scarcely ever troubles himself to look at the Act or the


rules either. He remains content to watch the share
market, and make an occasional visit to the mine ; except
perhaps in the case of an invidious director, he scarcely ever
troubles the management. He attends the meetings, or
sends a proxy, or perhaps does neither, and trusts to the
directors or the manager to see that the business is properly
conducted. If he wishes to appeal against a resolution of
the directors, or if he wishes to have a strict enquiry into
the management or the working of the mine, he does not
know how to go about it, and the inevitable result is that
he is compelled to obtain the advice of someone who does
know, for which advice he of course has to pay.
In the chapters which follow it is my object to point out
concisely what are the powers, duties, and liabilities of the
manager, of the directors, and of the shareholders in a min-
ing company, and the manner in which those powers and
duties should be exercised or performed. I must premise
that in mentioning the “ Act ” throughout I refer to “ The
Mining Companies’ Act of 1871 ” and all its amendments ;
and also, that though all the statements with regard to the
powers duties and liabilities of the various parties are based
either on the Act or on judgments of the Supreme Court,
I have refrained from citing any cases or decisions in the
pages, but have preferred to speak in plain unincumbered
language that will render itself intelligible to all.
In the event, however, of any reference being required, I
have included a Table of Cases at the end of the volume,
which are- referred to by the numbers appearing throughout
text.


CHAPTER II.
THE CLAIM.
The land which comprises the mine of the Company, by
-whatever tenure held, is usually spoken of as the company’s
claim, though strictly speaking, the term “ claim ” is only
applied to land held under miners’ rights. However, T
shall follow the usual custom, and speak of the land held
by the company under the common designation of the
“ claim.”
The claim need not necessarily be in Victoria, though
the company must have a registered office in the colony (1).
If the claim is outside the colony, the application
for it is governed by the laws of the colony or district in
which it is situated.
Land taken up for mining purposes in the colony of
Victoria is held either under Miner’s Rights or under Lease
from the Crown.
Claims taken up under miners’ rights are subject en-
tirely to the by-laws of the mining district in which they are
situated. It would be tedious to explain the by-laws of
the various mining districts of the colony, and I shall
therefore only touch on those proceedings which are general
under all the by-laws. Formerly, a claim which had been
registered with the mining registrar could not be taken
possession of by any other person than the registered owner
without an adjudication of forfeiture obtained from the local
Warden (2). How, however, if a claim is abandoned for a
period to be fixed by the by-laws of the district, it can be
marked out and applied for as virgin ground.
Possession of claims is taken by marking out, or pegging
in accordance with the by-laws, and applying to the mining


registrar for registration. Of course the applicant must be
the holder of a miner’s right in force. Notice of the
application is posted on the ground, or as the by-laws
diiect, and subsequently a certificate of registration is
obtained from the mining registrar. The applicant is then
the owner of the claim, subject to the by-laws of the
district.
The disadvantage of this kind of title is the possibility of
neglecting to renew the miners’ rights, or that some flaw
may be detected in the application, or that the claim may
through carelessness or oversight be allowed to remain un-
worked for a period beyond that permitted by the by-laws,
which may render it liable to forfeiture, or in mining
language “ liable to be jumped.” Though the privileges
conferred by a miner’s right are probably more com-
prehensive than those conferred by any other document in
the world, yet tor obvious reasons this title is not considered
sufficiently unassailable to authorise the expenditure of a
large amount of capital on the workings of the claim.
If a company does hold such a title, a consolidated
miner’s right should at once be applied for. This is issued
in the name of the manager or of some other person as
trustee for the company, and can be made available for any
term up to fifteen years. But a claim held under a con-
solidated miner’s right is subject to the same liabilities,
except that of annual renewal of the miners’ rights, as if it
were held under the ordinary miner’s right title.
The usual form of a mining title for Crown lands is a
lease from the Crown obtained under the leasing regula-
tions (8).
The first step in applying for a mining lease is to mark
off the ground by erecting posts not less than 2 feet 6
inches above the ground, and painted white to define the
boundaries and angles of the land. On each of these posts


must be affixed a metal plate with the words '• applied for
lease ” and the name of the applicant legibly painted on it.
These posts must be kept in position until the proceedings
are terminated.
The next step is to publish notice of the application.
The forms of notice can be obtained from any Warden’s
clerk. The notice must be inserted at least once in a news-
paper published in the district where the land is situated,
or if there be none then in that published nearest to the
land.
On the day of the publication in the newspaper the
applicant must post a copy of his notice at the office of the
Warden and at the post office or police court, whichever is
nearest to the land. If there are two post-offices and it is
doubtful which is the nearer to the claim, it is safer to post
a copy of the notice at each.
He must give a similar notice to every person occupying
or having any rights in the land (such as selectors, holders
of residence areas, &c.), and he must pay the necessary fees
to the Warden’s clerk.
Any of these preliminary acts may be performed by an
agent of the applicant : it is not absolutely necessary that
he should mark out the ground and post the notices him-
self.
If a larger area than thirty acres be required by the
applicant he must apply to the Minister of Mines for a
direction to the Warden to hear the application. This is
done by letter to the Minister, who will forward the neces-
sary direction to the Warden. If this is not done the Warden
cannot entertain the application at all.
All these preliminaries must be done within the seven
days before the applicant lodges his application. Forms of
application can also be obtained from the Warden’s clerk.


As soon as possible after the preliminaries have been com-
plied with the applicant should lodge his application, as the
date and time of lodging are endorsed on it by the Warden’s
clerk when he receives it, and priority of application is
decided by this endorsement. The application must be
lodged in duplicate.
If any person occupies or has any rights in the land his
written consent to the application must be obtained and
lodged with the Warden, and if the occupier is unwilling to
give his consent he must object to the granting of the lease,
in which case the matter is referred to the Warden.
Having lodged his application nothing remains to be done
by the applicant but to await notice from the Warden’s clerk
of the holding of a court of enquiry, at whiclx the applicant
must attend and prove compliance with the regulations, and
answer any objections that may be lodged to the granting of
the lease. Written depositions of the evidence are taken,
and the whole of the papers are forwarded by the Warden,
together with his report, to the Minister of Mines, who
decides whether or not the lease shall issue.
The applicant for a lease need not be the holder of a
miner’s right.
If the lease be granted, the fact is gazetted a month at
least before the issue of the lease. It is then forwarded to
the Warden for execution by the applicant, who will receive
notice from the Warden to call and execute it within twenty-
one days. If the applicant fails to call and execute it
within that time, it is returned to the Minister of Mines
and permission to execute it can only be obtained by special
application to him. In case the lease is not executed by
the applicant within sixty days after the date when it is
gazetted ready for execution, it becomes absolutely void.
After the lease has been executed it is forwarded to the


Office of Titles for registration, and when complete it is
delivered by the Warden to the applicant.
This lease applies only to Crown land. If the applicant
wishes to obtain a mining lease of private property he must
apply under •* The Mining on Private Property Act,” but
as the mode of obtaining a lease under this Act is most
cumbrous and complicated, and is hedged in with so many
restrictions and difficulties, it is advisable that the applicant
should always retain the services of a solicitor for the pur-
pose.
Public roads are vested in the Crown, and mining leases
of them are obtained in the same manner as ordinary leases
of Crown land. The surface, however, is under the control
of the local municipality, and if it is contemplated to break
or injure the surface, permission to do so and a consent to
the granting of the lease must be obtained from the council
of the municipality (4). An applicant holding a mining lease
of private property, and wishing also to obtain a mining lease
of roads abutting on his claim, must apply for the roads as for
Crown land, and obtain a collateral lease of the roads in
addition to the lease of the private property.
A holder of a claim under a miner’s right may apply for
and obtain a lease of his claim, in which case the miner’s
right title will merge in that of the lease.
Mining leases of land vested in the Board of Land and
Works (known as Government reserves) are applied for
under the special regulations made for the purpose (5).
An application, the form of which is given in the regula-
tions, must be lodged in duplicate with the Warden, having
attached to it a plan showing the situation of the claim
applied for and the position of the shafts, drives, and work-
ings proposed to be made.
A deposit of £5 and the necessary fees for survey must
be made with the Warden’s clerk on lodging the application.


Within three days after lodging the application an
advertisement must be inserted in a newspaper circulating
in the locality of the claim, or in the first issue after the
expiration of the three days, if there is no newspaper
published within the limited time. This advertisement is a
copy of the application.
The application comes before the Warden and is dealt with
in a manner similar to an application for a mining lease on
Crown land.
The foregoing remarks apply only to gold mining leases ;
all other leases for mining purposes are called mineral
leases. All gold mining leases, whether on Crown land or
on private property, or of reserves, are subject to a rent
reserved to the Crown.
Mineral leases, i.e, leases for coal, iron, silver, copper, tin,,
or any metal or mineral other than gold, are applied for in
much the same manner as gold mining leases of Crown land,
but under special regulations (6). The deposit to be paid is
,£ls, in addition to fees for survey, and the area granted,
not exceeding 640 acres, is prescribed for the separate
minerals.
These leases are subject to the payment of both rent and
royalty to the Crown. A lease for one or more minerals
specified in the lease is subject to a rent of from three pence
to two shillings per acre, and a royalty of two per cent, on
the value of the metal or mineral at the mouth of the mine.
If, however, the lessee wishes to mine for some other
metal or mineral than that named in his lease, the rent
payable is a maximum of one shilling per acre and a royalty
of two per cent, for each additional metal or mineral worked,
in addition to the rent and royalty reserved by the lease.
In no case will the Crown include Crown land, private


property and reserves, or any two of them, in one gold
mining lease.
Adjoining leases held by one lessee under the same title
may be amalgamated by surrendering the whole, and
applying for a consolidated lease of the entire area. This
can be done by application to the Minister of Mines direct
without the necessity of compliance with the regulations.
The conditions under which a mining lease is held are
fully set out in the lease and the regulations. The title is
the best that can be obtained for a company, though care
must be taken by the management not to allow the rent to
fall in arrear, or to suffer the lease to become voidable by
reason of not keeping employed on it the required number
of men ; for a lease claim is liable to be jumped as well as
a claim held under miners’ rights.
In cases of emergency, or for good cause shown, a lessee
can in most cases obtain from the Minister a suspension of
the labor covenants for a specified time, during which time
the claim is secure from the jumper.


CHAPTER III.
THE FORMATION OF THE COMPANY.
A mining company is merely a partnership consisting of
a number of persons having a joint stock and associated
together for the purpose of sharing profits, and until incor-
porated is substantially in the same position as an ordinary
partnership, and subject to the same laws as control ordin-
ary partnership firms, except that those laws are modified
by the power a member of a company possesses of trans-
ferring his share. Until the company is registered the law
will not recognise it as a corporation, and a contract made
by any one member or partner is not binding upon the other
partners, unless the partner to be charged has signed a
memorandum to that effect. These unregistered companies
or partnerships are what are known as co-operative com-
panies, and, except in the case of two or three miners or
mates, this is not an advisable mode of carrying on the busi-
ness of a mining partnership, owing principally to the
difficulty often experienced of getting in calls and contribu-
tions, and the liability of the managing partner who contracts
for necessaries to be saddled with more than his just share
of the debts.
As soon, however, as a company is registered it becomes
a corporation, a body distinct from the members composing
it, and its continuous existence is not affected by changes
among its members. A company registered under the Act
includes any partnership or co-adventure for mining pur-
poses, whether the operations are to be carried on in Victoria
or elsewhere. It is a corporate body with a common seal,
capable of exercising all the functions of an incorporated
company, and with numerous powers conferred on it by the
Act.


The first step after the company is floated— i.e. when not
less than two-thirds of the shares have been subscribed for
—is to get the members together to arrange and decide
upon the formation of the company. This is usually done
by advertisement, or by circular, convening a meeting at a
stated time and place. A notice in the usual form is given
in the Appendix. At this meeting a chairman is appointed
and a resolution passed that the company be incorporated
in pursuance of the Act under a definite name or title; the
amount of the capital, the liability on eacli share, and the
amount paid up being resolved on at the same time. The
company having been thus formed, the members present,
provided they are a majority in number and value of the
shareholders, may make and adopt rules for the manage-
ment of the company. In the Appendix I have included a
copy of rules which are sound and workable, though of
course the meeting will have power to alter and modify
them to suit the circumstances of the company. The first
rules made by the company should always be drawn as fully
and carefully as possible, as after the incorporation the rules
can only be added to, repealed or altered, by an extraordin-
ary meeting of the company.
The rules having been adopted, the meeting will then
proceed to appoint a manager and fix his remuneration,
elect directors, decide on the situation of the company’s
office, and appoint bankers, legal advisers, and auditors.
The appointment of the mine manager is always left to the
directors, for obvious reasons. The number of directors,
their qualification, and their mode of retiring will be settled
on going through the rules, as also the dates of holding
general meetings, the number of shareholders necessary to
form a quorum at a meeting, and many smaller matters
which will transpire as the rules are proceeded with, and
which may be settled, if necessary, by resolution at the
time.


It is never advisable to fix a large number of shares as
necessary to constitute a quorum at a meeting of the
company, owing to the difficulty sometimes experienced of
getting a meeting together at all; and a high qualification
for a director is often objected to, on the ground that a
small shareholder may probably be a desirable member of
the board, who perhaps cannot afford to hold a large stake
in the company. The most convenient number of directors
is five, three to form a quorum, and in any case it is never
desirable to fix a larger number than three to form a
quorum, or the board may become unworkable by reason of
its meetings lapsing through non-attendance of the directors.
The board should never consist of an even number of
members, as in the event of an equal division too much
prominence may be given to the casting vote of the
chairman.
The powers and duties of the directors are fully discussed
in a future chapter. The directors elected at the first
meeting of the company before incorporation (usually known
as the preliminary meeting) remain in office until the first
general meeting of the incorporated company, when they all
retire and a fresh board is elected. In electing directors at
a preliminary meeting it is usual to choose them by ballot,
if more than the required number be nominated; at a
subsequent meeting after the incorporation of the company,
they are elected by ballot, or by assessment of shares, or by
open voting, as may be provided by the rules. The
customary mode of election is by assessment of shares, which
will be explained in a subsequent chapter.
The following is the usual business transacted at a
preliminary meeting, and the order in which it should be
taken
Appointment of chairman.
Resolution for incorporation of the company, fixing the


name, capital, number and limit of shares,and amount
(if any) paid up.
Adoption of the rules.
Appointment of the manager, fixing his remuneration.
Election of the directors.
Appointment of the situation of the office.
Election of auditors, fixing their remuneration
Appointment of bankers, legal advisers, &c.
Any other business that may transpire.
Having proceeded thus far, the minutes of the meeting
should then be entered in a book, which afterwards becomes
the minute book of the company. They may be confirmed
at the preliminary meeting, or at the next subsequent
general meeting of the company. Nothing further can
then be done officially until the company is incorporated.


CHAPTER IV.
THE INCORPORATION.
The incorporation of a company must be conducted in
exact conformity to the provisions of the Act, and as this
may be attended with certain complications in the mind of
a layman it is always more expedient to obtain the services
of the legal adviser of the company for the purpose. It is
no portion of a manager’s duty to register the company.
The attendance of the company’s solicitor at the preliminary
meeting may also avert serious consequences in the future,
as it will be his duty to see that none of the proposed rules
are inconsistent with the Act. The practice which some-
times obtains of adopting another company’s rules in ylobo,
very often without reading them to the meeting, is very
unbusinesslike ; the draft rules should always be read over, so
as to give any shareholder present an opportunity of making
objections to them, or suggestions of alteration.
The manager will be required to sign the memorandum
and to make the declaration required by the Act, and on
completion of the registration he will be handed a certificate
of incorporation under the hand of the Registrar-General,
which is conclusive evidence in all courts that the company
has been duly registered under the Act, and of the date of
its registration. Under former Acts only one certificate of
incorporation could be issued, and this naturally became a
document of vast importance, and was jealously guarded, as
no other evidence of the incorporation could be obtained.
Under the Act of 1871, however, a copy of the certificate,
or rather an original certificate, of incorporation can be
obtained from the Registrar-General at any time on pay-
ment of a fee of a shilling. These certificates can be
obtained as they are required. But it is always advisable


for the manager to keep a certificate of incorporation in his
office to meet emergencies, and the safest method of keeping
it is to attach it to the original copy of the rules, which
latter should be kept by the manager and guarded with the
same strict care as the title to the claim or the seal of the
company. It is the usual custom to have the rules printed
for distribution among the shareholders, and in this case one
of these printed copies may be made an original. It should
be marked as such, and kept in the safe with the lease or
miners’ rights.
The first duty of the manager after the incorporation is
to provide a share register, books of account, and a seal.
He must bo careful that the correct name of the company,
as registered, appears on the seal. He may be able to pur-
chase a suitable share register, but he will find it more
convenient to have a special one, as shown in the Appendix,
printed and bound. These books and the seal must be kept
in secure custody, as they cay not be replaced if lost or
destroyed, and at the same time they must be always handy
for reference or use. The manager will also see to the
printing of the scrip, taking care to provide a sufficient
number to allow for future transfers.
The first scrip are issued in the names of the parties
mentioned in the memorandum of association, and can be
made out in fives, twenties, fifties or otherwise as the share-
holders may require. As soon as they are all written out,
signed and sealed, the manager should give notice to the
shareholders that they are ready for issue ; and he must
take care that each shareholder on obtaining his scrip signs
the receipt for them in the block of the scrip book. It is
alscr advisable, though not absolutely necessary, that each
of the first shareholders should sign the original copy of the
rules.
The office of the company must be at the place named in


the memorandum of association, and must be within the
colony of Victoria. This is called the registered office of
the company, and must be open forthe convenience of thepub-
lic at least two days in each week, and for not less than four
hours on each of those days. The days on which the office
is open are fixed by the rules, but the convenience of the
manager is always consulted in the matter. It need
scarcely be said that the fixing of these statutory days does
not preclude the manager from transacting the business of
the company on any other days as well.
As soon as possible after the incorporation a notice of
the situation of the office, signed by two directors, must be
filed by the manager with the Registrar General and
published in the Gazette. A form of the notice is given in
the Appendix. The notice to the Registrar General, upon
which no fee is payable for filing, may be forwarded to him
by post, but this mode of filing it is too uncertain to be re-
commended. •
Whenever the situation of the registered office is changed
a similar notice must be filed and gazetted. This constitutes
the registration of the company’s office, where notices and
legal process may be served, and where the financial
business of the company is carried on. If the manager
wilfully neglects to file or publish this notice he is liable to
a penalty of £10; and if a company carries on business
without having a registered office as required by the Act,
the penalty is £5 for every day during which business
shall be so carried on.
A similar notice to the above must be filed and published
of the appointment and of every change of the manager.
The shareholders having received their scrip, the company
may now be considered as fairly launched. The directors
will meet as soon as possible after the incorporation, and
the business of the company will be proceeded with.


CHAPTER V.
THE MANAGER.
The manager of a mining company, usually known as
the legal or statutory manager to distinguish him from the
mine manager, is entirely a creature of the Act. He comes
officially into existence when he signs the memorandum for
the incorporation of the company, having been appointed
for that purpose by the preliminary meeting of the share-
holders ; and he remains in that position as the head and
front of the company until the company itself deposes him.
His duties are many and onerous, and it is only by strict at-
tention to the Act and the rules of his company that he
can become perfect in those duties.
The duties assigned to him by the Act and his liabilities
on neglect of them may be considered first.
As previously stated, as soon as possible after the in-
corporation of the company he must lodge and publish the
notices of his appointment and of the situation of the
company’s office. He is then the manager, and remains so
until a new manager is regularly appointed in his place.
His office must be open to the public for not less than
four hours on some days to be not less than two days in
each week, and these days are usually fixed by the company
to suit the convenience of the manager. He is not required
to be always personally present at his office, but may
employ an agent or clerk to keep his office open and to
assist him in his work, though many of his duties, such as
signing scrip ifec., must be performed by himself.
The appointment of the manager need not be under the
seal of the company (7).


The manager is empowered to purchase goods and order
labor and material necessary to carry on the works to the
extent of £SO on behalf of the company, and without in-
curring any personal responsibility ; but he must go no
further. All other contracts must be authorised by the
company. The power of the manager in this respect will
be explained in a subsequent chapter under the head of
“ Contracts.”
He must keep the share register, which should be written
up immediately after the first scrip have been issued, and
must transfer shares when regularly required to do so.
Any shareholder or creditor of the company is entitled to
inspect the share register without payment of any fee.
In addition to the share register, the manager is required
to keep the accounts of the affairs and transactions of the
company, and these books must also be open for inspection
by the shai’eholders and creditors of the company on pay-
ment of a fee of one shilling. The minute book, however,
is not regarded as a book of account in this latter respect (8).
Any shareholder or creditor may also require copies of the
accounts and of the directors’ reports, which must be
furnished by the manager and certified by him as correct,
on payment of a fee of ten shillings ; but he is allowed to
limit the copies of the accounts to three months ending
with the day of service of notice requiring the copies.
He must convene extraordinary meetings of the company
when duly required, insert notices of calls, notices of sale
of forfeited shares, and keep his office open on the day
previous to a sale of forfeited shares.
If the company ceases to carry on business without being
wound up, the manager is allowed to claim three months’
salary from the date of the last meeting of the directors or
of the company, though the directors may, if they think it


desirable, retain his services for a longer period. If the
company ceases to carry on business without being wound
up for six months, the manager must deposit all the books
of the company with the clerk of the Court of Mines for
the district, unless the judge of the court extends the
time.
If a company is wound up by the court, the manager
must hand over all the books, documents, and property 7 of
the company to the liquidator, accompanied by a list of the
books and property handed over, and a statutory declaration
made by him that there are no other books or property
in his control except those mentioned in the list.
The manager cannot claim a lien for salary upon the
property of the company after it is ordered to be wound up.
Some offences by a manager are regarded in the serious
light of a misdemeanour, for which he is liable to twelve
months’ imprisonment. Stated shortly these are—
Wilfully neglecting to enter the transfer of a share in the
share register when lawfully required to do so.
Wilfully making a false entry in the share register or in
his accounts.
Wilfully refusing to hand over the books and property
of the Company to the liquidator when the company is
ordered to be wound up.
Failing to deposit the books and documents of the com-
pany with the clerk of the Court of Mines at the expiration
of six months from the time at which the company shall
have ceased to carry on business without being wound up.
It will be noticed that the three first offences are con-
stituted by the wilful act or default of the manager, while
the last offence is committed by simple neglect.
Other offences are of a lighter character and subject the


manager to a penalty of £lO. These are shortly—
Wilfully neglecting to lodge or publish the notices of his
appointment and of the situation of the company’s office.
Wilfully omitting to keep the required accounts.
Wilfully refusing to allow any person entitled to do so
to inspect any book of account or report, or obstructing
him in so doing. As before stated, the minute book is not
one of the books which the manager can be compelled to
produce for inspection.
Wilfully neglecting or refusing to furnish copies of the
accounts or statements which he is required by the Act to
furnish.
In case of any loss being sustained in the sale of gold or
receipts for calls by the manager, as to which he has kept
no accounts, the directors are responsible for the loss. It
is their duty to see that the manager performs his work.
The salary of the manager should be fixed by the company
and not by the Directors, though there is nothing to prohibit
the board from dealing with the matter, unless restricted by
the shareholders or the rules.
If the manager’s salary be fixed by a general meeting of
the company, the directors cannot reduce it though they
may increase the salary at the risk of an appeal to a
general meeting of the Company.
In case no manager is appointed at the first or pre-
liminary meeting, or if from any cause the company is left
without a manager, a new manager can be appointed by an
extraordinary meeting of the company, by the resolution of
a clear majority of the shareholders present personally or by
proxy. Authority should, however, always be given by the
rules to the directors to appoint a temporary or acting
manager should the office become vacated by reason of
death, resignation or otherwise.


The power of the manager does not extend to dealing or
trafficking with any of the property of the company ; and
an agreement by the manager to let the mine or any part
of it on tribute is not binding upon the company.
The foregoing comprise the main duties and liabilities of
the manager as defined by the Act. Other duties are im-
posed upon him by the rules, and they will be considered
more in detail under the various headings contained in the
subsequent chapters.


CHAPTER VI.
THE DIRECTORS.
On the formation of the company, i.e., at the preliminary-
meeting held before the incorporation, a number of share-
holders are elected as directors, to hold office until the first
half-yearly general meeting of the company. The first
directors are elected by ballot or by open voting ; sub-
sequent elections are usually conducted by assessment of
shares. Of course if only the required number is nominated
no election need take place : one resolution can comprise the
whole board. At the first half-yearly general meeting of
the incorporated company all the first directors should retire
and a fresh board be elected, after which they retire by
rotation or otherwise as provided by the rules. Unless
forbidden by the rules a director is always eligible for re-
election.
. If mi directors are appointed or elected at the preliminary
meeting, an extraordinary meeting of the company must be
convened as soon as possible after the incorporation, and
this meeting may elect a board of directors, and at the same
time fix the mode of election of future directors, their quali-
fication, powers, term of office, mode of retirement, and the
number required to form a quorum. A clear majority of
the shareholders present personally or by proxy at the
extraordinary meeting can carry any resolutions to this
effect.
In the absence of any rules for the emergency where
there is no legally appointed board of directors, a board can
be appointed by a majority of the shareholders present per-
sonally or by proxy at an extraordinary meeting of the
company duly convened (9).


It is the duty of the directors not less than a week before
the holding of a general meeting to lodge in the company’s
office a full and true report of the state and prospects of the
company and of its assets and liabilities, which report must be
left open for inspection by any shareholder or creditor of the
company.
The directors must also see that half-yearly statements of
the affairs of the company are made, and a printed copy of
them lodged with the Registrar General, verified by a
statutory declaration of the manager. These statements are
made out by the manager, and should be produced and read
at the half-yearly general meeting. They comprise the
balance sheets, the directors’ and mine manager’s reports,
and the statement of assets and liabilities.
The directors are also responsible for the manner in which
the books of account are kept by the manager; and they
are liable for any loss arising from proceeds of gold or calls
received by the manager as to which no accounts have been
kept (10).
No dividend can be paid except out of the profits of the
company. If the directors wilfully declare a dividend out
of the capital, or otherwise than out of the profits, they are
severally liable to a penalty of not less than £IOO nor more
than £SOO, and in default of payment to imprisonment for any
term extending from three to twelve months : and are also
liable personally to the creditors of the company to the
extent that the dividend so paid has exceeded the profits.
Any one director may be sued, and he is entitled to recover
contribution from the others to the amount he has been
called on to pay.
It was decided, however, in a case from Ballarat, where
the directors paid a dividend by means of an overdraft at
their bank in anticipation of proceeds; but the proceeds fell


short of the overdraft, that although there might have been
mistake or error, there was no fraud or malappropriation of
assets (10). However, it is always unwise for a board of
directors to anticipate such a doubtful result as the yield of
gold.
The directors of the company cannot sell the whole of its
property—thecompanycanonlywindup(ll). Inacase where
the directors sold all the plant and property of the
company, including some freehold land, in haste and at
an undervalue to avoid sequestration, it was decided that
they were responsible for any loss arising from the hasty
sale, and that the sale of the freehold land of the company
was voidable, and the directors personally were responsible
for the fair value of the land (10).
In a pre-payment company any director who incurs a
debt on behalf of the company beyond the estimated sum to
be realised by a call is personally responsible for the debt.
Any director wilfully omitting to lodge the before-men-
tioned report, or to cause the statements to be made and
printed (provided there are funds at his disposal), or
wilfully making any false report or statement is liable to a
penalty of £SO.
If a director wilfully refuses to allow any authorised
person to inspect the books and accounts of the company, or
if he obstructs such person, he is liable to a penalty of £lO.
The directors cannot let the mine or any part of it on
tribute without the sanction of an extraordinary or special
general meeting of the company. The manager has no
authority whatever to make an agreement or to execute a
lease of the mine on tribute.
The directors are frequently called upon to become
security for money advanced to the company. A joint and
several promissory note given by the directors personally


and not as directors renders each of those signing it person-
ally liable for the whole amount due on the promissory note.
A joint promissory note renders them liable jointly and not
individually on the note itself, though by subsequent pro-
ceedings any one director may be called upon to pay the
full amount, in which case he can recover contribution from
the others.
Where a joint and several promissory note was given by
the directors “ for value received on behalf of the company’'
it was held that they had rendered themselves personally
liable on it (12).
And where the directors gave a guarantee to a bank as
directors, but the seal of the company was not affixed to the
guarantee, it was decided that the guarantee did not bind
the company, as their styling themselves directors was
merely descriptive (13).
A. promissory note or guarantee given by a company
must always be under the company’s seal.
The directors should always bear in mind that they and
their manager, having the conduct of the affairs of the
company, are substantially the company. The whole of the
management is vested in them, and though they have large
discretionary powers, yet these powers are not to be ex-
ceeded, and that they are amenable to the company for
laches or neglect (14).
Directors’ meetings are usually held fortnightly, at a time
and place to suit themselves, or oftener if required. The
first board meeting should be held immediately after the
incorporation of the company is complete, when the first
duty will be to appoint a chairman, who should remain
chairman of the board so long as he continues in office as a
director. The routine business of the board is to receive
and answer correspondence, pass accounts, direct the work


ing of the mine, purchase plant, make calls, declare divi-
dends, and transact any other general business in connection
with the management of the company. All acts of the
directors are usually made by the rules subject to revision
and rescission by an ordinary, special or extraordinary meet-
ing of the company.
If the directors enter into a contract which is signed be-
fore the contract is rescinded by the company it is binding
on the company. If the company prohibits the board of
directors from entering into a contract, any such contract
subsequently entered into by the directors will not bind the
company. They have the implied authority of the company
to make contracts, but this authority can be revoked at any
time before the contract is signed.
In drawing up the rules it is advisable to allow the
directors and the manager the widest possible latitude with
regard to convening meetings of the board, as it frequently
happens an emergency arises requiring immediate attention.
The manager or any two directors should be empowered to
call the board together at any time and at a few hours’
notice.
Ordinary meetings of the directors are not specially con-
vened. It is usual for the manager to send a circular to
each director, reminding him of the time and place of meet-
ing, and stating shortly the business to be transacted.
If a director resigns or ceases to act, he is not responsible '
for what his co-directors may subsequently do (OO).
A director cannot attend or vote at a meeting of the
board by proxy.
A meeting of the directors can be held anywhere, provided
it is properly convened and a quorum as provided by the
rules is present.
The remuneration of the directors can only be fixed by a


general meeting of the company. If this is omitted, the
directors must go without their fees until a general meeting
is held.
A director should not he permitted to discuss or vote on
any question in which he is personally interested, or to sit
at the board during the discussion.
For all directors meetings, the manager should keep a
“ Directors’Meeting Book,” a form of which is included in the
Appendix, showingthe business to be transacted at each meet-
ing. This book should be signed by the directors present as
evidence of their attendance at the meeting, and their
signatures can be utilised by the manager as vouchers for
payment of their fees.
A contract which ought to be made by a board of
directors is not valid when made by the requisite quorum
but not at a board meeting, unless the person entering into
the contract had notice of the irregularity. The validity
of the acts of the directors depends more on the
power of the directors to do the acts than on the regularity
or irregularity of the manner in which the acts may have
been done.


CHAPTER VII.
THE SHAREHOLDERS.
Every person whose name is recorded in the share
register as the holder of shares in a limited company is
liable while so registered to contribute to the debts and
liabilities of the company to the amount unpaid on his
shares. In a limited company he is liable to be sued for a
call legally made, if action is taken within the time limited
by the Act. In a no-liability company, as the name implies,
the acceptance of shares does not imply any liability on a
shareholder to pay calls, and he cannot be sued for them.
If a shareholder assigns his shares and they are not trans-
ferred, but his name still remains on the share register, his
liability in respect of the shares continues so long as he is
registered for the shares. The management can only know
what shareholders are liable from the records of the share
register. A shareholder should therefore, on assignment of
his shares see that the assignment is completed by regis-
tration of the transfer. If his name remains improperly on
the register, or omitted from it, his remedy is by application
to the Court of Mines or a judge to have the share register
rectified by striking out or inserting his name.
If a shareholder is sued for calls or contribution he is en-
titled to show that, though his name is on the share register
yet that he has transferred his shares, and that the transfer
has been approved by the directors (15).
A shareholder can arrange with the manager that a debt
due to him by the company shall be set-off against a call
due by him.
Generally speaking, any dispute between the shareholders,


or between a shareholder and the company, as tn the right to
have a name taken off or put on the share register can be
decided by application to the Court of Mines or a judge.
The shareholders always have an inherent power to require
the manager or the directors to convene any meeting of the
company.
If the shareholders are desirous of altering the rules, or
of making new rules, or of appointing directors where there
is no legally appointed board, or of appointing a manager
when from any cause there is no manager, they can do so at
an extraordinary meeting of the company.
Two-thirds in number and value of the shareholders in
the company may pass a resolution at an extraordinary-
meeting requiring the company to be wound up without
resort to the court, provided the company is not in debt at
the time. An unpaid dividend is, however, a debt which
will prevent the shareholders exercising this power (39).
Falsely personating the owner of shares and thereby
obtaining a share or interest in a company is a felony.
The shareholders alone have the power to authorise the
lease of the mine or anv part of it on tribute, the sanction
for which must be given at an extraordinary or special
general meeting of the company (16).
A shareholder has the right to demand scrip for shares
legally and properly transferred to him. Where a company
denied a person’s title to certain shares, it was held that as the
manager had applied to him for a call which he paid, and for
which he obtained a receipt from the manager, this was
sufficient evidence that he was a member of the company,
and entitled to be registered for his shares.
It is quite a common practice for shareholders to assign
their scrip with the form of transfer signed in blank by the


transferror, to be filled up by an ultimate transferree. An
assignmentofthisnature is quite valid between theparties(l7),
and in practice scrip is mostly transferred, and fresh scrip
issued by the manager, with the transfer and acceptance
forms signed in blank.
A few remarks may be made with regard to the power of
shareholders at a duly convened meeting of the company.
The mode of convening a meeting is explained in a sub-
sequent chapter; but it should be remembered that where
the rules do not provide any special mode of convening
meetings, each shareholder must receive notice ; the ordinary
advertisement is not sufficient.
It may be laid down as a general axiom that where the
shareholders are unanimous they can do anything, or control
anything in connection with the company.
A shareholder may, previous to the holding of a meeting
collect as many proxies as he chooses, and may vote on these
and on his own shares to the limit allowed by the rules. If no
limit is fixed, he may vote on all his proxies if they are
admitted by the chairman, as well as on his own shares. If
a limit is fixed by the rules, he may vote on all his own
shares and on as many proxies as will reach the limit, any
shares over and above the limit being lost for voting purposes.
He may speak to any motion brought before the meeting,
subject to the ruling of the chairman, and may propose
motions and move amendments, and, subject to the rules,
may act and speak as he thinks best in the interests of the
company.
If, as often happens, a shareholder has any suggestion to
make, or any project to bring forward with regard to the
working of the mine, he should bring it forward at the
general meeting for discussion. As a great number of
shareholders in all companies are workingminers, these hints


or suggestions frequently produce valuable practical results.
Nothing so retards the progress of a company as the luke-
warmness of the shareholders in attending meetings, or the
want of interest shown by them in the prosperity of the
company. They should remember that by attending
meetings and enquiring into the management of the company
and the working of the mine, they are looking after their
own personal interests and supervising their own property;
and a shareholder should never, if he can avoid it, leave his
interests in the hands of a mere proxy who may probably
not hold the same opinions as himself.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE SHARE REGISTER.
The book in which are recorded the names of the share-
holders and the number of shares held by each is the most
important of all the books kept by the manager. Too much
care, therefore, cannot be taken in keeping this book in the
most plain and systematic manner. No form of register is
provided under the Act, and as the shares must necessarily
be numbered in consecutive order, the form of the share
register is a matter of serious consideration to the person
who has to keep it. His aim must be to combine usefulness
and lucidity with a minimum amount of labor. Formerly,
when it was customary to divide a company into not more
than two thousand shares, the common mode of keeping the
share register was to employ one line for each share, and to
record on that line the distinctive number of the share and
the various transfers of it in ruled columns until the page
was exhausted. In a company of twenty-four thousand
shares this system is almost impossible, and would entail
endless labor on the manager. The most convenient method
is to open one folio or page on the register for each share-
holder, and to enter the shares represented by each separate
scrip and designate them by the first and last of the con-
secutive numbers. Thus a scrip entered in the share register
as bearing the numbers “2756 to 2855” will represent one
hundred shares from 2756 to 2855 inclusive.
It may be as well to remind young managers of the care
required in arranging these consecutive numbers when issuing
the scrip. It sometimes happens that a manager, before he
has made himself thoroughly acquainted with his work wilj
issue a scrip for one hundred shares from, say, 1750 to 18 50


whereas in fact such a scrip carries one hundred and one
shares, as both numbers are included; it should read as
numbers 1751 to 1850. It will be seen at a glance that a
few such mistakes would soon utterly confuse the share
register. He should also distinguish between a share and a
scrip ; scrip is the certificate issued, and may include any
number of shares. Many people speak of holding so many
scrip in a company when speaking of their shares.
In some rare instances a transfer register is employed, but
this is very cumbersome and useless, and the practice is now
almost obsolete.
The Act requires that the share register must contain the
following particulars :
(1) The names and addresses, and (if known) the occu-
pations of the shareholders.
(2) The shares held by each shareholder, distinguishing
each share by its number, and the amount paid up on each
share.
(3) The date of entry of each shareholder in the register
and the date when he ceased to be a shareholder.
The most simple and practical method of keeping the
register is to reserve one page or folio for each shareholder,
writing his name, occupation and address legibly at the top
of the page. The shares held by him and the date on which
lie acquired them are entered in the first or left hand columns,
the consecutive numbers of the shares being entered in exact
form as written on each sci’ip, and the number of issue of
the scrip being entered in a separate column. In another
column to the right hand is entered the collective number of
shares represented by each scrip, the sum of which collective
numbers will represent the number of shares held by the
shareholder in the company. On transfer of any of the
shares the record of the transaction is entered in another


column ruled for the purpose, showing the date of the
transfer, the consecutive numbers of the shares transferred,,
as well as the collective number, and the number of the page
or folio to which they have been transferred. It is a con-
venient practice to rule an ink line through the numbers of
any shares that have been transferred, as this will show at
once that these shares are no longer held by the original
shareholder.
A form of the share register is given in the Appendix,.
Showing the method of registering and transferring shares.
Columns for calls, as shown in the form in the Appendix,
should be ruled on the right hand page of the register, and
in these columns the calls are entered when due and paid,
thus showing the amount paid up on each share.
If a shareholder requires a scrip “ split,” i.e. if he wishes
to retain his shares but to have {e.g.) two scrip for ten
shares each instead of one scrip for twenty shares, this
should be treated as a transfer from the shareholder to him-
self, and entered in the register accordingly. If this is not
done —if the manager issues two new scrip and leaves the
record in the share register uncancelled, the number of issue
in the register will not tally with that on the new scrip.
Thus one scrip for twenty shares numbered from 1601 to
1620 may be split by cancelling the scrip and issuing two
fresh scrip, one for numbers 1601 to 1610 O 0), and the
other for numbers 1611 to 1620 00), and entering the
transaction in the register in the same manner as an ordin-
ary transfer. A shareholder requiring a scrip split should
sign the form of transfer and acceptance as both transferror
and transferee.
In making up the share list for each call, an example of
which is given in the Appendix, it is only necessary to add
up the number of shares remaining uncancelled or untrans


ferred in each shareholder’s account, and the total should
tally with the full number of shares in the company. If it
•does not, there is an error somewhere, which should be
checked and rectified at once. The check can be easily
made by running through the consecutive numbers of the
shares on the share list from the first to the last share in
the company, and any error will then be detected at once.
In adding up the number of shares to each shareholder’s
account in the x’egister, the total must not be ruled up and
■entered in ink, as a subsequent transfer or acquisition of
shares may alter the number of shares for which he is
registered. The number can be written in pencil, as the
record is only a temporary one to check the share register,
and as soon as it is proved that the sum of each share-
holder’s shares tallies with the total number of shares in the
■company, the pencilled record is not further required.
It may happen that when the manager makes out his
share list for a call or a meeting he finds that he has more
•or less shares on his register than there are in the company.
In such a case he must at once trace back his transfers,
■comparing them with the block scrip book, until he discovers
the error, and if necessary must check the register from the
beginning. If this is not done at once, the error grows in
magnitude and becomes almost impossible to trace, resulting
probably in the expense and inconvenience of calling in all
the scrip for the purpose of rectifying the share register.
This is where the value of the share list is shown, as it
balances the register each time it is ma'de out. If a share
list is prepared for each call and dividend, and for each
half-yearly meeting, any such error can be traced without
much difficulty, as it must have crept in since the making
out of the last duly balanced share list.
The manager must allow shareholders and creditors of the


company to inspect the share register at any time during
office hours free of charge.
The share register is prirnd facie evidence of the truth of
all entries in it. But of course this can be rebutted.
If a shareholder is improperly put on or left out of the
share register lie can apply to the Court of Mines for the
district, or to a judge, to have the register rectified, and
his name erased or inserted and scrip issued to him, as the
case may be.
Six months after the company ceases to carry on business
without being wound up, the share register must be
deposited with the other books and documents of the
company with the clerk of the Court of Mines, unless a judge’s
order is obtained extending the time,
When a company is ordered to be wound up the share
register must be handed over intact to the liquidator.
Tampering with the share register is a misdemeanour.
In the case of forfeited shares the shareholder making
default should remain registered for his shares until they are
actually sold.
After a sale of forfeited shares an entry is made by the
manager in the page of the share register set apart for the
shareholder whose shares have heen forfeited and sold
showing the consecutive numbers of the shares forfeited, the
date of the forfeiture, and the date of the sale. For
example ;
“Shares N0.'115/124(>°> 346/3858°) = 50
“ Forfeited 10/3/88 : Sold 25/3/88.
“J. B. WALKER,
“ Manager.”
The forfeited shares may be transferred direct to the
purchaser in tire same manner as ordinary transfers are


effected, except that the scrip is not handed in with the
form of transfer signed. The entry of the forfeiture and
sale in the share register shows the authority for the trans-
fer, and there is no necessity to keep a forfeited share
account in the share register.
If any forfeited shares are bought in by the company an
account should be opened in the share register in the name
of the manager or some other person as trustee for the
company, and the shares transferred and scrip issued to him
as trustee. This scrip, which of course represents part of
the property of the company, must be kept in safe custody
with the books and seal until the trust shares arc disposed
of and transferred.
If there are any fully paid up shares in the company, a
separate register must be kept for them. This is known as
the “ paid up share register,” and is kept in the same man-
ner as the ordinary share register, with the exception of the
entries as to calls.


CHAPTER IX.
TRANSFER OF SHARES.
Scrip for shares in a mining company, the form of transfer
of which is signed by the transferror, can be assigned by
mere delivery. It is not absolutely necessary that the
blanks in the form of transfer should be filled in ; it is
sufficient if it is signed by the person in whose name the
scrip is issued as the transferror of the shares represented
by it.
But in order to constitute the transferree a member of the
company it is necessary that his name should be recorded in
the share register, and that he should receive a title to his
shares in the shape of a scrip issued in his own name. For
this purpose he must produce the scrip with the form of
transfer duly signed by the transferror or original holder,
and the acceptance signed by himself as transferree, to the
manager, who will cancel and retain the scrip and issue a
fresh one in the name of the transferree, whose name will
at once be entered in the register.
It is the duty of the manager on scrip being tendered to
him for transfer to give a receipt for it to the transferree,
dated on the day on which it is given, and within seven days
afterwards to enter the name of the transferree in the share
register as the holder of the shares represented by the scrip,
and to deliver new scrip for the same shares 'to the trans-
feree.
This duty, however, is scarcely ever carried out in
practice, the usual custom being to issue new scrip and to
record the name of the transferree in the share register at
once, without giving a receipt for the scrip. The object of
the provision in the Act is to allow the manager sufficient


time to write out and issue the new scrip, and is a mere
convenience to him. Of course if the new scrip is delivered
at once, there is no necessity for a receipt being given.
If, however, a transferree does not receive his new scrip
when he delivers the old one to the manager for transfer, he
should by all means obtain a receipt. It is quite usual for
a transferree to thrust his scrip hurriedly into the manager’s
hands with a request for him to transfer them, and to leave
the time of the transfer in the discretion of the manager.
A receipt is scarcely ever asked for in these cases, yet the
transferree rarely recognises the difficulty that may arise
should the scrip be mislaid in the office, or the manager deny
the receipt of it. and his name in consequence be omitted
from the register.
The manager should be careful for his own convenience to
transfer scrip as soon as possible after it comes in for
transfer, and not to leave it lying about in his office waiting
for a more convenient time to do the work. The labor
entailed is trifling and it prevents an accumulation
of work. If scrip is sent by letter for transfer,
the transfer should be effected at once and the new scrip
forwarded by return mail. The share register should be
written up on every office day ; this work especially should
not be allowed to fall into arrear.
A share in a limited company cannot be transferred if a
call is due on it. This restriction does not apply to no-
liability companies, though it is sometimes enforced by the
rules.
A share in a limited company not fully paid up cannot be
transferred after a petition has been presented to the court
to wind up the company, until the petition is dismissed or
the proceedings stayed. This also does not apply to no-
liability companies.
No transfer is effectual until the name of the transferree


is entered in the share register as the holder of the shares
transferred. Any shareholder requiring to have his name
registered as the holder of shares, or to have his name erased
from the share register, may apply to a judge of the Court of
Mines for an order to have the share register rectified, pro-
vided he is entitled to be so registered for the shares, or to
have his name erased.
If a transferree on tendering his scrip for transfer applies
for a receipt and the manager refuses to give him one, the
transfer nevertheless is effective, and the proper course for
the transferree to take is to apply to the Court or a judge to
have his name entered in the register in respect of the shares -
Where shares are “ dummied ” of course the transfer is
quite ineffectual. Dummying shares may be described
as transferring the shares without consideration to any
person with a view to evading any liability incident to the-
shares, and upon an understanding that the dummy will, at
some future time, if required, re-transfer the shares to the
original transferror. It is parting with the ownership
of the shares to a fictitious person, reserving a right to
resume ownership at any time. It is a practice with some
shareholders, when seeking to evade liability, to transfer
shares into the name of some person who does not exist.
This is quite illegal, and a person who dummies his shares by
putting them in the name of an apocryphal Brown,
Jones, or Robinson, cannot enforce any direct or implied
trust for him in the shares, nor escape any liability with
respect to them. In a no-liability company dummying
cannot be of any use, as there is no liability to evade.
Where, however, a shareholder is sued for calls on shares
which it is alleged he has dummied, even though the trans-
fer is properly and duly registered and new scrip is issued
to the alleged dummy, it is a question of fact to be decided
by the Court whether the transfer to the alleged dummy was
bond fide and honestly made (18).


And there does not appear to be any objection to a share-
holder transferring his shares to a man of straw, even with
the obvious intent of evading payment of calls, provided
there is no intention that the transferror may at any time
reclaim his shares (19).
A relinquishment somewhat of this nature is contemplated
by the Act. Any shareholder wishing to relinquish his
shares for the purpose of evading the liability of calls or
contribution may transfer them to the company, provided
all calls due on the shares are paid at the time of transfer.
The manager must give the required receipt for the scrip, and
if he refuses or neglects to do so the shareholder requiring
the transfer is freed from all liability on the shares after the
lapse of seven days from the time of the demand for trans-
fer. Proof of the tender of scrip for transfer is sufficient
answer to a demand for future calls, or the shareholder may
apply to the Court of Mines or a judge to have his name
taken off the share register in respect of the shares relin-
quished.


CHAPTER X.
CALLS.
A call is a contribution made in advance to the antici-
pated outlay of the company, the power to make which is
established entirely by statutory enactment. In a mining
company it is made by resolution of the directors at a legally
constituted meeting, and must not exceed the limit, if any,
prescribed by the rules of the company.
The Act compels all companies to make calls due and
payable on the second Wednesday in a month, and a notice
to this effect must be printed on the face of every scrip
issued.
A call must be made at least seven clear days before the
day on which it is due ; thus, if the second Wednesday in
the month falls on the fourteenth, the day on which it is
desired to make a call due, the resolution making the call
must be passed not later than the sixth of the month (Tues-
day).
Notice of a call must be published in the Gazette and a
Melbourne daily newspaper, as well as in a newspaper cir-
culating in the locality of the registered office of the
company. A form of the required notice is given in the
Appendix. In framing the rules of a company it is usual
to provide that seven clear days’ notice must be given by
advertisement, in which case, assuming the call to be due
on the fourteenth of the month, the call must not only be
made on or before the sixth, but one publication at least of
the notice of the call must be made not later than that day.
It is scarcely necessary to say that the publication of the
notice, as well as the making of the call, must be in exact
accordance with the requirements of the Act and of the


company’s rules. The omission of any one publication, or
of the time and place for payment of the call, will be fatal,
and the making of the call will be invalid.
A subsequent call cannot be made until after the ex-
piration of fourteen days from the day when the previous
call was payable. On the previous assumption, if the first
call was made due on the fourteenth of the month no
further call can be made until the twenty-ninth.
If a call remains unpaid for fourteen days after the day
on which it is payable, any shares on which that call is
unpaid become absolutely forfeited by operation of law, and
without the necessity of a resolution of forfeiture by the
directoi’s.
The dii’ectors, however, may elect to sue for the call,
pi’ovided it is not made in respect of shares in a no-liability
company, and this may be done within the fourteen days
after the call is due, i.e. at any time between the fourteenth
and the twenty-ninth, on the previous assumption of the
call being due on the fourteenth. In that case the for-
feiture will accrue after the lapse of fourteen days from the
date of the judgment, unless the call is paid in the
meantime.
A shai’eholder was held to be liable to have payment
of calls enforced against him in the police court, so long
as his name appeared on the register for the shares in
respect of which the call was made even after forfeiture (20).
This, however, has since been overi’uled. A shareholder, so
long as he holds his shares, is liable for calls in a limited
company to the full extent of the amount unpaid on his
shares. Forfeitux-e, however, will release a shareholder from
payment of a call ixx respect of which the forfeiture accrued,
and fi’om any calls subsequently made (26).
In pre-payment companies no portion of the company’s


expenditure incurred at or previous to the time of making
a call can be paid out of the call. The working of the pre-
payment system will be explained in a subsequent chapter.
A shareholder in a no-liability company, as the name
implies, does not take upon himself any responsibility or
liability for payment of calls, and cannot be sued for them.
All calls due, except those on shares in a no-liability
company, must be paid before the holder can transfer his
shares.
In a no-liability company shares become forfeited by
operation of law, as in a limited company, if a call remains
unpaid for fourteen days after the day on which it is due.
The shares can then only be sold; the shareholder is under no
liability to be sued for the unpaid call.
A call is considered to be made at the time the resolution
making it is passed, and not at the time when it is payable.
(21).
If a company is in course of being wound up, the company
cannot sue for a call made before the winding up. This
can only be done by the liquidator (22).
Where a shareholder has paid calls to the directors he
cannot be compelled to pay them again to the liquidator in
the event of the company being wound up (23).
A call illegally made or a call made in excess of the capital
remaining un-called, is a nullity, and no forfeiture will accrue
for its nonpayment. If any part of the call has been paid
before the illegality of the making of it is discovered the
money paid should be returned to the shareholder paying it,
and a fresh call duly made.
A cheque is good payment for a call, if the shareholder
giving the cheque has funds to meet it; but payment by
promissory note is not good (24).


The first duty of a manager after a call has been made is
to check the share register, and make out an alphabetical
share list showing the names of the shareholders at the time
the call was made, and the number of shares held by each,
with their distinctive numbers as shown by the scrip issued.
An example of the share list for a call is given in the
Appendix. On each payment of the call the manager should
give a receipt for it from his call receipt book, arid erase
from the share list the distinctive numbers of the shares on
which the call has been so paid. He will find this share
list a very great convenience in enabling him to obtain the
distinctive numbers of the shares on which the call
is paid without consulting the share register, and it can
be made out in a few minutes. It also serves as a check on
the correctness of the share register.
When the day of forfeiture arrives the manager has only
to look at his share list and he will see at once what entries
in it are intact and unerased, and these will represent the
shares forfeited and their distinctive numbers.


CHAPTER XI.
FORFEITURE AND SALE OF SHARES.
As I before explained, shares upon which a call is unpaid
for fourteen days after the day on which it is made payable
become forfeited by operation of law, and without the
necessity of a resolution of the directors declaring them for-
feited. If the directors elect to sue for a call, the forfeiture
accrues at the expiration of fourteen days from the date
when judgment was recovered, unless in the meantime the
call be paid.
In all mining companies it is absolutely essential that
forfeited shares be sold by auction. In a limited company
notice of the intended sale must be published in the Gazette
and in a Melbourne daily newspaper, as well as in a news-
paper circulating in the locality of the registered office of
the company, not less than seven nor more than fourteen
days before the day appointed for the sale. Thus, if it be
desired to sell forfeited shares on the fourteenth of the
month, the notice of the sale must be published some time
between the first and the seventh.
In advertising forfeited shares for sale it is not necessary
to publish the distinctive numbers of the shares. It is
sufficient to advertise that all shares upon which the specific
call remains unpaid will be sold by auction at a stated time
and place (25). A form of the notice is given in the
Appendix.
A sale of forfeited shares improperly advertised is not a
legal sale, and the holder of the shares can redeem them at
any time before they are properly and legally sold ; but
steps must be taken by the shareholder to upset the sale
within six months after the sale takes place.


Forfeited shares may be redeemed at any time before actual
sale, on payment of the call due and all expenses incurred
in respect of the forfeiture and the contemplated sale. In
the event of shares becoming forfeited no entry of the for-
feiture should be made by the manager in the share register
until they are sold as the shares may be redeemed, and on
redemption they will remain registered in the name of the
holder as if no forfeiture had taken place. The entry to be
made after actual sale is explained in a previous chapter
dealing with the share register.
Forfeiture of shares in a limited company will relieve the
holder of them from liability for non-payment of the call
which has occasioned the forfeiture, and for any calls sub-
sequently made (26).
On the day before a contemplated sale of forfeited shares
the manager must keep his office open, to enable the share-
holders to pay the call and expenses, and thus redeem their
shares.
Shares in a no-liability company become forfeited in the
same manner as those in a limited company, viz:—by
operation of law, after the expiration of fourteen days from
the day on which the call is due, and must be sold by public
auction, though it is not absolutely required that the notice
of the intended sale be published in any paper except the
Gazette, unless any other advertisement is required by the
rules of the company. It is, however, a wise precaution
and more satisfactory to the shareholders, to advertise the
sale in the usual manner.
The proceeds of a sale of forfeited shares are applied to
the payment of the call in respect of which they were for-
feited, the expenses of the advertisement, and any other
costs incurred with regard to the forfeiture and sale. The
balance, if any, must be paid to the shareholder who owned


the shares, on his delivering up to the manager the scrip for
the shares sold.
On the sale of forfeited shares the scrip representing the
shares sold becomes dead, and is not further negotiable.
Negotiating scrip, knowing the shares it represents to have
been forfeited and sold, is penal.
When forfeited shares are sold the owner or person
claiming to be the owner of the shares loses all right and
authority to dispute the legality or regularity of the sale
unless he takes action against the company in respect of the
sale within six months after the sale has taken place.
Where a number of forfeited shares are advertised to be
sold, which belong to different shareholders, and are included
in one advertisement, any shareholder who is desirous of
redeeming his shares should be required to pay towards the
expenses incurred in respect of the forfeiture and sale a
sum pro rata according to the number of shares advertised
to be sold. Thus if five hundred shares are advertised for
sale and one hundred are redeemed the shareholder redeem-
ing his shares should only be required to pay one fifth of
the expenses in addition to the call on his shares.
Any sale of forfeited shares may be postponed, but the
date of the postponed sale must be advertised twice in a news-
paper circulating in the locality of the registered office (27).
A sale of forfeited shares cannot be postponed for more than
fourteen days from the date of the first advertised sale. If
from any reason the postponed sale is not held within the
required time the sale will lapse, and fresh notice must be
given of another sale.
The directors are not bound to any limit of time in which
to dispose of forfeited shares.
The directors, or the manager by their authority, may
purchase forfeited shares on behalf of the company, subject


to certain conditions. They must purchase at public auction
duly advertised as before mentioned, and at a price not
exceeding the amount of the call for which the shares are
sold. If more than the value of the call is bid for the
shares the directors cannot buy them ; they can only buy to
save loss to the company. Shares purchased by the directors
in trust for the company are transferred to the manager or
some other trustee, who will be entitled to have his name
entered in the share register as trustee in respect of the
shares bought.
A trustee of forfeited shares purchased for the company
is not liable for calls in respect of the trust shares, and he
cannot vote on them at any meeting of the company (28).
If any shares remain unsubscribed for when the company
is registered they are the property of the company, and
must be registered in the name of a trustee appointed by
the company, not by the directors, for the purpose. This
registration confers no privileges of voting and imposes no
liability for calls on the trustee.
Trust shares can be disposed of in the manner authorised
and directed by a special general or extraordinary meeting
of the company convened for that purpose, and in no other
way. They need not necessarily be sold. They may be
either put up for sale by auction, or sold privately through
a broker, or divided pro rata among the existing share-
holders, or otherwise disposed of as the meeting may decide.
The directors alone have no authority to sell or dispose of
shares held in trust for the company.
Where shares are held by the manager in trust for the
company he will find it greatly to his advantage to debit
these shares with all calls made in respect of them in the
share register, and to pass the amount of the call through
his cash. It may at first sight seem a rather incongruous
and unnecessary proceeding to obtain a cheque for the call


from the directors which will subsequently be paid into the
bank to the credit of the company, but this practice will be
found .a great advantage in keeping the books. The manager
will thus keep his capital account in proper order, as the
money expended in the purchase of trust shares and calls
made in respect of them cannot be regarded as lost capital.
The trust share account will show the amount made or lost
by the purchase and holding of trust shares. The purchase
money for trust shares should be passed through the cash
in a similar manner.
Perhaps no subject in connection with the management
of mining companies has been so fruitful of litigation as the
forfeiture and sale of shares. The obsolete cumbersome
practice of forfeiting shares by resolution of the directors
has been superseded by the Act, which declares all shares
on which a call is unpaid to become forfeited by mere lapse
of time; and even with this simple provision it has been
found necessary to amend the Act at various times, in order
to protect companies against persons who have allowed their
rights to lie dormant for years. Many companies have been
ruined by actions and equity suits brought by persons seek-
ing to have a forfeiture or sale declared illegal, which prob-
ably accrued years previously. If a flaw could be discovered
the litigant claimed to have his name entered in the share
register and to receive scrip for his shares ; and it not un-
frequently happened that a shareholder who had transferred
his shares to a dummy to avoid liability, and allowed them
to become forfeited when the company was in difficulties,,
discovered years afterwards, when perhaps the company was
in flourishing circumstances, that the forfeiture or sale of
his shares was illegal through some technicality, and claimed
to be received back into the fold and to receive all the
profits on his shares since the forfeiture. In these cases, if
he were successful, the company was compelled to go into
the market and buy up sufficient shares to satisfy the de


mand, very often at a ruinous cost which culminated in a
disastrous collapse. This evil has been remedied by fixing
a limitation of six months after the date of the sale of for-
feited shares, within which time the owner or person claim-
ing to be the owner of the shares must commence proceed-
ings against the company in respect of them (29.)'
In the Appendix I have inserted a pro forma share list
for a call, and I have previously explained the manner in
which the distinctive numbers of shares forfeited can be
found without difficulty, with the names of the shareholders
owning them. The manager should file these lists after he
has done with them, as he will find them useful for future
reference with regard both to calls and forfeitures; or he
can enter them in a small foolscap book which he can buy
at any stationer’s for a shilling.


CHAPTER XII.
ORDINARY AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.
Meetings of the shareholders in a company are either
general or extraordinary. General meetings are either
ordinary or special. An ordinary general meeting is one
the time for holding which is settled by the rules—usually
half-yearly, as the directors are required by the Act to
furnish half-yearly statements of the affairs and trans-
actions of the company, which are to be verified by statutory
declaration and filed in the office of the Registrar General.
These statements, comprising the directors’ and mine
manager’s reports and the half-yearly balance sheet, are pre-
sented at stated times to general meetings of the share-
holders, together with any other information that may be
desired as to the workings or financial position of the
company. This comprises a portion of the business to be
transacted at an ordinary general meeting
A special general meeting is one convened for a special
purpose, which must be stated in the notice convening the
meeting, and no other business except that stated in the
notice can be transacted at a special general meeting.
An extraordinary meeting is one convened in pursuance
of the provisions of the Act for the purpose of transacting
any business required by law to be transacted at an extra-
ordinary meeting.
A meeting can be both ordinary and extraordinary, if
properly convened; that is, an ordinary meeting for the
purpose of transacting general business, and an extraordinary
meeting to pass resolutions required to be passed at an extra-
ordinary meeting. Of course the necessary majority is
required in the latter case.


A general meeting, whether ordinary or special, can do
anything except what is required by law to be done at an
extraordinary meeting.
A general meeting has power to direct the disposal of
forfeited shares bought on behalf of the company, and the
manner in which they shall be disposed of.
The mode of convening an ordinary or special meeting is
always defined by the rules. In most companies the rules
require seven days notice to be given by advertisement, and
fix a number of shareholders and represented shares neces-
sary to form a quorum. It is also provided that if the
required quorum is not present within an hour after the
time fixed for holding the meeting, the meeting shall either
stand adjourned or lapse.
If the rules do not provide a method of convening a meet-
ing each individual shareholder must have notice of it served
on him ; an ordinary advertisement is not sufficient (30).
Previous to the time appointed for holding the meeting
the manager should prepare a share list, arranging the
names of the shareholders alphabetically for his own con-
venience, showing who are the shareholders and the number
of shares held by each. The preparation of this, as will be
seen by a glance at the Appendix, will take hut a few mi-
nutes of his time, and it not only serves to check the share
register, but saves much time in reckoning the quorum and
receiving the proxies at the meeting.
At the time stated for holding an ordinary general meet-
ing the manager must be present with the minute book,
reports and balance-sheets, and as a matter of precaution
he should have the share register with him in case of dispute
as to ownership of shares. The chairman of directors is
usually appointed by the rules chairman of all meetings of


the company; if he is not so appointed a chairman must be
appointed by the shareholders present.
The first business is to see that a quorum as required by
the rules is present. For this purpose the manager takes
down in his rough minute book the names of those share-
holders present, setting opposite each name the number of
shares for which he is registered. These are taken without
any [difficulty from the alphabetical share list. Share-
holders are then requested to hand in their proxies, which
are examined by the chairman and if correct placed before
him on the table, the manager entering each proxy in his
rough minute-book, with the number of shares (obtained
from the share list) held by the person giving the proxy.
Adding all together when the proxies have all been handed
in, he will at once see how many shareholders are present
personally, how many attend by proxy, and how many
shares are represented, distinguishing without difficulty the
shareholders present from the proxies.
The manager should in all cases keep a rough minute
book. The minutes, if taken down direct into the minute
book, are never so concise and correct as when taken in a
rough draft form first, and entered up afterwards, and the
frequent erasures necessitated by alteration of motions, &c.,
are great disfigurements in the book. Any particular
motion can be handed in to the chairman in writing, if
thought necessary.
Should a quorum be present the meeting is regularly
formed, and the Manager then reads over the minutes of
the previous general meeting, which are confirmed, if
correct, by resolution. The reports and balance-sheets are
then read and adopted or rejected, as the case may be.
Votes are mostly taken by show of hands. It is seldom a
vote by assessment of shares is called for, except cn the
election of directors.


Voting by assessment of shares is when each shareholder
present possesses and exercises one vote for each share h e
holds or represents by proxy. An election of directors by
assessment of shares, when more than the required number
of candidates are nominated, is conducted thus :—The
names of all the shareholders nominated to the office are
written on slips of paper, one slip for each shareholder
present, and as these voting slips are distributed among the
shareholders, the manager writes in the corner of the voting
paper the number of shares (including proxies) for which
the shareholder receiving the paper is entitled to vote. If
there is any error in the number written on the paper the
shareholder receiving it should have it rectified at once.
The voting papers must be carefully distributed, care being
taken that each shareholder receives the paper on which
appears the number of votes he is entitled to. The share-
holders then strike out the names of those candidates for
whom they do not intend to vote, and two scrutineers ap-
pointed by the meeting collect the papers, usually in an
available hat, and hand them to the chairman. A share-
holder need not vote for the full number of directors
required ; he may plump for one if he likes. But a voting
paper containing more than the required number of names
uncancelled is informal. The chairman then, in the presence
of the scrutineers, examines the voting papers, and the
manager takes down in his rough minutes the result of the
voting, being careful to write opposite or underneath the
name of each candidate voted for, the number of shares
appearing in the comer of the voting paper. \\ hen all
have been taken down the results are added together, and
the candidates who have received the highest number of
votes are elected, and ,the result is declared by the chair-
man.
If three directors are required to be elected and the voting
for the third and fourth is equal the chairman cannot


exercise a casting vote. The decision between the ties ”
must be arrived at by a fresh vote.
A person who holds shares in trust for a company is not
entitled to vote on them.
A rule is made in some companies that a shareholder
shall not be entitled to vote in respect of shares on which a
call is due. This is impolitic. The directors may have
made a call which becomes due on the day before the
general meeting, and probably no portion of it has been
paid, in which case the whole company would be dis-
franchised. And it is very doubtful whether such a rule,
if made, would not he ultra vires.
The chairman has no right to reject valid proxies, other-
wise the resolutions passed by the meeting may be upset
(31.)
A proxy must be in writing, signed by the shareholder
giving it, and every proxy must be given for a special pur-
pose. A form of proxy is given in the Appendix. Some
companies provide proxy forms for their shareholders, but
the forms can always be obtained from any stationer.
A special general meeting can be convened at any time,
and for any particular purpose, provided the business to be
transacted at it does not require to be transacted at an
extraordinary meeting. The business of a special meeting
must always be stated in the notice convening the meeting.
Special meetings are convened as required by the rules,
and the conduct of them is in all respects similar to that of
an ordinary general meeting. Special meetings are usually
convened for the purpose of enquiring into the working of
the mine, or into the accounts, or of disposing of trust
shares, or of instructing the directors, or of the transaction
of any business that can be transacted at an ordinary
general meeting, but which requires immediate attention.


Ordinary and special meetings may be convened by the
directors. In addition, the rules usually give power to five
or more shareholders holding a specified number of shares
to require the manager to convene such a meeting, and
should lie neglect or refuse to do so, they are empowered to
convene the meeting themselves. The proper forms are
given in the Appendix.
The conduct of all meetings is in the hands of the chair-
man, whose ruling is final.
As soon as possible %fter the meeting is closed the minutes
of it should be entered by the manager in the minute-book
from his rough minutes, ready for confirmation at the next
ordinary meeting of the company. The names of all share-
holders present and of all shareholders represented by proxy
should be entered in the minutes, together with the number
of shares represented by each. This will show a quorum on
the face of the minutes, and may be found of great use
afterwards.
Minutes of a special meeting are sometimes confirmed at
the next subsequent ordinary meeting. They may be con-
firmed, however, at the meeting of which they are the
minutes, if their confirmation is made part of the business
of the meeting.
Minutes of an ordinary meeting are confirmed at the
next subsequent ordinary meeting of the company. On
confirmation they must be signed by the chairman of the
meeting at which they are confirmed.


CHAPTER XIII.
EXTRAORDINARY MEETINGS.
The meetings of the company which are invested with
the largest and fullest powers are what the .Vet calls extra-
ordinary meetings. Special notices of an extraordinary
meeting are required to be given in order that all the share-
holders may have an opportunity of knowing that such a
meeting has been convened, and though a quorum neces-
sary to form an extraordinary meeting is fixed by the rules*
yet for the various purposes for which such a meeting is
required by the Act, certain majorities are also required by
the Act to pass the necessary resolutions. In no case can
a resolution be carried at an extraordinary meeting except
upon the vote of a clear majority at least in number and
value of the shareholders of the company.
An extraordinary meeting can be convened by the
directors. This is always provided by the rules, which
frequently give power to a certain number of shareholders
holding a specified number of shares to require the directors
or the manager to convene such a meeting. The requisition
must be in writing and signed by the shareholders requiring
the meeting, and must be served on the manager or at the
registered office of the company. A form of the requisition
is given in the Appendix. Should the directors or the
manager refuse or neglect for five days after service of the
requisition to convene the meeting, the shareholders sign-
ing the requisition may convene the meeting themselves.
An extraordinary meeting is convened by a notice signed
by the manager or the requisitioning shareholders stating
that on some day not earlier than fourteen days from the
first insertion of the notice and at the time and place men-
tioned in the notice an extraordinary meeting of the com


pany will be held. In the Appendix I have given a
number of forms suitable to different cases. This notice
must be published in the Gazette and in two numbers of a
Melbourne newspaper, in each of two consecutive weeks,
and in a newspaper circulating in the locality of the
registered office once in each of the same weeks, and the
manager must post a written copy of the notice outside the
door of the company’s office.
If the meeting is called by requisitioning shareholders on
refusal or neglect of the directors or the manager, the same
notices must be given, but they will in this case be signed
by the requisitioning shareholders instead of by the manager.
The business to be transacted at an extraordinary
meeting must be clearly and concisely stated in the
notice, as no other business except that set out in the notice
can be entertained by the meeting. In fact, the resolutions
of the meeting, if passed, are merely an echo of the business
stated in the notice.
The conduct of an extraordinary meeting, and the man-
ager’s duties at the meeting, are similar in all respects to
those before explained with regard to general meetings.
Where there is no rule to the contrary shareholders may
vote by proxy at an extraordinary meeting ; the proxy
must be in writing, signed by the person giving it, and
must state the special purpose for which it is given. A
general proxy is not valid.
It should always be borne in mind that though a quorum
may be present to constitute an extraordinary meeting the
resolutions must be passed by the statutory majority. If a
bare statutory majority be present a resolution passed by a
majority merely of those present will not meet the require-
ments of the Act. For instance, a resolution for increase
of capital requires to be passed by a majority of two-thirds


in number and value of the shareholders of the company.
If the meeting is composed of just sufficient shareholders to
pass the resolution, they must be unanimous ; a divided
vote will not satisfy the provisions of the Act, for it would
not be a statutory majority, but merely a resolution passed
by a meeting at which a statutory majority was present.
A proxy can be admitted in order to constitute a majority
necessary to make or alter rules (32).
Power to adjourn is given to all meetings by the rules.
In the case of a duly constituted extraordinary meeting at
which a quorum as required by the rules is present, but at
which there is not the statutory majority to pass the re-
quired resolution, the meeting may adjourn to a future date,
and if a statutory majority is present at the adjourned
meeting, the resolutions passed by such majority will be
valid. The Act requires the majority only to pass the
necessary resolutions, not to control the conduct of the
meeting.
An extraordinary meeting, as well as a general meeting,
may authorize the disposal of trust shares. A clear major-
ity of a meeting at which a quorum is present is sufficient
for this purpose (28).
The further powers of an extraordinary meeting are to
make and alter rules, to elect directors or appoint a manager
should there be none legally elected or appointed, to increase
the capital of the company, to authorize the borrowing of
money on mortgage of the company’s property, and to
voluntarily wind up the company. The particulars of these
powers will be found under the different heads.
The rules should give power to an extraordinary meeting
to rescind any resolution passed at any previous n ei ting of
the company.


An extraordinary meeting is a general meeting, as the
greater includes the less, aud can transact any business
which can be transacted at an ordinary general meeting,
though the latter will have no power to interfere with the
prerogative of the former. The Act requires certain speci-
fied business to be transacted at an extraordinary meeting,
but there is nothing to prevent an extraordinary meeting
doing the work of a general meeting.
Confirmation of the minutes must be made part of the
business of an extraordinary meeting, otherwise a further
extraordinary or special meeting will have to be convened
to confirm them. The manager should write them out in the
minute-book before the meeting is closed, and after having
read them to the meeting, a resolution should be passed and
recorded for their confirmation, and the minute-book signed
by the chairman.


CHAPTER XIV.
THE ACCOUNTS.
No portion of the management of a mining company is
so simple, and yet no part is so important, as the correct
keeping of the books and accounts of the company. It is
notorious that many managers take office without any pre-
vious knowledge whatever of systematic book-keeping, and
either keep their accounts according to a method of their
own, which they and they only can understand, or are
compelled to seek instruction from another manager who is
better qualified. A company’s accounts are so simple, and
the system of keeping them is so easily mastered, that there
is no excuse for this defect; and many a budding manager
would save himself nights of fogging over complicated
figures if he could only make a proper start with his books.
The Act itself leaves everything to the discretion of the
manager. It simply requires that he shall keep true
accounts of the affairs and transactions of the company,
and leaves the method of doing it to himself. True, the
Registrar-General is empowered to prescribe the form in
which the books of account are to be kept, but he has not
done this, and it is scarcely probable that any special form
of books will be prescribed, as such a proceeding might
result in plunging half the managers in the colony into a
vortex of complication from which they could never extricate
themselves.
The simplest and safest system of book-keeping—indeed
the only correct one in dealing with the accounts of a min-
ing company—is the old-fashioned system of double entry
which is taught in schools, viz., by means of a cash book, a
journal, and a ledger. No other books are required.


Only the experienced managers who know the value of it
keep a journal, which, in reducing the system to its simplest
form, is the most useful book of all. Indeed, the keeping
of a company’s accounts without the aid of a journal is quite
impracticable, as without it no check' can possibly be kept
on the capital of the company ; capital lost by forfeiture of
shares can only be arrived at by wading through pages of
books and numbers of papers ; and no complete and perfect
account can be kept of transactions in trust shares bought
or held by the company.
The cash book represents all cash actually received and
paid, and nothing more; and as all moneys should be paid
out by cheque, the cash book balance at the end of the half-
year should tally with the balance at the bank. The
manager should never have cash in hand at a balance ; it
shows looseness and error somewhere. In a call paying
company it is a convenient practice to keep a separate
column in the cash book for money received for calls, which
is added up at the end of the half-year and the amount
carried into the journal as calls received during the half-
year, and credited to the capital account. Opposite each
item in the cash book should be entered the account to
which the item is to be debited or credited, as a convenience
in writing up the journal.
In making up the half-yearly balance the first duty of the
manager is to balance his cash book. This done, he next
proceeds to write up his journal, thus collecting the various
items under certain specific heads, so that they can be
posted in short form from the journal into the ledger. The
journal shows the actual receipt and expenditure for the
half year, and the difference between these should tally with
the cash balance.
The forfeited shares are dealt with, as regards the capital,
by what are called “journal entries.” They do not repre


sent actual cash, and consequently no entry of them appears
in the cash-book, unless the shares are sold and the money
received. The cash-book cannot possibly be made to show
the actual loss of capital by forfeiture of shares. The
journal entry of the forfeited shares is the only record pos-
sible of money lost by forfeiture out of the capital, and thus
affords the only practicable check on the capital account.
Money received by the company as the proceeds of a sale of
forfeited shares is a cash receipt, and of course appears in
the cash book as such.
The ledger is very simple, and twenty or thirty pages
will be sufficient to keep the company’s accounts for years.
It comprises the accounts under their various headings of
gold account, wages account, stores account, »fec., and can
be balanced at any time and at any stage of the company’s
existence in five minutes.
What is usually called the balance-sheet as submitted to
the half-yearly meetings of most mining companies is merely
a statement of the receipts and expenditure for the previous
half-year, written up from the cash book ; in effect, it is a
collection of the various items received and paid arranged
under their proper headings, such as would be represented
by the journalized accounts for the half-year. A balance
sheet is a very different matter. It should show in plain
figures the amount of capital called up, the loss of capital
by forfeiture of shares, the transactions in trust shares, as
well as all the receipts and expenditure of the company
from its inception. This can be made out in five or ten
minutes from the total balances to the various accounts in
the ledger. A statement of receipts and expenditure should
be submitted to every half-yearly meeting as well as a
general balance-sheet.
In the Appendix I have set out an example of this system
of book-keeping, from which any beginner should be able to


make a fair start with his books. But I should mention
that a manager who has kept his books by single enti’y (i.e.
by means of cash book and ledger only) cannot transfer the
accounts to the double entry system without a complicated
series of journal entries ; it is easier to write up the books
on the correct system from the beginning. Everything
depends on making a correct start.
As I have said, no entry of any payments by the com-
pany should be made in the cash book unless the payments
are made by the company’s cheque. If any small accounts
are outstanding for which the manager does not wish to
draw a cheque, he can disburse them out of his own pocket
and enter them in his petty cash book, and from time to
time get his petty cash passed by the directors and paid by
the company’s cheque ; or he may obtain a cheque of five
pounds or so from the directors in advance for petty cash,
if he does not care to disburse his own money.
The manager must allow shareholders and creditors of
the company to inspect his books of account at any time,
for which inspection he is entitled to charge a fee of one
shilling for the benefit of the company.
Any shareholder or creditor of the company may also on
giving two days’ notice require from the manager a certified
copy of the accounts, for which he must pay the manager a
fee of ten shillings for his own use. In making these copies
the manager need not go further back in the accounts than
three months from the date when the notice requiring the
copies was served.
When an order is made to wind up a company and served
on the manager, he must deliver up all his books and papers
to the liquidator.
At the expiration of six months from the time at which
the company has ceased to carry on business without being


wound up, all the books, papers, and documents belonging
to the company in the possession of the manager must be
deposited by him with the clerk of the Court of Mines.
In preparing for an audit, which should be half-yearly
and just before the ordinary general meeting, the manager
must have his books balanced, and his statement of receipts
and expenditure and balance sheet made out, as well as all his
vouchers ready for examination and in order, so as to corres-
pond with the entries in the cash book. The block receipts
for calls must also be put in order, and if a receipt for a call
happens to be defaced to such an extent that it has not
been issued, it should be folded in and pinned to the block,
so as to convince the auditors that no receipt has been issued
of which the manager has not the block. The same remarks
apply to cheques and to scrip. There should be no blanks
left requiring explanation ; the books and accounts should
speak for themselves.
It is scarcely necessary to mention that accuracy and
neatness are a virtue in keeping books. The auditors
should not have to complain of blots, smudges, erasures, or
altered figures.


CHAPTER XV.
CONTRACTS.
As the management and conduct of a company is left in
the hands of the directors and the manager, it may perhaps
be assumed that they or he possess unlimited power to
pledge the credit of the company. But this is not so. A
contract made by the manager for the purchase of goods or
for the pei’formance of work and the supply of material on
behalf of the company is binding on the company, provided
that the amount does not in the aggregate exceed fifty
pounds. This of course does not limit the power of the
manager or the directors-to incur debts to different creditors
to an extent not exceeding fifty pounds in the whole, or
that they are not allowed to contract for more work or
material than will altogether amount to more than fifty
pounds. If the hands of the manager were thus tied, no
company could carry on work, and the directors may be
considered in this respect as acting under the implied
authority of the company. The meaning is that no single
contract, such as the purchase of a plant, can be made by
the manager above the amount of fifty pounds, which will
be binding on the company, without the authority of the
company.
The fortnightly payments of most companies in full work
far exceed fifty pounds when the individual amounts are
added together, and it is not intended to circumscribe
the powers of the manager by prohibiting him from enter-
ing into a number of small .contracts. But a contract for
the sale or purchase of a plant, or the purchase of an adjoin-
ing claim, for an amount above fifty pounds would be clearly
beyond his power as binding on the company.


Certain contracts between private persons are by law
required to be in writing and under seal. In the event of
a company entering into a contract of this nature, it must
be made on behalf of the company in writing and under
the common corporate seal of the company. The affixing
of the seal should be, though not necessarily, attested by
two directors.
Other contracts, again, between private persons are valid
and binding if in writing only, and signed by the person to
be charged with the performance of them. Such a contract
by a company may be made in the name of the company by
any person acting under the express or implied authority of
the company, and his signature is sufficient to bind the
company.
A third class of contracts between private persons are
those known as parol contracts, i.e., contracts which are
good in law if made by word of mouth and not reduced to
writing. This class of contract may be made by parol or
word of mouth in the name and on behalf of the company
by any person acting under the express or implied authoi-ity
of the company.
The manager may be regarded as acting under the implied
authority of the company in making contracts in the usual
course of business of the company. But he must not exceed
his limit of fifty pounds. He is simply empowered to pur-
chase necessaries required in the conduct of the business for
which the company was incorporated, but the amount fixed
is not to be exceeded; an express authority is essential for
purchasers above that amount (33).
All the above classes of contracts can only be varied or
dischai-ged in the same manner as they are made.
In prepayment companies it is provided that no part of
the expense incurred at or previous to the time of making a


call shall be paid out of the call. This is more fully ex-
plained under the head of pre-payment companies. In these
companies the manager may make contracts on behalf of
the company for necessaries to an amount in the aggregate
not exceeding the sum which at the time of making the
contract shall be standing to the credit of the company in
respect of calls paid in. Within these limits he is not per-
sonally liable.
In the case of unincorporated or co-operative companies
a member of the company who did not assent to the appoint-
ment of a manager or secretary is not bound by a contract
made by the manager on behalf of the partnership. Though
he may be the agent of those who appointed him, he is not
the agent of a dissenting partner for the purpose of binding
him. He must give an authority to the manager in writ-
ing before he is bound. It is expressly provided that no
member or partner of a co-operative company is liable on a
contract made by another member or partner, except upon
a memorandum in writing signed by the person to be
charged.
A promissory note given by a company should be sealed
with the seal of the company, and it is advisable that the
sealing should be attested by tw o directors and the man-
ager.
In speaking of contracts in this chapter I use the term
in its legal sense as an agreement or obligation by which
the company binds itself or becomes bound to any person
to pay a sum of money, or to do or omit to do any particular
act. The term “ contract ” is usually applied by mining
people only to agreements made between the company and
a body of miners or others to do a certain quantity of sink-
ing or driving or other labor in connection with the work-
ings of the mine, or for the erection of machinery. In the
former cases, specifications of the intended work are pre


pared by the mine manager, and tenders are called and
accepted by the directors. In most cases the written con-
tract is comprised in the tender and its acceptance, two
letters which together with the specifications form the
contract. But it is always advisable to have a regularly
written agreement drawn up at the foot of the specifications,
or annexed to them, signed by the successful tenderer and
sealed with the seal of the company.
For the erection of machinery the specifications are
always drawn and the plans prepared by the company’s
engineer, and the contract executed as before mentioned at
the foot of or annexed to the specifications.


CHAPTER XVI.
INCREASE OF CAPITAL.
As soon as the whole of the capital of a company has
been called up, i.e., when the final call has been made, or if
the company is desirous of amalgamating with or purchas-
ing any adjoining claim at any time before the making of
the final call (34), the company may proceed at once to increase
its capital. It is not necessary to wait until the final call
has been paid or the shares forfeited, the proceedings for
increase of capital may be commenced as soon as advisable
after the call has been made.
The sanction for increase of capital must be given by a
majority of not less than two-thirds in number and value of
the shareholders present personally or by proxy at a legally
held extraordinary meeting of the company duly convened
in the manner already explained. It must be borne in
mind that not only must the statutory majority of two-
thirds in number and value of the shareholders be present
at the meeting personally or by proxy, but the resolution
authorising the increase of capital must be absolutely passed
by this majority. A divided vote carried by less than the
statutory majority will not be valid, even if more than the
statutory majority comprise the meeting.
The mode by which the capital can be increased is (a) by
increasing the amount payable in respect of each share, or
{b) by the issue of new shares in addition to those already
held, or (c) by both of these means. If the meeting decides
that new shares shall be issued, the same two-thirds majority
must direct the number of shares to be issued, and the
amount for which each new share is liable.


Great care must be taken in drawing up the advertise-
ment convening the extraordinary meeting, as the meeting
■will he bound by the exact words of the notice convening it.
Tlie resolutions as passed and entered in the minute book
should l)e an exact transcript of the business as described
in the notice. Forms of this notice will be found in the
Appendix.
,Vs soon as the resolution is passed authorising the in-
crease of the capital, and the minutes of the meeting are
confirmed, notice of the resolution is required by the Act to
be published, showing the method and particulars of the
increase, a form of which is given in the Act. This notice
must be published immediately after the meeting in the
Uiazette and in at least one Melbourne newspaper, as well as
in one newspaper circulating in the locality of
the registered office; and a copy of the same notice, which
must he signed by two directors and the manager, and
verified by the statutory declaration of the latter, must be
lodged with the Registrar-General within fourteen days
from the time when the resolution was passed.
If the increase is hv issue of new shares, the new shares
are open to the shareholders only, for fourteen days after
the date of the last publication of the notice of increase ;
after that time the new shares, or what are left of them,
are open to the public. If any of the new shares are made
preference shares at the extraordinary meeting, they can
only be issued on such terms as the before mentioned statu-
tory majority may direct.
A copy of the notice filed with the Registrar-General,
and certified by him to be a true copy, is conclusive evidence
that the increase of capital was properly resolved on, and
of the particulars and method of the increase.
Any capital raised by increase of capital is considered
part of the original capital of the company, in the same


manner as if it hud been included in the capital or the
incorporation of the company.
The capital of pre-payment and no-liability companies
can be increased in the same manner as that of limited
companies.
On issue of new shares, if that is the method of increase
decided on, notice should be given by the manager in the
newspapers, apart from the statutory notice, that the shares
are open to the shareholders for fourteen days ; and if they
are not all then taken up, he should advertise them after
that time as open to the public.
It is not necessary for the manager to open a new share
register, either for new shares or new capital. Hie new
shares are only added shares, and any new shareholders will
be entered in the register in the same manner as the
original shareholders were.
On completion of proceedings for the increase of capital
the manager should have new scrip printed, showing the
increase. It is not altogether necessary to call in the old
scrip and effect an exchange ; it will answer all purposes if
the manager issues the new form of scrip from time to time
as shares are transferred. The old scrip are not by any
means invalidated by the increase of capital, and are a
sufficient title to the shares they represent, but it is advis-
able that the amount of capital liable to be called up should
appear on the face of the scrip.


CHAPTER XVII.
MORTGAGES.
A mining company has full power to borrow money and
to secure the repayment of a loan with interest by mortgage
of its property, provided the sanction of the company be
given for the purpose at an extraordinary meeting by reso-
lution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds in
number and value of the shareholders present personally and
by proxy at the meeting. But a company under the
old Act had no power to pledge its property for
the payment of an antecedent debt, i.e., a debt
incurred previous to the time at which the security was
given. However, a company could give a valid mortgage to
a bank to secure a past overdraft and future advances, and
the bank might apply the receipts of the company towards
the repayment of the past debt (35).
As very few mining companies own land in fee the secur-
ity most usually given is a bill of sale by way of mortgage
over its machinery, plant, and effects. To enable the
company to effect this the manager is required by the
directors—or by the shareholders, if they think fit to serve a
requisition on the manager—to convene an extraordinary
meeting of the company for the purpose of authorizing the
negotiation of a loan and the execution of the necesssary
securities. The form of the notice convening the extra-
ordinary meeting is given in the Appendix.
As before stated a majority is required of not less than
two-thirds in number and value of the shareholders present
personally or by proxy, and resolutions are passed by the
statutory majority authorising the borrowing of a certain
sum, and further authorising the directors to sign and affix


the company’s seal to the necessary documents for securing
the repayment of the sum borrowed, and interest.
These resolutions having been passed and the minutes
confirmed, the directors undertake and complete the nego-
tiation, and the seal of the company is affixed to the mort-
gage or bill of sale. As soon as the security is sealed with
the company’s seal and duly registered as required by law,
it binds the company, whether the necessary preliminaries
have been exactly observed or not.
It has been decided that a bill of sale given by a
mining company over its property is binding against the
company, although no extraordinary meeting was convened
to authorise it, the mortgagee acting in good faith and hav-
ing no knowledge of the irregularity (36).
And a bill of sale is also good against the company if sealed
with the company’s seal, although the seal was not attested
by two du-ectors as required by the rules, but was affixed
to the deed in their presence (37).
A bill of sale given by a company is subject to all the
liabilities of an ordinary bill of sale.
As the Act requires, however, that the execution of a
mortgage or bill of sale shall be authorised by an extra-
ordinary meeting, it is never advisable for the directors to
take into their own hands the disposal of the property of
the company. Such a proceeding may raise the question of
bonajides on their part; and the solicitor acting for a mort-
gagee will scarcely allow his client to advance money on the
security of a mining company’s plant without first having
assured himself that the preliminaries required by the Act
have been complied with. The negotiations may thus be
delayed pending the convening of an extraordinary meeting,
and any such delay may be a serious inconvenience to the
company.


CHAPTER XVIII.
PRE-PAYMENT COMPANIES.
The formation of mining companies under the pre-payment
system has never found fa vor with the mining public, owing
probably to the stringency of its clauses, and the liabilities
incurred or likely to be incurred by a director in such a
company.
In a pre-payment company it is required that no part of
the expenditure of the company incurred at or previous to
the time of making a call shall be paid out of the call. The
principle is that no expenditure shall be incurred unless
there is capital in hand or called up to meet it. If it is a
call-paying company the manager must at the beginning of
each month make an estimate of the amount which will
probably be required for working expenses during the
month, and if these expenses cannot he met otherwise than
by a call, the company may make a call on its capital of so
much as shall be necessary for payment of the estimated
amount. The call must not, of course, exceed the amount
unpaid on each share, and must not exceed the limit, if
any, fixed by the rules.
In other words, the company can only call up capital
sufficient to meet the actual estimated expenses of each
month ; it has no right to contract for necessaries or labor
unless the money is actually in hand or has been called up
to meet the expenditure.
Notice of a call must be published in the Gazette, in a
Melbourne daily newspaper, and in a newspaper circulating
in the locality of the registered office. It must be payable
at the office of the company on the second Wednesday in a
month which shall occur next before the commencement of
the month for which the estimate is made out. Thus a call


must be made in June to defray the estimated expenditure
of the month of July.
The cumbrousness of this system is apparent on the face
of it, in addition to the inconvenience it must cause in
properly managing and working a mining company. It may
be noticed that the Act requires calls to be made by the
company, and it may be questioned whether under the Act
the company could by its rules delegate the making of calls
to the directors.
If such were the case, a special meeting of the company
would have to be convened for the purpose of making each
call.
The liabilities of a director in a pre-payment company
are such as would deter most men from accepting the posi-
tion. If a director incurs or authorises any expenditure on
behalf of the company beyond the amount realized by means
of the call he becomes personally liable for the expenditure,
and the company and its property are not responsible for
it, unless the expenditure be made out of the profits of the
company, or with the sanction of an extraordinary meet-
ing.
Pre-payment companies are registered and managed
under the same law as controls limited companies, with few
exceptions. The manager has power to make contracts on
behalf of the company for necessaries required in carrying
on the business of the company to an amount altogether
not exceeding the sum at the time standing to the credit of
the company in respect of calls paid in; any contract so
made is binding on the company, and not on the manager
personally. If he exceeds the limit he will be personally
liable. In other words, the manager may order necessaries
to the extent of the money the company has in hand, but he
may not pledge the credit of the company.


This system is an attempt to graft the co-operative system
on to the Act, but it is altogether unworkable in the ordin-
ary course of business, and is scarcely ever used. It strives to
reduce the working of a company to a ready cash business,
and like any other business of the same kind it must speedily
collapse.
A pre-payment company may be wound up, but as its
liabilities are necessarily nil, the expediency of such a pro-
ceeding is questionable.


CHAPTER XIX.
THE NO-LIABILITY SYSTEM.
The great and obvious advantages of this system have
rendered it by far the most popular form of incorporating
mining companies, as it affords protection to the share-
holders, and, to a great extent, does away with the
terrible bugbear of the winding-up order, and the impend-
ing sword held over the heads of the shareholders of their
liability to be called on to pay up the whole of the amount
remaining unpaid on their shares by way of contribution to
the debts of the company. It may not be so satisfactory to
a creditor, but he must take the necessary precautions ; and
if he willingly gives credit to a large extent to a no-liability
company, he is aware of the risk he incurs, and knows that
he cannot expect to enforce payment of his debt out of the
capital.
The principle of the no-liability system, as the phrase
implies, is that there is no implied contract by a shareholder
when he takes shares in the company to pay any calls in
respect of his shares, or any contribution to its debts or
liabilities, should the company be wound up.
He can receive his dividends, so long as there is no call
unpaid by him on his shares, but he cannot be sued for calls
or contribution. In a limited company a shareholder hold-
ing 2000 shares, on which 10s. per share remains unpaid
when the company is wound up, may possibly be called
upon to pay £lOOO, or the full amount of his liability on
the shares, towards the payment of the debts of the com-
pany ; and such a payment must necessarily be inconven-
ient, and may be ruinous. In a no-liability company a
shareholder escapes this possible risk.


To enable a company, however, to take advantage of this
system, and to become registered under what are commonly
known as “ the no-liability clauses ” of the Act, it is im-
perative that at least 5 per cent, of the subscribed capital
shall be paid up before the company can be incorporated,
and the fact of this payment must be evidenced by the
statutory declaration of the manager. A nominal pay-
ment of capital is not sufficient. The 5 per cent, must be
paid in cash, and the manager should see that it is in his
hands or in the bank before he makes the required declara-
tion. A practice arose in the early days of the Act to
issue the shares nominally paid up to a sufficient sum to
meet the required payment of 5 per cent., but no money
was actually paid. This is an evasion of the Act, and is
quite illegal, besides having the possible effect of bringing
trouble on the manager, t, ho makes a statutory declaration
that the money has been actually paid (38).
The liability of shareholders in a limited company to con-
tribute to the assets of the company does not apply to no-
liability companies, and shares in the latter companies can
be transferred, although a call be due on them.
• Shares in a no-liability company become forfeited by
operation of law when a call remains unpaid for fourteen
days after the due date of payment, as in a limited com-
pany ; and, when forfeited, the shares must be sold by
auction, advertised in the Gazette not less than seven days,
nor more than fourteen days before the day appointed for
the sale. The proceeds of the sale are applied as in limited
companies.
A no-liability company can be wound up in the same
manner as a limited company, but the shareholders are not
liable for calls or contribution. It is useless therefore to
wind up a no-liability company by petition to the Court,
with a view to getting at the uncalled capital. If, how


•ever, a no-liability company has property which can be
realised, a winding-up order may be effective, but this state
of things is scarcely likely to occur.
On winding up, if there is any surplus of the company’s
property remaining after payment of all its debts and
liabilities, the surplus is distributed among the shareholders
according to their interest in the company, and after the
distribution is complete the Court will, if necessary, make
an order for the dissolution of the company, and direct in
what manner the books and documents of the company are
to be disposed of.
Except as before mentioned, all the provisions of the
Act relating to limited companies apply to no-liability com-
panies. The share register and books of account are kept
in exactly the same manner as in a limited company, and
the duties of the manager and directors are in all respects
the same.
Any company registered under the old Mining Companies’
Act, known as number 228, may apply to be registered as a
no-liability company, and on the registration all liability
of the shareholders for calls and contribution ceases. But
there are very few companies, if any, in the colony at
present registered under the old Act, which have not taken
advantage of the no-liability system.


CHAPTER XX.
WINDING UP, &c.
Immediately a mining company is ordered to be wound’
up the management of it passes from the hands of the com-
pany and vests in the liquidator.
Very little, therefore, need be sail with regard to this,
subject. In a limited company which has been ordered to
be wound up, the contributories are those shareholders who .
at the time of the presentation cf the petition for winding
up are registered as shareholders, and a shareholder cannot,,
when the company is unable to pay dividends and when
calls are due, escape his liability by surrendering his shares-
to the company, even though the transfer be bond fide and
recognised by the company.
A company may be wound up by the Court—
(l.j When at an extraordinary meeting of the company
a majority in number and value of the shareholders
have passed a resolution requiring the company to be
wound up; or
(2.) When the company shall not have taken bond fide
steps towards the commencement of its business within
six months from the date of its incorporation; or
(3.) When the company shall suspend its business for the-
space of a whole year ; or
(4.) When the company is unable to pay its debts ; or
(5.) When the company has assigned its property to
trustees for the benefit of its creditors; or
(6.) When the company has made a fraudulent gift or
transfer of its property, or a,ny part of it; or


(7.) When the Court shall be of opinion that it is just
and equitable that the company should be wound up.
The commencement of the winding up proceedings dates
.from the time of the presentation of the petition to the
Court; not from the time when the winding up order is
made.
The liquidator is appointed at a meeting of the creditors
of the company, and the appointment must be confirmed by
the Court. As soon as an order is made confirming the
appointment of the liquidator, all the books, documents, and
property of the company must be handed over to him, and
the management of the company by the directors and man-
ager is determined. It is a very usual proceeding for the
creditors to appoint the manager as the liquidator, he know-
ing better than a stranger the details and particulars of the
books and accounts of the company. In this case the man-
ager should remember that he is no longer amenable to the
directors or the company, but is an officer of the Court of
Mines, with all the duties and penalties attached to his
office.
Any company may be wound up voluntarily, provided it
is not in debt. An unpaid dividend due by the company to
any one shareholder is a debt for which the shareholder can
sue, and which will prevent the company being wound up
voluntarily (39). A resolution to wind up voluntarily must be
jpassed at an extraordinary meeting, properly convened, by a
majority of two-thirds in number and value of the share-
holders, requiring the company to be wound up without
resort to the Court. It will be noticed that the Act requires
this resolution to be passed by a two-thirds majority of the
shareholders in the company, and makes no mention of
proxies; consequently a doubt may arise whether proxies
can be admitted either to make a quorum at the meeting or
to pass the resolutions. However, as the Act allows the


admission of proxies generally at all extraordinary meetings,
this doubt may reasonably bo set aside, and proxies ad-
mitted.
The voluntary winding up of a company is left in the
hands of the directors. The course to be pursued by them
for the purpose and the mode of disposal of any surplus of
the company’s property which may remain after completion
of the winding up are determined by a similar majority at
the extraordinary meeting, which majority will also direct
how the books and documents of the company are to be dis-
posed of. All these matters may be included in one resolu-
tion, or if preferred a separate resolution may be passed for
each. A form of the notice convening an extraordinary
meeting to wind up the company voluntarily will be found
in the Appendix.
A few words about dividends. Dividends are declared
by ordinary resolution of the directors, when in their opinion
the funds of the company accrued from profits will admit of
a dividend being paid. No dividend can be paid out of the
capital of the company, or otherwise than out of the profits.
Notice by the manager should be given by advertisement
of a dividend having been declared, stating where and when
it is payable. A form is given in the Appendix. The date
of payment is in the discretion of the directors. On the day
on which a dividend is payable the manager should have a
share list made up to date, as the shareholders then regis-
tered in the share register are entitled to the dividend,
irrespective of subsequent transfers. The manager has
nothing to do with subsequent sales or transfers of shares
ex div. or cum div.; his duty is simply to pay the
dividend to the shareholder in whose name the shares in
respect of which the dividend is payable are registered at
the time the dividend is due or to his order. It is quite a


usual practice for the manager to close the register of trans-
fers between the dates of declaration and of payment of a
dividend, but it is not absolutely necessary to do so, as the
manager can on the night before the dividend is payable
make up his dividend list ready for the following day.
However, in a company having a large number of share-
holders for each of whom a cheque has to be drawn and
signed, the manager will find it convenient to close the
transfer register for a day or two before the dividend is
payable.
Occasionally the directors consider it advisable to set
aside portion of the profits from time to time as a reserve
fund. This is usually done with a view to equalizing divi-
dends, so that, though the yields may be uncertain, the
directors may be in a position to declare a dividend of
equal value each month, or as the case may be. A large
reserve fund for contingencies or repairs is often objected
to by the immediate shareholders, who naturally prefer a
division of profits as they accrue, to the allocation of a
large sum of money for the benefit of future shareholders.
In a dividend paying company the manager must keep a
dividend book, a form of which is given in the Appendix.
In this are entered the names of the shareholders, arranged
alphabetically, the number of shares held by each, and the
amount of the dividend payable in respect of the shares,
together with the date of its payment. This is, in fact, a
copy of the share list. Each shareholder on receiving his
dividend must sign a receipt for it in this book, which can
be produced as a voucher. Any shareholder not being able
conveniently to call for his dividend may give an order duly
stamped for its payment to any other person, and payment to
the agent will be sufficient. If a shareholder wishes to have
his dividend cheque sent to him by post, and writes to the
manager to that effect, it can be forwarded to him by letter,


the manager making a memorandum of the mode of payment
in the dividend book. All orders for payment of dividends
should be pinned into the dividend book, as showing the
authority to pay otherwise than to the shareholder entitled
to receive the dividend.
If a shareholder neglects to call or send for his dividend
he cannot claim interest on the amount as against the com
pany.
A shareholder purchasing shares, on which a dividend is
payable, should at the time of purchase, provided he buys
cum div., obtain from his vendor a stamped order on the man-
ager to receive his dividend; otherwise the vendor will haveto
call at the office and sign a receipt for it in the dividend
book. If shares are purchased ex div. there is no need for
this, as the vendor remains entitled to receive the dividend.


TABLE OF REFERENCES.
The numbers of the References refer to the numbers
throughout the text.
1. 50 Vic. No. 881 sec. 3.
2. Critchley v. Graham, 2 W. & W. (L) 211; Barlow v.
Hayes, 4 W. W. & a’B. (M) 67.
3. Regulations relating to Gold Mining Leases, 23rd
January 1871 to 20th August 1883.
4. House v. Ah Sue, 2 W. & W. (L) 41 ; Schonfeldt v.
Beel, 1 V.L.R. (M) 1.
5. Regulations relating to Gold Mining Leases on Reserved
Lands, 26th May 1885.
6. Regulations relating to Mineral Leases, 4th February
1870.
7. Royal Standard G. M. Co. v. Wood, 3 W.W. ife a’B
(L) 85.
8. James v. Thomson, 10 V.L.R. (L) 125 ; 6 A.L.T. 12.
9. McLister v. Garden Gully Co., 5 A.J.R. 152.
10. Reeves v. Croyle, 2 V.R. (E) 42; 2 A.J.R. 13.
11. Creswick Grand Trunk Go. v. Hassall, 5 W. W. & a’B.
(E) 49 ; see Baw Baw Sluicing Go. v. Nicholls, 9
V.L.R. (L) 208; 5 A.L.T. 73.
12. McMullen v. O’Connor, 5 W.W. & a’B. (L) 200.
13. White v. Bank of Victoria, 8 V.L.R. (M) 8 ; 3 A.L.T.
90.


14. In re Tyson’s Beef Co., 3 W.W. & a'B. (L) 162.
15. Tilley v. Hart, Argus 28th Nov. 1867.
16. 37 Vic. No. 446, sec. 7.
17. Atkinson v. Lansell, 4 V.L. U. (E) 236.
18. Beeves v. Bonneau, 1 V.R. (L) 110; 1 A.J.R. 116.
19. Sleep v. Virtue, 2 A.J.R. 20 ; 2 V.R. (L) 29.
20. Beg. v. McGregor ex parte Wilkinson, 6 V.L.R. (L)
167 ; 2 A.L.T. 4; over-ruled by King's Birthday
Co. v. Jack, post (26).
21. Hodgson v. Fermoy Extended G.M. Co., 3 W.W. it a’B
(L) 70.
22. Great Northern Go. v. Maughan, 4 A.J.R. 161.
23. Beeves v. Brown, 6 W.W. & a’B (L) 85.
24. Umphelby v. Wilkie, 5 A.J.R. 108.
26. 46 Vic. No. 742, sec. 6.
26. King’s Birthday Q.G.M. Co. v. Jack, 11 V.L.R. 197 ;
over-ruling Beg. v. McGregor exparte Wilkinson,
supra, and Guthridge v. Gippslander Co. (5 A.J.R.
161).
27. 46 Vic. No. 742, sec. 7.
28. 47 Vic. No. 779, sec. 4.
29. Ibid, sec. 3.
30. Charlton v. Barkly Beef Co., 3 V.L.R. (L) 101.
31. Hick v. Havilah Co., 4 W.W. & a’B. (E) 87.
32. Bobertsonv. Weddell, 5 A.J.R. 115.
33. Mclver v. Duke Co., 5 V.L.R. (L) 449.


34. 50 Vic. No. 881, sec. 4.
35. McKean v. Cleft in the Ruck Co., 5 W.W. & a’R. (L)
42 ; United Hand in Hand and Band of Hope Co.
v. National Bank of Australasia, 2 Y.L.R. (E) 206 ;
see “ The Mining Companies’ Statute 1871,” sec. 47,
48.
36. Campbell v. Hasson, 5 A.J.R. 135.
37. Newey v. Rutherford, 3 V.L.R. (L) 340.
38. Park Co. v. South Hustlers Reserve Co., 9 V.L.R. (M)
4.
39. Tommy Dodd Co. v. McClure, 1 V.L.R. (L) 237.


APPENDIX I.
FORMS OF NOTICES.
NOTICE OF PRELIMINARY MEETING.
The Wyrlong Gold Mining Company
(TO BE REGISTERED).
A meeting of the Shareholders in the above Company
will be held at Scott’s Hotel, Collins Street West, Melbourne,
on Wednesday, the 13th day of June 1888, at three o’clock
p.m.
Business :
To resolve on the registration of the Company, to adopt rules,
appoint manager, elect directors, and transact any other business
that may be brought forward.
J. B. WALKER,
Secretary.
Melbourne,
6th June, JBBB.
NOTICE OF SCRIP READY FOR ISSUE.
The Wyrlong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
The Scrip in the above Company are now ready for issue,
and can be obtained on application at the office of the
Company, No. 11 Collins Street West Melbourne, during
office hours.
J. B. WALKER,
Manager.


NOTICE OF SITUATION OF OFFICE AND
APPOINTMENT OF MANAGER.
The Wyrlong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
We, the undersigned, hereby give notice that the regis-
tered office of the above Company is situated at No. 11,
Collins Street West, Melbourne, and that John Bewley
Walker is the Manager of the said Company.
JOHN TEMPLETON 1 Directors of the
HENRY WHEELER j said Company.
J. B. WALKER,
Manager.
Melbourne,
28th June, 1888.
NOTICE OF CALL.
The Wyblong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
A Call (the Ist) of One Shilling per Share has been made
on the capital of the above Company, the same to be due
and payable at the office of the Company, No. 11, Collins
Street, West Melbourne, on Wednesday, the 11th day of
July, 1888.
J. B. WALKER,
Manager,
Melbourne,
2nd July, 1888.


NOTICE OF SALE OF FORFEITED SHARES
The Wyrlong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
The undermentioned shares in the above Company, for-
feited for non-payment of the first call of one shilling pei
share, will be sold by public auction at the office of the
Company, No. 11 Collins Street West, Melbourne, on
Friday, the 27th day of July, 1888, at 3 o’clock p.m.
All shares numbered 1 to 2000 inclusive on which the
said call remains unpaid.
J. B. WALKER,
Manager.
11 Collins Street, West Melbourne,
18th July, 1888.
NOTICE OF POSTPONEMENT OF SALE.
The Wyrlong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
The sale of shares in the above Company forfeited for
non-payment of the first call of one shilling per share,
advertised to take place on the 27th day of July, 1888,
has been postponed to Tuesday, the 7th day of August, 1888,
when the shares will be sold by public auction at the office of
the Company, No. 11 Collins Street West, Melbourne, at
3 o’clock, p.m., unless previously redeemed.
J. B. WALKER,
■ Manager.
Melbourne,
25th July, 1838.


NOTICE OF ORDINARY MEETING.
The Wyelong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
The ordinary half-yearly general meeting of the above
Company will be held at Scott’s Hotel, Collins Street West,
Melbourne, on Wednesday, the 18th day of July, 1888, at
3 o’clock p.m.
Business :
To receive reports and balance sheets, to elect directors and
auditors, and to transact any other general business that may be
brought forward.
J. B. WALKER,
Manager.
11 Collins Street West, Melbourne,
7th July, 1888.
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING.
The Wyhlong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
A special general meeting of the shareholders in the above
Company is hereby convened, and will be held at Scott’s Hotel,
Collins Street West, Melbourne, on Wednesday, the 18th
day of July, 1888, at 4 o’clock p.m.
• Business :
To consider and determine on the amalgamation of the above
Company with the adjoining claim, [or as the case may be.]
J. B. WALKER,
Manager.
11 Collins Street West, Melbourne
7th July, 1888.


NOTICE OF EXTRAORDINARY MEETING.
The Wyrlong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
Notice is hereby given that an extraordinary meeting of
the above company is hereby convened, and will be held at
Scott’s Hotel, Collins Street West, Melbourne, on Thursday
the twelfth day of July 1888 at 3 o’clock in the afternoon,
to transact the following business, or such of the same as
the meeting may think fit:
*****
(For business see below.)
J. B. WALKER,
Manager.
11 Collins St. W., Melbourne,
25th June, 1888.
The business to he transacted at an extraordinary meet-
ing may be described as follows :
Foe Increase of Capital.
Where the directors have decided on the course to be
adopted :
(1) To increase the capital of the company from £5,000 to
£lO,OOO by raising the amount of each of the 2000 shares existing
in the company from £2 10s. to £5.
(2) To confirm the minutes of the meeting.
Where the directors have not arranged any definite mode
of increase:
To increase the capital of the company
(1). By increasing the amount payable in respect of each share to
such extent as the meeting may decide ; or


(2) By the issue of such number of new shares as the meeting
may decide; or
(3) By both of the above means.
(4.) To confirm the minutes of the meeting.
* * * * *
For Borrowing Money.
(1) To pass a resolution or resolutions authorising the borrowing
of such sum of money as may be decided by such meeting, and the
securing of the repayment of the same with interest by mortgage or
bill of sale of the company’s property, and authorising and empower-
ing the directors of the company, or a quorum of the directors, to
affix the company’s seal to such deeds and documents and to do such
other acts and things as may be required for effectuating the pur-
poses aforesaid, and for giving such security.
(2) To confirm the minutes of the meeting.
ir ♦ ♦ 1r #
For Voluntarily Winding Up.
(1) To pass a resolution or resolutions requiring that the company
be voluntarily wound up under the provisions of “ The Mining
Companies Act 1871,” without resort to the court.
(2) To determine the course to be pursued by the directors for
such purposes.
(3) To determine the mode of disposal of any surplus of the com-
pany’s property which may remain after completion of the winding
up.
(4) To direct the manner in which the books and documents of
the company shall be disposed of.
(5.) To confirm the minutes of the meeting.
*****
For Selling the Claim.
(1). To pass a resolution or resolutions authorising the directors
of the Company, or a quorum of the directors, or such other person as
the meeting may appoint to sell the company’s claims, leases, and
property upon such terms as the directors may think fit


(2) To authorise the directors, or a quorum of the directors, to
transfer the claims, leases, and property of the company to the pur-
chaser or purchasers thereof on any such sale being effected, and to
affix the company’s seal to such deeds and documents, and to do
such other acts and things as may be required for carrying such sale
and transfer into effect.
(3) To confirm the minutes of the meeting.
***•*■*
To Ai.ter the Rules.
(1) To alter and amend rule No. 10 of the rules of the company
by striking out the words “ five or more shareholders possessing
collectively two thousand five hundred shares,” and inserting in lieu
thereof the words “seven or more shareholders possessing collec-
tively five thousand shares. ”
(2) To amend rule No. 15 of the rules of the company by striking
out the words “ provided that no shareholder shall hold proxies for
more than two thousand five hundred shares in the company.”
(Or as the case may be).
(3) To confirm the minutes of the meeting,
* * * * *
If the meeting is convened by requisitioning shareholders,
they will sign the convening notice instead of the manager
REQUISITION FOR EXTRAORDINARY
MEETING
The Wyrlong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
We, the undersigned shareholders in the above company
hereby require you to convene an extraordinary meeting of
the said Company, to be held at Scott’s Hotel, Collins
Street West, Melbourne, on Thursday, the twelfth day of
July, 1888 at three o’clock in the afternoon, to transact


the following business, or such of the same as the meeting
may think fit.
* * * *
The business required to be transacted will be here described in
1 the same words as are contained in the notice convening the meet-
ing ; see previous forms.
* * * * *
Dated this twenty-first day of June, 1888.
Thomas Minor possessing 150 shares
Geo. Grim wood ~ 150 „
Andrew Stratton „ 250 „
Peter Brown „ 50 ~
George Clarke „ 150 „
Shareholders in the above Company.
To J. B. Walker, Esq.,
Manager of the said company.
A requisition for a special meeting will be framed in a
similar form to the above, mulatis mutandis.
NOTICE OF DIVIDEND.
The Wyrlong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
A dividend (the sth) of one shilling per share has been
declared by the directors in the above company, payable at
the office of the company No. 11, Collins Street West, Mel-
bourne, [and nt the Bank of Victoria, Ballarat], on Thurs-
day the 12th day of July 1888.
[The transfer register will be closed from the 9th to the
11th July, inclusive.]
J. B. WALKER,
Manager.
11 Collins Street West,
Melbourne,
sth July, 1888.


PROXY.
The Wyrlong Gold Mining Company, No Liability.
I, the undersigned, William Noble, the holder of 150
shares in the above company, do hereby appoint Thomas
Burke of Melbourne as my proxy, in my name and on my
behalf to vote and act for me in any business that may
lawfully be brought forward at the general meeting of the
said company to be held on the 18th day of July, 1888, or-
at any adjournment thereof.
Dated this 14th day of July, 1888.
WILLIAM NOBLE.
Witness : Alex. Smith.


APPENDIX II.
THE BOOKS OF THE COMPANY.
In preparing the following forms of the books to be kept
by a mining company I have assumed an imaginary com-
pany called “ The AVyrlong Gold Mining Company No
Liability,” with a capital of £5OOO in 2000 shares of £2
10s. each, paid up to ss. per share, or £5OO, which amount
is placed to the credit of the company as representing the
five per cent, required to be paid up in order to enable the
company to be registered on the no-liability system. The
transactions of the company date from its commencement
on April 12th to June 30th, 1888, and the balance sheet is
prepared up to the last mentioned date. A call of one
shilling per share has been made, which is unpaid on 350
shares ; these shares are forfeited and sold, realising £ll
12s. 6d., or less than the call, thus showing the amount of
capital lost by forfeiture to be Is. per share on 350
shares, or £l7 10s., minus the amount realised by the sale
of the shares, £ll 12s. 6d., or a total loss to the company
of £5 17s. 6d., as shown by the forfeited shares account.
As a matter of convenience, and to economise space, I
have imagined a company of 2000 shares, with a small
number of shareholders. The principle of the system will,
however, apply to any company, irrespective of the number
of shares in it.
The rules in Appendix 111 are drawn for a company
having a larger number of shares, as being more applicable
to the present mode of forming companies.


SHARE LIST.
1st call of 1/- per share: made 4th June 1888, due 18th June 1888.
Name * 1 Distinctive Numbers.
Shares.
Amount.
Adams, Jas. Ool lOOM"*** 1 ) IjolM.nO ("")
150
-
10
0
50
2
10
(1
200
10
0
0
Clarke, Geo. ■ 1101 i'U'OO 0"») 1801/1850 C s °)
150
7
10
0
Grim wood, G. i 401/500 W IbbMbUU W
150
10
0
Miller, Thos. 201/300 < ls °) 1751/1800 ( 50 )
150
7
10
0
Noble, Win. | 601/700 <>oo) ibUIUhoU W
150
10
0
Robins, Jas. 1 MUI/llUU UWJ 'IT'li'i7170M"TW)
150
10
0
Stratton, A. | 801 /OOOOoTRO 1 1 1 ACn) W 1701 /1750 W
250
12
10
0
Templeton, J. | lUDl/UUUT'lWh 18!>l/lUUnW
150
lo
()
Wheeler, H. | 1/1U0 W 3U1/4UU 1 W
200
10
0
0
loung, Oliver “bul/bUUl ,WT > 1951/200C( S °) I'Wl/ROo W
250
12
10
0
2000
100
0
0
■ ■--- ' ; -T- —— == ' —
A glance at the above list will show the figures which are not
erased, and these will represent the consecutive numbers of the
shares on which the call is unpaid. On the day of forfeiture, it is
advisable to check the list with the block call receipts, in case the
manager has omitted to erase any of the figures in the list.
The receipts for calls can be given from this list, and this will
obviate the necessity of turning up the share register each time to
find the numbers.


4^
LO
4^
tO
05
LO
Or
LO
4-
LO
to
05
CJ?
No
of Issue. 1
g
-5
X
X
Date of Scrip.
05
[30
LO
to
-
‘1
to
X
05
05
LO
GC
GO
X
4-
4*-
S Folio.
O
ZiX
a
O
O' LO —
05 o c
From
25
i o.
CO
s*
p
Lt
c
Cl 05
o o
w
c
1
y
c
-J
O
O
It
c
H
o
« g
■2
2
S'
ft
CJ
c
~
c
c
O
o
i
"o'
Number
4-h
g^
X
GC
Date of
Transfer.
Or
CO
o
X
p
CO
Oi
4-
to
4^
05
Folio.
X
-
1581
,1571
o
o
zS
— X
"J
p
X
2*
z
o
02
200
[1590
X
o
to
o
o
H
o
2 O
x <’
• (t
1
s
w
>
t—
o
s
o
o
Number.
i
■5
5
Number of
Shares held.
W
tel
Q
o
5
>
05
o»
o
i
o
o
! i
HH
(X
—
i
IO
No of Call
1 te
H
H
SJ
g
w
Value
r
J nne
X
X
due.
Date
p
X*
: >
1 >
to
X
5?
[160
I
No. of
Shares.
4^
05
Amount.
O
O
O
-
-
No. of Call
S]
C
X
X
u
a
Date
c
to
It
-
X
X
o
o
No. of
Shares.
p #
1
"o
1
—
ta
1
o
1
o
-
Amount
II o
o
o
Remaiks.
05
(a) The folio from which the shares are transferred to Andrew Stratton.
(h) The folio to which the shares are transferred by Andrew Stratton.
(r) This represents the splitting of a scrip of one hundred shares into two fifties for the purpose of transferring half of them. The
whole of the shares are transferred by Andrew Stratton to himself, and re-entered l elow as represented by Nos. of Issue 41
and 42, The scrip 5 is cancelled, two new scrip (41 and 42) are issued, one being retained by Stratton, and the other (42)
transferred to Folio 9.
(tl) These represent shares wholly transferred to another shareholder (at Folio 34).
(e) This column, added up in pencil, omitting the numbers ruled out, represents the number of shares held by Stratton.
(/) This column must always show the amount paid up on each share, thus, ss, is paid up at the inception of the Company, and a
Is. call subsequently made, thus representing 6s. paid-up.


Dr.
1888
Cash.
CASH
BOOK.
1888
Contra.
Cr.
1
(")
(6)
«)
1
Ap.
12
lo amt. to cr of
company
300
0
0
Ap.
26
By Wages wages a/c
72
7
6
22
>5
T. Miller
1st call
5
0
0
Thornton timber a/c
7
1 1
0
n
5)
H. Wheeler
55
10
0
0
May
10
Wages ' wages a/c
74
12
0
3 «
33
J. Adams
55
7 10
0
33
33
Williams stationery a/c
1
3
6
2;!
55
Brown
55
2
10
0
33
33
Nelson charges a/c
2
(i
3
May
55
VV. JNoble
5 5
2 10
0
33
Williams printing a/o
18
11
6
1
55
Bale of Gold
Gold a/c
6 11
4
Ogilvie stores a/c
14 12
0
33
55
J. Templeton
1st call
7
10
0
24
Wages wages a/c
93
6
0
33
55
E. Gritnwood
7
10
0
Ogilvie stores a/c
17
16
8
7
J)
A. Stratton
if
7 10
0
33
33
CometGM. Co.plant a c
125
0
0
» •>
5 J
T. Burke
3 3
10
Directors’ drs. fees a/c
3
0
0
13
55
Sale of Gold
Gold a/c
31
1
8
Manager manager a/c
17
0
o
33
55
G. Glarke
1st call
5
0
11
Mt Hope Co. crush*? a/c
13
12
O
17
55
J. Robins
33
7
10
0
J une
21
33
Wages wages a/c
94
7
4
21
55
0. Young
5*
10
0
0
Ogilvie stores a/c
28
13
2
June
23
55
Sale ffd. shares F.S.a/c
11
12
6
James & party con s a/c
75
10
0
27
33
Sale of Gold
Gold a/c
53
7
3
33
33
Mt Hope Co. crush*? a/c
12
8
3
672
0
8
30
Sale of Gold
28
2
5
—
—
82 K
0
Balance
4!
4
6
713
5
2
713
5
2
1888
.Inly
i
To balance down
41
4
o
1
(//). The folios in the Journal into which the various items are posted are entered in this column.
W* This column is kept for calls only, and the total carried out into the general column at the end of the half year.


JOURNAL.
12th April to 30th June
1888.
(«)
0) Cash a/c
(*)
Dr. to Sundries
For the following
receipts :
April
Capital a/c
12
Amount of paid up capi-
tal
500
0
0
J une
30
Calls received to date
82 10
0
(23) £582 10s. 0(1.
May
Gold a/c—
1
15
Sale of gold
Do.
6 11
31 1
4
8
27
Do.
53
7
3
June
30
Do.
(a) £119 2s. 8d.
28
2
5
Fed Shares a/c —-
12
713
2
June
23
Sale of forfeited shares
11
6
5
(4) £11 12s. 6d.
—
—
—
—
—
713
u
2
Sundries
0) Dr. to Cash a/c
For the following pay-
meuts:
Wages a/c —
April
26
Wages sheet
72
7
6
May
10
Do.
7-1
12
0
24
Do.
-j3
6
0
June
21
Do.
(5) £334 12s. lOd.
Timber a/c —
94
7
4
April
26
Thornton
7
14
0
(7) £7 Us. 0d
Stationery a/c —
May
10
Williams
(8) £1 3s. (id.
Forwd
1
343
3
10
6
4
[a). The small figures in brackets represent the folios in the
Ledger to which the various amounts are posted. The figures in the
centre of the page are the totals of the several accounts.
(/>). The cashbook folios from which the entries are taken.


12th June to 30th April,
1888.
Forwd.
(“)
Sundries Dr to Cash a/c
343
10
4
Charges a/c —
May
10
Nelson
2
G
3
(10) t 2 Os. 3s
Printing a/c —
May
10
Williams
18
11
G
(11) £18 1 Is. 6d.
Storks a/c —
May
10
24
Ogilvie
Do.
14
17
12
16
0
8
June
21
Do.
(IS) £61 Is. lOd.
Plant a/c —
28
13
L >
May
24
Comet G.M. Company
125
0
0
(14) £125 0s. 0d.
Directors’ Fees a/c —
May
24
Directors’ fees
O
0
0
(10) £3 0=1.0.1.
Manager a/c —
Mav
24
Manager’s salary
17
0
0
(18) £17 Os. Od.
Crushing a/c —
May
24
Mount Hope Company
13
12
6
June
21
Do.
(19) £26 0s. 9d.
Contracts a/c —
12
8
3
J une
21
James and party
75
10
0
672
0
8
(21) £75 10s. Ud
672
0
8
W
Forfeited Shares a/c
(23;
Dr. to Capital a/c
For 1st call on the
following shares :
G. Clarke igoi/iso
T. Miller 1751/1800
W. Noble eoi/roo
A. Stratton 301/900
50
50
100
100
2
2
5
5
10
10
0
0
11
J
0
1
O. Young 961/2000
50
2
10
0
17
17
10
10
0
0
JOURNAL (continued).


LEDGER.
1
Dr.
CASH ACCOUNT.
Ck
1
1888
June
30
To Sundries
(a)
713
5
2
1888
June
30
By Sundries
Balance
(d)
072
41
0
4
8
6
713
5
2
713
5
2
July
1
To Balance
41
4
6
3
Dr
GOLD ACCOUNT.
Cr.
3
J
1888
June
30
By Cash a/c
(«)
119
2
8
(a). The folios of the Journal from which the entries are posted.


LEDGER (continued).
4
Dr.
FORFEITED
SHARES ACCOUNT.
Cr.
4
1888
June
30
To Capital a/c ...
(a)
17
10
0
1888
June
30
By Cash a/c
„ Balance
(a)
11
5
12
17
6
6
17
10
0
17
10
0
July
1
To Balance
5
17
6
5
Dr.
WAGES
ACCOUNT.
Cr
5
1888
June
30
To Cash a/c
(a)
334
12,
10'
7
Dr.
TIMBER
ACCOUNT.
Cr.
7
1888
June
30
To Cash a/c
(a)
7
14
0


LEDGER (continued).
8
Dr.
-
STATIONERY ACCOUNT
Ck.
8
1888
June
30
To Cash a/c
(«)
1
3
6
10
Dr.
CHARGES ACCOUNT.
Cr.
10
1888
June
30
To Cash a/c
(a)
2
6
3
11
Dr.
PRINTING ANT) ADVERTISING ACCOUNT.
C
H.
11
1888
June
30
To Cash a/c
(«)
18
11
6
j
i
1
13
Dr.
STORES ACCOUNT.
Cr.
13
1888
June
30
To Cash a/c
(«)
(51
1
10
1
1


14
Dk.
LEDGER (continued).
MACHINERY AND PLANT ACCOUNT.
Cr. 14
18*8
J une
JO
To Cash a/c
(?)
125
0
o 1
1
1
1
16
Du.
DIRECTORS
FEES ACCOUNT.
Cr.
16
1888
•I une
JO
To Cash a/c
(a)
3
o
0
18
Dr.
MANAGER ACCOUNT.
Cr.
18
1888
June
30
To Cash a/c
(a)
17
0
-0
I
1
19
Dr.
CRUSHING ACCOUNT.
Cr.
19
1888
June
j 30
To Cash a/c
!
i («)
j 26
0
9
1


LEDGER (continued).
21
Dr.
CONTRACTS ACCOUNT.
Cb.
21
1888
June
30
To Cash a/c
0)
75
10
0
1
i
1
23
Dr.
CAPITAL ACCOUNT.
Cr. 23
1888
June
30
By Cash a/c
„ Ffd Shares a/c ...
(a)
582
17
10
10
0
0
(*)
600
0
0
(>'). This amount represents the capital called up, irrespective of the amount lost by forfeiture.
Note.— A beginner can easily master this system by writing up a set of hooks, making copies of the above, beginning with the cash
book, entering the items from that book into the journal, and posting from thence into the ledger. Following the items thus
from one book to the othe** will explain the system lucidly at once.


THE WYRLONG
G.
M.
CO. NO-LIABILITY
RECEIPTS
AND
EXPENDITURE
For the Quarter ending
30th June,
1888.
Receipts.
Expenditure.
(«)
(a)
Capital
23
582
10
0
1 Wages
5
331
12
10
Gold
3
119
2
8
,Timber ...
7
7
14
0
Sale of forfd.
4
11
12
6
Stationery
8
i
3
6
Shares
Charges ...
10
2
6
3
Printing &c.
11
18
11
6
Stores
13
61
1
10
Plant
14
125
0
0
Directors’
Fees
J6
3
0
0
Manager ...
18
17
0
0
Crushing ...
19
26
0
9
Contracts...
21
75
10
0
672
0
8-
Balance in
Bank ...
41
4
6
713
5
2
713
5
2
—■
—
'
““
(a) Ledger folios from which the items are taken. These, of
are the amounts actually received and paid during the quarter, and
not the ledger balances.


THE WYRLONG G.M. CO. NO LIABILITY.
GENERAL
BALANCE-SHEET.
30th June,
1888.
Dr.
Cr.
(«)
(«)
To Ooid a/c
3
119
2
8
By ffd shares
account...
4
5
17
6
„ Capital a/c
23
600
0
0
» Wages
account ...
5
331
12
10
„ Timber
account ...
7
7
11
0
,, Stationery
account ...
8
1
3
6
„ Charges
account...
10
2
6
3
,, Printing
&caccount
11
18
11
6
,, Stores
account
13
61
1
10
,, Plant ac-
count
14
125
0
0
,, Director’s
Pees
account...
16
3
0
0
„ Manager
account ...
18
17
0
0
„ Crushing
account ...
19
26
0
9
„ Contracts
account...
21
75
10
0
„ Cash ac-
count ...
1
41
4
6
719
2
8
719
2
8
—
(a). The Ledger folios from which the balances are taken. This
balance sheet is made up of the total balances in the ledger, irre
spective of the actual receipts and expenditure.


THE WYRLONG G. M. Co. NO-LI ABILITY
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES.
30th June, 1888.
Assets. Liabilities.
J
Capital of Coy. ...
5000
0
0
Ogilvie, stores ...
17
6
4
„ paid up...
600
0
0
James and Party,
retained on con-
tract
25
0
0
410o
0
0
42
6
4
Plant
125
0
0
Balance of assets
Cash in Bank ...
41
4
6
over liabilities...
4523
18
2
4566
4
6
4566
4
6
DIRECTORS’ MEETING BOOK.
Meeting op Directors.
25th April, 1888.
BUSINESS :
PRESENT I
Correspondence.
Jas. Adams, chairman, (a).
To make a call.
J. Templeton.
To call tenders for shaft.
Hy. Wheeler.
To purchase a whim.
Thomas Burke.
To pass accounts:
Jas. Robins.
Wages £72 7 6
Thornton 7 14 0
00
o
05
(a). Signatures of Directors present, (Ch XI).


DIVIDEND BOOK.
Dividend (the 3rd) of 2s. per Share, declared 5th Juue, 1888,
payable
8th June, 1888.
o
o
0s.
0d.
Name.
o 1
o S
Amount.
Date
Receipt.
Adams, James ...
1
150
15
0
0
8/6/88.
Jas. Adams
Brown, Peter
50
5
0
0
10/6/88.
Posted to him
(See order).
Burke, Thomas ...
200
20
0
0
8/6/88.
Thomas Burke
Clarke, George ...
150
15
0
0
8/6/88.
Geo. Clarke
Grimwood, George
150
15
0
0
9/6/88.
George Grimwood
Per W. Wilson (order)
Miller, Thomas ...
150
15
0
0
8/6/88.
T. Miller
•Noble, William ...
150
15
0
0
8/6/88.
Wm. Noble
Robins, James ....
150
15
0
0
12/6/88.
J. Robins
Per W. Wilson (order)
Stratton, Andrew
250
25
0
0
8/6/88.
A. Stratton
Templeton, John
150
15
0
0
10/6/88.
Pd. to Cr. Bk
N.S.W.
Wheeler, Henry...
200
20
0
0
8/6/88.
Hy. Wheeler
Young, Oliver ...
250
25
0
0
8/6/88.
O. Young
2000
200
II o
O /•
Receipts for £o and over as well as all orders must bear Id. stamp.


APPENDIX III.
RULES AND REGULATIONS.
RULES AND REGULATIONS
THE KANGAROO GOLD MINING COMPANY,
NO LIABILITY.
1. The said Company shall and may forthwith be regis-
tered under “The Mining Companies Act, 1871,” for
mining purposes, and shall be subject to the provisions
thereof.
2. The title of the Company shall be “ The Kangaroo
Gold Mining Company, No Liability.”
3. The business of the Company shall be to work the
mine and claim, situated near Taradale, held under lease
from the Crown, and such other ground, land, or claim as
may be obtained by purchase, agreement, or otherwise, for
and on behalf of the Company, and also of carrying on
such other gold mining operations on any such ground, land,
or claims or any interest therein.
4. The office of the Company shall be at No. 11 Collins-
street West, Melbourne, or at such other place as the said
Company shall from time to time think fit, and shall be
open for business on Tuesdays and Fridays, from ten
a.m. till four p.m. (a).
(a). These are usually fixed to suit the manager, having regard of
course to the convenience of the shareholders.


5. The capital of the Company shall be seven thousand
two hundred pounds, in twenty-four thousand shares of six
shillings each (h) and each shareholder shall share in the
profits and losses of the Company in proportion to the
interest held by them respectively. Provided that no
shareholder shall be liable to contribute in respect of any
liability, losses or expenses of the Company more than the
amount unpaid on his share or shares.
6. John Bewley Walker shall be the first Manager of the
Company.
7. There shall be two meetings of the Company in each ;
year, and the first of such meetings shall be held some time
during the month of January, one thousand eight hundred
and eighty-eight, at such time and place as the directors may
-appoint, and thereafter such meetings shall be held during
the months of July and January in each year (c) and every
such meeting shall be convened by notice from the Manager
by advertisement inserted for two consecutive days in such
newspaper or newspapers as the Directors may appoint, stat-
ingthe day, hour,and placeof such meeting. Provided that the
first insertion of such notice shall be at least seven days
prior to the day appointed for the meeting, to be reckoned
inclusive of the day of publication and of the day of
meeting. Provided always that if within one hour from
the time appointed for the holding of such meeting there
shall not be present at one and the same time at the place
appointed for such meeting a number of shareholders
sufficient and qualified to form a quorum as hereinafter
provided, then, and in every such case, the meeting shall
Capital.
Manager.
Meetings of
Company.
( b ) The capital and limit of shares will be fixed by the pre-
liminary meeting.
(c) January and July are the usual months for ordinary general
meetings, though any other months may be fixed. The first meeting
after incorporation should be held not more than six months after
the preliminary meeting.


stand adjourned until the next general meeting of the
Company.
: 8. The Board of Directors, or any five or more share-
holders possessing collectively two thousand five hundred
shares at the least ( d ) may at any time by a requisition in
writing require the manager to call a special meeting of the
Company for any purpose to be specified in such requisition,,
and within four days of such requisition having been delivered
to the Manager or left at the registered office of the Company,
the manager shall proceed to call such meeting in the same
manner as is hereinbefore provided for in case of general
meetings, provided that the first insertion of the notice of
such meeting in the newspaper or newspapers in which it
is to be advertised shall be at least seven days prior to the
day appointed for the meeting, to be reckoned inclusive of
the day of publication and of the day of meeting. If a
quorum, as in the preceding article mentioned, shall not be
present at the place appointed for such meeting, the same
shall be dissolved and lapse.
9. If the manager shall not within the four days in the
next preceding article mentioned proceed to call such meet-
ing, the directors or the shareholders requiring the same
may call the same in the manner hereinbefore provided for
the calling of the same by the manager.
10. Any five or more shareholders possessing collectively
two thousand five hundred shares at the least may at any
time, by a requisition in writing, require the manager to
call an extraordinary meeting of the company (e).
11. At every general meeting, or at any adjournment
thereof, the report to be lodged by the directors and the
balance-sheet and report to be made out by the manager as
{(I). It is not advisable to make this quorum too high, or the rule
may become inoperative.
(e). A small quorum should also be fixed for this purpose, though
not so small as to allow a few shareholders to harass the company.


hereinafter directed, and all other accounts and reports of
the business, property, and effects of the company, and of
the assets and liabilities thereof, shall be laid before the
shareholders, and such other matters and business shall be
transacted as may be necessary, or as occasion shall require.
12. The subjects to be considered at any special meeting,
or at any extraordinary meeting, shall be those specified in
the notice convening the meeting, and which can be legally
considered at such meeting and none other. The last
proviso contained in Rule 7 shall apply to special and ex-
traordinary meetings.
13. Every meeting, whether special, general, or extra-
ordinary, shall have power to adjourn at pleasure before the
whole of the business to be transacted thereat shall be com-
pleted, but only for the purpose of completing such busi-
ness, and adjourned meetings may be held at such place and
from time to time or from day to day, or at such time or
times as the majority of shareholders attending at the meet-
ing or at the adjournment thereof shall decide.
14. Every shareholder shall be entitled to one vote for
each and every share held by him, and each shareholder
may vote in person or by proxy (f).
15. Any shareholder may appoint any other share-
holder in the company, save as hereinafter provided, to
vote and act for him either generally or for a special
purpose, and every such appointment shall be in writ-
ing or printed, or partly in writing and partly printed,
and signed by the party giving such proxy, and shall
be deposited with the Manager or with the chairman
of the meeting at which the holder of such proxy shall vote
(/). It is usual now to allow one vote for each share, without
regard to the number, though it was formerly the practice to limit
the votes to a defined number, and on a sliding scale.


before the person appointed shall act, and no proxy shall
be held by any Manager or other salaried officer (save by
a Director) of the Company. Provided that no shareholder
shall hold proxies for more than two thousand five hundred
shares in the company.
16. Five shareholders or more, who shall amongst them
be the holders of not less than four thousand shares, or who
or any of whom shall as proxies represent shareholders
holding as many shares as with the shares held by the said
five will make four thousand shares or more, shall be
necessary to form a quorum at any meeting of the Com-
pany (g).
17. At every meeting of the Company a Chairman to
preside thereat shall be appointed by a majority of the
shareholders present at such meeting, and in case of an
equality of votes on any subject brought before such meet-
ing, the Chairman for the time being shall have a casting
vote in addition to his individual votes or votes, and the
majority of votes shall be competent to decide all questions
at such meeting, and all the shareholders shall be bound by
such decisions (h).
18. At every general, special, or extraordinary meeting
the voting shall be taken by a show of hands, or by ballot,
or by assessment of shares, and any shareholder may at any
time before the final decision of any motion or matter
under discussion demand a ballot to be taken in the usual
way or by assessment of shares, and the result of such
vote shall decide such question ; and no law, resolution, or
proceeding passed at any meeting shall be impeached or
vitiated on the ground that any person voting at such
(g) This quorum should never be made too high, or it is very
probable many meetings may lapse for want of a quorum.
(h) Sometimes the Chairman of Directors for the time being is
made Chairman of all meetings. The shareholders can decide this.


meeting was not entitled to vote thereat, or upon any
other ground whatsoever, unless put forward at the time.
Provided that no shareholder shall be entitled to vote if the
last call made in respect of the share or shares held by him
shall be in arrear for fourteen days at the time of the holding
of such meeting (i).
19. All acts or deeds made or done by the Manager,
Board of Directors, or other officers or servants of the
Company shall be subject to the review of the next ordi-
nary, special, or extraordinary meeting of the Company,
but no vote of the Company at any special or ordinary
meeting of assembled shareholders shall invalidate any
contract entered into by the Directors on behalf of the
Company, and every such meeting may require from the
Manager, Directors, or servants of the Company, any in-
formation or explanation with reference to the affairs of
the Company which it may deem tit, and may call for the
production of any vouchers, invoices, or other documents,
and may reject any accounts, balance-sheets, or reports.
Provided that no property of the Company, except gold, *
above the value of one hundred and fifty pounds shall be
disposed of unless such sale and disposal shall be approved
of and confirmed by an absolute majority of the shareholders
in the Company personally present at a special meeting of
of the Company, called for the purpose, at which a quorum
shall be present.
20. The Chairman for the time being of all meetings of j
the Company shall have the control and management
thereof, and his decision as to the mode of procedure at
such meeting, unless herein expressly provided for, shall be
final.
> Calls to be paid
Powers
Sale of Gold.
Management of
Meetings.
(i). It is not advisable to disfranchise a shareholder if his call is
simply unpaid for the reason before explained (Chap. XII). Being
in arrear for fourteen days is equivalent to forfeiture, and a share-
holder should not then complain if he loses his vote.


21. No resolution of any meeting of the Company shall
he rescinded except at a special meeting, and a special
meeting of the Company shall have power to rescind,,
cancel, alter, or vary any resolution passed at any
meeting of the Company or of the Directors if the
matter or thing required to be done by any such resolution
shall not have been executed, or in case of a contract, the
contract shall not have been signed at the time the requisi-
tion for calling such special meeting is lodged with the
Manager, or at the time of the calling of the special
meeting.
22. A Board of Directors consisting of five shareholders
(j) each of whom shall be possessed of and be and continue
registered in the books of the Company for at least one
hundred shares in the Company, shall be elected at the
first ordinary meeting of the Company to be held in the
month of January, one thousand eight hundred and eighty
eight [and thereafter a fresh Board of Directors consisting
of five shareholders, qualified as aforesaid, shall be elected
at each half-yearly general meeting of the Company, and
if the votes by which any two or more of such Directors
shall have been elected shall be equal, the retiring Director
or Directors shall be chosen by lot.] ( k ) If from any cause
the ordinary meetings of the Company are not or cannot
be held at the time hereinbefore appointed for holding such
(j). Five is the most satisfactory number for the Board, and the
most easily worked. (Chap. III).
(A). Or, if it be desired, the following may be inserted instead of
that part of the clause included in brackets;—“And at the next
“ subsequent ordinary meeting of the company, two-fifths of the
“ Directors shall retire, and thereupon two shareholders qualified as
“ aforesaid, shall be elected to fill the vacancies occasioned thereby,
“ and so on, two-fifths of the directors retiring at each ordinary
“ meeting of the Company held in July, and three-fifths at each
“ ordinary meeting held in January. The Directors shall retire by
“ rotation, and if the votes by which any two or more of such
“ Directors shall have been elected shall be equal, the retiring;
‘ ‘ Director or Directors shall be chosen by lot. ”


meeting, then the Directors who would have retired if such
meeting had been held, shall continue in office, and shall
in all respects be considered as re-elected. A retiring
Director shall be eligible for re-appointment, and any
Director may vacate office by sending in bis resignation to
the Manager. The office of Director shall be vacated :
(1.) If the person filling it shall cease to be a shareholder, or
to be the holder of shares in his own right in the Company
to the extent of one hundred shares. (2.) If his estate shall be
sequestrated or brought under liquidation or composition
underany insolventact. (3.) If heshallassign his estate for the
benefit of his creditors. (4.) If he shall hold any office other
than a Director or any place of profit under the Company.
23. If any Director shall refuse or neglect by failing to 1
attend three consecutive ordinary meetings of the board (I)
or shall become unfit or incapable to act in his office, he
may be removed fherefrom by the other Directors at a
meeting of the Board at which all such others shall be
present.
24. When any Director shall cease to be such, by reason (
of his office becoming vacated, or of his resigning, or being
removed, or of his dying, the other Directors shall at any
meeting at which a quorum shall be present elect any
shareholder, qualified as aforesaid, to be a Director in the
place of the Director ceasing to be such. Provided always
that the first general meeting held after such appointment
shall confirm such appointment or elect some other qualified
shareholder to the vacant office, and in either case the
shareholder appointed shall continue in office for so long
only as the person in whose place he shall have been elected
would have been entitled to continue if he had remained
in office.
Removal of
Occasional
Election of
(I). This refers to ordinary meetings, not to special or emergency
meetings of the Board convened for a definite purpose.


25. The Board of Directors may, by vote among them-
selves, fix the time and place for holding their ordinary
meetings, such meetings to be held not less than once every
fourteen days, and may adjourn and otherwise regulate
their meetings as they may think fit, and may also hold
special meetings whenever the Manager or any two mem-
bers of the Board shall convene the same by giving six hours
notice to each Director, either personally or sending by post
a written notice thereof at his place of business or residence
but the proceedings of any meetings of Directors shall not
in anywise be invalidated by reason of no such notice
having been sent or received.
26. Three members of the Board of Directors shall form
a quorum (tn) and shall have, possess, and exercise all the
powers of the full board and at the first meeting of the
Board of Directors after appointment they shall elect a
Chairman of their meetings who shall, when present at the
commencement of their meetings, be the Chairman of the
Board of Directors for so long as he shall remain in office
as a Director, and in the absence of the Chairman at the
commencement of any of the meetings of Directors a Chair-
man to preside at such meeting shall be appointed by the
votes of the members of the board present at such meeting,
and the Chairman of the meeting shall in addition to his
individual vote have a casting vote when through any cause
the votes of the Directors shall be equally divided. No
member of the Board of Directors shall have any vote on
any question in which he may be personally interested
beyond his interest as a shareholder in the Company, nor
sit at the board during the discussion of such business
except with the consent of the other members present.
27. All acts done by any meeting of Directors or of a
Committee of Directors or by any person acting as a
(m). This is the most workable quorum, as previously explained.
Chap. III).


Director, notwithstanding that it be afterwards discovered
that there was some defect in the appointment of such
Director or person acting as aforesaid, or that they or any
of them be disqualified, be as valid as if every such person
had been appointed and was qualified as a Director.
28. Subject to the rules and regulations for the time
being of the Company the affairs and business of the Com-
pany shall be managed and conducted by the Board of
Directors, who may pay all expenses of the Company, and
shall regulate and determine the mode of carrying on the
business of the Company, and enter into all necessary and
proper contracts on behalf of the Company for that object,
and shall have the control of the funds and property thereof
subject as aforesaid, and shall have the custody and control
of the corporate seal of the Company, and shall have the
appointment of all bankers, legal advisers, agents, clerks,
and mining manager of the Company, and shall allow them
respectively such remuneration, or reasonable salary («),
wages, or other benefit as they may deem fit, and shall have
power from time to time to suspend or dismiss any such
person, and may appoint such other or others in his or their
stead as they shall in each and every case think proper, and
may make calls, declare dividends, accept contracts, and
purchase or hire such machinery or apparatus as may be
required, and the powers of the Directors shall not cease or
be suspended so long as the Board of Directors shall consist
of a sufficient number to form a quorum.
29. The general or ordinary meetings of the Company
shall from time to time fix and appoint a sum of money out
of the funds of the Company, to be allowed as remunera-
tion to the Directors for their services, which shall be
Powers of.
Remuneration
(«). But see previous remarks as to the salary of the manager.
(Chap. V).


divided between them in such proportions as they shall
agree upon among themselves (o).
30. The Manager shall keep the hooks of the Company,
including the book required by the thirty-third section of
“ The Mining Companies Act, 1871,” in which he shall,
besides the matters to be inserted therein as directed by the
Act, enter the particulars of transfers of shares, the calls
paid or due on shares, and a note of such shares as may be
forfeited, and also including the books and accounts required
to be kept by the thirty-sixth section of the said Act, and
such other particulars relative to the accounts of the Com-
pany as the Directors may from time to time require. The
Manager shall also keep a book or books in which shall be
entered minutes of proceedings of all meetings of the
Company and of the Directors, and such books shall be
kept at the registered office of the Company and at all
reasonable times shall be open to the inspection of any share-
holder (p ) for the time being of the Company. The
Manager shall make out, at least once in every six months
and prior to the holding of each of the general meetings, a
fair balance-sheet of the accounts of the Company, and also
a report of the works of the Company, which balance-sheet
and report shall be submitted to the general meeting which
shall be held next after the making out thereof, and shall
give forward and publish all necessary notices in reference
to meetings, calls, or other business of the Company, shall
convene the meetings of the Company and of the Directors,
shall collect and pay the accounts of the Company, shall see
(o). It is always better to leave this an open question to be decided
by any general meeting. If the remuneration is fixed by the rules,
it cannot be altered except by an extraordinary meeting of the
company, and it often happens that directors consent to act for a
small remuneration at the inception of the company, with a view to
having the fees increased as the work progresses.
(/>). The manager is not bound to produce the minute book to a
shareholder or creditor, unless required to do so by the rules. It is
sometimes doubtful policy to allow a creditor to see the minute book.


that the orders and directions of the Company and Directors
are properly carried out, and shall do all further acts which
shall be necessary or ought to be done by a Manager in ac-
cordance with the said Act and these rules.
81. Any meeting of the Board of Directors at which a 1
quorum shall be present shall have power to suspend
the manager for the time being, and the Directors shall
immediately thereafter call a special meeting of the Com-
pany, and an absolute majority of the shareholders present
personally or by proxy at such special meeting shall have
power to confirm such suspension and remove or suspend
the Manager for the time being and appoint a new Manager
or reinstate the Manager in his office, and upon the resigna-
tion of or during the temporary absence, illness, or
suspension of the Manager, or any interval between his
suspension or removal and the appointment of a new
Manager in his stead, any other person may be appointed
by the Directors to transact the business and perform the
duties of Manager, and the person so appointed may and
shall perform the duties of Manager and do all acts that could
lawfully be done by the Manager of the Company, and upon
the appointment of a new Manager a notice of such appoint-
ment shall be lodged in accordance with the provisions of
the said Act.
32. It shall be the duty of the Manager at any time to
convene a special meeting of the Directors at the request of
any two Directors.
33. Any ordinary or special meeting of the Company may
appoint two or more persons, whether members of the
Company or not, to be Auditors of the books and accounts
of the Company, and may authorise such persons to examine
into the financial position of the Company and report
thereon, and may allow the auditors so appointed such
remuneration as they may think reasonable.
Suspension.
Duty of.
Auditors.


34. The shares of the Company shall be numbered
progressively and shall thereafter be identically distinguished
by such numbers, and a certificate signed by the Manager
and one ( q ) of the Directors for the time being shall be
issued to each shareholder and shall be in the form set
forth in the schedule hereto, and in the event of any
certificate being lost or defaced the Directors may permit a
duplicate thereof to be issued, but in the case of its loss,
upon a statutory declaration being made by its owner as
to such loss, who shall give such security as the Directors
may require before any such duplicate is issued, and any
person losing any certificate shall take such steps for the
recovery of the same as the Board of Directors may direct.
35. No entry shall be made on the register of shareholders
of the name of any person as transferree of a share unless
all calls due on such share shall be paid to the Manager.
36. The provisions of the said Act in regard to scrip
certificates shall apply to duplicate certificates, and the
transfer to be written on either a duplicate or a certificate
on the occasion of a transfer of a share must be attested by a
witness, and may be in the form set forth in the first
schedule hereto, and shall be on the original certificate or
duplicate, which certificate or duplicate shall upon transfer
of the share or shares, to be cancelled by the Manager, and
shall be left with and kept by the Manager who shall there-
upon give to the transferee a fresh certificate in accordance
with the said Act, and the transferee shall, upon such trans-
fer being deposited, become a shareholder in the Company
in respect of the share or shares transferred to him, and
shall be subject to these rules. Until the transfer of such
share or shares shall be completed by the issue of fresh scrip
(q). Some companies require their scrip to be signed by two
directors, but there is no advantage in thus increasing the manager’s
duties. The scrip should bear the company’s seal, though not
necessarily so.


certificate to the transferee, and the registration of his name
in the share register of the Company, the person in whose
name the said share or shares shall be registered in the
books of the Company shall be and continue subject to all
liabilities in respect of such share or shares.
37. Any meeting of the Directors at which a quorum
shall be present shall have power, subject to the provisions
of the said Act, to make such call or calls upon the share-
holders in respect of all moneys unpaid on their shares as
they shall from time to time think proper. Provided that
no call shall exceed the sum of sixpence per share (r), and
there shall be an interval of one month between the making
of any calls, or be payable at any time less than seven days
from the day on which it was made.
38. Whenever a call shall be made the Manager shall
insert in that issue of some newspaper published in Mel-
bourne in which it can be first published after the making
of the call a notice of the day when it will be payable, and
of the place for payment thereof, and of the amount of such
call, and shall insert a similar notice in that issue of some
newspaper circulating in the district in which the Company’s
operations are being carried on in which it can be first
published after the making of the call. The notice of a call
required by the said Act to be published in the Gazette shall
be published in that issue thereof in which it can be first
published after the making of the call.
39. All gold, monies, bills, promissory notes, cheques, or
drafts received by the manager, shall within forty-eight
hours after receipt thereof be lodged by him with the
bankers of the Company, and the receipt in writing of the
()■). This limit is fixed by the preliminary meeting. It does not
follow that because the directors are empowered to make a heavy
call they are obliged to do so ; and the full limit may possibly be
required to pay for machinery.


manager for the time being shall be a sufficient discharge
for all calls and for all other moneys due to the Company
and for any money or effects belonging or payable to the
Company.
40. Minutes of the proceedings of every meeting of the
Company and of the Directors shall be recorded in a book
or books to be kept for that purpose, and such minutes
shall be signed either at the meeting to which they refer or
at the meeting next thereafter by the person in the chair
at either of such meetings (s). No minutes shall be signed
until they have been confirmed by the vote of the meeting
of which they are or next following that of which they are
the minutes.
41. No sum of money shall be paid out of the Company
unless an account stating the particulars thereof shall have
been brought before the Directors and ordered by them to
be paid, and initialled by the Chairman,for the time being
of the Board, and all payments on behalf of the Company
above one pound shall be made by cheque or draft upon the
Company’s bankers, and all cheques or drafts for any sum
shall be signed by two Directors and countersigned by the
Manager.
42. The Directors may from time declare a dividend on
each share out of the clear profits but not out of the capital of
the company, and every dividend shall be payable at the office
of the Company, or at Melbourne, three days from the time
when the same shall have been declared as made to the registered
owners of the shares in the Company’s books, or to his or
their order, and the Directors may, before paying any divi-
dend, set aside such sum as they may think proper as a reserve
(».) This will not apply to extraordinary meetings. If the min-
utes of such a meeting are not confirmed at the meeting, and as part
of the business, a further special or extraordinary meeting must be
convened to confirm them. A rule made otherwise is ultra vires.


fund for repairs or for contingencies or for equalising
dividends.
43. No dividend shall be payable to any person in respect
of any shares whose name is not at the time of declaring
the same entered in the Eegister of the members as the
holder of such share. No dividend shall bear interest as
against the Company.
44. Abraham Jones, A’fred Wills, Thomas Anderson,
William Smith and Thomas Webb shall be Directors of
the Company until the first ordinary meeting, to be held
in the month of January, one thousand eight hundred and
eighty eight, and shall have power to do all acts that could
be done by any Board of Directors appointed under these
rules, and shall have all the powers and authorities con-
ferred on such Directors (t).
45. The Manager shall within eight days from the passing
of any new rule or rules, or any alteration in the rules of
the Company, annex to these present rules a copy of such
new rule or rules or alteration signed by the Chairman of
the meeting at which the same were made and the Manager,
and the new rule or rules or alterations so annexed shall,
thenceforth form a portion of the rules of the Company.
46. The Company shall continue and be in existence ,
for the term of fifteen years from the date hereof, unless
the same shall in the meantime be wound up either by the
Court or voluntarily under the provisions of “ The Mining
Companies Act 1871,” or under any other Act for the time
being in force for the winding up of such Companies.
Dated this 2nd day of August, 1887.
(t). These Directors are elected at the preliminary meeting, and
are superseded by a Board elected under rule 22, and the mode of
retirement (whether by rotation or otherwise) commences from the
date of the half-yearly meeting held in January 1888 (Chap. XII).


TRANSFER.
ACCEPTANCE.
I, the undersigned of do hereby, for
valuable consideration, sell, assign, and transfer to
numbered in the above Company, and hereby authorise
the Manager to transfer the said share in the books of the
Company.
Dated this day of .18
Progressive No. of Share
transfer, and agree to hold the said share on the same terms
and conditions as the said held the same, And I
authorise the manager to register me as a partner in the said
Company, in respect of such share.
Dated this day of 18
Progressive No. of Share
Transferror.
Witness
Transferree
Witness
The Schedule above Referred To.
THE
KANGAROO GOLD MINING COMPANY, NO LIABILITY.
Capital £7,200 in 24,000 Shares of Six Shillings each.
REGISTERED UNDER THE MINING COMPANIES’ ACT, 1871.
CALLS ARE PAYABLE ON THE SECOND WEDNESDAY IN EACH MONTH.
S CRIP CERTIEICAT E
No. of Issue
This is to Certify that is the holder of Share numbered in the above Company, and is
entitled to share in all the privileges and advantages now or hereafter to belong to the same, subject to the Rules and Regulations
of the Company.
Dated this day of 18
Director. ..Manager.
N.B. —This Certificate is to be delivered to and retained by the Manager on the transfer of all or any of the above shares.


INDEX.
Accounts or the Company ... ... .. ... 64
Copies to be supplied ... ... ... ... 67
Advertising Forfeited Shakes for Sale ... ... 48
Amalgamation of Leases ... ... ... ... 11
Application for Mining Leases ... ... ... 6
Appointment of Liquidator ... ... ... ... 85
New Manager ... ... ... ... ... 22
Area of Mining Leases ... ... ... .. 7
Assessment of Shares, voting by ... ... ... 57
Assets and Liabilities, form of ... ... ... 114
Assignment of Scrip in Blank Valid ... ... ... 40
Audit, preparing for ... ... ... ... ... 68
Balance Sheet ... ... ... ... ... 66
Form of ... ... ... .. ... 113
Balancing the Shake Register ... ... .. 37
Bill of Sale given by Company ... ... ... 76
When binding on the Company ... .. ... 77
Books and Accounts ... ... ... ... ... 64
To be handed over on winding up ... ... 67
Borrowing Powers or Companies ... ... ... 76
Business at Meetings ... ... ... ... ... 56
Transacted at preliminary meetings ... ... 14
Calls... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
Form of notice of ... ... ... ... 93
In no-liability company ... ... ... ... 46
Manager’s duty ... ... ... ... 47
Notice in prepayment companies... ... .. 78
Payment of by cheque ... ... ... ... 46
When payable to liquidator ... ... ... 46
When shareholder may be sued for ... ... 45
Capital, increase of ... ... ... ... ... 72
Cash Book, entries in ... ... ... ... ... 65
Form of ... ... ... ... ... 104
Chairman of Meetings ... ... ... .... 59
Claim, how taken up ... ... .... .„ ... 5
Consolidated Miner’s Right .„ ... _ 6


Contracts ... ... ... ... ... 69
How made and varied ... ... ... ■— 70
By co-operative companies ... ... ... 71
By directors, rescission of ... ... ... 28
By pre-payment companies ... ... ... 70
Copies of Accounts to be Furnished ... ... ... 67
Directors ... ... ... ... ... ••• 24
Cannot sell property of company ... ... ... 26
Contracts by, rescission of ... ... •• • 28
Duties of ... ... .., •• ... 25
How elected ... ... ... ... ... 24
In pre-payment companies ... ... ... 79
Meeting Book, form of ... ... ... ... 115
Meetings of, how held ... ... ... ... 27
When nd where held ... ... ... 28
Offences by ... ... ... •■ ■ ■ • 26
Quorum of ... ... ... ••• 14
Remuneration of ... ... ... ... 29
Security given by for company ... ... ... 27
Voting by ... ... ••• ••• 29
Disputes Between Shareholders and Company ... ... 31
Dividend Book .. ... ... ••• ••• 67
Form of . ... ... ••• D 5
Dividends ... ... ... ••• ••• 66
Form of notice of ... ... ... ••• 99
Dummying Shares, effect of ... ... ... ... 42
Extraordinary Meetings, how convened ... ... 61
Adjournment of ... ... ... 62
Business at ... ... ... ... 61
Confirmation of minutes of ... ... .. 63
Forms of notice of ... ... ... ••• 96
Requisition for... ... ... ••• 98
Statutory majority at ... ... ... 62
Forfeited Shares, how entered in register ... ... 38
Forfeiture and Sale of Shakes ... ... ... 48
Of shares in no-liability companies ... ... 82
Postponement of sale ... ... ... •• 59
Form of notice of ... ... ... .. 94
Purchase by directors ... ... ... .. 51
General Balance sheet, form of ... ... ... 113
General Doties of Manager ... ... ... ... 20
General Meetings of Company ... ... ... - 54


Illegal Call, effect of ... ... ... ... .. 46
Incorporation of Companies ... ... ... ... 16
Increase of Capital ... ... ... ... ... 72
Procedure on ... ... ... ... .. 74
Inspection of Books and Accounts ... 67
Share register ... ... ... ... .. 37
Journal, entries in ... ... ... ... ... 66
Form of ... ... ... ... ... 105
Utility of ... ... ... ... ... 65
Labor Covenants, suspension of .... ... ... 11
Leases, amalgamation of ... ... ... ... 11
Applicant need not hold miner’s right ... ... 8
Execution of ... ... .. ... ... 8
How applied for ... ... ... ... 7
Mineral ... ... ... ... ... 10
Of private property ... ... ... ... 9
Of public roads ... ... ... ... 9
Of reserves ... ... ... ... ... 9
Ledger, entries in ... ... ... ... ... 66
Form of ... ... ~ ... .. 107
Liability of Shareholders ... ... ... ... 30
Limitation for Redemption or Shares ... ... ... 50
Liquidator, appointment of ... ... ... ... 85
Manager ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Appointment of need not be unde seal ... ... 19
New manager ... .. ... ... 22
General duties of ... ... ... 20
Notice of appointment of .. ... ... 18
Offences by ... ... . ... ... 21
Power of, to make contracts ... .. ... 69
Salary of, how fixed ... ... ... ... 22
Meetings, extraordinary, how convened ... ... ... 60
Of directors, how held ... ... ... ... 27
Ordinary .. ... ... ... ... 54
Business and proceedings at ... ... 56
How convened ... ... ... ... 55
Preliminary ... ... ... ... ... 13
Special ... ... ... .. ... 60
Mineral Leases, how applied for .. .. ... 10
Minutes of Meetings ... ... .. ... ... 59
Mortgages by Companies ... ... ... ... 76


No-Liability System. The ... ... ... ... 81
Notice of Call, how given ... ... ... ... 44
Form of ... ... ... ... 93
Of dividend, how given ... ... ... .. 86
Form of ... .. ... ... 99
Of extraordinary meeting, form of ... ... 96
Of ordinary meeting, form of ... ... ... 95
Of preliminary meeting, form of ... ... ... 92
Of sale of forfeited shares, form of ... ... 94
Postponement of, form of ... ... 94
Of scrip ready for issue, form of ... ... ... 92
Of situation of office, form of ... ... . 93
Of special meeting, form of ... ... ... 95
To occupiers of land taken under lease ... ... 8
Office, form of notice of situation of ... ... ... 93
Registration 0f... ... ... . ... 18
Ordinary General Meetings ... ... ... ... 54
Form of notice convening ... ... .. 95
Paid-up Share Register ... ... ... ... 39
Parol Contracts, how made and varied ... 70
Petty Cash Book ... ... ... ... .. 67
Postponement of Sale of Forfeited Shares ... ... 50
Form of notice of ... ... ... ... 94
Preliminary Meeting, business of ... ... ... 14
Form of notice of ... , ... ... 92
Pre payment Companies ... ... ... 78
Inability of directors in .. .... ... .„ 79
Proceedings at Meetings ... ... ... ... 56
Proceeds of Sale, how applied ... ... ... ... 49
Promissory Note given by Company ... .. ... 71
Proxy ... ... ... ... ... .. 58
Form of ... ... ... ... ... 100
Voting by ... ... ... ... 32
Receipt for Scrip Lodged for Transfer ... ... 40
Receipts and Expenditure ... ... ... ... 66
Form of ... ... ... ... ... 112
Receipts for Dividends ... ... ... ... 87
Rectifying Share Register ... ... ... ... 38
Redemption of Forfeited Shares .. .. .. 49
Relinquishment or Shares to the Company ... .. 43


Remuneration of Directors ... ... ... ... 29
Reserve Fund ... ... ... ... ... 87
Reserves, mining leases of ... ... ... ... 9
Roads, miningon ... ... ... ... ... 9
Rough Minute Book ... ... ... ... ... 56
Rules and Regulations, adoption of .. .. ... 18
Form of ... ... ... ... ... 116
Sale of Property bv Directors ... ... ... 26
Forfeited shares must be by auction ... ... 48
Form of notice of ... ... ... 94
Postponement of ... .. - ... 59
Form of notice of .. ... 94
Scrip becomes Dead on Forfeiture and Sale ... ... 50
I! ow split ... ... ... •. ... 36
Notice ol issue of, form of ... . ... 92
Printing of ... ... ... ... ... 17
Security given by Directors for Company ... ... 2
Share List for Call ... ... ... ... ... 36
Form of ... ... ... ... ... 102
Share Register ... ... ... ... ... 34
Entries in, prima facie evidence ... ... ... 38
Entry of forfeiture and sale in ... ... ... 38
Trust shares in ... ... ... ... 39
Errors in, how rectified ... ... ... ... 38
Form of ... .. .. ... ... 103
How balanced ... ... ... ... ... 37
Particulars to be stated in .. ... .. 35
When closed for dividends ... ... ... 87
Shareholder, liability of ... .. ... ... 30
May set off debt against call ... ... ... 30
Powers of ... ... ... ... ... 31
Settlement of disputes ... ... .. ... 31
Shares, how forfeited ... ... ... ... ... 48
May be assigned in blank ... ... ... 32
Special General Meetings ... ... ... ... 54
Form of notice of ... ... ... . 95
Specifications for Work in the Mine ... ... ... 72
Splitting Scrip, mode of ... ... ... ... 36
Statutory Majority at Extraordinary Meetings ... 62
Suspension of Labor Covenants in Leases ... ... 11
System of Book-keeping Explained .. ... ... 64
Keeping share register ... ... ... ... 35


Table of References ... ... ... ... ... 89
Taking up Claims, mode of .. ... ... ... 5
Titles to Claims and Leases ... ... ... ... 6
Transfer op Shares ... ... ... ... ... 40
Manager’s duty ... ... .. ... 41
To dummies ... ... ... ... ... 42
When a call is due ... ... ... ... 41
Trust Shares held for the Company ... ... ... 51
Voluntary Winding cp ... ... ... ... 31
Procedure on ~. ... ... .. ... 85
Voting by Assessment or Shares ... ... ... 57
Directors ... ... ... ... ... 29
Proxy... ... ... ... ... .. 32
Winding cp ... ... ... .. ... ... 84
Of no-liability company... ... ... . 82
Voluntary .. ... ... ... ... 85
Written Contracts, how made and varied .. ... 70


Melbourne :
Harston, Partridge & Co., Printers & Lithographers,
452 & 454 Chancer# Lane.






