

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
A HANDBOOK
FOR THE
Guidance of Valuers.
Department of Taxation, Canberra.
By Authority:
L. F. JOHNSTON, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
4229.


FOREWORD.
In a separate pamphlet, Rules for arriving at the
Unimproved Value of Land for purposes of the Federal
Land Tax are set out. This pamphlet is issued for the
guidance of Valuers in making inspections in the field
and in the preparation of reports.
R. EWING,
Commissioner of Taxation.
Canberra, Ist November, 1935.


LAND TAX.
Procedure lor the Guidance of Valuers.
Inspections and Reports on City and
Suburban Lands.
INTRODUCTION.
The principles upon which land values for the
purposes of Commonwealth Land Tax are to be ascer-
tained have been laid down in Land Tax General Order
No. 816.
The following rules have been framed for the guid-
ance of Valuers in making inspections in the field
and in the preparation of reports in the Office.
NOTICE TO OWNERS.
1. The Valuer should, where practicable, give due
notice to the owner of his intention to inspect a
property. The form of notice supplied for this purpose
should be used. The owner should be afforded an
opportunity of being present during the inspection in
order that he may draw attention to any special
features which he regards as relevant to the valuation
of the property.
DISCUSSION WITH OWNERS AND AGENTS.
2. The Valuer must not disclose to an owner or his
agent his opinion of the value of land or improve-
ments. If pressed to do so he should intimate that
the Commonwealth law precludes him from disclosing
any information which his duties require he should
report to his superior officer. The Valuer must not
assume any authority for expressing an official opinion
to any person regarding values.
4229.-2.


3. In any discussion, conference or interview with
a taxpayer or his agent, the Valuer should record in
writing any representations made and advise the tax-
payer or his agent that these will receive considera-
tion.
SEARCH OF TITLE.
4. Prior to inspection the Valuer should ensure
that he is in possession of the true dimensions of the
land and full details of any easements or restrictions
affecting the property. This particularly refers to
properties the subject of sale —some restrictions may
seriously affect the price paid for the land.
INSPECTIONS AND RECORDING OF FIELD NOTES.
5. The Valuer must make a careful inspection of
each property to be valued. While actually inspecting
the property he should record on the plan and in the
field notes every observation necessary to establish a
true description of the property and the position and
extent of all improvements, trusting nothing to
memory.
6. The field notes form a permanent official record
of the inspection of the property and should be suffi-
ciently comprehensive to enable the Valuer, should the
occasion arise, to demonstrate to a Court, the thorough-
ness of his inspection and to answer any questions
concerning the land and the improvements.
7. The field notes should be attached to the Valuer’s
report, if the original notes in the field are not made
on the report form submitted.
INFORMATION TO BE RECORDED.
8. The following matters should form the subject of
reference in the Valuer’s field notes: —
. (a) City Lands.
(i) Natural Features. —The slope of the land,
the nature of the soil and subsoil, depth to rock,
any building difficulties such as unsoundness of
ground or disparity in levels of the surface of
the land, and of the road frontages.


(ii) Buildings (where valued). —Ground plan
of buildings, the number of storeys, material used
in construction, thickness of walls; type of
accommodation and tenants; existence of —base-
ment, light areas, lift, sprinklers, gas, water
supply, electricity, sewerage, refrigeration, and
heating; height of roof or parapet (stating from
where the measurement is taken), height of ceil-
ings and thickness of floors, depth of foundations,
date and cost of erection and of any subsequent
reconstruction or renovation; condition of build-
ing both as to physical state and obsolescence.
If dimensions of buildings cannot be obtained
in the field and reference has to be made to plans
either in an architect’s office or at the office of
the local building authority, this fact should be
noted in the report.
Information as to the age and cost of a building
should be obtained from whatever source is avail-
able.
( b ) Suburban Lands.
(i) Natural Features. —The slope of the land,
the nature of the soil, any building difficulties,
&c.
(ii) Buildings (where valued). —Description of
buildings, material used in construction and type
of accommodation. If the subject of a sale report,
or, when so directed by the Senior Valuer in cases
of a reference to a Valuation Board or an Appeal
to the Court, the following additional information
should he given: Ground plan of buildings, age
and condition of buildings, details of tenants,
and rents paid.
(iii) Conveniences, e.g., water, electric light,
gas, sewer.
9. The field hook should show distinctly the source
from which all information, whether noted on the
ground or subsequently ascertained, has been obtained.


METHODS OF VALUATION.
10. Before proceeding with the valuation of a district
a plan should be prepared showing the lands within
that district which have been sold, and giving a refer-
ence to each sale so that the details may be readily
ascertained. These sales should be inspected and the
values deduced therefrom indicated on the plan.
11. The price asked for any land within the district
where known should also be indicated on the plan. .
12. Typical properties on which the existing build-
ings represent a reasonable development of the site,
should then be examined and the net return indicated
by actual lettings taken and capitalized at the appro-
priate rate. The appropriate rate is that which sales
of properties under normal conditions indicate as being
that required by purchasers. From this amount the
depreciated value of the building, together with rates,
taxes and interest on land and building costs during
the period of development, should be deducted and the
result noted on the plan.
13. Other typical blocks should then be selected, and
assumed to be unimproved. The cost of a scheme of
reasonable development, for each site, should be
estimated, and the net returns which such a site, so
developed, would be capable of earning, should be
calculated. The estimated cost of development should
then be deducted from the capitalized net returns and
this will afford a further test of unimproved value.
14. From these tests the values of typical blocks are
estimated, and such values will form a basis for the
valuation of other similar lands in the district.
6


SUBDIVISIONS LANDS.
15. The methods to be employed in the valuation of
areas of suburban land capable of subdivision and sale
are set out on Folios 6/8, G.O. 816.
PROFIT ON SUBDIVISION.
16. In making an inspection of an area considered
to be suitable for subdivision, the Valuer should obtain
the necessary particulars to enable him to prepare
a design for a subdivision of the land to the best
advantage. The particulars should include contour
of the land, position of existing services, possible
location and width of roads, and size of allotments.
The requirements of any local authority in regard to
road construction, footpaths, &c., and undertakings
required to be entered into by the owner in regard to
extension of existing facilities, e.g., gas,, water, elec-
tricity and sewerage, should be ascertained and set out
in the report.
17. Inquiries should be made as to the probable
demand for the land if subdivided and an estimate
made of the time likely to be occupied in the disposal
of the land in subdivision.
18. The percentage of profit or allowance for risk
of realization on subdivision which is to be allowed
in cases where the land would not sell at once in
subdivision, is to be determined by reference to actual
sales of land in globo. Where such an area is pur-
chased and subsequently subdivided and sold the Valuer
should bring the case under the notice of the Senior
Valuer with a view to an investigation of the accounts
to ascertain —
(a) The purchase price in globo.
(b) The costs of subdivision and sale.
(c) The period occupied in subdivision and sale.
( d ) The total amount realized.


CITY VALUATIONS.
ADJUSTMENT FOR VARIATION IN DEPTH.
28. In order to secure uniformity and to facilitate
the calculation of lot values from standard unit values
it is desirable that some method of computing the
values per frontage foot for varying depths should be
adopted, in respect of each type of land or district.
29. For this purpose if depth tables are found
useful only those which give results conforming to
market values should be used. Details of the methods
of calculation for different depths should be discussed
with the Senior Valuer.
30. Care should be exercised to see that the par-
ticular depth tables employed give results consistent
with actual sales. A depth table which is appropriate
for positions where frontage is the dominant factor
will not necessarily apply where area assumes greater
importance, e.g., warehouse areas, industrial sites.
STANDARD RENTALS.
31. The Valuer should obtain and record details of
current rentals. These should be reduced to a common
basis per unit lineal foot (for a selected depth) per
week in the ease of shops and per square foot per
annum for upper floors. Standard rentals will thus
be ascertained as applicable to a certain length of
street frontage.
DETERMINATION OF UNIMPROVED VALUE.
32. The amendment of the definition of “ Unim-
proved Value” by Act No. 8 of 1930 requires that
unimproved value is the greater of two amounts
arrived at —
(a) on the assumption that the improvements do
not exist; and
( b ) by the deduction from the improved value of
the value of the improvements.
Generally, however, the employment of these alternative
methods will give the same unimproved value.


33. There are, however, cases when the adoption of
method ( b ) will give a higher unimproved value than
if the actual improvements are regarded as non-existent.
In cases where there is a serious discrepancy between
the value ascertained by the two methods, the matter
should be discussed with the Senior Valuer.
34. The improved value will generally be found by
a capitalization of net expectant returns at the interest
rate disclosed by sales. The existing improvements
must then be valued recollecting that their value cannot
exceed the amount that would reasonably be involved
in effecting improvements of a nature and efficiency
equivalent to the existing improvements.
VALUATION - OF LARGE AREAS.
35. The Valuer should pay attention to whether such
areas are of greater value in globo or in subdivision.
If market transactions disclose that in the particular
locality a large area sells for less than its total value
if regarded as a number of small parcels, the value
■ should be so reduced. The possibility of the size of an
area rendering it specially suitable for occupation as
a whole must be considered, and the land valued
accordingly.
DETAILS OF BUILDING COSTS.
36. The Valuer should obtain the cost of typical
buildings as they are erected. The buildings should be
inspected and measured and a price per unit (square or
cube) should be deduced.
37. Similar records should be compiled in respect
of other classes of improvements dealt with in the
valuation of city and suburban lands.
38. A report on all such details should be for-
warded to the Senior Valuer for incorporation in office
records.


LEASEHOLDS.
48. All cases of sales of interests in property subject
to lease should be investigated in order that the basis
on which expectant rents and freehold reversions are
bought and sold may be determined. Transfers of
leases for consideration money should also be inves-
tigated with a view to determining the rental value
indicated by the payment of any such premium. Any
cases of valuation of leaseholds which present unusual
features should be discussed with the Senior Valuer.


INSPECTIONS AND REPORTS ON
COUNTRY LANDS.
INTRODUCTION.
The principles upon which land values for purposes
of Commonwealth Land Tax are ascertained have been
laid down in Land Tax General Order 816.
The accompanying rules have been framed for the
guidance of Valuers in making inspections in the field
and in the preparation of reports in the Office.
NOTICE TO OWNERS.
1. The Valuer should, where practicable, give due
notice to the owner of his intention to inspect a
property. The form of notice supplied for this
purpose should be used. The owner should be
afforded an opportunity of being present during the
inspection, in order that he may draw attention to any
special features which he regards as relevant to the
valuation of the property.
REQUESTS TO OWNERS.
2. The Valuer should ask the owner or his repre-
sentative for particulars of the extent and position of
improvements, and for access to any plans which
would illustrate the disposition on the property
of its improvements.
3. The Valuer should examine the records of the past
productivity of the property, including the number and
class of stock carried over a period of the past ten
years, with weight of wool and yield of crops harvested.
Copies of these records should be made and attached
to the field book report.
4. If such information is not available on the pro-
perty the Valuer should make inquiries as to where
it may be obtained, and so advise the Senior Valuer,
who will endeavour to obtain the information. Should
the Valuer, however, be able to secure the required
particulars locally, without any additional travelling,
he should do so.


5. Information should be recorded in the space pro-
dded in the field book for “Record of Past Produc-
tivity ” of the inquiries made relative to records of
stock carried and the result of those inquiries.
DISCUSSION WITH OWNERS AND AGENTS.
6. The Valuer must not disclose to the owner or his
agent his opinion of the value of the land or improve-
ments. If pressed to do so he should intimate that the
Commonwealth law precludes him from disclosing any
information which his duties require he should
report to his superior officer. The Valuer must not
assume any authority for expressing an official opinion
to any person regarding values.
7. In any discussion, conference or interview with a
taxpayer or his agent, the Valuer should record in
writing any representations made, and advise the tax-
payer or his agent that these will receive considera-
tion.
RECORDS IN THE FIELD.
8. The Valuer must make a careful inspection of
the property to be valued. The time to be occupied
on inspections of large pastoral holdings should he
discussed with the Senior Valuer, in order that the
difficulties, if any, may be considered by the Deputy
Commissioner.
9. The Valuer must record on the plan and in his
field notes, while actually inspecting the property, every
observation necessary to establish a true description
of the property. The field notes form a permanent
official record of the inspection of the property, and
should be sufficiently comprehensive to enable the
Valuer to demonstrate to a Court the thoroughness
of his inspection, and to answer any questions relating
to the description and measurements of improvements,
the material used in their construction, the soil, geo-
logical formation, original timber, &c. He should record
minutely all facts relating to the property, however


apparently unimportant, trusting nothing to memory.
Extensions of calculations may, of course, be made
after an inspection, but they must be made without
unnecessary delay. All entries must be in ink or
indelible pencil. There is no objection to the use of
ordinary lead pencils for making notes in the field,
provided they are inked over without unnecessary delay.
CONSECUTIVE NUMBERING OF NOTATIONS.
10. Each notation must be given a consecutive
number on the plan, with a corresponding reference
in the field book, e.g., the Valuer, when traversing the
land being inspected, will note on the plan by means of
a consecutive number, the approximate position of an
improvement, and will note in his field book, under
the appropriate heading for the improvement, its
existence on the land and the consecutive number by
which it may be identified on the plan.
GROUPING NOTATIONS IN FIELD BOOK.
11. The notations in the field book must be grouped
under such headings as will permit of the total for
each class of improvement being readily ascertained.
The field book has been specially designed to facilitate
this part of the work.


MEASUREMENTS.
BOUNDARIES OF PROPERTIES.
12. Boundaries must be first determined on the
ground by tbe Valuer personally traversing tbe
boundaries by tbe most effective means of locomotion.
In regard to this procedure the general outline of the
disposition of the property, its physical features, hills,
creeks, &c., should be observed and recorded. The
lengths of the boundaries will be measured in similar
manner to subdivisional fences.
SUBDIVISION FENCES.
13. The location of these will be determined when
measuring boundary fences and any other fences met
with.
14. The length of subdivisional fences will be deter-
mined by measurement, either by counting panels or
by scaling from the plan. The direction in which one
fence bears away from another will he determined by
compass.
AREAS.
15. The boundaries of each class or quality of land
should be indicated on the plan and the area of each
calculated.
16. Measurements should be made by the most appro-
priate method, such as pacing, compass, &c., and when
plotted on the plan will sufficiently ensure reasonable
accuracy of the areas to be determined.


WATER SUPPLY.
MEASUREMENTS—GENERAL.
17. Each water improvement reasonably capable of
measurement must be measured.
18. Where the water improvement is not reasonably
capable of measurement, all information as to actual
measurements should be ascertained from all available
sources. Some of these sources, for example, may
indicate in a general way only the usual depth at which
water is obtained by sinking in the district.
TANKS—MEASUREMENTS.
19. Surface measurements should be made in similar
manner to measurements of other surface improve-
ments.
20. Depth measurements may be measured by a
suitable appliance or ascertained from whatever source
is available, and checked by observation of the sub-soil
lying about, and the line of batter in the tank itself.
Effects of silting should be noted for purposes of
arriving at the correct value of the improvements to
the property.
BORES—MEASUREMENTS.
21. Measurements and flow should be ascertained
from all available sources, without any attempt by the
Valuer to measure the depth of the bore or volume of
supply.
GENERAL.
22. Records should be made of—
(a) The lifting and service appliances. (This
should be made in detail.)
( b) The nature and volume of supply.
(c) Geological features disclosed in excavations.
(d) Suitability of the country for further pro-
vision of water and the probable distribu-
tion and accessibility of the provision.


(e) The description and extent of natural surface
water supply. (The position of natural
surface water should he indicated on the
plan by blue colour).
(/) The amount of depreciation of any improve-
ment should be indicated.


FENCING.
22. The Valuer must note carefully the material
used, the spacing of posts, droppers and wires, and
the length of different classes of fences.
24. He should record—
(a) The nature of country for sinking post holes.
( i ) The accessibility of timber for posts.
(c) The state of repair at the date of valuation.
( d ) The depreciation allowed from cost price of
a new fence in the form of a fraction of life
exhausted over the total life, e.g., if the
fence has a life of 40 years and its estimated
life as at the date of valuation is 10 years,
the depreciation would be noted as 30/40ths.
It should not be recorded as 3/4ths, as the
denominator is required in order that the
full life of the fence may be evident from
the record.
25. Half cost only is allowable for those boundary
fences, the cost of which is in part chargeable to
adjoining owners. The total length and length allowed
should be shown.
26. Values of boundary and subdivisional fences
must be shown separately.
27. Subdivisional fences on survey lines should be
shown thus j / / / / / . Subdivisional fences not
on survey lines should be shown thus —/—/—/—/—/;
netting fences respectively XXXXX-XXXXXXX and
_x_x_x_x„x_x„.


TIMBER TREATMENT.
28. The Valuer’s plan and notes must record—
(l) The nature of the original timber, assuming
the original timber were still standing,
giving separately—
(a) description of each kind of timber,
and
(b) the area of each.
(2) The areas that have been differently treated,
noting the progress allowed for and the
treatment yet required to obtain full
development, and a definite statement of the
time over which the treatment has extended,
and yet requires to be extended.
29. As to (1) above, the Valuer will obtain his
information from the most reliable sources. The infor-
mation is essential to enable the Valuer to report upon
the value to be allowed for timber treatment. The
owner, also, must have had similar information to
enable him to arrive at the value of the improvements
effected on his land. By careful and analytical ques-
tioning of the owner and/or other persons having a
knowledge of the timber the Valuer should be able
to ascertain the character and varying sizes of the
timber that was on the land at the time the timber
was cleared. From that information the Valuer will
be in a position to determine the allowance to be
made for timber treatment. Statements by persons
interviewed should be recorded, and, where possible,
the informant’s signature obtained.
30. The importance attached by the Courts to the
cost of timber treatment on lands valued for purposes
of Land Tax makes it necessary that the Valuer should
exert all his initiative to collect reliable information
on the question.
31. Eule 70a of Land Tax Order 816, dated the
Ist June, 1922, provides that the replacement of some
of the timber originally on the land by means of
plantations is an improvement for which an allowance
has to be made.


IMPROVEMENTS OTHER THAN
TIMBER TREATMENT.
32. These must be measured and recorded in detail,
and grouped, so that all notes of improvements of the
same nature come together for totalling. ,
33. Attention is directed to the amendment of section
3 of the Land Tax Assessment Act relating to improve-
ments, which reads —
“ Improvements ”... means improvements thereon
. . . and includes . . . the destruction of . . .
vegetable growths and of animal pests on the land to the
extent to which such destruction retains its utility, hut does
not include the destruction by any person of any such growths
or pests which are allowed to establish themselves on the land
during his ownership . . .
The Valuer should thoroughly investigate and report
whether the subject land was infested or adversely
affected by noxious animals, weeds or growths, when
originally acquired, or at a time when any subsequent
transfers were effected. (It should be noted that the
infestation and subsequent destruction during any one
ownership does not constitute an improvement within
the definition of the Act.)


AGRICULTURAL LAND.
34. The area of each class of agricultural land must
be recorded with notations of the soil and subsoil and
their geological origin, and the geological formation of
the land.
35. The yield per acre should be ascertained as
accurately as possible, together with the stock carrying
capacity in conjunction with cropping, and, alterna-
tively, its stock carrying capacity if not cropped,
stating the herbage and grasses available.
36. Land which has been continually cropped for
many years may sell, because of partial exhaustion, at
a price somewhat lower than virgin land. This partial
exhaustion must be taken into account, and the
unimproved value ascertained having regard to the
partial exhaustion.


GRAZING LAND.
37. Each class of land must be separately recorded,
and its carrying capacity recorded as —
(i) now developed,
(ii) fully developed.
38. In the case of large pastoral properties the
measurements cannot be exact, hut should be as
reasonably accurate as the means of measurement
permit. The country should he fully described so as
to convey an accurate idea of the classes of land dealt
with and their approximate areas.
39. Particulars of grasses, herbage, edible scrub,
&c., should be noted.
40. The natural features of the land should be
shown on the plan. The nature and depth of the soil
and subsoil, as well as the geological formation, should
be recorded.


BUILDINGS.
41. Buildings must be carefully inspected and
measured, and a full description given of tbe material
used in their construction. Notes should be made of
the outside measurements, the height to floor, ceiling
and ridges, thickness of walls, number and size of
rooms, &c.
42. The approximate age of the buildings and state
of repair must be noted and the present value stated
by recording the cost (new) and the allowance to be
deducted for depreciation. The depreciation should be
expressed in a fraction in accordance with the rules
relating to depreciation of fences.
43. Each building used for residential purposes is
to be separately recorded and valued. There should
also be included under the heading of “ Residential
Buildings ” the water supply necessary for the
residence.
44. The Valuer should make all necessary arrange-
ments with the owner so that the inspection and
measurements of the interior of a residence will cause
a minimum of inconvenience to the owner.
45. The Valuer should show in the respective
columns in the field book the total area in “ squares ”
and corresponding “ value per square ” or the total
number of “ cubic feet ” and value “ per cubic foot ”.


GENERAL REPORT.
46. The general report will comment upon the
compactness for working, the complementary nature
of the different classes of country, its soundness and
suitability for breeding or fattening, and the distribu-
tion of the water, &c., and the class of stock to which
it is best suited.
47. The Valuer will record the distance from rail
or port, the state of roads and cost of haulage.
48. He will record particulars of rainfall (local
and official records).
49. He will state if the owner is using any other
land—
(1) in conjunction with the land inspected,
(2) apart from the land inspected.
27


BASIC SALES.
50. Before a District Valuer uses information in
respect of sales lie must first satisfy himself by per-
sonal inquiries of the parties to the sale (if available)
as to the price, date of sale, and improvements existing
at the date of sale and the circumstances surrounding
the transaction. If the parties to the sale are not
available, the inquiries should be made with the same
object of the most reliable of other sources of
information.
51. Having selected the basic sales comparable to
subject land the Valuer should set out clearly on the
basic sale folio of the field book the particulars of
the basic sale, as follow:
Sale number, vendor, purchaser, locality, area,
date of sale, consideration, and deduced
unimproved value.
52. He should then show the manner in which the
basic sales have been applied to the valuation of the
subject land.
53. When submitting a report on a sale the Valuer
should state whether the deduced unimproved value
is a fair and reasonable value at the 30th June
following the date of sale. If the value deduced is
not considered fair and reasonable, the Valuer should
indicate a fair value, together with supporting evidence
similar to that furnished in the case of a report on
subject lands.


UNDEVELOPED PROPERTIES.
54. In all cases where additional improvements are
required to make the property fully productive, full
particulars of the additional improvements should be
shown under the appropriate heading for the improve-
ment in the field book, together with their estimated
cost.


NOTES ON PLANS.
55. All descriptive notes of country, e.g., volcanic
soil, sand plain, swamp, &c., must be written in the
plan across the area of the particular country, and
boundaries of the separate areas of the different classes
of country are to be indicated.
56. All land suitable for agriculture, but never
actually cropped, could be haehured yellow, while land
that has been or is used for cultivation should be
tinted yellow. Areas of green timber should be tinted
green, while any border lines between plain and other
land may be edged with green. This can be done by
the use of coloured pencils.


VALUER’S SIGNATURE.
57. The District Valuer must initial each page of
the field book and sign in his ordinary manner the
page containing the summary of information relating
to the valuation.


INDEX.
Additional improvements . , . . . . 29
Agricultural land . . . . 24, 30
Analysis of offers to sell . . . . . . 12
Analysis of sales . . . . . . .. . . 6
Areas—calculation of . . 18
Basic sales . . . , . . 8,28
Bores —measurement of . . . . . . 19
Building costs .. . . 11
Buildings—inspection of .. 5,26
Capitalization —rate of . . .. 9
„ returns . . . . 6, 9
Carrying capacity .. . . . . 15
City valuations —information necessary . . . . 4
~ „ depth tables .. . . 10
„ „ rentals to be obtained .. .. 10
Classification of land . . . . .. . . 18
Country valuations . . .. .. 15
Crop yields ' . . .. . . . . . . 15,24
Depth adjustments . . . . ~ . . 10
Depreciation of improvements .. .. 20,21,26
Description of property to be recorded during
inspection .. . . . . . , . . 4, 16
Discussion with owners and agents .. .. 3, 16
Easements .. .. .. .. 4,8
Exhausted land . . . . .. . . 24
Fencing . . 18, 2l
Field notes .. 4, 16
General report .. 27
Geological formation .. .. 24,25
Grasses, &c., to be noted .. .. . . .. 25
Grazing land .. .. .. .. .. 25
Green timber—how shown .. . . . . .. 30


Hotels —valuation of . . .. 13
„ sales of .. • .. .. 13
Improved value —how ascertained .. .. .. 11
Improvements—additional .. . . . . .. 29
„ cost of .. .. . . 11
„ depreciation of .. . . 20,21,26
„ measurement of .. .. 18,19,26
„ value of .. .. .. .. 10, 11
Information necessary to be recorded . . . . 4, 16
Inspection to be made .. .. . . 4,16
„ of residences . , .. . . .. 26
„ —notice of .. ~ .. .. 3, 15
Large areas—valuation of .. .. .. 7,11,13,16,25
Leaseholds .. .. . . .. 14
Measurements—how to be made .. .. 18,19,26
Method of valuation . . . , . . . . 6
Notations to be numbered . . .. . . . . 17
Notice to owners . . . . . . .. 3, 15
Noxious weeds and animals . , , . . . 23
Offers to sell . . . . . , 6, 12
Original timber —nature of . . . . . . 22
Owners—discussion with . . . , 3, 16
„ notice to . . 3, 15
Parcel—definition of . . .. . . .. 8
Past productivity .. .. . . . . 15,24
Pasturage to be noted .. .. . . . . 25
Plans—information to be recorded . . . . 30
Plantations are improvements . . . . . . 22
Productivity to be recorded .. .. .. 15, 24
Profit on subdivision . . . . . . 7
Properties offered for sale . , . . . . 6, 12
Rabbits, noxious weeds and animals . . 23
Rainfall—details of .. .. .. 27
Rate of capitalization . . . , . . 9


Rentals to be obtained .. . . .. . . 10
„ and outgoings .. .. .. . . 8
~ standard . • .. • • . • 10
Report on sales . . . . . . . . . . 9
Residences —inspection of . . .. . . .. 26
Residue of subdivisions .. .. . . . . 8
Restrictions .. .. . . .. . . 4,8
Returns —capitalization of .. .. .. .. 6
Sale reports . . .. .. . . 9
Sales —analysis of .. . . .. .. 8
„ basic . . .. .. . . 8,28
~ how to be used . . . ■ .. 8,28
„ of hotels . . . . . . . . . . 13
to be noted on plans . . . . . , 0
~ record of . . . . , . . , 8
~ special circumstances to be reported .. . . 9,28
when to be inspected .. .. .. 8
Search of title . . .. . . . . 4
Soil and subsoil —nature of . . .. . . 25
Standard foot values . . . . , . 9, 10
„ rentals . . . . . . .. . . 10
Stock records —to be recorded .. . . .. 15
Subdivisional lands —methods of valuation .. 7,11
„ profit on subdivision .. . . 7
Subdivisions —residues . . . . . . . . 8
Suburban lands—information necessary . . . . 5
Tanks —valuation of .. . . . . 19
Timber treatment . . . . . . . . 22
„ plantations . . . . .. . . 22
Title—search of . . . . . . ’ . . . . 4
Undeveloped properties . . . . . . , . 29
Unimproved value —definition of . . .. 10
„ „ determination of . . . . 10
Unit costa buildings .. 11
„ foot . . . . . . . , .. 9, 10


Valuation of —buildings .. •. . . 5,26
„ hotels .. . . ■ • • •
„ improvements .. • • • • H
„ tanks .. • • ■ ■ •• 19
Value —improved . . • • • • • ■ • • 11
„ unimproved . • • ■ ■ ■ • • 1®
Valuers’ estimates —not to be disclosed . . . . 3
Water supply .. . . ■ • • ■ ■ • 19
Weeds —noxious . . .. • • • • 23
Wool —weights of . . . . .. • ■ • • 16
X. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
