

A
Handbook
of the
Good
Neighbour
Movement
To assist people interested in the
assimilation of migrants
Issued by the Commonwealth Department of Immigration




Foreword
This booklet of practical advice for
persons interested in the Australian assimi-
lation movement has been prepared by the
Commonwealth Department of Immigration
in co-operation with the co-ordinating
Councils of the Good Neighbour Movement,
churches, voluntary organisations, sociolo-
gists publicists and field workers.
It contains suggestions for the formation
of branches and a list of good neighbour
activities which have been found beneficial
in furthering the happy assimilation of
migrants into the community.


ADDRESSES of State Headquarters of
Good Neighbour Bodies
NEW SOUTH WALES
Good Neighbour Council,
140 Elizabeth Street,
SYDNEY.
Phone: MA 8008.
VICTORIA
Good Neighbour Council,
Olderfleet Building,
475 Collins Street,
MELBOURNE.
Phone: MB 2879.
QUEENSLAND
New Settlers League,
King House,
77-81 Queen Street,
BRISBANE.
Phone: B 4855.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Good Neighbour Council,
12 Pirie Street,
ADELAIDE.
Phone: W 2898.
W 6389.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Good Neighbour Council,
Adela House,
75 Stirling Street,
PERTH.
Phone: BF 1987.
TASMANIA
Good Neighbour Council,
Y.M.C.A. Building,
55 Argyle Street,
HOBART.
Phone 7795.
CANBERRA (A.C.T.)
Good Neighbour Council,
Riverside,
CANBERRA.
Phone: U 1923.


Introduction
Since 1945, a great national movement has developed
in Australia to assist the assimilation of migrants into
the community.
With imagination and energy Australian citizens are
working to consolidate the vigorous expansion of the
nation’s population through immigration.
The Commonwealth Government, in co-operation with
the States, has succeeded in obtaining and maintaining a
steady flow of new settlers. To the limit of their ability,
the Governments have arranged for the reception and
after-care of the newcomers.
To the Good Neighbour Movement has fallen the im-
portant task of tackling the more personal problems of
assimilation—helping migrants to find a happy and worthy
place in the national family and to feel the warmth of
Australian friendship.




What is Assimilation?
Assimilation as applied to migration may be defined in
many ways. For our purposes, a workable definition is:
the process of introducing new settlers into the local
population so that the benefits may be mutual.
The new settler is not required to change the entire
pattern of his life to conform completely to the local
pattern. Nor are Australians asked to alter their way
of life to suit the different habits or customs of the new-
comer.
It is a process of give and take a two-way process.
It requires patience, understanding and goodwill on both
sides. It requires Australians to offer the hand of friend-
ship and to make allowance for differences in mannerisms
or accent of the newly arrived. It requires the newcomers
to try to learn and appreciate the customs and traditions
of their new homeland and to live in harmony with them-
selves and with their new fellow citizens.
Successful assimilation requires:
0 mutual understanding, consideration, tolerance
and goodwill
0 the minimising of personal prejudices or
fears between Australians and newcomers
and between the migrants themselves
0 co-operation in helping to solve personal
difficulties which confront migrants


9 consideration for the spiritual, moral, educa-
tional, vocational and cultural needs of new-
comers
• encouragement and assistance to all migrants,
British and non-British, to understand their
rights and responsibilities as Australians and
to the non-British to accept the privileges and
obligations of citizenship.
The list could he continued almost indefinitely. When
you take your place in the Good Neighbour Movement,
this fact will become more apparent to you.
Already the Movement embraces Australians in every
walk of life. They can appreciate the difficulties of
assimilation in general terms; they can also look at them
from their specialised viewpoints and can give new slants
on what assimilation requires.
Perhaps you, as a churchman or an educationist, as
an employer or an employee, as a housewife or a business
girl whatever your walk of life may be can pin-
point an assimilation problem and work toward its
solution. That is the aim of the Good Neighbour Move-
ment.
In short, assimilation requires of us all a good neigh-
bourly spirit, a beneficient and liberal attitude toward all
newcomers, so that they may become happy and contented
citizens of Australia.


The Good Neighbour
Movement
What is it?
The Good Neighbour Movement is a nation-wide,
voluntary organisation formed with the basic objective
of assisting the satisfactory assimilation of every migrant
into the national family.
How is the Movement constituted?
The Good Neighbour Movement is not a functional
organisation. It is the co-ordinated effort of churches and
other bodies which, while retaining their autonomy and
freedom of action, have voluntarily formed themselves into
co-ordinating Councils whereby they can readily and con-
veniently co-operate with each other and with governments
and other agencies in honorary work to assist in the
assimilation of all migrants.
How does it operate?
1 A co-ordinating Council of the Movement is
established in each State capital city and at Canberra, in
the Australian Capital Territory. Each has its own con-
stitution and freedom of action within its own region and
forms branches and appoints representatives in the metro-
politan area and in provincial towns and rural districts.


The Councils are called Good Neighbour Councils
in all States except Queensland where the Council is
known as the New Settlers League.
2 A co-ordinating Council comprises official rep-
resentatives of constituent churches, philanthropic bodies,
trade unions, commercial associations, educational and
sporting bodies, youth organisations, press, radio, etc.
with Commonwealth and State immigration officials as
liaison counsellors.
A Council may co-opt interested individuals,
including migrants, to committees and for special services.
3 Councils seek the personal support and co-opera-
tion of individuals and of the public generally in further-
ing their objective. They do not undertake the work of
Government officials but co-operate with them.
4 The Commonwealth Government assists each
Council financially by providing its administrative costs.
The Good Neighbour Movement otherwise is an honorary
service.
5 A Council, its branches and its representatives,
endeavour to ensure that the Australian public under-
stands and appreciates the significance of immigration as
a national need. They also seek, through the individual
members of churches and organisations and the public
generally, to secure an understanding of the personal
problems of migrants.


6 A Council and its branches strive to educate
and inspire the members of churches, organisations and
the public generally to be “good neighbours” to all
migrants and to assist them to become happily absorbed
into the normal life of Australia.
The scope of the Good Neighbour Movement
includes each and every newcomer who intends to reside
permanently in Australia irrespective of parentage or
possessions, race or creed. The Movement is concerned
with the well-being of each from the date of arrival.
8 Co-operation between co-ordinating Councils
and their branches and representatives, throughout Aus-
tralia is achieved by correspondence, Council and branch
meetings, regional conferences attended by delegates from
branches and affiliated bodies, and by personal liaison pro-
vided by a Commonwealth appointed Co-ordinator.
Each year since 1950 delegates from the Good
Neighbour Movement throughout Australia, as well as
representatives from a wide range of religious, voluntary,
trade union, employer and political organisations, have
met in Canberra at a Citizenship Convention.
This Convention provides a nation-wide forum
on immigration topics and also an opportunity to further
co-operation between the Good Neighbour Movement and
its affiliated organisations.


Suggestions for Good
Neighbours
The following suggestions may prove useful to Good
Neighbour organisations or to individuals who wish to
co-operate in the assimilation drive.
It will be appreciated, of course, that some of these
suggestions may be applicable only in certain areas and
also that the list is by no means inclusive of all the
activities of the Good Neighbour Movement.
FORMING A BRANCH
1 Communicate with the secretary of the co-ordina-
ting Council in your State (addresses are on p. 2
of this book). Request the Council to send a
representative to the meeting at which it is proposed
to establish the branch. This representative will
inform the meeting of the aims of the Movement,
the results already achieved, the work yet to be
done and ways in which the co-ordinating Council
can help your branch.
2 Secure the co-operation of influential citizens
such as the mayor, municipal and shire councillors,
leaders of churches and voluntary organizations,
the schoolmaster, the theatre and radio station
manager and newspaper editor. These community
leaders are in an advantageous position to spread
the assimilation message and enlist public support.


3 The mayor or some other appropriate citizen should
convene the inaugural meeting by inviting church
and organisation leaders and others to gather at
a mutually suitable time and place. He should also
arrange for press and other publicity.
4 It is desirable that the inaugural meeting of the
branch be held at the Town Hall or other suitable
public meeting place with the mayor or his deputy
presiding.
5 The meeting, after hearing selected speakers, decides
to form a branch consisting of representatives of
local churches and voluntary organisations with some
co-opted individuals if desired. It elects a president,
honorary secretary, honorary treasurer, vice-presi-
dent (2 or 3), and others (2 or 3) to form an
executive committee. This committee will act be-
tween meetings of the branch. (It is an advantage
if both men and women serve on the executive.)
6 It is often advisable for the newly elected executive,
at the close of the meeting, to discuss with the
representative of the State Council its constitution,
duties, activities and co-operation with State head-
quarters.
7 An executive committee usually meets at regular
intervals to consider reports and plans. The branch
usually meets quarterly, half-yearly or annually as
it decides.
8 The branch later may appoint committees or panels
for special purposes. Some might be permanent
(e.g. estate agent, solicitor and local government
representative to advise on land, home-building,
insurance, etc.); others might be appointed periodi-
cally (e.g. accountants to advise on preparation of
taxation returns).


9 In areas where migrant centres, hostels or housing
projects exist, special committees might concern
themselves with the welfare of migrants in those
establishments.
i A Seek the aid of migrants themselves. They may be
1U asked to form committees which can report on prob-
lems confronting migrants.
UDo not rest content when you have formed your own
branch. Encourage the formation of branches in
other areas and assist with advice in their formation.
WHEN THE MIGRANT ARRIVES
1 O Arrange individual or group welcomes for migrants
ifa arriving in your district.
1 Q Provide a “welcoming” auxiliary, including women,
10 to help new arrivals with baggage, transport, baby-
minding, customs procedure, refreshments and the
obtaining of household services (e.g. bread and milk
delivery).
1/I Arrange periodical welcomes by the mayor or
l*f citizens. These may take the form of a reception,
an informal picnic or sports day at which local resi-
dents can meet and mingle with the newcomers.
1C P rov ide new arrivals, particularly children, with a
ID souvenir of welcome. Adults may be given, say,
a guide book of the city or town to make them
familiar with streets, location of stores and public
services, churches, local points of interest.
| A Help new arrivals to locate the church, sporting
ID body, cultural association or other organisation in
which they may be interested. University students,
nurses, professional men, unionists, ex-servicemen,
farmers, sportsmen, etc. will find a special under-
standing in their appropriate organisations.


n Arrange for the executive of local sporting bodies
to seek out newcomers to join their ranks.
10 Encourage migrants to join sports clubs, cultural
XO societies and other Australian organisations (e.g.
Y.M.C.A., Y.W.C.A., Boy Scouts, Girl Guides,
C.W.A., Parents and Citizens Associations) so that
they will not find it necessary to form their own
national groups.
<A Australian organisations could offer temporary
iJ) “guest” membership to migrants with a view to
them becoming full members. Encourage migrant
members of any such organisation to interest them-
selves in its affairs (e.g. to stand for office) and
pay dues similar to those paid by other members.
A|l Secure co-operation of State and local government
X U authorities in arranging transport, welcoming
functions, use of rooms.
LEARNING ENGLISH
Ol Encourage migrants who do not speak English to
fai learn our language. Impress on them how impor-
tant this is to their future happiness in Australia.
OO Advise on the facilities provided for them by way
■fc of free classes, correspondence courses and radio
lessons.
00 If a class has already been formed in your locality,
fcw encourage migrants to attend it. Help teachers to
retain their classes.
0/1 If there is no class and you know of a group of
migrants who want tuition, arrange with the local
State School headmaster for a class to be formed.


M Migrant education publicity material is supplied by
the Commonwealth Department of Immigration to
each State Council for distribution to branches.
Obtain this material from your State Council and
display it at your branch office and any other place
where migrants will see it.
OC This literature will include enrolment cards. Help
lO migrants to fill in the cards. Make it clear to them
that they can get the radio booklets free even if they
are already attending a class or learning by corres-
pondence.
07 Interest fellow Australians in “adopting” a migrant
fc I student to help learn the language. Conversational
aid is the most important aid that can be given to
someone who is trying to improve his English speech.
OQ Arrange discussion groups for migrants who can
£0 speak English well. These discussion groups may
be held in private homes, club rooms, church halls
or any other place where meetings can be arranged
regularly. Discussion groups will help migrants
improve their English, will increase their confidence
in their ability to mix with Australians and, if
subjects are well chosen, will help them to know
more about Australia and its ways.
A A Suggest to employers of large numbers of new Aust-
£9 ralians that classes be formed among the employees.
The lunch break is a good time for these. The same
period might also be used now and again for talks
on aspects of the Australian way of life. These
talks can be made more attractive by showing
an appropriate film or two. Such films can be
hired from the State Film Centre in the capital city
of each State. Two 10-minute films and a 10-minute
talk would make an interesting lunch-time pro-
gramme.


QA Take the initiative in making conversation with
OU migrants who are learning to speak English. Gener-
ally new Australians are shy in initiating conver-
sations.
Qi Impress on your Australian friends that they can
OX be a potent force in encouraging and helping new-
comers to learn English. Most migrants appreciate
on-the-spot correction of their mistakes, provided
this is done pleasantly. Do not avoid conversation
with newcomers just because it might be difficult for
you to make yourself understood. Speak to them
clearly and slowly; if they do not understand your
meaning, say what you have to say in another way
which might be easier for them to understand. Don’t
think you are making yourself clearer to a migrant
by raising your voice to him when you speak. This
is a common mistake which should be avoided.
HOSPITALITY AND ENTERTAINMENT
QO Keep a list of hosts and hostesses who are prepared
0£ to welcome migrants and their children in their
homes or to help migrant women with shopping,
ordering food, Australian cooking.
QQ Keep a list of persons who are willing to take
00 migrant families for outings in their motor cars
when required.
Q/l Voluntary organisations could arrange social gather-
O 4? ings in their own rooms at which Australians and
migrants may meet. Form a social club comprising
both Australians and migrants who can share in
arranging and financing functions.
QC Organise afternoon teas, dances, concerts, tourna-
-00 ments. It is better to include migrants with Aus-
tralians in competitive events rather than have
“Australia versus Migrants”.


Q/J In large cities, consider the provision of a migrant
00 information bureau staffed by honorary workers.
The bureau could be in the rooms of some organi-
sation willing to make accommodation available for
this purpose or on municipal premises if the council
is agreeable.
Qn Organisations with refreshment services or coffee
J i lounges might invite migrants to enjoy these facili-
ties. Voluntary hostesses could help newcomers with
language difficulties and enable them to meet
friendly Australians.
QQ Invite migrant children to birthday parties and other
JO festivities with Australian children.
QQ Encourage Australian housewives to invite new
00 Australian womenfolk into their homes to exchange
ideas and demonstrate their cooking, needlework,
art.
/■A Encourage Australian families to extend invitations
HU to migrant children living in hostels and migration
centres to spend their school holidays with them.
i| 1 Organise camps, outings, hikes, bus tours, visits to
HI places or events of local interest (e.g. football,
cricket, places of historical significance).
flO Education in the English language and entertain-
Hfc ment can be blended. Try word-building games at
socials.
>|Q Education on Australian ways can also be blended
HO with entertainment. Try a nature-study hike to
acquaint newcomers with Australian flora, fauna,
scenery and country conditions.
>|l| Invite migrants to participate in Easter, Christmas
HH and other seasonal festivities (e.g. Carols by Candle-
light) and to exhibit in local agricultural shows.


AT Invite migrants to participate in special public
HrD occasions. They may attend in their national
costumes and give displays of dancing, arts and
crafts.
A/* Arrange conducted tours so that newcomers may
*fD learn about their new land (e.g. visits to Parliament
House, to municipal and shire councils in session,
to local industrial plants).
i|7 Encourage the formation of mixed Australian and
*FI new Australian choirs, orchestras, theatrical and
dance groups.
A Q Arrange joint Australian and new Australian con-
*fO certs and exhibitions of artwork, paintings, sculp-
ture, photographic work, cookery, needlework. A
good public response is evoked when exhibitions or
music are provided by migrants to raise funds for
Australian charitable appeals.
A A Arrange music programmes, concerts or dancing by
*l3 migrants to entertain the sick in hospitals and rest
homes.
|“A Form international groups, Good Neighbour Move-
-3U ment Forums and 50/50 clubs with Australian and
migrant men and women. A 50/50 club is, as its
name implies, a club with an equal membership of
Australians and migrants.
PRESS
Cl Invite representatives of local press to join
vJ, committees.
MSeek aid of local press to feature pictures and
stories dealing with the progress of immigration
plans and the contribution being made by migrants
to Australia’s development. A regular supply of


this material is contained in THE GOOD NEIGH-
BOUR, an illustrated monthly newspaper, which is
supplied free on request by the Commonwealth
Department of Immigration. Material in the paper
and stereos of all blocks appearing in it are avail-
able free of charge for reproduction in country or
provincial newspapers, and in trade or specialist
journals.
CQ Seek co-operation of the press to publish items of
30 importance (e.g. bushfire warnings in foreign lang-
uages where necessary) and to provide a “migrants’
column” of news which is of special interest to
migrants and good neighbours.
ri| Seek co-operation of the press to publish news
3*f about migrant participation in public events (e.g. to
mention specifically the part played by migrants in
processions, religious or national day observances).
rr Send stories about migrants and Good Neighbour
33 work to the Editor, THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR,
Department of Immigration, Canberra, for use in
the paper and distribution throughout Australia.
The stories of migrant or good neighbour activities
which interest you will also interest Good Neigh-
bours in other parts of Australia. Publication of
new ideas and practices to help assimilation which
you have evolved will encourage good neighbours in
other parts to follow suit.
CC Obtain publication in local newspapers, specialist
30 journals, etc. of repeated reminders to the Australian
reading public of the need for sympathy and under-
standing in migrants’ problems.
Encourage local papers in the suburbs or country
31 centres to publish details of migrant education
classes. The headmaster of the local school can
provide this information.


CQ Seek co-operation of the press to publish news about
00 naturalization ceremonies held in the locality. These
stories might deal with the new citizens’ background
or their success in Australia. Papers might run a
special regular feature under a title such as “Meet
these new citizens.”
RADIO
Arrange special sessions for migrants, featuring
JjJJ news of special interest for them, the music of
Europe, and talks on Australian history, customs
and institutions, cooking advice, etc. Encourage
migrants to enter talent quests, amateur hour con-
tests, quiz shows.
aa Secure the interest of the Australian listening public
Oil by broadcasting interviews with migrants, music by
migrants, talks on the traditions of Britain, descrip-
tions of European countries.
Secure the aid of the local station in helping
01 migrants to learn English. Encourage local radio
stations to announce details of English classes for
migrants which are being held in the area.
UQ Encourage migrants to listen to the radio lessons
Dl broadcast weekly by the Australian Broadcasting
Commission,
CQ Advise migrants that they can obtain a free copy
Oil of a booklet to help them follow the radio lessons.
This booklet may be obtained from the Education
Department in the capital city of your State.
HOSTELS and IMMIGRATION CENTRES
/jyi Many forms of help may be given to migrants living
Ot 1 in migrant hostels or centres. In consultation with


the management, good neighbours may establish
recreational centres, provide games, books and
libraries, arrange sewing circles, help with English,
invite migrants to private homes, arrange outings
for mothers and children, demonstrate Australian
cooking, help in beautification of grounds by supply-
ing shrubs and plants, teach children Australian
games, arrange film screenings, provide newspapers
and magazines.
CITIZENSHIP
CP Encourage new Australians to become naturalized
QO Australian citizens.
Talk to them about citizenship and explain its privi-
OD leges and responsibilities. Explain to them how to
go about applying for citizenship. This information
is available in the leaflet “This is How You Can
Help Someone Become an Australian Citizen”
obtainable from the office of the co-ordinating
Council in your State.
M Emphasise that their applications for citizenship
01 may be made after 4i years residence in Australia.
Cg Report to co-ordinating Councils any factors known
DO to be deterring migrants from seeking citizenship.
M Attend naturalization ceremonies and arrange
functions afterwards to welcome the new citizens
and their families.
TfA Persuade other Australians to attend naturalization
IU ceremonies and take every opportunity to make
migrants feel that their new status as Australian
citizens is fully recognised and appreciated.


n Co-operate with local government bodies in devising
means to impart added warmth and impressiveness
to naturalization ceremonies.
"70 Assist in securing maximum publicity by press, radio,
I £ etc. for naturalization ceremonies both beforehand
and afterwards.
"TO Arrange to “follow-up” naturalization ceremonies
10 so as to maintain good neighbourly relations with
new citizens until they are quite at home in the
community. Remember that acquiring citizenship
does not make a newcomer independent of the need
for good neighbourly consideration.
GENERAL IDEAS
711 Protect migrants against unfair practices or ex-
I*T ploitation.
TTJ” Ensure that they receive neither better nor worse
19 treatment than Australians in normal community
affairs. Preferential treatment for migrants may
lead to resentment both on the part of the Aus-
tralian public and the migrant who does not want
pampering. Equal treatment will appeal to the
Australian sense of fair play and will let the
migrant know that he is being accepted as an equal.
76 Advise migrants to observe traffic laws.
77 Advise them that facilities are available through
I I the Department of Immigration to assist in tracing
relatives and friends. Help to bring about re-unions
of families, relatives and friends. Help migrants
with letter writing.
1 70 Help migrant mothers with their babies. Advise
I O them on pre-natal clinic facilities, hospital methods.
Help with baby-minding.


“J A Arrange for regular hospital visits. Explain the
I U Medical and Hospital Benefits Schemes.
QA Show an interest in the former homeland of your
OU migrant friends, their traditions and customs. Many
newcomers feel twinges of home-sickness. Talking
to you about their homeland may provide the safety
valve for their feelings.
Q 1 Explain Australia to newcomers, but don’t boast
OX about your country or make comparisons to the dis-
advantage of the newcomer’s former homeland.
QO Develop a spirit of give-and-take with migrants.
0£ If you are giving advice on Australian ways • say
on cooking don’t think that the Australian way is
the only way. Accept readily advice on European
cooking methods and recipes given to you in
exchange.
QQ Advise on protection against sun-burn, prevention
00 of bush fires, life-saving on Australian beaches,
spiders, snakes, blowflies. Remember that some
newcomers lived in lands without sea beaches, with-
out hot summer suns, and without some of the things
which we have known from childhood and protect
ourselves against as second nature.
0/1 Advise newcomers on postal services, particularly on
O 4? transmission of money by money orders. Many of
them fail to forward the money order to the payee.
They mistake it for a receipt and believe that the
money is transferred automatically.
Or Encourage the confidence and trust of newcomers in
O 0 our police force and judicial system by arranging
for talks to them by local constables and police
court officials. Encourage such officials to meet
newcomers informally as socials, etc.
OC Arrange talks by specialists town clerks, health
Ow inspectors, etc. —on subjects important to new-
comers (e.g. home building, schools, health).


On Encourage migrants to understand and observe
Of national days (e.g. Anzac Day, Australia Day,
Queen’s Birthday).
M “Adopt” a migrant family or group of newcomers
so that they may know they have someone to turn
to without hesitation for guidance or advice at any
time.
A A Advise migrants interested in settlement on the land
09 about Australian farming conditions and local
methods.
M Australian organisations could arrange “New Aus-
tralian Days” devoted to the recognition of and
expression of welcome to newcomers. Such an
occasion might include the display of migrant art,
presentation of migrant music, invitation to a
migrant to address the meeting on his own land.
Invitations might be extended to migrants in the
locality to attend the meeting and have afternoon
tea.
Q 1 Luncheon clubs could invite new Australians to
vl address them on their homelands and their experi-
ences in Australia.
QA The problem of migrants in the district can be
tit discussed at conferences between employers and
employees, church leaders, publicists and philan-
thropists, and solved by united effort.
QQ Provide interpreters at courts or on special occasions
90 when non-English speaking migrants are involved.
AVI Advise migrants on legal matters and Australian
9*l laws and customs. Advise them to make a will.
In addition to enabling them to bequeath their assets
to the person of their choice, a will may assist the
Australian authorities to trace inheritors who are
not in Australia.


AC Local churches can arrange special services,
00 sermons, pastoral letters and welcomes to newcomers
and newly naturalized citizens.
% Arrange “pen friends” for migrants in remote
localities. Good friendships are developed this way.
AT Advise non-British migrants about the monthly
0 I newspaper THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR which is pub-
lished by the Commonwealth Department of Immi-
gration. The paper contains news for new Aus-
tralians, information about Australia, advice, easy
lessons in English, pictures. New Australians may
have a free copy mailed regularly to them on appli-
cation to the Editor, THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR,
Department of Immigration, Canberra.
M Assist migrants with their employment problems by
referring them to the office of the Commonwealth
Employment Service. If there is no such office in
your locality and the migrant is unable to express
himself clearly in English, write to the nearest
Commonwealth employment officer for him.
QA Migrants are entitled to certain social service
00 benefits. The nearest Commonwealth Employment
Office will be able to advise them in this matter.
IHO Help newcomers with Australian practices with
IUU which they may find difficulty (e.g. assist them to
fill in income tax returns, explain the medical
health scheme).
Ifll Seek to secure reciprocal goodwill and friendship
XUX from the newcomer towards later newcomers. In
this way the good neighbour movement will be
helped to “snowball” among the migrants them-
selves.


There you have one hundred and one ideas of ways
in which you can act in a good neighbourly role to help
migrants settle down in the community speedily and
happily. Even so, the list by no means covers all the
ideas being put into practice by existing members of the
Good Neighbour Movement.
This dpeß*the Good Neighbour Move-
ment is do’ltig'yi} thanTnee'd -Be'-done for the migrants and
that there Jis no room for imjLro‘ye.ment. Par trom it.
In s.eme atiflißpg.ood neighbours are performing many
of the’activities suggested in of ideas and possibly
some not ihhiuded in it. might discover
that theySaaji expanditheir usefulness by adopting some of
the practiced bt.othcT.circs.
And there are, of course, areas throughout Australia
where branches of the Good Neighbour Movement have
not yet been formed.
What is the position in your town? Is there a branch
of the Movement established there and are you a member?


THOS. URQUHART A SON PTY. LTD.. PRINTERS. MELBOURNE
