

A HERO OF THE WORKSHOP
AND
A SOMERSETSHIRE WORTHY,
CHARLES SUMMERS
MARGARET THOMAS




A hero of the Workshop
AND
A SOMERSETSHIRE WORTHY,
CHARLES SUMMERS,
SCULPTOR.
The St ory of his Struggles & Triumph.
BY
MARGARET THOMAS.
London: Hamilton, Adams & Co.
Weston-super-Mare : Charles Robbins.
Taunton : Alexander Hammett.
Price 2/6.


WESTON-SUPER-MARE :
BOBBINS, PEINTEB, HIGH STREET.


TO
Bobert JSrthuji Binglabe, Bsq., Itf.
WHO HAS LABORED TO IMMORTALIZE
THE GREAT AND GOOD OF SOMERSET BY
ERECTING MEMORIAL BUSTS IN THE SHIRE HALL,
AT TAUNTON,
THIS MEMOIR IS INSCRIBED BY
M. T.




Page 34, sth line from top, for " folds of their drapery,” read
folds of drapery.


Memoir of Charles Summers.
Charles Summers was born in the obscure village
of Charlton, seven miles from Ilchester, in
Somersetshire, on the 27th July, 1827, and was the
eldest but one of a family of eight children.
At the time of his birth, his father, a mason and
small builder, was in the enjoyment of a humble
patrimony, which might have served to educate
and keep his increasing family respectably, but
this, unhappily, he soon squandered. Thus it
happened that his son Charles, instead of learn-
ing to read and write in his childhood, was sent
as soon as he could walk, into the labour market,
to earn a shilling a-week by scaring crows from
a wheat field.


It would be tedious to relate how, as the boy
grew older, he was employed in the most arduous
and difficult tasks, while his father consumed
both time and money in the ale-house. Often
was he reproached with exacting too much from
his son; but the active, willing spirit of the
brave lad and his unvarying energy and strength
made him too valuable for his labour to be
surrendered for any future advantages which
education might be supposed to give him. At
the ages of eight and nine years, many a time
has he been compelled to make night journeys
alone with a horse and cart to the pit to procure
coals for the family consumption. And on one
occasion, being delayed by a heavy storm, the
horse’s life became a sacrifice to his burdensome
duty, and very nearly that of the future sculptor.
It was about this time that to repair his fallen
fortunes, the father conceived the idea of starting
a candle manufactory, and Charles and his elder
sister were employed in preparing the wicks.
It was also the duty of the former to drive his
father to the markets of Wells or Bristol to


obtain the tallow necessary for their branch of
industry. Want of attention, however, on the
part of him who should have been most devoted
to the business, produced its natural result, and
what would otherwise have proved a lucrative
business, failed most ruinously. The humble
home at Charlton was sold by the mortgagee,
the furniture sacrificed at a public auction, and
George Summers, his exemplary wife Ruth, and
their family, obliged to commence the world
anew.
They removed to a village called Street, near
Glastonbury; and here it was resolved that the
father should endeavour to procure employment
as a mason, aided by his eldest son, who was his
chief reliance in all matters of labour, and whom
he invariably termed “the boy.” I should here
state that a resolution of emigrating to New
Zealand was nearly carried into effect, and only
negatived by an assurance from the lord of the
manor that “ the savages always devoured those
who were unfortunate enough to settle in that
country,” Carrying, then, simply a change of


clothing - , the father and son set out on their journey
to Bristol on foot. Here there was a strike
among - the masons, and they lost no time in
obtaining - the work they came in search of.
But on the conclusion of the first day’s labour,
they were met by some of the men on strike ; and
the father, always easily induced to enter a public
house, promised, on the offer of three days’ wages
being paid to him, not to work except on such
terms as the men insisted on. The Summers’
then took steamer across the Channel to Ponty-
pool. For the father it was not difficult to
obtain work; but all the employers declared
that they did not want boys; and young Summers
was then rather short for his age. However,
the father asked them to try the boy, and give
him what he was worth. He was then employed
at fivepence a-day to carry mortar, and that
remuneration was in time increased to sevenpence,
the lad s industry and quickness never failing to
make head even under the most adverse circum-
stances. In about a month George Summers
became anxious to see his wife and family, and


again crossed the Bristol Channel. Arrived at
Bristol with a few pounds in their pockets, they
were again met by the Society men ; and the
record of that tedious journey to Street of thirty
miles, is that of a boy bringing home an intoxi-
cated man. About eight miles from home, over-
come with fatigue, they sat down in the snow, six
inches deep—though it was May—and fell asleep,
but were awakened by some wagons passing, in
which they performed the remainder of the
journey.
At this time was commenced the building of the
Wells Union, eight miles from Street, and here the
Summers’ again obtained employment, taking
lodgings in Wells for the week, and returning
home from Saturday evening till Monday morning;
and here the activity and intelligence for which
Charles Summers was always remarkable, began
in reality to display themselves. Strong and
industrious by nature, his work soon surpassed
that of the whole yard; and a wager as to whether
he or a lad nearly double his size and age could
best square and face a stone, was decided by the


umpires, their fellow-workmen, in favour of the
former. During - an election in the city, the public
houses were for four days thrown open free to the
“independent electors,” an opportunity we may
be sure not neglected by the elder Summers, and
Charles during these days went to work alone.
Finding remonstrances unavailing, he walked
home exasperated one Thursday evening to tell
his beloved mother everything, but changed his
resolution on entering the house, unwilling to give
her trouble, and merely said “ he had come for a
brown loaf, as he knew it was her baking day.”
The next morning found him again at his labour,
adding by it every day something more to the
comforts of their little cottage. He and his father
were the last workmen retained, but at last the
Wells Union was completed.
Relying as usual on the abilities of “ the boy,”
his father took small contracts on a line of rail
then in course of formation at Weston-super-Mare.
Here Charles Summers’ ability in carving fancy
stone work are still a matter of notoriety, and he
was particularly celebrated for skill in cutting


ornamental gate posts. During this period he
was the sole support of his mother and her family;
but earning a considerable sum of money by his
indomitable industry, was also enabled to leave a
few shillings a-week in the hands of his employer,
which in time became pounds, and for which he
received a small amount of interest. About this
time, the celebrated sculptor, Henry Weekes, R.A.,
completed a monumental figure in the attitude of
prayer, for a member of the Pigott family, to be
erected in the parish church at Weston-super-
Mare. The man who came down to erect it,
wanting assistance, was led from the accounts he
heard of the skill of young Summers to seek him
out and obtain his services; and from this
circumstance may be dated the anxiety of the
future artist to go to London, and perhaps become
a sculptor. This desire he communicated to his
employer—a Mr. Price—but was warmly urged
not to go. This was also the opinion of Mrs. Price,
who said that a young man doing so well for
himself, should not leave it for a place full of
such dreadful wickedness and temptations as


London. But with Mr. Summers a resolution
once made remained unbroken, and drawing £lO
of the £2O in his employer’s hands, he started,
accompanied by two young friends, to London,
At the age of nineteen, then, our enterprising
countryman found himself in the great metropolis
of England, and at once sought the studio of
Mr. Weekes. Finding, on application to his former
acquaintance, the foreman, no other position
vacant, he accepted that of polisher, at a remu-
neration of one guinea per week. The sight of
the models of the great sculptor was indeed a
treat to him, and he thought wetting the cloths
and cleaning the modelling tools, the most
pleasant of tasks. He soon became conspicuous
from his industry and cheerfulness, and frequently
Mr. Weekes, visiting the studio unexpectedly,
found one man alone at his post—the polisher. At
this time Mr. Summers employed his evenings in
learning the art of pointing marble, and applied
his knowledge to copying some of Fiammingo’s
beautiful models of boys. Thus he was steadily
laying in that stock of practical knowledge of


the mechanical part of his art, which is too often,
from its arduous nature, neglected by sculptors,
but of which he was a consummate master, often
in after life cutting his idea at once in marble without
forming it in clay .
Mr. Summers had not been more than ten or
twelve months in the studio, before Mr. Weekes
received commissions to execute two colossal
statues in bronze; and the men in his employment
erected the foundry, and made other preparations
for casting in that metal. The ability and energy
of the subject of our memoir also caused
him to be occupied with far other duties than that
which he considered his legitimate employment —
that of cutting marble. Under these circum-
stances he informed Mr. Weekes that he wished
his engagement to cease, and to that artist's great
regret, returned to Somersetshire.
He remained there for a month, endeavouring
to put into practice the knowledge his constant
habit of observation had enabled him to acquire.
He modelled medallions of his relatives, a bust
of the Mayor of Bristol, and of Mr. Moody,


M.P., for Somerset, and several other works,
all marked by an originality of execution and
vigorous resemblance, arguing well for his future
success. On his return to London, through the
instrumentality of a friend, to whom the value of
his services to Mr. Weekes were known, he
received a note from the late eminent sculptor,
M. L. Watson, to the effect that he wished to see
him next morning. The interview proved so
satisfactory to both parties that Mr. Summers
was engaged, at two guineas per week, to point
the immense group of Lords Eldon and Stowell,
upon which Watson was then employed. Of the
vigour with which he entered on his duties there
are still witnesses; so eager was he indeed to
perform his work that Watson often besought
him to rest for a day and visit some exhibition,
and bring him back his opinion of the works.
This pleasing incident illustrates the cordial under-
standing that existed between master and servant.
Summers at this time declined an offer to enter
Baily’s studio, and became a great favourite with
Watson, whose failing health rendered him unable


to work. He lived with the greatest frugality, and
his evenings and mornings were constantly
devoted to modelling; and finding, through the
friendliness of the family from whom he rented
his apartments, that his precious time was likely
to be encroached upon, he removed from Euston-
road to Pimlico. Watson’s health now entirely
gave way, and sending for his favourite assistant,
he desired him to break up all his models, Mr.
Summers hesitated to perform this task, begging
a few might be spared, but the dying sculptor,
wrapped in a blanket, was determined and watched
his beloved works shattered one by one. He has
often commented since on the wisdom of Watson
in doing this, saying it would be well for the fame
of many sculptors if they followed his example.
At one time Watson was so ill as to be unable to
superintend his works for three weeks, and during
that time of precious leisure, Mr. Summers con-
ceived a wish to enter the Royal Academy; and, un-
known to anyone, commenced the necessary model.
About a week after his models were destroyed,
Watson died, but not before he had given


Mr. Summers one of the most eulogistic letters
that could be penned, and which would have
secured his entrance into any sculptor’s studio.
I know not if it be worth recording, but he
always related that on the night, nay, the very
hour of Watson’s death, he heard the death
knock at the head of his bed.
By the terms of Watson’s will, Mr. Nelson, his
foreman, and Mr. Summers, were appointed to
complete his works—the Eldon Group, now at
Oxford, and the statue of Flaxman, which stands
in a hall of the London University. By this time
the latter had been admitted probationer of the
Royal Academy, and it now became necessary
for him to execute similar models and drawings
in the Academy to be admitted student. He
therefore proposed to Mr. Nelson to change his
hours of work. He was obliged to attend at the
Academy from ten to three ; before and after
those hours he worked at Watson’s group. This
did not meet the approval of Mr. Nelson, and it
was reported to Dr. h ranks, to whom was left the
< harge of seeing to the execution of the terms of


the will, that on the occasion of Lord Eldon
coming - to see the progress of the statues, only one
man was at work on them. Dr. Franks hearing
the circumstances under which this occurred,
could see nothing to find fault with ; but Mr.
Summers having met with great encouragement
at the Academy from the late Mr. Jones, the keeper,
resigned his position in the studio of Watson.
Pleased at his model being so highly approved,
he was less sanguine as to the fate of his draw-
ings, in which he had had no practice. For his
anatomical drawings, in place of choosing the
model by Houden, usually selected by students,
he took the figure of the “Dying
Gladiator,” His success was complete, and in
1850 Charles Summers was admitted student of
the Royal Academy.
Following up this success, he at once placed
his name in the list of competitors for the
silver medal for modelling from the antique.
This competition takes place in October ; but
at the commencement of that month he received
a letter to hasten to Somersetshire, if he wished


to see his mother before she died. The
affectionate son lost no time in proceeding
thither, but arrived two hours after she had
breathed her last. She had been an exemplary
wife and mother, and his grief was intense;
indeed, he never after spoke of her without tears.
He modelled her bust while she lay a corpse,
and returned to London ten days after the other
competitors had begun work for the medal.
We may be sure there were some jokes among
the students at the countryman who had put down
his name, but had not courage enough to come
forward. Undaunted by the delay, however, he
commenced a relief from “Silenus and the Infant
Bacchus,” the subject for that year’s competition.
Several students endeavoured to discourage him,
but he was re-assured by the approbation of Brown,
the clever modeller of Hunt and Roskell’s cups, etc.;
and in spite of all, carried away the silver medal.
A year’s hard work brings us to the dose of
i^SI, when he had the honour —but ones since
repeated —of receiving on the same evening the
first silver medal for the best model from life;


and the gold medal —given once in two years
for the best group of historical sculpture. The
subject of the latter was “Mercy interceding for
the Vanquished,” and few gold medal works
possess equal merit. There was not a little
surprise and a great deal of cheering in the hall
of the Academy, when the unassuming student
from the country received from the hands of the
president, Sir Charles Eastlake, the honours so
quickly won and so well deserved. The same
year —so fruitful to our artist —procured for him
a bronze medal from the International Exhibition,
fora “Boy with a Shell;” and to complete its
record, he entered into a matrimonial engagement.
He now became an exhibitor at the Royal
Academy Exhibitions, and taking a studio in
Warwick-street, Pimlico, received much praise
for the busts and medallions he executed. Among
works at this time I may mention the bust of
Lawson, in the Observatory at Nottingham, and
that of Dollond, the optician.
But the career which seemed opening so bril-
liantly became speedily clouded. The strong


and vigorous constitution he had brought with
him from his native county, gave way under his
intense application, and he was ordered rest and
change of air by the celebrated Dr. Snow, who
apprehended the approach of consumption. He
accordingly went to Weston-super-Mare; and
such was his appearance on his arrival that it
was reported that he had come back to die.
The sea air was found too strong for his enfeebled
constitution, and he retired to spend six weeks with
a friendly farmer in the quietude of his native village.
Here his health became gradually recruited, and he
returned to London to resume his beloved occupa-
tion. Again he succumbed to the unfavourable
atmosphere and his unrelaxed exertions, and he
was told that the only means of preserving his life
was a sea voyage. One of his brothers having pre-
viously settled in Australia, whence arrived those
wonderful accounts of gold discoveries, which un-
settled the minds of men at that time, he resolved
to proceed thither ; and purchasing a ready-made
house and many other articles which he fancied
might be of use, set sail for Melbourne in 1852.


After a pleasant voyage in the ship “Hope,” and
during which his health was completely restored,
he occupied himself with oil painting, for which he
had great talent, he arrived in Melbourne, and
fixed his house on a piece of land which he bought
in what is now called Docker-street, Richmond.
The wages of labouring men in the Colony were
then twenty shillings or thirty shillings per diem;
and not caring to pay so extravagantly for work
he could perform himself, Mr. Summers com-
menced to build a six-roomed brick house with
his own hands, and actually completed it, even
to the roof. There are many persons still living
there who saw the apparently untiring man work
from daylight till dark, and needed the confirma-
tion of the medals to believe that he was an artist.
His evenings he solaced with playing the cornet,
an instrument on which he performed with some
skill, having acquired it during a connection with
a Rechabite band in the town of Wells.
Opportunities then occurring of letting his
houses, he did so; and leaving Mrs. Summers,
went to try his fortune at the diggings, where
B


his brothers were already realizing much money.
He laboured there assiduously for six months,
but the old love of art had not died out. He
saw an advertisement for modellers, signed by
Captain Pasley, Chief Commissioner of Public
Works in Melbourne, and determined to send
in specimens of his ability. The work required
was for the Houses of Parliament, then in course
of erection. It need scarcely be added that
he was successful in getting it; but within
a week of his departure from Poverty Creek,
Tarnagulla, gold was found there in such abun-
dance as to make the fortunes of all concerned.
Mr. Summers gained nothing thereby.
He then began to model the female figures and
boys on the ceiling of the Council Chamber.
Delighted to be again with his clay, he modelled
at the same time many busts—some for payment,
some gratuitously. He also exhibited some busts
at the first Intercolonial Exhibition, held in
Melbourne in 1854. At this time were executed
busts of Frederick Wilkinson, Esq.; J. P, Fawk-
ner, Esq., M.L.A.; J. Hodgson, Esq.; and


J. G.Knight, Esq. His Government work finished,
he took a studio in Collins-street, and becoming
more generally known, received a commission
to model a Faun for the Melbourne Public
Library, and several busts and medallions, in
which latter branch of art he was peculiarly
successful. Soon finding his studio too small,
he took on lease a large piece of land higher
up in Collins-street, and erected a commodious
building. Here he executed many works. His
services to art in Melbourne cannot perhaps be
over-estimated. He was the pioneer of art there;
for by the exhibitions which he, at his own
expense, held annually, was implanted that taste
for it which now bids fair to produce a rich harvest.
He instituted them regardless of his own labour,
and—sometimes—interests ; and ever, by example
and precept, inculcated the true style of art.
He was the first President of the Victorian
Academy of Fine Arts. His own productions
at this period consisted principally of portrait
busts; some in marble, executed entirely by his
own hands, for it was impossible to procure


skilled labour of the kind at that time. He
modelled also the medal for the Exhibition of
1562, and a colossal statue of Shakespeare,
which, it is to be regretted, was never erected.
Among the busts I may mention those of Sir
Redmond Barry, for the Public Library ; Captain
Hovell; a posthumous bust of James Bruce, Esq. ;
John Moffat, Esq.; His Excellency Sir Henry
Barkly, and Colonel Neild.
In 1864 occurred the fatal episode of the Burke
and Wills Expedition, and a monument to the ex-
plorers was resolved on, partly through the gene-
rosity of a private individual, Ambrose Kyte, Esq.
After a competition, Mr. Summers’ design was
selected for execution in bronze. The colossal
group, thirteen feet high, which now adornsCollins-
street, was modelled and cast in plaster and bronze
by his own hands, aided only in some of the
mechanical parts by labourers, whom he had
instructed. A reverberatory furnace was erected;
and to such perfection did he carry the art of bronze
founding that the whole of the figure of Burke was
cast in one piece, at present the largest casting ever


made; he destroyed his first effort—cast in
two pieces—because he objected to have his
work joined in any way. The clever reliefs
which adorn the pedestal were then added. The
sum given to the sculptor for this work, which
will carry his name down to posterity as one of
the greatest artists of our age, was £4OOO.
Many spirited sketches of the natives of the
Colony, numerous busts and medallions, the
spandrel figures of the Bank of Victoria, reliefs of
boys carrying flowers and fruit, for the Bank of
New South Wales, and the zinc group erected in
Sydney, over the Provident Institute, belong to
1859 —1861.
On the formation of a Gallery of Art at the
Library, Mr. Summers undertook the arrange-
ment of the sculpture, and was one of the
commissioners for the purchase of pictures.
Having laboured so much for so many years, he
began to think of realizing the dream of all
artists—a visit to Rome. He received two public
commissions for marble busts—the great tragedian,
G. V. Brooke, and his Excellency, Sir Charles


Darling-; also two of private individuals, and these
he determined to execute in England. Accordingly,
he set sail in May, 1867, made himself so popular
during the voyage as to be presented with an
address and purse of sovereigns by his fellow
passengers, reached London, and set himself in
an obscure studio, to execute these works and a
marble bust of Captain Sturt, the explorer. He
then made a tour of the principal cities in Europe ;
and his correct taste and unerring judgment
prevented his being bewildered by the vast art-
treasures they contain. After his return, having
conceived an intense desire to dwell at least for a
time in the Eternal City, he went to Weston-super-
Mare to endeavour to obtain commissions enough to
enable him to carry out his design. He was beyond
measure successful. His townspeople vied with
each other to do him honour, a public dinner and
address were given him, and he carried several
commissions thence with him to Rome. Mr,
Knyfton’s bust is one of these, In Rome he met
with much encouragement, and executed busts of
General and Lady Macarthur, and several groups


in marble. His return to London, in 1869. was the
signal for fresh successes ; and he went back with
many excellent commissions from those who knew
how to appreciate his wonderful genius for por-
traiture. Four splendid busts modelled in one week,
will give an idea of his power with the clay; and
as works of art I cannot speak of them too highly.
Among the works executed about this time, were
busts in marble of Admiral Sir Philip Broke, the
celebrated hero of the naval battle between the
Shannon and Chesapeake, and his distinguished
descendant, Admiral Sir George Broke Middleton,
and Lady Broke Middleton. His bust of Viscount
Canterbury, at one time Governor of Victoria, is
also one of his finest and most characteristic works.
I am inclined to think that his name will live longest
as a portrait sculptor, and that his greatest genius
was for this branch of art. The record of the noble
race of portrait sculptors, which includes Chantrey,
Behnes, and Weekes, is not complete without the
name of Charles Summers.
The record of the remaining years of his life
is one of unvaried energy, labour, and success.


Some of his greatest works were executed during
this period—a recumbent figure of Lady Macleay,
erected in Godstone Church, Surrey ; a boy and
dog, of which I believe three copies were sold;
a colossal group of Lynceus and Hypermnestra,
exhibited in the Royal Academy; Resignation—a
monument in the Melbourne Cemetery; Nydia;
two groups of a mother and child; a child and dog,
executed for General Macarthur; Instruction—
a group; Innocence; Hero; Samson and Delilah ;
and a number of magnificent busts. “The
Illustrated London News,” “Graphic,” and “Art
Journal ” have on several occasions given en-
gravings of his works. That he worked too
hard for his health may easily be inferred
from this list, which is nevertheless imperfect;
and when I add that he always did the whole
of the modelling, and much of the marble
work himself, we can but wonder at his unceasing
industry. He went into his studio early in the
morning, and seldom left it till late at night. His
studio was the finest in Rome, and he employed
latterly as many as 20 men. He was present in


Rome during- the siege and entry of the Italians
in 1871, after narrowly escaping being shut up in
Paris It was at this period, the Roman citizens,
desirous of recording their admiration of the
talents of the English sculptor, honoured him with
a commission to decorate the hilt of Garibaldi’s
sword.
It now remains to mention the last and greatest
of his works —and the sad end!
In 1876 Mr. Summers received from Mr. W. J.
Clarke, of Melbourne, a commission to execute
four colossal statues in marble—the Queen, the
Prince Consort, and the Prince and Princess of
Wales. After eight months tedious delay, the
preliminaries were arranged, the designs ap-
proved by the Queen, and he returned to Rome to
execute them. A period of preternatural labour
ensued, and these works, together with the
splendid model of a Guardian Angel for Mel-
bourne, a mother and child, a small marble
group, and several busts, were actually completed
in August, 1878, and the royal statues forwarded
to their destination. He then set out for England,


intending to go to Melbourne by the September
mail, and also to consult a London physician,
for his health, hitherto almost uninterruptedly
good, had failed since May. Arrived in Paris, he
visited the Exhibition, and the next day, at the
hotel, fell down in a fit, and was taken up appar-
ently unconscious. An English doctor pronounced
it a case of acute goitre, and his family were at
once informed by telegraph of his dangerous
state. He was removed to Neuilly, and became
gradually worse, till successive fits necessitated
tracheotomy, and the operation was successfully
performed. He survived it but three weeks, and
now lies buriedin Rome —the city he loved so well.
I have only to add that most of these parti-
culars were gathered from his own lips ; and that
if I have said anything in this short memoir which
may give the least pain to the living, my apology
must be, an intense desire to do justice to the
dead. He was as much beloved as a man as he
was admired as an artist.
London, July, 1879.


London, July, 1879.
Dear Mr. Kjnglake,
You have asked me to write a few more particulars
concerning Mr, Charles Summers, the sculptor, to
complete the short memoir I have already penned ; and
I think I cannot do better in fulfilment of your wish
than put together, in the form of a letter to you, who
have taken such kind and continued interest, both in the
pamphlet and the Memorial Bust, such short reminiscences
of his life, work, and character, as first occur to me.
I should certainly think the happiest portion of Mr.
Summers’ life was that occupied in executing the Burke
and Wills Monument in Melbourne —a period of about
two years. He was then a comparatively young man,
enjoying the most robust health, and possessing almost
Herculean strength—able to break a stone with one
blow of his fist. His studio, in Collins-street, was the
rendezvous of whoever in those early colonial days
practised or loved art in any way : and there were a few
artists there whose works might have claimed for them


a place even in London. Mr. Summers had always a
word of ready advice or welcome for each of his various
visitors, and even in the course of his difficult duty of
selecting or rejecting pictures, etc., for his exhibitions,
never made one serious enemy. Indeed, very few of
those who knew him in life but now have a kind and
eulogistic word for the genial sculptor. He worked
untiringly, night and day, at his great Monument,
assisting in all the mechanical details, and invariably
going through the dangerous work of tapping the fount
at the castings himself. He once narrowly escaped
suffocation in the pit, where the pieces of the mould were
drying at a charcoal fire. That the figures of the
Aborigines in the beautiful reliefs (among the cleverest
of his works, and those with which he was best
satisfied,) might be truthful, he spent six weeks among
them in the “ Bush,” casting their heads and studying
such other details as might render the work perfect.
One of his finest busts was modelled just before this—
that of the Rev. Dr. Binney. I believe it was executed
in three sittings of about an hour each, in the
Doctor’s study, and while he was busily engaged in
writing.


Mr. Summers would often relate how, when he had
received the gold and a silver medal the same night at
the Royal Academy, instead of joining in the festivities
of his fellow-students, he walked quietly across the Park
to where his father and brother were anxiously awaiting
the tidings of defeat or success, and, throwing himself in
a chair, said not a word; so they, imagining he had
failed, began to console him. The party proceeded to
supper, and those who knew him will have no
difficulty in imagining the mischievous smile with which
he produced first one medal and then the other from
his pocket, and laid them beside his plate.
His idea of the mission and subject of art were the
highest conceivable ; he could not bear the thought that
anything mean or vulgar should be perpetuated by the
brush or chisel, and hence his very small appreciation
of the Dutch Masters, Rembrandt excepted. In the
last year of his life he refused to make three busts at 120
guineas each because it was made a sine qu& non that
the details of modern dress should be copied. His
admiration of the works of Michael Angelo was intense.
One of his most remarkable gifts was that of seeing in
a moment if a work of art was good or bad : no second


glance was required. He never forgot a face he had
once seen. For him life consisted of but one thing—
Art ; for that he lived; and, almost in the midst of it,
died : he could not have conceived existence without
it. Always, and under every circumstance, he was
thinking of his work, and gathering from whatever
surrounded him such imformation as he thought
would prove of service. In omnibuses, railway car-
riages, etc., he found opportunities of study, and could
always reproduce a likeness from memory of the
individuals so observed. In the short intervals of repose
generally forced upon him by circumstances, he was as
playful as a boy, as full of fun, and as easily amused. The
utter childishness of his relaxations may have rendered
them more completely restful. There was a charming
entente cordiale between him and young children. I
think I ought to add that, like many west country men,
he was rather superstitious.
His death has been noticed and lamented in many
newspapers, and in letters from many of his friends, both
celebrated and obscure. The correspondent of The
Daily News, of November sth, 1878, truthfully remarks,
in commenting on Mr. Summers’ death, that he worked


indefatigably, going into the studio early in the morning
and remaining often till late at night, With such appli-
cation did he labour for the last nine years in Rome,
that few sculptors ever accomplished more work than
he did in the same time. He did almost all ol it,
whether in the clay or marble, with his own hands,
having a rare ability and boldness in using the sculptor’s
hammer and chisel ; while he had an equal celerity in
modelling, especially portraits, an instance of which is
a bust of Sir Archibald Michie, Agent-General of
Victoria, which was modelled in two hours’ sitting.
. . . . The members of the British Academy of
Arts in Rome, of the committee of which the deceased
was a member, will feel his loss, as he was greatly
respected among them.”
The Argus, the leading Melbourne paper, observes,
“Personally, Mr. Summers was a man whom to know was
to esteem. Simple in manners, frank and gentle in speech,
modest and unassuming by nature, and entirely free from
that self-consciousness and self-assertion which make
some artists so intolerable in private life, he was the first
to discern and admire ability in others ; and the last to
obtrude his own upon your notice. Hence it was a


pleasure to converse with him upon art topics, and to
listen to the expression of his views and opinions,
which were always the fruit of independent thought
and reflection, and were conveyed rather by way of
suggestion than by that of positive statement or dog-
matic declaration.”
The Australasian remarks, “ Mort sur le champ de
bataille ! Charles Summers has gone down in his
harness, —a good way too for a brave and earnest man.
Looking back upon some acquaintance with the late
sculptor, the impressions which are strongest are of
his serene gentleness and the quickness of apprehension
which enabled him to secure points of characteristic
vrai semblance even from description.”
It is indeed safe to affirm that Mr. Summers was
loved and respected wherever he was known. Amuse-
ments, commonly so called, had no attractions for him ;
literature came in for a very small share of his attention,
and his mind, free from traditional bias, was perfectly
ready to devote itself entirely to the one object
which ever engrossed it. None of the common
weaknesses of men can be attributed to him ; he neither
drank nor smoked, nor devoted himself to any of the


frivolities of dress and fashion. He would have made
at least as good a painter as sculptor, having a
wonderful eye for color, and a good perception of
chiar-oscuro.
He never had any doubt as to what was right in Art,
and always went straight to the end he proposed to
himself. To him the Greeks were law, and M. Angelo
a wondrous canon to be reverentially studied. Flaxman
he reverenced for his tremendous simplicity and feeling;
and he believed Behnes and Chantrey to be the truest
guides in sculptural portraiture. During the last ten
years of his life his principles were matured, and in many
respects original: no need to tell him the cause of an
effect, or the effect of a cause (I speak as regards art) ;
his mind knew all intuitively. Regarding the gift of
genius, he was second to none ; in culture, some have
surpassed him ; and I cannot now stop to consider
which has the greater power over the average human
soul. To the poet and artist, I know the former is
incomparably the most precious. lam inclined to
think that his earlier and most studious works are best
as examples of sculpture ; but I am sure that his later
abound more in sentiment and imagination. His works
c


may always be distinguished among others by their
simplicity and breadth of treatment. No sculptor ever
better understood the treatment of the human eye, about
which he had formed many theories for himself; or the
delicate lines, curves, and folds of their drapery. The
latter is carried to great perfection in all his later works,
especially in the colossal marble statue of the Princess
of Wales now in Melbourne. His intense appreciation
of all that was delicate or beautiful, has rendered his
female busts most exquisite. The concentrated experi-
ence of a life so uniformly devoted to art as his, must
be most valuable; but it is gone with him, and only the
feeble echo of his inspirations remain ; for though in
his works he yet speaks, to how few it is given to read
the language 1
In early life he was most economical, often enclosing
the result of his week’s labours in a piece of plaster and
throwing it into a box, till he had realized enough to
enable him to study at the Academy ; and though in
later life he wanted for nothing that was necessary, he
was at no lime extravagantly inclined. In his life, as in
his work, simplicity was his rule ; patience and industry
were his guides to the success and distinction he attained.


Of his last sad illness it is not necessary I should
speak again, except to say that it was endured with
unmurmuring patience and never-failing resignation,
and in such a manner as to win the esteem and respect
of all who came in contact with him for the first
and last time during the six weeks it lasted.
And now, dear Mr. Kinglake, permit me to thank
you again for the interest you have taken in a real
“Somersetshire Worthy,” and subscribe myself,
Very sincerely yours,
MARGARET THOMAS.




[FROM "THE MELBOURNE ARGUS."]
Presentation to the Natinal Gallery.
A large number of ladies and gentlemen assembled in the
ante-room of the National Gallery, yesterday, to witness the
presentation by Mr. W. J. Clarke, M.C.L., to the trustees of the
Public Library and National Gallery, of the statues, in marble,
executed by the late Mr. Summers, of the Queen, the late Prince
Consort, and the Prince and Princess of Wales. The following
trustees were present: —His Honour Sir Redmond Barry, Sir
James M’Culloch, Sir John O’Shanassy, M.L.A., and Messrs.
T. T. A’Beckett, E. Langton, D. C. M’Arthur, and C. E. Bright.
The four statues have been executed in what is known as the
heroic size, and the deceased sculptor has chosen a sitting posture
for each figure, a method of treatment to which he was greatly
attached; and some of our readers will remember the success
with which he adopted it in his designs for a monument to
commemorate the Shakspeare Tercentenary in this colony; while
the figure of Wills, in the bronze memorial of the explorers,
will also recur to mind as a further illustration of the
artist s predilection. No doubt there is an agreeable sense of
repose and an absence of formality and rigidity about the
human figure when thus pourtrayed, which compensates for the
loss of whatever additional dignity and impressiveness may bo
considered as attaching to an erect image; while it must also be
acknowledged that modern costume, especially in the case of
men, does not lend itself very readily to picturesque and effective


treatment in sculpture. And certainly one of the grandest
statues of perhaps the only artist of modern Europe, worthy to
compare with the Greek sculptors, is a sitting figure. We refer
to the well-known “II Pensiero,” by Michael Angelo, in the
sacristy of the Church of San Lorenzo, in Florence. The period
of life at which Mr. Summers has represented the Queen and
the late Prince Consort was when each was about forty. Her
Majesty’s face is somewhat idealised, but that of the Prince
strikes one as being an extremely accurate likeness. The same
remark will apply to the countenance of the Prince of Wales, in
whose features it is easy to trace a resemblance to both parents.
But we venture to think that of the four works, the statue of the
amiable and popular Princess will be the one most generally
admired, not merely because it perpetuates in so pure and
permanent a material the winsome face and graceful form of a
lady who is so universally esteemed and beloved, but because the
deceased sculptor is here seen at his best. He seems to have
found a thoroughly congenial subject, and it has inspired him to
one of his happiest efforts.
Mr. Clarke, addressing the trustees, said: —Gentlemen, —lt is
my privilege to present to the trustees of the Public Library
and National Gallery the statues in this chamber of Her
Majesty the Queen, His Eoyal Highness the late Prince Consort,
and their Eoyal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Wales.
I would be wanting in feeling if I did not refer to the talented
artist who created these figures, and who unfortunately died while
he was on his way to place them with his own hand in this
gallery. (Cheers.) I have also to thank Sir Eedmond Barry for
the large amount of trouble he took in connexion with this
matter in England. Had he not devoted much personal attention


to the matter, we would not have been able to get the Queen’s
assent to have these statues made, and without that consent the
statues would have lost more than half their value. You are, in
fact, more indebted to Sir Redmond Barry than to myself for
these figures. (Sir Redmond Barry,—“Not so.”) I now declare
these figures the property of the National Gallery of Victoria,,
and I trust they will add to the pleasure of the colonists, and the
cultivation of an artistic taste amongst them. (Cheers).
His Honour Sir Redmond Barry, said:—Mr. Clarke, —The
trustees accept gratefully the truly noble donation which you
have bestowed on this institution, and undertake to preserve it
for the benefit of the community to which you have been so
bounteous. At the same time they desire to express their sincere
and respectful condolence for the painful occurrence of a domestic
nature which prevented you from presenting it to them on an
earlier day. It is gratifying to the trustees in many respects that
such a conspicuous instance of the liberality of your nature
should have assumed this form. Fortunate as you are in being
the inheritor of estates and means in extent and amount, far
beyond what is usually allotted to an individual, you have shown
that it is possible to make a right use of wealth; and I may be
allowed to say unblamed in your presence that no walk of public
or private benevolence or charity has been untrodden by you.
(Cheers.) Amongst the multitudinous objects to which your
attention has been spontaneously directed is this institution.
You have considered that the labours and aspirations of the
trustees would be materially assisted by such a contribution as
you have thus made to them. You have graciously acknowledged
that this institution, which is committed to their management,
is based upon such wide principles of general utility that it


deserves encouragement from every quarter. The comprehensive
nature of the subjects included within its range, each of its
kind demonstrated on the highest, latest, and most approved
principles, and the freedom with which all admitted are
■allowed to pursue their studies, gratify their tastes, and
Improve their leisure, have doubtless been recognised by you.
You are probably also satisfied, from the numbers which flock
daily to avail themselves of these advantages, that the entire
community would gladly avail itself of the assistance afforded
by you to the trustees. The trustees are thankful that you
have selected this institution as an object of your liberality,
and also for the manner in which your generosity has
displayed itself. You have chosen to present to us an
illustration of the art of sculpture, which art, in this
generation of all others, is perhaps the least studied and
the least supported by the general public. You have also
chosen to present to us illustrations of some of the most
illustrious personages of the epoch in which we live, namely,
the members of the Royal Family of Great Britain, whose
names you mentioned. You could not, it is clear, have
selected any gift that would have been more truly acceptable
to the whole community than that of the statues. (Cheers.)
You might have induced the artist to attempt something in
imitation of the past; but originality in art is, you evidently
considered, infinitely preferable to anything savouring of
imitation. It is almost impossible for a Christian artist to
enter into the spirit of Pagan philosophy and Pagan religion
sufficiently to evolve out of his own mind representations of
the majestic creations that the Pagans delighted to honour.
To do that, an artist of the present day would have to devote


to classical studies more time and attention than he could
spare from his arduous labours. You might also have com-
manded the services of the most eminent artist in any of the
capitals of Europe; but with a kindness and “ delicate
perception known to few,” you remembered the diligent man
of genius whom we may almost claim a s a citizen of victoria,'
who laboured hard here for many years, and who has made
his name ever memorable. We all lament the premature
death of Mr. Summers, which occurred just as he was
emerging from that cloud of obscurity which almost invari-
ably enshrouds genius in its early stages, and when he was
taking his stand amongst the great artists of the world.
(Cheers.) How Mr. Summers succeeded with the task you
entrusted to him, let those who inspect the result decide. It
is not my intention to detain you at any length either by
eulogy or criticism. But I cannot help saying that we must
all admit that the figure of the Queen now before us is a
work of the greatest genius of modern times. You see in
that figure the majestic repose of conscious power—of the
power of the august sovereign who rules with beneficent
sway over 300,000,000 of the human race. You likewise see
in her lineaments the traces of those tender virtues which
have adorned Her Majesty’s private life, and have distin-
guished her on the throne. You behold a tender mother,
an affectionate relation, and the beloved and adorned mistress
of the vast empire of which we form part; and nowhere is
she more beloved and adorned than in this colony, which
is distinguished by bearing her name. Turning to the
figure of the Princess of Wales, we can see the successful
reproduction of those graces and that elegance of form,
D


clothed with charms peculiar to herself, with which Her
Royal Highness is pre-eminently gifted. In fact, we see in
that figure the representation of one of the most amiable
and lovely women connected with English history. The late
Prince Consort is represented as he was—a prince of great
sagacity, the prudent director of Her Majesty’s counsels, a
loving and affectionate husband, and a careful parent. Lastly,
in the figure of the Prince of Wales, we see represented one
who has shown that he possesses very many talents for making
himself admired and esteemed. We know that he desires to
emulate his father in all those sterling accomplishments
which made that prince so justly esteemed ; that it is his
earnest wish to promote industrial advancement; also that he
takes a deep interest in those of Her Majesty’s subjects who
have settled in the colonies of the British Empire. It will
be observed that the period chosen for the representation of
these members of the Royal Family is about the year 1860.
There is, therefore, a harmony in the design. The figures are
all represented as of the ages of the illustrious originals in
1860. The development of the figures and features has thus
been secured ; and it is scarcely necessary to say that the
result would not have been happy had Her Majesty been
represented as of her present age, and the Prince Consort of
the age when he died. It is agreeable to be able to state that
the Queen was graciously pleased to express her entire appro-
bation of the models submitted by Mr. Summers for her
approval, as expressed by Her Majesty’s command through
the Earl of Carnarvon, while Secretary of State for the
Colonies. The question now arises, how ean the trustees turn
to the best account the donation which you have so muni-


ficently presented to the public ? Upon this question I speak
with diffidence. It is manifest that the best way to turn this
donation to the best account is to afford to all classes of the
community the opportunity of inspecting the figures, and
deriving from them all possible advantage. A very large
majority of the community are prevented, by the obligations
of their business vocations, from visiting this institution in
the daytime. For many obvious reasons, this portion of the
institution is closed daily at five o’clock p.m. The daylight
does not serve after that hour, and it is impossible to display
these works efficiently by artificial light. Therefore, there
remains only one mode of enabling those persons whose
occupations prevent them from coming here on week days in
the daytime to derive the advantages that they are entitled
to, and that is, to open the institution on Sunday afternoons,
from, say, 3 to 5 o’clock. (Cheers.) In making these remarks
Ido not desire to arouse any feeling of antagonism, for I
respect the feelings, the religious sentiments, and the deep
convictions of those who entertain opposite opinions. This
question is of much importance, and has been the subject of
controversy by speech and pen for so long a time that it is
well nigh exhausted; but I venture to offer a few remarks
upon it. In the first place, I will take what is known as the
“Sabbath-breaking” aspect of the question. The Hebrew
Sabbath and the Christian Sunday are not only different
days, but are established under different dispensations. The
Great Author of the Christian creed has Himself pointed out
that the pharisaical mode of enforcing the keeping of the
Hebrew Sabbath was carried to extremes, and when remon-
strated with for acts done by Himself and others on that day,


He said that the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for
the Sabbath. Great numbers of persons and many nations
entertain a different view with respect to the Sunday from
that held by those who object to what is called Sabbath-
breaking. I have travelled over Roman Catholic Spain,
I ranee, Austria, Relgium, Italy, Bavaria, and Saxony; over
Lutheran, Calvinistic, reforming Germany, Holland, Denmark,
and Scandinavia; and through Russia of the Greek Church ;
and found a universal concurrence in the belief that it is not
inconsistent with the tenets of the truest religion to devote a
portion of the Sunday, after the religious services of the
morning are concluded, to innocent recreation such as that I
have suggested. England appears to be the last stronghold
of what is known as the party of Sabbath observance, but
similar views are gradually spreading there. You see on the
table before you two voluminous books, containing the
evidence given before the House of Commons many years
ago. In that evidence it is clearly shown that a large class
of the people of London suffered great, and, as is there con-
tended, totally unnecessary privation of enjoyment of this
innocent nature, owing to the closing of museums and similar
places on Sunday. However, even in England, I formed one
of 8,000 people who on a Sunday inspected the pictures in
Hampton Court. One portion of that assemblage consisted of
a party of 600 parishioners from the east end of London,
headed by the clergymen of their parish. No one is bold
enough to say that there is anything improper or irreligious
in looking on the Sunday at living animals, and trees, and
shrubs. Why, then, should people be prohibited from
inspecting on that day the skeletons of animals in museums, or


beholding in glass cases trees and rocks, classified in such a
manner as to give some indication of the wonderful works of
nature ? Indeed, it has been contended that, of the two, the
latter afford the most favourable apportunity under certain
conditions of deriving knowledge as to the great design of
the Creator. In the one, there is only a limited field of
observation ; in the other, there are almost unbounded means
of comparing and contrasting the various forms of structure
throughout the extensive domains of natural history. Who
can contend that there is anything improper in beholding
pictures of natural objects or of charming landscapes, or
such figures as are before this assemblage P Is it generous to
accuse persons who wish to enjoy the contemplation and
matured study of such things on Sunday of a desire to
break the Sabbath or act in an improper manner, which
means—if it means anything—in a wicked and sinful
manner ? If there were anything in this chamber or in this
building which would raise a blush on the cheek of modesty or
suggest impure ideas, it should be banished from the place
immediately. It would be as improper and sinful to look on
such things on the week days as on Sundays. Nature does not
suggest such ideas. It should be remembered by those who
oppose the opening of these institutions on Sunday that no one
desires to force them or anyone else to visit such places on that
day. What is wanted is that those who see no harm in repairing
to such places on Sunday should be permitted to do so. It is
also said that it would be dangerous to open these institutions
on Sunday because it would be admitting “ the thin end of the
wedge,” and because the result would be the introduction of the
“ continental Sabbath,” and the opening on Sunday of theatres


and similar places of amusement. From such an illogical, it
might be said, so irrational, a conclusion I wholly dissent. That
is a matter for Legislature to regulate and control by prohibition
and penalty. The trustees of this institution have nothing to do
but to say that after divine service on Sunday and during con-
venient hours, the public shall be admitted to see what can do
them no harm. The last argument in defence of the exclusive
system has often filled me with surprise, namely, that it is not
fair for us to deprive the attendants of their day of rest. To it
there is a conclusive answer. We could not deprive them of
that day if we so desired. Our attendants engage to serve us
during all days in the year excepting Christmas-day, Good
Friday, and Sundays. We cannot compel them to do an hour’s
work on those days. But it would be quite possible to procure
the services of volunteers, who would be ready 'and willing to
undertake the duties of watching these chambers for two hours
on Sundays. There are such volunteers in London. Therefore,
there is not any reasonable ground of objection to this proposal.
A return shows that the Picture Gallery of this institution was
visited by 256,000 persons during seven months of 1875; by
375.000 persons in 1876; by 434,000 persons in 1877; and by
525.000 persons in 1878. On the first two days of this year
about 7,000 persons were admitted, or 3,500 per diem. It is
reasonable to suppose that if the institution were open on
Sundays the number of visitors would rise to 650,000 per
annum. That is a statement deserving much consideration.
This is not a homogeneous community. It is composed of men
of all creeds, and from all countries, of whom the majority who
contribute to the funds required to support the institution
entertain no objection to its being opened. The question of


opening this institution on Sundays has never been thoroughly
examined in our Parliament, although it has been three times
before that body. Nor has it been considered by the trustees
except incidentally, when an application was made to throw
open on Sunday the exhibition held on the premises in that year.
That application was refused. The trustees came to the con-,
elusion that it could not be acceded to, as money could not be
lawfully taken at the doors on a Sunday. Neither by the trustees
of this institution nor by the Council of the University has the
question of opening the doors on Sundays been directly discussed.
There a large and most interesting portion of our property is
unfortunately deposited in a building, condemned alike by
Parliament and the public, to which no access can be had in the
evenings or on Sunday without the consent of the Council, even
should Parliament approve of the measure. In conclusion, I
desire to state that, so for as this subject is concerned, I have
only given expression to my own views. Although the trustees
are honoured with the administration of the affairs of the
institution, as an independent corporation in that respect,
it would not be prudent, it would not be becoming on
my part, to advocate the adoption by them of such a
project, unless assured of the approval by the Ministry
and Parliament of what is still considered susceptible of
discussion and debate. I may be permitted to add that in
making these remarks I have not had the most remote
intention of offending the susceptibilities of any’person. I
desire to convey to you, Mr. Clarke, anew the thanks of
the trustees, with the hope that you may be long spared with
health and inclination to enjoy your vast wealth, and to
continue those acts of benevolence and liberality for which
you are so distinguished. (Cheers.) Sir Redmond concluded


by reading and presenting to Mr. Clarke tbe following
address, suitably engrossed and bound :
“To the Honourable William John Clarice , M.L.C.
“ The trustees of the Public Library, Museum, and National
Gallery of Victoria, at a meeting of their body, held on the
18th of November, 1878, unanimously agreed to the following
resolution :
“1. That the trustees recognise to the fullest extent the spirit
which actuated Mr. Clarke in presenting to them, to be placed
in the Museum of Art of the National Gallery, the statues of—
“ The Queen.
“ His Royal Highness the late Prince Consort.
“ His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.
“ Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales.
“ 2. They regard the donation as affording a memorable
and lasting instance of his generous and well-directed
liberality—one eminently calculated to encourage the suc-
cessful exertions of a distinguished sculptor, to promote by
illustrations of such excellence an intelligent and enlightened
cultivation of the Fine Arts, to stimulate in others who
have acquired affluence an imitation of the praiseworthy
example to enrich the institution, and to inspire and sustain
in the nearts of the people of Victoria the highest feelings
of loyalty to the Crown, and the most respectful and devoted
affection for the persons of Her Majesty and the members
of the Royal Family.” (Cheers.)
Mr. Clarke briefly replied, stating that he felt exceedingly
gratified by the form in which the trustees had accepted his
gift. He should value their address, not only on his own
account, but for the sake of his wife and children. (Cheers.)
The assemblage then dispersed.




