





A HINT
THE HOMEWARD-BOUND.


■
LONDON'
BRINTED BY SPOTTISWOODE AND CO.
NEW-STBEEI SQUARE






A HINT
THE HOMEWARD-BOUND.
A CLERGYMAN
WHO HAS SPENT TEN YEARS IN VICTORIA.
LONDON:
LONGMANS, GEEEN, AND CO.
1865,


’
■
*
'


1 Ps. xxxiii. 7.
7 Ps. xciv. 17, 18.
2 Pro. xxx. 4.
8 Dent. vi. 10-12.
3 Ps. cvii. 25 ; Ps. cxlviii. 8.
n 1 Kings xix. 12; Ps. cvii. 23 ;
4 Ps. Ixxxix. 26.
Ps. cxlv. 6,11, 12;
* Ps. cxlvii. 16.
Ps. xxxiv. 7, 17.
6 Ps. cxxxv. 6.
10 Ps. Ixxvi. 7.
O most powerful and glorious Lord God, 1 at whose
command the winds blow, 2 and lift up the waves of the
sea, 3 and who stillest the waves thereof; 4 who givest
snow like wool, and scatterest the hoar frost like ashes,
who castest forth thine ice like morsels, and who can
stand before Thy cold ? 8 Make us, we beseech Thee, 0
more sensible of Thy providential care, knowing that, il
Thy gracious protection be at any time withdrawn from
us, we must surely perish. 7 We confess, when we have
been safe, and seen all things quiet about us, 8 we have
forgot Thee our God, and refused to hearken to the still
voice of Thy word, 9 and to obey Thy commandments.
But now we see how terrible Thou art in all Thy
works of wonder; the great God to be feared above all; 10
and therefore we adore Thy Divine Majesty, acknowledg-
ing Thy power, and imploring Thy goodness to preserve
us in our present danger. Help, Lord, and save us for
Thy mercy’s sake, in Jesus Christ Thy Son, our Lord.
Amen.




Prayer is a short word, and soon uttered, but its
import is large—so large that it contains the very
life-history of all those who in every age have
been accepted of Gfod. All were alike in this.
In other things they differed and most widely,
but, rich or poor, learned or ignorant, in this one
thing they were all alike. If they fought the
good fight, and went from strength to strength,
then we knew thus much of their secret history,
though they themselves were silent concerning it.
Yet we knew it, without their disclosure, that, one
and all of them, they waited upon (rod in prayer.
We have only to refer to those portions of Scrip-
ture in which instances of fervent prayer are re-
ferred to, and we at once readily understand how
this must have been the case. Under the old dis-
pensation we read of the most striking display of the
Divine power brought about by its influence—de-
liverances effected, miracles wrought, and blessings
bestowed in answer to humble, persevering prayer;
while in the New Testament we find the Lord of
Life himself frequently enforcing this sacred duty,


both by precept and example, and saints and apos-
tles following in His most blessed steps.
In the way of precept, our Saviour has declared
to us, that we must ask, in order that we may re-
ceive—seek, that we may find—knock, before the
door of mercy can be opened to us. As tp the
conditions of our asking, He tells us that we must
do so in faith, assuring us that whatsoever we shall
ask in 'prayer, believing, we shall receive ; 1 and
further declares, of every petition offered up in
His name, that He pledges Himself to grant it.
Whatsoever ye shall ask, I will do it. 3
Again, that we may be furnished with a strong
motive to the steady fulfilment of this duty, He
bids us take heed to ourselves lest at any time
our hearts be overcharged, either with the lusts
or the cares of this life, and so the day of judg-
ment come upon us unawares. Watch ye, there-
fore, (he adds,) and pray always, that ye may he
accounted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son
of man. 3
That we might be supplied with a guide to our
devotions, He has left us a perfect form of prayer,
&c. 4 And in order that warmth and energy might
be imparted to our addresses, he fully proves—
from the case of a parent, evil as he may be,
1 Matt. xxi. 22.
2 John xiv. 14.
3 Luke xxi. 34.
4 Matt. vi. 9.


being ready to give good gifts to his child—that
much more readily will our Heavenly Father
give His Holy Spirit to all that ask Him. 1
Lest at any time we should be discouraged.
He spake the parable of the unjust judge and
the importunate widow, that we might learn to
pray always , and not to faint 2 —that we should
be habitually in that spirit of humble dependence,
desire, and expectation which gives life to prayer;
and, knowing the hindrances we are sure to meet
in attending to this important duty, that we might
still persevere, notwithstanding delays, disappoint-
ments, difficulties, temptations, persecutions, and
conflicts with indwelling sin and our spiritual
enemies.
In order to put us on our guard against
another extreme—the danger of self-confidence
and a self-righteous spirit—the prayer of the
proud Pharisee is recorded for our warning, who
said much about himself, but nothing of God.
7 O
Though he told what he did, he said nothing of
what he wanted, and as no blessing was asked,
none was received; while of the brief emphatic
prayer of the publican, expressive alike of humi-
liation for sin, true repentance, submission, faith,
and hope of pardon and acceptance, it is declared.
This man went down to his house justified rather
than the other?
1 Luke xi. 13. 3 L uk,e xviii. 1. 3 Luke xviii. 14.


But our blessed Lord has not only impressed
upon us the importance of this duty hy His ad-
monitions, encouragements, and warnings; He has
still more strongly enforced it by His own example.
The Gospel narrative frequently mentions His
retiring from His disciples that He might give
Himself up to private devotion, and that He even
continued all night in prayer unto God ; while on
one of these occasions, in the garden of Geth-
semane, the wondrous scene is laid open to our
view—the intense agony of the Son of Man, His
thrice-repeated supplication, and an angel from
heaven strengthening Him, at once reveals the
depth of our Saviour’s sufferings, and displays for
our comfort in the hour of trouble an affecting
■instance of earnest, fervent prayer, accompanied
with perfect submission to the Divine Will. From
these passages we learn the duty of secret prayer, 1
and we learn also what it is to wait upon God, to
continue in prayer. We may not be able with our
dull earthly spirits to remain during whole nights
in offices of devotion, but we may gather a valu-
able lesson from these passages in our Lord’s life
as to the true nature of prayer. Surely it must
require from us something more than a few hasty
snatches of time, and those too, perhaps, grudgingly
bestowed upon it. We cannot but learn from His
example that devotion lies in seeking God, in fre-
1 Appendix I.


quently and perseveringly drawing near to Him—
that God does not presently on any slight address
discover Himself in answer to our desires, but
after a patient continuance in our applications
to Him.
Let us call to mind what prayer is. Prayer
is simply the faithful utterance of those de-
sires and of those necessities of which, even
when unuttered, the heart is full. It cannot,
therefore, exist without the consciousness of our
own helplessness, and of our Saviour’s all-suffi-
ciency; without these feelings, hours of prayer
will be unheeded; with them, be assured the
smallest whisper that faith shall ever utter will
not return unanswered. We have a striking in-
stance of this in the brief yet earnest cry of the
zealous Peter— ‘ Lord, save me/’ 1 Though be-
ginning to sink, it was not too late. It was
enough for our compassionate Eedeemer that it
was the cry of one who had no hope but in His
mercy, yet in His mercy had the most unshaken
confidence. These were the wings which carried
that short petition, ‘ Lord, save me,’ directly to
the heart of Him to whom it was addressed.
This, then, is a true specimen of acceptable
prayer. 2 It is that intercourse with heaven which
calls down upon us its best and choicest gifts,
withdrawing our thoughts from the perishable
1 Matt. xiv. 30. 2 See Appendix 11.


objects of this world, and lifting them up to high
and spiritual things.
When we thus approach the throne of grace,
we may with confidence ask those things which
are needful for us—supply in our wants, comfort
in distress, mercy and pardon for our offences;
and, more than this, it includes all that praise
which we should yield to Grod, to show our due
esteem of all His glorious works, that thanks-
giving whereby we should express our gratitude,
giving thanks always for all things unto Ood
and the Father , in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ while it should ever be accompanied with
that humble confession of our vileness, our guilt
and misery, which is due from us as wretched men
and grievous sinners.
So important, so needful is the duty of prayer,
so great its influence over our whole lives, that an
apostle has admonished us to 'pray without ceas-
ing. Not that we should be always framing
prayers with our lips, but that we should con-
stantly have a readiness and disposition for prayer,
that we should consider it a matter of the deepest
interest and pursue it with unwearied diligence,
that even amid the daily occupations of life our
hearts may breathe forth a silent prayer, and the
spirit be lifted up in holy thoughts and desires
towards heaven. This is the prayer of the
J Eph. v. 15.


Psalmist of Israel when he exclaims, My heart is
fixed —I will sing and give praise ; l fixed—that
is, readily prepared and steadily indieed for
devotion.
To pray without ceasing signifies that we
should press our requests earnestly, and not desist
till they are granted; and when we consider
the value of those good things we implore, so
necessary to our spiritual life and welfare—when
we remember that we not only ask freedom from
the power of sin, our bad inclinations, and vicious
habits, but entreat the sanctifying presence of
God’s Holy Spirit, and its blessed fruits, growth
in virtue, delight in spiritual things, and a sense
of God’s love and favour abiding in us—we may
well persevere till we have obtained them; we
may wrestle with God like Jacob, and with Jacob
exclaim, I will not let Thee go , except Thou bless
me. 2 It is thus God suffers himself to be (en-
treated) prevailed on, and is willingly overcome.
He does not bestow at the first asking, but with-
holds for a time these His choicest gifts, that we
may learn how to prize them. He knows our
wants, as our Saviour tells us, before we ask, and
it would be foolish to suppose that by mere prayer
we could persuade or flatter our Great Creator.
No, it is for some other purpose than this we are
obliged to praj r . God has bidden us thus apply
1 Ps. Ivii. 7. 4 Gen. xxxii. 26.


to Him, because it becomes us so to do—because
it brings us nearer to Him—because it is a
proper instrument of improving and bettering
our souls—because it nourishes in us holy affec-
tions, renders us contented here, and fits us for
the enjoyment of happiness hereafter. It is for
such ends as these that devotion is prescribed, and
perseverance required; and yet how many neglect
it altogether, or allow their worldly affairs to
interfere with the right performance of this solemn
duty. But is devotion itself an affair of no import-
ance ? Can any obligation be more binding on us
than yielding due respect and service to our
Maker and liberal Benefactor ? Can any interest
be more weighty than this, of providing for our
souls eternal health and happiness ?
Whenever, therefore, you do not find that
delight and satisfaction in prayer which you do in
other trivial employments, nor will be at the
trouble to work such dispositions in your souls—
when you gladly turn to other worldly conversa-
tion, yet shun this intercourse with heaven —let me
entreat you to put these questions to yourselves.
Do I know of any other comfort in the time of
anxiety and distress ? Who else but my Heavenly
Father will give me strength to resist temptation,
and enable me to subdue those evil passions which,
if I indulge, are sure to plunge me into ruin ?
If at this moment sickness should seize me, and


I should lie down, deserted by my relatives and
friends, without comfort, without assistance, what
other hope is there ? No, in all such cases as
these we have no other than Gfod. How dreadful,
then, would our situation be if in that hour of
helpless misery He should fail us; if, having
prayed with coldness and indifference in the time
of health, we should find that we could not pray
in the hour of weakness; if, having refused to
call earnestly upon Him while He was near, to seek
Him while He was to be found. He should then
refuse to hear us. 1
Experience will teach you, that if you seldom
come to Grod in prayer, you will little know Him,
scarce remember Him. You will rest insensible
of His love, and regardless of His favour. Be
assured our souls require spiritual nourishment,
as our bodies need supplies of food, and it is
prayer which thus supports them, preserving their
life and strength.
This is that holy and heavenly fire which darts
into our minds the light of spiritual knowledge,
and if we long continue absent from it a night of
darkness will overspread our minds, a deadening
coldness will seize on our affections, and we shall
at length dislike and loathe a duty which might
have been rendered delightful to us. Let us then
turn our hearts to it; at first it may seem difficult.
1 Pro. i. 24-28.


for we are all naturally slow to withdraw our
thoughts and affections from earthly things, and
fasten them on objects purely spiritual: but only
let us persevere, and the difficulty will soon be
removed. The heart is changed by frequent
practice, and, instead of appearing a task, devo-
tion will soon become an easy and grateful employ-
ment. Instead of enmity, or a servile dread towards
God, there will spring up a humble confidence, a
hearty love towards Him ; and when we have once
asked for those pure gifts of heaven, a resigned
will, a quiet conscience, and a title to the favour
of Cfod, when we have once experienced the
delight of possessing them, we shall be ever
ready to exclaim with David, / love the Lord ,
because He hath heard my voice and my sup-
plications. Because He hath inclined His ear
unto me, therefore will 1 call upon Him as long
as I live. 1 Such are the benefits we derive from
prayer, and such is the frame of mind which it
is calculated to produce in us—peace in our own
hearts, and love towards God.
Surely, then, in the distribution of our time, 2
devotion should not want its full share. It rather
claims the choicest portion of it, as being the
noblest part of our duty, the chief concern of our
lives ; for what affairs can be more important than
to refresh our spirits and nourish our inner life;
1 Ps. cxvi. 2. * Appendix 111.


to carry on our correspondence with heaven, and
improve our friendship and interest with God? It
behoves us, therefore, to set apart certain seasons
for that purpose; such as the Psalmist recommends
when he says. It is a good thing to give thanks
unto the Lord , and to sing praises unto Thy
name, 0 most High! To shore forth Thy
loving kindness in the morning, and Thy faith-
fulness every nightl Yes, every day we receive
a new life from God. It is not our own, it is
His free gift, for in Him we live, and move, and
have our being; and for all we know each sun
which rises may be the last that will ever shine
upon us.
When we leave our bed of rest and go forth to
meet the cares and toil, the dangers and tempta-
tions of the world, is it not reasonable that we
should offer up thanks to the gracious Preserver 2
of our life, the Restorer of its support and
comforts ? Is it not reasonable that we should ask
His guidance on all our honest undertakings, and
to His protection commit ourselves, and all that
He has entrusted to our care; and every night,
before we close our eyes in sleep, should we not
bless God, who has preserved us the day past;
implore His mercy for the manifold transgressions
of our duty, and resign our souls into His hands
who alone doth neither slumber nor sleep : praying
1 Ps. xcii. 1,2, 2 .Appendix IV.


that He will keep us from all the dangers of the
night, and raise us up again in health and safety?
For the time to come let us at least begin and
end the day with prayer. Begin each morn with
addressing the throne of grace, and you will soon
find the power which it has to breathe life into the
ensuing employments of the day.
In this sense, you will indeed pray without
ceasing. It would make you ever sensible of
God’s presence; that you are working under His
eye. It would make you conscious of His unceasing
observation; and who shall say what the power
and value is of this consciousness ? How cheering
it is, through the sultry toils of life, the burden
and heat of the day, through laborious efforts
repeated in the face of disappointment, and of
trying discouragements from without and from
within—through vexations and difficulties, and the
sense of failure even in our best undertakings, and
under the painful sense of making so little way in
the work which God has given us to do; so
little way in the warfare we have to wage with
ourselves—so much of life gone by—so little of
life’s work done! Very precious is the consolation
which can then support us; very precious is the
thought that we are not deserted, not alone —that
we are under the eye of God —that our work, with
all its trials, is the work which He has given us
to do, and by the performance of which He is


even now judging us, and noting the judgment
down.
Cheering indeed is it to look up and remember
that our Heavenly Father beholds us—to remem-
ber the morning communion we held with Him—
to feel the comforting presence of His Holy Spirit
giving life to our exertions, and urging us to look
ever onward, that we may keep up with its
strengthening influence.
This is the life of prayer —this is what the
apostle spoke of when he bids us pray without
ceasing. This makes the day to be one continued
prayer, when it is one continued conscious realising
of our morning covenant with Cfod, before the
works and trials of the day began.
And shall we not be prepared to renew this
blessed covenant when the evening closes in upon
us, when the hour of quiet is come, and we look
back to review the day, and see in its history the
fulfilment of the morning promise; when we see
that Clod has been with us, and more than see,
when we believe, that it has been so, and are thus
led to throw ourselves on His unchanging good-
ness, and again to commit our bodies, souls, and
spirits to His protecting care, believing that He has
been about our path, and near us, and in us; that all
things have been working together for our good
that evil, which was on its way to us, has been
1 Eom. viii. 28.


bidden to glance aside; 1 that good has been brought
to our doors by means beyond our conceiving.
When the sense of these are present to us as the
night approaches, surely this is a season when we
should again solemnly renew our devotions, before
sleep once more oppresses us—again commit
ourselves into the hands of our Heavenly Father
with humble and earnest supplication.
Prayer is indeed a precious privilege and an
important duty, and we have high authority and
great encouragement to fulfil it. It was our
dying Lord’s secret employment on earth, and He
has not yet laid it aside, for He is even now at the
right hand of God, and ever liveth to maize inter-
cession for us. 2
1 Appendix V. 2 Heb. vii. 25.


APPENDIX.
I. ‘We should entertain just and awful thoughts of the
Divine Majesty, representing Him as a God of infinite
purity and justice, as well as of power and wisdom;
one who is always present with, and beholds all our
secret thoughts and actions, in order to a future re-
compense. We must endeavour to resemble Him as
much as maybe, in holiness and righteousness, in truth,
in goodness, and in mercy; and we must worship God
from spiritual principles, a sincere love and filial
reverence of Him; and to spiritual ends, that we may
promote His glory, and do what is well pleasing in His
sight; and, after a spiritual manner, serving Him with
the whole heart, soul, and mind, and with a fervency
of spirit.’ —Whitby.
11. ‘ This is a true specimen of acceptable prayer.
With such an example and such an encouragement before
us, let us ask ourselves—Are these the feelings which
occupy my heart when I raise my voice in prayer ?
Have I ever uttered one such earnest, heartfelt petition
as this of St. Peter at the throne of grace ? This is a
question of universal application—but it particularly
addresses itself to members of the Church of England.


We are familiar with a form of words truly scriptural,
truly spiritual, truly applicable to all the multiplied
necessities of the largest congregation; but we may
have been no more benefited by these petitions than
the beggar would be enriched by walking over a golden
pavement.
* Do we pray the prayers which our lips are wont
to utter ? When we repeat Lord, have mercy upon us ,
miserable sinners, is there any feeling of misery ?
When the minister, solemnly addressing himself to the
Omnipotent Jehovah, exclaims, 0 God, make speed to
save us ; and we reply, 0 Lord, make haste to help us,
is this a mere formal repetition of a request in which
we have no interest; or is it an earnest expression of
real feeling, warm from the heart, dictated by a sense of
weakness which we acknowledge ourselves utterly unable
to remedy ? Is it urged by a conviction as heartfelt as
that of the drowning Peter, that if God do not help us, if
Christ do not save us, we must perish, and perish ever-
lastingly ? Without these feelings, there may be many
words, but there is no prayer.’— Lecture on the History
of St. Peter — Eev. Henry Blunt.
111. * When Allred was lying hid amongst the dank
thickets of the Isle of Nobles, he had vowed a vow unto
his God. He promised that if God should give him rest
from his enemies round about, he would dedicate to His
service the third part of his time. The vows of adver-
sity commonly become the broken promises of prosperity :
but not so with Alfred. And now see him in the
palace of his kingdom. He is carefully measuring the
twenty-four hours of the day and night into three equal


portions. There is not a clock in the land to toll the
burial of one hour, and the birth of the next. There is
not even an hour-glass to be turned by Alfred’s watch-
ful hand. What will Alfred do? With six wax
candles carefully marked by lines of different colours—
each burning for four hours, three inches an hour—
he marks a night and day. “ They did orderly burn
four hours apiece,” says Spelman, and it was the duty of
the keepers of the Chapel Eoyal to go and advertise the
king how the coloured hour-lines were consuming in
their turn. To shield this little torch of time from
wavering before the breath of chance winds, it was
placed in a lanthorn of thin white horn with a frame of
wood, the king’s own happy contrivance ; and thus the
thrifty economist knew when to give his eight hours to
God in devotional services or pious works ; his eight to
the affairs of his kingdom, and the remaining eight to
a short sleep, to hasty meals, and to some precious hours
of study. This was the man who had fought fifty-six
pitched battles with the invaders of his country, and
whose days and nights were passed in almost con-
tinuous suffering from some incurable malady.’—His-
tory of England.
IY. ‘ God’s work of Providence is His most holy,
wise, and wonderful preserving and governing of all
His creatures, and all their actions. Our world is but
an outlying corner of His creation, bearing, perhaps, as
small a proportion to the great universe as a single
grain bears to all the sands of the sea shore, or one
small quivering leaf to the foliage of a boundless forest.
Yet, even within this earth’s narrow limits, how vast


the work of Providence ! How soon is the mind lost
in contemplating it! How great that Being whose
hand paints every flower and shapes every leaf; who
forms every bud on every tree, and every infant in
the darkness of the womb; who feeds each worm
with a parent’s care, and watches over the insect that
sleeps away the night in the bosom of a flower ; who
throws open the golden gates of day, and draws around
a sleeping world the dusky curtains of the night; who
measures out the drops of every shower, the whirling
snow-flakes, and the sands of man’s eventful life; who
determines alike the fall of a sparrow and the fate of a
kingdom; and so overrules the tide of human fortunes,
that whatever befall him, come joy or sorrow, the be-
liever says—it is the Lord; let Him do what seemeth
Him good.
‘ln ascribing this great work to Jesus Christ, we
simply declare our belief in a truth which Scripture so
plainly asserts. All things were created hg Him, 1 and
by Him all things consist . 2 In the hands that were
once nailed to the cross, it places the sceptre of universal
empire; and on those blessed arms that now enfold
every child of God, it hangs the weight of worlds.
Great is the mystery of godliness ! 3 the Lord Jesus Christ
even now upholdeth all things by His power: 4 By Him
the angels keep their holiness, and the stars their orbits ;
the tides roll along the deep, and the seasons through
the year ; kings reign, and princes decree justice ; the
Church of God is held together, riding out at anchor
the rudest storms; and by Him, until the last of His
elect are plucked from the wreck, and His purposes of
1 John i. 1. 2 Col. i. 15,16. 9 1 Tim. iii. 16. 1 Heb. i. 3.


mercy are all accomplished, this guilty world is kept
from sinking under a growing load of sins.
‘lt is good to see God’s hand on every extraor-
dinary occasion, and we may be ready to acknowledge
His Providence in such events as disease or death, or
any remarkable escape from danger. But is it not,
after all, a more remarkable Providence when we are
continually preserved in peace and safety, when we
travel the livelong day free from all alarm or accident
whatever, or pass thousands of miles over the trackless
ocean in perfect safety, to the haven where we would be ?
‘ Let clear-eyed Faith behold Christ on His Throne,
with the strong hand of a God, and the sympathies of a
man guiding in Heaven the helm of your fortunes, and
you may go to sleep in the rudest storm.
‘ What should hinder him whose head is pillowed on
Jesus’ bosom, and who feels himself enfolded in the
arms of Providence, from fulfilling this high, this
happy command ? Be careful for nothing ; but in every-
thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let
your requests be made known unto God. And the peace
of God, which passeth all understanding , shall keep your
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus' I—Christ 1 —Christ in
Providence —Guthrie.
V. It was on the homeward voyage, from Melbourne to
Liverpool, on the 4th of April 1864, when the vessel was
in latitude 54° 40' south, and longitude 145° 27' west,
which is somewhere about midway between Melbourne
and Cape Horn, in the South Pacific Ocean, the ‘ Royal
Standard ’ had a very near escape of being dashed to
1 Ph. iv. 6, 7.


pieces against one of those formidable floating masses
which in the summer of the Antarctic region are fre-
quently detached from the frozen waters of the South
Pole, and drift into the highway of Australian naviga-
tion. The weather was hazy at eleven o’clock in the
morning; the vessel was sailing with a fresh breeze
from the north-west, ten knots an hour; her steam-
engines, therefore, were not at work, and her screw-
propeller was raised, while she made use of the favour-
able wind. Suddenly she ran into a dense fog. The
look-out man reported that she was in broken water,
and immediately afterwards saw a large iceberg on the
right hand, close under her starboard bow. The captain
instantly had the helm put hard a-starboard, called all
hands, and braced the yards sharp up, thus bringing the
ship alongside of the iceberg, instead of running into
it, as she would otherwise have done, for it was impos-
sible to stay her course. The iceberg lay just under
her lee, its precipitous cliffs, six hundred feet in height,
were towering above the ship on the right hand, their
ends being concealed by the fog; the only question was
whether the ship could get past without being driven
against them. The sea, running high that way, gradu-
ally settled her against the iceberg broadside on. Each
wave now knocked her against it; the rebound of each
wave carried off her hull, but struck her yards against
the iceberg above. They bore one or two of these
shocks, while causing a shower of great lumps of ice to
fall upon the deck. At length the main-topmast and the
mizen-topmast snapped asunder just above the caps,
and fell, bringing down with them all the upper masts,
yards, and gear belonging to each, and breaking in their


fall the brass bands of the lower yards. The ship
meanwhile still moved slowly on. In several places the
starboard quarter was stove in. The iron beams of the
poop-deck, across the breadth of the vessel, were bent
so as to bulge up the deck as much as one foot. The
walls of the cabins were damaged, and the captain’s
cabin stove in, breaking up the case which contained
the ship’s chronometers, and scattering them, with other
wreck of the cabin and its furniture, on the floor. By
another crash, an upper plate amidships was split, with
considerable damage besides. At this moment the
destruction of the ship seemed quite inevitable; but,
as she continued slowly to move ahead, under mainsail
and foresail, there was still some hope. The ‘ Royal
Standard ’ had thus rubbed shoulders with the iceberg
for about half-an-hour, scraping along half-a-mile of its
length, when, happily, the end of it was seen through
the surrounding fog, and at last the ship got clear. One
of the passengers says that they all acknowledged their
gratitude to Almighty God for their preservation from
this fearful danger ; and he adds that they would bear
testimony to the good conduct of the captain, officers,
and crew, by whom the discipline of the ship was per-
fectly maintained, and whose efforts to save her were
at length crowned with success.




O most mighty and gracious good God, Thy mercy
is over all Thy works, 1 but in special manner hath been
extended toward us, whom Thou hast so powerfully
defended. 2 Thou hast showed us terrible things and
wonders in the deep, that we might see how powerful
and gracious a God Thou art ; 3 how able and ready to
help them that trust in Thee. 4 Thou hast showed us
how both winds and seas obey Thy command; that we
may learn, even from them, hereafter to obey Thy voice,
and to do Thy will. 5 We therefore bless and glorify
Thy Name, for this Thy mercy in saving us. 6 And we
beseech Thee, make us truly sensible now of Thy mercy,
as we were then of the danger ; 7 and give us hearts
always ready to express our thankfulness, not only by
words, but also by our lives, in being more obedient
to Thy holy commandments. 8 Continue, we beseech
Thee, this Thy goodness to us; that we, whom Thou
hast saved, may serve Thee in holiness and righteous-
ness all the days of our life ; 9 through Jesus Christ our
Saviour. Amen.
1 Ps. cxlv. 9.
* Ps. cxvi. 8.
* Ps. Ixv. 5.
4 Ps. xxxvii. 40.
* Is. i. 3.
6 Ex. xv. 2.
7 Ps. cvi. 12, 13.
8 Ps. cxix. 32.
9 Luke i. 74, 75.


