

THE
CORNILL MAGAZINE.
Published Monthly, price Is. net. Annual Subscription, postage free, 13s. 6d.
to Canada and Newfoundland; 14s. to any other address in the Postal Union.
NOVEMBER 1916.
CONTENTS. pag*
Flyleaves: Tales of a Flying Patrol, B.E.F.
1915. I * 513
The Tutor’s Story. Chaps. XXXYIII-XLI (conclusion).
By the late Charles Kingsley, revised and com-
PLETED BY HIS DAUGHTER, LUCAS MALET . •
The Tercentenary of Richard Hakluyt. By E.
Hallam Moorhouse
The Old Contemptibles : Fighting Strength. By
Boyd Cable
Squires and Trade in Olden Times. By A. G.
Bradley ...•'••••
A Highland Anzac. By Lady Poore_ . •
The Brink of Acheron. By Claude E. Benson . 595
What our Soldiers Read. By Beatrice Harraden <jo7
Lost Horses. By R. T. Coryndon, C.M.G. . . 614
« The Progress of Pickersdyke.’ By Jeffery E.
Jeffery
Balliol Memories. Anote bytheHoN. A. E.Gathorne-
Haedy b4O
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Communications to the Editor should be addressed to the care of Messrs.
Smith, Elder, & Co., 15 Waterloo Place, S.W.
All Contributions are attentively considered, and unaccepted MSS. are returned
r when accompanied by a stamped addressed envelope; but the Editor cannot
hold himself responsible for any accidental loss. MSS. cannot be delivered on
personal application. Articles of a political nature are not accepted.
Every Contribution should be type-written on one side of each leaf only, and
should bear the Name and Address of the Sender ; a preliminary letter is not
desired. . __
LONDON;
SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 15 WATERLOO PLACE, S.W.
PARIS: a AUG NANI A CO.
V£ir YORK: INTERNATIONAL NEWS COMPANY. MELBOURNE: MELVILLE A MULLEN, PROPTY.
SYDNEY and BRISBANE; EDWARDS, DUNLOP Jc CO,, Limited.
ADELAIDE; RIGBY, LTD. TASMANIA: WALCH Jc SONS.
TORONTO • TORONTO NEWS COMPANY. MONTREAL; MONTREAL NEWS COMPANY.
7


*To CURE —is the Voice of the Past.
To PREVENT —is the Divine Whisper of the Present *
INDOOR WORKERS
When brainwork, nerve strain, and
lack of exercise make you feel languid
—tired—' blue ’ —a little
END'S ‘FRUIT SALT’
in a glass of cold water will clear
your head and tone your nerves.
This world-famous natural aperient for over 40 years
has been the standard remedy for constipation, biliousness,
impure blood, and indigestion.
A Judicious Rule. —' Ist, Restrain your appetite, and
get always up from the table with a desire to eat more. 2nd,
Do not touch anything that does not agree with your
stomach, be it most agreeable to the palate.' These
rules have been adopted in principle by all dieticians of
eminence, and we recommend their use.
A LITTLE at the RIGHT TIME is better than Much
and Running Over at the Wrong,
END’S ‘ FBUIT SALT ’ IS SOLD BY CHEMISTS AND STORES THROUGHOUT THE WORLD.
£
£
m
onfy ar by J- C. ENO, Ltd., ‘Fruit Salt* Works, London, S.E.
INCORPORATED
A.D. 1720.
Head Office:
ROYAL EXCHANGE,
LONDON, E.C.
ROYAL EXCHANGE ASSURANCE
FIRE, LIFE,
SEA,
ACCIDENTS,
MOTOR CAR,
PLATE GLASS,
BURGLARY,
EMPLOYERS’
LIABILITY,
The Corporation will act as
EXECUTOR OF WILLS,
TRUSTEE OF
WILLS AND SETTLEMENTS.
LIVE STOCK,
THIRD PARTY,
LIFT, BOILER,
MACHINERY,
ANNUITIES,
FIDELITY
GUARANTEE.
Prospectus and all information may be obtained on application to the Secretary.
Head Office—ROYAL EXCHANGE, LONDON, E.C.
West End Office-44 PALL MALL, LONDON, S.W.
8


A HIGHLAND ANZAC.
BY LADY POORE.
Clean aims, rare faculties, strength and youth,
They have poured them freely forth
For the sake of the sun-steeped land they left
And the far green isle in the North.
Australia’s Men, by Dorothea Mackellar.
For the first time in the life of each of us Phoebe and I have been
to Scotland. It is excusable in Phoebe, who is so many years
my junior and only paid her first visit to the British Isles in 1904,
but I am ashamed to think I have been going to and fro upon the
earth and the sea for nearly half a century without once crossing
the Border. And yet the postponement of this excursion into the
near unknown is not without advantages. One has heard of
people who had neither permission nor opportunity to read the
Bible till they were grown up, and to them it came as a revelation
of wonder and beauty. That is what the Highlands have been to
us whose minds have already been filled with impressions of various
shapes, colours, sizes, and consistencies till it is surprising there
should be one corner left, one spot of absorbent tissue upon which
the imprint of a new sensation may be received. The long journey,
undertaken at a moment when London was like a basement kitchen
and even Perth no better than a stuffy attic, ended in the aromatic
ethereal sweetness of a six-mile drive through heather, bog-myrtle,
and bracken, past twisted firs, red-barked and shaggy-headed,
standing crookedly against a blushing sunset sky.
We woke next morning with the waters of Lochalsh plashing
and murmuring not many yards from our beds. Ten huge sea-
gulls screamed and squabbled over their breakfast on a field of
orange seaweed slashed with silver pools and embossed with blue-
black knobs of granite; and with them, grudgingly tolerated as
humble retainers, were three hoodie crows and a yellow hen with
nine chicks of mixed parentage. Beyond the pools lay a stretch
of darkling water shadowed by the black velvet hills of Skye twin
hills that faced us with a narrow strait between them leading
south. It was hard to dress quickly with half one’s attention
flying out of the window, but the prospect of eating real porridge


was alluring, and after breakfast the exploration of a new world.
We would not have changed places with Columbus.
We were the only visitors at the comfortable grey-gabled hotel
at Z and absorbed and gladly held the friendly, if un-
demonstrative, attention of the tiny village, a row of little houses
set by the lochside on a sheep-trimmed sward where bare-legged
children with dark bright eyes kept holiday from dawn to dusk in
company with a couple of sheep dogs and a pack of wise-faced,
short-legged terriers. Thatched cottages from whose moss-grown
roofs grass and ferns sprouted, and low stone houses whose walls
were gay with scarlet fuchsias and blazing tropoelum crouched
behind fenced gardens in which the prose of potatoes and cabbages
was enlivened by the invasion of tall blood-red poppies with navy-
blue hearts and grey-green leaves.
We had been a week at Z , a week of undiminished fervour
as explorers within a three-mile radius, favoured with warm sun-
shine and blessed by the sight of mountains, sea, and sky varying
almost from minute to minute in colour, character and atmosphere,
when the Highland Anzac descended from a dog-cart at our very
door. We had lazily breakfasted in our rooms, and I was dressing
at the moment but peeped behind the blind in time to catch a
glimpse of the broad-brimmed hat of the tall soldier. Instantly
I pinned my Australia brooch (the shoulder and hat badge of the
Australian Imperial Force) into my tie and sent my maid to tell
Phoebe of her countryman’s approach. Before I was ready to
leave my room I heard her welcoming the new-comer. Had he
been the last and least of Australia’s soldiers he must have re-
sponded to. the friendship in her warm, deep tones ; but he was
of the true and the best type—the type now familiar to English
eyes, yet, somehow, exotic still. Nearly six feet high is Donald
Macleod, rose-bronze of skin, broad of shoulder and lean of limb ;
square-browed and endowed with well-opened eyes of a blue, now
bright, now shadowed, like the waters of a mountain tarn, and
fringed with thick black lashes. When he laughs he squeezes up
his eyes till the dark fringes interlace, and his small teeth flash
white between lips hot full but kindly and humorous. He is a
corporal, and we believe him to be twenty-four. Born in New
South Wales and educated at the best of Sydney’s schools—and
they are very good—he travelled westward like the rising sun to
Perth (W.A.). A pearl-fisher of Broome by choice and occupation,
he basked for a few years in and on the sunny waters of a tropical


archipelago, and when the Empire wanted him he came, one of
twenty-two Macleods, expatriated patriots of his clan who, from
the simple private to the distinguished colonel, have left their all
at the Antipodes to follow the old flag. He was in the first division
of the A.I.F. to see service in Flanders, and there to the slight
wound he had received at Gallipoli he added five others, all in his
left side, which chiefly interest him as providing a reason for his
joining the Australian Flying Corps, a service in which he would
not have to carry a pack.
The mettle and temperament of the Anzac fit him peculiarly for
dashing enterprises. He is wasted on slow and dogged nibbling
and unsuited for the tame but valuable task of following up the
pioneer. His psychological attitude and mental equipment, like
his physique, are those of the race-horse : he may break his heart if
he is badly ridden in a race, but he will surely break it if he is put
to ploughing.
‘ I’m ashamed of this jacket,’ said Donald Macleod, surveying his
shabby sleeve with disfavour. ‘ I bought it off a fellow the other
day when I hadn’t a rag to my back, but I’ll get a tailored jacket, not
an issued one, in London.’ ‘ I hear the Anzacs’ measurements
are an inch every way more than the English soldiers,’ said Phoebe
proudly. * That’s right,’ answered the boy. * And an inch or so
less in every way in boots,’ said Ito myself. Corporal Macleod was
wearing a pair of clumsy-looking English-made boots, and I remem-
bered the beautifully cut boots and gaiters I had seen worn by a
couple of newly arrived Australian Tommies in London a month or
two ago. It is a fact that Australian khaki and leather equipment
is vastly superior to that produced in England. Australian sheep
and cattle have afforded their very best, and Australian factories
have put their finest work into the Anzacs’ uniforms, so that the
most ordinary private has a look of unusual smartness as long as his
workaday rig holds together.
Our Anzac had been given ten days’ furlough as soon as ever he
was fit to leave the hospital where he had been for ten weeks, and
had come north to visit his unknown Highland ‘ aunties ’ a few miles
from Z . They were kind and hospitable, but it wasn’t ‘ life,’ and
Donald Macleod is very human, bubbling with vitality, eager for ex-
periences. The lift he had been offered to Z that morning gave
him a chance to stretch a mind weary with answering questions
about his fa mily in Western Australia on his last morning in Scotland,
and when his fellow-travellers, two elderly members of a School


Board Committee, had been deposited at our door, he was free to
browse around alone. But we did not let him browse alone. In our
own sitting-room we gave him ‘ morning tea,’ an institution dear to
Australians and easily adopted by those who visit Australia, and
then we went and sat on a great purple rock crested with white
and orange lichens and three parts surrounded by the falling tide,
and talked about the war. Corporal Macleod was as completely
free from shyness as he was from ‘ swank,’ answering our questions
frankly but minimising his own share in the worlds earthquake.
• They’re awfully good to us in England, but the papers insult on
making us all out heroes, whereas we’re really only good soldiers,
was the refrain of his reminiscences. ‘ And it’s the same in France
mind you. I talk French a bit (there’s all sorts to talk to up at
Broome), but the French beat me once they begin to chat. They
were ripping to us at Dijon ; the French ladies couldn t do enough
for us at the railway station with flowers and fruit and what not.
One of our chaps pondered a bit and then said to the leading lady .
Madame, !e rose de Dijon est le gloire de Dijon, mais ye dis les
dames de Dijon est le vrai gloire de Dijon.” She seemed to grasp
what he meant and went on talking nineteen to the dozen and
smiled mote than that. But some of the peasants were completely
“ boxed ”by the Australian badges. They kept asking if we were
Autrichiens You see we were the first Australians to get over.
They know all about it now, and nothing is too good for us.
It was near Armentieres that our Anzao was wounded. A
bursting shell made five holes in him as he was lying on the ground.
■ I got the news of the Battle of Jutland when they were dressing
my wounds, and, my word !it hurt more than the dressing. I said
to myself, “ This is my bad day, sure enough.” It beats me now how
the papers made such a sad song about that victory. The day
before I was near being wiped out by a sheik Only that something
made me wait and talk to a parson—not a habit of mine it wou d
me clean. He was a good chap too and I don t mind
owing him my life. You’d be surprised to see the way the French
aTthe Belgians carry on their business as if nothing was happen-
ing There was an old woman used to bring the newspapers m o
“ r trenches as regular as clockwork, no matter how the Boche was
Sto ‘Ar S en’ S t you being a Highlander ?’ we asked, for our
minds were so full of the charm of the place and the history of
its people that we felt positively envious of the boy s origin.


He smiled disarmingly and answered ‘ I haven’t much of an
eye for scenery ; I don’t seem to notice it much, anyway ; and, to
say the truth, I’m keen on getting to a place in Hampshire called
A where a big swell a friend in Westralia gave me an intro-
duction to lives. There’ll be more people there, and I’ve not seen
many so far outside the hospital at X ,’ * Were they good to
you there ? ’ I asked. ‘ Good as gold, but uncommon strict, and
there were more flowers to smell than food to eat on the table at
meals some days. But they were kind, and no mistake. The ward-
sister opened all the windows of the ward I was in to let me hear
the gramophone in another wing spouting out “ Australia will be
there.” There were a lot of enterics among the patients, poor
chaps. Queer, isn’t it ? how the ones I’m most sorry for seem to
get the least attention from visitors. Why, I wouldn’t wear my
wound, stripe in hospital for fear they’d feel out of it, but there were
ladies, young and pretty and old and ugly, who’d come into the
ward and, if they saw a man with a couple of fingers missing or a
bandage round his head, it was “ Oh, I am so sorry you are wounded !
Does it hurt much ? Would you care to come out for a motor-ride
and have tea at our house this afternoon ? ” • . . The wounded
chap would say “ My wound’s all right, thank you, I’m only wear-
ing that bandage to please the doctor ” ; but she’d go on pouring out
sympathy and invitations till the poor devil was forced to accept.
Next bed, perhaps, there’d be an enteric, dead sick of hospital
and feeling like nothing on earth. “ Where were you wounded ? ”
the lady would ask. “ Not wounded, miss—enteric (or perhaps
dysentery)’s my trouble.” “ 000-hh ! ” says the sympathiser with
wounded men only, and on she goes to the next bed. No drives or
tea-parties for the men that were lying there weeks and weeks,
while we that were w r ell and fit, but for a bullet-hole or two or a
scratch of a shell, would be fairly smothered with attention. My
word ! it used to make me feel sick and ashamed.’
Phoebe was in Cairo in March and had seen the shocked faces
and up-raised hands of those who unsparingly condemned the
mad pranks of idle Anzacs in that city, the most unsuitable head-
quarters for half-disciplined troops imaginable, ‘ Were you one
of the men who decorated Ibrahim Pasha’s equestrian statue by
putting a nose-bag on his horse ? ’ she asked, ‘ I wasn’t in that,’
said Corporal Macleod, ‘ but I helped to throw a piano out of the
window of one of the houses we wrecked in the quarter that ruined
so many of our men. I wish the fire that followed had burnt
VOL. XLI. —NO. 245, N.S. 38


the whole beastly place up.’ £ So do I,’ Phoebe agreed. Why, in
the name of common sense, they didn’t create a camp city on the
banks of the canal I shall never understand. It was a crazy thing
to turn loose a pack of new-made soldiers, cramped and restless after
a six weeks’ voyage on board crowded troopships, in a place like
Cairo, that breeds more harpies and sharpers to the square yard
than perhaps any other city in the world, unless it’s San Francisco.’
* What about General Birdwood ? ’ I asked. ‘ Have you ever
spoken to him ? ’ The Anzac’s eyes disappeared behind their
lashes and his teeth flashed in a glad grin. ‘ Once,’ he answered.
‘ There’s hardly one of us who can’t say he had the opportunity.
He asked me when I thought the war’d be over, and I had to smile.
My word ! he’s a fine chap.’
The gentlemen of the School Board Committee had done their
work, and when we saw the ‘ machine ’ drive round from the stables
we left our rock and returned to the hotel. The minister climbed
stiffly into the front seat, and our Anzac, after a warm handshake,
saluted and took his place beside the white-haired grocer at the
back. Phoebe and I gazed and waved from the door till the merry
face with its strong oval framed in the curve of a brown chin-strap
receded in a blur of white dust from the long straight road. I
wish he had seemed the least little bit impressed by the Highlands,’
I said regretfully.
‘ You needn’t worry,’ answered Phoebe. ‘ When he gets back
to West Australia and has time to sort out his memories and talk
things over with his people he’ll be just as proud of being a High-
lander as he is of being an Anzac.’
