

A House
or
A Home
Which for you?
Goulburn:
Compiled by PERCY J. PORTUS
Secretary Greater Goulburn Association


A Residence •
becomes ci
When you make the Garden.
ome
Is
It
True
?
If you could have a fence-high hedge, garden plots,
lawn and gravel-wajk all ready on that' jnst-hnilt
HOUSE, it would become a HOME
7X fsj |\ if would increase the value of tbe House
/\i * 1 J iy easily .£5O to £lOO
A. Lcmsdowne & Son
Auburn Street : : GOULRURN
can supply all kinds of Ornamental and Flowering
vShrabs, Hedge Plants, Flowering Plants, &c.
Hlso Tools and Implements to do the work.


iMsPui*
'fIMBER CoffflGE^
°&cp go cgos^aTy
Y*.
m.
s*=-
TIMBER FOR GOULBURN
Reasonable Prices Fair Dealing
S. A. BURNS 8t CO.
Have opened a
Timber Yard in Verner Street.
h
\_L _
a?>«
C
&kz£‘-
~c
: : *‘ • ; v ,; '
We are carrying a large and varied stock of Building Materials.
We are happy to be able to place our 40 years’ experience at
the disposal of those about to build.
Come and inspect our stocks.
We publish Monthly Price Lists. Post free.
W. S. LANSDOWN 1
Phone 412
S. R. A. BURNS j Managers
&
BORNS TD
TIMBER MERCHAMTS
g-g 5 ggOPCE S-r. SYDNEY




7M
o
XIP
D
Bn
'^TeJ 5 7%
V°
rrr
Laying' the Keystone of Future
Prosperity.
The City of Goulburn is building a big reputation for industrial
progressiveness. Its resources and possibilities are recognised
by keen investors, whose enterprise and . sound judgment has
laid the keystone of the future prosperity of Greater Goulburn.
When you build in Greater Goulburn remember J, T. LEMON,
the house that has built a big reputation for sterling values
in up-to-date merchandise.
As prices keep on advancing, and the call for economy
becomes more and more insistent, the house of J. T. LEMON
responds with values keener in their money-saving possibilities.
Building Requisites (&L Ironmongery.
We specialise in Building Requisites and General Ironmongery.
Our extensive stocks represent a varied choice of every requisite
in the hardware line for the builder, and many useful and new
ideas for the tradesman and householder.
Our keen prices will please you and the quality of the goods is
beyond doubt.
We sell Vaughan’s Door Locks, Yale Night Latches, Galv.
Barrows, Malthoid Roofing, Stoves, Guttering and Ridging
—in fact all building requisites.
J. T. LEMON,
105 Model Arcade, Greater Goulburn.


PLAN
OF THE
CITY OF GOULBURN
The Municipal Council Public Services administered :
Electricity Supply Undertaking, Water Supply Works, Municipal
Baths, Municipal Saleyards, Sanitary Service (Sewerage Scheme to
cost £89,000 almost completed).
Electricity for light and power supplied at the following rates : —
Light, 6d unit; power (sliding scale) from 3d to 2d unit. Number of
units generated for year ended 3I/I2/I7, 446,928. 960 consumers.
Charges for admission to Baths : —Adults 3d, Youths 2d, Children
Id. Hoc baths (Sundays only) from 8 to 12, 6d.
Saleyard dues : —Horses I/, cattle (fat) 4|d, store 3d, sheep 4/-
per 100, pigs Id. Stock sold through Municipal Yards for year
ended 3I/I2/I7 —Horses 1537, fat cattle 2079, store cattle 47,397,
sheep 245,144.
Minimum charge foi hire of Sports Ground, £1 I/- per day.
The office of the Council situated in Auburn-street is open for
business daily, between the hours of 10 a.m. and I p.m. and 2 p.m. to
4 p.m.; Saturdays 10 a.m. to 12 noon.
E. Rogers, Mayor. R. J. McLean, Town Clerk.


Furniture !
The last thing in a House
And the most important.
Very often the “Extras” on
the home run away witli
some ot the money you pnt
aside for Furnishing'
W
q B»)
WWIHI 11%
., "MW
It’s then you think of ECONOMY !
And economical Furnishing suggests
J. W. CRAIG.
For your Blinds, inside and out, made to any size or design
Upholstering, in all its brandies.
Carpets, Linoleums, Grass Squares, etc.
Fu rniture made to any design.
Crockery and Glassware.
In fact, everything to make the new home comfortable. •
Stocks in Goulburn are displayed for 3 r our selection at
our two shops.
We will willingly talk over the cost with you, and give you a
free estimate.
Call, Write or Phone us.
Phone 214*
Auburn Street
GOULBURN
Two Shops
North & South


This is Published in the Intent of Bringing
Together in Goulburn, to their Mutual Benefit
Property Investors who are interested in the development of
Property values.
Financiers who have money to invest in a solid and improving
security in a solid and improving city.
Architects and Building Contractors and Speculators
who are prepared to keep abreast of the spirit and demand of
the times.
Timber and Building Merchants who can supply the demand
for up-to-date constructional material.
Goulburn Manufacturers and Employers who want a
solution of the employee-housing question.
Would-be Residents who are denied citizenship in Goulburn
by their inability to obtain a house.
Ho me-Seekers who want to achieve the great ideal of every
true citizen —to own and improve his own home.
Compiled by Percy J. Portcs
Herald Chambers Goulburn
Originator and Executor of
I9IS Goulburn Eoost.
One thousand copies of this brochure are being printed, and if yon
know of any person interested', your personal reference to the Secretary
will insure his receiving a copy.
The Greater Goulburn Association commends the attention of
investors to the advertisers on the Booklet. Every advertisement
has been OK’d by the Organiser, and we can safely assure interested
persons that the advertisers can offer them the best service obtainable
in the District.
The Executive Committee of the Greater
Goulburn Association consists of The
Mayor (Chairman), T. T. Alkin (President
Chamber of Commerce), A. M. Betts,
E. Bond, E. 11. Dudley,. C. AT. Furner,
A. Goodhew, J. Knowlmau, P. J. Mejrnr
and Percy J. Portus (Secretai’y)


*9
m
mil
<4*
wm
Here is an example of what “Gypsboard” will do for you.
Attractive, modern rooms, free from the troubles of lath and plaster.
Perfect Walls and Ceiling's for Country
Houses.
"Gypsboard” Monolithic Plaster Sheets
are the ideal material for all country homes, offices and interiors.
Easy and clean to erect —the sheets are simply taken into the room
and nailed on the framework on new work, or over the old shabby
walls when you renovate. No fuss or mess like lath and plaster walls.
“Gypsboard” enables you to have modern panelled walls and
beamed ceilings that are hygienic, insect proof, fire retarding, and
which last as long as the building.
Send for Free Sample & Illustrated Booklet to the Manufacturers.
NOYES BROS. (SYDNEY) Ltd.,
115 Clarence Street, Sydney.


THE WHY OF THIS BOOKLET.
[BY PERCY J. PORTUS.]
GREATER GOULBURN MOVEMENT lias been
in process of organisation for over 12 months, and the
main obstruction to the immediate growth of the City,
to cope with its industrial possibilities, has been the
shortage of housing accommodation for would-be
residents.
One meets everyday people whose business interests are in
Goulburn but have perforce to accommodate their wives and children
in Sydney or some other centre where they journey each week end
and where naturally they spend their money earned in Goulburn,
thus robbing the District of the fruit of its laboui’s. With a view
of solving this problem this booklet has been prepared, and your co-
operation in this by suggestion or deed is wholeheartedly solicited both
in your own and the district’s interests. Every difficult}’ presenting
itself to a community can be solved by communal Movement—and
your co-operation in giving publicity to the information given and
required in this booklet will be of much advantage in the development
of Goulburn.
Analysing the shortage of houses in Goulburn it would seem
from the basis of our knowledge—the late building Inspector’s reports—
that this shortage has been apparent for some six or seven years (see
page 12). Goulburn is not without numbering among its citizens a
good many persons and institutions of sufficient financial standing to
have coped with this shortage. The natural sequence therefore is
that these people either have not had confidence in Ihe district or that
property owning does not commend itself to them.
Until the outbreak of war the building trade was booming in
Goulburn. Now the increased cost of material and labor has enhanced
values until it has been cheaper to buy a place to-day than it
would be to build. This results in a fair number of places changing
hand, although the demand is so great that only those persons leaving
the city can afford to sell their homes. But in no case has a modern
home been sold for less than it would cost to build it, so that it would
seem that there is a financial investment in property, given the
assurance of prosperity in the city and district.


FOR YOUR BUILDING
REQUIREMENTS
We can supply promptly from large stocks all
Building Requisites.
It will be a pleasure to attend to your enquiries.
Write or Phone Goulburn 138.
The following are some of the lines stocked, viz.
LIME (freshly burned)
CEMENT (best brands)
PLASTER PARIS
KEENE’S CEMENT
AIR BRICKS (all classes)
POSTS AND RAILS
PALINGS
BRICKS
DRAIN PIPES
Bends, Junctions, &c.
LATHS
WALL TIES
DRY COLOURS
&c. &c.
Pi ices are bedrock at all times, and will be gladly supplied on application.
For many years we have served the building trade faithfully and can always
assure you of prompt and careful attention to your commands.
THOS. WILLIAMS,
PRODUCE AND GENERAL BUILDING
MERCHANT
Head Office and Bulk Store: Sloane Street
Branch Store and Firewood Mill: Auburn Street
supplying
All Lines of Produce—Special Poultry Foods
Firewood—Coal —Coke—&c.


Analysis of Sydney building figures during the past five years
reveal the fact that at least 85 per cent, of the residences constructed
were built for the owner’s occupancy either under building society
conditions or mortgages, or straight out purchases.
The Why of Building:
Now the arguments in favor of building in Goulburn at the
present time are :
1. Demand, see resume of the reports of the late Municipal
Building Inspector over the past years.
2. The high rents obtaining in Goulburn.
3. The high values of property obtaining.
4. The assurance that at least for the next six years building
will be 20 per cent, dearer than it was before the war, and
even after that it will never have a chance of going back to
pre war cost.
A temporary acute shortage of roofing and other materials is
being overcome, and it would be well for would-be investors
to consider against the increased cost they are paying to-day
for building materials, what the value of their home would
be to them for the next 5 or 6 years.
5. The fact that population is the best investment that a city
("especially an industrial city as Goulburn) can have, and it
behoves therefore present Property Owners and Investors,
Employers and Employees to consider carefully this
Housing Problem.
Now the arguments against building are—
1. The high cost of building materials at present.
This factor is referred to above and also in several pages
throughout this booklet. It will pay everyone to think
again before saying “It’s too dear to build now.” Imported
materials will not be much cheaper for some time to come.
2. The Fair Rents Act.
*
The clauses of this Act which obstruct building are left too
much at the discretion of the Magistrate, and there is no
doubt whatever that the Act as a principle is an outrage
against existing covenants and contracts made with all faith
by both contracting parties. The possibility of its extension
to Goulburn is a great deterrent to property investors.


The Demand —
Every day we are informed by the man in the street that there
are people who want to build in Goulburn and have £lOO of their
own money that they are prepared to invest in their own home. In
connection with the Goulburn Boost 1 have received at least fifty
letters wanting to know why building Companies are not operating in
Goulburn, and the demand in those letters gave me the impression
for this brochure.
The Opportunity—
I want every person who wants a Honfe, and who is prepared to
put down either a block of land worth £lOO or capital from £1 00
upwards to write me giving full particulars of their requirements,
and I will prepai’e a list of them, and I also want to hear from every
Investor, Speculative Builder or Company and Property Owner who
is prepared to build a home for an accredited client on the weekly
payment of interest and principal basis.
After making a list of both of these, a meeting can be called of
Investors, Ac., and on seeing the actual demand and the definite
proposals, they could either Syndicate or taking up individuals
severally, or meet a demand that will satisfy their requirements in
some definite manner. Failing their grappling with the situation, the
figures (but not the names) of the home-seekers will be given publicity
in Sydney and other financial centres.
The tabulation of the exact demand is the desired end. No good
can come of casual remarks on the housing impasse, and this
registration of definite demand will assuredly produce the solution of
the problem that some are apathetically or resignedly content to let
stand in the way of the city’s industrial progress.
In the endeavour to clearly set the position in Goulburn before
an intending Hofne Builder or Buyer the articles and advertisements
in this booklet have been completed and consideration of the whole
contents will repay every person interested in the development of their
own and the district’s interests.
Goulburn, July, 1919.


And Yon
have lived how long in a
house you rent per week ?
Every week you pay rent
you are losing profits that
you are making for the
landlord.
If you are 60 years old
perhaps you are retiring
from work. You have lived
40 years in rented
Houses ; average 20/ per
week rent. You have paid
over £2OOO away, and
have nothing to show for it.
We can build you a cottage,
four rooms and kitchen, from
£550.' Probably we can
arrange finance for you, if
you have the land.
We have hundreds of oilier
plans for you to look at,
And—
We charge you nothing for
an estimate when you are
interested in the idea of
Acquiring
a. Home.
Call and have a talk with us.
We can tell you everything
you want to know about
building.
We have for years
enjoyed a position
among the leading
contractors of New
South Wales.
King & Armstrong,
Contractors and Timber Merchants,
GOULBURN.


MUNICIPALITY OF GOULBURN.
Town Hall, Goulburn, 9/11/18.
Percy Portus, Bsq., Goulburn.—Dear Sir,—
Regarding the official information you require respecting building
applications, cost of same, and the shortage of houses within this
municipality during the past five years, I have much pleasure in sup-
plying yon with the following information, taken' from my annual
reports of each year to the Council, viz.: —
The building applications in the year 1913 totalled 99 costing £50682
For the year 1914 applications totalled 101 costing <£(11379
For the year 1915 ~ ~ 108 ~ <£44070
For the year 1916 ~ ~ 93 „ <£40362
For the year 1917 ~ „ 84 „ .£46060
It will be understood that one application is frequently made to
cover the erection of two, three, and in some instances up to eight
houses. In regard to the shortage of houses this matter came under
my notice as early as 1914 when the remark was made in the report
that “ there is evidence of a very great deal of overcrowding in certain
portions of the city.”
In the annual report for the year 1915 the following extract
occurs : “ Notwithstanding the large number of houses erected during
the year, the problem of housing the rapidly increasing population of
Goulburn is a serious one, and it is evident that there is a very great
deal of overcrowding. This occurs unfortunately in the small 3 or 4
room houses, a whole family sometimes occupying one room, in which
they cook, eat, and sleep. 1 inspected about 600 houses during the
year, and found on an average that about one house in ecery seven
contained two, three, and in isolated cases four families.”
In the annual l’eport for the year 1916 the following occurs :
“ Notwithstanding the fact that during the past 3 years £200,000 has
been expended on new buildings in the city, the housing problem is
still serious, more especially in the small houses, where it is not
infrequent to find whole families occupying one room, which is used
for all purposes.”
In the annual report for the year 1917 the following occurs :
“ There is still evidence of serious overcrowding incertain sections of
the city, and not infrequently much of the sickness occurs in these
parts. On examination of the records of house inspection, lam of
the opinion that there is a shortage of 600 houses, such records show-
ing that every sixth house has more than one family occupying same.
I consider the shortage of houses in Goul-
burn is mainly due to the lack of building speculators, who could sell on
the time-payment system, part rent and partly reduction of principal.”
(Signed) J. R. Biddlk, Building Inspector.


53
For years our position
as leading cottage
builders has been
unchallenged.
We have built a large number of cottages in Goulburn,
and'our reputation is as solid as out buildings.
If you have a block of land or a cash deposit, and
Avant a home, do not hesitate to call and
get a quotation.
ALL QUOTATIONS FREE.
Plans and Specifications and Terms submitted
without any obligation to build.
We have only one address —
JOHN CODY.
Auburn Street
GOULBURN
We can also supply you with
All kinds of Building Material, Iron, etc. at cheap rates.
Call and inspect our Joinery Works and Timber Yards.
Ironmongery Paints and Oils and Colors
Wall Papers Only Best Brands Stocked
Fibrous Plaster and Cement Sheets
Lime, Bricks and Cement


A TALK TO PROPERTY OWNERS
HOME-SEEKERS, INVESTORS by
O. R. GRUBB.
Home-seekers !
What a live Estate Agent can do for yon in getting you a home,
I have practically the right type of home you require here
Now, and perhaps I can arrange some terms of Purchase
to suit you. No waiting for it to be built.
My business is conducted on up-tordate keep-moving lines, and I
endeavour to keep my clients’ requirements the main feature
of my observation both in letting and selling'.
Property Owners !
If you have a HOUSE for sale I will willingly call, and without
cost to you put a value on it I can get for you.
It will pay you in these days of firm demand to have your
Property on My Books.
Bead the information in this Book. Be convinced Goulbuni has
an assured Prosperity ahead, and that will be always
in good demand. Then call in and talk to me, and I will
give you free the benefit of my Beal Estate experience.
My knowledge is worth while to you. It is founded on common
sense, investigation, and hard work, and it is yours for the
asking.
Correspondence promptly attended to.
Valuations.
O. R. Grubb, auctioneer,
Goulburn’s Leading Property Salesman,
Auburn Street.
Also for Furniture, Household Furniture, etc.


THE GREATER GOULBURN MOVEMENT.
By REV. G. TULLOCH
The Manse, Goulburu.)
One cannot bat admire the spirit which seems to actuate some
of the citizens of Goal burn in a desire to “go forward” by “boosting”
the city, not only in the Commonwealth, but out of it.
As a comparatively newcomer to Goulburn, I feel that there is
much room for development within the city in many directions, but
more especially in the direction of the erection of residences for those
who have made their homes here.
I should like to see Goulburn made the “Garden City of New
South Wales,” as I .am convinced it has many natural advantages
which fit it for such an ideal. There is plenty of room in Goulburn
for private enterprise in building, manufactures, and commerce, and
when the advantages of climate and railway facilities are understood,
no doubt many captains of industry will see it to be to their interest
to settle here. In England it has been found that many businesses
may with advantage remove to country towns, and goodly numbers
have done so. Rents, rates, and taxes are lower. Professor Marshall
tells us that in London 150,000 people engaged in the clothing trade
“are doing work which it is against all economic reason to have done
where ground rent is high.” The hint has been taken, for the
clothing industry has largely migrated to Leeds, Bradford, and other
places, while the boot and shoe trade has gone to Bristol, Norwich,
etc. Hansard’s parliamentary debates in England are not printed in
London, but miles away in the country. The success of Messrs.
Huntley and Palmer, biscuit bakers, at Reading, and Messrs. Chivers,
provision merchants at Hitchem ; of Messrs. Lever Bros, at Port
Sunlight ; Messrs. Cadbury at Bournville ; and the Singer Company
at Clydebank, prove that residence in the country is no, hindrance to
commercial prosperity, but rather a help.
Now, if Goulburn can rise to the occasion, provide homes for the
residents, open up industries for the young people, so that they can
be retained here, we can heartily welcome settlers from all parts of
the Commonwealth and from the old land, and Goulburn will “boom”
yet. In this way our “boosting” will help to check the migration to
the crowded, chaotic, unlovely capitals, and will help to turn the
current of population in precisely the opposite direction to a “Garden
City,” bright and fair, wholesome and beautiful.
“Then,” said his Lordship, writes Thomas Carlyle,“will God mend a’.”
“ Nay, Donald, we must help Him to mend it,” said the other.
This is the problem for the people of Goulburn, and it will be
wise for them to take full advantage of the favorable wind and tide.


UIAIKI
invivmvjri
vtfivmfiui
umti
huh*
m
H 4»
i>*j w»*<jwtTiu«»nwi
Buzacott Gates and Fences
“Weather the Weather.”
Buzacott Gates and Fences ara impervious to
extremes of heat and cold; gale, storm, tornado, and from
ravages from white ant. They are wiry, figuratively and
literally, and lend distinction and dignity to the portals of
your home.
Buzacott Gates and Fences
greatly enchance the appearance of your home and an
addition permanent value, because their stability is unim-
paired after years and years of service. They are stronger
than wooden fences, even when wooden fences are first
erected—and then their appearance is Always much better.
Perhaps you think the cost is prohibitive ? This is not so.
Send for the New Fence Booklet. 11l it are depicted
numerous beautiful designs, at prices that will really astonish
you. Send for your copy without delay.
BUZACOTT CO., LTD.
(Always ask for Buzacott’s Gales and Fences)
7-11 Market Street,
SYDNEY.
1
fp
1


THE REATER OULBURN MOVEMENT.
Its objectives and their realisation to date, even before the
release of the picture, as shown by excerpts from published
ar ticles.
“The Boost is ‘ a Solid, Genuine Business Proposition that
demands the immediate and active support of every business man,
settler, property owner, and wage earner, The Boosting Movement
is comprehensive, and is first concerned with communal efforts on
internal problems necessary to the welfare of our city and district.
Then secondly with advertising by a moving picture and com prehen-
sive covering publicity, the capabilities and possibilities of the dis-
trict.”—(February, 1918, the first circular issued.)
Regarding the first objective, the Greater Goulburn Association
has actively interested 'itself in every patriotic and charitable
organisation, in engendering interest in the work of the various
executive bodies of the district, and generally in awakening residents
to a recognition of the demands of true incul-
cating a spirit of introspection, an analysis of the virtues and short-
comings of their city and district, which has begotten a natural
determination to correct the latter.
“The Goulburn Council and the Goulburn Chamber of Commerce
saw the possibilities of the proposal as soon as Mr. Portus unfolded
it ; hard-headed business men took it up ; and this “boost” of Goul-
burn has become an accomplished determination. The civic spirit has
been aroused “ Watch Goulburn Grow” is the spirit of
the present in the hope of the future. Goulburn district residents
are ceasing to carp in petty criticism on small individual short-
comings, and as broad-minded sensible citizens are prepared to
proudly display the superlative advantages' their district
offers, and bring their glorious future within the reach of early
accomplishment.” —(“Goulburn Herald” Editorial.)
“The old cry of ‘ this rotton hole’ has practically gone, and a
much higher opinion of its importance has taken its place. Those
who saw no good in the place twelve months ago can now see no city
equal to it, and to say anything against its importance is a great
offence. This, to my mind, has been the great result of the boost,
and for which I would like to congtatulate the committee and par-
ticularly Mr. Portus on its success. That it has benefited
property owners 1 am absolutely certain. People who would not
think of investing in local properties a short while ago now purchase
freely, and new cottages are being erected in every part of the city.”
(A Leading Insurance and Property Agent—C. J. McShane.)


These are typical of many appreciative articles that justify the G.G.
Association in being satisfied with their success in their first objective.
Now for the external publicity—the second objective. My
undertaking was to complete 1500 ft of picture and 20,000 circulars
letters, sheets, etc. linking up with the picture. How has this been
completed ? The picture is condensed to 2700 ft from over 4000 ft
of film actually taken. On December 25, when I submitted the
proof of my work to the Executive, 32,000 sheets had been written
and circulated, and this has been added to since, making over 40,000-
These sheets included 1000 copies of the Building Inspector’s reports
(published on page 12), 2500 circulars sent from Goulburn business
people and residents to merchants who supply them, and these
resulted in over 350 replies being collected all appreciative of our
efforts : 600 letters to newspapers throughout Australia enclosing a 9in.,
paragraph and a sin. paragraph.—this resulted in over 200 newspapers,
sending us their copy containing reports varying from a Sin. paragraph
to two columns.
To sum up generally:—The Boost has killed the statement
“Goulburn” is a “Dead City,” and it has given the vehicle for the
making of “Glorious Goulburn” a household word thi’oughout
Australia.
The Hon. G. H. Beeby said (Sydney Morning Herald, February
25, ’ID) in a column article emphasising the necessity for Boosting
Australia in America :—“Australia is quite unknown in the United
States—nobody knows much about our country, and what is known is
not very favourable. A commission sent out to investigate Australian
conditions in 1914 seems to have gone out with a preconceived idea
that it was the most hopeless country in the world, and looked for
evidence to support the idea. They seemed to have found the
evidence mainly through private conversation with great numbers
of Australians, who had not a good word to say for their country.
It is useless sending State Commissioners to America for our States
are absolutely unknown.”
What Mr. Beeby said of Australasia as a Nation in America
is true of Goulburn as a District in Australia.
Our Greater Goulburn Movement in one year has corrected
our disparaging efforts of a decade —who can say but that a Boost
of Australia on similar lines would make good.
Our A.I.F. have done great preliminary work in Boosting Aus-
tralia— they have given us a wonderful introduction.
Shall “Goulburn Get its Due” be the inspiration for a Great
Australian Boost, “Advance Australia Fair!”


O. H. FURNER 8c CO.
Auburn Street
OOULBURN
Auctioneers, Estate Agents,
Stock and Station Agents,
Valuators —The two members of the firm are sworn
valuators under the Real Property Act, and are the accredited
Government valuators for the Goulburn District.
We have large numbers of properties on our books,
including many modern cottages—Also many splendid
solid investments m houses bringing regular incomes.
Grazing and Farming Lands a speciality.
Some splendid investments on our books
for sale.
If you are an Investor, or a Home-Buyer, or a
House-Renter—
If will pay you to have a talk with us to direct your mind
iu your decision.
BUILDtNG LAND-
We have many splendidly sitnated town blocks of land,
excellent home sites both from a residential or financial
aspect.
O. H. FURNEK (SL CO..
Auburn Street, GOULBURN
Goulburn Street, CROOKWELL
House or Furniture Sales, clearance or part, undertaken in our
Central Sale Koom or on the site.
Weekly Auction Sales—Thursday, 11 30 a.m., at The Mart.
Weekly stock Sales—Wednesday, 11 a.m., Municipal Saleyards.
Special Sbeep and Cattle Sales—As advertised.


A GARDEN CITY SCHEME IN OPERATION.
—'TLLESPTE & CO., LTD., Hoot Manufacturers and Tanners, of Goulburn, is
a. company floated by Mr. Fled Walpolo some time ago to take oyer a
business established many years.
The new company, owing to efficient management and direction, has made
wonderful progress, and has been a decided factor in the development of
Goulburn ; it promises to be even more so in the future.
The absolutely latest machinery, systemized factory costing and operating,
employees’ welfare considerations, an honest pride in their true-to-label products
—these have been the factors greatly operating for the firm’s success. Most every
retailer handling “Buffalo” Boots has expressed the opinion that Gillespies are
“only a small firm now to what they will be.”
While other firms have been postponing promised extensions and develop-
ment, Gillespies • have, with fully justified confidence, been ever piepared to
extend both premises and plant to cope with the ever-increasing demand for their
honest products.
One Type of the Cottage: Homes of Buffalo City.
These beautiful villas are being built in garden city formation by Gillespies
for their workmen, who can purchase them from the firm on a nb-profit rental
basis.
The housing schemes now foreshadowed by national legislation in every
country in the world prove Gillespie A Co.’s foresight in adopting this common-
sense plan of dealing at once with the local housing problem, and at the same
time giving consideration to the welfare of their employees.


“Not the same-as others ."
MALTHOID
—the perfect roofing
for every purpose
When it comes to the critical test, assurances of
durability, guarantees up-to-the-hilt, and other sales-
manship devices count as nothing before the unparallelled
record of service that Malthoid has given users in
Australia and New Zealand during the past 1-t years.
Equal quality and value are not
procurable under any other name.
There is a tendency to associate other materials with
Malthoid because they look the same. This is not in
the best interests of the user, as the durability of
Malthoid is due to the ingredients used, and to the
special method? employed in the manufacture.
* Actual samples and illustrated booklet
post free from
The Paraffine Companies Inc. (E. M. Prince, Australasian
Manager), Challis House, Sydney.


SOLID FACTS THAT MAKE GOULBURN OLID.
FACTS ABOUT GOULBURN, THE QUEEN CITY OF THE SOUTH, THE CENTRE OF THE
SOUTHERN TABLELAND OF N.S.W. AUSTRALIA.
A Commercial city in a Tourist climate.
“Goulburn is destined by its topographical situation, its unique railway dis-
tributing facilities, its climate, the best in Australia, its excellent water supply,
plentitude of factory building sites with river frontages—by all these superlative
advantages Goulburn is destined to become a huge .manufacturing and distribut-
ing centre, with attendant activities” (the Keynote of the Boost Movement).
13b miles by rail from Sydney, the junction of three railway lines, aud when
the Federal Capital, Canberra, is finished (60 miles away) and the Jervis Bay
railway is built, Goulburn will be the most important inland town in Australasia,
now the most important State Railway centre out of Sydney.
2074 ft above sea level, average summer heat 80—nights always cool.
Short cold winter, no snow. Recognised centre for Tourists, over 3700 cars
arrived here in 1918 —the centre of over 700 miles of the best roads in the State.
Within 30 miles of the Shoalliaven River, the future hydro-electric supply of
Sydney and the South Coast.
Burrenjuck is 73 miles from Goulburn. and the hydro-electric generating
machinery is promised as a first Public work “after the war”—it can produce at
once 8,217,000 units per annum to sell profitably at |d.
Goulburn Municipal Council finances on another page are convincing figures.
The city area 8320 ; population 15,700 : 80 miles of streets. 21 miles kerbed
and guttered; Municipal electricity 900 kws, 240 v power, from 2d unit; light
6d unit; 960 consumers.
Excellent educational facilities. Technical, Secondary, High and Primary
schools.
The Government Medical Officer classes Goulburn as one of the healthiest
centres of population in the Commonwealth.
Water sewerage just being connected.
Goulburn is the best store stock market in Australasia, and is the centre of a
large and prosperous sheep and cattle raising district.
Stud flocks from Goulburn district have Australasian reputations.
Last yearLerida (Goulburn) clip realized the Australasian record price for
wool, and followed this year by topping the world’s record in the English market,
while Pomeroy (A. A. Dalglish) this year’s clip created a new record in America.
Over 1600 orchards bearing in the district. Annual fruit output marketed :
apples 35,000 cases; cherries 35,000 cases; pears 10,000 cases ; plums 25,000
cases ; peaches 2000 cases; apricots 6000 cases.
Ideal district for mixed farming and grazing ; within 30 miles radius—the
Goulburn Pastures Protection Board numbers over 960 names.
Mineral deposits all over the district practically unexploited..
Chatsbury slate, Kingsdale lime, Windellama marble, Gunning granite—are
famous quarries that are yet to become more famous and productive.
Over 7,000,000 bags of wheat were stored in Goulburn depots. Tremendous
quantify still in sheds.
The best business city in Australia off the sea-board, and there is an imme-
diate demand for 800 more cottages to accommodate residents and would-be
residents.
The Chamber of Commerce has the largest membership in the State outside
of Sydney.
The pay of Goulburn Government Institutions alone is assessed at between
.£BOOO and JE9OOO per week by a leading banker.


A Buffalo City Cottage Home (see article on page 20).


SOME ANTICIPATIONS.
We are proud of the honored place our City has long held in the commercial
and industrial life of the State, and we contemplate her future with high hopes
and unbounded confidence.
For commercial probity, solidity, enterprise, and prosperity, Goulburn
deservedly enjoys a most enviable reputation, and with her great natural advan-
tages, backed as they are by a splendid district, whose resources are as yet
practically untapped, with a rapidly expanding population and a real live senti-
ment of go-ahead progressive citizenship, we predict for our City of the South a
future of commercial importance and of industrial activity the possibilities of
which we can only faintly foresee.
All the elements and essentials of such a future are already ours. It but
remains to seize them and to utilize them to the fullest advantage.
CHARLES ROGERS & CO.
. Probably in common with other large provincial cities Goulburn has prospered
during the past 5£ years that 1 have known it. This not only applies to the city
but to the great and safe district that looks to it as the business centre. I can
with some confidence say that the tablelands offer the best investment in land
just now obtainable. The district holds the record for high priced wools, and
probably boasts of the finest merino stud in Australia, while its industrial possi-
bilities ate considerable. The roads throughout are very good, and must appeal
to motor owners for touring and to settlers for cheaper transit.
J. W. HAMILTON
Manager Bank ol Australasia.
Am I confident of Goulburn’s prosperity? Well, why not ! The night'of
doubting is passed. I have lived here long enough to see the place stagger under
the financial crisis of 1893, after which it remained in a state of torpor until a
few years ago when its own citizens began to believe in the possibilities of their
city.
For years “the little Goulburn” movement held sway. Every other town
possessed every other advantage. Goulburn laboured under the whole gamut of
disabilities until the idea became something of an obession.
To-day there is evidence of a growing pride of place, and Goulburnites are
gaining a wider appreciation of their city. No more cogent indication is neces-
sary of its prosperity than the vision of those who formerly came to scoff, now
remain to praise its virtues which Goulburn enjoys, not because, but in spite of
its citizens.
P. J. MEYER.


Notwithstanding its other advantages I cannot help feeling that Goulburn’s
future greatness lies in the fact that it is undoubtedly destined to become one of
Australia’s foremost manufacturing centres.
In arriving at this conclusion one can be guided by the early history of
England and other continental countries where we find that, notwithstanding
the fact that industries were invariably started on the seaboard, the tendency
has always been for most of them to ultimately remove to more suitable inland
sites.
Unfortunately at the present time most manufacturers in New South Wales
seem wedded to the idea that a successful factory of'any kind must be situated in
Sydney.
However this phase will surely pass, and as Australia’s population increases,
Goulburn, by the wonderful advantages it holds over other inland cities, is
destined to become another Bradford, Leeds, or Nottingham.
We can only vaguely guess the length of time this process will take, but
judging from,the ffict that during the past five years Goulburn has gone ahead
by leaps and boitnds, perhaps it is shorter than even the most optimistic of us at
present imagine.
J. E. KNOWLMAN.
Goull> urn.
Percy J. Portus, Esq, 22nd Oct, 1918.
Goulburn.
Dear Sir, —
Answering your enquiry, I am glad to say that my residence in Goulburn dates
from over 40 years ago, and during that period I have been in close touch with the
business and, civic life of the city, but it has never experienced a more prosperous
period than that which it has enjoyed during the last six years. This is not
attributable Jto the war in any way, as in many respects its effect has been preju-
dicial, and I entertain a strong opinion that we are fully justified in believing
that this prosperity is not a. mere temporary “ boom” but on the contrary is of a
permanent nature, the only handicap militating agaiust a still more rapid
progiess in the future being the “housing” problem.
Yours faithfully,
A. M. BETTS.
Will Goulburn continue to prosper P What are my convictions in a short
paragraph P
Your questions are opportune, but to state in a short paragraph all of my
justifications for my assurance of the development of the prosperity in Goulburn
is impossible.
The Government institutions are all growing and must continue to grow ;
our fruit industry hasn’t yet commenced; our manufacturing industries are in
the swaddling clothes stage; our mineral wealth is practically unexploited; our
pastoral industry is capable of immense development; our distributing position
is unique; our farming opportunities ungrasped; our tourist facilities unappre-
ciated ; our health giving climate practically unknown We have unqualified
assurance in the future prosperity of the district.
(Sgd.)
BOND & SONS.


mm
V
lliljS
HUNDREDS of BEAUTIFUL- HOMES
are to be found in Sydney and its Suburbs. These would be
found on inquiry to be principally built with
Spriggs* Asbestolite,
The superior brand of Asbestos Cement Sheets,
and roofed with Asbestolite Slates.
On entering the -home, your attention would immediately be drawn to the
beautiful snow-white ceilings. Those in the drawing room would be Lottoid
Plaster Decorative Panels and plain Lottoid Sheets with joints artistically
covered with Lottoid Cover-moulds, and fitted with fancy Lottoid Bosses or
Rosettes at each intersection ; all finished snow white.
In the dining room and other rooms you would probably find the plain Lottoid
Sheets used both on the ceilings and walls, with the joints covered with an Oak
or Tru-Grained Oak Cover Batten.
The distinguishing characteristics of Lottoid are a
smooth hard face, snow white, absence of fibre, and
surface that will not rub off; easily cut with a saw
and nailed like wood.
We also carry large stocks of Three Ply Veneers in Oregon, Oak, Ash, Pine and
Maple ; Malthoid and American Ready Roofing ; Pabco Paint for iron roofs ;
Oak Cover Battens in various widths.
Write for Catalogue G, and get all information and prices
of our various manufactures.
Spriggs* Asbestolite Company,
“Phone 1440. 338 Pitt Street, SYDNEY (near Danlcs )


HOME-BUYING BY WEEKLY PAYMENTS.
(WRITTEN FOR THE ORGANISER, GREATER GOULBURN MOVEMENT.)
In an excellent little book entitled the “Stock Exchange.'" Mr. Hirst, the
well-known Editor of the “Economist,’ ’ lays down the principle that* the first
thing a man should strive for is the ownership of his own house. This is the
well-matured advice of a sound economist, who wrote his book with the object of
assisting men of small means to use their savings wisely and well.
With this eminent testimony to support me, I have no hesitation in stating
the case for “every man his own landlord.” There are many men who carelessly
say that, at the end of a long period of time payments, one is no better off rela-
tively than if he had paid rent. This is clearly fallacious reasoning. The point
is you own your home ; whereas if you hadn’t tackled the responsibility of making
set and regular payments you would still be paying rent. To put your savings
into a deposit on a freehold property is to bind yourself to save money which
would inevitably go in other ways. It may hurt a little at first. But after the
first few payments you get into the habit of saving and develop the quality of thrift.
The first hundred pounds takes a lot of getting together ; and when a man
has saved it he nurses it lovingly. He also is apt to let himself go a little and
spend more freely, relying upon the <£loo as a standby. There is a disinclination
to part with that .£lOO, and it requires some courage to plank it down as the
deposit on a home. But it is sound finance to do so. First, it is just as much
yours as if you had it in the bank. And, secondly, you overcome that trouble in
the event of overspending. If you hold it you are sure to add to it. This may
not be expressed so elegantly as Mr. Hirst states the case. But I feel that it is
nevertheless true. By commencing to buy in your own home you save more than
you ever gave yourself credit for being able to save. The habit of thrift grows,
and creates a feeling of righteous satisfaction which the unthinking spender
never knows.
What interest can a man take in a home no fraction of which belongs to him ?
Will he shape a nice garden and do the little things about a place which makes it
a home of refinement and taste ? I think not. The interest is lacking. There
will always be the absence of inducement to devote leisure hours to improving
another man’s property. But once he buys a share in that home, he begins to
“potter” about and make it worth living in. The unsightly back yard is turned
into a lawn and flower beds, and soon creeping roses begin to climb up ugly
verandah posts. These are not a few sentimental phrases “dished” up for the
occasion. They are home truths based upon the findings of a man who is a clear
thinker well-wisher of the working and middle classes. The man who has
a stake in his home is more frequently in it. He finds the pleasures of prospective
ownership sweet, and money that would be thoughtlessly spent outside goes to
shorten the date when he can claim the deeds. And when that day comes will
any sane man argue that he is not better off than the rent-paying neighbour who
scoffingly remarks that “fools build houses and wise men live in them ?” Let
there be no misconception about the time payment acquisition of a home. It is
good business.
As Treasurer of the State my advice to every man who has saved a little
money is to think it over. Go to the nearest State Savings Bank and see what
the Manager can do for you. If you put up a decent proposition he will be ready
and willing to help. Three-fourths of the money required may be advanced upon
approved properties, and the payments may be extended easily over 30 years.
I wish success to the Greater Goulburn movement, and feel sure that the
high hopes of its patriotic and big-hearted promoters will be fulfilled.
(Sgd.)
J. C. L. FITZPATRICK
Colonial Treasurer, State of New South Wales.


DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND INDUSTRY,
GOULBURN BRANCH.
A- branch of this important department has recently been
established in Goulburn, and has already proved a source of great
convenience to the public, as the officer in charge is in a position to
give information in connection with the Factories and Shops, Indus-
trial Arbitration, Early Closing, and Workmen’s Compensation
Acts, Ac.
One of the principal activities is the work of the LABOUR
Exchange, where any employer seeking labour, or any worker wanting
employment, has only to register his name, and the prompt service of
the department is at his disposal FREE of all cost..
The local branch is linked up with a chain of similar branches
•throughout the State, and therefore offers particularly wide facilities
for meeting the needs of persons needing either workers or
employment.
The office is in Montague Street, Goulburn.
When you build your HOUSE give a
*"* special eye to the
Plumbing
It will pay you
After 36 years of successful business in
Goulburn you cannot do better than trust it to
W. J. Lemon,
VERNER STREET GOULBURN


DACEYVILLE COTTAGES.
Dacey Garden Suburb is situated five miles from Sydney G.P.0., .and is of an
area of 336 acres, between Mascot, llotany and Kensington.
The plan provides for 1673 houses, to be built on 273 acres (roads included),
leaving 63 acres for permanent parks and open spaces.
Two designs of cottages are shown in this booklet, and the internal airange-
ments of the dwellings are equal to the exterior aspects ; all conveniences, water,
gas (cooking) and electricity and fuel stoves being provided. The dwellings are
let on a weekly tenancy, but remain the property of the Housing Board, acting
for the Government of N.S.W.
It is seldom that there are less than 300 applicants awaiting their turn for a
lease ; the only disqualification for a would-be tenant is the possession of land in
the State of N.S. W. having a dwelling thereon.
The dwellings are let under an agreement, and this agreement includes a
condition that the gardens shall be kept in good order.
Some fifty cottages at Daceyville are occupied by soldiers’ widows or
returned incapacitated soldiers.
It has been truly said that if Great Britain can spend over £~>, 000,000,000 in
protecting herself from a foreign foe, then she can profitably 3pend the
.£100,000,000 Lloyd George promises in better placing the houses of her working
class, so as to enable sickness and disease in her producers to be more easily
overcome.


WHAT WE OWE TO THE GREATER GOULBURN
MOVEMENT.
(By Aid. E. Rogers, Mayor of Goulburn, Chairman o| the Greater Goulburn
Association.)
What has been the value to date of the Boost? What difference has it wrought
in Goulburn? Has it justified itself so far?
These are questions that quite naturally occur to every person interested in
our development, and especially to those with vested interests who have been
requested to lend a hand in the organising work.
And in view of the endorsement of the movement by subsidy, by the N. S.W.
Government, the Goulburn Municipal Council, and the Chamber of Commerce, the
failure of the average property owner to whole heartedly support the “Boost” is
quite inexplicable and much to be deplored. However I venture to say that were
another Communal movement now launched, the achieved value of this
initiatory movement would ensure it the immediate hearty assistance of the pro-
pertied interests iu the district.
At the outset it would seem from the analysis of the subscription lists that a
large and improportionate amount of the working funds have been subscribed by
the business people—the people, after all, on whom has fallen, by reason of their
get-at-ableness, the onus of supporting many subscription lists for charitable and
patriotic purposes during the last five years. A few of the bigger pastoralists
too have “done their bit” nobly, but the main bulk of the property owners of the
district and the city have failed to take a live hand in the communal work of
boosting their own interests.
The splendid results secured by the publicity already projected have them-
selves more than realised full value for the amount expended on the whole move-?
ment, and to these published and therefore measurable results must be added an
enormous amount of personal instruction and appreciation of the various virtues
of Goulburn and district that even at first casual consideration must far out-
weigh the value of the “expressed” appreciations.
Thus then the Greater Goulburn Association have by virtue of their publicity
propaganda work achieved wonderful success in their stated object, namely, the
establishment of Goulburn’s definite claim to future greatness as an industrial,
manufacturing, and distributive and residential district, and the recognition of
the manifold advantages of living and operating in the district both from the
standpoints of health, wealth, and happiness.
And this too is before the release of the Picture for exhibition outside of the
district! So much greater then will the result be when, as a natural result of the
Film’s distribution, Goulburn will “Get it’s Due.”
But to me the greatest value so far of the Greater Goulburn Movement has
been the generation of true citizenship in our midst. We have learnt by civic
introspection, by analysis of the virtues and shortcomings of our city and its
“service” what duties we as citizens owe to our city and district.
Goulburn citizens are wise now to the fact that any fool can find fault with his
city : it is a wise man who recognises its virtues and talks of them while correct-
ing its faults.
The ideals and responsibilities of our citizenship we are realizing, and thanks
to the “Boost,” Goulburn is now less riven with petty dissension and more abie
therefore as a civic centre to face the added responsibilities of production and
organisation that the wastage of the last five years has cast on us.


NOTES AND TABLES FOR BUILDERS.
Brickwork is measured by the rod of 16ft. 6in. square, equal to 272 ft. 3in.
superficial of work 14in. or bricks thick. All other thicknesses are reduced to
this standard.
1000 open-kiln or patent-kiln bricks (Sydney) weigh from 4 to 4| tons.
Goulburn Machine 3f to 4 tons. Sandstocks 3J to 3£ tons.
Approximate super feet to a ton weight of Timbers:
Hardwood 360 ft Cedar 700 ft
Oregon 800 ft | Pine Flooring 1000 ft
Kauri or Pine 750 ft Pine Lining 1200 ft
Redwood 700 ft J Pine Lining 1600 ft
Slates, &c., required per square laid with 4in. cover, with Battens, &c. :
Description. Size No. Battens Labor and
Inches. Required. ft run. Nails.
Duchess 24 x 12 120 120 7.0
Countess 20 x 10 180 150 8.0
Viscountess 18 x 9 230 175 9.0
Ladies 16 x 8 300 200 10.0
Doubles 13 x 6 535 270 12.6
Quantities, per square, Marseilles Pattern Tiling :
120 tiles ; 90ft run, 2xl batten and nails ; lib copper wire ; labour.
Fibro Cement Slates:
24 x 12in., 12 x 12in., 12 x 16in.. 16 x 16in., 16 x Bin., and to the following
thickness :g, %, and Ain. 1000 16 x -Jin. slates can be packed in four crates,
measuring 3ft x Ift, 6in x Ift 6in each, and weigh 6lcwt. 1000 16 xl6 slates will
cover 131 square yards. Cost of fixing, battens, nails, etc., about the same as
ordinary slates.
Plastering :
'1 cubic yard lime, 2 cubic yards sand, and 3 bushels hair will cover 75 yards
render and set on brick ; or 70 yards on lath ; or 65 yards render 2 coats and set
on brick; or 60 yards on lath. One bundle of l£in. laths (400 ft) will cover on an
average 5 square yards (provided 100 laths are in the bundle). 3 bags Portland
cement and 6 bags of washed sand will cover 20 super, yards Ain. thick.
TO find the number of sheets of galvanized corrugated iron in a half-ton case
divide 572 by the length of the iron = number of sheets.
Gotilburn Wants Immediately an up-to-date
Brick and Pottery Kiln—only sandstock bricks are obtainable,
and in limited quantities, although clay from many open parts of
the city will manufacture dry-press bricks.


Don't own a
i
unless finished
HOME
witH an imperfect
Kitchen.
No kitchen can be perfect
off with a
K.F.B. Gas or Fuel
Stove.
Specially made for Goulburn District.
EDFORD FUEL- STOVE.
All cast, including ovens, and with extended fire-box.
IDEAL GAS STOVE.
Low gas consumption and greatest efficiency
Gas Stoves
Fuel Stoves
Register
Grates
Interior
Grates
Gas
Coppers
Fuel
Coppers
K.F.B.
Foundry,
Ltd.,
357 Pitt Street,
Sydney.
E
s 5
“Our Goods are Better.”


Who will Build these in Goulburn?
Another Daceyville Cottage (See also Page 29)
Semi-Detached Cottages, 5 Rooms, &c; rent 18/3 per week
The opportunity is bigger in Goulburn than in Sydney. A shortage of houses in Strath field is
relieved by 50 built in Randwick or Mosman or Eastwood or Dobroyde. Thus a speculator runs a
certain risk building in ANY suburb.
In Goulburn there is a definite shortage of between 600 and 1000 houses —no amount of
building in Crook well, Harden, Moss Vale, or Woop-Woop will relieve the urgent demand.
Thus Goulburn Property will always remain in demand and be a safe, profitable investment.
How about it, Mr. Investor?


Cheap - Compact - Comfortable
Cosy-Country Cottages.
“Saxton** Ready-to-erect Weatherboard Buildings
enable Country Buyers to secure an up-to-date home at lowest
possible cost. Frame and Roof Timbers are sent forward
cut—framed—morticed and marked ready to put to-gcther.
All materials are guaranteed to be the best of their respective
kinds—Joinery work all complete—lron for Roof, in fact
everything necessary to complete the* Cottage, excepting
Foundations, Bricks for Chimneys, and paints.
lire
Our “Cottage Home” Catalogue shows 37’Modern Designs
including many Bungalows.
This Booklet with complete Price List posted free to
any address.
All information as to cost of freight, etc. gladly furnished.
Correspondence invited.
fl. C Saxton & Sons Ctd.
Timber (SL Joinery Merchants
PYRMONT - SYDNEY


STARR-BOWKETT SOCIETIES.
(By the Late
C. J. MCSHANE
late Sec. Argyle Starr-Bowkett Society)
About one hundred and fifty years ago two doctors named
respectively Starr and Bowkett conceived the idea of forming a
mutual society amongst the fishermen upon whom they were attending
to enable each in his turn to purchase a net, and afterwards a boat.
The men contributed a small sum weekly, and as sufficient was accu-
mulated lots were drawn for the right of purchase, and so in time
every man became possessed of the necessary outfit to carry on his
trade. The idea was found to work so well that the doctors extended
the operations to the purchase of cottages. Others saw the success of
the scheme, and numerous combinations were quickly formed in all
parts of the United Kingdom. The Government finding such large
sums of money being collected and invested without proper supervision
eventually took control and passed a law bringing all such bodies under
their supervision and designated by vhe name of Starr-Bowkett
societies, thus perpetuating the name of their founders.
The intention of the Founders of Starr-Bowkett societies is to
give men who are in such circumstances financially, that they could
never hope to put away sufficient money to pui-chase a home for cash,
or for that matter on a deposit and terms for the balance, a chance to
become their own landlords. It is not necessary for a member to have
any money to become the owner of his home under this system—he
joins the society,taking any number of shares fi’om one to ten—a share
is fifty pounds, and on joining he pays 6d per share entrance fee, and
on the assumption that he takes ten shares his payment would be five
shillings, his weekly subscriptions being the same amount. Immedi-
ately on joining he is given a Registered Number, which remains in
the Ballot till drawn, which must be sooner or later.
When his number is drawn he receives five hundred pounds
free of interest repayable by weekly instalments of 15/10 over twelve
and a half years. With this money he purchases a property, occupies
it rent free, sells it if he wishes, takes the profits, and uses the unex.
pired portion of his loan for further investment, and when the £500 is
fully paid, the deeds of his property are handed over to him ; and this
is not all —the 5/- per week he has been paying in subscriptions is
accumulating, and when the society is wound up it is refunded with
any bonus which has accrued. Members taking a smaller number of
shares participate proportionately.
In all societies there are members who are anxious to secure a
home before their turn in the ballot comes and this contingency is pro-


vided for by the sale system now in practice in all np to date societies.
Every second appropriation is a sale. Members are allowed to pur-
chase any sum not exceeding the number of shares held by them, and
the sale isopen to members only who purchase at a weekly premium,
which weekly premium is paid only till such time as the member’s
number is drawn. The balance of the loan is free of interest, and by
this means many shareholders have been able to redeem their proper-
ties from other institutions about to take possession of them.
The great advantage of those societies is the fact that as they
advance up to the full value of the property, and as their loans'are for
extended terms and free of interest, the whole of the money paid as
rent to landlords in this case goes to redeem the home, and by their
assistance the poorest person can secure a property of his own.
In the City of Goulburn and the surrounding district there are
hundreds of people in possession of their own cottages and farms who
otherwise would be paying rent, and who have to thank for this theii
membership in the Argyle Starr Bowkett Society.
ARGYLE STARR-BOWKETT BALLOT AND SALE
SOCIETY.
Montague Street, GOULBURN.
SECRETARY - - A. J. McSHANE.
Directors : Messrs. J. W. Wright (Chairman), T. A. Ayling, C. L. Joscelyne,
J. C. Walsh, and John Knowles.
Solicitors : Messrs. Johnson and Seudall.
Bank : Savings Bank of New South Wales.
Since its formation in July, 1911, it has distributed over =640,000.
That is the way to make Goulburn grow: Join at once, and assist the
boost.
BUILDING BLOCKS FOR SALE.
Good Positions
Different Sizes
—Apply Box 32, G.P.0., Goulburn


GOULURN'S INDUSTRIAL FUTURE
AND HOME BUILDING.
It is admitted on every hand that Goul burn has a tremendous
future as an industrial city. Now how does Goul burn's industrial
development link up with this Home-Building proposition? We
have at the present time five big Factories in Goulbnrn, of which the
two employing the most hands aie Boot Factories. Now Boot Fac
tories are no more “indigenons” to Gonlburn than many other kinds of
Factories—certainly not so much as a Canning Plant.
Goul burn presents undoubted opportunities to the manufacturer.
He can tap districts served by the network of railways branching
from Goul burn as a semiterminal, and he has again this field as a con-
sumer for his manufactured product. He can compete with every
assurance of advantage against a manufacturer operating in Sydney,
who is confronted with 136 miles of freight on raw and 136 miles on
manufactured articles, and he has also the ad vantage of more favorable
conditions of manufacturing, having cheaper rates, rail siding sites,
closer personal touch with supplier and consumer, and, of more con-
sideration still, tremendous advantages in labor factors such as healthier
better-housed employees, who are not likely to be casually induced to
leave their factory for a similar one operating in another suburb.
And this development of the industrial resources of Goulbnrn is
the greatest opportunity presented by the Greater Gonlburn Move-
ment.
In Sydney the population is moving more and more from crowded
“terraced” suburbs to residential garden suburbs which are being
opened up on vacant land which must necessarily be some distance by
tram, train, boat and foot from the city.
Now in most Factories the greatest cost is the Wages Bill, and
therefore the first place where a Manufacturer should study his costs
should be in the efficiency of his workmen.
The “every-day” story following on page 38 is therefore com-
mended to every manufacturer. Tt could be titled “Close-by Garden
City Accommodation for Workmen Employees as an efficient factor
transcending all other considerations in erecting a Factory.”
jZ?
Yon who have read this, Mr. Employer, don’t pass it over without thinking
—it doesn’t mean Lever or Cadbury or Gillespie, it means YOU !
Whether you have a “ three staff ” office or a “ 100 hand ” plant—think over
how your consideration for your Employees’ housing contentment affects your
overhead costs then Act.


BILL MAC.
Bill McLeod was a good machinist—in fact an excellent machinist. When
the Boss got on his feet at any function with the Staff, and said he had a fine
team of men working with him, etc., back in his mind’s eye he was thinking of
Bill McLeod more than he was of Mr. Tenant, the accountant.
The Mill Foreman was talking to the Boss one night, just a friendly casual
chat after the whistle had gone, and after they had gone over the “hand”
troubles, the Boss said, “By Jove, isn’t it a pity there are not more Bill McLeods.”
“Well, I don’t know,” said the Foreman, “I can’t make him out lately, he is not
the sticker he used to be —always leaving his machine and arguing.” The Boss
was surprised, he opined that that was only temporary—but Bill got worse and
developed as a canker, and the Mill became nothing but a Bolshevik Debating
Society. At last it had to be done, and Bill was sacked. That night Bill again
aired his wrongs to his cobber on the machine. “Wots a man to do. Things are
always crook at home, dead crook. Doctor says to send the wife and kids away,
the cronk air from the fumes of all the power plants here would knock anybody.
George on the Planer there wants me to move to Lidcombe, but look at the time
he takes to get to work. Says he’s got a garden instead of my 10 x 8 asphalt,
hut lie’s always crying about having no home life. He works like h—l every day
for B*, and has to leave at 6.30 in the morning, and don’t land home till 6.30 in
the evening—a twelve hours day, and he kids he’s an 8 hour machinist! If they’d
stick his place where mine is it’d be a bit of orlright—except.” “Except wot ?”
says the cobber.
“Except he’s the same off as me. If he improves his place up goes’s rent—
even if it’s only 1/- a week. I’ve bought my place twice over. Here I’m over
45, only got <£6o, and no ’ope of ever getting a house, working for d—n landlords
all me life, I am. Look at this crowd. The Boss is a big shareholder, and he
owns ’alf Suburbia. Look at all the other Directors —all Landlords—an’ all
Driving Motor Cars. More we work more houses they get and the better cars -
I’ve taken a tumble, I ’as, Jim.”
Bill came to a decentralised factory in Goulburn, a natural site for an indus-
trial undertaking, manufacturing the South and South Western Products into an
article which the people of these districts consumed in large quantities, as well as
the people in the capital and abroad.
Bill’s late Boss met him about two years later—a new Bill, a happy, prosper-
ous, healthy Bill, and Bill told him of “my” firm.
He said they had co-operative ideas, and had instituted profit sharing
schemes ; studying the employees for mutual interests they had built a garden
city near their factory on cheap land. The employees healthily living in pure
atmosphere near their work, happily buying their homes from the firm on time
payment, contentedly seeing their positions improve, were 50 per cent, more
efficient than they were in the old days. Their energy thi'ougli health, industry
through interest, skill through application, had brought the firm and them to
yearly improving mutual success.
The housing conditions of your Employees, their home lives, their worries
through Rental 'troubles, family ill-health and their own—in other words the
things that worry them outside of your Factory or Office walls, are the greatest
co-efficients in the depreciation of their positive value as employees, and should
therefore command your attention, not as an afterthought, but as a primary con-
sideration of industrial organization.


iTlodcrn Interior Fitments
make the home desirable
•s-r-s»(fi<sK **
Just as the finishing
touches complete a
picture so the fitment
touches make the
home.
We feature modern
interior fitments that
are beautiful, and
useful, as well as
splendid value.
Lighting and Heating Specialties, Hot
Water Services, Mantelpieces, Fireplaces
and Surrounds, Sanitary Fittings, Stoves
and Cookers, Vacuum Cleaners, Latest
Bath Heaters.
You are invited to make a call or write ur
for information on any of the above.
Our Showrooms are the Finest "In Sydney.
John Danks & Son Pty., Ltd.
324*330 Pitt Street, Sydney.
The Home of Modern Interior Fittings.
in
-!•
0
•fac.


FINE
SUPER
BEAUTY AND ECONOMY.
WHEN Taubmans’ Superfine Tarnishes and Specialties are
used, this rare combination results. The following is a
brief survey of our products which, once used, become
indispensable to the progressive tradesman :
Taubmans* Coachbuilders* and Car-body
Painters* Varnishes —The result of years of severe test
and experiment, are no# supreme for finish and durability.
Taubmans* Painters* and Decorators*
Varnishes —Of unequalled quality. This statement is borne
out by the fact that they are in universal trade use.
“Auto-Brand** Weatherboard Oil —A hard
oil preservative that has been proved by test a positive protection for
all outside timbers against the ravages of the weather.
“Finisol** (regd.) The unequalled oil dryer for paint.
Absolutely the only SAFE dryer for all painting.
“Hyg’lo” Oil Varnish Stain. Hard and brilliant,
gives a bright polish finish to Furniture and all interior home fittings,
Taubmans* “ QuiK-Dry ** Prime T —Dries with a
a snap. Acts as a primer and filler in one operation. Indispensable
for all interior work. Most economical.
“Auto-Brand** Floor Varnish Stains— The most
durable, free-working and hard-wearing stains yet produced
for floors. Unexcelled for beauty and permanence of finish
To Storekeepers:—Any line you are particularly interested in, just
send a card for full particulars, prices, etc., to
TAUBMANS LIMITED, Varnish MaKers,
232 Castlereag'H Street, SYDNEY.


HOW THE HOME TIME-PURCHASE COMMENDS
ITSELF TO THE PROPERTY INVESTOR.
[BY J. S. LILLIS, GOULBURN.]
SINCE the days when Noah built the Ark, property well bought in
a rising and growing district or city, has always been an at-
tractive investment. Investigation will prove that the shortage
of houses in most communities cannot be disassociated with the class
of unthinking tenant, whose inconsideration for his landlord’s property
which houses him is past comprehension.
This inconsideration results in broken or scratched woodwork,
plaster damaged by numerous nail holes, walls scribbled and used as
match strikers—and in the end general disrepair in the house. Add
to this the many cases the cost of collecting arrears of rent, and one
can readily realise why many landlords or “houselords” have been by
bitter experience convinced of the futility of expecting a lasting in-
vestment in house property for rent, and they have realised and
invested their capital in other less troublesome and more stable pi’o-
positions. Aud so has come mainly from this cause the present
shortage of accommodation.
The property owners at present interested in the development of
the district are vitally concerned that this district aud city should
continue to prosper and grow; they will be prepared to consider the
solution that bids fair to overcome the housing difficulty in Sydney,
where there is operating too, the Fair Rents Act.
By making each home dweller a home buyer you make him his
own laudlord eventually, and with this prospect in view he is vitally
interested in the up-keep and development of the property that is,
until paid for, the landlord’s security.
The deposit that the purchasing dweller makes is his assurance of
his intention to look after and develop the property he has taken up,
and as he makes each successful payment, and with the couise of time
improves more his home, he becomes more and more the owner of the
property, while in the meanwhile the mortgagor, secure on the basis
of his original advance,becomes more and more secure as the principal-
cum-interest payments reduce his financial interest.
Even were this not proved by actual experience in most every
capital centre, a walk round the side streets of Groulburn will prove
that 99 per cent, of the houses that are well kept and painted and look
well are occupied by owners or “to be” owners.
The encouragement of home buying by tenants by every means,
and especially at the hands of pi’esent property owners, is, in my
opinion, the greatest opportunity of “Boosting” Goulburn.


AUSTRALIAN-MADE
PAINTS
Contractors to Government Departments
throughout Australia and N.Z.
of every description made at our
two modern factories.
Paint and Chemical Works - Snail’s Bay.
Colour Works - - Johnstone’s Bay.
MAJOR BROS. & CO.,
Exchange Corner,
SYDNEY,
N. S. W.
Major bros. are assisting Goulburn and District to “ Get
its Due,” because they purchase and mine numerous crude
raw materials within a radios of 20 miles of Goulburn.
These minerals or ores were purchased in a manufactured or
marketable condition from Germany and other countries during pre-
war time, but necessity, caused by extreme shortage of imported
stuffs, compelled them to utilise local supplies, with the result that
Australia has been almost self-contained in paint and colour products
during the war period ; also Major Bros, are contractors to N.S.W.
and Queensland Railways, Commonwealth Navy and Public Works
Department, which is ample evidence of the quality of their products.
We congratulate them upon their enterprise in endeavouring to
assist in making Australia great, and also in helping Goulburn to
“Get its Due.”
Their paints can be purchased from local storekeepers.


HOULD PERIODIC PAINTING BE COMPULSORY ?
[ABRIDGED FROM A SPLENDID ARTICLE IN THE PROPERY OWNER.]
By A. MASON
President of Master Painters Association.)
This question is frequently being raised at the present time. The
demand for economy is persistent and not invariably a wise policy
High prices of labor and material may give cause for serious thought,
but the old adage of “a penny wise and a pound foolish” still holds good.
It would be well for the Australian to adopt the practice of the
United States, and have a “clean up campaign” in the spring time,
as in many instances property owners do not see the vital necessity of
keeping their property in order. They must be taught to understand
the value of having their houses painted in time to prevent decay.
The average person has only to use his eyes to see the neglected
appearance of many of the residences in and around Sydney and
Goulburn. Houses that were regularly painted every three or four
years, are now left for six and seven years.
This is an expensive policy, for joints of the timbers are opened
and decay has set in, and the work gets into such a perished condition
that it requires a much larger expenditure to put the property in a
reasonable state of repair.
Since the start of the war many owners have put off having the
house painted at the usual time, because there are more urgent ex-
penses to meet; or instead of employing a reputable man and paying
a fair price to get the work done properly, they attempt to save money
by getting a. so-called, cheap man who is usually as incompetent as he
is cheap. The result is the job only lasts half the time it did when the
regular painter did the work. It often happens that the cheap man,
fully aware that it is not probable that he will do any more work for
this customer, gets inferior materials to those he had agreed to supply
when he undertook the job.
It would be well if property owners were to give consideration to
the fact that when the oil has perished the whole value of the paint
has gone, leaving all the pores of the wood exposed to the effects of
the weather.
A short time ago a well-known authority made the statement that
it ought to be made a penal offence to allow house property to go
unpainted for over three years if near the sea, and over four to six
years inland. So important has this question become, that in one of
our sister States a Bill is expected to be shortly brought before Par-
liament to amend the Health Act and make it compulsory to have
houses painted on the outside "every three years.


PAINT!
CrD
GOULBURN’B LEADING PAINTER
W. Stewart
SPEAKS
Not
To-Morrow
But
To-Day
Painting is not so much a Decorative as a
Preservative Element. The skin of Genuine
White Lead coloured to harmonise with
surroundings and applied with Pure
Linseed Oil is the preserving factor that
prevents the wood and other material warping,
cracking and rotting.
PAINTING IS DEAR NOW —SO YOU SAY I
But Listen—lt will be still dear and labour will be much dearer.
You cannot afford to go on postponing that coat of preserving PAINT
that your house wants.
Genuine Pure Australian White Lead
Genuine Pure Australian Linseed Oil
Genuine Pure Australian & Imported
Colours
(Mixed as only an Expert Painter can mix ’em)
Don’t put it off any longer—lnsure' your home or your property by
keeping out the weather, improving the wood, and at the same time
beautifying the building and making it good as new for another 4 years.
A Four Roomed Brick House costs roughly
about £24 to paint; Weatherboard, £3O.
But drop me a line and I’ll go over your job and quote you free.
Paperhanging, Internal Decorating,
Kalsomining, Distempering, &c. &c.
(All work done by Experienced Tradesmen)
Country jobs? Yes—l’ll go anywhere. Call or Write.
W. STEWART, Market Street, GOULBURN.


WHERE THE RISE IS.
While evei’ybocty comments on the rise in the cost of building, and
the advance in the value of properties therefrom, very few know the
proportionate cost.
These quantities are of an ordinary well-finished four-roomed
Cottage, with kitchen, laundry, bath-room, pantry, and linen press.
This will help to correct the impression some people have that
houses have “gone up” over £5O “ on account of the bricks.”
(Figures by W. E. Armstrong, Contractor, Goulburn.)
(Note. —Labor is included with each item—the average rise in
wages has been 16 per cent.)
1914 1919
£ s d £ s <1
Excavate 30 yds. ... ... ... ... 3 15 0 4 10 0
Footings Cement Concrete, 14 yds. ... . . 24 10 0 28 0 0
Foundation, Brick and Cement, 8000 ... 44 0 0 50 0 0
Walling in lime Mortar 22,000 ... 110 0 0 182 0 0
Damp Course, 6 rolls 44, 1 roll 14in. “ Malthoid” ... 2 14 0 3 12 0
Ventilators, 3 doz. in and out ... ... ... 1 16 0 2 9 0
Arch Bars 30 2in. x fin. iron ... ... , ... 3 0 0 410 0
Copper, 12 gal. fixed complete ... ... ... 4 0 0 5 0 0
8 Window Sills, 3 Steps, 3 Chimney Pots ... ... 5 0 0 6 5 0
100 ft. 4in. EW. drain, 2 Gully Sinks ... ... 8 0 0 9 0 0
Carpenter—
Floors, 10 squares ... ... ... ... 30 0 0 40 0 0
Roof Timbers, Plates, Rafters, Ridge Battens, Collar
Ties, Valleys, Verandah Postsand Plates, 1500ftfixed 32 10 0 38 0 0
Joinery—
Door Openings complete, 10 ... ... ... 34 ' 0 0 40 0 0
Window Openings complete,9 ... ... ... 27 0 0 33 0 0
Facia, Soffits, Barges, Brackets, &c. ... ... 17 0 0 23 0 0
Skirtings 200 ft, Picture Rails 200 ft fixed ... ... 9 0 0 12 10 0
Mantles and Grates (2) fixed ... ... ... 8 0 0 10 10 0
Cupboards and Shelves ... ... ... 600 80 0
Kitchen and Laundry Fittings ... ... ... 50 0 650
Plumber—
Water from City Supply to all points including Shower 13 0 0 19 0 0
Guttering and Flashings, Valley and Down Pipe ... 7 0 0 11 0 0
Bath, Basin, Sink, and Tubs ... ... ... 11 0 0 16 0 0
Roof Iron including Ridgecap 18 sqr. fixed... ... 36 0 0 72 0 0
Tank fl) 800 gal. ... ... ... ... 5 0 0 10 0 0
Electric Light, 7 points ... ... ... 8 15 0 10 10 0
Plasterer—
Ceilings, 100 yards complete ... ... ... 25 0 0 30 0 0
Plaster, 350yds. ... ... ... ... 27 0 0 35 0 0
Hearths (3) Cement... ... ... ... 14 0 1 10 0
Cement Floors, including 4in. Cement Concrete, 40yds 14 0 0 16 0 0
Painter ... ... ... ... ... 30 0 0 43 15 0
.£553 4 0 ,£721 6 0


FIGURES OF THE MUNICIPALITY.
QOULBURN used to be spoken of as a “ Dead” Town. That
impression has long since been removed, as Commercial Travel-
lers place Goulbnrn as the most go-ahead business town in the
State,which is borne out by the fact that, while many new business firms
have opened here in the last six years, none have left to open elsewhere.
The following figures supplied by the Town Clerk (Mr. R J.
McLean) and OK’D by the Council’s Auditor (Mr. Geo. Christie), will
re-pay attention.
The Aunual Report for 1917 by the Auditor, Mr. George Christie,
P.S.L.A., Sydney, alludes to the very satisfactory position of the
Municipality. He comments very favorably on the administrative
expenses, and commends the Town Clerk and Staff.
The comparisons between 1908 when Local Government was
instituted, and 1918 give the following figures :
1908 1917
Total Revenue £10,469 £35,000
Assets ... 64,321 115,340
Valuation ... 358,300 410,000
General Rate 3|d s|d
Liabilities ... 63,321 97,439
The comparison of administration expenses of other Municipalities
of comparable size with Goulburn show that of Tam worth, Alburj',
Wagga, Lithgow, Bathurst, West Maitland, Invei’ell, the total incomes
amount to £79,547 and the administrative expenses to £6848, the
percentage of cost being B’6.
Goulburn is the lowest percentage of cost at 6 7.
Improved Capital Value of the Municipality £1,593,340
The Revenue includes —
Rates for 1918 (5id)... ... £9500
Water Supply Revenue (l|d Rate)... ... 4996
Electricity Revenue (customers connected
power and light 960) ... ... ... 9200
Sanitary Service Revenue ... ... ... 4600
Loan Rates for Electricity Capital A/c ... 1100
Sundry Revenues 3200
Clerical administration 3£% on yearly expenditure.
The Municipal Council, in commenting on the figures in regard
to the various trading accounts and especially on Mr. Christie’s re-
marks on the administrative expenses and generally satisfactory position
of the Goulburn Municipality finances, passed a hearty vote of con-
gratulation to the Town Clerk and staff.


SAVE ONE-THIRD OF YOUR FUEL BILL *
*J'i -
' ,v>:
'
1
pr
fi
1
liJs
i
■
:• -■■ :. . : :
WSSmm i. —i 11 'WmSm
M
■
A GREAT GRATE Made in Three Sizes.
Goulburn Engineering f? Foundry Works, Clinton Street
A. Ball, Proprietor.
When
you start Building that Home remember that
efficiency and price value count for everything
in
the supply of the necessary fittings,
Baths and Basins, Stoves, Grates
Bituminous Roofing
&c. &c.
I can quote you a Less-than-Sydney Price landed on the job.
Call or Write.
T. J. MARGRIE,
SLOANE AND BRADLEY STREETS.
(Late S. L. Furner’s Corner)


jbmm
The Commonwealth Portland
\ Cement Company Ltd.
Office:
4 O’Connell St., Sydney.
Works:
Portland, New South Wales.
TME GOOD ROADS AMD STORAGE
PROBLEM
solved by
union CEMEm
One Quality Only
Mew South Wales Government Standard
m
mm
' - - ‘


INSURE with IV
South Bri
Capital £2,000,000
3 1508 000
The LEADING AUSTRALASIAN COMPANY
Chief Office for N.S.VV.:
I 2 BRIDGE ST., SYDNEY.
Fire.
Insurances Effected on Every Description of Property, including
Dwelling, Woolsheds, Farm and Station Buildings. Fencing, etc,, etc,,
the Company's Policy extends to cover Loss or Damage caused by
Lightning, tins Explosion, arid Dusli Fires.
Accident.
Policies provide Weekly Allowances in event of Disablement through
Accident or Sickness at Lowest Premiums. Special Policies issued to
Gra/aers and Farmers.
Workmen's Compensation.
Employers of Labor Beware! Run no risks under this Act, which is
far-reaching in its benefits. The (Company’s Policy will fully indemnify
you. We suggest, applying to.our District Agent for particulars, and
secure cover forthwith. Our I .kites are the Lowest Current.
CROPS. —Covered against risks of FIRE and HAIL.
LIVE STOCK.— Covered against MORTALITY.
In addition to the above, the Company transacts the following business: —
Marine (Hulls and Cargo), Public Risk, Fidelity Guarantee, Burglary, Plate
Glass, Motor Car and Boiler Explosion.
NOTE.—The SOOTH BRITISH has been established in New South
Wales for over 40 Tears, and is well-known to its insuring public for its Prompt
and Liberal Settlement of Claims.
FOR PAimCt'LARS, apply—
A. J. McSHANE
District Agent, GOU LBU RN
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by A. Johnstone, Auburn St., Gonlbum
Reproduction is permitted of any article in this booklet, provided acknowledgment
is made in such reproduction of—and a copy is forwarded to —the Greater
Goulburn Association and Percy J. Portus. the Secretary thereof.


roujH
.9
3 P
fgQ35
V ■-•►-
ers ?
sti
■ : '
-
:?
ksj
CB-
-3 ff
pgn
©2*
8
MI
MM I f
..1 - J
mom!
==l6oB3®
For everything you require, in best qualities, at lowest prices
Chas. Rogers & Co., ve u s L b p urn
