

A Hundred Years
of Progress
1850
W. MENZ & CO. LIMITED
1950




Ok is hoo Hi is to commemorate the centenary op
W n/enz & Co. M Jt teds briefly the life story of
the firm in its first hundred years, yiues tke simple reasons
why it has been a century op progress, and expresses th e con-
fidence that this centennial birthday tui (( he hut one of tke
early anniversaries in the firm s (ony and vigorous future.


Premises 1850
Premises 1950


Mr. W. Menz,
son of founder.
Mrs. J. Menz, who with her
husband, founded the firm.
Mr. A. H. Menz,
son of founder.


The Old
This story, unlike the usual romance, begins with a wed-
ding.
In 1849, two young migrants landed in Adelaide and in
the same year were married in the Holy Trinity Church, on North
Terrace.
The bridegroom's name was John Menz—the founder of
the century-old firm of W. Menz & Co. Ltd.—and in the new
year of 1850 he and his wife opened a modest business on a
small block of land facing Wakefield Street, on the site of
the present factory.
John Menz was trained as an architect, but in the new
life in the new land he apparently found little scope for his
old profession. We do not know now what influenced his
decision, but the new business was a little bakery which pro-
duced bread, cake and biscuits and also sold groceries.


The enterprise prospered and the Menz family grew. Two
sons, William and August, and a daughter Emmie were born,
but the children were still in their babyhood when John Menz
died in 1856, leaving his wife to keep the business going and
bring up the children.
In both her tasks she succeeded well. The boys were given
a good, liberal education and grew up in due time to take over
the business, trading under the new name of W. Menz and Co.
The colony of South Australia was growing, and the Menz
business kept pace with it. In 1885 new plant was installed
and biscuit making was undertaken on a larger scale. A Mr. Jim
Ryan was placed in charge of the growing biscuit production,
and he stayed with the firm for many years.
Breadmaking for the hungry, hardworking colonists was
still an important activity, and the grocery side of the business
was maintained.




Old Price List


Premises —photo 1885


The Menz brothers, growing confident os their industry
expanded on its solid foundation, branched out in a new direc-
tion in 1892 and began to make confectionery. A good
tradesman called Werner, who knew this business, was brought
from Europe to look after it, and the new venture progressed
under his experienced hand.
Chocolate was manufactured only in small quantities until
1910, when more new plant was imported and production
stepped up.
With the increasing development of this section of the
business, it was decided in 1914 to cease making bread, and
the breadmaking plant was sold to Mr. W. J. Hill.
After the war years the business kept growing as the demand
increased and the standard of its products won a reputation
and steady custom. All the time production was increasing,
and new confectionery, chocolate and biscuit making plant was
imported.
In 1921 the firm was made into the private limited company
which it is now.


Back Row — E. Bolting, J. Ritchie, C. Schrader, J. James, S. Reedman,
C. A. Conway, H. Archer.
Middle Row —G. King, J. Ryan, A. Klein, A. Ornstein, J. Hamilton, A. J. Rowe,
A. Miller.
Front Row — M. Coleman, E. Colyer, H. Gray, F. King, R. Gardiner.


Group of Employees —photo 1900


...and The New
The Menz family retained control of the firm when it
became a company, and all the shares are still held by the
family, with the exception of those of Mr. L. T. Grummet, who,
with Mr. W. J. Menz, joined the Board in 1948.
The present Directors of W. Menz and Co. Limited are:
Mr. H. V. Menz, chairman of directors.
Mr. W. 0. Menz,
Mrs. W. H. A. Menz, the widow of the late Mr. A. H.
Menz, who was the first chairman of directors
until his death in 1922. Mrs. Menz, now in her
85th year, took an active interest in the affairs
of the company until her recent illness.
Mr. L. T. Grummet, secretary.
Mr. W. J. Menz, factory manager.


Mr. H. V. Menz
Mrs. W. H. A. Menz
Mr. W. O. Menz
Mr. L. T. Grummet
Mr. ]V. J. Menz


Back Row — G. Comley (47 years), S. Potter (48 years), A. J. March (46 years),
H. V. Menz (44 years), B. Crowther (45 years).
Front Row — A. Miller (53 years), Mrs. Read (40 years), Miss Lucas (44 years),
R. Gardiner (52 years).


Employees with 40 years’ service and over.


The children of the founder and the next generation—
the sons and daughters of Mr. August Menz —were all born
on the site of the present factory. Mr. W. J. Menz, the son
of the present chairman, represents the fourth generation
actively engaged in the management of the business, and it
is hoped that the sons of Mr. W. 0. Menz, a brother, will also
take their part in continuing to build this old-established firm.
The firm of Menz has been a family affair in an unbroken
line of succession since the founder, John Menz.
The next generation to take management were his sons,
William and August Menz. After William's death in 1896,
August became the sole proprietor, and in 1921, when the firm
became a limited company, he became its first chairman of
directors.
On his death in 1922, Mr. H. V. Menz was made chair-
man, and he and Mrs. W. H. A. Menz (the wife of the late
Mr. A. H. Menz, first Chairman of Directors) and Mr. W. 0.
Menz have been directors of the firm since the formation of
the limited company. The late Mr. Chas. A. Conway was the
first secretary of the company.


Menz products are well and favourably known throughout
South Australia and the rest of the Commonwealth.
Their quality, and the general, steady progress of the firm
are largely due to the fine and loyal staff which has always
distinguished the company.
In the record of the building of this old firm, we must, in
its centenary year, remember, along with the present staff;
Mr. Ornstein Morcombe Colyer
(a former manager) Kafer Byrne
Messrs. Klein Stoddart Murray
Resdman Guthrie Bigwood
Ryan Hay Shinkfield
King Pietschmann Braham
Sleep Wallis Stewart
Rowe Archer Miss B. Fisher
Coleman Conway Miss Kiley
Lyons Bannister, Miss Bailey
James Schrader Mrs. Nelson
Moyle Hamilton Miss Keelan
and many others.


Staff group comprising Office, Sales, Engineering (Mechanical),
Engineering (Motors), Storemen, Packers, Drivers.


Staff group comprising Biscuit Manufacturing and Packing.


Staff group comprising Chocolate and Confectionery Manufacturing and Packing.


At present the firm employs about 250 people, whose satis-
faction in their jobs is reflected in the length of their stay.
Nine have served for more than 40 years. Two have been
with the firm throughout 50 years of work and progress, and
many for over 25 years.
Some old employees are now on the pension list, enjoying
the reward of loyal and long service in a good superannuation
plan. A very happy relationship has always existed between
the management of the firm and its employees since the distant
day of its foundation.
As the firm progressed it grew, and more land was acquired,
until now the company owns a city acre in the heart of Adelaide.
But it has not stopped growing. In foresight of future
needs, 10 acres of land at Richmond were bought ten years
ago, and it is confidently expected that the firm's activities
will one day not far distant require expansion to the fullest
extent of this new site.


Relations between the firm and the retail and wholesale
trade, and with individual merchants generally, have always
had the pleasure based on mutual satisfaction and confidence.
A bond of rivalry that is always friendly has grown between
the firm and its competitors, both in South Australia and Aus-
tralia generally.
These strong bonds of goodwill have materially helped the
business of the House of Menz in its first hundred years, and
have made that business always a pleasure.


DL Staff* of Wenz do. <=dimited responded to
tL eir doantrij s call in both world wars and in the 1939-43
conflict, 52 members of the (Loij. Served in the armed forces.


SPECIALTY PRINTERS LTD.,




