

W °fjvrjT$ ,
SHERE KHAN kCT


If
H Wife
iW% Dear n ° a f
fWl l» r y0U p frot" U : story lell " s e store's of tH a< T
jil ©sJSfSsf »(lJt
V -* te the *£
§J|p • Try re^turol-i,
r 1 trl . vTT ien t a . s t to C *P j fhi s I
Wmi '^zfessh*?*-" mb
lib -Srs^S'^
m °:li my "J*. .„ , iM<
W b ° l " r in ittvi tob Mems ahl '


2 0 JUN 1945
CIBI2I
Jacko Whacko and Greybeard.
A Jar of Nuts
Many, many years ago there lived a very large tribe of monkeys
in the great, grey, grim Himalaya Mountains in the far distant
country of India. Fine big monkeys they were too, with wise serious
faces and long, glossy, grey coats, just like Mother's furs. Their coats
were just as pretty and soft too.
The tribe was called Langurs and they were noted for their
quickness in climbing trees and swinging from branch to branch,


using their hands, their feet and their tails to hold on to branches
and tree trunks. Their leader was a fine old fellow with great, grey
whiskers and fine, flossy fur. He was so old that none of the other
Langurs could remember just how long he'd lived in the great, grey*
grim Himalaya Mountains and he'd even forgotten himself!
Because of his great, grey whiskers and his fine, flossy fur the other
monkeys called him Greybeard, of course, and his full title was
"Chief Greybeard, King of the Langurs."
There were hundreds, and hundreds, and hundreds of other
monkeys in the tribe too. Big monkeys and little monkeys, long
monkeys and short monkeys, fat monkeys and thin monkeys, old
monkeys and young monkeys, monkeys with big ears and monkeys
with little ears, monkeys with long whiskers and monkeys with short
whiskers, monkeys with big feet and monkeys with small feet,
monkeys with long noses and even monkeys with noses so small that
they looked as if they'd no noses at all, in fact monkeys of all sizes
and shapes were members of the tribe.
None of all the tribe was better known than one little rascal of a
monkey. He was leader of the young monkeys of the tribe, a young
monkey so full of mischief that all people and animals in the country


around the great, grey, grim Himalaya Mountains knew his name and
of his doings, his naughtiness and his love of mischief. His name
was Jacko and because of his many whacking 3 he was always known
as Jacko Whacko! He was whacked by his mother, whacked by his
father, whacked by his grandmother, whacked by his grandfather,
whacked by his uncles, whacked by his aunts, whacked by his cousins,
whacked by his big sisters, whacked by his big brothers, whacked by
all the older monkeys and whacked most of all by old Greybeard.
He was whacked most of all by old Greybeard.


He was whacked so much that his seat was always sore, —Oh so
m
GORE T that at times he couldn't sit down, or even lie down, or swing
by his tail in the treetops, but only stand up and plan more mischief
until the soreness wore off. What an awfully naughty young rascal
was Jacko Whacko!
Well, one day the Langurs were swinging along in the tree tops,
swinging from branch to branch, catching one branch with their
hands and then with a mighty swing letting go and catching a branch
in the next tree with their tails, only to swing again and let go,
catching the next branch with their hands, and so on. Greybeard
swung along at the head of the tribe leading them to a favourite
feeding place.
Jacko Whacko as usual was swinging along keeping an eye open
for mischief of any sort. Only a moment before he'd taken a great
flying leap and caught the tail of one of the older monkeys, swung on
it, and then let go, racing away as fast as he could. As he went he
suddenly spied, far down below on the ground, a native house with
an open window. Instantly lie gave a low call to the other young
monkeys near him.


Greybeard was leading them to a favourite feeding place.


"Ker-wow!" he said, which of course you know means, "Stop!*'
in monkey language. "Ker-wow! Koo queek quo car," which means,
"Stop! Look at that window open down there. I wonder what's
inside? Let's look."
Quickly about twenty young monkeys slid down tall trees to the
grassy ground and raced over to the mud-brick wall surrounding the
house in the forest.
"Kweek quo whoa," said Jacko Whacko. "You stay here while
I have a look." The other young monkeys stayed in the tall grass
close to tree trunks so that they could quickly climb up and get away
if anything went wrong. Jacko Whacko left them, and with a bound
was on top of the rough wall. There he stopped, he looked, and he
listened. Nothing moved so he called the other monkeys on to the
wall. They bounded up to the top of the wall to keep watch while
he went further.
Jacko Whacko bounded down and raced over to the open
window. Below it he stopped, and he looked, and he listened. All
was quiet and he sprang on to the wind > v sill and peeped inside. It
was dark in there after the sunlight outside and it took his eyes a


nflr
Jacko Whacko sprang onto the window sili and peeped inside.
minute or two to get used to the different light. So he stood on the
window sill and peered inside, listening all the time for any sound of
movement inside the house.
Jacko Whaeko found himself looking into a room the walls of
which were lined with shelves, and on the shelves were tins, and jars,
and bottles, and bags of all sorts, and sizes, and shapes. He sniffed,
and there was a delightful scent in the air of good things to eat.


Jacko W hacko looked over his shoulder at the other young monkeys,
grinned at them, and then jumped down on to the floor inside.
He started to look at the things on the shelves. "Ah! Here's a
bag of sweet, brown sugar," thought Jacko Whacko as he tore open
the paper, spilling half the sugar on to the floor. Busily he crammed
his mouth with it and threw the rest of the bag on to the floor, too.
Each time he tore open a hag he tasted the things that were in it.
Some he did not like very much and these he threw down angrily.
Others he enjoyed so much that he tasted them two or three times
before dropping the bag. He went on looking at bag after bag, tearing
them open and spilling the contents on the shelves and floor.
Sugar, tea, flour, salt, rice, barley, sago, dried peas all were
opened, tasted and dashed to the floor which looked as if someone
was going to mix a tremendous Christmas Pudding on it. Jacko
Whacko next found an open tin of condensed milk most of which he
ate and then tipped the rest out, too, as well as some butter from a
dish on a shelf. These, of course, turned the other things, that Jacko
Whacko had already spilled, into a greasy, sticky mess, but he did
not mind that at all.


He was having a glorious time until he came to the shelf of
highly tasting and smelling spices. The first tin contained pepper and
poor Jacko Whacko sneezed and sneezed after he opened it. He
threw it from him and that made him sneeze more and more but he
went on opening tins and tasting their contents. He opened a tin of
dried ginger and took a mouthful which he quickly spat out again as
it burned his mouth badly.
kweek, kweek, * lie called in anger at the top of his
\oice as he hurled the tin out through the window where it made a
The floor looked as if someone teas mixing a Xmas pudding.


great clatter as it struck the ground. Jacko Whacko danced up and
down >vith rage as the hot ginger burned his mouth more and more,
and he called out again at the top of his voice, "Kweek, kweek,
kweek." But after a minute or so the burning stopped and Jacko
Whacko was just going to open another tin when he heard footsteps
and the door opened. As quickly as lightning he seized the first thing
he saw and raced away for his life, followed to the window by a tall
native servant shouting at the top of his voice, "Hi, bandara hi.
Badmash bandara," which means, "Hi, you monkey you! You
villain of a monkey!"
The Native climbed out through the window after him and
chased him across the grass but jacko Whacko was too quick for
him. Held by a coil of his tail he carried a large, glass jar with which
he easily bounded the wall from which the other young monkeys had
long since departed and swung to places of safety in the tree-tops.
Once over the wall Jacko Whacko felt safe and stopped to look
at his prize which to his delight proved to be a large jar full of
walnuts. He danced with glee and shouted the good news to the
other young monkeys who quickly gathered around him again. But


Jacko Whacko raced for his life followed by a native servant.
Jacko Whacko was greedy. He thrust his hand into the jar and
gathered up a great fistful of nuts nearly half the nuts in the jar
and turned to his friends and said, "Week kwar queek!" "You
can have what's left! These are mine and I'll have a great feast. You
should have been in there with me too. I had such lovely things to
eat."


But what was this? His hand was held fast in the jar and he
could not get it out. He pulled, he twisted, he turned, but still his
hand was held fast and would not come out. The other monkeys
giggled, Jacko Whacko got angry. He gave a mighty tug and hurt his
hand but still it wouldn't come out. He got frightened and thought
of traps and gave a mighty shout. "Kweek, KWEEK,
K-W-E-E-E-E-K!"
His friends bolted up trees again, but Jacko Whacko sat
screaming on the ground. Suddenly Greybeard shot through the tree-
tops and swung down till he hung by his tail from a branch just above
Jacko Whacko. As he swung there his old eyes took in what had
happened and he scratched his head in wonder. He turned his head
this way and that, looked at the jar and at Jacko Whacko's hand
caught tightly in it, and he looked very, very puzzled.
"Oh, Greybeard! Please help me," pleaded Jacko Whacko. "I
can't get my hand out of this jar."
"No, I don't suppose you can," said Greybeard still looking
puzzled. Then suddenly he laughed and laughed. The forest rang


You can have ivhat's left. called Jacko Whacho as he raced ataxy.


to his roars of laughter and he got so out of breath with laughing
that he forgot where he was and let go of the branch with his tail.
BUMP! He landed on the ground beside Jacko Whacko all the
breath knocked out of him but Jacko Whacko was still too
frightened to laugh and so were the other young monkeys, who were
still up the trees watching to see what would happen.
After a minute or two Greybeard sat up: "You silly young
rascal/' he said. "I'll give you such a whacking for this. Don't you
know it's wrong to steal ? You really deserve this. And if you hadn't
been so greedy you'd not have got caught either. LET GO THOSE
NUTS!"
Jacko Whacko looked down. Sure enough his fist inside the jar
was so full of nuts that he couldn't get it out. He let them go and his
hand came out easily. He gave a joyful shout and started to race
away, but Greybeard was too quick for him. Jacko Whacko was
caught and hauled back by the tail and what a whacking he got! And
I think he'd still be getting whacked if the native servant hadn't
looked over the wall and called out with a laugh, "Hi, badmash


bandara,*' which means, 64 You villain of a monkey, you! ,? which gave
both Greybeard and Jacko Whacko such a scare, that they both
bounded into the trees and swung away followed in great haste by all
the other young monkeys, who had had an awful scare too, and who
all vowed later on, when they were back with the tribe iu the forest,
that they w r ould never steal or be as greedy as naughty, mischievous
Jacko Whacko.
Bump! He landed with all the breath knoched out of him.


And so we leave Jacko Whacko and Greybeard in the trees of
the great, grey, grim Himalaya Mountains in the far distant country
of India, until we read about them again in "Shere KlianV next
book called, "Raiding the Cornfield."


" tha« ot P re * e ict ion$ ° n //^
fe e KH«a" tcarti" 16 r '" c0 pie» ot
M T tor *» t0 WV\
)p/L nvaaP 01 ®^. ot po« sib , r ch ilctreI1 ' , (fi I V&^>
\l .TrS oer, ** 15 n n f booh 8 f° „ 5 e ri« s ' '° r AI 3T
W3 f othor seri- »f J
, cs . ka° iurl aS .J; " SlIlg ."North-
T hcscSCr 5 to 8 9^c«r» old j" ,» Scrr® 9 '
JffigL > eSt ift to I 4 cordis Jw
iJSLi W "" w " - v w7
& """ w
o «^ c *°
fell. "JhCS- Gt e^b ..rjjai- Sm /li
ip


..J33r
■ ggsEt i jff V
Jv '' '; 'aRp' y^-^k>.* ':.-£"Br " *1 Y«pPy^ t -
JsffrjMS; " 33%'- -
Wt■&BBm& : - ~JT ~ : ~ ■.• ... ...,«. '.^v? : x- - •* . <HK
Ja? jfrfc jcL ]|^H^Bjj^^E2fjiH3^Rr
SHERE KHAN
STORY
»»»»<»»»ooo«ooe#«4N#«<*#*o#4MMMW*if
mk <$
In the great, dense jungles of India live heiars and wolves, elephants and
J c w..
leopards, jackals and monkeys, and many, many other wild animals.
Amongst them all there is one great Lord of the Jungle, who is old. and
wise, and knows all.
He can tell tales without number, of natives and animals, for he roam*-
everywhere, and all others give way to him at the meeting and drinking places
» \-t m.
and on the forest paths.
This great Lord of the Jungle is Shere Khan, the Tiger, and this is one
of his stories.
N \>\
Printed by The Langlea Printery Pty. Ltd., 433 Kent Street, Sydney, for the
publishers, "Shere Khan" Productions, N-S.W.
