









A
JOURNEY FROM SYDNEY
TO THE
AUSTRALIAN ALPS,
UNDERTAKEN IN THE
MONTHS OF JANUARY, FEB RUARY, AND MARCH, 1834
BEING AN ACCOUNT OF THE
GEOGRAPHICAL & NATURAL RELATION
OF THE
COUNTRY TRAVERSED, ITS ABORIGINES, &c.
TOGETHER WITH SOME GENERAL INFORMATION
RESPECTING THE
COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By Dr. John Chotshy,
Colonist, N. S. Wales, F. R. Bot. S. Bavaria , etc.
SYDNEY: 1835.
SOLD BY J. INNES, BOOLSELLER, PITT-STREET.
LONDON;-
By Commission at R. ACKERMAN’S Repository of Arts, Strand.


Sydney , 1 rinted at the Australian and Sydney fiaxeitt OJxeex


TO
THE INHABITANTS OF THE COLONY t
OF
AS
A TOKEN OF GRATITUDE,
FOR THE
PATRONAGE AND FRIENDSHIP
WITH WHICH
HE HAS ON ALL OCCASIONS BEEN FAVOURED,
iHost Uespcctfulls.
THE AUTHOR.


Quo mihi rectius videtur ingenii, quam virium, opibus gloriam
quaerere; et, quoniam vita ipsa, qua fruimur, brevis est, memoriam
nostri quam maxume longam efficere. Nam divitiarum et formae gloria
fluxa atque fragilis ; virtus clara aeternaque habetur.—Nam et
prius, quam incipias, consulto; et, übi consulueris, mature facto
opus est.— Sallustius.


A
JOURNEY FROM SYDNEY
TO THE
AUSTRALIAN ALPS.
After a labour which I may call immense, in order to
compress into a narrow compass, and that at the least
possible expense, the requisites of a long Journey, I
started from Sydney on the 10th of January, 1834. I
had with me a cart with one horse, and four men ; it
matters not whether they were called free or assigned :
as long as an assigned servant conducts himself pro-
perly, I treat him as a free one, and I should wish to
possess the discretion, as often as I should deem it ex-
pedient, of acting vice versa . —I left behind me all Bills
of Exchange, Courts, Summonses, Attorneys, Editors
of Newspapers, Gaols and such like, and exulted in
the feeling, that abandoning all these delights of ultra-
civilized society, I should once again enjoy for some
time, a freedom nearly approaching the state of nature.
I left Sydney at 10 a. m., and determined to stop for
dinner with my party in the bush opposite Grose Farm,
as the heat was excessive, and as I was desirous of ha-
bituating my half-wild horse, and town-fashioned
servants by degrees, to the change of life we were about
to commence. We were all in the best possible
spirits—At 3 p. m. the heat reached its highest degree,
and there were only a few fine cirrho clouds standing


in the zenith, at an immense altitude, in the perfectly
clear and serene firmament, while a rather fresh N. E.
breeze was blowing intermittingly.
My health which did not suffer during an 18 months
residence in the hottest parts of the Brazils, had been
much impaired since my arrival in New South Wales,
and though I cannot call the climate of Sydney un-
healthy, yet the sudden transitions of Australian tem-
perature, and the predominance of Southerly Gales,
charged as they are with incredible quantities of the
dust of our unpaved and unwatered streets, injure the
lungs of the inhabitants more than might be believed.
This day, however, I was induced to attempt a re-
medy, which under the necessary precautions and res-
trictions, may be adopted by persons similarly circum-
stanced. I bared the upper part of my body, and in
that state walked for half an hour in the currents of air
among the trees. The effect was excessively bene-
ficial, and I felt the muscles of my thorax so much invi-
gorated, that I repeated the experiment during my
journey with the most beneficial result. To phy-
sicians at home, this serial bath has been long
known, and it would appear besides, that the slender
clothing of tropical nations, rests on a deeper diatetical
foundation, than is generally supposed. I stopped the
first night at J. Solomon’s inn, on the Liverpool Road,
where the accommodation as in many other Country
inns of the Colony, was not to be complained of. From
this place, George’s River is distant in a straight line,
about 6 miles; Botany, 19 ; Banks Town, 19 ; these dis-
tances however, do not accord exactly with those given
in our latest map, viz : —that published by Captain
Sturt; but we rest assured that these, and other errors
of that map will be corrected in the shortly expected
publication by Major Mitchell, whose application, and
exertions as a Surveyor, are so well known to the whole


Colony. At 9p. m., I observed lightning to the N. N.
W., although the horizon was clear and the air chilly
and bracing. Scarcely a day passes without this phe-
nomenon being observed in the Northern parts of the
Colony. Neither heat nor cold, wind or calm, rain or
drought, seems to effect the excretion of electric matter,
which should therefore appear to be exceedingly
copious in our skies. At Sydney I have observed light-
ning in different, and almost opposite directions.
At an early hour in the following morning (January
11,) I resumed my journey along the Liverpool Road.
The deep sand which surrounds the neighbourhood of
the Metropolis, soon disappeared, small declivities of
red loam were seen, and the land began to assume a
more fertile character. According to all human calcu-
lations, this and similar places in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of Sydney, (some spots even on the Parra-
matta Road being above mediocrity) ought all to be
now under cultivation, and small farms should be al-
ready coagulating into villages. These however, are
to be looked for in vain. As all lands here, were origi-
nally given to a small number of individuals without
sufficiently binding restrictions, they have fallen
very soon into the hands of a few, who are now too rich
to direct their attention to such isolated spots of good
ground. To the existing mass of misregulation res-
pecting the alienation of land, the conditions of the go-
vernment notice of the Ist of July 1831, suppressing
even the primary grants to new comers, the natives of
theColony,andthefreed-man,maybe said to have given
the finishing stroke, to have erected an insurmountable
bar to emigration, and to have planted in the bosom of
our young Colony, the deleterious germ of an eminently
aristocratical system. The small hamlet of Irish -Town,
composed of a few modest tenements, abstracted me for
a moment from these gloomy and melancholy reflec-


tions. From the many specimens scattered along'the
road, I concluded that a secondary stratum of Trapp
formation exists in the neighbourhood. The country
near Liverpool is well cultivated, in fact so much so
that this is one of the few places in the Colony, where a
traveller may fancy himself in some parts of Europe,
surrounded as he is by drays and teams, persons on
horseback and in vehicles, combining the appearances
of active agriculture, and thriving village life. The
public houses here, as in many other parts of the Co-
lony, are far too numerous, their number between
Sydney and Parramatta, being 29. Thus I arrived at
Liverpool, an improving little town, having some good
public edifices.
We encamped at noon beside a pond of water, near
the road side, at an open forest space, called “ the
Long Bridge. This was the first time I bivouaced
with so large a party in Australia. During such in-
tervals, my horse was walked about, a practice which
I never allowed to be neglected when it was taken from
the shafts, either at noon or night, and by this and
some other means, I was able to bring this animal,
(which by some accident in its purchase, happened to
be a very bad one), so far as Pass Britannia, where it
died. To the little attention which travellers are
usually able to pay to such apparent trifles in this
wholesale country, the failure of many expeditions is
to be attributed. The vegetation near the Long
Bridge, began already to be very different from the coast
vegetation near Sydney. The experience I have as yet
obtained, during my Australian travels, enables me to
distinguish five systems of vegetation in this country.
The coast vegetation from Sydney, South to Illawarra ;
in these extensive sandy levels and hills, the Epacris,
Borroma, Dalvinia, Gompholobium, Xantorrhea, Ha-
kea, Grevillea, Personia, and such like, are prevalent


and characteristic, when of the higher forest trees,
scarcely any other than the Eucalyptus are visible.
However, I must observe, (as far as I can do so on the
present occasion), that even this coast vegetation, has a
subdivision of a very striking character; and this is
the vegetation of our rocky gullies. Here, although
few springs appear, Avhich feed the small number of
creeks we possess, and the periodical or permanent
moisture, elicits a series of plants not to be seen any
where else in the same geographical localities. In
such gullies, or small flats surrounded by such gullies,
is the spot where the two sole species of palms we pos-
sess, are to be found. Here the Corypha Australis pro-
jects its annulated stem, of a hundred feet high ; here
theSeafortia Nobilis ascends to an equal height, but
with a thicker and smoother trunk. The second sort
of vegetation which I shall here mention, is the Argyle
vegetation , or that with which the grassy hills, flats, and
plains of that County, and all congenial places in the
Colony abound. Here, almost all the families of the
Coast are wanting, and a certain number of others ap-
pear, which begin to be mixed with the tribe of the
Composite, the vast quantity of which characterises
the extensive downs of Menero.* In similar reflec-
* According to an examination of about 100 species which I collected
in passing Argyle, about 66 of them were brought under names, the re-
mainder might be considered as undeScribed genera and species. The
genus of Thlaspi, Cerastium, Goniocarpus, (2 species,) Convolvolus, Eu-
phrasia, Prunella, Thymus, Verbena, Scandix (2 species), and Hydro-
cotyle, are characteristic of this vegetation, and an indication of the great
discrepancy of the Australian Coast—and Inland Flora. The far more
prominent genera of Composite, found under the same localities, are
Calotis, (2 species), Elichrysum, Beilis, (2 Species), Senecio (2 species),
Sonchus, Angianthus, Gnaphalium(2 species), Cotula, Podolepis, Cas-
sinia, Erigeron, Craspedia.—We are indebted for much information
connected with Botanical nomenclature in this work, to Mr. Richard
Cunningham, Colonial Botanist, who stands unrivalled in the know-
ledge of Australian plants, amongst all the persons we have met with in
this Colonv.
*


tions I indulged at my noonrest of to-day. Several
persons passed the road near us, asking the usual hos-
pitalities of Australian Camps, a drink of water, and a
light for their pipe. My people were ordered to give a
bit of tobacco to all persons, who appeared in need of
such a present. In the afternoon I descended some
slightly undulating hills, and passed Raby, one of the
most famous farms in the Colony. I stopped for the
night at Mr. Howell’s farm, called Molle’s Main, and si-
tuated a short distance to the left of the road. Mr. H.
had invited me previously at Sydney, and I could not
fail to call upon a gentleman, who in conjunction with
Mr. Hamilton Hume, was the first traveller who saw the
Australian Alps from a distance, and brought these
giants to the notice of the world. Both he and Mrs.
Howell received me very politely. I saw the chart of
Mr. Howell’s journey, and was confirmed by this docu-
ment and his information in my original plan, to ap-
proach the Alps (as I did afterwards,) by the Eastern
side. The soil of the farm is rather moist, and rich in
grass, upon which a considerable dairy stock is
kept. In the winter of 1831, ice was seen about this
place.
On Sunday (12th January), I left Molle’s Main,
whence the land ascends towards Mr. Scott’s farm, and
commands a fine view over the land at the Cow Pasture
River, towards which the country gently verges. The
floods of this river are, as the inhabitants know too
well, sometimes excessive, so much so, that they once
reached even Mr. Campbell’s farm., situated at a consider-
able elevation. The stream valley of the river consists
of an alluvial soil of fine quality, in the grassy places
of which, a quantity of the Argyle vegetation is ob-
served. The river has a constant run of water, which
is a scarcity in Australia, and the colour of the water
is perceptibly yellow. The Cow-Pasture Bridge is a
good piece of wooden work, constructed I believe, in


the reign of Mr. Oxley. The road after passing the
bridge, is very bad, the alluvial soil on this side of the
river, being still finer, and extending to a longer dis-
tance than on the other side. However, the many re-
marks I have to make on the roads of New South
Wales, I will delay for some future page. At Noon, I
stopped at Cawdor, an old Government station. This
is one of the places, which are called in the Colony,
“watering-places.” Insuchthe government men, * and
other people who are desirous of practising ceconomy,
stop with their teams, and cook their provisions; here
the travelling stockmen remain with their herds for
refreshment. Here, therefore, you may be assured of
meeting with large heaps of half consumed timber,
often still burning, and then nothing is necessary, but
to put on pots of water for tea. In such places the
Australian traveller who happens to have a few good
servants, may enjoy a state of the greatest inde-
pendence and ease. Nothing but the sun and meteors
(those rulers of nature herself), will influence his de-
termination, he may fancy himself master of all that
surrounds him, he can walk for hours or days under
the dome of gigantic Eucalyptus, repose on the
down of ever-verdant herbage, he may stop or start as
he pleases, and circumscribed by his own will to the
moderate comforts conveyed in his cart (a sort of ter-
restrial vessel,) he is always in that tranquil state,
where neither buying nor selling is wanted. In that
way I greatly enjoyed my camps. One of my youn-
ger servants was strolling about to catch some insect,
another to gather plants, whilst I was occupied in ar-
ranging and classifying such objects, and composing
my journal.
In the afternoon I ascended a slight range, which
* This is one of the names, by which the Transported Convicts are
distinguished in the Colony.


lies before a higher one, called Razor-back ; the latter
extends from N. N. W., to S. S. E., forming the South
boundary aud bulwark of the Cow-pasture River, and
is an elongated thin-spined range, of 700 or 800 feet in
height, covered on its flanks with timber. At 3p. m.,
the wind was S. S. W., and the horizon cloudy. The
lower parts of the mountain present no rocks at all,
but an alluvium of loam and sand is visible, then suc-
ceed some small strata of Greywacke. Razor-back is
one of the best specimens of this formation I have seen
in the Colony. The rock is composed of rather fine
and very well united grains, of a color between brown
and dirty green, and the size of the grain is almost the
same all over the mountain. I did not observe any
tendency to stratification in the rock, although by the
last operations of the Road Department, some of the
higher parts of the mountain had been cut to a con-
siderable depth. To this, the learned will be indebted
for some more exact observations in future, than I was
able to make. Our Greywacke never occurs porous,
however I have several specimens, where some cavities
on the superfices are observed, which being rather
more yellow, it seems that they owe their origin to the
admixed iron, which has been affected and dissolved
by the air. A very fine occasional admixture * of this
rock is solid Lithomarge , which occurs in thin strata
between its cavities. It is perfectly white, and
slightly botryoidal at the surface of some specimens.
Very fine samples of „this (for Australia new)
mineral, are to be found on tfie top of the
mountain, at the right hand side of the road.
* I have followed in my geological and mineralogical terminology,
the works of the celebrated German mineralogist, Sir Charles C. Leon-
hard, whose “Characteristic of rocks,” 3 vol. printed 1824; his
“ Oryctognosy” published 1821; finally his “Agenda Geognostica,”
printed 1830, will I believe bring me very nearly on a level with the
mineralogical notions now adopted in Great Britain.


As Heterogeneous Layers (Fremdartige Lager) I
found our Greywacke,—lst. mingled with amor-
phous parts of Argilaceous Shiste—2ndly. with
the same and a Mandlestone of very fine grain,
mingled together. In specimens of the latter
extraction, I found some thin strata of petre-
factions, of which some present the shape of
small vegetable stems, others appear more to belong to
the animal kingdom, as wings of insects, &c. OurGrey-
wacke therefore, fully justifies by the scarce admixture
of organic remains, the name of a transitory formation.
The higher parts of this range command to the
N. W., an extensive view over an immense Panorama
of forest and manifold transsected and undulated
land. The highest peak of the Blue Mountains bears
here N. N. W. 40 miles distance. On the most ele-
vated point of Razor-back, the view is still more ex-
tensive and majestic. But such and all similar sensa-
tions were damped by a feeling which darkened all my
views in Australia, namely, that the vivifying feature
to all this scenery —the man is no more. The Abori-
gines of all these extensive lands are gone, they have
given room to another race of people, and what these
will be, time alone can unvail! On the top of the
hill, I collected some good plants, amongst which was
a very fine Paspalum, with stellular, hispid seeds.
The road over this Mountain must be in bad weather,
a nearly impassable one; I fed my horse with some
corn on the half-way, and as I said, it was only by such
trouble and exertions, that I was able to go on at all
with my small outfit. I for the night on the
other side of Razor-back, in a small valley, surround-
ed by rocky declivities, over and through which a
small rivulet was serpenting.
I chose this place, because I was told before, that the
Stockade which was here, belonged to an Ironed Gang.


However, I found it to be only a Road Party. At this?
intelligence even my prisoner servants were alarmed,
it being known, that many dreadful crimes are com-
mitted by such men, who are permitted by negligent
or vicious overseers, to leave their huts atnight. How-
ever all passed quietly with us, and the early bun ot
the next morning, found me surrounded by all the
freshness and serenity of a fine day in the bushes ot
AustrO/li^
Monday, (January 13,) at half-past 5 a. m., the
Thermometer ranged from 58 to 60, according to the
force of the Western breeze. I found afterwards, that
the Thermometer is always affected by this circum-
stance. At 6a. m. the rivulet, which is at the foot ot
the rock, shewed 61. Here, as well as at Razor-back
it was, that I and my men began to collect specimens
with more carefulness, and we stopped at this place
until 3p. m. All sorts of preparations were going on,
of the product of which, unfortunately I can give the
reader little account, several of my boxes which i lelt
in charge on the road, (those from the Alps, I took
back in my cart myself) having been maliciously
spoiled or plundered. The discriminating reader will
not blame me for the many apparently minor affairs, 1
mingle with this work. In this spacious country the
germ of a vast Empire is laid, and it will doubtless be
interesting to an European, as well as the impartial
Australian reader, and also to posterity, to know
something concerning “ veteris populi prospera, vel
adversa” —as says Tacitus.t Besides the first rudi-
* Road Parties are formed by probationary Convict Servants, re-
turned to Government by tbeir masters, where they must s j x
months, before they are again assignable to private service, ihey do
not work in irons. * . ... .
f Amongst a collection relating to the history of New South Wales
a collection which I am daily increasing, 1 possess a very valuable Ma


ments of the Argyle vegetation, a large fine Datura
from 2 to 3 feet in height was growing here, which I
should have taken for a stranger, had I not found it
equally in distant forest gullies. This too was the first
place, where the very rare Aneilema —Cristatae si-
milis—much resembling the Genus Tradescantia, was
& After the heat of the day was over, and our business
transacted, we started, and passing different ridges of
forest land, reached Stone Quarry Creek, whence we
proceeded to Myrtle Creek to stop for the night. Be-
tween these two places is a remarkable stratum of
Limestone, and at the last one, an interesting simple
mineral of the same tribe, which at present I am unable
to distinguish any further, two parcels containing my
collections in this quarter, having been exposed for
weeks in the heaviest rain at Sydney, and in conse-
quence, all the paper and straw which surrounded the
stones, was converted into mere dung, all labels were
rotted &c. At the “ Travellers arms” I found a merry
party dancing to the strains of a violin. is a
thing seldom heard in our Colony, I listened therefore
with pleasure even to these monotonous tones. Ail
passed very decently, and I enjoyed myself in my room
seeing others to enjoy.
A crystalinedew the nextmormng (J an. 14,) covered all
herbage along the way such freshness and elasticity of
nuscript in 2 vols. under the following title ; “An account of the first
Colonization of New South Wales—also, of that part of the Country
colonised, its inhabitants, &c. &c., in a series of letters to a triend,
by G. B. Worgan, Esq., surgeon in His Majesty s Ship Sirius.
This manuscript communicated to me by the son of the author, (Mr.
John P. Worgan,) will, when published, afford much information, and
complete the—as it were, primordial narratives of Captains Phillips,
Hunter, Collins, &c.


theair, may I am sure, extract every germ of pulmonary
affection, from the discriminating European traveller’s
chest. We approached Bargo Brush, a range of little
elevation, stretching from S. W. to N. E. The heat
was oppressive, we therefore encamped near Lupton’s
inn, to divert the harrassing way through the Bargo.
This is a dry, uncomfortable, shrubby piece of land.
All the way from Sydney, I saw no Banksia, no Hakea,
nor any plant of this tribe ; here in this dry, arid and
rocky situation, the Lambertia formosa appeared,
and brought with some other plants, the character of
the vegetation to a level with that of the Sea Coast.
In these dry, desert, lonely shrubs, we met a transport
of handcuffed men and women, escorted by some sol-
diers. They passed us silently, and all appeared
more exhausted than we ourselves were. This scene
reminded me after some days, which had elapsed since
I left the metropolis of New South Wales, where Iwas—a
consideration which vanishes when a man is only
surrounded by the simple and pure scenes of nature.
In this locality I saw for the first time, those
somewhat gigantic nests of ants, not to be met with
near Sydney. They are from three to four feet high,
commonly of a conical shape, and externally formed
of a yellow loam, and placed either totally unsup-
ported in the bush, or leaning on a tree, and sometimes,
but rarely so, situated in hollow trees. Here, and
afterwards in several other places, I opened such
nests, and found the inside consisting of a cavity, run-
ning through the length of the construction, which
exhibited a mass of curvated Cellulas, which seems
to be a compound of earth, and some glutinous secre-
tion of these laborious animals. I observed the same
structure of curvated Cellulas in those nests, which
are found on the sea coast upon the branches of trees,


although the mass of Cellulas is in that case not earth,
but rather a vegetable matter.* From Bargo we ar-
rived at J. Keigron’s inn, situated in a valley of good
land, but closely encompassed by bushy hills, which
give to the whole place a rather wild aspect.
The continual anxiety of an Australian Traveller, is
regarding the existence of some potable water. I was
therefore much annoyed, when I saw this day towards
sun-set the firmament getting covered with dark clouds,
which decrepitated at last in a heavy Southerly storm
with lightning, whilst we had still live miles to go to
the place where I had determined to stop. We there*-
fore proceeded with some haste through a wood of gum
trees, which were actuated, and as it were swept by a
heavy gale. After some time proceeding on a road not
well settled, we perceived, quite in the darkness, lights
which however were only belonging to -some drays, the
pitched tents of which looked rather strange in this
perplexing obscurity. Upon inquiry we heard that
houses were near, and after some straggling about, I fell
into the house of Chalker. This rather renown-
ed pugilist received me with civility enough, and offer-
ed us every accommodation his little quasi Inn offered.
The place about is called Mittigong Flat, and consists
of a series of good meadows, intersected with water.
Farther on is Mittigong Range, not so high as Razor-
back and stretching from E. S. E. to W. N. W. A
small river called the Bong Bong is 6 miles further, run-
ning in a N. W. direction, where plenty of Ornitoryn-
* I possessed very fine specimens of such cellular work, but although
I offered repeatedly to our Colonial Government my collections, com-
posed of all sorts of Australian curiosities, for sale, I could not get
even an answer to my applications. These very curious objects are
therefore now scattered about over many of the Museums of Europe,
when they could in a great part have been united (for a comparatively
trifling sum) in our well doted Colonial Museum.


chus (Platypus) are to be found. Chalker, a native of
Australia, is rather an athletic man, in his external
appearance a sort of William Tell, and I was grati-
fied by seeing in his house the two wings of an enor-
mous eagle, which he had shot, and of which, and also
the head, he made me a present.
Mittigong Range, (one of the many passages in the
Colony, which are a horror to the travelling drays &c.)
is composed of Hornblende, specimens of which I am
able to distinguish amongst my collection, all others
being as I said corroded by the damp. —I look now to
tell the truth, with tears on this heap of well shaped
geological specimens, the knowledge of the localities
and stratifications of which being lost to me, are now
only fit to be thrown away; many of them were marked
with the blood of my cut hands. Bargo Brush, Mit-
tigong, &c. &c., are therefore, in a great measure mere
empty names to me. To the decomposition of the
Hornblende, (which is here chiefly composed of a black
clay and iron) the surrounding land owes its character
and fertility, all soil there being light, and of a black-
ish colour. Four miles from the range is a small
creek running north. Here about, on the estates of
Mr. Riley, I took to day my noon-rest; it was a large
open valley, surrounded by fine forests. Approaching
now South (my present distance was about 75 miles
from Sydney) I found a change even in the Cryp-
togamical Flora, and some rough barked Eucalyptus
were covered with a quantity of fine Lichenes. So we
arrived at Bong Bong, a Township of about twenty
hearths, situated in a very fine fertile valley. I would
not stop close to the Town, which I had occasion after-
wards to regret, because after leaving it, I found the
road enclosed on both sides for miles with a heavy sub-
stantial fence, which I could not pass. Here the re-
collection struck me that even in the East, that conn


try inhabited some thousands of years, and imbued
with prejudices as we call them, there are places left
at convenient distances for the accommodation of
travellers. In those caravanseries he finds shel-
ter from wind and weather, whilst in the bushes
and deserts of young Australia, he can proceed for
miles, pass the most desirable places, without finding
an inch of land where to pitch his tent, or where to lay
down his head. These fences, quite useless at present,
have been erected by the gratuitous labour of prison-
ers, to enrich further people who are already in com-
fortable circumstances ; whilst the poor emigrant, the
new comer whom Great Britain vomits out, as well for
her relief as for his benefit, must despair in the same
country, without getting a single inch of land of the
vast patrimony of Australia.* After several miles
however the fences ceased, and we encamped at the
right hand side of the road, opposite a few small huts.
Towards evening there was some thunder in S. S. E
—the wind was South, and cold. The night was
very cold, but without dew. When about to start
the next morning, one of the tenants of the huts, (a
shoemaker) came to my tent and entered into
conversation with me. He offered me the last numbers
of the Monitor, of which he was a subscriber, and (as
it is occasionally written,) a great admirer, and I found
with some satisfaction, that my name had penetrated
through such medium, into the huts of the unprejudiced
and humble.
Thursday the 16th, we passed Sutton Forest, one of
those fine fertile valleys the traveller meets with on
proceeding towards Argyle. Here stands the little
c
* It is notorious that since the abrogation of primary grants of
land, three or four Emigrants of decent sober habits, have put an end
to their existence at Sydney. Some such case was very probably tha
motive for establishing the Emigrants Friend’s Society.


wooden built church, which is the nearest parochy for
all this comparatively great population, which is scat-
tered between this place, the Alps, and Twofold Bay,
about 250 miles in both directions. The land is as I
said, very good about here, and the situation so plea-
sant, that several farms, huts, inns, blacksmith
shops &c., stand here, and in fact the rudiments of a
village are already formed. It would be time now, that
in such localities yearly, or what would be still better,
quarterly fairs should be established. Besides this,
another very fit place for such fairs would be Lime-
stone Plains. The prices for the usual commodities of
life in these remote districts, particularly the latter,
are exhorbitant. Tea is sold by dealers who go there
occasionally, at Bs. per pound when the retail price
in Sydney is 2s. 6d., sugar for Is. when it costs 3jd. in
town, &c. In such ratio the setler also sells these
articles to his tree or freed, or ticket of leave shepherds
and stock-keepers &c. Certainly a very good arrange-
ment for the wealthy, to pay a man £l2 or £l5 yearly
wages, and have two thirds of it taken out this way.
The small farmer on the other hand when his stock is
consumed unless he goes to Sydney, is subjected to the
same inconvenience and extortion. For both these
latter parties (and therefore for the people in general)
the establishment of fairs in the interior once a quarter
would be highly beneficial. Such a mart would afford
the poor man an opportunity to exchange his produce
without the expense of a long journey to Sydney, &c.
Besides such fairs would vivify in some degree the
death-like monotony and silence of the Australian in-
terior. However severe measures against troublesome
prisoners and others ought to be adopted, a strong
body of field police provided, the quantum of spirits
which any dealers dray might carry, determined, &c.,
enactments easy to be executed with the enormous


sum now in the Colonial Treasury ; whilst the increased
commercial movement thus introduced in the Colony,
would soon recompense the temporary outlay of rusting
public money. In such and similar reflections, I was
engaged, when I perceived a short distance from the
way, the first Aborigines I met with since I left Syd-
ney ; a very striking contrast with the period when
Captain Phillips saw in Sydney Cove, tribes of 50 and
60 of them—now not one to be found in a space of
about 90 miles. I shall have more occasion hereafter
to explain, why I consider this extinction of an entire
race of men, as one of the greatest blames of all the
different governments, which have succeeded each other
in these Colonies, whilst the present success of ci-
vilizing the Aborigines of Van Pieman’s Land, shews
clearly, that all other failures were and are owing to
the whites and not to the blacks. The tribe I saw, was
composed of a few individuals, amongst whom a rather
handsome young girl was remarkable. As we had a
long journey before us, I did not choose to stop with
them, whose small number could not afford me any
important information. This however was quite con-
trary to their expectation, and they sent after me some
strong oaths, because I had not —they said—given them
even a bit of tobacco. I knew a long time since, that
such black Bajaderes considered it an affront to be
passed without notice. —Proceeding further on my
road, I lost entirely the guidance of the “ Itinerary
comprising the roads throughout New South Wales,”
in the main a meritorious paper annexed yearly to the
Sydney Post Office Directory. There are so many
“ old and newlines” mingled together in that (apparently
semi official) publication, that I could not even upon the
very spot make out whereabout I was really travelling.
However, I camped at noon at Moore’s Flat, where I
found the earth in some places, Sf feet deep, A short


distance from us, some heavy drays were also camping,
and I went to the men to ask about the continuance of
my road. They came from Limestone Plains, which
was the first place I was aiming at, and they described
the passage there to be horrid, which I did not altoge-
ther believe. However I was pleased to converse with
persons, who were in some degree acquainted with so
distant a part of the Colony, as Limestone then ap-
peared to me. They informed me further that the
distance on the main road by the Wombat Brush to
the first water place was 14 miles, and that I should do
better to proceed by a cut to Mr. Oaks’s Stock-yard.
On that way there are, about a mile and a half S. W.
-from Moore's Flat, a few detached houses. We
proceeded thence 7 miles S. W., through a continuous
superb Forest, chiefly composed of Eucalyptus
(pulvigerae similis.) This tree so characteristic of
some of the Australian forests, was for the first time
observed by me in Bargo Brush, where it forms only
small shrub-like trees, but I scarcely ever afterwards
saw a place where it grew loftier, than at the spot now
alluded to. It is a gum tree never higher than 20 or
30 feet, with rather round leaves, but these as well as
the smaller branches, are covered with a mellowish
silvery dew, and present therefore in their ensemble
the most curious, and rather enchantment-like appear-
ance, as in such large masses, the green softens
to a mild blueish white, which combined with the sur-
rounding azure of our sky, makes the whole like one
of the scenes of the gardens of Armida. This magni-
ficent scene however, has never been drawn by any
traveller whatever, and here I must confess sincerely,
that as to representing nature systematically, even the
works of Humboldt and Martius, meet not with my
entire approbation. Three miles from the above men-
tioned habitations, is a basaltic formation which appears


on the surface with a quantity of rocky debris,
and which is probably superposed on Pudding-stone.*
The basalt is sometimes porous, and contains red iron
oxyd in such a quantity, that some specimens appear
on the first inspection like cinnabar. In this neigh-
bourhood is one of those places, which are called in
the Colony “ ploughed grounds.” The Author of the
“ Itinerary, &c.” says in the Sydney Post Office Di-
rectory for the year 1834, page 83, — that such places
“ may be the remains of that character, as impressed
on the earth, when it first emerged from the deluge.”
By such tame geological hypothesis, certainly the
Author will not claim any prominent place among na-
turalists, who have written on New South Wales. My
opinion in the present case is, that the basalt the great
attraction of which for atmospheric moisture, and con-
sequently great tendency for entire decomposition is no-
torious, has formed, by the last procedure, these bare
open places, composed as they are of a deep fine ba-
saltic mould,t which bears the appearance of tilled
land. This soil thus formed is so soft and moveable,
that any comparatively recent inundation produces a
series of ridges, and sweeps away every succeeding
germ of vegetation in this so peculiarly formed earth.
The plouged ground in question is evidently placed
in a large concave basin, where such inundations are
likely to occur. Towards evening the forest extend-
ing about seven miles, through which we travelled,
* In my present circumstances my time is so taken up by minor
business, that it was impossible in my Journey, and so it is now in my
study, to pay to such geological occurrences the minute attention neces-
sary. My minerals I am about to send to the Geological Society,
London, and Wernerian, Edinburgh ; where they will, combined with
my rhapsodic observations of their localities, contribute at any rate to
lay down the first rudiments of a radical Geology of Australia.
f Vide “ Characteristic der Felsarten,” vol. 2, page 534.


ceased, and a fine although ciscumscribed valley cal-
led Garner’s Station, intersected by a few small bos-
cages of a BanJisia, which I never saw before, and
flanked at the N. E, by a highly picturesque range
of hills, displayed itself before my eyes. We had
now travelled seven days from Sydney, with scarcely
any interruption ; I determined therefore, to remain
in this delightful place the whole of the next day.
An Overseer of Mr. Oaks’ of Parramatta, who pos-
sesses a snug little farm here, afforded me much assist-
ance. The night of the 16th January was rather cold,
the following day neverthess extremely hot. At 12
o’clock (17th January) the thermometer ranged in my
tent 87 degrees, at 2 o’clock 92 degrees In the sun
at half-past 2p. m. 119 degrees. The wind was East
slight and only blowing momentarily. I had sent out
Walker (formerly a valet of Colonial Secretary Goul-
burn’s,) at an early hour in the morning for shooting,
and he returned in the forenoon with a good quantity
of game, which I proceeded to skin, and of which I
noted the observations mentioned below, regarding our
Colonial Zoology, &c.* I suffered exceedingly from
the heat in my tent, which besides, was filled by an
immense number of flies, attracted by the skins and
carcases of these animals. Every tool left a few hours
exposed, get useless by the exsiccating rays of the burn-
ing sun, so that every handle for tools in such an ex-
pedition, ought to be made of the dryest wood, and
* Laughing Jackass, (Dacelo gigantea, Leach) lingua brevissima,
Cartilaginea, spatulata, angulis posterioribus serratis. —Bendicut (Thy-
lacis nasutus. Ann. du Musee 14. t. 44) Urina crocaeo luea, vivi
pulicibus parvis nigris obsessi. T6stis perfecte ovalis, epipidimis du-
plicibus. Liiigua ovina, minime aspera ad fundum alata, infra linea
alba; meatus auditorius externe cum valvula cartilagena particular!,
hunc forsaii Bird (?) oculis rubia,
papilla nigra. Epizws Stfatefe


bound with iron hoops. One of my thermometers
owes its deranged state in which it afterwards got to
the splitting of the case, which was of cordwain, instead
of tin as it ought to have been. In such a day,
snakes are to be doubly apprehended. As my men
were standing at noon quite close to the tent, in an en-
tirely open place, one such venemous monster about
7 feet long, appeared suddenly amongst them, it
was one of these called in the Colony, black snakes ,
which general name however conceals many distinct
species. This one was reddish under the belly. After
the heat of the day was over, I ascended with my
chief servant William, the hill to the N. E. of the
valley. It is rather a steep one, the mass of which is
composed of a hard argillaceous rock, without stratifi-
cation, and several secondary minerals in the state of
rolling stones, the hill exhibiting strong signs of a re-
cent diluvial inundation. From the top, which forms
a rocky flat, I saw S. S. W. three undulatios of fo-
rest land, and S. W. by W. a long mountain range,
terminating to the S. with a very abrupt declivity
distant about 35 miles. Here amongst these rocks,
was the first time that I observed our fine Pryngium
ovinum ( All. Cunningham,) and another plant of the
Papilionacea>, the branches of which spread at a dis-
tance of two feet. The evenings after clear hot days
are in Australia indeed heavenly; there reigns then a
sort of metallic resonance in the air, the majestic
trunks of our white-barked Eucalyptus look as if made
of massive silver, and their tender ramifications and
leaves show to a remarkable degree of perspicuity in the
extreme clearness of the atmosphere. In such nights I
reposed on my cloak often until a late hour at my watch
hie, the feelings of past and present, the musings of
future times overwhelmed my imagination, a mental
operation which it appears impossible to be denied to


the spirit, when surrounded by such scenes. The oc-
cupations 1 was engaged in in this Edenlike valley,
collecting insects, &c. &c.,* were so multifold that
I even remained there the whole Saturday (18th of
January.)
Sunday (19th January) the heat was again very intense,
so much so as to make me feel rather indisposed. Two
miles from Garner’s station is Patrick’s River, a stream
running to the N. N. W. I arrived under some exhaus-
tion at the Pack Inn, and took my noon’s rest on
the banks of the Wollondilly in a small valley, a short
distance to the right hand side of the Inn. There are
some ridges of rocks there, stretching from N. E. to
S. W., the almost perpendicular declivities of which
being towards the South. The middle of the day was
oppressively hot, wind E. with thunder in the N. W.,
and a slight shower of rain. Some good plants of the
Argyle vegetation were gathered on the banks of the
river. Passing the Pack Inn on our way, I was
asked by the owner to send one of my servants with
* The whole collection (worth in London £6OO or 700) which I
now possess from this expedition, consists of about 9 or 10 large
boxes, casks, &c., for the kind and safe transmission of which I
am principally indebted to Robert Campbell, Esq. Sen., M. C.
and his superintendents. Besides my extensive collection of minerals
and plants, amongst the latter Lichenes on rocks, of all the different
formations, I transected ; a sort of collection which had never before
been attempted by any Traveller in this Country,—there are about
3000 specimens of insects and above 100 of quadrupeds and birds.
The only gentleman who could render me any assistance respecting
insects (non omnia possumus omnes), who is besides in possession of
an incomparable library .on Natural History, is so entirely engaged in
the sphere of high and official life (which under present circumstances
seems to be incompatible with a scientific one) that it would be out of
the question to request his literary assistance and co-operation. How-
ever we will give some Enfymological remarks in the course of
this work, and the Insects will be sent to the Zoological Garden, Lon-
don and others, for their radical and final elucidation.


his man, after some wild turkeys, (the New Holland
Vulture, of Dr. Latham) which were seen in the adja-
cent wood. This was the first time I saw this noble
bird of our forests, which however gets more common
on proceeding towards Menero, but was not observed
by me on those downs. Two or three miles from the
Pack Inn, a range of hills appears, extending in a cir-
cular line from N. E. to S, W., four or five miles dis-
tant, and well timbered. In the vicinity of Stuckey's
Farm is a Government Limestone reserve, from which
the first marble in this Colony was worked. This re-
finement has been introduced into New South Wales
by Mr. Clewett. According to information obtained
from Mr. C., he at present works six different sorts of
marbles : a reddish spotted one, and a yellow one from
this place, a sort of dove marble (a most beautiful one)
from a place belonging to Mr. Francis M' Arthur,
a black one, a black and white one, and a black jack one,
from the land of Mr. Hyrie.* Mr. Clewett aplied some
time since to our local government, for a Grant of Land
upon which marble is found, but under the present in-
genious regulations, the introduction of sculpture into
Australia, does not entitle a man even to so poor a favor
as this. Three quarters of a mile ftom Stuckey's, I
found the first granite I met with in Australia. We
stopped the night at a flat before Mr. Lockyer’s Farm.
The night was serene, the wind N. but rather chilly.
We killed another black snake near my tent, but of a
different species, with a yellow belly. It was at the
Pack Inn, and afterwards at Lockyer’s Farm, that I
first observed those highly characteristic chain of Ponds,
which would deserve a geological examination of
months, as they are a phenomenon not to be found, to
* An altogether insignifficant notice on ‘‘Australian marble,” ap-
peared a few days ago in some of the Sydney papers.


my knowledge, in any other part of the world. They
are commonly round or oval basins, of from 20 to 200
feet in diameter, or length, excavated or sunk in the
superficies of an alluvial soil, which is commonly of a
rich kind, fed by subterraneous springs ,* often, indeed
generally very deep, and not at all to be confounded
with water holes owing their origin to the accumulation
of atmospheric water. As far as I may hazard any hy-
pothesis upon them in the present work, they are stri-
kingly analagous to the systema gangliosum of animal
bodies, the cosmic operations of the globe not having
in our continent, proceeded so far as to the formation
of the vascular system, which in the organism of the
globe is represented by rivers. I cannot here omit
saying, that I do not believe that any one of our rivers,
as the Wollondilly, the (upper) Murrumbidgee, the
Snowy River &c., will ever be made properly naviga-
ble, by any other method than by converting them into
canals, and then further by means of locks. The sim-
ple transforation and digging up of their shallows,
would never obtain a complete run of their waters, un-
less they were also partially received and retained by
the means above alluded to. But in that way Goul-
bourn might in the course of a century, be on the
banks of a highly active canal.
The waters of the little ponds near which I had
camped for the night, were smoking in the early matin
hour when I rose, and the steam was slightly propelled
by an Easterly,breeze, but this lasted only a short time.
We started, (20th Jan*) and proceeded silently through
a serene fresh air, surrounded by the beautiful forest
land of the Argyle. After a few miles, we passed a
number of fine large ponds, around which the forest
was more dense, the dark shadow of which reposed
like a mystic dream, upon the surface of these quiet
and limped waters. We soon reached a place where


the road approaches the Wollomdilly a second time ;
the rock near this place is a Puddmgstone with lai gc
white silex. At 10 a. m. we arrived at the hrst
ford of the river, and I camped on the bank, ine
surrounding flats and small ponds were rich in inter-
esting plants. One of my men brought me several ol
the large spikes of a bulrush, which much resembled
the Tupangustif alia, but the leaves are rather glaucous
A very fine little white Lobelia appeared in the fres
herbage of the banks; Ly thrum austr ale with long spiked
red flowers, also embellished the verdure, and the very
rough and scrubby Grevillea sulphurea with dark pme-
like leaves, alone indicated to the European traveller,
the distant place in which he was moving. Ihe rocks
on the shore were few, and protruding upon the surlace
with sharp spines. To the left, the river moves m a
straiter course, and its graceful winding was visible at
a considerable distance. The east wind which pre-
vailed all the morning, increased so much towards noon,
that I was obliged to go into my covered cart to change
the paper of my plants. At Ip. m. the thermometer
ranged in the shadow from 90 to 92 accord g
to the changing impetuosity of the gale. The water o
the river where it was open to the rays of the sun, was
80 to 81 ° and the mercury descended when taken out
of the water, by evaporation, 1| ° lower, t 0 about .*
Exposed to the sun it ranged 110 ° . The scene at this
ford was a lively one, heavy teams passing it, and water-
ing their animals ; upon one of them, a black oy qui e
naked, was extended very comfortably. We started after
the intense heat of the day had a little subsided and
passing through fine forest land, arrived at a second tor
of the Wollondilly, the waters of which are yet covered
with a great variety of ducks. My man wounded one,
but our dogs, although good swimmers, could not get it,


as it dived under, when near to them, not re-appearing
Side Ten “ e at a con f lderable dista «ce. At the othe?
merl! l l nw i a roW of Bark huts, which for-
eily harboured a road gang. One mile from thence
we entered a rather wild forest, from which a lofty range
. ? n he i j aS J ISIWe * he N - E ’ o{ at least 000 feet
ght and coveriA with timber. The expectation
n/V, » h, , '' ;’ l Uni Plains ( here commonly called the
flat e 7 ea t Se r t 7 eTy , mom We reached a little
hut tei ‘ ° h above ranges, where two small,
hut well cultivated farms are situated, and plenty of
vegetables were growing about. We again en tered' the
visi ieT d r f aChed * he \ Vollo ' i,l| lly. whose course was
the verd "r g e , x . te I nt through a tine open forest land,
e veidure ot which, contrasted agreeably with the
placid waters of that limped stream. While eno-ao-ed
in contemplating this scene, it appeared as if a" vast
mass of clear and pellucid dust was transpiercing the
umbrage ot the forest—it was the extensive scenery of
I had iZhe lams - , ThiS Was tlle first view of "- hind
Lrf, f ‘he present journey. I therefore sent my
eniov h ’ and down comfortably to analize and
enjoy this new, and hitherto unseen sight. The ulain 7
haTf tt he d7 bOUt fl e . mi,es !nngth, and twoand a
alf in breadth and being an almost perfect level the
very few undulations being unimportant, it is visible
0 oi that distance, extending from N. N. E
i A lon ? ran § e of wooded mountains, about
/ ce * S ir \; them from N. E. towards S. W. To
• ; i W. another large one of nearly 2000 in height
thJ 1 S b W 1 a dlStance of about 40 or 50 miles, and at
distant ‘A S 0 me K oWer ° neS appear at near2s
istance. After having repeatedly seen the banks of
Wofloiidl lv a T 111 th t Colony ’ and late ly those of the
vvollondilly, I now became convinced, that almost


every fertility in New South Wales, is the effect of
ormer inundations, very seldom as in other countries
ot humufaction. I saw also that the bed of the Wol-
londilly was a newly sunken one, its banks (which are
almost always perpendicular) being composed of an
alluvial soil of from 3 to 7or 12 feet in height. But
its floods have now ceased to be, as they must formerly
have been, extensive. I saw no marks which exceeded
more than twice the breadth of its channel. While
making these reflections I perceived the sun sinking
below the horison of these plains, gilding them
to a large extent. 1 started and went towards the
township, where hospitality had been offered to me in
Sydney by a gentleman, possessing a farming esta-
blishment here. But as I found his house accidentally
occupied by a military officer, I could not expect to find
room enough for my manifold operations. I turned
therefore to the right, and searching a long time for
water, camped at the North side of the Plains, upon the
extensive grounds of Mr. Hannibal MArthur. For
the sake of shewing the animus of my party I
just observe, that through accident the only thing
we had this night with our tea, was some raw salt
pork and a few handsfullof wheat. The night however
was delightful, and in the morning (the 21st of Ja
mmry,) we reached very soon in a S. E. direction
Rossimlle, a fine estate of F. N. Rossi. Esq., who besides
his situation as Chief Magistrate of the Colony, ma-
naged a considerable farming establishment at this
place. However, it was, and is managed with judg-
ment, and 1 believe the men are treated justly. &
At this place I enjoyed four days rest, looking round
the neighbourhood, with the two promising sons of the
owner. Although the previous days were very hot the
temperature changed suddenly on the day of my ar


rival, and at Half-past 6, p. m., the thermometer
ranged only 08 degrees, whilst the evening was cloudy
and cold. The Wollondilly, was at the same hour,
72 ° and the instrument descended by evaporation
so low as 59 °. One of my first visits, was to
some of those strata of Limestone, which transect
Goulbourn Plains. It is a transitory Limestone, form-
ing a pure compact mass of a greyish color, in whic ,
however, streaks of white, and even rose color are ob-
served. The admixture of silicious minerals m these
rocks, is rather great, and I found not only large
pieces of common quarz, but also some layers ot iron
flint, embedded in it. In the latter again are found
some small druzy crystals, which require to be investi-
gated in Europe, they will probably be found to be
Zeolithe. In some places, the Limestone is mixed with
a large quantity of alumina, which appears under t e
form of a mandlestone of blueish white grains, and o
which I found square lumps in the hollows ol several
of these rocks. There is also another mineral which
is of a yellowish brown color, presenting an altoge-
ther porous mass, found in the same localities. But the
most characteristic admixtures of this rock, are certain
irregular grains of a metallic nature, varying in size
from a pea to a small walnut, with vitrous superficies,
uneven fracture and of considerable weight I his mi-
neral appears to me to be Titanit , or some of the conge-
nial tribes.* The Limestone of Goulburn is rather de-
* I must observe here once for all, that it would be a loss of time
and auite out of place in New South Wales, to make “ new genera and
species! ,S Tor this the gentlemen connected with the British Museum
&c., are better provided with books, instruments, and the fo ® tei ?"§ *
sistance of Government. My province is only to make such obser
tions, as are necessary to be made on the spo , anc ,
learned in Europe will be thankful enough, as it is out of their spher ,
to make them.


ficient in petrefactions, however I am told that Dr,
some perfect ones of shells, which he presented
to Mr. , the gentleman who with one or two
more, claimed ’till the present time, an exclusive mo-
nopoly and dictatorship over all information respecting
the Natural History of New South Wales, and the
transmission of specimens to the first rate Museums
in Great Britain. —Hinc illce lacri7ii(E. Hence so much
crying and sanguinary injustice, I have endured in this
Colony.— The Limestone rocks in this place, I found
covered with a great variety of characteristic Lichenes,
as Parmelia, Verrucaria, &c. &c., however, they were
unluckily in the boxes, which as I before stated, were
maliciously damaged.
W. S. W. from the farm, 2 miles distant, is a Go-
vernment Limestone Reserve, of 650 acres, the strata
of which are falling towards E. N. E. under 45
degrees. There is found about here, as well the com-
mon grey, as a whitish and variegated Limestone,
which would as may be concluded from the appearance
of the superficies, yield an inferior sort of marble.
About 200 yards farther on the right or East bank of
the Wollondilly, is a thick stratum of grey and yel-
lowish clay slate, of which some pieces were large flats
fit for slating. Captain Rossi postponed the examina-
tion of its utility, until after my departure.
The next Thursday (January 23,) was again very
warm, after this a heavy storm passed in an Eastern
direction. At 6p. m., the air varied from 78 to
80 °, according to the blowing of the gale; the river
was 77 ° by evaporation 70 ° . In the night light-
ning was playing all about, from the North to
wards the East, without the flashes being visible, the
horizon being only illuminated by them sunlike ; the
wind was S. S. E. On these Plains a considerable


change in the climate is already perceptible ; in the
months from April, heavy and wet fogs fill them,
which abate not ’till several hours after sunrise. For
these reasons, Captain Rossi has given up all endea-
voursto cultivate any other fruit than apples, pears,
and such like of Northern Europe. I went over once
to see the Township of Goulbourn, the locality of
which however, has now been changed further down
towards the South. There are a few public houses, at
which the vice of drunkenness was going on in the
usual way of the Colony, and I heard with true com-
miseration, that persons waste here as much as <£4o,
in keeping themselves continually drunk for a fort-
night, their families at the same time lingering in
misery. To similar mismanagement or want of proper
regulations, it may be ascribed, that according to a
calculation of Mr. Barton’s at Captain Rossi’s, among
twelve persons who were buried here in a certain
period, eleven died of some accident or other, as horses
becoming unmanageable, drowning, accidents with
fire-arms &c. The few days we were at this place pass-
ed away very rapidly, being spent besides my ordinary
occupations in putting my whole threemaster into
order, for which purpose several mechanics of Mr.
Rossi s were employed, and the repaired wheels, shafts
&c., lasted us again until we reached Limestone.
The evenings were spent with the Captain and his
little household, and I felt it to be a satisfaction for an
outcast as I might be considered, to meet at the end of
the civilized world with men of experience and
feeling.
In the afternoon of the 24th we started, taking a S.
W. and partly W. direction, and travelling over a tract
of land without very characteristic features, passed
different farms, as Mr. Kinghorne’s, 2 miles and a half
from the Captain’s, where is the last Windmill. One


mile further is Mr. Chisholm’s sheep station; before
arriving at which we forded the Wollondilly for the last
time. The land here becomes gradually more undulat-
ing, and small rocks of clay slate protrude at the sur-
face. The sun was quickly descending the sethereal
vault, when we entered Bredalbane Plains, a vast expanse
of smooth, level land, altogether destitute of shrubs and
trees of any kind, and encompassed by wooded
ranges. There are properly speaking three such Plains,
the first stretching towards W., then is a sort of turn,
whence the second stretches to S. S. W. After the
long drought and parching heat of the summer, these
Plains strikingly resembled an immense green and yel-
low carpet, only furrowed by numerous cattle tracks,
the scarcity of water obliging the stock to go a long
way in search of it. We all passed silently through
this strange and imposing scenery, while the sun was
majestically plunging below the horizon. The sur-
rounding forests exhibited then a singularly beautiful
appearance, the long rows of white barked Eucalyptus
presenting a pale blueish colour, the masses of foliage
beyond looking dark in the approaching umbrage of the
evening, while the higher parts were still gilded fairy-
like by the rays of the departing sun. In this wide
expanse two strange looking heaps of white silex, were
the only things which diverted attention amongst this,
as it were grandeous monotony. The lumps of this
silex were of a milky colour, and uneven fracture. Even
my men were impressed with the magic beauty of this
scene, and as to myself the name of Bredalbane Plains
will for ever resound in my bosom. It is one of those
objects which can never be erased from memory, and
when surrounded by conflicting passions or untoward
accidents, a feeling will rise in our hearts, which seems
Dr. Lhotsky’s Australian Alps.
D.


to say “ though unhappy and dissatisfied now—l have
once seen—Bredalbane Plains!!”
“ Once seen became a part of sight.”
The night was approaching rather rapidly, when we
arrived at a place where the road divides ; that to the
left leading to Lake George, that to the right towards
the third Bredalbane Plain. I took the latter which led
towards some hilly land, as it appeared that huts were
in that direction. At this (the W.) end of the second
Plain, a stratum of Basalt appears on the surface, of a
blackish grey colour and uneven fracture, corroded
and as it were perforated at the superficies of some
specimens, seveial of them having the shape of fractured
six sided prisms. Other lumps were rather of that
kind the French Geologists call basalt amygdaloyde, and
in the mass of all these sorts are interspersed small
and sometimes circular bits of a yellowish simple mine-
ral, which may be Augit or some of that tribe. Ap-
proaching the objects I had taken for huts, I found with
a feeling which partook as well of satisfaction as of
disappointment, that they were large roundish blocks
of granite, under the shelter of which I was much pleased
to pitch my tent. Our fire was soon lighted, and cast
its broad glare over a long expanse of the surrounding
Plains, whilst the full moon appeared in the zenith of
an aetherial sky. I and my party were prepared to pass
the night without tea, as we had not met with any water
for the last ten miles, with which to fill our cask. How-
the blazing of the fire attracted some men be-
longing to Mr. Chisholm's stock yard, which was at a
short distance from the masses of granite before men-
tioned. One of them said he would guide my servant
to a Pool, where a pot of water might be obtained. I
therefore armed my man with a tomahawk, and they
went away, and soon returned with a small quantity.


i will avail myself of this opportunity to give a rough
idea, how I in general conducted the arrangements of
this journey. Although my outfit could be neither ex-
tensive nor sumptuous (the Government having even
within the last week previous to my departure, refused
to assist my expedition with a loan of £4O or 60, on
bills upon some of my constant customers, the pub-
lic Museums of Europe)—it was nevertheless a ra-
dical and well calculated one. Besides a great quan-
tity of paper for drying plants, 10,000 insect needles,
with four different insect nets and forceps, a set ot
hammers and chisels for breaking and shaping minerals
(such and similar things were made for me on credit
by Messrs. Onions, Blanch, and Wilson), anatomical in-
struments, telescope, drawing paper and colours,
twelve or fifteen mineralogical and other books, &c. &c.
even provisions for health and comfort were not
scanty. As well as tea and coffee, I had with me
pounded almonds for orchade ; sulphuric acid with sugar
served for lemonade (which I and my people found
greatly disaltering in the subsequent heat of 129°),
our slops and boots (made on the above terms by
Messrs. Maeltzer and Ross) were of excellent quality ;
needles, thread, awls, wax, twine, &c. of all kinds in
abundance; and my servant Walker was at once sports-
man, bird-stuffer, and shoe and harnessmaker; Keif
groom, tailor, and plant collector ; whilst William was
storekeeper, and a man so much attached to my person,
that I could leave with him the keys of my boxes, con-
taining bank notes and other valuables. Paddy a little
Irish lad performed the more minute occupation of insect
catching, and often equally amused us by his ingenu-
ous and naive questions and observations. One of my
ruling principles was during this hot weather, to rise
some hour before day-break, and after proceeding for
miles we often found camps of drays, the men belonging


to which were still sleeping. At from 10 to noon
(according to the heat) we made our first stoppage, but it
was extremely difficult to meet a place combining shade,
water, and food for the horse. Australian bushes are
(so far as I am acquainted with them) all nearly des-
titute of shade, the trees of which they are universally
composed (I mean the Eucalyptus), growing in the
first place only solitary, never in combined tufts ; se-
condly, their branches being scanty and their foliage
loose, they are unable to withold the rays of our semi-
tropical sun. Although I cannot develope this state-
ment here at any length, the fact that Australia pos-
sesses properly no shade, is one of the most characteristic
features of its Botanical Geography and Physiology. As
it was not worth while to pitch my tent in the day time,
we were obliged to shift my cart every half hour accord-
ing to the movement of the sun, to give us a little shade
by its canvass cover. I had at first no provision of
meat or flower with me, and this for two reasons. I
am not in the habit of inquiring or saying too much
before I do any thing, and consequently my information
respecting the roads in the Colony was derived chiefly
from the " Itinerary.” There I read of “ a great South
road ,” and so many other old and new lines, that I was
quite satisfied, that as far as the roads were officially
described, they would be good ones, on which as a
matter of course a constant and lively traffic, public
houses, &c. would be found. In this, however, I was
greatly disappointed, and I must take this opportunity
to say for the sake of the public &c. at home, that after
passing Liverpool (20 miles from Sydney), there is in that
direction no artificial road whatever, nothing than better
or worse bush-ways, tracked and kept in order as far as they
are so, by the working of the iron wheels ; and from the
Pack Inn near Stuckey’s there is no public-house until
reaching Goulburn, where is the last one. I had there


fore often much trouble about my provisions. How-
ever, 1 was always welcomed in the houses and huts of
the humble and lower classes. They sold me salt pork
and other meat, flour, or wheat for the usual prices,
and very often after making such insignificant pur-
chases, I was invited to a good cup of tea, my men too
were treated with milk. As to the high and wealthy
(excepting the gentlemen with whom I was previously
acquainted, and a few others), I received from them no
civility whatever, notwithstanding tidings of ray expe-
dition always preceded me : none of them invited me,
nor did they in fact take the least notice of me, when
proudly passing my camp in their gigs. Like Cain in
the time of old stained with fratricide, I was marked
with the guilt of two capital offences, which very few
in this Colony (spoilt as it is by two bad and corrupted
administrations), will ever forgive. I was a man with-
out fortune*, and unconnected with Government. But
enough of this Jeremiad on Bredalbane Plains.
In the morning, (Saturday the 25th January), I com-
menced the examination of the rocks under the shelter
of which we were camping. They were huge, roundish
blocks, scattered about on a rather level but bushy
ground, some of them measuring as much as 10 feet
in height. The granite was of a white colour, the ad-
mixed greyish Mica being in small proportion. TheQuarz
of the Granite was not of the texture nor of that (milky)
colour, which the stratum of the Plain exhibited, and
its whole mass was of a slight concentrical texture,
which showed itself by the effect of our fire, the heat
splitting away from them such shaped strata. Proceed-
ing on our road, I met one mile from the place where
* “ With others poverty is a misfortune (or rather a casualty),
with us it is a crime” says the ingenious Mr. Bulwer in his Work
“ .England and the English.”


vve encamped, with some strata o { Aphanit or porphy-
void Basalt. The direction of the road this morning
was N E, and at times even N., probably thus tracked
by the first stockeepers and drays to avoid ranges and
swamps, and to proceed on more open and firmer ground.
We went on towards the third Bredalbane Plain,
through forest land, with here and there a pond of
water. This Plain stretches westward, and there are
about six miles from Chisholm’s Stockyard, two houses
occupied by a man named Mud Billy.” In the
neighbourhood we chased some wild turkeys, which we
saw quietly feeding on the open Plain. It was, how-
ever, impossible to come near them, unless on horseback,
and although Walker crept along with great circum-
spection, hiding himself behind some shrubs, they soon
got scent of him, and flew away majestically into
the adjacent forest. The road thenkeeps constantly west,
and one mile from Mud Billy’s the country is chiefly
composed of debris of an iron grey quarz, the fracture of
which exhibited a rather vitruous lustre, the land thus
composed was of course very barren, and no water is
here to be found, save some rain collected in a few
puddles. A phenomenon of our Botanical Physiology,
which very often attracted my attention during this
journey, was the decortication of our Gummtrees. They
shed their bark at certain periods under the concomitance
of very remarkable circumstances, an operation, which
may not inaptly be compared to the yearly moultering
of the feathered tribe. 1 also observed here some such
trees, which grew to a height of about 60 feet before
any branches appeared, a fact which occurs in almost
all of them, although not always in the same degree,
and contributes greatly to the before mentioned shadow-
lessness of Australian bushes. I cannot refrain here
from anticipating my further journey by saying, that
although Australian nature may possess great charms


and beauties, nevertheless in all the tract (about 590
miles) —which I traversed this time, there reigns a
uniformity in its forest trees, that banishes imagination
and scantifles experience ; and although I saw new kinds
of Eucalyptus in “ Byron’s” and “ Napoleon’s” Valley,
about Mount Didic* and Pass Britannia , there is always
the same monotonous ramification, the branches
stretching from the trunks in very obtuse angles, the
same simple coriaceous leaves, the same unshowv
flower, an entire deficiency of the picturesque creepers
of the other semi-tropical climates—and it is only
in the higher parts of the Alps, that some Cali-
thris, spiningas it were the flanks of their gigantic rocks
with their pyramidal crowns, make some variation in
this mind-hlunting monotony. We took our noon’s rest
4 miles from Mud Billy’s, where the land was composed
of Chloride shiste between a grey and green colour,
cleaving in very thin strata, and appearing not
to be an independent formation, but only superposed
on granite. In the afternoon our direction was W. and
partly W. N. W., and the land as barren as before.
We made now towards the Fish River , and our final
direction on that day was W. and W. S. W. We were
* It is a fact acknowledged by all unprejudiced Britons, (especi-
ally Scotchmen) that the English pronunciation of vowels, anni-
hilates every regularity and system of other languages. However as
I am not disposed to set about reforming the English language in
New South Wales, t can only say on the present occasion, where I
begin to write names and words of our Aborigines (“ the Papuas’)
that I am obliged to adopt for their language the Italian vowels :
a as a in father, e as ein exercise, i as i in internal, o as usual, u as
oo in wool. I will remark here by the way, that the Rev. Mr. Threl-
keld told me, that in his “ Pcrpua Grammar ,” he will adopt tha
same orthography. This Work be ought now to publish, as his pay
of £l5O a year, besides the considerable grant made to him, can only
be understood to be due for this undertaking; we were at his (aon)
Mission !! at Lake Macquarie.


about to descend a steep granite hill, when some per-
sons passing informed me, that a tribe of about 00 Pa-
puas was camping at the place, where I intended to stop
for the night. I and my people were rather glad at
this news, as the continual lonely camping of a few
persons in the bush, although it might induce some
gleams of imagination, and afford opportunity enough
for reflection, produces after sometime, a sort of ere-
mitic dullness and obstipation of the spirit. The ti-
dings of our journey, as I have before said, generally
preceded us a considerable distance, I was therefore re-
ceived by this tribe with all the petty diplomacy and
cunning of half civilized people, which afforded me
some observations upon that interesting (although not
very exalted) state of mankind, when between the state
of nature and perfect humanity.
As we were about to pass over the last hill, three
men well dressed and ornamented stopped us, and after
the exchanges of mutual curiosity, asked or rather
begged for some tobacco, of which they desired a large
quantity ; but how was I astonished, when I found that
even powder and shot were among their diplomatic re-
quisitions. These (seemingly videttes of the tribe) of
course expected to have the cream of the travellers
donations. We then descended into the stream valley
of the before mentioned Fish River, which however
consists only of a succession of several Ponds or sheets
of water, tending Southward. I pitched my tent at a
rather enclosed part of the bank, whence to the left on
a fine grassy place the Gunjas* of the tribe were seen,
where was much uproar and confusion. Unmoved
however I pursued my ordinary occupation of tent
pitching, plant arranging &c., when I observed several
females circumambulating my encampment. This and
the great number of the tribe induced me to enclose the
whole of my camp with a sort of rope paling, within
* This is the Papua name for their shelters of bark or boughs.


which, none of these half savages should be admitted.
After completing such arrangements, I lighted my long
pipe, and proceeded towards their camp. The whole
presented in the delightful evening a tolerably good
appearance. The men and women (some of the latter
were out hunting) were sitting under their Gunyas,
either without any particular occupation, or preparing
Opossum skins for cloaks,making nets of corrigiong, &c.
Upon a fine round Plain the male youths were playing
with a ball made of wool, which they threw to a great
height, catching it w ith much dexterity. It was very
interesting to see these fine, naked, athletic bodies in
such a gymnastic exercise ; they were almost all mus-
cular, smart people. The quality of a gentleman was
of course immediately ascribed to me, and they made
inquiries respecting several of the neighbouring far-
mers. A question which I could not at first well un-
derstand was “ name you, name you,” which they kept
addressing to me in an inquiring way. lat first con-
ceived they alluded to Emus, but I soon found that
they wished to know" my name. I could not venture
to submit to their unpractised guttural organs, a rather
barbaric name, but I entirely satisfied them with the
general appellation of “ Doctor/’ I then asked in
return their names, w hen the Chief (an elderly man )
w r as introduced to me as Mr. Tommy, others called
themselves Kegg, Wullumwudalla, &c. Asking them
how far they extended their peregrinations, they said,
they go as far as Goulbourn, and Yass Plains, but
not so far as Limestone. None of them was ever in
Sydney, and the use of our coins w r as unknown to them.
An elderly man, however, had a small old fowling-
piece carefully w rapt up in some rags. Even amongst
these savages, there were some ratlling youths, which
understood my questions belter, and answered them
very intelligibly. My watch greatly excited their


curiosity, and they all left their play to see it, as I
pointed out to them the motion of the hands. The
inside however, appeared more familiar to them, they
gazed very eagerly upon the balance, which they called
a wheelbarrow.* But now came a moment of great
perplexity for me. I had brought from my cart some
tigs of tobacco, of which I gave some bits to the
first askers, and so on, but soon every tongue was
loudly clamouring for tobacco. This made me
rather uneasy, and as I am fond of addressing num-
bers, I explained to them (turning out my
pockets), that if I were stuffed with tobacco, I
could not satisfy all their demands. But I
soon saw, how questionable it might be sometimes,
even among the Papuas, when a man fraternizes
with the people; for at once a simultaneous cry of
“ not budgeri you” (you are not a good man) re-
sounded from almost every mouth, and reminded me of
the Jewish outcry of old:” crucifige ilium.” How-
ever, the clever and aliianced youths before-mentioned,
extricated me from this commencing unpopularity ,
and brought the affair more on a level. In the mean
time, Walker was coming after me, and entered into
conversation with some of his old acquaintances, as he
had before lived in this neighbourhood. He asked
after some persons of other tribes, and unluckily men-
tioned some, w ho he was ignorant had since died. To
mention even the name of a dead person, give a deep
apprehension to all Papuas I met with. They turned
their heads and reminded him by their silence, and
very serious countenences of the unwelcome question
he had put to them. It is difficult to say whether this
feeling be based on materialistic, or superstitiously re-
* This is the name the Menero tribe give to any Cart or Dray.


ligions belief. We were hy*and-bye informed, that
this tribe (they called themselves the Pajong tribe)
expected this night the attack of a wild tribe, with the
intention of carrying off some of their women. They
were all naked, excepting that the men wore a girdle
with a small sort of apron formed of fringes before and
behind. Some of them had curled, others plain hair,
some very long beards, nostrils perforated, in which
they wore the usual piece of reed. A tew of the strong
young men w ore a sort of armlet upon their left arms,
made (as were also the girdle above-mentioned) of the
twisted hair of Kangaroos, and which was a sort of dis-
tinction for brave warriors. I tried to enter into con-
versation with them respecting their ideas of eternity or
mythology ; however 1 found I had not known them
long enough to gain their confidence, I had after-
wards an opportunity of obtaining some information
on this matter, from my friends of the Menero tribe
near the Alps.
I now returned to my camp to get supper, which I
had scarcely began, when three men of the tribe ar-
rived, two of them with plates* (Chiefs), the other w ith-
out, the latter one representing as it were the House of
Commons. The object of their visit was of course to
obtain their supper from me, the time of which was
well known to them. I gave each of them a quart pot
full of tea and some bread, however they found fault
1 believe both with the quality and quantity, and
asked for some meat. I was induced to address them
* It is a custom in this Colony, to give to a good behaved or well
deserving man, a sort of half-moon brass plate, with his name
engraved upon it, which characterises him as the Chief or King of
his tribe. However his comrades pay no particular attention to this
our, imposed upon them distinction. In their original state, the
Papuas near Two-fold, and the Alps have no chiefs.


once more saying, that it they would make any thing
useful to travellers, as opossum cloaks, nets, &c. or if
they had during the three hours 1 had been there
caught some opossums, kangaroo-rats, or fish, I could
save my other provisions, and give them in exchange
some of the things they desired. I was confirmed here
in my observation made often in Sydney, that the Eng-
lish had acted with these blacks as high people com-
monly do with the poor or beggar, to throw down a
crust from their table, ora penny out of their pocket,
without being willing to trouble themselves by inqui-
ring into their real wants, or in giving them advice
how to remedy their poverty in a radical way by labour.
Such and such like I call a cheap and easy Philan-
thropy, in the same way our present Government
have spent in the current year <£9oo* to supply some
blacks momentarily with bad blankets, and to
feed fifty of them one day at the Governor’s feast
at Parramatta —nefandum regina ! !—As they were
now with me, not I with them, the old (i not
budged you” issued not from their lips, notwilh-
standingmy mountain sermon before alluded to- —it was
upon their countenances. As it soon after became one
of those supernatural Australian full moon nights, I
confidently expected that a Corrohery (a dance and
song) would be performed. Without fear of the “ not
budged you” I proceeded (again with some tobacoo
in my pockets) to their camp, where they were painting
themselves with white clay and red ochre. However
the dance could not commence before the affair with
the wild blacks was terminated. We were all
in expectation of the things to come. But as
I am in no case fond of long waiting, I soon
returned to my tent, leaving Walker behind to tell me
the sequel of the story. He informed me, that a short
* Vide Colonial expenditure.


time after, the wild blacks (few in number) were heard*
and that he was hidden by the people in the camp
under a large piece of bark, to prevent his being in-
jured. Probably our tribe was too numerous for their
enemies, and the only hostility committed was, that a
few Bauerings (a sort of crooked wooden projectile)
were thrown into the camp as the enemy passed by.
After this the Corrobery began, to which I listened,
pleasantly extended on my cloak. Their strain was in
2-4 time, which they marked by beating crotchets,
and in moments of greater excitement, quavers. I will
hereafter describe a like scene I witnessed near the
Alps, and give the music and words of one of our Papua
songs, which for majestic and deep melancholy, would
not dishonor a Beethoven or a Handel. The tones
weakened by degrees, the tones died away, and grand
silence and setherial clearness tilled the Plain and all
the wilderness about my camp.
Sunday (26th Jan.), the camp of the Blacks was en-
tirely silent, when we left the bank of the Fish River
at an early hour. The road tended now towards
Mr. Kennedy’s farm, about which Granite is the pre-
dominant formation. The latter farm is situated in
what is called Goneng Valley , (Gonning in the Sur-
veyor General’s Map,*) intersected by a chain of
* Since the publication of the first sheet of this journey, Surveyor
General Major Mitchell, with that liberal spirit, which a man of
learning and science ought to possess and to exhibit on every occa-
sion, has notified by an announcement in the papers, that the Maps
in his department are open for inspection. I was not at all surprised
to find them laid down in a superior way, doing honor to the present
and anterior Surveyor General’s. —Ne sutor ultra crepitam. A Sur-
veyor General of this Colony has now enough to do with this de-
partment, and ought not to be troubled with the material business of
roads, with iron-gangs. &c. ; neither has he time to make expeditions
to the interior, which according to the style, in which people of
£1,300 and upwards a year are accustomed to live, will be commonly
(as the last of the Major’s was) abortive.—


Ponds. These, the tendency of which is towards the
Lachlan, as well as those which run in the Mnrum-
bidgi, and which I traversed afterwards, abound with
tish, amongst these, a fresh water cod is the most re-
markable, of which some were caught hereabout, weigh-
ing as much as 90 pounds. From Kennedy’s we
perceived over the Oat of the valley, an extensive hill,
called Rocky Hill , bearing from the house S. S. W.
six miles distance ; S. E. 14 miles distance, are the
banks of Lake George. A short distance in Goneng
Valley is a house, which I was obliged to enter, on
account of some occurrence with my cart. The land-
lady received me very politely, but I observed a certain
reserve and fear expressed in her countenance. Being
called aside by William, he told me, that the woman
had asked him if I was a Colonial Officer, and that he
had heard from the servants, that she and her husband
were Squatters, the name given in the Colony to per-
sons who cultivate unoccupied Ground, belonging
therefore, as they say to Government. The fear of the
poor woman afflicted me deeply, and a feeling of pro-
found indignation seized me, seeing that in British
Australia, on a surface nearly as great as Europe, a
poor British family must be afraid to cultivate with
the sweat of its brow, a few inches of land, belonging
to the nation. The cream and other refreshments she
gave me, burned as it were my bowels, and I was
ashamed that she considered me connected with a Go-
vernment, which had enacted regulations of this kind.
Our direction hence was S., the first five miles bar-
ren and arid, then ravines with water. The sky was
continually clear with a few cirrho clouds. At noon
the wind was JV, W., 2p. m. calm. Thermometer in
the sun 104 ° , water in the ponds where it was exposed
to the rays of the sun 82 ° , the instrument descending


by evaporation to 75°. At my noon rest of to-day,
which I took on the border of a perpendicular ravine,
the bottom of which was covered by several ponds of
good water, I was much annoyed by ants, which were
numerous in this barren, dry place. They carried
away entire bits of our bread and meat, and entered my
insect boxes, so that it is not so easy as it may appear
to many, to bring home 3000 insects, and so many other
specimens from such an expedition 5 ". Here the recol-
lection struck me, that since leaving Goulburn, I had
not observed any of their nests, and even those, nearer
to the Plains were no longer the conical buildings
of Bargo and the Ploughed Ground , but merely
flat heaps of a loosely connected sand. The most
of our ants belong to the gen ns of Atta of Fabric! us,
and I have some red ones found during this journey,
which are of a very fine size and colour. In these
hot days, when a sudden change of temperature is
greatly to be avoided, I and my men were occasionally
attacked by diarrhoea. I was able to cure this illness
by the most simple means, viz. the tying of the abdo-
men with some cloth, a rather rigorous diet, some unsu-
gared strong coffee, and by the application of a remedy,
which it is rather hazardous in this colony to mention,
so much the public is indifferent about it; I mean
“ Animal Magnetism.” However the recent observations
of Dr. Martius in South America, have again proved the
efficacy of this powerful agent, even upon the savages of
that country. But the exhaustion which follows every
* “ Our Botani ca l specimens were as scanty as our Zoological, in-
deed the expedition may, as regards these two particulars, almost be
said to have been unproductive.” Two expeditions into the interior
of Southern Australia. By Captain Sturt, London, 1833. Yol. 2. p.
188. v


diarrhoea, weakens the nerves to that degree, that I felt
the parching heat of the noon sun of this day in a very
uncomfortable manner. But a rather mental induce-
ment it was, which abstracted me from my present un-
easiness, and this was a grandeous formation of Porphy-
ry (Feldstein Porp. Leonhard ; Porph. euritique d’Au-
huisson), upon which I was travelling a short time after
I left Kennedy’s. The Porphyry in question then ex-
tends as far as Limestone Plains. In this large space
its character is of course much varied. Its colour is, Ist
Brownish-red (road to the left side of the rocky hill) ;
2d, Flesh-red mingled with green (Dairy of Limestone)
3d, White, five miles from Kennedy’s towards IVLLeod’s.
Feldstein is predominant in this latter rock*, in which
crystalline masses of Quarzare inspersed. No. I. has
bipyramidic Dodecaeder crystals of Quarz, which are
the most pronounced in the fine specimens of No. 2.
In another part of the road after passing IVPLeod, the
admixture of Quartz becomes so predominant, that the
rocks get very like the Porphyre Kerntique of Many,
besides which numerous scales of Hornblende are like-
wise appearing. Three miles from Gonderoo about
Packer’s, I observed some small balls of Hornstein or
the Porphyre en houles of the French, three miles
before the latter place the Porphyry is transient into
ancient sand-stone, (selterer sandst:), and the hills
before reaching Gonderoo are entirely composed of
Silex, as large layers in the main Porphyry. This
whole country exhibits the lacerated barren character
of this Geological formation, however it will be
* In this place probably some Caolin, Porcelain Clay will be
found, it being nothing else than decomposed compact Feldspar
ox Feldstein. Hut for such discoveries we want an instructed
administration.


become particularly adapted for vineyards, the dissolved
Porphyry forming a very fit soil for such plantations.
Some geological observations respecting this formation,
will find a more appropriate place in the description of
Limestone Plains.
Afternoon (the above-mentioned 26th January), our
direction was W. and W. S. W., when we passed, with
much difficulty, a steep hill, over which the road led, and
which was to the left of the rocky hill. From this ele-
vated spot I again perceived a succession of steep ranges
and gulleys to the E., the verdure of their wooded sum-
mits, being splendidly illuminated by a brilliant sun.
These ranges are called Mount Chaton , in the maps of
the Surveyor-General’s Office. The wind was now east-
erly, and there were no clouds. I carefully noted that
the character of the vegetation changes visibly in the
parallel of Lake George, but in an expedition under-
taken (as was never any other in any British Colony)
without the least public assistance, it was impossible to
make a minute arrangement of my dried plants, objects
which I must defer for my next expedition. However,
I see that a very fine Pidtencea (aristata n. s.) a Meli
chrusy Bolax (aridromedi/hlius n. s.), Trachymene ovata, a
beautiful Pleurandra , &c. have been gathered on this
high and barren land. Towards evening we entered
upon a spot of land, composed of a better soil, where the
glaucous Gum tree ( Eucal: perfoliata vel pulvigera)
grew to a great height, in which species I never per-
ceived any decortication. I will here likewise observe,
that the branches of several of our Gum trees, after the
period of their decortication is over, are so much
and so smoothly swelled, that the bark in places, where
thick branches bend, gets plicated and overlaid in such
Dr, Lhotsky’s Australian Alps.
E,


a manner, as strikingly to resemble the fine muscular
swelling of a well formed human limb, exhibiting a ra-
ther curious phenomenon in the vegetable world. The
vegetatative force in these trees is considerable, because
I observed large and old stumps of them, not more than a
few feet above the surface of the ground, budding again,
aud bunches of new saplings shooting from the centre of
such decayed trunks. This night I pitched my camp in a
rather thick and lofty forest, being unable to find any
other place combining all the conveniences we required.
It was a somewhat grand scene, to observe my party
walking with fire-brands in their hands, through the
pitchy darkness of the forest, the condensed foliage of the
trees,and the transpiercing beams of the moon creatingan
incomparable chiaroscuro. Save the champing of the
horse, stillness all about—-only now and then broken by
the dismal howling of the native dogs, the rustling of
snakes, or the shrill buzzing of some solitary locust
(Tettigonia ?).
Monday (27th January,) I heard at day-break the
singing of a little bird, the tones and strains of which
were very delicate and tender. This is rather rare in
Australia, the feathered tribe here not being very melo-
dious. However during this season (the summer), in
exposed places, scores of Magpies ( Picus —) are to be
seen, which greet the rising sun with their clamarous,
gay, and flute-like tones ; flying, playing, and hopping
upon the trees near the traveller, in fact so tame are
they, that I felt considerable reluctance to shoot any
of them. Another characteristic bird of this land is the
white Cockatoo (Psittacus Galeritus), but it is some-
what singular, that there are only certain places where
I met with it. For instance they were very numerous
near Captain Rossi’s, and I also saw many of them on
my return near Lake Bathurst, Thfey are very shy,


and perch only upon the highest branches Those
which are kept iu the houses and farms ot the Colony,
are taken from their nests when young, and become
very familiar. My direction this morning was b. and
S. half E , and after two miles travelling on high land,
(as was the whole road since the Rocky Hill), we at
last perceived some fine low ground, but again sur-
rounded by higher ranges, which kind of scenery is one
of the most pleasant a person can meet with in our
Colony. After a mile more, a very high range appeared
in E. S. E., the porphyric ground continuing barren and
destitute of water. 1 noted the particulars of this in-
teresting plateau , upon which we were travel ing lor
some time, but as I had nothing with me but the very
superficial map which accompanies Captain bturt s
work, I could not divine its Geological and Geo-
graphical importance, until upon perusing the maps
of the Surveyor General’s office at Sydney, 1 found that
this was the dividing watershed between the Lachlan
and Murrumbidgee. Such plateaus are commonly (as
I had previously observed in South America) barren
and destitute of creeks, these running down in different
directions at the flanks of their declivities. Gonderu
Plains now announced themselves by a few patches ot
good grassy land, in which a solitary shepherd was
gathering his sheep from the neighbouring ranges. T his
condition is certainly one of the most distiessful in
which a prisoner can be placed in this Colony, being
condemned to pass whole days in the parching heat
without seeing a human being, so different in this res-
pect from what is the case at home. But there is sab
vation for man under most circumstances, and indeed
I found some such shepherds, beguiling their time in
making straw hats, which they sell to the neighbouring
inhabitants, audthence derive somecomfort,wlulstothers


di owned and torpified by such a condition, pass their
days in a brutal apathy, and drag* on a wretched exis-
tence in rags and misery. After traversing some forest
land, we arrived a t Gonderu Plains, (|8 miles from
Kennedy’s) amid which the Gonderu creek was grace-
fully winding. I greeted its waters with exultation,
it was the first tributary of the Murrumbidgee which I
saw, and this name, connected with the fame of enter-
piising Sturt—Lake Alexandrine, and my favorite
central Australia, took hold of my thoughts. Although
I saw a good house in the neighbourhood, I pitched my
tent a quarter of a mile distant, thinking of Cain in
the times of old. However after a short time I per-
ceived three gentleman advancing towards my camp,
amongst whom one wearing a long beard was remarka-
ble. This gave me at once some confidence, thinking
myself among originals , when I recognized in the
second, my friend Assistant Surveyor Stapylton ; con-
versation soon flowed freely, and surveying parties, ex-
peditions, Sturt, minerals, Australian Alps, (Snowy
Mountains as we then called them), occupied very
agreeably the day and a half I passed with these friends
in the house before mentioned, which was inhabited
by the bearded gentleman, (Mr. Rae, superintendent
of Mr. McLeod). Gonderu Plains are about two miles
aud a half in length, stretching southward, at which
end is a singular triangular hill 12 miles distant. At
10 a. m., the wind was S. by E., and at 5 p. m.. the
thermometer ranged in the shade at 76 ° , Gonderu
creek water where exposed to the sun, shewed 82 ° ,
the instrument descending by evaporation to 70°.
This creek has no floods of any extent, and the fresh
water cod and the turtle, inhabit its waters ; I found
its banks toward IMallango range, composed of a sort of
porphyry shiste. A great many dypterous and hymenop-


terous insects were caught upon its banks, and the river
seemed in several places as if overlaid with a green and
yellow covering, which 1 found upon a closer examina-
tion to be a hepatic plant of small pinnated and rather
vascular leaves, and nourished by an extensive fibrous
root. The same plant I afterwards found on the Mur-
rain hidgee at the entrance to Menero, but I did not
observe it either in the Cromwell, or in the main channel
of the impetuous Snowy river* (! !). N.W. from M‘Leod’s
house is the above Nallango range, which is not marked
in the Surveyor GeneralV map. One of those even-
ings which I have characterized so oft, tempted me to
wander from my party, along the banks of the creek,
and I took the first of those views, of w hich one has
been already executed by Mr. H. Harrison of Sydney.
Thursday (28th January), a heavy fog filled all the
plain and country around, greatly refreshing the herb-
age after the previous dry weather, it disappeared about
half past 7, a. m. Before last Christmas a drought of
15 months had desolated as well Gonderu , as Limestone
and Menero Plains. Mr. Rae told me, that during this
drought fogs were common, but appeared less frequently
after the rains set in. Here already snow is common in
the winter. Alum occurs about this place, and there
were found some time before I arrived here, part of two
human skulls concealed (probably by the natives, but
for what purpose or ceremony is unknown) in the
hollow of a tree. Mr. Stapylton shewed me some spe-
cimens of an ore, which he found at the outskirts of the
Alps, about Mount Marragorah , near Yayock Creek,
which is a tributary of the Murrumbidgee. I recog-
* I flatter myself that I am the first writer introducing this river
into Geography.


11 ized in it one of the finest and heaviest Hannntite. The-
specimens were externally botryoydal, internally of a
radiated texture. On the forenoon I bade farewell to
my friendly hosts, to proceed towards Limestone. Our
direction was S., and we passed the farms of Styles,
Jackson, Barlow, and Packer, all about one mile distant
from each other, in fact these are the last places in that
direction, where contiguous habitations are to be found.
We encamped upon Packer’s ground, the weather was
constantly serene, wind N. N. W. and slight. The
Plain extends here from N. N. E. to S. S. W. for two
miles, ascending towards S., consequently the fail in
the chain of ponds is considerable, and a continual flux
of water is again rendered impossible. However the
stream and water formation of this continent is so ex-
traordinary, that lam only able just slightly to touch
upon it, and thus laying down a few rudiments for a
future hydrography of Australia. We next passed a
third flat which is in some degree connected with Gon-
deru Plains, it stretches S. by W,. andl perceived in
the rear, some ranges, with rather soft elongated linea-
tions. There were no stones whatever to be seen on
the flat, and I must observe here by the way, that the
plains I traversed in this journey, are all destitute of
those characteristic pebbles (Geroelle) of other coun-
tries, Four miles S. by W. is a deserted blacksmith’s
hut near the way side, where an incomplete or imperfect
channel of a creek attracted for the first time, my obser-
vation. We camped at this place.
Wednesday (29th January;, I rose with the pleasing
hope of reaching Limestone to-day, and thus to com-
plete the first part of my journey. So far as this, the
meritorious Allan Cunningham had penetrated about
nine years since, at which time it was considered a
difficult undertaking. After this I was about to move


outside the limits of* the Colony on my own ground,
and thus to lay some slight shade of colour, upon a part
of the undefined blank of the map of Australia. We
travelled again through good forest land, with some
chains of ponds. The country was occasionally fur-
rowed by those slight ravines, which I observed in dif-
ferent parts of my journey, and which are evidently
the imperfect, or incomplete channels of creeks, in
which the water flows in heavy rains. Now, why with
such apparently equal materials to those which other
countries possess, our continent could not develope
itself so far as to the more perfect formation of creeks
and rivers, is a fact, the explanation of which I may
guess, but cannot at present account for. On such ter-
rain it was, that we again lost (as we so often did before)
the road, or rather the tracks, which exist here, leading
from one habitation to another. Because although a
great many roads are incorporated and figuring in the
“ Itinerary,” and marked in this direction to about 190
miles, there are properly, nothing else than occasional
ways or tracks formed in the progress of inhabitation,
at first by the lonely stock-keeper, and followed and
maintained by drays. While struggling thus, the
forest opened, and Limestone Plains were before our
eyes. I entered the dairy, which is surrounded by
some lofty gum trees, through the fine foliage of which,
and a heavenly sky, the Italian-like scenery towards
the S.—the colosses of the Alps were visible. Limestone
Plains are at least 7 miles long, but there are several
other branches here, separated from each other only by
some slight ranges or undulations of land. So are
Molonglo Plains, 15 miles S.E. from the dairy; they
are 7 miles in length, and four or five broad. Kent-
levy Plain lies to the N. N. W., 3 miles from this place.


Beyond the expanse of the plains it was that I now saw
the outskirts of the Alps, beginning at the first only
with detached hills, over which rises a long chain of
higher mountains, not however to be compared with the
main ranges I afterwards ascended. From this place
the people pointed out to me Nctmadgi range, being 18
miles distant S. W., which is covered with snow during
a gieat part of the year. 1 was obliged to remain se-
veral hours at the dairy on account of the intensity of
the heat, which was indeed distressing, and I was in>*
duced to try for so many times more, the efficacy of an
aerial bath, and it was only in that stale, that I was
able to write, or busy myself in my usual way. Near
the house 1 gathered the Malva pleheia All: Cunn .*,
perhaps upon the very spot where he first disco-
vered it. The dairy is a very considerable one, the
season commences here generally in September, but
could not begin last year (1833) until December, by
reason of the 15 months previous drought, w hich des-
troyed also Mr. Campbell’s wheat crop at Limestone,
confirming the Australian proverb, “ we have here al-
ways or feast or famine. 3 ’
As I had letters from John Campbell, Esq. jun. to the
Superintendents of his father’s estates, I expected to
feel myself quite at home when in the cottage of Lime-
stone, and this was indeed the fact. It is a clean, roman-
tic little house, overhung with vines, the last one with
window panes and such like comforts, as it were at the
end of the world. The distance from Gonderu to Lime-
stone is 24 miles, I remained six days in Limestone cot-
tage, and I brought together, amongst other things, a
collection of minerals, which displayed as they are
now before me, elates my heart by * the regularity,
beauty and variety of its specimens. However I api
rather at a miss to lay its results before the reader,


because my time and attention being taken up by selling
wood and vegetables, my mind is consequently not
quite in that equable state, which a work of this kind
requires. But as the cause is connected with the acts of
the existing administration, I may be permitted in this
work (the object of which is to convey general infor-
mation respecting New South Wales), to advert to it.
Although this young, and (as it now is) poor, dis-
tressed, lingering Colony is annually taxed from £IOOO
to c£l3oo for Natural History, the writer of these lines
was not deemed worthy to receive, either before or sub-
sequent to the expedition herein narrated, any official
assistance whatever. My offence against the Govern-
ment was indeed an inexpiable one. I reminded Governor
Bourke and Mr. M 4 Leay, nearly two years since of a
salary, which was and continues to be voted fora dead
man,* and I petitioned that the vacant situation might
* It was under the administration of Governor Darling, that a Mu-
seum was very judiciously founded in Sydney, and the situation of
Colonial Zoologist was given to a Mr. W. Holmes, who died at More-
ton Bay in August 1830. However the salary continued to be voted,
as appears by the following account of
COLONIAL ESTIMATES VOTED.
1831 (for 1832). 1832 (for 1833). 1833 (for 1834). 1834 (for 1835).
No detailed Colonial Museum, Colonial Museum. Towards the
expenditure is to Colonial Zoo- Colonial Zoo- support of the
be found. But legist..., logist .. ~£l3O Colonial Mu-
a salary which Purchase Purchase seum £"200.
was voted in of speci- of speci- The latter item
1833 for a man mens, &c. 70 mens, &c. 70 is a mere shift,
whodiedin 1830, in consequence
was beyond o£2oo ,£2OO of the voting of a
doubt also voted salary to a dead
at an earlier pe- man, having
riod. been commented
upon at a public
meeting, etc.
The sum thus annually voted is said to be given to Mr. M'Leay


be bestowed upon me pro tempore, until confirmed or
revoked by the Home Government. From that moment
every thing I have set about, is condemned to frustra-
tion. Thus was treated my “ Australian Mine Ex-
ploring Company” my “ View of Mount King William the
4th,” (of which the Colonists have purchased two copies
by raffle for £2l). Thus also was it with the discovery of
my “ Mineral spring” —vilipending as it were even the
health of the citizens, for the mere sake of annihilating
my exertions. And it is only by the patronage of the
community, that this frail work (the first however—
frail though it be—wherein it happens that Australia
speaks for herself), is continued. But it gives me satis-
faction amid the sorrows, and strength amid the diffi-
culties under which I labor, that this work will be a
lasting warning to the future Governments of the Colony,
not to (divert) even such insignificant amounts of
public money, and to distress in that way any person,
who has a just claim upon such funds. This work,
combined with other facts, may also induce our home
government, to send in future to these distant Colonies
men of aptitude for rulers ; as individuals of an
opposite description, (like Governor Darling for
instance, who realized in different ways, £50,000 during
his administration), are rapidly alienating the feelings
of the community from that line of respect and affec-
for his scientific, and Mr. Deas Thompson, (Clerk of the
Council Chamber, in which place the Museum is kept), for his
mechanical attendance. The collection is (if at all!) increased by
additions, ordered to be made occasionally by some prisoner or other
gratis. Such and similar facts are loudly clamouring for a more nu-
merous legislative body, than the present one of 15 members.


lion, which a British sovereign and the British consti-
tution so truly merit.
Returning again to the main narrative of my journey,
the next day after my arrival (Thursday, 30th
I ascended a fine hill to the VV. of the cottage (Cottage ,
hill), about 200 feet above the plain, and covered slightly
with gum trees. Its lower parts are again composed of
porphyry, which however approaches more to an argi-
laceous nature, and in which a considerable quantity of
iron has become apparent, seemingly by some previous
pseudo-volcanic operation, (such a one is still in progress
at Mount Wingen). Some of the greenish brown lumps
of it are covered with a thin layer of red oxyd of iron,
in others the operation has proceeded so far, as to con-
vert the mass into a sort of argilaceous iron ore, and
some specimens, of which the top of the hill is com-
posed, present the finest possible appearance, and look
like scoriae, being however of a lilac red, and very ten-
der, some of a cellular structure. If thus, the compa-
ratively recent existence of terrestrial fire is indisputable
in Cottage hill , it is as evident, that a deluvial or allu-
vial revolution was operating in this locality anterior to
the volcanic one. In proofofthisl have a specimen, in
which one or two tubes of a moluscous animal are visible
in the indurated and burnt clay. The middle of the
hill is composed of a stratum of very hard rock of rather
line grains, and a greenish yellow colour, and which is
one of the many varieties of Greenstone or Trapp-por-
plit/ry, the exact classification of which is not yet deci-
dedly settled. From this point an extensive view over
the higher parts of the mountains is afforded, possessing
a more decidedly Alpine character. These higher ranges
extend in an arcuated line, from S. W. \ W. to W. i
N. at a distance of3o, and some of them 40 miles, their
highest peaks bearing S. W. On this spot an observa


lion of the ingenious Mr. Humboldt struck me forcibly,
that however varied a vegetation the different parts of
the globe may exhibit, their fundamental geological ap-
pearances remain always the same. These mountains
with their long protracted, but well defined and
marked summits, reminded me of several such scenes
which I saw in the Alps of Tyrol. The cryptogamical
Flora of this hill (I mean Lichenes) was very varied
and beautiful, and I must here observe also, that in
these (as in other) climates, every geological formation
produces a different series of species of this sort of ve-
getation. The heat continued very intense, and I di-
verted myself during* a part of the night by leaving the
door of the parlour open, when scores of moths (Tinea)
flew towards the candle, of which I caught a considerable
number, as did also my men outside the house with a
lantern. This night a fine Southern breeze, agreeably
refreshed the animal and vegetable world.
Friday, (31st January) was however the hottest day
I experienced in this journey, the thermometer ranging
at 3P. m. 129 ° . In such hours ray customary activity
was about to leave me, and sulphuric acid, with much
Water and well sweetened, was the only thing
which in any degree kept down the boiling quality of
the blood. Even my dogs (which were mere skeletons,
from the effects of a harrassing journey of 220 miles,
which they made double or treble), came every moment
to me, with their tongues hanging out, imploring re-
lief as it were at this dreadful crisis. However, w 7 hatis
stable, or uniform in Australian nature? The same
night an E \ S. wind sprang up, which depressed the
temperature at 10 p. m. to 7*2 ° , there was also a little
rain, and none of the insects of the previous night appear-
ed. The subsequent day, (Ist February) I felt as cold as
I melted the day before, and the instrument at 8 a. m.


ranged only 62 ° . A locality which occupied me very
much was the banks of Limestone-, or as it was origi-
nally called by the natives (they are now no more !)
Kembery River, the source of which is sttMolonglo Plains.
It receives afterwards the Quinhien Creek 5 miles from
hence, in a place bearing S. E. by E. The source of the
latter I was told, is to the S., right over the Twins or
Tindery Mountain, at Mr. KeePs place near Mikelem *
• l ain i ™ e Limestone River discharges itself
into the Murrumbidgee about 12 or 15 miles from
the Cottage, in a point which is between W. and S. W.
JN either of these two streams has a constant run of
water, indeed the Quinhien exhibits in most places
nothing more than the appearance of an incomplete
channel, or a slightly marked and inclined planum,
over which the rain water occasionally runs. We put
our tackle in the Limestone Riyer, and caught two cod,f
weighing abont 13lbs each. A larger onelook the bait,
and carried away line and all. I stuffed the two we
caught. Among the reeds of this river the Platipus
(Ormtorynchus) is rather plentiful, but they are so ex-
tremely shy, that even the flash in the pan makes them
dive under with amazing celerity, so that the shot often
has no time to reach them. Walker wounded a very
Jarge one with my percussion rifle, and followed it
among the reeds, but the spurs of the monster prevented
is approaching it. At another part of the river the
sand of the banks was interspersed with shells, amongst
which a snail (helix) was remarkable. The shell is of
the very finest description, and resembles an extremely
thin coat of dissolved isinglass, its color is yellow
* Monquedelan ! of the “ Itinerary,” p. 81, N. S. W. Calendar, 1834.
rJtrs/Z; itbl P '“° Terg ° profimde Viridi et luleo P UBCtat «'


brown. Three more fresh water shells were found in
this river, one of which is of considerable beauty. The
vicinity of the river presented a rich spot for Botanists ;
a fine white Jpomea wound itself amongst the reeds,
and Gratiola oval a, Lohelict inundata , a species ot lllcce-
brum, several Polygonum , a Crambe , Euphorbia, (diffusa ,
n. s.J, a Sysimbrium, Epilobium , Galium , Splicer anthus.
Thymus, and such like, grew in swampy places ; whilst
the beautiful Centaurea riparia All: Cunn : (native ar-
tichoke) grew on grassy banks, but was very rarely to
be found in flower. I lie root of this plant, as well as
all others of any size, are roasted and eaten by the
natives. The genus of Rurnex began to appear, amongst
which was R. diffusus , n. s. Fallows and such like
places were covered for halt miles to the height of a
man, with a species of Polygonum , which made the
passages through them extremely annoying. Speaking
here of plants, I must observe for the sake of other
Botanists, who may come after me, that the proper
flower season is in these latitudes already over by the
end of January ; however taking all together, I hit upon
the best time, because I found so many plants in flower,
and others in seed, of which latter I made (especially on
the Alps), a splendid collection.
Returning home from such excursions, 1 found even
upon the fences of the farm some subjects lor observa-
tion. A number of hawks were so unshy, that they re-
mained for hours there and on the adjacent tiees. 1
are about the size of a fowl in the body, of a brownish
plumage, the female variegated upon the breast and
neck in a very handsome manner, the male more of a
uniform brownish red, and in the opinion of Mr Coxen,
who has much experience in Australian Ornithology,
are a new species. I called it Falco Napoleo, on account
of its resemblance to the emblematic arms of that cele


brated man. The approaching sunset drew me several
limes to die garden bench, whence a superb view over
the outskirts of the Alps is to be seen. Under this pure
sky, in the aerial freshners wafted from the Alps, in this
remoteness from all the pestilential exhalations and mi-
series of towns, the— u beat us ille” resounded often in my
bosom. Allhough an exact denomination of mountains
cannot be expectedin a country, which(like this)has never
been surveyed or laid down, it is certain, that that por-
tion of the ranges, which is from this place to the right
(S. W.) is called Namadgi range; but this is com-
posed of several successions of ranges. Tenant's Hill
is the scene towards the middle, bearing S. by E.
Thereabout, 14 miles from Limestone, is Joe Beard's
station, on the banks of the Murrumbidgee. ihe
Twins or Tindery are to the left (S. S. E.), where the
mountains shelve towards the plain land, and the latter
ones are two united Mamellons of from 800 to 1000
feet in height above Limestone Plains, All these are
of course only such mountains, as, being in the first
planum, strike more the eye of the passing beholders.
But above the first row of mountains, a number of
other peaks and summits are visible, which I sketched
in t! e second of those views 1 took in this journey.
From any of the hills on Limestone, it is visible, that
the highest parts of these ranges extend from S. W. \ W.
to VV.JN., of which again the most elevated peaks
are in S, VV. For the sake of uniting similar subjects,
I will here describe a scene which I observed from the
fine Boa vista in Mr. Campbell's garden, where as
before mentioned, I most commonly passed the time of
sunset. On the 3rd of February, (a rather rainy and
stormy day), a reflection of the setting sun was seen in
the East. One ray again was reflecting and projecting
towards the S., painting the Twins for several minutes
Dr. Lhotsky’s Australian Alps.
F


with a reddish blue color, and illuminated all valleys
of the mountains to such a depth, as 1 had never seen
them before. After the sun sunk behind the range,
a strong westerly breeze sprung up, and clouds like
a thin grey gauze curtain, passed before the glare of
the W. It was certainly rain, but the direction of the
streaks was not vertically towards the ground, but
inclined towards the S., some such representing the
form of an imperfect S. The whole phenomenon was
tending and propelled Southward. Lightning also
was visible, flashing and phosphorising over the dark-
ness of this' mountaineous world, and some I observed
flew horizontally from one cloud towards another.
On the {st and 2d February, I made some excur-
sions towards Kembery, when passing Limestone
River, I examined the pebbles of its bed, which of
course are the documents of the composition of the land,
through which this river and its tributaries (the Quin-
bien, &c.) flow. I found several kinds of basalt , of
which some were of porous superficies, others contain-
ing a superabundance of oxyd of iron. Several sorts of
Trachyte, amongst which was the Tr. celluleux Beud
the pores of which are handsomely filled with Anahim,
Mejonit , or some such simple mineral. Some more
specimens of a chlorit-shiste, iron-flint and different
kinds of Quartz were also found. It was in one such
large and porous lump, that I found one of the few ves-
tiges of ore, 1 met with in this journey. It is inter-
spersed throughout the mass of Quartz, and consists of
small grains, some of which approach to the form of
cubododecaeders. Some of them are of a silver or
pinchbeck w hile, others of a decidedly gold colour. It
is neither sulphuret of iron, nor sulphuret of copper,
however,aminute examination is impracticable for me
under the circumstances, adverted in p. 31 and 57.


The temperature of this day was moderate, the night,
however chilly, wind E by S., thermometer 66. On
the 3d February, I made an excursion towards Giknin-
Ginnindera , the direction of the road being N. W., and
one mile from Limestone is visible Mojora hill, bearing
from that spot N. -W. 1 mile d stance. It is a small
range of about 400 feet, and well timbered. Hereabout
my attention was attracted by one of the finest mine-
rals discovered by me in this Colony, and this was
Nephrite , of which lumps of angular form were scat-
tered about. It is generally of a green colour, which
varies between leak, apple and (though not frequently)
dark green, of an even fracture, transient into a coarse
splintery one. Polished it exhibits an appearance,
which is between that of the New Zealand Axestone,
and Verde anticco. The exact geological occurrence of
this mineral is not known in Europe, it having been
found only in a very few parts of the globe. I found
it lying about on the summit of a flat hill, which was
composed of Porphyry, and many specimens were stick-
ing in the loamy ground one or two inches deep ; some
pebbles of serpentine, were alse strewed about. Pro-
ceeding about a mile further, we entered a snug plain,
where Mr. M‘Pherson has a small, but well managed
allotment of land. This plain extends about one mile
in length, one extremity stretching towards S SW. and
the mountains, the other N E. towards Mojora-hill. It is
a Tempe-like spot, but being away from Limestone
Creek, and its stream-valley, water is not sufficiently
plentiful. About the middle of the plain is a very con-
spicuous conical mass of rock, MTherson’s Sugar-loaf,
composed of serpentine of a larger grain, than that near
the Nephrite, of a fine greenish colour, w hich when po-
lished will at some period adorn the edifices of Lime-
stone. The outside of these rocks cleaves away in


ihin strata, ami is besides covered with a slight layer
of a simple mineral, intermixed with some chrysials.
The temperature of this day was very curious, ihe
heat, even at the rising of the sun, was oppressive, viz.
90° in the shade. Towards neon a gale came from
the N W., with rain. At 4 p. m. there was somewhat
of a storm, the air was then the same as in the morning
90°, whilst the rain water subjected to obser-
vation immediately after its falling, ranged 70°,
water from the river, which had been kept some hours
in buckets being 80°, Towards midnight a dread-
ful storm of wind and rain was raging, w hich fright-
ened the large spiders and triantalopes, which were
amongst the beams of the root, and drove them into the
room. I was lying in my 7 bed, and just observing
through the window the tine effect of the lightning upon
the plain, when one of the above-named gentry nearly
as large as a chihPs fist, fell sans ceremonie upon my
face. I could not forbear whistling between my teeth :
“ Oh, the joys of Travellers
But I should be compelled to be too diffuse, were I
to give the reader a full account of all the Mineralogieal
and Geological relations of the interesting Plain of
Limestone, where, unencumbered by any sorrow, I
wandered happy upon the adjacent hills and gulleys,
with the confident anticipation, that so extensive a col-
lection as I was able to make, would gain after my
return, the approbation of the two persons who com-
mand our Colonial Museum; an expectation which
however was altogether frustrated by reason of the old
(but in this instance greatly misapplied) principle:
Amor incipit ab ego.” I will conclude therefore
these sort of observations, saying, that towards Kembery
Plains and on the Plains themselves, there are strata
of different sorts of rocks which protrude on the surface.


as a white sbiste, which is between argilaceons and
marl shisle, then another stratum of silex, which con-
tains hollows with fine chrystals, overlaid with iron,
which is prevalent all through the rock. But there are
strata of a rock protruding at Kembery, which with
my means and time, I am not able to bring under any
known classification whatever. It is a homogenous
rock of the silex tribe, of a fine splintery fracture, very
hard and tough, fragments angular and sharp, opaque,
and of a color between reddish brown and yellow. It
exhibits no stratification. Throughout the whole mass,
there is interspersed in some small cavities a substance
of a pure yellow color, near which the matrix acceeds
more to a pure silicious nature. In some parts this
rock* exhibits that external shape, which is called
backed, and in others, large spots of the surface are
even and very smooth, which quality cannot be in the
present instance (as is the case in some rocks, which
I have from the Hunter), the effect of melting by light-
ning. I cannot refrain from anticipating, that many
Australian rocks possess such smooth and polished-like
superficies, as for instance, the granular Limestone near
the Mineral Spring on Wl enero, which exhibit the same
qualities in an eminent degree.
Limestone is also one of the most imporfant spots as
far as the political economy of the colony is concerned.
The Plains themselves must contain at least 20,000
acres of good, compact, arable land, besides which they
form a point where three principal roads, the great
road from Sydney, that to \ass Plains, and that to
Menero Downs—will eventually converge. At Lime-
stone, therefore, at no distant period, a fine town will
* Several specimens of this rock being on band, there will be am-
ple room for its elucidation at competent quarters.


exist, uniting Spencer’s Gulph (by means of the Mur-
ray), Sydney, and Twofold Bay. If any British
Colony deserves the attention of the Ministry and
Parliament, ours certainly does, a whole continent of
immense extent being before us, and therefore any fault
committed in the tirst organization of so large a body,
will have incalculably awful and embarrassing con-
sequences. More especially the disposition of land is
loudly claiming attention, if an Agrarian Law in
some shorter or longer period is to be avoided.*
With regard to Limestone this is now too late,
the whole plains belonging by grant or pur-
chase to a few (although very worthy) landholders.
And although five shillings per acre is far too
much for primary grants to Emigrants or well behaved
freed men, it is far too little for those already possessing
large property, who in that way might now purchase
entire Dukedoms. However, it is not only the inconsi-
derate disposal of such large portion's of lands which is
amiss at Limestone, and similar places in this Colony ;
these distant parts have in every respect escaped the at-
tention of the two or three rather questionable Govern-
ments, which have ruled these Colonies for the last 12 or
15 years (vide Dr. Lang’s N. S. W. throughout). When
speaking of Menero Downs, the kind reader will per-
ceive the importance, which these places already pos-
sess, regarding not only the numbers of overseers and
* It is a curious fact, that the families of the original founders and
settlers of Colonies, seem not to be endowed with any principle of
duration. Where are the successors of Cortes, Pizarro ! In the
Brazils too, there are very few families of the first settlers in exis-
tence. Where are the palaces, the parks, the estates of these peo-
ple? Moderation! Moderation! is the grand lesson continually
proclaimed by history, to which however neither nations nor indi-
viduals seem willing to listen.


prisoners who live there, but also as the commercial ex-
ponent of at least 35,000 sheep, and a proportionate
number of other cattle. A parsonage with an ambula-
ting Schoolmaster, an Hospital, a Court-house, a Post-
office, and a quarterly fair ought therefore to be imme-
diately established at Limestone, this being the regular
thoroughfare for the above stated vast country. As
regards the first point, be it known by all religious and
humane persons in Great Britain and N. S. W., that
under our present (as it calls itself philanthropic and
humane) Government, with the sum of <4:100,000 recent-
ly accumulated and locked up in the Colonial Treasury,
there are hundreds of British subjects, who may remain
for years and years in the Colony, and far more on our
outstations, without hearing the consolatory or admo-
nishing voice of a minister of religion ; be it known that
hundreds, nay thousands of christinans, and British Chris-
tians too, are dying in this (officially !) rich Colon v like
brutes, are buried like brutes ! As to the Post-office, the
establishment of a Mail once a-month, has been proposed
to the authorities by some gentlemen, who received for
answer, that “it would not pay/’ But I would re-
mark, that any public expenditure ought not to be
considered as to its topical, especial and immediate re-
imbursement, but as to its compatibility with, and ex-
pediency to the general welfare. And here I would ad-
vert once for ever to the fact, that there can be no occa-
sion at all for saving and accumulating public money,
in a young, as it were just sprung-up Colony. The
exhibition of such a figure before the eyes of the Secre-
tary of State, may at the first sight be charming, and
it is very likely to have been accumulated to charm
and please him, and thus to cause a duration
and prolongation of the present system. But
this charm will quickly vanish, and turn into the


opposite extreme, when the. Ministry, and Mr. Spring
Rice in particular, come to know, that such unnatural
savings have been acquired by an unpardonable
retardation, retrojection; misery, starvation, and
incipient unmanageableness —in tact by a general neg-
ligence of all the interests of the Colony, and its im-
mediate dependencies. Witness numerous and im-
portantly signed petitions, sent to the Newspapers, for a
reparation of the principal roads , erection of bridges ;
bread at I7d the 4lb. loaf; the Banks compelled to
restrain their discounts, an approaching stagnation of
all business ; mutiny at Castle Forbes; first mutiny
at Norfolk Island, second ditto ditto; war-like ap-
pearance of New Zealand ; nearly half of three fiee
female ships thrown upon the streets of Sydney, a de-
gradation to themselves, poison to our young gene-
ration ; non-publication of a highly useful map of,
and for the Colony, made by the Surveyor’s Depart-
ment, paid by the Public (£20,000 per annum), and
printed four months ago ; an unpaved, unwatered and
unlimited —in fact, unclean, village-like Colonial Me-
ss
tropolis, &c. &c.
As to the management of Mr. Campbells farm in
particular, I was told that the sheep breeding com-
menced here nine years ago with about 700 head,
which the overseer Mr. Ainsley has, lo the present
time, succeeded in increasing to upwards of 20,000,
not taking into the account the number sold during
that period. The farthest out-station of this esta-
blishment is Dilighet, about 170 miles S. from hence,
and thence four or five days journey, according to the
Blacks, are Plains (caPed by them Omeo), larger than
those of Menero, and containing an extensive Lake.
Thus it gave me great satisfactian to reflect on the
man y objects I had collected, and the observations I
had noted in Limestone Cottage ; however it was now


time lo push on. 1 therefore gtive orders to puck up
the three boxes, which were to be sent directly to
Sydney, and to arrange the other concerns for the
cart* The articles which we had to put in order were
indeed innumerable, (an expedition of this natuie with
one cart and horse is no easy jobj ; and I must again
confess, that I was astonished at the quantity of work
my four servants performed, they busied themselves
indeed like Britons. At last our fair was broken up,
and three trunks, each containing a vast quantity ot
articles, as arsenic-soap, camphor, gypsum, powder
and shot, candles, tinder-boxes and phosphorus, plaster
and physic of different sorts, saws, chisels, twine ; then
other detached cases, boxes, bundles ot paper, cask,
bottles, guns, baskets, tomahawks, ropes, soldier’s
knapsacks, aud the good supply of provisions which I
got by the order of Mr. Campbell—completely tilled my
cart up to the roof. Thus on the 4th of February, the
shrill tone of my mates whistle, summoned my men for
departure, which we always did with the spirit of sailors
about to weigh anchor. We made now for Girihom-
hery (alias Giridibomhera ), a farm of Mr. Palmer.
The day was cloudy and rather mizzly. Our direction
was S. and S. S. E. The plains are here divided and
broken by banks and small hills, and three miles fiom
Campbell’s Cottage, is a stralumof Limestone,of a grey-
ish black colour, flat conchoidic fracture, and there also
are some small seams of Limespar and another simple
mineral ( Anhydrit 9) occurring in it. There is some
more Limestone towards Kembery, and it is from
such strata, the plains have their name. INo
shrubs, save some Ha/cea were met with, and the very
few Gum trees, the seeds of which carried there by the
winds, birds, &c. from the adjacent bushes—did not
prosper, but exhibited a scanty, lingering appear, nee.
After 7 miles work we reached Giribombery, which lies
on the banks of a distant creek, or chain of ponds, bix


miles R from hence is Tagranong or Gin Bell, a farm
of Mr. M‘Laren’s, in a plain called Isabella Plain, and
equally on the bank of a small creek. About the
same direction is JSies, a cattle station of Mr. llarbert,
25 miles distant, in a very mountaineons country. In
the house were two Farmers from Lake George, who re-
mained for the night, and gave the following informa-
tion. This Lake recedes every year from its original
circumference, it having diminished about 25 feet in
the last three years. There are Blacks, who say, that
they have seen it dry. No fish or frog, or animal of
any size inhabits its waters, with the exception of a
small turtle, and therefore aquatic birds are not so nu-
merous, as from its extent we might be led to ex-
pect. The prevalent winds are W., and produce con-
siderable current and waves. In one of my compa-
nions (an Australian), I observed a certain reserve and
singular taciturnity, which in his absence, was explained
by the other men, to have for its cause some heavy fa-
mily affliction, which happened when he was a child.
In the morning we could not find him for his breakfast,
and the servants told us, that he went away half a mile
to the creek, to wash himself. “He would rather go
“ five miles, than ask any person even for such a thing as
a glass of water,"’ said his friend. I felt inclined to call
th is a good sample of old British tenacity.
But it occurred that Giribombery should exhibit
to the travellers a specimen of the characters of dif-
ferent Nations, and it was after breakfast that a sort of
N. S. Wales Don Quixote, presented himself at the
entrance of the farm. This was the superintendent of
a neighbouring place, known all about for his occa-
sional fondness for spirits, and extravagant deeds. He
anrived in full gallop upon his bay horse, and exer-
cised some manoeuvres of cavalry with his horse whip
upon the shoulders of my servants. This personage


iiatl the mania (when he was in liquor), to think lie had
been at Waterloo, and was then hudibrasising upon the
many good Frenchmen, he had killed at that battle.
This might have been all very good for an after break-
fast joke ; but as Mr. Duncan told me, that in these
heroic fancies, he some times got eccentric, indeed, so
much so, as at one time to have driven an aide-camp
out of his house in the middle of the night, I deemed
it not convenient to see a repetition of the ‘ 4 Battle of
Waterloo in minature,” just now. I preferred there-
fore of making my retreat by an outer door, and gave
my servants directions to follow me incog . with the
Cart.
Thus, on the sth of February, I was about to trans-
gress the limits of the Colony. We passed through some
forests of blue and red gum trees, over two of the
steepest hills I had hitherto passed. Our present task
was to flank the Tinderies, and to make for a sheep-
station of Mr. Campbell’s, called the Waterholes.
However, such a task was too much for one horse, and
especially for such a one, as I got at Sydney. We ar-
rived at length at a shepherd’s place, about four miles
from Giribombery, where I was obliged to remain two
days, in order to procure another horse and cart to as-
sist me over the pass. These two days were wasted in
some such preparation or another. We saw here one of
those green Snakes, which are called in the Colony Grass
Snakes ; they attain the length of ten feet, and are harm-
less. The shepherd informed me, thatthe brown and yel-
low species bite the sheep, and when seen by a flock, they
rush asunder with great precipitation. These species also
attack and bite dogs, but very seldom seize upon larger
cattle. When in the greatest perplexity with the horse
and cart, a rather new appearance presented itself to
me, and this was two settlers on horse-back passing
from Menero. They were habited in quite a bush-like


undress, their tethering rope was wound round the
horses neck, some tin pots for boiling tea suspended
from their halters, their bedding apparatus placed at
the back part of their saddles, and muskets and dag-
gers by their sides—gave these travellers a truly Aus-
tralian appearance. Finally on Friday, the 7th Fe-
bruary, 1 was able to start with two carts from this
solitary sheep station. My direction was SS E. Two
miles further appeared some rocks of Gneiss, of which
several of these ranges seems to be composed. How-
ever, the general formation was still that Feldstein-Por-
phyry, which 1 transecled since I left Kennedy’s.
Thus we arrived at the foot of the Twins, which re-
mained to our right (W.) Only one projection of this
mountain was visible in this enclosed valley, the other
parts receding behind the woods. Here upon a small
flat a hut was once standing, hut the people were
obliged to relinquish it for want of water, which is de-
deficient upon this plateau for many miles, this being
again the watershed between the Limestone River,
and the (main) Murrumbidgee. This is the more to
be regretted, as the declivities of, and the flats between
these hills, would afford a fine pasture for sheep*.
After this I arrived at an opening, through which the
road passed between the Twins and another small
range, this opening being due South. I called this
whole mountaineous, and important passage, leading
over a certain number of tertiary ranges, and probably
the only one from Limestone to Mikelego Plains,
* There are people, who believe and say (in their own interest),
that N. S. Wales will, and can never become a thickly inhabited Coun-
try. We would remind, however, these gentlemen, that history in
its grand evolutions cares very little about the selfish views or wishes
of individuals; and that the introduction of Artesian wells!! (re-
served perhaps for some Canning-like Governor), will shew the
falsity of their anticipations.


« George Canning's Pass, ’ in memory of that great
forerunner of the present Heformed. Government,
After a few miles more, we arrived at a place, where a
large range of mountains (Mikelego Range) covered
wilh clouds, was visible. We encamped at some ponds
for dinner, and although the morning was very hot, at
11 o’clock a. m., a fine refreshing N E. breeze sprung
up. After noon we made a very steep descent, when
several branches of mountains appeared ; in fact, there
is a whole reticulation of mountains here, and I believe
this is the place, where the system of the Australian Alps
is concatenated with the coast range of the Murroo-
lliver and Bateman’s Bay. One such range runs from
SSE.IoNN W. about 1,200 feet high, another smal-
ler one from SW. to NE. Four miles further my di-
rection was S E., rounding several circular hills of a
secondary or tertiary magnitude. Arriving near the
waterhoh s, my direction was SE\ S. The distance
herefrom Giribombery is 21 miles. The information
which I here obtained respecting the surrounding lo-
cality, is the following. The Murrumbidgee runs near
this side of Mount Tenant, the foot of which, it reaches
at a place bearing NW| W. From Tenant’s Hill,
it runs N W. towards a very pronounced pyramidical
hill, which is 20 miles from the same place. 1 here the
junction with the Limestone River takes place*.
On leaving the waterholes, a decided disposition of
rivification Southward is visible, all water hasting
rapidly towards the Murrumbidgee. We had again to
* It will require the laying down of a regular map to purge and
correct such and similar data ; however, 1 am at present at a loss to
know, how I shall be able to get this map done. It is one of the
foibles of our young Colony, that political feelings are mixed with,
and influencing private intercourse —nay, interfering with that
civifity and co-operation which every useful exertion deserves.
Whigs


pass the yoke of a small range, which stretches from
W |N. to E \ S., and which is the range, that encom-
passes Mikelego Plains towards N. Thus, at 4p. m.,
we arrived at the Plains, f 6 miles from the waterholes)
where, to the right is Mr. KeePs farm, composed of
level, arable land, and commanding an extensiv e cattle
run upon the Plains themselves*. The Plains are
three miles long and one and a half broad, and stretch
from N. by W. to S. by E. The peaks of the splendid
range towards the E., appear from hence in their whole
grandeur. I was induced to bend from the main plain
to the left fE.), as water was nearer in that direction.
After passing a little range of hills, we arrived at a
secondary plain, where Mr. Packer has a station. This
hill was composed of Gneiss, and I found there a fine
specimen of Calcedony, of a light apple-green colour.
The latter flat is connected in S S W. with Mikelego
Plains. We encamped upon the declivity of a hill com-
manding Packer’s flat, and contiguous to some pools of
water. This was some of the worst water we used in
this journey, it being quite green from decomposed
and Tories, Radicals and Conservatists, are mingled at home in
one common feeling to support arts and sciences ; and if the Duke
of Wellington were to be personally offended with all, that is said
against him politically, he could not take in a single one of tho
English Papers or Periodicals. Meminisse juvabit.
* This farm is unquestionably beyond the marked limits, and
therefore in the unlocated parts of the Colony. Without wishing
to reflect upon the particular claims or merits, which Mr. Keef might
have tor a grant of land in such a locality, I must say, that under
the greater number of Governors, who have ruled these Colonies
until now, every thing was possible with, and nothing at all prac-
ticable without—favour (Vide Dr. Lang’s N. S. W. throughout).
I am given to understand, that Mr. G. M'Leay, and others, have re-
ceived grants as far as Twofold Bay, and should not be astonished,
if, by and bye, even the Whaling Grounds should be given away
to Cousins, Sons-in-law, &c.


vegetable matter, and disturbed by tlie cattle. How-
ever, the view from this hill towards Mikelego range
was heavenly, the range stretching from N W \ W. to
SE| S. for many miles length, and so high as to shut-
ting up the horizon entirely from this side. It is at
least 1500 feet above the plain, of a rocky barren cha-
racter, timbered half way up, then peaks composed of
steep scrubby rocks. Many of these are perpendicular,
and present the form of elongated cubes, as I after-
wards found them so frequent in the Alps. Amongst
those here, I noticed the Throne of Liberty , the highest
but one, and remarkable for a long level rocky peak.
In the half-dry puddles of the flat, many insects were
caught, amongst which I observed a rather large wasp
( Vespa), the body of which was black and orange varie-
gated, the hind part of the wings was of a similar
colour. This insect, when about puddles, vibrates its
wings so quickly, that the colours unite, and its
whole body appeares like a small disce of the finest
radiating colour, so much so that I did not know at
first what to make of it. It was not till several days
after, at Gunguandra, that my boy was able to catch
one, which he brought me, exclaiming—“ Here is the
fly which so long made fools of us.” Towards evening,
I and Walker passed Packer’s flat, for the purpose of
seeing Mikelego range from a nearer point. It was
again one of those supernatural evenings, the travellers
were favoured with during this journey, w hen we passed
over a range of barren hills, S. E. from Packer’s fiat.
Upon this range I was gratified, for the first time, with
the sight of a remarkable tree, which 1 afterwards
found upon several ranges, and on the main Alps.
They are called in the Colony Old Man’s Oak, and are
a (probably new) species of Callitris. They ascend as
high as 60 or 80 feet, and resemble in their external
appearance, as well as in the grain and resinous con


tents of the timber, our European pines. If they
should be found plentiful (as however I never found
to be the case), rosin and some sort of turpentine may
be extracted from them. The name of Old Man’s
Oak, is rather appropriate, as far as the first two epi-
thets are concerned. The lower branches of this tree
(often as high up as 20 or 30 feet), die away, and pre-
sent a decayed, broken and hanging down appearance ;
the bark is extremely rough and ruggid, upon which
and the decayed branches, great numbers of Lichenes
and Hepaticce are growing, of which I gathered at
Cuma a whole boxful. The upper part of the tree
alone presented a green appearance, the leaves being
however small, cypress-like, and of a dark colour. I
saw no flowers, but collected a quantity of seeds.
Wandering about in these solitudes, I discovered (al-
ways in the same direction), the last plication of these
plains, contiguous to Mikelego range “ Bolinghrohe’s
Valley .” It bears entirely the character of a mountain
valley, debris of rock scattered all about, and stretch-
ing in a S S W. direction about one mile ; its inclina-
tion however is towards E. N. E mile. Walker, who
was altogether an enterprising fellow, would hardly be
restrained from ascending Mikelego range from this
place the next morning, being (as he said) confident,
there must be water at the foot of such a range as this.
My time and means however permitted no such delays
of my principal projects (the Alps) ; besides the ascen-
sion of this height as it were of hewn rocks, must be no
easy task The evening approached, when we left this
melancholy, solitary valley ; but in making home, we
lost our way, having nothing but the Waning glare in the
West for our guide. To tell with what pleasure I at
last percieved from a hill the fire of my camp, where
rnv people, according to an old regulation of mine,
fired guns, every quarter of an hour—would carry me


too far out of my latitude. After such harassing days,
besides an extra allowance, some moral incitements
were always conceded to my men. The reading aloud
ol Robinson Crusoe (whichbecame the unattainable, but
not therefore the less enviable prototype for every one
ot them), playing cards, and a jewsharp. I smoked my
pipe, and gazed at the silent but eternal rotations of
the nocturnal lights above me. “ There,” it is said,
“ the ephemeric destinies of men are recorded.”
As I was now beyond the limits of the colony, I
found myself quite in a new situation, even so far as so-
cial life is concerned. 1 had lived before under abso-
lute monarchies and under commonwealths; here I
found myself surrounded by absolute anarchy and
lawlessness. For the next 100 miles to come, I had
still to traverse from station to station, some of them
of great importance—however there was no percepti-
ble tie or sway, connecting man and country with any
authority whatever. If any motive will inculcate
upon the government the imperative necessity, of infu-
sing into our council a sufficient number of men of
experience, the great shallowness which exists in our
colonial laws regarding out-stations, will not be the
least important. For the present, I will only mention,
that I found on Mikelego, one of the places called
in the colony, “ sly grogshops.”* In such places, the
convict stock-keepers, shepherds, runaways, bush-
rangers, &c. congregate, to dispose of stolen property,
especially cattle, to some squatter or another, which
latter nuisance has just now reached to an unprece-
* Our community being composed of a great number of slaves, de-
prived of their civil rights, without the capacity of buying and selling,
&c., the retail of spirits is very properly restrained by several restrictive
and modifying regulations ; these of course are not likely to be observed,
where there is nobody to enforce any law whatever.
Dr. Lhotsky’s Australian Alps, G. r


dented degree in this colony. There, fighting and dis-
order of all kinds is going on, for which there is no re-
dress—no stoppage. And I repeat, is this with such
an absolute want of law, regulations, paid magistrates,
constabulary, &c., that our colonial revenue is to be
locked up, or diverted (as is a great part of it at the
present moment) into an un-colonial, and consequently
foreign and unlawful channel! (Ample room for ano-
ther of our patriotic John Blaxland's protests.)
It was rather late the next morning, (Saturday, 8
Feb.) when I started from Packers flat, the other
cart left me, and we plunged further into an unknown
country.* The (S. S. W.) end of Mikelego Plain is
again divided by a small longitudinal hill. As we
proceeded, a high range appeared to our right (W)
4or 5 miles distant, and a little nearer, a smaller
one covered with timber. Between these two
ranges, runs the Murrumbidgee. Both keep the
same direction as the plain (from N. to S.), and
the river must keep the same, running here in a pro-
bably very narrow ravine, formed by their junc-
tion. Our direction was, for the first four or five miles
southerly, when we passed the lonely expanse of
* I cannot forbear remarking, for the sake of preventing mistakes,,
that every thing which will be said by me after leaving Giribombery, is'
(even so far as geagraphy is concerned), my exclusive scientific property.
Mr. Keef’s place is the last object, which is merely named in that official
(and as I said before, in part meritorious) document, “ the Itinerary.”
There is not a word in that publication about the Snowy River, nor
Menero. After my return from this expedition, many persons became
on the qni vie upon these subjects, and I understand that shortly after,
three Gentlemen of the. Surveyor General's department were dispatched
for these spots, where some of them still remain. However, Ido hereby
solemnly claim the priority of any such discovery, and declare that any
rhapsodical notice sent.home since my return, could not originate other
than in the hearsay of rny discoveries, and is not to be put in a parallel
with the authenticity of the present work.


Mikelego. We crossed with some difficulty a hill,
which encompasses on that side the plain, and suc-
cessively the high range to the left receded, and that
to the right, became more prominent. I must say
here by the bye, that to form general observations ol
a country, to construct philosophical inductions of its
nature, requires more time than I could properly de-
vote to such objects, and I restrict myself in ge-
neral to the laying down the simple data, leaving to
others, or to a subsequent period, more discursive rea-
sonings. However, it is obvious, that the axis of this
great chain of plains, which follow each other at the
south eastern side of the Australian Continent, is alto-
gether in the direction of the meridian. It is besides,
a most remarkable, but not very easily explicable fact,
that they are altogether destitute of trees of any kind,
and only on the secondary hills or banks, which divide
their plications, are some gum-trees thinly scattered,
whereas large timber covers the main ranges. The
assumption of a diluvial flood, which might have left
these plains and downs in a comparatively recent
period, receding, of course, by degrees, is a fact which
presents itself immediately to the observer. But ad
mitting that, it is difficult to understand, how it is, that
there is not even a vestige of incipient sylvification in
the plains and downs themselves. In this case, the
investigation of the channels, through which these
floods disembogued themselves into the ocean, would
be a highly interesting study for the Geologist, and it
is very probable, that our Shoalhaven Gully, (one of
the most striking phoenomena in the known world,
(vide Sturt vol. 1, p. xxxix.,) may be such a dike.
Barometrical admeasurements of those places, would
decide much appertaining to these questions; however,
I had no such instrument with me, which, as Sturt
broke his very soon, amounts to about the same.


There is one fact which sheds a little light in this
respect, and this is the immense trunks of gum-trees,
which I observed from the Cove of Port Jackson, tra-
velling all along the high coast ranges of IHawarra;
some of these giants (for instance in Mr. M‘Leay’s
garden, at Elizabeth Bay), measure from 6 to 7 feet"in
diameter, a dimension like to which 1 found none
others even approaching, in my whole tour from Syd-
ney to Pass Britannia, (the latter place about forty
miles from Bass s Straits). 1 here must be points,
when proceeding in a westerley direction, such trees
will again appear, and in that case the ranges of the
sea coast, and the latter places would probably have
first emerged from the Australian deluge, forming thus
early groups of dry islands and rocks, adapted to vege-
tation and sylvification, whilst all the plains of the S.
E. part of the coast w ere still covered with the fluid
element. The fluctuating lakes, George and Bathurst,
wmuld be then the last existing pulsation of this grand
natural phenomenon. There is some tradition amongst
the Blacks to this amount, that there was a time, when
their forefathers passed in canoes the tops of the
highest trees, which w r ere then all under water. If the
kind reader w ill call to recollection, that the traditions
ot a deluge w 7 ere found in the Hieroglyphics of Egypt,
and amongst the sacred documents of the Inkas, this
(rather natural) fact may be the only one, in which
the religious (if it may be thus termed) belief of man-
kind may converge.
Four miles from Packers, the road turns to the S.W.,
the high range to the East disappears, wdiilst that
to the right approaches the road. At noon, a breeze
from the N. E. refreshed the air. We stopped at a
small plain, w here several roads branch off to different
stations. To the left, that of Mr. Campbell, (Good
night Barlow), Keith’s (Monkey Dillon), to the right,


a station of Bunn’s. This place was only a mile and a
half from the Murrumbidgee, but extremely barren for
many miles. I had a few drops of water in my held
bottle, but men and horse were compelled to go with-
out, although two of the men went with the barrel, sup-
ported by means of a pole upon their shoulders (the
way they usually managed), some distance in search
of it. We left this inhospitable place very soon, how-
ever the appearance of the country did not change,
and we arrived after several miles work, at another
very barren and rugged plain, round and encompassed
by hills, like the funnel of some volcano. Small lumps
of Gneiss, not properly pebbles, were lying all about
the ridges, as if left there by the retreat of a recent de-
luge. However, on the N. W. corner of this Plain,
we found finally one of these circular deep water-
holes, I characterised in page 25. In this lonely place
we were met by a prisoner, belonging to a neigh-
bouring station, who barefooted and covered with
rags, reminded me forcibly, that I was in a land of ba-
nishment and expiation. I asked him how he came
to be so badly off, he replied that the slops were
issued very irregularly, and was besides of the very
worst description. He was also all over affected with
the Syphilitic disorder, and told me, that many men
were in the same situation, without any surgeon at
hand. I shook my head, as it appeared to me, as if
some demon sentenced to perdition was addressing me
in this valley of desolation.* I had no medicine with
me for such cases, but I offered him my good services,
when returning to Sydney. He declined every offer
with a mournful resignation, saying that he should
soon be entitled to freedom. Here the thought struck
* One of the Sydney Papers (called the Sydney Herald,) which
owed its momentary prosperity to the low price, first established by it in


me, that there is no regulation as to master s issuing
to their assigned servants, slops of a substantial kind.
Indeed the principal superintendant of convicts is set-
ting a very had example in this respect, as 1 was told
by several settlers and magistrates, even within 80 or
100 miles of Sydney, that the slops which the men get
upon leaving Hyde Park Barracks, (and for which
every master has to pay £\ per head), are of a worth-
less description, so much so, that the men commonly
arrived at the farms bare-toed. I know myself, that I
once got a young boy from the barracks, for whom I
was obliged to take out shoes immensely too large,
no others being in the stores. Nefandum Regina! —
The man pointed out to me a rather high range 16 miles
East from this place, called Bredbow-range, where
there is some stations. Half a mile from hence is Jun-
the colony, not independent enough to be a bona fide opposition or
reform paper, lias, however, taken up some time past, a bauble, with
which it plays childlike without plan or aim, and this is the crying out
for an increased severity in the punishment of prisoners. It is indeed a
shallow, and at the same time a pityful system of Colonial Reform, which
this paper engendered, consisting chiefly in a multiplication of lashes,
and an increase in the weight of the cat. The two young printers under
which firm this paper is written, should be reminded, that no man how-
ever situated, (nor indeed even brutes) can be managed by the scourge
alone. The mis-government of our prison population, lies not chiefly in
the leniency of the secondary punishment Act, (which, it is said, owes
its origin to the head of our honored and independent bench, Chief
Justice Forbes), but in the too great accumulation of assigned servants
in the hands of a few, and in the little attention which the present go-
vernment, and in consequence private individuals pay to their improve-
ment and reformation. Compare the energetic regulations with respect
to the cleansing, diet, cooking, clothing, &c. of prisoners, enacted lately
by the Legislature of Van Dieman’s Land. It is easy to pass an xActsuch
as the above, but it ought to be accompanied with a profound study of,
and energetic personal investigation into, the situation and management
of those men—but the low state of health of Governor Bourke seems not
to allow him to perform such laborious exertions, as the daily more
complicated circumstances of the colony require.


gel era, a station of Sir John Wylde. The distance
from Mikelego to Jungelora Plain, is \'2 miles. The
Mu rrumbidgee is 1 mile hence, and then so far as to a
distance of 15 miles, the country is composed of ranges
and very much broken.
As it was not late in the day, I pushed on for Gun-
guandra, another of Mr. Wylde’s stations, 8 miles
distant. Beyond Jungelera Valley, the road turns to
the S.E., and we passed all the way forests of blue and
white gum, but remarkably destitute of any underwood,
to which cause the want of moisture and water must
be equally ascribed. It was in this place that I found
a lump of splintery Silex, which appears under the
Lens to be coloured with some reddish substance, and
in which small grains of a very bright ore are inter-
spersed. This is therefore the sixth or seventh kind
of ore discovered by me in Australia. I saw after 6
miles work, that we could not reach Gunguandra this
evening—l was therefore obliged to stop, although not
a trace of water was to be seen. I sent away two of
my men, but they returned without, after having gone
far in search of it. Luckily I had filled my keg at the
water-hole of Jungelera, and we made shift with
this.
There is always a great supply of dry wood in Aus-
tralian bushes, as several sorts of the Eucalyptus have
unproportionately long (tortuated) branches, which
are broken oft’by every wind; but to keep up a fire the
whole night even by these means, would be neverthe-
less too troublesome. Australian travellers have re~
course therefore to a plan, which the internally rotten
and decayed state of several of our gum trees, must
have suggested very soon. In this way we made a fire
to-night, at the bottom of such a tree, which in a short
time exhibited one of the finest scenes of nature, 1 ever
saw of this kind. The decay of our gum-trees is not


conn lied to the lower part of the trunk, but ex-
tends all up the tree, and besides this decay the inter-
nal texture of the wood is so splintery and impreg-
nated with resinous matter, that the fire ascends with
surprising rapidity. Scarcely is such a tree lighted at
the foot, than some of the lower branches begin to
evaporate and smoke, this proceeds quickly to the
higher branches, until the smoke bursts out of some
spiracle or hole of a branch; finally condensing and in-
creasing, a lively flame springsupin the midst of verdure
and apparent life, and illuminates like a Bengal fire all
the adjacent wilderness and solitude. Such spiracles
multiply in number, and this phenomenon continues
thus for many hours ; until first branches, consumed
by the action of the fire, separate from the trunk, then
the solid exterior of the trunk itself being weakened
from the same cause, the tree falls with a noise, which
echoes through the silence of the night. Tents and
carts must therefore be kept out of the reach, this
however is not very easy, the nights being sometimes
so very cold, as to induce the men to approach even
to such a dangerous proximity. Almost all forests
contain gum-trees burned in this manner, some of
them erect, although the bark alone remains, others
lieupontheground,andharbouraquantity of Opossums,
and Kangaroo-Rats—and in the Alps, several other un-
described animals. On Sunday morning, (9th Feb.)
we pushed on for Gunguandra, lying about 2 miles
S. W. from the spot, where I had passed the night.
Some savage-looking prisoners received me in their
hut, but seeing the easy and quiet manner, in which
my party proceeded, I was every where received well
and with civility, and I must confess that many of
the lowest of this class have manifested much British
pride regarding the Zoological Gardens, British Mu-
seum, and such institutions of the Mother Country.


Tliis hut is* situated in a small enclosed valley, the
rocks of which are the first, exhibiting a decided pri-
mitive character. Behind the lint is a hill, on which
1 collected two species of Exarrhena, which genus
very much resembles the Scorpion grass (Myosotis),
To the right of the hill are some meadow-like plains,
and opposite the hut is a well, the temperature of
which, was at 10 a.m. 63° . At noon, the instrument
was 84° in the shade, 106° in the sun, in the well
64 ° . About the well we caught many insects,
amongst which was a very singular sort oi gad-fly,
(Oestrus), which I previously remarked on the win-
dows of Limestone Cottage, but did not mention while
speaking of that place, as my observations thereon had
already taken up a large portion of these pages. It is
aboht double the size of the common fly, and ot nearly
the same colour, excepting that the back part of thebody
is brown, and marked with a longitudinal line, as well as
a spot of the same colour near the implantation of the
wings. I saw it flying about the windows hunting
after the common flies, which it grasped with its hind
legs, and commenced sucking them with its sting.
The luckless captives buzzed much, the tormentor
walking them about until it let them fall dead.
Although the room was full of common flies, they kept
from the window as much as possible.
The Murrumbidgee is S.S.W. hence, again one mile
distant, and it is very obvious, why the persons who
first penetrated into this country (Mr. W. C. Went-
worth was the first, who had a cattle station here), kept
near the river, avoiding, however, its enclosing ranges,
and thus road and stations were established in their
present position. In the hut, I found the stock-
keeper of Mr. William Bradley, to whom I had a note
from his master, whose station is lour miles distant.
It is usual among the men on Menero, to pass their


Sundays in mutual calls, having shaved and cleaned
themselves and swept out their huts, the whole pre-
sents a rather patriarchal appearance, however, all
looks extremely masculine , the conversation also is
mostly confined to the topic “ in such and such a hut
they have grog.” 1 must here likewise observe, that
after leaving Mikelego Plains, we saw no more white
females, although we travelled upwards of a hundred
miles on stations. In the afternoon the Stockman re-
turned to his hut to prepare for my reception, and we
followed him with the cart, with the pleasant anti-
cipation of reaching this evening the first of Mene-
ro Downs. We passed thro’ dry barren plains, the
herbage of which, literally scorched by the heat of
the summer, presented a yellow autumnal appear-
ance, at length we arrived at a Creek, which,
running in a W. N. W. direction into the Mur-
rumbidgee, is considered the northern limits of Me-
nero. As Menero will constitute ere long, some of
the most important counties or dukedoms of Aus-
tralia, I named this Creek “ Earl Grey’s Creek,”
in commemoration of that great historical person-
age of our age. In one place the banks ot this
Creek, were five feet high, and composed of a
sandy alluvial soil. A short distance from the
Creek is a hill, whence I for the first time beheld
the Murrumbidgee beautifully winding through the
plain of Bellebalaing. From this situation, two
mountains were also pointed out to me, as being
beyond even the “Snowy River,” bearing S. 1.95°
E., 50 miles distant. To our right the Murrum-
bidgee was only half a mile off, its left (W.)
bank being backed by mountains of 1,200 feet
high. Thus we arrived at Bililingra, a station of
Mr. York’s, the low roof of the hut being im-
planted in the main declivity of a hill, pre


sented rather a wild appearance. From hence, we
heard the Murrumbidgee murmuring over its gravel-
ly bed (a rare occurrence in Australia), and af-
ter fording the same, we arrived at Ballebalaing hut
on Menero.


PART THE SECOND.
TRAVELS THROUGH, AND DESCRIPTION OF MENERO
DOWNS .*
Thus I was on Menero Downs, the name of which is
just emerging from Geographical obscurity. The pre-
sent plain (called Baliebalaing, alias Bulangewaing),
extends from N. N. E. to S. S. W., four miles long by
one and a half broad, and is shut up at the south side
by a range which is barren and thin-wooded, as are also
those which enclose it entirely on the E. and W. sides.
Near the hut, the river in some places hastes over a
rocky or gravelly bed, in other parts it presents seve-
ral tine sheets of water, overhung with interesting
species of Leptospermum, boarded with reeds and
bull rushes. I was much pleased at finding a large
tub on its banks near the hut, of the water in which I
* It was rather late, that I had an opportunity to see the paper of
Captain Currie, R. N., who in Mr. B. Field’s “ Geographical Memoirs”
published his “ Journal of an excursion to the south of Lake George,”
in which he discovered (in 1823) Menero Downs, and the Australian
Alps, the outskirts of which are called by him, “ Murrumbidgee Moun-
tains. ( The kind reader is requested thus to correct what I said about
this discovery , p.S). However it would require too much time to bring
the stations of the Captains (so far as they go) in accordance with my
route, besides it is so very tedious to trouble ourselves with data, of
which several are, for instance Captain Curries South Fish River, pro-
bably already placed and rectified in Major Mitchell’s new map.
But, it is a fact belonging to history, that a British Colony is de-
prived of the use of a map, made at her expense, and printed now four
©r six months ago.


availed myself to make many thermometrical observa-
tions, which are in continual variance with that ob-
served in the river, and will yield interesting facts res-
pecting the relative incalescence and refrigeration of
dead and living water. The wind at 6 p. m. of
the same day f9th February) was S. S. E. and
fresh, at 7 p. m. air 64 °, river 76°, by evaporation
02° , tub 73 ° . As Mr. Bradley’s stockman seemed
willing to accommodate me in the best way pos-
sible, I determined to make here another stay as at
Limestone, to which the delightful banks of the
river so much invited. Rising early next morning
(10th February), the air was alpester and very fresh,
the atmosphere cloudy, the ranges covered with fog,
and there was a dead silence about this extensive
plain. At 6a. m. air 58 ° , river 70 ° , tub 60 ° . At
noon, wind N.N.E. slight, thermometer shade 86°,
sun 98 ° , river where exposed to the sun 75 ° , evapo-
ration 72 ° , tub where exposed to the sun 72, evapora-
tion 89 ° . The river at this place was 30 or 40feet broad
with averyrapidcurrent,but much interrupted by rocks
of which the bed was composed. This rock was a mi-
caceous shiste of a reddish brown colour, containing
a great quantity of Oxyde of Iron, and with the Mica
a proportion of Talcum and very little Quartz. The
Strata are very thin and slightly bent, the angle of
stratification being 70 to 75 ° , almost vertical. My
first endeavour was to trace the Murrumbidgee up-
wards, which I was able to do to a distance of about
five miles. The first part of the way was rather an-
noying,, the stream-bed of the River being covered
with a high and stout grass, growing in large and
thick solitary tufts. After passing this plain ground,
I found the river flowing through a narrow valley,
lined by rocky, or thinly timbered hills of 150 to 200
feet high. Its general direction is here N. W, although


from its rather tortuous course, and the projecting
angles of its banks, it is seldom visible to any con-
siderable distance. Two gullys, supplied in rainy
weather with water, disembogue themselves into it
from the West side. The banks of the river are from
5 to 12 feet high, the left or westerly higher, and al-
most perpendicular, however, there are plenty of fine
alluvial patches, where as well as upon the adjacent
rocks, a number of very fine plants (Veronica n. s.,
Aster n. s., &c.) are growing. The current of the
stream is very rapid, although interrupted by rocky
banks, with some fine Acacia, Leptospermum inclin-
ing over its pure and limpid waters. From hence to
Yass Plains there may be at some time a canal, but
never a simple navigation. At these places, the banks
and adjacent ranges are composed of a granitic rock,
the general colour of which is a paler or darker flesh-
red, however, the rock of the banks is entirely desti-
tute of Mica, (the Granite graphique of Hauy), whilst
in those of the more distant ranges, there is a vestige
of this mineral, and some chloryte. Many solitary
lumps of a white silex are scattered about the alluvial
soil near the river. As far as the picturesque is con-
cerned, nothing can be more beautiful than these se-
cluded banks, the flesh-red masses of granite, respond-
ing in a semi-tropical sun, and covered with tender
shrubs and flowers, the tepid shade of the winding
valleys, the freshness and murmuring of the stream,
and a solitude which transforms the passing beholder
into the Proprietor of all he sees— #
“ O ! that such desert were my dwelling place.’'
I cannot omit mentioning a very fine beetle, which
I never found in any place but this. It is an inch
long, its wings and thorax are black, with fine
white spots, however, its antennse are of extraor


dinary construction, being like a fan, composed
of very tender ribs and of a concave shape. They
are rather copious here, and fly about with great
celerity, when their antennae gets very conspicuous.
By reason of these features, the people on Menero
call them devils. I observed them sitting much upon
the flower of the Kangaroo-grass (Danthonia). At 7
p. m. the wind was S. E., thermometer in the current
of the wind 75 ° , out of the current 74 ° , river 76 ° ,
tub 70 ° , descending from the latter through evapora*
tion to 58.
The next morning, (11th February, in the middle
of the Summer), was again a Menerian one, air 54 ° ,
thermometer placed in the dewy grass 52 ° , river
72 ° , tub 59 ° , the lively devils of the preceding day,
hanging stiff and motionless in the spikes of the Kan-
garoo-grass. In the course of the day, I made an ex-
cursion towards S S.W. After two miles climbing over
rocks, we arrived at a more even place, and I found
one of those curious plains, called on Menero, “ dry
lakes.” These are circular flat places of smaller or
larger extent, perfectly level, the outsides of which are
covered with slight verdure, whilst the middle parts
have a loamy, gravelly, or (in the larger ones) rocky
surface. I collected on the border of this, a very
handsomeErodium, with blue flowers, which like many
plants of these latitudes, may be considered new ones,
however, I lost this by some casualty. The banks of
this lake towards W. and the ranges, were composed
of a singular sort of Gneiss, partly of a dirty and
rather muddy colour, of soft texture, so as to break
easily under the hammer. After I had collected some
plants and insects round the dry lake, I turned to-
wards N.W., where we arrived at some perpendicular
rocks of granite, and then at the bank of a tributary
creek of the Murrumbidgee, which from the grandeur


of its scenery, 1 named “ noble creek.” It exhibited
to me, in an unprecedented way, the nature of Aus-
tralian creeks, it being sometimes nothing but a ravine
of micaceous shiste (of which rock the greatest part
oi its banks are composed), through which in rainy
weather (the period round which turns the totality of
Australian nature), the water rushes like a cataract,
leaving behind debris of rocks and timber. Then
followed again a more even gully or valley, where
fed by subterraneous springs, line, although not very
extensive sheets of pure water extended their specular
surfaces, overhung and interrupted by huge rocks, and
bordered by a verdure of smiling and interesting
flowers. I could not forbear sometimes sitting down
at such delightful places, and not busying myself about
any thing in particular, remaining entirely absorbed in
reflections upon the indescribable beauty of the sur-
rounding scenery ; and I am sure, if many of our
Town-people could imagine the beauty of the Aus-
tralian interior, the freshness and elasticity of its air,
they would not bury themselves in a town, possessing
(as it now is) all the curses and pest of social life, with-
out even any of its refinements, to say nothing of subli-
mities. Noble creek runs generally E. or N., and re-
ceives succesfully two tertiary torrents from the S. and
one from the N. W. In these places I found different
sorts of rock, the strata of which were succeeding each
other in great variety, thus was a sienite composed of
fine green Amphybole and white Feldspar, another sort
of micaceous shiste, the mica of which was of a
strong metallic lustre. The anomaly and irregularity
ifwas in many places on Menero, that my attention was fixed by
the people upon the Gold, which they said is to be found in Creeks, &c.
However, I knew it always before, that it was nothing’ but the metallic
scales of Mica, they were pointing oat to me.


of Australian torrents was throughout visible in Noble
Creek, its water-holes and w ater-sheets decreasing in
size, as we descended its banks, when finally the place,
where it empties itself in the Murrumbidgee (always
understood in the time of floods), was barred by a
large sand-bank; which, however, was at some dis-
tance from the embouchure of the creek. Returning
home, the stock-keeper and others gave me the follow-
ing information about the MurrumbidgeO : Its course
upwards, from hence, is known about seven miles;
whilst its banks are barren, rocky, and mountainous,
but afterwards it forms a very obtuse angle, and comes
down from N.W. (which must be somewhere about
Kuma , vide infra). Its heads cannot be far distant,
but they are unknown. The floods of the river are
considerable, commonly two hundred yards beyond its
bed; but in the preceding year (1833),- they were ex-
cessive, covering all contiguous flats, and lasted from
March to November. The former month is that in
which its annual rise takes place, which, however, is
never very sudden. The periodical rising of the Mur-
rumbidgee cannot be easily explained, rains being
there, generally speaking, irregular and rather scarce,
as on Gonderu, and Limestone-Plains. But this fact
is equally incompatible with the melting of the snow
in the Alps, March being there, the end of summer or
begining of Autumn, when little or no snow may be
met with. However, speaking of seasons on Menero,
I perceived from the state of vegetation in February
and March, and was told too, that .the proper
season (the middle of Spring) is Christmas, wdiich
would better coincide with the end-of the inundation in
Novemoer. They also spoke to me here, and on other
stations, of a summer and winter-grass, upon w hich
the cattle are depastured in these respective seasons ;
but at times, when floods or snow r cover the flats, and
Ea. Lhotsky’s Australian Alp.s.
H.


downs, they are obliged to retreat among the ranges,
and to feed sometimes upon the young leaves ot the
Eucalyptus.
As 1 remained four days at Mr. Bradley’s station, I
had ample room to observe, that the vegetation had
again considerably changed, at the entrance of such a
natural limit as Menero: to which many causes, as
the geological formation of the country, composed of
the most ancient primitive rocks, and the existence of
an ever-running stream are contributing. Indeed,
every spot near Ballebalaing would be interesting for
the Botanist of leisure and experience. Near the hut
I found a small plant covering inundated patches, with
its low but splendid tapis ; the flowers of which being
white and carneous, appeared like pearls strewed upon
green velvet. This plant belongs to the family of
Caryophyllese, but its beauty gets entirely lost by dry-
ing. On other parts of the banks three species of
Umbellifercs were growing, of which one resembled
parsley, Apium . Grassy places were embellished with
a species of Cyathodes, the genus Podolepis (originally
discovered in Van Diemen’s Land) first appearing,
with its large scaly yellow calyx, as well as a small
earth-creeping Bindwood (Convolvulus sagittifo-
lius.) And when many of the antecedent plants
reminded the Traveller so strongly of European
genera, it was a beautiful species of Cinquefoil (Poten-
tilla—Menerensis), * which transported us altogether
* These plants surprised even here many persons, amongst others
“ Baron Huegel,'* a German Gentleman, who obtained a good practical
knowledge of Australian Botany, by his visits to Swan River, V an Die-
men’s Land, and within the limits of our Colony. He possesses a hne
botanical nursery-gai’den near Vienna, of which there exists a pnn e
Price Current. By the great many seeds he collected in the Australian
Colonies and elsewhere, he will not only contribute to the advancement
of Horticulture and Botany, but his journey will turn out to him a very
lucrative speculation.


upon European meadows, resembling as to the
first appearance, so much our Goosegrass cinquefoil.
In the same way were adorned the banks of the river,
where two species of speedwell ( Veronica) were growing.
One is probably the Veronica Derventia, the other is a
highly ornamental herb of two or three feet high,
with glaucous leaves and a spike of very tender sky-
blue liowers.* Several nearly fruticous species of Se-
necio, and a fine Aster of the same growth (rosmarini-
folius ?) vegetated amongst the rocks; and another
Composita, much allied to Erigeron , grew in large
tufts along the Creek.—l collected a great many of,
and paid particular attention to the pebbles of the
Murrumbidgee, which having been carried down
from a long extent of a mountainous country,
are very varied and beautiful, and they deserve
more skill and attention than I possess, or any man
here can bestow upon them. They are composed
of solid and porous Basalt, Trachyt of various kind,
Chloryte, very hard Breccia, Jasper, silicious Lime-
stone, J argillaceous Shiste, Mica Shiste, and some
other even simple Minerals.
Wednesday, (February 12th), was consumed in the
arrangement and packing of my different collections,
which I did with enough ease, although hut and yard
were scarcely ever free from travellers. There is, in-
deed, a greater trafic and motion on Menero, than our
Legislature (not even the name of these downs appear-
ing in any of our Acts'), may believe. This time of
the year is the conclusion of sheep-shearing, where
the persons employed in it (free and bond), were
returning home, or to the head-stations, from whence
they had been taken for this purpose. Some
* V. glauc?scens, spicis elongatis terminalibus, foliis sessilibus
oblongo-cordatis acuminatis, crenatis. Planta sufFruticosa ulnaris.
f Analogous to the formation of Goulbourn* —\idep. 30.


of the former earn a good sum at this employ-
ment. It will not be here out of the way, to mention
something about the present financial relations of the
out-stations in New South Wales. Money is a thing
seldom met with after leaving the main road, and it
was with great difficulty, that I could get two pound-
notes changed at the Township of Goulburn. After
this, Orders were the order of the day, and I even
once saw one for the sum of eighteen pence. It
may be, that the particular (penal) circumstances
of the Colony may influence the monetary system of
our outstations, however it is nevertheless certain, that
incredible distress, for w ant of a sufficient circulating
medium characterizes the administration of General
Bourke, marring every sort of business. His Excel-
lency was the first Governor, who thought it a benefit
to the Colony, to lock up, and shew off to the home
authorities at one time about £150,000 in the Colonial
Treasury, although this accumulation being perhaps
the half of the whole specie existing in the Colony,
created in this infant society, much and inexpressible
obstruction and embarassment.—The present day was
warm, towards evening, a S. by W. wind sprung up,
and it got cold. At 7 p.m. the foot oi the mountains
was covered with a sort of fog; air o*2°, River 72°,
evap 58°, tub 70°, evap 55°.
We left Ballebalaing, Thursday (13th Feb). The
wind was N. by E., and the air again temperate. Our
direction was towmrd S.E. We saw the running of the
Murrumbidgee a good distance, and as far as we did,
Its course was from S.S.E. to N.N.W. We made a
rather steep hill, where we lost the track, and had* as
I often had before, recourse to my compass. On the
top an extensive view presented itself, and I perceived
the barren range, w hich borders the plains to the S.
To the W. a prolongation of the Ballebalaing Moun


tain started towards the Firmament, whilst to the E.
the chain receded further back. We reached now
what is called “ the Little River,” a tributary stream
of the Murmmbidgee. In dry weather, there is not a
continual run, but it presents a number of different
reaches of water. We travelled two miles on its banks,
where its course was N,W., then we perceived it com-
ing from an Easterly direction. The rocks about this
river are Gneiss, composed of rather thin strata, and
resembling the formation near Canning’s Pass. We
travelled now S. by W. four miles, and arrived at the
top of that barren range, which shuts up Ballebalaing-
plain towards the South, from whence 1 was surprised
with the most extensive view, hitherto had on my
journey. It appears hence, that all ribs of the great
nkmntain-yoke, which we had now to the W. (running
from S. to N.), were diverging from the main chain in
aS. £. direction. It appeared further, that the great
Nodule of this mountainous system is N.W. from Mr.
Bradley’s hut, where many imposing mountains are
towering one above another. We travelled now upon
a plateau, which divides two extensive plains, Balle-
balaing, stretching N.N.W., Menem S.S.W. A water-
shed which is hereabout, is obliged to round a hill to
meet the Little River. After two miles journey S.E. by
E. a solitary, perfectly triangular hill appeared to my
left, surrounded by a perfect level flat, to which I
gave, in commemoration of an ancient and powerful
association, the name of “ Masonic HUL” Travelling
again along some forest, we perceived through the
opening of its branches a scenery, as if a yellow
ocean was extending behind ; it was the second down
of Menero, furrowed and divided (like waves) by longi-
tudinal small ranges. To the W. was a double range of
hills, between which (about 4 or 5 miles distant) the
Murmmbidgee is running. Descending from the slope


of the Plateau, I perceived with a sort of inexpressible
(social) feeling, two gentlemen walking in the plains
under me, it was Dr. Reid and a friend, the first being
for the sake of superintending the shearing of his
flocks, in this distant district of the Colony. After en-
quiring from some passing men, the name of this Down,
they called it Menem. This was then the kut £ox*v
Menem. It is very probable, that Captain Currie must
have reached as far as this place, because he says, 1. c.
p. 376. “ From these natives we learned that the
clear country before us was called Monaroo, which
they describe as very extensive.” It is therefore only
an error to call all these successions of Downs, which
extend from Ballebalaing until Plato's Plain , and per-
haps, but not known to me, as far as Bass’s Straits,
Menem, the latter being only a specific name. To
avoid this inconvenience, I have given to the above the
name of Menero, by which they might be distinguished
from the latter partial locality. As to the blacks, it is
obvious to me, that they have no general name for
comprehending any aggregation of objects whatever.
After I had pitched my tent, I could not resist giv-
ing this very evening a call to Dr. Reid, whose tent
was at some distance from the hut of the sheep-station.
It is also the custom in Sydney, to keep away from the
contact with prisoner servants —though many may de-
serve this treatment, it ought not to be made a general
practice. Dr. Reid’s tent presented a thorough Colo-
nial appearance, being about fifteen feet long, and sup-
ported by strong poles, where tea-chests and rum-
casks served as tables and chairs. There were other
guests present, and we partook of a substantial held
supper, consisting of fried cheese and other eatables,
and concluded with a moderate potation of grog, (pro-
perly speaking the circulating medium of our out-sta-
tions), when the conversation turned on politics, several


of the company arguing, that the Colony ought to
have now a Civilian lor a Governor, which I translated
thus, that the Colony ought now to be treated, at any
rate, civilly. A man conducted me at rather a late
hour, over stumps and reeds to my encampment.
On Friday (14th February), I began to examine the
heights which were to the W. of the hut of Meneru.
They were composed of large masses ol Rocks, similar
to those of the Murrumbidgee behind Bradley’s hut, to
wit, a flesh-red Granite without Mica; however this
formation is mixed with banks of a soft gneiss, which
form considerable masses. The latter is composed ol
thin, rather undulated strata, the quartz being colour-
less, and the feldspar of a milky colour, which is very
nearly decomposed into Caolin. The whole Gneiss is
interspersed with garnets, of which however I found
none either of a large size, nor a pronounced chrystali-
zation. Wandering over these huge masses ol rocks, I
arrived at a ravine, in which the waters congregate in
rainy weather, to unite fas all creeks hereabout do) in
the Little river. There were some cavities under the.
granite rocks, where very singularly, small banks of a
Lime Tuffa protruded on the surface. I saw with
great edification these most recent operations and pio-
ducts of an active nature, and I felt myself happy to
observe, that in this distant quarter ol the globe, these
alluvial formations are going on in the same way as in
Europe. This Tuffa is very soft and spungy, in which
however botryoidal and tubular parts are to be met
with. The same as in the European Tuffa, I found in
ours also some fragments of roots; belonging to still ex-
isting plants. The Tuffa in itselt is white, but being
mixed with a quantity of soil, the whole presents a
more dirty appearance. Treated with sulphuric acid,
it effervesces considerably. It is strange, that such
rapid waters, as must flow occasionally in this gull^,


can deposit any mass, thus constructed as this Tuffa is,
and it is more to be supposed, that this operation takes
place in the cavities, after the main waters have receded,
and only some stagnant puddles are remaining. To
the E. of the hut, are two springs, of which 1 noted the
following. At 2p.m. of the above mentioned day, the
wind was W. and the instrument ranged in the shade
84°. The spring more to the N. ranged then 74°, the
mercury descending by evaporation to 64°, the tempera-
ture of the mud surrounding that spring was 69°. The
other spring a few feet more to the S., ranged at the
same time 64°, evaporation 58°. At 7p. m. the wind
changed to E, the air was then 82°, the first spring 84°,
evaporation 57°, second spring 81°, evaporation 58°.■ —
Walker whom I had sent out to shoot, came back
towards evening, and told me, that proceeding 3 miles
W. he reached the banks of the Murrumbidgee, and
had found some little plains, where a good station could
be established, and a flock of a thousand sheep main-
tained. I shall have occasion to mention many others,
and far more extensive places in the course of this work,
where any settler, or any free beginner (ticket-of-leave
ought never be permitted to squatt), may find for years
a gratuitous place of abode, or a pasturage for his
flocks and herds.
Saturday (15th February).—The morning was calm,
and at 7a. m. the air was 61°, the first spring 59°, eva-
poration 57°, the second spring 81°, evaporation 58°,8.
After 9 o’clock the E. wind set again in, and blew the
whole day very hard. I visited Dr. Held, who told me
the following about his sheep-farming. From 900 sheep
shorn at this station, he had obtained fifteen bales wool
at 2451 b each. The produce of his whole flocks on
Menero, consisting of 2192, was 82001 b., and about
800 lb refuse. One man shears commonly 70 sheep a
day, but there are some, who shear 130. Such free


men could do exceedingly well, but it happens generally, that
after having accumulated their wages for one or more years, they
do not employ it to buy some small bit of land (our Government
sells no land, except in large parcels, and therefore none to the
poor), and to establish themselves accordingly, but go to Sydney
on a speculation, when they fall in with some bad friends, and
drink 40 or £SO in a short time. The winter is at Meneru, as I
was told, cold, foggy; these fogs not dispersing sometimes until
3f. m. The snow lays only for a few hours, and here also cattle
and sheep must feed in the winter sometimes on young leaves.
I have yet forgot to remark, that the distance from Ballebalaing to
Meneru is twelve miles.
Sunday, Feb. 16. —Preceding evening and night after the setting
of the moon quiet, and in the beginning temperate, then fresh. To-
day 6a. m. air 54 3 , first spring 55 3 , G, dewy grass 52 ° . There was
first some fog, it disappeared, the morning got fine—“ the hand
of fate was on the curtain, and about to bring the scene to light.”
W. Scott.
Acquainted by experience with the manifold windings of human
life, I had expected from my very starting, that some circumstance
or other might occur, which would give to my journey a decided
direction, and 1 was finally not disappointed in this anticipation.
The person who thus, like the spell of fate was expected by
me, appeared finally, though in a rather humble apparel. I was
this morning occupied about my cart, when a simple dressed
man on horseback approached, and said to me, that he had heard
of my expedition, and should be happy if I would honor him with
a call at his place. He promised to give me information about my
following tour, which I soon perceived was important and useful.
I agreed to proceed to Mr. Bath’s (this was his name), who proved
to bean overseer of Messrs. Cooper, Holt, Roberts & Co. in Syd-
ney. After I had packed up my cart, we went on our way towards
Kuma. Our direction was for the first two miles South, then one
mile S. by W., leading over a barren land, without any water or
trees, or even shrubs; the very grass was burnt away by the
preceding heat, and the wind raised and blew up whirlwinds of dust,
which was flying before us in these solitudes. Then came some
undulated, mammellon-like hills, as if produced by the immense
waves of an agitated ocean. We felt exceedingly hot, which sensa-
tion was increased by a momentary, torrid gale from E.N.E. Our
subsequent direction during two miles (the distance from Meneru


to Kuma being five miles) was first one mile W.S.W., and the
second mile W. to N. We passed in the beginning another sry
lake, a spot perfectly round, like a menage, forty yards in diameter,
and encircled by a zone of reeds. We turned finally, as I said,
W. to N. and arrived at a water-run, overgrown with fine luxuriant
grass, where a number of fine cattle were grazing. The hut of
Kuma appeared, backed by some rocky hills, and being at the border
of a fine water-hole. As the building of huts on Menero (and
probably at all Australian out-stations) is always upon the same
principle, I will give a short description ot it. Such huts are built
of stringy-or iron-bark trees, the stems of which being straight,
require little shaping and adjusting. The bark ol both these trees
being besides separable from the stem easily and in long sheets,
is one of the principal materials of our forest architecture, as the
latter is equally used by our natives. Such sheets are nailed on
the uprights, and form the walls, and of the same materials is the
roof, all which produce of course a rather sylvan appearance.
Such huts are composed, firstly, of the main room, in which
a large fire-place is always fed with the robust branches of the
adjacent forest. About this place, pieces of salted meat are hang-
ing, ready, as it were, to glide into the equally large kettle, which
is constantly boiling or simmering. Next to the fire-place is the
table, and a place like an arm-chair, the exclusive lounge of the
overseer or stockman, which of course was always ceded to the
honored guest. One of the sides of this room opens into another
place, where the beds of the men, also made on the long sheets
of bark, are visible. This place serves sometimes as a store for
casks of beef, flour &c., and above this is a loft, where other
articles are deposited. Many of the huts are kept in good order,
but this is only accidentally, because I am convinced, that few
masters are aware, of the vast influence of material cleanliness and
order, even upon men’s morals and feelings. As such huts are
commonly near water-holes, where a quantity of the best humus
and alluvial soil abounds, spots are often cultivated as kitchen-
gardens, and the reader will be astonished to see in the course of
this work, that I found at Mutong (the last out-station in that
direction of the Alps), the finest sort of water-melons, cabbages,
and other vegetables.
After we had taken our refreshment, Bath called my atten-
tion to some curious birds, which were swimming in the water-
hole, and of which we soon shot a couple. There was no native


Name of the
Number
of Stock
How Long
since
Station.
Owner.
Locality.
Cattle.
Sheep.
Establishe '.
Waterholes,
Dziliket etc.
R.Campbell,sen.
Menero etc.
22,000
7 years
Kuma
Cooper & Levy
Ditto
3000
1600
5 years
Pindjera
Dr. Ried
Ditto
2000
2000
1 to 5 vears
Collerandong
Ky rie
Ditto
6000
2 years
Womerob
S. Bouleway
Ditte
700
6 years
Y ayak
.1. Slake
Uurrumbidgee
150
3 months
Y'uiquimbiang
F aitlilul
400
6 months
Jijompeka
Wright
300
t year
Mitchell
Murrumbidgee
600
I ditto
########
Gibson
Ditto
L ditto
Wuiwey
E. Buckles
Menero
700
2 years
Bobondera
Styles
Ditto
700
2 ditto
Eiemmondgy
r. Bird
Ditto
600
2 ditto
Jijedery
Brooks
Ditto
1000
5000
6 ditto
#/#/####
'iherwin
Mt.Laucblan,en-
leiingSuowy riv
600
3 years
Yimbrotbers
Ditto
Menero
6000
M#/
2 years
J. Moore
1000
2 years
Cooper & Levy
700
3 vears
Tomgrogm
W bite
4 ditto
Benilingra
York
Menero
600
2000
5 ditto
Bulungewaing
Bradley
Ditto
800
2 ditto
C. ftl'Guigen
200
2 ditto
Buloka
Guise
1000
M##
d months
Maranombla
E. S. Hall
Menero
500
1 year
Giiimatoug
.1. Hosking
Ditto
300
6 months
Biggon
Plato’s Plains
Capt. Tbompsoi
Ditto
200
8 months
M Laren
Ditto
<+***
1200
3 months
Crisp
Ditto
300
2 years
Mutong
Cooper & Levy
Ditto
600
#■/ r#
2 years
Arabel
name given to them, but they belong to the family of Pygopodes,
perhaps some genus about Uria or Colymbus. The body like a
small pigeon, but of an entirely eliptical form, having no tail. The
wings very small, the webs consisting of lobes, the head not at all
like that of a duck, but with a straight, pointed bill. Their eyes
shortly after they were killed were very curious, and glittering like
diamonds.* As Bath was well acquainted with the stations in and
about Menero, I noted from his information the following tajble:
Statistical Return of the principal Stations on Menero and there-
abouts, in the beginning of the year 1834.
* Coly mbits'?—oculis bruneis, punctis albo-luteis micantibus, pupilla externe circuit)
albicanti, micanti —nigra.


Asked about the particular breed of the cattle depasturing on
Menero, Bath said that nothing could be made out, it being now so
much crossed. Of the tribes of the natives, which visit this hut
sometimes to the number of sixty and seventy, I heard the follow-
j n o- : the Menero tribe is already very weak, consisting ot about titty
men, they are entirely tame (indeed not civilized, but corrupted),
and wander as far as Yass and Limestone Plains. The Kunora
alias Gundanora tribe, over the Snowy river, and in the Alps,
may consist of 300 men, they never go farther than Menero.
Then is the Omeo tribe, near the lake and Stanley s plains. Ihe
other tribes to the westward are numerous, but very shy. ihe
number of the men in all the tribes exceeds that of the women,
some of the former are very old, and have hair white as flax
others are perfectly bald. There are regular doctors amongs
them. For the bites of snakes they scarify the wound, and several
persons suck it, after which they wrench out their mouth. 1 his
operation is repeated until the patient is exhausted. Ihe doctors
perform also on other occasions bleeding with a fine stone, tl ey
catch the blood in a bark vessel, bake it, and shew the place where
the disease was. The parents assign their children for marriage.
Males bathe in ponds and water-holes, but if they see a woman
doing so, they do not drink out of it. T hey eat \ ams (of which
hereafter), Biggon, a root of a sort of Sonchus—ants, grubs (upon
which they put some broken charcoal), and their own parasites.
and I heard even, that they bleed themselves in cases of great
hunger, and eat their blood baked. The frost generally begins
about Kuma at the latter end of March, but it is not rare even in
January, and this year it nipped about that period all
potatoes near the hut. In the winter ice occurs even in the
huts, and in that of 1831 the snow was knee deep, remained
two days on the ground, and some shallow places m the Muuu
bidgee were so much frozen, that a man could slide over.
I come now to a rather important part of my journey, and this
is the description of a mineral spring. Ihe search for precious
minerals and mineral waters, was, although by no means my prin-
cipal still one of the objects of my journey. I calculated as far
the latter are concerned, that the visiting of this
by invalids from the surrounding tropical countries, would much
increase were such an inducement, added to those already
existing! I therefore enquired frequently amongst other things, as
to the existence of springs of a curious kind. It was at Limestone


Plains that I heard first, that such a spring existed on Menero,
and the extravagant reports told, such as to its occasionally explod-
ing and cracking the adjacent rocks etc., increased my curiosity to
visit it. From Dr. Reid as a professional man, I also of course
made enquiries, but he knew it only from hearsay; and although
there were arrangements made for our going there together, by
some accident, we were prevented. If any person except Bath,
says, that he went with me to this spring (and many things were
indeed said, and done to vilify and annihilate this my discovery), he
says—a falsehood. After I had made enquiries from Bath about
this spring, and arranged and prepared every thing required for
conveying a water, impregnated, as this was supposed to be, with
gas (preparations unknown to any person, who visited the spring
before or after me), I set out on Monday, the 17th Feb. for the
place. The preceding night was very cold, and at half-past five in
the morning the air was 56 3 , the water in the tubs 50 3 , the instru-
ment falling by evaporation to 49°,3. We rode 2 miles S. along
the creek, in the fine grass of which a quantity of fat cattle were
grazing, our direction was then two miles S.S.E. and two miles
again S. We passed long extensive downs, whose vegetation was
now all scorched, all looked yellow and livid, and this singular
aspect, unvaried by a single tree, and only clothed with very scarce
shrubs of Hakea or Bursaria is one of extreme originality, cha-
racterising these far extending, lonely downs. Amongst the herbs,
I saw a few parched specimens of Eryngium ovinum, several
Rumex, and a few Syngeneseous plants, resembling Chelychry-
sum etc. Now and then our way was intercepted by long undu-
lated hills, and the horizon was bordered with small peaks and pris-
matic, elongated mountains. Amongst these were the three
Brothers, which were S.S.W. eight miles distance. These con-
spicuous heights are the only bearing, which the lonely stockman
or hut-keeper, who is obliged to go from one station to another,
has, and Bath told me, that a few years back, when this country
was first inhabited, several men were lost and starved by mistaking
their way. We saw also the bones of cattle, which died here some
time ago of a very mortal disease, called the black leg. There
was a curious mineral to be found on the surface of these downs,
namely lumps of a Jaspery Clay-Iron-Stone, which however
w r ere of no large size. They have been rolled by some diluvial
revolution, and were smooth and shining at their surface. After
ten miles travelling, we perceived suddenly a range of huge.


escarped rocks starting from amongst the downs it was the
locale of the spring.
Scarcely descended from my horse, I was surrounded by several
men, tending a flock of sheep, which was depasturing there. I
asked them where there hut was, but they said, they had none,
and although this station was occupied for several months past,
they have been obliged to live in a shelter under the rocks. As 1
had no tent with me, I felt no great pleasure at this news. I soon
penetrated the whole management, which was here going on, and
as the men surrounded me repeatedly,♦ asking for physics to cure
their rheumatic complaints, I said (shrugging my shoulders):
had none.” In fact, I ought rather to have said, that I, tor ray
part, was not rich enough, to supply them (as every convict ought
to be by law from his master in such a locality), with cloaks, sub-
stantial boots, trousers etc. However they gave me every thing
they could, in the two days I stopped with them. _
The basin in wdiich the spring is situated, consists of a concave
valley, of one mile diameter, the deepest part of which is stretch-
ier from S S.E. to N.N.W., surrounded at some distance by un-
dulated, barren hills. Almost in the center of this level part are
two masses of huge rocks about 2 or 300 feet high,, divided by an
even passage of about 200 feet, that to the N.N.E. stands insu-
lated, whilst that to the S.S.E. is connected by some slight undu-
lations with the surrounding ranges of hills. To the xS.N.E., about
80 feet from the foot of the rocks is the spring, coming forth a the
most elevated part of the flat, where it forms a sort of mamellon-
like vault. I approached the spring alone, the words of the poet
resounded within my soul:
Egeria ! sweet creation of some heart,
Which found no mortal resting place so fair,
As thine ideal breast.
Ch. Harold.
When I arrived at the spring, it presented only a small cavity,
the opening of which was about 8” diameter, the water was limpid,
and T constant eruption of gas was visible This took place in its
original state (I opened it afterwards considerably), from two holes
in °the main cavity of the spring, which was about one foot deep.
One such hole was situated to W.S.W., whence the gas issued
almost continually from a perpendicular tube, the second spiracle
was towards S.E., the gas escaped there from a horizontal tube m
larger bubbles, but rarer than in the first one. At noon of the


above day, the wind was N.W., the thermometer ranged in the sun
102°, shade 92 s , water of the spring 60°, the instrument
when exposed to the air for 45 minutes, rose to 76 0 . At half-past
two p. m. the spring was 59| ° . At four p. m. the water of the
adjacent pond was 72° . At six p. m. there was lightning to the
E. and thunder, wind S.S.E., the air became cold to sensation, the
spring was still 60 °. I made this day the following experiments.
At noon the water bubbled strongly, the intensity of which
changes often, and as far as I could observe, without a certain
succession. A tin pot filled with water became soon overlaid at
its sides with bubbles, which covered after half a minute all the
vessel, and began then to erupt. I had nearly forgotten to inform
the reader of its taste, which is that of the most valuable mineral
waters, as Seltzer and Cheltenham, to wit, a pleasant, slightly
acidulous taste, prickling upon the tongue, and affording by this,
and from its constantly low temperature, a very pleasant and disal-
tering beverage. As the relish for mineral waters is idiopathical,
I was not able to drink more than a cup of it, but there are men
who drink pints at once, and some found it very beneficial for the
syphilitic disorder (rather common on Menero), constipation of
bowels, sore eyes etc. Under such and similar occupations sunset
approached, and I felt myself so much elated by the interesting
spot I was in, that I determined to leave off all gealogical enquiries
until the next day, and to enjoy sunset on the top of the huge
rocks, which are at the S.S.E. of the spring. I ascended them
with some difficulty, but was rewarded with a sublime and extensive
view. Thence
The middle one of the Three Brothers bore W, 78 ® , distance 9 miles.
A conical very conspicuous mountain, S. 175 ® .
A high, long yoke of mountains, due N.N.W. distance 25 miles.
Another very long yoke, composed of several rows, due N. distance 25 miles.
A two saddled mountain projecting over all the rest, N. 7°, 40 miles distance.
The place where the hut of Bath is, appeared from here to be N.W. seven miles in
a straight line.
The scene all around was composed of waste undulated downs,
long projected hills amongst them, covered with a very few trees.
At the foot of the rocks to the N. were some ponds of water, the
direction of this run was from N.E. to S.W., and it was chiefly in
the grassy land, which bordered this run of water, that the sheep
could exist at the present moment.
When I had descended from my observatory, I found the men
all busy to light and provide a good fire for the night, and a bed


was made for me on some hurdles in the open air, as their shelter
under the rocks was infested with centipedes (Scolopendia?) of a
considerable size. An Irishman in particular exerted himself, and
he fetched logs upon his shoulders from the adjacent heights, which
had at least 250 pounds weight, exclaiming every time he chucked
one to the ground: ie There is still some pith in an Irishman. At
the cheering sight of the fire, and the tea and-tobacco I brought
with me, a general and very pleasant conversation ensued. Ihe
climate of this part of Menero was also represented as changeable
and sometimes inclement, which however, it must be observed,
appeared more so to persons wanting clothes. One of the men
told me of the occurrence of hail-storms in this part, in which also
entire lumps of ice are projected from the atmosphere.
The next morning, Thursday, Feb. 18, was foggy and unplea-
sant, at sunrise the air was 58 3 , spring 58 , the instrument
descending by evaporation to 52 0 ,3, the pond of water at the
brim 68°, in the middle 66 °. I begun now with crowbars and
hammers to break open and to enlarge the basin of the spring, and
to examine the geological relations of the spot. Ihe foundation ot
this whole basin is probably the same, as both masses of rock
before alluded to—primitive limestone, the fracture of winch how-
ever is tending towards the splintery. It is very hard, effervesces
but little with acids, and as parts are of a rather white colour, it
would yield a fine marble for architecture and even statuary. Ihe
rock exhibits no stratification, but a homogenous, solid mass. At
one place, which forms a prominent angle near the spring, it pre-
‘ sents an obviously polished surface. If this is the result of melting
by lightning, or of some dilluvial revolution, is impossible tor me
to say. With the simple eye and far more with the lens, very
small blackish grains of a metallic lustre appear throughout its
mass however there is no occasion for investigating minerals micro-
scopically—in N. S. Wales. I found some other minerals about
the spring, but did not trace their respective stratification in the
main rock. (L’appetit vient en mangent. A man learns to travel
by travelling). Amongst these are specimens of Diont ot a very
homogenous texture, and blackish colour, and which bears the
appearance of a columnar shape. The faces of these columns are
corroded. Another mineral approaches Zeolite, its exterior is
more corroded, so much so, that it looks melted and scoriae- i e.
The latter quality is far more visible in a specimen, which has the
appearance of burnt clay—and all this (conjointly with the analogy


bt the spring shows, that besides the action of dihmum, g-
neons revolutions too have reigned once on that spot. Oui
primitive limestone is occasionally split into large crevices,
and contains also, as is the case at Antiparos and inLaiigue-
doc ,* some caves. Walker, who became while with me a
thorough amateur, tracked them out the first, and one or tw o
were of a sufficient size for a man to enter; memorable to
say, they contained large layers of native dogs excrements,
iri Which a great quantity of bones ot minor animals Kan-
garoo-rats, Bandicoots, Opossums (?) were imbedded. H e
bones are not properly petrified but A 6
ance as the larger ones at Wellington Valley.t On the sur-
face of these layers, some efflorescence was observed, which
was lilac-red like the finest Cobalt. But I found there e\en
gome canine and molare teeth of larger animals, probably na-
tive dogs : it is difficult to say how these came there, unless
they were brought as a prey by some of those gigantic
eagles of which I saw some very large ones (as large and
lamer than the Vultur barbatus of the Swiss Alps), in the
environs of this place. The primitive limestone is then un-
doubtedly the stratum, upon and in which the operation
of nil? swine is going on, but how different and various are
to miS B mafscs which cover this spring. A vault as it
were which, whether it was formed coeval with he spring,
m was constructed in a succession of centuries by the con-
cretion and precipitation of it—is impossible lor us to discuss,
as it is perhaps beyond the reach of antropocentncal know-
leThis large vault, which occupies the whole space be-
tween the rocks and the creek, is composed ot travertine,
which, is of a more or less white colour, containing a numb i
Dr, Lhotsh/s Australian Alps
i
• TVAiibuisson Devoisins traitde de Gedgnosie. Edit. 1. Vol. 2. § 227.
t When 1
Valley, to some animals of agencies-and 1 do this
the cause of grand geological op uhinnc.eroses and Elephants have been found at
sssawsssa * .**.


of smaller and larger cavities, some of them being covered
with a sort of Sinter. The fracture is earthy, and it has con-
siderable hardness. In some places it makes a transition into
a sort of roe-stone, the nodules of which however not being
round, no regular concentrical formation is. observed. Small
slabs of the above Travertine are scattered copiously round
the spring, and as a saline, white substance effloresces con-
tinually from all those Travertine rocks ; the vicinity of the
spring looks, as if some extensive buildings had gone on, and
the plasterers had just left off working. My men swept to-
gether a quantity of this salt with some feathers, and as a
little rain fell shortly after, all the salt was momentarily dis-
solved and disappeared accordingly. It has an obviously
ammoniacal taste. In breaking open and enlarging the spring,
I met with two, as it were arcs or bridges of rock, which
show's clearly, that the wfflole mass is composed of cavities.
The minerals then found were also very interesting. In the first
the Travertine began to be mixed with some Sinter, which
appeared in small scams, and of a rather crystalline texture.
The colour was white, yellow and brown, the latter two being
produced by different oxydes of iron, of which some appeared
in the state of ocher. The rock in the next vicinity of the
spring presented small cavities, in which some stalactytes
occurred ; they w’ere not of course of a large size, but some
of them beautiful and of a peculiar shape. As I was by such
operations, stirring up the spring, I w r as astonished to see,
tfiat conjointly with large bubbles of gas—freed by the break-
ing away of small vaults of rocks—a quantity of the bodies
and other parts of beetles were forthcoming, which snper-
nated the surface of the water. Although mostly broken,
they were not decomposed, which may be owing to the pre-
servative quality of the water. Some of them Avere partly
coA’ered AA'ith a crust of Tuffa. I Avas, I said, astonished,
but not surprised by this curious fact, because a Naturalist
travelling in Australia, gets prepared successively for many
strange and unheard of things. The lower parts of the
spring (about 2 to 3 feet under the surface of the ground) *
presented precipitations and incrustations, of substances,
■with which (as it will be hereafter seen) the mineral Avater is


impregnated. The Tuffa becomes entirely brown, and in
this species also, cavities, transversed by botryoidal and
tubular masses, overlaid with drusy crystals of various kinds
- are visible. Other parts are white and have a farinaceous
appearance, in others this white substance covers roundish
drusy places. But as I went deeper, I found, that all the
latter minerals were in state of formation and entirely soft.
I was astonished especially to find, that the yellow and mar-
tial substance, which covered the cavities of some of this
Tuffa, was soft and tenaceous, and I could handle it like mace-
rated animal skins. Thus it seemed to me, as if I Was sur-
prising nature’s operation on this spot, and I believe, that
after such substances have been chemically precipitated out of
the water, there is an intermediate state between this soft and
moveable existence, and the final induration and solidity In
these places the insects alluded to appeared in great numbers,
and I have specimens, in which part of these beetles are im-
bedded in a white, farinaceous substance. Whether the ani-
mal glue, Contained in these insects contributes to render
some of the deposits and precipitations so tenaec as I found
them, it is difficult to say, as this phenomenon has (as far as
lam aware of), no analogy in the present compass of our
Geology. A further question is, how and whence such a
quantity of beetles could accumulate in the spring. They
belong to some genus allied to Curculio, they are black, about
half an inch in length, and the same as I found in many
places on Menero. The vegetation however around the
spring is null, and even the two masses of rocks adjoining,
are only very slightly overgrown. * I believe, that the water
ot the spring may be lethal for insects falling in, because none
of the cattle ever drink it, but even with this assumption, the
accumulation of so many beetles in the recesses of the spring,
will always remain a curious query. After I had considerably
enlarged the basin of the spring, 1 could not find (with a bar
of about four feet long), any bottom in one of the perpendicu-
* I did not observe any peculiar phenerogamic plants round the spring, with the
exception of a very large Thysanbtiis, which grew amongst the rocks. The Lichens
however were numerous and beautiful, softie of them nearly scarlet-red, others
green, and thus form superb drawings upon the even, white masses of the Lime-
stone.


lar spiracles, laid open by my mining operations, and it was
from this depth, that, when stones were fractured, insects
were forthcoming. In the natural state, the spring is, as I
said before perfectly clear, and none of the men remembered
ever to have seen there any thing like beetles.
I must now mention, that the spring besides the eruption
of gas, is entirely immoveable, because there is neither any
place visible, nor could I discover one with my instruments,
through which the waters can eflux. The richness of the
spring is considerable, because although after it had been
enlarged, and its cavity could not contain at once more
than three to four gallons of water, it took four men nearly
half an hour, to empty it with some tin pots to a certain
degree; an experiment I made for that reason, because the
people told me, that the spring is inexhaustible. This pro-
perly speaking is not true, however, the copiousness of the
water must be considerable, as the basin, soon after we had
nearly emptied it out, became full again in a few minutes.
As I wished to know, whether the protrusion of mineral water
is the same at a certain distance from the spring, I made a hole
wdth a crow-bar about twenty feet from it, towards the
pond. The terrain was Travertine and Sinter, and water was
forthcoming at a depth of one to two feet; there was also some
effervescence of (carbonic) gas, but the water had, no
means the chemical strength of that of the spring. hat
quantity of water the spring will yield, if it should be
systematically enlarged, no one can say, but orders should
be issued, that this shall not be done without permission,
because it is a well known fact, that the Thermes ol Carlsbad
were impaired for some period, after they had been incau-
tiously enlarged.—The reader will perceive, that I was not
idle the day and half 1 remained at the spring, yet although
the etfloresence ol a saline matter all around the rocks near
the spring, conjointly with the taste ol the water, proved
clear enough, tliat it must be abundantly saturated with salts,
I determined to try this by experiment. A kettle was there-
fore put upon the fire, and a quantity of water exposed to
evaporation, when a rather large proportion of saline matter
was obtained. Owingto the roughness of the operation, the


salt produced was not pure, whilst that swept away from the
rock, when observed with the lens, exhibited very distinct
plumiform crystals of a perfectly white colour, but as a matter
of course, mingled with soil. Both of them have now been
kept for eighteen months in airtight bottles, when the natural
one, has still retained a pronounced amoniacal smell, a smell
which the second one possessed too, a long time after it had
been obtained.—l am obliged to cut the matter short, saying,
that I filled and carefully arranged four bottles of the water,
packed up my specimens and prepared for starting.
This spring has been discovered like some others in a rather
humble manner. (It is known, that Carlsbad was discovered
first by a dog of the Emperor Charles IV.) Shortly after some
sheep had penetrated into this part of Menero', a Convict
assigned to Mr. John M £ Laren of Sydney, William Macna-
mara, wanted some flags, to bake bread upon ; when break-
ing and lifting a rather large one, water sprung up to his face,
which seemed boiling, and frightened him very much. Upon
tasting it, the people compared it to ginger-beer, and drank
it for several diseases. William M ( Nama7'a, (whose assertion
has not been disputed by any of the men present), asked me
repeatedly, to recommend him for some reward, which I do
hereby in the most solemn way, and I hope, that the Secre-
tary of State will be graciously pleased to send orders, that
this man maybe provided for the remnant of his life, he being
rather infirm and broken down.— My people being employed
in packing, 1 went alone to the spring, the bubbling and mur-
muring of which was solemn in the silence of this solitude.
The rocks of marble around me, originated strange thoughts
and dreams within my breast, imagination constructing an
Australian “ Bath” before my eyes. I saw the proud country-
palaces of future Kings *br Presidents of these vast countries,
built of the same material, over the rough masses of which a
solitary wanderer was now treading—l saw long rows of build-
ings and hospitals, wherein numbers of sick from all adjacent
countries were relieved and restored to health—l saw sump-
tuous roads leading over these yet lonely and melancholy
.downs. The conviction, that my memory will be for ever
blended with this importent and interesting spot—was a solace


for that, I had before experienced at Sydney, and I was ap-
prehensive of (as lias yet been the fact) 1 probably would
experience, as long as the present administration exists —and
as there is a place in history for all sorts of notorieties, I
named then, and I name now this spring “ Governor Bourke’s
Spring,”—leaving it with posterity and the (if any) future
public career of the General, what epithet will become most
appropriately appended to his name.
J come now to the, as it were official part of the descrip-
tion of this spring. Considering that the British Government
has always rewarded all discoverers, I assembled finally the
men round me, and declared : “ that as I was the first person,
“ who took any scientific notice of this mineral spring, in-
“ curred considerable trouble and expense to make it eventu-
« ally known to the world—as besides this spot was so far
« off from the located part of the Colony of New South
“Wales—l was only imitating the custom of other dis-
coverers, in taking possession of the spring and the
“ adjacent, now wild and worthless land ; and placing the right
“ and title of this discovery under the protection of our
“ Sovereign and Lord, King William IV.” A more detailed
document of the same tenor was written out, and signed 23d
Febr. at Kuma by three witnesses. Arrived at the latter
place, I proposed to send an express on horseback with my
report and two bottles of the water and some specimens to
Governor Bourke, requesting His Excellency for some trifling
assistance to pursue my discoveries in the Alps. But 1 ab-
stained finally from so doing. However on my return, and
after having ascended twice the Australian Alps, I sent from
the road (about the 20th March) a letter to the Governor,
reporting the result of my expedition. This letter was never
taken any notice of. When I had returned to Sydney, I
communicated with several gentlemen about this mineral
water, and a board was assembled in the Civil Hospital on
the 16th April, 1834, composed of Messrs. J. Bowman, (first
Colonial Surgeon), J. Mitchell, (second Colonial Surgeon),
George Moncrief (third ditto), W. Lithgow, (Auditor Gene-
ral M. C.), and Mr. R. Campbell, agentleman of chemical know-
ledge. The certificate of these gentlemen declares: “ —the


“water having been tasted by us, we are of opinion, that it
“ is a cold acidulous mineral water, containing a large quantity
(( of carbonic acid—and further indicated carbonate of lime,
“Muriatic acid and Magnesia.”—“The care and trouble
“ evinced by Dr. Lhotsky in bringing this water under the no-
tice of the public, we consider deserving commendation.”—•
A second bottle was opened on the 30th April, and subjected
to the examination of Sir John Jamison, M. D., Mr, P. M. Hos-
king. Surgeon, and other gentlemen of scientific acquirements,
who certified ; “ that they arc of opinion, that it resembles
“ the celebrated Seltzer water, possessing a pleasant and
“ slightly acidulated taste. We therefore consider the dis-
covery of this spring well deserving public notice.”—Rely-
ing upon these sentiments, and considering the extent of my
otlxer geographical discoveries, I addressed 29th May, 1834, a
memorial * to His Excellency Governor Bourke and the
Honourable the Legislative Council of New South Wales,
soliciting :“ to grant him (me) such a remuneration, as his
“very dangerous and arduous expedition in general, and
“ this very especial and immediately available discovery”—
“ a mineral water for the invalids of, and the many others visit-
“ing. New South Wales , ’ —“deserves.” —Mr. G. K. Holden,
(Private Secretary of the Governor) answered under June
16th, —“ soliciting remuneration for the discovery of a
“ spring of mineral water during your late Journey towards
“ the southern part of the Colony , I am directed to inform
“ you, that His Excellency does not think your claim of such
“ a nature, as to justify its being laid before the Legislative
“ Council .” f Ido not know, if it has ever occurred,
that a memorial addressed to a Governor and Council has been
refused by the former even to be laid before the latter, when it
contained the inquest for a small remuneration for geographi-
cal and scientific discoveries, made in the very same country—
* These and several other documents will be printed in the appendix to this
work.
t By this lettrr it appears, that Mr. H. has been induced to believe, that my
journey had only extended so far as towards the southern part of the Colony,
whereas the kind reader will perceive, that lam even in the present stadium of my
expedition 60 ra les beyond tne southern boundary of the Colony—That the dis-
covery of a mineral spring for the sake of our sick “ is not of a nature to justify
etc” will be a new feature in the history of any British administration.


however, Governor Bourke was then so very busy In accu-
mulating and exhibiting a large amount in the Colonial
Treasury, that every other consideration vanished before this
paramount aim of his.
But enough and more than enough of this official tran-
saction, which I had never mentioned, if it had not in-
jured me materially, and of course paralysed to the present
moment all my further endeavours for exploring this
interesting continent. Thus the mineral water also has
been neglected for nearly two years, and I am sure, many
patients have been debarred of cure, far more of relief. It
will not be out of the way, to insert here the opinion of
some good books of reference, respecting the medical
qualities of those mineral waters, to the class of which
Governor Bourke’s spring undoubtedly belongs, as Seltzer,
Cheltenham, Scarborough etc —to wit; these waters have
been found beneficial in hectic fevers, weakness of the stomach
and indigestion, inrclaxations of the system, in nervous, hysteric
and hypochondriacal disorders, in the green sickness, scurvy,
rheumatic and asthmatic complaints.”— 1 “ This water has been
long in high repute, on accoupLof its medical virtues. From its
agreeable taste and exhilarating effects on the spirit—”*
As our Colony gets every year more visited by invalids of the
adjacent semitropical countries (we calculate that at any time
between thirty and forty military, civil and medical officers
are here on leave of absence or sick certificate), we will tell
the manner how these w T aters could be used even in the pre-
sent rough state of the place. We would advise, to dispatch
ten days before the patient starts himself, a dray with three
bullocks or two horses, containing besides the necessary pro-
visions (with exception of meat, which can be bought on
Menero) a good tent. This dray ought to expect the patient
at Gondaru, which is 160 miles from Sydney (and where, if
he has not his own gig or horse he can now go by the Mail.)
Thence he has only 110 miles to go to the spring, foi which
♦ This quality is essential to our Menero water, and if I had been able to present
six bottles instead of one at each of the meetings-t uy would h a a^^ ee “^P^f o^v
The importation of Seltzer water into Java is lot),000 bottles a
is not yet awake to the advantages of such a beverage m a hot Cl matt, liowtui
the Seltzer water imported, sells at 4s. a bottle.








