

A JOURNEY
FROM WILGENA AND TARCOOLA TO THE EVERARD RANGES
[?]a n Adela ide Syndicate to look at the
[?] which was accomplished with Heres in 1882.
BY S. C. GUBBIN.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Adelaide:
SHAWYER & Co., PRINTERS, CURRUE STREET,
1902.


Am erican PridP
PURE AMERICAN
twist tobacco.
GREAT BOULDER BLOCK
DARK
Pure American Tobacco.
w
ts.
1
■
£ .
Brig
Plug an
(D
WJ
A Really
Tobacco .
Sound Tobacco. Every Smoker should Try it !


□ rm'”Tic/)mrOO>2
Maine mailing S Brewing ft,
(LIMITED)
Brewers of the Celebrated Macclesfield Ales,
Kent Town, A DELAIDE.
Malt Food
CONCENTRATED (for Invalids.)
Malt Extract
(For Bakers’ Use.
Liquid Malt Extract
(A Non-Alcoholic Beverage.)
Tonic Ale
XXX Ale „
A
Export Bitter Ale
Extra Double Stout
f \
L Invalid Stout
Telephone 604,


S. C. WARD & Go.
S. 0. WARD, Member Stock Exchange of Adelaide.
EDWARD WARD, Member Stock Exchnngo of MeV jurne.
STOCK AND SHAREBEOKERS,
No. 12, PIRIE STREET, ADELAIDE, aid
LEE’S CHAMBERS, HANNANS STREET, KALGOORLIE.
Agencies throughout all Markets. Commission Business Only.
Telephone 754. All Orders receive Prompt Attention.
E. ROBINS,
HOUSE, LAND, AND ESTATE AGENT, etc.,
PARADE NORWOOD.
Houses, Land, Shops, lo Let and For Sale at Norwood and near surrounding
Suburbs. You will save time and expense by giving me a call.
Established 1894.
CARL WIESE,
BAMBOO AND WIOKJSR WORKS,
80 HINDMARSH SQUARE, ADELAIDE.
Qo-Carts a Speciality.
GOLDEN RULE HOTEL, PIRIE STREET,”, ADELAIDE.
I wish to advise my old Northern Friends that I have taken the above premises, and
will be pleased to see any old Northerners to have a chat on old times. All who
wish a nice, quiet, comfortable place to stay call upon me, and I you at
home. All Beer, Wines, and Spirits I guarantee of good quality, as Igwill notjpur-
chaae anything but the best of Liquors to be got in Adelaide, which I shall rely
upon to keep up my business. English and Colonial Bottled Ales and Porter of the
best brands kept.-— S. C. QUBBIN,
B. T. MOORE,
MAGILL ROAD, NOWOOD.
JERATED WATER AND CORDIAL MANU-
FACTURER,


MA TTERS & Co.
OPPOSITE
TOWN HALT Adelaide.
... HAVE ...
BARGAINS IN PKOPJUJRTIE3S,
BARGAINS IN' 1-lOXJSKS,
BARGAINS IN LAND.
MONEY TO LBND FROM T TKI-i CENT.
Call on MA TTERS & Co.
Auctioneers, Estate Agents, Licensed Laud Brokers.
COOPER & SONS’
ALE PORTER.
PUREST. STRONGEST. BEST.
W. A. BLACKEBY,
PASTRYCOOK AND CONFECTIONER,
BUNDLE STJREET CAFE.
Weddings, Tea Meetings and Picnics Catered for. Call and see ottr
Electric Pie Warmer. The only one in the States.


Golding’s Adelaide
Rubber and Cycle Tyre Factory,
194 RUNDLE STREET,
(Below Tork Hotel),
Our Cycle Tyres 11/6, 14/6, 17/6, 22/6. '
“ Cycle Tubes 4/6, 5/6, 6/6, 7/6 ,
“ Tennis Shoes—Ladies’ 3/6 to 15/6 ; Gent’s 5/0 to 25/-
“ Rubber Sole Boots-Ladies’ 10/6 to 17/6; Gent’s 20/-
to 30/-
IN STOCK OR REPAIRED.— CycIe Tyres, Saddles and Accessories,
Tennis Shoes, Hot Water Baths, Enemas, Air Cushions and Pillows,
Tubing, Footballs, Punching Balls, Exercises, Sponge Bags, Bath Caps,
and Garden Hose, Wringers, etc., etc.
B. W, SAN DUBS, Manager.
C. A. KRUGER,
CO./ICEBUILDER,
■H|c WAYMOUTH STREET, ADELAIDE, :N-
-andat KENT TERRACE, KENT TOWN.
Buggies of all Classes made to Order on the Shortest No tut.
The First Adelaide Exhibitor at Northern Shows.
UNION HOTEL, waymouthstreet,
(Near King William Street.)
MRS. DVT. HAOM Proprietress/
(Late of Shakespeare Hotel).
First-Class Accommodation. Wines and Spirits of the Choicest known Brands.
LION ALES ON DRAUGHT.
N. B,- Front and Back Saloons. The Only Central House,


Introductory.
There has been a great deal said about a railway from Port
Augusta to the Western Australian boundary, and it is very easy
to write about it in the Adelaide press, but it people only
knew what sort of country has to be traversed they would have
a very different opinion, as the difficulties to surmount are un-
imaginable to those who stop at home, and who have never seen
the Western sandhills, as you will see after reading a few pages of
my book.
But should the railway to the Western Australian Border be
carried out, the first part from Port Augusta to Tarcoola, and a
little beyond, would not be difficult to make, as the country is
very flat for most part of the way, and the worst part of the
sandhills could be avoided by striking off about fifteen miles
from Wirraminna, or the old Coondambo Station, keeping down
towards Lake Gardiner. That would miss all the sandhills
between Bitter Well and Kingoonia and Kingoonia and Wilgena.
But the railway could not be taken straight from Tarcoola to the
Border, but would have to go in a south-westerly direction
straight to the coast, or else keep up under the Warburton
Ranges, and go via Lake Phillipson, keeping on the north side of
the lake and a creek that empties into it, and follow the table
land country to the eastern end of the Everard Ranges, and on
to the M.usgrave if required. By keeping the table lands good
rainwater tanks could be made, as it is goed holding ground. It
would be a longer line, but I believe from what I have seen of
the two sides of the country that the Lake Phillipson route would
be easier made, and cheapest to keep in repair, and ballast to
make the line could be scraped up off the surface for miles,
especially along the Stuart’s Range country.
As many persons do not know what a claypan or rockhole is, it
may be interesting to those interested in research to know what
hey really are, and a few words of explanation may not be out
of place as to their structure, etc. In the first place in travelling
hrough the sandy parts of our continent, one will come across


a cluster of granite rocks, some being as flat as a table on the
top, and you will occasionally get what is termed a pan, holding
from a few gallons to hundreds, and probably sometimes a
thousand or more, and you will find nice holes, about eighteen
inches across, which go deep into the rocks, frequently holding
several buckets of water. When the sun has evaporated the
water out of them, you will sometimes get a soakage by digging’a
hole in the sand, and will get enough to supply yourselves and
horses, and which the natives have to fall back upon when the
waters have dried up outside. They are a sort of an oasis in the
desert. A bttshman, when he sights these peaks ’of granite,
expects to find water there, and selclon fails in 'his anticipations.
A claypan is a hard flat depression in the ground, the bottom
being of clay, which becomes so hard that you ran hardly notice
the impression made by a horse travelling across it. Any rain
that falls remains in them for some time after. They 'are a great
boon to the explorer in his search after mineral and pastoral
country.
S. C. GUBBIN.


R JOURNEY.
With C. J. Coates tor an Adelaide Syndicate to look
at the Country
From Wilgena and Tarcoola*
to the Everard Ranges
and which was accomplished with Horses in 1883.
pass?
June 19th, 1882, we left Port Augusta to look at the
M country between Wilgena and the Musgrave Ranges.
Wilgena had little or no stock on it then as they
were only just forming it, and we did not go over to the camp,
but camped a mile or two northward of it. Our journey starts
from here, as we left all civilisation behind us, to push our way
through a belt of between 300 and 400 miles of a heavy sandhill
country, which reaches as far as we went, to the Everard Ranges.
We started for Gibralter Rockholes and soakage, passing on the
way other good large rockholes or rockpans, as there are plenty on
top of the rocks, which hold a lot of water, and are several inches
deep. We arrived at Gibralter, and camped for the night, with
fine feed everywhere. Next morning we made a start for Mul-
cutchie Rockholes which lie away down to the southward. We
passed a granite range and fine open country, then we came into
ironstone and quartz hills, with flats between, then some very
heavy sandhills, with very large mulga. We also passed a large
lagoon. After leaving this country behind we came out into
open country, and saw several swamps ; then as we got further on
into the tablelands we saw a large quartz hill, which we went and
had a look at, and camped for dinner. We also saw the tracks of
blacks and the remains of fire still burning, which they had
recently left. We went on again after dinner, and arrived at
Mulcutchie in the evening. Here we spelled two days, getting
things ready to make tracks through the sandhills for the Mils-
[• Explanation.—No doubt a lot of rny readers will say on reading: my title page that
11 Tarcoola was not in existence at that time.’' Quito right; I simply made use of
Tarcoola as it has been before the public through the papers so turn h on account of
the goldfields, which are only about lf> miles from Wilgena in a westerly direction and
not far out of the route; that is why I used the name “ Tarcoola " with Wilgena.


grave Ranges, which we did, not reach, although we could sec
them in the distance. We left Mulcutchio .Rockholcs, alter
giving our horses a rest of two days, and steered a course
N.N.W., travelling over sandhills and thick scrub, and camped at
night, without finding any water. We went on again, the country
being much the same, with the exception of crossing a ridge of
small stony hills. We came upon a large daypan that had a
good drop of water in; we tilled our waterbags, and watered the
horses. We also passed a long chain of salt lakes, and then got
into more hilly country. We saw the tracks of blacks, which we
followed up, when we came to a native well, which we cleaned
out, but we could not get any water, so we packed up next
morning, and went due north to pick up the course we. had left.
We passed over a large stony bluff, with malice growing on it ■
we went on further into the sandhills, where we had to camp with-
out any water, and as our horses had now been two days without
any we thought it advisable to 'return, so we started due south.
We got on top of a very high sandhill, and had a look around,
but could only see a lot of lakes and thick timber everywhere.
We journeyed along until sundown, when we lot our horses go
again, without finding any water tor them. This was the third
day they have gone without getting a- drink, hut we have had
beautiful grren feed everywhere. Here I may as well mention 1
used to do a lot of scouting, out away from the line of travel,
looking for water, and as the boss used to steer by compass 1
could make sure of reaching camp alright. I mention this, as
it will be seen what happened to me through a mistake on the
boss’s part by stopping on his track for a time. This made
things very unpleasant for me, as I had to camp out all night
without either food or water. I had been out all the
afternoon looking for water, and knowing the track or line they
should be steering, I bore in about sundown to the line which
they should have gone past, so that I could pick up their tracks
and run them into camp as I used to do. I rode across the line
several times, until it was getting too dark to see anything of
them, and, as I found out afterwards, they stopped and had a
camp on the way, which made them late in passing, and they had
to travel late to make up for it, as we were making for water we
knew of in a daypan we passed coming out. I had to give up
trying to find them, and made a bee line westward to pick up
our tracks coming out (which I did next day), and had
to camp without any tucker or water, my waterbag being
empty, using my saddlecloth for a rug to sleep on. 1
also had to tie ray horse up all night, as she would not
stop in hobbles, and kept galloping off to find the other
horses. Next day I had to walk and lead her, as she
knocked up, and kept lying down like a camel would do when
pinched for water. I again made a start, and picked up our


coming out tracks, and ran them back to the water I knew they
were making for. I just caught them as they were saddling up
to make a fresh start going back to Mulcutchie Rockholes.
It was about one o’clock' (mid-day). We travelled from
these claypans in different directions, making west and
then W.S.W., during which time we saw some ironstone
hills country : we also come to a high, stony range. After
passing over this we altered the course to S.E., and passed
several large lakes, crossed one, and ramped on the edge. We
made an early start next morning, course still S.E., and got out
of some very heavy sandhills we had travelled over, and passed
three more lakes. Saw some black’s tracks, which I followed up,
and found their camp. 'I saw a small quantity of water, and
watered my horse, but as there was not enough for all the horses
boss decided to travel on and camp for the night. We went on
again next morning, and passed over some more ironstone hills,
and came out about nine miles to the westward of Malcutchie
Rockholes ; then turned east, and arrived at the rockholes about
one o’clock. This day was Wednesday and our horses had been
without water since Sunday morning at 7 o’clock. We stopped at
Mulcutchie a day and a half, and left, again travelling east, to
some other rockholes about seven or eight miles away,
where we stopped that night. We made a fresh start
from here, our course this time being due north, which
turned out much better, as, if we had kept to the previous course,
we would have had much greater difficulties to contend with, as
that course would have kept us in the sandhills nearly all the way
to the Everard Ranges, whereas we did get a spell occasionally on
the other course of hard country to travel on. Well, to go back to
where I left off, we were travelling north over ironstone country
till day. Next day we came into heavy sandhills and thick scrub,
and passed several lakes ; coming out into open country where
we found a small clay pan full of water and spelled a day on it.
We went on again next day and came to a box creek, which we
followed down and came to a nice fresh-water lake with red clay
bottom and flat rocks, and stunted box trees growing on the edge.
Lake Woorung (the native name) is fresh to thelastdrop, asthereisno
gypsum or salt on the bottom. I made a small square hole in the bottom
of it while we were there to hold about five or six hundred gallons of
water, and cut some poles and laid across, putting on top the large
slabs of fiat rock to keep the sun from it. It came in very useful
afterwards, as we made for this place in coming back, and after
travelling nine days without seeing a drop of surface water to give
the horses a drink, we hit this place exactly, and for which the
horses, I dare say, were thankful, as we had enough water to
satisfy us. If it had not been for the splendid green feed every-
where, we must have all perished, as the horses could not have
lived so long without water. We saw a few blacks here; I went


out in the afternoon to have a look round on horse-back when
came across them out hunting. When they saw me they made a
bolt. I went after one to “ round-up ” and have a talk to ; the
black, finding that he was hard pressed, jumped into a hop bush
and crouched down in the middle. I coaxed the black out, and
he shook all over with fear, but gradually got right when he saw I
meant no harm. The blacks were naked, like they all are in their
wild state. This piece of country would be worth stocking, as
there are plenty of places where water could be conserved, and a
little further on there are some nice mulga flats, and on
the eastern side is the table-land country, where rain
water tanks could be made, and it is very probable
that fresh water can be obtained -by sinking There is a
chain of lakes to the west of this fresh lake. It is walled in with
very high sandhills. There is a box creek coming in on the
south-east side which fills Woorung after heavy rains. We left
this place and went on our course, now north-west, through thick
scrub and sandhills with flats between, when, after travelling
about to miles, we came into more open country, with a chain of
several large fresh claypans or lagoons, and, after awhile, we got
into the heavy sandhills again ; then we have a short spell of hard
country to travel over, into the heavy sandhills again, and then
we come out into more open country. Next day we made a turn
and went south for about ten miles, when we came across some
old native tracks, which we followed up for about six miles, and
found a native well, where we spelled a day, and cleaned it out to
a depth of about nine ieet, to get enough to water our horses, but
they had to go without, as there was no more at the bottom than
when we started, the quantity being about a gallon. We had a
supply of rope, buckets, picks, and shovels with us to do anything
in that way, and which were very handy. The water was of no
use to us as it was rotten. The country was clothed with beauti-
ful green feed as far as we had travelled. We tried the horses at
a clay-pan that we came across after leaving the native well, but
they would not touch it, although they had been without for a day
or so. The native well was in a mulga flat between the sandhills.
Our horses got so accustomed to us that if an animal frightened
them in the night they would all come galloping into camp in
hobbles. We started back for the fresh lake where we saw the
blacks, and travelled over very heavy sandhills; we also crossed
some mulga flats and an ironstone ridge, some very low sandhills
with very thick scrub, studded with dwarf bushes. In making
back we struck the claypans or lagoons that we saw after starting
from the fresh lake. This lake lies about nine or ten miles
westerly of Lake Phillipson. We made a fresh start, going north
by compass. I was out scouting, as usual, looking for water, when
I came across a little dam the natives had made and covered
over with bushes, it was full of water with a myrtle bush growing


on one side. It was one of a long string of claypans in the sand-
hills, so I rode after my companions and brought them back, and
we camped there for the night. There was a lot of wurhes about,
as though it was a favorite camping place of the blacks. In the
morning I went on with the Tack-horses, course north-north-east
for a few miles, then we altered our course again to north. We
have had the box creek on our right all the way from the lake, as
we saw it several times, and travelled into it sometimes when it
came into the course. We camped on this creek one night about
37 miles from the lake. After leaving the creek wc came out
into very stony table-land country, which looms in the distance
like a high range, and, according to the plan we have, should be
Stuart’s Range. We travelled alongside of this range, keeping it
on our right, when we crossed a box creek, about 17 miles from
the last one, which must empty into a lake in the sandhills, and
it is quite likely to he a fresh one like the last we left. Wc did
not go much further before we camped. Next day we travelled
over the same sort of country (dint and ironstone) until dinner-
time, when we altered the course again to north-west, crossing a
mulga creek, also another gum creek. It was a little scrubby here
until we got on to the high ground, when it breaks into an open
plain over which we travelled, reaching the edge of the sandhills
at night. The sandhills did not last long before we came into
level flat country with low dwarf bushes which we could look over
and see a long way to the westward. This country was covered
over with that black or brown ironstone, water-worn gravel, with
red ground, similar to the table-lands in the far North. There
was not a vestage of feed. According to estimate of travelling we
have had about 80 miles of firm or hard ground to travel over,
which was ease to the horses after working so much in the heavy
sandhills. We passed some water in a claypan yesterday and
watered our horses. We have struck sandhill country again, with
thick scrub. The sandhills in this part are very high, and tower
up like mountains. In some places we had to lead our horses
over them, as they were too steep to ride over. We also saw
signs of blacks here, in tracks and burnt country, which made it
easier for us to travel. We saw a large range in front of us which
we found to be stony, with enormous great sandhills on each side.
We also saw from this range a very high peak to the eastward.
The blacks’tracks were leading that way, so that there is every
probability of getting water there. We passed over hills that were
stony, with sand on their tops, and came upon a little rock-hole
which was very welcome, as we were only allowed a pint and a half
of water a day. We filled our bags up again, and that took the whole
lot, so our horses had none. These hills are very high, and stretch
away to the east and west. We went on, still travelling through
the same sort of country, and while on a very high point we
sighted a high granite range to westward, and as we got nearer to


it the travelling got better, but still it was sandy right up to the
Ranges. It took us two days to reach them alter we sighted
them, and according to plan they must be the Everard Ranges.
We could see a very large gum creek which comes through them
and leads into the sand-hills cm the south side which must be the
Fetdinand. We rode on to the top of the range we first struck,
and we could see the Musgrave Ranges away to the northward.
The Everard Ranges run about east and west. I followed a small
creek up, as there was a nice “pad” going up (which the blacks
had most likely made) where; we struck the Range first, and I saw
a nice waterfall of about 12 or 15 feet with a large pool of water
at the bottom, but whether it is permanent or not could only he
judged in the summer, as I have seen similar places in the Gawler
Ranges which are quite dry in the summer, While we were view-
ing from the top of this Range, we could see a large rock about
north-west on the outer edge of the ranges, and in the sun there
appeared to be a stream of water running down the side, probably
the overflow of one of those rock-pans. We.struck these ranges
east of the highest point, then we travelled on towards it and got
very close under it. It is a very remarkable hill, being dome-
shaped on the top, and appears as smooth as a basin turned up-
side-down, and shines very red at a distance, We sat on our
horses and had a look at it, wondering how it could get into such
a shape as that. What timber we saw was mulga, pines, and
honeysuckle, The mulga was better, and the flats between the
ranges was harder to all appearance to the north of us. We
camped under the noble hill one night and when wc were getting
towards the camp I noticed some blacks sneaking through the
bushes, dragging their spears by their toes, but my mates did not
see them. I told the Boss what I saw, and he said wc would
camp, so we stopped and let go our horses. I could say some-
thing more about letting our horses go, but I will let; that part
rest. The natives came into camp as soon as it was dark, and
in the morning there was a good muster. We packed up early
next day, and my mates went on to water their horses, leaving me
lo saddle up by myself. I started to catch them up, but stopped
to water my horse at a clay-pan, when the blacks surrounded me
and commenced to beat my horse with sticks. I calle’d out to
my companions to come back, and they did so. The blacks
seemed to enjoy the fun of seeing my horse prancing about, though
it might have gone hard with me if the horse had thrown me, as
I should have been at. their mercy. We carried our revolvers
loaded on our saddless, and I drew mine out ready', but, as luck
would have it, there was no necessity to use it. We now started
on a course due south, making to rock-hole marked by Mr. Giles
as about 5o miles south from the highest point in the Everard
Ranges. The blacks followed us for about five or six miles, jab-
bering all the time; they were all looking well, and quite naked.


We were travelling through very heavy sandhills and thick scrub.
Wc had been on short allowance of water since leaving the ranges,
chewing geraniums and other herbs to keep moisture in our
mouths, as the weather came out very warm. This has been a
regular thing with us since starting, to be put on short allowance,
either through short-sightedness or stubbornness, I don’t know
which, as wc had sufficient indiarubber water-bags in our packs
that would have kept us supplied, with care, for a couple of
weeks. We travelled on and on over heavy sandhills and scrub,
and when we thought we had gone far enough to have hit the
ruck-hole marked on the plan lay Mr. Giles, we turned and went
west for half a day, and camped for the night in heavy sandhills,
and as we were short of water we could noteat, so we went to bed
without our supper and went on next morning without our break-
fast. The Ross gave us about a teaspoonful of brandy (not a drop
more) over-night in a little drop of water, which made us feel
much refreshed. We got up and made a start to go back to the
Evcrard Ranges again, as we thought wc had passed the
rock-holes, and were not sure where to pick them up,
hut afler passing over sandhills like mountains for about
seven miles, we struck a. large claypan with some water
in it, which, though muddy, was good rain water. This
saved us a journey of eight or nine days, which would have
made a great difference to us, as our rations were nearly done.
We stayed there that day and the next, so I went out to have a
look around on (out. I found the rock-holes wc were looking for
and also crossed our horse-tracks coming out, which shows how
easily any one can ride past a place with water on both sides of
our tracks, and miss both. This is a pretty place. There is a
dump of black oaks and malice on the north side, and a lot of
malleu on the south. The water is in rocks in a deep valley or
basin on the west end of a stony range that has sand on the top,
Wc had a long tramp from here, steering a course of about south-
east, and making for the dam that I made and covered on the
fresh lake, and after a journey of nine days through sandhills and
scrub without seeing a drop of water to give our horses a drink
we arrived back at tire lake, the horses doing the whole distance
without water, We used to allow our horses to travel from 20 to
25 miles per day, so they must have covered quite 200 miles
without getting a drink. We wore not a bit worried about them,
however, as our horses were once seven days, on another occasion
five, and still another four days without; water, and not a drop of
rain. We were quite proud of them, and they must have been the
best set of horses that could be got at Port; Augusta. While we were
travelling a drizzling rain came on one night, but we were camped
on sand, and the rain sank straight in, We left the fresh lake and
travelled on, passed over Rake Philltpson, and went on to a day-
pan that wc camped at previously on the track out. I think it.


would be about 15 miles. At the clay-pan we saw the first white
man since leaving Kingoom’a on our road out —just about three
months. He had a horse and dray and a luhra, and was out
prospecting. Next day we started fnr McDouall’s Peak, keeping
the open plain all the way ; and having these guides to lead us to
the station, was a good help. They were then forming the station,
and had just obtained a well of fresh water. Our ration bags were
quite empty on arrival here.
I would like to mention something that we saw, and, perhaps,
some of ray readers might he able to clear up n mystery. When
we left Wilgena and had got some miles on the road to the first
rockholes between our Wilgena camp and Gibraltar, we came
across the remains of an old dray. There were only the two
heavy tyres, some of the ironwork, and some small pieces of wood
left; it was, you may say, entirely gone with the exception of the
iron. It was on a narrow mulga creek, and on the western side.
It must have taken years for white ants to destroy the wood, and
as it was in 1883 we saw it, who could have left it.
Travels in the North.
Just to fill up ray book I will give a small account of my travels
and doings in the North, the names of the oldest hands (some of
whom are no more), and what the far North was like when I first
went there. I left Adelaide in the middle of winter, 1870, bound
for the Angorichina sheep station. The train did not go any
further than Kapunda (50 miles) at that time, so passengers had
to lake the coach from there to go to the old Blinman mine, 348
miles. We left Adelaide on a Friday morning, arriving on the
following Sunday at the Blinman, after a ride and walk of 300
miles, travelling day and night, as we had to get out and
walk a good many times. Messrs, McDonald and Hoskin were
the contractors, Mr. McDonald driving part of the stage himself,
Mr. Ferry another, and Mi, Kinvan the third, as far as my recol-
lection goes. It was a trip that no one would forget, as it rained
very nearly all the way, so that we had to plough through mud
and slush and had running creeks to cross, one in particular, the
Boolcunda, where the coach was left in the creek with a lady
inside, while the four horses went up the bank with the front
carriage and wheels. There used to be a nasty siding just on the
north side, a bit that the mailman always had a rope to fix on Ihe
top of the coach to prevent it capsizing, and it had to be used on
this occasion. Mr. W. R. Barnes was the mail-guard, and if he
should see this there is no doubt he will not have forgotten it.


It was a grand season that year lur the North, as there was beauti-
ful feed and water all over the country. I have spent a number
of years in the North since, and have seen good and bad seasons,
but I have never seen feed in such great abundance. Well, we
arrived at the Blinman, I was met by the overseer, Mr, Warwick,
and we started on a short drive of four miles to the station, On
our way we met some blacks, and Mr. Warwick had a long chat
with them in their own language, which he. is perfectly able to do,
having learnt it while young on their own station, which they have
had for a great number of years. Just in time for tea we reached
Angorichina, which was to be my home for twelve months, as I
was under an agreement to stay that length of time, which I did.
There were only a few sheep, something like 4,000, and I will
not be sure, but 1 think there were 2,000 goats, which were being
crossed with the Angora goat for the wool or hair, and which
were shorn a little earlier than the sheep while I was on the station.
But the owner did not keep them long after I was there, as he
sent away two mobs to the Port Augusta boiling-down establish-
ment, where they were rendered down for their flit, and they were
fat when they left, as well as the sheep on the station. Mr, Swan
had a few horses, and he bred some very pretty mules, as well as
a few donkeys. There is plenty of good water on Angorichina.
This run is very hilly in parts, and rough to travel
over, although there is some nice flat country on the
south and south-east end of it, such as Board’s
Wain and hirst and Second Plains. The Blinman
mine was in full swing when I went up first, and things used to
be pretty merry for the business people, as there was always plenty
of money about, and such money as I don’t suppose we shall see
again. It was nearly all promissory notes of is., 2s. 6d., 55., ros,,
•/,' 1, and upwards, as gold and silver was a scarce commodity.
The companies must have made a good thing by issuing paper
money, as there must have been many a one lost or destroyed j
some used to be fair rags by the time you got them. Mr. Chas.
Faulkner kept the North Blinman Hotel, and Mr. Williams the
South Blinman. Messrs, Young & Gordon (Mr, Me Parian e,
manager) also kept a store at North Blinman, and Mr. George
Cqllison—commonly called “ Paddy ” —kept the South Blinman
store, and a real good-hearted old gentleman he was. Among the
oldest hands that were there were Kelly (who had the well), Jack
Branch, J. W. Duck, Armstrong (who afterwards had a hotel in
Quorn), James Dobson, Tom Williams, and a host of others too
numerous to mention. I left Ango. Station and went north to
Wirrabunna, where I went on the board, learning to pick wool from
the shearers after the fleece had been shorn off. I think I was
picking from twelve shearers, and 1 had to keep going to keep
them clear, as the shearers, as a rule, are not polite in the language
they use if you are not smart and keep the wool away, I was not


destined, however, to stay through to the finish, as I was taken
ill and had to lay up for about ten days. Mr. Henry Baker was
manager of the two stations, the other one being Angipcna, where
the gold was found a few years back. I met Mr. J. H. Mules,
and, taking a liking to me, when I was well enough to go to work,
he asked me if I would like to go with him and learn to be a
stockrider at Blanchewater. I was taken with the idea, so I
went, up with a bullock team, taking nine or ten weeks to do the
trip. The stations were-pretty well deserted, there being no stock
on Owieandaita, Umberatana, or Illiwortina. The Mr. Spicers
were at Yeraleena with a few sheep, and Troopers Fisher, Curnow,
and Whitbread were at the Freeling Station. You were always
hospitably received on the stations everywhere in those days, as
travellers were very scarce, and the people were glad to have a
chat with you to hear news of others they knew’. I forgot to
mention that there used to be a good gathering at the races held
on the race-course about four miles ftom the Blinman, among the
winners being Mr. W. R. Barnes’Jupiter, Mr. Taylor’s Talkenough,
Mr. Mules’ Roachy (an old station horse from Blanchewater),
and a good many more I could mention. To go on from where
I left off, wc were getting towards Blanchewater when, about 12
miles this side—at Quart-Pot Swamp—we were met by a lady and
two gentlemen who bad heard from the mailman the time we
would be there, and who should the lady be but my fellow-pas-
senger of sixteen mouths previous by coach. Tire lady knew me
again, and called me by name, hut I did not recognise her until
she told me of the trip by coach. We did not reach the station
till next day. It was some time before it came to my
turn to get on a horse and go out amongst the cattle
and horses, but it did come, however, and when I look
back, I don’t think I would care about the same living
again, as the rations were not of the best. You had to sift all
your flour to take weevils and maggots out, with post and rail tea,
black sugar, and salt beef, damper, and Johnnycakes to eat.
These last arc cooked on top of the coals, the damper under the
ashes. It was always a welcome change when the time came
round to get a bit of fresh beef to eat, and a nice steak cooked
on the coals would make your mouth water to get a taste of, but
the change from salt beef to fresh used to play up with tire men,
although it never affected me. Holloway’s were not wanted then,
but were greatly in demand before, and would always be carried
for emergencies. Yet the stockman’s life is a happy one, for he
enjoys his work, it is of a lively description, especially in cutting
out for sending fats to market, and drafting the calves off from
the cows for. branding. In drafting you get a yard full ot calves, and
there are two leg ropes and a head rope. The man with the head
rope has a long pole, over which he coils a couple of turns of a
loop, the other end being passed through a hole in one of the


stockyard posts. As soon as the calf is caught this rope is hauled in
by a couple of men outside, and the calf is pulled up close to the
post, and two men, each holding a leg rope, seize hold of the calf
and slip a rope on the fore and hind legs and each pass a turn
lound the rail of the yard, and the word is given to the men on
the head i ope to let go. Ihe call, thinking it is free, makes a bound
to get away, and, of course, falls. Then a man sits on the neck
part, the ropes are given another hitch on the other legs, so that
the loin legs are held tight, and the work of car marking, branding,
itc., is done. Ihe ropes are then slipped, and the calf is up again
and olf, the men being so used to it that it is only the work ot a
lew minutes. Working among the horses is nice work, and, my
woid ! they give you a good gallop at times, and you will need a
horse with good bottom to put them in the yard. I remember
once when we tried to put a mob of wild horses into a yard, and
we galloped over twenty miles of sandhills to get them, hut out
ot 20 head only managed to yard seven, though we had a man
waiting with fresh horses to change immediately we got to the
yard. That was from the head of Lake Torrens to the Gregory
Creek, on this side of Stuart’s Creek. Mr. Tom Adams was in
charge ot the Kumiss Station and Charlie Miller at Stuart’s Creek.
I have wandered away a little, so will go back to Blanchewater.
I worked for the Hon. Jno. Baker when he owned it, and also
helped to muster when, after the death of Mr. Baker, it came
into Sii I horn as Elder's hands. 1, saw some of the blood horses
which were sent down to Morphettville. Among the men who
worked there were E. Simmons, Alex. Smith, F. Godlee, and
some others. “ Old Ned,” as Simmons was called, was a hue
horseman, and ! was one of his pupils, he being the first to place
me on a colt’s back an aged one, as he was seven years old. I
carry a mark from him at the present time, as he used to strike,
and I got a nasty pat on the nose. Mr. Noble used to be at'
l-’arallana, Mr. McTaggart at Wool tana, McCallum Brothers at
Nepowie, and' Mr. Phillips at the Tea Tree. Blanchewater is
mostly all tableland country, with the McDonald and Tindalpina
Creeks running through it. In the course of these creeks are
some large waterholes, which get filled after heavy rains, and last
for a long time, being very deep, but the main waters are at St.
Mary’s Pool, Wortitandana, and the Springs, close to the station.
There arc other creeks on the run which are very useful, such as
the Six Mile, and Twelve Mile, also the Emu and Cockatoo
Creeks, which run into the creek above Tooncutchen. The
country grow.s fine herbage and grass in good seasons, and stock
get very fat. The country is very stony, and a peculiarity is that the
ground ia of a soft red and yellow color, in which the horses sink
up to their fetlocks in parts when riding over it. Yon will also
find some prettily marked stones, as though they had been cut
and polished. You can ride for miles over crystal and milky


quartz and brown colored stones, all more or less water-worn ;
and you can see for miles ahead, as the ground appears to be
level to the view. I remember once there were only three of us
at the station, all the rest being away out on the run. when the
blacks mustered into the station. One night there was a great
corroboree amongst them, which ended up in a row (as always
happens on these occasions), and they made up their minds to
stick up the station. We got out the firearms, and, as there was
plenty of ammunition, we got our rugs and lay just outside of the
men’s hut, watching all night; but after coming up pretty close to
the station and yelling thev went back again to their camps—
probably they sent spies who found that we were watching and
armed. After leaving Blanchewater I went to Manuwalkaninna,
previouslyownedbyElder, Hack,&Dean, This wasanice little run,
with 500 head of cattle and 200 horses of the draught class.
There were no permanent waters, only rairMvater holes, that the
stock had to depend on There is a great chain of lakes forming
a half-circle round these runs, reaching from the Tea Tree on the
east side to a place called Boolcaltaninna (a fresh lake on the
south end of Lake Gregory) on the west. The lakes are Gregory,
Blanche, Mulligan, and Frome. There are several crossing-places
in the lakes, where we have crossed over and gone into the sand-
hills after stock, which would go away after heavy rains on to good
claypans and cane-grass lagoons. There they would stop until
the lagoons dried up, and then make in again on to the main
waters. When I went to Blanchewater first Mr. Dean was just
about leaving Manuwalkaninna. I think Mr. C. Perry (who was
also with him) is still in the North. I made a trip in January,
1873, t 0 Lake Hope while at Manuwalkaninna. It was summer-
time, and the lake was quite dry. The distance was 50 miles,
over heavy sandhills, but it was nothing to the trip further on, for
one blazing hot day one of the horses stopped and laid down, and
we had to carry water back to him before he could get up and come
on to the waterhole we were looking for. We thought we were
going to have a bad time, as the blackfellow we had as a pilot
lost his bearings, and we got a bit cross with him. Fie jumped off
and ran on ahead on foot, while we stopped and waited to see if
he would return. After about quarter or half an hour’s wait he
came back and told us he had found the water we were looking
for; and, poor fellow, he said he would not stop to have a drink
himself until he had brought us to it. Well, we got in alright,
fairly famished, horses and all, and as soon as we had taken off
the saddles and hobbled out cur horses, instead of the black
going down to the edge of the waterhole and taking a drink as we
did, he stripped off his clothes, tumbled into the water, and had a
good swim round, and we soon joined in. We returned by a
difieient route and had water every few miles. We saw a good-
sized boat at Lake Hope Station, but the seams were all open, as


it had not been used for several years. The lake got filled shortly
after we returned the same year. It is about forty miles around.
'The police and missionaries had to leave Kopperamahna on
account of the water being done or no good, and were camped on
the Cooraninna Creek. We paid them a visit on Christmas Day,
and spent a pleasant time rowing up and down the waterhole in
their boat. Cason, Smith, and Curnow were the policemen, and
Voegelsein and Schoeltncch the missionaries. ' After spending
the day with them we returned to Manuwalkaninna and
went on with the usual work, which consisted of riding
round the cattle and horses and getting outside of all tracks to
see if any were making away, so as to bring them in again. The
horses were afterwards mustered and shifted down to the Mulligan
Springs, and, shortly after, I left the station and went to work in
the Sliding Rock Copper Mine, which was then at its best. After
working there fur a time I left that and rode the North Mail for
Messrs. Whitbread and Hantke. When it changed hands I threw
it up and came down to Adelaide for a change, but I did not stop
long before I went north again. I have done a lot of travelling over
South Australia—it would lake up too much space here to relate
all—so I will conclude now with some experiences as a
prospector.
As a Prospector.
I started out from Leigh's Creek with horse and dray, tucker,
and tools, to make my fortune, the same as a good many more
have done before me, and after several years I was able to sell
out my mine and get a lift. 1 started digging for gold, and spent
four or five months in one place, working on the old Boolyeroo,
where there is always a little fine gold to be got on the surface,
but not enough to pay, so we had to leave there. Next I tried
my luck at Mount Ogilvie for a few months, but had to go away
without being successful, and I went shearing at Murnpeowie to
get a few pounds to try again. Well, there was a fresh rush at
Boolyeroo and I started again. We were sinking to 25 and 30
feet, in fact, one shaft was put down 60 feet by a syndicate, and
line gold was found in the bottom. We were getting nice rough
and ragged gold in our claim, hut there is so much water that it
would require an engine and pump to keep the water down if you
wished to go to 200 or 300 feet. From the gold I have seen
taken out I am of the opinion that, if a strong company took it in
hand and worked it in a systematic manner, there would be good
profits derived for the outlay. We also got some nice gold at


Mt, Coffin, about four miles south-east of the Boolyeroo, and nine
miles from Leigh’s Creek railway station. There is no water
there, so we had to do all dry blowing to get the gold. After that
I started prospecting for copper, and I consider that if the men
who are out of work only knew the value of it, there would be
more at it, as it is far better than digging for gold. As long as I
was at it 1 always had a pound in my pocket, but not so with gold.
Gold-digging is a very fascinating game, and it will string you on
so long that it will send you away more often without the money
you took with you to try your luck than it will fill your pockets.
The gold diggers live vety hard lives, sometimes on dry bread, tea
and sugar, and pipe of tobacco for weeks, and I have seen hoots
mended with bits of wire, and plates of an old shovel put on the
sole. There is no doubt that the North is nothing but a network
of veins of copper, and some nice quantities are taken out by the
miners. There are also leads of silver and lead ore, but silver
and lead being so low in price it is not sought after, therefore it
lies in the ground untouched, although there is one party working
15 miles from the.Lyndhurst railway siding, and they send a good
bit away—how much I cannot say, There is not the least doubt
that the North is one of the finest mineral countries in the world,
but why it is not thriving and going ahead is a mystery. There
is gold, silver, copper, lead, and coal, and plenty of iron—every-
thing that is required to make a country rich, and yet there it all
lays idle. I think that, if we had gentlemen who have had
experience of deep sinking, and who would have a look over the
northern country and take time to thoroughly examine it, things
would be different, as, perhaps, their influence might induce men
to put capital into good properties that are now lying idle. I had
a real good mine which I sold, and I will not believe but that it
is good now, in spite of their expert’s opinion, as no man can tell
what is under the ground. It had a beautiful smooth foot-wall
which is likely to go to any depth, and as long as that was there
I would say try further than 150 ft. before leaving off. There
was gold, silver, and copper showing. Assays of copper (black
oxide) went as high as 72 per cent, concentrates, with gold from
a few pennyweights to 1 oz. 15 dwts. per ton, and a lode where I
left off showed mixed material of over 4 ft. in width. I only hope
that some one will come along and take on the mine again, pick
up the lode again, and prove my words correct.


JUDGES r Alexander Bruce & Co.'s
Special Cream S
in Black Squat Bottles has No Equal. ASK FOR IT
H. J. D. Munton & Co., Sole Agents.
W. L Glastonbury,
PORT ROAD, HINDMARSH.
Cheapest Drapery Establishment in the District.
FEDERAL TURNERY AND CABINET WORKS,
26pa, HINDLEY STREET, ( 'Si T )
A G. CR EE PER,
GENERAL WOOD TURNER.
Building and Cabinet Work a Specialty.
Furniture Repaired and Re-Polished.
WOODS & SPINKSTON,
HOTEL BROKERS # LICENSED VALUATORS.
Hotels to Let in all Parts of the Colony and Broken Hill.
BUYERS FINANCED.
CALL OE WRITE TO-
Woods & Spinkston, Penn Chambers, 100 King Wm. St


O. V. G. «
WHISKY.
E. & W. HACKETT,
SEJEOSMEN ' and NURSERYMEN,
73, RUNDLE ST., ADELAIDE.
Nursery—MAßßY ATVTLLE.iIm-
Telephone 307.
GILLES
mm
ARCADE
(Off Currie St.)
Archie Badman,
(Late R. Troy.)
Horse and Carriage Bazaar . . .
. . Livery and Letting Stables.
Horses and Traps on Hire. Drags with Careful Drivers a Speciality, Horses
Stabled by Day, Month or Year. Horses, and Traps, and Harness Bought, Sold
or Exchanged.
CHARGES MODERATE. Horse Sales held every Wednesday.
JOUF PAWWDUIi & CO,, AUC’HON'KKRS.


Radam's Microbe Killer.
A MEDICINE, NOT A DISINFECTANT,
RADAM’S MICROBE KILLER is composed of Pure Water charged
with the Gases Generated from the following ingredients;—
1< lowers of Sulphur, Nit rate of Soda, Black Oxide of Manganese,
Sandalwood, and Chlorade of Potash. It is a POSITIVE and
CERTAIN CURE for all diseases, and is guaranteed to he perfectly
lt will effect a cure in every instance if given a fair trial.
TESTIMONY OF CURES GIVEN UNDER OATH IN THE
SUPREME COURT OF NEW YORK CITY SUBSTANTIATES
THE ABOVE.
ON SALE BY ALL CHEMISTS AND STOREKEEPERS.
COCKING & Co., Topham Street, Adelaide.
Sole Agents for South Australia.
Adelaide Parcels Express.
J. Cocking & Go.,
PEOPRIETOES.
Head Office, Topham St., Adelaide; Lipson St, Port.
City Telephone 379. Port Telephone 147.
FURNITURE REMOVED.
Custom House and Shipping Agents,


ed.)
oath
We are Sole Agents for :
)WIN S ENGLISH SOAPS- Rose, Heliotrope, Ivy, Butter milk,
Honey, Lilac, Swiss Violet, Balsamic and Brown Windsor—one
grade only— The Best.
GLASS for Linen. Polish your Shirt Front with this, and you
don’t require a mirror, just prop it up on the dresser and shave
by it.
gra clips for Correspondence, everlasting, time saving, cheap.
TER'S EVER BRIGHT METAL POLISH and SILVER CAKE
For Cruets and Brass, and HARNESS COMPO. for your
Leather work.
ENS’ CLOUDY AMMONIA-1 *or Household purposes. First
Prize Sydney, 1900.
RAS CURRY POWDER— Finest in the market.
ENCES - All flavors; Hinton & Sons’, San Francisco ; Carter’s,
Liverpool.
NTON Co ’s Incandescent Gasoline Lamps.
DORAN ” (Acorn Brass Works) Gasoline Lighting Outfits.
JILUENA” LIQUID BLUE —One gd. Bottle lasts four months at one
washing per week ; Bleaches Pure-White-
- " -
em.
IUNG’S (Geelong) Black, Tan* CREAMS— Try ’e
T TON’S Evaporated and
IT COMFORT —“ A Boot| t« tired and aching ”
INKEE STRAWS for Res&rf&te...
QUAKER” BATH at Home.
JARCE’S PATENT BLACKING BOTTLE 'TOPS Clean Fingers,
and an even application to the Boot.
[LTfiRS— Is., 2/0 and ss. The On\y Cure for the Bad
Condition of the Tap Water. Fit any Tap. Get one and Save
Gutter Expenses.
This is the name by which our Patent Washing
rwn. Call and See it. Specially recommended by
Judges for a prize at Agri ;ul:ural Show', March, 1902.
SPOTS & POKER MACHINES (Six Slot).) Every Club, Wine
Saloon, Tobacconnist, and Hotel should have one; does the
work of six. Write for Pamphlet. Makes six times the money
as old style.
He fliistrallav Traaiqg Agency.
GENDERS’ BUILDINGS,
lIINDMARSH SQUARE, ADELAIDE.


West End brewery,
Hindley Street, Adelaide,
10th February, igo2.
The South Australian Brewing
Company, Limited,
has pleasure in informing its customers and the public
generally, that it has purchased outright the (Business
of Messrs. Syme & Sison’s Adelaide Brewery,
and in addition to its well-known 'Brands, viz :
WEST END PALE ALE,
BITTER ALE,
XXX STOUT, and
TRILBY TONIC ALE,
it will continue the Brewing and Bottling of those
(Popular Brands, viz:
TIGER STOUT,
JOKER ALE, and
BUXTON TONIC ALE,
and trusts by maintaining their quality ctk,.
to ensure to the Company the support so extensively
given to the late firm.
THE COMPANY’S LAGER BIER PLANT
is now almost completed and with the very latest im-
provements for facilitating production and giving
excellence in results, it hopes shortly to distribute a
Lager Bier, equal to any imported, at a price that will
make this much needed article accessible to all.
