

A JOURNEY
FROM SYDNEY,
OVER THE RLUE MOUNTAINS,
TO BATHURST,
Sorty Years Ago.
ADVANCE
AUSTRALIA.
Bathurst, N. S. Wales:
GLYNDWR WHALAN,PRINTER, SCHOOL OF ARTS
BUILDINGS, HOWICK-STREET.
1882.




Introduction.
A letter containing the particulars of this Pamphlet
was sent by the writer to her mother in England, and
was circulated amongst a number of relatives and
friends, and excited at that time much attention and
comment. It is thought that its appearance in the
present form may be welcome and instructive, and,
being a little history of the past, be interesting when
compared with the progress which has been made
during the years which are gone,
I do not like to detract from the simplicity of the
narrative, but a few remarks comparing the past with
the present may not be amiss, and by referring to the
then desperate state of the roads, the want of
accomodation, the absence of the barest necessaries,
the means of travelling and mode of traffic ; viewing
these things with the present advance in the mode of
travelling, and the conveyance of goods by the intro-
duction of the rail and steam appliance, may encourage
others who are thinking of emigrating as far into the
interior as the writer. To those who may have to face
similar difficulties in pushing into the still farther
interior, it may show what patience, perseverance, and
industry, as here recorded, trusting also to the care
and guidance of an all wise Providence, will accom-
pany those who determine to make a home for
themselves and families in this beautiful (almost
boundless) and free country. To this end a few
explanatory notes are appended.




Bathurst, N. S. W.,
July 15th, 1841.
My own Beloved Mother :
It is now about a week since we welcomed
letters from Barbara and Matilda, but have
yet received the one therein mentioned as written
by Mr. C—, and sent by his brother, which we
regret, but still hope to receive. When I wrote
last we were busily preparing for our journey over
the mountains ; and, perhaps, a few particulars
respecting the same may furnish the most inter-
esting subject for this, but I am greatly at a loss
how to begin or where to end, for if all the ups
and downs of that ever-to-be-remembered fort-
night were detailed, I suppose the whole quire
would not contain one half that might be
written.
The most speedy mode of travelling over the
mountains is by the mail cart, which leaves
Sydney for Bathurst on certain days, but this is
too expensive to be generally adopted, as the
lowest fare is 90 J- each person ; all, therefore,
who cannot afford this, and have no conveyance


of their own, are under the necessity of travelling
by some of the drays, numbers of which are con-
stantly on the road to and from Sydney.
After many anxieties respecting this journey,
it was settled that our best plan would be to dis-
pose of many unnecessary articles we had in
possession, and purchase in their stead the most
useful and saleable in the part we were bound for.
These were packed with all our other goods on
bullock drays, and with a person who had pur-
chased land at King’s Plains and wished to see
it, we agreed that he should take us in his own
dray with two horses, and our bedding and pro-
visions for the journey. These drays are precisely
the same as those used by the small brewers in
England. We had hoped, by this arrangement,
to have had sufficient room, to have travelled the
distance in a week, and to have escaped the very
undesirable company of the bullock drivers, who
are almost sure to be convicts of the very
lowest grade.
After this agreement was made, our driver,
wishing to make the journey as advantageous to
himself as possible, loaded the dray with various
commodities of a bulky and weighty character,
paying no regard to our comfort or that of the
horses.


And now, dear mother, fancy me with my five
dear babes seated on the top of this miserable
load ! Eliza walking on a little out of the town,
and my husband by our side, on one of the cold-
est mornings in June (which you must remember
is your November, and quite as cold in many
parts) ; but, although we had resolved on starting ,
the poor horses had evidently determined other-
wise, both positively refusing to act as leader.
After much whipping, scolding, and rearing up,
the horse in the shafts fell down, with the load
pressing heavily on some part of it, making
it very restive, and with no little difficulty
we again dismounted. As is usual in such
cases, we soon had plenty of help, and I plenty
of advisers : — 11 Sure you would nt be thinking
to cross the mountains with all those children 1”
cried one ; and “ sure you’ll lose all your babes,
God bless them!” cried another; and “ the
mountains all covered with snow, you will cer-
tainly perish,” said a third ; while others were
utterly astonished the young girl should have so
many children, and especially three at a birth!
But we believed it to be our duty to proceed, and
to Him who had borne us in safety over the
seas we looked for protection on the mountains.


Every hour seemed now to increase our perplexi-
ties, for the horses would not stir an inch, and
the load was by far too heavy. Our goods were
gone on several days in advance of us, and there
we stood with just money enough to defray our
expenses and none to spare for delays or fresh
agreements, the driver cooly telling us that he was
very sorry, but his horses would not take the
load, and he would not go without it.
It was in the midst of these troubles that I
thought my poor husband’s courage would have
failed him, and never shall I forget his look
when with eyes filled with tears (not allowed to
escape), he exclaimed “ Dear, what am I to do !”
About mid-day, however, we bade farewell to
Sydney, the driver having procured another dray
and horses, dividing the goods between them.
Owing to the roads being heavy after a fortnight’s
rain we made but eight miles that day, and as
there was no food or water for our horses, we
drove into an inn yard* Now you must not
* The camping places for the bullock or horse teams
were about 14 miles apart. Sometimes there was no
water near these places ; the drivers had to carry it in
kegs from the last one or two plaoes, the poor beasts
having none,


expect it was one of those comfortable places so
common in dear Old England, where, after the
fatigues of this troublous day, we might have
been accommodated at a reasonable rate, but
finding that £4 at the lowest would have been
the demand, our drays were drawn carefully under
a shed, and for the first time in our lives with
sorrowful hearts we began to prepare our beds on
the top, contrary to the usual mode which is
under the drays. I dare say you can believe we
slept but little—poor Mary and Sarah both fell
from the top, the latter’s fall somewhat modified
by coming in contact with the dog. There would
have been no danger of their falling out at all,
but Eliza, not finding as much room as she had
been used to, had slipped into the manger, where
she slept peacably for an hour or two, till the
man, who had located himself somewhere in the
neighbourhood, arose to feed his cattle, and mis-
taking her cap for the corn sack, handled it
rather too unceremoniously. At daybreak we
again started, but surely no Sabbath ever dawned
and found us less prepared to welcome it. As the
roads were better, we reached Parramatta by
noon, and by night found ourselves fully 18 miles
from Sydney, and stopped at a beer shop, which
affording no hospitable shed, we slept that night


in the open air. The next day we passed
through Penrith, a pretty little village, at the end
of which we were with the drays ferried across
the Nepean (in a punt), a river about 300 feet
wide, and from which we first saw the Blue
Mountains in all their magnificence. Here, fill-
ing our bottles with water, we proceeded over
Emu Plains, and rested our horses at the foot of
Lapstone Hill. Here we lighted our first fire,
and seated around it in true gipsy style, partook
of our first comfortable meal. Being anxious to
reach the top before dark, we attempted once
more to proceed, but here the poor horses again
raised objections, and very soon the accompanying
dray was backed fast in a tree, about nine feet
below the level of the road, and here we must
have stayed had not a number of men forming
the iron-gang (who were returning from their
work of improving these roads) kindly
assisted us, for a small sum of money to buy
themselves tobacco. They very readily strung
into a harness of ropes, some drawing before, and
others pushing at the wheels. These men are
stationed at various places, with two or three
soldiers over them, working constantly in heavy
irons, and their labour generally appointed as a
punishment.


Our road hitherto had borne the appearance of
a shrubbery or pleassure-ground, lying through
beautiful evergreens, thickly interspersed with
flowers of different hues, and many of them quite
equal to those dear Aunt brings from Wands-
worth. The pretty heath, called acacia, and sold
in London in pots, grows here in abundance,
and, I think, must be the same ; but as we were
strangers in this really lovely land, we could
only guess at the names. Here we seldom met
a creature, but now and then a column of smoke,
rising from a hut of the roughest construction,
convinced us we were not in a fairy land.
But no language of mine can describe to you
the beauty of Lapstone Hill, with its overhang-
ing rocks on our left hand, and its awful gullies
on our right. Once in particular, near its
summit, we looked at each other in amazement,
for the sun, which shone brightly, had pene-
trated its deepest recesses, and lit up its water-
falls and foliage in matchless beauty ; but
while we passed slowly along Sol sunk behind
the mountains to make your day, leaving us to
shudder at what we had before admired.
In a short time we reached the huts, and were
persuaded by the men to encamp for the night at
this station. The soldiers were very kind, and


gave the children a good tea in their quarters,
while we lighted a large fire, and prepared their
beds in a tent which my dear husband had made for
the journey, and pitched for the night. Here,
not quite unmindful of the company surrounding
us, it was decided that the pistols should be
loaded, and Joseph and the man act alternately
as sentinels through the night. With the excep-
tion of the horses breaking loose and pushing
violently against our tent (which, though based
on a rock, stood none the more firmly), and a
little alarm by a smell of burning, which proved
to be the drivers’ night-camp, we arose somewhat
refreshed, and once more pursued our route.
Now, again, the roads were heavy, and the
drivers, notwithstanding every effort, were con-
stantly mortified by the horses standing still, and
then again lying quite down. Through this day
poor Eliza walked on with dear baby, and I
brought up the rear, and blocked the wheels at
every stoppage, sometimes left half-a-mile
behind, and then having to run as fast as possible
to perform this new but somewhat irksome duty.
Having made this day about eight miles, we
encamped near a hut at Springwood, and, with


mutual consent, the next morning, parted with
our guide, who, placing the horses abreast, pro-
ceeded with his load, leaving us to wait some
other conveyance.*
Towards evening that day we were joined by
five bullock teams, and as one had behind his
dray a new and empty one, we agreed with
him to take us to Bathurst. Among these
vehicles was the one loaded with our own goods,
which we had passed on our road ; but as they
formed altogether a jolly company, and had been
a week coming from Sydney, they thought well
to “ spell ” (as they termed it) another day ;
but while they were carousing, our stock of pro-
visions were diminishing ; and it was with cheer-
ful hearts that, about 11 the next morning, we
found ourselves on the road, comfortably seated
in our new conveyance, and forming, as the pro-
cession moved slowly along, a formidable array—
for, to every dray, there were about three men to
swear at, beat, and take care of the bullocks,
* The most common way of travelling 40 years since
was on horseback—two, three, or more, going together
for company, the journey occupying three days, the
travellers stopping for the night at Hartley and Pen-
rith, when going to Sydney.


each team consisting of nine, and almost as
many dogs. Now we had no more anxiety,
for our cattle were sure though slow, and if any
difficulty occurred, it was only to hook on some
ten or eight others, and soon all was set right.
Nothing occurred worth relating until w e
encamped the second night, when, having all our
fires lighted, the wind blowing very cold and
high, took some of our sparks across the road,
which soon communicated with the bush. We
were amused by seeing it spread and blaze to a
considerable extent. It is not unf'requently that
in dry seasons the bush takes fire, spreading
destruction for miles, burning down everything
before it. I should say that on these mountains
we felt the cold quite as severely as at any time
I can remember in England, and we daily ex-
pected snow, as it lays sometimes for weeks on
these ridges ; but dear Joseph most cleverly
contrived to shelter us by placing our ship’s
berths at the sides, and covering the top with
the canvas of our tents.
It was late one evening when we began to
descend Mount Victoria. At its top there is a
very sudden and awkward hill, called Soldier’s
Pinch, which owes its name to the folly of a


soldier, who, being called on to block the wheel,
unwittingly placed his foot instead of a stone,
which was, of course, crushed to atoms. At the
bottom of Soldier’s Pinch is another cluster of
huts belonging to the Iron-gang Station. Here
the poor creatures all came out with the hope of
buying tobacco, and to inquire if we were the
people with the many children who had been set
down on the mountains.*
Our road now, for about two miles, was a
gradual descent, the road good, and the scenery
beautiful by the setting sun. And now we
had reached the long-looked-for hill, which, report
says, is like going down the side of a house, it
being three miles long, and as steep as you can
imagine. At the sight of it the most stout-hearted
bullock driver owns that he shudders. In one
part was a stone bridge about 150 yards long,
and about 300 or 100 feet above the level of the
dell, which divides this mountain from another.
In crossing this bridge, one now and then
* The stockades for the prisoners in the iron-gangs
referred to, were very strong buildings made of slabs,
the roofs covered with bark from the stringy-bark tree.
The soldiers’ quarters were of the same construction
but more convenient.


ventured to look over the slight parapet, and
were pointed out the place where a wood-dray
with three horses went over, and also the spot on
which two men had fought, and the one thrown
headlong by the fiend-like fury of his antagonist.
Above the clouds Mount Victoria reared its
craggy height, and looked defiance to all aiound ;
whilst beneath us, on both sides, appeared forests,
and nearly fronting us Mount Haye, from which,
by means of a telegraph, communications have
been made with Sydney.* I should have men-
tioned that at the top of this mountain, while the
drivers locked their wheels, and yoked half their
bullocks behind their loads, we took out the dear
children (Eliza and I carrying one each, and
their father two, while dear Willie ran by their
side.) It was very near the bottom, with
aching arms and weary feet we unanimously con-
fessed it was far more pleasant to sit and read
about mountains than to travel over them. It
* We now have telegraphic communication all over
the colony, the wires carried in the usual way fixed
upon high posts. At the time referred to in the narra-
tive telegraphic communications were from one high
point to another by means of wooden arms elevated to
different angles by ropes or rods.


was almost dark when we camped, and had much
difficulty in lighting our fires, as the wind was
very high, and no water to be found within a
mile.
At noon next day our bullocks were once more
yoked, and we slowly climbed another mountain*
The men, considering the worst of the journey
was over, now began to drink rather freely ; they
had certainly treated us throughout with the
greatest kindness and respect, but their general
language is of a more awful and profane
character than common English swearing. This
part of our journey was beautiful in the extreme,
and romantic beyond description. We greatly
admired a particular kind of parrot; numbers of
them were flying from tree to tree ; they were
very different from the common parrot, the
colours being a bright mixture of red, green, and
blue. Our resting place this night was near to a
public-house by the side of a mountain, which
was almost perpendicular. Through the kind-
ness of our companions, we had here a nice
supper of potatoes to eat with our last piece of
meat, and in the morning some milk for the chil-
dren, which, you must remember, is now a great
treat.


In the middle of the next day the rain,
which had threatened us long, now fell heavily,
and soon dropped fast through our tent, which
had formed a covering. In this miserable plight
we again turned aside for the night. My husband
here covered the tent with blankets, which are
the best preventive against wet, and (pray,
remember, should you be tempted while reading
this to follow us here) we contrived to make our
beds without getting out, dear Joseph waiting on
us, drenched with rain and shivering with cold,
for here it was quite impossible to light fires.
This place is called Solitary Creek, and very
solitary it is in wet weather ! Through this
night we had many fears, for the wind at
times threatened nothing less than to upset us
altogether.
In the morning we started again with a rather
more favourable sky, but the roads in a most
horrible state from the wet ; sometimes our
wheels sank to their axles—and then, oh, the
beating ! the shouting! and the swearing ! !
Here again through mud and mire we walked,
and often, as the bullocks fell down or stuck fast,
we carried the dear children. As there are no
such roads in good old England, you can form no


idea how really bad they are. Notwithstanding
all that has been done to mend them, they
remain, like Bunyan’s “ Slough of Despond,”
very little the better. This day, after many
attempts, we succeeded in obtaining a loaf of
bread, 4 lbs. weight, for which we paid 2s. 6d.
The next day we came to Mount Lambie, and
then our stock of provisions was fairly exhausted ;
for several days we had watched them anxiously,
and eaten them sparingly—hut now they were
really gone, and had it not been that our com-
panions were kind, we must have fasted to
Bathurst ; hut Paddy, a steady convict for life ?
declared “ the women and children should not
want while he had a morsel,” and brought us a
famous supply of potatoes. It seemed rather
strange at first sitting down to this truly Irish
meal, but I assure you we all ate heartily, and
felt more thankful—l may safely add, than
we have often done when rising from an
English breakfast of bread, butter, and tea, with
milk, to say nothing of the many luxuries we
often added, and which we now discovered as
needless.
After a similar breakfast next day, there was
throughout the camp great washing, and shaving,


and borrowing of looking-glasses, as we were
then but fourteen miles from Bathurst, and
hoped to reach it before sundown : all were
cheerful and busy, except my dear husband and
I, for you must not forget that sad inroads had
been made upon our last pound-note. As I
have before said, our money had been converted
into goods (excepting what we had deemed
necessary to defray the expenses of our journey );
these, as you may suppose, were of a heavy
kind, and for every hundredweight we paid 12s.
This is thought a very low price, for m dry
seasons it is as high as 255.
Having met with such delay, and now with
the uncertainties of the way in which we could
get from Bathurst to King’s Plains, and not
knowing how long we might wait there for a
conveyance —camping is not allowed near the
settlement —and public-house charges are exorbi-
tant—and friendless and unknown as we felt
ourselves —we forgot that our Hca\ enly Father,
who had never left or forsaken us in so many
troubles, was able to provide for us here ; and
before we had decided which should he sold—my
dear husband’s watch or mine, or the pistols—we
reached Bathurst Plains, and read the first mile


stone—B miles from Bathurst.* As my dear
husband has given a description of this settle-
ment, I shall hasten to say that, on entering it,
our drivers told us that they occupied a small
cottage close by, and if we would like to turn into
it, they would sleep under the dray in the yard.
This, of course, we joyfully accepted. After
giving our dear children a comfortable tea, and
thinking and saying how much better it would be
in a smoky cottage, with broken windows and
dirty floor, and cracks in the doors you might see
through, than to be camping out, we set off to
make a call upon a Mr. Hughes. The foreman
of the Sydney Foundry, where my dear husband
had been employed, had a daughter living with
this person, and having a message from her
mother, my dear husband thought he would do
well to see Mr. Hughes, who was able to give his
advice, his opinion being generally worth having.
On our way we met the person who at first
brought us from Sydney, and had just returned,
and having heard that a quantity of drays were
. There were other milestones on the mountains
besides that mentioned as being 8 miles from Bathurst.
These escaped the writer’s notice,


coming in, was then seeking us out to advise us
by no means to proceed further, as it was not at
all a suitable place for Mr. Stangor. He had
seen Mr. Cooper, the younger, who, after hear-
ing his description of him and his abilities, said
he thought it would be quite unadvisable. Here
again, as you may imagine, we were in a great
dilemma, and earnestly trusting that Mr. Hughes
might be enabled to guide us right, we reached
his door, and were still more dismayed to find
that he was out for some days. Mrs. Hughes,
however, is a very pious, sensible, and business-
like woman, and after hearing all said, she was
quite certain it would be far better to stay in
Bathurst, as there was just such a person needed,
and advised my husband to go the next morning
and judge of the place for himself, and by no
means to take his family on until he had seen
the man, who, as I before said, had brought
goods, hoping to find a sale for them here. He
had taken a room for a week, and as his sale was
to take place next day, kindly offered us the use
of it, as lie must pay the week’s rent for it. As
the week did not end for four days, there was a
place at once for us to go into, while my husband
made his decisions free of any expense. To save


time, he hired a horse, for which he paid 10/-,
and the next morning started for the bush,
leaving me to move from Paddy’s cottage to the
empty store ; so once more packing our beds in
the dray, and tying dear Willie on the top, Eliza
and I took two childi’en each and walked behind
that nothing might be lost. * As that part of
Bathurst to which we were bound was over the
river, we had a favourable opportunity of viewing
the place, which is beautifully romantic. After
fording the river, we soon reached our destination,
and here stood our goods, which, from all my
husband had heard, he had thought best to
detain. After helping the man to roll in some
of the heavy casks—there being no fire place
we begged hot water from our neighbours, and,
giving the dear children a warm bath, all went to
bed, and truly, dear mother, since I left my
native land, I had never felt more depressed or
forlorn, and my only consolation was’ as it had
( den been before, that you knew not what hard-
ships your children were enduring. Here, dear
The bullock driver’s hut in which we slept, in
of Bathurst, was at Kelso, on the east side of the
Kiver Macquarie, Bathurst being on the other side of
the Eiver,


Eliza did her utmost to comfort me, and trusting
that soon our way would be made clear, at length
fell asleep. Our repose was, however, soon
broken by loud cries of “ murder,” and the
eloquent voice of a coarse Irishwoman defying a
man 3 to open her box. As we were only
separated by a glass door, you may suppose we
were not a little alarmed, for our best earthly
protectoi was far away, and the only one left was
a rough dog, which I had borrowed for the night
and lay growling by my side. We soon found it
was a sad quarrel between a man and his
(should be) wife, who, after remonstrating with
her for disturbing the free emigrants, gave her in
charge, and left us thankful for the riddance.
The neighbours were kind in allowing us the use
of their fires, but what we endured with cold you
can scarcely imagine. The climate in this part
is very much like that of England, and this is the
depth of winter. About noon, my dear husband
returned, and was never more welcomed. Three
days after this, we were moved by our kind
friend Mr. Hughes to the cottage and business
my husband has mentioned, which, although
humble, is peaceful and homelike compared to
anything since we left. This we have made our


Bethel, and with Jacob have vowed that now, “ if
the Lord will bless us and find us food to eat
and raiment to put on, and return us again to our
Father’s house, then he shall be our God, and
the tenth of all we possess shall be His.”
You will not think we eat the bread of idle-
ness when I tell you we have begun bonnet and
dress making, and are called very clever. We are
able to get just double the prices as at home, and
as we are economical, and my husband’s salary
is good, he has, every week, a very pleasant little
errand to the Bank ; and so, dear mother, I hope
we are very thankful, and trust we are just where
we should be, as I do sometimes think that the
prospect before us is rather cheering. We know
“ the gold and the silver is the Lord’s.” “He
also maketh rich, and addeth no sorrow thereto.”
If spared, I will soon write another long letter
about my dear darlings, whom we now look upon
as wealth—for such they really are in this land—
and I only regret that for a long time it will bear
but poor interest. We only wish we could trans-
plant many whom we are sure would do well. I
often wish that dear aunt Giffen and family had
been advised by me and come with us. Shoes are
very expensive, and they never think of mending.


Christopher, too, might do well ; indeed, any one
who cannot get on at home. Want is a thing
never heard of here, and, I assure you, an Eng-
lish family is made much of. I have never yet
heard of any one who has not passed through
many hardships on their first settling here, and
we often feel thankful that we have been brought
safely through this much of the portion assigned
us. I long, dear mother, to see your hand-
writing—l wish you would write every month.
I cannot, at times, suppress a tear, for although
my dear husband has had many letters, I have
received but one from B. and M. Tell Ellen she
might, I am sure, write, for although the receipt
of a letter generally unsettles us for days, still
they are the greatest treat we have. We feel
very much the loss of society, for such as we have
been blessed with is very scarce. We are not so
favoured as at Sydney with our minister, nor do
we hear him with the pleasure or profit we did
Mr. Saunders, but we have found great friends in
Wesleyans, and have every reason to love and
speak well of them ; besides, I hope, in this
land, we have learnt to love all who love our
common Lord, and can readily worship with any,
whatever may be the form, for sectarianism has


not yet ventured to cross the ocean, and foun-
dered be the bark in which she sets sail! I shall
think much of our dear Barbara in September ;
pray tell me of all when you write, and what the
dear babe or babes are named? I am often
anxious to hear about dear George and Miss ,
and hope that you will begin with Barbara, and
end with James, giving every particular.
And now, dear mother, farewell. Remember
at the throne of grace your exiled children ;
cherish the hope of one day seeing us return, and
believe me
Your ever affectionate
SOPHIA.




Exlanatory Notes.
At the period referred to in this narrative, matters
were very different to what they now are with respect
to the roads, the vehicles for carrying goods, and for
travelling.
The horse drays were, at that time, with single
shafts, just like the small brewers’ drays in use in
England.
The bullock drays were larger and stronger than the
horse drays, with single shafts ; the heaviest animals
were chosen for the “ shatters,” which were harnessed
the same as horses to the shafts, and were usually
immense beasts. The team made up, two yoked
together, as many as needed in each team. These
drays are now made with poles, and two bnllocks fixed
to the pole. The old English gig with one horse, or,
for long distances, two horses, tandem fashion. The
mail cart occupied six days coming and going between
Bathurst and Sydney, the driver with a seat for one by
his side; under this the receptacle for the mail
bags. The hinder part was provided with sittings for
two passengers, sociable fashion. Thse carts had two
horses, one in the shafts, the other attached to an out-
rigger. The fare for each passenger was £4 10s.
The roads over the mountains were in a fearful state.
Miles of deep sands, caused by the breaking up of the


soft freestone, over which the drays ploughed their
course, up to the axletree, very little provision having
been made to carry off the water. At other parts, the
rocks were harder, and the water had washed away
the soft portions of the soil and left boulders standing
2 feet or 2 feet 6 inches higher than the road level.
Over these the nine, thirteen, or more bullocks would
pull and flounder, often causing the shaft bullock to
fall down, the weight of the load thrown entirely on
the poor animal. When all the amount of whipping,
shouting, and swearing, would fail to make the bullock
get up, and the numerous dogs which always accom-
panied the teams were set upon the shafter, then with
a tremendous bellow the poor brute would rise again
to his feet ; sometimes before many miles had been
traversed they had to go through' the same process
several times. The time occupied in travelling between
Sydney and Bathurst by these conveyances was usually
four weeks, sometimes longer.
Now, we have a very complete and effective railroad,
extending 150 miles beyond Bathurst, which conveys
passengers and goods to and from the metropolis day
and night, the time occupied in the journey from
Bathurst to Sydney, 144 miles, is eight hours. Cost of
first-class passenger, 31/6 ; second class 21/3.
There were no places in the colony lighted with gas
40 years ago. Now, the city of Sydney, with a radius
of five miles, has this convenience, and many of the
principal towns, including Bathurst, have their gas
■works.


Then, there were no deposits of metals or minerals
known. Since then, at different intervals, extensive
discoveries have been made, of Gold, Coal, Iron, Copper,
Tin, Kerosene Shale, &c., all of which are now being
extensively worked, giving labour to tens of thousands
of persons, and the sending to all parts of the world of
these commodities, employs a large fleet of ships, and
affords employment to thousands more. Then, oil our
wants, of the usual manufactures, had to be obtained
from England and other countries ; now, nearly every
article of necessity is produced in our midst, fresh
manufactories constantly starting into existence.
In the year 1841, the imports and exports were about
£4,000,000, these are now about £25,000,000.
The number of manufactories in 1871 was 6827 ; in
1881 there ware 14,474, employing about 27,022
hands.
Railway communication is rapidly increasing ; about
700 miles are finished, and 582 miles are in progress.
It is only 96 years since the first few Europeans
arrived in Sydney Harbour, then called Port Jackson,
and which now bids fair to become one of, if not the
most prosperous and important of all the British
possessions.
■FINIS




