

A JOURNEY ALONG THE COASTS OF NEW IRELAND
AND NEIGHBOURING ISLANDS.
By the Rev. Gr. Brown.
From ' Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society and Monthly
Record of Geography April No., 1881,




1 A JOURNEY ALONG THE COASTS OF NEW IRELAND
AND NEIGHBOURING ISLANDS.
By the Eev. G. Brown.
New Ireland, situated between lat. 2° 25' and 4° 52' S., and long. 153° 12'
and 150° 30' E., has not been much visited by white men. Whalers often
obtained a few supplies whilst coasting along, but not much was known
of the places or the people, with the single exception of a small district at
the south-east "end in which are the harbours of Port Carteret, Port
Sulphur, and Port Praslin, and where the French colony of the Marquis
de Bays is at present formed.
In a former paper * I gave an account of the first journey across the
island, at a point near Cape Eossel, N.N.E. of Port Hunter. At this
place an elevation of nearly 3000 feet was obtained. From this place,
going in a north-westerly direction, the range gradually decreases
in height for about 25 miles, to a place called Kuramut, about 15
miles south-east from Cape Givry, when it again rises very abruptly,
and trends away more to the westward. At this place, Kuramut,
there seems, from seaward, to be a decided break in the land, as if
the island had been at one time divided by a channel, and it was
long thought that it was very much narrower there than is repre-
sented on the present charts. We often asked the natives about this,
and they, no doubt thinking that we wished the island to be narrow
there, made it narrower and narrower every time we asked about it;
until finally, when I asked them if I could drag my boat across, they
assured me that, with the exception of one rather difficult place, I could
do so with very little trouble. I did not believe this, but still thought
that it was comparatively narrow there, though I knew also that few,
* ‘Journal R. Gf. S.,’ vol. xlvii. p. 137. —For general map, consult ‘Proceedings,’
new series, vol. iii. p. 128.


if any, of my informants had ever seen the place, as they were all from
adjoining districts, and as a rule natives in these parts do not go much
into other districts, as the fashion here is not simply to “ heave ’arf a
hrick ” at a stranger, hut to kill and eat every one they catch.
On the 22nd of June, 1880, I called olf Kuramut in our steam-launch,
and arranged with the chiefs there to go as guides early the next morning.
We then ran down the coast to pick up an anchorage, which we did
outside a small island about five miles from Kuramut. Here we
collected a few specimens of the coast formation to forward to Sydney
for examination. This particular place in the Western Pacific is, I
believe, the only place in the South Seas where any true chalk is found,
it being first discovered by Professor Liversidge, of the Sydney Uni-
versity, in some chalk images from New Ireland, which I took to
Sydney in 1876. A slight examination of the coast here showed it to
consist principally of the ordinary coral limestone, with layers on the
surface, in different places, of what appears to he impure chalk. The
place from which the material used in making the images is obtained, is,
however, much further inland, a little to the north-west of Kalil, near
Cape Eossel, and is at a much higher elevation than this part; hut
I have not yet visited the place.
The next morning we started for Kuramut, hut on our arrival found
no natives there to go with us. After waiting some time we got one who
consented to guide us, [and soon afterwards we met several others who
also went with us. Our party consisted of Mrs. Brown, our little hoy,
myself, and a few teachers and natives of Duke of York Island. We
soon found out that we had greatly under-estimated the distance, and
our hopes of finding a narrow isthmus by which we could have easy
access to the other side of the island were quite destroyed. The path led
us over comparatively low land, winding round the base of a spur of the
low range of hills seen from the coast. We walked for two or three hours,
expecting every minute to see the coco-nut trees and hear the sound of
the surf on the other side, when we halted by the side of a rivulet, deep
down in a ravine, similar to several others we had already passed, and
our guide then told 'us that we were nearly half-way across. We did
not feel very comfortable, as we were only a small party, and we knew
nothing of the character of the people whom we were going to visit.
Soon after we passed through some clearings, and then the road began
to descend, and we soon saw the red, clayish soil, and the open plains
covered with tall, coarse grass, which characterise the east and north-
east side of the island. Here, as in nearly all the islands I have visited,
the east or north-east side is lower and more open than on the west
and south-west side. On the former the soil is a reddish stiff clay,
covered with coarse grass, with a comparatively small quantity of
dense bush. Except on the mountain range on the west and south-
west side, the soil is nearly all rich decomposed vegetable matter,


and there is scarcely any open country except where the natives have
had plantations. The mountain range descends abruptly to the beach
on this latter side, but slopes gradually down to the sea nearly the
whole breadth of the island on the east and north-east side. On the
west and south sides the shores are steep-to, and there are no outlying
reefs, whilst on a great part of the coast there are neither shore- nor
fringing-reefs. On the east side the fringing-reefs certainly are much
larger, and extend farther from the shore; and, judging from analogy,
I should expect some shoal patches along that coast. I noticed this
difference between the two sides of the island also in the Solomon Group.
It is especially marked on St. Christoval and Guadalcanar. We passed
through several small villages, and as the people had never before seen a
white man, our appearance caused no little sensation amongst them. They
were especially interested in Mrs. Brown and our little boy. We reached
the beach at about 3.30 p.m. I estimate the distance at about 15 miles,
though we must, from the crooked character of the paths, have travelled
a much longer distance. Unfortunately I had no compass with me, but
we struck the coast at a village called 80, almost directly opposite the
southern extreme of Gerrit Denys Island, which we could see quite
plainly. There was a large bay, the bight of which was composed of a
large shore reef, dry at low water, and extending about a mile out from
the head of the bay. No such formation would ever be found on the
west or south-west coast.
We occupied two small native houses, as it was too late to return
that day. The natives came about us in great numbers, all armed, but
apparently friendly. Our Duke of York lads, however, were very sus-
picious, and so also were the New Ireland men who came with us from
the west coast. One of them overheard a remark which convinced him
that they were going to attack us. He soon told this to the others, and
this of course confirmed their own suspicions, and they were soon in a
state of great excitement. I went out and quieted them, and having
fortunately a good interpreter, I soon explained matters to the natives,
who were getting suspicious of us. They denied all hostile intentions,
and we were soon good friends again. After supper they asked us to
fire some guns, as they did not seem to know what they were. After
our boys had fired a ball through a bread-fruit tree and fired off rapidly
the charges in a revolver, I think they were quite convinced of the
folly if not of the impropriety of venturing to attack us now that we
were on our guard. Next morning we started, in heavy rain, on our
return. We took another route which led us over the top of the
range, which rises abruptly here and trends away to the north-west.
From this range we had a fine view of Gerrit Denys and the coast-line.
We reached Kuramut again at 1 p.m.
We have now settled the following points That there is no
narrow isthmus here, but that there is a tract of comparatively


level land with a road across, which could very easily he improved
so as to give easy access to the other side of the island; that the island
is about 12 or 15 miles in width here; that it is well populated on both
sides and in the interior also; that the land on the east and north-
east sides is much more open and level than it is on the opposite; that
the range is much further inland, and that the shore- and fringing-
reefs are much larger than they are on the west and south-west
sides.
Excursion to Sandwich Island, Portland Islands, and'
New Hanover.
Captain T. de Hoghton, H.M.S. Beagle, having kindly invited me to
accompany him on a short cruise, we left Port Ferguson, Duke of York
Group, in that vessel on Saturday, October 25th (1880), and made the
land a little to the northward of Cape Rossel, New Ireland, the same
day, and there lay-to for the night. Next day (Sunday) we anchored
at Kuras, a few miles further south. On one of my previous visits to
this place we had the most positive proof of the cannibalism of these
people, as some women were actually roasting the thigh and leg of a
man in a hut not ten yards away from where I was sitting. I did not
know it until we left the village, as my lad was too frightened to tell
me; in fact, he was afraid lest I should interfere with the operation, and
so get us both into trouble. On a subsequent visit, however, the natives
readily admitted the fact, and I bought the man’s skull for a few beads,
and brought it away with me. Had I known it at the time, I should
not have felt very comfortable, as I was then the only white man who
had ever landed amongst them, and I had only a native lad and a New
Ireland man from another district with me.
Captain de Hoghton did not like the anchorage, and so we weighed
anchor again, and with a light fair wind we stood along the coast to
Cape Givry. For some distance on both sides of this cape the island is
evidently densely populated, and most of the villages are on the beach.
The coast here is extremely beautiful, the dark red of the many planta-
tions on the hill-sides contrasting with the light green of the under-
growth of those recently abandoned, and with the darker green of the
dense forest which covers all the New Ireland ranges, whilst the lights
and shadows on the hills and ravines which intersect them in every
direction combine to increase the beauty of the view.
A little to the south of Cape Givry, near a large village or district
called Masalam, we saw a few coral patches a quarter to half a mile
from the beach, on which anchorage might perhaps be found for small
vessels in fine weather; but it may be safely stated that there is no good
harbour or any secure anchorage for vessels on the west or south-west
side of New Ireland from Port Carteret to Catherine Haven.


Immediately on the north-west side of Cape Givry there is a large
village, situate in a fine grove of coco-nut trees. We stood quite close to
the beach, hoping to find anchorage, hut we found that the small shore-
reef was quite steep-to, with deep blue water to its very edge.
Ten miles further north-west there is another large village, with a
good quantity of coco-nut palms. We coasted along quite close to the
shore, and were visited by great numbers of natives, who came off to us
in small canoes. We often had from forty to fifty canoes alongside.
The people seemed most friendly, and were all very anxious to trade.
Iron hoop was the article most prized.
Next day (Monday, 27th) we tried again for anchorage, but could not
get one. I landed with the captain near Seelhorst Point, and we found the
people quite friendly. The women all wear the little flax fringe which
serves as an apology for dress. Small as it is, however, it is a little im-
provement upon the custom in Duke of York and New Britain, where the
women as well as the men are all quite naked. Some of the men in this
village also wore a few green leaves. They all distend the lobes of the
ears with wood or bark, as in the Solomon Group. I noticed particu-
larly here the custom of expressing admiration and astonishment by
placing the forefinger between the teeth across the mouth, and making
a hissing noise. Another mode is to slap violently the thigh, slightly
lifting the leg at the same time.
On Tuesday we coasted slowly down until within a few miles of
Attack Island. The natives in this part brought off great numbers of
most grotesque-looking wooden masks, and also some rather elaborate
wood-carvings, some of them being representations of the hornbill
(Buceros ruficollis), and others representing iguanas eating snakes, &c.
These they readily sold for iron hoop. The masks, I believe, are used in
their native dances; the carvings, lam inclined to believe, are put up in
houses where certain young girls are kept confined for some months or
years at the commencement of puberty. I gave an account of this custom
in a former paper on our first expedition across the island. There were
no carvings in the houses we then saw, but I believe they form part
of the furniture of those used for similar purposes at this end of the
island. Two natives came off from near Attack Island on a very good
catamaran, made of some soft light wood. I noticed here that all the
men practised circumcision. This, though common enough in Eastern
Polynesia, is the first instance I have seen amongst these islanders, and
here only in this particular district.
Sandwich Island. —The south side of this island, which is about 12 miles
in length, trending about W.S.W., has not been previously described.
About two miles to the south-west of the east point, we landed in a small
bay, called by Captain De Hoghton Deep Bay, having several small
islands on its east side, The women here were very earnest in beckoning
us on shore, and quite as earnest in running away from us as soon as we


neared the beach. The bay was full of coral patches, and we could not
find any safe anchorage for the ship. The natives were of the same
appearance as those on the mainland of New Ireland, and were all
armed with the same kind of spear, made of a length of betel-nut wood
inserted into another length of bamboo, which is generally ornamented
with figures burnt on it. They also used the same sword club, with
sharp cutting edges, as is used by the natives on the mainland.
We went some distance inland, but could not find any village. A
good, broad, well-beaten track seemed to lead to the opposite coast, and I
think that the villages are principally on that side of the island, and
that the people only visit the south side for the purpose of fishing.
Here we noticed particularly that patting the top of the head with
the hand is the particular way of expressing friendship. This sign is
also used on the north-west end of New Ireland, but not southward of
Cape Givry, so far as I know. It is another instance of the peculiarly
important, and in some degree sacred, character attached to the head by
all natives in these seas. In Samoa a native will never use the ordinary
word when speaking of the head of another person, except he does it in
abuse, and in war they always made a great distinction between the
number killed and those whose heads were got. They first counted the
number of those killed and beheaded (audio), and then those simply
killed, but whose heads were not obtained. It was a great alleviation
of their sorrow if the relatives of any one who was killed knew that his
body was recovered entire, and in most instances when this was not
done, some of his friends would beg the head from the conquering
party, and when they got this they cared but little what was done with
the rest of the body. In that group also the most respectful way of
acknowledging any valued present is for the recipient of it to place it
for a moment on the top of his head. The heaviest curse a Maori could
speak was to tell his adversary to go and cook the head of his grand-
father, or some other relative.
“ Cannibal Jack,” a well-known character, once told me that in the
early days when he was in New Caledonia, or one of the adjacent
islands, a white man who had been adopted by the chief was killed by
the people because he had once playfully patted the old chiefs head.
The chief did all in his power to save him, but in vain, and Jack
assured me that ever afterwards he was very careful not to play any
practical jokes of that kind amongst savages. On New Ireland and
Duke of York Island, the skulls and lower jawbones are kept as
trophies, and the skulls of their own chiefs and principal men are
carefully preserved and hung up in the houses of their relatives for
years. In the Solomon Group, after the bodies of the dead have been
for some time exposed in the mangrove bushes, the heads are all care-
fully collected and placed together in a rude stone cairn or small hut,
generally on some small island off the mainland. At this place, how-


ever (Sandwich Island), they do not attach much value to some, as a
native brought out a skull for sale, which I bought for a string of beads.
This is the first instance I have ever known of their voluntarily bringing
out such an article.
The south-west point of the island has been named Beagle Point. A
large fringe-reef which commences some distance eastward of it takes a
wide sweep off this point, extending in some places two or three miles off
the coast, and having a number of large reef-stones on it. There is then
a large break in the reef, forming a wide, deep channel, but full of shallow
patches extending into an island which was named by Captain de
Hoghton Eedlands Island. This is separated from Sandwich by a channel
about three-quarters of a mile broad. The west side of the channel pre-
viously mentioned consists of a fringe-reef and a number of coral
patches extending south of Eedlands Island for some three miles, and then
uniting in a large barrier-reef, which sweeps away to the north-west,
north, and north-east, having another large break in it on its north-west
side, with a channel almost extending into a small coral islet called by us
Archway Island. The termination of the reef on its north side was not
seen, but it seemed to be closing the shore very fast when lost sight of
behind the land. This dangerous reef has not been previously reported
nor marked on the charts. We coasted round Eedlands Island, and landed
for a few hours at the site of a deserted village. There was a grove Of
coco-nut trees here on which there seemed to be a native tabu. Ex-
treme thirst compelled us to disregard this, and our lad was sent up to
throw down a few drinking nuts. Before we left, however, we hung
up some beads and other little things far above the value of the nuts.
I have always found it the safest and best plan to observe and respect, as
far as possible, the customs and laws of the natives. We shall probably
never visit the place again, but our having observed and respected their
own custom by paying for a violation of the tabu may make it easier for
any who follow us. By native custom, any party can take coco-nuts to
eat and drink without payment, except when the grove is tabued as in
this instance.
Portland Islands are in lat. 2° 32' S. and long. 149° 45' E. We made
this group on October Ist. The ‘ South Pacific Directory ’ states that
they are six or seven in number. We could only make out three principal
islands and one small one. There may, however, be one or two more islets,
but the group really contains only three islands at all worthy of the name.
The same work states that they are encircled by a reef. We found only a
very small shore reef a few yards distant from the beach, on the east side
of the north-east island, where we landed without difficulty close to the
north-east end. Any vessel could go to within fifty yards of the shore
on that side. After passing the north-east point, we found that the
fringe-reef extended further away from the beach, but not to any great
distance. Off the south-west end, however, of the south-west island, we


saw the reef extending for about two miles from the shore, and appar-
ently forming a barrier round that end and the west side of the group.
The group is very thinly populated; in fact, as far as we could make out,
only the north-east island is inhabited, and there appears to be not more
than 100 or 150 inhabitants on it. The natives are a nice, quiet people,
so far as we could judge; in fact, during our short stay we never saw a
spear, club, or any weapon whatever. Their houses were very good, and
the little villages were all exceedingly clean. We walked over a good
part of the island, shooting pigeons, and saw some very good plantations
of taro. The people also seem to be planting coco-nuts, as we found one
part almost covered with young trees which had been planted out. We
saw no women after we landed, as they had all fastened themselves up
in a large house. The people are of the same race as the New Ireland
natives. A mask which was brought for sale was exactly similar to
those purchased in New Ireland.
New Hanover. —We only anchored in one part of this island, at North
Haven. This place was, I believe, first visited by H.M.S. Blanche , and
subsequently by the German ship of war Gazelle, the officers of which made
an excellent chart of the harbour. We anchored there on October 2nd, and
were soon surrounded by canoes. A curious custom was at once noticeable.
The men here blacken only one half of the teeth on both upper and
lower jaw, leaving all the teeth on the opposite side of the mouth per-
fectly white. This is done by only chewing the betel-nut and lime on
one side, and keeping the other side white with pumice-stone and earth.
They appear to be of the same race as the New Ireland natives, but I
noticed that their hair was slightly different in many cases. Many of
the men had short, crispy, brownish-black hair, often half coloured with
red paint or with lime. With the exception of a few coco-nuts and
taro, they seemed to have very little to sell. We only saw two small
villages here, the one reported by the Gazelle on West Island having
been since abandoned. The houses here are all built with spear-proof
walls, made by building up as high as the eaves with lengths of firewood
about 18 inches in length. The canoes have only a very narrow open-
ing, unlike the New Ireland ones, which are open the whole width of
the log, and often have a plank built up on the body of the canoe. The
reef which runs north from North Harbour, trends away to north-east a
few miles from that port, where it seems to assume more of a barrier
formation, having a number of small islands on it, between two of which,
as seen from the masthead, there appeared to be good anchorage, which
could not, however, be examined for want of time.
LONDON. - FEINTED BY WM. CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, STAMPOED STREET
AND CHARING CROSS.




