





peX k Sf/ gg/
NO. 8329.
A JOURNEY WITH LEICHARDT.
No I.
The reported discovery, •whether true or
folse, of the relics of Leichardt by Mr. J . B.
Bkuthorpe in north-western Queensland, has
revived the interest in the fate of one of the
greatest and most unfortunate Australian ex-
plorers. Under these circumstances anything
throwing light cfn the character cf the man
o o
and the work he performed is worthy of
attention, and we make no apology in present-
ing to our readers an account never before
c?
published of one of the earlier journeys of the
distinguished traveller. We may state in ex-
planation that our information is drawn from
a lecture delivered by Mr. Henry M. Turnbull,
at Launceston, in the year 1856. Mr.
Turnbull accompanied Leichardt on the jour-
ney in question, and we shall allow him to tell
the story in his own words.
Mr. Turnbull delivered the lecture on behalf
of the widows and orphans of those who fell in
the Indian mutiny. In giving his narrative of
his journey with Leichardt into the interior
of New Holland, he refers to the disadvantages
under which he labored in losing his journal
and the whole of his papers relating to the ex-
pedition in the disastrous flood in the Murrum-
bidgee in 1852, and states that he has nothing
to trust to but his memory. He thus de-
scribes his first meeting with Leichardt :
One evening, in the month of August, 1846,
I was encamped with my party of three men
and one blaekfellow on the banks of the Upper
Barnard river, a tributary of the Manning.
I was travelling at the time with a large herd
of horses to a station some 150 miles off. We
had just rounded our horses for the night, the
quart pots were smoking with hot tea, and we
were preparing to make a most determined on-
slaught upon a huge damper and some salt
beef (a thirty miles ride without breaking our
fasts having considerably freshened onr ap-
petites) when my black boy called out
“ White fellow coming !” As this was a very
out-of-the-way sort of place for a traveller,
there being no road but a mere “ marked tree
line” for nearly 200 miles, I felt curious to
know who the stranger could be. Certainly
his appearance was not a little striking as he
advanced towards me, leading a wretched-
looking and apparently broken-down old pony,
staggering, as it seemed, under a load of what
appeared to me roots of trees and tufts of grass.
The traveller himself, a tall handsome man,
with a jet black moustache and immense
beards was clad in what I no doubt had
once been a coat, and pair of thick woollen
trousers, but both bad been so patched and
darned and darned and patched that scarcely
a glimpse of the original fabric could be dis-
cerned. This*, added to an old cabbage-tree
bat with one-half of the brim torn away, and
a pair of thick boots with the front off one,
through which a stockingless foot seemed
struggling to get a little more daylight, about
“ made up” the attire of the most, extra-
ordinary-looking biped I had ever seen. Ad-
vancing towards me, he, with a most graceful
bow, said he was a naturalist on his way to
Sydney, about 250 miles distant, and wanted
permission to turn his horse with ours and
camp near us for the night. The moment he
Bpoke all thoughts of his being a bushranger
dr runaway were dissipated. There was a some-
thing—an indescribable something—in his man-
ner which told me that no ordinary man stood
before me. I at once offered a share of my
tent and the whole of a spare blanket, for
which he expressed himself very thankful, and
then, while my boy was unsaddling and hob-
bling out his horse, he told me his name was
Leichardt, and that he had travelled all the
way through the bush from Moreton Bay—
walking the whole distance (nearly 500 miles),
climbing mountains, fording rivers, cutting his
way through frightful scrubs, and camping
out night after night entirely by r himself.
This accounted for the raggedness of
his attire and the extraordinary load
bis horse was carrying, which consisted
of specimens he had collected by the way,
My friend, as I shall now, and have often
since been proud to call him, having partaken
of a pot of hot tea, made in the most approved
style, and paid bis respects to the beef and
damper before mentioned, commenced telling
me a few of his adventures en route, , and I
enjoyed a most interestingand instructive con-
versation with him, which lasted till nearly
daylight. He opened up all his specimens,
of which he had a great number, in botany,
geology, mineralogy and entomology, besides
half-a-dozen other ologies I do not remember.
These he displayed before my wondering eyes,
telling me at the same time where they had
been collected, and all he had seen on his long
and tiresome journey, ever and anon intro-
ducing some apposite remarks or interesting
anecdote, and so completely fascinating %ie,
as it were, that I look back to the hours I
spent with him on the rugged banks of the
Barnard River as amongst the most delightful
of my whole life —•
As a bright spot in memory’s waste
On which imagination loves to dwell.
There was something about this man (and I
have heard many others remark the same)
that completely wen you over- completely
subdued you, I have seen several of what were
called portraits of him, bat what likenesses !
It would require no ordinary painter to put
that man’s face upon canvas, I assure you —
such a magnitude of intelligence in that lofty,
noble, thoughtful brow—such an earnestness
and sincerity of soul in that clear-speaking eye
(that observant seeing eye) looking far beyond
the mere ordinary range of vision into the very
pecrets of things—a straightforward, unquiet-
ing, eagle-like expression of countenance —with
at" the same time a dove-like gentleness; some-
thing, too, happily expressive about the mouth
seemingly formed to give utterance only to pure
and noble thoughts. Then, again, that gentle,
clear, calm, distinct voice—soft and gentle as
a woman’s, yet with a manly depth of earnest-
ness in it, winning trust and admiration.
.There was (I speak of him as of the past, for,
alas ! there are faint hopes of our ever seeing
him again) an intensity of character, an indi-
viduality, which proved him to be a great,
high-minded, sincere man, one who labored
long and devoutly in the cause of science and
for the benefit of his fellow-men.
The next morning, before parting, I took
the opportunity of giving my friend'a letter to
my brother, who was living some 80 miles
off, and I had the pleasure of hearing, when I
returned some months after, that Leichardt
bad as completely charmed rny brother as he.
had charmed me, and my brother had prevailed
upon him Vo remain several days at his house,
when he delighted all who met him with his
mild, gentlemanly deportment and amiable
manner.
Several months passed away and I heard of
Leichardt’s intended expedition into the inte-
rior. You have all doubtless heard, ladies and
gentlemen, of the result of that expedition—
how with his small party of seven persons,
after unheard of perils and privations, of hair-
breadth escapes by flood and field ; and after
enduring an amount of suffering and fatigue,
Biot often falling to the lot of man, the heroic
Stranger succeeded in reaching Port Essington,
on the north-west coast of New Holland,
where there was a small settlement and a de-
tachment of troops under the command of
Colonel M‘Arthur, with the loss of
one of his party, the unfortunate and
much lamented Mr. Gilbert, the talented
naturalist to the expedition, who was killed in
sin encounter with the aborigines, when close
to Port Essington. You have also, iio doubt,
heard with what acclamation and kind greet-
ing Leishardt was received in Sydney on his
return, and how, in a few weeks afterwards,
he made up another expedition for the purpose
of forcing his way through the heart of the
vast continent of New Holland, a distance of
some 3000 miles of perfectly unknown country.
I soon learned he was coming to the part of
the country where I was residing, for the pur-
fose of selecting mules for the expedition, and
secretly determined that if he would accept
my services I would accompany him ; and
$ few days later I had the pleasure of once
mere shaking by the hand the man who
had charmed me so much two years be-
fore on the banks of the Barnard River, and
also hearing him express himself de-
Sphted at my wish to accompany him. I was
a gay young bachelor in charge of an
Bltonsive horse station, belonging to the Aus-
tralian Agricultural Company, where I had
been for nine years. Having made his selec-
tion of mulesf Leichardt once more started ;
(but not before I had told him that he might
expect me to join him as soon as I had made
Brr Vig e raent3 to leave, but this I found no
easy matter. My friends would not hear of
• ;t and argftei with me strongly on the folly of
leaving a comfortable home and running the
chance of leaving my bones to whiten in the
wilderness; but the more they advised the
more resolved I was to go, so one fine night,
“ about four o’clock in the morning,” 1 made
what is called in Scotland “ a moonlicht fiit
on ’t”—that is, I ran away. Leichardt, at
the time I started, was about three weeks
ahead of me, and some 200 miles off, but miles
were nothing to me then. I had three sp’en-
did homes—one my own and two given to me
by kind friends who approved of my going
and secretly assisted , me, and after
riding 500 miles, riding one horse and
leading two, through the bush the whole way—
(that part of the country was very different
eleven years ago to what it is now, you must
bear in mind—the last 150 miles without a
track, and nothing but a compass to guide me,
I had the satisfaction of overtaking Leich-
ardt about 40 miles beyond the last station.
It was near sundown when I rode up, and
JLeichardt no sooner caught sight of me than
he ran to meet me, crying out, “ Oh, my friend,
rny friend, have you indeed come,” and, half
carrying me towards his tent, introduced me
to the other members of his party as his good
young friend, who had ridden 500 miles to join
him. After two days’ rest, we made what we
intended as a final start, and I may as well
now mention that our party consisted of nine
persons (sevenwhite nq*nand two native blacks).
The livestock consisted of 15 horses, 16 mules,
50 fine bullocks, 110 sheep, 270 goats and 5
dogs. Thus you see we had five different kinds
of animals, requiring different treatment and
manner of driving, and all requiring a more
than ordinary share of attention. Our
cavalcade, on setting out, was a striking one,
the whole of the party being clothed in bright
scarlet shirts. [First rode up Leichardt,
mounted on a strong mare, and very conspicu-
ous, from wearing a conical-shaped Malay
hat. Then followed the mules, in Indian file,
loaded with the supplies ; then the spare
horses, six in number, followed by the bullocks;
and behind them came the sheep and goats.
Our first day’s journey was a chapter of acci-
dents ; first, the mules began kicking off their
loads, then two of the party who had not had
much practice in horsemanship managed to
tumble off, and v/e had hard work to catch their
horses. One of the dismounted, who was a
sailor, on being reproached for falling off, ex -
claimed, “ Why, I did all I could to stick on :
1 let go the braces, and manned fore and aft.”
He learned to stick on without “ letting go,”
before we returned, I can assure you. At the I
last station »we called at there was a hutkeeper
(I forget his name) who showed Leichardt and
myself much kindness. He was very fond of
reading, and on leaving I told him
I was writing to Sydney, and, as a
small return for his kindness, would send for I
any book lie would like. He replied that if I I
could send him Tom Paine’s work, he would I
be very much obliged. I told him I would I
not advise him to read such a hook as that, I
but would send him one quite as good. He E
then said he was a bit of a poet, and had I
written some verses in honor of our departure. I
I forget the whole of them, but, as near as I I
can remember, the first-few lines, as lie re- I
peated them standing in the doorway of his I
hut, were as follows : I
I arewell, kind sir, may your footsteps prosper,
r And guide you to the land of wealth ;
May He who watches us be thy protector.
And grant you all the aid of‘health.
Poor fellow ! I never saw Kim again ; but I
under a very rough exterior there beat a kind I
heart. We bid him and his wife (a warm-1
hearted Irishwoman) “Goodbye,” and as we I
turned our horses’heads around to start away, I
she ran after us, and with a rich brogue cried!
out, “ Good bye, doctor dear ; God bless ye, I
and good luck to ye every time ye see a paving!
stone. ’ The sequel will show that the kind* I
hearted old woman’s good wishes availed ua I
not, for we never had the luck to sight a single I
“ paving-stone.” On my return to Sydney I
twelve months after I did not forget this I
aspirant for poetic fame, and sent him a well- I
bound copy of Raley’s Moral Philosophy, I
which I thought would tend more to improve I
the poor fellow’s mind than the Age of I
Reason. And now that we were fairly I
launched into the bush, the doctor \we always I
called him doctor—die had a surgeon’s diploma I
from a Prussian University) divided our I
party into watches, two in each, the ninth 9
man .being left out to cook. We were I
obliged to keep a horse saddled all night long, |
as the bullocks, having b£en collected from |
several herds, were very wild, and for many j|
weeks gave us great trouble, we frequently, and I
in fact always in wet weather, having to ride I
round them all night. The doctor also now I
gave out to us our scale of rations, which was I
as follows : —3| oz. flour each man per day, I
with meat ad libitum ; 2 pints of tea each per I
day ; and 1 lb. of sugar each man per week ; II
and the way he managed was this : In the fl
morning, about half-past five in summer, each I
person had served out to him a pint pot full I
of hot soup and meat together, which had been I
preparing all night, carefully attended to by ]
the different watches. On camping in the I
afternoon, which we usually did between three I
and lour o’clock, our ration of flour, amount- I
ing in all to 9 oz., was carefully weighed |
out by the storekeeper, and made into what !
is known to bUshmen as a “Johnny cake,”
fried in the pan and then cut into nine equal
parts; but, to ensure a satisfactory division,
one of the party was made to stand with his
back to the carver, who, touching a piece,
would say, “ Whose is this ?” And he would
be answered, “Mr. A.,” or “Mr. 8.,” as he
thought proper ; and so on until all were
served. In the evening we had a pint of hot
tea, and generally s6ine meat, either fried or
boiled. We lost some of our mules at this
place, which the doctor had called “ Charley
Creek,” and were compelled to remain several
days, during which time a large tribe of blacks
came down to us. We were then about sixty
miles from any station, and these were a
regular wild-looking lot of fellows, from 100
to 120 in number. Not a word of English
could they utter, and the only mark of civili-
sation to be observed amongst them was a
dirty black pipe, the stem of which was massed
through the nose of one of the ladies, and which'
did not at all add to her personal charms.
It was a glorious summer’s evening when we
prepared to leave “ Charley’s Creek,” which
we considered as our last starting point. We
were in great spirits, and burning with high
hopes of being able to succeed in our perilous
undertaking. We were in the act of packing
up and saddling when down came some sixty
or seventy blackfellows, who walked into the
midst of our camp, and commenced turning I
over our traps in a way which showed pretty I
clearly that they would like to make a few I
selections. The word was passed by our I
leader to stand to our arms, but on no arccount I
to meddle with the natives so long as they I
were peaceable, as he was anxious, as he often I
afterwards told us, that this expedition should I
be a bloodless one. There was an immense I
hawk perched on a tree just over the camp. I
I called out to one of our blackfellows, and I
told him to let the “ Myall” see how he coaid I
shoot. “ Myall” is an expression used hy the I
natives of Wales on the Sydney I
side, and means literally “ wild.” “ Wommie” fl
(the blaekfellow) grinned as only a blaekfellow H
can grin, and, lifting his gun to his I
shoulder, down charged the body of the I
hawk right into the centre of a group of a I
dozen natives, who were collected round a I
heap of pack saddles, iron pots, &c., &c,, and I
seemingly calculating in their own minds the fl
best way of carrying off the whole lot. But fl
the effect of the dead bird was tremendous, fl
With a most fearful yell they all rushed beyond I
the precincts of the camp and commenced talk- I
ing and screaming as if the inmates of half a I
dozen Bedlams had got leave for the day and I
were making the most of it. I got a repri- I
mand from the doctor for my frolic, but it had I
the effect desired of keeping our sable friends I
from helping themselves. We had not done
with them yet, however, for, as we were
mounting our horses, one of the most hideous
looking ruffians the imagination of any man
could conceive marched up to within a few
feet of where Leichardt and myself were ■
standing, and putting out his tdngue till it j
nearly touched his breast, scowled upon us
with all the ferozity of a pent-up tiger—only
he certainly was not nearly so good-looking ;
and then, leaping some five feet into the air,
and twirling a boomerang in his hand, let out
such a volley of abuse that, had it been good,
sober English, would have puzzled a forty-horse
power short-hand writer to have taken down.
I never saw such a mixture of intense ugliness,
combined with intense passion, before or since.
After abusing us for several minutes, two old
men came up and with difficulty dragged him
away. On our return, seven or eight months
after, I learned that this notable fire-eater
had been killed in an encounter with the
whites; he was shot through the head just
after he had sent a spear through the leg of a
friend of mine. He was known to have
assisted at the murder of some fourteen white
men in about eight months.


4(52. From Melbourne to Sahcmdge, by way of Em-
erald-lfl, three times a day ; and from Sandridge to
Melbourne, by way of Emerald-hill, four times a day.
HENRY BOLTON,
Postmaster-General.
Post Office and Telegraph Department,
Melbourne, 29th September, 1881.
will be received until 12 o'clock on
1 Thursday, 27th October, for RENEWING
POLES and GENERAL REPAIRS'on the line of tele-
graph between Footscray and Echuca via Castlernaine
and Sandhurst.
Models and Specifications may be seen at the Stores
Branch. General Post Office ; and specifications at the
post offices at Footscray, Gisborne, Macedon, Wood-
end, Kv lie ton, Castlernaine, Sandhurst, Goornong and
Ecb.ca.
Tenders to-be endorsed “ Tender for Re-poling, &c.,
Echuca Telegraph Line,” and addressed (if by post,
prepaid) to the Honorable the Postmaster-General,
Melbourne, or deposited in the tender-box at the
General Post Office, Melbourne.
The amount of the preliminary deposit to be en-
closed with the tender is £45.
The lowest or any tender will not necessarily be ac-
cepted.
HENRY BOLTON,
Postmaster-General.
Post Office and Telegraph Department,
Melbourne, 29th September, 1881.
TENDERS will be received until 12 o’clock on
Thursday, 27th October, for the SUPPLY of 500
POLES of Western Port bluegum.
Specifications may be seen a't the Stores Branch,
General Post Office, and' at the post offices at Hast-
ings, Balnarring, Griffith’s Point, Dromana, Morning-
ton and Frankston. .
Tenders to be endorsed “ Tender for Western Port
Bluegum Poles,” and addressed (if by post, prepaid)
to the hohorable the Postmaster-General, Melbourne,
or deposited in the tender-box at the General Post
Office, Melbourne.
The amount of the preliminary deposit to be en-
closed with the tender is £2O,
The lowest or any tender will not necessarily be
accepted.
HENRY BOLTON,
Postmaster-General.
%
SALE OF HAY STORES.
TENDERS will be received at the Pay Office,
Treasury, Melbourne, until 10 a.m. on Monday,
31st inst., from persons willing to PURCHASE two
Stacks of HAY at the Industrial Schools, Royal Park.
Terms —20 per cent, cash, with tender and balance
before commencing to remove the hay.
Fail particulars at the Tender Board office.
BRYAN O’LOGHLEN,
Treasurer,
Treasury.
Melbourne, 21st October, 18S1.
ICTORIAN RAILWAYS.
Separate tenders arc invited for the undermentioned
works, &c.
Tenders, accompanied by the necessary preliminary
deposit, and endorsed “ Tender for ——- ” (as the case
may be), must be deposited in the Railway Tender
Box, Crown Lands Office, Treasury Gardens, Mel-
bourne, unless otherwise stated, at or before 12 o’clock
noon of the dates as specified.
THURSDAY, 27th OCTOBER.—Erection, in two con-
tracts, of fourteen Gatekeepers’ Cottages on the Goul-
burn Valley line. Particulars at the Engineer-in-
Chief’s office, Spencer-street, and at Seymour, Benalla
and Shepparton stations. Preliminary deposit, £2O.
THURSDAY, 27th OCTOBER.—SuppIy of SOOOcubic
yards of 2£ in. hand-broken Bluestone Metal, delivered
at Geelong. Particulars at the Engineer-in-Chiefs
office, Spencer-street; and at the Geelong station.
Preliminary deposit, £2O.
THURSDAY, 27th OCTOBER.-Supply of 550 blue
cloth Cap Bands, with V. R. in cotton embroidery.
Particulars at the Accountant’s office, Spencer-street,.
Preliminary deposit, 10 per cent, on amount of tender.
(Tenderers must submit samples of the material they
propose to use in the manufacture of the bands.)
THURSDAY, 3rd NOVEMBER.—SuppIy of 2506
lineal feet of Piles and 2285 cubic feet of Timber. Par-
ticulars at the Engineer-in-Chief’s office, Spencer-
street; and at Sale, Echuca, Seymour and Shepparton
stations. Preliminary deposit, £lO.
THURSDAY, 27thOCTOBER.—Erection, in separate
contracts, of Closets, &c., at Brighton Beach and East
Richmond stations. Particulars at the Engiueer-in-
Chief s office, Spencer-street. Preliminary deposit in
each case, £5.
- THURSDAY, 27th OCTOBER.—Water supply Dam
at Korong Vale, Inglewood and Charlton line. Parti-
culars at the Engineer-in-Chief’s office, Spencer-street;
and at Inglewood station. Preliminary deposit, £lO.
THURSDAY, 3rd NOVEMBER.—SuppIy, during the
year 1882, in one or two contracts, of say 6®,000 tons
of Screened Coal (46,000 tons /or Melbourne and 14,000
tons for Geelong). Particulars at the Accountant’s
office, Spencer-street, and at the offices of the Com-
missioner of Railways, Sydney; the Victorian Govern-
ment Coal Viewer, Newcastle ; and the Under-Secro-
tary for Public Works, Wellington, New Zealand.
Preliminary deposit, £lOO.
THURSDAY,3rd NOVEMBER,—Carriage,duringthe
year 1882, of say 46,000 tons of Coal from Griffith’s
Point,Western Port, Victoria, Newcastle, Coal Cliff or
Jervis Bay, New South Wales, or from New Zealand to
Williarastown or Sandridge Railway Pier, or any point
on the River Y'arra, at Melbourne, as may be re-
quired ; and, say 14,000 tons to the Geelong Railway
Pier. Particulars at the Accountant’s office, Spencer-
street, and at the offices of the Commissioner of Rail-
ways, Sydney; the Victorian Government Coal Viewer,
Newcastle; and the Under-Secretary for Public Works,
Wellington, New Zealand. Preliminary deposit,
£lOO.
THURSDAY, 17th NOVEMBER.—SuppIy of 20,000
tons of Steel Rails and 1070 tons of Steel Fishplates.
Particulars at the Engineer-in-Chiei’s office, Spencer-
street. Preliminary deposit, £l5OO. (Fresh tenders.)
No tender will necessarily be accepted.
THOMAS BENT,
Commissioner of Railways.
Stocks and Shares.
ALLIANCE, Victoria, National, Southern, Colonial
Mutual Insurance, Langlands, Opera House
Shares Bought. Bills discounted. Willdcr, Griffiths.
A USTRALASIAN AGENCY BANKING COR-
XIL PORATION, Garibaldi, City Ballarat, Coffee
Tavern, Cliff Tin, Locke’s Extended. Newingtons
Bought, Willder & Griffiths.
BALLARAT BANK SHARES, Madame Berrys,
Hepburn Estates, Riston’s, Lone Hands, Berry-
Consols, Captain Hepburn Bought. Willder, Griffiths.
BALMORALS, Belmont, Saxby, Melbourne Wool-
len Mills, Ellesmere, Empress India, Bought.
Willder, Griffiths, 22 Collins-street west.
C COMMERCIAL, National, Land Mortgage, Colonial,
j Victoria, City, Oriental, New Zealand Bank
Shares Bought. Willder, Griffiths, Collins-street;.
DIXON'S GAS, Egerton, Permewan Wright. Brew-
ing Malting Company Shares Bought. Willder,
Griffiths, 22 Collins-street west.
HEPBURN HOME PADDOCK, North Home-
bush, Cumberland Tin, North Birthday, Terry’s
Brewery, Golden Stream, Longhlins Bought. Willder
& Griffiths.
JOINT STOCK BANK, Long Tunnels, CarUbrooks.
Working Miners, Band Albions Bought. Willder’
Griffiths, Collins-street,
1% B ETROPOLITAN, Brighton, Bendigo, Geelong Gas,
Debentures, Victoria Ice, Victorian Permanent
Building Society Shares Bought. Willder, Griffiths.
M'CULLOCH CARRYING COMPANY, Indemnity
Insurance, Treasury Bonds, Australian De-
posit, Australian Freehold Banking Shares Bought.
Willder & Griffiths.
TVTEVV Coffee Tavern, Bourke-streec east.—loo
XI Shares for Sale at Is. premium. Bonus, Age
office.
Q>U FEN'S BIRTHDAY - , Long Tunnel Extended,
5 Yorkshire, Kong Meng, Trustees Execu-
tors’, Matuii Store Shares Bought. Willder, Griffiths,
Stockbrokers.
TIN SHARES. —Biachoff’s, Stanhope’s, Montagu,
Montagu Extended, Empress Victoria’s, Prince
George, Orient, (pomwalJ Shares BOUGHT. Willder &
Griffiths.
; Fittings, Water
Meters; lowest rates, Thomas
mrke-street west.
Warburton,
JOHN PERRY, Russell-street.—Kauri, Queensland,
Huon Pine, Ash, Oak, American Whitewood,
suitable cabinetmakers; coachbuildcrs.
J ACLEAN’S PATKNT~COLQMNS, an(T ail 'kinds
it % of Casting’s. 12 Franklin-street, six doors from
Elizabeth-street.
1% S ANTELPIECES, Grates, Gasfittings. —Awarded
aT a gold medal; lowest prices. Douglas &, Sons,
Flinders-lane east.
~ :g; g" ~1~~ ~ -
BROOKS, ROBINSON & Co.
WINDOW GLASS of every description. BROOKS,
ROBINSON & Co., 39 Elizabeth-street;
WARD. 20 Loiisdale-street east.—GALVANISED
IRON, Spouting, Ridging, Bed Tubes, Brass-
work, Gasfittings, Beer Engines. Cheapest in town.
Machinery and Ironfoundsrs.
AT DAYID MUNRO & Co.’s Machinery of Every
Desciiption. Illustrated catalogues free. 154
Queen-st,, Melbourne.
AT DAVID M'KENZIE’S Royal Mint Foundry, 107
Little Lonsdale-street west, Iron Castings of
every description promptly executed.
A TLAS CO. of ENGINEERS, Latrobe and Queen
streets, Melbourne, Manufacturers of Engines,
oilers, Flourmills, Sawmill Machinery, Girders, &c.
BUNGLE’S EXHIBITION FIRST PRIZE Chaff-
cutters, Horseworks, Barkcutters, Disintegrators,
on Sale. Parkside Ironworks, North Melbourne.
€ CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS, Robison’s Patent, to raise
j from 30 gallons to 100,uOO gallons per minute.
Will discharge more water with the power applied
than those of any other maker in the world. Robi-
son Brothers and Co., engineers, Fliudcrs-street west,
Melbourne.
171 NOBLE and Co., GLASGOW IRON WORKS,
Abbotsford-street, West Melbourne, manufac-
turers, from Scrap Iron, of Cart, Waggon, Railway
and Crank Axles, Buffers and Hooks, Stamper Bot-
toms, Discs, Bings, Cams and Shoos. Mouldboards
bent. Scrap Iron bought.
HOWARD and COOKE, Smiths, Engineers and
Boilermakers. —Planing, Turning and Screw-
cutting done for the trade. Machines bought, sold and
repaired. Britannia Ironworks, Latrobe-street west.
LANGLANDS FOUNDRY COMPANY (Limited),
Yarra-bank,
ENGINEERS, TRONFOUNDERS, BOILERMAKERS,
Manufacturers of Engines, Boilers,
Wool Presses, Centrifugal Pumps and Boring-rods.
Specialty—Quartz Crushing, Pumping and Winding
Machinery, various designs. Plans submitted for
inspection.
Stamp Shoes and Bottoms, lowest rates, special
quality.
Largest Stock of Spur Wheel and Pulley Patterns ia
the colony.
y lON GALVANISING WORKS, 10 Franklin-street
j A west, T. JV Connelty.—Galvanising done for the
trade, lowest rates, promptness and dispatch. Orders
executed for galvanised tubs, buckets and soil.pans.
Large stock always ready. Also, colonial ovens, ven-
tilators, air bricks. State school requisites. Price lists
on application.
fUBRICATORS. —Fanil’s Patent self-acting Glass-
Jconducting, at patentee’s,s9 Elgin-street, Carlton.
PUMPS, American, all sizes; cheapest, iri Mel-
bourne. Robison Bros. & Co., 31 Flinders-st. W.
QUARTZ Crushing Plant, complete, 8 or 10 heads,
with engine (16 cylinder) and suitable boiler,
wanted by the “ Britannia Rival Company (No Lia-
bility),” Steiglitz. Full particulars to be forwarded
to the company’s office, 47 Elizabeth-street, Mel-
bourne. Henry Nickless, manager.
ROBISON BROTHERS & Co., Flinders-strfeet west,
Engineers, Boilermakers, Coppersmiths, Brass-
founders and Lead Pipe Manufacturers.
’’ft VICTORIA IRON ROLLING COMPANY.—Maim-
V facturers of Rod and Bar Iron, Horse Shoe and
Rivet Iron, Hammered Shafting, Stamper Bottoms,
Shanks, Share Moulds, Engineers’ and Agricultural
Forgings, Bolts and Nuts, Rivets, new Patent Stripper
Teeth Iron. Dudley-st., Melbourne.
Wines, Spirits and Provisions.
|T IRKER, GREER & Co.’s Old Irish (prize) and
Ink. Scotch “LochDhu” Whiskies. W. Williams,
30 Collins-street east.
mHE CALCUTTA TEA SYNDICATE,
Formed for the
INTRODUCTION of
PURE INDIAN TEAS
into the Australian colonies from the districts of
Assam, Cachar, Sylhet, Darjeeling, Terai, Darjeeling,
Terai, Dooars, Western Dooars, Julpigoorie, Chota,
Nagpore, Chittagong, Kaugra Valley, Behra Doon,
&c., Knmaon.
Agents: JAS. HENTY* and Co.,
11 Little Coliins-strect, Melbourne.
mniSTLE-BLEND WHISKY, in bulk and case, on
SALE b} r James Henty & Co., Little Coilins-
street.
BRANDY, j. and F. Marten’s, in bulk and case.
Jas. Henty & Co., Little Collins-street.
Medical.
ADAM.(NTEAN ARTIFICIAL TEETH, 10s. 6d. a
tooth ; set from £5 ss. Messrs. ESKELL,
Dentists, 64 and 118 Collins-street east.
DAMANT^AN^ARTIFICIAr - TEETH. No pain ;
no stumps extracted. ES KELL’S New Patent
Principle. 64 and 118 Collins-street east.
\ PERFECT Triumph.—Artificial Teeth, Cellu-
loid plates ; misfit impossible. Made only by
Hayes & Binge, 109 Swanston-street,
A RTIFICIAL Teeth.—Patent CELLULOID Plates,
supersedes gold or vulcanite. Beware of imita-
tions. Hayes & Binge, Swanston-street.
ARTIFICIAL Teeth, inimitable ; single, 10s. Cel.J
sets, £5 ss. to £lO 10s. Mr. EMANUEL, DEN-
TIST, 130 Collins-street east.
CIONSULT Dr. L. L. SMITH, Mornings and Even-
j ings, Collins-street. Consultation fee by letter,
£l. Medicines forwarded all over the globe, appro-
priately packed to avoid observation.
SANDER and SONS’ EUCALYPTI EXTRACT.—
Under the distinguished patronage of his Ma-
jesty the King of Italy. Dr. Cruikshank, health
officer, city of Sandhurst, certifies to the extract being
the mostdesirable remedy for inflammation, bronchitis I
diphtheria, affections of the lungs, chest, pains of
rheumatic nature, neuralgia, "swellings, bruises,
sprains, wounds, disorders of the bowels, diarrhoea.
The extract effected, according to report of colonial
newspapers, cures of eczema and other skin diseases,
dysentery, whooping coughs, severe colds, croup, in-
flamed eyes, injured feet, bad legs, wound on arra
with enormous swelling, sprained "ankle (Brown), in
which case eight months’ medical advice was of no
avail. Epitome of declaration made before Cohen,
Esq., J.P., at Sandhurst, October, 1877 :—After nine
weeks’ medical treatment, Dr. Macgillivray declared
amputation of Kaabe’s leg imperative. The extract
effected speedy cure without amputation. Miss Y'ung-
hrenn, suffering from disease of the bone, as pro-
nounced by Drs. Atkinson and Boyd, just as speedily
cured.' The extract inwardly taken regulates the
action of the kidneys, and prevents contagion ia
scarlet, typhoid and intermittent fever.
Caution.—Vendors of medicines sometimes offer
the common Eucalypti Oil instead of our Extract;
therefore ask for hander and Sons’ Extract. The
genuine Extract is made up in phials, bearing labels
with our trade mark and signatures, each phial
accompanied by directions for use and reports of
cures.
Wholesale at Melbourne, by ROCKE, TOMPSITT
and Co., FELTON, GRIMWADE and Co., and SUM-
MONS, LAWS and Co, Retail by SCARLETT and
MARK, 243 Elizabeth-street, and all chemists.
OMALL - P O X
lO “ Homoeopathic Prevention and Cure.”
Dr. Leidbeck, of Stockholm, states that he has never
seen a case of small-pox terminate fatally when treated
with Aptimoniuni Tartaricum in sffiall doses. Homoeo-
pathic Medicines. B. Foulton, 84 Collins-street east.
fpHE Great REMEDY all DlSEASES.—Mitchell’s
JL celebrated Salve and Pills. Wholesale agents,
Rocke, Tompsitt & Co., Felton & Grim wade.
Printed and Published by the Proprietors, Davu>
Syme and C 0... at I'iiE Aon office, Coilins-ttreet east
l&lbouc**
