

pgllv Pfcw
(S IS'I
K &
We were sitting and lying about in the broad verandah one warm
evening, at Ballandra, eating grapes and peaches, and drinking white
Yering. It was late in an Australian spmmer. Pgr wggks gpgj. plQptbg
had the sun burned through cloudless skies and over a thirsty land.
Again and again had the short mild night been followed by the long hot
day. The springs and creeks, “ the waters forgotten of the footstep,” had
hidden deep in the bosom of the sun-tormented earth. Dusty were
the smooth winding forest tracks—crisp and dry the leaves of the great
evergreens, which stood white-stemmed and weird in the starlight. As we
sat looking out over the great river-flats, we could faintly discern long dark
lines which we knew to be droves of cattle, moving slowly towards the
deep cool reaches of the river. Deep and hollow sounded their lowings
through the still night air.
We sat dreamily sipping our wine in silence, while these “ scenes and
sounds of a far clime ” passed before us—the calm starlit night, the
-delicious sense of utter repose, the flower-laden air. Then our host, old
Hector McDiarmid, suddenly roared out, —
“ What are ye all thinking about, my boys ? I believe I was asleep
myself! ”
“ Thinking,” said Jack Barton, u what capital tipple for a summer
evening this white Yering is !—if it’s well iced, mind you,—must be
iced, you know,” continued Jack, with great earnestness.
“ In the great days to come of Australian vineyards,” cried Redgate,—
u and it will be hard if sun, soil, and grapes like these,” said he, extending
his arm§ to the fruit=di§tig§ ; “ shouldn't give n§ wing to drink and to bo§§t
of; —in those days let us remember Paul Castleton’s early efforts in the
good cause. He made wine ”
“ And his friends drank it,” interrupted Captain O’Donnell; “ and
why, indeed, wouldn’t they ? It’s proud I’d be to be his friend meself.
I’d—”
“ Mr. O’Donnell,” said Redgate, with dignity, “ will you permit me to
finish the not very lengthy sentence I had commenced ? ”
“ Bedad, I won’t, then. I stopped ye on purpose. Didn’t I know
what was coming ? and you’d have been into it in another second, and
then what chance would we have? the Acclimatization Society—devil
a less ”
Go on with your speech, my dear Redgate, I pray you; I’m sure


it’s meant to be very pleasant and instructive, and all that,” struck in
Barton. “ What was it ? ”
“ I was going to say, that we’d better have another bottle and listen to
Mac’s idea ; for I’m sure he’s got one, —he always has when he looks
like that.”
Hector McDiarmid was a tall, gaunt, red-bearded old Scot. He had
been many years in Australia. Of the perils which made up the every-
day life of the pioneer-squatter he had had his share. Possessed of
vast personal strength, and a constitution utterly unassailable by the
extremes of heat or cold, hunger or thirst, he had staked life against the
many hazards of the bush, and risen a winner—a winner of the broad
flats and rich forests of Ballandra, and the great herds which fed over
them. Simple as a child, kind as a woman, and fearing nothing upon
earth, —such was old Hector McDiarmid.
In all the pleasant west country was no pleasanter place than Ballandra.
You stayed a week, a month, a year, as you pleased. If you shot, there
was abundance of game, guns, and dogs. If you rode, there was every
conceivable variety of horse. You might read, you might boat, you
might write that pamphlet which was to overthrow the ministry, or
you might do nothing at all. In all of which employments and recrea-
tions you felt from the first hour that you had net only the concurrence
of your host, but his warmest approbation.
McDiarmid was rich beyond his wants or cares. Unmarried, and
■with no thought of marriage, he was never so happy as when he had
half-a-dozen of the younger men of the district (pretending to help him to
muster cattle), the effervescence of whose spirits he enjoyed deeply. Old
as he was, his feats* of strength, when we coaxed him to exhibit, were
marvellous. His eye was still as true and his nerve steady as in the days
when his rifle had more than once saved his life. And when he ivould tell
us, —for he spoke very charily of deeds which went to make a large share
of the legendary lore of the district, —his “ owre true tale ” often made us
grave enough.
‘Well, ye disrespectful dogs, I’ll just tell you my idea; it’s a grand
one. I’m just going clean mad about those kangaroos that are eating me
up completely. That’s no news, ye’ll say. Eh, but it’s got beyond a joke.
I’m not pushed for a thousand or two, I may say without boasting ; but
were I the poor man I once was, looking to my fat cattle to meet my bills
or else lose the bonny hard-won station, where would Ibe now ? Many
a time in years past have I spared the poor furry brutes, when Bran and
Barefoot and Fingal had their muzzles buried in their flanks, for surely I
trusted that all forest things would disappear before civilization. All history
is our warrant for wild beasties, ay, and all aboriginal craters, fading away
before the great Aanglo-Saaxon. But there the brutes abide, every one
of them eating as much grass as two sheep, forbye what they trample
and spoil. There are thousands of great big foresters on the run if


there’s one, this minute. They’ve increased like rabbits of late years,
and the old run is now, what no white man ever saw it before, short
of grass.”
Here the old man paused, -with an expression of ruefulness almost
ludicrous. It was as if he had said, “ The Bank of England—half-a-crown
in the pound, think of that ! ” Indeed it was a very serious affair, and
productive of severe loss, though not so ruinous as it would have been
to a man of smaller means. Yet McDiarmid had not quite weaned him-
self from the idea that the condition of his yearly drafts of fat cattle was
a matter of extreme importance. It was certain that the enormous flock
of kangaroo had consumed the herbage so completely which formed the
food of the herds of cattle that these valuable and highly bred animals
were, though not starving, so much reduced in condition as to be little
more than half of their former value.
The verandah looked out on a shaven lawn, which was much loved by
our host. It was entirely of English grasses, and the careful superin-
tendence of it formed a great part of the old man’s employment. Even in
this fiery season it was comparatively green, and afforded a grateful relief
to the eye. As he spoke, a dozen tall dusky upright forms sailed over
the high rail-fence which bounded the garden. Some fell to munching
Mac’s dogstail and cocksfoot in the degraded position of “ all fours,”
sacrificing uprightness to appetite. Others “ sat up,” erect, and crossing
their sinewy arms or forelegs across their chests, looked about them “ as
nateral as a white man.” One huge brute, towering a couple of feet
above his companions, showed his lighter-coloured fur, about sixty yards
from us, clearly in the starlight.
“Saw ye ever the like of that?” groaned Mac. “ It’s the blessing
of Providence they’ll no want into a man’s bedroom, for they’ll no be
kept oot. Am I any kind of kin to yon Pharaoh, think ye, that a
plague of these brutes has come against me? What say ye, lads?”
Leaving us to deliberate upon this view of the question, he slipped quietly
into a dressing-room, and reappeared with a long heavy rifle, pretty well
known in these parts, and letting drive without more ado, down came the
“ old man ” kangaroo with a thud like a buffalo. The rest of the
marauders retreated with a silence and celerity as wonderful as their
approach. We saw them top the high rail-fence, with the same gravity,
the same stately stride, the same enormous bound, looking in the half
light like a steeple-chase of Ghouls. There remained one “old man,”
however, a solemn fact. He lay dead under a choice young pine, and
measured ten feet from the head to the end of the tail.
“ Noo, laddies, ye’ve ocular proof of my woes and oppression,” recom-
menced Mac. “My life’s a burden to me. I’ve tried dogs. There’s
twenty deerhounds at the back that can pull down anything from a ban-
dicoot to a wild bull. But what of that ? The puir brutes are cut and
gashed and ripped till there’s hardly hide on them to hold stitches. And
von. xiv.—no. 84. 35.


they’re wearied out till they’ll hardly rise to follow the everlasting
vermin.”
« Don’t you shoot a lot of them ? ” put in Jack Barton, in a soothing
tone of voice. “ I should think a fellow in a week might make a goodish
bag, eh ? ”
11 Shoot them ! I believe they breed faster than rabbits, and then
they’re like the crows; they misdoot the auld iron, and just gae hop, hop,
hopping fifty yards out of range. Well, we maun die fechting. I’ll no
give in. And now, ye’ll have my idea. We’ll have a ‘ finchel,’ as they
call it in the Highlands that is, a grand ‘drive.’ We’ll get all the
neighbours, strangers, friends, foes, and acquentances, and then we 11 see
how many of the villains we can drive into the bran new yard that they
Yankee trapper bodies have just finished. They’re douce-like chiels, and
I’ve promised them all the skins for their trouble.
The proposition was received with delight by every man of us; and
next day we organized our plan in detail. We wrote hard till lunch
invitations, of course. We also sent an advertisement to the local
thunderer, the Ballandra Sentinel, announcing the “ Kangaroo Drive ”
for a certain day.
Every one came, and brought some one else. The proverbial hospitality
of Ballandra attracted some, the sport more. Besides, it was the idle time
of year. The harvest was threshed, the sheep were shorn, the calves
branded, the fat cattle not started. Like England at Christmas, Canada
in a frost, India in “ the rains,” and Swan Eiver all the year round, there
was little or nothing to do. So every one for miles round about adopted
the notion of a week’s sport witia cheerful promptitude and a clear
conscience.
As we were recovering from our epistolary fatigues, affirmative answeis
began to pour in. All the neighbours, McTavish, Sedley, Jones, Lecroix,
and the rest, —they would all come. It was “ the thing to help a neigh-
bour. Besides, they might want the smart riders and good horses of
Ballandra in a day of need. All the stockmen, we heard by word of
mouth, were coming, from the Moyne to the Glenelg; partly foi the fun,
for which they did not care much, partly for the grog, for which they
cared a great deal. All the boys made it clear that none of them would
stay away. It was a glorious excuse for leaving home, and for showing
off one’s horse. It proffered unlimited gallopping, yelling, and bloodshed,
singularly combined in the cause of duty. Even the doctor thought
he "would probably look in ; casualties might occur. In fine farmers,
bankers, drapers, butchers, bakers, black fellows, every one who could get
a horse or a holiday, came to our mighty hunt.
Our host made stupendous preparations for the company. Two
bullocks were killed; a good shot was told off with O’Donnell to beat
the river and lagoons, and strings of wild ducks, pigeons, and a couple of
noble wild turkeys, speedily adorned the larder. Impromptu stabling was


devised ; levies were made upon adjoining establishments for table neces-
saries and bedding ; all the available hacks were got in for remount
service; and after a week’s incessant activity we rested, satisfied that
either everything was done or that nothing more could be done, —which
came to the same thing.
On Monday the guests began to arrive ; in the forenoon principally
those who lived close to Ballandra —that is, from ten to thirty miles. Also
boys in great numbers, nervously anxious not to be late. In the after-
noon the procession was continuous of hacks, dog-carts, buggies, mail-
phaetons, &c., as people preferred to ride or drive. By sundown
the house was full; the kitchen and men’s huts crowded ; the lawn in
front of the house, and the green before the u huts,” all studded with
every variety of man and boy possible under the existing laws of species.
Most of the gentry lounged about the verandah or sat on the lawn, now as
dry as a deal table. The small farmers, stockmen, and “ people ” generally
sat upon fences, or logs, or carts, and smoked and chaffed unconstrainedly.
Our evening festivities were genial but not protracted, for to-morrow
w r as to be the day of battle, and rumours were afloat of a start so very
early as to strike the Town-bred guests with affright. Every man was
expected to make his own sleeping arrangements. As nearly all had
had the requisite apprenticeship in camping out—for sport or work —
this was held to be all that the most exacting Sybarite could require in
such weather.
McDiarmid sounded the reveilles at the first streak of dawn, say about
3.30 a.m. He’was also good enough to notify that every one not dressing
immediately would be left behind. The boys and many of the inexpe-
rienced were thereby goaded into an excited and comfortless style of
dressing. But we of the ancient habitues of Ballandra knew better.
We knew that Mrs. Teviot, the housekeeper, could not have her cold
rounds and hot steaks, her wild turkey hash and devilled drumsticks, her
jam, honey, fresh butter, eggs, and short-cake and porridge, marshalled at
any such supernatural hours. So we of the committee and a dozen or
two more “ old hands ” strolled quietly down to the calm cool river, lying
bright in the crimson dawnlight, and had a welcome dip. The water was
deliciously cool, but the air was so mild and warm that we sat on the
rock or lounged about after coming out, watching the blue and white
cranes, the golden-burnished ibis, the pelicans and the spoonbills, as they
fished in the shallows, or stood (principally on one leg) in dignified repose.
So we lounged and trifled till, in a w’ave of billowy gold and purple, the
u glorious sun uprist; ” and then the woods woke up with w T arble and
chatter, the stockmen shook themselves, lit their pipes, and were dressed
for the day. Whips began to ring, running in the horses from the
paddock. Business becoming imminent, we betook ourselves to our
simple apparelling in earnest, and about an hour after sunrise we sat
down to a breakfast that yet lives in dreams.
35 —2


Before breakfast commenced we bad heard a few whips “going,” and
a rolling thunder of gallopping hoofs which we knew to be the troop of
riding horses which had been collected from all parts of the great horse-
paddock, and “ run in ”to the horse-yard —a spacious railed enclosure,
with smaller yards abutting on to it. Therefore, directly the after-
breakfast pipe was finished, every man shouldered his bridle, and took his
way down to the horse-yard. Here was the commencement of the day’s
exciting duties. Every one had a bridle, by which he desired to connect
himself with a horse. There were about one hundred and fifty horses in
the yard—blacks, browns, bays, grays—all colours, values, sizes, ages,
from Mr. Hollymount’s Mameluke, up to fourteen stone with any hounds
in Britain, to Dicky Wilder’s Timor pony; from the doctor’s venerable
chestnut, quiet and sagacious enough almost to pay a medical visit on his
own account, to Frank Smasher’s black colt, backed the day before yes-
terday.
It is commonly believed that the Australian horse runs up to the
colonist, who simply signifies his desire by whistling. This is not precisely
true. Those horses which are quiet, generally make some effort at evasion,
unless when hobbled or lowered in spirit by travelling. The horses
which are young, nervous, or vicious, bolt about the yard in utter dis-
regard to the owner’s feelings and his dignity, and are only cornered with
the help of numbers and forced to submit. When a great number are
mixed together, they excite one another to rebellion, and complicate con-
fusion in every way.
Thus this morning we had before our embarrassed view a chaos of
heads and tails—principally the latter for the first twenty minutes —every
man trying, like hunting-men at a hand gate, to get out of the scrape
himself, regardless of his friends. Cries of “ Hang that colt of yours,
Jones; he’s run- over the top of me : you’re always riding a colt ! ”
“ Brown, why on earth did you bring that kicking mare of yours here ?”
“Wilson, lend us a hand with the filly; she won’t take a minute.”
“ Mr. Robinson, may I venture to ask respectfully if you are on friendly
terms acquainted with that white-legged chestnut, against whose hind-legs
you brushed this moment? That horse, sir, is Mr. Leech’s Cannibal;
he has killed two men, and for private reasons has just missed the chance
of killing a third! ” Mr. Robinson goes and sits on the rails to recover
himself.
At length all the horses are caught, and in much shorter time than
might be expected. Anon we are all mounted and away, the younger men
and boys “lashing” their horses (over the great gum-tree logs, which,
offering jumps suited to all comeirs, lay thinly scattered over the great
fiat which fringed the river. Betw/een the operation of the heat and the
competitive energies of the catthe-herds and the flocks of kangaroo,
the vast natural meadow was, as one of the stockmen feelingly ob-
served, “as bare of grass as the palm of your hand; ” while another


gravely professed his belief u that you could hunt a flea across it with a
stock-whip.”
Few of the depredators were visible at this hour of the day on the flat,
though the night would see it thickly dotted with their dark quaint forms :
now they were lying in groups at the bases of the white and red gum-trees
of the forest which we were just entering. The well-bred short-horns of
the Ballandra herd soon began to meet our eyes in 11 mobs” or droves, and
their manifest low condition drew forth angry comments from the
squatters and their retainers.
The yard, which was to hold our game, could they be induced to
enter it, was a large enclosure of split timber, with saplings and branches
placed vertically against the rails, so as to augment the appearance of
height and solidity. A kangaroo can. jump as high as a deer, so that
extraordinary fencing is needed. This, however, was but the strong room,
as it were—the final prison, which entered, “ left hope behind.” Longer
enclosures, called “ lanes,” led in circuitous fashion to this oubliette.
Behind these again were the u wings ” —long lines of fencing, gradually
closing in towards these lanes, and far apart —indeed, out of sight —at
their extremities.
Captain O’Donnell divided us into companies, and with military
decision and brevity gave us our instructions and routes.
Our commanding officer, who had put on his parade expression (which
he could adopt with great suddenness and completeness whenever it so
pleased him, and which transformed the gay, rollicking O’Donnell into a
stern, hard-looking man, without a trace of sympathy or humour), made a
grand military disposition of the forces. Partly from McDiarmid’s direc-
tion, and partly from a pretty accurate knowledge of the run, acquired in
his numerous shooting excursions over it, he despatched one party after
another to all points of the compass. An active young neighbour was told
off in command of a party to beat the Ettrick plain. “ Cold Morning,” a
tame aboriginal, of hound-like qualities, led another band to rouse the
long-tails out of the “ green gully.” Every creek, gully, flat, and range
had a few well-known bushmen allotted to it, who were accompanied
by a proportion of volunteers. The general order was to keep wide and
quiet till we got near the wings, and then to rush there and go “like
steam.”
Turning our horses’ heads different ways, we soon lost sight of all but
our immediate adherents. By this time the sun was not to be denied.
It was of a lurid copper-colour, and the air was full of a misty haze,
fairly tremulous with the heat. Trees were plentiful, but shade was
there none. Yet the horses bounded on, and the men were in high
spirits and full of vigour.
Our costume was light to a fault, A shirt, trowsers, and boots were
the whole equipment of the stockmen and farmers. A silk coat, a puggree,
boots, and white cords, adorned the wealthier. A daring swell or two rode


in knickerbockers and brown Russian boots, still more delusive as to
tbe temperature. But all honour to the genial Australian climate. Hot
it was, yet the heated air was dry and fresh, and lacked the deadly subtlety
of the tropics. There you go about (if you happen to be young and
foolish, as is generally the case) rejoicing in your strength, and thinking
the heat of no particular consequence, when down you go with a sun-
stroke, to die before the day is out, or to lie moaning for a month
like a wounded jackal. Little recked our band of the noonday sun.
Many of the younger men—natives of the country —had nothing on their
heads but shallow straw-hats, made of the cabbage-tree —encircled by a
broad black ribbon. And yet these fellows "would go gallopping about
all day, or mowing, reaping, cattle-branding, any violent work, with
impunity. They would come in at night, after all this, to eat beefsteaks,
and sleep as soundly as if the keen breeze of—let us say —a North British
spring were bracing nerve and sinew.
Through the broad glades of the southern forest we held our way
merrily. Now over wide flats like browm billiard-tables; now under giant
white-barked weird encalypti: sometimes over piles of lava and scoria,
through the clefts of which the grass grew broad and green in the early
summer. We scared the wood-duck from the dry lakes, and the turkeys
from the burnt grass. Clouds of parroquets flashed around us like clusters
of Avinged emeralds and rubies—as omvard and onward still we rode, until
Ave had made the circuit of the run and commenced to concentrate the
forces of the u finchel.”
Large flocks of kangaroo had from time to time risen from their
noonday camps, and fled before us. As Ave uoav began to vieAV our
fellow-hunters Ave had' in sight a comtinuous stream of terrified animals,
hurrying to a common centre ; the llarger males—the 11 old men, ’ as they
are called—tOAvered above the flying bucks, flying does and joeys, thehalf-
groAvn bucks, does, and young ones. The Avallaby,—a smaller variety,
and bearing the same analogy to its larger confrere , the forester, as the
rabbit does to the hare —might be seen scuttling along in the melee—
joining perforce Avith the main troop, and sometimes making vain attempts
to double back: attempts which generally landed them in the midst of
the army of dogs in the rear, Avhere they Avere instantly snapped up and
disappeared.
We Avere now close to the edge of the wings. The spectacle Avas
remarkable. The long line of horsemen, at tolerably equal distances, Avere
closing on the flying host of fur-clad two-legged creatures, hopping and
bounding frantically before them. A.s they approached the eastern Aving
a larger proportion of the horsemen spread themselves in that direction,
keeping behind them, and forming a 'continuous line Avith the end of the
fence. The Avestern side Avas left ciomparatively open, so as to permit
that flank of the body of game to extend itself easily. The leading
kangaroo, so guided, ran up Avhat appeared to be an unconnected fence.


The pace now became better. Up go the leaders, fearing no evil and
doubtless hoping for a turn to the right and general escape. Not so. The
western wing is now sighted. The opening between the two wings is not
more than 500 yards, and rapidly narrows. At a wave from the Captain’s
hand fifty eager riders spur across, and every five yards from fence to
fence is filled by a horseman. If they do not turn and “break now they
The moment has arrived. It is the charge down the hill at Waterloo.
It is Marengo when Desaix comes up. Mac gives the equivalent order to
“ Up, Guards, and at them! ” and taking old Bushranger by the head,
races desperately up to their tails. The younger portion of the company
had been ready and more than willing for an hour back; and when the
glorious signal was given,
-such a yell was there,
As if men fought on earth below,
And fiends in upper air !
The wild centaurs of lads picked up their nags, and all but jumped
on the backs of the crowded and frantic animals. All who could ride,
and all who could not, delivered themselves over to the delirium of the
moment. The long heavy whips of the stockmen rose and fell like a
forest of flails, while their reports rang like musketry. The dogs, sternly
repressed up to this moment, barked and worried liked demons. The
rear of the mass pressed madly on the leading animals, which, with a fence
on either side, and all Gehenna “ maddening in the rear,” had no choice
but to go forward.
Up the fast closing straight running they flew, with the speed of a
dream. Another half-mile is gained, and the vast herd is approaching
the fatal enclosure. But the vanguard, whose delicate instinct has been
dominated temporarily only, scents the coming evil, and slackening pace
falls back on the main body. Tremendous confusion is created. By the
concussion, dozens of the younger animals are knocked over by the weight
and impetus of the older ones. The whole herd are now mingled in
one trampling whirlwind of dust. The front, jammed by the rear, in
vain try to charge back. Every one who has had the privilege of attending
cattle musters recognizes this as the turning moment of the contest. If
the herd “ breaks,” or turns its flank outward, a thousand horse Avould
not stop them, and the day’s work is thrown away.
“ Stick to them, my lads,” shouts Captain Blake, double-thonging with
a hunting-whip like a maniac.
“ Back up, for dear life,” roars old Mac, with his features glowing with
excitement and wrath, as he waves his broad-leafed hat, and shies it
desperately amid the host.
These exhortations were barely needed by any but the town-bred and
inexperienced members of the hunt. Every old hand and every bush-
bred lad was going it like an Irish sergeant at a forlorn hope. 4 heir yells


and cries were redoubled. The dogs raged with demoniac energy. The
trained horses of the stockmen bit and kicked as they turned heads or tails
alternately to the foe. None broke the line. The rear was forced bodily
on to the front rank, which, confused and overpowered, once more took to
the open. After a short distance rattled over at fair hunting pace, lo ! a
turn to the right appears leading back towards the route by which they had
entered. Down the lane they go like a whirlwind, followed by the whole
herd ; and after passing down a lane, turning still more in the line of the
escape route, debouche into a large enclosure having no outlet whatever.
It is the strong yard. For one moment the whole line of horsemen “ blocks ”
the passage by which they had entered. Another—and two men simul-
taneously pull sliding lines, and a wall of canvas eight feet high stands
between them and the outer world.
Now there are great breath-takings, loosenings of girths, and general
return to the realms of common sense. Apologies are made to any one
who has got in the way, and been sworn at in the hurry ot business.
Now recommences the reign of chaff among the stockmen, too busy for
conversation of late, and being, to do them justice, men capable ot doing
several hours’ work in one, when needs must.
Now that we had got the kangaroo, the next question was, What were
we to do with them ? The duty of the historian becomes painful. They
were all to be killed! Yes, dreadful as it sounds—butchered in cold
blood. There was nothing else for it. We have our tendernesses
like other people, and hate needless cruelty. But the lives of these
animals represented an annual loss of a couple of thousands a year,
at least ; and sheep and cattle, and the welfare of Christian men, women,
and children thereon depending, nnust be preferred to that ot brutes,
however directly inoffensive.
Mac and his squatter friend, anal the stockmen, were thinking more
of the despoiled pastures and diminiished reputation of Ballandra, than of
abstract questions of humanitarianisim. So arming themselves wuth heavy
sticks they entered the yard. Then, every one else adopted a weapon, and
hasted to the slaughter—one or two had got hold of swords ; some had
heavy-handled hunting-whips ome an Indian hogspear. The boys
rushed to the prey. Then the slaiughter commenced. Every one was
rather excited by the chase, so affter the first few moments every one
went in savagely enough. The kangaroo is easily killed by a blow on the
head; if, with an “old man” at bay, you have nerve enough to stand
still for his rush (for at such a time he charges like a wild bull), and to
strike him fair between the ears, he will fall as if shot. So the sticks
were the favourite weapons.
Mac led the way, striking down right and left with a great she-oak
sapling. The stockmen, w T ho occasionally had some practice in killing
calves on nearly as large a scale, and in the same fashion, were decidedly
the most efficient macropicides, though all the laymen assisted manfully.


After all, killing a kangaroo, like many other arts and accomplishments,
is not so easy as it looks. He is an agile beast, and if elderly, fierce.
So when the youthful townsmen essayed this cheap form of heroism, they
were occasionally deceived. But the greater number of the trapped
creatures were huddled together too confused and terrified for further
flight or resistance ; but one flying buck, like the solitary Mameluke at
the citadel of Cairo, dared the impossible, and took the canvas-wall fair.
On the other side was an individual who might be described as a
gentleman in difficulties. Mr. Neuchamp was the fortunate proprietor
of a horse, a late purchase, which he had invested in against the advice
of his squatter host. This valuable animal when tied up invariably
broke his bridle. When left loose on “ parole,” he immediately started
off for the place where he was bred, about a hundred and fifty miles
distant. On this occasion, being over-excited by the chase, he utterly
declined to let Mr. Neuchamp get off—making ready to kick at him as he
alighted—or to stand still, or to go away from the yard, rearing despe-
rately when moved in the opposite direction. While his perplexed rider
was mentally questioning the horsemanship which he had brought from the
old country, and which he trusted (and indeed asserted) was to awe the
natives of this new one, the flying buck aforesaid leapt the canvas, and
dropping upon Mr. Neuchamp, as if from the clouds, at once decided
the question of dismounting. In one agonized moment he lay gasping on
the turf in one direction, the yet more astonished kangaroo in another ;
and Mr. Neuchamp only raised himself on his elbow, when slightly
recovered, to behold his horse and his marsupial antagonist going best
pace in opposite directions—the former, as usual, heading straight across
country for Warranup,
The long, long summer day was nearly done—the tireless sun was
lingering to his rest behind the far blue range in red golden glories—the
air Avas cool as we rode soberly home to Ballandra, dusty, tired, hungry,
and blood-stained. Yet was the feeling not unpleasant as we let our
horses go in the horse-paddock, knowing that a season of well-earned rest
and delectation awaited us. Happy (the man who, when the hour arrives,
doubts not of appetite or the meal that is to satisfy it.
As Ave came up, each man bearing his saddle and bridle, old Mrs.
Teviot greeted us with looks of astonishment and a mountain of toAvcls,
foreboding of the cool swim in the quartz-pebbled river, which Avas de
rigueur after such a day. “Eh ! gudesake, look at the laddies ! Just
fearsome! And did ye kill a’ the puir beasties ? Weel-a-weel, it’s sair
Avork shedding the bluid o’ sae mony o’ the Lord’s creatures. But ye
gentlemen ken a’ aboot it, nae doot; it’s no for me to judge. Puir Maister
McDiarmid's sair fashed and disjeckit like. He just canna sleep at nicht.
Nae doot Ave maun live in the land and multiply, and Ave canna live for
time landloupin’ thieves o’ kangaroo. Noo, dinna swim a’ the nicht, for
the denner’s a’ but Avaitin’ on ye.”
05 —5


In dozens we pitched ourselves off the tall rock, one after the other like
school-boys, into the deep cool rivier reach, now fast shadowing over in the
long twilight. Who swims not losses a pleasure of the choicest, in all lands
where the sun shines strongly. We came up cooled and freshened to the
inmost nerve, and before dinner proceeded to comfort the inner gentleman
with deep draughts of the well-cocoled and delicate Yering.
And the dinner ! But let us inspect the sacred reserves of that immortal
meal. None but men who like ms had ridden and toiled, pure from the
base compromise of lunch, could jhave performed such a feat as was then
performed.
Those of our friends who were new to bush life asked themselves
sternly, why they did not so toil and so enjoy, daily, continually ? Why,
this was life—life to the very finger tips ! It was a new revelation !
Henceforth they would live in the wilderness, exist on horseback, and be
demigods.
The night wore on, all violefc-bluc and silver-starred. Tales were
told. Songs were sung. Long we sat and gossipped, and lay about on the
lawn’s dewless grass, far into the kind cool night. No fears had we in our
al fresco indulgence. No viewless foe lurked in the flower-scented air,
or the low faint sigh of the river-oaks. Why go to bed, why go at all ?
Had sleep fairer dreams than these? It was Aidenn, would it but last, —
lotus-land; and we world-worn wayfarers, dreaming on the bank of the
lulling water, in a land of changeless summer.
So wore the night. The next day saw the departure of all save a few
friends, who stayed to keep Mac company. But for years after among the
chronicles of the west, the memory will be fresh of the jests and the
adventures, the hospitality and gomd-fellowship, of the great Ballandra
Kangaroo drive.
